Women

in Science Fiction
and Fantasy

This page intentionally left blank

Women

in Science Fiction
and Fantasy

VOLUME 1: OVERVIEWS
..............................................................................................................................
Edited by Robin Anne Reid

GREENWOOD PRESS
W E S T P O R T, C O N N E C T I C U T. L O N D O N

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Women in science ﬁction and fantasy / edited by Robin Anne Reid.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-313-33589-1 ((set) : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-313-33591-4 ((vol. 1) :
alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-313-33592-1 ((vol. 2) : alk. paper)
1. Science ﬁction—Women authors—History and criticism. 2. Fantasy ﬁction—Women
authors—History and criticism. 3. Science ﬁction, American—History and criticism.
4. Science ﬁction, English—History and criticism. 5. Fantasy ﬁction, American—History
and criticism. 6. Fantasy ﬁction, English—History and criticism. 7. Women and literature—
History—20th century. 8. Feminism in literature. 9. Gender identity in literature.
10. Women in literature. I. Reid, Robin Anne, 1955–
PS374.S35W63
2009
809.30 8762082—dc22
2008035424
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data is available.
Copyright 
C 2009 by Robin A. Reid
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be
reproduced, by any process or technique, without the
express written consent of the publisher.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2008035424
ISBN: 978-0-313-33589-1 (set)
ISBN: 978-0-313-33591-4 (vol. 1)
ISBN: 978-0-313-33592-1 (vol. 2)
First published in 2009
Greenwood Press, 88 Post Road West, Westport, CT 06881
An imprint of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc.
www.greenwood.com
Printed in the United States of America

The paper used in this book complies with the
Permanent Paper Standard issued by the National
Information Standards Organization (Z39.48–1984).
10

9 8 7

6 5

4 3

2 1

Contents
PREFACE
Robin Anne Reid

vii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

xv

1

The Middle Ages
1
Gillian
Polack
........................................................................................................
2

Nineteenth-Century Fiction
12
Helen
Pilinovsky
........................................................................................................
3

Nineteenth-Century Poetry
23
Donelle
R.
Ruwe
........................................................................................................
4

Fantasy, 1900–1959: Novels and Short Fiction
34
Christine
Mains
........................................................................................................
5

Science Fiction, 1900–1959: Novels and Short Fiction
45
Eric
Leif
Davin
........................................................................................................
6

Comics, 1900–1959
54
Trina
Robbins
........................................................................................................
7

Fantasy, 1960–2005: Novels and Short Fiction
62
Christine
Mains
........................................................................................................
8

Science Fiction, 1960–2005: Novels and Short Fiction
73
David
M.
Higgins
........................................................................................................
9

Comics, 1960–2005
84
Anita
K.
McDaniel
........................................................................................................
10 Genre Poetry: Twentieth Century
94
Scott
Green
........................................................................................................
11 Fantasy Film: Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries
101
Holly
Hassel
........................................................................................................
12 Science Fiction Film: Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries 112
Susan A. George
........................................................................................................
13 Anime and Manga
123
Eden
Lee
Lackner
........................................................................................................
14 Television: Twentieth Century
135
Barbara
Lynn
Lucas
........................................................................................................

v
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

15 Music: Twentieth Century
148
Barbara
Lynn
Lucas
........................................................................................................
16 Gaming
159
Laurie
N.
Taylor
........................................................................................................
17 Men Writing Women
170
Janice
M.
Bogstad
........................................................................................................
18 Heroes or Sheroes
179
Christine
Mains,
Brad
J.
Ricca,
Holly
Hassel,
and
Lynda
Rucker
........................................................................................................
19 Intersections of Race and Gender
191
Yolanda
Hood
and
Robin
Anne
Reid
........................................................................................................
20 Intersections of Class and Gender
202
Donald M. Hassler
........................................................................................................
21 Intersections of Age and Gender
209
Laura
Quilter
and
Liz
Henry
........................................................................................................
22 Speculating Sexual Identities
222
John
Garrison
........................................................................................................
23 Science
230
Lisa Yaszek
........................................................................................................
24 Feminist Spirituality
241
Janice
C.
Crosby
........................................................................................................
25 The Creation of Literature for the Young
254
Patricia
Castelli
........................................................................................................
26 Girls and the Fantastic
266
Deborah Kaplan
........................................................................................................
27 Fandom
278
Bernadette
Lynn
Bosky
and
Arthur
D.
Hlavaty
........................................................................................................
28 WisCon
290
Jeanne
Gomoll
........................................................................................................
29 The James Tiptree Jr. Award
302
Debbie Notkin
........................................................................................................
ABOUT THE EDITOR AND CONTRIBUTORS

309

INDEX

329

vi
..............

Preface
THIS PROJECT is the ﬁrst general reference work focusing on women’s contributions to science ﬁction and fantasy in ﬁction, nonﬁction, poetry, ﬁlm, television, comics, graphic novels, art, and music. Its purpose is to serve as a
reference work for general readers on the historical presence and ongoing
engagement of a diverse group of women in the creation and reception of science ﬁction and fantasy in literature, media, and the arts.
This encyclopedia contains two volumes. Volume 1 is a collection of
essays about important periods, genres, media, and themes in the fantastic
literatures. Volume 2 contains shorter entries arranged alphabetically, on important writers and other ﬁgures, as well as on a number of topics, including
national traditions of science ﬁction and fantasy from countries other than
the United States. The essays and entries all contain lists of further readings,
including timely and specialized websites that will aid those wishing to learn
more about the topics. Care was taken to provide cross-references between
entries in both volumes that present additional information on authors,
topics, periods, or genres. In the text of each essay and entry, these are
denoted by a bolded word or phrase. In many cases, a list of further relevant
entries appears at the end.
Given the historical and international scope of the encyclopedia, as well
as the variety of media covered and required limits, this work does not
pretend to be comprehensive. While the encyclopedia gives some consideration to how male creators of science ﬁction and fantasy have dealt with the
topics of “women” and “gender” in a variety of media, the primary focus is on
women. The encyclopedia concentrates on works in English from the twentieth century to the present, covering ﬁction, nonﬁction, ﬁlm, television,
graphic novels, and music.
Choices for topics in both volumes were made based on a variety of factors, such as the amount of academic and popular/fan scholarship on the
subject. Writers and other individuals (artists, editors, fans, and scholars)
were selected for inclusion through a process that involved compiling lists of
the winners of all major and minor awards made by fan and professional
organizations; soliciting advice from scholars on the fantastic, primarily but
not solely those connected to the International Association of the Fantastic in
the Arts and the Science Fiction Research Association, the two oldest and
largest academic organizations devoted to the study of science ﬁction and
fantasy; and reviewing the existing scholarship. A session scheduled at the
2005 International Conference for the Fantastic in the Arts was held solely to
generate ideas for topics and writers. While a number of the contributors
vii
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

came from that session, open calls for contributors to apply to write essays
and entries were circulated via the Internet, on a range of academic listservs,
and on Laura Quilter’s feminist science ﬁction listserv, as well as being posted
on LiveJournal.
The overwhelming response of academic, independent, and fan scholars to those calls was outstanding: more than two hundred people sent proposals to write contributions. Assignments were made based primarily on
expertise, although in a number of areas, especially fan works, that expertise
might have been decades of work in fandom rather than academic publications, as academic scholarship simply does not cover the range of productions
created by fans. Of interest to future editors, perhaps, is the fact that the
three entries that received the most applications by contributors were those
on J. R. R. Tolkien, J. K. Rowling, and Joss Whedon. The proposals made by
potential contributors also revealed the growing importance of scholarship on
new media and visual texts as well as children’s and adolescents’ literature. A
number of entries were added later in the process based on persuasive evidence provided by contributors who made the case for their inclusion. The
one area where it proved most difﬁcult to ﬁnd contributors was in art and
illustrations. While literary and media scholars have apparently grown in
number in the past decades, the study of the cover art for magazines or books
and illustrations does not seem to have grown as rapidly, or perhaps disciplinary boundaries kept calls from circulating to those scholars. However, the
wealth of suggested topics, not all of which could be accommodated, argues
that there is a need for further and more specialized reference works in key
genre and media areas.
Some of the writers chosen as the subjects of encyclopedia entries have
written several hundred works of ﬁction and won numerous awards; others
have published fewer works but are seen as making particularly important
contributions in the realm of explorations of gender and race in science ﬁction and fantasy. The need to recognize as many of the subgenres of speculative ﬁction as well as mainstream science ﬁction and fantasy is addressed by
speciﬁc genre entries in volume 2. Topics and themes that are recognized as
important by fans, critics, and academics have also received entries. Most
importantly, although the United States and the United Kingdom are the primary focus of this work, science ﬁction and fantasy traditions and literatures
in a variety of other countries in the Americas, Asia, and Europe are included.
The growing awareness of international science ﬁction and fantasy, especially
in literatures other than English, is only beginning.
Volume 1 contains twenty-nine chapters. These essays provide sociohistorical context, analysis, and background information on key themes that
cross genre boundaries. Subjects cover major and minor ﬁgures, movements,
and conﬂicts in literature, art/graphic texts, and music. Consideration of sociohistorical contexts situates subjects in relation to the different waves of
viii
................

Preface
feminist movements as well as to different periods of science ﬁction and
fantasy development. Themes and formal elements of texts are considered,
along with genre issues. Transmission methods and media, audience and
reader issues, and fandom topics are also described.
Volume 1 is organized roughly chronologically, from the medieval period to the twenty-ﬁrst century, although individual chapters focusing on
later work may provide historical information as needed. The essays, each
written by a scholar who has published on the relevant topic, all provide
select but excellent lists of further readings to encourage readers, teachers,
and students who are interested in further study.
The ﬁrst three chapters (“The Middle Ages,” “Nineteenth-Century
Fiction,” and “Nineteenth-Century Poetry”) cover historical periods that
existed before the development of the contemporary genres of fantasy and
science ﬁction as they are understood by most people. However, these periods
are connected in important ways to both genres: a good deal of popular genre
fantasy published in the United States and the United Kingdom after Tolkien’s
The Lord of the Rings (1954–55) draws on mythologies and sources from the medieval period. While some critics, such as Brian Aldiss in his well-known
monograph Trillion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction (1986, originally published as Million Year Spree in 1973), argue that science ﬁction originated in
earlier mythic and heroic tales that deal with superhuman or supernatural
events, others see the genre as tied to the rise of Industrialism during the
nineteenth century with its accompanying development of science and technology. In this argument, the ﬁrst true science ﬁction—stories extrapolating
from contemporaneous ideas of science—was published during the 1800s.
During the nineteenth century, fantasy also became a more popular genre in
ﬁction and poetry.
The next group of chapters focuses on the period during which the genres of the fantastic become more and more distinct in both production and
reception, especially as “science ﬁction” and “fantasy” deﬁned themselves as
opposite, one focusing on technology and imagined futures, the other on
magic and imagined preindustrial pasts.
The growth of written fantasy and science ﬁction in the ﬁrst half of the
twentieth century was connected to rising literacy rates, which produced a
growing number of readers who were the audience for pulp science ﬁction
and fantasy in the United States and the United Kingdom. The ﬁrst half of
the century is considered by many to be the golden age of some of the genres
and is covered in chapters 4 and 5: “Fantasy, 1900–1959: Novels and Short
Fiction” and “Science Fiction, 1900–1959: Novels and Short Fiction.”
The dates are, as always, artiﬁcially imposed since historical, social,
and literary trends overlap, but most readers and critics agree that the social
changes connected to technology, especially in the areas of civil and human
rights, taking place in the post–World War II period were reﬂected in the
ix
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

writers and literature of the time. Writers experimented with new content
and experimental literary forms. Chapters 7 and 8, “Fantasy, 1960–2005: Novels and Short Fiction” and “Science Fiction, 1960–2005: Novels and Short
Fiction,” consider the literatures of the fantastic during that time and moving
into the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Although poetry has not always received the same attention as ﬁction,
especially in the twentieth century, it continues to be a genre in which writers
explore science ﬁction and fantasy themes, as detailed in chapter 10, “Genre
Poetry: Twentieth Century.” Just as the “popular,” and thus less elite, status of
science ﬁction and fantasy, which results in many critics separating “genre”
literatures from mainstream “literature,” is due in part to its origins in pulp
magazines, so too genre poetry is isolated, thriving primarily in small magazines and small presses, and ﬁnding new publication opportunities on the
Internet. Since the same can be said of much mainstream written poetry in
the United States, at least during the last half of the twentieth century, the
boundaries between categories of poetry may not be so strictly maintained in
the future.
Film was a new medium that was developed in the late nineteenth century and was associated with fantasy from the start. Chapters 11 and 12 cover
the origins and development of ﬁlm in both genres in “Fantasy Film: Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries” and “Science Fiction Film: Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries.” Film is a collaborative medium, and the participation of
women as creators is not always easy to document, but more work is being
done in that area in recent years with the development of ﬁlm studies as an
academic ﬁeld.
The twentieth century marked the rise of other popular visual media
that often incorporate science ﬁction and fantasy characters, plots, and
themes: comics and television. Chapters 6 and 9, “Comics: 1900–1959” and
“Comics: 1960–2005,” cover the former in two periods, while the latter is discussed in chapter 14, “Television: Twentieth Century.”
While comics in the United States have long been considered a genre ﬁt
only for children, as fantasy was during the nineteenth century, they have
long been taken seriously as art forms in Japan, originating in centuries-old
blending of graphic images and text, as discussed in chapter 13, “Anime and
Manga.” The growing popularity of these genres in North America and Britain
during the last decades of the twentieth century has presented new challenges concerning gender and audience demographics, with a growing number of women buying anime and manga as mainstream United States comic
companies struggle to maintain readership. Independent comics that are
spread through a variety of means, including the Internet, further diversify
the audience for visual media, with many dealing with fantastic themes.
Chapter 15, “Music: Twentieth Century,” turns to audio media. It
explores the extent to which music has long been intertwined with
x
.............

Preface
speculative ﬁctions, although the primary focus of the essay is on contemporary musicians.
The ﬁnal essay to focus on a genre or medium is chapter 16, “Gaming.”
Science ﬁction and fantasy have played an important role in the development
of games (tabletop, video, and online), a number of them arising directly from
Tolkien’s epic fantasy and related texts. As this essay explains, the growing
popularity of games in all media since the 1970s has resulted in even more
hybridization of genre conventions. These new technologies not only offer
new stories but can also supplement science ﬁction and fantasy narratives
released in other media, such as books, ﬁlm, and television. In his 2006 monograph Convergence Culture, Henry Jenkins began to develop methods of analyzing how the explosive growth of new technologies and new media are
changing ownership, production, and reception of content.
The last and largest group of essays in the encyclopedia focuses on
themes and topics that cross genre and media boundaries in tune with postmodern hybridity, that is, the mixing of genres and cultures, as well as certain
key audience and production issues. Chapter 17, “Men Writing Women,” considers the effect of the long dominance of male authors in science ﬁction and
fantasy. This essay considers how the constructions of female characters by
male writers has changed over time, reﬂecting sociohistorical developments.
It also discusses the rise of new and experimental forms and the inclusion of
social sciences as well as the hard sciences in the genres. Chapter 18, “Heroes
or Sheroes,” then covers the debates over the consequences of writing women
characters into the role of the epic hero, with four scholars presenting an
overview of strong female protagonists in literature, comics, ﬁlm, and television, created by both female and male writers, artists, directors, and
producers.
The next four chapters, 19–22, are based on contemporary intersectional theories that ask how the social constructions of race, class, and age
overlap with the social construction of gender, and how different constructions of sexuality are understood. The ﬁrst three essays—“Intersections of
Race and Gender,” “Intersections of Class and Gender,” and “Intersections of
Age and Gender”—provide information on the scholarship and writers dealing
with the questions of intersecting identities, as well as discussing writers
whose work incorporates characters, plots, and themes that show the interwoven and complex layers of identities. Chapter 22, “Speculating Sexual Identities,” then draws on contemporary gender and queer theories to discuss
authors whose work incorporates multiple constructions of sexualities.
Two essays consider the impact of science and religion on women in
science ﬁction and fantasy. The ﬁrst, “Science,” chapter 23, covers the history
of women’s relation to and participation in the scientiﬁc disciplines and institutions in the United States, showing how women’s relation to science ﬁction
is connected to their status in the scientiﬁc community. Chapter 24, “Feminist
xi
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Spirituality,” discusses the range of feminist relations to religion, both the
institutions of the great world religions such as Christianity, Judaism, and
Islam and the growing movements related to Wicca. It considers how fantasy
novels by women played a major role in the development of these later
movements.
The nineteenth-century insistence that fantasy was suitable only for
the young, and the application of that attitude in the United States toward
science ﬁction, has often served as a reason for teachers, parents, and critics
to dismiss much fantastic literature without even reading it. Despite attempts
to control, ban, or censor such material, the growing sense that children, and
later adolescents or young adults, needed their own literatures has led to a
growing number of writers creating science ﬁction and fantasy texts and
media based on age, although the audience for both genres has always
included adults. Chapters 25 and 26, “The Creation of Literature for the
Young” and “Girls and the Fantastic,” consider the social context in which
children’s and young adult fantasy and science ﬁction developed, as well as
the portrayal of girls in literature, comics, television, and ﬁlm.
Finally, chapters 27–29—“Fandom,” “WisCon,” and “The James Tiptree
Jr. Award”—focus on the contributions of women to fandom, the creation of
the ﬁrst feminist SF convention in 1977, and the ﬁrst SF award named for a
woman. As Camille Bacon-Smith (Science Fiction Culture, 2000), Justine Larbalestier (The Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction, 2002), and Henry Jenkins (Textual
Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture, 1992), among others, have
argued: SF (whether “science ﬁction” or “speculative ﬁction”) is not just a body
of texts, it is a culture; moreover, it is a complex body of multiple communities that act to comment upon and at times transform the primary texts,
whether through reviews, essays, awards, or fan-created art, ﬁctions, and videos. Hugo Gernsback encouraged active reader participation through the letter columns of his SF magazines, and the ﬁrst fan clubs formed in the 1920s.
Arguably, science ﬁction fandom was the model for other popular and media
fandoms that have developed since, following everything from sports to soap
operas. Ever since the 1920s, fans have debated a wide variety of topics,
including the role of women along with larger social debates over gender,
class, race, and sexuality.
Volume 2 begins with an alphabetical list of 230 entries, followed by a
topical guide that groups related entries under ten categories:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
xii
...............

Awards and Publishing
Biographical Entries: Artists, Editors, Fans, Scholars, and Others
Biographical Entries: Authors
Ethnicity/Race
Fans and Fandom
Genres
National Literatures

Preface
8. Sex and Gender
9. Themes
10. Visual Media

Also in volume 2 is a selected bibliography of scholarship on all aspects
of science ﬁction and fantasy covered in this encyclopedia, including the
foundational bibliographies, other types of reference works in the genre, and
theory and applied criticism, in both journals and book form. This scholarship
is a part of the historical and cultural context that has created the opportunity for this encyclopedia to be published.

xiii
...............

This page intentionally left blank

Acknowledgments
WHILE I have served as editor, this encyclopedia, as is true for all works of
scholarship, could not exist without the efforts of many people who supported the project in every way possible. First, I must thank George Butler and
Kathleen Knakal at Greenwood Press for overseeing this project and dealing
with the spreadsheet problems. Second, my appreciation for the many people
who offered to contribute and especially the 127 contributors cannot be
adequately expressed in words. The enthusiasm among scholars and fans for
the ﬁrst encyclopedia about women in SF/F made even dealing with spreadsheets tolerable.
Special thanks must go to Hal Hall, curator of the Science Fiction and
Fantasy Research Collection at Texas A&M University, College Station, and his
staff who ably assisted a very nervous editor in her ﬁrst foray into archival
research: Valerie Coleman, reference assistant; Kristin Hill, reading room
supervisor; Melissa Zajicek, reference assistant; Stephanie Elmquist, reference
assistant; Naﬁsah Hankins, head of media services; and the student workers
at the Collection. The Internet database created and maintained by Hal and
others served as an invaluable aid during the time I was not privileged to
spend at College Station.
On my own campus, I owe thanks to Dean Allan Headley and Natalie
Henderson of the Ofﬁce of Graduate Studies and Research, Texas A&M
University–Commerce. The encyclopedia was supported by two Faculty
Research Enhancement Grants during the 2005–6 and 2006–7 academic years,
which provided research assistance, travel for archival research, supplies, and
most importantly for humanities scholars, release time to do the work. While
I may live and work in rural Texas, the Internet and the support of the Interlibrary Loan Ofﬁce, Gee Library, Texas A&M University–Commerce—especially
the work of Scott Downing and Jacob Pichnarcik, who never blinked an eye at
the number of requests for books with covers featuring bug-eyed monsters—
meant that I had access to a great deal of research from my home campus.
Cynthia Garza provided valuable research assistance in 2006.
Over the years, I have received encouragement and advice from Farah
Mendlesohn, Michael Levy, Faye Ringel, Veronica Hollinger, and Robert
Latham. Their busy schedules did not allow their direct participation, but
their scholarship and communications have shaped this work in ways that
must be acknowledged. A special note of thanks is due Marleen Barr, whose
work was the ﬁrst introduction I had to scholarship that yoked the “two
horses” of feminist theory and science ﬁction.
xv
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

I also beneﬁted immensely from my online friends’ list in LiveJournal, a
combination of social networking/blogging site for online science ﬁction fandom. While fandom remains active ofﬂine and in a variety of spaces on the
World Wide Web, LiveJournal was the space that brought me back into active
fandom. Academics, fan scholars, and fans read drafts of the earliest proposal, supplied suggestions for topics, networked both online and ofﬂine, and
together constituted one of the most amazing networks any writer could
have. Eden Lee Lackner and Barbara Lynn Lucas not only gave feedback on
topics and read early drafts, as well as volunteering to cover returned essays
and entries, but also introduced me to new genres and media texts and scholarship during the past years. We have collaborated on past work and will do
so again in the future. Christine Mains provided incredibly valuable insights
into genres and periods that are her areas of expertise, as well as taking on
additional entries at the last minute. Kristina Busse provided key feedback in
the proposal stages and ongoing support. Tamara Brummer, Deborah Kaplan,
Rachel McGrath-Kerr, Dorothea Schuller, Wilma Shires, and Ruth Veness ably
helped by copyediting essays and entries I wrote, understanding that it is
always easier to edit another writer’s drafts. Judy Ann Ford edited the further
readings and bibliography for conformity to Chicago Manual of Style
requirements.
A number of friends who are active in fandom and fandom scholarship
also provided feedback. They are listed under their fan pseudonyms at their
request: 10zlaine, Aprilkat, Boogieshoes, Cofax, Cryptoxin, The Drifter, Half
Elf Lost, Oursin, Rothesis, Slashfairy, Travelingcarrot, Werelemur, and Zellieh.
While it is not unknown for academic scholars to dismiss fans of a work, my
experience in fandom and academia is that fans often have an encyclopedic
knowledge of their favorite writers, genres, and media, as shown in a number
of published and online reference works, and are always happy to share information and resources. It strikes me as only appropriate to acknowledge the
importance of the fan scholars as well as the independent scholars and academics who have worked to make this encyclopedia what it is, while noting
that any remaining errors are solely my responsibility.

xvi
................

1

The Middle Ages
GILLIAN POLACK

TECHNICALLY, fantasy, science ﬁction, and horror did not exist in medieval
times in the sense that those genre terms are now used to describe modern
literature and the worldview to which the fantastic belongs. However, if speculative ﬁction includes all ﬁction that pushes the boundaries of the known
and the experienced and incorporates elements of the numinous, the magical, and the inexplicable, then a range of medieval texts are readable as science ﬁction or fantasy. What is important about these texts is that many of
them are ancestors to our own sense of the fantastic. Saints’ tales gave the
West a taste for biographies, which led to the modern novel. The links
between the medieval Arthurian tales and the modern versions are close.
This chapter assumes a modern view of what comprises the fantastic and
examines the range of literatures in which such speculative ﬁction appears
and especially how women were involved as creators, adaptors, patrons, performers, and subjects in the Middle Ages.
One of the key differences between modern and medieval is in the
interpretation of miracles. Miracles were in keeping with the technical operations of the world, according to many medieval scholars, because of the direct
role God and his assisting beings played in medieval cosmology. Augustine
argued that the only true miracle was creation itself. What we call “miracles”
and think of as events breaking with established order and bringing about the
fantastic were considered unusual manifestations of God’s workings. In literary terms, saints were often described as interlocutors with God, meaning
those who requested or triggered these events. This distinction is important
in considering texts in the Middle Ages in the context of literary equivalents
to modern speculative ﬁction: the religious mindset and its description of
reality clearly moved the Divine and its evocation from the fantastic to the
mundane. What this means in terms of equivalencies will be seen below, but
essentially it means that works where the Divine is expressed are closer to
1
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

the contemporary understanding of science ﬁction than to fantasy in terms
of how they explore the universe.
Religion and its effects have a vast inﬂuence on medieval tales. Biblical
women appear frequently in medieval literature, for instance. However, some
of this inﬂuence is medieval and some is imputed by modern readers. Early
magic and witchcraft literature (such as the Formicarium or Kramer and
Sprenger’s Malleus Malleﬁcarum) inﬂuenced the earliest witch trials, for example, but their chief literary inﬂuence was not seen until after the Middle Ages.
In terms of pure cosmological exploration, literature seldom plays a
part. The main writings of this sort (expanding understanding of the universe)
are technical. One of the most popular was Macrobius and his commentary
on Cicero’s Dream of Scipio. Abelard, Maimonides, and other medieval scholars
discussed the precise relationships between miracles, sorcery, nature, God,
and the universe in great detail. Some of these discussions were manifested
in literature. Saints’ lives and vision literature explore these issues from a
popular angle. Benedicta Ward suggests that Gerald of Wales is typical of
someone who disseminated new ideas while holding onto and explaining tradition. His work is full of material that would be considered accurate by the
credulous and fantastical by the more cynical.
The culture informing the inquiries of medievalists has little overlap in
this instance with the culture informing the study of modern speculative ﬁction. The ﬁelds of inquiry and the approaches chosen by the experts in the
ﬁeld do not render an overview of women and science ﬁction/fantasy and the
Middle Ages straightforward. The further readings at the end of the chapter
therefore can only serve as a background for medieval studies concerning
women and literature, with an emphasis on those elements of most interest.
In some ways, discussing women in medieval literature is quite different from discussing women in modern literature. The most important difference is that, according to some medieval thought, women occupied liminal
roles because of their intrinsic nature, just as Jews did. Because of this and
because of the rather large genre differences between medieval and modern
literature, the most useful scholarly studies for modern readers who are interested in the medieval speculative and the role women play tend to be those
that address individual works, individual authors, or individual themes.

WOMEN READERS AND WRITERS
...............................................................................................................................
Medieval female readers have been studied since the 1980s. The notions that
all texts are authored and that the environment around the writing and production of a text is relevant in its analysis have proved to be important in
understanding women reading in the Middle Ages. Medieval women were not
monolithic in their reading preferences: some read passively and others
2
.............

The Middle Ages
engaged actively; some preferred education, while others sought moral
enlightenment.
Determining female authorship is not straightforward. Scholars variously follow themes or seek textual hints through vocabulary or the form of a
work. Only a small proportion of possible works by women in the Middle Ages
have named authors, which means that most conclusions about women writing speculative-ﬁction-equivalent genres and themes in the Middle Ages
depends on scholarship that is still changing rapidly. Gender becomes more
of an issue and more easily apparent in writings of the later Middle Ages than
the earlier: there are more known authors and clearer genre–gender links. It
is always important to keep in mind that the Middle Ages were not simple or
short—even keeping to the typical period deﬁnition, meaning in Western
Europe from the ninth to ﬁfteenth centuries—there is a high degree of cultural change and differentiation and cultural instability.
There is clear evidence of women trouveres (northern French performers
and possibly composers of music and lyrics), although the scholarship on
res whose names we know include Blanche de Castille,
them is divided. Trouve
Lorete, Dame Margot, Maroie de Diergnau, and Sainte de Prez. Discovering
the exact numbers of performers/composers is difﬁcult, however, as the evidence is meagre. It is even harder to discover links between songs with supernatural or miraculous components and women composers.
Most famous female writers of the Middle Ages have little or no known
connection with the tales of romance and legend. A possible borderline case
is Christine de Pizan. Another is the great exception—a writer who not only
used folktales and Arthurian material but also helped shape the use of this
material by others: Marie de France.
Christine de Pizan or de Pisan lived from about 1364 to 1430. A FrancoItalian writer, often claimed to be the ﬁrst professional woman writer, Christine
was based mainly in Paris. Her work included ballads and several hundred
other short pieces, plus around fourteen more major works. Initially her writing was focused on the courtly and lyric and historical verse aimed at attracting patrons. Her work contains dreams and symbolism, and her writing is
imbued with the sentiment and understanding of contemporary religion. Only
a very small proportion of her work incorporated themes of the fantastic or
the liminal: she was far more a social and political commentator than an
explorer of horizons. The works that have magic or explore the universe in
any way tend to be retellings of standard legendary tales, that is, not innovative. Christine’s main interest in anything speculative is in her sophisticated
use of allegory. Her work is in sharp contrast to her predecessor, Marie de
France, whose poems carry many hints of the supernatural, link to Arthurian
themes, and incorporate miracles.
Marie de France wrote in Old French in the twelfth century. Her work
encompasses much of the best known of the vernacular fantastic in the
3
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Middle Ages. Marie wrote three types of work (although some scholars have
contested the attribution of the third). The ﬁrst is lais—short narrative verse
(a few hundred lines) dealing with romantic or folkloric themes. The second
is a translation of Aesop’s fables, and the third a tale of St. Patrick’s voyage to
the underworld. All three types of narrative use liminalities.
The lais are the most well known, and the liminal nature of their telling
is famous with one of her settings—the forest of Broceliande—copied and used
by many other medieval writers to indicate a tale’s potential for magic and
otherworldly happenings. Marie presented a vision of the otherworld in these
lais that was clear, elegant, and folk derived, but she also drew her images
from classical mythology and Arthurian tales. The Arthurian tales combine,
for instance, with the folk tradition in her lai “Lanval,” where the hero is a
knight of Arthur’s court and the heroine is a particularly beautiful fairy.

GENRES
...............................................................................................................................
The following survey, though not a thorough review of literary genres in the
Middle Ages, lists genres in which women and the speculative are likely to
meet and gives an explanation of where and how that happens.
Lyric Poetry

Female-voiced lyric poetry (poetry written from a female point of view) was
most common on the European continent. Subgenres included cantigas de
amigo (songs of friendship), chansons de toile (songs of the loom), pastorela
(rural/pastoral songs), alba (dawn songs), and love lyrics. The vast majority of
them are anonymous. Some scholars maintain that they were written by
men, some that women wrote them, and others argue that there is insufﬁcient evidence to be certain of the authorship. Occasionally these short lyric
poems include a hint of magic, but it is not a major feature.
Devotional and Visionary Literature

The writings of women visionaries and mystics such as Julian of Norwich and
Claire of Assisi are well preserved. It is arguable, however, whether they can
be classed as speculative ﬁction. With a modern view of reality, these women’s works are sometimes classed as allegories, other times as moral instruction, and sometimes they are dealt with according to the nature of the visions
therein. The mystical elements of the works are far more important than any
visions, though, as visions are only one aspect of the teachings of these
women. Most importantly, the contemporaries of writers such as Christina of
Markyate (twelfth century) and Catherine of Siena (fourteenth century) did
not consider them to be writers of entertainment; any visions or numinous
experiences in their works are regarded as fact, not ﬁction.
4
.............

The Middle Ages
In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, mystical work by writers such
as Marguerite Porete, Mechthild of Magdeburg, and Hadewijch of Anvers reﬂect
the courtly lyric in style. Their writings, however, are religious and often used by
scholars as source material to discover the religious expression of medieval
women. This focus puts them at the far end of the spectrum of religious literature from saints’ tales, which are considered at least partly entertainment.
Dream Visions

Dream visions in medieval literature are not uncommon, with many poems
devoted entirely to describing a dream and exploring its teachings. They are,
however, borderline in terms of speculative ﬁction because they were mainly
intended to be allegorical. One of the best-known is the fourteenth-century
Middle English poem “Pearl.” A young girl is an important element of the allegory. Religious works such as “Pearl” or romantic/religious allegory such as the
“Roman de la Rose” are closest to modern speculative ﬁction in some ways,
though the use of magic and science in these texts is generally peripheral.
Allegorical ﬁgures are important in medieval literature. Fortune or Fortuna, for instance, has an important place as arbiter of human fate. She
appears to have been less important before the twelfth century, but increasingly from then Fortune’s wheel appears in both literature and art, with Fortune herself very clearly female. Other female ﬁgures used allegorically
include Lady Meed, Wisdom, Nature, and the Virgin Mary. Allegory is often
used in the same way that modern high-concept science ﬁction is used: to
represent ideas that need to be explored and that need more than the current
reality in order to explore them. In the case of these ﬁgures, they exert inﬂuences over events and people, enabling writers to break out of the religious
model dictated by their worldview.
Hagiography (Lives of Saints)

Saints’ lives range from biographical or semibiographical to purely ﬁctional
accounts of the life of a saint or martyr. They vary considerably in form and
nature, appearing in verse and prose, in the vernacular and in Latin. The Jewish lives of martyrs tend to focus on the mundane, but the Christian saints’
lives can have considerable fantastical elements.
Hagiography is ﬁction that explores the relationship between the spiritual and the physical. While much of the time this is mundane and the writer is
more concerned with the biography and the incipient sainthood, there is
always the possibility of the liminal. An early example for a female saint is in
one of the earliest pieces of Old French extant—the Cantilene de Sainte Eulalie.
The miracle in this tale occurs when she is supposed to be burned to death.
The moral nature of the lives of saints are given to the audience to
present the hope of salvation in a palatable form. Entertainment is therefore
5
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

important, and the working of miracles and presence of strange beings or the
Devil are occasionally used purely for entertainment value. Saints’ tales tend
to be religious or instructional in nature. The biographical form and moral
function determine the types of liminal and fantastic occurrences. Frequently
occurring elements include the saint being martyred or persecuted, rising to
prominence in the Church, working as a missionary, ﬁghting against pagans,
turning to ascetism, becoming a hermit, and rising to prominence in society.
The amount of the nonmundane content ranges from none at all to a tale
bursting with miracles and the supernatural.
The legend of the saint and the personality of the saint combine with
the form of the tale to determine the importance of the speculative elements.
Women ﬁgure as the subjects of many of these tales. Particularly popular
female subjects include Margaret, Anne, Christina, various collections of virgins, Faith, Agnes, Dorothy, Mary Magdalene, Katherine of Alexandria, Cecilia,
Agatha, Lucy, Elizabeth of Hungary, Theodora, and Helena. They all have speciﬁc aspects that are highlighted in the tales; for example, Helena is closely
linked to the True Cross.
Virgin martyrs had a particular appeal, as the Church focused on abstinence as a path to religious perfection. Some of the more important tales
written between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries are those of Agnes,
Barbara, Catherine of Alexandria, Christina, Faith, and Margaret. The tale of
Margaret of Antioch is particularly interesting from a speculative ﬁctional
point of view, as it uses the inherent powers of the universe as, in this case,
an evil dragon. Even when elements of the fantastic are absent from the tales
themselves, the death of saints implies their potential for affecting the order
of the universe, as they are given the miracles that prove their sainthood.
The cult of Mary is quite apart in many ways and even possibly includes
writings concerning Mary Magdalene. Mary Magdalene had her own history in
the Middle Ages, incorporating elements of tales of other Biblical ﬁgures such
as Mary of Bethany. One of the most important elements of stories concerning
her was that she was a whore who repented. Her complete tale gave her a rich
and varied life, allowing readers of her story to explore her transitions through
marriage, prostitution, possession by devils, sanctity—including living by
divine sustenance given to her after the Ascension. Her story explores the role
of God and how deity inﬂuences the medieval world, and it helps its audience
understand some of the crucial boundaries of sin and virtue in that universe.
The Marian cult is a very special case. Mariology comprises the story of
Mary and her miracles. Like the tales of Mary Magdalene, it explores the interaction of the divinely favored human with the universe and the capacity of
such an individual to change the universe. The cult of Mary was the single
biggest cult in the Middle Ages, and the literature relating to it is vast.
6
.............

The Middle Ages
Frame Tales

Frame tales are sequences of stories contained within a wider narrative
framework. The most well-known medieval frame tales are Chaucer’s and
Boccaccio’s. The tales within each collection tend to reﬂect the wider range of
stories available from different literary types, such as the Wife of Bath’s tale
in The Canterbury Tales, which is taken from an Arthurian narrative.
Women play a signiﬁcant role in these tales, some more so than others.
In 1253, Prince Fabrique of Castile ordered a translation from Arabic to the
common tongue of a frame tale (one of the group commonly referred to as
the “Seven Sages”) that features women telling as well as appearing within
the stories.

Chansons de Geste

The chansons de geste (old French epic legends) are an important and inﬂuential genre. The roles of women divide the epics into two groups, one where
the role is minimal and the other containing romance. Where the story
revolves around relationships between the characters, speciﬁc women are often important. Liminality and the fantastic play a minimal part in the tales—
the sun stops in the Chanson de Roland, for instance. Guiborc (William of
e) and the other women in the chanOrange’s wife) and Aude (Roland’s ﬁance
sons de geste are seldom involved with anything supernatural.

Romance

Romances and lais are generally about adventures and knights and their love
lives, and they can range considerably in length. Manuscripts have survived
where many verse romances adorn a single volume, while other manuscripts
contain but a section of a multivolume work. The most popular multivolume
works generally concern Arthurian tales. Some romans assume a pseudohistorical past, while others take the story away from a clear time and place.
Ones with Arthurian settings are more likely to avoid too close links with
known history.
Romance is the genre most likely to meet modern notions of speculative ﬁction. The romances have a larger percentage of incidents that can be
considered magic or imaginary; they have strong themes of adventureromance, and they clearly carry the reader’s imagination away from reality
into different worlds through use of liminal elements such as the forest of
Broceliande. Even those romances with named heroes from known (and relatively recent) history have few links to actual history. The formulas are the familiar ones of modern adventure stories and romantic ﬁction.
The romances were written across Europe in a range of languages. Over
a hundred survive from England alone, in Middle English, Anglo-Norman (the
7
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

English dialect of Old French), and Latin. The tales crossed not only language
barriers but religious barriers as well, with several romances rewritten for
Jewish audiences in the late Middle Ages. Most romances are anonymous.
The possibility of some authors being women merits serious study, as scholars often posit a mainly female readership. Manuscripts of French Arthurian
romances from the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries give evidence of women
having owned the volumes.
Some romances have women as chief protagonists. On the whole these
are romantic in nature. An important exception to this is the Old French
Roman de Silence, where Silence lives her early life as a boy and takes on the
duties of heir. Some romances have Arthurian themes (e.g., the Middle English Sir Tristrem), and some have historical themes (such as Guy of Warwick or
Richard Coer de Lyon, both written c. 1300). Some romances use older themes,
loosely connected to classical stories. There are romances that retell the story
of Orpheus and Eurydice, for instance, or the Trojan War. These are retellings
of classical tales that reshape the tales to ﬁt medieval visions of reality, and
the women in these stories have been reshaped to suit medieval concepts.
Many English-language romances derived their themes locally, from
French romances or from stories told in entirely different forms (the French
chansons de geste gave several English romances their subject matter). However, most romances display a limited range of roles for women and focus on
male heroes. Women are mainly objects of desire/love/marriage/testing. An
important example of this is Philippe de Remi’s La Manekine (France, c. 1270),
the story of the abuse of a woman by her father and then by her mother-inlaw. The story ends happily ever after, but en route to the happy ending, the
heroine’s hand is cut off (to save her from incest) and reattached half a lifetime later. A group of other works copied this plotline, which became particularly popular toward the end of the Middle Ages.
Women also appear as minor plot elements. The Alexander Romance is
the ﬁctionalized life of Alexander the Great. It appears across Europe and
North Africa in a variety of languages, from at least the ninth century until
the close of the Middle Ages. This work includes several episodes that might
be considered speculative by modern readers, including a voyage under the
sea and one by air. One of the most important episodes concerning women
(where Alexander visits the city of the Amazons) does not really ﬁt a magical
theme, but another, earlier in the tale, where the experiences of Nectarebus
with Queen Olympias of Macedonia include making her believe that
Alexander was fathered by the god Ammon, is clear in its use of magic.
The most important exceptions to women as victims or as lesser plot
elements are mainly in Arthurian romances.
8
.............

The Middle Ages
Arthurian Romance

The Arthurian tales are the closest to modern fantasy in the way they take
the reader into a quest or romance-ﬁlled reality with world-threatening
potential. The tales are also the closest in terms of how the fantastic and the
liminal are used to help create the tale.
The corpus of Arthurian stories vary in genre considerably, as discussed
above. The women in them tend to play more important roles than in any
other genre except saints’ tales. Guinevere is not simply the victim of circumstances, but a major protagonist in many of the stories concerning her. Laudine (in Chretien de Troyes’s tale Yvain) may need a male defender and be
chieﬂy a love interest, but she has a fully developed personality, and Lunete
(her maid) is able to act independently. In Malory’s version of the same story,
Lyonet has supernatural qualities. Enide in Chretien de Troyes’s Erec et Enide is
mixed. In some parts of her story, she acts as a protagonist, but in others, she
is doomed to silence and subservience. This ambiguity nicely reﬂects the roles
women play in much literature. Supernatural qualities or a woman being in
reality a fairy are devices used often to give the women a greater role and
wider choices of action in these tales. Nimue, for instance, in the Vulgate
Arthurian cycle and in Malory is capable of magic and thus able both to trap
Merlin and to serve as Arthur’s protector.
Of all the women in the Arthurian corpus, the most interesting is Morgan.
Her characteristics changed over time and according to the narrative in which
she appears. Her personality ranged from being virtuous, magical, and beautiful in Geoffrey of Monmouth’s history to being a meddler of evil intent in the
later prose romances. Morgan largely owed this focus to the enduring strength
and widespread popularity of the Arthurian tradition in the Middle Ages.
The story of Tristan and Iseult cannot be ignored, because it was so inﬂuential and because Iseult is a particularly well-drawn female protagonist.
The tale was copied by many other writers, and so Iseult was important as a
literary model. The magic potion drunk by the lovers is the most important
element of the fantastic in the Tristan and Iseult tale, because it links all
others together and focuses on Iseult.
The “loathly lady” is another major player in a variety of stories. She
mainly appears in short tales set in Arthurian contexts (tales featuring
Gawain), but also in Irish historical legends where the woman in question is
allegorical, representing sovereignty. The basic tale has an excessively ugly
woman posing riddles to the hero.

Drama

The Bible and other religious texts were key sources for drama, and elements
of the fantastic within drama tend to reﬂect these sources. The attitudes toward women displayed in the source texts tend to be reﬂected in the dramatic
9
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

text. For instance, a very popular sequence derived from the apocryphal Gospel of Nicodemus involved the Harrowing of Hell by Jesus, and the story is all
about men.
KEY CHARACTERS
...............................................................................................................................
Important characters and character types in medieval literature who are not
discussed elsewhere in this entry include the following.
Ancestresses

The female ancestors of major dynasties such as the Plantagenet, Lusignan,
and de Boullon lines are literary ﬁgures in their own right. The most celebrated were considered important parts of major genealogies. They were at
least partly otherworldly and were described as beautiful but also as monstrosities. There are not many of them, but they carry a large literary and cultural burden. These women appear in certain types of literature, but are also
referred to in passing comments occasionally. For instance, the best-known
work on Melusine (the Lusignan ancestress) is in the romance by Jean d’Arras
(late fourteenth century). Melusine protects Raimondin when he has killed
his uncle by mistake. She will give him wealth, power, and all he needs as
long as she is left alone on Saturdays. Together they found a dynasty. Many
years later, Raimondin spies on Melusine at his brother’s urging. She is not
human—one of the words used to describe her is “faee.” The marriage is
doomed—as soon as Raimondin accuses her of being monstrous, she leaves.
The March entry in the Duke of Berry’s Tres Riches Heures shows her ﬂying
around the castle held by the Lusignan family in her guivre form.
Cosmological and Mythological Literary Figures

Characters drawn from earlier writers such as Boethius appear in medieval
tales as wisdom goddesses. These include personiﬁcations of the Arts, the
Muses, Dame Nature, classical goddesses, and Sybil. They appear mainly in
learned texts, but there are passing references to them throughout medieval
literature, especially to Dame Fortune.
Fairies and Supernatural Women

Some of the women who appear in medieval literature are nonhuman, and
the most important of these are fairies. Most fairies are female and are
described as having hair of red gold, beautiful pale skin, and clear eyes of gray
or blue. Medieval fairies appear frequently in romances. They do not resemble
modern fairies except insofar as they are possessed of exceptional beauty. In
literature, they appear as mothers (and can become ancestresses to important lineages as discussed above) or lovers. They also appear in folk
10
...............

The Middle Ages
anecdotes. Some of them have names and clear identities, and a few have
achieved signiﬁcant literary and wider fame. A good example of the latter is
Melusine. Others touch on the lives of people without achieving fame in their
own right such as the Swan Maiden or the Lady of the Lake. The most sophisticated fairy in literature is Morgan (see above).
There are other ﬁgures that appear in the Norse mythology and literature of the north, such as Grendel’s mother and the Valkyries (the battle
maidens of Odin in Scandinavian tales).
Lilith

Lilith appears as a female demon in medieval folk belief. Her most important
literary appearance is in the Hebrew text “The Alphabet of Ben Sira.” In this
narrative, Lilith is a demon who eats babies, and protection against her (amulets) is important. These tales and related folk practices crossed religious
boundaries. Lilith was considered to be evil and possibly supernatural.
Mermaids

Mermaids appear as an animal in bestiaries (encyclopedic descriptions of animals, birds, and insects). They may or may not be linked to the more literary
fairies with serpent’s tails (for example, some variants of the Melusine story).
Liban in The Book of the Dun Cow (eleventh century) developed a salmon’s tail,
for instance, but was quite human otherwise. Scholars are divided on this
question. Geoffrey of Monmouth writes about the sirens encountered by Brutus on his way to Britain. In cases like this, this reﬂects classical inﬂuence
rather than a separate medieval tradition.
Further Readings
Brumble, H. David. Classical Myths and Legends in the Middle Ages and Renaissance: A Dictionary of Allegorical Meaning. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1998.
Finke, Laurie A. Women’s Writing in English: Medieval England. London: Longman, 1999.
Harf-Lancner, L. Les Fees an Moyen Age: Morgane et Melusine; La Naissance des Fees Librairie
Honore Champion. Reprint, Paris: H. Champion, 1984.
Lacy, N. J., ed. The New Arthurian Encyclopedia. New York: Garland, 1996.
Lindahl, C., J. McNamara, and J. Lindau, eds. Medieval Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Myths,
Legends, Tales, Beliefs, and Customs. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-Clio, 2000.
Meale, Carol M., ed. Women and Literature in Britain, 1150–1500. Cambridge Studies in Medieval Literature, 17. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Smith, L., and H. M. Jane, eds. Women, the Book and the Worldly. Vol. 2, Selected Proceedings of
the St. Hilda’s Conference, 1993. Cambridge, England: D. S. Brewer, 1995.
Ward, Benedicta. Miracles and the Medieval Mind: Theory, Record and Event, 1100–1215. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1982.
Wogan-Browne, J. Saints’ Lives and Women’s Literary Culture, c. 1150–1300: Virginity and Its
Authorizations. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.

11
..............

2

Nineteenth-Century Fiction
HELEN PILINOVSKY

THE nineteenth century began with a tradition of fantasy well established. In
Spain, Don Quixote (1605), later to be heralded as the ﬁrst novel, had already
drawn upon fantastic themes. In France, the contes de fees (fairy tales) and
the seeds of scientiﬁc romance held sway. In Germany, authors such as
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Ludwig Tieck, and Clemens Brentano published
tales whose tropes were based in legend, myth, and folklore. In Russia,
Alexander Pushkin, inspired by the French fad for fairy tales and the more literary German stories, drew upon Russian folk stories to create the “artiﬁcial
ﬂowers” that would guide so much of that nation’s literature. And in England,
the foundations of what would become science ﬁction and fantasy had been
laid down by Horace Walpole with The Castle of Otranto (1764) and reinforced
by Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley with Frankenstein (1818).
Discussions of nineteenth-century ﬁction must, of necessity, deﬁne their
chronological boundaries with a bit more care than might at ﬁrst seem obvious,
or necessary. Frequently, academics speak of the “long nineteenth century,”
referencing the thematic commonality of the work spanning the period from
1789 to 1914, that is, from the French Revolution to World War I. This period
overlaps the styles of writing commonly referenced as gothic, Romantic, and
Victorian. Call it what one will, it is certain that the period in question was
tumultuous, particularly on the issue of social roles and most particularly,
gender roles. In the nineteenth century, a time when women were coming into
their own, that movement was represented in their ﬁction and in the ﬁction
produced concerning them. Women were present, not in “science ﬁction” or
“fantasy” as the coalescing genres came to be known, but in speculative ﬁction—
said speculation concentrating upon who they were, what their roles would be,
and where the future would take them. Although many of the authors from the
early portions of the period are male writers producing male-centered works,
their work was based in the female-dominated tradition of the fairy tale.
12
...............

Nineteenth-Century Fiction
Many critics argue that the fantastic came to England with the advent
of the gothic. Practically speaking, the gothic begins prior to the beginning of
even the long nineteenth century. However, its themes and scope are crucial
enough to the birth of the fantastic as a genre to warrant inclusion. The
gothic genre is commonly held to have been begun by Walpole in 1764 with
The Castle of Otranto. The novel integrated the “realistic” style of the day with
the whimsy of the fantastic. The gothic genre is marked by several characteristics: stylistically, a certain dark tone, a sense of ominousness; thematically,
a claustrophobic inability to escape from a situation or locale; and centrally
and most importantly, an emphasis on the possibility of the fantastic.
Although The Castle of Otranto is Walpole’s best-known work, he also included
several literary fairy tales in his collection Hieroglyphic Tales (1785), pieces that
es of the seventeenth century.
were heavily inﬂuenced by the contes des fe
However, while Walpole may have begun the gothic as a genre and
established it in a certain mode, his followers adapted it to their own ends
and means. Many of the successive gothic novelists, Anne Radcliffe being
foremost among them, kept the trappings while eliminating the central point;
the fantastic possibilities were quickly subsumed into a split between what
Tzvetan Todorov would call the “marvelous” and the “uncanny.” This split
more or less uniformly followed gender lines, with men indulging in marvelous conditions and women providing realist plots, establishing a pattern that
would hold true throughout much of the development of the genre of fantasy
in nineteenth-century ﬁction.
Anne Radcliffe began writing ﬁction as an amusement and quickly
became one of the most popular authors of the period. Of her many works,
The Mysteries of Udolpho (1794) is considered to be most inﬂuential. Radcliffe’s
novels differed from those of her male peers most speciﬁcally in that,
whereas she, like Walpole and Matthew Gregory Lewis (The Monk, 1796),
focused on the travails of heroic young women cast into mysterious dangers,
her dangers were explained away as mundane malevolences, whereas theirs
depended more heavily upon fantastic devices. In 1798, Jane Austen would
extend the movement of women rejecting the novels that were purportedly
most popular among them by parodying the gothic genre in Northanger Abbey
(published 1818), in which her somewhat fanciful heroine, Catherine, imagines herself quite incorrectly to be in similarly threatening circumstances.
Austen’s listing of Catherine’s reading material (the majority of it written by
women) became known as the “Northanger Horrid” novels.
The themes and stylings of the gothic also provided rich inspiration for
the Romantic authors. The Romantic movement was in many ways a rejection of the goals of the Enlightenment and was marked by a questioning of
established social hierarchies and by an interest in the relationship of the
individual to the natural world and to themselves. The gothic evocations of
terror and strong emotion, along with its interest in anachronistic times and
13
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

traditions, lent itself well to the new movement. One of its leading lights,
Samuel Coleridge, would explore those themes in his poetry: “Cristabel”
(1800) is thought to feature the ﬁrst vampiric character in British literature.
The Romantics’ main contributions to the discipline of speculative ﬁction
would in fact largely fall into the category of what we think of today as horror:
certainly so with the novel that many consider the cornerstone of science
ﬁction, Frankenstein.
Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley was born in 1797 to two of the great political thinkers of the day: William Godwin and seminal proto-feminist thinker
Mary Wollstonecraft, author of A Vindication of the Rights of Women (1792). Mary
eloped with Percy Bysshe Shelley at the age of seventeen. She produced the
novel Frankenstein some two years later under dramatic circumstances. A famous house party at Lake Geneva during the “Year without a Summer”
prompted the ghost-story writing contest that would also produce John Polidori’s The Vampyre (credited as a strong inﬂuence on Bram Stoker in his composition of Dracula). By this date, Mary Shelley had already suffered the death
of her ﬁrstborn son shortly after his premature birth and was experiencing serious concerns for her sickly newborn son, William. Frankenstein, inspired by
what Shelley famously referred to as a waking dream where she saw a pale
student kneeling beside the creature he had assembled has frequently been
discussed as an exploration of the concerns of motherhood, and the responsibilities of the progenitor, with Dr. Frankenstein serving as a stand-in for the
anxious author. Although the female characters of the novel function as
pawns, the metaphor of birth, a central female concern, is transposed onto
Shelley’s masculine protagonist. The issues of power and gender are eloquently addressed, albeit at a remove.
Another of the “Lake Poets,” as they would come to be called, Robert
Southey produced the prototype for the story of “Goldilocks and the Three
Bears.” In his version, titled simply “The Three Bears” (1837), the ursine protagonists are not a family unit, but simply a trio of male bears who live together,
differentiated by their sizes in the text; the invader, too, is changed, represented not by a winsomely mischievous little girl, but rather by a little old
woman with a marked propensity for rude exclamations when her ill-gotten
rewards disappoint her. Southey was in good company when it came to the
writing of fairy stories, original and otherwise: with the 1823 publication of
Edgar Taylor’s translation of the Grimms’ Children’s and Household Tales, the fairy
tale became a new battleﬁeld for the proponents of fantasy to quarrel over.
By the time of the Industrial Revolution and the Victorian period, fairy
tales’ original values were seen as a nonissue as compared to their potential
usefulness as a tool of didacticism and appropriation. Extreme changes were
made to modify fairy tales from their original forms to versions that might be
more palatable to their (paying) target audience: the tales were bowdlerized,
edited, rewritten, recast, and reincarnated to an extreme degree. Fairy tales
14
...............

Nineteenth-Century Fiction
and, by extension, fantasy, were tidied and made suitable for the modest readership that was seen as their proper audience: women and children. However,
the members of that readership did not always agree with the rewriting.
For other authors, the themes of older tales served as inspiration for
social commentary and the revitalization of the fantastic. The ﬁrst instance
can be detected in the recategorization of fairy tales as being ﬁt only for children or women, and in the structural changes that made them so, crystallizing the fairy tale into a recognizable genre. The second can be seen in the
fantastical creations of countless authors that began as plays on new literary
fairy tales before evolving into the genre that we recognize today as fantasy.
The result was a paradigm shift in two parts, ﬁrst of the fairy tale into a medium for children, and second of that children’s medium into the genre of
fantasy when its proponents found its constraints to be too narrow.
As the fairy tale was tidied into a neatly speciﬁc genre targeted at a juvenile (either literally or ﬁguratively) readership, many of the authors who ﬁt
it rebelled against its purposes, either by railing against it directly or by simply subverting it. In the course of this subversion, it is possible to argue that,
as original fairy tales grew further and further from their traditional roots as
a result of the narrowing of the genre, the original fairy tales became original
fantasies—fantasies that addressed the issues of gender and power. Simply
put, the process can be broken down into three stages, consisting of original
tales that reinforced the genre boundaries of the traditional fairy tale in original stories, parodic and subversive rescriptings, and ﬁnally self-contained stories set in fantastical surroundings.
John Ruskin’s “The King of the Golden River” has been described by
some as the ﬁrst English fairy story intended for children. This distinction differs from the various translations of stories originally intended for adults,
and from the remakings of those stories for didactic purposes in works such
as Sarah Fielding’s The Governess (1749). Although “The King of the Golden River” was not published until 1851, it was in fact written ten years earlier for a
twelve-year-old Efﬁe Gray, whom Ruskin would marry seven years later. “The
King of the Golden River,” concerning the struggles between three brothers
(two iniquitous and one virtuous) to achieve success, is short on female characters, possessing precisely none, heroic or villainous. In some ways, it is the
best possible example of the limitations the Victorians placed upon the fairy
tale: written in the form of a fantastic parable with magical creatures in lieu
of angelic beings, the story takes the editing of unwanted sexuality or disturbing social commentary in children’s stories to a new height by simply eliminating all women. Despite or perhaps because of that, it was immensely
popular, going back to press in 1868, and remaining, to this day, one of the
most popular examples of an original English fairy tale. Ruskin was not the
only notable British intellectual to seriously try his hand at the fairy tale or
fantasy, but he was one of the ﬁrst, and most successful.
15
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

In 1853, William Makepeace Thackeray composed The Rose and the Ring
(1855) as a distraction for his daughters. Parodying the conventions of the
“traditional” fairy tale, and pointing toward the growing dissatisfaction for its
stringently policed contemporary constraints, The Rose and the Ring satirizes
the tropes with a bored fairy godmother, the Fairy Blackstick, who grants her
charges bad luck for the purpose of character-building. The frustrated ﬁgure
of female authority can be seen as a fascinating metaphor for the feminine
response to the stagnation of the genre, which had previously been owned by
her and all her ilk.
Charles Dickens—who famously commented that he would have been
quite glad to have grown up to marry Little Red Riding Hood—reinforced that
position in two key pieces: ﬁrst by telling in “Frauds on the Fairies” (1853) and
then by showing in “The Magic Fishbone” (1868). The essay “Frauds on the
Fairies” responded to the pedantic didacticism of fairy tale revisions of the age,
most speciﬁcally to George Cruikshank’s teetotaling rewritings in the Fairy
Library (1853–64).
“The Magic Fishbone” is a good example of the subversion of the fairy
tale form into an early type of fantasy. It is set in a rather modern kingdom
ruled by a king and queen who follow the trappings of the bourgeoisie: visiting the ﬁshmonger, going to the ofﬁce, keeping house, all while managing
nineteen children. Luckily, the eldest princess, Alicia, is of a pragmatic bent,
capable of providing assistance and having been granted a magic ﬁshbone
that will grant one wish (provided that it is wished for at the right time) by a
cantankerous Good Fairy. Throughout the Queen’s illness and a number of
other lesser mishaps, whenever the King inquires as to the disposition of the
ﬁshbone, Alicia puts him off and applies practical solutions instead, until
ﬁnally she has the opportunity to rectify their poverty, not by wishing for endless wealth but by wishing it Quarter-Day (one of the four days in England
when rents are due).
Whereas Ruskin maintained the status quo concerning fantasy, Thackeray and Dickens began the process of subverting the fairy tale into fantasy.
Their parodic treatments expanded its boundaries, and their central employment of self-motivated female characters was quite deliberate. It was the beginning of a movement to be built upon further by the next generation of
nineteenth-century fantasists.
In 1865 Charles Lutwidge Dodgson published Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland under the name of Lewis Carroll, with Through the Looking Glass, and
What Alice Found There following in 1872. The Alice books were inspired largely
by Carroll’s friendship with the children of the Liddell family, Alice in particular. Rather than taking their roots from fairy stories, as so many other works
of the period did, the Alice books were founded in traditional English nursery
rhymes. Dodgson’s publisher considered the title of Alice Among the Fairies
upon ﬁrst seeing the manuscript.
16
...............

Nineteenth-Century Fiction
Critics admire the novel as the ﬁrst literary fairy tale for children with
no speciﬁc moral purpose, making much of its anarchic, dreamlike qualities:
however, critics also note its peculiarly anti-female views. Carroll, with his
comments concerning the wisdom of leaving off growing at seven and his
inexplicably, unreasonably hostile maternal ﬁgures, evinces distaste for
mature femininity. In analyzing his attitude toward the virtues of girlhood,
critics note an element of transposition: as Nina Auerbach and U. C. Knopﬂemacher have put it, the most admired authors of Victorian fantasy were men
who gloriﬁed the state of childhood in their tales of imaginary lands where
characters could avoid the pressures of adulthood, whereas, in contrast,
“Most Victorian women … envied adults rather than children,” continuing
caustically that “if they were good, they never grew up” (Forbidden Journeys, 1),
given the typical conditions of women’s lives.
Among Carroll’s notable fellow authors, and as his mentor (it was supposedly the enthusiastic reception of MacDonald’s three daughters that
encouraged Carroll to publish), it is impossible to ignore the work of George
MacDonald, frequently referred to as the father of modern fantasy. Author of
numerous original fairy tales, MacDonald’s ﬁrst prose work, Phantastes: A Faerie Romance (1858), was set in a dream world similar to Carroll’s, albeit one
featuring a mature male protagonist and his quest through fairyland for a
beauteous woman of marble, a quest complicated by his acquisition of a malignant black shadow which corrupts all that it falls upon. As in much of MacDonald’s work, his hero is guided by a mentoring enchantress, indicating a
somewhat different mentality from that of Carroll.
Critics have noted that MacDonald’s attitudes toward women were
nearly reverential, attributing this to his loss of his own mother at the age of
eight. MacDonald’s work is heavily populated with radiant maternal ﬁgures.
Almost equally notable are his courageous female characters: Irene, Mossy,
and Rosamund. MacDonald’s career trajectory overlaps with the larger movement within nineteenth-century fantasy: in “The Light Princess” (1864),
MacDonald parodied the traditional fairy tale format with his tale of a princess cursed with weightlessness at her christening by the obligatory overlooked guest cum witch; in The Princess and the Goblin (1872), he composed a
fairy-tale-like story more closely approaching a self-contained fantasy world;
and in Lilith (1895), he wrote an allegorical fantasy relating to his goal in Phantastes, but one inﬂuenced by adult sexuality and tempered by his religious
beliefs. Certainly, this fantasy was never intended for children. The transition
between fantasy based in fairy tales and intended for children and fantasy
written for its own sake and intended for adults is one of the most important
steps in nineteenth-century speculative ﬁction.
Where, then, were the female authors? Why, working side by side along
with their masculine compatriots, to somewhat different ends. To a certain
degree, these authors are indebted to their male predecessors and
17
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

compatriots; however, their purposes and intentions, as well as their achievements, were different. Women faced a dual challenge in authoring works of
fantasy. In a medium that had been tailored to reinforce the dominant paradigm, they struggled to subvert it while producing salable works of ﬁction. As
the result of social expectation, many of their works were aimed at children:
their morals, however, were anything but juvenile.
Anne Thackeray Ritchie, daughter of William Makepeace Thackeray,
wrote fairy tale retellings of her own in Five Old Friends and a Young Prince
(1868) and Bluebeard’s Key, and Other Stories (1874)—versions of traditional fairy
stories set in contemporary London. In one tale, her narrator remarks on the
prevalence of fairy-tale ﬁgures in modern life, commenting that too many
people in modern life assumed the metaphors of fairy tales for reality. Ritchie’s observation of the accuracy of the fairy tale metaphors in modern life—
poor girls striving, girls in general waiting passively—is frighteningly true, and
well demonstrated in her ﬂeshing out of the themes of the tales. In her acerbic take on “Sleeping Beauty,” for example, the heroine lives an empty, repetitive life devoid of meaning, and the fact that her “prince” is taken with her
ignorance is a source of chagrin on the part of the other characters.
Julia Horatio Ewing preﬁgured MacDonald’s The Princess and the Goblins in
some ways with her story of “Amelia and the Dwarfs” (1870). Her heroine, however, is not a cherished innocent but an artlessly precocious nuisance who deliberately interrupts mature conversations with inappropriate observations and
torments the adults around her with her carelessness and pickiness. Disobeying
her nurse’s injunction to stay out of the ﬁelds at night, Amelia sneaks outdoors
to disrupt the haycocks even after a warning that the fairies would be out on
such a moonlit night, and she is carried away by the dwarfs to their underground realm where she must wash every frock she has ever sullied, live off the
scraps of her previously rejected meals, mend every item that she’d destroyed,
and clear away the broken threads of all of the conversations that she has torn.
Underground, Amelia makes the acquaintance of a mortal woman in a
similar situation who warns her of her likely fate: to be kept by the dwarfs as
a “pet” unless she can charm them using the typical feminine strategy of
feigning happiness and distract them via another, their love of dancing. In the
course of her chores, Amelia catches the interest of the one particular dwarf
who repeatedly inveigles her into dancing with him, only to eventually claim
her as his eternal partner. Amelia, on the further advice of the old woman,
succeeds in escaping this fate to return to her home as a model of virtue.
While the idea of rectifying one’s wrongs and achieving a new moral dimension is certainly in keeping with Victorian mores, Ewing’s descriptions of the
rebellious, forthright Amelia are extremely engaging. Her reactions to the
prospect of an unwanted partnership are a commentary on the state of male
and female relations; the hint of enslavement is one that MacDonald and
other authors would use in their work as well.
18
...............

Nineteenth-Century Fiction
In another of her stories, “The Ogre Courting” (1871), Ewing’s adult heroine (appropriately known as “Managing Molly”) similarly outsmarts her
unwanted suitor by giving him exactly the qualities he thinks he desires in a
wife, only in excess: she feigns thrift to make herself irresistible before tricking him into stufﬁng their marital bed with snow in lieu of goose feathers,
weakening him sufﬁciently so as to put an end to his boundless appetites.
Another key example of Victorian attitudes is the use of sexually voracious dwarfs and goblins as a metaphorical manifestation of typical fears of
miscegenation, class contamination, or other debasement. This theme can be
found in the work of Christina Rossetti, whose work in the fashion established
by earlier authors is in keeping with the gendered breakdown of attitudes toward fantasy. Her most famous work, the poem “Goblin Market” (1859), certainly argues for the primacy of hearth and home while preaching against the
dangers of the fantastic and the unknown: the “goblin fruits” offered to women
in the poem have been thought to represent narcotics, or the pleasures of the
ﬂesh, and correlate with the projected fears of women swayed from their goals
by ill-intentioned men. Similar themes are enacted in her subversive short stories for children, such as “Speaking Likenesses” (1874), wherein a moralizing
aunt succinctly demonstrates the dangers of disobedience to her charges using
fantastic measures. Written in the form of a dialogue, “Speaking Likenesses” is
structured as a narrative: the stories, concerning three willful little girls who
wind up in a series of nightmarish scenarios resulting from their rebelliousness, are frequently interrupted by the curiously listening charges, sending a
dual message to readers as to the rewards of rebellion.
Jean Ingelow’s Mopsa the Fairy (1869) begins with a seemingly familiar
story as our young hero Jack ventures forth into Fairyland on a quest; however,
the nature of that quest—to return a quartet of infant fairies to their native
land—is quickly subverted by Ingelow’s growing focus on one of the seemingly
insigniﬁcant fairies, the titular character, Mopsa. As Jack and the fairies wend
their way through the various realms, they encounter situations vaguely reminiscent of Gulliver’s travels: a kingdom of talking horses served by loyal
automatons; a fairy market that rivals Rossetti’s own; and, ﬁnally, an enslaved
fairy queen, ransomed to freedom with the most valuable coin Jack possesses.
The fairy queen serves as foreshadowing of what Mopsa will become. Mopsa
begins the tale as a tiny ﬁgure the size of Jack’s thumb, and concludes it by
having outgrown her putative rescuer both literally and ﬁguratively. Although
her happy ending consists of her dutiful acquiescence to her fate of ruling
over a fairy kingdom, Jack quickly forgets his disappointment over leaving
Fairyland to settle back into the mundane life of a British schoolboy.
Ingelow’s ﬁrst major collection, Poems (1863), was heralded by Rossetti
as “a formidable rival to most men, and to any woman” (The Rossetti Macmillan
Letters, 19), reﬂecting the view that the gender hierarchy was related to talent.
Rossetti’s evaluation did faint justice to both the morals of Ingelow’s writing
19
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

and the qualities of her work; after Tennyson’s death, Queen Victoria was
petitioned to install Ingelow as poet laureate. Her message concerning the
weight of female responsibility, however, left a lasting legacy.
Less than a decade later, Mary de Morgan would publish her ﬁrst collection of original fairy stories, On a Pincushion (1877), containing the understandably underpraised story “The Toy Princess.” The story tells the tale of a
kingdom that prefers a synthetic simulacrum to its living, breathing, problematic princess. The tale is set a thousand years ago on the other side of the
world, in contrast to the more typically vague “Once upon a time in a land
far, far away.” The pointed nature of de Morgan’s observations is immediately
made clear when the kingdom of very polite people who live in harmony is
disrupted as a foreign bride is brought to the land from a country of laughter
and strong emotion. The miserable young queen pines for her homeland
fruitlessly and without recourse, except in one manner. Having already wed,
she cannot beg her fairy godmother for assistance in her own name, but she
can certainly do so on behalf of her daughter. When the godmother, Taboret,
checks in on her motherless charge to ﬁnd her lonely and despondent, she
decides to remove her to more convivial surroundings, leaving a specially
made automaton (purchased from the largest shop in fairyland for the price
of four cats’ footfalls, two ﬁshes’ screams, and two swans’ songs in a scene
that both hearkens back to Dickens while predicting Dunsany) in her place.
The princess, Ursula, is removed to the cottage of a friendly ﬁsherman, and
all concerned are happy. The princess has love and freedom, and the kingdom
has a perfectly mannered princess whose entire vocabulary consists of four
simple and polite phrases. However, when Taboret sees that Ursula is beginning to fall in love with the ﬁsherman’s son, she explains matters to the
court, reveals the deception, and returns the princess for the trial period of a
week. Needless to say, the court prefers its toy princess; Ursula is released
from her responsibilities, and Taboret, having thrown up her hands in disgust
at the kingdom’s choice, gives them all exactly what they desire and deserve.
De Morgan is better known for the titular story of her next collection,
The Necklace of Princess Fiorimonde (1880), which contains a vainglorious princess who is willing to sacriﬁce her suitors in her quest for beauty and, in fact,
to use them to enhance it, enchanting them into beads for her necklace. Possessed of a far more conventional moral where the princess’s willful wickedness is balanced out by the good intentions of her kindly maidservant and the
manful assistance of one suitor’s valet, this latter tale was far better received
and remains the most popular of de Morgan’s work.
Nevertheless, the damage (or delight, depending on one’s perspective)
was done, and the “rebellious princess” was ﬁrmly established as a trope, to
appear and reappear in fantasy stories, such as Edith Nesbit’s “The Last of the
Dragons” (thought to have been written around 1900, though it was published
only posthumously, in 1925), and even to appear in the guise of a magician’s
20
...............

Nineteenth-Century Fiction
daughter who would be a princess, as in Evelyn Sharp’s “The Spell of the
Magician’s Daughter” (1902).
Fantasy, coming out of the roots of the feminine tradition of the fairy
tale, had a much stronger grounding in feminist and proto-feminist thought
than did the ﬂedgling tradition of science ﬁction: science ﬁction, or the
“scientiﬁc romance” as it was initially termed, was for the most part a masculine domain, despite its inception by the unconventional Shelley. Her successors, writers with the temperament and the background knowledge to
explore the increasingly convoluted technological advances of modern science, were largely, although not entirely, male.
In 1886, Robert Louis Stevenson produced The Strange Case of Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, a taut psychological adventure that owed as much to the
gothic and to the work of Edgar Allen Poe as it did to the advances in speculative ﬁction in the intervening years. In 1897, Bram Stoker took London by
storm with his epistolary novel Dracula. Both of these stories are considered,
in some ways, as “invasion narratives.” As such, the roles of women are held
to fairly traditional roles, although somewhat less so in the latter, where Mina
Harker serves not only as victim but also as savior. Both of these works
hearken back to an earlier and more psychological type of horror, closely
related to Frankenstein. Meanwhile, their creators’ contemporaries were creating fantasy as we know it today; self-contained narratives set in worlds somewhat different from our own.
Some examples of fantasy may be found in works such as William Morris’s The Well at World’s End (1892), The Wood Beyond the World (1895), The Water
of the Wonderous Isles (1896), and The Sundering Flood (1898); George MacDonna (1905). Examples of scienald’s Lilith; and Lord Dunsany’s The Gods of Pega
tiﬁc romance, or ﬁction, are seen in Jules Verne’s Journey to the Center of the
Earth (1864), Edward Bulwer-Lytton’s Vril: The Power of the Coming Race (1870),
H. Rider Haggard’s She (1887), and H. G. Wells’s The Time Machine: An Invention
(1895). In many of these tales, a speciﬁc theme concerning women as creatures of the fantastic can be detected.
Women in other worlds, or worlds not too wildly disparate from our
own, serve as alluringly unfamiliar sources of temptation, either for good or
ill: in many of these narratives, the female characters represent either fantasy
(not used in the genre sense) representations of idealized womanhood, foreign
and yet compliant, or fearful extrapolations of the abuses to which women
might put power. This trend, a predictable reaction to the changes in society
that were reﬂected in the subversion of the more established ﬁeld of fantasy,
might be considered a form of backlash: certainly, it was soon to be rectiﬁed
in science ﬁction as in fantasy with the women of the future, as authors and
as subjects, although a trace of the initial attitude affected the ﬁeld well into
the twentieth century. However, even the nineteenth-century rewritings of
21
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

history made the picture appear more dire than it was, as Justine Larbalestier
and Eric Leif Davin have recently discussed.
Nineteenth-century ﬁction provided us with one of the most enduring
interpretations of maternal anxiety ever written in the cross-dressed narration of Frankenstein. Similarly, the birth of the genre of fantasy in nineteenthcentury ﬁction has occasionally been occluded by a one-dimensional gaze
positing men as the primary creators of the form. Nevertheless, born out of
the fairy tale and midwived into existence by women and men alike, the ﬁeld
of speculative ﬁction continues to grow, even as it comes into the fullness of
its heritage through a fuller and more comprehensive understanding.
See also chapters 3 and 25.
Further Readings
Auerbach, Nina, and U. C. Knopﬂemacher, eds. Forbidden Journeys: Fairy Tales and Fantasies
by Victorian Women Writers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.
Knopﬂemacher, U. C. Ventures into Childland: Victorians, Fairy Tales, and Femininity. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Manlove, Colin. The Fantasy Literature of England. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1999.
Prickett, Stephen. Victorian Fantasy. Sussex, England: Harvester Press, 1979.
Silver, Carole G. Strange and Secret Peoples: Fairies and Victorian Consciousness. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1999.
Todorov, Tzetan. The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre. Cleveland: Case
Western University Press, 1973.

22
...............

3

Nineteenth-Century Poetry
DONELLE R. RUWE

POETRY, of all the literary genres, would seem to be the least welcoming to
nineteenth-century women writers. Poetry often requires specialized training
in classical literature and formal poetic techniques, and relatively few women
had access to formal education in the 1800s. Further, many poetic forms are
implicitly masculine in content and mode. For example, the epic, which
nineteenth-century writers considered the highest poetic form, features
heroic exploits, warfare, and national struggles. The conventions of other
more personal forms of poetry such as the romantic sonnet assume that the
speaker of a poem is male and the object of affection is a woman.
Nevertheless, many nineteenth-century women overcame these obstacles
and developed various empowering strategies. Sometimes they worked in different poetic forms than did male poets. Other times they adapted traditional
forms and used them to address feminine concerns. Some women wrote
under the guise of a male identity or pseudonym. Others wrote beautiful
poems about the difﬁculties of being a woman writer, and still others adopted
childlike voices that allowed them to say outrageous things while appearing
immature and nonthreatening.
When the ﬁrst feminist scholarship on nineteenth-century women’s
poetry appeared in the 1970s and 1980s, critics suggested that the way the
genre of poetry gendered the subject/object split (a man as a poem’s active
speaker, a woman as a passive object being depicted) made it difﬁcult for
women to become poets. Poetry after the Romantic era (1780–1830) centered
on the poet’s own subjectivity—his emotions, anxieties, reﬂections, and
needs. Literary critics Margaret Homans, Alicia Ostriker, Sandra Gilbert, and
Susan Gubar argued that such solipsism prohibited most women from
becoming writers. Nineteenth-century women were expected to subordinate
their needs and desires to the needs of others and to play a supportive rather
than self-centered role within the domestic sphere. Those women writers
23
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

who did desire the fame and glory of poetry, or whose inner voice was too
strong to be suppressed, adopted poetic techniques to hide their “unfeminine”
poetic genius. As Gilbert and Gubar note, nineteenth-century women writers
embedded self-doubt into the very structure of their poems.
One of the most common empowering strategies was for female
authors to split their poetic identities between the subject and object and
become both the speaker of the poem as well as the object being spoken to.
In poems by Emily Dickinson such as “Me from Myself—to Banish,” the poet
divides her identity between acceptable and unacceptable selves—and then
banishes one part. In the most extreme cases of such splitting of identity, a
female poet presents herself simultaneously as the subject-speaker of a poem
and as a dead object. In other words, as Gilbert and Gubar demonstrated,
nineteenth-century women’s poetry was inherently gothic. Dickinson’s “I
Heard a Fly Buzz When I Died” and Christina Rossetti’s “Dead” and “Dead
Before Death” have the eerie perspective of a voice speaking from the grave.
This strategy of profound self-denial, of speaking as one dead or as one who
is entirely passive, has also been called an aesthetics of renunciation. In such
an aesthetic, beauty is created through a renouncing of the self or a renouncing of the poet’s ability to create art. In other words, women crafted beautiful
poetry about being silenced or about refusing to speak.
The ﬁrst feminist critics saw nineteenth-century women poets as victims of a patriarchal society that prevented them from reaching their full
potentials. As feminist scholarship matured in the 1990s, feminists reexamined the historical record and discovered that, far from being unable to
publish, thousands of women produced volumes of poetry and were well
known and respected in their day. The second wave of feminist scholars
began recuperating these forgotten texts, and numerous anthologies of women’s poetry and scholarly editions of women’s texts were published. Once the
voices of so many female poets were available, critics discovered that women
writers were part of a poetic tradition that could be distinguished from poetry
written by men. For example, Anne Mellor’s Romanticism and Gender argued
that women writers favored an ethic of care (being attentive to the needs of
people in one’s immediate circle) and rejected the ideal of the egocentric
Romantic artistic genius. Stuart Curran suggested that women writers appreciated the quotidian (the ordinary world) and respected the uniqueness of
others and the alterity and integrity of objects, and thus they did not feel
compelled to subsume all poetic objects under one controlling and unifying
vision.
Other critics such as Angela Leighton wondered about the very concept
of the female poet—if women rejected the Romantic ideal of the solitary, selfcentered, revolutionary genius, what did they put in its place? She suggested
that Victorian women poets presented themselves as Corinne or Sappho ﬁg€l novel of the same name, is a female
ures. Corinne, from a German de Stae
24
...............

Nineteenth-Century Poetry
poet who dies of a doomed love in the midst of civil unrest. She represents a
public poet who performs original, inspirational, improvisational effusions.
Women who adopted the Corinne model engaged in public debate while
escaping the censure of a patriarchal society that preferred that women
remain in the domestic sphere. Corinne poets are not intellectual and challenging, and they are ultimately ineffective because they are solitary, selfdestructive ﬁgures who are wrapped up in emotion. Sappho, an ancient Greek
female poet from the isle of Lesbos, wrote brief lyrics depicting an intense
romantic love. Poets who adopted the Sappho model were choosing to forgo
the public role of a Corinne. These women authored poetry of deep emotional
intensity.
By the end of the twentieth century, scholars were moving away from
seeing men’s and women’s poetry as belonging to separate traditions. Too
many women wrote work that responded to, critiqued, rewrote, or celebrated
the writings of men, and men as well as women lived in the same historical
moment and shared many of their period’s concerns. Contemporary scholars
now see women’s and men’s poetry as containing gender-inﬂections rather
than as comprising completely separate traditions. Men as well as women
can author feminine poetry in which women’s concerns are prominent and in
which feminine behaviors, modes, and imagery are featured.

M
YTHOLOGY
...........................................................................................................................................
Throughout the nineteenth century, women writers adapted classical myths,
ﬁnding in these ancient stories a way to express the plight of women as well
as a vehicle for personal and political expression. One of the most successful
retellings of classical mythology is the Spenserian-stanza sequence Psyche; or,
the Legend of Love (1805) by the Anglo-Irish Mary Blachford Tighe. Psyche is the
ﬁrst British female-authored epic based on Psyche’s experiences. Its ﬁrst two
cantos follow the basic story line as told by Apuleius in The Golden Ass. Venus
is jealous of the human princess Psyche’s beauty, and she orders Cupid to
punish her. Cupid, however, falls in love with Psyche and carries her off to his
palace. There they live happily until Psyche breaks her vow never to look at
her lover or to ask his name. When Cupid then abandons her, Psyche begins
her quest to win him back. At this point, Tighe diverges from Apuleius’s tale.
Psyche’s quest in Tighe’s version takes her through a dreamlike allegorical
landscape accompanied by a knight (Cupid in disguise). As she confronts
numerous female ﬁgures who represent different aspects of the human psyche, she learns more about her own identity. By turning Apuleius’s myth into
a narrative of female development, Tighe announces her ability to transcend
psychological, emotional, and cultural constraints.
Although no other early nineteenth-century retellings of classical mythology would reach the heights of Psyche; or, the Legend of Love, other female
25
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

poets of the Romantic era tried retellings of ancient mythology. Anne Hunter
authored a collection of light verse pieces about Cupid called The Sports of the
Genii (1804). In 1836, “L.E.L.” (Letitia Elizabeth Landon) authored a series of
poems on women in mythology, legend, and history called “Subjects for
Pictures.” One of these, “Calypso Watching the Ocean,” depicts the forgotten,
lonely, and grieving Calypso. As Leighton has suggested is typical of the Sappho style of writing from the early Victorian period, L.E.L.’s poetry explores
the fate of women who are trapped in a world of suffocating emotion.
By the mid-1870s, women poets began to write openly about the rights
of women, and many women used characters from classical mythology as a
way of exploring women’s issues. Feminist activist Emily Pfeiffer published a
group of sonnets in 1879 about the sorrows of Kassandra and her justiﬁed anger. Rather than condemn Klytemnestra for the murder of her husband,
Pfeiffer claims that she acted appropriately in her role as a woman ﬁghting
against a tyrant. Another late-century feminist, Dora Greenwell, authored
“Demeter and Cora,” a haunting dramatic poem in which the mother Demeter
calls out to her lost daughter who is trapped in Hades. In language that
evokes the early women’s movement, Cora explains that Hades imprisons her
in chains made of his love, and that the beauties of the dark, ﬁery ﬂowers
compel her. Mother and daughter call to each other, speaking about the ﬂowers above and below the earth, and neither is content.
Rosamund Marriott Watson also tells a story of an abused woman in
“The Story of Marpessa (As Heard in Hades)” (1889). The ghost Marpessa
recounts how her father refused to allow her to marry, how her mortal lover
Ides kidnapped her, and how she was kidnapped in turn by Apollo and imprisoned. When Marpessa hears the voices of Apollo’s abandoned lovers crying
out that Apollo had once loved them, she turns from Apollo back to her mortal lover, asking only that he remain faithful. However, the ﬁnal lines of the
poem belie the glib sentiment of love leading to a happily-ever-after. When
the interlocutor asks Marpessa if Ides was true to her, she ﬂees, and the question remains unanswered. In effect, Watson’s poem shows that all men in
authority—father, lover, god—abuse women and questions the Victorian truisms that domesticity leads to bliss.
Perhaps the most signiﬁcant late-century female poet to author retellings of mythological tales is Augusta Webster. Webster wrote novels, plays,
essays, a children’s fantasy novel, and poetry—particularly dramatic monologues in which women characters speak surprisingly openly about sexual
longings and their desires for a better world for women. Webster’s Portraits
(1870, 1893), her most important collection for feminist scholars, consists of
twelve dramatic monologues, many of which give voice to women’s concerns.
In “Circe,” the ancient Greek femme fatale who turns men into pigs is given a
sympathetic voice: she argues passionately in defense of her life and
26
...............

Nineteenth-Century Poetry
expresses her desire for a mate who will be her match. “Medea in Athens” is a
similarly sympathetic portrait of a despised woman.

F
A N TA S Y, L E G E N D , A N D F A I R Y TA L E S
...........................................................................................................................................
Fantasy and fairy-tale poems by nineteenth-century women use childlike voices or children’s poetry forms to mask mature themes and content. Scholars
of children’s literature acknowledge that the early Romantic era is important
for establishing the tradition of fantasy poetry for children. In 1805, William
Roscoe wrote one of the earliest fantasy poems for children, “The Butterﬂy’s
Ball and the Grasshopper’s Feast,” in which a group of children is invited to
join anthropomorphized insects at a party. When Catherine Ann Dorset, the
sister of poet Charlotte Smith, mimicked Roscoe’s poem with a satirical fantasy poem called “The Peacock ‘At Home,’” a poetry fad began that was based
on Dorset’s satire. In Dorset’s work, a peacock envies the insects and has a
party of his own. “The Peacock ‘At Home’” depicts the complicated social
maneuverings behind the scenes of a high-society social gathering—all made
ludicrous by Dorset’s clever linking of society types (the snob, the social
climber) to types of birds. Dorset imagines, for example, Lady Mackaw
criticizing the greenﬁnch for ﬂirting with the siskin. Dorset’s poem inspired
thirty years of imitations such as “Rose’s Breakfast,” “The Butterﬂy’s Funeral,”
“The Council of Dogs,” and “The Fishes’ Feast.” A majority of these poems
were authored by women, including a work by Ann Taylor called “Wedding
Among the Flowers.”
The Taylor family were engravers, authors, and foundational ﬁgures in
the ﬁeld of children’s literature. Jane Taylor wrote “Twinkle, Twinkle, Little
Star,” and the family coauthored some of the ﬁrst poetry collections for children, producing what is probably the ﬁrst anthology of fantasy poems for
children, Signor Topsy Turvey’s Wonderful Magic Lantern (1810). Ann, her sister
Jane, and their brother Isaac coauthored and illustrated this collection in
which the world is seen upside-down. For example, in “The Cook Cooked,” the
turkey, hare, eels, and oysters get their revenge by putting a human chef on
the spit; in “The Horse Turned Driver” the horse ﬁts a bridle and spur onto his
unfeeling human driver. Many of these poems belong to the eighteenthcentury tradition of the “it narrative” in which an object, an “it,” is the protagonist and point-of-view speaker of a tale. These fantasy works for children
also look forward to the nonsense poetry of Victorian authors Edmund Lear
and Lewis Carroll, the animal poem “The Spider and the Fly” by Mary Howitt
(1829), and the Peter Rabbit books of Beatrix Potter, which use anthropomorphized animals as protagonists.
Perhaps the greatest fantasy poem of the century is Christina Rossetti’s
“The Goblin Market.” In this poetic fairy tale, bestial goblins attempt to sell
succulent fruit to virgins. The poem focuses on two sisters, Lizzie and Laura,
27
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

one of whom succumbs to the goblin’s cry. Laura cuts a lock of golden hair—
symbolic of her loss of virginity—in exchange for goblin fruits. Before long,
Laura wastes away, starving for more of the goblin fruit. However, since she is
now a fallen woman, the goblins will not sell to her. To save her sister, Lizzie
tries to purchase fruit and is attacked by goblins in a violent scene comparable to a group rape. Through her sister’s sacriﬁce, Laura is restored to life.
The sensuous imagery of the poem has generated endless critical debate. Its
imagery suggests a lesbian sexual fantasy, a feminine Christian resurrection
scene, a cautionary tale about promiscuity and venereal disease, an exploration of drug addiction or of anorexia, and a critique of the Victorian empire,
in which all of the goods of the world are available to the British but women
are not allowed to participate in the market. Since its publication in 1862, the
poem has proved popular with children and adults. Rossetti authored other
fantasy-style poems, such as the brief “The Prince’s Progress” in which a princess wastes away while waiting for her prince to come.
Augusta Webster is often compared to Rossetti because both use passionate and vivid poetry to examine women’s lot. Like Rossetti, Webster also
dabbled in the form of the verse fairy tale. Webster’s “Fairies’ Chatter” (1870)
explores a classic fairy tale theme: what happens when a mortal and a fairy
fall in love. The fairy must exchange her life of innocent freedom for human
mortality. In the hands of nineteenth-century women, this motif symbolizes
women’s self-sacriﬁce and loss of identity within heterosexual romance as set
up within patriarchal society. Webster also published a prose fantasy for chil€xaxicans: A Romance of History (1884), about a human
dren, Daffodil and the Croa
child who tumbles into a pond and discovers a fantasy world inhabited by
anthropomorphized frogs.
Jean Ingelow, a contemporary of Rossetti and Webster, used the genre
of the verse fairy tale to explore women’s issues. Ingelow’s “Gladys and Her
Island” (1867) depicts a governess on a brief holiday at the seashore. Gladys
ﬁnds herself on a magical boat surrounded by playful dolphins and arrives at
an enchanted island. On the island, she meets various characters from history and literature as she climbs Mount Parnassus, the mythological home of
music and poesy and the place where the Muses are said to live. At the end of
her adventure, she meets Perdita and learns things that Prospero her father
never knew. Gladys will eventually return to her dreary job as teacher in a
girl’s school, but she will now have the comforting memories of her adventure. In “Gladys and Her Island,” Ingelow draws attention both to the plight of
the working woman as well as to the gendering of literary history. The poem
explores one of Ingelow’s constant poetic themes: the conﬂict between the
world of the imagination and the limited world of domesticity offered to
women.
Today, Ingelow’s greatest claim to fame is her fairy tale novella Mopsa
the Fairy (1869). A young boy named Jack discovers a nest of fairies, one of
28
...............

Nineteenth-Century Poetry
whom is named Mopsa and becomes Jack’s playmate and teacher. Jack and
Mopsa are carried to fairyland by an albatross and engage in adventures, after
which Mopsa regains her fairyland throne and Jack returns to his mother. The
tale is often read as a precursor to J. M. Barrie’s Peter Pan as well as a parable
of domestic power (in that both Mopsa and Jack’s mother are in positions of
authority by the tale’s end). Ingelow republished the poetry from Mopsa the
Fairy in a collection called The Shepherd Lady, and Other Poems (1876).
Embedding poetry within a novel was a common nineteenth-century
technique. The poetry in Sara Coleridge’s children’s fantasy novel Phantasmion was singled out for praise by critics, and Charlotte Smith republished
original poetry spoken by characters in her gothic novels in her supposedly
autobiographical collection, Elegiac Sonnets. The practice of extracting and
republishing poems from novels has allowed critics to disprove the assumption that women write only from personal, emotive experience. Although a
poem is written in the ﬁrst person, it does not mean that the “I” of the poem
is synonymous with the poet herself.
Fantasy-voyage works like Mopsa and “Gladys and Her Island” are
almost a subgenre of their own and are particularly common in children’s literature. For example, Mary Howitt’s poem “The Voyage with the Nautilus”
(1831) imagines a child making a little boat out of a pearl shell, sails of butterﬂy wings, and ropes of spider’s lines. The child journeys on the nautilus until
s/he grows sick for mother and home, but the ship has a mind of its own and
brings the child to the brink of eternity before ﬁnally turning back.
The most famous works of fantasy poetry in the nineteenth century are
€ . As children, Emily Bronte
€ and her sister
the Gondal poems of Emily Bronte
Anne invented a fantasy kingdom of two islands: Gondal, a large island in the
North Paciﬁc, and Gaaldine, a large island in the South Paciﬁc. These islands
are the setting for the sisters’ fantasy games in which they authored poetry
and dramas about tempestuous royalty, political intrigue, passions, wars,
murders, and the other motifs of melodramatic ﬁctions. The mythic world of
Gondal presented strong female leaders, particularly in the form of Queen
Augusta G. Almeda, or A.G.A., who it has been speculated is based on Mary,
Queen of Scots, or the young Queen Victoria. Little is known about the actual
€’s poetic juvenilia,
plotline of the Gondal saga, but it is clear that Emily Bronte
which took on the voices of the Gondal characters, established her later ability to handle dark emotional themes in Wuthering Heights (1847).
Although mythology was the most common outside source for poetry,
the Aladdin stories, Arthurian tales, Shakespeare’s fantasy works, and other
legends were sometimes adapted. Eliza Lucy Leonard published several booklength children’s tales in verse such as The Miller and his Golden Dream (1827)
and The Ruby Ring: A Poem (1815). The Ruby Ring is based on the Oriental story
“The Ring of Amurath.” It shows a young prince who misuses a magical ring,
is punished for his failings, and learns a lesson in humility.
29
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

The Victorian era was fascinated by the King Arthur legends, and many
male poets such as Alfred, Lord Tennyson, in Idylls of the King wrote poetic
reinterpretations of the Arthurian stories. Mary Elizabeth Braddon, author of
the popular sensation ﬁction Lady Audley’s Secret, wrote a dramatic monologue
called “Queen Guinevere” for Garibaldi, and Other Poems (1861). Braddon imagines Guinevere struggling against her fatal passion for Lancelot and begging
angels to help her die. Braddon’s poem builds on the aesthetic of renunciation, in that the entire poem depicts Guinevere struggling to renounce her
own emotions. The poem also condemns the idealization of Victorian women
as angels in the house, for Braddon’s angels, who are described as once being
women, are death-bringers. Mary Robinson, who sometimes wrote under the
pseudonym of Oberon, authored a group of sensual poems exploring the
romance between the fairies Oberon and Titania from Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Night’s Dream.
Some women, such as Rosamund Marriott Watson in The Bird-Bride, a
Volume of Ballads and Sonnets (1889), went outside of European traditions for
source material. The title poem of this collection retells the Eskimo folktale of
the man who captures a wild gull after she has been transformed into a woman’s shape. She remains with her human husband only so long as he swears
not to kill any gulls. However, when he feels the pangs of starvation, he forgets his oath. The bird bride has her three children gather the dead bird’s
feathers and, transformed back into birds, the wife and the children disappear into the gray skies.
Like the British authors Rossetti and Ingelow, American poets also used
fairy-tale and folktale forms to tell cautionary stories or to rail against the
injustices of patriarchal society. For example, American poet Rose Terry
Cooke explored the dangers of sexual and material temptation in “BlueBeard’s Closet” (1861).
Sarah Morgan Bryan Piatt, a Kentucky blueblood, understood that her
fairy-tale childhood was bought at the expense of slave labor. Her difﬁcult poetry often explores bitter ironies of white privilege and the bleak realities of
supposed domestic bliss. “A Ghost at the Opera” (1873) describes the end of
the antebellum South through imagery of ghosts and phantom plays. “The
Black Princess: A True Fable of My Old Kentucky Nurse” (1872) depicts an old
princess with African features who was more beautiful than even the whitest
queen. The princess is freed from her slavery by death, the “Knight of the Pale
Horse.” For Piatt, the familiar motif of the fairy-tale princess provided a structure for her exploration of race matters.

G
OTHIC POETRY
..........................................................................................................................................
Women’s poetry of the nineteenth century, according to Gilbert and Gubar, is
inherently gothic because it requires the female poet to split her identity
30
...............

Nineteenth-Century Poetry
between subject and object, or between the creative force that must be
repressed and the passive domestic role that is expected of women. That
which is repressed—the creativity and the passion—appears in women’s po€ nger, or a haunting.
etry as a madman, a ghost, a reﬂection, a doppelga
In the early Romantic era, Charlotte Smith revived the sonnet form by
using it as a mode to express personal anguish and artistic angst. Many of
her sonnets explore the gothic splitting of identity. In “On Being Cautioned
Against Walking on an Headland Overlooking the Sea Because it Was Frequented by a Lunatic” from Elegiac Sonnets (1797), Smith describes a solitary
wretch who haunts the cliff and murmurs to the sea. It is only at the end of
the sonnet that readers realize that the lunatic is a projection of Smith’s
imagination, and that she is the one who is truly haunted. In true Gilbertand-Gubar fashion, Smith splits her identity into speaker and object of the
poem, into a controlled rational voice and an irrational force of nature.
Poets in the latter half of the century mastered the pattern of selfhaunted poetry, or poetry obsessed with death and self-denial. Emily Dickinson, as Gilbert and Gubar note, brought the practice of a gothic splitting or
doubling of identity to its highest form. “I felt a Funeral in my Brain” and
“They Shut Me Up in Prose” suggest that to follow society’s dictates is the
equivalent of an entombment or being enclosed in a cofﬁn. “One Need not be
a Chamber to be Haunted” explicitly links gothic conventions to psychological
states. Dickinson writes that the hidden chambers of the mind contain visions
far more terrifying than any gothic tale. It is far better to gallop through an
abbey at night or to meet an external ghost, assassin, or specter than it is to
confront one’s own self. The “interior confronting” is the true terror.
Christina Rossetti’s “Song” (1862) opens with the eerie desire, “When I
am dead, my dearest, / Sing no sad songs for me,” and then continues until
the reader understands that the speaker wishes, in fact, to be dead to emotion so that she does not care whether or not she is mourned. “At Home”
(1862) imagines a dead woman returning to her home and watching her
friends laughing, singing, jesting, and sucking “the pulp of plum and peach.”
The title is powerfully ambiguous in that the phrase “At Home” refers to
women’s practice of remaining “at home” for certain hours and days of the
week in order to be available to company. In Rossetti’s hands, however, to be
“at home” is to be dead, and the visitors are heartless. It is a grim condemnation of domesticity.
Mary Elizabeth Coleridge’s “The Other Side of a Mirror” (1896) envisions
a woman whose red lips are a hideous wound; she is speechless, and in her
“lurid eyes” shines the madness of a dying, hopeless desire. Coleridge’s “The
Witch” opens with a witch begging to be let in from the snowy wind; the ﬁnal
stanza suggests that she represents all women who plead for their heart’s
desire. However, once she is welcomed, the hearth ﬁre dies and is never relit.
31
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

“The Witch” suggests that for a woman to acknowledge her secret desires is
to kill the smaller, but comforting, hearth ﬁre of the domestic space.
While Smith, Rossetti, Dickinson, and others utilized gothic images to
explore psychological states, overtly gothic texts—spooky tales of terror—
were popular as well. The gothic ballad was, in fact, a dominant genre in the
Romantic era, and one that had special appeal to women writers. Critics speculate that this genre, with its emphasis on the entrapment and abuse of
women, provided writers with a formal structure for exploring the unhappy
lot of women within patriarchal society.
One of the earliest collections of gothic ballads by a woman is Anne
Bannerman’s Tales of Superstition and Chivalry (1802). Bannerman presents the
female perspective within the ballad genre, for her women characters keep
coming back from the dead to avenge themselves on their oppressors. The
collection is also interesting in that one of its ballads is a retelling of the King
Arthur legend in which female goddesses play a central role.
Other Romantic era authors participated in the craze for gothic ballads.
The actress, poet, and novelist Mary Robinson wrote various gothic poems
such as the long ballad “Golfre, a Gothic Swiss Tale” (1800) and “The Lady of
the Black Tower” (1804), a work which exploits all of the gothic conventions.
“The Lady of the Black Tower,” which is set in the Middle Ages, shows a lady
waiting for her lover to return from the Crusades. She is surrounded by
monks who fear she is going mad after she imagines them carrying a livid
corpse, and she then imagines a grinning specter who speaks to her of death
in a hollow, booming voice and whose ﬂesh wastes away from his cheeks even
as she watches. Mary Howitt’s “The Countess Lamberti” (1829) contains the
traditional stuff of gothic ballads: a woman is forced to marry against her
will; her nightmarish dreams reveal that her lover was murdered by her father and her husband; she stabs her husband to death in his sleep; and she is
declared mad. Isabella Lickbarrow’s “Lady Hamilton” (1814) takes a similar
approach in poeticizing a legend about the ghost of a betrayed lady who
haunts her paternal hall.
The craze for gothic ballads was so extreme in the Romantic era that
women writers even wrote poetry satirizing the fad. Charlotte Elizabeth Tonna’s The Authoress: A Tale (1819), an anonymous work sometimes attributed to
Jane Taylor, portrays a young lady who shares her attempts at different, popular forms of writing with a sarcastic older gentleman who can hardly contain
his disdain after reading the young woman’s truly wretched medieval ballad,
“Sebastian and Elvira: A Legendary Tale.” The meter and rhyme are so
uneven, the violence so irrational, and the events so implausible that he
refuses to read beyond the opening canto.
The gothic was also popular in the Victorian era, though it appeared in
the form of ghost stories and sensation ﬁction more frequently than in poetry. Some Victorian women writers participated in magazine features on
32
...............

Nineteenth-Century Poetry
gothic writing. For example, L.E.L. dallied with gothic modes in “The Haunted
Lake: The Irish Minstrel’s Legend” and “The Phantom Bride.” Both poems were
published for a series called “Subjects for Pictures” in New Monthly Magazine in
1836, a series of poems on women in mythology, history, and legend. Adelaide
Proctor participated in a special feature of the journal All The Year Round in
1859 called The Haunted House, in which different authors produced scary
works for every room of the house. Proctor’s offering, “The Nun’s Portrait,”
demonstrates that memories of the past make the present world uncanny.
See also chapters 2 and 25.
Further Readings
Armstrong, Isobel, Joseph Bristow, and Cath Sharrock, eds. Nineteenth-Century Women Poets.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996.
Bennett, Paula Bernat, ed. Nineteenth-Century American Women Poets. Malden, MA: Blackwell,
1998.
Curran, Stuart. “Romantic Poetry: The I Altered.” In Romanticism and Feminism, ed. Anne K.
Mellor, 185–207. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988.
Feldman, Paula R., ed. British Women Poets of the Romantic Era: An Anthology. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1997.
Higonnet, Margaret Randolph, ed. British Women Poets of the Nineteenth Century. New York:
Meridian, 1996.
Leighton, Angela. Victorian Women Poets: Writing against the Heart. Charlottesville: University
Press of Virginia, 1992.
Mellor, Anne K. Romanticism and Gender. New York: Routledge, 1993.
Ostriker, Alicia. Stealing the Language: The Emergence of Women’s Poetry in America. Boston:
Beacon Press, 1986.

33
..............

4

Fantasy, 1900–1959: Novels
and Short Fiction
CHRISTINE MAINS

A WIDE variety of fantastic works, both novels and short stories, were written
in the early decades of the twentieth century, much of it in literary magazines
such as The Strand Magazine and The New Yorker and later in the pulps. However, some authors were not published widely or even, in some cases, at all
until the post-Tolkien surge of interest in Secondary World fantasy created a
publishing market.

T H E E DWA R D I A N S
...............................................................................................................................
The works published in the earliest years of the twentieth century established
narrative patterns that continue to inﬂuence the development of fantastic literature today. The cornerstones of epic fantasy include the ﬁgures of the heroic male warrior or adventurer and the dangerously erotic woman, sometimes
worshiped as a goddess because of her beauty and sexuality. H. Rider Haggard,
a late Victorian-era writer still publishing in the Edwardian period, continued
the story of his all-powerful and immortal She-Who-Must-Be-Obeyed in Ayesha, the Return of She (1905). The image of the femme fatale recurs in later
works, such as A. Merritt’s The Ship of Ishtar (1926), featuring the goddesses Ishtar and Nergal in conﬂict, and Dwellers in the Mirage (1932).
Other works appearing from Haggard in these years continue the story
of his adventurous hero, Allan Quatermain, who had been introduced in King
Solomon’s Mines (1885). The same type of the male hero appears in the early
short ﬁction of Lord Dunsany, named as an important inﬂuence by fantasists
including H. P. Lovecraft, Michael Moorcock, and Neil Gaiman. The stories collected in The Gods of Pegana (1905) and The Sword of Welleran, and Other Stories
(1908) recount the exploits of male warriors and gods, and female characters
34
...............

Fantasy, 1900–1959
are notably absent. One exception is “The Bride of the Man-Horse” (1911), an
adaptation of the Greek myth of the centaur’s attempt to abduct a hero’s
bride. A young centaur hears of a beautiful maiden whom all fear to take as a
lover. He drags her away by her hair, only to become a slave to her beauty.
Another familiar ﬁgure is the puer eternus, the eternal boy who never
grows up, and the women who take care of him. J. M. Barrie’s Peter Pan sets
the type, ﬁrst appearing in The Little White Bird (1901), then in a play later
adapted into a novel originally titled Peter Pan and Wendy (1911) but more usually published as Peter Pan. Peter’s visits to the Darling women cross generations, and his interest in Wendy is primarily as a mother to his Lost Boys,
while the relationship between Wendy and the other female characters of
Tinkerbell, Tiger Lily, and the mermaids is marked by jealousy.
These years also provided an adventuring female hero in the ﬁgure of
Dorothy Gale, the protagonist of L. Frank Baum’s The Wonderful Wizard of Oz
(1900), a central work of American fantasy that launched a seemingly neverending series. Dorothy is helped and hindered by other important female
characters in the book, witches both good and wicked. Later works become
even more intriguing from a gender perspective. In The Marvelous Land of Oz
(1904), the young girl Ozma is actually a young boy, Tip, until it is safe for her
to be revealed as the queen.
In children’s literature of the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, readers
had many adventuring girls with whom to identify, from Dorothy to Swedish
author Astrid Lindgren’s unconventional young female hero Pippi Longstocking
(1945) and C. S. Lewis’s Daughters of Eve in the Narnia series published in the
1950s. The strength of such role models is illustrated in Elizabeth Goudge’s
Henrietta’s House (1942). Henrietta attends a children’s party where the guests
enter the worlds of literature; she ﬁnds herself in a cottage in the fairy-tale
woods reminiscent of all her girlhood heroines, including Alice, Red-RidingHood, and Snow White.
Many women were publishing in this period, often primarily writing for
children, including Edith Nesbit, whom later fantasists, including Moorcock,
Lewis, and Edward Eager, author of Half Magic (1954), named as an important
inﬂuence on their work. Nesbit, one of the founders of the Fabian Society,
needed to earn a living through her writing because her husband’s illness
made it impossible for him to support their family, certainly a familiar story
for women authors before and after her. Many of her literary fairy tales were
originally published in The Strand; some were collected in The Magic World
(1912). She is better known for her novels, including The Enchanted Castle
(1907) and the trilogy Five Children and It (1902), The Phoenix and the Carpet
(1904), and The Story of the Amulet (1905), about ﬁve brothers and sisters who
are able to travel through history and around the world, having their wishes
granted (albeit not as expected) by magical objects and creatures such as a
magic carpet and a phoenix.
35
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Nesbit’s friend Netta Syrett is another proliﬁc author who should be
better known. Syrett began publishing in the late Victorian period and continued into the 1940s. Her novel Judgment Withheld (1934) features a lesbian
heroine—daring for the time. Nesbit’s inﬂuence is evident in Magic London
(1922), in which a fairy godmother sends children traveling to the past. Some
of Syrett’s late Victorian and Edwardian fairy tales are collected in The Magic
City, and Other Fairy Tales (1903), set in London and other cities and something
of a forerunner to the 1980s urban fantasy (as is Eleanor Farjeon’s Gypsy and
Ginger [1920]). Syrett’s “Blue Roses: A Fairy Tale for Impossible Women” (1903)
is about a princess with a sense of humor and a mind of her own.
Demonstrating that the dream of a female utopia is not limited to European or North American women, Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain’s “Sultana’s
Dream” (1905) recounts a visit to Ladyland, where purdah, the isolation of
women from the male gaze, no longer exists.

B E T W E E N T H E WA R S
...............................................................................................................................
The years between the end of the First World War and the beginning of the
Second were marked by a number of authors, both male and female. They
are considered by critics to be as important to the ﬂowering of genre fantasy
as J. R. R. Tolkien and his fellows, many of whom owe a direct debt to these
earlier if less well-known authors.
Some of these authors did little to dispel the stereotypical images of
adventuring males and bewitching females, including American author James
Branch Cabell, whose Poictesme Cycle includes the infamous Jurgen, a Comedy
of Justice (1919). Jurgen is a seducer of women, trying his charms on Guinevere,
Helen of Troy, and even the Devil’s wife. The hero encountering the women of
literature on his adventures would appear again thirty years later in John
Myers Myers’s Silverlock (1949), with modern man A. Clarence Shandon journeying to the Commonwealth, where he meets Circe (and ﬁghts alongside Robin Hood, Beowulf, and the Green Knight). For Cabell, women are either wives
or seductive witches; in Figures of Earth (1921), the hero grieves for his wife
who has died young, and learns magic from his lover before abandoning her.
In The High Place (1923), Florian impregnates Sleeping Beauty. An image from
Barry Pain’s “The Moon-Slave” (1901), about a princess who dances to supernatural music under the full moon, is echoed in Cabell’s The Music from Behind
the Moon (1926); the siren song of the witch-woman Etarre leads Madoc the
wandering poet in pursuit, no matter how many beautiful women he lies with
to forget her.
Another author cited as one of the originators of genre fantasy is E. R.
Eddison; his The Worm Ouroboros (1922) is a work of heroic fantasy in which
female characters have only minor supporting roles. The later Zimiamvian
Trilogy, beginning with Mistress of Mistresses (1935), does include more female
36
...............

Fantasy, 1900–1959
characters—the world’s Creatress is a manifestation of Aphrodite, and two of
the main characters are women—but they are the mistresses of the male protagonists, idealized objects of beauty and worship in a style reminiscent of
courtly love.
Several male authors of the period were more sympathetic, though,
even provocative, in their portrayals of female characters. In the second volume of George Viereck and Paul Eldridge’s trilogy about the Wandering Jew,
Salome, the Wandering Jewess (1930), the protagonist encounters the eponymous
questing hero who seeks the liberation of women from the female curse of
oppression, a quest marked by frustration and failure. And in David Garnett’s
Lady into Fox (1922), Silvia, a Victorian bride, is transformed into a fox and
eventually torn apart by hunting hounds in a fairly overt critique of marriage.
In several works, John Erskine provides a decidedly unsympathetic picture of men, reversing the usual portrayal of men and women in important
literary works. The Private Life of Helen of Troy (1925) recounts Helen’s unhappy
domestic life post-Troy, while Penelope’s Man: The Homing Instinct (1927) sheds a
different light on the great Greek hero Odysseus. The biblical story of the Garden of Eden, long used to justify female oppression, is re-envisioned in Adam
and Eve, though He Knew Better (1927), featuring a weak-willed Adam caught
between an unconventional and rebellious Lilith and a powerful, albeit
manipulative, Eve. Erskine’s short-story collection Cinderella’s Daughter, and
Other Sequels and Consequences (1930) contains fairy tales commenting on
social issues, including the sexual politics of the time.
Better known to readers of fantasy are two authors whose work found
new life in the fantasy revival of the 1970s: Kenneth Morris and Lord Dunsany. Morris was a Welsh writer who spent much of his life in California. His
many short stories, some collected in The Secret Mountain, and Other Tales
(1926), are based on the narratives of many cultures, including those of
China, India, and Spain, and on Greek and Norse mythology; the stories
were published under several names, primarily in magazines of the Theosophical Society, of which he was a member. In “The Rose and the Cup”
(1916), written in the style of the Arabian Nights, the defeated Queen of Persia, widowed and pregnant, saves her kingdom from a conquering warrior
with a rose transformed into a sacred cup. “A Mermaid’s Tragedy” (1917) tells
of Gwendon, a mermaid princess exiled from the sea when she hears mortal
music, her besotted human husband slain by a Viking on their wedding night.
Many of Morris’s stories describe the clashing of religions and cultures, and a
resolution through peace and love instead of war and violence. Morris is better known for his reworkings of the Welsh Mabinogian, known to literature primarily through the translations of Lady Charlotte Guest and an important
source for Arthurian fantasy. The Fates of the Princes of Dyfed (1914) and the
sequel Book of the Three Dragons (1930) feature the Celtic goddesses Rhiannon
and Ceridwen as ﬁgures connected both to nature and to wisdom.
37
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Lord Dunsany’s novels of this period contain more detailed portrayals of
female characters than his earlier short stories. The King of Elﬂand’s Daughter
(1924) describes the consequences to both the mortal realm of Erl and its neighbor when Erl’s prince travels to Elﬂand and convinces the king’s daughter to
come home with him as his bride; miserable in the mortal realm, she eventually returns to her home. The Charwoman’s Shadow (1924) makes use of the
Loathly Lady motif. A young man apprenticed to a magician to earn gold for his
sister’s dowry helps an old charwoman to regain her shadow and gains a lovely
young bride when he breaks her curse. The Curse of the Wise Woman (1933)
recounts the efforts of a witch to stop the development of a bog in Ireland.
Many women were also writing fantasy in this period, although only a
couple have beneﬁted from the resurgence of interest in the ﬁeld. Writers of
Oriental tales popular in the 1920s include Lily Adams Beck, whose stories
were collected in The Perfume of the Rainbow (1923) and Dreams and Delights
(1926), and Helen Beauclerk, lover of artist Edmund Dulac, in The Green Lacquer Pavilion (1926). Beauclerk’s later work departed from this style; The Love of
the Foolish Angel (1929) is about a fallen angel who falls in love with a woman
named Basilea whom he has failed to tempt to sin, and The Mountain and the
Tree (1936) speculates on the changing role of women in Stone Age cultures.
Margaret Irwin’s Still She Wished for Company (1924) describes the consequences to two women in different times as an occultist attempts to communicate
with the world beyond. The following year, Irwin published These Mortals
(1925), in which a heroine named Melusine, raised in isolation in her father’s
magical palace, eventually learns the truth about the world of men.
Although the writings of Rebecca West were diverse, some of her works
used elements of gothic or scientiﬁc romance. West was a frequent contributor to the Freewoman, an overtly feminist newspaper. Despite her many essays
on the suffragist cause and other political issues, she is most known for her
ten-year love affair with science ﬁction author H. G. Wells. In Harriet Hume: A
London Fantasy (1929), the heroine has an almost telepathic connection with
her lover that only increases after their deaths. The device of the psychic soul
bond also appears in Netta Syrett’s Barbara of the Thorn (1913) and in the 1920s
Emily Starr trilogy by Canadian author Lucy Maud Montgomery, an occasional
contributor to Weird Tales.
Although most of her work is ﬁrmly in the realist mode, novelist and
feminist Virginia Woolf did publish one fantastic novel, Orlando: A Biography
(1928), about a time-traveling, gender-switching hero/ine who was modeled
on her friend and lover, the openly bisexual Vita Sackville-West. The pseudonymous protagonist is born a man in Elizabethan England, but after an
affair with a princess from Muscovy (Russia), Orlando journeys through four
centuries of history, eventually transformed into a woman who struggles
against gender oppression both in politics and in her literary career. Lady Orlando must contend with the disdain of male poets, including Pope and
38
...............

Fantasy, 1900–1959
Addison, as well as with the pain of childbirth and the unfairness of patrilinear inheritance.
Two female authors who did receive recognition for their early contributions to the ﬁeld during the fantasy revival of the 1970s are Hope Mirrlees
and Sylvia Townsend Warner. Mirrlees was a friend of Woolf and the longtime
companion to classics scholar Jane Harrison. Lud-in-the-Mist (1926) plays with
the motif of forbidden fairy fruit (as did Christina Rossetti’s Goblin Market
[1862]); Mayor Chanticleer sets out to discover how the dangerous fairy fruit
is being smuggled into the sensible land of Dorimare, located on the borders
of Fairyland, after his son becomes addicted and his daughter and her dancing class are seduced by fairy magic. Joanna Russ’s “The Zanzibar Cat” (1983)
is an homage to Mirrlees’s tale.
Also occasionally reprinted is Warner’s Lolly Willowes; or, The Loving
Huntsman (1926). In it, Laura is a respectable unmarried woman who is content with her place caring for her aging father in their home, but after his
death, she is forced to move to London to ﬁnd domestic employment in her
brother’s family as maiden Aunt Lolly. Oppressed by the dull tasks expected
of a spinster living on her brother’s sufferance, Lolly breaks away, ﬁrst moving
on her own to a village where she ﬁnds fulﬁllment in a mystical relationship
with the natural world, then taking a vow to serve Satan as a witch. Less well
known to fantasists is Warner’s The True Heart (1929), a retelling of the Greek
myth of Cupid and Psyche set in Victorian England, detailing a servant girl’s
love for and eventual marriage to a mildly retarded upper-class man. Warner
was also a proliﬁc writer of short stories on diverse themes, among them “A
Love Match” (1947), a controversial tale of sibling incest; her best-known
works in fantasy are a series of stories written late in her life for The New
Yorker and collected in Kingdoms of Elﬁn (1977), which, despite the title, deal
primarily with the queens who rule in Broceliande. Warner’s personal life was
at times as controversial as some of her work; she was a member of the Communist Party and had a lifelong love affair with poet Valentine Ackland.

T..............................................................................................................................
HE PULPS
Although more female contributors to the pulp magazines were writing science ﬁction (SF) than fantasy, it was not unusual to see strong female characters, particularly woman warriors or Amazons. Robert E. Howard, often
called the father of sword and sorcery and an important contributor to Weird
Tales, is best known for his loner barbarian warrior Conan, but his female
characters were not always damsels in distress. In “Queen of the Black Coast”
^lit, and “Red Nails” (1936)
(1934), Conan joins forces with the pirate queen Be
features another pirate queen, Valeria.
Other male authors featured powerful (yet vulnerable) female warriors.
In Fletcher Pratt and L. Sprague de Camp’s “The Mathematics of Magic”
39
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

(1940), psychologist Harold Shea is transported to the world of Spenser’s The
Faerie Queene (1590), where he encounters the lovesick Amazon Britomart and
the virginal huntress Belphebe, the latter returning to America as his wife. A
less fraught portrayal of strong warrior-women is that of Joan of Arc in H.
Warner Munn’s Merlin’s Ring (1974), written in the 1930s as a sequel to a serial
published in Weird Tales about the Roman warrior Gwalchmai, Merlin’s godson
in the Americas, on a quest through history to tell the pope about safe haven
in the New World. Gwalchmai ﬁnds a survivor of long-lost Atlantis, a sorceress named Corenice; Joan of Arc is their descendant.
More often than not, these warrior-women are the hero’s companions
(and usually come to a bad end) rather than the heroes themselves. The ﬁrst
female protagonist of sword-and-sorcery was Jirel of Joiry, the creation of C. L.
Moore, better known for her male hero, Northwest Smith. Jirel is a female
Conan, the warrior queen of the pseudo-medieval land of Joiry. She was introduced to readers in “The Black God’s Kiss,” published in Weird Tales in 1934, in
which Jirel ventures into another dimension to destroy a man who has
betrayed her. In “Jirel Meets Magic” (1935), her blood lust and vow of vengeance give her strength to ﬁght the seductions of a violet-eyed sorceress. The
stories were collected as Jirel of Joiry (1969).

WITCHES AND VIRGINS
...............................................................................................................................
Evangeline Walton’s Witch House (1945) was the ﬁrst novel published by the
Library of Arkham House, but she is better known for her female-centered
retelling of the Welsh Mabinogian, about the clash between the matriarchal
society of the Old Tribes and the New Tribes who insist on virginity before
marriage to ensure patrilinear inheritance. The Virgin and the Swine (1936) and
the remaining three unpublished volumes were eventually published as part
of Lin Carter’s Adult Fantasy Series for Ballantine in the 1970s. A common
thread in the tetralogy is the goddess Rhiannon, who appears ﬁrst as a virginal bride to be won by the hero, then as a wronged queen, punished by the
community by being treated as an animal, then as the mother of a son, and
ﬁnally as a grieving widow. Among the Old Tribes, Arianrhod prizes the modern fashion for virginity so much that she lies about being a virgin and is
tricked into giving birth to two sons against her will. Her curse on her second,
fathered by her brother Gwydion—that he will never lie with a mortal wife—
leads to the creation of a woman made out of ﬂowers who rebels against her
destiny by plotting her husband’s death. Of the male characters, Gwydion
and his brother are punished for raping a virgin by being transformed into
animals, each taking turns as the female animal bearing young.
In her youth, Walton also wrote several short stories that did not see
publication until the 1970s; these stories explore the legends of Ys, a Breton
city drowned when the pagan princess Dahut opened the ﬂoodgates, whether
40
...............

Fantasy, 1900–1959
out of foolish love or malicious intent. “The Mistress of Kaer-Mor” is narrated
by an American nurse seeking peace after the end of the Great War; she travels to Brittany to visit Alienor, an old friend ﬂeeing an abusive marriage. Alienor, believed to be a witch, dies at the hands of a man who once loved her.
Alise-Guenn, accused by a would-be lover of being possessed by the spirit of
the dead princess, meets a similar fate in “Above Ker-Is” when he throws her
over a cliff.
Thematic explorations of witchcraft and virginity were popular with
other authors of this period, both male and female. In Seven Days in New Crete
(1949), Robert Graves provides a fantastic treatment of his theory, described
in The White Goddess (1948), of the triune goddess of poetry. The narrator
wakes in the far future, in a peaceful utopia ruled by witches, where everyone
worships this goddess; the peace is destroyed when he seduces two young
witches who become jealous of his affections, ending in murder and suicide.
One of the earliest works by Fritz Leiber, who often shares the credit with
Robert Howard as the father of sword and sorcery, is Conjure Wife (1943). In
this novel, a university professor learns that his wife, and the other faculty
wives, belong to a secret society of witches whose magic spells determine the
career success of their husbands. Norman at ﬁrst forces his wife Tansy to
abandon her silly hobby, but when she comes under attack by the others, he
masters the female art in order to rescue her and turn the tables on the other
women.
While male authors are more likely to depict the witch as a ﬁgure of
evil, female authors describe the witch as empowered and liberated from
oppression, much like Sylvia Townsend Warner’s Lolly Willowes (discussed
above). Danish author Karen Blixen, better known by her pseudonym Isak
Dinesen, has a female character speak of the impossibility of loving any
woman who was not familiar with witchcraft. There are elements of magic
and the supernatural in Dinesen’s collection Seven Gothic Tales (1934), including sisters conversing with the ghost of their brother about his adventures as
a pirate in “The Supper at Elsinore.” One sister is happy to live vicariously
through his stories, while the other resents not being able to live such an
exciting life herself. The much-discussed story “The Monkey” tells of a prioress possessed by a monkey-demon who uses her to manipulate her homosexual nephew into raping a virgin, who is then forced to marry her rapist.
That is not to say that the morality of witchcraft was not an issue for
female authors. Hilda Lewis’s The Witch and the Priest (1956) is narrated by a
priest in seventeenth-century England who is concerned about the women he
is sentencing to death for witchcraft. One elderly woman who died awaiting
trial appears to him as a young woman to whom he had been attracted as a
youth and describes her activities as a witch. She justiﬁes her choice on the
basis of her unhappy marriage, and the priest attempts to help the witch’s
ghost ask for God’s forgiveness. In Constance Holme’s He-Who-Came? (1930), a
41
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

witch is caught between her desires to do both good and evil, while Elizabeth
Goudge’s protagonist in The White Witch (1958) uses magic only to heal.
The witch’s power may come from being isolated by a society inimical
to her need for independence. Ronald Fraser, who also wrote Flower Phantoms
(1926) about a young woman with a special connection to ﬂowers, describes a
heroine isolated from her community by strange visions in which she sees herself in previous lives in Miss Lucifer (1939). Stella Benson, a British writer living
in China, set the novel Living Alone (1919) during the Great War; the heroine
has her ordinary life transformed by a witch who shows her to the “House of
Living Alone,” where she meets others with magical talents and has adventures with broomstick-riding witches. The disruption of women’s everyday
lives by magical forces was also a popular theme after World War II. Mary Norton, better known for her children’s series beginning with The Borrowers (1952),
published an earlier work about a spinster learning how to become a witch;
The Magic Bed-Knob (1943) was later ﬁlmed by Disney as Bedknobs and Broomsticks (1971). A similar theme underlies Susan Alice Kerby’s Miss Carter and the
Ifrit (1945), in which a spinster learns to enjoy life with the help of a genie.
Among Theodore Sturgeon’s many short stories dealing thoughtfully
with issues of gender is one about witches and virgins. “The Silken Swift”
(1953) concerns a unicorn, a man named Del, and two virgins: Rita, the cruel
squire’s daughter, and Barbara, the gentle healer who lives alone in the forest.
When Rita drugs Del into blindness and insanity as part of her project to punish men for their beastly desires, he rapes Barbara thinking she is Rita. To
prove that she still retains her all-important virginity, Rita insists on a unicorn
hunt, only to be humiliated when the unicorn chooses the physically impure
Barbara instead.

G E N R E FA N TA S Y
...............................................................................................................................
Although their names are overshadowed by those of the male writers credited
with creating the interest in modern fantasy, there were women writing in
the late 1940s and 1950s; all too often, however, they were writing science ﬁction or fantasy for younger readers. Andre Norton, who came to prominence
in the 1960s, began her career writing historical ﬁction and children’s fantasies: Huon of the Horn (1951), a tale about an elf king who makes an appearance in the later Steel Magic (1965) and Rogue Reynard (1947), about a fox, are
both retellings of French fairy tales. Eleanor Farjeon, better known as a children’s writer, published Ariadne and the Bull (1945), a retelling of the myth of a
woman abandoned by the hero whom she helped to save. Jane Gaskell was
still a teenager herself when Strange Evil (1957) was published; in this youngadult novel, the heroine discovers that some of her relatives are fairies and
are at war with others of their kind. Gaskell’s King’s Daughter (1958), about an
exiled Atlantean princess, was the beginning of a series published in the
42
...............

Fantasy, 1900–1959
1960s, detailing the Atlanteans’ ﬂight into Egypt. Marjorie Livingston also
wrote about a princess of Atlantis ﬂeeing to Egypt in a trilogy begun in Island
Sonata (1944).
But this period really belonged to the men, especially those writers
widely credited with sparking the interest in epic fantasy that exploded in the
marketplace during the 1970s. J. R. R. Tolkien’s inﬂuence on the genre began
with The Hobbit (1937), in which a male hero and his male companions set out
on a quest aided by a male wizard. The Lord of the Rings, although not published until the mid-1950s, was written in the interwar years. Although the
emphasis was still on the adventuring male heroes, Tolkien did include a
number of female ﬁgures. Goldberry is a nature spirit; Arwen, the elf maid, is
the mostly absent love interest of the hero. Galadriel, an elf queen ﬁlling the

role of sorceress, and Eowyn,
the warrior maiden who gladly gives up both
battle honor and her desire for Aragorn to wed Faramir, are the two female
characters seen the most in the narrative. The importance of Tolkien’s work
to the development of fantasy in the later half of the twentieth century also
meant cementing these limited roles for female characters for many of Tolkien’s imitators.
Women play much more of a part in T. H. White’s retelling of Malory’s
Le Morte d’Arthur, The Once and Future King (1958), a collection of four novellas
written prior to World War II. Some of White’s female characters do not rise
much above stereotypes, Merlyn quite enjoys being seduced by Nimue, and
Morgan le Fay is the evil enchantress behind the young Wart’s ﬁrst quest. But
White’s portrayal of Guinevere, as an aging woman torn between two men
whom she honestly loves and frustrated by the limited life allowed her as a
woman, is complex and sympathetic. Even Morgause, who deliberately seduces Arthur and neglects her sons, is narrated with understanding.
Another founding father is C. S. Lewis, whose Till We Have Faces (1956) is
a retelling of the Cupid and Psyche myth from the viewpoint of Psyche’s sister, treated more favorably by Lewis than in the original. Lewis is better
known for the Chronicles of Narnia. Lewis’s treatment of female characters is
inconsistent; while Susan is given a bow and arrow by Father Christmas, and
Queen Lucy rides to battle with her brothers, the evil villain of The Lion, The
Witch, and the Wardrobe (1950) is the White Witch, the same arrogant, violent
Queen Jadis who despoils the Narnian Garden of Eden in The Magician’s
Nephew (1955), taking on the familiar role of temptress and deceiver.
See also Professional Magazines; Sex Changes; chapters 5, 18, and 25.
Further Readings
Anderson, Douglas A., ed. The Dragon Path: Collected Stories of Kenneth Morris. New York: Tor,
1995.
Ardis, Ann L. Modernism and Cultural Conﬂict, 1880–1922. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2002.
43
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Clute, John, and John Grant. The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. London: Orbit, 1997.
Feminist Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Utopia [online]. Http://feministsf.org.
Marcus, Jane. “A Wilderness of One’s Own: Feminist Fantasy Novels of the Twenties;
Rebecca West and Sylvia Townsend Warner.” In Women Writers and the City, ed.
Susan Merrill Squier, 134–60. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1984.
Nesbitt, Jennifer. “Footsteps of Red Ink: Body and Landscape in Lolly Willowes.” Twentieth
Century Literature 49, no. 4 (Winter 2003): 449–71.
Nord, Deborah Epstein. “Androgyny, Writing, and Place in Woolf’s Orlando and A Room of
One’s Own.” In Woolf across Cultures, ed. Natalya Reinhold, 227–34. New York: Pace
University Press, 2004.
Pringle, David. Modern Fantasy: The Hundred Best Novels. London: Grafton, 1988.
Stetz, Margaret D. “‘The Mighty Mother Cannot Bring Thee In’: E. Nesbit in the Wilderness.”
Victorian Poetry 33, no. 2 (1995): 221–32.
Swanwick, Michael. “The Lady Who Wrote Lud-in-the-Mist.” Inﬁnity Plus [online], 2000,
http://www.inﬁnityplus.co.uk/introduces/mirrlees.htm.

44
...............

5

Science Fiction, 1900–1959:
Novels and Short Fiction
ERIC LEIF DAVIN

WOMEN—such as Lady Margaret Cavendish (1666), Mary Wollstonecraft
Shelley (1818), Jane Webb Loudon (1827), and Mary Grifﬁth (1836)—have been
writing fantasy and science ﬁction (SF) ever since the origins of the literature
that eventually came to be called “science ﬁction.” Indeed, Roger C. Schlobin
has listed 375 female authors who collectively wrote 830 book-length Englishlanguage science ﬁction novels, collections, and anthologies over a course of
almost three hundred years, from 1692 to 1982.
By the Victorian era, many female writers began appearing as authors of
ghost stories. Mrs. J. H. Riddell, Amelia B. Edwards, Elizabeth Gaskell, Mary Wilkins Freeman, Sarah Orne Jewett, Harriet Prescott Spofford, and even Edith
Wharton were among those who competed with such male authors as J. Sheridan Le Fanu, M. R. James, and Charles Dickens for readers in this popular genre.
In the spiritualist movement of the age, women ﬁgured prominently as
some of the leading mediums. And, from time to time, such spiritualism shaded
off into what we would now call science ﬁction. For example, in 1906 Sara
Weiss published Decimon Huydas: A Romance of Mars, described in the subtitle
as “a story of actual experiences in Ento [Mars] many centuries ago given to
the psychic.”
Although the term science ﬁction, and the self-consciously distinct genre
of science ﬁction, did not exist until the late 1920s, novels and stories by male
authors such as Jules Verne and H. G. Wells, which would later be seen as
proto–science ﬁction, were published before that. So, too, were such novels
and stories by women.
As the twentieth century began, for example, Charlotte Perkins Gilman,
a leading socialist and feminist writer, used science ﬁction tropes to champion
45
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

women’s rights in Moving the Mountain (1911) and in her explicitly feminist
and now classic novel Herland (1915). Herland depicts a trio of modern men
coming upon and coming to terms with an unknown utopia populated entirely
by women.
In like manner, other mainstream authors also sometimes utilized science ﬁction forms for their own purposes. Thus, Virginia Woolf’s Orlando
(1928) features an androgynous Elizabethan hero/ine who goes through sex
changes several times as s/he lives and loves into the modern era. The
reputed inspiration for the title character was a fellow member of Woolf’s famous Bloomsbury Group, Victoria “Vita” Sackville-West. The latter herself
turned to science ﬁction to express concerns that could not be expressed in
any other medium. Thus, during World War II, Sackville-West published a
dystopia, Grand Canyon (1942), in which Hitler wins the war in Europe and
threatens world conquest.
For the most part, however, proto–science ﬁction and early science ﬁction by women appeared in magazine form simply because the genre was
mostly a magazine phenomenon until the middle of the twentieth century.
Early general-interest magazines published stories of all types, but among
them one can ﬁnd stories by women that can be classiﬁed as science ﬁction.
For instance, “My Invisible Friend” by Katherine Kip (in the Black Cat, February
1897) preceded Wells’s The Invisible Man into print by four months. Indeed, the
very ﬁrst issue of the popular pulp the All-Story Magazine (January 1905) carried a science ﬁction story by Margaret P. Montague: “The Great Sleep Tanks,”
which supposed that sleep was a tangible thing which could be captured and
stored in huge tanks.
“A Rule That Worked Both Ways,” by Octavia Zollicoffer Bond (Black Cat,
December 1904), was about a machine that materialized spirits from the ether
or, with a reversal of polarization, caused a person to disappear. Another marvelous invention was described in “The Ray of Displacement” (Metropolitan Magazine, October 1903), by the popular nineteenth-century writer of ghost stories
Harriet Prescott Spofford, which described a means for humans to pass
through solid matter. Irish-British writers L. T. Meade (Elizabeth Thomasina
Meade Smith) and Robert Eustace (Dr. Eustace Robert Barton) collaborated on
several proto–science ﬁction stories, perhaps the best being “Where the Air
Quivered” (The Strand Magazine, December 1898). This story concerned the use
of a new scientiﬁc invention for the purpose of committing a crime.
Then there was Francis Stevens (Gertrude Barrows Bennett), a wellknown female writer of the early pulp magazines who published several inﬂuential stories, some of which were reprinted in Famous Fantastic Mysteries and
Fantastic Novels as late as the 1940s. Many rank her as the most important
female science ﬁction writer since Mary Shelley. “Friend Island” (All-Story
Weekly, September 7, 1918) depicted, among other things, either a paralleluniverse or a near-future Earth (it is unclear which) where millennia-old
46
...............

Science Fiction, 1900–1959
gender roles were abolished. The concept of a parallel universe is unmistakably clear in her novel The Heads of Cerberus (serialized in the Thrill Book, August 15–October 15, 1919). This idea would not be taken up again until Murray
Leinster (William F. Jenkins) used it in “Sidewise in Time” (Astounding Stories,
June 1934). Today, the science ﬁction world gives an annual award for this
type of story. However, it is not known as the Cerberus Award; it is called the
Sidewise Award.
In 1923, Weird Tales, the world’s ﬁrst and most famous fantasy magazine, appeared, and women ﬁgured prominently in it from its debut. Indeed,
for almost half of the magazine’s existence, from May 1940 until the demise
of the ﬁrst incarnation of Weird Tales in September 1954, it was edited by a
woman, Dorothy McIlwraith. Further, the much-praised artist who painted
sixty-six monthly covers for the magazine in the 1930s and who is most
closely associated with that era of Weird Tales was also a woman, Margaret
Brundage. At one point, Brundage painted thirty-nine consecutive covers for
the magazine, including nine for Robert E. Howard’s Conan stories. Indeed, it
was Brundage who gave us our ﬁrst visual depiction of Conan, as well as our
ﬁrst glimpse of C. L. Moore’s warrior princess, Jirel of Joiry.
All of the editors of Weird Tales, including the male editors who preceded
McIlwraith, regularly published female authors. Indeed, stories with female
bylines began appearing in Weird Tales with its debut issue in March 1923 (Meredith Davis’s “The Accusing Voice”). Its second issue, April 1923, had stories by
two women. In addition, as early as that ﬁrst year of publication the covers
themselves were sometimes devoted to stories by authors such as Efﬁe W. Fifield, Greye La Spina, Sophie Wenzel Ellis, and Katherine Metcalf Roof.
According to SF editor Donald A. Wollheim, women authors such as
these were crucial to this magazine in its early years. Weird Tales was an
experiment in magazine publishing—an all-fantasy magazine. No one was
sure it would work. Thus, early female authors such as La Spina (1880–1969),
who already had a track record in earlier pulp magazines like The Thrill Book
(1919), brought needed cachet to the venture. La Spina’s stories were so popular that one of her Weird Tales serials was published in book form as Invaders
from the Dark as late as 1960 when she was eighty years old.
Many other female authors were also favorites of the readership. Mary
Elizabeth Counselman’s “Three Marked Pennies” (August 1934) generated such
a popular response that readers fondly mentioned it in letters for years afterward and voted it one of the most popular stories the magazine ever published.
Counselman eventually published thirty stories and six poems in Weird Tales
over a period of two decades, from 1933 to 1953. But she was not the most proliﬁc female Weird Tales author. Allison V. Harding published thirty-six stories in
the magazine, while Dorothy Quick published well-received poetry and prose
for twenty years, from 1934 to 1954. Indeed, a total of at least 127 women published 365 stories in Weird Tales over the course of its lifetime from 1923 to 1954.
47
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Nor were these token appearances, as there were often four, ﬁve, or even six
female authors in a single issue; several of the authors even publicized their
status as married women.
And, judging from the letters Weird Tales published, it appears that the
magazine had a likely female readership of a size wise editors dared not ignore,
especially during the economically perilous times of the 1930s Great Depression. During the span of its ﬁrst existence (1923–54), Weird Tales printed letters
from 1,817 readers, 1,429 of which have clearly gendered names. Of these, 382,
almost 27 percent of the identiﬁable letter writers, were clearly female. Using
these letters as a rough guide for the elusive question of readership gender, it is
likely that more than a quarter of the Weird Tales readership was female.
But even among the most male-oriented of the science ﬁction magazines, which began to appear after 1926, female authors could still be found.
Planet Stories (1939–55), for instance, had a reputation for publishing the most
juvenile space opera adventure stories of its age. It appealed entirely to teenage boys who wanted action above all else, but even here 5 percent of all Planet
Stories authors were female. The publication of women writers improved during
the 1950s. For example, more than 10 percent of authors published in Galaxy
between 1950 and 1960 were female, while 16 percent of the authors published
in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction between 1949 and 1960 were
women, a ﬁgure comparable with the 17 percent in Weird Tales.
Thus, the proportion of women genre writers before 1960 was comparable to the 1970s when the women’s movement began to make itself felt in the
ﬁeld. According to Pamela Sargent, as late as 1974, only 10–15 percent of all
science ﬁction writers were female. Joanna Russ calculated the female membership of the Science Fiction Writers of America (SFWA) for that same year
at 18 percent, again about the same as the percentage of female ﬁction
authors in Weird Tales from 1923 to 1954.
Turning from the percentages of women authors to raw numbers, we
ﬁnd that the trend of female participation in the ﬁeld was steadily upward
over the decades from 1926 (when Amazing Stories, the ﬁrst science ﬁction
magazine, appeared in April) to 1960. Each decade witnessed a doubling, tripling, or quadrupling of female science ﬁction authors and stories by them
over the previous decade.
The ﬁrst woman to appear in a science ﬁction magazine, only a year after the medium was invented, was Clare Winger Harris. Her story, “The Fate
of the Poseidonia,” appeared in the June 1927 issue of Hugo Gernsback’s
Amazing Stories. It had won third prize and publication in a story contest that
attracted 360 aspiring authors. Other women soon joined Harris in the pages
of Amazing Stories and subsequent science ﬁction magazines. Indeed, six
female authors appeared in the science ﬁction magazines in the three years
of the 1920s during which these magazines existed. In the 1930s, the number
of female authors quadrupled to twenty-ﬁve. In the 1940s, the number again
48
...............

Science Fiction, 1900–1959
climbed, virtually doubling to forty-seven. And in the 1950s, the number of
known female authors more than tripled, to 155 for that decade.
In all, excluding the authors who appeared in Weird Tales and other fantasy magazines, 204 female-identiﬁable authors appeared in the explicitly science ﬁction magazines between 1927 (Harris’s debut) and 1960, inclusive.
Were the authors from the fantasy magazines to be included, the number
would be, of course, much higher. The same steady and regular increase over
the decades in the number of stories women published can be seen. In total,
923 known female-authored stories appeared in the science ﬁction magazines
between 1927 and 1960.
Beyond that, enough of these 923 stories were sufﬁciently different
from the stories written by male authors that we can speak of them as representing a school of early female science ﬁction, with its own themes and concerns entirely distinct from male-authored science ﬁction. Further, these
themes and concerns introduced some of the very qualities that critics have
long claimed were absent from early science ﬁction.
The ﬁrst noteworthy feature of early women’s science ﬁction is the tradition of socialist and feminist utopias, which appeared in the pulps—and
nowhere else—between 1920 and 1950. The period from the end of the Civil
War to World War I was one of great social and economic turmoil. To many
observers, it seemed that American civilization was on the brink of chaos and
destruction. American literature reﬂected these beliefs. It was poised between
visions of worldwide revolutionary transformation and fears of a crushingly
inhuman dictatorship. There were many dystopian novels that predicted the
coming of death, destruction, and totalitarianism. There was also, however, a
proliferation of utopian novels envisioning a better world to come. Of the known
utopian novels that appeared in the decades before World War I, most of which
dealt with economic ideas, only a few dealt with gender relations: Edward
Bellamy’s Looking Backward from the Year 2000 (1888), Mary E. Bradley Lane’s
Mizora: A Prophecy (1889), W. H. Bishop’s The Garden of Eden, USA (1894), and
Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Herland (1915). None showed a gender-liberated future.
The science ﬁction magazines remained a place where thoughtful
female authors (and almost only female authors) continued their social speculations. Moreover, the speculations of these women writers were profoundly
different from the earlier utopian tradition. For the very ﬁrst time, they
explored explicitly feminist social arrangements in which they envisioned
egalitarian gender relations. They also portrayed strong female characters
who broke out of the Cult of True Womanhood stereotype to become active
agents of social transformation in their own right. Their themes and their
treatment of gender relations show they were not a tardy echo of late nineteenthcentury utopian prophecies, but unacknowledged precursors of the Second
Wave feminism that emerged in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
49
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Stories expressing this new consciousness appeared quite early. In
1914, Inez Haynes Gillmore (a militant suffragist afﬁliated with Alice Paul’s
National Woman’s Party) published “Angel Island,” a feminist Swiftian fantasy
which editor Mary Gnaedinger reprinted in Famous Fantastic Mysteries in February 1949. Francis Stevens later portrayed a gender egalitarian society in the
aforementioned “Friend Island” (All-Story Weekly, September 7, 1918), which
Gnaedinger reprinted in Fantastic Novels Magazine in September 1950. With the
coming of science ﬁction magazines in 1926 there was a proliferation of such
feminist stories. Typical of these was M. F. Rupert’s “Via the Hewitt Ray”
(Wonder Stories Quarterly, Spring 1930), a story about Lucile Harris, a commercial pilot, who ﬁnds a world ruled by women in another dimension, aided by a
woman scientist. At one point, the word feminism is used; the word, along
with feminist, was coined in Greenwich Village in the 1910s and became widespread among the “New Women” in the 1920s. Their use by Rupert suggests
her awareness of this larger social milieu.
Although Jane Donawerth seems unaware of Rupert’s work, in her pioneering exploration of feminist utopias in the pulps she notes many more
such stories by Clare Winger Harris, Sophie Wenzel Ellis, L. Taylor Hansen,
Minna Irving, Lilith Lorraine, Kathleen Ludwick, Louise Rice, and Leslie F.
Stone. In her investigations, Donawerth discovered several generalizations
that can be made about this early feminist pulp literature. For example, she
observed how liberation from the domestic sphere was a prime concern. And,
because women’s roles are seen as socially constructed and are thus changeable, changed women abound in these stories. In Harris’s “The Ape Cycle” (Science Wonder Quarterly, Spring 1930), Sylvia, an airplane mechanic and pilot,
explains to her male chauvinist friend that women of the past were not
mechanically inclined because of their environment. In Stone’s “Out of the
Void” (Amazing Stories, August–September 1929), the astronaut for the ﬁrst
Mars rocket is a woman, Dana Gleason.
Donawerth found that such stories of revised gender roles could be
generally categorized into two groups. One group focused on women as social
reformers, ﬁtting the ideals of Victorian feminism about women’s work. Other
writers, in contrast, explored the concept of equality between men and
women, moving away from the idea of women’s roles to focus on the need for
education and a free choice of careers for women. In Rice and TonjoroffRoberts’s “The Astounding Enemy” (Amazing Stories Quarterly, Winter 1930),
Mildred Sturtevant is a career scientist and ofﬁcer of the Woman’s Party. In
ﬁghting off an alien insect invasion of Earth, Sturtevant enlists in the army—
as do other women—as a ﬁghting soldier. When friends try to talk her into
taking a safe rear-echelon position, she rejects the idea out of hand.
Another noteworthy aspect of early women science ﬁction writers is
that, as a group, they brought a more empathetic and more fully conceived
dimension to their descriptions of people, relationships, and especially aliens
50
...............

Science Fiction, 1900–1959
than did the great bulk of their male colleagues. Their conception of aliens is
a notable departure from the standard H. G. Wells War of the Worlds depiction
of threatening invaders.
Typical of this feminine approach was the work of Wilmar Shiras,
whose ﬁction emphasized character and relationships. Her debut, “In Hiding”
(published by John W. Campbell in Astounding, November 1948), was voted by
the members of the SFWA for induction into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame.
Combined with two sequels, “Opening Doors” and “New Foundations” (Astounding, March 1949 and March 1950), it was published along with two new
stories in novel form as Children of the Atom (1953). The plot concerns an elementary school guidance counselor who is sent a troubled young boy having
difﬁculty ﬁtting in with his peers. As the story unfolds, he is revealed to be
one of a number of a mutant geniuses living a secret life among humanity’s
“normals.” Contrary to the approach of male writers treating this theme, the
children are not presented as threats and are accepted by “normal” humans
for the gifts they bring to all of humanity.
This manifestation of empathy and acceptance is found in the stories
of the very earliest female magazine science ﬁction writers, for example,
Clare Winger Harris’s classic story “The Miracle of the Lily” (Amazing Stories,
April 1928). Her story has a surprise ending that powerfully poses the question, What is human? If not the ﬁrst, then it is surely one of the ﬁrst stories to
ask this now-standard science ﬁction query. Harris expanded the deﬁnition to
include sentient Venusian insects. Donawerth notes, however, that such sensibility was not unique to Harris. Other women writers showed empathy for
their alien characters, rejecting the bug-eyed monster (BEM) stereotypes that
were a feature of male authors. These empathetic depictions of fully conceived aliens are well exempliﬁed in the work of C. L. Moore in such stories as
her famous debut, “Shambleau” (Weird Tales, November 1933). Shambleau is a
beautiful Medusa-like female—an alien gorgon—but is also memorable and
sympathetic. Likewise, Moore’s science ﬁction magazine debut, “The Bright
Illusion” (Astounding, October 1934), is a powerful love story of a man and an
almost inconceivable female alien, and here again the alien is described in
distinctly empathetic terms.
Perhaps one reason early women writers tended to portray aliens so
empathetically was because their stories emphasized cooperation and community in general more than male-authored stories. For example, in Madeleine L’Engle’s ﬁrst work of science ﬁction, “Poor Little Saturday” (Fantastic
Universe, October 1956), a lonely boy discovers the companionship of a strange
witch in a deserted house. The theme of friendship between the outcast runs
through all of her juvenile SF novels, beginning with A Wrinkle in Time (1962).
The theme can also be discerned in the work of Zenna Henderson in her
stories of “The People,” aliens who crash-landed on Earth. Henderson, who debuted in 1951 and was extremely proliﬁc in the 1950s, wrote about the search for
51
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

community and communication. Establishing rapport between humans and
aliens is also the theme of Mildred Clingerman’s famous debut, “Minister
without Portfolio” (Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, February 1952). Ida
Chriswell is a sixty-year-old widowed grandmother living with her son and
daughter-in-law. On a trip to the country, she stumbles upon visiting aliens and
their ship, although she remains unaware of their extraterrestrial nature. A
pleasant conversation ensues and family photographs and other gifts are
exchanged before Ida bids farewell to her newfound friends. As it turns out, Ida
has saved Earth, as the aliens consider her to be the only “sane” human they
have found on the planet. Clingerman’s story of peaceful coexistence with aliens courageously departed from the dominant Cold War paranoia of the time.
This theme can also be found in Anne McCaffrey’s “Lady in the Tower”
(Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, April 1959). Here the female protagonist
is twenty-three-year-old Rowan, a lonely and isolated telepath and teleporter
who has been trained to use her talent for the common welfare. Along with
other Primes, one to each star system, her job is to be a psi-powered way station
facilitating interstellar travel. When the male Prime of another star system
comes under attack, Rowan telepathically comes to his aid. She eventually
links the minds of all the various Primes into a single powerful unit that drives
off the attackers. Loneliness and isolation are bridged, not only between individual Primes but among all of them, for humanity’s mutual beneﬁt.
A similar emphasis on community and bonding is found in Judith
Merril’s 1950s stories, such as “Stormy Weather” (Startling Stories, Summer
1954), a story somewhat similar to McCaffrey’s “Lady in the Tower.” In Merril’s
“Survival Ship” (Worlds Beyond, January 1951), not only do we ﬁnd an almost-all
female community, but the women also command and run a generation starship, with the four men on board relegated to subsidiary positions because the
greater psychological stability of women better qualiﬁes them to command
starships than notoriously unstable men.
The creation and preservation of community is also the concern of Merril’s powerful 1950 novel of post–nuclear holocaust society, Shadow on the Hearth.
 of isolated bands of ragged surviThis story is not like the typical male cliche
vors scrabbling for existence in the ruined rubble of civilization. Rather, Merril’s
work focuses on a middle-class suburban mother and her two young daughters
as they learn self-reliance and mutual support after a nuclear exchange has
obliterated Washington and New York City. Emotional relationships among and
beyond humans is also the theme of Merril’s excellent “Daughters of Earth,”
published in the Twayne anthology The Petriﬁed Planet (1952). It is the family saga
of six generations of mothers and daughters and the conﬂicts among them as
they ride the crest of humanity’s expansion into space.
The emphasis on cooperation and community is also evident in the
work of the proliﬁc Miriam Allen deFord. In “Operation Cassandra” (Fantastic
Universe, November 1958), we ﬁnd four volunteers—two white men, a black
52
...............

Science Fiction, 1900–1959
Harvard philosopher and poet, and a woman—who awake from suspended
animation after a nuclear holocaust. Naturally, they confront the necessity of
rebuilding civilization. The woman, a graduate of a prestigious Eastern university, is not the passive sex object we have come to expect from so many similar stories written by men. She is intelligent, resourceful, and treated as an
equal. Further, when the men avoid considering the possibility, it is she who
suggests and insists upon the fact that she will need all three of them as
potential mates, as one or more might be sterile due to radiation. There will
therefore not be one New Adam for the New Eve. There will be three cooperating Adams, as polyandry is to be the nature of the new extended family.
These examples hardly exhaust the selection of early science ﬁction
stories by women featuring their own gender as strong and resourceful main
characters. Nor do they exhaust the thematic subject matter of empathy and
community. But perhaps they serve to illustrate the fact that a perceptible
gender difference—the quest for community in its various guises—can be found
in many of the stories women authors were writing before 1960. The 204 known
women writers who published almost a thousand stories in the science ﬁction
magazines between 1927 and 1960 represent a tradition of women’s science
ﬁction that existed long before the commonly accepted appearance of such
“women’s science ﬁction” in the 1970s.
See also chapter 4.
Further Readings
Bowman, Ray F. An Index to Famous Fantastic Mysteries and Fantastic Novels Magazine.
Carmel, IN: Bowman, 1991.
———. An Index to Galaxy Science Fiction. Toledo, OH: Bowman, 1987.
———. An Index to Planet Stories. Carmel, IN: Bowman, 1989.
———. Index to the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. Carmel, IN: Bowman, 1988.
Cockcroft, Thomas G. Index to the Verse in Weird Tales, Including Oriental Stories and the
Magic Carpet Magazine and the Thrill Book. Melling, New Zealand: Cockcroft, 1960.
Davin, Eric Leif. Partners in Wonder: Women and the Birth of Science Fiction, 1926–1965. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2006.
Donawerth, Jane L. “Science Fiction by Women in the Early Pulps, 1926–1930.” In Utopian
and Science Fiction by Women: Worlds of Difference, ed. Jane L. Donawerth and Carol A.
Kolmerten, 137–52. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1994.
Jaffery, Sheldon R., and Fred Cook. The Collector’s Index to Weird Tales. Bowling Green, OH:
Bowling Green State University Press, 1985.
Russ, Joanna. How to Suppress Women’s Writing. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1983.
Sargent, Pamela, ed. Women of Wonder: Science Fiction Stories by Women about Women. New
York: Vintage Books, 1974.
Schlobin, Roger C. Urania’s Daughters: A Checklist of Women Science Fiction Writers, 1692–1982.
Starmont Reference Guide, no. 1. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont House, 1983.

53
..............

6

Comics, 1900–1959
TRINA ROBBINS

THE introduction of Superman to the American public in Action Comics #1 in
June 1938 ushered in the age of superhero comics and the period that has
been deﬁned as the Golden Age of comics. This was also a golden age for
women heroes, and by the war years, the pages of comic books were full of
beautiful, competent, costumed superheroines.
It is no coincidence that the advent of superheroines coincided with the
advent of World War II. As men left their jobs to ﬁght overseas, women
entered the professions: they built ships and planes, and then they ﬂew the
planes. They drove buses and trucks and worked in factories. And they also
drew comics in greater numbers than ever before. Women like Ruth Atkinson,
Lily Renee, Fran Hopper, Marcia Snyder, Tarpe Mills, Jill Elgin, Dale Messick,
and Pauline Loth sat at the drawing tables vacated by the young male cartoonists who had enlisted or been drafted. They drew strong, beautiful action
heroines.
The motto for women was “We can do it!” If women were stronger than
ever in real life, why not on the pages of comic books, too? It took only a
small step of imagination for a woman to go from ﬂying a plane to ﬂying, all
by herself, through the sky.
It was just two years before women followed in the boot-shod footsteps
of their caped and leotard-wearing male counterparts. In 1940, the adventures of the Woman in Red, the ﬁrst costumed woman hero in comics,
appeared in the pages of Thrilling Comics, which would be her regular home
until 1945. The Woman in Red had no special powers; she was merely undercover policewoman Peggy Allen who donned a red hooded cloak and mask to
protect her true identity from the bad guys. The next costumed heroine to
appear in comics, Miss Fury, who debuted in American newspapers in April
1941, was also a normal woman, Marla Drake. Drawn and written by a
woman, Tarpe Mills, the heroine donned a panther skin her explorer uncle
54
...............

Comics, 1900–1959
had brought back from Africa and, thus disguised, fought criminals and Nazis
as Miss Fury.
Another very human heroine was Black Cat, drawn by Jill Elgin and
published by Harvey Comics from 1941 until 1963. Black Cat’s alter ego was
ﬁlm star Linda Turner, who began her career as a stuntwoman and still did
her own stunts. She rode motorcycles and fought using judo, and, as a former
stuntwoman, she was easily able to slide down a rope or leap from a balcony
onto a moving motorcycle. Each issue of Black Cat included at least one page
of the heroine demonstrating real, and easily understandable, judo moves.
Other comic book heroines who relied on judo included Silver Scorpion and
DC Comics’ long-running heroine Black Canary.
However, the above characters were exceptions. The majority of Golden
Age superheroines possessed super powers that involved either fantasy or science ﬁction. Even Miss Fury incorporated science ﬁction elements. In a 1945
story arc, Miss Fury had to prevent the mad scientist Doctor Diman from trying out a deadly chemical he had invented on his two-year-old ward. The
chemical would have completely dissolved the child. Miss Fury rescued the
little boy and adopted him, making her the ﬁrst superhero to be a mother.
The comics world had to wait over twenty years for another super-powered
mother: Sue Storm, Invisible Girl of the Fantastic Four, gave birth to Franklin
Richards in 1968. Franklin’s father was another member of the supergroup,
Reed Richards, aka Mr. Fantastic.
A thread of fantasy ran through many of the Golden Age superheroine
stories, and goddess-like ﬁgures were common. The mysterious USA, “the spirit of Old Glory,” appeared in Feature Comics six months before the United
States entered World War II. We will probably never know how USA’s name
was pronounced. Instead of a cape, the tunic-clad woman draped herself in
the American ﬂag, which soared in the air behind her, drooping when the
country was in danger. Since America was not yet ofﬁcially at war, the Nazilike enemy that USA battled was simply referred to as “the foreign power” or
as “aggressors.” The weapon she used against her enemies was her torch of
freedom.
Patriotic superheroines ﬂourished during the war; another with mystic
overtones was Liberty Belle, who was tuned in to the vibrations of the Liberty
Bell. In her other identity as Libby Belle Lawrence, a reporter, radio commentator, and world traveler, she wore a small Liberty Bell pin. The pin, made of
the original’s metal, could be used to summon her by a descendant of Paul
Revere. Another superheroine who received her power from jewelry was Moon
Girl, who starred in her own comic in 1947 and 1948. Despite her name, Moon
Girl was not from the moon. She was a princess from a matriarchal society in
Samarkand who derived her amazing strength from the magic moonstone
she wore around her neck. The toes of her strappy sandals curled up, as did
her collar and the cuffs of her shorts, all echoing the crescent moon.
55
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Some heroines needed to repeat magic words in order to claim their
powers. Radio actress Kay, whose last name was never supplied, repeated the
words “Om Mani Padme Hum,” in order to be transformed into Magga the
Magniﬁcent. Mary Batson and her twin brother, Billy Batson, were given their
miraculous powers by the wizard Shazam. They had to say his name to transform into Mary Marvel and Captain Marvel. Although the Batson twins were
teenagers, when Billy uttered the magic name, he became a muscular, grown
man, but Mary, although she could ﬂy and was invincible, remained a young
teenage girl. Whatever the reasoning behind Otto Binder’s decision to keep
Mary young, it paid off in popularity. For the ﬁrst time, American girls had a
superheroine of their own age to identify with. Mary’s comic career lasted for
nine years, from 1945 to 1954, and along with starring in Wow Comics and
Mary Marvel comics, she also appeared with brother Billy and an adopted
brother, Captain Marvel Junior, in the Marvel Family Comics. Fans could join
the Mary Marvel Club for ten cents and buy Mary Marvel clothing, which was
advertised in her comics.
Mary Marvel’s comics tended to include strong fantasy elements, and
at various times she interacted with witches, princesses, mummies, and
gnomes. The “Shazam Girl’s” magic word must have been a strong selling
point for her fans, too. If a secret word could transform Mary, could there be
a secret word for her young readers, too? How many girls, during the 1940s,
whispered “Shazam” in the privacy of their bedrooms or searched for their
own magic word?
The Black Widow, from the appropriately named Mystic Comics in 1941,
and Ghost Woman, from 1944’s Star Studded Comics, represented the ultimate
in supernatural superheroines: they were both dead. The Black Widow was
sent back to Earth by the Devil because there were some people who were so
evil that he did not want to wait for them to die. Since she was already dead,
the villains could not kill her. All she had to do was throw her cloak over
them, and they were destroyed. Ghost Woman was killed in an auto accident
and returned to Earth to battle evil supernatural forces.
Sometimes the fantasy-oriented superheroines were simply not human.
In 1948, the Marvel Comics line, under the editorship of Stan Lee, published
four superheroine comic books: Blonde Phantom, Sun Girl, Namora, and Venus.
The four superwomen also made guest appearances in each others’ books
and seemed to be created speciﬁcally for girl readers. Despite her name,
Blonde Phantom was actually a normal woman whose only powers were a
mean right hook, and it was never explained exactly who Sun Girl, who only
lasted a year, was. But Namora, the Sea Beauty, was a kind of ﬁsh-woman
with winged ankles and a bathing suit made from ﬁsh scales. She was the
cousin of the amphibious superhero Submariner, and the two came from
Atlantis. She possessed the ability to pop out of the water wherever there was
an ocean, from the Yucatan to the China Seas.
56
...............

Comics, 1900–1959
As for Venus, she was the goddess, although writer Lee adapted the
mythology to have her also living on the planet Venus. She would ﬂoat down
to Earth to have adventures, which often included such diverse mythical ﬁgures as the biblical Samson, the Norse god Loki, and even the son of Satan.
Venus’s popularity kept her in comics longer than her sister Marvel heroines;
she lasted from 1948 until 1952.
Unlike Moon Girl, the silver-haired Mysta of the Moon actually lived on
the moon. This goddess-like woman, possessor of all knowledge, controlled
the universe from the moon. Drawn by a number of artists, including woman
cartoonist Fran Hopper and African-American Matt Baker, she was a regular
feature in Planet Comics, the science ﬁction title of Fiction House Comics, a
comic book publishing house known for specializing in pulpy adventure stories featuring beautiful, strong women heroes. Eventually, perhaps because it
almost seemed to be the rule that all Golden Age superheroes needed a secret
identity, Mysta moved to Earth and got a job as a technician at the Safety
Council. True to tradition, her handsome but clueless boss, Dirk Garro, never
realized the true identity of his assistant, who, as Mysta, always stepped in to
save the planet whenever her boss bungled an emergency. Mysta had her origins in science ﬁction. She was the product of an experiment by a scientist
named Doctor Kort, who used a form of hypnosis to place all the knowledge
of the universe into her mind when she was an infant.
Pseudoscientiﬁc origins, often accidental, abounded among Golden Age
superheroines. When sixteen-year-old Madeleine Joyce found herself trapped
during a thunderstorm in the high-voltage cabinet of her uncle’s scientist
friend, she acquired super powers and became the Marvel superheroine Miss
America. A cute ﬂying teenager in a patriotic short red dress, Miss America
wore glasses even in her superhero role, thus becoming the only nearsighted
superheroine in comics. Drawn by Pauline Loth, Miss America debuted in
1945, as the star of Miss America Magazine. The magazine featured a mix of
comics and girly articles about fashion, makeup, and movie stars and was
part of Marvel’s line of girls’ comics that also included Namora, Venus, Blonde
Phantom, and Sun Girl.
In the case of girl detective Invisible Scarlett O’Neill, her scientist father
accidentally exposed his daughter to an experimental ray in his lab, giving
her the power to render herself invisible by pressing a nerve on her left wrist.
Invisible Scarlett O’Neill was drawn and written by Russell Stamm, who got his
comics experience by assisting Dick Tracy creator Chester Gould. Her strip
ran in national newspapers for ﬁfteen years, and she even starred in her own
novelization, published in 1943 by Whitman. Her newspaper strips were collected and reprinted in comic book form.
Twenty years later, Marvel Comics’ most successful superheroes would
all acquire their super powers accidentally: the Hulk by exposure to gamma
rays, the Fantastic Four by exposure to cosmic rays, and Spider-Man by the
57
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

bite of a radioactive spider. This trend led to cartoonist Phil Yeh commenting
that Marvel editor Lee’s message in the 1960s was that radioactivity is good
for you.
More obscure than Miss America or Invisible Scarlett O’Neill, and over
two decades before Peter Parker acquired spider powers from the bite of that
radioactive spider, Shannon Kane, the wife of a chemist, found a formula in
the ﬁles of her dead husband, who had been killed by enemies. The formula
was for a ﬂuid as strong as spider webs, The heroine designed spider webbing
bracelets and became the Spider Queen, swinging on her webs during the war
years through the pages of Eagle Comics.
Despite all the comic book heroines who were given their powers by scientist uncles, scientist fathers, and kindly old scientist teachers or who were
assistants to male scientists, there was not one woman comic character during the 1940s who was herself a scientist. Additionally, many of the superheroines did not survive the war because the comic books they appeared in did
not survive the war either. Once there were no more Nazis to ﬁght, some comics simply ran out of stories to tell. Mysta lasted throughout the 1940s, Miss
Fury until 1950. Venus and Mary Marvel survived until the early 1950s, which
many comics scholars consider the end of the Golden Age. By that time, most
of the women cartoonists who drew these strips had been either sent back to
the kitchen or assigned to drawing the new “love comics.” The message in
love comics, very different from that of superheroine comics, was that no
matter who the heroine was, no matter what she did, she could only attain
true happiness when she found the right man, married, and raised a family.
Only one superheroine made it through the 1950s, eventually lasting
for over sixty years; she appeared on the cover of Ms. magazine and become
an icon and a symbol for feminists. Wonder Woman was created in 1941 by
Dr. William Moulton Marston, a psychologist, pop culture magazine writer,
and inventor of the polygraph, commonly called the lie detector. While it is
generally accepted that Marston created his heroine as a role model for girls,
there exists no exact statement on his part conﬁrming this claim.
Basing his story on Greek mythology, Marston, under the pseudonym
Charles Moulton, created a woman’s world of Paradise Island, peopled by
beautiful, immortal Amazons. This ideal life of man-free sisterhood is shattered when a plane, bearing Intelligence Ofﬁcer Steve Trevor, crashes on the
island. The Amazon princess Diana saves mortally wounded Trevor by bathing him with light from the purple ray. After learning about the war against
the Axis, Diana decides to return with Trevor to “man’s world” and aid in the
ﬁght against fascism. The Amazons are a scientiﬁcally advanced race. Some
of Wonder Woman’s other science ﬁction–inspired accouterments included
an invisible plane, which the Amazon could contact telepathically, and a
mental radio.
58
...............

Comics, 1900–1959
Along with elements from mythology and science ﬁction, Marston
included fantasy and fairy-tale elements in his scripts. Wonder Woman interacted with shark women, mermen and mermaids, leprechauns and fairy princesses, and winged, fairy-like women from the planet Venus. As written by
Marston, Wonder Woman was often a completely woman-centric comic. Princess Diana’s best friends were women: her sister Amazon, Mala; a reformed German spy, Paula; and her sidekicks, the girls from Holliday College, led by Etta
Candy. When the stories took place on Paradise Island, they were by default allfemale because no men were allowed there. Even the villains were often beautiful women, who, conquered by Wonder Woman, were taken to Reform Island,
there to learn the error of their ways and to eventually become accepted into
the Amazon tribe. In contrast, the male villains were often ugly and deformed,
like the dwarf Doctor Psycho, the equally dwarﬁsh Duke of Deception, and Mars,
the god of war and Wonder Woman’s archenemy. These villains never reformed,
and Wonder Woman had to ﬁght them again and again.
Marston gave Wonder Woman a subversively feminist origin. Most mythological heroes are the product of a union between a deity and a virgin; in the
case of Wonder Woman, Marston gives this tradition an all-woman twist. The
virginal Amazon Queen Hippolyta wants a baby, so the goddess Athena
instructs her to mold one from clay. Then the goddess Aphrodite breathes the
breath of life into the statue, and little Diana, product of three mothers, is born.
There are no existing demographics showing how many girls and how
many boys read Wonder Woman. In Wonder Woman, the Complete History (2000),
Les Daniels claims that the readers were predominantly male, but he supplies
no statistics. On the other hand, Gloria Steinem noted that the reason the
staff of Ms. put the Amazon princess on the cover of their ﬁrst issue was that
she and the other founding editors had all been “rescued” by Wonder Woman
when they were girls; in her introduction to a 1972 collection of Wonder
Woman stories, Steinem describes her joy of reading about such a woman.
Wonder Woman seems to have inspired negative feelings on the part of
male comics historians and critics throughout the life of the comic. She has
been accused of being a lesbian, of bashing males, and of sadism. In his 1954
condemnation of comic books, Seduction of the Innocents, Dr. Fredric Wertham
calls the Wonder Woman comic one of the most harmful crime comics, saying she was the lesbian counterpart of Batman. In the 1970 anthology All in
Color for a Dime, writer Jim Harmon describes the Wonder Woman comic as
“sick” because the princess hugged and kissed her female friends. James Steranko, in The Steranko History of Comics (1970), complained that Wonder Woman
enjoyed beating up men, and in Super Heroes: A Modern Mythology, Richard
Reynolds states that she was created to appeal to men’s fantasies of sexual
domination and bondage.
Other critics have noted that in her Golden Age stories, Wonder Woman
rarely uses physical force. Instead, she employs her magic lasso. The lasso, an
59
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

obvious reference to Marston’s polygraph, is a rope forged from gold links that
compels those tied with it to obey her and to tell the truth. When she defends
herself, she resorts to the game of “bullets and bracelets,” using her heavy
metal bracelets to deﬂect bullets with lightning speed.
As for the accusations of bondage, Wonder Woman is indeed tied,
chained, or otherwise imprisoned in page after page of her Golden Age adventures. However, she is shown breaking out of her bonds over and over. What
critics of Wonder Woman neglect to mention is that most action comics in
the 1940s were ﬁlled with bondage scenes. Sometimes the hero was tied up,
so that he could break his bonds and escape, but more often the captive was
a pretty woman, often wearing a torn dress. She was tied up so that she could
be rescued by the hero. Wonder Woman did not need a hero to come to her
rescue; she rescued herself.
She also often rescued her hapless blond boyfriend, Steve Trevor, who was
very much the Lois Lane to her Superman. He existed merely to get into trouble
and be saved by his Amazon sweetheart. Many Wonder Woman stories ended
with Steve asking Wonder Woman when they would ﬁnally marry. She would
always answer in ways that put the marriage beyond foreseeable future. She
could never marry him, just as Superman could never marry Lois. It would have
spoiled the tension of the eternal triangle: Clark Kent loves Lois Lane who loves
Superman; Diana Prince loves Steve Trevor who loves Wonder Woman. (More
recently, in an attempt at realism, comic book heroes and their girlfriends and
boyfriends are marrying. Wonder Woman actually married Steve Trevor in 1986,
and Superman married Lois Lane in 1996. Since her marriage, however, Wonder
Woman has been reinvented several times, and she is currently not married.)
The gynocentric world depicted by Marston in his Golden Age Wonder
Woman stories was a safe place for girl readers who, in real life, existed in an
often threatening male-dominated world. Boys felt the same way about their
phallocentric superhero stories, where, if girls existed at all, they were there
to get into trouble so that the hero could rescue them. Just as the boys
wanted a club free of girls, so too did girls want all-girl fantasy worlds. As a
result, Wonder Woman survived from the 1950s into the second half of the
twentieth century as a feminist icon. Chronicle Books still produces scores of
Wonder Woman products: address books, journals, note cards, photo albums,
calendars, valentines, and stationery.
See also chapters 9 and 18.
Further Readings
Benton, Mike. Superhero Comics of the Golden Age: The Illustrated History. Dallas: Taylor, 1992.
Daniels, Les. Wonder Woman: The Complete History. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2000.
Feiffer, Jules. The Great Comic Book Heroes. New York: Dial Press, 1965.
Harmon, Jim. “A Swell Bunch of Guys.” In All in Color for a Dime, ed. Lupoff and Thompson,
186–87. New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House, 1970.
60
...............

Comics, 1900–1959
Mankiller, Wilma, Gwendolyn Mink, Marysa Navarro, Barbara Smith, and Gloria Steinem,
eds. The Reader’s Companion to U.S. Women’s History. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1998.
Robbins, Trina. The Great Women Superheroes. Northampton, MA: Kitchen Sink Press, 1996.
Steinem, Gloria. Introduction to Wonder Woman, by William Moulton Marston, 11. New
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1972.
Steranko, Jim. The Steranko History of Comics. 2 vols. Reading, PA: Supergraphics, 1970, 1972.
Wertham, Fredric. Seduction of the Innocent. New York: Rinehart, 1954.

61
..............

7

Fantasy, 1960–2005: Novels
and Short Fiction
CHRISTINE MAINS

ALTHOUGH fantasy as a genre had little market presence until well into the
1970s, it has since become not only a best-selling marketing category but also
a source of critically acclaimed novels and short stories, in terms of both
awards and scholarship. While certain criticisms leveled at the ﬁeld do have
some validity—that it is politically conservative, that it appeals to children and
the childish, that it is formulaic and repetitive, especially in the trend to neverending sequels—fantastic ﬁction can be a way of describing an imperfect world
and provoking social change. Women writers in particular have used the mode
of fantasy to recuperate female archetypal roles that have fallen into stereotypes; to recover a lost matriarchal tradition in myth and history; to deal explicitly with women-centered issues such as rape and gender inequality; and
to reenvision traditional fantasy from a feminized perspective of caring and
community.

O
RIGINS
..........................................................................................................................................
Despite its arguably longer history as a mode of writing, fantasy, particularly
by women, did not have as much presence in the market of the 1960s and
early 1970s as did science ﬁction. Many women have written in both genres,
particularly during this period, often in the subgenre of science fantasy. Anne
McCaffrey’s Pern is one of several “lost colony” stories, set on worlds colonized
by space travel but subsequently devolved into feudal societies; the ﬁrst novel,
Dragonﬂight (1968), recounts Lessa’s struggle to become accepted as a ﬁghting
dragonrider. Marion Zimmer Bradley’s Darkover series, begun in the early
1960s, combines the feudal trappings of fantasy with remnants of advanced
technology and psi powers. Darkover has since become a shared-world series,
62
...............

Fantasy, 1960–2005
continued by other authors, including Mercedes Lackey and Deborah J. Ross.
Andre Norton also launched a shared-world series with Witch World (1963),
exploring the sharing of power, magical and otherwise, between men and
women. In it, a World War II veteran crosses into a world inhabited by aliens
and by witches able to work magic as long as they remain virgins; he teams up
with Jaelithe, who retains her power after they wed, and her friend Loyse, who
escapes a forced marriage by disguising herself as a male warrior, a notuncommon motif in genre fantasy. C. J. Cherryh’s Morgaine Cycle, begun in
Gate of Ivrel (1976), features a female hero on a quest through time. Ursula K.
Le Guin’s Hainish universe includes a short story, “Semley’s Necklace” (1963),
and a follow-up novel, Rocannon’s World (1966), which combine space travel
and elements of fairy tales and folklore, a combination also found in the work
of Tanith Lee. Once named the “crown princess of SF,” Lee began her long career with The Birthgrave (1975), a sword-and-sorcery epic with spaceships and
computers, and has written a number of far-future fantasies.
Another starting point for genre fantasy prior to the mid-1970s was the
market for fantastic stories created for children and young adults. This market is certainly one explanation for the continued perception of fantasy, particularly works by women, as frivolous entertainment rather than serious
literature. But many authors crossed the boundary between adult and juvenile ﬁction to produce thought-provoking stories that shaped many of today’s
readers and the next generation of authors. Lloyd Alexander’s Chronicles of
Prydain, published throughout the 1960s, introduced strong female characters
such as the spunky Eilonwy and ethically ambiguous enchantress Achren.
Andre Norton published several fantasy novels for juveniles, including Steel
Magic (1965), based on Arthurian material, Octagon Magic (1967), featuring a
neighborhood “witch,” and Fur Magic (1968). The central quest of Alan Garner’s Moon of Gomrath (1963) belongs to Susan, and The Owl Service (1967) is a
sympathetic retelling of the Welsh myth of the goddess Blodeuwedd.
Aside from her science ﬁction, Le Guin wrote a young-adult fantasy trilogy set in a secondary world, beginning with A Wizard of Earthsea (1968); the
second volume, The Tombs of Atuan (1971), is a feminine coming-of-age story,
in which the young Tenar, a female Chosen One, rebels against a matriarchal
community of priestesses to aid a male wizard. Le Guin returned to Tenar’s
story with a very different perspective in the 1990s: Tehanu (1990), condemned
by some readers as a feminist polemic, usefully calls into question many of
the gender conventions evident in the earlier books.
Although the longer-established market for science ﬁction and juveniles provided a useful foundation for women writers creating imagined
worlds, not all fantasy being written by women in this period made use of science ﬁction trappings or was suitable for children. Reprints of some earlier
works also appeared in this period, many as a result of Lin Carter’s Adult Fantasy line for Ballantine Books, which reissued Evangeline Walton’s The Virgin
63
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

and the Swine (1936) as The Island of the Mighty (1970), soon followed by three
other volumes in a retelling of the Welsh Mabinogian. Walton’s award-winning
tetralogy, centered on Celtic goddesses Rhiannon and Arianrhod, deals explicitly with changing conceptions of marriage and virginity as the Old Tribes’
belief in matrilineal descent gives way to the patriarchal attitudes of the New
Tribes who prize virginity above female freedom. Collections of stories published earlier in the century were also reprinted in the late 1960s and 1970s,
including C. L. Moore’s Jirel of Joiry (1969), tales about a female warrior originally published in the pulps, and Sylvia Townsend Warner’s Kingdoms of Elﬁn
(1977), stories previously published in The New Yorker.

S..........................................................................................................................................
ECONDARY WORLDS
By the mid-1970s, there was a growing interest in the type of fantasy made popular by J. R. R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings (1954–55), that is, epic fantasy or
quest fantasy set in secondary worlds. Multibook series, such as Terry Brooks’s
The Sword of Shannara (1977) and its sequels, exploited that interest, a trend that
continues with Robert Jordan’s Wheel of Time series. Many of these works center on a hero, inevitably male, with a destiny to fulﬁll and companions (also
mostly male) to help him achieve it; all too often, female characters are relegated to princess-brides (sometimes spunky) and enchantresses (often evil).
Seeing little place for themselves in such worlds, some female fantasists created secondary worlds in which women could be warriors, wizards,
and rulers, whether they had to ﬁght for that right or were accepted as such
without remark. Patricia McKillip’s The Forgotten Beasts of Eld (1974) is a comingof-age story of a young female wizard who enters the world of men to take
revenge for an attempted rape; the novel won the ﬁrst World Fantasy Award.
The second volume of her Riddle-Master trilogy, Heir of Sea and Fire (1977),
transformed Raederle from the object of the hero’s quest into a questing hero
in her own right, surrounded by female companions. Since the mid-1970s, secondary worlds created by women and featuring strong female characters have
continued to catch readers’ attention. Joy Chant’s When Voiha Wakes (1984)
depicts a society where women are the rulers, farmers, and hunters, and men
live apart as domestic workers and artisans. Mercedes Lackey’s world of
Valdemar, ﬁrst introduced in Arrows of the Queen (1987), allows both men and
women to serve as Heralds, warriors with telepathic powers. Jane Yolen’s
land of the Dales includes bands of female warriors training to ﬁght against
patriarchal conquerors; Sister Light, Sister Dark (1988) and its sequel White
Jenna (1989) recount the destiny of Jenna, their future queen. The hero of Lois
McMaster Bujold’s Paladin of Souls (2003), a Nebula Award winner, is Ista, a
middle-aged mother. Anne Bishop’s Black Jewels trilogy, the ﬁrst volume of
which won the 2000 Crawford Award, also examines the destiny of a female
Chosen One in a matriarchal society of witches.
64
...............

Fantasy, 1960–2005
Creating imagined worlds inhabited by characters whose traditions and
customs are different from consensus reality takes sustained effort, which is
one explanation for the trend toward long novels and multibook series. However, shorter ﬁction has also played an important part in the market. The
shared worlds of Darkover and Witch World have been continued by many
contributors through dedicated anthologies. Since the late 1980s, the Year’s
Best Fantasy and Horror anthologies by editors Ellen Datlow and Terri Windling
have allowed readers glimpses into a wide variety of imagined worlds and
introduced them to new authors. Themed anthologies, often coedited by Martin H. Greenberg, have been a particular venue for exploring and reimagining
traditional female archetypes. Several such anthologies focus on the ﬁgure of
the woman warrior: for example, Jessica Amanda Salmonson’s Amazons!
(1979), Esther Friesner’s Chicks in Chainmail (1995), and Marion Zimmer Bradley’s Swords and Sorceress series, published annually from 1984 to 2004.
Others recuperated the ﬁgure of the witch or enchantress, including Susan
Shwartz’s Hecate’s Cauldron (1982) and two volumes by Kathleen Massie-Ferch:
Ancient Enchantresses (1995) and Warrior Enchantresses (1996). Arguing in her
introduction that there had been no previous anthology devoted solely to
women writers of fantasy, Shwartz edited Sisters in Fantasy (1995) and a sequel
the following year, hoping to counter the perception that female fantasists
write only romantic ﬂuff. In the secondary worlds imagined by fantasists,
women wield the kind of power they still do not always have in the real world.

L
OST TRADITIONS
...........................................................................................................................................
Fairy Tales

In their attempts to recuperate archetypal roles played by female characters,
many authors have turned to narrative traditions of the past. Fairy tales and
folklore have proven to be a rich source of feminist fantasy, an ever-growing
market since the publication in 1979 of Angela Carter’s The Bloody Chamber in
Britain and Tanith Lee’s Red as Blood: Tales from the Sisters Grimmer in North
America. Both Lee and Carter, as well as those writers who have followed
them, use the texts and conventions of well-known tales to explore female
desires and to reimagine the stock characters of the virginal princess and the
wicked witch. Editors Datlow and Windling have been inﬂuential in the subgenre of retold fairy tales; the Fairy Tale Series includes Kara Dalkey’s The
Nightingale (1988), about a singer in medieval Japan; Patricia C. Wrede’s Snow
White and Rose Red (1989), setting the tale about two sisters in Elizabethan
England; and Pamela Dean’s Tam Lin (1991), in which a group of 1970s college
students ﬁnd themselves living the Scots ballad about a pregnant young
woman who saves her lover from the Fairy Queen—the same ballad that
underlies Patricia McKillip’s Winter Rose (1996) and Diana Wynne Jones’s Fire
and Hemlock (1985). The ballad of Sweet William is the source for Delia
65
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Sherman’s Through a Brazen Mirror (1989), in which a young woman escapes
her witch-mother’s curse by disguising herself as a serving man and then has
to deal with the king’s attraction to her in that form. Datlow and Windling
also coedited a series of anthologies of retold fairy tales, beginning with Snow
White, Blood Red (1993), an important venue for telling stories that question
traditional gender roles.
Feminist versions of retold fairy tales allow for the reclamation of the
female hero, from damsel in distress to rescuer in her own right or seeker on
a quest. Passive fairy-tale heroines—Snow White, Cinderella, and Sleeping
Beauty—no longer wait for their princes to come to them, in works such as
Sheri Tepper’s Beauty (1991), Robin McKinley’s Spindle’s End (2001), and Lee’s
Silver Metal Lover (1981), a science ﬁction fairy tale. Other tales recover a lost
tradition of more active female heroes, as in the many versions of Beauty and
the Beast, or Juliet Marillier’s Sevenwaters trilogy in which a girl must rescue
her seven brothers transformed into swans, or the English Katie Crackernuts
tales that inform Charles de Lint’s Jack the Giant Killer (1987), featuring Jacky
Rowan and her friend Kate Hazel.
The darker aspects of such tales have inspired authors to explore difﬁcult issues related to the concerns of Third Wave feminism for those marginalized and oppressed by society. The physical and emotional abuse suffered
by women and children is the focus of Windling’s anthology The Armless
Maiden (1995), with stories contributed by Emma Bull, Midori Snyder, Ellen
Kushner, Joanna Russ, and others. McKinley’s Deerskin (1993), based on
Charles Perreault’s tale “Donkeyskin,” is a painfully compelling look at father–
daughter incest. The long association between the fairy tale and the nursery
holds no sway with authors determined to reshape childhood favorites into
cutting critiques of the adult world.
Mythic Fantasy

Some writers have reached into the far past, into a time before recorded history, to ﬂesh out hints of matriarchal societies shaped by goddess worship
and to create ﬁctional worlds in which female characters are culture bearers
and warriors. Morgan Llywelyn’s The Horse Goddess (1982) recounts the tale of
a young girl named Epona, whose psychic abilities allow her to domesticate
wild horses for the beneﬁt of the early Celts. The Celtic goddess Epona is the
driving force behind Judith Tarr’s series beginning with White Mare’s Daughter
(1998), the ﬁrst novel telling of the clash between the nomadic White Horse
tribe and the matriarchal Lady’s People, who know nothing about horses, war,
or men in power until a daughter of the tribe arrives to teach them. Another
series that imagines the destruction of matriarchal cultures begins with Constance Ash’s The Horsegirl (1988), about the clash between those who follow
Eve, the First Mother, and Alam, who promotes the abuse of women. The
bond between women and animals is not unusual in these works; that so
66
...............

Fantasy, 1960–2005
often the animal is a horse alludes not only to long-standing mythic associations but also to the association of horses with power and freedom to travel.
Other writers draw on classical mythology and its many tales of female
goddesses and the mortal women wronged by gods and heroes. In Kara Dalkey’s Euryale (1988), set in the time of the Roman Empire, the eponymous heroine is the Medusa, ﬁnally freed from her curse. Marion Zimmer Bradley’s The
Firebrand (1987) recounts the tale of Kassandra amidst the aftermath of the
Trojan War. Jane Lindskold’s The Pipes of Orpheus (1995) alludes to the myth of
Eurydice as, after her loss, Orpheus becomes the Pied Piper of Hamelin. Several works reference the myth of Persephone and Demeter, including Tanith
Lee’s Silver Metal Lover (1983) and White as Snow (2000), and Melanie Gideon’s
The Girl Who Swallowed the Moon (1994). The ﬁgure of the Greek god Pan symbolizes youthful freedom and the Alaskan wilderness of her childhood to the
protagonist of Megan Lindholm’s Cloven Hooves (1991), a novel about a young
woman trapped in an unhappy marriage.
Although debates about cultural appropriation remain unresolved,
many works of fantasy make use of non-Western myths, legends, and history,
sometimes as an exotic element in world-building by writers outside the culture, sometimes as an exploration of the self by writers within it.
Asian cultural material has been particularly represented in fantasy by
women. Between volumes 1 and 2 of her Amazons! anthologies, Jessica
Amanda Salmonson published Tomoe Gozen (1981), the ﬁrst in a trilogy about a
woman samurai. Dalkey’s Genpei (2000) is set in twelfth-century Japan, as two
warring clans call on demons for aid in their struggle for power. Japanese kitsune legends are the basis for Kij Johnson’s Crawford Award–winning The Fox
Woman (2000), and, in her novel Fudoki (2003), a cat becomes a woman warrior.
Canadian Larissa Lai’s When Fox Is a Thousand (1995) interweaves the narrative
voices of a fox on the verge of her thousandth birthday, a ninth-century Taoist
nun, and a twentieth-century Vancouver woman. In R. A. MacAvoy’s Tea with
the Black Dragon (1983), middle-aged ﬁddler Martha Macnamara is aided by an
ancient Chinese dragon in human form as she searches for her daughter. In
her Blood of the Goddess trilogy, beginning with Goa (1996), Dalkey examines the
clash of Western and Eastern cultures in sixteenth-century India.
The aboriginal cultures of the Paciﬁc and North America are also
exploited, often as sources of feminine spirituality and environmental balance. Michaela Roessner’s Walkabout Woman (1988), a Crawford Award winner,
uses Aborigine myths. Mercedes Lackey’s Sacred Ground (1995) features a
female detective in training to become a shaman. Elizabeth Scarborough’s
The Godmother’s Web (1998), part of a series about the guiding role of older
women in the vein of fairy godmothers, discusses Hopi-Navajo land rights.
Canadian de Lint often blends European and Celtic folklore in his works of
urban fantasy, as in Forests of the Heart (2000), which includes both Irish and
67
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Mexican-Indio trickster ﬁgures. And this list by no means exhausts the number of fantasy novels that make use of non-Western cultural material.
Perhaps the most important wellspring of mythic fantasy in this period
has been the Matter of Britain, the legends of King Arthur falling somewhere
between myth and history. Nearly twenty-ﬁve years after its publication,
Bradley’s The Mists of Avalon (1982) continues to sell well and garner critical
response. Her retelling of Sir Thomas Malory’s version of the Arthurian
legends from the point of view of the female characters is compelling, and
her decision to set the tale just after the end of the Roman occupation of Britain opens up a theme of great interest to many authors—the clash of worldviews between a reimagined matriarchal paganism and a patriarchal
Christianity. But Bradley was by no means the ﬁrst or only writer to explore
either of these paths.
Mary Stewart’s Arthurian series, beginning with the award-winning The
Crystal Cave (1970), centers on the life of Merlin; in the third volume, The Last
Enchantment (1979), Nimue disguises herself as a boy to become Merlin’s
trusted apprentice, thus subverting the traditional view of the character as an
evil seductress. Also during the 1970s, Vera Chapman, founder of the Tolkien
Society, published the Three Damosels series, each volume recounting the
lives of women who make a place for themselves in Camelot. The protagonist
of the second volume, The King’s Damosel (1976), is Lynette, a tomboy raised as
a ﬁghter but raped at thirteen and unwillingly wed to a brutal man; she eventually becomes the king’s messenger. King Arthur’s Daughter (1978) tells the
story of Ursulet, Arthur’s legitimate daughter who survives the fall of Camelot
to become a warrior and leader in her own right. Gillian Bradshaw’s trilogy
uses the Welsh myths rather than Malory as a basis; the ﬁnal volume, In Winter’s Shadow (1982), is narrated by Gwynhwyfar, who, unlike Bradley’s version,
is a strong woman capable of running Arthur’s kingdom. Guinevere is also the
central ﬁgure in the novels of Sharan Newman and Rosalind Miles; these
works and others explore Guinevere’s adultery in the context of the constraints placed on women by marriage.
Morgan le Fay, in tradition Arthur’s enemy, and other enchantresses
such as Nimue and Morgause, are often recuperated in feminist revisions of
the Arthurian mythos. The primary narrator of Bradley’s Mists, Morgan is also
the central character of Fay Sampson’s Daughter of Tintagel series; her life as
a follower of the old religion is recounted by her nurse in Wise Woman’s Telling
(1989), the ﬁrst volume. The Lady of the Lake is an ambiguous ﬁgure in Phyllis
Ann Karr’s The Idylls of the Queen (1982), Andre Norton’s science fantasy Merlin’s Mirror (1975), and, indirectly, Patricia McKillip’s The Tower at Stony Wood
(2000).
The Arthurian mythos continues to exert a strong inﬂuence in works
as diverse as Guy Gavriel Kay’s epic fantasy The Fionavar Tapestry, Patricia Kennealy-Morrison’s science fantasy Keltiad series, and works for young adults
68
...............

Fantasy, 1960–2005
such as Susan Cooper’s 1970s series The Dark Is Rising and Jane Yolen’s Sword
of the Rightful King (2003), in which a young boy named Gawen who pulls the
sword from the stone is revealed to be Gwen, short for Gwenhwyvar, playfully
suggesting the rightful place of women in Arthurian tradition as the real
power behind the throne.

History

History has not been kind to women, subject to oppression on the basis of
gender and sexuality for centuries and largely ignored by the history books
except as the wives and mothers of great men. So it is not unexpected that
feminist writers of fantasy would choose to rewrite that history. Historical
fantasy makes use of real people and events, simply adding the element of
magic. Alternate histories reshape the narrative of events by imagining different outcomes at key moments in time. And some authors choose instead
to create an imagined world recognizably based on our own past.
A usual theme of historical fantasy set in the Middle Ages is the intolerance of the Christian religion toward other faiths, particularly those more
accepting of women. In Susan Shwartz’s Shards of Empire (1996), a key conﬂict
lies in the Christian protagonist’s desire to marry a Jewess in Byzantium. Guy
Gavriel Kay also explores religious conﬂict in that city in his duology The Sarantine Mosaic, in which an analogue of the oft-reviled Empress Theodora is a
sympathetic character. Marie Jakober’s The Black Chalice (2000), set in twelfthcentury Germany, recounts the clash of Christian and pagan faiths from the
viewpoint of a monk concerned for the soul of a war leader in love with a
pagan priestess. Katherine Kurtz’s series of Deryni Chronicles, begun in 1970,
is set in an alternate medieval Britain, where the Catholic Church persecutes
those with magical powers.
Aside from critiques of the Church, fantasists interested in this period
occasionally place women on the battleﬁeld. Mary Gentle’s Ash: A Secret History (2000), plays with the often discredited historical accounts of Frankish
women warriors during the Crusades. In an alternate ﬁfteenth-century
Europe, a girl, in some ways a ﬁgure of Joan of Arc, grows up among the
armies. Although she is raped at eight years of age, she eventually becomes
the commander of a mercenary force.
Other periods of European history have attracted the attention of fantasists. The Renaissance, with a powerful queen on the throne of England and a
number of historical ﬁgures claiming to be magicians, is the setting for several works. Midori Snyder’s The Innamorati (1998) takes place in an alternate
Italy, with characters drawn from commedia dell’arte. R. A. MacAvoy also sets
her Damiano trilogy in Renaissance Italy; the eponymous protagonist is the
son of a witch who encounters both Satan and the archangel Raphael. Elizabethan London is the setting of Lisa Goldstein’s Strange Devices of the Sun and
69
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Moon (1993), where bookseller Alice Wood ﬁnds herself entangled along with
Christopher Marlowe in a war between the faery folk. The world of Ellen
Kushner’s Swordspoint (1987) and its sequels share the sensibilities of Jacobean revenge tragedies, as swordsman Richard St. Vier and his aristocrat lover
Alec negotiate political and sexual intrigues.
A number of works, collected in the omnibus edition White Crow (2003)
by Gentle, are set in an alternate version of seventeenth-century England,
where the regime of the Lady Protector Olivia has deposed Queen Carola; the
central character is a woman named Valentine, aka White Crow, a soldier and
scholar. Seventeenth-century France is the setting for The Moon and the Sun
(1997) by Vonda N. McIntyre, about two scholars, a brother and sister, and
their search for a mermaid. Delia Sherman’s The Porcelain Dove (1993) recounts
the events of the French Revolution from the viewpoint of Berthe Duvet, maid
to Adele, whose daughter Linotte sets off on a quest disguised as a young man
to free her family from an ancient curse. Freedom and Necessity (1997), an epistolary novel by Emma Bull and Steven Brust, puts a young woman named Susan
into the midst of magic and Marxist revolution. Caroline Stevermer’s A College
of Magics (1994) is about a female scholar of magic in an alternate Edwardian
England.
The Present

Although it is possible, as is obvious from the above, to critique the society of
the present by either imagining another world or reimagining the past, many
fantasists choose to work more directly with the materials of the present
moment in history. The eruption of the fantastic into the everyday signals a
catalyst for personal, and often political, change. Many of the works of urban
fantasy in the 1980s were related to the revised fairy tales of that time, partly
due to the inﬂuence of editor Terri Windling. Windling created the sharedworld series Bordertown, about a city in North America inhabited by both
elves and humans. Authors contributing to this series included Charles de
Lint and Emma Bull, who were both signed to Tor Books by Windling. Bull’s
War for the Oaks (1987) is set in Minneapolis, where rock guitarist Eddi
becomes involved in a war between the Seelie and Unseelie Courts of the
Faery folk, forms her own rock band, and falls in love with a pouka. De Lint’s
Moonheart (1984), set in Ottawa, is also about the rival courts of the Faery and
about a young mortal woman drawn into their conﬂict; the novel won the ﬁrst
Crawford Award.
De Lint later created Newford, an archetypal North American city, to
explore themes of social activism and community-building, themes of interest to many fantasists writing about the present from a feminized perspective. Jane Lindskold in Brother to Dragons, Companion to Owls (1994) portrays the
urban world from the perspective of a young woman released from a mental
hospital after budget cuts and later adopted by a street gang. Megan
70
...............

Fantasy, 1960–2005
Lindholm in A Wizard of the Pigeons (1986) does the same for a homeless war
veteran in Seattle. Concern for the community is also reﬂected in fantasy’s
concern for the environment, a theme common in works of fantasy, including
Patricia McKillip’s Something Rich and Strange (1994) and many of de Lint’s novels. Often environmental issues are related to feminist spirituality, as in
Louise Lawrence’s The Earth Witch (1981), informed by myths about fertility
goddesses and the sacriﬁce of their seasonal lovers. Joan D. Vinge’s science
fantasy The Snow Queen (1980) combines such mythic themes with the fears
about technologically caused apocalypse found in environmental SF.
The role of the woman as artist within the community is, naturally, an
issue of interest to authors. Greer Ilene Gilman’s Moonwise (1991), a tour-deforce of literary allusion and poetic language, is about the quest of two
women who travel in the world that they created as college students. Similarly, Yarrow (1986), by de Lint, is about an author who writes about the dream
world in which she lives by night. In de Lint’s Memory and Dream (1994), a
female artist deals with her physically abusive mentor and comes to terms
with her love for her college roommate, a writer who committed suicide as a
result of childhood abuse by her parents. A character in Elizabeth Hand’s Mortal Love (2004) is artist’s muse, artist’s model, and artist in her own right.

B
ORDERS
...........................................................................................................................................
Fantasists have always transgressed boundaries of both gender and genre, a
trend especially celebrated by women writers who have found in fantasy the
freedom to explore the diversity of sexual identities. The characters in Elizabeth
A. Lynn’s series beginning with Watchtower (1979) are openly homosexual;
in the sequel Dancers of Arun (1979), the young protagonist falls in love with
his elder brother. Gael Baudino’s Gossamer Axe (1990) won the Lambda
Award for a story about a long-lived harpist who forms an all-female heavy
metal band to free her lover from the Faery folk. Elizabeth Hand’s Waking the
Moon (1994), about the return of the Dark Goddess, won several awards
including the Tiptree. Candas Jane Dorsey’s Black Wine (1997), a Crawford
Award winner about the bonds between women across generations, deals
frankly with sexuality and sexual violence, as does Sarah Monette’s Melusine
(2005).
As for genre boundaries, fantasists have been crossing those lines since
the beginnings of genre fantasy, blending science ﬁction, sword and sorcery,
horror, and romance as the ﬁeld continues to evolve. As the growth of the
small press provides even more opportunities for those whose imagined
worlds might not suit corporate sensibilities, such boundaries become ever
more ﬂuid. Although there continues to be some debate about exactly what
the term entails, the Interstitial Movement counts among its followers many
of the authors and editors discussed in this chapter. The stories selected for
71
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

The Year’s Best in Fantasy and Horror are drawn from a wide range of publications; other recent showcases for genre-bending work include Conjunctions 39
(2002), a special issue on the New Wave Fabulists edited by Peter Straub, and
Flights: Extreme Visions of Fantasy (2004) and its sequel, for which editor Al Sarrantonio requested contributions with no restriction on theme or genre. Since
the turn of the millennium, a number of newer authors have begun to make
a reputation for themselves in the genre. One of the most talked-about is
Kelly Link, author of several award-winning short stories, editor of the anthology Trampoline (2003), and, with Gavin Grant, editor of Small Beer Press and
the magazine Lady Churchill’s Rosebud Wristlet, as well as Terri Windling’s
replacement on the Year’s Best anthologies since 2002. Other women writers
to keep an eye out for in the coming years include Sarah Monette, Jacqueline
Carey, Gwyneth Jones, Karen Traviss, K. J. Bishop, and Theodora Goss.
The elements of genre fantasy continue to appear in works of literature
shelved among the mainstream rather than relegated to the back of the bookstore. Authors such as A. S. Byatt, Marina Warner, Margaret Atwood, and
Louise Erdrich may not be shelved alongside Marion Zimmer Bradley or
Tanith Lee, but their work is also based on fairy tales and folklore, on reimagining the past and imagining a different present.
See also chapters 4, 18, 19, 22, and 25.
Further Readings
Attebery, Brian. Strategies of Fantasy. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992.
Boyer, Robert H., and Kenneth J. Zahorski, eds. Fantasists on Fantasy. New York: Avon, 1984.
Clute, John, and John Grant. The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. London: Orbit, 1997.
Endicott Studio [online]. Http://www.endicott-studio.com.
Feminist Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Utopia [online]. Http://feministsf.org.
Hume, Kathryn. Fantasy and Mimesis. London: Methuen, 1985.
Sandner, David. Fantastic Literature: A Critical Reader. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2004.
Spivack, Charlotte. Merlin’s Daughters: Contemporary Women Writers of Fantasy. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1987.
Yolen, Jane. Touch Magic. Rev. ed. Little Rock, AR: August House, 2000.

72
...............

8

Science Fiction, 1960–2005:
Novels and Short Fiction
DAVID M. HIGGINS

FEMALE writers have always been present in science ﬁction (SF), and the subterranean histories of women’s contributions to the genre are now being
recovered (see Pamela Sargent’s Women of Wonder anthologies and Eric Leif
Davin’s Partners in Wonder: Women and the Birth of Science Fiction, 1926–1965). In
contrast to the covert history of women’s contributions to early pulp SF, however, women have had a much more active and public presence in science ﬁction since the 1960s.
One reason why women have been drawn to science ﬁction in this
period is because SF offers rich possibilities for exploring alternative modes of
social experience. Rather than reinforcing women’s standard social roles,
science ﬁction can imagine new and liberating alternatives for women’s
experiences. The thematic and stylistic experimentations of the New Wave
in the 1960s created space for strong female protagonists in SF while challenging the sexist assumptions of earlier pulp genre formulas. The feminist
SF of the 1970s called into question normative assumptions about gender
and sexuality and imagined alternative forms of relationships between men
and women.
Although the “hard-boiled” cyberpunk movement of the 1980s has been
characterized as a backlash against feminism, critics like Donna Haraway
argue that cybernetic ﬁctions also challenge basic binary categories of existence, and that the breakdown of these essential categories can be useful for
feminist concerns. Alongside the cyberpunks, humanist SF writers in the
1980s and 1990s explored literary craftsmanship, complex characterizations,
and experiments in “soft” sciences in order to escape a restrictive emphasis
on “hard”-science extrapolations prevalent in earlier stories.
73
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

At the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, women are still outnumbered by men as SF writers, but they are an indisputable presence in the ﬁeld.
Women have been visibly present in SF since the 1960s, although women of
color remained rare voices until the beginning of the new millennium. In the
2000s, encouraged by an atmosphere of “slipstream” and “interstitial” ﬁctions
where hard-science stories can stand alongside magical realism and postcolonial narratives, women of color are emerging as vital writers and editors
throughout SF communities.
T
H E N E W WAV E
..........................................................................................................................................
Britain and America were changing in the 1960s. New technologies were
emerging at a rapid rate: space futurists believed that technological progress
would advance mankind to the stars, while others feared that technological
advancement might lead to the world’s destruction. Liberating social changes
caused fear among some, leading to the assassinations of major public ﬁgures
such as Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X, and John F. Kennedy. Britain was
losing its colonial empire as America began a new phase of imperial expansion in Vietnam. At the same time, the 1960s saw the decline of SF magazines
as publishers began to understand the proﬁtability of novels that could be
kept in print continuously.
All of these changes affected the themes and attitudes of SF in the
1960s. A new generation of young writers emerged seeking to rebel against
the conservative limitations imposed by pulp SF formulas. This new generation sought to combine SF’s extrapolative power and sense of wonder with
avant-garde literary experimentation and an emphasis on the soft sciences
(such as psychology and sociology) in contrast to the hard physical sciences
(physics, biology, mathematics) championed by traditional SF. New Wave writers of the 1960s were determined to reject and/or expose the ideological
underpinnings of pulp conventions. They were critical of technological progress, suspicious of national power and imperialism, and devoted to a celebration of sex, drugs, and rock ’n’ roll. In some cases, New Wave writers
emphasized the dystopian decay of Western culture in order to critique the
social and political conditions of their time.
As SF in this period began to develop neglected subgenres, explore new
thematic territory, and reexamine long-held assumptions about content and
style, more women began to emerge as SF readers, writers, and editors. Men
had a much larger presence in the New Wave than women, but there are signiﬁcant and visible contributions by women within the movement.
The New Wave emerged from four major publication nodes: the British
SF magazine New Worlds under the editorship of Michael Moorcock beginning
in 1964, Harlan Ellison’s Dangerous Visions anthologies in 1967 and 1972, Damon Knight’s Orbit anthologies beginning in 1966, and Judith Merril’s England
74
...............

Science Fiction, 1960–2005
Swings SF (1968) and her Annual of the Year’s Best SF anthologies. Several important women published ﬁction in New Worlds, including Hilary Bailey, Daphne
Castell, Gwyneth Cravens, Sandra Dorman (later Sandra Dorman-Hess), Carol
Emshwiller, Gretchen Haapanen, Katherine MacLean, Judith Merril, Kit Reed
(Lillian Craig Reed), and Pamela Zoline, who contributed both ﬁction and
illustrations. New Worlds also included poetry by Libby Houston as well as
nonﬁction features by Joyce Churchill, Stacy Waddy, and Judy Watson. In
addition to ﬁction by Dorman and Emshwiller, Ellison’s Dangerous Visions
anthologies included work by Miriam Allen deFord, Ursula K. Le Guin, Judith
Ann Lawrence, Evelyn Lief, Joanna Russ, Josephine Saxton, James Tiptree Jr.
(Alice Sheldon), and Kate Wilhelm. Many of the above authors also published
work in Knight’s Orbit anthologies and Merril’s England Swings SF. Additionally,
Orbit featured ﬁction by Eleanor Arnason, Doris Pitkin Buck, Carol Carr, Grania Davis, Liz Hufford, Virginia Kidd, Vonda McIntyre, Raylyn Moore, Doris
Piserchia, Allison Rice, Kathleen M. Sidney, and Joan Vinge, while Merril’s
anthologies included work by Karen Anderson, Holley Cantine, Sheri Eberhart,
Elizabeth Emmett, Alice Glaser, Zenna Henderson, Maxine W. Kumin, Felicia
Lamport, Anne McCaffrey, and Muriel Spark.
Several of these writers used SF to challenge unspoken cultural assumptions about sex, race, gender, and other social norms. Zoline’s “The Heat Death
of the Universe” (1967) suggests that a domestic housewife is asked to accomplish the same impossible work that Maxwell’s demon is required to perform
in thermodynamic physics. Reed wrote moral fables sharply criticizing social
conditions; her novel Armed Camps (1969) tells the story of a decaying America
where neither a male soldier nor a female paciﬁst can offer a solution to
entropic decline. Dorman-Hess and Henderson both use alien characters to
explore themes of race, immigration, and alienation; Dorman-Hess’s “When I
Was Miss Dow” (1966) uses aliens as a narrative tool to reﬂect on human conditions rather than as a racial enemy to be eliminated. Emshwiller wrote several stories focused on women’s self-estrangement, and she became known
for her literary craftsmanship and her dedication to challenging the narrative
and thematic conventions of the SF genre. Saxton’s novels emphasize the exploration of “inner space” in order to explore mental states, mental breakdowns, and the ways that social and institutional conditions pressure
women’s internal worlds of experience. MacLean optimistically explored the
potential of soft sciences in SF while still writing with a hard SF tone; her 1971
novella “The Missing Man” won a Nebula Award.
Several women of the New Wave were successful as both writers and
editors. The most famous is Merril, who moved to England and published England Swings SF. She continued to support New Wave experimentation and publication after returning to America in her Year’s Best SF anthologies. Her ﬁrst
major publication was “That Only a Mother” (1948), a story about a woman
who believes that her mutant baby is normal. This story chillingly calls into
75
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

question the relative “madness” of the murderous father who seeks to kill the
child and the warlike atomic society that is responsible for its creation. Hilary
Bailey, who was married to Michael Moorcock from 1962 to 1978, was the
coeditor (and sometimes sole editor) of New Worlds Quarterly, the anthology
that succeeded New Worlds. Her work was often ﬁction in a mainstream style,
but she was also known for “The Fall of Frenchy Steiner” (1964), and she cowrote The Black Corridor (1969) with Moorcock without receiving authorial
credit. Kate Wilhelm and her husband, Damon Knight, founded the Milford SF
Writer’s Conference, which later became the famous Clarion SF Writer’s Workshop. Wilhelm edited a Clarion anthology in the 1970s. She began by writing
typical genre stories, but she won a Nebula for “The Planners,” a story of a
collapsing near-future United States and an unstable protagonist.
While the New Wave was attacking technological progressivism, the
conquest of space, and the male-dominated capitalist state, women outside
the New Wave made different contributions to SF. Cele Goldsmith Lalli was
another editor who was not restricted by the notion of an adolescent male
readership. She edited Amazing Stories and Fantastic from 1958 to 1965 and is
credited as one of the editors who opened the door for Joanna Russ to enter
the ﬁeld. Among mainstream SF writers, Andre Norton (who wrote hundreds
of novels and short stories in her lifetime) was one of the earliest women to
offer liberated female protagonists in her ﬁction. She was the ﬁrst woman
to win the Grand Master Nebula Award, in 1983. Anne McCaffrey won a Hugo
for “Weyr Search” and a Nebula for “Dragonrider” in 1968 (both later collected
together in Dragonﬂight), making her the ﬁrst woman to win both awards.
McCaffrey’s ﬁctions are considered to be traditional science fantasies, but she
often focuses on capable central female characters. Marion Zimmer Bradley,
who started writing sword and sorcery in the 1950s, became famous for her
Darkover novels, which focused on colonial issues within a massive galactic
empire. Later in this series, Bradley went on to explore questions about gender stereotypes and sexual politics. Vonda McIntyre, a geneticist who graduated from the Clarion Workshop in 1970, won a Nebula for “Of Mist, Grass,
and Sand” in 1973, and this story later became part of her Nebula and Hugo
award-winning novel Dreamsnake (1975). McIntyre’s ﬁction also features strong
central female protagonists and feminist themes.
The impact of feminism and the presence of female writers and editors
changed the representations of women within SF from the 1960s onward. Realistic female characters were rare in SF until this period; pulp SF often portrayed women as objects to be desired, feared, rescued, or destroyed or to
otherwise validate the masculinity and heterosexuality of male protagonists
and readers. Female protagonists begin to emerge in SF stories from both male
and female writers in the 1960s: Naomi Mitchison’s Memoirs of a Spacewoman
(1962), Robert A. Heinlein’s Podkayne of Mars (1963), Samuel R. Delany’s Babel17 (1966), Alexi Panshin’s Rite of Passage (1968), Russ’s Picnic on Paradise (1968),
76
...............

Science Fiction, 1960–2005
and McCaffrey’s The Ship Who Sang (1969) all focus on capable female protagonists. The changing atmosphere of thematic and stylistic experimentation in
the 1960s set the stage for the emergence of feminist SF in the 1970s.

F
EMINIST SF
...........................................................................................................................................
The women’s movement gained momentum in the 1970s; Gloria Steinem’s
Ms. magazine started publication in 1972 and quickly became a ﬂagship publication for feminist issues. Congress passed the Equal Rights Amendment in
1972, and the Supreme Court ruled in favor of an unmarried person’s right to
use contraceptives that same year. Title IX of the Education Amendment
banned sex discrimination in schools, and in 1973 Roe v. Wade established a
woman’s legal right to abortion. In 1974, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act
made credit discrimination based on race, gender, and other prejudicial factors illegal, and the Supreme Court ruled that businesses could not pay
women lower wages than men simply because men would refuse to work for
the same low pay as women. In 1976, for the ﬁrst time, Nebraska became the
ﬁrst state to criminalize marital rape.
The success of the women’s movement made an impact on SF in the
1970s. New Wave feminists went beyond simply questioning the sexist limitations of pulp SF formulas into more active challenges of social inequality, and
further still into exploring new conceptions of power relations between men
and women. The imaginative ﬂexibility of SF allowed these authors to think
about women in different circumstances and situations rather than creating
literary settings and situations that “realistically” reproduced existing oppressive conditions.
Several important voices emerged in SF in the 1970s. Le Guin’s The Left
Hand of Darkness (1969) was a literary “thought experiment” that examined gender stereotypes by imagining a social world based on alternative sexual physiologies. The novel won a Nebula in 1960 and a Hugo in 1970, and it is considered
to be the ﬁrst gender-based SF novel to win both critical and commercial success. Le Guin followed this with The Dispossessed (1974), a utopian novel hailed
as a masterwork in both SF and postmodern ﬁction that interrogates complex
and subtle questions about the relationships between self and society.
Russ is one of the ﬁrst authors to write about a female protagonist who
adopts an explicitly male role in her “Alyx” stories (published in Orbit in the
late 1960s and eventually collected as The Adventures of Alyx in 1983). Russ is
often characterized as a more forceful feminist than Le Guin, and she is one
of the ﬁrst SF writers to openly address lesbianism. Russ won a Nebula in
1972 for “When It Changed,” a story depicting a completely female society.
Her novel The Female Man (1975) is a feminist classic that tells the story of four
women ( Jeannine, Janet, Joanna, and Jael) who come together from realities
with alternative gender norms.
77
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Tiptree won praise for combining strong characterizations of women
alongside “manly” Hemingway-style prose before “he” was revealed to be Alice
Sheldon (a retired psychologist and former CIA ofﬁcer) in 1977. The fact that
Sheldon had been accepted as a male SF writer exploded stereotypes of the work
done by female writers. Tiptree died in 1987, and in 1991, Pat Murphy created
the James Tiptree Jr. Award to recognize work that reimagines stereotypical gender roles and explores SF’s potential to challenge social and sexual norms.
Several women gained recognition as editors and anthologists in the
1970s. Sargent’s Women of Wonder (1975) and More Women of Wonder (1976)
were the ﬁrst SF anthologies of SF by women about women. McIntyre edited
an anthology of feminist and humanist SF called Aurora: Beyond Equality in
1976 with Susan Jane Anderson. Analog ran an issue focused on women under
the editorship of Ben Bova, and Robert Silverberg’s The Crystal Ship (1976), Virginia Kidd’s Millennial Women (1978), and Alice Laurance’s Cassandra Rising
(1978) were all subsequent anthologies that collected women’s SF.
Many women writing in the 1960s gained greater recognition in the
1970s, including Arnason, Bradley, Davis, McCaffrey, McIntyre, Piserchia, Saxton, Vinge, and Wilhelm. The 1970s also brought several major new voices:
Suzy McKee Charnas, C. J. Cherryh, Octavia Butler, Phyllis Eisenstein, Suzette Haden Elgin, Sally Miller Gearheart, Virginia Hamilton, Cecelia Holland,
Anna Kavan, Lee Killough, Tanith Lee, Dorris Lessing, Elizabeth A. Lynn,
Judith Moffett, Marge Piercy, Marta Randall, Lisa Tuttle, Monique Wittig, and
Chelsea Quinn Yarbro all gained recognition in SF during this time. Charnas’s
ﬁrst novel, Walk to the End of the World (1974), is an explicitly feminist work presenting a dystopian future where women are blamed for humanity’s decline.
Cherryh, who won the John W. Campbell Award for most promising writer in
1976, became a major ﬁgure in the new space opera movement during the
1980s with the success of her Union-Alliance series. Butler is the ﬁrst major
African-American woman to gain recognition in SF; her work interrogates
power relationships on the basis of gender, sex, race, and species starting with
her Patternist series in the 1970s. Piercy is most known for Woman on the Edge
of Time (1976), a novel about a Chicana trapped in a mental institution who
believes that she is contacted by an emissary from a utopian feminist future.
The SF genre as a whole became more open to women’s issues during
this time, and this change affected male writers such as Samuel R. Delany, Joe
Haldeman, Kim Stanley Robinson, James H. Schmitz, and John Varley, who
each began to use strong female protagonists and to integrate feminist perspectives into their work. Several writers began to work with gay and lesbian
issues during this time, including Arnason, Delany, Disch, Lynn, Russ, and
Bradley, who turned from traditional science fantasy to a serious exploration
of women’s issues and questions of sexuality. In 1977, the ﬁrst WisCon (a convention for feminist SF writers and fans) was held at the University of
78
...............

Science Fiction, 1960–2005
Wisconsin. Guests of honor included Katherine MacLean and Amanda Bankier, who edited The Witch and the Chameleon (credited as the ﬁrst feminist
fanzine).

H
UMANISTS AND CYBERPUNKS
...........................................................................................................................................
In the 1980s, science ﬁction was becoming more visible in mainstream American culture. The success of Star Wars (1977) brought a wider audience to traditional SF, and some publishers became less supportive of literary
experimentations. Combined with a growth of conservative sentiment in the
United States and United Kingdom, some women in SF communities began to
experience a backlash against feminist work.
Despite this reaction, more and more women were drawn to SF, and
even mainstream literary writers outside of the SF community began to incorporate speculative ﬁction into their work: Margaret Atwood, Jean M. Auel,
€ Fairbairns, Cecelia Holland, Anna
Christine Brooke-Rose, Angela Carter, Zoe
Kavan, Rhoda Lerman, Doris Lessing, Ayn Rand, Emma Tennant, Fay Weldon,
Monique Wittig, and Christa Wolf all used SF tropes and methods during the
1980s, and some core SF writers, like Le Guin and Piercy, found themselves
adopted into the mainstream literary world.
Pamela Sargent describes the 1980s as an ambiguous decade for women
in science ﬁction. Women were being published regularly, yet at the same time
many writers were feeling pressure to avoid being labeled as feminists. Some
fans and critics in this environment began to challenge whether or not feminist works should be legitimately included as real SF. At stake in such criticism
is the implicit privileging of hard or masculine physical sciences over soft feminine sciences like psychology, linguistics, ecology, and sociology. Women, who
had been actively excluded from the study of hard sciences until the late
twentieth century, have not historically been part of the technocratic elite,
and the prejudice against soft sciences in SF reﬂects a lingering bias against
scientiﬁc domains considered less objective and more feminine.
Several women in the 1980s gained public recognition for their work in
SF, only to be labeled as “soft” writers whose work wasn’t real science ﬁction.
One example was Connie Willis, the ﬁrst author to win a Nebula in all four
categories of ﬁction. Despite her widespread achievements, some critics have
suggested that her work falls outside the core of SF. Willis’s focus on metaphorical extrapolations, literary craftsmanship, and detailed characterization
is a sign of a different category of SF that refuses to privilege scientiﬁc extrapolations as the essence of the SF genre. Several other writers in the 1980s,
many of them women, also began to develop a rich literary SF sensibility:
Karen Joy Fowler blended SF and magical realism in her novel Artiﬁcial Things
(1986). Pat Murphy won a Nebula for her novel The Falling Woman (1986). Lisa
Goldstein’s ﬁction combines SF and fantasy elements in a way that makes her
79
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

difﬁcult to categorize. On the harder end of the literary SF spectrum, Nancy
Kress wrote realistic and plausible works that imagine speculative advances
in biotechnology alongside their corresponding ethical dilemmas.
Some critics view a division in the 1980s between these literary writers,
sometimes referred to as “humanist” SF authors, and the cyberpunks. If the
humanists adopted a mainstream literary style and focused their work on
human choices and philosophical problems, cyberpunks focused on cybernetic and information technologies, a literary style inspired by ﬁlm noir and
hard-boiled detective ﬁction, a distrust of Big Business, and an embrace of
left-wing and/or libertarian sensibilities. William Gibson’s Neuromancer (1984)
is one milestone of the cyberpunk movement, and other key authors include
Greg Bear, Paul J. McAuley, Lewis Shiner, John Shirley, Neil Stephenson, and
Bruce Sterling. While it is true that male authors clearly outnumber females
among cyberpunk authors, a notable exception is Pat Cadigan, author of
Mindplayer (1987), Fools (1992), and Synners (1991), whose “postfeminist” cyberﬁction features active female characters whose capability as protagonists is
assumed rather than marked as unusual. In 1994, Melissa Scott published
Trouble and Her Friends, a novel that questioned some of the cyberpunk tropes
through the creation of two lesbians as protagonists.
Female characters in cyberpunk ﬁctions often occupy secondary roles as
dominatrixes, sex objects, whores, victims, or femme fatales, and several
cyberpunk stories lack active female characters at all. Cadigan, however, is not
the only female author writing cybernetic ﬁction: Tiptree is often credited as a
precursor of the genre with “The Girl Who Was Plugged In” (1972), a story about
a suicidal girl who agrees to abandon her physical body to inhabit a glamorous
corporate-owned robot mannequin. Piercy also gained recognition as a
“literary” cyberpunk with He, She, and It (1991), a novel about a romance
between artiﬁcial beings set in a dark future where oppressive multinational
corporate entities enforce the boundaries of “personhood.” Maureen McHugh’s
“A Coney Island of the Mind” (1993) uses virtual reality to explore the borders
of sexual identity, while Raphael Carter (a transsexual who does not identify
as male or female) explores similar issues in The Fortunate Fall (1996).
Although there are few women writing cyberpunk ﬁctions, cyborgs have
nonetheless been adopted by feminist theorists as a tool for imagining hybrid
identities and categorical disruptions. While cyberpunk ﬁctions do not openly
address feminist concerns, the cyborg itself disrupts restrictive categories of
identity in a way that can be friendly to feminist politics. If the cyborg blurs
the boundaries between “human” and “machine” and calls into question the
purity of such categories, cyborgs (both in ﬁction and in reality) are conceptual tools that challenge the stability of many other conceptual categories
(human/machine, human/animal, man/woman, heterosexual/homosexual,
etc.). Donna Harraway’s famous essay “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century” (originally
80
...............

Science Fiction, 1960–2005
published in 1985 and also collected in Harraway’s 1991 book Simians, Cyborgs,
and Women) challenges readers to use the concept of the cyborg to move
beyond isolating categories such as “man” and “woman” and to begin imagining these categories as ﬁelds of afﬁnity offering different possibilities for
expression and play beyond typical social limits. Harraway celebrates SF writers such as Butler, Delany, Russ, McIntyre, Tiptree, Varley, and Wittig as
cyborg “theorists” who use cybernetic images and themes to imagine new
social realities. Several other feminist critics and theorists have adopted
cyborgs as a tool for criticizing categorization and imagining new modes of
afﬁnitive identity, including N. Katherine Hayles, Sadie Plant, Anne Balsamo,
Lisa Nakamura, and Veronica Hollinger, who argues that cyberpunk ﬁctions
disrupt the notion of unitary human subjectivity and challenge the liberalhumanist myth of the essential rational “self” (a privileged conceptualization
of identity that has prioritized “masculine” reason over “feminine” emotion).
Moving further beyond the boundaries of cyberpunk, several works by
female writers in this period explore themes related to cloning and genetic
engineering, including Le Guin’s Nine Lives (1992), Sargent’s Cloned Lives
(1976), Ira Levin’s The Boys from Brazil (1978), Wilhelm’s Where Late the Sweet
Birds Sang (1980), Lois McMaster Bujold’s Falling Free (1988), Kress’s Beggars in
Spain (1994), and Cherryh’s Cyteen (1988).
Alongside the humanist and cyberpunk SF of the 1980s, several women
also continued to explore the utopian SF tradition, including Le Guin, Joan
Slonczewski, Atwood, Elgin, and Sheri S. Tepper. Slonczewski’s The Door into
Ocean (1986), a response to Frank Herbert’s Dune, focuses on a utopian female
society of paciﬁsts. Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale (1985) imagines a dystopian
society where women are forced to assist in their own oppression. Le Guin’s
Always Coming Home (1985) offers an anthropological approach (collecting
poems, short stories, and music) to imagining a utopian future based on
Native American tribal histories. Elgin’s “For the Sake of Grace” (1969) tells
the story of an intelligent woman who must strive for a chance at education
in a male-dominated world, while her later novels Native Tongue (1984) and
Native Tongue II: Judas Rose (1987) imagine a future where women have no legal
rights and develop their own language to act as translators and interpreters.
Tepper’s novel The Gate to Women’s Country (1988) portrays a world where men
and women live divided and separate lives.
Other women SF writers who gained recognition during the 1980s
include Gill Alderman, Kim Antieau, Lois McMaster Bujold, Jayge Carr, Jo Clayton, Storm Constantine, Grania Davis, Candas Jane Dorsey, Carol Nelson
Douglas, Diane Duane, M. J. Engh, Zoe Fairbairns, Cynthia Felice, Sheila Finch,
Caroline Forbes, Karen Joy Fowler, Esther Friesner, Sally Miller Gearheart,
Mary Gentle, Molly Gloss, Lisa Goldstein, Eileen Gunn, Barbara Hambly, Gwyneth Jones, Janet Kagan, Leigh Kennedy, Lee Killough, Kathe Koja, Anna Livia,
R. A. MacAvoy, Ann Maxwell, Julian May, Ardath Mayhar, R. M. Meluch, Judith
81
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Moffett, Pat Murphy, Jane Palmer, Rachel Pollack, Elizabeth Scarborough,
Susan Schwartz, Jody Scott, Melissa Scott, Nancy Springer, S. C. Sykes, Sydney
J. Van Scyoc, Sharon Webb, Cherry Wilder, M. K. Wren, and Jane Yolen.

T
HE NEW MILLENNIUM
..........................................................................................................................................
The contemporary period (since 1990) is more difﬁcult to break down into SF
movements than previous decades. One reason for this is because more SF
novels are now being published than ever before. Meanwhile, SF magazines
have continued to decline, as many distributors have been absorbed by a
small number of larger distribution companies that are selective about how
they allocate shelf space. Internet magazines have proliferated, but even the
most popular of these (such as Ellen Datlow’s SCI FICTION and Eileen Gunn’s
The Inﬁnite Matrix) have had brief life spans.
By the 1990s, women had gained acceptance in the SF community as
readers, writers, and editors, even if they were still often pressured to enter
the ﬁeld under conditions determined by “old boys” who were still prominent
in SF circles. Women of color were almost absent in SF communities until the
contemporary period. Octavia Butler, who began writing in the 1970s, was the
only recognized female African American writing SF until the early 1990s. She
was joined by Nalo Hopkinson, who started writing (with encouragement
from Judith Merril) in 1993. In addition to novels, Hopkinson’s work appeared
in an anthology called Dark Matter: A Century of Speculative Fiction from the African Diaspora (2000) edited by Sheree R. Thomas, and she went on to coedit
(with Uppinder Mehn) So Long Been Dreaming: Postcolonial Science Fiction and Fantasy (2004). With the publication of these anthologies, women of color from a
variety of ethnic and cultural backgrounds are ﬁnding recognition in the SF
community. Their work often refuses a narrow hard SF emphasis and occupies
a middle ground between SF, fantasy, folklore, and magical realism. In addition to Butler, Hopkinson, and Thomas, a short list of these authors would
include Linda Addison, Opal Palmer Adisa, Zainab Amadahy, Velma Bowen,
Shirley Gibson Coleman, Tananarive Due, Jewelle Gomez, Andrea Hairston,
e Fanonne Jeffers, Lillian Jones, Cynthia Kadohata,
Akua Lezli Hope, Honore
Tamai Kobayashi, Karin Lowachee, devorah major, Carole McDonnell, Nnedi
Okorafor-Mbachu, Ama Patterson, Saira Ramasastry, Eden Robinson, Michelle
Sagara (Michelle West), Nisi Shawl, Evie Shockley, and Vandana Singh.
In addition to Hopkinson and Thomas, several other women have
become prominent as SF editors in the 1990s and beyond. Deborah Layne and
Kelly Link have been key editors in the slipstream movement, while Kristine
Kathryn Rusch edited Pulphouse magazine before becoming editor of the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. Ellen Datlow edited Omni magazine before
moving on to edit SCI FICTION (one of the most successful online SF magazines). She has won critical recognition as an SF editor along with Kirsten
82
...............

Science Fiction, 1960–2005
Gong-Wong, Eileen Gunn, Jennifer A. Hall, Elizabeth L. Humphrey, Nicki
Lynch, Shawna McCarthy, Cheryl Morgan, and Pamela D. Scoville.
Many other women have edited novels, magazines, and anthologies in
the contemporary period. A partial list of important SF editors would also
include Susan Allison, Catherine Asaro, Andrea L. Bell, Kristen Pederson Chew,
Kathryn Cramer, Julie E. Czerneda, Noreen Doyle, Jean Feiwel, Jenna Felice,
Karen Fowler, Michelle Frey, Shelia E. Gilbert, Laura Ann Gilman, Susan Marie
Groppi, Karen Haber, Donna Maree Hanson, Jennifer Heddle, Jennifer Hershey,
Liz Holliday, Tanya Huff, Kerrie Hughes, Roxanne Hutton, Cindy Hwang, Janis
Ian, Sharon Lee, Maxine McArthur, Michelle Marquardt, Betsy Mitchell, Mary
Anne Mohanraj, Yolanda Molina-Gavilan, Debbie Notkin, Sharyn November,
Tamora Pierce, Elizabeth Scheier, Shelly Shapiro, Anne Sowards, Juliet Ulman,
Shelia Williams, Connie Willis, Elizabeth R. Wollheim, and Jane Yolen.
In response to the gritty near-future ﬁction of the cyberpunks in the
1980s, some authors, such as Linda Nagata and C. J. Cherryh, began returning
to the genre of space opera to develop alternative SF visions. Other writers,
including Lisa Goldstein, Theodora Goss, Vandana Singh, Lori Anne White,
Ursula Pﬂug, and Karen Joy Fowler have moved toward slipstream or interstitial ﬁctions that blur genre boundaries with inﬂuences from SF, fantasy, and
magical realism. There are enough women publishing SF in the contemporary
period that it becomes difﬁcult to offer a comprehensive list here. A summary
of authors who have won the Hugo, Nebula, Tiptree, or other major awards
since 2000 includes a mix of new voices and familiar names from previous
decades, including Eleanor Arnason, Catherine Asaro, Kage Baker, Elizabeth
Bear, Lois McMaster Bujold, Octavia Butler, Suzy McKee Charnas, Susanna
Clarke, Candas Jane Dorsey, Carol Emshwiller, Sheila Finch, Karen Fowler,
Esther Friesner, Molly Gloss, Hiromi Goto, Nicola Grifﬁth, Eileen Gunn, Elizabeth Hand, Gwynneth Jones, Janet Kagan, Ellen Klages, Nancy Kress, Ursula
K. Le Guin, Kelly Link, Katherine MacLean, Anne McCaffrey, Maureen
F. McHugh, Vonda McIntyre, Elizabeth Moon, Linda Nagata, Severna Park,
Pamela Sargent, Johanna Sinisaslo, Martha Soukup, Mary A. Turzillo, Jo Walton,
Leslie What, Connie Willis, and Jane Yolen.
See also “The James Tiptree Jr. Award” (vol. 1); “Science Fiction, 1900–1959:
Novels and Short Fiction” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Donawerth, Jane. Frankenstein’s Daughters: Women Writing Science Fiction. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1997.
Larbalestier, Justine, ed. Daughters of Earth: Feminist Science Fiction in the Twentieth Century.
Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2006.
Lefanu, Sarah. Feminism and Science Fiction. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989.
Sargent, Pamela, ed. Women of Wonder: The Classic Years. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1995.
———. Women of Wonder: The Contemporary Years. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1995.
83
..............

9

Comics, 1960–2005
ANITA K. MCDANIEL

THE late 1950s or early 1960s to the present, known as the Post–Golden Age
of comics, is most notably marked by the rise and evolution of the superhero
genre. During this time, comic book pulp ﬁction was replaced with the heroic
exploits of super-powered men and women in masks and brightly colored
spandex uniforms. DC Comics led the way with superhero icons such as Batman, Superman, and Wonder Woman until Marvel Comics emerged with its
version of superhumans like the Fantastic Four, X-Men, and Spider-Man.
Initially superhero narratives consisted of crime ﬁghting and epic struggles against alien threats and supervillians. But, as time went on, the stories
incorporated battles against various social injustices and inner demons (rape,
racism, substance abuse). Lead characters were allowed to change and grow
beyond their origin narratives and appeared in forms other than “good-guy,
white guys in tights.” Mainstream comic book readers were exposed to antiheroes like Sandman (DC/Vertigo), Punisher (Marvel Comics), and Hellboy
(Dark Horse Comics); superheroines such as Catwoman (DC Comics), Laura
Croft (Image Comics), and Star Wars’ Shaak Ti (Dark Horse Comics); and minority characters like Black Panther (Marvel Comics), Spawn (Image Comics),
and Static (Milestone Comics).
As the superhero genre was allowed to develop and thrive during this
time, the industry saw great change as well. From the beginning of this time
period until the early 1970s (also referred to as the Silver Age), DC and Marvel
set the agenda for the story lines and themes presented in comics as well as
how to do business. Then from the mid-1980s to the present (the Modern
Age), independent, creator-driven publishing companies such as Image Comics and Dark Horse Comics began to change the way readers viewed mainstream comics and challenged the “business-as-usual” business practices of
the Big Two.
84
...............

Comics, 1960–2005
One of the more signiﬁcant changes that has occurred since the Golden
Age is the infusion of women in the production of comics. Since the beginning, the comic book industry has been dominated by men: male creators,
writers, and artists producing male-oriented subject matter for male readers.
From the late 1970s through the present, however, women have had the opportunity to inﬂuence the superhero genre as editors, writers, and artists of
well-known titles such as Incredible Hulk, Doom Patrol, and Conan the Barbarian.
They became creators of independent titles like Flo Steinberg’s Big Apple
Comix and Colleen Doran’s A Distant Soil. As a result, new voices from women
are being heard in comic books and are helping to shape readers’ perceptions
of the superhero.
Between the Big Two, women such as Dorothy Woolfolk (DC Comics’
ﬁrst female editor) used their feminine perspectives on the social world to
guide the narrative interpretations of artists and writers. Female writers,
including Gail Simone (Birds of Prey), Devin Grayson (Nightwing), and Ann
Nocenti (Daredevil), developed characters beyond the stereotypical conventions of “male superheroes are strong” and “female superheroes are just pretty.” Women who became artists, colorists, and inkers (such as Jill Thompson,
Glenis Oliver, and Marie Severin) gave male and female readers new forms to
incorporate into their classic views of the superhero. A cursory description
of the achievements of all of these women (and others) would not do justice
to their contributions to Post–Golden Age comics. Therefore, the innovations
of three women—a DC editor, a freelance writer, and a Marvel artist—will be
discussed as representing the overall effect that women have had on the
superhero genre and perceptions of female superheroes in particular.

E..............................................................................................................................
DITOR KAREN BERGER
Comic book editors are responsible for getting the book completed on time.
To do so, they need to know something about the creative process (plotting,
story conversation, and placement of the dialogue balloons) and the business
end of comics (promotion of the title and ﬁnding artists and writers who can
sell new projects and current titles). Karen Berger has been editing comics for
DC since 1979. She has a bachelor’s degree in English with a minor in art history from Brooklyn College. She entered the industry as an assistant editor
based on the referral of a friend and began working on superhero titles such
as Wonder Woman, The Legion of Superheroes, and Swamp Thing. Berger is best
known in the industry and to many female readers as the current executive
editor of DC Comics’ Vertigo line—a group of dark-fantasy, crime-ﬁction, war,
and real-life comic books with controversial subject matter similar to independent titles.
Realism is a deﬁning characteristic of Modern Age comics. For example,
Golden Age heroes protected ﬁctional cities like Gotham and Metropolis from
85
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

space invaders and super-powered villains. Modern Age heroes, however, establish residence in real locations like Boston, Los Angeles, and various parts
of New York City, where sitting mayors and heads of state make cameo
appearances in their books. When Berger worked with George Perez on a revision of Wonder Woman, she contributed a different kind of realism: a woman’s view of feminism.
In spite of her iconic status, most incarnations of Wonder Woman (Princess Diana) have exploited her Amazon origins to the point of almost ruining
her as a female superhero. She has been presented in stereotypical and sexist
ways that range from warrior to ice princess to potential love interest of various super-powered members of the Justice League of America (Batman,
Superman, and Aquaman). An editor sustains the life of a title or character
by injecting new ideas into it and/or encouraging new approaches to the
s. The Perez-Berger relaunch of the
genre, not by recycling antiquated cliche
title presented a feminist vision of what a female superhero could be: a
woman who is motivated to serve and protect humankind without dominating or being subservient to men or trying to ﬁght like a man.
Too often, the feminist perspective is considered by men and women to
be a monolithic ideology, a perspective based on the superiority of women
over men with an emphasis on women’s issues. One aspect of feminism is
about empowering women by validating the role they play in society. As such,
it is as fragmented as any other ideology in its means to achieve its goals. In
the ﬁrst seven issues of his run on Wonder Woman, Perez emphasized the
mythological origins of the Amazons by highlighting their connection to the
Greek gods. He described these women as a race envied and then enslaved by
men. However, under the guidance of the gods, Hippolyte (Princess Diana’s
mother) freed the Amazons, defeated the men who oppressed them, and led
them to their current home on Paradise Island.
In the process of defeating their captors, a philosophical rift occurred
among the Amazons similar to that within feminist ideology. One group of
women took an adversarial stance against men and embraced violence as a
means to combat their former oppressors. The other group (from which Diana
is a direct descendent) chose to work with men to achieve a better society
and to protect humankind from the evil that existed below Paradise Island
and beyond—a recurring theme for the title. Adopting an adversarial, antiman approach to life is different from adopting a cooperative and protective,
pro-woman approach. Although it would have been easy for Perez to associate all of the Amazons with the pro-woman approach to feminism (as other
writers have done), he chose to introduce the reality of at least two competing
views of the ideology. Given that attention to a more realistic presentation of
the Wonder Woman Amazons, Berger’s inﬂuence seems evident on Perez’s narrative choices.
86
...............

Comics, 1960–2005
As both artist and writer for his run on Wonder Woman, Perez’s vision of
Princess Diana did not depict her as someone who either dominates or submits to men. Wonder Woman was not drawn in a way that sexualizes her
character. That is, Perez did not “pose” her for the other male characters or
readers. In spite of appearing almost exclusively in a uniform that is basically
a strapless bathing suit and knee boots, Wonder Woman’s feminine features
were not enhanced in a way that made her seem less heroic.
Also, Wonder Woman was not written in a way that made her inferior
or superior to the male characters in the story. She was not compelled to fall
in love with the lead male, Steve Trevor, nor did she continually save him
from danger. Wonder Woman was the star of her title, but not at the expense
of the male egos of her supporting cast or the readers. It may have been eass because he
ier for Perez to avoid stereotypical narratives and visual cliche
was both the artist and writer of the title, but it was the editor who nurtured
his efforts.
Finally, Berger’s inﬂuence was seen in Diana’s ability to resolve conﬂict.
A common theme in superhero narratives is to defeat various threats to
humankind with physical force or near-lethal uses of super powers. In the initial story arc, Princess Diana defeated Ares, the god of war, in his campaign to
rule the world. However, the contest did not end with a predictable physical
confrontation. Diana did not beat Ares because she fought him physically;
she emerged victorious because she used her golden lasso (a gift from the
female gods and the Earth Mother Gaea) to show Ares that he could not rule
the world by destroying everyone on it. Wonder Woman was not physically
strong enough to defeat the god, so she used what was available to her as a
woman to ﬁnd a way to help him see the truth. In the end, Perez may be credited with restoring Wonder Woman to her superhero icon status, but he
acknowledges that he achieved that distinction with the help of a female
editor.

W
RITER BARBARA KESEL RANDALL
..............................................................................................................................
Comic book writers are responsible for creating narratives suitable for new or
existing characters. To do so, they need to be able to tell a story that readers
want to read and develop characters that have the potential to grow. However,
writers are not free to do whatever they want with a character in order to tell
a good story. According to the DC/Marvel paradigm, a character cannot be
changed to the point where the hero is unrecognizable to readers nor changed
in ways that interfere with the marketing of the character. Thus, writers for
superhero comics create stories in which lead characters experience forms of
psychological or relational change that denote their ability to cope with personal fears, limitations, and weaknesses and possibly provide motivation for
future exploits.
87
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Barbara Kesel Randall entered the industry as a freelance writer for DC
Comics in 1981. She has a bachelor’s degree in drama from Cal Poly Pomona
and had intended to become a playwright upon graduation. However, after
writing a ten-page letter to a DC editor complaining about their negative and
stereotypical portrayals of female characters, she was given an opportunity to
write a Batgirl backup story for Detective Comics during her sophomore year
in college. Over the course of her career, Kesel has written stories for DC
Comics, Marvel Comics, Image Comics, Dark Horse Comics, and Wildstorm
and superhero characters such as Batgirl, Ultra Girl, Supergirl, Hawk and
Dove, and the members of WildC.A.T.s. To date, her most impressive work in
comics has been the Meridian series published by CrossGen Comics. The series
is about a teenage girl named Sephie who begins the story as a fairy-tale
princess and grows up to become a strong and intelligent woman who ﬁghts
and heals.
Not surprisingly, Kesel’s main contribution to the superhero genre is
her positive portrayals of female superheroes. A good example is her noteworthy depictions of Barbara Gordon (aka Batgirl). Kesel’s version of Batgirl established her as a character separate from Batman and Robin: a woman
motivated to do what men do, but alone and in her own way. Her Secret Origins (1987) and Batgirl Special (1988) countered the victimized and objectiﬁed
presentation of Barbara Gordon/Batgirl in Alan Moore’s acclaimed The Killing
Joke (1988).
Victimization and objectiﬁcation are common narrative themes for
women in superhero comics. Although objectiﬁcation is more obvious in the
visual representations of women, how the female character is written provides the artist with clues as to how she should or could be drawn. Victimization, on the other hand, is exclusively within the province of the writer. Too
often women in comics, whether female superheroes or relational partners,
are tortured, raped, maimed, killed, depowered, or made to go insane to further the development of a current story line for a male character or to establish a premise for a future story. The “women/girlfriends-in-refrigerators
syndrome,” as it has been called, has its roots in the pulp ﬁction narratives
that later spawned comic books. This style of writing not only devalues
female characters but also sexualizes their existence and demise. Many readers and individuals within the industry believe that Barbara Gordon became a
“better” character after she was paralyzed, but few people comment on the
speciﬁcs of the event that allowed her to become that “better” character.
Paralyzing Batgirl was not the subject of Moore’s story; it was a plot device designed to traumatize her father. Barbara Gordon was not portrayed as
the intelligent and resourceful woman who assumed the Batgirl persona; she
was portrayed as a cocoa-serving homemaker overly concerned with the mess
her father was making cutting and pasting news clippings. At the end of the
story, Moore did not cause the reader to care about her fate; his emphasis
88
...............

Comics, 1960–2005
was on the transformation of the relationship between his two lead characters, Batman and the Joker. Industry insiders speculate that Batgirl was
allowed to be done away with in this manner because she was outdated.
However, it is likely that if audiences had grown tired of Batgirl, it was not
because she was a bad character but because she had been written badly.
Moore and Kesel use a similar writing strategy to develop their stories
and versions of Barbara Gordon: the script. Scriptwriting is a process in which
the writer plots each panel in painstaking detail (character placement, pieces
of dialogue, the mood of the scene, character motivations, etc.) in order to
help the artist tell the story. In The Killing Joke, the Joker was the star of a tale
that centered on the genesis of his criminal insanity. Barbara Gordon and her
father were merely the objectiﬁed victims of the Joker’s madness. Moore
scripted the Joker in a way that helped the reader understand his insanity
and ultimately feel sympathy for him. However, the Gordons were not treated
as well. Little to no background information was offered for either character,
and both were sexually victimized. However, Barbara’s father was allowed to
maintain his identity as Police Commissioner Gordon. Even though he had
been stripped naked and was forced to look at nude photographs of his
injured daughter, he remained determined to arrest the Joker without breaking laws. Barbara Gordon, on the other hand, had no real identity beyond that
of an innocent female bystander who was shot by the Joker. No reference was
made to the loss of her Batgirl persona. She became just another faceless,
sexualized female victim.
In Secret Origins and Batgirl Special, Kesel (writing under her married
name, Randall) gave Batgirl an identity and established her as a superhero.
Kesel’s stories were set in a time period that preceded Moore’s story. The point
of her stories was to help the readers understand that paralyzing Batgirl was
a signiﬁcant loss to the superhero world. In Secret Origins, Kesel created Barbara Gordon as a Batman-like young woman whose drive and independence
were motivated, in part, by childhood losses. Emphasis was placed on the natural talents (her photographic memory and skill with computers) and
acquired talents (superior intelligence, athletic ability, and desire for justice)
needed for her to become Batgirl. The narrative was complemented by artwork that focused the reader’s attention on the development of a female
superhero instead of just a girl who wanted to be like the men in tights.
In Batgirl Special: The Last Batgirl Story, Kesel scripted Batgirl’s attempt to
capture Cormorant, a man who battered women and had nearly killed her in
an earlier encounter. In the story, Batgirl felt compelled to bring Cormorant to
justice even though she was afraid of another confrontation with him. Kesel
carefully developed Batgirl’s fears so that readers could appreciate the character’s ability to overcome them. Batgirl’s independence and deliberate
approach to crime ﬁghting remained a constant throughout the story, but
she was allowed to grow from someone in a costume who was afraid that
89
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

she could die being a vigilante into a hero who was committed to facing danger in order to protect others. In the end, Kesel recreated the Batgirl persona
as a superhero worthy of recognition and respect. In general, female writers
seek opportunities to validate female superheroes—to give them meaningful
background stories and proper motivation for future exploits. If Kesel’s goal
was to make readers care about Barbara Gordon and Batgirl, she succeeded.

ARTIST JAN DUURSEMA
...............................................................................................................................
Comic book artists are responsible for telling a story with or without words.
Ideally, they take direction from the writer and create visual representations
of the character, the physical setting, and the mood of a panel, page, or entire
book. Comic art may take the form of black-and-white drawings with ink,
pencil-and-ink images with computerized color, or full-color, painted illustrations. The monthly titles for Marvel and DC require the services of a penciler,
inker, and colorist—sometimes with one person playing more than one role in
the artistic process. However, the artistic credit is most often given to the
penciler. Whatever the means of creating the visual component of a comic
book, the artist has to complete the work by a speciﬁc deadline, which means
artists for the Big Two have to be able to work fast.
Jan Duursema has a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree from the Joe Kubert
School of Cartooning and Graphic Arts. While there, she developed a camera
artist’s eye for comic art. Duursema began her career with Marvel as the artist
for Star Wars when the company published the title, and she went on to be
the penciler and/or inker for such superhero titles as The Avengers, The Incredible Hulk, X-Men, X-Man, X-Men 2099, and X-Factor. Currently, she is known
for her artwork on various Star Wars projects published by Dark Horse Comics. Two of the female characters that she created, Jedis Shaak Ti and Aayla
Secura, caught the attention of producer George Lucas and appeared
in recent Star Wars ﬁlms Episode II: Attack of the Clones and Episode III: Return of
the Sith.
Comic book superheroes need to get the attention of readers visually.
For male characters, artists focus on colorful uniforms and imposing physical
statures to enhance their heroic appeal. For female characters, they tend to
focus on exaggerated features of the feminine form that have little to do with
being a hero. According to industry professionals, good art is creating a visual
representation of who that character is, not just generating a composite of
masculine or feminine features. Unfortunately, the industry standard for good
comic book art has become drawing men to look strong and brave and drawing women with large breasts.
“Commodiﬁed femininity” is a term used to reference the visual objectiﬁcation of women by the media (Goldman). It means that media agents signify femininity by visually emphasizing the line and curve of the female body,
90
...............

Comics, 1960–2005
along with a code of sexualized poses, gestures, body cants, and gazes. Common examples used by comic artists are visual angles that feature perfectly
shaped bottoms, demure gazes that accentuate bedroom eyes and moist lips,
and clothing stretched across or precariously perched upon large, gravitydefying breasts. Female artists have attempted to combat this trend by featuring women of different body types and drawing them as characters who do
not pose seductively and who wear more clothing. The commodiﬁed female is
a damaging trend for female superheroes because it robs them of their identity as superheroes. A well-documented example is She-Hulk.
The Savage She-Hulk appeared in 1980 as a spin-off from The Incredible
Hulk. During times of stress, frustration, or extreme anger, petite lawyer Jennifer Walters would transform into the nearly seven-foot-tall, 650-pound,
green female version of the monster. However, unlike the Hulk, She-Hulk
retained an awareness of her other personality and intelligence that rationalized a desire to protect innocent individuals while seeking justice. The character possessed super strength and a ﬁerce independence, and her narratives
contained a strong, feminist message, slightly more anti-man than prowoman. During the twenty-ﬁve-issue run of the title, She-Hulk was drawn
with a shapely ﬁgure, full bosom, moist lips, and painted nails, probably to
enhance her femininity and remind readers that she was a female hero and
not the Hulk in a torn dress.
The character was resurrected in 1989 in The Sensational She-Hulk. In
this series, She-Hulk maintained her strength and independence, but she
became popular because she broke the “fourth wall,” the convention of the
separation between the audience and the characters. Because She-Hulk was
aware that she was in a comic book, she was portrayed as being in on the
joke, of knowing how to play to a male audience using her feminine assets.
Somehow, making the character aware that she was being objectiﬁed was
supposed to lessen the exploitation. Cover art and pinup posters of She-Hulk
bursting out of her clothing, scantily dressed, or suggestively posed became
the preferred method of selling the title rather than emphasizing the heroic
stories inside the book.
For example, the cover for Marvel’s Swimsuit Special #2, penciled and
inked by Steven Geiger and colored by Paul Mounts, represented the commodiﬁed view of She-Hulk. As a piece of comic art, it is a near-perfect representation of the female form. All of the body parts are well proportioned,
appropriately hued, and cleanly crafted. However, the illustration does not
tell an accurate story of who She-Hulk is or was. Because her pose consists of
an arched back, uplifted chin, and hands behind the head; the viewer’s eye is
drawn to the line and curve of She-Hulk’s breasts and lower body, further
emphasized by a string bikini. Her long, lean form accentuated as such looks
more supermodel than superhero. In fact, so little of She-Hulk’s identity
exists in the drawing beyond the green hair and skin, she could be anybody
91
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

and, thus, becomes recognized as no one. No acts of heroism are implied or
inferred. She-Hulk is nothing more than an object for the male gaze.
Duursema was never an artist for a She-Hulk title, but her image of the
character for Marvel’s Swimsuit Special #4 exempliﬁes her approach to drawing women. Duursema is known for creating strong women, physically strong
and strong in character. Readers are reminded constantly that these women
do something besides look pretty. Her illustrations of female superheroes seem
to strike the proper balance between representations of beauty and valor.
Duursema used two qualities to distinguish her drawing of She-Hulk: a
heroic pose and an emphasis on form that focuses on her super power. SheHulk is depicted lifting a boulder on her back while standing in a pool of
water. The pose is reminiscent of sculptures of Atlas, a Greek hero, upholding
the world. And although She-Hulk looks like she is enjoying posing for the
camera (denoted by her direct eye contact with the reader and coy smile), she
is not playing to the male gaze. Her pose is a display of her super strength, a
primary identity marker of her superhero persona. The eye contact and coy
smile signify her awareness of the fourth wall; however, in this illustration,
the awareness signiﬁers do not necessitate exploiting her feminine assets.
Additionally, the She-Hulk form demonstrates that she is equal parts
beauty and power. Because the image appeared in a spoof of the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issues, an attempt had to be made to display the character’s
beauty and femininity. Therefore, She-Hulk is drawn with her customary wild
green hair and moist lips and wearing a skimpy bathing suit to accentuate
her full bosom. But the other features of her body that draw the reader’s eye
are her muscular legs that imply power more than deﬁnition. Almost half of
the space on the page is devoted to the character’s legs, creating a balance
between the character’s feminine qualities and her superhero qualities. The
eye does not go immediately to her breasts because the legs compete for the
reader’s attention. Duursema’s image of She-Hulk is important because she
refocuses attention on the identity of the character; she visually reminds
the reader of the savage and sensational She-Hulk qualities that made the
character noteworthy in the Marvel universe.
The Post–Golden Age superhero genre has beneﬁted from the contributions of
women during comic book production. As editors, writers, and artists
(pencilers, inkers, and colorists), women have inﬂuenced the perception of
the female superhero by injecting multiple feminist perspectives into their
stories, creating more opportunities for character development and decreasing objectiﬁcation. Hopefully, the feminine voice in the comic industry helps
readers of the superhero genre understand that they need an improved view
of the female superhero.
See also chapters 6 and 18.
92
...............

Comics, 1960–2005
Further Readings
Daniels, Les. Wonder Woman: The Complete History. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2000.
Feiffer, Jules. The Great Comic Book Heroes. Seattle: Fantagraphics, 2003.
Goldman, Robert, Deborah Heath, and Sharon L. Smith. “Commodity Feminism.” Critical
Studies in Mass Communication 8 (1991): 333–51.
Marston, William, and Harry G. Peter. Wonder Woman Archives. Vol. 1. New York: DC Comics,
1998.
Marvel Comics. “Articles in Category ‘Women’” [online directory]. Marvel Universe. Http://
www.marvel.com/universe/category:women.
Robbins, Trina. The Great Women Superheroes. Northampton, MA: Kitchen Sink Press, 1996.
Robinson, Lilli. Wonder Women. New York: Routledge, 2004.
Siegel, Jerry, and Joe Shuster. Superman Chronicles. Vol. 1. New York: DC Comics, 2006.
Simone, Gail. “Women in Refrigerators.” Http://www.unheardtaunts.com/wir.

93
..............

10

Genre Poetry: Twentieth Century
SCOTT GREEN

AT the same time that science ﬁction (SF) and fantasy became distinct genres,
genre poetry was published in the pulp SF magazines in the United States.
The term genre poetry includes poetry in any of the genres of science ﬁction,
fantasy, horror, dark fantasy, speculative ﬁction, science, and whatever else
editors of genre magazines have chosen to buy for their publications. Before
World War II, SF and fantasy editors might use poetry as ﬁller, but one magazine took poetry seriously: Weird Tales. For some years, this and, to a lesser
extent, its short-lived competitor Unknown (sometimes referred to as Unknown
Worlds, 1939–43) were the only places poetry was taken seriously.
Weird Tales was not part of the pulp magazine industry; instead, it was
created as showcase for serious ﬁction. Poetry was treated as an important
part of the magazine because many of its contributors, such as H. P. Lovecraft, Clark Ashton Smith, and Robert E. Howard, were also serious poets.
One important inﬂuence for the men, and occasional women, who wrote for
Weird Tales was Edgar Allan Poe, whose literary work included both ﬁction and
poetry. Unknown featured more fantasy and comic stories, publishing authors
such as L. Sprague de Camp and Fritz Leiber. Here, in terms of the poetry,
Ogden Nash rather than Poe was the inspiration. Women poets such as Dorothy Quick and Leah Bodine Drake were published in Unknown.
After the war, two new venues for poetry emerged, and Weird Tales
faded away by 1954. The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, founded in
1949, positioned itself as the New Yorker of the science ﬁction and fantasy
world, and like its model, it published poetry. Four of the most proliﬁc contributors of poetry to its pages were women: Doris Pitkin Buck (twenty
poems), Sonya Dorman (eight), Leah Boldine Drake (eight), and Winona
McClintic (thirteen). Poetry was not generally accepted by the other serious
genre magazines during the 1950s and early 1960s because it was considered
too literary and perhaps too old-fashioned for modern science ﬁction
94
...............

Genre Poetry
magazines. What little poetry did appear in other science ﬁction and fantasy
magazines was usually in publications that were either old-line pulps, such
as Startling Stories, or conservative magazines such as Fantastic Universe.
A second showcase for poetry started in 1956 and continued until 1970.
Rather than being magazine-style periodicals, the Year’s Best Science Fiction
was a series of annual anthologies, edited by Judith Merril, and they included
poetry. In eight of her editions, Merril reprinted poetry, primarily from mainstream rather than genre sources. This tradition would continue until 1975
when Harry Harrison and Brian Aldiss began to edit the annual anthologies.
The fact that much of the published poetry came from what was considered
mainstream or literary sources caused problems within the genre, where
these anthologies were perceived as elitist. The status of poetry within science ﬁction suffered as a result.
The only other major anthology publications in the science ﬁction and
fantasy ﬁeld were the annual anthologies of the best prose and poetry from
the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. However, when these anthologies
were later reprinted by Ace in paperback, the poetry was often dropped. In
the 1960s, British science ﬁction magazine New Worlds, under the editorship
of Michael Moorcock, began to change from genre science ﬁction to speculative ﬁction. It was associated with the New Wave movement in science ﬁction,
moving away from technological to more psychological and literary themes.
Merril and Harrison championed New Worlds in the United States, and their
anthologies eventually showcased poetry from this era of the magazine.
There was a short run of the magazine in a U.S. edition, and, in 1968, Merril
edited an American collection of prose and poetry from New Worlds. The continued association of poetry with more elitist and experimental genres of science ﬁction did not help the genre of SF poetry to grow.
Ironically, in 1969 when much of the science ﬁction community in the
United States was deploring New Worlds, an American reprint of a British collection of speculative poetry, Holding Your Eight Hands, became a commercial
success. While the reason for this collection’s popularity is debated, possible
reasons could be that it included poetry from both genre and nongenre sources and not only poems from New Worlds. The success also proved that poetry
in the science ﬁction, fantasy, and horror genres would sell to readers.
During the 1960s, a new format to showcase these types of poetry
emerged: the original anthology. While there had been occasional anthologies
for original science ﬁction and fantasy before, the popularity of such publications increased during the 1960s. One reason was that the death of so many
magazine markets demanded that a new showcase be developed for shorter
works. Roger Elwood was often associated with this trend, but only three of
the anthologies that he edited or coedited with agent Virginia Kidd actually
used poetry. Kidd went on to coedit another anthology with Ursula K. Le Guin,
95
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Interfaces, that included poetry. Kidd was not known as a writer, but she did
publish several poems in anthologies.
The 1970s became a crucial decade for genre poetry in the United
States. One reason for the increase in popularity was undoubtedly the growing number of new writers who had a strong background in the humanities
and liberal arts. These writers began writing in science ﬁction alongside those
with scientiﬁc or engineering backgrounds. Many of these new writers started
their careers in mainstream markets but were science ﬁction fans. They
decided to write science ﬁction because they wanted to and because they
enjoyed working with the formal structures of poetry as well as prose.
Another reason the 1970s were important was the founding of Isaac Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine in 1977. From the beginning under George
Scithers, the ﬁrst editor, as well as under his successors, this magazine was
an important showcase for poetry. However, at about this time, the editors
of the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction decided to abandon poetry, a
policy that was maintained until recently. Scithers’s decision to use poetry,
something he did when he edited “semi-pro-zines” (fanzines that become
popular enough that they can pay their writers small fees because they have
some advertisers or sponsors), inﬂuenced Elinor Mavor, the editor of Amazing
Stories.
In 1978, Suzette Haden Elgin founded the Science Fiction Poetry Association to promote the use of poetry in science ﬁction publications, as well as
to be a forum for poets and those interested in poetry. Elgin also founded
Star*Line, the magazine of the association. She is the author of Elgin’s Law,
which states that a science ﬁction poem is a poem with both narrative and
scientiﬁc components. She has produced little independently published poetry in her career as a science ﬁction writer, although poetry is often integrated into her novels, which is not uncommon among science ﬁction and
fantasy novelists.
The Science Fiction Poetry Association created annual awards for both
the best long and short poems, the Rhyslings. Other awards that existed at
the time with categories for poetry included the Balrog, Clark Ashton Smith,
International Clark Smith, and Stoker awards. Only two of these have survived: the Rhyslings and the Stokers (the annual award of the Horror Writers
Association, which includes a category for best poetry collection). Recently,
the Rhysling winners have been republished in the Nebula anthologies put together by the Science Fiction Writers of America.
During the 1970s and 1980s, a number of women emerged both as writers and as editors within the ﬁeld of science ﬁction, fantasy, and horror poetry. Some of these women are described in the following paragraphs.
Ruth Berman is a proliﬁc poet who has appeared in many genre magazines as well as in Jewish publications and mainstream literary quarterlies.
96
...............

Genre Poetry
Her poetry always has a strong narrative element. Perhaps the difﬁculty in
easily categorizing her work is the reason her name is often omitted from discussion of poets in the ﬁeld. For much of its existence, she was the poetry editor of the small press magazine Pandora.
Lee Burwasser is active as a ﬁlk writer. Filking is the writing and performing of songs that reﬂect themes from science ﬁction literature and science ﬁction ﬁlms and television.
Mercedes Lackey began as a ﬁlk singer and edited two ﬁlk fanzines:
Strum und Drang and Thulur. During the 1980s, she published and recorded
many songs with Off-Centaur, a recording studio that specialized in ﬁlk
songs.
Yale Dragwyla is perhaps the only poet who can trace her ancestry to
Vlad Tepes, the historical ﬁgure who inspired the character of Dracula. She is
a practicing magician, and her poems explore the mechanics on how magic
would function. For a time, she published and edited a publication devoted to
ceremonial magic.
Janet Fox was a proliﬁc writer of fantasy prose and poetry. Her work
appeared in commercial newsstand markets and numerous small press publications. For many years, she was the publisher and editor of Scavenger’s Newsletter, a periodical that covered markets, paid and nonpaid, for genre
publications and book projects. It became the publication of record for the
small press segment of the science ﬁction, fantasy, and horror market. Fox
also published a considerable body of poetry. Many poets published with her,
including Denise Dumars, Lisa Lepovetski, Elissa Malcohn, Ana K. Schwader,
and Stephanie Stearns.
Terry Garey is a former editor of Aurora, a fanzine devoted to the discussion of feminist issues and how they are addressed in science ﬁction. She
was also the poetry editor for Tales of the Unanticipated, a small press magazine
that continues to be an important showcase for Midwestern writers. Lastly,
Garey was a founder of, and has continued to be actively involved in, WisCon, the only major science ﬁction convention devoted to feminist issues.
Millea Kenin was the late founder and editor of Owl Flight, a small press
magazine that during the early 1980s published many of the leading genre
poets, including Janet Fox, Frances Langelier, Esther Leiper, Kendra Usack,
and Leilah Wendell. Kenin was also the publisher and editor of one of the key
anthologies of genre poetry during that decade, Aliens and Lovers (1983).
Esther M. Leiper was the poetry editor for Z Miscellaneous, a mainstream
literary journal that attempted to be a showcase for both mainstream and
genre speculative poetry. She is still the poetry editor for Writer’s Journal,
where she frequently writes about genre poetry for mainstream audiences.
While her work has been published in genre markets, much of Leiper’s poetry
97
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

has appeared, often as successful winners, in countless state and local poetry
contests.
Elissa Malchon was a proliﬁc poet during the early 1980s and was frequently nominated for a Rhysling. However it was as an editor of Star*Line
that she was most important to the ﬁeld. As editor, Malchon was rigorous and
demanded of the writers that their work be well structured. She has inﬂuenced the tendency of poetry in the genre to be precise in its structure.
Marge Simon is the current editor of Star*Line. Unlike many of her fellow poets, she started her career in the fanzines and small press markets.
While she has occasionally published in major commercial publications, she
is better known for her long service as editor of Star*Line.
Another category of poetry is the poetry that is concerned with the lives of
scientists or scientiﬁc and natural phenomena. To a lesser extent, this genre
of poetry can also use scientiﬁc language as metaphors for other themes. In
1985, an important collection of science poetry was published in Boston: Songs
from Unsung Worlds, edited by Bonnie B. Gordon. Most of the poetry had previously appeared in the pages of the magazine Science. Some of the poets
included in its pages were Dianne Mackerman, Lois Bassen, Amy Clampitt,
Lucille Day, Helen Ehrilich, Laura Fargas, and Anne S. Perlman. During the
early years of the Rhysling, many of the winning poems were in this category
and were often by mainstream poets.
The position of poetry within the ﬁeld of science ﬁction became controversial when making poetry sales sufﬁcient for full membership in the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA) was debated and,
eventually, changed. Relatively few poets had taken advantage of this rule;
most of the writers who were known as poets also had a body of published
prose that qualiﬁed them for full membership. Although the SFWA no longer
allowed membership based only on poetry publications, several other professional organizations regularly included poets as full members. These organizations included the Small Press Writers and Artists Organization and the
World Science Fiction Society. The Science Fiction Poetry Association also continued to grow.
By 1990, genre poetry had created an organization structure; there were
awards in the ﬁeld, as well as numerous small press markets and one constant major market, Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine. Other science ﬁction
and fantasy markets might use poetry occasionally, but Asimov’s continues to
be poetry’s publishing outlet in newsstand markets.
While genre poetry can encompass all genres of the fantastic, the majority of poems that have won the Rhysling have either been science ﬁction or
science poems. Only a handful of poems that could be described as either
fantasy or horror have ever won a Rhysling, despite the fact that there have
always been more fantasy and horror small press magazines in the ﬁeld than
98
...............

Genre Poetry
science ﬁction titles. The single largest group of nominees has come from
three long-lived small press magazines—Dreams & Nightmares, The Magazine of
Speculative Poetry, and Star*Line—all of which tend to favor science ﬁction poetry and poems of science, though other work occasionally appears.
Several women have won Rhysling, Stoker, Asimov’s Readers Poll, and
Balrog awards. Sonya Dorman shared the Rhysling for short poem in 1978.
Dorman was a mainstream speculative prose and poetry writer whose work
appeared primarily in the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. She was a
writer of speculative work who found a home in science ﬁction and fantasy,
but was not particularly a genre writer. In 1982, Ursula Le Guin won the long
poem Rhysling with the high fantasy poem “The Well of Baln.” Her poem was
one of the few fantasy pieces to ever win this award. In 1984, Helen Ehrilich
won the short poem Rhysling with “Two Sonnets.” Her work appeared primarily in Lyric as well as winning numerous state and local amateur poetry publications. However, she did have an occasional appearance in Star*Line, and her
Rhysling-winning poem ﬁrst appeared in Science. It reﬂected the strong interest that the Rhysling voters had at that time in poems of science.
Susan Palwick won the short poem Rhysling in 1986. A full-time writer,
she started writing science ﬁction poetry because she saw some work on the
newsstand and thought she could do better. Most of her poetry tends to be
narrative ballads or quotellas (poems based on quotes from other writers’
works). At one time, she was an editor with the well-regarded Little magazine.
Suzette Haden Elgin tied for the short poem Rhysling in 1988, and Jane
Yolen won that award in 1993. Yolen started her career in children’s and
young-adult poetry, markets that have always been poet friendly. Marge
Simon in 1996, Terry Garey in 1997, and Laurel Winter in 1998 won the Rhyslings for long poems. Winter followed it up in 1999 with the win for the short
poem. While primarily a ﬁction writer in the fantasy ﬁeld, Winter has published a number of poems, mostly in Asimov’s, and has been successful in the
mainstream amateur magazine segment of poetry publishing.
In 2000, Rebecca Marjesdatter won the short poem Rhysling with the
dark fantasy “Grimoire.” She’s still a relatively new writer on the scene, and
her work has appeared in periodicals as diverse as Asimov’s, Tales of the Unanticipated, and the Magazine of Speculative Poetry. In 2003, Sonya Taaffe shared the
Rhysling long poem award. Like Marjesdatter, Taaffe is a new poet, and her
work has appeared in primarily small markets such as Mythic Delirium and
Not One of Us. Also in 2003, Ruth Berman won the Rhysling for short poem.
Two women have won in the Asimov’s Readers Poll awards: Yolen and
Winter. Similarly, two women have won the Stoker award for best poetry collection. Linda Addison, an African-American writer, was the poetry editor of
the long-running but now defunct magazine Space and Time. The other Stoker
winner, Corrine DeWinter, has maintained an active career in both mainstream and genre markets; the former tend to be major showcases such as
99
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Yankee, Lyric, and New York Quarterly, while the latter are mostly small press
titles with the exception of Dreams of Decadence. Like other poets active within
the science ﬁction and fantasy genre, DeWinter has been a Pushcart nominee.
The Balrog was an award for science ﬁction and fantasy that attempted
to include material not seen in either the Hugos or the Nebulas. Only one
woman has won the award: Ardath Mayhar in 1985. She started publishing
mainstream poetry and prose in the 1950s and began to write SF poetry during the 1980s, as well as westerns.
While poetry struggled in the ﬁrst years of genre and pulp publishing, it
has become a strong part of the writing produced in science ﬁction, fantasy,
and horror, in part due to the efforts of women who wrote, edited, published,
and created the space for poetry.
Further Readings
Chernyshova, Tatiana. “Science Fiction and Myth Creation in Our Age.” Science Fiction Studies 31, no. 3 (November 2004): 345–57.
Johnston, Nancy. “Poetic Speculations.” Science Fiction Studies 28, no. 1 (March 2001): 143–44.
Science Fiction Poetry Association [online]. Http://www.sfpoetry.com.

100
................

11

Fantasy Film: Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries
HOLLY HASSEL

 directed The CabFROM the beginning of ﬁlm history, when Alice Guy Blache
bage Fairy in 1896, women have participated in the creation of the fantasy ﬁlm
genre. They have played central roles in many critically and commercially
successful fantasy ﬁlms throughout motion picture history.
Many literary and ﬁlm scholars have deﬁned the contours of fantasy as
a creative genre. As early as 1927, E. M. Forster’s Aspects of the Novel noted
that fantasy could hint at the existence of the supernatural. Other critics
relied upon this notion of the supernatural, including Colin Manlove, who in
Modern Fantasy: Five Studies claims that fantasy brings human characters into
contact with the supernatural. The ﬁlms under discussion here fall within
these parameters. A few scholars have collapsed the genres of science ﬁction,
horror, and children’s fantasy under the umbrella of “fantasy” ﬁlm, though
generally, science ﬁction and horror are treated as distinct genres.
The works discussed in this chapter are organized under two headings:
Tolkienesque or high/medieval fantasy, and contemporary/modern fantasy.
The former refers to J. R. R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings, in which he
created the world of middle-earth where fantastical creatures abound and
organic magic is common; these kinds of fantasy ﬁlms are often based on
fairy tales and folklore. Contemporary or modern fantasy includes any intervention of the fantastic into the ostensibly “real” contemporary world inhabited by the reader.
Unlike fantasy ﬁction, where the only limits are the writer’s imagination, the material requirements of producing a ﬁlm have signiﬁcant impact
on the work that attracts studio interest and, subsequently, the resources
allotted to the ﬁlm. Because fantasy requires the incorporation of fantastic
101
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

elements, which may include anything from fairies to supernatural entities to
magical creatures, the production costs for special effects can be signiﬁcantly
higher than those of mainstream ﬁlms. As a result, studios have been less
inclined to trust female ﬁlmmakers with such budgets.
While women have been involved in cinematic production since the
medium’s inception, their roles have been governed by economics, production
politics, and cultural notions about gender, all intersecting to shape women’s
contributions. These same factors have shaped how women have been constructed as images throughout the history of ﬁlm. Women have had notable
roles in many fantasy ﬁlms, some that reinforce gender stereotypes and
others that have challenged those stereotypes.

WOMEN MAKING FILMS
...............................................................................................................................
Documenting the contributions of women to the development of the medium
has been a project of feminist ﬁlm theorists and scholars since the 1970s.
They have struggled to collect erratically available resources and historical
artifacts recording women’s contributions to ﬁlmmaking that have not always
been preserved with the same care as male-dominated (produced and
directed) works. Often even feminist critics and ﬁlm historians were quick to
conclude that women were not involved in early ﬁlm production. The patriarchal structures within which ﬁlmmakers operated after the 1920s discouraged
many women directors, writers, and producers. Feminist critic Marjorie Rosen
documents the situation that, while by the 1920s motion pictures were “the
nation’s fourth largest industry,” the percentage of women working as scenarists and screenplay writers slipped from 21 percent in 1928 to 15 percent in
1935, and by 1940 the number had dropped to 11 percent (Popcorn Venus, 397).
Also, the genres of ﬁlms that ﬁlmmakers were likely to work in limited
their contributions to fantasy ﬁlmmaking, with early women screenwriters
more likely to be identiﬁed with the “woman’s ﬁlm,” as Lizzie Francke has
documented. MGM Studios employed an extensive roster of women writers to
€ Atkins,
pen ﬁlms focused on romance and the family. They included Zoe
Lenore Coffee, Lillian Hellman, Anita Loos, Frances Marion, Bess Meredyth,
Dorothy Parker, Adela Rogers St. John, and Salka Viertels. Few women directors were working, however, and those who did were being encouraged to
focus on stereotypically feminine topics. In addition, women directors themselves, as ﬁlm critic Gwen Foster has noted, had visions different from those
of their male contemporaries; most ﬁlms by women directors show a deep
and abiding concern for realism. Famous early women directors, producers,
e Dorothy Davenport),
and writers like Lois Weber, Mrs. Wallace Reid (ne
Frances Marion, and Cleo Madison are typical of this creative orientation.
Despite these limitations, however, women ﬁlmmakers have made contributions to all fantasy genres. French-born American director Alice Guy
102
................

Fantasy Film
 is considered to have directed one of the earliest—if not the ﬁrst—
Blache
ﬁctional ﬁlms, The Cabbage Fairy. The ﬁlm was just 60 seconds long, the story
of a woman who grows children in a cabbage patch.
While high fantasy as a genre did not gain mainstream box ofﬁce success until at least the 1970s, elements of fantasy can be found periodically
throughout ﬁlm history. Thea von Harbou (1888–1985) worked as a scenarist
and screenwriter in the early 1920s on fantasy ﬁlms such as The Indian Tomb
(in two parts; 1921), based on her novel of the same name; the ﬁlms were later
remade in the 1950s. Pioneering Austrian-born American director Fritz Lang
frequently worked in the fantasy genre and relied heavily on von Harbou. They
married in 1922. She was a writer for several of his fantasy works, including
Die Nibelungen (1924), released in two parts in the United States, Siegfried and
Kriemhild’s Revenge. Partly derived from a Scandinavian saga, the ﬁlm is a highfantasy tale of the pure-hearted warrior Siegfried and his journey to woo the
aloof Kriemhild. Along the way, Siegfried ﬁghts dragons and acquires a vast
treasure from a dwarf king. Von Harbou also cowrote with Lang the original
script for The Weary Death, aka Destiny, the story of a young woman hoping to
. Von Harbou
dissuade an anthropomorphic Death from coming for her ﬁance
later split with Lang (both in professional collaborations and through divorce
in 1933) when they became divided politically. She embraced the Nazi Party,
while Lang rejected Nazism and left Austria for the United States.
Following the golden era of silent ﬁlm and the move to the studio system, women’s professional participation in the motion picture industry was
more limited. Several notable exceptions from this era (the 1930s through
1950s) include animators Lotte Reiniger (German-born British citizen, 1899–
1981), Claire Parker (American, 1906–1981), Joy Batchelor (English, 1914–1991),
and screenwriter Frances Goodrich (American, 1890–1984).
Animator Reiniger is considered to have created the world’s ﬁrst
feature-length animated ﬁlm, The Adventures of Prince Achmed, in 1926, a story
based on 1,001 Arabian Nights in which the title character battles an African
sorcerer for the hand of Princess Peri Banu. The ﬁlm is a ﬁne example of her
contributions to pioneering animation work. She was the foremost practitioner of the technique of silhouette puppetry. She also made two other feature ﬁlms, versions of Hugh Lofting’s 1920 book Dr. Doolittle and of Maurice
Ravel’s 1925 opera The Boy and the Bewitched Things, both examples of contemporary fantasy.
Parker is best known for her 1933 eight-minute short ﬁlm Night on Bald
Mountain. The ﬁlm is based on a tone poem by Russian composer Modest
Mussorgsky about a peasant who surreptitiously observes the nocturnal revels during a witches’ Black Mass on Bald Mountain in Russia. The short is considered one of the most important animated ﬁlms ever made and was well
received in European circles at the time of its release. She collaborated with
her husband, Alexander Alexeieff, and invented pinboard or pinscreen
103
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

animation, which uses a perforated board to create an effect, through moving
light and shadows, of animated steel engraving.
Batchelor collaborated with her husband, John Halas, to animate an adaptation of George Orwell’s Animal Farm in 1954, considered England’s ﬁrst
feature-length cartoon. The subtitle of the book itself—A Fairy Story—places it
squarely in the traditions of fantasy. Batchelor and Halas’s cartoon version of
the thinly veiled critique of Stalinist totalitarianism is more dramatic than
light comic satire, especially in its portrayal of the pigs who lead the farm
revolt, but the animated version’s political allegory of the corruptive nature of
power bowed to commercial pressure to lighten the pessimistic ending. The
ﬁlm was nominated for a British Academy of Film and Television Arts Award
as best animated ﬁlm in 1956. Their studio, Halas and Batchelor Animation,
Ltd., became the largest cartoon ﬁlm studio in Britain.
Goodrich, like many women writers and directors, worked closely with
her husband—in Goodrich’s case, third husband Albert Hackett—cowriting
and adapting many of Hollywood’s biggest hits during the Golden Age of
Hollywood, including realistic dramas like The Diary of Anne Frank and adaptations of Dashiell Hammett’s comic detective stories of Nick and Nora Charles.
However, Goodrich’s most signiﬁcant contribution to the development of fantasy ﬁlm is as co-screenwriter of what has since been named by the American
Film Institute as the most inspirational American movie of all time, Frank
Capra’s It’s a Wonderful Life. The contemporary fantasy ﬁlm is the story of
George Bailey. Suicidal over ﬁnancial ruin through no fault of his own, he is
interrupted in his attempt to kill himself by the angel Clarence and given the
opportunity to see what life in Bedford Falls would be like had he never been
born. The ﬁlm proposes thematically that even in the most wretched of
human moments, love, family, and friendship make life worth living.
Women’s contributions to shaping fantasy ﬁlm grew rapidly and internationally in the last half of the twentieth century and, as noted above, a signiﬁcant increase in the number of both independent and studio directors occurred
in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. This expansion of women’s involvement was
accompanied by the introduction of a body of critical work exploring women’s
representation in ﬁlms, such as Marjorie Rosen’s 1973 Popcorn Venus: Women,
Movies and the American Dream, Molly Haskell’s From Reverence to Rape: The Treatment of Women in the Movies, published the same year, and Laura Mulvey’s
groundbreaking psychoanalytic examination of images of women in ﬁlm,
“Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema” (1975). This new critical and scholarly
groundwork drew attention to the absence of women from major creative roles
in the ﬁlm industry and to the limited points of view and roles offered to women.
Since the 1960s, international women ﬁlmmakers have produced fantasy ﬁlms of a surrealist, experimental, and avant-garde bent. For example,
avant-garde German lesbian ﬁlmmaker Ulrike Ottinger’s ﬁrst ﬁlm, called a
postmodern pirate ﬁlm, draws upon the historically male adventure genre for
104
................

Fantasy Film
feminist allegory and tells the story of women who abandon their traditional
roles to join the notorious “lady pirate” Madame X for love and adventure on
the high seas. Another of Ottinger’s ﬁlms, Freak Orlando (1981), combines elements of Tod Browning’s 1932 classic Freaks and Virginia Woolf’s fantastic
novel Orlando (1928), about the title character who lives four centuries and
through supernatural intervention is able to switch sexes. While Ottinger also
ﬁlms documentaries and identiﬁes ethnography as central to her aesthetics,
she embraces the use of the fantastic as an important counterpart to social
realism.
In contrast, American women ﬁlmmakers (writers, producers, and directors) since the 1970s have tended toward realism in ﬁctional pictures and have
worked extensively in the documentary genre. Women like Leigh Brackett
have contributed as screenwriters to blockbusters. Late in her career, Brackett
wrote an initial draft of George Lucas’s space opera The Empire Strikes Back
(1980). More typical, however, is the work of Martha Coolidge, Nora Ephron,
Penny Marshall, and Leslie Dixon, who have taken lighthearted and comedic
approaches to contemporary fantasy through the use of magic, angels, inexplicable body switches, and ghosts. For example, director Marshall’s 1988 smash
ﬁlm Big, starring Tom Hanks, and screenwriter Dixon’s 2003 remake of Freaky
Friday use a common plot conceit—souls of young people transplanted into
their elders—both for comic effect and to cultivate a new appreciation of each
generation for the tribulations of the other. Similarly, director Ephron’s 1996
ﬁlm Michael, starring John Travolta as an unlikely and unexpected Archangel
Michael; director Coolidge’s Three Wishes (1995), another tale of a misplaced
and mischievous angel healing broken hearts and lives; and writer Dixon’s
2005 romantic comedy Just Like Heaven, about a ghost occupying a lovelorn
man’s apartment, all employ their fantastic elements to bring lovers together,
reveal sentimental truisms about life, or warm viewers’ hearts.
Less commonly, women ﬁlmmakers like American screenwriter Caroline Thompson and British director Sally Potter have explored darker fantastic
themes in their work. Thompson’s extensive work with gothic ﬁlmmaker Tim
Burton (Edward Scissorhands [1990], The Addams Family [1991], The Nightmare
before Christmas [1993], and Corpse Bride [2005]) ﬁlls out alienated characters
who struggle to maintain their unique values and identities in the face of a
conformist mainstream culture. Potter’s 1993 adaptation of Woolf’s novel Orlando (see Ottinger, above) is praised for its success in translating the literary
elements of the novel about an immortal and gender-switching dilettante to
the silver screen to explore larger social questions about what it means to be
a man or a woman, wealthy or poor, of one time and nation or another.
W
OMEN IN FILM
..............................................................................................................................
Despite their limited involvement in the creation of some of the large-scale
fantasy ﬁlms of the twentieth century, women characters have always played
105
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

central roles in works of both high fantasy and contemporary fantasy, though
frequently those roles have been two-dimensional, reinforced gender stereotypes, and been secondary rather than leading. As the popularity of fantasy
as a genre has increased, so have opportunities for women in those ﬁlms;
however, even the most recent fantasy ﬁlms in both high and modern genres
have relied upon gender stereotypes and featured male protagonists with
women in subordinate roles, albeit with some notable exceptions. Women’s
roles in high-fantasy and sword-and-sorcery ﬁlms are more likely to be stereotypical than those in comic and dramatic modern fantasy ﬁlms, though the
latter genres are as likely to feature women in subordinate rather than leading roles.
High Fantasy and Sword and Sorcery

The most traditional version of fantasy narrative is that of high fantasy and
its subgenre, sword and sorcery. Some common elements of this genre
include a mythic story with a hero, journey, or quest; magic; new worlds or
alternate visions of reality; an ordinary hero who reﬂects the everyday person;
a battle between good and evil; and a meaningful quest with an end goal in
mind. Typically, these protagonists have been male, and the stories have
involved the rescuing of a princess or love interest as the end goal. This plot
is especially prominent in the sword-and-sorcery and high-fantasy genres.
Women have historically played very limited roles in these genres, often restricted to evil (or good) queens, beautiful princesses (and love interests), sorceresses, or mythical creatures like fairy queens.
Some sword-and-sorcery ﬁlms originated as early as the 1920s silent
era, though fantasy ﬁlm was not highly successful as a genre until the late
1970s. Early examples include The Thief of Bagdad (1924, remade in 1940 with
some signiﬁcant changes) and the aforementioned Die Nibelungen by Fritz
Lang (1924). These early ﬁlms feature women in stereotypical roles: sleeping
princesses and jealous brides. Frank Capra’s Lost Horizon (1937) is the ﬁrst of a
number of ﬁlms adapted from books in which the main characters stumble
upon a mysteriously accessible land or lost continent, including Walt Disney’s
production of the Jules Verne novel 20,000 Leagues under the Sea (1954), its
sequel Mysterious Island (1961), and Edgar Rice Burroughs’s The Land That Time
Forgot (1975). All these ﬁlms feature few or no female characters.
From the 1950s to the 1970s, legendary stop-motion animator Ray Harryhausen and his series of Sinbad and other myth-based fantasy ﬁlms
account for a good portion of the mainstream fantasy ﬁlms. In them, female
characters are, in the tradition of The Thief of Bagdad, princesses or beautiful
damsels in need of rescuing, or evil witches who serve as an antagonist. For
example, in The Seventh Voyage of Sinbad (1957), Sinbad must obtain the ingredient to unshrink a princess under a curse by an evil wizard, and in Sinbad
and the Eye of the Tiger (1977), Sinbad contends with evil witch Xenobia. Other
106
................

Fantasy Film
Harryhausen ﬁlms are set among the myths of ancient Greece and Rome,
such as Jason and the Argonauts (1961) and Clash of the Titans (1981), both of
which set their narratives around the quests of male main characters. Jason
is in quest of a golden ﬂeece, while Perseus must kill the evil Gorgon Medusa
e, Princess Andromeda.
and bring back her head in order to save his ﬁance
Consistent with most high fantasy, women characters are featured in very circumscribed roles, usually ancillary to the actions of the main character. This
limitation is true as well of Ingmar Bergman’s inﬂuential Swedish fantasy medieval epic, The Seventh Seal (1957), about a knight who plays chess with Death
to garner enough time for him return to his wife after the Crusades.
The 1980s ushered in another subgenre of sword and sorcery, sometimes called “sword and sandal.” The barbarian ﬁlms of the 1980s such as The
Beastmaster (1982), Conan the Barbarian (1982), and Conan the Destroyer (1984), as
the titles suggest, generally star male protagonists. These ﬁlms center around
their male protagonists; women characters enter as princesses and/or love
interests (as in Conan the Barbarian), slave girls, evil queens, or sidekick warriors. Red Sonja (1984) is unique in its use of a female main character (who
nonetheless receives much aid from a Conanesque male character, Kalidor).
However, it received scathing reviews, as much for its poor quality as for its
homophobia (the evil queen Gedren is portrayed as a lesbian whose vendetta
against Sonja is fueled partially by her rejection of the queen’s advances).
In addition to the cluster of barbarian fantasy ﬁlms, the 1980s was a
rich period for high fantasy, especially medieval epics, including Excalibur
(1981), Dragonslayer (1981), The Sword and the Sorcerer (1982), Krull (1983), Deathstalker (1983), The Neverending Story (1984), Ladyhawke (1985), Legend (1985),
Highlander (1986), The Princess Bride (1987), and Willow (1988), although none of
these ﬁlms was the ﬁnancial blockbuster that strictly action-adventure or
comic fantasy ﬁlms were of the era. Many of these ﬁlms are love stories—
such as Legend and Ladyhawke, about star-crossed lovers—while others, notably
Deathstalker and Krull, center around kidnapped princesses who are rescued by
the male protagonists.
Most recently, adaptations of some of the major works of fantasy ﬁction
have become critically successful and highly bankable productions, leading to
an explosion in the number of high-fantasy ﬁlms and roles for women; often,
because they are adapted from classic ﬁction and because of the reluctance
of Hollywood powers-that-be to tamper with tried-and-true formulas for success, these ﬁlms continue to feature women in stereotypical roles and star
male leads. For example, Peter Jackson’s Academy Award–winning trilogy of
Lord of the Rings movies (2001–03) focuses on the journey of a group of male
adventurers, led by hobbit Frodo Baggins, to destroy a powerful ring. Female
queens, fairies, and elves assist them along the way. By contrast, in an ensemble cast of two boys and two girls, the Pevensie siblings share the role of
protagonist in C. S. Lewis’s Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch, and the
107
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Wardrobe (2006), though the narrative structure pits the selﬁsh, evil White
Witch against a beneﬁcent male lion who, through sacriﬁce, vanquishes her.
The highly successful Harry Potter ﬁlms (the ﬁrst ﬁlm, Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone [2001], alone has grossed almost a billion dollars in theater
attendance and rentals), adapted from the series of novels by J. K. Rowling,
center around a male main character, although Harry’s close circle of friends
features Hermione Granger as his brainy buddy. Even the highly successful
Pirates of the Caribbean series (2003–07, inspired by the Disney amusement
park ride), while primarily a swashbuckler, is more beloved for the adventures
of Capt. Jack Sparrow than the romance between Will Turner and Elizabeth
Swann.

The Legacy of Alice

A departure from the male-dominated traditions in fantasy narrative is the
Alice in Wonderland plot. Considered the father of modern fantasy, Lewis
Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland was ﬁrst published in 1865 and has
served as a template for a number of female-centered fantasy narratives that
have appeared either as books or as original ﬁlms. Such stories center on
female characters—usually in adolescence—who, through some supernatural
intervention, leave the “real world” to enter an alternate, sometimes nonsensical, universe where they engage in the questing typical of high fantasy.
The earliest version of this narrative plot is The Wizard of Oz (1939),
adapted from L. Frank Baum’s 1900 book The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. The
movie centers around Dorothy Gale, who during a tornado ventures to an
imaginary world paralleling her own native Kansas. Along the way, she
teaches lessons to those she meets as she navigates the disorienting land of
Oz. A 1985 adaptation of Baum’s second and third Oz books, Return to Oz,
charts Dorothy’s return to the land of Oz and her outwitting of yet another
witch, Mombi.
The 1951 Disney animated adaptation of Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland,
while technically a children’s movie, ﬁgures importantly into this subgenre of
fantasy ﬁlm because it features a female main character around whom the
plot centers. A Czech version of the story, Alice (1988), takes a darker
approach than the cartoon, with grislier imagery and more experimental
cinematography.
Two more contemporary versions of this subgenre include Labyrinth
(1986) and MirrorMask (2005). Labyrinth stars Jennifer Connelly as the adolescent Sarah who wishes her baby brother would disappear, resulting in his
abduction by the King of the Goblins, played by David Bowie; she is given the
opportunity to rescue him, but only if she navigates his endless labyrinth,
which she does, successfully outwitting the goblin king. MirrorMask, as well,
involves an unexplained journey into an alternative world for Helena, whose
108
................

Fantasy Film
alter ego, the Dark Princess, has used an enchanted mirror mask to escape
the clutches of her repressive mother, the Dark Queen. With the help of
masked harlequin Valentine, Helena maneuvers through a sort of metaphor
for her unconscious, constructed from the drawings, posters, comics, and various other artistic outpouring the artistic Helena has crafted.
In all of the ﬁlms of this Alice in Wonderland subgenre, the question of
whether the female protagonist is in her “real world” or has crossed over to
an alternate reality is left ambiguous. Often the dreamlike quality of the new
world is made even more unclear by the appearance of objects or people from
the heroine’s world in new forms in the new place. The persistence of this
subgenre suggests that, despite the historical focus on male protagonists, ﬁlms
with women or girls in leading roles are as likely to garner a fan base and earn
critical and commercial success as their male-dominated counterparts—when
they are produced.

L..............................................................................................................................
I G H T A N D DA R K C O N T E M P O R A R Y FA N TA S Y
Light contemporary fantasy and its counterpart, dark contemporary fantasy,
often take comic and dramatic narratives and infuse an element of the supernatural. As with high fantasy, contemporary fantasy has been dominated by
male-centered narratives, for example, the ghost and Bangsian ﬁlms of the
1940s. Typical examples include The Devil and Daniel Webster (1941), Here Comes
Mr. Jordan (1941), Cabin in the Sky (1943), Heaven Can Wait (1943), It’s a Wonderful
Life (1946), A Matter of Life and Death (1946), and The Ghost and Mrs. Muir (1947).
Both dark and light fantasy ﬁlms in the 1980s and 1990s, as well, have centered on male characters, including the 1984 blockbuster Ghostbusters, about
three New York parapsychologists who open a ghost containment business.
Other ﬁlms of the era following this masculinist trend include Bill and Ted’s
Excellent Adventure (1989), Big (1988), Beetlejuice (1988), Field of Dreams (1989),
Edward Scissorhands (1990), and Groundhog Day (1993).
An interesting divergence from this pattern is Ghost (1990), starring
Whoopi Goldberg as a reluctant medium pressed into service to reunite
, played by Patrick
bereaved Demi Moore with her recently murdered ﬁance
Swayze. While Swayze’s ghost takes up a lot of the narrative, the prominent
role of female leads sets this ﬁlm apart from others of the era. Similarly,
1998’s Practical Magic, adapted from the novel by Alice Hoffman, is the story of
the Owens family, a family of witches cursed with the untimely deaths of
husbands. Though the ﬁlm was not commercially successful, it illustrates
that making female-centered pictures is sometimes contingent upon women
having women in positions of inﬂuence in the ﬁlm industry (the ﬁlm had a
female screenwriter and producer).
Another light fantasy ﬁlm with a high-powered female cast that
enjoyed some success in the 1980s is The Witches of Eastwick (1987), starring
109
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

three of the most successful actresses of the time: Susan Sarandon, Cher, and
Michelle Pfeiffer. As three single women in a New England town, the women
are insensitive to their own sexual and spiritual powers, powers that grow
when they unconsciously evoke the devilish Jack Nicholson. As van Horne, he
seduces the women, undermining their friendship as they compete for his
attention and approval. Even as they eventually banish him from the material
world, he continues to inﬂuence the women incorporeally. The ﬁlm has been
dismissed by some feminist critics such as Kathe Davis, who argues that the
ﬁlm stereotypes modern women in negative ways.
Dark contemporary fantasy is less common in the 1980s and 1990s
than comic, but has generally featured women as romantic interests, like
1980’s Christopher Reeve/Jane Seymour vehicle Somewhere in Time and the
1988 German ﬁlm Wings of Desire, about an angel longing for human love,
later remade in the United States as City of Angels (1998). Other dark fantasy
ﬁlms—for example, the cult hit Donnie Darko (2001) and Stephen King’s blockbuster hit The Green Mile (adapted from his serial in 1999)—center on a charismatic and mystical hero who sacriﬁces himself so that others (usually female
characters) will live.
Finally, a major force in the work of the dark (or dramatic) fantasy is
director and screenwriter M. Night Shyamalan, Indian-born but raised in the
United States whose highly inﬂuential box ofﬁce hits—typically stylized,
atmospheric supernatural dramas—have also renewed critical and commercial interest in fantasy ﬁlm. Most of his early major ﬁlms—including The Sixth
Sense (1999), Unbreakable (2000), and Signs (2002)—center on a male protagonist or ensemble of male characters, but two later ﬁlms, The Village (2004) and
Lady in the Water (2006), include women in central roles.

The Future

Trends in the last decades of the twentieth century have been mixed. Martha
Lauzen, professor of communication, has documented the participation of
women in the motion picture industry and notes in her 2005 study “Celluloid
Ceiling”: “Over the last four years, the percentage of women working as directors, executive producers, producers, writers, cinematographers, and editors
on the top 250 domestic grossing ﬁlms has declined from 19 percent in 2001
to 16 percent in 2004.” Also problematically, in 2000, women accounted for 11
percent of directors of the top 250 ﬁlms of the year, but in 2004 the ﬁgure was
just 5 percent. The number of executive producers, producers, directors, writers, cinematographers, and editors working on the top 250 grossing ﬁlms of
2004 also declined 1 percentage point to 16 percent from 2003.
As more women enter the production and creative aspects of fantasy
ﬁlmmaking and gain access to the big budgets that are often the key to
110
................

Fantasy Film
believability, we may see more women in the ﬁlmmaking role, and more variety in the portrayal of women in fantasy ﬁlm.
See also chapters 12, 13, 14, and 18.
Further Readings
Beauchamp, Cari. “The Women behind the Camera in Early Hollywood.” MoviesbyWomen.
com, 2008 [online], http://www.moviesbywomen.com/history.html.
Bellin, Framing. Monsters: Fantasy Film and Social Alienation. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
University Press, 2005.
Davis, Kathe. “The Allure of the Predatory Woman in Fatal Attraction and Other Current
American Movies.” Journal of Popular Culture 26 (1992): 47–57.
Francke, Lizzie. Script Girls: Women Screenwriters in Hollywood. London: British Film Institute,
1994.
Goldberg, Michelle. “Where Are the Female Directors?” Salon.com, August 27, 2002 [online],
http://dir.salon.com/story/ent/movies/feature/2002/08/27/women_directors/index.
html.
Haskell, Molly. From Reverence to Rape: The Treatment of Women in the Movies. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, & Winston, 1973.
Internet Movie Database [online]. Http://www.imdb.com.
Jak, Sable. Writing the Fantasy Film: Heroes and Journeys in Alternate Realities. Studio City, CA:
Michael Wiese, 2004.
.” Sight and Sound 40 (1971): 151–54.
Lacassin, Francis. “Out of Oblivion: Alice Guy Blache
Lauzen, Martha. “Celluloid Ceiling: Behind-the-Scenes Employment of Women in the Top
250 Films of 2005.” MoviesbyWomen.com, 2006 [online], http://www.moviesbywomen.
com/marthalauzenphd/stats2005.html.
Mass, Wendy, and Stuart Levine, eds. Fantasy: The Greenhaven Press Companion to Literary
Movements and Genres. San Diego: Greenhaven Press, 2002.
Nicholls, Peter. The World of Fantastic Films. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1984.
Rosen, Marjorie. Popcorn Venus: Women, Movies, and the American Dream. New York: Avon,
1973.
Searles, Baird. Films of Science Fiction and Fantasy. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1988.
Slide, Anthony. Early Women Directors. New York: Da Capo Press, 1984.
Spivack, Charlotte. “Women Are Changing the Face of Fantasy.” In Mass and Levine, Fantasy, 133–42.
Unterburger, Amy. The St. James Women Filmmakers Encyclopedia. Detroit: Visible Ink, 1999.
Women Who Made the Movies [videocassette]. Prod. and dir. Gwen Foster Dixon and Wheeler
Winston Dixon. 54 min. VCI Home Video, 1990.

111
................

12

Science Fiction Film: Nineteenth
and Twentieth Centuries
SUSAN A. GEORGE

EARLY in the development of ﬁlm as a signiﬁcant new art form, innovators
lie
s found it a perfect
such as French magician and theater owner Georges Me
medium to create fantastic landscapes, characters, and scenarios. Through
the use of stop motion, models, miniatures, double exposure, and other techlie
s created fantastic and magical ﬁlms, becoming one of the ﬁrst
niques, Me
ﬁlmmakers to apply the technological capabilities of ﬁlm to the literary genre
of science ﬁction (SF). He and other ﬁlmmakers established a link between
the technology of ﬁlm and the West’s fascination with science and technological development early in the medium’s development, a link that remains
strong today.
lie
s and others certainly
Another aspect of early cinema that Me
exploited was the representation of the “fairer” sex as a part of the voyeuristic
spectacle of ﬁlm. From women in short shorts on Earth to scantily clad
lie
s’s best-known
women scampering across the surface of the moon in Me
ﬁlm, A Trip to the Moon (1902), to other early short ﬁlms, including Trapeze Disrobing Act (1901) and Pull Down the Curtains, Suzie (1904), which showed men
watching women undressing, the female body has been a central feature of
cinema.
As the art form developed and more complicated scenarios were presented, female character types also developed. With science ﬁction ﬁlm’s ability to make the metaphoric or the imagined cinematically “real,” its female
characters in the past and present often become models of the “proper” role
for women in a particular period. However, they can also represent safe alternatives to the role models and, in the worst-case scenario, embody negative
archetypal ﬁgures.
112
................

Science Fiction Film
R
OBOTIC WOMEN
...........................................................................................................................................
Perhaps nothing highlights the constructed nature of gender more than SF
ﬁlms featuring female cyberbodies: robots, androids (robots taking more or
less human form), cyborgs (merging of the organic, usually human, and the
mechanical), or clones. One of the earliest and probably best-known ﬁlms
that shows the feminine embodied as technology in a less than positive way
is Fritz Lang’s Metropolis (1927). Lang’s dystopic world is divided in two, with
the rich living luxurious, decadent lives above ground while the workers who
make the city run live like robotic slaves below ground. Joh Fredersen is the
master of Metropolis and controls the city’s workings. A power struggle
between Fredersen, who believes the current class division is normal and just,
and his son, Freder, who wants more for the workers, soon begins.
A central ﬁgure in their struggle is the daughter of a worker, Maria,
who makes Freder aware of the injustice of the workers’ situation. Maria is
good, kind, and cherished by her people as she preaches of a day when a mediator will come and help them. Fredersen, in his attempt to retain control,
goes to Rotwang, a prototypical mad scientist, for help. Rotwang shows him
his latest invention: a robot that never tires or makes mistakes. Knowing the
power Maria has among the workers, Fredersen asks Rotwang to make the
robot over in Maria’s image so it can incite the workers to rebellion. Rotwang
abducts Maria and, through the use of a marvelous machine, changes the
robot into a copy of Maria.
What is signiﬁcant here is how the robot or android Maria performs
gender as the ﬁlm establishes the link between the destructive power of
female sexuality. To make sure the robot Maria can pass as the “real” Maria,
Fredersen and Rotwang have it literally perform an erotic striptease for other
businessmen. The men’s reaction, their desire for it, assures Fredersen and
Rotwang that it can pass as human. The robot, now encased within the image
of Maria, seductively incites the workers to revolt, while the real Maria and
Freder save the workers’ children, who are threatened by the uprising.
Another signiﬁcant ﬁlm featuring robotic women that focuses on the
constructed nature of “woman” in patriarchal culture is The Stepford Wives
(1975). The ﬁlm starts when Joanna’s husband, Walter, decides to move the
family to the lovely suburb of Stepford, but there is something strange going
on at the Stepford Men’s Association that is changing the women. After a few
months in Stepford, women become perfect, sexy housewives who are submissive and obsessed with cleaning and cooking. Joanna and her friend
Bobby, another new arrival to the community, ﬁnally unravel the town’s secret: the men of Stepford are replacing their wives with androids. The mastermind leading the Men’s Association, which consists of artists, engineers, and
scientists, is Dale Coba, affectionately referred to as “Dis” because he once
worked for Disney.
113
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

After Bobby is transformed, Joanna realizes the seriousness of the
threat and decides to leave town with her two young daughters, but the Men’s
Association has taken them. When she goes to ﬁnd them, what she ﬁnds is
her android double. The Stepford Joanna, dressed only in a sheer peignoir
emphasizing its signiﬁcantly larger breasts, is brushing its hair in a replica of
Joanna’s bedroom. Dis watches as his smiling creation rises, twisting a nylon
stocking around her hands as she prepares to kill the original Joanna who
served as her template.
The Stepford Wives outraged feminists, who claimed it was completely
anti-female. The ending certainly is disheartening as even Joanna, who Dis
himself notes is “brighter than most,” is destroyed by the unrelenting power
of patriarchy. The ﬁnal sequence shows Joanna in the supermarket now wearing the Stepford uniform of a long yet sexy dress with matching hat and a
vacuous smile.
However, as the ﬁlm gained cult status and cultural critics took a second look, scholars began to see the ways the ﬁlm made literal, as science ﬁction often does, the theory that gender is a cultural construction rather than
a biological imperative and that a wide range of gendered activities are more
about controlling women and their behavior than any “natural” order. Besides
casting all the men in Stepford as virtually heartless conspirators and murderers (only one man shows any emotion when his wife is replaced), the ﬁlm
takes a critical stance regarding industry and technology’s role in sexist
oppression. Surrounding Stepford is an array of high-tech companies. The
narrative logic of the ﬁlm makes the presence of these companies understandable, but the repeated inclusion of the company’s signs in the ﬁlm implicates not only Stepford’s men but also industry, science, and technology in
the ongoing oppression of women.
One shortcoming of the ﬁlm and, indeed, most of the ﬁlms discussed
here is that they fail to comment effectively on issues of race, class, or sexual
preference, constructing worlds inhabited by white, heterosexual, and mostly
middle-class people. The token inclusion of an African-American couple at
the end of the original ﬁlm and the brief appearance of a gay couple in the
2004 remake are not sufﬁcient to continue or advance the multilayered critical examination of sexism in the United States that was the core of the original by according equal attention to constructions of race or sexual
orientation.
Besides linking technology, woman, and feminine sexual power, these
robotic-women ﬁlms also raise the issue of the dark Other or double as well
as the issue of (gender) identity, a central concern of the postmodern period
and the work of feminist scholars such as Donna Haraway and Mary Ann
Doane, both of whom examine gender identity in relation to the cyborg/body.
Other important robotic characters are the replicants in Blade Runner (1982),
114
................

Science Fiction Film
the hybrid Ripley and the android Call in Alien 4: Alien Resurrection (1997), and
the androids in Cherry 2000 (1988) and Eve of Destruction (1991).
T
HE GOLDEN AGE
...........................................................................................................................................
Though the 1950s are nostalgically remembered by some as a simpler and
quieter time, the truth about the decade is much different. Besides the joys
and beneﬁts brought about by postwar afﬂuence, the nation was experiencing
social and political changes. For instance, discussion of the atomic bomb, the
bombing of Japan, and the attempt to improve the image of the atom by promoting its peaceful and medical uses appeared in a variety of 1950s cultural
artifacts, including popular magazines like Ladies Home Journal, newspapers,
federal Civil Defense Administration publications, church sermons, and, of
course, Hollywood ﬁlms. Shortly after the war ended, the Cold War began,
and worries over Communism and communists inﬁltrating neighborhoods,
universities, Hollywood, and even the government itself swept the country as
Sen. Joseph McCarthy made his accusations and the House Committee on
Un-American Activities held its hearings.
In addition, gender relations and the role of the modern woman in the
public sphere created tension and anxiety. Middle-class women had been
encouraged to work outside the home as part of the war effort, but once the
war was over, government and industry started campaigns pressuring women
to return to their homes. Though most women were forced out of their
higher-paying wartime jobs to make room for returning veterans, not all
women could ﬁnancially afford or wanted to return to the home and the very
narrow deﬁnition of American womanhood now being promoted.
In terms of ﬁlm, the 1950s is frequently referred to as the Golden Age
of SF ﬁlm in the United States. The genre became a hot commodity in the
atomic age, and scores of SF ﬁlms of varying quality were made during this
decade. As Vivian Sobchack notes, “Although the SF ﬁlm existed in isolated
instances before World War II, it only emerged as a critically recognized genre
after Hiroshima” (Screening Space, 21). She further observes that, based on the
decade’s fears regarding the atomic bomb, it is not surprising that SF ﬁlm is
at best ambivalent about the beneﬁts of technology and scientiﬁc research.
Moreover, it is not historically surprising, considering the anxieties regarding
gender roles, that SF ﬁlms of the time present female characters that served
as both models and cautionary tales for women and men of the decade.
Mystique Models

While many scholars and critics remember 1950s SF ﬁlm women as nothing
more than high-heeled, well-dressed helpless damsels who screamed when
threatened, on closer viewing they are a more diverse group than one might
think. Though almost all of them do scream at one point or another, and
115
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

many are meant to serve as role models, others offer alternatives to this construction. They embody both the anxiety and promise concerning the changing role of women at the dawn of the atomic age. Still, the largest numbers of
female characters in SF ﬁlm are those who serve the values of the dominant
culture. Since these characters exemplify or model the attitudes and values
that Betty Friedan discusses in her 1963 book The Feminine Mystique, I call
these women “Mystique Models.”
The Mystique Models have taken to heart all the columns, books, and
articles that were telling them they would ﬁnd complete fulﬁllment only as
wives and mothers. They are poster girls for dominant ideologies and the status quo. They represent what needs to be preserved and protected about the
“American Way of Life”: hearth, home, family, and white womanhood. While
some of them hold jobs, they are employed in positions historically viewed as
“women’s jobs,” such as elementary school teachers. These characters may
be active early in the ﬁlm narrative, but are either completely absent from
the closing scenes or are shown watching the hero save the day from a safe
distance. They include Sylvia in The War of the Worlds (1952), Ellen Fields in It
Came from Outer Space (1953), and Cathy Barrett in The Monolith Monsters (1957).
Carol Marvin, in Earth versus the Flying Saucers (1956), is another example of this type. She helps her new husband, Dr. Russell A. Marvin, with his
research but does not appear to be employed to serve as his assistant. She is
a fairly active participant in the development of the technology to stop the
invaders, but strictly in a “stand-by-your-man” capacity. In addition, she frequently appears handling “women’s” chores, such as preparing dinner for her
husband and her father and bringing in food and sundries when the newlyweds go into the control booth to track the progress of the next satellite
launch.
Ellen Fields, the local elementary school teacher in It Came from Outer
Space, is another stand-by-your-man woman. She stands by John Putnam even
when everyone else in town has turned against him. Cathy Barrett in The
Monolith Monsters is also an elementary school teacher and the girlfriend of
the hero, Dave Miller. Her central role in the ﬁlm, however, is as a surrogate
mother concerned with the well-being of the soon-to-be-orphaned Ginny
Simpson.
Cathy, Ellen, Carol, and others like them embody dominant cultural
notions of the “proper” attitudes, actions, and role of women in the 1950s and
exemplify what genre ﬁlms like SF can be: a forum where the dominant culture tells tales about the correctness and naturalness of the current social
and political order.
While far fewer of these character types appear in more recent SF
ﬁlms, they have not disappeared completely. Instead, they appear in updated
forms in ﬁlms like Steven Spielberg’s family-focused ﬁlms Close Encounters of
the Third Kind (1977) and E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial (1982). Mystique Models are
116
................

Science Fiction Film
also evident in SF ﬁlms of the new millennium, including Monica Swinton in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence: AI (2001), Rachel Keller in The Ring (2002) and The Ring Two
(2005), and Telly Paretta in Forgotten (2004). Many of the more recent ﬁlms
focus on the role of mother and deemphasize the role of wife, in keeping with
the rise in single-parent, usually mother-headed, households. However, the
role of the mother as protector of her child becomes the central driving force
for these women’s actions and the ﬁlm’s narrative trajectory.
SF Vamps

In stark contrast to women such as Ellen, Cathy, and Carol is the SF version
of the archetypal Vamp. The SF Vamp may represent the greatest threat to
the patriarchal system because she has “sucked men dry physically, ﬁnancially, and/or morally for centuries on stage, in literature, and more recently
in ﬁlm” (George, “Pushing Containment,” 1). As Janet Staiger notes, the Vamp
is a staple of early ﬁlms such as D. W. Grifﬁth’s The Mothering Heart (1913) and
Frank Powell’s A Fool There Was (1915). She embodies the allure and appeal of
sexuality as well as male fears regarding the all-consuming and destructive
woman. She has never disappeared completely from the silver screen, returning with a vengeance in the form of the 1940s ﬁlm noir’s femmes fatales,
including Phyllis Dietrichson in Double Indemnity (1944) and Kathy in Out of the
Past (1947) and again with the monstrous women of 1950s SF ﬁlm.
Unlike the Vamps of Staiger’s study and the femmes fatales who
remain outwardly beautiful until their end, the evil deeds and desires of the
SF Vamp are inscribed on her body as well. In common with other screen
vamps, the SF Vamp is not an innocent bystander; she takes an active role in
the events that lead to her transformation out of “overreaching desire to
regain youth, beauty, male affection and/or ﬁnancial gain”—all fatal ﬂaws
that 1950s women were warned about and advised to avoid (George, 11). If
not properly contained within a heterosexual relationship, by imprisonment,
or by death, these sexual and aggressive screen women—like Janice Starlin in
The Wasp Woman (1960), June Talbot in The Leech Woman (1959), and Nancy
Archer in Attack of the 50 Foot Woman (1958)—“distract men, destroy families,
and by doing so make the nation weak and ripe for invasion” (George, 3), a
thinly disguised metaphor for Communist inﬁltration.
The SF Vamp is less insipid and far more openly objectionable and
powerful than the role models. Like the femmes fatales of ﬁlm noir, they are
“the most dangerous of women: beautiful, clever, crafty, sensual, sexual, and
deadly” (George, 31). Their stories are “cautionary tales for the unsuspecting
men they may seduce, and they serve as a warning to women to stay in their
place or they will, literally, turn monstrous and be dispatched without mercy”
(George, 33). Though these ﬁlms and representations are critical of the double
standard in society, especially as it relates to age and beauty, and contain
some convincing feminist speeches, the critique is not sustained. Moreover,
117
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

the SF Vamp often buys into the dominant ideologies regarding women and
youth and becomes as aggressive and dangerous as any femme fatale.
The SF Vamp also appears in more recent ﬁlms such as Species (1995)
and Species II (1998), in which the tall, blonde, and beautiful actress Natasha
Henstridge initially plays the monster, Sil, genetically engineered from human
and extraterrestrial DNA. However, as Sil’s biological clock starts ticking and
the drive to mate and produce a child increases, the beautiful Sil transforms
into a man-killing H. R. Giger monster (Giger’s other creations include the
alien and alien queen of the Alien ﬁlms) that must be killed by the end of the
ﬁlm.
Other recent SF Vamps include Mystique in the X-Men ﬁlms, the queen
in Aliens, and the Borg queen of the Star Trek franchise. All SF Vamps, as
Staiger notes, can “be considered a projection of male fear or hatred of women” and take on the destructive attributes of negative archetypal female ﬁgures such as Medusa, whose mere look could turn men to stone (Bad Women,
149). Moreover, to some degree they all represent what Barbara Creed terms
the “monstrous-feminine.”
The Monstrous-Feminine

Creed argues that the term monstrous-feminine is necessary because “‘female
monster’ implies a simple reversal of ‘male monster’” and “the reasons why
the monstrous-feminine horriﬁes her audience are quite different from the
reasons why the male monster horriﬁes his audience” (Monstrous-Feminine, 3).
Creed uses the psychoanalytic theories of Freud and Julia Kristeva’s notion of
the abject—“that which does not ‘respect borders, positions, rules’, that which
‘disrupts identity, system, order’”—to examine the signiﬁcance of gender in
the representation of female monsters. Creed argues that gender makes all
the difference. She notes that while the Monstrous-Feminine can “wear many
faces,” there are two major classiﬁcations:
1. The mothering and reproductive classiﬁcation, which includes the archaic
mother and the monstrous womb both evident in the giant-ant ﬁlm Them!
(1954) and the Alien ﬁlms, and
2. Woman as castrator, including the alluring, sexual castrating woman such
as June Talbot and Sil, as well as the castrating mother, as in Psycho (1960).

Female characters based on these archetypes and theories of psychoanalysis
continue to appear on the silver screen today.
Good Working Women

Less destructive than the SF Vamp and less traditional than the role models,
are the Good Working Women. Some examples are Dr. Pat Medford in Them!,
Marisa Leonardo, M.D., in 20 Million Miles to Earth (1957), and graduate student
118
................

Science Fiction Film
in biology Stephanie Clayton in Tarantula (1955). The Good Career or Working
Woman in SF ﬁlms is a vital, independent woman who manages to have her
career and love. Some can even remain sexy and in control of their sexuality
without transforming into a Vamp. Though her transgressions against patriarchy are similar to those of the SF Vamp, she is not punished, does not turn
into a monster, and does not suck men dry, because of three key factors. First,
she does not engage in the professional world for personal ﬁnancial gain or
the power it brings, but for knowledge and to protect humanity from various
threats, invaders, and mutations, usually caused by atomic testing and radiation. Second, she is a team player who does not act on her own but works
cooperatively within the established bureaucratic system, a highly valued
trait in the 1950s, an era in which the archetypal image of the rugged individualist had become suspect. Finally, while intelligent, the career-minded
woman is not cold or distant. She is still sexual and eventually willing or
interested in a heterosexual relationship. Her emotional outbursts throughout
the ﬁlm make it clear that no matter how intelligent and professional, she is
still a “real woman,” who desires and relies on men.
This is the case with Dr. Leslie Joyce in It Came from Beneath the Sea
(1955). After a puzzling encounter, Navy submarine commander Pete Matthews ﬁnds some mysterious tissue on the sub. Renowned marine biologists
Joyce and Dr. John Carter arrive in the Paciﬁc to classify the marine tissue
sample. A courtship triangle between Joyce, Carter, and Matthews soon
begins. At ﬁrst it appears that Dr. Joyce will create a ﬁssure between the two
men and will need to be contained by the end of the narrative; but that is not
the case. While she is an “eminent” marine biologist dedicated to her work
and school, she does not possess the driving desire for power, wealth, youth,
or beauty.
Dr. Joyce is, however, well aware of her beauty and uses her “feminine
wiles” when necessary. If the love triangle is not enough of an example of her
sexual power, there is another vivid example early in the ﬁlm. When the men
are trying unsuccessfully to get information from some sailors regarding the
attack on their ship, she decides she will give it a try. Taking off her sweater
to reveal her low, scoop-neck shirtwaist dress, she enters the room where the
sailors are being interrogated. Sitting coquettishly on the desk, pulling out a
cigarette and asking for a light, she quickly gets the crewman to conﬁde in
her as she covertly turns on the desk intercom so the brass in the other room
can hear. She is beautiful and uses that to advantage—again not for personal
gain, but for the common good of the dominant culture.
Joyce, like other Good Working Women, is an active participant in the
professional and predominantly male world of the ﬁlm, and she often takes
the lead in brieﬁngs and in the search for the monster. However, she does not
directly take part in its ﬁnal destruction, and her position and power are
repeatedly undercut. For example, in one scene she explains to Matthews that
119
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

she will not be pushed around by him and that he “underestimates her ability
to help in a crisis.” Then, only moments later, the giant octopus rears its ugly
head and grabs the local sheriff. Her reaction is a hysterical scream followed
by her cowering against Carter. Throughout the ﬁlm, in fact, she alternates
between being calm, clinical, and efﬁcient and then hysterical and clinging to
either Matthews or Carter.
While Joyce is clearly not a SF Vamp or the monster of the ﬁlm, she is
another disturbing and uncontainable force in the ﬁlm, one that is never completely contained. In the closing sequence, the three characters are sitting together at a bar. Joyce, sitting between the men, is wearing a low-cut black
dress with sequined spaghetti straps, still refusing to choose between Matthews and Carter. Dr. Leslie Joyce and the other Good Working Women delicately teeter on the edge of feminine monstrosity as they refuse to give up
their careers for men.
In recent ﬁlms, Good Working Women, especially those who are doctors, frequently appear in ﬁlms opposite SF Vamps, as in the case of Dr. Laura
Baker, the molecular biologist in Species and Species II. Other Good Working
Women of late include Dr. Susan Tyler, an entomologist in Mimic (1997);
Rachel in Paycheck; and, though generally a less-developed character, Irene in
Gattaca (1997).

Tough Women

Even in the 1950s, there were a few Tough Women or, at least, women who
served as the ﬁlm’s protagonist, notably Helen Benson in The Day the Earth
Stood Still (1951) and Marge Farrell in I Married a Monster from Outer Space
(1958). Since the 1970s ﬁlms such as Alien and Halloween (1978), in which the
last remaining main character is not the traditional white male, but a (white)
woman instead, more Strong or Tough Women have graced big screen and
television SF. Ellen Ripley of the Alien ﬁlms and Sarah Connor of The Terminator
(1984) and Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991) are probably the most famous
and written-about of these ﬁlm women.
In 1979, when Alien was released and the ﬁrst ofﬁcer and then the captain, both white males, became the ﬁrst victims of the monster, it left audiences wondering who, if anyone, would survive the encounter. When it turned
out to be a female crewmember, Ripley, it was shocking. Instead of being
reduced to screaming hysteria and paralysis, as several of the other crewmembers are, Ripley, though certainly scared, manages to keep her head
throughout the ﬁlm. She is resourceful, intelligent, and yet, as several scholars note, still remains a feminine spectacle in the closing sequence as she
undresses preparing for hypersleep. She even survives actions that would
mean the end for lesser characters, male or female, in SF and particularly
horror, such as when she goes back to rescue Jones, the ship cat.
120
................

Science Fiction Film
An even tougher Ripley appears in James Cameron’s Aliens (1986). As
Ximena C. Gallardo and C. Jason Smith note, Cameron reconstructs Ripley
into a hero for the hard-bodied Reagan era, but still manages to center her
gender as she becomes a surrogate mother ﬁgure and rescuer of the
orphaned little girl, Newt. Several scenes, one in the alien queen’s egg nest
and the ﬁnal battle sequence between Ripley and the queen, reinforce the
issue of woman-as-mother versus the monstrous-feminine. Ripley is the good
mother set against the alien queen as the “monstrous mother.” In the ﬁnal
showdown, Ripley, now encased in the metal power loader, engages the alien
queen advancing on Newt with “Get away from her, you bitch!” Here Ripley is
recast as a hard hero motivated by maternal feelings and set in contrast to
the monstrous motherhood of the queen.
In the third ﬁlm, Alien 3 (1992), even with her head shaved, Ripley
remains a strong woman hero. Her very presence on an all-male penal colony
is in itself disruptive, and she is literally going to be a mother of sorts because
she harbors an alien within. In the fourth ﬁlm, Alien Resurrection, Ripley is resurrected from DNA miraculously retrieved (as only Hollywood can do) from
the inferno Ripley cast herself into to destroy the alien growing in her at the
end of the third ﬁlm. This Ripley is truly less than human. She is a cloned
alien/human hybrid, complete with amazing strength, speed, and acid blood.
Here the line between Ripley as Tough Woman and Monstrous-Feminine
becomes blurred, a common problem with strong female characters in SF ﬁlm.
Another problem Hollywood ﬁlm has always had is keeping the tough
female hero from simply becoming as one-dimensional and “hard” as stock
male heroes. Even clarifying what it means to write strong women who are still
women is difﬁcult if not impossible. This problem is one that many scholars
and critics say plagues the development of the character Sarah Connor in the
Terminator ﬁlms. In the ﬁrst ﬁlm, Connor is an everyday woman working as a
waitress and trying to get by. As the ﬁlm progresses, she shows strength and tenacity, but, like the Good Working Women of the 1950s, she relies on the knowledge and help of a man, Kyle Reese, who has come from the future to save her.
In the end, however, Reese dies before his mission is complete, and Connor
must save herself and the future of humankind by destroying the Terminator.
By 1991 and Terminator 2: Judgment Day, Connor (and actress Linda Hamilton) had transformed physically and mentally into a hard-bodied hero.
When this sequel (also directed by Cameron), begins, she is in a mental institution while foster parents are raising her son. After being freed from the
institution by her son John and the Terminator, who is now programmed to
protect the boy, she watches them together and realizes she has lost her ability to love and be a good mother. As Susan Jeffords notes:
While she is focusing on being a super-soldier, the Terminator is working on
being a better mom, listening to and playing with the son that Sarah hardly
121
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

notices for all the weapons she is carrying. Sarah Connor even acknowledges
that the Terminator is doing a better job than she could. (Hard Bodies, 162)

The Tough Woman may serve as a hero, but fails to provide a progressive or
multifaceted representation of women.
Since the beginning of the new millennium, Tough Women in SF, horror, and fantasy ﬁlms have been on the increase, appearing in ﬁlms such as
Resident Evil (2002), Resident Evil: Apocalypse (2004), Underworld (2003), Underworld Evolution (2006), Aeon Flux (2005), and Ultraviolet (2006). The new Tough
Women, some of whom come out of video games, tend to be ultraviolent and
hypersexualized. The body count climbs and the leather outﬁts get even
tighter in these more recent ﬁlms. Whether they offer the same type of progressive or alternative representation for the twenty-ﬁrst century that Ripley
did in the 1970s is certainly questionable. It will be interesting to see what
scholars say about them and other SF women in the millennia to come.
See also chapters 11, 17, and 18.
Further Readings
Creed, Barbara. The Monstrous-Feminine: Film, Feminism, Psychoanalysis. New York: Routledge,
1993.
Gallardo C., Ximena, and C. Jason Smith. Alien Woman: The Making of Lt. Ellen Ripley. New
York: Continuum, 2004.
George, Susan A. “Pushing Containment: The Tale of the 1950s Science Fiction Vamp.”
Reconstruction 5, no. 4 (Fall 2005) [online], http://reconstruction.eserver.org/054/
george.shtml.
Jeffords, Susan. Hard Bodies: Hollywood Masculinity in the Reagan Era. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press, 1994.
Kirkup, Gill, Linda Janes, Kath Woodward, and Fiona Hovenden, eds. The Gendered Cyborg: A
Reader. New York: Routledge, 2000.
Kuhn, Annette, ed. Alien Zone: Cultural Theory and Contemporary Science Fiction Cinema. New
York: Verso, 1990.
Sobchack, Vivian. Screening Space: The American Science Fiction Film. New York: Ungar, 1987.
Staiger, Janet. Bad Women: Regulating Sexuality in Early American Cinema. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995.
Telotte, J. P. Replications: A Robotic History of the Science Fiction Film. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1995.

122
................

13

Anime and Manga
EDEN LEE LACKNER

WHILE manga and anime are relatively new types of media to Western audiences, both have a long tradition within Japan and surrounding Asian cultures. English-speaking readers may most closely associate manga with the
North American comic book industry; indeed, the marriage of pictures and
text is an obvious link between comics and manga. Comic books, however,
still hold a marginalized position in Western literature and carry the stigma
of being uniformly aimed at and read by children. Conversely, these limitations are not in place for manga, as it is a major form of print media. Rather
than the overwhelming stereotype of the North American comic book reader
as socially awkward, hygienically challenged, and obsessed with trivial ﬁctional details—most aptly parodied by The Simpsons’ Comic Book Guy—manga
is read by a wide cross-section of Japanese citizens, from children of both
genders to adult men and women.
Anime is often the outgrowth of manga-based stories. The more popular the manga, the more likely it is to be translated into animated form for
the purpose of television series and movies. Nevertheless, there are many
anime shows that take shape in animated form without ﬁrst being generated
in a static medium. Just as English-speaking readers often conﬂate the place
of manga in Japan with that of comic books in Western countries, Englishspeaking viewers tend to see anime as the Japanese equivalent of children’s
cartoons. This dichotomy does not exist in Japan, however, where anime is a
medium, not a speciﬁc genre. Although it is not consumed as widely as
manga, it is understood to appeal to a broad audience.

A
BRIEF HISTORY OF MANGA
...........................................................................................................................................
The precursor to what is known as modern manga appears in Japanese art as
early as the Heian Period (794–1185). The Choju Giga, or “Scrolls of Frolicking
123
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Animals,” is a set of four scrolls depicting animals engaging in human activities such as wearing clothes, dancing, holding objects in their paws, and
standing on two legs. The scrolls are not accompanied by text, but do provide
loose narratives by means of character positioning and actions. The ﬁrst
two scrolls are usually attributed to the Buddhist priest Kakuyu (1053–1140),
also known as Toba Sojo, although there is currently no information available
to verify this claim conclusively. Literacy was not widespread during the
Heian Period, during which primarily the clergy and royal court beneﬁted
from this type of education. The Tale of Genji by Shikibu Murasaki, considered
to be one of the ﬁrst novels ever written, dates from this same era. It is a
short jump from pictorial storytelling and text-only narrative to pairing the
two, and in fact, there is a twelfth-century version of Murasaki’s novel that
presents illustrations alongside the tale (the Genji Monogatari Emaki).
During the Edo Period (1603–1868), there was an upswing in the popularity and distribution of illustrated stories, paintings, and woodcuts known
as ukiyoe, a Buddhist notion meaning “pictures of a ﬂoating world.” This
“ﬂoating world,” or ukiyo, emphasized the transience of life as well as the
impulse to seek pleasure. As woodcuts in particular were inexpensive and
easy to mass produce, ukiyoe were easily distributed. Most often they presented images reﬂecting daily life, samurai, Kabuki actors, and geisha,
although as the art form continued to develop, landscapes also became a
popular subject. The ukiyoe continued to evolve through the Edo Period and
into the Meiji Period (1868–1912), and in 1814 this long tradition of illustrated
text came to fruition in the ﬁrst known usage of the word manga. Katsushika
Hokusai, an artist specializing in ukiyoe, published the ﬁrst of ﬁfteen volumes
of his Hokusai Manga, a series of close to four thousand sketches of landscapes, people, and animals. This work was very much in line with such
works as the Choju Giga because, rather than introducing a controlling narrative, Hokusai’s manga was a series of primarily unconnected images.
The pairing of text and picture, however, continued to develop and
evolve into what is known as the modern manga. In 1702, long before the
Hokusai Manga, Ooka Shumboku released the Tobae Sankokushi, a type of
comic book ﬁlled with pictures of men humorously engaged in daily tasks in
various locales in Japan. Growing out of this publication was a ﬂurry of blackand-white illustrations, sometimes paired with stories, bound into leaﬂets
and known as “tobae,” after the creator of Choju Giga. These tobae stand as a
marker of the larger commercialization of manga made possible in part by an
increasing exposure to new technology and artistic styles as Japan reopened
its borders. Additionally, the advent of kibyoshi, or “yellow cover” booklets, rising out of children’s literature and containing monochrome pictures accompanying fables, perpetuated this marriage of illustration and caption, and in
fact strengthened narrative ties.
124
................

Anime and Manga
These intersecting traditions of pictorial scrolls, novels, ukiyoe, tobae,
kibyoshi, and other illustrated stories laid the foundations for the modern
manga. During the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, manga truly became
a mass media project. Ease of production manifested wider distribution in the
form of newspapers and magazines, and eventually large monochromatic
publications the size of phone books, meant for rapid reading and discarding
by a highly literate public. These narratives were not conﬁned to one genre,
but like the widening of imagery in the ukiyoe, as modern manga developed,
it embraced an increasingly large range of topics and styles. The word mangaka—the correct term for a manga creator—entered the public lexicon,
deﬁning a whole new subset of artist and writer.
Among other artists and writers, Osama Tezuka, widely acknowledged
as the most important mangaka of all time, caught the public eye for the ﬁrst
time in 1946, at the age of seventeen, with the Diary of Ma-chan, a four-panel
strip depicting the adventures of a small boy in postwar Japan. A year later,
Tezuka rose to national attention with Shin Takarajima, a manga inspired by
Robert Louis Stevenson’s Treasure Island. He later went on to produce such
favorites as Metropolis (1949), Jungle Taitei (Kimba the White Lion; 1950–54), Tetsuwan ATOM (Astro Boy; 1952–68), Yuniko (Unico; 1976–79), and his ﬁnal completed epic, Buddha (1974–84). Not only does Tezuka’s large body of work
straddle a wide number of genres, such as romance, fantasy, science ﬁction,
mystery, and historical narratives, but a number of his manga series, including Metropolis, Ribon no Kishi (Princess Knight; 1953–56), and Twin Knight (1958),
are notable in representing ambiguous and shifting gender identities as characters both literally and ﬁguratively move between female and male—a trope
picked up on and expanded by later mangaka. Ribon no Kishi also stands out
as an important early shoujo work (meaning it was aimed at a female audience), setting many of the stylistic standards for that medium that continue
through to the present.
Far from being a ﬁction-only medium, manga is so pervasive in Japanese culture that it is sometimes used to deliver nonﬁction texts. The combination of pictures and words has proven to be an effective method of
delivering information to customers, patients, and citizens on behalf of businesses, social programs, and the government. These texts reach a larger portion of their intended audience than simple printed text, as the medium itself
is perceived as more interesting and accessible, often showcasing art by famous artists or popular characters.

A
BRIEF HISTORY OF ANIME
...........................................................................................................................................
With the rise of animated features, manga and anime have become inextricably linked. The natural lifecycle of any popular manga includes being published in multiple parts as a serial, collected together in a book, and then
125
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

adapted into a television series, one or more original video animations (OVA),
and potentially a feature-length movie. As a result, it is difﬁcult to consider
one medium without referencing the other.
Anime began in the early twentieth century, coinciding roughly with
Japan’s movement away from the insular model outlined by the foreign relations policy known as Sakoku, which was in effect during the Edo Period, forbidding Japanese citizens from leaving and foreigners from entering Japan.
Sakoku tightened restrictions on the ﬂow of commerce, effectively, but not
completely, isolating Japan for a period of two hundred years. As the Tokugawa shogunate lost its hold on the rule of Japan in the late nineteenth century, so too did Sakoku loosen and drop away, reopening Japan to trade,
foreign relations, and migration. Along with this change came a ﬂood of
external inﬂuences that were suddenly easier to access, so it is no wonder
that, as animation and ﬁlm techniques spread worldwide, Japan would
explore these avenues as well. In 1907, a short three-second clip of a boy in a
sailor suit writing out “Moving Pictures” in Japanese heralded the ﬁrst step
into what would later become the medium known as anime.
By the 1930s, Japan was experiencing success in animated movies, but
not in live-action ventures. One of the reasons behind this dichotomy was the
fact that live-action ﬁlms required capital for sets, costumes, and salaries
that animation did not, making the latter more cost-effective. Japanese ﬁlm
did not have the ﬁnancial backing common to early Hollywood studios, and
thus the industry suffered from an inability to produce competitive products.
Additionally, xenophobia and racism may have been a factor, as the “exotic”
look of Japanese actors would bar Japanese-produced movies from wider distribution in Caucasian-dominated countries. Where live-action ﬁlms failed,
however, animation succeeded. Elaborate sets and costumes were only a
brushstroke away; salaries were cheaper, and the space and setup time
required to create a story were signiﬁcantly less than for projects requiring
location work.
From the 1930s onward, anime gained ground as a legitimate, all-pervasive medium. A plethora of genres, from character-driven relationship comedies to epic science ﬁction dramas, found homes in anime studios. In 1980,
the advent of OVA, the equivalent of direct-to-video releases, led to a sharp
increase in the amount of anime available to the Japanese market. Perhaps
because of this sudden ﬂood, the end of the 1980s saw a drop in the success
of any one title, while overhead costs climbed to record levels. These opposing
forces might have signaled the end of anime’s heyday if it were not for the
increasing success of anime and manga worldwide. The 1990s brought an
increased global awareness and interest in the anime that had been slowly
trickling out of Japan since the 1960s, and as the century turned, anime took
its place as an alternate medium closely aligned with, but not quite the same
as, the Western animated movie.
126
................

Anime and Manga
Much of anime’s roots lie in Disney animation. Although animators
were already taking cues from Disney, it was in the 1960s that Osama Tezuka,
already acknowledged as an inﬂuential mangaka, considered the inspiration
early Disney features offered and used the style and technique as templates
to be altered, simpliﬁed, and built upon. He popularized the use of exaggerated features, such as eye size and mouth shape, which allow for a wide
range of expressions in a variety of character types. While anime has since
moved on from Disney-speciﬁc characteristics, its roots are still present in
these facial features. Additionally, although computer graphics are used in a
limited way in Japanese animation, most anime emphasizes a traditional
approach of multiple still frames that simulate movement when shown in
rapid succession. This technique preserves the strong link between anime
and manga, as well as underlining the simple fact that many animators are
also mangaka.

R
E P R E S E N TAT I O N S O F W O M E N
...........................................................................................................................................
As both manga and anime are media rather than genres, there is much room
to target speciﬁc markets through the creation of demographically precise
classiﬁcations. These umbrella groupings include kodomo texts, aimed at children; shoujo, for the consumption of girls; shounen, the equivalent boys’ category; josei, for young women; and seinen, for young men. There is a tendency,
especially among Western researchers, to consider these demographic terms
as falling within certain genres, but each primarily describes a target audience and only loosely guides genre divisions. A shounen work may display
relationship-speciﬁc characteristics and little high-risk action, such as in Oh!
My Goddess, while a shoujo text may contain violence, death, and gore, such
as in Banana Fish. In a broad sense, certain artistic styles divide along categorical lines, with softer features and more abstract backgrounds most often
appearing in female-targeted works, and male-targeted works displaying grittier, sharper, and more realistic lines and backgrounds. It is important to
note, however, that these classiﬁcations are grouped not according to individual likes and dislikes, but rather age and gender.
Within these demographic divisions are further categorical breakdowns
that align more precisely with genre expectations, yet the deﬁning characteristics of these subcategories are not necessarily exclusive to one demographic
or another. For example, “magical girl” anime and manga—characterized by
young girls and women who possess supernatural abilities which they use to
ﬁght evil and protect the world, usually while maintaining a separate,
“normal” life—are most often directed at a shoujo audience, yet that does not
preclude similar features from appearing in shounen works.
Despite the inclusion of female writers, animators, and readers in
manga and anime, neither medium displays widespread transgression of
127
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

dominant gender roles. Given that anime and manga are widely consumed
media, however, it is natural for both to reﬂect mainstream conceptions of
gender and sexuality. Female protagonists are strong, within certain boundaries, and exhibit physical traits drawn to denote attractiveness and beauty.
The shounen genre often fulﬁlls these stipulations by presenting female characters with exaggerated features such as torso and leg length, and waist and
breast size, very much in line with Hollywood’s depictions of female action
heroes such as Lara Croft. Shoujo provides protagonists that have similarly
exaggerated features, as well as large, round eyes and cute mannerisms or
clothing.

F..........................................................................................................................................
E M A L E A R T I S T S A N D A N I M AT O R S
While the Japanese comics industry has never lacked stories marketed to a
wide variety of readers, at ﬁrst there were very few women writing manga.
Female mangaka did not begin to proliferate until the early 1960s, ﬁnding a
niche in which they wrote stories speciﬁcally aimed at girls and women.
While these women did not create the ﬁrst manga targeted at a female audience, they did adjust, reﬁne, redevelop, and expand the concepts behind such
works, eventually dominating the production of shoujo manga.

Machiko Hasegawa

Machiko Hasegawa, one of the ﬁrst female mangaka, started her career at the
age of fourteen as an assistant at the girl’s publication Shoujo Club. She was
the ﬁrst truly successful woman in the ﬁeld. Early into her tenure as an assistant, she began a humorous four-panel strip called Sazae-san, exploring the
life of a modern woman. Sazae-san began life in the Fukunichi Shimbunran
newspaper and ran from 1946 through 1974, when Hasegawa retired. The
comic resulted in a 1955 radio dramatization, a few related television series,
and in 1969, an anime series that continues to run to this day.
Although Hasegawa enjoyed a successful career, most mangaka at the
time were male, including those writing for women. This gendered divide
between artist and audience resulted in the very earliest shoujo texts perpetuating subordinating stereotypes of women and a tendency toward tragic or
extremely emotional narratives. The lack of female artists and the sense of
women as submissive can be traced back to the Edo Period, in which egalitarian notions of Japanese life were set aside in favor of Confucian doctrine
advocating the enforcement of hierarchical relationships. While this unequal
status only began to operate during this era, the Meiji Period brought with it
stricter enforcement, subsuming women’s rights and needs under those of
their parents, husbands, and male children. These strict boundaries are still
in effect to a certain degree today, but they loosened to an extent during the
128
................

Anime and Manga
1960s when women were able to move into the forefront of shoujo manga
creation.
The Magniﬁcent 24s

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, more and more female mangaka began to
rise rapidly in the public eye. The Magniﬁcent 24s—also known as the Year 24
Group (Niju-yon-nen Gumi) or the Forty-Niners, so named because many were
born in 1949, the twenty-fourth year of the Showa Period (1926–89)—were a
large part of a major boom of female writers and artists. The Year 24 Group is
historically ill-deﬁned, but most critics agree that Yasuko Aoike (From Eroica
with Love), Moto Hagio (They Were Eleven), Riyoko Ikeda (The Rose of Versailles),
Toshie Kihara (Mari and Shingo), Minori Kimura (Miokuri no Atode), Norie
Masuyama, Yumiko Oshima (The Star of Cottonland), Nanae Sasaya (Gull), Keiko
Takemiya (The Song of the Wind and the Trees), Mineko Yamada, and Ryoko
Yamagishi (Our White Room) fall within the category. These women were
among the many that moved into the shoujo market, considerably changing
the primarily male writer and artist demographic. Additionally, they were
some of the ﬁrst to produce a large amount of material within short deadlines
as, about this time, shoujo manga moved to weekly production schedules.
Taking a cue from the serialized format of television shows, the ﬁrst
weekly magazine came out in 1956, and this change in distribution frequency
soon spread to many shounen publications. Shoujo followed suit in 1963, and
while this new schedule did not last, the women writing and illustrating during this time used the opportunity to expand shoujo’s genre boundaries,
incorporating more complex and diverse plots alongside themes previously
conﬁned to shounen. Science ﬁction and fantasy became mainstays of shoujo
works, and homoerotic themes and stories (known as “boys’ love” and yaoi)
found more mainstream audiences than they had previously enjoyed. The
Magniﬁcent 24s, and other mangaka like them, expanded what was originally
a cohesive if narrow genre into a far-reaching category held together primarily by artistic style, convention, and audience demographic. Where once
shoujo manga was directed almost exclusively at girls and young women, the
1960s and 1970s brought shoujo to an older audience, creating a category of
lifetime readers and thus ensuring its continued success.
Rumiko Takahashi

Rumiko Takahashi is arguably the most well-known female mangaka worldwide. Her career began in 1978, and for twenty years, her most high-proﬁle
works ran in Shounen Sunday. Unlike many other female writers and illustrators, her stories more accurately ﬁt within the shounen categorization than
shoujo. She is the creator of a number of long-running, multiple-volume series, including Urusei Yatsura (1978–87), Maison Ikkoku (1980–87), Ranma 1=2
129
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

(1987–96), and her most recent work, InuYasha (1996–present), as well as many
shorter texts. Takahashi’s longer series generally contain ensemble casts
headed by a male and female pairing, often romantically involved. All four of
Takahashi’s longest-running works have been translated into animated form
and distributed outside Japan as both manga and anime. Some of her shorter
works, including Maris the Chojo (1980), Fire Tripper (1983), Laughing Target
(1983), and the Mermaid Saga (1984–94), have also been distributed outside Japan in manga and anime form. Her work moves between genres, from gothic
horror to lighthearted comedy, much in the way many of her characters move
between worlds, cultures, and even bodies. Urusei Yatsura concerns the relationship between an alien girl and a human boy, Maison Ikkoku brings together
people from various walks of life to live under one roof, and InuYasha explores
one girl’s journey between the modern day and a fantastical alternate ancient
Japan ﬁlled with full and half-demons.
Ranma 1=2 is especially notable in this movement between states as the
title character experiences ﬂuid and sometimes rapid shifts between male
and female physical forms. Ranma Satome’s metamorphoses is the result of
falling into one of a series of magical springs that curse those exposed to
change into the shape of whomever or whatever drowned there last whenever
the cursed person is doused with cold water. The spring Ranma falls into
turns him into a red-headed female version of himself, leading to many misunderstandings and misidentiﬁcations worthy of a farce. He is not the only
character afﬂicted as, among others, his father Genma turns into a panda
and his rival Ryoga Hibiki often becomes a piglet. Hot water reverses the
curse, at least temporarily. This metamorphosis from human to animal and
back again is part of a long tradition of worldwide myth and literature;
Ranma, however, is the only character in Takahashi’s story to experience
transgenderism, as all other cursed characters turn into some form of
animal.
While genderqueer characters abound in ﬁlm and literature, Ranma’s
transformation is part of a smaller subset of works exploring literal transmutation between genders, including the myth of Tiresias, the Greek male
prophet who becomes a woman, and Virginia Woolf’s Orlando, in which the
title character shifts between sexes through several lifetimes. Ranma 1=2 is
more comedic than these earlier representations, and Ranma himself is
clearly masculine-identiﬁed even when in female form. In this manner, Ranma’s transformation is more of a naturalistic drag performance. He spends
his time in female guise exploiting or overturning archetypal feminine behavior rather than learning how to pass as female or exploring any femalespeciﬁc concerns or worldviews. As a result, much of the comedy from this
series comes from the farcical aspects rather than a larger consideration of the
themes of transformation and metamorphosis.
130
................

Anime and Manga
CLAMP

CLAMP is a group of manga creators currently consisting of four female
artists. When the group was formed in 1989, it was as a doujinshi, or amateur
manga group, and had a total of eleven members. Over the years, as it metamorphosed into a professional organization, it shrank to seven members, and
then to four. The current members are Satsuki Igarashi, Mokona, Tsubaki
Nekoi, and Ageha Ohkawa. As a result of this multiauthorship, the artwork
style changes from work to work, depending on which combinations of artists
are working on which text. Much like Takahashi, CLAMP’s works straddle both
genre and demographic groups, resulting in a varied audience.
The studio is popular both inside and outside Japan, and many of
CLAMP’s manga series, complete and incomplete, have been adapted into animated form. CLAMP’s stories run the gamut from family-friendly magical girls
such as those in Magic Knight Rayearth (1993–95) and Cardcaptor Sakura (1996–
2000) to the historical and mythological fantasy of RG Veda (1990–96) to the
sexually sophisticated adaptation of Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, Miyuki-chan in Wonderland (1993–95).
Miyuki-chan is notable in how it plays with textual boundaries. The work
places the eponymous shoujo schoolgirl archetype into a blend of fantasy and
homoeroticism. Once in Wonderland, the title character must navigate
through not only this version of Carroll’s world, but six other worlds, including Mirrorland—a domain consciously reminiscent of Through the LookingGlass—and X land, which is populated by characters from CLAMP’s apocalyptic
paranormal series, X/1999 (begun in 1992, currently on hiatus). Miyuki must
not only ﬁnd her way home but also avoid the sexual advances of a number of
characters, most of whom are female.
Miyuki’s movement from her own story into that of another CLAMP text
is a characteristic of many of the studio’s works. People and story lines often
intersect, creating a loose universe in which all of CLAMP’s stories take place
and providing extratextual continuity. Long-time readers, therefore, are able
to recognize and revisit characters from completed series, providing the studio with an already-existing fan base for each new release. For instance, both
the campus and many of the characters in Clamp School Detectives (1992–93),
an episodic detective comedy set in an elementary school, appear in numerous other story lines, including Duklyon: Clamp School Defenders (1992–93), Man
of Many Faces (1990–91), Tsubasa: Reservoir Chronicle (2003–present), and X/1999.
Additionally, the crossover between plotlines is especially notable in Tokyo Babylon (1990–93) and X/1999. Tokyo Babylon, another of CLAMP’s paranormal series, concerns the efforts of fraternal twins Subaru and Hokuto
Sumeragi to protect Tokyo from spirits via exorcism. Their goals are often
complicated by the inﬂuence of Seishiro Sakurazuka, a family friend, and as
the plot unravels, Subaru and Seishiro’s relationship becomes more of a focal
131
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

point of the story. Making the story arc more complex is the deﬁnite homoerotic subtext implicit in the male characters’ interactions. While Tokyo Babylon is a complete work in and of itself, the ending is ﬁgured in such a way to
suggest the potential for continuing adventures. X/1999 then picks up these
threads, folding Subaru and Seishiro into an even more bleak story against
which the paranormal occurrences of Tokyo Babylon pale. Not only are these
characters drawn into an apocalyptic battle between good and evil, but they
ﬁnd themselves on opposite sides, heightening the tragedy of their unfulﬁlled
relationship. X/1999, however, is not a sequel to Tokyo Babylon in the traditional sense, as it is not speciﬁcally concerned with the outgrowth of the Tokyo
Babylon characters, nor is it imperative to read one text in order to understand
the other. Instead, those characters become part of a larger cast and story as
the focus moves to new main characters, backgrounding but not entirely
doing away with Subaru and Seishiro.
Yuu Watase

Yuu Watase is a female mangaka and creator of such texts as Fushigi Yuugi
(1992–96) and Ayashi no Ceres (Ceres, Celestial Legend; 1996–2000). Her ﬁrst work,
Pajama de Ojama (An Intrusion in Pajamas), was published in 1989, and she
quickly found a receptive audience. In 1998, she received the Shogakukan
Manga Award for Ceres. Watase exclusively writes shoujo manga characterized by very beautiful—or bishoujo—men who are often foils for one or more
female protagonists on a quest. These deﬁning features hold ﬁrm regardless
of whether Watase’s texts are set in a fantastical or modern setting.
Although Watase’s works appear at ﬁrst glance to be light fantasy, they
often explore darker, more sexual themes. Fushigi Yuugi, while seeming to
present a simple tale of magical and historical romance—the heroine and her
best friend are sucked into a book in which they become priestesses aligned
against each other who must seek warriors for their individual sides—quickly
delves into violence and the threat and consequences of sexual assault. These
themes are accompanied by issues of gender identity because one of the warriors is a male who lives and dresses primarily as a female, and, in both the
manga and anime versions, there are interludes in which the male warriors
must dress as women in order to successfully cloak their identities. The genderbending present in Fushigi Yuugi is couched in entertaining, nonthreatening
terms, but the concerns around virginity, chastity, and female sexuality bridge
the historical time frame of the fantasy world and the main characters’ own,
making the work resonate with current-day concerns.
The menace of rape and physical and psychological assault comes to
the fore again in Ayashi no Ceres, as this later work presents as lush a vision as
Fushigi Yuugi but pushes the representation of violence further. While the perpetrators of violence against women in Fushigi Yuugi are strangers or patently
evil men, Ceres takes a more frightening turn, as the main character, Aya
132
................

Anime and Manga
Mikage, is continually under threat of parricide once her family realizes that
she is a conduit for the title character and mythological spirit, Ceres. Because
the Mikage family believes that the manifestation of Ceres will bring ruin
upon them all, they attempt to kill Aya, and she must complete a quest to lift
the family curse and save herself while being chased by relatives who wish
her harm. Additionally, Aya’s twin brother, Aki, almost rapes Aya while under
the inﬂuence of the spirit of Shiso Mikagi, the founder of the family and originator of the legend. In this manner, Watase explores female sexual vulnerability within a fantastical framework, subverting shoujo notions of romance
and fulﬁllment at the hands of a male lover. It is important to note, however,
that in both Fushigi Yuugi and Ayashi no Ceres, the threat of rape does not
come to fruition, leaving the female characters available, whole, and pure for
their inevitable male suitors.
L
O O K I N G F O RWA R D, L O O K I N G B AC K
...........................................................................................................................................
Given the natural progression of manga text to anime series, it is no surprise
that mangaka occupy a high-proﬁle position in Japanese popular culture.
Story adaptation is a keystone of the animation industry, and thus, even when
mangaka have little to no input into the television or ﬁlm versions of their
works, the ﬁnal animated products are strongly associated with their names.
Where once there were few women, pioneers such as Machiko Hasegawa and
the Magniﬁcent 24s paved the way for a more gender-equitable outlook going
forward. As the ﬁeld expanded to include these women, so too did genre conventions and boundaries evolve and stretch to accommodate new perspectives, themes, and artistic techniques, which have been picked up and further
modiﬁed by successive generations of women artists and writers. Although
women’s manga and anime are by no means universally subversive, they often explore gendered concerns, be they sexual, physical, or psychological in
origin. As the century moves on, more and more female mangaka begin to
straddle audience demographic divides just as they continue to push the
boundaries of shoujo.
There are myriad women involved in the production and consumption of anime and manga—far more than could be comprehensively covered
in any one article. Readers, writers, illustrators, and animators comprise a
complex ecosystem that continues to grow and change with time. Indeed, not
only is there a long tradition of fans creating manga (both original and based
on professionally published works), but many mangaka have found routes to
careers in illustration and animation through the amateur doujinshi market.
With such a long history of manga and anime behind them and more opportunities and challenges ahead, women will no doubt continue to affect the
shape of anime and manga as the industry moves forward into the future.
See also Graphic Novels; Queer Science Fiction.
133
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Further Readings
Aestheticism.com [online]. Http://www.aestheticism.com.
Bolton, Christopher, Istvan Csicsery-Ronay Jr., and Takayuki Tatsumi, eds. Robot Ghosts and
Wired Dreams: Japanese Science Fiction from Origins to Anime. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota, 2007.
Brown, Steven T., ed. Cinema Anime. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
Clements, Jonathan, and Helen McCarthy. The Anime Encyclopaedia: A Guide to Japanese Animation since 1917. Rev. ed. Berkeley, CA: Stone Bridge Press, 2006.
Drazen, Patrick. Anime Explosion! The What? Why? and Wow! of Japanese Animation. Berkeley,
CA: Stone Bridge Press, 2003.
Gravett, Paul. Manga: Sixty Years of Japanese Comics. London: Lawrence King, 2004.
Grossman, Andrew, ed. Queer Asian Cinema: Shadows in the Shade. Binghamton, NY: Harrington Park Press, 2001.
Kinsella, Sharon. Adult Manga: Culture and Power in Contemporary Japanese Society. Honolulu:
University of Hawaii, 2000.
———. Sharon Kinsella [online]. Http://www.kinsellaresearch.com.
Levi, Antonia. Samurai from Outer Space: Understanding Japanese Animation. Chicago: Open
Court, 2000.
Lunning, Frenchy, ed. Mechademia. Vol. 1, Emerging Worlds of Anime and Manga. Vol. 2, Networks of Desire. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2006.
McCarthy, Helen. The Anime! Movie Guide. New York: Overlook Press, 1997.
Napier, Susan J. Anime from Akira to Howl’s Moving Castle: Experiencing Contemporary Japanese
Animation. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
Patten, Fred. Watching Anime, Reading Manga: 25 Years of Essays and Reviews. Berkeley, CA:
Stone Bridge Press, 2004.
Poitras, Gilles. The Anime Companion: What’s Japanese in Japanese Animation? Berkeley, CA:
Stone Bridge Press, 1999.
———. The Anime Companion 2: More What’s Japanese in Japanese Animation? Berkeley, CA:
Stone Bridge Press, 2005.
Ruh, Brian. AnimeResearch.com: Anime, Manga, and Japanese Popular Culture Research
[online]. Http://www.animeresearch.com.
Schodt, Frederik L. Dreamland Japan: Writings on Modern Manga. Berkeley, CA: Stone Bridge
Press, 1996.
———. Frederik L. Schodt [online]. Http://www.jai2.com.
———. Manga! Manga! The World of Japanese Comics. New York: Kodansha International
Press, 1997.
Thorn, Matt. Matt-thorn.com [online]. Http://www.matt-thorn.com.

134
................

14

Television: Twentieth Century
BARBARA LYNN LUCAS

BEING a hero is hard work. Fighting the forces of darkness, piloting starships,
harnessing magical powers, and solving mundane and paranormal crimes
requires strength, intelligence, determination, and the willingness to put the
welfare of others above one’s own. A sly wit, a sense of humor, a stalwart
sidekick, and nifty gadgets (either mystical or technological) are optional but
desirable.
When one is both a hero and a woman, the job gets considerably
harder. Not only is it necessary to manage the expectations audiences have
about heroes, but it is also important to navigate gendered assumptions
about the roles women occupy in society. The changes in how women characters have been portrayed in twentieth-century science ﬁction can be
described as moving from housewife to hero. While the fantastic shows over
the course of several decades have changed in their presentation of gender,
to some extent they have done less to extend the focus of race, class, and sexual orientation.

M
AY B E R R Y M E E T S T H E M A C A B R E A N D M A G I C A L
...........................................................................................................................................
During the 1960s, television viewers tuned into The Andy Grifﬁth Show (1960–
68) for a warm, comfy slice of small-town nostalgia served up in Mayberry,
North Carolina. The show’s focus on home, family, and community is something that the fantastical series of the same era borrowed. However, while
they appropriated these ideals, they also managed to subvert them without
dismissing or shattering them. In fact, despite the intrusion of the fantastical
elements, these series reinforce and valorize the same values as their nonfantastical counterparts.
Two shows from this time period introduced a single fantastical element into an otherwise ordinary setting. Bewitched (1964–72) holds the title as
135
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

the longest-running American science ﬁction or fantasy series (based on the
number of episodes—Stargate SG-1 had the longest run in terms of the number of seasons). The show focuses on the lives of Samantha and Darren Stevens. Samantha (Elizabeth Montgomery) is a witch, a fact that she neglected
to tell her husband, Darren (ﬁrst played by Dick York and then by Dick Sargent), before they married. It does not take long before Darren ﬁnds out, of
course, as Samantha’s family, especially her mother, Endora (Agnes Moorehead), is not happy at her daughter’s choice of spouse. In fact, Endora frequently creates magical mischief in order to cause tension between her
daughter and son-in-law, who wants his wife to refrain from using magic.
Since Samantha must use her magic to correct her mother’s acts, circumstances never seem to allow her to follow her husband’s wishes.
I Dream of Jeannie (1965–70) follows a similar pattern. When astronaut
Capt. Tony Nelson (Larry Hagman) crash-lands on a desert island, he discovers a bottle that houses Jeannie (Barbara Eden), a female genie trapped
centuries ago. Jeannie is wildly grateful for her rescue and is determined to
help Nelson, her “master,” whether he wants her assistance or not. Nelson’s
government position keeps him under constant scrutiny, especially by Dr. Alfred
Bellows (Hayden Rorke). The need to keep Jeannie (who usually sports a hotpink harem outﬁt, is unfamiliar with modern customs and technologies, and
has an outgoing personality) and her powers secret is a challenge that results
in much of the show’s conﬂict and humor. While not technically a couple for
much of the series, Jeannie and Nelson eventually wed.
What both of these series have in common, in addition to their basic
premises, is how the fantastic functions in each. In both cases, a supernatural
woman is paired with a mortal mate who is wary and distrustful of her
powers. He wants his life and his mate to be traditionally normal. However,
both women are continually forced to use their powers while keeping them
secret from all but a few. When they do, it is almost inevitably either to see to
the household or to help their mates’ careers.
Both Bewitched and I Dream of Jeannie had greater longevity than the two
shows that took the surface of the familiar family sitcom and gave it a macabre twist. In The Munsters (1964–66), classic horror movie “monsters” settle
down to raise a family. Herman (Fred Gwynne), a lumbering Frankenstein’s
monster, marries and settles down with Lily (Yvonne de Carlo), a vampire,
and they manage to produce a son, Eddie (Butch Patrick), who is a werewolf.
The extended family also consists of Grandpa (Al Lewis), Lily’s vampire father,
and their unfortunate niece Marilyn (Pat Priest). Marilyn is the only normal
human in this macabre world, and her wholesome, blonde, girl-next-door
looks seem terribly out of place among the gothic gloom of the rest of the
family, who love her despite her oddities. However, in spite of its monstrous
surface, the show focuses on classic family situations such as children having
problems at school, mothers needing to work outside the home when there is
136
................

Television
a shortage of money in the household, and family members trying to play
matchmaker for their relatives.
If the Munsters are unconventional on the surface, the title characters
in The Addams Family (1964–66) are odder, “ookier,” and more slyly subversive.
In the series, many conventional beliefs, values, and activities are twisted into
an Addams perspective. For example, mother Morticia (Carolyn Jones) loves
gardening, but the plants she tends are poisonous. The Addamses rarely want
for money, despite the fact that they live in a large, gloomy manor, have servants to care for it, and don’t really work. Gomez Addams (John Astin) and wife
Morticia have an extended family living with them, including their children
Pugsley (Ken Weatherwax) and Wednesday (Lisa Loring), Uncle Fester Frump
(Jackie Coogan), and Grandma Addams (Marie Blake).
In addition to overall premises, both series also have similarities in plot.
The Munsters fret about the dating possibilities for unfortunate niece Marilyn
and try to play matchmaker; the Addamses do the same for fabulously furry
Cousin It (Felix Silla). Eddie Munster has trouble in school and is in danger of
failing science until his teacher believes Herman is his science fair project;
Wednesday Addams has issues with the fact that the good guys always win in
the fairy tales she has to read at school. Both series feature episodes where
the families are selected randomly as being representative of the “typical”
American family. And despite the creepy surface, the families are typical in
that the mothers stay home and focus on caring for their children, spouse,
and household.
W
HERE NO WOMAN HAS GONE BEFORE?
...........................................................................................................................................
In 1966, Gene Roddenberry produced a pilot episode for the science ﬁction television series Star Trek. The episode, called “The Cage,” featured a starship
Enterprise commanded by Capt. Christopher Pike (Jeffrey Hunter). Pike’s second in command, Number One (Majel Barrett), was a formidable woman of
cool logic and ﬁrm command. When aliens who are threatening the ship capture Pike, she makes a decision that could result in his death when she is
forced to choose between his life and the safety of the ship and its crew.
Number One was a total departure for a female character at this time—
perhaps too much of a departure, since one of the changes Roddenberry was
forced to make for the series was replacing her with the male Vulcan-human
character Spock (Leonard Nimoy), who assumed many of the intellectual and
emotional qualities of her character.
Star Trek’s presentation of female characters is problematic at best.
While the series tried to test and challenge gender boundaries, it also reinforced many traditional gender roles and gendered ways of thinking. For
example, the series included female crewmembers in key positions on the
staff, but the functions of those women demonstrated that they had not
137
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

progressed very far during the centuries between our own time and that of
the Enterprise. One of the constant female presences on the bridge crew is the
African-American communications ofﬁcer Lt. Uhura (Nichelle Nichols), whose
role is little more than a high-tech switchboard operator, a comparison that is
obvious when she is pressing buttons on her console with the ﬁngers of her
other hand resting on her earpiece. Since racism is no longer a problem in the
twenty-fourth century, the show did not have to deal with that topic directly.
The other occasional female presence on the bridge is Yeoman Janice Rand
(Grace Lee Whitney), who is probably remembered best for her woven blonde
beehive hairdo. Rand’s purpose seems to be to bring Kirk reports to sign and
to dispense coffee. Once the character of Number One was eliminated, Barrett
found herself in the ship’s sickbay as nurse Christine Chapel.
All three women have lower status than their male counterparts. Their
roles are supportive in nature and do not include prominent positions in command, the sciences, engineering, navigation, or security. The gender divide is
further reinforced by the show’s costuming. Instead of wearing the same uniforms as the men, as Number One did in the show’s pilot, they sport short
miniskirt-length dresses and knee-high black boots.
In looking for women who hold positions of command and authority,
one has to turn to the alien races, such as the unnamed Romulan commander (Joanne Linville) whom Spock romances in order to steal her ship’s
cloaking device in “The Enterprise Incident.” While the Romulan commander
holds a great deal of authority, she is, at the same time, able to be wooed into
letting down her guard and compromising her ship’s security. Vulcan society
is matriarchal, and we see some of the most impressive displays of female
power and logic in imposing matriarch T’Pau (Celia Lovsky) and T’pring
e. T’pring uses impeccable logic in order to
(Arlene Martel), Spock’s ﬁance
avoid the arranged marriage to Spock so that she can have a mate of her own
choosing.
Still, many of the alien women also fall into classic and subordinate
character types. They are either femmes fatales, like Elaan of Troyius (France
Nuyen) from the episode of the same name whose tears make men susceptible to her considerable charms; ice princesses waiting for a thaw, like the warrior Shana (Angelique Pettyjohn) from “The Gamesters of Triskellion”; or good
wives and mothers, such as Miramanee (Sabrina Scharf), the short-lived wife
of Capt. James T. Kirk (William Shatner) from “The Paradise Syndrome.” While
the ﬁrst two types usually succeed as being a love-interest-of-the-week for
the male characters, usually the womanizing Kirk, the last group do not tend
to survive their episode, because long-term committed relationships did not
ﬁt the weekly adventure format of the series.
When Star Trek was reborn as Star Trek: The Next Generation (1987–94),
the decades between the two series show that women have made advances,
but not as much as their real-life counterparts were making. Deanna Troi
138
................

Television
(Marina Sirtis), the ship’s counselor, is the revised Uhura. In her role as
empath and therapist, she fosters communication between her crewmates
and aliens and also helps them get in touch with their inner selves. The need
for this service among the highest-ranking male crew members is reinforced
by the enigmatic alien bartender Guinan (Whoopi Goldberg), whose keen
insights and sound advice often offer the perspective and knowledge to
unravel a problem-of-the-week a male character is having. Since Guinan is a
humanoid alien, the issue of contemporaneous race issues could also be
avoided on the show.
The series does offer some chance for female characters to advance.
The sickbay is run by Dr. Beverly Crusher (Gates McFadden), an indication
that women have progressed in at least that branch of the sciences. While
Crusher is a professional in charge of a key department, she is also a mother,
the only main cast member to have a child travel with her. However, her
maternal concern for her son Wesley (Will Wheaton) and her warm feelings
for Capt. Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick Stewart) suggest that these emotional
attachments, which are often presented as an inconvenience or hindrance to
male characters, are important for a female character in authority to make
her more human and more likable.
Expectations about roles and vulnerability in female characters collide
most strongly in Lt. Tasha Yar (Denise Crosby). While a woman security ofﬁcer was never seen in the ﬁrst series, Yar is not only an ofﬁcer but the security chief. Her character shows that women were advancing into less passive
and more active roles; however, there is the sense that this comes at a cost.
The differences between Yar, with her close-cropped hair and direct, confrontational demeanor, and the wavy-haired, doe-eyed Troi suggest that Yar has
to become “one of the boys” in order to do her job.
Star Trek: Voyager (1995–2001) is the ﬁrst series in which the ship central
to the story line has a woman in command: Capt. Kathryn Janeway (Kate Mulgrew). Capt. Janeway, like Yar, is arguably a step forward for female characters. However, because Voyager had been on a training mission before being
caught in a wormhole and thrown across the galaxy, Janeway has a young
and inexperienced crew, and although she is their commander, she is also a
maternal presence. As with Dr. Crusher in The Next Generation, her authority
and advancement cannot be presented without a corresponding emphasis on
behaviors and roles that are traditionally women’s roles.
G
ETTING DOWN TO BUSINESS
...........................................................................................................................................
During the 1970s, television women were breaking free of the home and getting down to business. There were shows—Police Woman (1974–78), Charlie’s
Angels (1976–81), and Laverne and Shirley (1976–82), to name a few—that
focused on single women and their jobs rather than on married women and
139
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

their families. In the science ﬁction series Space: 1999 (1975–77), the main
female lead, Dr. Helena Russell (Barbara Bain), broke out of the role of the
nurse and became chief medical ofﬁcer on Moonbase Alpha years before Beverly Crusher did so on Star Trek: The Next Generation. However, Dr. Russell was
the focus of complaints concerning her coldness, just as Majel Barrett’s Number One was. The series tried to combat the negative perceptions by developing the romantic ties between Russell and Comdr. John Koenig (Martin
Landau).
While careers in the sciences still seemed to be problematic for female
characters, they ﬂourished in other series where women with paranormal
powers use their abilities to ﬁght crime. Perhaps the most striking of these
crime ﬁghters is Diana Prince (Lynda Carter) of Wonder Woman (1975–79).
When Maj. Steve Trevor (Lyle Waggoner) crashes on Paradise Island, a secret
island inhabited by Amazons, he is sent back with altered memories and the
princess Diana as a champion. When she is not struggling to keep her island
from being discovered and pillaged by those who want to claim its stores of
bulletproof feminum (the material her reﬂective bracelets are made of) or
ﬁghting spies, a genetically engineered Nazi version of herself, or criminals,
she is a military aide to Trevor. She is his subordinate, essentially a secretary.
Only her secret role and persona allow her to slip the bounds of that traditional female role.
However, a live-action series with a female superhero lead took off in
the short-lived series Isis, a half-hour-long show that ran in the Saturday
morning cartoon slot and was produced as a companion series to the male
superhero series Shazam! In it, science teacher Andrea Thomas ( JoAnna
Cameron) discovers a mysterious amulet on a dig in Egypt. The amulet, once
belonging to Queen Hatshepsut, allows the bearer to summon the powers of
Isis and become, in essence, an avatar for the goddess herself. With it,
Thomas is able to ﬂy, have enhanced strength and speed, move inanimate
objects with her mind, and have rapport with animals. Each week, she saved
students (mostly) from bad decisions that put them or their friends in jeopardy, and the show would wrap up with Isis addressing the audience directly
to reinforce the moral of the story.
Like Isis, The Bionic Woman (1976–78) was a companion series, in this
case, growing from The Six Million Dollar Man. The character of Jaime Summers
(Lindsay Wagner) was introduced on the latter show in 1975, as the love interest of Steve Austin (Lee Majors). When an accident threatens her life, she is
saved and her body restored through the same bionic technology he possesses. Both legs, one arm, and her ear are mechanically enhanced, so that
she has super strength in the limbs and acute hearing in her one ear. However, Summers’s body rejected her bionic implants, something that caused
her death and exit from The Six Million Dollar Man. On television, however,
death is not always the ﬁnal curtain. Summers was saved, but at the cost of
140
................

Television
her memories of Austin, their relationship, and her need to be a part of that
series. On The Bionic Woman, she was given a fresh start and returned to her
life as a schoolteacher, which is interrupted when she is called away to go on
missions for the Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Investigations. During her missions, Jaime
faces spies and mad scientists bent on taking over the world.
As is typical in superhero stories, both Thomas and Summers have
seemingly ordinary lives and jobs outside their secret personas. Of note is the
fact that those careers are both focused on teaching children. Since both
characters are single and neither has a family to tend to, their jobs provide
them with traditional roles and surrogate children to stand in for the family
that a woman who spends her time chasing down spies, thwarting alien threats,
facing legendary foes, and saving the world from criminal masterminds is not
able to accommodate.
A
S PA C E O F H E R OW N
...........................................................................................................................................
Star Trek: Deep Space Nine (1993–99) is considered by many to be the best written, most interesting, and least conventional of the Star Trek series. It departs
from the adventure mold of the other series in the franchise and is the ﬁrst
show where the female characters in the regular cast hold positions of command. Kira Nerys (Nana Visitor), a member of the Bajoran militia, is assigned
to the space station to work with Capt. Benjamin Sisko (Avery Brooks). Lt.
Comdr. Jadzia Dax (Terry Farrell), the station’s chief science ofﬁcer, is a joined
Trill, a woman who hosts an alien symbiont that transfers the wealth of its
memories and experience from host to host.
The Trill’s host before Jadzia was male, and despite the character’s outward appearance as an attractive woman, Capt. Sisko refers to her as “Old
Man,” hearkening back to his rapport with his mentor and the Trill’s former
host, Curzon Dax. The episode “Rejoined” explores the complications inherent
in a species for which gender is a temporary condition tied to an individual
host. Lenara Kahn, the former wife of earlier host Torias Dax, comes aboard
the station. Despite the taboo that keeps Trill from becoming involved with
partners of previous hosts, Lenara and Jadzia share a moment of remembered
intimacy and a sensual same-sex kiss. Although discussion about the episode
often focuses on the kiss, far more radical than the act itself is the underlying
assumption that gender is one of the least important factors in determining
whom to love.
J. Michael Straczynski’s Babylon 5 (1994–98) ran during the same time as
Deep Space Nine and also focused on life aboard a space station. The stable
location allowed both series to develop longer and more complex story arcs
and relationships between the characters, concentrating on character development rather than exploration and adventure. One quality the female characters on both shows share is that all are struggling to reconcile contradictory
141
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

parts of their personalities. This tension often results in the female characters
experiencing isolation and ostracism as they are caught between conﬂicting
cultural norms. For example, the Mimbari ambassador Delenn (Mira Furlan)
is caught between human and Mimbari culture as she undergoes a transformation to become more human. She also experiences conﬂicts between her
culture’s priest caste afﬁliation and a role as head of the Rangers that leans
more toward the warrior caste during the Shadow War.
Comdr. Susan Ivanova (Claudia Christian), the second in command on
the Babylon 5 station, also demonstrates conﬂicting personality elements. Ivanova is presented as a capable commander with a quick tongue, hot temper,
and sharp wit. A telepath who has hidden her meager powers, Ivanova is
guarded and cautious with others, even with her close friends. Despite her
distrust of other telepaths, most of whom belong by law to the Psi Corps, a
group she holds responsible for her mother’s suicide, Ivanova eventually
becomes friendly with the station’s resident telepath Talia Winters (Andrea
Thompson). Winters also struggles with her loyalties to the rigid and ruthless
rules of the Psi Corps and her growing respect for the crew of Babylon 5.
During the “Divided Loyalties” episode, the two characters have become
friendly enough that Ivanova offers to let Winters stay in her quarters when
the telepath’s become unlivable. In one scene, Winters wakes up alone touching the empty bed and rumpled sheets beside her. Ivanova has left the room,
and the scene suggests they were sharing a bed, while leaving the level of intimacy between them deliberately ambiguous. In that same episode, Winters
proves to be a mole planted by the Psi Corps to spy on the command staff.
When the implanted persona is stripped away, her true personality emerges,
and the Winters that Ivanova (and the audience) knows is destroyed. Later in
the series, in “Ceremonies of Light and Dark,” Ivanova admits that she
believes she loved Winters during a secret telling that is part of a Mimbari
rebirth ceremony; however, she also starts a short-lived relationship with
Ranger Marcus Cole (Jason Carter), suggesting that her sexuality as well as
her telepathic talents position her outside of cultural expectations.

T
HE TRUTH IS OUT . . . WHERE?
..........................................................................................................................................
Chris Carter’s genre-blending series The X-Files (1993–2002) presents audiences
with a unique mix of science ﬁction, horror, fantasy, mystery, and thriller as
it follows the cases of a pair of FBI agents who investigate paranormal phenomena and reports of alien contact and abduction. Fox Mulder (David Duchovny), a psychologist and criminal proﬁler, believes in aliens and the
paranormal. This belief has earned him a basement ofﬁce and the derision of
his colleagues. At the beginning of the series, he is partnered with Dana
Scully (Gillian Anderson), a doctor, fellow agent, and devout skeptic. She is
convinced that rational explanations exist for everything and needs to see
142
................

Television
hard evidence before she will believe. Their personality traits subvert typically
gendered behavior by having the female character be the rational center
while the male is guided more by intuition and emotion.
This dichotomy is useful because as Mulder is convincing Scully, he is,
by extension, convincing the audience. In the series pilot, Mulder and Scully
ﬁnd a series of bumps on the skin of victims of a supposed alien abduction.
Scully sits at her laptop calmly writing case notes and dismissing Mulder’s
claims as unsubstantiated. However, later, when she is in the shower and
feels bumps on her back, she rushes to have Mulder check them out, only to
have him pronounce them bug bites.
While Scully’s intelligence, wit, and efﬁciency are admirable, she also
avoids the trap earlier female characters that possessed these traits fell into.
Unlike Number One from Star Trek, Scully is not detached and cool. She does
not have to give up warmth, passion, or caring in order to be credible as a scientist. Another thing that makes Scully compelling is that she avoids the
female action-hero role like that of Sydney Bristow (Jennifer Garner) in Alias
(2001–06). While both women are government agents who face danger
because of their work, Scully never becomes a character who runs around in
skin-tight, revealing clothing as she beats bad guys into submission or bags
the monster-of-the-week. She never crosses the line into a stock character
type or caricature and manages to close her cases through tenacity and reason rather than cunning and physical force.

O
F S L AYA G E I N S U N N Y D A L E
...........................................................................................................................................
Joss Whedon’s hit series Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1997–2003), with its hip
young cast, focus on interests and issues central to the lives of young adults,
and smart writing full of pop cultural references that resonated with audiences, earned a strong fan following. It had one spin-off series, Angel (1999–
2004), and inspired other series such as Roswell (1999), Smallville (2001–present),
Supernatural (2005–present), and Point Pleasant (2005) that tried to appeal to the
same audience.
Buffy the television series was a sequel to the 1980s ﬁlm of the same
name. The ﬁlm was a campy romp that pitted cheerleader, mall crawler, and
Valley girl Buffy Summers (Kristy Swanson) against a vampire (Rutger Hauer),
who in the climactic ﬁnal battle crashes her prom with his horde of undead
minions and has to be put down by the reluctant Slayer. The television series
begins after the events of the ﬁlm, with Buffy and her mother relocating to
Sunnydale for a fresh start, something that is hard to come by when one is
the Slayer living in a town that sits over the Hellmouth, a focus of evil energies. The new Buffy (Sarah Michelle Gellar) is smarter, wittier, and a good deal
darker than the original. As a transfer student, Slayer, and typical adolescent,
she does not feel she ﬁts in and is reluctant to let other people get close to
143
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

her because of her Slayer status and the chance that it would endanger them.
Unlike the typical “damsel in distress” who is menaced by monsters and
depends on a male hero to save her, Buffy is not only more than capable of
looking after herself, but she also winds up saving (or ﬁghting very hard to
save) others.
Like most young heroes, Buffy is left without the support of a biological
family. Her parents are not together, and her mother dies early in the series.
However, she does not become a loner; instead, a tight group of friends,
including her closest friends Willow Rosenberg (Alyson Hannigan), Alexander
“Xander” Harris (Nicholas Brendon), and their eventual signiﬁcant others,
forms around Buffy and helps her ﬁght the forces of darkness. This group,
called “the Scoobies” after the teen sleuths from the cartoon series Scooby Doo,
becomes a surrogate family for Buffy. Plots showing Buffy and her friends
ﬁghting evil are entwined with conﬂicts relating to high school politics, the
struggles that teens go through during the transition between high school
and college, sexuality, dating, and maintaining relationships.
In “Chosen,” the ﬁnal episode of the series, the climactic ﬁnal battle at
the Hellmouth drew both praise and censure. When Buffy awakens the
potential to become Slayers in hundreds of other girls, many read this as a
message of empowerment, emphasizing that talents and strengths just waiting to be realized exist inside all women. However, critics are quick to point
out that the ability to access these powers is not something the girls can
achieve through their own agency. It is a gift that has to be bestowed by
another. The nature of the gift is also questionable, as we look at Buffy’s life
over the course of the series. Yes, she has supernatural abilities, but overall,
they end up causing her grief. She loses her mother and is never able to
maintain a lasting romantic relationship, a collegiate career, or a steady job.
Her potential and power seem to come at a high cost: the chance to have a
life of her own.

T
HE POWER OF THREE
..........................................................................................................................................
One of the series that sprang up during the Buffy years was Charmed (1998–
2006). The show became the longest-running series with all female leads, a
spot formerly held by the sitcom Laverne and Shirley. The series focuses on the
lives of the Halliwell sisters, who reunite when the youngest, Phoebe (Alyssa
Milano), comes home to live with her two older sisters, Prue (Shannen Doherty) and Piper (Holly Marie Combs), several months after their grandmother
dies. The sisters inherit Gram’s house, including her Book of Shadows, which
Phoebe uses to awaken the sisters’ magical powers. Prue can move objects
with her mind; Piper can freeze time; and Phoebe has premonitions about the
future. As the series continues, the sisters’ powers and personalities grow and
develop. Together, the sisters form the Charmed Ones, a closely linked trinity
144
................

Television
of powerful good witches. When Prue is killed, half-sister Paige Matthews
(Rose McGowan), who also has a telekinetic power similar to Prue’s, is discovered to keep the Charmed Ones group intact.
The thing that makes Charmed so charming is the characters themselves, who mature and develop over the course of the series. The magical
conﬂicts and crises in the stories always play out against the complicated
relationships between the sisters. For example, in “Dead Man Dating,” Phoebe
exposes her power to normal humans when she works as a psychic in order
to make money for a birthday present for Prue. As the sisters face mystical
menaces, defeat demons, cope with forbidden romances, and create (and
resolve) magical mischief, their powers and their relationships with each
other are tested just as surely as they are while they struggle to keep their
powers secret and maintain their nonmagical careers.

B
AT T L I N G O N
...........................................................................................................................................
Unlike Star Trek, where the roles of women gained more prominence in subsequent series but not without reinforcing stereotypical gendered behavior and
roles, Battlestar Galactica’s reinvention was markedly different. While the
original series (1978–79) featured three female regulars among the cast, the
show itself focused on the military men of the Galactica and the male buddy
relationship between the overly earnest Captain Apollo (Richard Hatch) and
cigar-smoking, womanizing Lieutenant Starbuck (Dirk Benedict), two of the
ﬁghter pilots on the Galactica. The women, not surprisingly, were the love interests of the male leads. Cassiopeia (Laurette Spang), a former prostitute with a
heart of gold, becomes attached to Starbuck. Serena (Jane Seymour), Apollo’s
, dies and leaves her son in his care, and Sheba (Anne Lockhart),
ill-fated ﬁance
the daughter of the legendary Commander Cain of the Battlestar Pegasus, joins
forces with Galactica’s ﬂeet after her father and his ship are lost in a suicide
mission. While Sheba is presented as a capable pilot, making her kin to the
other working women of the 1970s, most of the other women are little more
than pleasant (or shrewish) distractions.
In its new incarnation, Battlestar Galactica (2003–present) shifts tone and
focus from a campy adventure show to something darker, grittier, and far
more sophisticated. The male buddy relationship of the original series was
lost when Starbuck, the cigar-smoking, card-playing playboy, got a promotion
and a sex change; the new show features Capt. Kara “Starbuck” Thrace
(Katee Sackhoff), a decision that drew protests from the actor who originated
the role. Kara was engaged to Comdr. William Adama’s younger son Zach and
feels responsible for his death. This guilt strains the relationship between her
and his older brother Lee “Apollo” Adama (Jamie Bamber) and breaks the
typical buddy chain. In another indication that this is reimagining of the original series rather than a reproduction of it, another male pilot, Boomer,
145
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

became Lt. Sharon “Boomer” Valerii (Grace Park). The integration of women
into the ranks of the Viper pilots is doubtless due to the rise of women in
military combat roles in our own world.
Another series that reverses gender expectations is Xena: Warrior
Princess (1995–2001). Xena (Lucy Lawless) made her ﬁrst appearance in 1995
on The Legendary Adventures of Hercules (1994–99), where she was one of the
foes of Hercules (Kevin Sorbo). As was the case with Jaime Summers on The
Six Million Dollar Man, the character of Xena, after she was revised and edited,
became so popular with fans that she earned her own series, which eventually eclipsed the popularity of the show that spawned it. In Xena: Warrior Princess,
Xena is a female action hero who is seeking redemption for her past sins. She
e O’Connor),
is joined on this quest and on her adventures by Gabrielle (Rene
a village girl who becomes fascinated with the warrior princess and joins her
as a companion.
The Hercules series centered on the male buddy relationship typical of
action movies; the main hero has a best friend/sidekick, Iolas (Michael Hurst),
who plays a supporting role in their adventures and often provides comic
relief. Similarly, Xena has her Gabrielle. But while the homosocial bonds that
exist between the characters in male buddy relationships are carefully constructed and controlled so that they do not become overly affectionate or intimate and develop into homosexual desire, the same cannot be said for this
female buddy pair.
In the second part of “Friend in Need,” the last episode of the series,
Xena allows herself to be killed because she needs to be dead in order to be
able to ﬁght a dead villain. She does this believing Gabrielle will bring her
back to life by dropping her ashes in a magic pool. However, when Xena ﬁnds
that she needs to stay dead in order for the souls of the departed to truly
remain at rest, she stops Gabrielle from returning her to life. This decision
results in a tearful declaration of love from Gabrielle who uses the language
of a bereft lover who cannot go on without her beloved. Xena insists Gabrielle’s adventures are not yet done and stresses that she will always be with
her. The female relationship allows for this intimacy to be expressed and for
love to be articulated; however, the relationship itself is not allowed to continue because of Xena’s death.
C
ONCLUSION
..........................................................................................................................................
Women in fantastical television series share one feature that is different from
their male counterparts: they are expected to reconcile their power with the
traditional roles that have been expected of them by society. They grapple
with the bonds of family, emotional intimacy, commitment, and purpose:
issues that generally do not plague their male counterparts. In essence, they
have always done double duty: ﬁghting against the forces of gendered
146
................

Television
assumptions about their proper roles and ﬁghting for the ideals and people
they cherish.
See also chapters 11, 12, and 18.
Further Readings
Delasara, Jan. PopLit, PopCult, and the X-Files: A Critical Exploration. Jefferson, NC: McFarland,
2000.
Early, Frances, and Kathleen Kennedy. Athena’s Daughters: Television’s New Women Warriors.
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2003.
Ginn, Sherry. Our Space, Our Place: Women in the Worlds of Science Fiction Television. Lanham,
MD: University Press of America, 2005.
Gwenllian-Jones, Sara, and Roberta E. Pearson. Cult Television. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2004.
Heinecken, Dawn. The Warrior Women of Television: A Feminist Cultural Analysis of the New
Female Body in Popular Media. New York: Peter Lang, 2003.
Helford, Elyce Rae. Fantasy Girls: Gender in the New Universe of Science Fiction and Fantasy Television. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2000.
Jowett, Lorna. Sex and the Slayer: A Gender Studies Primer for the Buffy Fan. Middletown, CT:
Wesleyan University Press, 2005.
Lancaster, Kurt. Interacting with Babylon 5: Fan Performance in a Media Universe. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2001.
Stafford, Nikki. How Xena Changed Our Lives: True Stories by Fans for Fans. Toronto: ECW
Press, 2002.
Wilcox, Rhonda V., and David Lavery. Fighting the Forces: What’s at Stake in Buffy the Vampire Slayer. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2002.

147
................

15

Music: Twentieth Century
BARBARA LYNN LUCAS

MUSIC and the fantastic have a long and complex relationship. The incredible
scope of the genre is reﬂected in the music associated with it, music that can
range from cool electronica to soaring orchestral epics. Works that reference
it include everything from opera, which is typically more associated with high
culture than popular culture, to decidedly pop cultural ﬁlk, which grew out of
science ﬁction fandom and fan culture. The role women play in the music is
one that will grow as their ability to be recognized as performers and creators
also grows. This chapter brieﬂy covers the historical views of music and performance and then moves to discuss women in science ﬁction music, from
mystical muses to dark divas to soulful sirens.

HISTORICAL VIEWS
...............................................................................................................................
Historically, the major composers and creators writing women were mostly, if
not exclusively, male. In ancient Greek drama, the chorus often communicated through chanting or song. Most often, they provided commentary on
the action of the play itself and its impact on the characters, and the chorus
or its leader would often directly address the actors or the audience. One of
the more active and interesting choruses of mythical women were those in
Aeschylus’s play “The Euminides,” the last of his Orestia trilogy, which also
consists of “Agamemnon” and “The Libation Bearers.”
In order to obtain good winds for his ﬂeet when they are setting off in
their campaign to reclaim Helen from Troy, Agamemnon sacriﬁces his daughter Iphigenia. When he returns triumphant from his campaign, his wife, Clytemnestra, slays him. She is, in turn, slain by her son Orestes at the urging of
his sister Electra and the god Apollo. This spilling of kindred blood summons
the Furies, goddesses of vengeance, who start pursuing Orestes. At the opening of “The Euminides,” Orestes has taken refuge in the temple of Apollo, but
148
................

Music
the god cannot call off the Furies, who are the chorus in this play. The action
of the play involves Orestes’ trial for murder, with the Furies acting as his
prosecutors and would-be executioners.
In the Renaissance theater, female characters were played by young
men, since women were prohibited from performing on stage. However, those
same restrictions did not apply to noblewomen, who performed in Renaissance masques, lavish entertainments staged by and for nobles. Masques
were often performed at manor houses for visiting dignitaries or in association with marriages or processions. The budget for these entertainments was
as grandiose as the costumes and sets, not to mention the cost of hiring
musicians, playwrights, and composers. The nobles participating often found
themselves playing parts as gods or personiﬁcations of virtues in allegorical
tales. The purpose of the entertainment was most often to ﬂatter and praise
the host or the guests for whom the masque was staged.
Opera shares many traits with the Renaissance masque. Both were
entertainments for the elite, though opera was more for the wealthy than
simply for the nobility and was less focused on conveying direct praise toward
an individual. Still, the action of the opera, as in the masque, created a series
of visual and musical tableaux through lavish sets and costumes, dance, and
song supported by an orchestra. The plot of an opera unwinds in recitative
songs, while the more lyrical and melodic arias are the expressive showcases
for individual characters. Group song or the chorus provides comment on
action, like the chorus in Greek drama.
Many operas incorporate enduring mythic and legendary tales, tales
that resonate beyond opera itself. For example, Richard Wagner’s epic Der Ring
des Nibelungen (The Ring of the Nibelung) consists of four operas: Das Rheingold
€ re (“The Valkyries,” 1870), Siegfried (1871),
(“The Rhine Gold,” 1869), Die Walku
€mmerung (“Twilight of the Gods,” 1874). The story follows the forgand G€otterda
ing of a golden ring that ends up destroying the lives of the mortals and gods
who become entangled in its curse. From the Rhinemaidens who guard the
mystical gold from which the ring was forged to the cursed Valkyrie
€ nnhilde to the goddesses in Valhalla, female characters play major roles
Bru
in the plot. Elements of the tale of the Nibelungen, a Germanic legend, obviously had an impact on J. R. R. Tolkien’s epic fantasy The Lord of the Rings
(1954–55).
€nder (“The Flying Dutchman,”
Another Wagner opera, Der ﬂiegende Holla
1843), draws on the legend of a ship captain who breaks an oath and is condemned to sail the seas until Judgment Day. Once every seven years, he can
walk on land and try to ﬁnd a woman who will be true to him. When he abandons the beautiful Senta because he believes her false, she throws herself into
the sea to prove herself faithful until death, and her love and death redeems
him. The inﬂuence of this legend is clear in Disney’s popular Pirates of the
149
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Caribbean ﬁlms (2003–07), especially the last two, Dead Man’s Chest (2006) and
At World’s End (2007).
The fantastical still enjoys considerable success in the contemporary
musical theater. While not all ventures have fantastical themes, many of the
shows that have been most popular do. Andrew Lloyd Webber’s The Phantom
of the Opera (1986), based on the Gaston Leroux novel of the same name, follows the dark and obsessive love that a deformed genius who lives beneath
the Paris Opera House has for a stunning young soprano. Wicked (2003), based
on the Gregory Maguire novel Wicked: The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of
the West (1995), looks at the relationship between two witches, Elphaba and
Glinda, who meet at a school for magic, become rivals and then unlikely
friends, and then develop into foes as the Wicked Witch of the West and Good
Witch of the North from L. Frank Baum’s The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900).
Multiple award-winning American composer Stephen Sondheim took
Bruno Bettelheim’s nonﬁction work The Uses of Enchantment (1976) as his inspiration for the musical Into the Woods (1986). The musical explores the consequences of the decisions made in various fairy tales (including “Cinderella,”
“Little Red Riding Hood,” “Rapunzel,” and “Jack and the Beanstalk”), framed by
an original tale of a baker and his wife that pulls them all together. It stands
in contrast to Sondheim’s darker Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street
(1979; Tim Burton ﬁlm released in 2007), where a man falsely imprisoned
returns to take vengeance on the corrupt judge who destroyed his life and
family. His quest for revenge leads to a boom in business for his landlady and
would-be lover, Mrs. Lovett, who disposes of his victims in her wildly popular
meat pies.
MYSTICAL MUSES
...............................................................................................................................
Celtic music enjoys considerable international popularity. The appeal of this
sort of music is shown by the successes of Michael Flatley’s The Lord of the
Dance and Riverdance performances and the tours by Celtic Woman and
 na, two groups that combine traditional songs with more contemporary
Anu
tunes like “Somewhere over the Rainbow” performed with Celtic stylings. As a
genre, Celtic music tends to take traditional songs, myths, and legends from
the British Isles (and others with similar themes from across the globe), and
give them a new vitality though the use of more contemporary instruments
or soundscapes.
Loreena McKennitt

Canadian singer/songwriter Loreena McKennitt’s attraction to Celtic music
led her to incorporate the history, literature, myths, and legends of the British
Isles into her music. While much of her music makes use of Celtic rhythms,
melodies, and myths, her later albums have branched out to tap into more
150
................

Music
global legends and have made her a best-seller in countries as diverse as Turkey and New Zealand. Her ﬁrst album to have major success in the United
States was the multiplatinum The Book of Secrets (1997). McKennitt manages
her own career through her own record label, Quinlan Road.
McKennitt’s interest in British literature can be seen in performances
and music scored for the Stratford Festival of Canada’s production of Shakespearean drama. Her studio albums also reﬂect this trend. The Visit (1991)
contains a musical version of Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s poem “The Lady of
Shalott” (1842), whose charmed and doomed story has been captured in three
famous paintings by J. W. Waterhouse. The Book of Secrets (2006) contains a version of Alfred Noyes’s “The Highwayman” (1906) about doomed lovers whose
ghosts haunt the moors. An Ancient Muse (2006) features another tale of
doomed love from Sir Walter Scott’s poem “The English Ladye and the
Knight.”
Blackmore’s Night

Many people are more familiar with British rocker Ritchie Blackmore’s complex and scintillating guitar riffs as the lead guitarist for Deep Purple than
they are with the Renaissance-inspired songs he produces with his musical
and romantic partner Candice Night. Their folk-ﬂavored work as Blackmore’s
Night, a play on their names, is likely to ﬁnd the duo dressed in period garb
performing at Renaissance fairs or European castles rather than sold-out arenas. Even though the group’s music tends toward the acoustical, the guitar
work is complex and often draws as much attention as Night’s clear voice.
The duo’s debut album Shadow of the Moon (1997) evoked a bygone world
of legend and myth in songs like “Magical World” and “Renaissance Faire,”
while also incorporating the haunted tale of loss and longing in “Ocean
Gypsy.” Under a Violet Moon (1999) continues that trend in the title song and
“Castles and Dreams,” the texture of each evoking the modes and melodies of
the past. While the duo still focuses on the lyrical and romance of the Renaissance, their music has developed a slightly more folk-rock edge.
Mediæval Bæbes

The Mediæval Bæbes were formed from the demise of British madrigalinspired group Miranda Sex Garden. Katherine Blake, along with several other
members of the former group and their friends, formed the Bæbes, whose
membership ﬂuctuates from album to album. Blake remains at the core of
the group, and their music incorporates traditional medieval songs and poetry
set to music, as well as some original compositions. The group performs in
languages that range from those spoken in the British Isles to Russian,
French, and Italian, allowing them to tap into the traditions and legends of
those other countries and to broaden the scope and appeal of their music.
151
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Some of the group’s songs are performed a capella (no musical accompaniment); others are supported by medieval and modern instruments.

Enya

 in) was surrounded by
Irish performer Enya (born Eithne Patricia Ni Bhraona
music her entire life. Performers have been part of her family for several generations. Before embarking on the solo career that has made her an international sensation and Ireland’s best-selling solo artist, she performed with her
siblings and uncles in the band Clannad. Enya’s blend of Celtic lyrics, motifs,
and harmonies with synthesized music, most of which she performs herself,
gives classical songs a contemporary and dreamy feeling. She performs all
vocals in her music, the lead vocals as well as the richly textured chorus of
supporting voices. Each vocal is recorded individually and then layered together to create the background vocals. While many of Enya’s songs are sung
in English, she has also recorded works entirely in Irish and Latin. Other songs
also include lyrics in Welsh, French, Spanish, and Japanese.
Long before being nominated for an Academy Award for songwriting
for her work on Peter Jackson’s Lord of the Rings trilogy, Enya’s music was featured on soundtracks from ﬁlms like L.A. Story (1991), Toys (1992), Green Card
(1990), and Far and Away (1992). She composed songs for The Fellowship of the
Ring (2001), including “May It Be,” which she sang in both English and Tolkien’s Elvish tongue Quenya. She also performed “Aniron,” a song that played
behind a tender moment between Aragorn and Arwen in Rivendell, in the Sindarin dialect of Elvish. However, the inﬂuence of Tolkien on her work can be
seen prior to this in the instrumental piece “Lothlorien,” which can be found
on her album Shepherd Moons (1991).
After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, Enya’s song “Only Time” from A Day without Rain (2000) was used
behind many of the photographic and sound-bite montages that accompanied
the reporting on the tragedy, and a special edition of the song was released to
raise funds for the families of the victims.

DA R K D I VA S
...............................................................................................................................
While Celtic music has a darker side due to the gloom of the haunted moors
and the curses that hang over doomed lovers, the more acoustical or synthesized sounds of the songs keep these motifs from becoming truly oppressive
or from tapping into veins of deep anger, sorrow, despair, and lust. The same
cannot be said for bands that combine the crashing sound and raw edge of
metal with dark passions and desires.
152
................

Music
Evanescence

Grammy Award–winning alternative rock band Evanescence dominated the
charts after the release of their album Fallen (2003), which earned the group
Grammies for best hard rock performance and best new artist. The album’s
major hits, “Bring Me to Life” and “My Immortal,” were featured on the soundtrack for the Ben Afﬂeck superhero ﬁlm Daredevil (2003). The band was
formed in Little Rock, Arkansas, by lead singer Amy Lee and guitarist Ben
Moody (who has since left the band) and several of their friends. The hardrocking guitar work and percussion in the band’s music is complemented by
Lee’s powerful vocals, which dominate the songs that look at obsessions and
fantasies.
In “Bring Me to Life” (with guest vocals from Paul McCoy of 12 Stones),
the singer is longing for escape from the existence that has trapped and is
suffocating her. The song makes an appeal not unlike one that a statue might
have made if she could call out to her Pygmalion to shape her and breathe
life into her. “My Immortal” loses the driving guitar for a piano-supported,
mournful song of a lover haunted by loss and tormented by lingering
memory.
The Open Door (2006) did not enjoy the same popularity as Fallen. The
music and vocals have a harder, more discordant edge, but many of the same
preoccupations remain. In “Imaginary” (also from Fallen) there is a juxtaposition of banality of waking world and richness and refuge offered by an inner
life incompatible with that world. The chilling “Snow White Queen” is almost
the mirror image of “Bring Me to Life,” where obsessive and possessive love
leads to a trap that dooms the object of the speaker’s twisted affection.

Nightwish

Finnish symphonic metal band Nightwish was formed in 1996. While they
enjoyed popularity in their home country immediately, it took time for the
group formed by Tuomas Holopainen to gain an international following. The
band’s membership has changed over their career, the most signiﬁcant
change occurring when original member and lead singer Tarja Turunen was
replaced by Anette Olzon for the band’s most recent album, Dark Passion Play
(2007).
Their style of music has some similarities with Evanescence in that
they have a haunting female singer whose powerful, soaring vocals lead the
hard guitar and backing. However, unlike Evanescence, Nightwish also uses a
background orchestra to give their music a classical and epic texture, something that complements the more operatic vocals of Turunen. The group’s
music blends not only musical genres and styles but also myths, legends, and
motifs from a variety of sources.
153
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Their album Wishmaster (2000) includes several songs with strong fantasy roots. “Fantasmic,” with its narrative transitions and reference to the famous “Night on Bald Mountain” segment in the Disney ﬁlm Fantasia (1940),
moves from bright, hopeful fairy tales to decidedly darker stories. The title
song “Wishmaster” makes a connection between sorcery and storytelling,
both talents that are passed down from master to apprentice, while
“Crownless” plays on the line from a poem in Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings
that states that “The Crownless again shall be king.”
Century Child (2002) plays with the ideas of the vitality and passion of innocence and enduring numbness of experience in “Bless the Child” and “End of All
Hope” and includes a metal-infused version of “The Phantom of the Opera” from
the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical. In a somewhat more gentle interlude, the
singer in “Ocean Soul” haunts the seashore, and her desire to become joined
with the waves evokes Hans Christian Anderson’s Little Mermaid, where the
bodies of the merfolk become foam on the waves when they die.
SOULFUL SIRENS
...............................................................................................................................
Popular music spans genres from synth-pop dance songs to bluesy ballads,
from rock-and-roll anthems to alternative songs that snare widespread
appeal. Because the lyrics, performance, and soundscape of a pop song have
to appeal to a large and diverse audience, the performers whose work falls
into this category do not use the tropes of the fantastic as often as those
whose work is targeted toward a more niche market. After all, science ﬁction
is a marginalized genre, and many of its motifs are perceived as geeky and
uncool to those outside the science ﬁction subculture.
Multi–Grammy Award–winning Canadian singer/songwriter Sarah
McLachlan is one musician who taps into rich veins of myth and legend. In
her hit album Surfacing (1997), her delicate, slightly raspy vocals soar in
“Angel,” a meditation on suicide that speculates on the peace that might be
found in the embrace of death. In “Building a Mystery,” the speaker addresses
a man who ﬁts into the mold of the demon lover, making a mystery of the
man who is at once child, warrior, vampire, god, and lover and suggesting
that he is doing the same to her. The invocation of the surreal can be seen in
her earlier works as well. For example, in the album Touch (1989), her song
“Strange World” looks at lovers who are clinging to the shell of a dead relationship in a landscape turned surreal, where everything is out of place.
€ rn Ulvaeus,
Swedish dance music quartet ABBA—Benny Andersson, Bjo
€ ltskog, and Anni-Frid “Frida” Lyngstad—might be best known for
Agnetha Fa
€ ltskog
their dancy disco sound and the harmonic vocals of main singers Fa
and Lyngstad. However, their album Super Trooper (1980) included “The Piper,”
a song clearly inspired by the tale of the Pied Piper of Hamlin, where a traveling musician attracts a rapt following that ends up dancing in the moonlight
154
................

Music
to his enthralling tunes. Their hopeful “I Have a Dream” from ABBA: The Deﬁnitive Collection (2001) stresses the importance of believing in the wondrous and
fantastical.
Although the sorts of fantasies that pop diva Madonna conjures might
trend toward the kinky and sexual, she also delves into a world of mermaids,
fountains of youth, leprechauns, and magic lanterns in “Dear Jessie” from her
hit album Like a Prayer (1998). In a powerful song from Ray of Light (1998), the
deﬁnitely watery-sounding music of “Mer Girl” evokes a submerged world
where a woman is both searching for identity and terriﬁed of ﬁnding it. She is
haunted by her own life in a world that has become surreal. Neither song,
however, enjoyed the commercial success of the pop tunes most associated
with the Material Girl.
American singer/songwriter Tori Amos (born Myra Ellen Amos) creates
surreal musical soundscapes and landscapes like the one in “Raining Blood”
from Strange Little Girls (2001), which details an apocalyptic vision where the
speaker is both judge and the person being judged. References to the fantastical are found in songs such as “A Sorta Fairytale” from Scarlet’s Walk (2002)
and “Pandora’s Aquarium” on From the Choirgirl Hotel (1998). However, science
ﬁction fans do not have to be familiar with Amos’s music in order to be familiar with her. Amos is a close friend of writer Neil Gaiman, and she references
him and his work in several of her songs. Gaiman is rumored to have based
his character Delirium, one of the Endless from the Sandman series, on the
quirky performer.
“Edgy” and “surreal” might be two adjectives to describe Scottish
singer/songwriter Annie Lennox, frontwoman for the 1980s band the Eurythmics and later successful solo artist in her own right. Like Enya, Lennox was
asked to contribute to Peter Jackson’s Lord of the Rings trilogy. Her rich, smoky
vocals are featured in “Into the West” from The Return of the King (2003), a song
that echoed the powerful sense of all things having their own time and then
passing that was a major theme in the ﬁlm.
British singer/songwriter Kate Bush’s musical career has spanned decades and genres. Her music is difﬁcult to classify as it cuts across and incorporates elements from many genres. One consistent element, though, is the fact
that many of her songs are inspired by literature and ﬁlm. Horror ﬁlm comes
into play in “Get Out of My House,” inspired by Stanley Kubrick’s ﬁlm adaptation of the Stephen King novel The Shining, and “Hounds of Love” was inspired
by the 1950s horror movie Night of the Demon. Bush nods to other classic horror ﬁlms in “Hammer Horror.” Additional references are heard in “In Search of
Peter Pan” from the classic J. M. Barrie novel and in “Wuthering Heights” from
€ novel. Bush’s work has been featured in a number of ﬁlms.
the Emily Bronte
Most recently, her song “Lyra” was featured in the closing credits of The Golden
Compass, the 2007 movie adaptation of the ﬁrst book in Philip Pullman’s His
Dark Materials trilogy.
155
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

FA NS AN D FILK
...............................................................................................................................
Filking is a type of folksinging performed by (and largely for) science ﬁction
fans, often at conventions or other fan gatherings. While some ﬁlk songs
focus on speciﬁc worlds from the ﬁlm, television, and literature of the genre,
others simply pull from general fantastical motifs. For example, Gwen Knighton’s “Like Their Feet Have Wings” is about the singer’s brush with fairy rings
and magical dancing in Tennessee. It is more a reference to tropes common
to fairy stories than to any particular tale. Similarly, Jeff and Maya Bohnoff’s
“Knights in White Satin” evokes both the Moody Blues song of unrequited love
“Nights in White Satin” and the courtly tales of knights and their ladies as it
focuses on a warrior who is as devoted to his princess as he is to the gowns in
her wardrobe.
Like writers of fan ﬁction who appropriate the stories and characters
from their favorite movies, television, and texts and craft new stories from
them, ﬁlkers use those same source texts and turn them into songs. These
songs can ﬁll in gaps in the source narrative or provide the opportunity for
the events in a source text to be seen from the perspective of a minor character. They can also allow for a deeper exploration of the thoughts and feelings
of character that are not revealed in the source text. For example, “A Thousand Ships,” from German writing partners Katy Droege-Macdonald (music)
and Juliane Honisch (lyrics), provides a perspective on the battle that
destroyed Troy from Helen’s perspective.
Unlike literary texts, ﬁlms and television often do not allow characters
the luxury of introspection, something a ﬁlk song can provide. For example,
Julia Ecklar’s “Ladyhawke” unfolds as a dramatic monologue and commentary
on the action of the ﬁlm of the same name from the point of view of Phillipe
Gaston. Canadian ﬁlk trio Urban Tapestry (Allison Durno, Jodi Krangle, and
Debbie Ridpath) allows Gabrielle to express what her life was like before
meeting Xena and how it changed afterward in “Battle On!”
While fan ﬁction maintains a close relationship to the source narrative
it is based on, ﬁlk songs are more adaptive, many of them commenting on
the experience of being a fan. Among fan ﬁction writers and fans who simply
read but do not write ﬁction, this commentary on fandom itself takes the
form of “meta” posts, nonﬁction writing by fans about fandom.
Urban Tapestry has several songs that ﬁt into this category. In “Waiting
on Frodo,” the singer is waiting, very impatiently, for Jackson’s Lord of the Rings
movies. She is well aware of the fact that her friends, who clearly are not fans
themselves, think her behavior is odd and hope her fascination will pass. In
“The Truth Is Out There,” an exasperated wife documents her husband’s obsession with the X-Files as he shuts out the rest of the world for his hour of
happiness that would arrive every Sunday night when new episodes aired; during the rest of the week, he would pine for his lovely Scully, worry that people
156
................

Music
were out to get him, and begin to believe his friends have been replaced by aliens. Dr. Mary Crowell’s sexy, bluesy “Legolas” is an homage to the Tolkien elf,
which includes rapt admiration for how skillfully he handles his bow.
In addition to programming slots at science ﬁction conventions, ﬁlking
has its own set of awards, the Pegasus Awards, which are presented annually
at the Ohio Valley Filk Fest (OVFF). Like other awards, the Pegasus recognizes
excellence in the genre. Its award categories are Best Song, Best Classic Filk
Song, Best Performer, and Best Writer/Composer. In addition, two additional
topical categories, varying from year to year, receive awards. These have
included Best Parody, Best Fannish Song, Best Love Song, Best Space Opera
Song, and Best Humorous Filksong.
M
U S I C A L LY I N C L I N E D
..............................................................................................................................
Describing the music associated with science ﬁction, fantasy, and horror is no
easy task. The genre encompasses a diverse set of tropes and motifs, and the
music that draws on it for inspiration follows suit. It includes the orchestral
splendor of opera, the hard-driving guitar and percussion of heavy metal, and
the effervescence of pop and rock. One of the only consistent things about
science ﬁction–inspired music is that it tends to be international, the soundscapes and motifs of the music cutting across geographic borders in their
appeal, rather like the magical song created by the protagonist in Emma
Bull’s musically driven urban fantasy War for the Oaks (1987): “The song was
free.… It ﬁlled everything with its roaring, it pushed the walls down around
them and the walls for as far as thought could range” (317).

Further Readings
Bernstein, Jane A., ed. Women’s Voices across Musical Worlds. Boston: Northeastern University
Press, 2003.
Bowers, Jane, and Judith Tick, eds. Women Making Music: The Western Art Tradition, 1150–
1950. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1987.
Citron, Marcia J. Gender and the Musical Canon. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2000.
Hayward, Philip, ed. Off the Planet: Music, Sound and Science Fiction Cinema. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004.
Jezic, Diane Peacock, and Elizabeth Wood. Women Composers: The Lost Tradition Found. New
York: Feminist Press, 1993.
Koskoff, Ellen, ed. Women and Music in Cross-Cultural Perspective. Champaign: University of
Illinois Press, 1989.
McClary, Susan. Feminine Endings: Music, Gender, and Sexuality. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2002.
Neuls-Bates, Carol, ed. Women in Music: An Anthology of Source Readings from the Middle Ages
to the Present. Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1995.
O’Brien, Lucy. She Bop 2: The Deﬁnitive History of Women in Rock, Pop and Soul. New York: Continuum International, 2004.
157
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Ohio Valley Filk Fest. The Pegasus Awards for Excellence in Filking [online]. Http://www.
ovff.org/pegasus.html.
Pendle, Karin, ed. Women and Music: A History. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2001.
Sadie, Julie Anne, and Rhian Samuel, eds. The Norton/Grove Dictionary of Women Composers.
London: MacMillan, 1995.
Solie, Ruth A., ed. Musicology and Difference: Gender and Sexuality in Music Scholarship. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995.
Whiteley, Sheila. Women and Popular Music: Sexuality, Identity and Subjectivity. New York:
Routledge, 2000.

158
................

16

Gaming
LAURIE N. TAYLOR

VIDEO games grow out of the many traditions established in card games,
board games, tabletop role-playing games, sports games, and parlor games.
Video games speciﬁcally developed out of improvements in computer science
combined with the larger history of gaming and play. Since their inception,
video games have remained tied to developments in computer science and
the U.S. military. The military uses games for training and simulations, which
means that games also beneﬁt from the military’s work. As game development evolved, games also became increasingly connected to personal computers (PCs), the Internet, new console and portable game system
development, and other media forms such as comic books and ﬁlm. Now
games are a transmedial form, crossing into all other media and into nonentertainment forms by operating as political, military, educational, and business applications.
Gaming’s history and potential future are also tied to science ﬁction
and fantasy because of the reciprocal inﬂuence of science ﬁction and fantasy
on games. Many early games were based in science ﬁction and fantasy
worlds, or drew on tropes from these genres, and many games subsequently
informed other science ﬁction and fantasy works. Gaming’s relationship to
science ﬁction and fantasy is shown through the history of gaming as well as
through gaming’s own genres and developments.
The history of gaming itself also connects to the history of play. Play is
normally deﬁned as an entertaining activity without rules or without a winning state. Video games, like other game forms, normally have more formalized rules, and a winning condition. However, many video games do not have
a winning event. These games are often simulations, where the manipulation
of variables offers play, as in The Sims, which is essentially a virtual dollhouse
game. Because games like The Sims do not have a winning event, they are not
games in the strict sense, nor are they equivalent to the completely open
159
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

arena of play. Furthermore, even video games with strict rules and winning
events—like racing or ﬁghting games—also operate within the sphere of play
when the games are played as part of a group activity of play. Multiplayer
games immediately open into multiple spheres of play, as do many singleplayer games because players play the games with friends or within the context of larger play communities.
Video games draw on the history not only of games themselves but also
of games and play as represented in other media. For instance, games and
play have inﬂuenced literature and have reciprocally inﬂuenced games
through narratives like Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, the Harry Potter novels, and Ender’s Game. Because video games are transmedial, operating based
on existing forms and works and then inﬂuencing existing forms and works,
their history clariﬁes some of the transmedial connections.

GAME HISTORY
...............................................................................................................................
Because video games fuse games and play along with multiple media types
with text, narrative, video, audio, and interaction, exact deﬁnitions prove difﬁcult. Video games are generally deﬁned as games played entirely using an electronic device. Video games began on computers, with the earliest games
dating back to the 1940s. Despite this long history, video games developed
slowly at ﬁrst, with the ﬁrst commercial game releases coming in the 1970s.
Gaming history began as a diverse ﬁeld, with arcade games, computer
games, and console games. More recently, handheld dedicated game systems
like the Game Boy and Sony PlayStation Portable, alternate reality games
(ARGs), games on cell phones and personal data assistants (PDAs), and others
have entered the gaming market. The three primary gaming forms are console gaming, computer gaming, and mobile gaming. Console gaming refers to
game systems that can be played by connecting the system to a television.
Mobile gaming encompasses handheld game systems, PDA gaming, and cell
phone gaming. Alternate reality gaming fuses multiple gaming structures, and
so ARGs often blend two or more of the three primary gaming platform categories. Gaming’s history ties these different platforms together and then further divides each into the commercial apparatus for the game. Games are
then also divided by their game play styles and by genres.
The history of gaming platforms shaped much of gaming as certain
developers and trends emerged that were more powerful and inﬂuential for
gaming. By the 1980s, console gaming boomed with the home Atari system
and busted with the gaming market crash. Nintendo then released its Nintendo Entertainment System, which revolutionized gaming as a form and as a
market. Nintendo’s emergence was signiﬁcant because Nintendo is a Japanese company, so its games were often based on stories, genres, and aesthetics that were less familiar to a world audience. Computer games were
160
................

Gaming
developed largely in the United States and Europe and offered different game
styles. After Nintendo’s release in the world market, several major corporations entered the console gaming hardware market in the years that followed,
including Sega, Sony, and Microsoft. While these four represented the primary
console developers, many others also entered and left the console market.
Because the console market has been so tightly controlled by only a
few central companies, the console differences are often referenced as the
“console wars.” This term is useful because it also explains how certain game
play styles and game genres have migrated to or been ﬁxed to particular platforms. For instance, Nintendo developed many games that were released only
on the Nintendo systems, such as the ones in the Legend of Zelda and Mario
series. Even third-party game developers sometimes sign contracts releasing
their games on only one system, at least initially.
In addition to console systems, computer games altered with each
generation of new technology, game arcades developed from standing
arcades and pinball machines to also include consoles and PC games, and
handheld and mobile gaming expanded from dedicated handheld systems
to include games on all mobile devices. Other game devices, but not game
systems, like single-use electronic pet games, have also been created and
many have been popular. Most recently, ARGs use one or more electronic
platforms and then fuse them with other media in order to create games
that cross media and traditional boundaries. For instance, some of the
games create websites that offer puzzles that can be solved to reveal realworld coordinates. Players must then go to those coordinates and ﬁnd
another puzzle that can again be unraveled. The next clue could then lead
to a website, a phone number, or another media form. While ARGs are the
most recent innovation for gaming media, game genres also develop alongside gaming technology.

G..............................................................................................................................
AME STYLES AND GENRES
Many games can be simply labeled, as with puzzle games. The vast majority,
however, defy simple categorization and classiﬁcation because, for many
games, game genres and game styles are conﬂated. For instance, Doom relies
on a science ﬁction and horror narrative, but is also a ﬁrst-person shooter
(FPS) game. The genre for Doom refers to both the game narrative or aesthetic
genre and to the game play style. Similarly, some games are classed as
“simulation” games based on their game play style, but the games can then
be real-world ﬂight simulators using real-world constraints, arcade ﬂight simulators with more fantastic physics and controls, or spaceﬂight simulators
using science ﬁction constraints. For some, the game genre and the game play
style are also mixed. An example is the “survival horror” game, which refers
to the game play—survival—and the game genre—horror.
161
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Game play styles include massively multiplayer online role-playing
games (MMORPGs), such as EverQuest and World of Warcraft; adventure; platformer; and many others. Game play styles may also be classiﬁed using game
genres, which include genres from ﬁlm, literature, television, and comics.
Other game genres that cross into game play styles include rhythmic games
like Guitar Hero, where players play simpliﬁed guitar chords; Dance Dance Revolution, in which players move to the game beat using dance pads; Donkey
Konga, where players drum and clap to the game beat; and others.
Given all of the game genres and game play styles, the normal problems with genre divisions become even more complicated. Game genres are
subsequently reduced to being useful generalized archetypes or overall categories, but they are not useful for purposes that are more deﬁnitional.
Gaming’s diverse game play styles and genres have recently grown to
include “serious games.” Serious games are the newest game genre, and they
are not classiﬁed by their game play styles or their aesthetics. Instead, they
are classiﬁed by their intention. Serious games are games designed to teach,
train, argue, advertise, or promote, in one manner or another. For instance,
the Make-a-Wish Foundation developed Ben’s Game at the request of Ben Duskin, a young boy with leukemia. Duskin wanted a game that would help him
through his treatment process and help other children like him. Other serious
games have been used for education and argument, like Food Force from the
United Nations World Food Programs, which sought to teach about humanitarian food relief efforts.
In addition to game genres based on games’ internal characteristics,
other game genres are deﬁned by the social constructs within which players
play them. Some multiplayer games—including particular FPS games, ﬁghting
games, and MMORPGs—are played within organized groups. These groups are
divided like sports teams—some formal, some informal, and often termed
“clans,” “guilds,” or “teams”—who then play in tournaments against each
other for particular games or for particular game styles.
Game genres also rely on media crossovers from books, comics, music,
sports, and movies. For instance, the Tony Hawk skating games draw upon
and reference professional skateboarding, game simulations, and popular
clothing and music, with skating clothing in the game and music by the
group Fallout Boy on the game soundtrack. Game genres continue to develop
based on other media, with some games divided into chapters like novels,
others broken into episodes like television, and still others separated into
sequels like ﬁlm. The game industry operates in conjunction with other
media, players, businesses, and academics to continue to develop and alter
game genres. The rise of the Internet and mobile gaming has also led to the
creation of independent games, some of which can be downloaded free
online.
162
................

Gaming
S..............................................................................................................................
C I E N C E F I C T I O N A N D FA N TA S Y G A M E S
With the variety of game genres, gaming still includes more traditional narrative and aesthetic styles like science ﬁction and fantasy. In fact, the origins of
gaming tend to be heavily based on science ﬁction and fantasy tropes, conventions, and stories. Many existing science ﬁction and fantasy novels, ﬁlms,
and television shows have been recreated within or expanded through video
games. Because the genres of science ﬁction and fantasy have been so inﬂuential for video games, the many subgenres are also prevalent in gaming.
Video games have drawn on many earlier gaming forms that relied heavily on
science ﬁction and fantasy settings, like such tabletop role-playing games
(RPGs) as Dungeons and Dragons, and have also drawn on the existing iconography from pinball games, which often feature fantastic backdrops.
Science ﬁction in games includes dystopian futuristic worlds, space ﬂying and traveling missions, time travel, aliens, as of yet uninvented technological advances, and super-powered humans. Novels, ﬁlms, and television that
have been transformed into science ﬁction games include Tron, Star Wars, Star
Trek, The Matrix, the Alien series in Aliens vs. Predator, Blade Runner, The
Chronicles of Riddick, The X-Files, and many others. Fantasy in games frequently
includes magic, the supernatural, horror, alternative histories, and fairy tales.
Novels, ﬁlms, and television that have been transformed into fantasy games
include H. P. Lovecraft’s Call of Cthulhu stories; the Chronicles of Narnia; Peter
Pan; Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland; The Lord of the Rings; the Harry Potter series; Legend of the Three Kingdoms; Pirates of the Caribbean; King Kong; Buffy the
Vampire Slayer; multiple Disney ﬁlms; numerous characters and narratives
from comics like The Hulk, Superman, and Spider-Man; White Wolf’s Vampire
game and novels; and many others.
Games incorporate and recreate the stories from existing media in different manners. For instance, gaming includes many shared-world games
within the Star Wars and Star Trek worlds. Gaming even offers innovative versions of these worlds, with games like Lego Star Wars, which fuses the Lego
Star Wars characters with the narrative from the Star Wars ﬁlms. The Matrix
ﬁlms similarly have games based on the ﬁlm narratives that then extend the
stories. Games have also provided many new concepts that have been directly
made into science ﬁction or fantasy ﬁlms, television shows, comics, and novels. Games that have sparked revisions include those from the Resident Evil,
Alone in the Dark, Doom, Halo, Final Fantasy, Mortal Kombat, and Street Fighter series; BloodRayne; and countless others that have also provided material for
other media in one form or another.
Like the literary genres of science ﬁction and fantasy and their subgenres, video games that fall within one category or another often also have
attributes from others. Because of the difﬁculties in game genre classiﬁcation,
some, like the Metal Gear Solid games, are classiﬁed in a variety of ways. For
instance, the Metal Gear Solid games are normally classiﬁed as stealth games,
163
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

and then are further described as stealth military games with cinematic overtones. All of these descriptors aid in classifying the structure of the games,
but the genres for the game are closer to military espionage action or science
ﬁction because of the use of technology that does not currently exist. Games
like Metal Gear Solid show how games can augment the traditional categories
of science ﬁction and fantasy.
Games offer innovations for science ﬁction and fantasy not only in their
remakings of existing stories and the addition of new stories but also in the
global scope of the game narratives and systematic construction of the game
worlds. Because games are developed and then consumed globally, localized
narratives with localized belief structures are transmitted through games. For
instance, many Japanese games feature fantastic depictions of aspects of
Shintoism and Buddhism. In addition, many Japanese games also present
Asian folk, fairy, and monster narratives, as well as science ﬁction stories
based on Asian and speciﬁcally Japanese cultural concerns. Games made in
the United States follow more traditional Western narratives, but these are
also augmented and altered by the presence of developers in Europe. Like
most media, games must still be translated and localized in order to cross
from region to region and country to country. However, gaming’s fans aid in
the movement and reception of games by creating websites and other fanmade resources that explain the games and how to acquire the games across
regions. Like the earlier science ﬁction and fantasy fanzines and e-zines (electronic magazines), these resources help to contextualize the games for reception, and they explain how to ﬁnd the games cross-culturally.
In addition to presenting globalized narratives and a means for the
transmittal of those narratives across traditional cultural and physical boundaries, games themselves aid extraordinary narratives of all kinds by presenting simulations that can be used to model behavior or to create visual
representations of behaviors. For instance, technological advances in video
games have aided science ﬁction and fantasy ﬁlm by developing the means to
create realistic video of unreal creatures, places, and events. Video games
have also further developed modeling abilities such that those unreal images
can behave realistically.
Video game modeling includes the creation of images and objects that
appear realistically and then behave realistically in response to collisions with
other objects. This modeling is necessary for games so that when a video
game character attacks an enemy, both move correctly in response. When the
game character subsequently falls back into an object in the game, like a
crate, the crate also needs to respond by moving or breaking. Video game
modeling behavior is thus useful for ﬁlm and animation to provide a basis for
ﬁlmic depictions of science ﬁction and fantasy stories that could not otherwise be easily created. Because of the usefulness of video game imagery for
164
................

Gaming
modeling, video games have even been used to create short and longer ﬁlms
called machinima, which often depict science ﬁction or fantastic narratives.
Video game technological developments have greatly aided other media
forms, especially science ﬁction and fantasy works within those forms. However, video games have also aided in developing new narratives from concepts
like a hive mind or the connected network of Serial Experiments LAIN, where a
young girl is born from the network and other children become lost in the
network as the network grows exponentially and blends known reality with
the network itself. Because video games emerged to mainstream popularity
alongside the Internet, many new narratives based on the Internet also
involve gaming.
The network crossing into reality follows similar themes established in
the tabletop RPG Shadowrun, as well as in the Matrix ﬁlms. The networked
aspects of gaming have also aided the development of MMORPGs and the development of ARGs, as well as new types of gaming like “smart mobs.” Smart
mobs utilize the same systems as ARGs, which are essentially aspects of pervasive computing, to create organized, thinking mobs of people. These smart
mobs are unlike traditional unruly mobs because they are planned, aware,
and organized. Smart mobs have been used for game-like performances,
where a group of people organize as a smart mob, meet at a particular place,
and perform a particular choreographed set of actions. Smart mobs can also
be used for protests or educational purposes, with the smart mob acting to
organize and demonstrate support for a particular concern.
Networked games and gaming developments like ARGs and smart
mobs present new possible attributes or tropes for science ﬁction and fantasy
works. MMORPGs also present potential new developments for existing forms
because of the many media forms that surround and interoperate for the
games. For instance, World of Warcraft continues to release new character
races and new additions to its overall world.
World of Warcraft is based on a high-fantasy setting like that found in
Lord of the Rings. However, the earlier Warcraft games were world-building simulation games where players would train their workers to mine ore, build fortiﬁcations, and the ﬁght other players for land and power. World of Warcraft
combines these aspects into a game where players play as single characters,
which they design, of different races who are either with the Horde or the
Alliance. The Horde creatures are generally evil, and those in the Alliance are
generally good. The players individually then join with other characters based
on friendships or professional skills to ﬁght enemies and accomplish quests.
Individual players can play within parties and within guilds to further develop
their own skills and to become more powerful within the game.
From the micro level, where players play individually against other
players and random monsters in the world, players are also playing within
the macro level of the world where the Horde and Alliance battle for power
165
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

and where the world is being shaped by the players. These micro and macro
levels are further complicated when the game developers sometimes release
new changes and updates that alter the world in important ways. For
instance, the developers sometimes release changes to make particular character types more or less powerful in order to help maintain the balance of
power in the world. Additionally, players can play in different creator-controlled
world versions that result in some players playing with people from their area—
in western Europe, the eastern United States, or Asia, for example—and players can choose to play in themed worlds. For instance, one world requires all
players to speak in a fantastic version of a Middle English dialect using thee
and thou. All of these variables lead to increasing complexity in the game and
in gaming as a whole. In doing so, gaming presents and tests different possibilities for all media and particularly for science ﬁction and fantasy genres.

WOMEN CHARACTERS
...............................................................................................................................
Despite the great variety in game genres, the majority of video games are
male dominated and racially homogenous. However, there are games that
include female playable characters and characters who are not Caucasian or
Asian (whichever is most common based on the game’s place of origin).
Women video game characters include characters that are the female versions of their male counterparts—as with Ms. Pac-Man in Ms. Pac-Man, the
female frog in Frogger, and the Valkyrie in Gauntlet—damsels in distress, side
characters, and main playable characters.
The female versions of male characters do not differ from their male
counterparts other than in appearance and skills. However, if the character’s
skills can develop in signiﬁcant ways, then the women characters are characters on their own instead of simply exchanged versions of their male counterparts. The damsels in distress include characters like Princess Peach in Super
Mario Brothers, the various princesses waiting to be saved in Wizards and Warriors, and many others. Women side characters include nonplayers, who are
often in supporting roles for the playable characters. Sometimes these characters represent the girlfriends of the playable characters or their sisters,
friends, or colleagues. Other times, the nonplayable women characters are
simply minor characters like supporting cast members in a play. The prevalence of women characters in these supporting roles shows a possible avenue
for game diversiﬁcation.
Far fewer women characters are actually playable characters in video
games. Notable ones include Metroid’s Samus Aran, Tomb Raider’s Lara Croft,
Perfect Dark’s Joanna Dark, Street Fighter’s Chun-Li, Phantasy Star’s Alis Landale,
and Tenchu’s Ayame, among others. While gaming has many women characters, it still offers relatively few in comparison to the total number of largely
166
................

Gaming
male characters. However, certain games offer a slightly different ratio, with
games in the Resident Evil and Fatal Frame series having more women characters. The Resident Evil series includes Rebecca Chambers, Claire Redﬁeld,
Jill Valentine, and Ada Wong, while the Fatal Frame series includes Miku
Hinasaki, Mio and Mayu Amakura, and Rei Kurosawa. Other game series—
particularly adventure, ﬁghting, and role-playing games—offer multiple characters for each game and have more women than the average for gaming
overall.
Women characters in adventure games include The Longest Journey’s
€ Castillo, and Herinteractive’s Nancy Drew games
April Ryan, Dreamfall’s Zoe
with Nancy Drew. Women characters in ﬁghting games include Street Fighter’s
Chun-Li, Cammy, Sakura, and Elena; Soul Calibur’s Sophitia Alexandra, Taki,
Isabella “Ivy” Valentine, and Chia Xinghau; Tekken’s Angel, Anna Williams,
Asuka Kazama, Christie Monteiro, Julia Chang, and Lili (Emily Rochefort); and
the women ﬁghters in the entirely women ﬁghting games Dead or Alive and
Rumble Roses. RPGs offer even more women characters because many of them
allow players to choose a character’s gender.
While there are relatively few women characters in video games,
women also represent a smaller, but growing, percentage of game players,
game designers, and gaming media specialists. As more women enter gaming,
gaming has responded by offering more women characters and more options
in general. Despite the changes, the same common complaint about gendered
representations in comics is also leveled against video games: that while all
characters are hyperbolically depicted, women are additionally hypersexualized. For instance, comics and video game heroes are shown as incredibly
strong with perfect physiques; however, the women have the same perfect
physiques plus exaggerated sexual characteristics. Although this is a continuing problem, video game depictions of women have improved as the number
of women gamers and game designers increases.
RPGs have created an exception to the norm because they allow players
to choose the character’s gender and more recently have even begun allowing
players to customize the character’s appearance. Thus, while many earlier
games required players to choose either a man or woman character, and then
perhaps allowed players to customize certain aspects like hair color, now
players can also customize body style and other attributes that relate to sexualization. In fact, this level of customization has even carried over into some
ﬁghting and simulation games. The character customization is important,
because it allows players to create men or women characters and then to
choose how those characters are represented.
While gaming has begun to diversify in terms of gender, the vast majority of game characters are still limited in terms of gender and ethnicity. These
limits are odd, because even the many science ﬁction and fantasy games
167
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

follow the same real-world gender norms, and game customization also
allows for different depictions that are otherwise infrequently found in
gaming.

CONCLUSION
...............................................................................................................................
Throughout gaming’s history, many notable game designers, games, and
events have shaped gaming and have aided it in connecting to and drawing
from other media. Gaming developed alongside many signiﬁcant technological advances, including home computing, networked computing, and the
Internet. Artistically, it also developed alongside the importation of Japanese
animation known as anime and Asian comics (Japanese comics called
manga, Korean comics called manhwa, and Chinese comics called manhua),
the rise of the graphic novel, and digital imagery in ﬁlm. These and other
factors made video games an immediately interconnected form that drew
from existing sources and in turn offered new concepts, stories, and technologies for existing forms. Most recently, simulation games, serious games, and
alternate reality games have begun to reshape gaming and will by proxy inﬂuence the interconnected media with which games operate.
Despite gaming’s prevalence across the world and across media types
and narrative genres, video games are faced with many upcoming difﬁculties.
The gaming market is expanding to include nontraditional players such as
adults over forty, women, and girls. As new gamers enter the market, the
market itself will change. Many gaming corporations focus on one or a handful of high-budget games at any given time. This means that many gaming
corporations have their resources invested in a small selection of possible
products. This corporate model has led to the failure of many smaller gaming
corporations and provides cause for concern for many other gaming
companies.
As gaming technology has advanced, the industry expectations for
game depth and length has enlarged and the production cycle for games has
subsequently grown longer. This longer production cycle also provides cause
for concern because some game companies have difﬁculty earning sufﬁcient
return on investments in a timely manner. The gaming market changes have
also led to the creation of more adult-oriented games like the Playboy game
and other sexually themed games. Because many people still view games as a
children’s media form, these games and the controversy over video games
and violence could present future public relations concerns for the entire
video gaming industry.
Nevertheless, despite these problems as the gaming market and game
industry changes, gaming itself is also faced with many more opportunities.
Technological advances allow for new types of games to be made, and market
changes mean that gaming now has a larger and more diverse group for
168
................

Gaming
which to create games. As gaming continues to grow, it will grow in conjunction with the other media with which it is already interconnected.
Further Readings
Callois, Roger. Man, Play, and Games. Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2003.
Castronova, Edward. Synthetic Worlds: The Business and Culture of Online Games. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Digital Games Research Association. DiGRA Digital Library [online]. Http://www.digra.org/dl.
Games and Culture: A Journal of Interactive Media [online]. Http://www.gamesandculture.com.
Game Studies: The International Journal of Computer Game Studies [online]. Http://www.
gamestudies.org.
Huizinga, Johan. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play Element in Culture. Boston: Beacon Press,
1955.
Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Meet. New York: New York
University Press, 2006.
Journal of the International Digital Media and Arts Association [online]. Http://idmaa.org/journal/.
Kinder, Marsha. Playing with Power in Movies, Television, and Video Games: From Muppet Babies
to Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.
Kohler, Chris. Power-Up: How Japanese Video Games Gave the World an Extra Life. Indianapolis,
IN: Brady Games, 2005.
Lancaster, Kurt, and Thomas J. Mikotowicz, eds. Performing the Force: Essays on Immersion into
Science-Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Environments. Jefferson, NC: McFarland Press, 2001.
McAllister, Ken, and Ryan Moeller, eds. Capitalizing on Play: The Politics of Computer Gaming.
Special Issue of Works and Days 22, nos. 43 and 44 (2004).
Montfort, Nick. Twisty Little Passages: An Approach to Interactive Fiction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2003.
Murray, Janet. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. New York: Free
Press, 1997.
Parlett, David. The Oxford Guide to Card Games. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990.
———. The Oxford History of Board Games. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Ray, Sheri Graner. Gender Inclusive Game Design: Expanding the Market. Hingham, MA: Charles
River Media, 2004.
Rollings, Andrew, and Dave Morris. Game Architecture and Design. Scottsdale, AZ: Coriolis,
2000.
Salen, Katie, and Eric Zimmerman. Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2003.
Sheff, David. Game Over: How Nintendo Zapped an American Industry, Captured Your Dollars,
and Enslaved Your Children. New York: Random House, 1993.
Taylor, T. L. Play between Worlds: Exploring Online Game Culture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2006.

169
................

17

Men Writing Women
JANICE M. BOGSTAD

THE LACK of subtlety in the construction of female characters in science ﬁction (SF) has changed a great deal since the Golden Age of the 1940s, 1950s,
and early 1960s. Then, not only were the majority of writers assumed to be
male, but so were the readers. Editors insisted that stories appeal to their
expected audience of adolescent and young adult males. For example, editors
insisted that Mary Alice Norton become Andre Norton when she ﬁrst began
publishing. It was not until the late mid-1960s that authors were able to add
breadth to characterization in general, but especially to female roles or to
portrayals of interpersonal relations.
Earlier male writers objectiﬁed and sexualized female characters, with
portrayals ranging from complete exclusion to misogynistic exploitation. Jules
Verne and H. G. Wells, two writers often identiﬁed as the “fathers” of modern
science ﬁction, wrote most of their work as if women were totally irrelevant or
were restricted to stereotypical familial domestic roles. Even the recognized
mainstream, or “hard,” SF writers of the 1950s and 1960s, such as Isaac Asimov,
Ben Bova, and Robert A. Heinlein, who established their careers during the
Golden Age, did little to change their treatment of women characters despite
careers that lasted in some cases into the twenty-ﬁrst century. Yet others of the
same generation, such as Frederick Pohl, managed a more nuanced, comprehensive portrayal of women, their abilities, and their relationship to men. The
attempts of writers like Pohl, Samuel R. Delany, Thomas Disch, and Alfred
Bester to present more complete depictions of women were furthered by the
breakthroughs that accompanied the 1960s New Wave. These breakthroughs
included exploring the interpersonal and the political, along with stylistic
experimentation, and they ushered in more highly nuanced science ﬁction that
continues into the present day, despite some subgenres such as cyberpunk.
A younger generation of Anglo-American and European male writers,
ville, Kim Stanley
including Iain Banks, Gregory Bear, Ken McLeod, China Mie
170
................

Men Writing Women
Robinson, Geoffrey Ryman, and Neal Stephenson, has done much to challenge the stereotypical constructions of Golden Age and cyberpunk texts. The
shift comes from the understanding that gender is socially constructed
rather than historically ﬁxed or biologically grounded in the individual. Contemporary male writers’ abandonment of the stereotypical, dependent, ignorant female character has been long in coming, however, and by no means
dominates current SF. Writers for whom a hard-science focus means no signiﬁcant female characters in what is presented as a man’s world of logic and
reason still exist. As Joanna Russ pointed out some years ago, the understanding of scientiﬁc changes is not always matched by understanding social
changes.

V
ERNE, WELLS, AND BURROUGHS
..............................................................................................................................
The early history of men writing women in SF novels and stories is based on
the paradigm of woman as the “second sex” (to use Simone de Beauvoir’s terminology) or the “Other,” which dominated SF narratives from the earliest
writers through the twentieth century. For example, Jules Verne constructed
most of his utopian and dystopian visions either entirely without women or
with women in strictly prescribed roles such as mother or sister or the middle-aged, useful, and obedient wife. In Verne’s most famous novels, male
societies are created aboard a submarine in Twenty Thousand Leagues under the
Sea (1870) and on a remote island in The Mysterious Island (1875).
Verne values the family setting so much that in The Mysterious Island he
creates a “son” for the castaways in the form of a teenage scientist, Habert,
who is identiﬁed and treated with pride as the mentee of the talented engineer Cyrus Smith. One character repeatedly reminds everyone that the island
lacks for nothing (although there are no women) except tobacco—a commodity that is soon found. The patriarchal relationship between father and son is
preserved without the agency of a mother, and male bonding is present in
these earliest examples of modern SF as the norm for enlightened human
relationships.
H. G. Wells does a little more with his female characters, but the central stories are always of male-dominated adventure. An argument could be
made that the entire Eloi culture of The Time Machine (1895) was created in
order to symbolize a truly helpless female in need of rescue yet adult enough
to inspire male passion.
Edgar Rice Burroughs and H. Rider Haggard wrote for broader audiences, although their work developed out of Verne’s adventure tradition. Their
women were often mysterious, unnatural monsters found in the middle of
remote deserts or on Mars. In their work, the typical male hero arrives on the
scene to establish more “natural” and proper roles of submission and sexuality, as in Burroughs’s Mars books. Feminist criticism has noted that Thulia,
171
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Maid of Mars, removes female agency from childbirth since her children
hatch out of eggs, not out of her body. This plot device of reestablishing the
natural order of female submission to male dominance persisted into late
1960s popular culture, as seen in the original Star Trek, particularly in the episode “Spock’s Brain.”

HARD SF: GERNSBACK AND CAMPBELL
...............................................................................................................................
Between the two world wars, editors of major short-story magazines such as
Hugo Gernsback and John W. Campbell conceived of SF as the genre that is
sometimes identiﬁed as “hard science ﬁction,” the SF of technology divorced
from troubling questions of cultural misogyny, Eurocentrism, imperialism,
and colonialism. Thus the images of guys and gadgets, of rocket ships and
world-savers, dominated the pages of pulp SF magazines and moved into the
emerging SF magazines such as Astounding, Amazing, Thrilling Wonder Stories,
and eventually Analog and Galaxy. The paradigm of SF as adventure stories to
which women were either irrelevant or a nuisance in need of rescue from
“bug-eyed monsters” was designed to appeal to a juvenile male readership
and to reinforce basic misogynistic beliefs of mainstream Anglo-European
culture.
Embedded in the Enlightenment thinking that originated the Scientiﬁc
Revolution, women, children, animals, and all non-Europeans were constructed as incapable of embracing science and technology, much less independent personhood. This attitude toward women as characters in SF has
persisted with some writers up to the present day. In this thinking, the question of alternate sexualities—that is, alternatives to the heterosexual paradigm—did not even occur. Limiting women to their biological and sexual
functions had wide-reaching implications. Few, if any, women characters
played central roles in science ﬁction stories and novels before the mid-1960s,
nor were they seen in the roles of scientists, technocrats, or leaders unless
brought in by male connections such as husbands or brothers. Nor was the
range of human sexualities ever admitted in the characterization of heroic
individuals of either sex. When an alternative sexuality did appear, the characters were portrayed as villainous deviants and killed off. Male characters’
universal reaction to females was the perception of them either as irrelevant
or as sexual objects of their attention, not as persons in their own right.
Meanwhile, another current of fantastic literature, the dystopia, was
being developed by writers who became known outside of the genre SF culture during the 1940s and 1950s. Writers such as Aldous Huxley (Brave New
World, 1932), C. S. Lewis (Out of the Silent Planet, 1938), Olaf Stapleton (Starmaker, 1937), and George Orwell (1984, 1949) published works that focused on
the deeds of male characters but asked vast philosophical questions. These
questions included Stapleton’s search for meaning in man’s need of woman
172
................

Men Writing Women
and treated questions about human freedom as they affected the agency of
both men and women as in 1984. Yevgeny Zamyatin’s We (1924) is another
excellent example of this alternative dystopian trend that included women in
speculations about the fate of humanity, as writers questioned the developing
technology that brought both the atomic bomb and the United Nations.
Kurt Vonnegut explored both racial and sexual oppressions in his
wide-ranging ﬁction. Another writer of their generation, Arthur C. Clarke,
identiﬁed both male and female children as inheritors of the next stage of
evolutionary development in his famous Childhood’s End (1953). These writers
created the basis for inclusion of women as humans with as much a stake in
the public world as the men around them, but that world was still largely
identiﬁed with patriarchal goals and deﬁnitions of humanity that assumed
both heterosexuality and biological determinism based on physiological
sex. Questions about the place of nurture, as opposed to nature, in deﬁning
individuals—regardless of their physiological sex—were largely ignored until the
mid-1960s.
Some critics have identiﬁed Robert A. Heinlein, especially in his juveniles, as an alternative voice, citing his female hero in Podkayne of Mars (1963)
or his erstwhile female starship captain in “The Menace from Earth.” His
political revolutionary Wyoming Knot, in The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress (1966),
gave many female readers in the 1960s their ﬁrst indication that women
could move out of limited domestic roles and indeed become scientiﬁc adventurers. While Heinlein’s female characters were revolutionary in comparison
with other science ﬁction of the time, they were always carefully identiﬁed as
heterosexual and in relationship with men as mothers, sisters, or daughters.
They were, as was Podkayne’s mother, immediately ready to drop careers and
individual goals for the biologically satisfying role of nurturer to both children
and men. Heinlein often portrayed this tendency as a higher goal to which all
women were called due to their biology. He even went so far as to have a
character in Citizen of the Galaxy (1957) say that girls should be put in a sack
between the onset of puberty and the ﬂowering of womanhood so that their
awkward years need not be tolerated by the men around them.
The stock heroine of early SF was there to be rescued, to provide sexual
attraction, and to distract the male heroes from their appointed tasks. Even
when females had careers as space cadets or explorers, as in Heinlein’s juveniles, they eventually grew up to their natural roles as wives and mothers,
nurturers and protectors. One exception in Heinlein was the preteen heroine
in Have Space Suit—Will Travel (1958), but then she had not yet reached adolescence, and her survival was assured by an alien that she and the hero knew
as “the mother thing,” a strange name for a female intergalactic cop. Heinlein,
whose works inﬂuenced many juvenile SF readers and writers in the 1950s
and 1960s, made some effort to expand the intellectual scope of his female
characters, but his explorations of alternative human sexuality seem to be
173
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

limited to a conservative paradigm of group marriages (The Moon Is a Harsh
Mistress), where tidy arrangements are made for individual males to sleep
with individual females, with no awareness of gay, lesbian, or bisexual possibilities. In Heinlein’s adult novels, sexuality was deﬁned by men’s needs, speciﬁcally men’s needs as paradigmatically heterosexual.
The rescue motif was modiﬁed in later stories by Isaac Asimov, Ben
Bova, Frank Herbert, and Orson Scott Card to include punishments for
women who stepped out of their proper roles, such as the wives in Bova’s
recent Asteroid Wars series (the ﬁrst published in 2001) who are focal points
for possessive anger and bargaining on the part of males, to the point where
they are either killed, sometimes in extremely painful scenarios, or shunted
from one abusive relationship to another. The concept of female agency was
as alien to the majority of 1950s-generation writers fostered by Campbell as
was the idea that people could be happily homosexual.

W H E N I T S TA R T E D T O C H A N G E
...............................................................................................................................
A curious and interesting exception to stereotypical gender attitudes in SF
can be found in some of Frederick Pohl’s ﬁction, such as his story “Day Million,” which hints that future individuals will view twentieth-century sexual
practices with the same disdain for barbarism as we do the sexual practices
of Attila the Hun. Pohl’s story shows the beginnings of a revolution in male
writers’ understanding of men’s and women’s places in the natural order that
began with writers such as Samuel R. Delany and the New Wave generation
fostered by New Worlds, a British magazine that changed from a focus on
technology to more of a focus on experimentation in style and thought in
1964 under Michael Moorcock. As Mike Levy notes, the experiment was a
ﬁnancial failure, but it provided a venue for writers to try out sophisticated
writing styles and alternative sexualities.
The late 1960s sexual revolution also saw a new generation of writers.
Delany’s Babel-17 (1966) focused on a female character with unusual powers
of communication. He went on to publish such technically innovative and
gender/sexualities-sensitive works as Nova (1968), Triton (1976), and Dhalgren
(1974), which served as models for a next generation of male writers. Not only
did Delany present homosexuality as an alternative to monogamous heterosexuality in his work, but he also explored the implications of emerging
genetic technologies to free individuals from biologically induced sexual identity. Nova and Triton exploded sexual paradigms both with alternative sexualities and discussions of sex changes. He was followed by such writers as
David Brin and John Varley whose female characters play a larger range of
social roles and are often the focal characters in intergalactic adventures.
In many ways, the genre of SF matured in the 1970s to embrace, at
least in a limited fashion, alternative sexualities, even when women
174
................

Men Writing Women
characters did not receive more sensitive treatment or scope for their actions.
Social consciousness produced by Martin Luther King Jr. and the civil rights
movements, anti-Vietnam activism that brought leftist thinking back to the
forefront, and the emerging feminist movement were reﬂected in and paralleled by a new generation of writers, many of them female, during the 1970s.
Between Sputnik’s launch in 1957 and the new cultural focus on scientiﬁc education leading to the ﬁrst moon landing in 1969, science ﬁction began to catch
up with potential expanded roles for women, theoretical analyses of questions like the primacy of nature or nurture in determining one’s social roles,
and the troubling questions about innate qualities of gender, race, and social
class. At the same time, the loss of blind faith in governments, especially in
the United States, France, and England, and the end of the colonial era of
imperialism began to undercut the blind belief in Anglo-European superiority
and entitlement. While these battles are still being fought, the questioning of
the Enlightenment hierarchies of being focused on race was accompanied by
a questioning of male superiority and heterosexist socialization.
The ﬁrst examples of changes in SF written by males can be found in
Harlan Ellison’s Dangerous Visions anthologies and, as mentioned above, in
 Farmer’s “In the Farm,” published in the
New Worlds. For example, Philip Jose
ﬁrst Dangerous Visions, postulated a planet where some human babies were
socialized (or in this case, desocialized) to become farm animals, carrying theories about early-childhood deprivation to an extreme. While human females
were demeaned into roles of cows, breeders, and food animals, males of the
same group were simply destroyed at birth, providing a snapshot of a continuum in the view of nonworthy humans identiﬁed by lower race, class, country
of origin, and gender as being little more than animals.
But even works heralded as changing the construction of female characters have been seen as problematic. The ﬁrst novel in Frank Herbert’s Dune
series, Dune, was praised when it was ﬁrst published in 1965 as a breakthrough for its female characterization. The women of the witchlike, nunlike
adepts, the order of the Bene Gesserit, are afforded a measure of power and
agency. Their dedication to the goal of producing an ultimate adept to further
their cause, and the roles of the desert women on the planet Dune and of the
focal character Paul Atreides’ mother and sister, seem to argue that women
could decide to be other than submissive.
At the same time, however, the familiar trope of females being dedicated to male success is imbedded in every aspect of the Dune series. The
Bene Gesserit order exists to produce a genetically superior male being, capable of looking into parts of the soul where the women cannot look. Paul’s
mother, capable, intelligent and resourceful, is at the same time totally
devoted to her husband and her son. Paul’s sister eventually suffers a sort of
madness for her mental powers and her divergence from the goal of her
brother as the ultimate prophet. This kind of expansion of women’s’ roles still
175
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

did not liberate the male authors’ characterizations from underlying assumptions that women exist for the furtherance of the men around them and have
no independent goals of their own.
A number of writers such as J. G. Ballard, John Crowley, Thomas Disch,
Larry Niven, and Norman Spinrad made further inroads in expanding the
roles of women characters, but still rarely gave them central or focal roles in
their ﬁction. At the same time, other writers followed in the Golden Age traditions, so writers like Stephen Baxter and Peter Hamilton can write ﬁctions
exploring nanotechnology and vast reaches of time and space while ignoring
all the recent changes in our understanding of gender. Hard SF, seen by a core
masculinist community as the real or authentic or best science ﬁction, still
has a loyal audience.
Still, the set of insights on human sexuality explored by Delany, as well
as by women writers such as Ursula K. Le Guin, Joanna Russ, Kate Wilhelm,
and Judith Merril, during the 1970s opened the way for further explorations.
The ranks of women writers—Octavia Butler, Pat Cadigan, Joan Vinge,

Elisabeth
Vonarburg, and dozens of others—within a heretofore maledominated genre have continued to grow into the twenty-ﬁrst century. One
lasting inﬂuence was the challenge to the editorial paradigm that SF appealed
to solely or largely to a young, heterosexual, male audience. As a result of the
growing awareness of a more diverse female audience, editors like David
Hartwell could sell a new kind of SF by women as well as by men. By the
1980s, many women were cast in the roles of central, heroic characters in
works exploring a range of sexual and political orientations that removed the
previously naturalized equation of women with her biology.
Another paradigm for females in science ﬁction was also being developed by highly talented writers such as Iain Banks and Kim Stanley Robinson.
Each uses some female-viewpoint characters in their works and gives them
lives outside of their sexuality. And each attributes at least equal, but often
very different, talents and intelligence to these characters.
In Banks’s case, alien and machine entities are used to expand the
understanding of human characteristics and break out of the tendency to
identify women and social sexuality itself from the seemingly inevitable biological functions of childbirth and nurturing. Banks’s many complex technotopias, such as the Against a Dark Background (1993) and The Algebraist (2006),
foreground both male and female characters that are central and competent,
such as Sharrow in the former, who feels for her own life but protects the
lives of many others. Banks is able to turn the classic space opera SF theme
into a true future vision of societies where all humans—male, female, and
even robotic sentients as large as entire spaceships—enjoy positions of agency
or suffer under autocratic dictators, regardless of the stereotypical roles of
race or gender that preceded them.
176
................

Men Writing Women
Another example is Neal Stephenson, who, in Diamond Age (1995), portrays a rebellion that is fostered by girls and women who had been educated
by an interactive electronic book. Geoffrey Ryman, in complex, multicultural
visions such as Air, explores whole new deﬁnitions of identity and sexuality in
the cyber-era of our near future. John Crowley and Charles de Lint have created fascinating ranges of female characters in what are now characterized as
texts of fantastic ﬁction in their blending of insights from hard sciences and
the “softer” biological sciences, as well as anthropology and sociology. De Lint’s
exploration of different mythologies and magics imbue female characters with
powers that distinguish them as a central force whose full humanity and intellectual competence are at once unquestioned and essential. They are computer experts, bibliophiles, and artists, and some are also seduced by evil in
their search for agency, thus fulﬁlling a range of potential human roles.
Cyberpunk, a movement of the 1980s, was in some important ways a
fertile ground for denying basic humanity to women. There are many ways an
author can interpret the desire for strong female characters in ﬁction, as has
been proven by the cyberpunk writers. Bruce Sterling, the self-appointed
spokesman for a type of SF that was actually created in Bruce Bethke’s 1983
story “Cyberpunk,” proclaimed the end of “feminist” writing in SF as part of
the rhetoric of this new movement. The cyberpunk of the 1980s and 1990s,
when done well, explored the darker sides of technological innovation without the male gender-based, often militaristic, assumption that the ideal
human was what has been called the “machismo male”: the white, heterosexual, lonely, street-smart outsider. While many male cyberpunk writers
included individual female characters that were physically and mentally
equivalent to males, the authors tended to make them mirror images of male
characters and paid little attention creating believable females in roles of
authority or leadership.
Feminist critics, male and female, describe cyberpunk as a step backward for female characterization, arguing that it was in part a reaction to the
many excellent and award-winning female writers of the 1970s and 1980s.
The cyberpunk view of the female hero as essentially masculinized has been
carried over to popular ﬁlms like The Matrix (1999). The cyberpunk writers dealt
more realistically with alternative male sexualities, almost as a counterpoint to
Pohl’s earlier “Day Million,” by portraying all sexuality as male sexuality.
Another group of cyber- and nanotech male writers, including Greg
ville, Lewis Shiner, and Kim Stanley Robinson, were able to
Bear, China Mie
avoid the idea of the oversimpliﬁed maschismo punk as the masculine ideal
for the technofuture we all face. Robinson is a case in point: in his early Three
Californias trilogy, his Mars series, and his more recent three novels on global
warming, Forty Signs of Rain (2004), Fifty Degrees Below (2005), and Sixty Days
and Counting (2007), he shows women and men in nonstereotypical roles. For
example, one family consists of a stay-at-home lobbyist father, two sons, and
177
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

a mother who works for the National Science Foundation and is both logical
and preoccupied with her public role. Additionally, non-Western cultures,
such as the Tibetans who are negotiating against global warming trends and
human domination of the planet in favor of the Society of Drowned (island)
nations, represented both in their cultural difference and their political and
social competence.
While the history of men writing women in science ﬁction has been a
grim one, and writers who objectify women are still numerous in the genre,
there are now many male writers who are capable of portraying a range of
human characters, regardless of race, gender, class, or region of origin, as full
participants in the human endeavor, be that near or far future. This kind of
vision is much needed in a world where broad human agency battles on a
daily basis with socially conservative movements that seek to return women
as well as men to the cultural limitations of past social roles. Since a number
of male writers have proven that men can write women as people, it remains
for other writers, and their readers, to understand the implications of their
blind spots and the failure of Enlightenment paradigms of the human.
See also chapters 19, 20, and 22.
Further Readings
Corcos, C. A. “Women’s Rights and Women’s Images in Science Fiction: A Selected Bibliography.” In An International Guide to Law and Literature. Buffalo, NY: W. S. Hein,
2000. Available at http://faculty.law.lsu.edu/ccorcos/biblio/womensciﬁ.htm.
Cornillon, Susan K. Images of Women in Fiction: Feminist Perspectives. Bowling Green, OH:
Bowling Green University Popular Press, 1972.
Levy, Michael M. “The New Wave, Cyberpunk and Beyond, 1963–1994.” In Anatomy of Wonder: A Critical Guide to Science Fiction, ed. Neil Barron, vol. 4, 22–37. New Providence,
NJ: R. R. Bowker, 1995.
Russ, Joanna. To Write Like a Woman: Essays in Feminism and Science Fiction. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1995.

178
................

18

Heroes or Sheroes
CHRISTINE MAINS, BRAD J. RICCA, HOLLY HASSEL,
AND LYNDA RUCKER

WHILE the term hero can mean the central character or protagonist, male or
female, in a novel, short story, game, comic, graphic novel, ﬁlm, or television
show, many assume a hero is most likely to be a male. The traditional hero is
a male, often of noble or elite standing (or in the process of becoming noble),
who is a notable warrior or, in more modern texts, a ﬁghter for truth and justice. The hero is isolated; although he may rescue the “heroine,” his narrative
rarely focuses on his marriage or family life.
The question of what happens when a female character is cast as the
hero of a narrative, especially an action narrative, is the focus of this chapter.
Popular media, including genre literature, comics, ﬁlms, and television shows,
have made a number of women protagonists into heroes. Sherrie Inness has
published scholarly analyses of the popularity of “tough girls” or “action
chicks” in the media. But are these characters popular because they are
strong women, appealing to a more feminist audience, or are they popular
because they cast women (often wearing scanty clothing) into traditional
action narratives to appeal to a primarily male audience? There is no consensus among fans, critics, or academics on this question. The title of this chapter reﬂects the two most clearly opposing views: that women can be heroes
without having to imitate men, or that a woman in that position must be
referred to as a shero, her character and plot differing from the conventional
hero sufﬁciently to justify coining a new term.
The various positions range from celebrating characters who embody
beauty and strength, showing that women can do the same work that men do
in their cultures, to criticizing characters some call “men with breasts.” These
disagreements reﬂect some of the different perspectives among feminists on
the question of women and violence, women and martial arts training, or
women and the military. In a number of industrialized nations, women have
179
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

served in law enforcement and the military for decades. Equally, women participate in a variety of activist movements that protest institutional abuses in
law and the military and have historically been important contributors to
paciﬁst and antiwar movements. Still other critics, working with the intersections of race and gender or of class and gender, criticize the extent to which
these sheroes are primarily white and middle class, as well as ﬁtting in heternormative gender roles despite having some costume or character elements
that can also be read as queer.
In any case, when it comes to fantastic genres such as science ﬁction,
fantasy, and horror, some of the most popular books, comics, ﬁlms, and television shows featuring heroes and sheroes are discussed below by four of the
encyclopedia’s contributors. Their goal here is not to answer the questions
raised above deﬁnitively; rather, it is to explore the complex ways in which
popular culture reﬂects changing gender expectations and roles.

T H E F E M A L E H E R O I N L I T E R AT U R E
...............................................................................................................................
Christine Mains
Too often in literature, female characters have been restricted to roles
deﬁned in relation to the male hero: the sexy temptress, the damsel in distress, the virginal bride who is the object of his quest and the reward for his
heroism. Even female protagonists are often passive heroines rather than
active heroes. Although the worlds of science ﬁction and fantasy are more
open to the female hero, as literary critics have argued, the full potential is not
always realized. In Tanith Lee’s A Heroine of the World (1989), Ara is the center
of world events, but is a pawn with little agency of her own. Even Ursula K.
Le Guin, in The Tombs of Atuan (1972), resolves Tenar’s coming-of-age story
with the conventional plot of marriage and motherhood—a situation later
addressed by her return to Tenar’s story in Tehanu (1990). Nevertheless, since
the 1970s, with the reprinting of C. L. Moore’s 1930s pulp tales about the warrior Jirel of Joiry and the publication of such books as Joanna Russ’s The Female
Man (1975), the female hero has reﬂected women’s desires and concerns.
In many stories, the male and the female work side by side, accomplishing more as partners than either could separately. Such equality is a recognized feature in the works of Andre Norton, especially in the early volumes
of the Witch World series, and in Patricia McKillip’s Riddle-Master trilogy, in
which Morgon and Raederle, working together, symbolize a union of natural
elements. But achieving equality is often a struggle. In Anne McCaffrey’s
Dragonﬂight (1968), Lessa ﬁghts against an overprotective society in order to
become a ﬁghting dragonrider, while in Robin McKinley’s The Hero and the
Crown (1984), Aerin’s desire to ﬁnd a useful role leads her to become a dragonslayer. Many female heroes turn to questing or ﬁghting in an attempt to
escape patriarchal violence: Elizabeth Moon’s Paksennarion is not the only
180
................

Heroes or Sheroes
woman ﬂeeing an arranged marriage (The Sheepfarmer’s Daughter, 1988), nor is
Lynette, in Vera Chapman’s The King’s Damosel (1976), the only victim of rape.

At times, the female hero must adopt a male disguise, as does Eowyn
in J. R. R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings (1954–55). The male guise can be metaphorical: Angharad, the protagonist of McKinley’s The Blue Sword (1982), is a
tomboy nicknamed Harry. Or it can be magical: Lynn Flewelling’s Tamir trilogy, beginning with The Bone Doll’s Twin (2001), is about a warrior queen raised
as a boy, enchanted into the form of her dead male twin. However, it is not
necessary to adopt a male name or form in order to take up a narrative role
that is conventionally male, because many authors have created ﬁctional
worlds in which it is natural for women to become farmers, blacksmiths, wizards, and warriors. Jane Yolen’s Jenna, in White Jenna (1989) and other volumes, is the destined Chosen One of her people, followers of the goddess
Alta; the questing hero in Joan Vinge’s The Snow Queen (1980) is Moon, traveling around her world and across the galaxy to save her lover.
Although some critics argue in favor of portraying both male and
female heroes with conventionally feminine values of community and cooperation, the reading public seems to enjoy seeing a woman doing “a man’s job.”
There is no shortage of women warriors in sword-and-sorcery or women soldiers in military science ﬁction, and themed anthologies featuring women in
such roles have sold well. Jessica Amanda Salmonson, whose novel Tomoe
Gozen (1984) draws on legends of a female samurai, edited Amazons! (1979); it
won the World Fantasy Award and spawned a second volume. Marion
Zimmer Bradley’s Sword and Sorceress series, begun in 1984 and continuing
for twenty years, was the ﬁrst sale for many authors, and the home for Phyllis
Ann Karr’s stories about the amoral, violent swordswoman Thorn. By the
1990s, the ﬁgure of the woman warrior was well enough established to be the
subject of parody; Esther Friesner’s series of anthologies, beginning with
Chicks in Chainmail (1995), features stories about Amazons on strike and the
importance of cup size for armored breastplates.
In the worlds of science ﬁction, not tied to the pseudo-medieval past
common to fantasy, women serve and even lead in battle. C. J. Cherryh’s
time-traveling Morgaine wields a technologically advanced sword in Gate of
Ivrel (1976) and its sequels. And several female characters combine careers as
starship captains with romance and motherhood, including Lois McMaster
Bujold’s Capt. Cordelia Naismith, Cherryh’s Signy Mallory (Downbelow Station,
1981), the eponymous protagonist of Moon and McCaffrey’s Sassinak (1999),
and Moon’s Esmay Suiza, whose story begins in Once a Hero (1997). Such depictions of women in command are welcome, as are stories like Joe Haldeman’s
The Forever War (1975), which traces the growing acceptance of women warriors due to changing social conditions.
Science ﬁction can look forward to a time when women’s strength and
skill in battle will be recognized as equal to men’s, but some works of fantasy
181
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

suggest the possibility of recovering a past when women did ﬁght, a past that
has been erased. In McKillip’s Alphabet of Thorn (2004), legends are told of a
Sleeping King who will return in times of great need, and that ﬁgure is revealed
to be a Sleeping Queen. Mary Gentle, in Ash: A Secret History (2000), recounts
the career of a female ﬁfteenth-century mercenary commander through the
device of a twenty-ﬁrst-century translation of a suppressed historical document. As for the present, the heroes of cyberpunk and urban fantasy are as
likely to be women as men.

THE FEMALE HERO IN COMICS
...............................................................................................................................
Brad J. Ricca
Female comic characters, though often praised for being powerful, courageous women, are also subjects of controversy because of their subservience to male characters and audiences, as well as their often unrealistic
artistic portrayals.
In the early newspaper comic strips, women occupied fairly static roles
of damsels in physical or romantic distress (e.g., Olive Oyl), lower-class darlings (Blondie, Little Orphan Annie), or sexual creatures (Li’l Abner). As adventure
genres caught on, more traditionally heroic characters began to appear. Buck
Rogers, Tarzan, and Flash Gordon introduced Wilma Deering, Jane Porter, and
Dale Arden: three proto-sheroes who, though often in captivity, could ﬁght aliens, tame jungle animals, and operate futuristic technology. Most subsequent
sheroes are permutations of this initial role of a sidekick/love interest who
still deﬁes traditional gender roles, often by co-opting male ones.
Appearing ﬁrst in 1938, the longest-running woman character in superhero comics is Lois Lane. Lane, the ace reporter, is relentless, stylish, awardwinning, and career-minded. Yet despite her independent behavior, Lane still
exhibits a great dependence on Superman, usually in the form of continually
requiring rescues from rooftops. In the 1950s and 1960s, she was awarded her
own comic and sometimes her own superpowers, but they are always temporary; her humanity always separates her from achieving Superman’s professional success. Lane ﬁnally marries Clark Kent (not Superman) in a 1996
story. Though the perennial criticism of Lane is that she was consistently
fooled by a ﬂimsy set of glasses, her longevity and overall positive representation make her an iconic shero.
In the 1960s, Marvel Comics introduced a number of female characters
who were variations of the Lois Lane model: Mary Jane Watson, Sue Storm (the
Invisible Girl), Janet Van Dyne (the Wasp), and Jean Grey (Marvel Girl). These
characters initially functioned as love interests for both heroes and readers
(the 1960s issues often feature pinups) and their “powers” were feminized as
beauty, invisibility, shrinking, and empathy. In the 1970s and 1980s, these
characters gained more power: Watson marries Spider-Man and becomes a
182
................

Heroes or Sheroes
successful model; Storm marries Reed Richards (Mr. Fantastic), has a son, and
changes her code name to the Invisible Woman; Van Dyne forms a highly successful fashion company and joins “The Lady Liberators”; and Grey gains
immense new superpowers, moves into her own apartment, and ﬁnally consummates her relationship with the awkward Scott Summers (Cyclops).
But in the 1980s and 1990s, these characters fell victim to tremendous
acts of physical and emotional violence. Watson is revealed to have a history of
childhood abuse, and her daughter is kidnapped by the Green Goblin. Because
of her adventuring, Storm miscarries her second child (a daughter) and falls
prey to an emotional entity named Malice. Van Dyne’s husband beats her and
she divorces him. Grey becomes Dark Phoenix, kills a billion alien beings, and
takes her own life. Many of these events are subsequently reinterpreted in later
editions of the comics, but even so, violence reduces the too-powerful shero to
a plot device and returns heroic focus to the male hero (and reader) by giving
them something to rescue or to mourn. In the 1990s, comics writer Gail Simone
compiled a public list of these “women in refrigerators,” naming all of the
female comics characters who become victims of horriﬁc violence.
Female analogues of male heroes are many, including Supergirl, Power
Girl, Ms. Marvel, She-Hulk (a practicing attorney), Batgirl, Zatanna, Valkyrie,
and others. Violence follows this group as well: Supergirl is killed by the AntiMonitor. Batgirl (Barbara Gordon) is shot through the spine by the Joker; now
crippled, Gordon begins a second career as Oracle, the computer mastermind
for the Justice League, though her role is more feminized as switchboard operator instead of vigilante. Gordon also forms the Birds of Prey, consisting of
Black Canary, Huntress, and other sheroes. Reformed villains such as Catwoman, Rogue, the Scarlet Witch, Elektra, Spider-Woman, and the White
Queen are also strong female characters, though they undergo complicated
evolutions: Scarlet Witch marries a robot and her “bad luck” power reshapes
reality; Elektra is killed and reborn; and Rogue’s mutant power denies her
human contact. These sheroes also tend to be depicted in a more sexualized
manner, much like earlier femmes fatales seen in Terry and the Pirates and The
Spirit. Modern characters such as Vampirella and Witchblade epitomize this
type of shero drawn for maximum (often impossible) sexual power.
The epitome of the super-shero is Wonder Woman, who was created by
psychologist William Moulton Marston in 1941. Marston created Wonder Woman
to prove the superiority of women, and her origin over time reﬂects this: created
in clay and given life by Aphrodite, Princess Diana lives with the Amazons on Paradise Island. After rescuing an Army ﬂyboy (Steve Trevor) and nursing him to
health with a “Purple Ray,” Diana (in disguise, against her mother’s wishes) wins a
contest of arms. She is given the mantle of Wonder Woman and the job of spreading the Amazon wisdom to “Man’s World,” but at the cost of her immortality.
Wonder Woman also has her share of critics: Her patriotic costume is
revealing; her Golden Lasso’s ability to “compel” the truth reﬂects gender
183
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

stereotypes, and her silver bracelets are historical symbols of slavery. Her main
disciple is an obese teenage girl named Etta Candy. Wonder Woman is also frequently put in situations of bondage, although readers disagree if this is sadism
on Marston’s part or his “scientiﬁc” belief that submission was an act of love. In
recent years, Wonder Woman has also murdered a criminal on global television
to save her best friend Superman. Still, Wonder Woman exhibits a number of
progressive qualities: her mission of feminist imperialism involves the rehabilitation of criminals, charity foundations, and frequent acts of forgiveness, along
with the occasional hard right hook. There are other early sheroes (the Black
Cat, Miss Fury, Miss America, the Phantom Lady), but it is Wonder Woman who
remains the most popular and well respected, both in and out of the ﬁction.
THE FEMALE HERO IN FILM
...............................................................................................................................
Holly Hassel
Since the 1902 science ﬁction ﬁlm Le voyage dans la lune (A Trip to the
Moon), science ﬁction and fantasy ﬁlms have been dominated by male heroes.
Over the course of a hundred years of feature ﬁlm, it is only after the Second
Wave of feminism emerged in the 1960s and came to fruition in the 1970s that
these genres introduced the shero as a viable protagonist capable of carrying
a ﬁlm both narratively and commercially. However, critical debates have
emerged since the shero’s appearance questioning her integration into mainstream ﬁlm. As Mark Gallagher has noted, when women assume the traditionally masculine protagonist role, it succeeds in “emphasizing gender imbalances
but also limit[s] the narrative autonomy of women characters” (Action Figures,
77). Nonetheless, the future of the shero seems secure, as she has attracted
some commercial success and cult status among viewing audiences.
Many critics (examples include Sherrie Inness, Atara Stein, and Gallagher) observe that female characters of science ﬁction or fantasy ﬁlms have
adopted masculine qualities in order to convincingly assume the role of the
shero. Typical characteristics include agency, competitiveness, physical
toughness, forcefulness, aggressiveness, violence, independence, and rugged
individualism. Critics also note that there are narrative consequences for
abandoning the conventional feminine role; characters are portrayed as
“freakish, unﬂatteringly unfeminine, and unnatural, while making a point of
reminding the viewers of their persistent feminine vulnerability” (Stein, “She
Moves in Mysterious Ways,” 190), while at the same time in several key ﬁlms
such as the Alien series and Terminator 2, their assumption of masculine
properties make them unsuitable for mothering roles.
Early Sheroes

The earliest science ﬁction/fantasy (SF/F) ﬁlms employing a girl as the protagonist include two children’s ﬁlms (both book adaptations): The Wizard of Oz
184
................

Heroes or Sheroes
(1939) and the animated version of Alice in Wonderland (1951). Both of these
fantasy stories feature female characters on quests to ﬁnd an object or person, though the sheroes don’t embrace the masculine personal qualities typically associated with heroism.
One of the earliest SF/F ﬁlms featuring a shero is 1968’s Barbarella, starring Jane Fonda as the lusty eponymous character whose erotic intergalactic
adventures were ﬁlmed in both French and English. While some critics have
argued that Fonda’s character has evolved enough, by the forty-ﬁrst century,
to combine physical strength with nudity and sexuality as part of her empowerment, others view the ﬁlm as sexually objectifying its heroine.

The Legacy of Ellen Ripley

Perhaps legendary among sheroes, the character of Ellen Ripley from the
Alien franchise—Alien (1979), Aliens (1986), Alien3 (1992), and Alien Resurrection
(1997)—has received the most critical attention of any SF/F shero. Gallardo
and Smith’s monograph Alien Woman: The Making of Lt. Ellen Ripley argues:
Though Ripley was, as many critics have pointed out, a product of masculine
discourse, in the sense that the role was originally written by males for a male
actor and Alien (1979) was directed and produced by males, the character
Ripley as she appeared on the screen is, nonetheless, the product of 1960s and
’70s Second Wave feminism. (3)

Her emergence as an empowered, autonomous, independent lead character
who, through her physical toughness, ingenuity, and resourcefulness, “saves the
day” stems from shifting cultural notions about gender contemporaneous with
the ﬁlm’s release. However, the four ﬁlms in the Alien tetralogy have perplexed
and provoked feminist critics in their analysis of Ripley as shero, including such
issues as her adoption of masculine-coded “toughness” cues in dress, language,
demeanor, and weapons handling; her sexualization throughout the ﬁlms; her
adoption of mothering behaviors in Aliens; and her complete dehumanizing
when she is genetically recreated in Alien Resurrection after her suicide in Alien3.
In the wake of Ripley emerged a series of sheroes who, beginning in the
mid-1980s and early 1990s, did not quite take up the mantle of the male hero,
but instead took on central roles with male assistance. Some examples
include the sword-and-sorcery ﬁlm Red Sonja (1985), the 1992 ﬁlm predecessor
to the popular 1990s TV series Buffy the Vampire Slayer, featuring Kristy
Swanson in the title role; and Terminator 2 (1991), starring a beefed-up Linda
Hamilton in the role of warrior guerrilla mother protecting her son, John Connor, the future savior of the Earth.
A major surge in the role of the shero modeled after the conventionally
masculine hero has occurred in the early years of the twenty-ﬁrst century,
especially in action-oriented SF/F ﬁlms. The commercial and critical success
185
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

of Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (Wo hu cang long; 2000), a fantasy martial-arts
epic featuring two strong female leads played by Michelle Yeoh and Ziyi
Zhang (though Yun-Fat Chow is given ﬁrst billing), signaled the beginning of a
new era for the shero in popular culture. The ﬁlm, with Taiwanese director
Ang Lee at the helm, made $128 million in the United States alone on a $15
million investment and garnered four Academy Award wins.
Angelina Jolie, in the title role of Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (2001), headed
the top-grossing action ﬁlm with a woman in the lead role after Aliens (1986),
garnering a 2002 sequel (Lara Croft: Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life) and a proﬁt
of $50 million for the studio. Some anime ﬁlms have adopted female lead
characters, such as Hayao Miyazaki’s 2001 fantasy ﬁlm Spirited Away. Other
recent, action-oriented SF/F ﬁlms starring sheroes include the video-gameinspired, postapocalyptic Resident Evil (2002) and its sequel, Resident Evil: Apocalypse (2004); the supernatural thriller Ghost Ship (2002); the vampire–werewolf
battle ﬂick Underworld (2003) and its sequel, Underworld: Evolution (2006); and
two comic-book-inspired, dystopian pictures, Aeon Flux (2005) and Ultraviolet
(2006). Most of these ﬁlms feature women adopting the masculine-style hero
attributes of toughness, including physical stamina and power, emotional and
physical control, and facility with weapons.
The Critical Exceptions

Notable ﬁlms that have been critically identiﬁed as escaping from the prototypical masculinized shero include the German ﬁlm Run, Lola, Run (1998) and
Tank Girl (1995). In these two ﬁlms, scholars argue, the main characters avoid
the pitfalls of the masculinized shero because their characters are allowed a
wider emotional, physical, and psychological range than the narrowly prescribed masculine characteristics. Gallagher argues that Run, Lola, Run, in
addition to featuring a physically and psychologically strong central female
character played by Franke Potente, “locates a female protagonist at the center of its action narrative” and “demonstrates that the reassertion of a traditional, inﬂexible masculinity does not resolve this crisis” (Action Figures, 200,
202). Of 1995’s Tank Girl, Stein argues that the comic-book-inspired picture
features a shero who is “courageous, competent, and successful” with an
“irreverent wisecracking, exuberant, and deﬁant sense of humor” and does
not “imitate the stereotypical, excessive masculinity of the Byronic hero” (“She
Moves in Mysterious Ways,” 186).
THE FEMALE HERO IN TELEVISION
...............................................................................................................................
Lynda Rucker
The representation of women as action heroes in SF/F television has its
roots in characters from other genres, such as The Avengers’ Emma Peel. By
the late 1960s and through the 1970s, the ﬁrst female heroes were making
186
................

Heroes or Sheroes
their way into SF/F TV programming as icons like Wonder Woman, Batgirl,
and the bionic woman. However, the bionic woman was always under the
protection/direction of men, and neither Batgirl nor Wonder Woman was permitted to use serious physical force against villains.
Beginning in the mid-1990s, the woman as shero in SF/F television
exploded, with Xena: Warrior Princess and Buffy the Vampire Slayer being the
most studied and cited examples. Such representation of women in pop culture is often considered to be an outgrowth of Third Wave feminism, a movement begun in the late 1980s and early 1990s that rejected essentialist ideas
about gender (that is, the idea that certain qualities or characteristics were inherent to either men or women) and attempted to move beyond the white
middle-class focus of earlier movements to engage a younger generation.
Xena is based on a character that was originally introduced in the television show Hercules in March 1995. The popular character went on to star in
her own series, which ran from 1995 to 2001. Xena (Lucy Lawless) is a formerly evil warrior in ancient Greece attempting to atone for her past by protecting the weak and ﬁghting for justice, while struggling to contain the
violence and rage that consumed her in the past. She is beautiful but also has
a physically powerful appearance. The series is notable for its subtext of a
lesbian relationship between Xena and her sidekick Gabrielle, which implies
a freedom from the need to seek masculine approval. Even more signiﬁcant,
as particularly explored in Frances Early and Kathleen Kennedy’s Athena’s
Daughters (2003), the series’ setting places Xena ﬁrmly at the birth of Western
civilization and writes her into many of our founding cultural myths, insinuating the feminine into our largely patriarchal sense of where we in the Western world come from and who we are.
Buffy the Vampire Slayer features Buffy Summers as a California high
school student who has been called as a Slayer, the one girl in each generation imbued with superhuman strength to ﬁght the forces of supernatural
evil. Over the course of seven seasons, Buffy grows from a teenager who
resists her calling and longs for a “normal life” to a young woman who
accepts her role. Often described by creator Joss Whedon (who also wrote
the 1992 ﬁlm of the same name) as a direct repudiation to the stereotypical
female victim in horror ﬁlms, Buffy, as played by the small, blonde, conventionally attractive Sarah Michelle Gellar, reverses expectations for her physical type. The program alternately reinforces and challenges gender
stereotypes: Buffy is presented as a character who must control her sexual
appetite—for example, she has a dangerous weakness for vampire lovers—yet
the presentation of her sexuality is complex and realistic. She challenges, and
wins out over, the age-old patriarchy of the Council of Watchers and their
attempts to control her, but she succumbs unthinkingly to a desire to be fashionable, thin, and attractive to men. Like many contemporary working women
(but unlike her male action-hero counterparts), Buffy struggles with various
187
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

models of leadership and balancing an identity that requires her to be simultaneously caring and compassionate—she has been tasked with saving the
world, after all—and ruthless enough to accomplish those ends. Unlike Slayers
before her, Buffy resists the notion that she must work alone, attempting to
incorporate feminine ideas about cooperation and relationships into the individualistic, masculine hero mold; the degree of her success is a matter of some
critical controversy.
Other TV sheroes can be found in a variety of shows. The series Dark
Angel, which ran from 2000 to 2002, featured Jessica Alba as Max Guevara, a
genetically engineered superwarrior turned bicycle messenger, struggling to
survive in a bleak, cyberpunk-inﬂuenced near-future dystopia. One of the
series’ creators was James Cameron (the other was Charles H. Eglee), notable
for his direction of two iconic ﬁlm sheroes: Ellen Ripley of Aliens and Sarah
Connor of Terminator 2.
In 2007, the 1970s series The Bionic Woman, in which a secret government agency saves and rebuilds a traumatically injured woman with cybernetics that leave her capable of superhuman feats, was revived. Two other SF/
F television shows of the late 1990s and early twenty-ﬁrst century that
included shero ﬁgures, though not as the series’ central focus, were Farscape
(1999–2003), featuring alien (but human-looking) soldier Aeryn Sun, and Battlestar Galactica’s (2003–present) Starbuck (controversially gender-switched
from the male Starbuck in the original 1970s show). In fact, Starbuck, as portrayed by Katee Sackhoff, is arguably science ﬁction television’s most realistic
shero to date: a complex, troubled, deeply ﬂawed, yet gifted ﬁghter pilot, Starbuck eschews, for example, the skimpy or “feminine” attire of many action
sheroes and dresses instead like the soldier that she is. Because the writers of
Battlestar Galactica have attempted to create a gender-neutral universe, rather
than being the exception—a shero in a world that remains male-dominated—
Starbuck is only one of many women heroes who train, ﬁght, and perish as
equals alongside men. In the short-lived 2002 series Fireﬂy (also created by
Whedon), Zoe, a former soldier under Capt. Mal Reynolds and now his second
in command, is played by Afro-Cuban-American actor Gina Torres, a refreshing change from the mostly white landscape of television heroes and sheroes.
The TV shero has been the subject of work by feminist and media
scholars. Television in the United States is arguably the most market-driven
medium of all, with programs existing for the sole purpose of selling advertiser space. Critics are divided as to whether or not a shero can enforce a subversive, feminist agenda in such an environment or must simply function as
an updated projection of heterosexual male fantasies. Television sheroes generally do not challenge conventional ideas about beauty, but programs such
as Buffy and Xena in particular are “open texts,” fodder for a variety of
interpretations.
188
................

Heroes or Sheroes
Critics have argued that the ways in which bodies are framed in television shows liberate women from the objectiﬁcation of ﬁlm: television tends to
depend on long shots rather than close-ups, and thus women are seen as
whole beings rather than idealized parts. Furthermore, television arguably
permeates the culture more thoroughly than any other medium. Radical
notions about female power may be co-opted and sanitized by the mainstream capitalist corporations that produce television shows, but the market
is arguably indifferent to ideologies: that is, if sheroes sell, we will continue to
see them on TV. Even with their inconsistent, contradictory messages about a
woman’s place and potential, they already have reframed much of the conversation about gender in popular culture and carry the potential to effect
change in society’s ideas about women’s natures and capabilities.
See also Female Friendships; Sex Changes; chapters 6, 9, 11, 12, and 14.
Further Readings
Literature
Fries, Maureen. “Female Heroes, Heroines, and Counter-Heroes.” In Popular Arthurian Tradition, ed. Sally K. Slocum, 5–17. Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State University
Press, 1992.
Heilbrun, Carolyn G. Reinventing Womanhood. New York: W. W. Norton, 1979.
Pearson, Carol, and Katherine Pope. The Female Hero in American and British Literature. New
York: R. R. Bowker, 1981.
Pratt, Annis, et al. Archetypal Patterns in Women’s Fiction. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1981.
Russ, Joanna. “What’s a Heroine to Do?” In To Write Like a Woman: Essays in Feminism and Science Fiction. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995.

Comics
Daniels, Les. Wonder Woman: The Complete History. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2000.
Feiffer, Jules. The Great Comic Book Heroes. Seattle: Fantagraphics, 2003.
Marston, William, and Harry G. Peter. Wonder Woman Archives. Vol. 1. New York: DC Comics,
1998.
Marvel Comics. “Articles in Category ‘Women’” [online directory]. Marvel Universe. Http://
www.marvel.com/universe/category:women.
Robbins, Trina. The Great Women Superheroes. Northampton, MA: Kitchen Sink Press, 1996.
Robinson, Lilli. Wonder Women. New York: Routledge, 2004.
Siegel, Jerry, and Joe Shuster. Superman Chronicles. Vol. 1. New York: DC Comics, 2006.
Simone, Gail. “Women in Refrigerators” [online September 1999]. Http://www.unheardtaunts.
com/wir.

Film
Gallagher, Mark. Action Figures: Men, Action Films, and Contemporary Adventure Narratives.
New York: Palgrave McMillan, 2006.
Gallardo C., Ximena, and C. Jason Smith. Alien Woman: The Making of Lt. Ellen Ripley. New
York: Continuum, 2004.
189
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Inness, Sherri A. Tough Girls: Women Warriors and Wonder Women in Popular Culture. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999.
Stein, Atara. “She Moves in Mysterious Ways: The Byronic Heroine.” In The Byronic Hero in
Film, Fiction, and Television, 213–20. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press,
2004.

Television
Early, Frances, and Kathleen Kennedy, eds. Athena’s Daughters: Television’s New Women Warriors. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2003.
Heinecken, Dawn. The Warrior Women of Television: A Feminist Cultural Analysis of the New
Female Body in Popular Media Culture. New York: Peter Lang, 2003.
Inness, Sherrie A., ed. Action Chicks: New Images of Tough Women in Popular Culture. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.

190
................

19

Intersections of Race and Gender
YOLANDA HOOD

AND

ROBIN ANNE REID

RACE and gender, even when considered as separate elements of socially
constructed aspects of identity, have held complicated positions in the discussion of science ﬁction (SF) and fantasy literature. This chapter focuses primarily on the science ﬁction of the United States, although the later sections
include writers who are working to move out of binary racial categories, such
as the United States’ “white/black” structure. Writers mentioned in this chapter come from Canada, the United States, the Caribbean, and India. Latin
American and Mexican writers, whose work includes the fantastic genre of
magical realism, are discussed in other entries in the encyclopedia.
The histories of colonialism and immigration have shaped present
national cultures, languages, and political boundaries. Since class also affects
race and gender hierarchies, different cultural attitudes and languages shape
racial hierarchies in each nation. Gender in the context of this chapter
includes not only the social construction of masculinity and femininity but
also issues of sexuality, since some of the writers creating intersectional
works incorporate queer characters.

H
ISTORY
..............................................................................................................................
Since the early decades of pulp science ﬁction in the United States, the predominantly white and male writers and readers of SF tended to share the
assumption that scientiﬁc advancement, celebrated in their exciting new literature, would solve social problems by technological means. This utopian
view was supported by the national ideology of “American exceptionalism,”
the long-standing belief in the United States that this nation is superior to all
others, whether due to advancements in technology, the nature of political
ideology, the type of economic system, or some other national attribute, the
speciﬁcs of which have changed over time. Within the science ﬁction
191
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

community, some came to question such optimism rooted in technology
because of the U.S. development of and use of the atomic bomb. For that reason, among others, a number of writers in the fantastic genres have shifted
away from optimism since the middle of the twentieth century, starting with
the New Wave in science ﬁction during the 1960s and 1970s. The growing
range of genres that can be grouped under the term fantastic literature or speculative ﬁction, especially works drawing on the social sciences such as sociology and psychology, reﬂect this change in the community.
Another cause of change in the SF community has been the more than
a century of civil and human rights movements that have challenged power
hierarchies in the United States through changes in the legal system. However, the primary cause of the change is the growing diversity of writers and
readers of science ﬁction, which now include more than primarily white men,
with the addition of white women. Fantastic genres are beginning to consider
more clearly the changing narratives of race, of gender, and of the intersections between them. It is not possible to make a credible claim that the necessary intersectional work is now a dominant part of SF, but it is possible to
discuss the changes over time in dealing singly with race or gender, and the
growing number of writers who are working to move beyond having either
race or gender as the single focus of a work.
Historically, science ﬁction of the pulp era, from the 1920s to the 1940s
and even into the 1950s and 1960s, was perceived as being written for and by
“white boys with high-tech toys” (Hopkinson, interview, 148). The default
assumption for many writers is that whiteness is normative, and other races
are not mentioned because, within the work of literature, a world has been
created in which the dominant culture maintains the status quo. Maleness is
also perceived as normative in the historical narratives about science ﬁction.
There are works of science ﬁction and fantasy that do not address gender
relations at all, just as they often do not address race, and for similar reasons.
All the described social relations are status quo, or, as Joanna Russ pointed
out her 1970 essay “The Image of Women in Science Fiction,” most American
science ﬁction stories are set in futures in which technology has changed
many aspects of life, but the “speculation about social institutions and individual psychology” is missing, leaving the future gender roles equivalent to
that of “the American middle class with a little window dressing” (207). While
she did not specify the white middle class, that clearly is the group Russ is
referencing.
However, fantastic literatures cannot avoid the presence of beings other
than straight white males. Even when there seems to be a lack of a racial or
gendered presence, that apparent absence of the “Other” is undercut by the
presence of a whole range of other beings, whether it’s science ﬁction’s robots
and aliens or fantasy and horror’s supernatural creatures, especially those
assigned to serve the white middle-class humans or to positions of darkness
192
................

Intersections of Race and Gender
and evil. These beings, in terms of race or gender or both, can serve as ﬁgurative statements about society, race or gender relations, and the Other, however that other may be ﬁgured.
There are far more scholarly studies about gender in science ﬁction
and fantasy than there are concerning race or the intersection of the two.
The scholarship on women and science ﬁction began appearing in the 1970s,
ranging from essays by science ﬁction writers such as Russ and Ursula K. Le
Guin. Fandom saw the creation of feminist fanzines in the mid-1970s and of
WisCon, the ﬁrst feminist science ﬁction convention, in 1977. Academic
publications by scholars such as Marleen Barr, Sarah Lefanu, and Natalie
Rosinsky, incorporating feminist theory and literary analysis, followed in the
1980s. A general subject search for scholarship on “women and science
ﬁction” in 2007 in the academic database for literature and languages, the
Modern Languages Association Database, resulted in 372 sources listed. A
search for “race and science ﬁction” found 91.
Individual articles on race, or race and gender, in fantastic genres in all
media (ﬁlm, television, literary) have appeared in journals dedicated to science ﬁction studies (such as Extrapolation, Femspec, and Science Fiction Studies).
Other journals or collections, focusing on the larger ﬁeld of African-American
literature, often include an essay on race in science ﬁction or fantasy.
In 1997, the ﬁrst collection of essays on race and science ﬁction in fantastic literatures, Into the Darkness Peering: Race and Color in the Fantastic, edited
by Elisabeth Anne Leonard, was published in the “Contributions to the Study
of Science Fiction and Fantasy” series by Greenwood Press. The collection, its
title drawn from “The Raven” by Edgar Allan Poe, brings together thirteen
essays by scholars of the fantastic, including work on constructions of race in
works by white SF authors (Le Guin, Robert A. Heinlein, Stephen King, and
Robert Silverberg). One essay, by Leonard, focuses on race, sexuality, and class
in Elizabeth A. Lynn’s Chronicles of Tornor series. Essays on authors Octavia
Butler and Leslie F. Stone are included. Other essays take a broader view,
looking at racial constructions in science ﬁction and cyberpunk.
’s novel about Tituba, the ﬁrst
One essay focuses on Maryse Conde

woman to be accused of witchcraft in the Salem Witch Trials of 1692. Conde
is a Guadeloupean writer, born on a small French-speaking Caribbean island.
She was educated in France and later lived and taught in Ghana, Senegal,
and London. She taught at universities in Europe and the United States, retir’s
ing from Columbia University, where she taught French, in 2004. Conde
work deals with the intersections of colonialism in Africa and the West Indies.
She has written historical and fantastic works for adults and children. In
 creates an autobiographical transcription of Tituba’s life,
Tituba, Conde
’s ﬁction is an
including her initiation into a healing type of witchcraft. Conde
example of contemporary intersectional work in the fantastic.
193
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

The following sections discuss scholarship on race, then on gender, and
ﬁnally on the intersectional work that has begun to be published. The information presented is by necessity selective, not comprehensive.

RACE
...............................................................................................................................
Recent scholarship in sociology and critical race studies, as well as antiracist
work in civil rights organizations and activist communities, emphasizes that
the social construction of “whiteness” as a racial category depends upon creating other categories to deﬁne whiteness against. In the United States, whiteness has been deﬁned in opposition to “blackness.” The same sort of binary
opposition can be seen in how “maleness” is deﬁned in opposition to
“femaleness,” and “straight” in opposition to “queer.” Yet the centuries of European colonialism resulted in a variety of racialized hierarchies in a number
of countries. The social construction of racial categories is connected to the
historical context, so that portrayals of race, as well as gender, differ in some
respects over time.
In Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination, Toni Morrison
analyzes how white authors in the United States historically constructed
opposing but interdependent images of “Americanness” (whiteness, claiming
the status of the Americas for one nation) and “Africanness” (blackness). She
considers imagery, plot, and characterization in the publications of such canonical authors as Willa Cather, William Faulkner, Ernest Hemingway, Mark
Twain, and, most importantly from the science ﬁction and fantasy standpoint,
Edgar Allan Poe. In her discussion of Poe’s The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym,
Morrison argues that no “early American writer is more important to the concept of American Africanism” (32), describing the impact of Poe’s images of
powerful whiteness set against the images of dead or controlled blackness. It
is important to note that Morrison coins and uses the term “American
Africanism” for the trope of blackness that was constructed in a Eurocentric
culture.
The constructions of race and gender are highly contested variables in
narratives of Americanness, as Morrison shows, whether those narratives are
historical, biographical, political, or literary. Science ﬁction and fantasy literature may, for some writers and readers, seem to present an escape from having to confront racial and gendered conﬂicts. That escape may have been less
openly challenged during the earlier decades of the twentieth century; however, ongoing debates about race in literature, connected to civil rights challenges to the dominant power hierarchies, show the impossibility of escape
today.
Recent scholarship has reclaimed the efforts of writers who challenged
the status quo. The debates tend to center around different approaches
authors take to the topics of race and gender in science ﬁction and fantasy.
194
................

Intersections of Race and Gender
These approaches range from ignoring the existence of races other than
whites to creating metaphors of race through the presence of aliens, robots,
cyborgs, or androids. Even when the primary characters are white men, the
presence of other beings can call into question the constructedness of whiteness and maleness. The existence of the white male dominance in SF has also
been challenged with recent work focusing on the contributions of Jewish
immigrants to science, mathematics, and technology in the United States, as
well as to the development of science ﬁction. While Judaism is a religion, the
nineteenth-century racist ideology and laws in the United States often categorized Jews as an inferior race, along with the Italians and Irish.
The growing status of science in American culture, especially in the
decades leading up to and after World War II, accompanied by the exclusion
of Jewish Americans, African Americans, Asian Americans, and other minority cultures from elite institutions, resulted in a 1950s stereotype of SF as having a “Straight, White, Middle-Class Males Only” sign prominently displayed.
Fantasy, with its roots ﬁrmly in the Northern European and Celtic mythologies
ﬁrst popularized by J. R. R. Tolkien, offered little contrast to the AngloEuropean atmosphere of SF as a literature and as a community. The whiteness of the science ﬁction community during the 1950s was so extreme that
two white male fans, Terry Carr and Peter Graham, invented a ﬁctional black
fan, Carl Brandon, and wrote under his name to add to the “diversity” of the
fan community.
However, in most science ﬁction and fantasy of the 1920s through
1960s, it was rare for race to be mentioned at all. At best, some writers suggested that, in the future, racism has disappeared. Any reference to race relations therefore is a non sequitur because all races have meshed together to
lange of a human race. While that meltingcreate some sort of futuristic me
pot idea may ensure racial equality, this assumption in and of itself is highly
political, considering that in many cases the authors rarely present how society’s races merged together or how racial equality came into existence. Given
the protests and riots in the United States during the 1960s over integration
in the public schools and the attempts to end laws against interracial marriage, speciﬁcs about how a conﬂict-free merging of races occurred would
have been difﬁcult for any writer to imagine.
The Invisible Writers

Those writers most easily able to avoid the assumption of whiteness as the
norm are ethnic minority writers. Just as the contributions of European Jewish
immigrants to science and science ﬁction are overlooked, so too are works of
proto–science ﬁction by African Americans. Sheree R. Thomas, the editor of
Dark Matter (2000) and Dark Matter: Reading the Bones (2004), has brought together a century’s worth of African Diasporic speculative ﬁction, ﬁnding
works by writers often taught in African-American literature classes (W. E. B.
195
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Du Bois, Amiri Baraka, Charles W. Chesnutt) but not in science ﬁction classes,
or, at times, taught in science ﬁction classes but not in literature classes.
Thomas’s work also features a variety of contemporary writers of speculative ﬁction (such as Steven Barnes, Octavia Butler, Charles R. Saunders,
and Nisi Shawl), as well as work by authors like Ishmael Reed who are rarely
considered “genre writers,” in the sense of writing fantasy or speculative ﬁction. Her focus on the speculative nature of ﬁction rising from the African
Diaspora leads to her use of the metaphoric title “Dark Matter,” a title taken
from NASA’s glossary: “nonluminous form of matter which has not been directly
observed but whose existence has been deducted by its gravitational effects”
(Dark Matter, x). Thomas’s anthologies show the artiﬁciality of boundaries:
between the literary canon and the genre of science ﬁction literature, between
“white science ﬁction” and “diasporic literature,” between “black” and “white,”
and between “heterosexual” and “homosexual.”
She includes an essay by Samuel R. Delany, often identiﬁed (incorrectly) as the ﬁrst African-American science ﬁction writer. In his “Racism and
Science Fiction,” Delany acknowledges the earlier work by other AfricanAmerican science ﬁction writers, saying that he might be considered the ﬁrst
to earn a living from his writing. The main focus of the essay is his experiences in science ﬁction in the context of the ways in which racism as a system
affected him. He begins by recognizing the growing number of African-American
writers working in multiple fantastic genres during the 1990s and earlier.
Delany’s essay is a call to action, to engage in “systems analysis,” starting
with the programming tracks at conventions where, he notes, he and another
African-American writer, such as Nalo Hopkinson or Butler, are often paired,
regardless of the differences in their work, because of their shared blackness.
Delany’s essay sparked discussion about race at WisCon and resulted in
the founding of the Carl Brandon Society.
The mission of the Carl Brandon Society is to increase racial and ethnic diversity in the production of and audience for speculative ﬁction. (http://www.
carlbrandon.org/index.html)

His essay also discusses the extent to which the intersections of racism and sexism operate.

GENDER
...............................................................................................................................
The majority of early science ﬁction simply did not feature women characters
at all or placed them in stereotypical roles as heroines: the mother, the wife,
the scientist’s beautiful and dutiful daughter asking for an explanation.
Another approach for some male science ﬁction writers, from the 1920s to
the 1970s, was to reverse the power hierarchy. Joanna Russ, in her 1980 essay
196
................

Intersections of Race and Gender
“Amor Vincit Fœminam: The Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction,” analyzes ten
stories by men (and one by James Tiptree Jr., whom, at that time, she did not
know was a woman). She argues that while the stories vary in tone and quality,
they share one common essentialist assumption: that biology is sacred, that a
woman—even one born into a ruling class oppressing men—will “naturally”
become submissive when faced with, in effect, sex with a Manly Hero.
Although 1970s feminist science ﬁction writers and the scholars who
later focused on their work tended to dismiss all published works from the
earlier decades, recent scholarship by scholars such as Eric Leif Davin, Robin
Roberts, and Lisa Yaszek has argued, convincingly, for the existence of protofeminist themes in the works of authors such as Judith Merril, C. L. Moore,
and Leslie F. Stone. When more openly feminist works began to be published,
stories appeared showing worlds in which women were oppressed to the
point of having to develop subversive systems of survival, especially with the
feminist utopias and dystopias.

M
OV I N G T OWA R D I N T E R S E C T I O N S
..............................................................................................................................
The majority of women writers and characters created during the 1920s to
1970s period were white, often accepting the same default whiteness as their
male counterparts, with a few notable exceptions such as Marge Piercy’s
Woman on the Edge of Time (1977) whose Mexican-American protagonist, Consuela Ramos, is poor and institutionalized by white doctors who drug her.
Only during the last decades of the twentieth century and the ﬁrst decade of
the twenty-ﬁrst have a number of writers, especially women of color, begun
publishing science ﬁction and fantasy that explores the intersections of race
and gender and critiques patriarchal and racist social structures, as well as white
middle-class feminism’s theories and social structures. A number of these
writers’ works might also be discussed in the context of postcolonial theories.
The term postcolonial comes from postcolonial studies, a theoretical and
academic ﬁeld that originated in Edward Said’s criticism of the negative
“Western” (American and European) cultural constructions of the “Orient”
(Orientalisms, 1918). While the terms and methods associated with the ﬁeld
are extensive and complicated, the analysis of the power relations among
those European nations that colonized other societies can be seen in the
intersections and fantastic ﬁctions of a number of contemporary writers who
move beyond racial and gender binaries such as white/black or heterosexual/
homosexual. Postcolonial writers, whether of theory or ﬁction, explore the
multiple and interlocking areas of oppression and resistance, emphasize the
difﬁculties of hybridization and creolization instead of the pleasant blandness
of the “melting pot,” and write about the complexities of colonial pasts, contemporary presents, and a number of futures, none of which feature technological optimism or American exceptionalism.
197
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Samuel R. Delany (1942– )

Samuel R. Delany is known for an impressive body of work that includes
award-winning science ﬁction novels, science ﬁction criticism and theory, autobiography, historical ﬁction, queer theory, and pornography. His critical work
covers a range of genres and media. He has won four Nebula and two Hugo
awards, as well as other awards honoring him for achievement both in science
ﬁction and gay and lesbian writing. His science ﬁction is often set in postapocalyptic worlds and features strong female characters as well as societies in which
the constructions of sex and gender have shifted radically from twentiethcentury North America. Dhalgren (1975) explores intersections of race, class,
and gender through an intense focus on language and consciousness and an
experimental narrative structure. His later work, in ﬁction, theory, and criticism, continues to explore the same types of complex and dense intersections.
Octavia Butler (1947–2006)

Born and raised in Pasadena, California, in an ethnically mixed but poor
neighborhood, Octavia Butler’s science ﬁction features black women as protagonists and avoids utopian themes. Her novels deal with complex hierarchies of power that are not limited to racial or gender binaries; a global rather
than a national focus; and the fear of change, along with the absolute necessity to accept change. A central philosophy of her Xenogenesis series is that
the combination of intelligence and hierarchies in humanity is ultimately
lethal. The aliens in that series, the Oankali, a three-gendered species who
arrive on Earth after a nuclear war, try to breed out those traits. Butler’s ﬁction deals more with graphic issues of oppression, slavery, violence, and sexuality than does most science ﬁction.
Butler’s work often crosses disciplinary boundaries, being taught in science ﬁction and African-American history and literature classes. In one of her
best-known novels, Kindred (1979), Dana, an African-American writer married
to a white man in twentieth-century California, is inexplicably pulled back in
time to the antebellum South, where she must save a white boy who is one of
her ancestors through the rape of one of the women he owns as a slave. The
focus on how slavery is constructed, working on twentieth-century “modern”
characters, emphasizes the power of social construction.
Nalo Hopkinson (1960– )

Nalo Hopkinson was born in Jamaica and lived in the Caribbean until moving
to Toronto in 1977. Her fantastic works come out of the blend of cultures and
histories—Caribbean, African, European, and Asian—and the fantastic or
speculative elements are real. Her work is often discussed in the context of
magical realism, although she calls it speculative ﬁction. Her published works
include Brown Girl in the Ring (1988), Midnight Robber (2000), The Salt Roads
198
................

Intersections of Race and Gender
(2003), and a number of anthologies and short stories. Her award-winning
work presents complex, multilayered narratives of gender, sexual, linguistic,
and cultural differences in stories that deal with exiles, multiple mythologies,
and the hybridization of cultures.
Hopkinson worked with Uppinder Mehan to coedit So Long Been Dreaming: Postcolonial Science Fiction and Fantasy (2004), which brings together nineteen stories by writers of color, including Carole McDonnell, Karin Lowachee,
Nisi Shawl, and Sheree Thomas. The collection has an introduction by Delany
and an essay by Mehan, both of whom live and work in Toronto. A number of
reviewers have noted that these stories are hard to categorize as “simply” science ﬁction, fantasy, or postcolonial literature. Those critics who assume that
genre ﬁction cannot have a literary quality are concerned that the stories will
be lost if the collection is marketed next to the science ﬁction literature,
which they assume is about bug-eyed monsters. Some critics, working more
in the ﬁeld of science ﬁction, critique the lack of a recognizable plot in the
more “literary” offerings in the anthology.

Other Important Writers

A number of other contemporary women create intersectional and postcolonial works across a variety of media and genres. The list cannot be comprehensive, but those discussed below serve as an introduction. Many of the
writers have been published in the Thomas and Hopkinson/Mehan anthologies discussed above.
Linda Addison is the ﬁrst African-American writer to win the Bram
Stoker Award from the Horror Writers Association, for her poetry collection
Consumed, Reduced to Beautiful Grey Ashes (2001). She publishes ﬁction and
essays as well. Zainab Amadahy, a black Cherokee, is a writer, singer, songwriter, and activist who runs a community organization for First Nations people in Toronto. Her science ﬁction novel Moons of Palmares (1997) is a feminist
and postcolonial story set on a future world.
Tananarive Due has published seven novels, including a civil rights
memoir, science ﬁction, and supernatural thrillers. The Living Blood (2001)
received the 2002 American Book Award.
Jewelle Gomez’s novel The Gilda Stories (1991) twice won the Lambda
Award, given for outstanding lesbian gay bisexual transgender (LGBT) works.
The novel’s protagonist, Gilda, is the ﬁrst African-American lesbian vampire,
and Gomez is credited with creating a new vampire mythology.
Andrea Hairston is a professor of theater and Afro-American studies at
Smith College. She has written plays, stories, novels, and essays. An excerpt
from her novel Mindscape (2006) appeared in Dark Matter: Reading the Bones,
and “Griots of the Galaxy” (2004) was published in So Long Been Dreaming.
Mindscape is set on a future Earth and features a multilingual, multicultural
199
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

group of characters who are trying to end a lengthy war caused by a mysterious entity known as the Barrier.
Karin Lowachee’s ﬁrst novel, Warchild (2002), was listed as a ﬁnalist for
the Philip K. Dick Award in 2002. The novel tells the story of an eight-year-old
boy who, as a slave for an alien race, is trained to become a spy. Her other
two novels are set in the same war, but focus on different protagonists. Cagebird (2005) won the 2006 Gaylactic Spectrum Award (given by the Gaylactic
Spectrum Awards Foundation, for positive treatment of LGBT topics in science
ﬁction, fantasy, and horror) and the Prix Aurora Award (given by Canadian
Science Fiction and Fantasy Association).
Nnedi Okorafor-Mbachu is an American-born writer whose parents
emigrated from Nigeria before she was born, although the family regularly
returned for visits. Her young adult novel Zarah the Windseeker (2005) was on
the shortlist for the 2005 Carl Brandon Parallax and Kindred awards and was
nominated for the 2005 Locus Award for best ﬁrst novel. The novel is set on a
different planet but Okorafor-Mbachu’s culture is based on Nigerian folklore.
Her essay, “Stephen King’s Super-Duper Magical Negroes,” won the 2005
Strange Horizons Reader’s Choice Award for Non-Fiction.
Eden Robinson is a Haisla writer who lives in British Columbia and has
published three books that are described as “Northern Gothic.” Her collection
of short stories, Traplines (2001), was a New York Times Editor’s Choice and
Notable Book of the Year.
Nisi Shawl publishes ﬁction and essays. With Cynthia Ward, she has
coauthored Writing the Other: A Practical Guide, which grew out of their experience at the 1992 Clarion West Workshop where writers expressed their fear of
writing characters from different ethnic backgrounds. Shawl and Ward created a workbook and workshop on how to avoid “getting it wrong” when writing about characters whose ethnicity, gender, sexual preference, or age differ
from the writer’s own.
Michelle Sagara, who also publishes under Michelle West, is a JapaneseCanadian author who has published several series, including the Sacred Hunt
and Sun Sword series, as well as numerous short stories.
Vandana Singh was born and brought up in New Delhi. She teaches
physics and writes science ﬁction and fantasy, primarily for children. Her ﬁrst
novel, Younguncle Comes to Town (U.S. publication 2006), is one of the few children’s books published in America that is set in India.

Further Readings
Antczak, Janice. “Octavia E. Butler: New Designs for a Challenging Future.” In AfricanAmerican Voices in Young Adult Literature: Tradition, Transition, Transformation, ed. Karen
Patricia Smith, 311–36. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1994.
Carl Brandon Society [online]. Http://www.carlbrandon.org.
200
................

Intersections of Race and Gender
Delany, Samuel R. “Racism and Science Fiction.” In Dark Matter, ed. Sheree R. Thomas,
383–97. New York: Warner Books, 2000.
Ginway, Elizabeth M. “Vampires, Werewolves and Strong Women: Alternate Histories or the
Re-writing of Race and Gender in Brazilian History.” Extrapolation 44, no. 3 (Fall
2003): 283–95.
Hopkinson, Nalo. Interview by Diane Glave. Callaloo 26, no. 1 (2003): 146–59.
Jesser, Nancy. “Blood, Genes and Gender in Octavia Butler’s Kindred and Dawn.” Extrapolation
43, no. 1 (Spring 2002): 36–61.
Kelso, Sylvia. “Connie Willis’s Civil War: Re-Dreaming America as Science Fiction.” Foundation 73 (Summer 1998): 67–76.
Lothian, Alexis. “Grinding Axes and Balancing Oppositions: The Transformation of Feminism in Ursula K. Le Guin’s Science Fiction.” Extrapolation 47, no. 3 (Winter 2006):
380–95.
Mohanty, Chandra Talpade. Feminism without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003.
Moody, Nickianne. “Displacements of Gender and Race in Space: Above and Beyond.” In Aliens
R Us: The Other in Science Fiction Cinema, ed. Ziauddin Sardar and Sean Cubitt, 51–73.
London: Pluto, 2002.
Morrison, Toni. Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1992.
Ono, Kent A. “To Be a Vampire on Buffy the Vampire Slayer: Race and (‘Other’) Socially Marginalizing Positions on Horror TV.” In Fantasy Girls: Gender in the New Universe of Science Fiction and Fantasy Television, ed. Elyce Rae Helford, 163–86. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2000.
Rashley, Lisa Hammond. “Revisioning Gender: Inventing Women in Ursula K. Le Guin’s
Nonﬁction.” Biography 30, no. 1 (Winter 2007): 22–47.
Roberts, Robin A. “Science, Race, and Gender in Star Trek: Voyager.” In Fantasy Girls: Gender
in the New Universe of Science Fiction and Fantasy Television, ed. Elyce Rae Helford,
203–21. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2000.
Singer, Sandra. “So Long Been Dreaming: How Does the Subaltern Speak?” Science Fiction
Foundation [online]. Http://www.sf-foundation.org/publications/academictrack/
singer.php.
Smith, Stephanie A. “Octavia Butler: A Retrospective.” Feminist Studies 33, no. 2 (Summer
2007): 385–93.
Soyka, David. “Nalo Hopkinson Uses SF to Probe the Inner and Outer Worlds of Alienation.”
[Interview of Nalo Hopkinson.] Sci Fi Weekly, no. 232 (2001) [online]. Http://www.
sciﬁ.com/sfw/issue232/interview2.html.
Weinbaum, Batya. “Race and Culture.” Femspec 4, no. 2 (2004): 199–313.

201
................

20

Intersections of Class and Gender
DONALD M. HASSLER

THE RANGE of possibility and variation in gender in fantastic literature
stretches from the monster and his lovable mate created by Dr. Frankenstein
in Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley’s novel published in the early nineteenth century to the egalitarian world that Connie Ramos extrapolates, or possibly hallucinates, in Marge Piercy’s novel published during the mid-1970s. The latter,
Woman on the Edge of Time (1976), looks forward several centuries to a society
where the gender roles are radically mixed, but Piercy’s vision, like so much
science ﬁction, applies to her own time as well. Similarly, Shelley’s haunted
vision of what was happening, or at least thought about, in science and society
of the early nineteenth century was so strong that initial revolutionary movements toward change and progress in gender roles and toward a less class-rigid
society suffered setbacks for the major part of the Victorian Era. Her husband,
Percy Bysshe Shelley, had predicted accurately that the fear of atheism and a
society of mixed values and mixed genders would lead to a major religious
revival and defense of stable values during the remaining decades of the 1800s.
As a result, thinking about the possibilities in gender were more or less
put on hold by the extremity of these early visions, in spite of the fact that,
since the time of Shelley, women writers of all genres have contributed to the
evolution of the strong gendered voice in the usually male-dominated genre of
science ﬁction. A further irony, consistent with the resistance toward change
in Victorian times, is that Mary Shelley herself ended her long literary life primarily as a memory keeper for her dead poet husband. The young revolutionary who left her home to live with a man she was not married to became the
devoted wife of a dead revolutionary in nonrevolutionary England.
F E M A L E E D U C AT I O N A N D T H E F R E N C H R E VO L U T I O N
...............................................................................................................................
The most extreme vision for changes in both gender and class in society came
with the fall of the Bastille and the outlawing of the French nobility. The
202
................

Intersections of Class and Gender
French Revolution in 1789 exerted a profound inﬂuence on both Mary Shelley
and her husband, but ambivalence about the nature of women existed among
progressive writers from Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) on. The growing
belief that individuals needed special education to become women emphasized the assumption that the gender role was not innate. Writers after Rousseau such as Erasmus Darwin (1731–1802), Mary Wollstonecraft (1759–1797),
and Hannah More (1745–1833) are not often included in the canon of science
ﬁction, but each was a science “projector” to use the revolutionary term that
Daniel Defoe (1660–1731) had made so popular a century before the revolution. These writers questioned gender roles under the guise of training individuals to perform those roles.
This dynamic continues whenever and wherever writers are allowed to
extrapolate about gender roles. The destruction of the French nobility, or their
forced exile, provided the necessary model to make such change seem plausible. But even in England, with the trial of Queen Caroline in 1820, the matter
of the nature of highest class of women was questioned. Caroline was the
separated wife of the new King George IV and the mother of Princess Charlotte,
who was born nine months after what was possibly the only night the couple
spent together. Like Henry VIII, the new king wanted to rid himself of his
wife, and the ensuing legal action received extensive news coverage. As a
result, nearly all of England, led by William Cobbett, sided with the queen
and against the old class system. The social and legal arguments for gender
rights, property rights, and access to the princess became explicit. Princess
Charlotte fueled the public emotions further with her sad death in childbirth
just as her mother’s radical moves—or the moves made for her by the politics
of the time—were taking shape.
These rights were associated with the queen’s desired separation from
her class in society; England feared a real revolutionary crisis similar to the
one that had taken place on the Continent. One context for this political discussion was the recently published work by Thomas Malthus (1766–1834) on
the sexual pressures for population increase. Thus the question of how nobility, and the noble classes, were to be isolated and nurtured in society was
inescapably tied to the question of the nature of woman.
As the idea of a Malthusian classless society of great natural fecundity was beginning to evolve, later revolutionary movement among the
lower classes challenged the class structure. The lower classes had genuine
Malthusian and Marxian faith in the power of nature. But the French at
the end of the eighteenth century were led by members of the upper middle classes and the aristocrats themselves, and neither Percy nor Mary
Shelley nor Malthus were themselves from the poor and lower classes.
Similarly, Mary Shelley both generated a wonderful start to the changes in
gender understanding and gender roles and remained a devoted wife and
widow.
203
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

THE VICTORIAN BALANCE
...............................................................................................................................
When young Queen Victoria came to the throne in England in 1837, her longevity and strength of identity and role, both in her class and her gender,
were welcomed. Percy Shelley had predicted conservative reaction, as noted
above, and it seemed to reach everywhere from science to writing to religion.
Eventually in the Victorian Era, Sigmund Freud deﬁned women as having
their own innate and special sort of illness which he called hysteria. The
Church and the upper classes maintained social control during the Victorian
Era, and, contrary to what had begun to develop in the literature of the
Enlightenment with writers such as Aphra Behn and others, strong women
who wanted to write felt that they would be wise to write as men. George
Sand (1804–1876) and George Eliot (1819–1880) are the best-known examples.
Even in the residue of the Victorian Era after the death of the queen, a
talented writer from a great noble family that had survived the French Revolution wrote with a male-sounding pen name, constructing the persona of a
classless writer divorced from her high class in society. Philomene de LevisMirepoix, whose married name was the Countess Philomene de la ForestDivonne, produced exotic ﬁction under the pen name Claude Sylve in the
early twentieth century. She was a friend and sometime translator of Edith
Wharton and attended the Wharton salons in Paris as well as the literary
circles overseen by Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas, two more nearly genderless and classless women.
Paris at the time Sylve ﬂourished was nearly as revolutionary as it had
been 120 years earlier. Attempts to overcome the combination of high class
and ﬁxed gender roles were challenged by the political, social, and economic
rifts produced in World War I. This challenge eventually resulted in some success, as Piercy, Pamela Zoline, and others afterward show in their work. But
an effort was made by one woman writer, at least, to maintain Victorian values. Wharton herself wrote ghost stories, just as Henry James and Arthur
Machen did, in order to express the sense of haunting change. Wharton is
ambivalent about impending change in all her work. Divorce was one of her
key themes, so strongly imaged that echoes of the Queen Caroline case are
heard nearly a century later.
Wharton wrote and worked for a solid sense of female independence.
Unlike H. G. Wells, and yet with a similar ambivalence in tone to his A Modern
Utopia (1905), Wharton allows herself tantalizing hints of the “no place” of
utopia in her many tales on class and gender; she never embraces that place
in the way that the women writers who came after her did so radically. Her
hero, Newland Archer, is torn between the old woman and the new woman,
and his true love, who like the Countess Philomene, married into the nobility,
declares ﬁrmly that there is no such place where they can live without the
old categories.
204
................

Intersections of Class and Gender
Wharton’s haunting ambivalence of desire is an attempt at Freudian
analysis with only the remotest hope for cure. Her work on the body and her
explicit writing about her own sexuality together constitute one of the most
fascinating literary and scholarly detective stories of modern times. On
female sexuality, she is actually nearly as good as many of her more radical
sisters of the future, but, at the same time, she longs for the old ﬁxed gender
roles and class roles of the Victorian Era.

T..............................................................................................................................
H E WO M A N B E YO N D C AT E G O RY
The bravery and balanced ambivalence of Edith Wharton could not be maintained, however, under the pressure of the ongoing revolution in culture and
the economy that swept the rest of the century. Twentieth-century movements for women’s rights that began with the right to vote constitute a sort
of inevitable narrative toward long-anticipated breakthroughs in the transformation of class into classlessness and gender expectations into gender and
transgender experimentation. The naming of things well preceded the actual
changes, just as all the animals had to be named in Eden even as the processes of evolution were created to challenge the names.
By the time of the great debate in 1977 over who James Tiptree Jr.
actually was—even though Alice Sheldon had created several pen names for
her work and “Racoona Sheldon” simply meant the “masked Sheldon”—
progress had become so rapid that it was actually playful. Debbie Notkin said
later that she had hoped, in fact, that Tiptree would remain a male because it
was good to have a man writer who understood women and class so well.
Joanna Russ, who began as a devoted disciple of Tiptree, also said that she
could not have learned to write if she had not thought of herself as a “sort of
fake man,” as she wrote in a letter to Tiptree. In her biography of Tiptree, Julie
Phillips argues that Sheldon thought of her work as a sort of game playing. In
other words, utopian growing places were actually being found in the revolution where games and change could be nurtured freely. The idea of a woman
writer masking herself with a man’s name became a much more liberated
and expansive possibility than it had been for George Eliot when it had been
so solemnly undertaken.
The image of a modern utopia, however, a place to grow, may have
found its best expression with the women. Earlier speculations by Wells in A
Modern Utopia both anticipate and build on Marxian theorizing about possible
species change in society, as well as, most recently, the “singularity” ideas of
utopists such as Vernor Vinge and Greg Egan. But it is the botanist voice in
the early Wells that seems to have been the most fertile image. The botanic
life form that Ursula K. Le Guin’s surveyors discover far beyond the human
Ekumen resembles an entity as slow and massive as the mind of God, itself or
herself neither human nor male heroic at all, nor aristocratically classed.
205
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

It perceives all things at all times simultaneously. But even with such speculation about connectedness and about inevitable linkages in this revolutionary
manner, the history of feminism has been marked with distinct disjunctions,
especially during the 1960s and 1970s. In most science ﬁction, the necessary
alien is the enemy that serves to exaggerate human heroism.

THE REVOLUTION POINTS TO THE FUTURE
...............................................................................................................................
The real change in this narrative came when writers began to imagine
humans as aliens. The Female Man (1975) by Joanna Russ may have been one
of the most effective examples of this change because she posited an
Amazon world with only women. This world seemed more actual and modern than a repeat of the myths that included the heroic single-breasted warrior women. Then Marge Piercy created the Mattapoisett of her heroine
Connie in Woman on the Edge of Time, published the year after Russ, a place
that seems like a genuine utopia of real change. Connie is something new
in speciation, not to mention class, in science ﬁction, and Piercy’s novel is
ambiguous about whether she is insane or a genuine advance in character.
During the same time, Ursula K. Le Guin was sending ﬁctional survey teams
to the edges of the Ekumen.
What seems most interesting; however, are the choices that are presented at this move into this new century and at this century anniversary of
A Modern Utopia. Most recently, Nancy Kress is in the process of narrating a
set of stories driven by an alien species that she calls the Vines, and even
though it is not literary allusion that is most important in these stories, the
echoes from the Le Guin ﬁction about World 4470 in the story titled “Vaster
Than Empires and More Slow” are signiﬁcant.
Some of the most fertile and “botanic” innovations in character speculation and in social organization, the fruits of feminism, appear to have roots
both deep and far back in time, as well as to have links that are closer and
even conscious. Perhaps it is not just a coincidence that Kress was married to
the science ﬁction novelist Charles Shefﬁeld, who earlier had become interested in Erasmus Darwin and published a book called Erasmus Magister in
1982. Shefﬁeld died of a brain tumor in 2002 when Kress was working on her
botanic Vine series. She went on to ﬁnish the series, giving her readers a genderless and classless “no place” that is provocatively utopian in the tradition
that Le Guin, Joan Slonczewski, and other women writers established in the
early years of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Kress must have been inﬂuenced by Le Guin’s story. Not only are the
Vines—a strange, nonhuman species that is a totally connected botanic
unity—slow and thorough in its godlike intelligence but it is also, of course,
uniformly “green” due to photosynthesis. Thus Kress is further able to echo
Le Guin in an evocation of the great seventeenth-century warrior poet
206
................

Intersections of Class and Gender
Marvell. As the human protagonists work to communicate with the Vines in
the second of Kress’s two volumes set in this world, she quotes a substantial
passage from Marvell’s “The Garden” (1681) that images the feminist and distinctly botanic hope for peace in a time of war and says that this peace
resides primarily with intelligence: “it creates, transcending these, / Far other
worlds, and other seas; / Annihilating all that’s made / To a green thought in
a green shade.” If Wells in 1905 had been ambivalent about the hopes for a
modern utopia and used his botanist speaker to convey this ambivalence, the
women writers in science ﬁction and fantasy a century later resolve this
ambivalence in a genuine hopefulness.

P..............................................................................................................................
O S T M O D E R N L I B E R AT I O N
A recent textbook on methodology in the social sciences expresses the less
utopian underbelly that has accompanied recent changes in the understanding of gender and class, as well as in the writing that has come from this
understanding. The radical and fundamental thinking has not only resolved
ambivalence into the ﬁctions of hope mentioned above but also established
so much liberation that there is less and less “government” or agreed consensus about both gender and class. The textbook Experiments in Knowing: Gender
and Method in the Social Sciences (2000) is based on the postmodern attitude
that meaning is always multiple, shifting, and uncertain. This moment is one
that Marge Piercy anticipated so well in her 1976 novel. An experimental story
by Pamela Zoline, “The Heat Death of the Universe” (1967) is one of the best
expressions of the postmodern statement of a total lack of ﬁxity. In the story,
the grand adventure and the grand narrative that is similar to an Isaac
Asimov or Robert A. Heinlein narrative becomes a “kitchen” narrative, leaving
potentiality as all that remains.
Perhaps only the self-conscious genre of science ﬁction, even though it
was the Moorcock New Wave rebellion, could spawn Zoline’s work. Not only is
science ﬁction highly genre conscious and does it keep replaying the same
tropes to remind itself of genre conﬁdence, but the heroic male gender role is
also among the most reliable of those repeating tropes. The Zoline story questions everything, just as the postmodern project does.
Perhaps the phrase that William Butler Yeats coined in his 1928 poem
“Among School Children” says it best: the two words “dying generations” manage to touch both death and creation as well as to evoke all the potentiality
buried in the gender and genre words. Clearly, all classes are challenged in
such potential and liberation; and even though there is never the clear hope
of a utopia in such ambivalence, there is the sense of the power of nature or,
rather, the empowerment of people in nature. The opening out of gender and
of class goes on—even if it is difﬁcult in its variety to study. Men such as
Thomas Disch and Samuel R. Delany have followed the important lead of the
207
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

women writers; the traditional and conservative profusion of alien characters
in science ﬁction and fantasy is now supplemented with a variety of gender
roles and class empowerments included in the writing; and the writing, in
turn, more and more inﬂuences the politics and the social change in gender
roles and class. One would almost want to conclude that there is some truth
to the notion of inevitability toward substantial change in human affairs.
Further Readings
Disch, Thomas M. “The Astonishing Pamela Zoline.” In The Heat Death of the Universe, and
Other Stories, ed. Pamela Zoline, 8. Kingston, NY: McPherson, 1988.
Glorie, Josephine. “Feminist Utopian Fiction and the Possibility of Social Critique.” In Political Science Fiction, ed. Donald M. Hassler and Clyde Wilcox, 148–59. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1997.
Larbalestier, Justine, ed. Daughters of the Earth: Feminist SF in the 20th Century. Middletown,
CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2006.
Lewis, R. W. B. Edith Wharton: A Biography. New York: Harper & Row, 1975.
Mankiller, Wilma, et al., eds. The Reader’s Companion to U.S. Women’s History. New York:
Houghton Mifﬂin, 1998.
Matthews, Susan. “Gender.” In Romantic Period Writings, ed. Zachary Leader and Ian
Haywood, 150–81. London: Routledge, 1998.
Notkin, Debbie, ed. Flying Cups and Saucers: Gender Explorations in Science Fiction and Fantasy.
Cambridge, MA: Edgewood Press, 1998.
Oakley, Ann. Experiments in Knowing: Gender and Method in the Social Sciences. New York: New
Press, 2000.
Phillips, Julie. James Tiptree, Jr.: The Double Life of Alice B. Sheldon. New York: St. Martin’s Press,
2006.
Roberts, Robin. A New Species: Gender and Science Fiction. Champaign: University of Illinois
Press, 1993.
Robins, Jane. The Trial of Queen Caroline: The Scandalous Affair That Nearly Ended a Monarchy.
New York: Free Press, 2006.

208
................

21

Intersections of Age and Gender
LAURA QUILTER

AND

LIZ HENRY

SCIENCE ﬁction and fantasy (SF/F), at its best, pushes the boundaries of literary exploration of human experience. Age and gender diversity in social science ﬁction, the genre of science ﬁction (SF) that focuses more on exploration
of social structures than on technology, opens many questions of identity,
politics, and investigation of cultural issues around aging bodies, family roles,
and the maturation process.
R
E P R E S E N TAT I O N S A N D C H A R A C T E R I Z AT I O N S
...........................................................................................................................................
A character’s age holds meaning, creating or playing into common expectations of age-related roles. In SF, protagonists are most often adult men: they
are adventurers, scientists, or soldiers focused on action, without direct
responsibility for anyone else’s care. Female characters are particularly
marked with respect to their age, so age diversity and the presence of complex social and family ties are important in assessing women in SF/F.
Power

Even a brief glance at the ages of male and female characters sufﬁces to demonstrate the highly gendered social treatment in relation to maturity and age.
A woman character’s age is always notable, in contrast to male protagonists,
whose age is not as marked. Female protagonists are most often young, their
youth signifying sexual availability and reproductive potential, and even
women in their thirties may be read as “older” women by other characters,
authors, and readers alike. Youthful female and unmarked-age male characters, therefore, deﬁne a storytelling standard of romantic pairings of young
women and older men.
This common age and gender pairing for romances in science ﬁction
books and movies is part of a broader characterization of women as
209
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

subordinate in age or relationship to male characters. Because power comes
with age, the token plucky girl or scientist’s daughter is “naturally” junior to
the older male characters. Authors recapitulate that dynamic in numerous
ways: Gene Wolfe’s The Urth of the New Sun (1987), for instance, transforms the
strong, professional Gunnie into the much younger Burgundofara, decreasing
her competence while enhancing her innocence, sexual availability, and need
of (male) education and protection.
The counterpart to the plucky young girl is the classic portrayal of the
powerful older woman as villainess: the wicked stepmother or Baba Yaga, a
destructive or menacing creature who is frequently obsessed with youth or
beauty, as in “Snow White” and Catwoman (2004). Numerous works revisit
these stereotypes or their underlying mythic archetypes, for example, the
humanistic fairy godmothers in Elizabeth Ann Scarborough’s Godmothers
series, the wicked witch in Gregory Maguire’s Wicked (1996), and the grandmotherly priestess in Nalo Hopkinson’s Brown Girl in the Ring (1998). Other
works directly engage feminist spirituality and mythic themes, such as the
“triple goddess” motif of maiden, mother, and crone, as in Marion Zimmer
Bradley’s The Mists of Avalon (1983), Jean Auel’s Clan of the Cave Bear (1980),
and Marie Jakober’s The Black Chalice (1999) and High Kamilan (1993). Such stories reﬂect a signiﬁcant trend in fantastic literature that imagines an egalitarian society that values mature and powerful women in conﬂict with emergent
patriarchy. This conﬂict also appears in works such as Theodore Roszak’s The
Memoirs of Elizabeth Frankenstein (1995), Kim Chernin’s The Flame Bearers (1986),
and Elizabeth Hand’s Waking the Moon (1995), in which mature priestesses sustain a “hidden history.”
Older women’s proverbial outspokenness, viliﬁed when they are framed
negatively as harridans, scolds, shrews, or nags, may also, in subversive feminist reclamations, be reframed positively as bluntness, fearlessness, and a nononsense ability to articulate problems. In Suzette Haden Elgin’s Ozark series,
older women aspire to become Grannies who operate in political roles outside
the patriarchal hierarchy, their status signiﬁed by dress, age, and speech.
While the role of young women is to act with energy and resolution, that of
older women is to speak unpalatable truths and cut across established patterns. The better the Grannies ﬁt the grumpy-old-woman stereotype, the more
powerful and effective they are. “Bossy” older women are articulate revolutionaries in the crone-led rebellions of Leonora Carrington’s The Hearing Trumpet
(1974) and Anna Livia’s Bulldozer Rising (1988) and the middle-aged rebel leaders of Ursula K. Le Guin’s “The Day before the Revolution” (1974), Myrna Elana’s “Hourglass City” (1997), and Starhawk’s The Fifth Sacred Thing (1993).
Another response engages the postmenopausal power of reproduction,
such as the Bene Gesserit’s breeding program in Frank Herbert’s Dune (1963)
or Isaac Asimov’s Dr. Susan Calvin, who works on robot reproduction
throughout her life. Works that address the terrains of “feminine” and
210
................

Intersections of Age and Gender
“masculine” power explicitly include Lois McMaster Bujold’s Cetaganda
(1995), whose protagonist and readers come to understand that the Haut
ladies’ breeding program is the ultimate power in Haut society, while the
“masculine” military power is merely a tool used by the ladies. Similarly, the
leaders in Sheri S. Tepper’s The Gate to Women’s Country (1988) control reproduction, manipulating the apparent power of the military. Breeding programs
are also at the core of Liz Williams’s Banner of Souls (2005), and again, military
power is ultimately subordinate to the reproductive program.
Other works have tried to step outside this dichotomy altogether,
depicting powerful older women who are not necessarily evil, “scheming,” or
focused on reproduction. Characters such as Gran’ma Ben in Jeff Smith’s
graphic series Bone, Ofelia in Elizabeth Moon’s Remnant Population (1997),
Granny Weatherwax in Terry Pratchett’s Discworld series, and Les Triplettes de
Belleville (2003) attest to storytelling possibilities beyond the dichotomy. Writers have explored the potential for physical power in older and middle-aged
female warriors: Elizabeth Lynn’s Northern Girl (Paxe), S. M. Stirling’s Nantucket series (Coast Guard captain Marian Alston), and Mercedes Lackey’s
Vanyel trilogy (Aunt Savil). Other writers have put older women in the heroic
quest role, as in Eleanor Arnason’s Daughter of the Bear King (1987) and Nancy
Kress’s The Prince of Morning Bells (1981), whose protagonist’s quest is interrupted by marriage. Carol Emshwiller explored, tongue in cheek, the labors
and heroism of an elderly female superhero in “Grandma” (2002).
Some writers have directly shown women’s struggles for power in sexist
societies, whether as the power behind the throne in Mary Doria Russell’s
Children of God (1998) or the explicit feminist struggles and implicit sexism
faced by the characters in L. Timmel Duchamp’s Marq’ssan series. Other stories have simply taken a humanistic approach to depicting feminine leadership in egalitarian societies, such as the characters of Marti Hok in Lynn’s
Northern Girl (1980), who typiﬁes a nongendered political brinksmanship, and
Grum in Vonda N. McIntyre’s Dreamsnake (1978), who is a respected tribal
leader and grandmother.
Hollywood’s efforts in this direction have led to characters such as Captain Janeway on Star Trek: Voyager (1995) and President McDonnell on Battlestar
Galactica (2004), women who are relatively youthful and attractive. Such representations break down the stereotype of older women as unattractive, villainous, or obsessed with beauty, but do little to counter the expectation that
female characters must be presented as sexually attractive or to shift the norm
from the default assumption that whiteness is the status quo in television.

Sexuality

Typically depicted as the domain of the nubile young, sexuality in older people, particularly older women, may be inscribed as repulsive, decadent, or
211
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

corrupt. Many authors have resisted this vision of older women’s sexuality,
explicitly engaging older women in healthy sexuality or romance: Madeleine
Robins’s The Stone War (1999), Molly Gloss’s The Dazzle of Day (1997), Laurie
Marks’s The Watcher’s Mask (1992) and Elemental Logic series, Lynn’s Northern
Girl, Donna McMahon’s Dance of Knives (2001), and Stirling’s Nantucket series.
Presaging some of this exploration, Sylvia Townsend Warner’s spinster “of a
certain age” in Lolly Willowes (1925) dismays and disrupts familial and social
expectations by ﬁnding romance and sexuality. Among the classic SF writers,
Robert A. Heinlein notably included sexually enthusiastic middle-aged
women in later novels such as The Number of the Beast (1980).
A number of stories center on the concerns raised by such late-in-life
romances. For instance, in Lois McMaster Bujold’s Paladin of Souls (2003), the
Dowager Empress Ista escapes her “madwoman in the attic” role by going on
pilgrimage. While she is concerned for her adult children, she focuses primarily on her search for love, equal partnership, and self-determination. Le Guin’s
fourth Earthsea novel, Tehanu (1990), picks up the story of Tenar, now middleaged after experiencing the life afforded to young women in her society: marriage, childrearing, drudgery, and submission. In Tehanu, Tenar ﬁnds love with
Ged, while experiencing the gap between her own and society’s expectations
for middle-aged women. Geoff Ryman’s Chung Mae in Air (2004) faces similar
issues when ending her marriage and taking new lovers.
Rather than reclaiming sexuality for postmenopausal women, some
writers have posited sexuality as confusing or even dangerous to women. In
Elgin’s Native Tongue (1984), for instance, only postmenopausal women are
considered trustworthy revolutionaries; their real work begins when they
move to Barren House and their loyalties are no longer troubled by sexuality.
Elgin’s Ozark Grannies are powerful in part because they are outside of the
sexual market system. In Tepper’s The Gate to Women’s Country (1988), young
women are prone to infatuations with the glamorized male warriors and are
consequently excluded from power and knowledge, their sexuality rendering
them complicit in their oppression both by their male lovers and the secret
matriarchy. Tepper’s older female protagonist in Gibbon’s Decline and Fall (1996)
considers saving the world by eliminating sexual desire altogether. In Diana
Wynne Jones’s Howl’s Moving Castle (1986), the young female protagonist,
Sophie, is magically transformed into an elderly woman, who is expected to
act independently rather than wait for rescue or marriage. She has both the
authority of life experience and the invisibility of an elderly laborer.
The Child

Adult-oriented SF/F rarely features children as protagonists, instead treating
them as secondary characters with thematic or plot functions. Such child
characters may carry many related meanings: innocence, wildness, uncontrollable energy, unpredictability, chaos. Children can signify monstrosity or
212
................

Intersections of Age and Gender
act as harbingers of the future. Writers intensify characterizations and plots
by emphasizing children’s vulnerability. The presence of children in a story
can also intensify horror and evil, and authors play on both gender and racist
stereotypes to contrast presumed innocence with hidden monstrosity. Henry
James’s The Turn of the Screw (1898) used this contrast to create a sense of psychological horror, a device also used in ﬁlms such as The Bad Seed (1956) and
TV episodes of The Twilight Zone (“It’s a Good Life,” 1961), Angel (the Senior
Partners’ ﬁrst representative), and The X-Files (“Eve,” “The Calusari,” “Chinga,”
1993–98). Myths of changelings and bewitching youths preﬁgure these monstrous innocents and often add sexual tension to their relations with adults.
The discomﬁting mingling of adult sexuality in a child’s body has often
€ nter Grass’s The Tin
been used to great effect, such as the eternal child in Gu
Drum (1959) and the child vampires in Anne Rice’s Interview with the Vampire
(1976) and Octavia Butler’s Fledging (2005), all of whom combine decades of
life in a child’s body with an adult’s mature interests. Numerous writers have
explored adult sexual exploitation of young people: Connie Willis’s “All My
Darling Daughters” (1985), Joan Vinge’s Psion (1982), and Starhawk’s The Fifth
Sacred Thing (1993).
Portrayals of emergent adolescent sexuality may be highly gendered,
hinging or focusing on the future sex-object status of female children; classically, a Gigi-like spunky girl grows up and ﬁnds romance, as in Heinlein’s Podkayne of Mars (1962) or Alexei Panshin’s Rite of Passage (1968). Girl characters
may also be active sexual agents, assertive and in control of their own sexuality, but not overwhelmed or depicted primarily as sexual, as in Diane Duane’s
Young Wizards series, Justine Larbalestier’s Magic or Madness series, and Y.T.
in Neal Stephenson’s Snow Crash (1992).
The social structures that youths create form an important aspect of
many works about young people, playing out visions of children as the
“natural” or primitive uncivilized version of humans. Gender may play a role
in these stories, as well. In some instances, the violence into which boys’ communities descend may be seen as a commentary on boys’ inclination toward
brutality when they lack the civilizing inﬂuence of women. William Golding’s
Lord of the Flies (1954), like Orson Scott Card’s Ender’s Game (1985), purports to
show the cruel hierarchies that ungoverned boys may establish by violence.
Other authors, however, show children working together to build alliances
and protect the vulnerable or weak members, as in Tamora Pierce’s Circle of
Magic and Protector of the Small series.
Children, teens, and young adults are often harbingers of the future, as
in Wilmar Shiras’s Children of the Atom (1953), Theodore Sturgeon’s More Than
Human (1952), and the adolescent mutants of The X-Men (1963–present). Sydney Van Scyoc writes about mutant children with wild superpowers in the
Daughters of the Sun trilogy, where puberty triggers metamorphosis. Adult
relationships with these children thematically parallel anxieties about the
213
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

future and hybrid identity, as in Butler’s Xenogenesis trilogy, Andrea Hairston’s Mindscape (2006), and Joan Slonczewski’s Elysian novels, which feature
genetically engineered and hybrid children. In Van Scyoc’s Starmother (1984)
mutant children frighten adults, and the adults in Stephanie Smith’s Other
Nature (1995) are similarly concerned about their mysterious, seal-like
children.
Preteen girls in particular, on the cusp of puberty, may discover or manifest unusual powers or abilities, as in the tradition of young girl witches and
poltergeists. In adult-targeted works, these explorations may represent the
maturation process, as in Richard Lupoff’s Lisa Kane (1976) and Ginger Snaps
(2000), which liken the werewolf metamorphosis to puberty. Zenna Henderson’s People stories often relate the experience of the alien “Other” to the alienation experienced by children.
Child Protagonists

By contrast with works targeted to adults, which largely treat children as plot
or thematic devices, works that are written for youths foreground children
and youth perspectives. In such young adult (YA) works, children are the protagonists, and the stories are their journeys. Wilderness adventures are not
parables of humanity’s degeneration, but stories of empowerment or rebellion. Cruel children’s hierarchies, when explored from the youth perspective,
present universal themes of alienation, vulnerability, and disempowerment,
as in Andre Norton’s underclass of alienated and disempowered younger
characters. Unusual powers that manifest during adolescence, rather than
signifying the frightening future, permit youthful protagonists to build their
own identities, as in Willo Davis Roberts’s The Girl with the Silver Eyes (1980),
Lackey’s Valdemaran heralds-in-training, “Escape to Witch Mountain” (1975),
Nnedima Okerafor-Mbachu’s Zahrah the Windseeker (2005), and The X-Men.
Outside of YA, works with ensemble casts often include youths. Here,
s, but
too, gender plays a role: the boy team members of Star Trek are cliche
works such as The X-Men and Joss Whedon’s Fireﬂy have successfully integrated empowered young women into ensemble casts. Other works, such as
Whedon’s Buffy the Vampire Slayer, actually focus on those characters.
A
G I N G A N D M O R TA L I T Y
..........................................................................................................................................
While the age of a character can be a signiﬁer or proxy for personal characteristics, the processes of aging and mortality also offer authors the opportunity to explore the richness of human social relations and fundamental
concerns about human identity. In literature, art, and myth or religion, one
of the central human responses to aging has been fear of death and dying.
Intergenerational relations and human identity are fundamentally shaped
by how societies choose to respond to that central human response: Does a
214
................

Intersections of Age and Gender
society avoid or integrate death and aging? Mistreat or venerate the elderly?
Nurture or exploit the young? The choices an author makes in establishing
its ﬁctional society, whether articulated in terms of aging and mortality or
not, fundamentally shape the characterizations, plots, and signiﬁcance of
any story.
The role of aging in individuals’ lives is most apparent in stories that
follow single characters over the course of a lifetime. Naomi Mitchison’s
Memoirs of a Spacewoman (1962), for instance, paints a complicated portrait of
an explorer and alien communications expert across her lifetime. Rebecca
Ore’s Outlaw School (2000) similarly follows a woman through her life, from
youth to renegade to folk hero. Geoff Ryman turned this approach on its
head in The Child Garden (1989), giving readers the disjunctive experience of
long life that is long only relative to its characters. Nancy Springer’s Larque on
the Wing (1993) explores in depth what it means for someone to live, consciously, in different ages and genders. Larque’s midlife crisis generates versions of herself—a 10-year-old girl and a young adult gay man—who have
freedoms and talents not available to her as a wife and mother. Virginia
Woolf’s Orlando (1928) similarly took advantage of time and alternate personas to explore life.
The signiﬁcance of age is established in part by cultural associations,
such as “old equals wise”; “young equals sexual”; and “female equals
nurturing.” Many writers use science ﬁctional devices to interrogate these
associations, juxtaposing maturity and youth to permit characters to experience life as the Other. Time-travel stories, such as Back to the Future (1985),
David Gerrold’s The Man Who Folded Himself (1973), and Peggy Sue Got Married
(1986), permit characters to observe maturation as outsiders, reﬂecting on
younger versions of themselves or others with their own knowledge and experience. Body-swapping stories, such as Mary Rodgers’s Freaky Friday (1972),
and sudden alterations in age, such as in the movies Big (1988) and 13 Going
on 30 (2004), expose the absurdities of age-appropriate social conventions.
They also offer the opportunity for characters to reﬂect on themselves, as
teenager Oz observes, when commenting on enchanted adults in the Buffy
episode “Band Candy” (1998): “They’re teenagers. It’s a sobering mirror to look
into, huh?”
The negative value placed on aging has led many authors to speculate
that, given the choice, most people would present a relatively youthful
appearance. John Varley’s Eight Worlds universe includes body-manipulation
technology that permits characters to choose their age and gender—such as
the youths in “Picnic on Nearside” (1974), who choose their gender and are
surprised by elderly appearance, and the protagonist of The Golden Globe
(1998), who chooses to extend his “childhood” to continue his hit children’s
TV show. Such possibilities may mark those who decide to “age naturally” as
social renegades or may signify distasteful eccentricity—as demonstrated by
215
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

the protagonists’ responses to such characters in Samuel Delany’s Triton
(1976) and Suzette Haden Elgin’s Star-Anchored, Star-Angered (1976).

Vanity

Most stages of life are gendered in patriarchal societies that value women
according to their youth, sexuality, and fertility. SF has treated both the social
reality and the sexist stereotype of women determined to remain youthful at
all costs, as in the mid-twentieth century ﬁlms that Vivian Sobchack studied:
Attack of the 50 Foot Woman (1958), The Wasp Woman (1959), and The Leech
Woman (1960). In these and other works, women’s efforts to avoid the consequences of aging in a patriarchy are often framed as mere frivolous vanity.
Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray (1891) similarly linked the vain pursuit
of eternal youth to queer male sexuality. Confronting the vanity stereotype
directly, Jacqueline Carey’s female sorceress in Banewreaker (2004) and Godslayer (2005) seeks power from an obsessive fear of death, but with dignity
and strength; her fear is not, after all, unreasonable.

Immortality

A large body of literature and religious mythos has explored themes of immortality, longevity, and the quest to avoid death and aging, from roots as far back
as Gilgamesh’s quest for immortality, through Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley
(Frankenstein, 1819; The Mortal Immortal, 1833), to the modern fascination with
vampires, nanotechnology, and cloning. SF authors have examined numerous
forms of immortality, from immortal familial and clonal lineages to biological
and machine hybridization. Many such tales cast immortality as fool’s gold,
tricking people into trading the presumed beneﬁts of short, fertile, and
relationship-rich lives for an immortality that leads to sterility, corruption,
loneliness, or loss of humanity. Feminist scholar Robin Roberts describes this
as a masculine approach to immortality, contrasting feminist approaches that
posit immortality as nurturing, rich, experiential, and laden with potential.
Human relationships, and the risks posed by aging to relations with
peers and loved ones, are a classic theme explored in immortality stories. Rip
Van Winkle, fairy tales, time travel, and relativity all permit the writer to
frame a world whose characters are estranged from their society—the same
dislocation that older people may feel in the face of social change. The soldiers of Joe Haldeman’s The Forever War (1975) face isolation and social change
from the relativistic effects of faster-than-light space travel.
These concerns also arise in the numerous stories that inscribe alien
immortals, long-lived races, and eternal objects as cold, inscrutable, and
beyond human morality. Long-lived wizards, elves, and magicians often hold
a detached, long-term view of human history. Human concerns and morality
216
................

Intersections of Age and Gender
may be abandoned or irrelevant to immortals, as shown by examples such as
the amoral Q in Star Trek: The Next Generation; the “cold” enchanted magical
objects of Michael Moorcock’s Elric Saga and Marion Zimmer Bradley’s Sharra’s Exile (1981); and the enchanted human/sword “Need” of Mercedes Lackey’s
Vows of Honor series. In Larry Niven’s Protector (1973), humans who encounter
a particular catalyst turn into alien Pak protectors, cold manipulators fanatically driven to protect their breeding-age relatives. Such stories frame mortality and aging as the sine qua non of human existence; those who “escape”
death abandon their own humanity.
This choice contrasts with the vision of a feminist immortality that
Roberts sees some female SF writers proposing: this immortality offers opportunities to build, construct, and learn. In Octavia Butler’s Wild Seed (1980), for
instance, two immortals, a female and a male, separately attempt to foster
immortal families, but Anyawu’s identiﬁcation with her mutable body leads
to self-awareness, empathy, altruism, and community; Doro, the male immortal, degenerating into corruption and despair, must learn not to destroy possibilities for love. Immortal female nurturance can also be seen in Anne Rice’s
Queen of the Damned (1988) and Steven Barnes’s Blood Brothers (1996). James
Tiptree Jr.’s Up the Walls of the World (1978) and Joan Slonczewski’s The Children
Star (1998) also contrast the potential for long, productive lives with sterility
or jadedness. Other stories have explored the family connections offered by
immortal clonal lineages, as in Suzy McKee Charnas’s Motherlines (1978) and
David Brin’s Glory Season (1993); clones are closer than siblings and may even
offer the opportunity to learn from clone siblings’ errors, as in Tiptree’s
“Houston, Houston, Do You Read?” (1976), Joan Vinge’s The Snow Queen (1980),
and C. J. Cherryh’s Cyteen (1988).
Biological and other technologies also offer the possibility of hybridizing, raising issues of parasitism and absorption that are often treated in gendered fashions. Human/machine hybrids, or cyborgs, transform the body with
mechanical, nano-, or digital technology. As with reproduction and cloning,
thematic questions arise of whether machine replacement offers “more” of
new kinds of life or “less” of humanity. C. L. Moore’s classic story “No Woman
Born” (1944) makes this contrast explicit: a woman’s brain and intelligence
are moved into a robot body, arousing her lover’s fears that she will become
less human; she insists she is still human, and indeed, rejects immortality in
order to retain her humanity. Stephanie Smith’s “Blue Heart” (1983) expands
on this theme: a female starship guide transfers her dying male lover into a
robot body, and years later in her old age, she, too, transitions to an artiﬁcial
cyberbody, to maintain both love and career forever. Anne McCaffrey’s The
Ship Who Sang (1969) and M. John Harrison’s Light (2002) further extend this
theme. The Borg Queen in Star Trek: First Contact (1996) and Star Trek: Voyager
(1999–2001) offers the nightmare version of machine replacement: ultimate
loss of personality and humanity in the service of a hollow immortality.
217
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

I..........................................................................................................................................
N T E R G E N E R AT I O NA L R E L AT I O N S
Social Conﬂict

Oppositions of old and young, mortal and immortal, wealthy and poor, establish fundamental social conﬂicts. The potential for intergenerational conﬂict
was explored quite explicitly in the 1960s and 1970s, reﬂecting social anxiety
around the “generation gap.” Works such as William Nolan and George Clayton Johnson’s Logan’s Run (1967) clearly articulate this anxiety, depicting a society that kills everyone over age twenty-one (thirty in the 1976 movie
version). Feminist writers Marge Piercy (Dance the Eagle to Sleep, 1970) and
Suzy McKee Charnas (Walk to the End of the World, 1974) present the same
social conﬂict in terms of elderly monopolizations of power. In these works,
youth revolts show ancient themes of parasitism as a metaphor for class and
access to resources, reﬂecting the disempowered status of the young and poor
relative to the rich and elderly.
Unequal access to immortality is the ultimate social inequity, and realistic accounts of widespread social disruption from such inequities have been
considered in Kim Stanley Robinson’s Mars trilogy, Elizabeth Moon’s Winning
Colors (1995), Larry Niven’s Known Universe series (organlegging and boosterspice), and Karen Traviss’s Crossing the Line (2004). In Kate Wilhelm’s Welcome,
Chaos (1983), a complex middle-aged female protagonist plays a role in the
release of a deadly disease that makes its survivors immortal.
Intergenerational conﬂicts show up as a form of parasitism in numerous stories, often linked to social conﬂicts over resources. In science ﬁction,
clonal parasites or organ harvesting are common, as in The Island (2005) or
Lois McMaster Bujold’s Mirror Dance (1994), in which bioscientist cartels raise
clones for replacement parts for the wealthy elderly. Fantasy and horror, by
contrast, look to magic or vampirism, with elders “eating their young,” as in
Steven Barnes’s Blood Brothers, The Leech Woman, Justine Larbalestier’s Magic or
Madness series, and the Buffy episode “Witch” (1997). Vampires operate as a
classic metaphor for parasitism, linking aristocratic exploitations directly
with aging and mortality in stories and myths from Countess Bathory to Anne
Rice to Chelsea Quinn Yarbro.
Anxiety in the United States over mistreatment of and disrespect for
the elderly has persisted for decades, and numerous works critique our segregation and isolation of the elderly. Rudy Rucker satirized such segregation in
his novels Software (1982) and Wetware (1988), in which the elderly have taken
over the state of Florida. The X-Files episode “Excelsis Dei” (1994) grimly
depicts modern institutionalization of the elderly, and Logan’s Run and other
works depicted deliberate “disposal” of the elderly. These stories raise questions of what societies and individuals owe to one another, and what people
have to offer at different stages in their lives.
218
................

Intersections of Age and Gender
Transmission of Knowledge

Transmission of knowledge is perhaps the greatest gift of elders to the young,
and thus the most signiﬁcant cost of conﬂicts between the generations. The
Star Trek: The Next Generation episode “Half a Life” (1991) explored the consequences of the loss of knowledge and experience offered by the elderly, when
the scientist whose knowledge could save his world submits to ritual suicide
at the age of sixty. In Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale (1985), the disruption of transmission of knowledge was deliberate: the protagonist’s mother
is sent to die in a slave labor camp with other older women, because her
years of knowledge and experience as a feminist activist pose a threat to the
new order.
Transmission of knowledge and culture often occurs down gender lines,
maintaining gendered divisions in society. From Obi-Wan Kenobi (Star Wars,
1977) to Ogion (Ursula K. Le Guin’s A Wizard of Earthsea, 1968), older men regularly take younger men as apprentices to train them in the “old ways” or to
invest them with their hopes for social change (Katharine Burdekin’s Swastika
Night, 1937). Feminists have sought to reclaim the power of such traditions,
exploring feminine transmissions of power and knowledge in guilds and religions, as in Marion Zimmer Bradley’s matriarchal guild on Darkover and priestesses in The Mists of Avalon. In Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni’s The Mistress of
Spices (1997) and Moon’s Surrender None (1990), women hold and transmit
unique “women’s knowledge” to other women. Tamora Pierce’s YA series Protector of the Small explores the complexities inherent in such gendered mentoring: Alanna, the ﬁrst lady knight in the kingdom, wishes to help another
young woman, Keladry—but she must do so secretly, lest she risk her own success, undermine Keladry’s military career, or appear to favor women over men.
The transmission of knowledge can pose risks to the young, as seen in
some parasitic immortality and absorption stories. The individual who
absorbs the life essences or memories of those who came before risks the loss
of individuality, as seen in the struggles of Chung Mae in Geoff Ryman’s Air
and monstrous Alia in Frank Herbert’s Dune series. Successful integrations—
as in Robert Heinlein’s I Will Fear No Evil (1970) or Dax of Star Trek: Deep Space
Nine—offer the chance for the merged minds to experience multiple genders
and ages at the same time. These struggles parallel the struggle by young
people to learn from their elders’ experiences while establishing their own
identities, setting up themes of social revolution, the transmission of history
and cultural values, and personal transformation and escape from cycles of
abuse.
Numerous feminist works have resolved such potential conﬂicts
through a vision of integrated, intergenerational communities, often using ritual to facilitate the social integration of generations and the transition of individuals into different social roles. The utopian Mattapoisett society in Piercy’s
Woman on the Edge of Time (1976) ritualizes and normalizes the passing of its
219
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

elderly, as do the societies in Le Guin’s Always Coming Home (1985) and The Left
Hand of Darkness (1969). Feminist and egalitarian rituals implicitly comment
on the nonexistent, gendered, or exploitive transitions offered by present-day
society. For instance, Piercy’s Woman on the Edge of Time, Joanna Russ’s Whileaway, and E. M. Broner’s A Weave of Women (1978) all present humanist rituals
that help women and youths fulﬁll their human potential. Other writers have
paid particular attention to the introduction of youths to sexuality, which in
mainstream society has often been simultaneously stigmatized and exploited:
Le Guin’s “Coming of Age on Karhide” (1995), Patricia Kennealy-Morrison’s
Keltiad series, and Jean Auel’s The Valley of Horses (1982) offer alternatives, and
Esther Friesner’s Psalms of Herod (1995) and Louise Marley’s The Terrorists of
Irustan (1999) offer critiques.
Family Relations

The relative lack of age diversity within SF skews depictions of intergenerational relationships. Outside of YA and social SF, naturalistic depictions of
family relationships are the exception rather than the rule. Instead, family
relations may function largely as thematic or plot devices. For instance,
parental sacriﬁce permits commentary on other social issues, such as the
horrors of the organ trade in the X-Files episode “Hell Money” (1996), in which
a father trades his organs to pay for his daughter’s medical care. Inez Haynes
Gillmore places parental sacriﬁce in a feminist context in Angel Island (1914):
while winged women permitted their own wings to be clipped to preserve
their families, they resist such sacriﬁces for their daughters.
The de-familialization of protagonists, which permits adventure unencumbered by social burdens, is present even in YA, where many authors cut
the apron strings with orphan protagonists (Star Wars) and school settings (as
in Mercedes Lackey’s Valdemaran Herald’s College and J. K. Rowling’s Harry
Potter stories). Basic human interactions are shifted from families to peers,
and plot points, such as rescues, shift from parents to older siblings or nonparental adults, as in Tank Girl (1995) or Russ’s The Two of Them (1978). Maternal substitute ﬁgures, such as Spider-Man’s Aunt May or Batman’s foster
mother Leslie Thompkins, are also common. Mentors, as described above, fulﬁll functions of advice and support that parents might otherwise perform in
numerous stories.
Feminist depictions of balanced, integrated communities, with protagonists relating to characters of multiple generations, offer a pointed contrast
to such works. Works by Doris Lessing, Nancy Springer, and Le Guin have all
depicted middle-aged and older women, active and integrated in their communities. Hiromi Goto’s A Chorus of Mushrooms (1994) integrated and incorporated the experiences of women of various ages. And Nalo Hopkinson’s Brown
Girl in the Ring (1998) not only incorporates elders into the story but centers
the story on a young woman protagonist, nursing a child.
220
................

Intersections of Age and Gender
C
ONCLUSION
...........................................................................................................................................
Social concerns regarding age and gender form a rich strain of thematic, plot,
and characterization within SF/F. However, critical examinations of and innovative approaches to the intersections of age and gender are only beginning
to be explored in these genres.
Further Readings
Barr, Marleen. “Immortal Feminist Communities of Women: A Recent Idea in Science
Fiction.” In Death and the Serpent: Immortality in Science Fiction and Fantasy, ed. B. B.
Yoke and D. M. Hassler, 39–47. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1985.
Kasturi, Sandra. “Divine Secrets of the Yaga Sisterhood.” In Girls Who Bite Back: Witches,
Mutants, Slayers and Freaks, ed. Emily Pohl-Weary, 236–49. Toronto: Sumach Press,
2004.
Roberts, Robin. “‘No Woman Born’: Immortality and Gender in Feminist Science Fiction.” In
Immortal Engines: Life Extension and Immortality in Science Fiction and Fantasy, ed.
G. Slusser, G. Westfahl, and E. S. Rabkin, 135–44. Athens: University of Georgia Press,
1996.
Sobchack, Vivian. “The Leech Woman’s Revenge: On the Dread of Aging in a Low-Budget
Horror Film.” Paper presented at the Scary Women Symposium, UCLA, January
1994. Available at http://www.cinema.ucla.edu/women/papers.html.

221
................

22

Speculating Sexual Identities
JOHN GARRISON

SCIENCE ﬁction and fantasy (SF/F) often feature new forms of sexual identity
and relationships, whether as central elements of the plot or as one component of a narrative’s imagined culture. In doing so, SF/F worlds offer unique
environments in which to explore sexual identities that could exist outside
the range of real-world scientiﬁc or cultural possibility. In some cases, genre
works simply place the sexual identities that exist in our culture into an alternative history, such as worlds where homosexuality comprises the majority
of the population and heterosexuality the minority. Other works, however, go
beyond simply reimagining our own culture and its sexual modalities to speculate what form as-yet-unrealized sexual identities might take.

S..........................................................................................................................................
P E C U L AT E D S E X UA L I D E N T I T I E S A N D G E N D E R S T U D I E S
SF/F offers a rich landscape for those interested in the study of gender and
sexuality, as the genre actively troubles existing, real-world logics. Many of
the genre’s major writers, artists, and ﬁlmmakers have featured new modes
of sexual identity and relationship in their works. The new forms of sexuality
found in the work of novelist Ursula K. Le Guin, for example, call into question generally held concepts of binary gender identities and heteronormative
desires. Populated by social forms operating outside contemporary scientiﬁc
possibility and cultural normalcy, her work offers new ways to explore concepts of what new gender identities might look like, as well as how sexual
desire might operate when mapped within an epistemology of difference
deﬁned outside of dimorphic and heterosexual systems.
The hybridized bodies found in the work of novelist Octavia Butler and
ﬁlm director David Cronenberg constitute opportunities to consider how
biotechnology-enabled means of sexual interaction and asexual reproduction
may blur lines between human bodies, technology, and other species. These
222
................

Speculating Sexual Identities
new bodies are also of “scholarly use” to those studying both psychoanalysis
and social power, as they suggest new kinds of kinship.
In addition to scholars, those involved in social movements related to
gender may also ﬁnd SF/F of particular appeal. Samuel R. Delany’s novels, for
example, suggest new ways that gender minorities and other “sexual outlaws”
can rally against—and sustain themselves outside of—their society’s dominant ideologies by redeploying the very mechanisms and language created to
control them.
While these narratives provide new opportunities to better understand
the implications of gender and sexuality theory, they also offer a vantage
point from which to explore the social and ideological preoccupations of the
historical moment from which they emerge. Cultural contexts signiﬁcantly
inform literary practices and, equally important, literary works shape how we
rationalize the world in which we live. The speculated sexual identities found
in SF/F often offer strong metaphors for issues of liberation and marginalization at work in their authors’ own societies. Indeed, the genre places a particular focus on notions of “Otherness” and, in turn, self–Other power relations.
New sexual identities ﬁnd their origins in a variety of causes and contexts within SF/F. Magic may enable beings to undergo sex changes at will,
for example, as might the anatomies of alien species or future humans. Similarly, technology may enable new forms of sexuality identity by changing the
human body or by creating a hybrid of human, nonhuman, and machine
bodies that allow for new genders or new ways that individuals can connect.
New notions of marriage or other culturally deﬁned relationships are often
products of SF/F’s ﬁctionalized worlds and societies. Each of these new modes
of sexual identities destabilizes normative notions of desire, identity, and
relationship.
This chapter offers a survey of different ways that SF/F imagines new
sexual identities, and considers the implications of these as-yet-unrealized
social forms.

N
EW BODIES
...........................................................................................................................................
In the essay “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century,” scholar Donna Haraway considers the
possibilities of what new bodies may emerge in the future. She uses cyborgs
as a metaphor for a new kind of posthuman, better equipped to deal with the
political, cultural, and scientiﬁc complexities of the coming world. Drawing
from a broad landscape of SF/F writers, including Joanna Russ and Anne
McCaffrey, Haraway emphasizes the important role of SF/F for foregrounding
metaphors and notions of sexual identity that are useful for understanding
today’s world.
223
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

SF/F’s imagined bodies offer sites for writers, readers, and scholars to
understand what new sexual identities will look like: their physical manifestations, their associated behaviors, and the means by which individuals will
connect in a sexual way. In David Cronenberg’s 1999 ﬁlm eXistenZ, master
game designer Allegra Geller creates a virtual reality world that can only be
entered by connecting to a game module through a bio-port built directly into
the body. Teresa de Lauretis and other scholars have argued that the ﬁlm’s
vision of bodies with new oriﬁces that allow connections with both machines
and other humans suggest new economies of bodily relationship.
In Lynn Flewelling’s The Bone Doll’s Twin (2001), a young girl destined to
be queen is magically transformed into a boy child at birth to disguise her/him
from assassins. The boy infant, Tobin, grows up unaware of his true gender
identity. Throughout childhood, Tobin struggles with how his own “feminine”
behaviors and attraction toward boys are at conﬂict with others’ expectations
of how s/he should act. The internal conﬂict between Tobin’s feelings and the
natural assumptions about his behaviors as a young boy provides opportunities for Flewelling to explore issues related to gender, including the extent to
which sexual identities are socially constructed and the nature of hetero- and
homosexual desire.

C
U LT U R A L C O N T E X T S
..........................................................................................................................................
Many works use alternate timelines or worlds to explore how sexual identities
might be constructed if Earth’s culture had evolved differently. Joanna Russ’s
The Female Man (1975), for example, explores the different female gender roles
and gender identities that might emerge from different versions of our own
world. In the novel, four women intersect from four different Earths: one in
which the Great Depression never ended; one in which a 1970s feminist tries
to succeed in a male-centric society; one from a utopian Earth where only
women exist; and the fourth from an Earth with separate female and male
societies at war with each other. By juxtaposing different versions of female
identity and relationships to men, Russ is able to comment on the degree to
which cultural factors inﬂuence the role of women in society and the sexual
relationships they form with others.
Eleanor Arnason’s A Woman of the Iron People (1991) also considers the
degree to which cultural factors inﬂuence gender identity and sexual relationships. The novel focuses on a group of human anthropologists trying to
understand a seemingly primitive alien species that they observe on the aliens’ home planet. This narrative of peaceful human–alien encounter allows
Arnason’s novel to explore notions of sexual difference, monogamy, family,
and other beliefs grounded in assumptions around gender. Nia, one of the primary aliens with whom the humans come into contact, lives in a society
where men and women are kept separate except for the purposes of mating.
224
................

Speculating Sexual Identities
Nia is concerned that she is a “pervert” for desiring a fully realized relationship with a man. As the story progresses, the reader learns that inhabitants
of Nia’s world use this term interchangeably to describe females who have
sex with males outside the mating season, females who sleep with females,
and those tribes that build their houses from wood. As the humans and aliens
observe and critique each other, their ongoing interplay calls into question
which race is truly more advanced.
John Kessell’s novella “Stories for Men” (2002) depicts a utopian matriarchy created to repress the threat of male homosocial behavior. The women
of the society, having identiﬁed males congregating as a precursor to violence
and war, strictly police the behavior of men. In this society, all men and
women are bisexual, partnering freely with whomever they choose. Traditional marriages and monogamous relationships do not exist. Rather, women
raise children in households that often include their male lovers but rarely
give regard to the biological father of the children. More than a matriarchy,
the society is marked by broad sexual freedoms but also totalitarian overtones. Its catch phrase, “Solidarity, Sisterhood, Motherhood,” suggests a feminist rewriting of the motto that emerged from the French Revolution and the

e, Fraternite.” The story centers on the
Age of Enlightenment: “Liberte, Egalit
actions of Tyler Durden, a comedian-turned-activist, who calls the norms of
the society into question and is deemed a dangerous revolutionary. The story
won the 2002 James Tiptree Jr. Award for its exploration of gender roles and
sexuality, but also generated some controversy. “Stories for Men” was
removed from the curriculum of a high school English class in Seaside, Oregon, after being deemed “inappropriate” by the school principal.
Russ’s, Arnason’s, and Kessell’s works look at the degree to which social
norms—whether the choice of one’s sexual partner or the alignment of social
power according to gender—are largely relative and codiﬁed by a group-driven
process.

H
U M A N – N O N H U M A N S E X UA L R E L AT I O N S H I P S
...........................................................................................................................................
Many works in the science ﬁction and fantasy genres deal with humans
encountering new sentient species. These new species can include aliens or
other fantastic beings. Sexual and love relationships between members of
two species can create opportunities for authors to explore issues of profound
difference, or Otherness, and the degree to which societies will permit very
different beings to relate.
The prospect of sexual relationships with alien species or fantastic
beings is often used by authors to explore the nature of sexual desire and the
Other. These nonhuman sexual beings often become symbolic entities upon
which to project human fears and desires around sexuality. Christina Rossetti’s
poem “The Goblin Market” (1862), for example, is rich with sexual imagery as
225
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

goblins feed rich and decadent fruits to a young girl named Lizzie. Upon
returning home, the girl’s friend Laura voraciously kisses and licks the fruit
from Lizzie’s body. The poem suggests both the decadence and the temptation of inhuman creatures, as well as a reaction to Victorian mores. Some
critics interpret this and others of her poems to represent a feminist theme
because supernatural creatures allow the female characters to express their
own sexual needs and desires.
Mary Doria Russell’s novel The Sparrow (1996) positions an alien species’ sexuality as voracious, similar to that of the goblins in Rossetti’s poem.
However, the Other’s sexuality here holds a stronger overtone of menace as it
drives the novel’s main character, Father Emilio Sandoz, into a forced sexual
role. The Sparrow’s depiction of Sandoz as a victim of alien sexual urges can
be read in a variety of ways, from a reversal of traditional colonialist narrative
conventions to a realization of fears of the Other as potentially harmful. Like
many SF/F narratives, Russell’s centers on an encounter with another culture as
a means to motivate its human characters to question their own mores and
attitudes toward sexuality.
ville also explores cross-species relationships in his novel
China Mie
Perdido Street Station (2000). Lin, a beetle/human hybrid Kepri, is in a romantic
relationship with Isaac, a human scientist. Their relationship is frowned upon
by society, and they must keep it secret. Rather than focusing on the nature
ville focuses his novel on societal discrimination toof an alien sexuality, Mie
ward relationships between people who do not ﬁt the dominant society’s
notion of acceptable difference and sameness between the members of a couple. Lin and Isaac’s relationship can be read as allegorical for interracial,
homosexual, or other types of relationships that meet societal disapproval in
our own world.
Narratives featuring sexual relationships between human and nonhuman entities offer fruitful analytics for the consideration of difference. They
also point to strong parallels between science ﬁction and historical encounter
or ﬁrst-contact narratives that consider the implications of two cultures
meeting for the ﬁrst time.

N
EW NOTIONS OF SAMENESS AND DIFFERENCE
..........................................................................................................................................
As discussed above, new and imagined sexual identities are most often
deﬁned by the identity of the desired object and the extent to which the
object is deﬁned by the degree of sameness or difference from the desiring
subject. In The Birthday of the World, and Other Stories (2002), Ursula Le Guin’s
planet “O” is divided into two moieties or kinship groups: Morning and Evening
people. Assignment to either group is matrilineal. A legal marriage on O is
comprised of four individuals (two women, two men), a sedoretu comprised of
two acceptable heterosexual relationships and two acceptable homosexual
226
................

Speculating Sexual Identities
relationships, as well as two forbidden heterosexual relationships. Le Guin
goes to lengths to explain that, though different from Earth’s marriage model,
O’s marriages are still strictly deﬁned and deviation is not tolerated. In fact,
the only term used to describe the forbidden relationship between a man and
woman from the same moiety is sacrilege. As in contemporary society, the
debate around whether a relationship is “normal” or appropriate is focused
on issues of sameness and difference.
In Le Guin’s book, the stories “Unchosen Love” and “Mountain Ways”
present a paired contemplation of two possible outcomes of individuals
choosing to transgress against O’s socially accepted marriage model. In
“Unchosen Love,” two homosexual couples, in which each member desires
only his or her homosexual partner, devise a scheme to form a sedoretu
under false pretenses. Though it will bring disapproval from their larger community, the couples’ choice not to marry avoids an incursion with the law. In
this case, freedom is found not in claiming the right to be recognized by the
regulatory structure, but rather in positioning oneself outside of it. In
“Mountain Ways,” it is once again homosexual lovers that break with the
sedoretu tradition. When Shahes and Akal, two female lovers, wish they
could marry only each other, they devise a solution. By disguising Akal as a
man, they enter into the four-way marriage with a heterosexual pair in which
the members also desire only each other. The scheme is effective, and Akal’s
disguise allows the author to explore the degree to which gender identity is,
as scholars such as Judith Butler have argued, merely comprised of a series of
performances.

F
LUID GENDER IDENTITIES
...........................................................................................................................................
SF/F narratives at times feature species or individuals for whom gender is not
a ﬁxed characteristic. This ﬂuidity of gender identity problematizes notions of
polarized gender identities and questions to what extent an individual’s personality is impacted by their bodily sex.

In The Silent City (1988), Elisabeth
Vonarburg depicts the experience of
Elisa, a genetically engineered woman who is gifted with both the ability to
change her physical form and a strong empathic sense that borders on telepathy. Vonarburg explores the intersection between desire and gender identity
as Elisa learns that her physical form shifts based on the thoughts and emotions projected by others with whom she comes into contact. During one
instance of lovemaking with Paul, Elisa is stunned when she catches her
reﬂection in the mirror. She sees not herself staring back, but rather the face
of his deceased lover, Serena. Elisa, being extraordinarily empathic, has sensed
Paul’s unspoken fantasy, and her body has physically responded. This blurring
of lines between Paul’s thoughts and Elisa’s physical experience of the world
invokes similar sentiments to Sigmund Freud’s description of romantic love: in
227
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Civilization and Its Discontents (1930), he characterizes it as the one instance
where ego boundaries dissolve, and the “I” and “You” become one.
Elisa later learns that her ability to change her bodily form extends to
taking on not only other female identities but male ones as well. She further
ﬁnds that, in her male form, she is able to impregnate other women. This aspect of her gender ﬂuidity offers the mechanism by which she can save the
genetically ravaged population of her planet. Her healthy genetic material
can be spread through the population. Elisa and her children not only destabilize the binary opposition between “man” and “woman” but also suggest a
way in which new sexual identities may play a crucial, productive role in their
societies.
In The Left Hand of Darkness (1969), Le Guin describes an alien race known
as the Gethenians, who are primarily asexual. Once a month, however, they
manifest female or male sex characteristics. During their lives, Gethenians
can thereby partner with others to become a mother or a father (depending,
completely by chance, on the moment) to children. The very nature of the
Gethenian culture troubles traditional claims to essential, ﬁxed gender identities. The ﬂuidity inherent in one’s gender shifting by random chance undermines notions of discrete gender identity and further disrupts the degree to
which social power and sexual roles “naturally” align to a single gender.
N
EW NOTIONS OF REPRODUCTION
..........................................................................................................................................
The prospective sexual identities found in SF/F imply not only new economies
of sexual desire and relationship but also new modes of reproduction. In turn,
these new modes—whether asexual, biotechnology-enabled, or otherwise—
suggest new forms of family and genealogy. Indeed, the new modes of sexual
reproduction in SF/F divorce reproduction from its real-world logics bound by
blood, patrilineality, and phallocentrism. In turn, it suggests new notions of
kinship, family, and sexual connection.
Joan Slonczewski’s A Door into Ocean (1986) focuses on human explorers who encounter beings called Sharers on the moon of Shora. Sharers live
in an all-female society and are passively resisting a patriarchal, mechanistic
culture on the planet Valedon. The Sharers’ gender identity is implied to be
female and their reproductive process operates via a “fusion of ova.” The
process has the overtones of genetic engineering, as one of the eggs is
imprinted with the chromosomal patterns of sperm to enable interaction. The
Sharers and the Valans are both humanoid, and the Sharers are genetically
capable of interbreeding with Valan males, though their respective anatomies
have evolved to a point where they can no longer do so physically. Part of the
narrative, then, is one character’s attempts to convince the Sharers that they
should consider the Valans as similar to them and that perhaps an alternative
reproductive process could be realized. As with other works discussed here,
228
................

Speculating Sexual Identities
acceptability of relationships—judgment along axes of sameness and difference—
comes under a process of cultural valuation. Readers experience another race
questioning the normativity of relationships and reproduction.
The future of cross-species companionship and gene traders is one
theme of Octavia Butler’s Xenogenesis trilogy. In the series’ ﬁrst novel, Dawn
(1987), a human woman named Lilith is rescued from a ravaged Earth by the
Oankali, who promise to revitalize both the planet and the dying human race.
Lilith learns that the Oankali society is comprised of three sexes: male, female,
and ooloi. The ooloi actively combines and shapes genetic material produced
by the male and female. The Oankali are gene traders who treat genetic material as an object of economic value. Toward their own ends, they begin to combine human and alien DNA, as well as to manipulate Lilith’s genetic material
so that Lilith becomes impregnated by multiple fathers. This hybridization of
bodies and species is one trope that is often used to explore notions of difference and, in turn, the intersections of race and gender in SF/F.
T
H E I M P L I C AT I O N S O F N E W S E X UA L I D E N T I T I E S
...........................................................................................................................................
One of the primary attributes of SF/F is its ability to offer opportunities for
readers and writers to reimagine components of society outside the constraints of contemporary social, economic, and political contexts. At the same
time, SF/F renders itself knowable and understandable by necessarily constructing itself from the language, forms, and prevailing notions of the present.
Thus, the very act of “speculating sexual identities” is both a forward-looking
and retrospective activity. That is, the works described in this chapter imagine
what new forms of sexuality may emerge in the future or on other worlds.
But, at the same time, they offer a means to better understand those identities found in our own society through a productive comparison where each is
understood as, to some extent, “constructed.” These new sexual identities
question normative notions, explore alternatives, and exercise the unique
freedoms of mainstream and speculative ﬁction alike. From there, it is up to
readers to return to our world, question what we know, and prepare ourselves
for the coming world.
See also Cyberbodies, Female; Pregnancy and Reproduction; chapter 19.
Further Readings
Brickell, Chris. “The Science/Fiction of Sex: Feminist Deconstruction and the Vocabularies
of Heterosex.” Sexualities 7, no. 3 (August 2004): 373–75.
Haraway, Donna. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the
Late Twentieth Century.” In Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature,
149–81. New York: Routledge, 1991.
Latham, Rob. “Sextrapolation in New Wave Science Fiction.” Science Fiction Studies 33, no. 2
( July 2006): 251–74.

229
................

23

Science
LISA YASZEK

WOMEN write science ﬁction (SF) for many reasons: to translate scientiﬁc theories to lay audiences, to explore the implications of technological innovation
on the natural environment, and even to speculate about the impact of new
sciences and technologies on social relations. Indeed, this latter reason is often the most pressing of all for women authors. Although women are often
the objects of scientiﬁc study and targets of technological innovation, historically they have been excluded from key areas of scientiﬁc practice and thus
the creation of those scientiﬁc narratives used to justify social arrangements.
By writing SF, women imaginatively intervene into dominant understandings
of science, society, and gender, critically assessing current scientiﬁc and
social practices and imagining a wide range of new and more egalitarian ones
grounded in their own experience of the world. Therefore, it is not surprising
that the history of women’s writing about science in SF largely parallels the
history of women’s relations to the scientiﬁc community itself.
This history begins with the development of modern science during the
Enlightenment, when women were ﬁrst permitted to participate in the scientiﬁc community as audience members. With the 1744 publication of Eliza
Haywood’s journal The Female Spectator, women took on new roles as science
writers and forged distinctly feminine modes of authority to justify these
roles. Enlightenment thinkers assumed that, while women were not intellectually equipped to grapple with the physical sciences, they were both better
observers of nature and more inherently moral than men. This assumption
enabled women to argue that they were ideally suited to explain both natural
history and natural theology to an audience of children and other adults in
the home. Accordingly, eighteenth-century women developed a tradition of
popular science writing that revolved around the ﬁgure of “the Scientiﬁc
Mother” who explores the grounds outside her home with her children so that
they may better understand the wonders of nature and God.
230
................

Science
Women authors of this period did more than just report scientiﬁc fact;
they also wrote what is sometimes called “proto–science ﬁction,” inspired by
the time’s scientiﬁc innovations. The most celebrated example of women’s
proto–science ﬁction is Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley’s Frankenstein; or, the
Modern Prometheus (1818). Shelley was a widely read scientiﬁc enthusiast who
attended public demonstrations of galvanism, in which scientists ran electric
current through dead animals. As the current caused the corpses’ muscles to
contract, it seemed the animals were temporarily brought back to life. Shelley
extrapolated from this phenomenon to imagine a world where one scientist,
Victor Frankenstein, uses electricity to spark life in a human being assembled
from scavenged body parts.
Shelley also extrapolated from new theories of reproduction posited by
Erasmus Darwin, who argued that paired sexual reproduction was evolutionarily more advanced than hermaphroditic or solitary paternal propagation.
These theories enabled Shelley to subtly critique the masculinist nature of
science as it was practiced in her day. As she makes clear in her novel, Victor
creates life, but he cannot nurture it. Frankenstein’s bad parenting causes his
creation to become a monster that methodically kills off his loved ones and,
eventually, the scientist himself.
Like the other women science writers of her day, Shelley derived the
authority to write from her experience as the member of various scientiﬁc
audiences. However, she went beyond her contemporaries by commenting on
the dangerous nature of a scientiﬁc community that appropriates the feminine power of reproduction without preserving the equally important and traditionally feminine task of caretaking. In doing so, Shelley anticipated both
the practice of science ﬁctional speculation as a whole and of feminist science ﬁctional critique in particular.
As women’s positions within the scientiﬁc community evolved, so did
their stories about it. The decades between 1880 and 1910 were particularly
crucial in this respect, because they marked both the professionalization of
science and the creation of “women’s work” in science. Prior to this time, science was treated as an amateur activity in which any man with sufﬁcient
education, funding, and access to equipment could participate. By the ﬁnal
decades of the nineteenth century, however, science was an integral part of
big business, and scientists were deﬁned as formally educated, paid experts
who worked in university laboratories or other institutional research settings
and who regularly published in specialized journals.
This period also marked the beginning of First Wave feminism, in
which women banded together to secure the same political rights and responsibilities as their male counterparts. First Wave feminism culminated in the
1920s when American and British women ﬁnally won the right to vote in all
political elections. Women also sought greater access to traditionally masculine professions, including science. By the 1880s, young women regularly
231
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

received excellent scientiﬁc educations at single-sex academies. The majority
of these women married soon after graduation and applied their hard-won
knowledge to the task of “Republican Motherhood,” that is, the production of
well-rounded children who would someday become upstanding citizens in
their own rights. But those who remained single often sought to extend their
relationship to the scientiﬁc community by joining scientiﬁc organizations,
working in museums and observatories, and pursuing graduate educations.
Male scientists were generally hostile to such women because they
feared that the “feminization” of science would threaten its newly achieved
professional status. Accordingly, women worked out two very different strategies to secure places for themselves in the scientiﬁc community. Some,
including Christine Ladd Franklin of Vassar College, formed liberal-to-radical
organizations such as the Association of College Alumnae that put pressure
on graduate schools to live up to their own democratic ideas, reject sexual
stereotypes, and open their doors to men and women alike. Others—most
notably Ellen Swallow Richards, the ﬁrst woman to graduate from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) engineering program—invoked conventional ideas about uniquely feminine skills and talents to establish distinct
areas of women’s work in science. Much of this work was menial in nature,
comprised of painstaking, low-level research and computation that rarely led
to promotions or raises. But women like Richards were also instrumental in
creating new ﬁelds of expertise such as domestic engineering (later known as
home economics) and consumer relations, both of which gave women access
to satisfying work in academia, government, and industry.
New ideas about women as scientiﬁc educators and domestic engineers
were central to the feminist utopias that ﬂourished in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries. The ideas are particularly apparent in Mary E.
Bradley Lane’s Mizora: A Prophecy (1881) and Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Herland (1915). Both works depict single-sex societies organized around the traditionally feminine activities of mothering, homemaking, and community
building. The women of Mizora and Herland enjoy unprecedented standards
of living because they apply the principles of domestic engineering on the
widest scale possible, transforming the hostile arctic and tropical lands where
they live into fertile paradises. They also extend the scientiﬁc management of
the home to the scientiﬁc management of people, carefully combining eugenics with education to create perfectly adjusted children. Much like their reallife counterparts in women’s colleges and the home economics departments
of coed universities, then, Mizorans and Herlanders forge self-sufﬁcient communities with distinctly feminine sciences.
In some areas of scientiﬁc discovery and technological innovation, the
women of these early feminist utopias clearly surpass their male counterparts. Inspired by the development of the automobile and the telephone,
232
................

Science
Lane imagines that her heroines’ lives might be made even more comfortable by the mass production of airplanes and televisions. Meanwhile, Gilman
extrapolates from ﬁndings in the new ﬁeld of psychology to create characters
that use the art of mental adjustment to produce new levels of consciousness and morality. Signiﬁcantly, both authors insist that their protagonists
accomplish these amazing feats because they are not conﬁned to the margins of a masculine scientiﬁc community: they are the scientiﬁc community.
Much like Shelley, Lane and Gilman expand upon the social arrangements of
their own day to comment on sexism in the scientiﬁc community. However,
while Shelley suggests that the masculine appropriation of feminine labor
can end only in tragedy, Lane and Gilman more optimistically propose that
the inclusion of feminine values in science will beneﬁt all humankind.
Between 1910 and 1940, scientiﬁc women focused primarily on consolidating the gains made by their foremothers. The overall number of female
scientists at coed colleges and in government slowly rose throughout this
period, but women were generally hired to work in the soft disciplines of
anthropology, psychology, and home economics rather than the more prestigious, male-dominated ﬁelds of the hard sciences, medicine, and engineering.
Meanwhile, ambitious young women interested in industry were advised by
male and female mentors alike to earn twice as many professional honors as
men and then to cheerfully accept subordinate posts as lab assistants and
librarians if they wanted to work at all. Although conservative ideas about
“women’s work” had opened doors for earlier generations of female scientists,
by the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth century it was apparent that those same
ideas were something of a liability for modern women.
The period between 1910 and 1940 also marked the rise of SF as a distinct mode of storytelling, complete with its own readers, writers, and publications. Much like science, SF writing was perceived as a masculine activity.
But women were vital members of the early SF community, and their stories
addressed the interrelations of science, society, and gender in creative ways.
At ﬁrst glance, many of these stories seem simply to reﬂect the ongoing marginalization of women in science, as they are generally told from the perspective of male scientists and rarely depict women engaged in scientiﬁc labor.
Prime examples of such tales include Clare Winger Harris’s “The Fate of the
Poiseidonia” (1929), in which an amateur astronomer uncovers a Martian plot
to steal Earth’s water (as well as his girlfriend), and Minna Irving’s “Moon
Woman” (1929), in which a science professor who subjects himself to suspended animation eventually wakes up in the utopian society of the title
character. However, it is important to recognize that these stories were, ﬁrst
and foremost, the products of a new literary community still in the process of
deﬁning itself. As such, it is no surprise that they reﬂect the central assumptions of that community, including the belief that SF readers were primarily
adolescent boys interested in scientiﬁc discovery and romantic adventure.
233
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Even as they adhered to the early conventions of SF writing, women
found ways to incorporate feminine (and feminist) ideas in their stories. Many
drew upon the utopian tradition established by their literary predecessors to
demonstrate not just how man might conquer the stars but also how woman
might do so, once she is liberated from housework by the products of domestic engineering. For example, the protagonists of Lilith Lorraine’s “Into the
28th Century” (1930) enjoy labor-free banquets of jeweled food ﬂakes and
sparkling beverages, while the women of Leslie F. Stone’s “Women with
Wings” (1930) delegate housework to robots. Meanwhile, in Sophie Wenzel
Ellis’s “Creatures of the Light” (1930), the dangers of childbirth are eliminated
by the perfection of glass wombs, and in Stone’s “Men with Wings” (1929),
women are free to pursue careers outside the home because children are
raised by trained professionals. Much like Lane and Gilman before them,
women writing for the early SF community often asked readers to consider
how science might change women’s lives for the better. However, they mitigated any anxiety readers might have felt concerning these changes by insisting that scientists—not politicians or feminists—be the heroes of their stories.
SF authors also managed to include feminine perspectives in their stories with the use of alien narrators. For example, in Stone’s “The Conquest of
Gola” (1931), an elderly alien tells her daughters about an incident from her
youth when males from the neighboring planet Detaxal attempted to bring the
women of Gola to their knees with a combination of force and seduction. In
response, the Golans marshaled their superior scientiﬁc powers, including a
carefully cultivated talent for telepathy, and drove the Detaxalans away for
good. Signiﬁcantly, Stone tempers this feminist power fantasy by carefully
adhering to another narrative convention of early SF: she insists that her aliens
are distinctly nonhuman beings, complete with rubbery appendages, golden
fur, and moveable eyes, who smell, hear, touch, and ingest food with organs
they extrude from their bodies at will. Thus Stone suggests that the war for
Gola is not so much a battle of the sexes as it is a battle between two alien
races with very different bodies and sciences. At the same time, however, this
narrative sleight-of-hand allows her to allegorically convey both the alienation
and the sense of accomplishment that women of her own world must have felt
as they struggled to preserve the gains made by their feminist foremothers.
The period between 1940 and the mid-1960s was very much one of transition for women in both the sciences and the SF community. During World
War II, women demonstrated their scientiﬁc and technological prowess in ofﬁces, laboratories, and factories while men fought overseas. However, once the
war ended, women were encouraged to exchange their careers for housekeeping and childrearing in the suburbs. In many ways, the advent of the Cold War
reinforced traditional gender ideals. Although the decades following World
War II marked record growth in almost every aspect of American science and
technology, for the most part women were still relegated to the margins of
234
................

Science
technoscientiﬁc labor. This marginalization was justiﬁed by the rhetoric of the
“feminine mystique,” which suggested that women were biologically evolved
to choose family over career. Indeed, antifeminist commentators insisted that
women who tried to “have it all” were doomed to failure because the incompatible demands of motherhood and science would endanger the well-being
of both the individual scientist’s family and American science as a whole.
Nonetheless, women continued to pursue scientiﬁc and technological
careers in record numbers. Moreover, as Cold War tensions increased with
the advent of the space race, a small but increasingly vocal number of scientists and politicians argued that the United States could only maintain its
position as a global leader by encouraging women to do so. New ideas about
women in science and technology were reﬂected in the National Defense Education Act of 1958, which allocated funds to the scientiﬁc education of men
and women alike, and the short-lived Women in Space Early program, which
provided Americans with new images of women who were both intensely
feminine and technologically adept. Slowly but surely, it seemed that the relations of gender, science, and society were changing, and that patriotic women
might use their talents in both the laundry room and the laboratory.
Women writing for the postwar SF community certainly thought this
was the case, and they incorporated new ideas about gender and science into
both their journalism and ﬁction. As contributors to major SF magazines such
as Amazing Stories and Fantastic Adventures, authors like June Lurie, Rita
Glanzman, and Kathleen Downe wrote hundreds of articles on topics ranging
from the historic foundations of mythology and superstition to new developments in deep-sea diving and atomic energy. Following the conventions established by women science writers in previous centuries, these columnists used
distinctly feminine personas to critically assess the discoveries made by male
scientists and engineers—and also to comment on political, social, and gender relations. For example, Lurie’s staunchly patriotic “Red Atoms” (1950) celebrates the heroism of the American scientists who developed nuclear
weapons before their Soviet counterparts; Glanzman’s “The Bantus with the
Brains” (1951) uses anthropological data to challenge racist assumptions
about the intellectual superiority of white Westerners; and Downe’s “Why Not
a Woman?” (1955) marshals both scientiﬁc and sociological studies to explain
why women would make better astronauts than men.
Fiction writers addressed the issue of women’s scientiﬁc authority even
more directly. Throughout the postwar era, women challenged the logic of
feminine mystique by writing stories from the perspective of female characters that are both scientists and mothers. In Marion Zimmer Bradley’s “The
Wind People” (1959), for instance, a space-traveling medical ofﬁcer learns,
upon the birth of her son, that she must either euthanize her baby or give up
her shipboard post. Although she preserves her child’s life by staying with
him on an alien planet, the loneliness of her new life, combined with the
235
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

haunting suspicion that she and her son are not alone on their world, drives
Bradley’s protagonist to madness and death. Meanwhile, in Judith Merril’s
“Dead Center” (1954), the authorities of Earth’s newly formed Space Agency
decide to replace their lead female rocket designer with an inexperienced
male engineer. This decision initiates a string of tragedies, including the
death of the designer’s astronaut husband and six-year-old son, the designer’s
subsequent suicide, and the end of Earth’s space program. For authors such
as Bradley and Merril, then, the choice between family and work was a mistaken one for women, leading to both personal and public tragedy.
But SF authors also rewrote masculinist myths about science and technology to show how women might combine their professional and personal
lives in more progressive ways. Such stories include Katherine MacLean’s
“And Be Merry …” (1950), in which a scientist unlocks the secret of immortality in her kitchen-turned-laboratory; Merril’s “Daughters of Earth” (1952), in
which the death of their husbands inspires two generations of spacefaring
women to develop radical new exploration techniques; and Doris Pitkin Buck’s
“Birth of a Gardener” (1961), in which a disastrous marriage inspires yet
another woman to perfect multidimensional travel. The protagonists of these
tales are neither bad scientists nor helpless housewife heroines, but compassionate and consummate professionals who lead their people to the stars.
While the space race opened up new possibilities for women in the scientiﬁc community, it was not until the advent of Second Wave feminism in
the mid-1960s that women were fully able to act upon them. Postwar politicians assumed that National Defense Education funds would be spent in conventionally gendered ways and that women would be trained to teach math
and science to children while men pursued graduate degrees and prepared
for the critical work of national defense. However, as thousands of women
ﬂooded into college- and even graduate-level scientiﬁc programs, they refused
to accept this script. Inspired by the consciousness-raising activities of journalists such as Gloria Steinem and Betty Friedan, scientists, including sociologist Alice S. Rossi and psychologist Naomi Weisstein, gathered massive
amounts of data documenting discrimination against women in the sciences
and published scathing articles on the subject in both professional journals
and popular magazines. Much like Christine Ladd Franklin and the Association of College Alumnae nearly a century earlier, women scientists hoped that
serious efforts to expose sexism in the supposedly value-free realm of science
would lead to its eventual eradication.
Modern women scientists also took up group politics in their efforts to
reform the scientiﬁc community. Scientists like Rossi became leading ﬁgures
in the National Organization for Women, thereby drawing attention to the
fact that the problem of sexism in science was part of the larger problem of
sexism in society. In 1970, psychologist Bernice Sandler initiated the ﬁrst
236
................

Science
class-action lawsuit against sexual discrimination in hiring practices at public
universities. Taken together, such efforts led to the ratiﬁcation of the 1972
Educational Amendment Acts, whose Title IX guaranteed equal pay for both
men and women working in higher education while banning sex discrimination in any educational program that received federal funding. Although this
political legislation did not immediately transform the relations of science,
society, and gender, it ushered in a revolutionary new era in which women
could initiate the process of change more effectively.
The late 1960s and early 1970s also marked the emergence on an
overtly feminist science ﬁction in which authors, like their political counterparts, dreamed of equal access to scientiﬁc and social power for all. This
dream of equality was expressed in a variety of ways. Some authors, such as
Ursula K. Le Guin in The Left Hand of Darkness (1969), used anthropology, sociology, and psychology to demonstrate how androgynous cultures might distribute childbearing responsibilities and thus power relations more equitably
than cultures grounded in sexual division. Others, like Marge Piercy in
Woman on the Edge of Time (1976) and Joanna Russ in The Female Man (1975),
explored how new reproductive sciences and technologies might reform
social relations among men and women. For example, in the mixed-sex utopia of Piercy’s novel, babies are gestated in mechanical wombs while both
men and women use hormone therapy to produce breast milk and enjoy the
experience of mothering. Meanwhile, technologically enabled reproduction in
Russ’s single-sex utopia liberates women to engage in activities ranging from
romance and mothering to law enforcement and dueling. All these feminist
SF authors are strongly indebted to earlier feminist utopian authors in that
they insist new modes of reproduction are key to the creation of better societies. In contrast to Lane and Gilman’s saintly women, however, the inhabitants
of these new science ﬁctional worlds are both generous and selﬁsh, wise and
stupid, peaceful and aggressive. In other words, they are not conventionally
masculine or feminine, but distinctly human.
The ﬁrst generation of feminist SF authors did more than simply dream
of equality in their writing; they also freely conveyed the anger that women
feel when they are denied this equality. In both Piercy’s and Russ’s novels, individual female characters gladly turn the weapons of science against patriarchy
to ensure the creation of feminist utopias, even at the cost of their own lives. In
other stories, entire societies of women are deﬁned by their anger. This theme
is particularly apparent in Suzy McKee Charnas’s Holdfast series (1974–99),
which imagines that women of the future might need a wide range of emotional and technological weapons to prevent literal enslavement by men. Still
other novelists displaced women’s anger onto the conventionally feminized
body of the Earth itself, as in Sally Miller Gearhart’s Wanderground: Stories of the
Hill Women (1980), where women roam the world in harmony with nature,
while men retreat to walled cities because nature has rejected them and
237
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

science and technology no longer operate properly on open ground. By imagining worlds where women turn patriarchal science against men, transforming it
for their own political ends and even abandoning it when it has no more social
value, feminist SF authors dramatize the different strategies that female scientists were using to express their own anger with the patriarchal status quo.
Although the quest for equality in the sciences continues today, the development of new information and communication technologies and the
advent of global capitalism have brought new issues to the attention of
women in both science and SF. In contrast to earlier generations of feminists
who saw science as just one locus of discrimination among many, the Third
Wave feminists who ﬁrst emerged in the 1980s propose that thinking carefully
about the relations of science, society, and gender should be a central priority
for all women. Led by science studies scholars Donna Haraway and Chela
Sandoval, contemporary feminists insist we must recognize not just that new
sciences and technologies have transformed women’s lives but also that
women across the world experience what Haraway calls the “integrated
circuit” of capitalism in radically different ways. In doing so, feminists take
the ﬁrst critical step toward developing modes of political activism that better
address the complexities of life in a high-tech world.
Other feminist science studies scholars, including Evelyn Fox Keller,
Hilary Rose, and Sandra Harding, propose that progressive people might
transform the relations of science, society, and gender more effectively by
exploring the impact of patriarchal values and practices on science itself. To
overcome patriarchal bias in science, feminists must recover the stories of
women and other people whose scientiﬁc practices have been left out of history, and they must identify the gendered metaphors that structure scientiﬁc
thinking and writing. Finally, feminist science studies scholars propose that
scientists themselves should practice what Harding calls “standpoint epistemology,” in which scientiﬁc and technological professionals acknowledge
both their social positions in the world and how those positions inﬂuence
their practices. As Keller, Rose, and Harding emphasize throughout their
work, these analytic activities are meant to make science more truly objective
by accounting for all the different factors informing it.
Insights derived from feminist science studies are central to the imaginative practices of contemporary SF authors. For example, feminist writers often use the SF subgenre of cyberpunk to dramatize the gendered implications
of life in the integrated circuit of high-tech capitalism. Novels such as Pat
Cadigan’s Synners (1991) and Melissa Scott’s Trouble and Her Friends (1994) predict that the corporate dream of a future in which people use new technologies
to escape the messy problems of the material world will eventually trigger information apocalypse and the breakdown of society as a whole. But these
authors also imagine that people who recognize the value of physical bodies in
relation to the abstract world of computation might transform bad corporate
238
................

Science
futures into new and more egalitarian ones. Perhaps not surprisingly, the protagonists of feminist cyberpunk novels who initiate these better futures are
usually rewarded with both stimulating work and adoring romantic partners.
While feminist cyberpunk authors offer their audiences some of the
most direct interventions into the narratives of science, society, and gender
structuring the contemporary moment, writers of color provide some of the
most provocative ones. Nearly every story African-American author Octavia
Butler published between her literary debut in 1976 until her death in 2006
uses the classic SF theme of “the encounter with the alien Other” to complicate readers’ thinking about science, technology, and the racial Other in our
own world. Most notably, in stories such as “Blood Child” (1984) and the Xenogenesis trilogy (1987–98), humans and aliens learn that they must put aside
their prejudices and creatively use science and technology to breed new,
hybrid races that are both species’ only hope for survival. Meanwhile, CaribbeanCanadian author Nalo Hopkinson’s Brown Girl in the Ring (1998) and The Midnight Robber (2000) revolve around women of color who embrace the practices
of their non-Western ancestors to better combat the deadliest aspects of traditional Western science while extending its beneﬁcial tendencies in striking
new ways. Whereas Butler’s protagonists are literally hybrids, Hopkinson’s are
cultural ones. In both cases, these hybrid characters herald the beginning of
new futures that do not simply repeat the bad old past, but that come with
their own tragedies and triumphs.
Finally, contemporary women writers are central participants in the
ongoing creation of postmodern SF, which critiques the patriarchal bias inherent in science as it is currently practiced yet retains an overall faith in the
possibility of true scientiﬁc and social progress. Much like feminist science
studies scholars Keller, Rose, and Harding, these authors encourage readers
to rethink their deﬁnitions of science and technology by illustrating the multiple ways that women engage them.
This is particularly apparent in Piercy’s He, She, and It (1991), which follows three generations of female computer scientists as they try to transform
their dystopic near-future. While the women occupy very different technoscientiﬁc roles (as corporate workers, independent scientists, and revolutionaries) and rarely condone one another’s personal or political choices, they
remain bound together by familial love and a mutual desire to create a better
future for their children. Meanwhile, in “Balinese Dancer” (1997) and Life
(2004), Gwyneth Jones imagines that one woman’s experience of sexual discrimination and relegation to work on the margins of the scientiﬁc community
paradoxically liberates her to make the most shocking scientiﬁc discovery of
all: that humans are in the process of evolving past sex and gender.
Like their counterparts in the academy, Piercy and Jones do not provide
readers with easy answers to the problem of how women might reform either
patriarchal science or society. They do, however, insist that readers
239
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

understand the wide range of practices that might eventually lead to such
reformation, including the complex and sometimes contradictory interactions
of power, knowledge, and love.
See also chapter 19.
Further Readings
Alic, Margaret. Hypatia’s Heritage: A History of Women in Science from Antiquity through the
Nineteenth Century. Boston: Beacon Press, 1986.
Attebery, Brian. Decoding Gender in Science Fiction. New York: Routledge, 2002.
Donawerth, Jane L. Frankenstein’s Daughters: Women Writing Science Fiction. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1997.
Donawerth, Jane L., and Carol A. Kolmerton, eds. Worlds of Difference: Utopian and Science Fiction by Women. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1994.
Flanagan, Mary, and Austin Booth, eds. Reload: Rethinking Women þ Cyberculture. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2002.
Freni, Pamela. Space for Women: A History of Women with the Right Stuff. Santa Ana, CA:
Seven Locks Press, 2002.
Gates, Barbara T., and Ann B. Shteir, eds. Natural Eloquence: Women Reinscribe Nature. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1997.
Haraway, Donna. Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New York: Routledge, 1991.
Harding, Sandra. The Science Question in Feminism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1986.
Keller, Evelyn Fox. Reﬂections on Gender and Science. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1985.
Keller, Evelyn Fox, and Helen E. Longino, eds. Feminism and Science. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Kessler, Carol Farley. Daring to Dream: Utopian Stories by United States Women, 1836–1919. 2nd
ed. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1995.
Kohlstedt, Sally Gregory, ed. History of Women in the Sciences: Readings from Isis. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Oldenziel, Ruth. Making Technology Masculine: Women, Men, and the Machine in America, 1880–
1945. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 1999.
Roberts, Robin. A New Species: Gender and Science in Science Fiction. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993.
Rose, Hilary. Love, Power, Knowledge: Toward a Feminist Transformation of the Sciences. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994.
Rossiter, Margaret W. Women Scientists in America: Struggles and Strategies to 1940. Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.
———. Women Scientists in America before Afﬁrmative Action, 1940–1972. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1995.
Tolley, Kim. The Science Education of American Girls: A Historical Perspective. New York: Routledge Falmer, 2003.
Whaley, Leigh Ann. Women’s History as Scientists: A Guide to the Debates. Santa Barbara, CA:
ABC-Clio, 1993.
Yaszek, Lisa. Galactic Suburbia: Gender, Technology, and the Creation of Women’s Science Fiction.
Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 2007.
240
................

24

Feminist Spirituality
JANICE C. CROSBY

THE BEGINNINGS of the contemporary feminist spirituality movement are
found in the United States during the nineteenth century. Along with their
agitation for women’s suffrage, Matilda Joslyn Gage and Elizabeth Cady Stanton critiqued the role of Christianity in supporting and perpetuating patriarchal culture and the oppression of women in their respective works Woman,
Church, and State (1893) and The Woman’s Bible (1895). As the American feminist
movement of the latter twentieth century continued to face the challenge of
dismantling patriarchy, criticism of traditional religion was an area of interest
for many feminists.
While some feminists have criticized those who explore questions of
spirituality (typically referred to as spiritual feminists, especially when they
practice outside mainstream religious traditions) as diverting energy from
more material and political causes, the fact that contemporary feminist spirituality has entered its fourth decade demonstrates that spirituality, in its
many manifestations, remains a fundamental concern for women both personally and politically. This concern and the intersection of the spiritual with
the political is acknowledged by Penelope Ingram in “From Goddess Spirituality to Irigaray’s Angel: The Politics of the Divine” as valid for feminist theory.
However, her continuing use of the word mere to qualify spirituality can be
read as undermining her stated objective of joining the popular discourse of
spiritual feminists with that of theory-oriented academic feminists.
During the feminist movement of the latter part of the twentieth century, Christianity was critiqued and reevaluated along with other traditionally
male-dominated religions, such as Judaism. Criticism of Hinduism, Buddhism,
and Islam followed. This approach is usually referred to as “reformist”; it
attempts to change religious institutions and practices from within. The
reformist position was espoused by such critics as Rosemary Radford Ruether,
Judith Plaskow, and the early works of Mary Daly.
241
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Many spiritual feminists felt that the reformist approach was inadequate, however. They became interested in gynocentric (woman-centered)
religious practices favoring women’s myth, stories, history, experiences, and
bodies. Through their investigations, women began rediscovering the concept
of the feminine divine or Goddess. Theologians such as Carol Christ and Daly
were highly inﬂuential in introducing this approach into academic discussion.
Critics and theorists from other disciplines such as anthropology and art, notably Marija Gimbutas, Merlin Stone, Rianne Eisler, and Gloria Orenstein, wrote
groundbreaking works that not only furthered debate in academic circles but
also inﬂuenced grassroots spiritual feminists and “New Age” spirituality.

TYPES AND TRENDS
...............................................................................................................................
Feminist spirituality encompasses a wide variety of forms and practices. As
noted, the feminist reformation branch primarily focuses on traditional religions such as Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Buddhism, and Hinduism, ﬁnding
value in the core beliefs, but rediscovering or reimagining feminist values,
beliefs, roles, interpretations, and so forth. For example, Christian feminists
such as Ruether examine the feminine qualities of Jesus Christ or examine
powerful females in the Bible. The dominance of the traditional religions, as
well as the large number of female adherents involved, has ensured the continuance and proliferation of the reformist tradition.
The gynocentric branch concerns the search for or creation of spiritual
practices centering around women and female power, thus appealing to
women disaffected with mainstream traditions who yearn for a spiritual practice that meshes with their feminist values. Drawing from archaeology, anthropology, art, oral tradition, and other disciplines, feminists have sought to
ﬁnd evidence of cultures and time periods where women were not spiritually
subordinate, and may even have held primacy. Eisler’s The Chalice and the Blade
(1987) looks to prehistory for evidence of cultural female equality springing
from reverence for the divine feminine or Goddess. Often the terms matrilineal
(descent through the mother’s rather than the father’s line) or matrifocal (a
family structure centered on a woman and her adult daughters) are used
rather than matriarchal, because few scholars assert that women historically
subordinated men. From this research, such as Stone’s When God Was a
Woman (1976) and Ancient Mirrors of Womanhood (1979), the existence of Goddess
worship at various historical points in cultures worldwide sparked a renaissance of interest in and exploration of Goddess theology, sometimes called
“thealogy.” Orenstein’s The Reﬂowering of the Goddess (1990) was among the ﬁrst
book-length works to locate the presence of spiritual feminism in both art
and literature.
Daly’s radical departure from the reformist position in Gyn/ecology
(1978) included a discussion of the genocide of European women during the
242
................

Feminist Spirituality
centuries of witch-hunts, often referred to as “the Burning Times.” Though
debate continues among historians as to the motives of the persecutors and
the number of victims, even among feminist historians such as Anne Barstow
(Witchcraze: A New History of the European Witch Hunts, 1994), Daly’s material
merges academic feminism with European traditions (or imaginative recreations) of witchcraft, including one burgeoning modern offshoot, Wicca.
Wicca deﬁes singular deﬁnition; while elements of pre-Christian European
paganism are predominant, some of its main characteristics include eclecticism and borrowing from other traditions. Key variants of the concept of the
centrality of the Goddess and the democratization of spiritual leadership
result in a range of practices. For example, a group may be led by a High
Priestess, but all women are considered priestesses; groups that include men
view all men as priests. Dianic Wicca, however, is characterized by focus
solely on the Goddess, with only female participants; some Dianic groups are
lesbian and separatist, creating a solely gynocentric focus and space for participants. Though Wicca arises from British traditions, including the philosophies of Gerald Gardner and Alex Sander, both of whom founded and led
groups of witches, there are differences. Important differences include the
departure from the concept of strict male–female balance, coven (group) hierarchy, and set ceremonial rituals. Starhawk’s The Spiral Dance (1979), widely
considered a pivotal text in the promulgation of Wicca, has led to numerous
“how-to” books created for beginning Wiccans, including solitary practitioners. At this point, feminist theology merges with alternative or New Age
spirituality for the grassroots spiritual seeker.
Archetypal feminism merges academic feminism with a feminist selfhelp movement for women where many feminist revisionists of archetypal
theory often turn to various goddesses to illustrate their points, while making
a connection to everyday women’s lived experience. Jean Shinoda Bolen’s Goddesses in Everywoman (1984) is one such text, as are Clarissa Pinkola Estes’s
Women Who Run with the Wolves: Myths and Stories of the Wild Woman Archetype
(1992), Christine Downing’s Goddess: Mythological Images of the Feminine (1981),
and Maureen Murdock’s The Heroine’s Journey (1990). These early, pivotal texts
of Jungian feminism utilize the idea of the feminine divine and relate it to
women’s lives. With the exception of Estes, however, the texts focus on the
Greco-Roman pantheon, which is familiar to many readers but has been
noted to be too heavily weighted in one section of the Western tradition to
actually speak to “everywoman.”

C..............................................................................................................................
ONT ROVERSIES: RACE AND CLASS
Cynthia Eller’s Living in the Lap of the Goddess (1993), an ethnographic study of
the Goddess spirituality movement, characterizes the participants as primarily white, educated, and middle-class, an observation that parallels studies of
243
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

the larger neo-pagan movement of which Goddess spirituality is a part.
Though feminist spirituality is not conﬁned to the West, American and British
feminist traditions, especially when coupled with the religious pluralism of
the United States and the counterculture movements of the 1960s and 1970s,
have created a body of texts, research, theories, groups, practices, and publishing that are indeed dominated by this demographic. The eclectic nature of
spiritual feminism, including Wicca and other forms of witchcraft, as well as
the blending of non-Western practices, such as Eastern meditative techniques
and Native American religious beliefs and practices, with European practices
in the New Age movement has resulted in charges of both ethnocentrism and
imperialistic appropriation of non-Western beliefs and practices.
Though some practices, such as Celtic neo-paganism, encourage those
of a particular European ethnicity to investigate more fully a feminist spiritual tradition (or adaptation) that some might deem more culturally appropriate in terms of heritage, others encourage a “buffet” approach of pantheons
and practices not limited to a practitioner’s ethnic heritage and thereby leave
themselves open to these charges. As these approaches become more popular
(see below), persons and agencies (such as publishing companies) within a
capitalist society may seek to proﬁt from such popularity, furthering the
charge that exploitation, rather than spiritual exploration, is the primary factor. For example, Laura E. Donaldson’s “On Medicine Women and White
Shame-Ans: New Age Native Americanism and Commodity Fetishism as Pop
Culture Feminism” cogently argues against such religious borrowing, especially when the borrowers have taken no measures to know speciﬁc tribal cultures and their histories.
Though spiritual feminists as a whole would do well to examine such
charges in terms of their own practices, academic discourse reﬂects that the
movement has become more inclusive and has inﬂuenced women of color
and Third World women’s spirituality. Luisah Teish, for instance, writes works
incorporating Voodoo and African Diasporic ritual traditions in an accessible
manner (Jambalaya, 1985; Carnival of the Spirit, 1994). Works based on Native
American tradition include Paula Gunn Allen’s Grandmothers of the Light: A
Medicine Woman’s Sourcebook (1991) and Marilou Awiakta’s Selu: Seeking the
Corn-Mother’s Wisdom (1993).

P O P U L A R I Z AT I O N
...............................................................................................................................
In 1998, Karen Andes’s A Woman’s Book of Power: Using Dance to Cultivate Energy
and Health in Mind, Body, and Spirit included the chapter “Every One of Us Is a
Goddess.” What is noteworthy about this event is the matter-of-fact approach
Andes uses in a ﬁtness book toward incorporating the idea of Goddess spirituality as a given, requiring little explanation for her readership. This approach
indicates the far-reaching inﬁltration of what once was (and to some, still is)
244
................

Feminist Spirituality
a radical feminist challenge to entrenched patriarchal religion. Now, Goddess
spirituality, in various forms, appears in workout routines, dance, drama, and
many other ﬁelds. While such manifestations do not directly translate into
either actual Goddess worship or the complete erasure of patriarchal religious
structures, they do indicate a cultural shift, at least in the West, toward the
inclusion of spiritual feminism in popular culture. As discussed below, this
popularization is replicated in literature of the fantastic from initial, provocative groundbreaking explorations to—especially among women writers—
incorporation of various elements of spiritual feminism such as goddesses,
witches, Wiccans, and magical practitioners in a similar, matter-of-fact way
in the background of many subgenres of fantastic literature.

C..............................................................................................................................
H A N G E S I N L I T E R AT U R E
As with other realms of feminist literary criticism, developments in feminist
theory resulted in new techniques of literary criticism. The rise in popular culture studies from the 1980s onward parallels the spread of feminist spirituality
in both academic and grassroots areas, as described above. Traditional mythology had provided one means for feminist science ﬁction and fantasy (SF/F)
critics to approach the appearances of goddesses and quest motifs, for example, in Thelma Shinn’s Worlds within Women: Myth and Mythmaking in Fantastic
Literature by Women (1986), Charlotte Spivack’s Merlin’s Daughters: Contemporary
Women Writers of Fantasy (1987), and various journal articles. In works incorporating feminist spirituality, a new understanding of spiritual feminism allowed
for further grounding of literary analysis in terms of works reﬂecting this new
spiritual paradigm shift. Book-length studies concentrating on feminist spirituality in fantastic literature include Annette Van Dyke’s The Search for a WomanCentered Spirituality (1992) and Janice C. Crosby’s Cauldron of Changes: Feminist
Spirituality in Fantastic Fiction (2000), which includes an annotated bibliography.
In discussing the many, often overlapping genres and subgenres in
which feminist spirituality appears—science ﬁction, fantasy, dark fantasy or
horror, urban fantasy, sword and sorcery, romantic fantasy, magical realism—it becomes clear that examples can overlap and incorporate feminist
spirituality to greater and lesser degrees, so the idea of a “literature of the
fantastic” is important as an overarching term. This is similar to the choice
Marleen Barr made, for many of the same reasons, in Alien to Femininity: Speculative Fiction and Feminist Theory (1987) to broaden the abbreviation SF from
referring only to science ﬁction to standing for “speculative ﬁction,” including
science ﬁction as well as fantasy and magical realism. While the wide variety
of subgenres in which some element of feminist spirituality now appears
underscores the scope of the phenomenon and its recognition on the part of
both authors and audiences, more important is the degree to which feminist
spirituality is represented and highlighted.
245
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

F E M I N I S T S P I R I T UA L I T Y I N L I T E R AT U R E O F
T H E FA N TA S T I C
...............................................................................................................................
Feminist spirituality appeared at ﬁrst as an innovative, groundbreaking feature in various subgenres. These texts took one or more aspects of spiritual
feminism, such as revisionist history or spiritual questing, and made it central
to the text, thereby foregrounding the issue and exploring its possibilities via
the architecture of the fantastic in a way which had not been done previously.
Later works began to explore feminist spirituality in depth and extrapolate it,
following in the footsteps of the groundbreakers. Eventually, due to the popularization mentioned above, feminist spirituality began to appear as a
“background” element—present but not the central concern of the work. The
signiﬁcance of such works lies in their presentation of feminine deity, magic,
witches or Wiccans, and so forth as part of the world of the story, without
much explanation or editorializing; the writer assumes the reader to be relatively familiar with the concept, indicating the widespread nature of feminist
spirituality at both a grassroots level and within literature of the fantastic as
a whole.
The groundbreaking, exploring, and background phases of spiritual
feminism occurred across the full range of subgenres. Some representative
examples are discussed below.

Marion Zimmer Bradley

Marion Zimmer Bradley, a prominent and proliﬁc SF/F author, is a prime
example of a groundbreaking author who used feminist spirituality in a variety of ways, in different genres and subgenres. Due to her prominence, Bradley introduced many authors and readers to the potential of feminist
spirituality in literature of the fantastic.
Bradley’s numerous Darkover novels, which fuse psychic powers with
the futuristic technology typical of science ﬁction, typically relegate ideas of
God and Goddess to the background. The Free Amazon or Renunciate series
(The Shattered Chain, 1976; Thendara House, 1983; City of Sorcery, 1984) connect
the idea of sisterhood with the meaning of the Goddess. Though deemed
“Free Amazons” by the people of patriarchal and caste-conscious Darkover,
Renunciates, as the name implies, ﬁnd freedom by renouncing all caste privilege, support by men, and obligation to childbearing, in exchange for personal
freedom, living by their talents, and being bound only by the oaths of sisterhood. The deﬁnition and strength of sisterhood are challenged in City of Sorcery, where the protagonists, especially Magda, embark on a spiritual quest
centering on their discovery and differentiation between the Dark Sisterhood
and the Sisterhood of the Wise.
With her New York Times best-selling novel The Mists of Avalon (1979),
Bradley took the material of Arthurian legend and created an enduring legacy
246
................

Feminist Spirituality
to both fantasy ﬁction and feminist spirituality simultaneously. Few novels of
any genre are as widely known among spiritual feminists. The previously villainous ﬁgure of Morgan le Fey becomes Morgaine, priestess of the Goddess of
Avalon and narrator of the story. Arthurian legend is recast as a battle
between Goddess-worshipping Britain and patriarchal Christianity. Additionally, Morgaine must wrestle with the question of rightful use of power, a
recurring theme in spiritual feminist writing of all types, as well as the deﬁnition of the Goddess, another recurring theme, which various factions deﬁne
differently.
By taking the spiritual feminist task of unearthing Goddess history (or
“herstory’) and combining it with one of the major European legends, the
“Matter of Britain,” while personalizing the struggle of feminist versus patriarchal spiritual values through one heroine’s journey, Bradley created one of
the richest ﬁctional formulations of the issues central to spiritual feminists.
Arthurian legend has long been fertile ground for fantasy writers, but one
could argue that the many permutations of Guinevere’s story, as well as other
feminist renditions of various ﬁgures, might not have existed, or at least been
so numerous and varied, had The Mists of Avalon not been written. The other
novels that serve as prequels (Priestess of Avalon, 2000; Lady of Avalon, 1997;
The Forest House, 1993), written by Diana Paxson as Bradley’s collaborator and
posthumous literary executor, further detail the transition from Goddess
tribal culture to patriarchal Roman-Christian imperial culture.
Echoing the work of Rianne Eisler and other feminist revisionist historians, Bradley traces the rise of patriarchal religion farther back than the Christianity of Avalon. Her Firebrand (1987) serves a parallel purpose to The Mists of
Avalon with another European cornerstone legend, Homer’s fall of Troy, retelling it from the point of view of Kassandra, the doomed prophetess. She
describes the conﬂict between Hellenistic Apollo and the Python, once sacred
to the Earth Mother. The Python’s slaying by Apollo is read as the vanquishing
of female, Earth-based religion by the sky gods of patriarchal religion.
Through Kassandra’s story, Bradley gives her not only a voice but also an
audience who will heed her warnings.
Laurell K. Hamilton

In the category of horror or dark fantasy, as well as erotic science ﬁction/
fantasy, Laurell K. Hamilton uses feminist spirituality as background in the
later Anita Blake Vampire Hunter novels in the form of Marianne, a Wiccan
familiar with Anita’s world, including shape-shifters and vampires, who
becomes a teacher-therapist ﬁgure to the Christian Anita. There are other varieties of witches in the series, as well, including Christian witches (Followers of
the Way) and malevolent types such as shape-shifting witches. Anita’s awareness of the variety of witches and Wiccans—most benign, but not all—indicates
both the growing numbers of Wiccans in society as well as other types of
247
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

witches and different cultural views of the term witch. The range of witches
in the background of a number of Anita Blake novels appears to reﬂect Hamilton’s own growing involvement in Wicca.
The foregrounding of the Goddess in the Meredith Gentry novels also
suggests such a shift. As the series has progressed to date, Meredith “Merry”
Gentry’s suitability to rule in the world of Faerie has been given increasing
cosmic support, including the return of the Chalice, symbol of divine femaleness, plenty, and regeneration. Also, the Goddess (here the Celtic Danu, as
beﬁts Faerie) has spoken through Merry to others and has given her visions of
returning life to the realm. What begins as a quest to provide restorative rule
to the realm of Faerie, intertwined with explorations of sexuality and the nature of love, increasingly becomes a quest to restore lost divinity and rightful
use of power through the return of the Goddess, a theme that parallels spiritual feminists’ desire to overturn patriarchal power and domination with an
ethos of afﬁrmation of the life-sustaining principles of the feminine divine.

Gael Baudino

In the categories of urban fantasy and dystopian ﬁction, the works of Gael
Baudino incorporate feminist spirituality in groundbreaking and exploratory
ways. A Dianic Wiccan, her works clearly explore Goddess spirituality and its
relevance to the contemporary world. Gossamer Axe (1990), a Lambda Award
winner for its positive portrayal of a lesbian relationship, is an urban fantasy that
details the quest of the Sidh (Faerie) musician Christa, in modern-day Denver, to
use rock music to win the freedom of her lover. The Strands series, beginning
with Strands of Starlight (1989), uses fantasy to create an alternative history that
explores Elves and their relationship to witches during the Burning Times in
France. The protagonist of this novel, Miriam/Mirya, who also appears in some of
the subsequent installments, becomes Elven and must learn to change her quest
for revenge into one for justice as she learns the dance of the Goddess.
The explorations of the dance certainly evoke Starhawk’s Spiral Dance,
and Baudino mentions the text speciﬁcally in another part of the series thus
explicitly connecting her own practice, the feminist spirituality movement, and
its presence in her ﬁction. By exploring the issues of the witch-hunts, the
proper use of power, and the nature of the Goddess, Baudino’s work is groundbreaking, especially as the series continues until it reaches a contemporary Colorado setting (Strands of Sunlight, 1994) where a troubled young woman, Sandy
Joy, who is Wiccan, meets with a discouraged Natil, the Elven harper who leads
others that are spontaneously (or through emergence of long-buried strains of
Elvin heritage) emerging as leaders of the gentle power of the Goddess.
In the dystopian Dragonsword trilogy, consisting of Dragonsword (1991),
Duel of Dragons (1991), and Dragon Death (1992), Baudino’s protagonist Suzanne,
a graduate student still scarred by the Kent State shootings, becomes Alouzon
248
................

Feminist Spirituality
Dragonmaster in an alternate universe initially created by her misogynist professor, but which, upon her entrance, becomes inﬂuenced by both her conscious ideals and subconscious fears. While overt Goddess and Wiccan
symbolism and characters do not appear until well into the series, Baudino’s
trilogy is exploratory due to its foregrounding of one of the ongoing conﬂicts of
spiritual feminists: in the valuing of interconnectedness and relationship, is
paciﬁsm the “correct” path, or can violence ever be not only justiﬁed but necessary? And if the latter, how does a society incorporate violence without becoming another manifestation of patriarchal dominance? Suzanne/Alouzon, a
paciﬁst shocked to ﬁnd herself a veritable Amazonian warleader and dragonrider in the warlike sexist world of Gryylth, learns that her subconscious has
effectively created a new enemy for Gryylth by recreating the Vietnam War, and
ultimately she must ﬁght for that which is good in that world, even if it means
shedding a na€ive paciﬁsm. Baudino thus suggests that some things are worth
ﬁghting for, but also that the “need” for ﬁghting comes from collective, often
unconscious, fear. As with the Strands series, the Dragonsword trilogy offers
one spiritual feminist viewpoint: that violence is not the answer, or at least not
an easy one, but that evil cannot be allowed to vanquish that which is good.

Utopias

Feminist utopian fantasy has often operated on the theory, espoused by
many feminists in varying degrees, of essentialism—the idea that women are
inherently different from men and that these differences, such as nurturing
and primacy of relationships, which have been denigrated by patriarchal society, are in fact superior to traditionally masculine traits. In fantastic literature, this belief has resulted in various female utopian societies, many lesbian
in nature, which either exclude or minimize the presence of males through
various means. The collection Radical Utopias (1990) contains several pivotal
works from the 1970s. Those that do not explicitly espouse or depict spiritual
feminist principles still reﬂect many of the same concerns of the movement.
In contemporary utopian fantasy literature, Starhawk’s The Fifth Sacred
Thing (1993) demonstrates the ﬁctional fulﬁllment of the Wiccan spiritual
principles she articulated in her various nonﬁction discussions of Goddess
spirituality. The Fifth Sacred Thing posits a futuristic San Francisco that is communal, inclusive of all ethnic traditions, ecologically sound, accepting of
magic and ritual for healing and community, tolerant of a variety of sexual
expression, and steadfastly dedicated to nonviolence. This dedication is
tested, however, when the city is threatened by a potential takeover from Los
Angeles–based fundamentalist, warlike troops. Clearly Starhawk extrapolates
the extremes of the potential embodiment of a spiritual feminist-based ethos
with that of one paralleling the current Far Right, based on fundamentalism,
war, sexism, consumerism, and the control of reproduction. Though challenged and tempted to violence, Starhawk’s protagonists come to a different
249
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

conclusion than Baudino’s. For them, to resort to violence would destroy their
identities and the foundation of their culture; physical death is better than
death of the soul. The difference between the two authors reﬂects more than
the dictates of different genre conventions: their conclusions illustrate the
inclusion of difference within feminist spirituality.
Rosemary Edghill

The Bast novels of Rosemary Edghill are perhaps best classiﬁed as mystery
novels, though an argument could be made for their inclusion as urban fantasy. A key difference, however, is that the witches and Wiccans of the Bast
novels, including the titular protagonist, do not possess supernormal powers
like, for example, the witches of Kelley Armstrong’s women of the Otherworld
series. In fact, Speak Daggers to Her (1994), Book of Moons (1995), and The Bowl of
Night (1996) present a view of contemporary urban magical practitioners—
whether Gardnerian, Dianic Wiccan, or Ceremonial Magical—that persons
involved in those practices would immediately recognize. Edghill’s portrayal
of these groups, often as disputing factions, combines a sympathetic realism
with a wry satire of their human foibles and excesses, such as “witch wars,”
the disdain of Dianics for spiritual feminists practicing within groups that
include men, or conﬂicts resulting from the embracing of hierarchical practices versus collectivist, consensus groups. Thus, the series offers readers a
view of the longings of the various participants for spiritual fulﬁllment outside of mainstream religions, while simultaneously noting the interdynamics
between participants that, some might argue, have both encouraged the dismissal of alternative spirituality as a fringe element and kept the movement
itself from achieving some of its far-reaching goals of societal transformation.
Edghill has also written romantic fantasy, such as Met by Moonlight
(1998), where a contemporary Wiccan, Diana, ﬁnds herself transported to
England at the time of its witch-hunts. There she is taken in by a group of
witches, where she learns the similarities between her beliefs, a modern-day
re-creation of European pagan tradition, with the harsh realities faced by
those actually trying to hold onto their ancestral beliefs in the face of intense
persecution. A traditional romance plot naturally is part of the novel, but Edghill’s inclusion of witchcraft in her text is groundbreaking, and it was one of
the forerunners of widespread inclusion of psychic powers, witchcraft, and
other feminist fantasy elements by a host of romance writers, including Jayne
Ann Krentz (aka Amanda Quick), Teresa Medeiros, and many others who now
routinely incorporate ever-expanding instances of horror and SF/F, including
vampires and shape-shifters, into their romance template.
Other Authors Writing about Feminist Spirituality

A complete listing of feminist writers of the fantastic who incorporate spiritual feminism to some degree in their works would be impossible. However, a
250
................

Feminist Spirituality
selected list of authors incorporating feminist spirituality, in addition to those
covered above, would include Lynn Abbey, Lynn Andrews, Kim Antieau, Kelley
Armstrong, Toni Cade Bambara, Alice Borchard, Emma Bull, Octavia Butler,
Jacqueline Carey, Maryse Conde, Carol Nelson Douglas, Diane Duane, Charlaine
Harris, Jeanne Kalogride, Patricia Kennealy-Morrison, Mercedes Lackey, Tanith
Lee, Ann Marston, Toni Morrison, Gloria Naylor, Juilene Osborne-Knight,
Kristine Kathryn Rusch, Pamela Sargent, Elizabeth Scarborough, Ntozake
Shange, Leslie Silko, Joan Slonczewski, Sheri Tepper, Alice Walker, Joan Vinge,
and Jane Yolen.
C..............................................................................................................................
ONCLUSION
Popular genres would not exist without an audience. The increasing presence
of elements of feminist spirituality in feminist works of fantastic literature
indicates not only the inﬂuence of the movement on writers (and vice versa)
but also the audience’s familiarity with at least some of the concepts of spiritual feminism. Readers of these texts may beneﬁt from a sense of recognition of
their own alternative spirituality or, at the least, become more open to the presence of feminist spirituality in their own worlds as well as ﬁctional ones. As
feminist literature speaks to women’s realities, so too does spiritually oriented
feminist fantastic literature speak to women’s spiritual realities. The increasing
blending of subgenres of the fantastic in this regard may also indicate a further
breaking down of traditional boundaries that matches women’s own.
See also chapter 19.
Further Readings
Abel, Elizabeth. “Black Writing, White Reading: Race and the Politics of Feminist Interpretation.” Critical Inquiry 19, no. 3 (1993): 470–98.
Berger, Helen A. Witchcraft and Magic in Contemporary North America. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press, 2005.
Birnbaum, Lucia C. She Is Everywhere! An Anthology of Writing in Womanist/Feminist Spirituality. N.p.: iUniverse, 2005.
Boucher, Sandy. Discovering Kwan Yin, Buddhist Goddess of Compassion. Boston: Beacon Press,
1999.
Carson, Anne. Feminist Spirituality and the Feminine Divine: An Annotated Bibliography. Freedom, CA: Crossing, 1986.
———. Goddesses and Wise Women: The Literature of Feminist Spirituality, 1980–1992; An Annotated Bibliography. Freedom, CA: Crossing, 1992.
Christ, Carol P. Diving Deep and Surfacing: Women Writers on Spiritual Quest. 2nd ed. Boston:
Beacon Press, 1986.
———. She Who Changes: Re-Imagining the Divine in the World. New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
2003.
DeVita, Alexis Brooks. Mythatypes: Signatures and Signs of African/Diaspora and Black Goddesses. New York: Greenwood Press, 2000.
Devlin-Glass, Frances, and Lyn McCredden, eds. Feminist Poetics of the Sacred: Creative Suspicions. New York: American Academy of Religion, 2001.
251
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Doherty, Lillian. Gender and the Interpretation of Classical Myth. London: Duckworth, 2001.
Donaldson, Laura E. “On Medicine Women and White Shame-Ans: New Age Native Americanism and Commodity Fetishism as Pop Culture Feminism.” Signs 24, no. 3 (1999):
677–96.
Edwards, Carolyn McVicker. The Storyteller’s Goddess: Tales of the Goddess and Her Wisdom from
Around the World. 2nd ed. New York: Marlowe, 2000.
Edwards, Emily. Metaphysical Media: The Occult Experience in Popular Culture. Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 2005.
Finley, Nancy J. “Political Activism and Feminist Spirituality.” Sociological Analysis 52 (1991):
349–62.
Fleenor, Juliann E., ed. The Female Gothic. Montreal: Eden Press, 1983.
Freeman, Barbara G. The Feminine Sublime: Gender and Excess in Women’s Fiction. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1995.
Gerhart, Mary. Genre Choices, Gender Questions. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press,
1992.
Gimbutas, Marija. The Living Goddess. Ed. Miriam R. Dexter. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001.
Grifﬁn, Wendy, ed. Daughters of the Goddess: Studies of Healing, Identity, and Empowerment.
Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2000.
Groover, Kristina K. Things of the Spirit: Women Writers Constructing Spirituality. Notre Dame,
IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2004.
Hume, Kathryn. “Romance: A Perdurable Pattern.” College English 36, no. 2 (1974): 129–46.
Ingram, Penelope. “From Goddess Spirituality to Irigaray’s Angel: The Politics of the Divine.”
Feminist Review 66 (2000): 46–72.
Jorgenson, Danny L., and Scott E. Russell. “American Neo-Paganism: The Participants’
Social Identities.” Journal for the Scientiﬁc Study of Religion 38, no. 3 (1999): 325–38.
Keating, AnnLouise. “Making ‘Our Shattered Faces Whole’: The Black Goddess and Audre
Lorde’s Revision of Patriarchal Myth.” Frontiers 13, no. 1 (1992): 20–33.
Keller, Rosemary Skinner, Rosemary Radford Ruthford, and Marie Cantlon. Encyclopedia of
Women and Religion in North America. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2006.
King, Ursula, ed. Feminist Theology from the Third World: A Reader. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1994.
Krentz, Jayne Ann. Dangerous Men and Adventurous Women: Romance Writers on the Appeal of
the Romance. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992.
Levitt, Laura. “Feminist Spirituality.” In Spirituality and the Secular Quest, ed. Peter H. Van
Ness, 305–34. New York: Crossroad, 1996.
Lewis, James K., ed. Magical Religion and Modern Witchcraft. Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1996.
Parsons, Susan Frank. The Cambridge Companion to Feminist Theology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2002.
Pearson, Joanne, ed. Belief beyond Boundaries: Wicca, Celtic Spirituality, and the New Age. Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2002.
Pintchman, Tracy. The Rise of the Goddess in the Hindu Tradition. Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1994.
Price, Janet, and Margrit Shildrick, eds. Feminist Theory and the Body. New York: Routledge,
1999.
Radway, Janice. Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular Literature. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1984.
252
................

Feminist Spirituality
Ruether, Rosemary Radford. Goddesses and the Divine Feminine: A Western Religious History.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005.
Russell, Letty M. Inheriting Our Mother’s Gardens: Feminist Theology in Third World Perspectives.
Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1988.
Spretnak, Charlene, ed. The Politics of Women’s Spirituality: Essays on the Rise of Spiritual Power
within the Feminist Movement. Garden City, NY: Anchor, 1982.
Wilson, Deborah S. Bodily Discussions: Genders, Representations, Technologies. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1997.

253
................

25

The Creation of Literature
for the Young
PATRICIA CASTELLI

THE DAWN of literature for young people is veiled in the same mist that
shrouds all literature before the written word. In the time of bards and other
storytellers, both old and young would gather around a community ﬁre, in
the great halls of castles, in marketplaces and bazaars, to listen. Tales varied
by the teller. Some of these tales were eventually transcribed into the relative
permanence of the written word, and among those are tales of the fantastic.
In ancient Europe and other areas of the world where writing arrived
late, the recorded tales are but a shadow of a rich heritage of story, history,
myth, and legend. A perfect example is the loss of much of Celtic mythology.
The surviving hero tales only hint at a rich heritage of gods and goddesses
whose stories are lost. In contrast, poets wrote the mythologies of Greece and
Rome when their gods and goddesses were still revered, their stories and the
stories of the heroic deeds of mortals and half-gods well known.
Fairy tales, now thought of as children’s literature, have been told in
various guises all over the world. The story of the lost slipper is a lost sandal
in some tales, but the “Cinderella” story is recognizable in a number of cultures from Africa and Asia to Europe, a tale collected by both Charles Perrault
in France and the Brothers Grimm in Germany. A “Sleeping Beauty” tale was
recorded in writing during Egypt’s Twentieth Dynasty (1196–1070 BC). Tales in
The Thousand and One Nights exist in manuscripts hundreds of years old. While
some are clearly rooted in Arabia, other tales in the collection are similar to
stories told in Europe or India.
Whereas the oral tales belonged to all within hearing distance, the written word at ﬁrst, for all its permanence, was exclusively for the wealthy and
the educated. Scribes meticulously formed letters on vellum, which is
254
................

The Creation of Literature for the Young
carefully prepared animal skin. The vellum pages were gathered and stitched
together and bound by hand. Books, rare and valuable, were not for children.
The ﬁrst printed items intended for children, hornbooks, appeared in
the 1440s. A hornbook is not a book at all; it is a small wooden paddle with
the text of the alphabet usually accompanied by some religious instruction
printed on a sheet of vellum or parchment that is pasted on the paddle. The
name hornbook comes from the thin sheets of transparent horn that protected
the text as a covering fastened along the edges of the paddle with brass
stripping.
England’s ﬁrst printer, William Caxton (1422–1491), printed a book of
instruction for children in his ﬁrst business year, the Book of Curtesye (1477),
comprising verses attributed to an unknown monk for boys to learn how to
behave while serving in noble or royal households. Two other books, The Book
callid Caton (1483) and The Book of Good Maners (1487), also instructed the
young.

L..............................................................................................................................
I T E R AT U R E F O R A D U LT S
Caxton printed the ﬁrst English versions of Reynard the Fox in 1481 and Aesop’s
Fables in 1484, complete with woodcut illustrations. He also printed tales of
King Arthur (1485), the story of Odysseus, and other exciting romances and
adventures. Children were not the books’ intended audience, although they
read them.
Caxton was not only the printer of these works but also the editor and
sometimes the translator. He translated Reynard the Fox, a beast fable about
the clever fox that outwits the other animals, from the Flemish. He translated Aesop’s Fables, as well, from a manuscript by a ﬁfteenth-century
€ wel, who had gathered the fables that legend attributes to
German, Stainho
Aesop, a sixth-century BC Greek slave. Caxton edited the work of Sir Thomas
Malory (c. 1400–1471), who translated tales of King Arthur from French sources. The French had added ideas of chivalry to the Celtic legends found in
History of the Kings of Britain, written in Latin in 1135–38 by Geoffrey of
Monmouth. Caxton took Malory’s separate King Arthur stories and edited
them into one tale, which he published as Le Morte d’Arthur in 1485.
In 1678, John Bunyan wrote a Christian allegory, Pilgrim’s Progress.
Though not written for children, generations of young people have read it,
though not as allegory but as a story of a great adventure. In their imaginations, they traveled along with Christian on his long journey from the City of
Destruction to a number of surreal places until ﬁnally reaching the city of
pure gold.
The Arabian Nights’ Entertainments, Consisting of 1001 Stories told by the
Sultaness of the Indies was published in France in twelve volumes between 1704
255
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

and 1717. Antoine Galland’s French translation of an Arabic manuscript was
so popular that it was translated into English for publication in Britain beginning in 1706. Tales such as “Ali Baba,” “Sinbad the Sailor,” and “Aladdin” have
had lasting appeal for children, though children were again not the intended
audience—many of the stories are still not considered appropriate for children. Scheherazade’s storytelling weaves together the huge collection of tales
known as The Thousand and One Nights or 1,001 Arabian Nights. As the sultan’s
new bride, her life expectancy is just one night, because the sultan always
arranges for the execution of each wife the day after marriage. But Scheherazade begins a fascinating tale on her wedding night that she promises to ﬁnish the next night, when she also begins another tale that will ﬁnish the night
after. Thus the stories multiplied, with tales that include magic, mysticism,
travel, and sometimes sex and violence. Scholars today recognize that the
stories gathered in the Arabian Nights, while mostly Persian in origin, include
fables and legends from many other areas of the world.
Young readers likewise adopted the great adventure novels of the eighteenth century, which are still in print. Daniel Defoe (1659–1731) wrote Robinson Crusoe (1719) to such acclaim that it was reprinted four times in four
months. The novel spawned a number of inferior shipwreck and desert island
stories that were also read enthusiastically. Gulliver’s Travels by Jonathan Swift
(1667–1745) was intended as political satire for adults, but children read it for
the adventures in the miniature land of Lilliput and among giants in Brobdingnag. Swift published the book anonymously as Travels into Several Remote
Nations of the World (1726) by Lemuel Gulliver for fear it would not be well
received. However, it soon appeared as Gulliver’s Travels by Jonathan Swift,
and as such it is read to this day.
Many young people obtained the stories in inexpensive, abridged editions called chapbooks, but even these were not created for children. The chapbooks of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were cheaply produced
little adventure stories, romantic legends, fairy tales, histories, and religious
instruction made for the common people. Some chapbooks also included diabolic, criminal, supernatural, and dream interpretation. Drastically abridged
versions of the popular novels of the day appeared as chapbooks, for the most
part unauthorized. Thus Robinson Crusoe may appear in a sixteen-, thirty-two,
or sixty-four-page booklet with crude and/or recycled woodcut illustrations.
Such space limitations left no room for ﬂowery language, lengthy descriptions, or even characterization, but instead cut the story to focus on the plot
that made for exciting reading for children, especially compared to the books
on manners or morals that were written for them.
Chapbooks often consisted of one story from a collection of fairy tales
or other works, including stories from the Arabian Nights. The common people
and the young became familiar with tales from other cultures by reading
256
................

The Creation of Literature for the Young
chapbooks. In the chapbook editions, these were boiled down to the bare
bones, but the little books were clearly popular.

R..............................................................................................................................
E S I S TA N C E T O L I T E R AT U R E F O R C H I L D R E N
The dearth of literary works intended for children is best understood by comprehending a child’s place at the time. Coming out of the Middle Ages, children were not given any special place in society other than following the lot
in life assigned to their parents. In the working classes, a child began to work
from a very young age, as soon as developmentally able to complete allotted
tasks. The concept of a special place for adolescence was still centuries away.
A literature especially for teens would not appear until the twentieth century.
High mortality rates and religious teachings about heaven and hell gave
people a strong desire to be prepared, and to prepare their children, to enter
heaven at any time. The Puritan view declared all works of ﬁction frivolous,
or worse. John Calvin and his followers warned that life was too short to allow
for diversions from the work ordained by God.
For the upper classes, the work of the philosopher John Locke brought
an awareness that children should be allowed to be children. In his popular
book on childrearing, Some Thoughts Concerning Education (1693), Locke advised
parents against the use of common threats about naughty children meeting
horrible ends. However, despite the title of his work, Locke did not emphasize
education. He recommended that children read the Scriptures and declared
only two books written for enjoyment worthy of reading: Caxton’s printings of
Aesop’s Fables and Reynard the Fox.
Even among the educated people of the Enlightenment in the eighteenth century, fairy stories met with disapproval. Part of rejecting traditional
religious and political ideas included rejecting the superstitions of days past.
Tales of fancy came under this general ban, especially when children were
considered. The Age of Reason viewed such tales as irrational, provincial, and
uncouth. However, the door to fantasy was already open. The animal fables
of Aesop and similar works were accepted, and talking animals are not a far
step from stories with other kinds of magic.

M
O T H E R G O O S E : A L I T E R AT U R E F O R C H I L D R E N
..............................................................................................................................
Fairy tales became popular in the French Court starting in the late seventeenth century and continuing into the next century. Countess Marie-Catherine
d’Aulnoy (1650/51–1705), Gabrielle-Suzanne Barbot Gallon Villeneuve (1695–
1755), and Jeanne-Marie Le Prince de Beaumont (1711–1780) took traditional
folktales from humble peasant settings and spun them with the glamorous
trappings that we still associate with fairy tales: delicate princesses, fabulous
castles, chivalrous heroes, and so on.
257
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

The storytellers in the French Court were both men and women, but
the credit for the ﬁrst published collection of French fairy tales embraced by
children goes to Charles Perrault (1628–1703). Histoires ou contes du temps passe
(Tales of Olden Times) was published in France about 1697, but the book is better known by the subtitle derived from the book’s frontispiece. The illustration that precedes the title page shows three children listening to an old
re l’oye”
woman. A prominent plaque on the wall that reads “Contes de ma me
can be translated to “Mother Goose Tales.” It is by that name that the collection of eight fairy tales was published in England in 1729.
Perrault’s title page did not bear an author’s name, and some scholars
believe that Mother Goose Tales was the work of Perrault’s son, Pierre Perrault,
who was eighteen years old at the time of the original publication. Of more
signiﬁcance than the actual authorship of the gathered tales is the Mother
Goose ﬁgure herself, a familiar ﬁgure in both France and England as the teller
of tales to children. Perrault’s book contained the common stories that children would have heard while gathered around tellers, who were most likely
women. The eight stories are known today as “Sleeping Beauty,” “Blue Beard,”
“Puss in Boots,” “Diamonds and Toads,” “Cinderella,” “Red Riding Hood,”
“Ricket of the Tuft,” and “Hop-o’-My Thumb.”
The name “Mother Goose” became more commonly associated with collections of nursery rhymes. The ﬁrst appearance of such a collection was
Mother Goose’s Melody, an American publication by Thomas Fleet in 1719.
Fleet’s mother-in-law sang old nursery rhymes to his children, and her name
was Mistress Vergoose. Fleet printed the little songs with a title based on her
name. “Mother Goose” has since been adopted so often for such collections
that it is almost a synonym for nursery rhymes.
In the middle of the eighteenth century, French fairy tales continued to
be popular in England as well as France, with many quickly translated into
English. Madame Le Prince de Beaumont founded a magazine for children, Le
Magasin des enfans. A story ﬁrst published in that magazine in 1757, “Beauty
and the Beast,” remains popular today. In 1761, the magazine was published
in English as The Young Misses’ Magazine.
John Newbery (1713–1767) is the London publisher credited with creating
children’s literature for enjoyment. The American Library Association’s prestigious Newbery Award for the best children’s book of the year is named in his
honor. His ﬁrst book for a child’s enjoyment was A Little Pretty Pocket-Book
(1744), the content clear from the statement following after the title: “Intended
for the Instruction and Amusement of Little Master Tommy and Pretty Miss
Molly with Two Letters from Jack the Giant-Killer; as Also A Ball and a Pincushion: The Use of which will infallibly make Tommy a good Boy and Polly a good
Girl to which is added, A Little Song-Book Being a New Attempt to Teach Children the Use of the English Alphabet by way of Diversion.” Newbery is best
known for a moral tale, History of Little Goody Two-Shoes (1765).
258
................

The Creation of Literature for the Young
When publishers did begin printing books for children’s pleasure
instead of for education and behavior, the emphasis was on moral tales that
were more acceptable to a religious society than tales of the fantastic. Perhaps to make the books he published for children more acceptable to that
society, Newbery went on record against fantasy, declaring, “People stuff
Children’s heads with stories of Ghosts, Fairies, Witches, and such Nonsense
when they are young and they continue Fools all their Days” (quoted in Townsend, Written for Children, 30).
The efforts to purge English and American society, and particularly
children’s bookshelves, of fantasy had a major effect on respectable publishing for more than a century. However, the continuing popularity of chapbooks
with the content that religious ﬁgures and educators condemned clearly demonstrates that people still sought tales of romance, adventure, and magic.

F..............................................................................................................................
A N TA S Y V E R S U S M O R A L I T Y
The call for strongly moral books inspired a number of people, mainly
women, to come forward and write such books for children. Sarah Fielding
(1710–1768) wrote The Governess; or, The Little Female Academy with the intention of building girls’ characters and teaching manners. She created the formidable governess, Mrs. Teachum, who warns the girls against stories about
giants, dwarfs, magic, and the like, but she does this by sharing tales with
such characters. Thus the book became a target for being what it claimed to
avoid. It was later republished with the fantasy elements removed. “Evenings
at Home” was a series created by a sister and brother, Anna Letitia (Aikin)
Barbauld (1743–1825) and John Aikin (1747–1822). It included fables with heavyhanded morals, short plays, stories, and instructional articles.
Sarah (Kirby) Trimmer (1741–1810) was primarily interested in educating children, especially about the natural world. An Easy Introduction to the
Knowledge of Nature (1782) introduced two children, Charlotte and Henry, with
the lessons imbedded in the narrative. While her professed goal was to avoid
all fantasy, her book The History of the Robins (1786) has a family of robins that
converse with one another as they move the story along. In the book’s introduction, Trimmer writes:
Before Henry and Charlotte began to read these Histories, they were taught to
consider them, not as containing real conversations with Birds (for that is
impossible as we shall ever understand) but as a series of Fables, intended to
convey the moral instruction. (quoted in Meigs et al., Critical History of Children’s
Literature, 70–71)

Works of two sisters were published in the 1780s. Speaking animals
appeared again, but without apology, when Dorothy Kilner (1755–1836) wrote
Life and Perambulations of a Mouse published under the initials M.P. Her sister
259
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Mary Jane Kilner (1753–?) used the initials S.S. She wrote the much-done story
of the good child contrasted with the bad child where the good always triumphs. Oddly, the narrators for Mary Jane Kilner’s stories were inanimate
objects. Memoirs of a Peg-Top and Adventures of a Pincushion were very popular
with young readers. Though the publisher advertised the books as being free
of the trappings of fantasy, the fanciful elements are evident from the titles
alone.
During this period, education of the common man was becoming an
important social issue. Sunday schools were created to teach the children of
the poor to read. Chapbooks were popular on the streets but unacceptable to
the strict moral standards of the societies that supported the schools. Many
such societies attempted to create their own reading materials, which were
then used by other educators. Hannah More (1745–1833) wrote little pamphlets called Cheap Repository Tracts from 1795 to 1798, each with a short sermon, a set of verses, and a story. She released three tracts per month that
ultimately sold in the millions in both Britain and the United States.
Sunday school libraries purchased so much material similar to the work
of More that there was a ﬂood of poorly written moralistic ﬁction. Samuel
Goodrich (1793–1860), an American who wrote 170 volumes under the name
Peter Parley, sold ﬁve million books with such writing. He spoke out against
fantasy ﬁction, declaring the cat in “Puss in Boots” to be a liar and “Jack the
Giant-Killer” revoltingly violent. Goodrich professed that the violence in society was the direct result of such tales.
William Goldwin (1756–1836) opened a publishing house for children’s
books and produced a series called the City Juvenile Library. For the series, he
wrote Fables, Ancient and Modern (1805) and The Pantheon, Ancient History of
Schools and Young People (1806), both under the name Edward Baldwin. He published a book of Shakespeare for children in 1806 written by a brother and sister, Charles and Mary Lamb. Mary Lamb rewrote fourteen plays in a narrative
form for children, and Charles Lamb rewrote eight. Tales from Shakespeare is
still common in public libraries, and it still appears with authorship credited
primarily to Charles Lamb.
Traditional fairy tales, gathered from the oral tradition, remained the
most common fantasy books in the nineteenth century. Popular Fairy Tales
(1818) was published by Sir Richard Philips under the name Benjamin Tabart.
An American, Washington Irving (1783–1859), spent some time in England
and wrote a group of tales and essays to increase understanding between the
British and the Americans. At ﬁrst published in periodicals in the United
States, the group of tales and essays was later gathered and published as The
Sketch Book (1819) under the name Geoffrey Crayon. Irving became enthralled
with English and Scottish folktales and legends, and he remembered the stories he heard growing up in New York. New York, settled by the Dutch, was
much more open to folklore than Puritan New England. Among the writings
260
................

The Creation of Literature for the Young
Irving sent from England were “Rip Van Winkle” and “The Legend of Sleepy
Hollow.”
German brothers Jacob Grimm (1785–1863) and Wilhelm Grimm (1789–
1859) gathered folktales from many women storytellers, including Dortchen
€rchen, published in Germany in 1812–
Wild, Wilhelm’s wife. Kinder- und Hausma
15, was widely accepted. Edgar Taylor translated selected tales into English,
published as German Popular Stories in 1823.
In Denmark, Hans Christian Andersen (1805–1875) grew up loving stories of folklore and magical creatures that his grandmother told him. He
wrote stories, ﬁrst based on the tales he heard as a child, and then original
ones with the feel of folklore. In 1835, his ﬁrst set of four stories was published as a pamphlet containing “The Tinder Box,” “Little Claus and Big
Claus,” “Princess and the Pea,” and “Little Ida’s Flowers.” The second booklet
brought readers “Thumbelina,” “The Naughty Boy,” and “The Traveling Companion.” He wrote two more stories for children in 1838, “The Daisy” and “The
Steadfast Tin Soldier,” and in 1842 he wrote “The Ugly Duckling.” Also a performing storyteller, Andersen was in demand for both adults and children.
His collected tales Wonder Stories for Children began appearing in English in
1845. By 1846, at least three editions were available, including Wonderful Stories for Children translated into English by Mary Howitt (1799–1888). Howitt had
previously published a collection of poems in 1834 that included “The Spider
and the Fly,” still a favorite poem. Toni DiTerlizzi illustrated the poem as a
picture book and won a 2003 Caldecott Honor from the American Library
Association for his art.
In Norway, Peter Christen Asbjrnsen (1812–1885) and Jrgen Moe
(1813–1882) worked together on a written language for Norwegian. Their collection of Norwegian folktales Norske folkeeventyr was published in four volumes in 1841–42. In addition, Norse myths were written by Annie and Eliza
Keary in Heroes of Asgard (1857), translated and published into English in 1859.
In 1851, American novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804–1864) retold
Greek myths for children in A Wonder-Book for Boys and Girls. This was followed
in 1853 by Tanglewood Tales for Boys and Girls.
Finally, with the publications of so many wonderful collections of
myths and folklore, fairy tales both traditional and original, society’s blanket
rejection of all things fanciful lost its grip on publishing. Authors began to
speak out in favor of fantasy. Sir Henry Cole, writing under the name Felix
Summerly, included traditional fairy tales in his series the Home Treasury
(1841–49), and author Anthony Montalba prefaced his collection Fairy Tales of
All Nations (1849) with the statement that the folly of declaring fairy tales
immoral had been “cast off.”
Early Scottish ballads tell of the vicious fairies that require human sacriﬁce every seven years. Dinah Maria Mulock (1826–1887) wrote about the
261
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

fairies in a ﬁfteenth-century setting, where they steal two children who get
help from Thomas the Rhymer to escape. Her novel Alice Learmont was published in 1852. In 1863, she published The Fairy Book about the old tales, and in
1872 The Adventures of a Brownie.
Mary De Morgan (1850–1907), sister of artist and novelist William De
Morgan, wrote On a Pincushion, and Other Fairy Tales (1877), which was illustrated by her brother. Her most popular book, The Necklace of Princess Fiorimonde, and Other Stories (1880), is also a fairy story, but illustrated by Walter
Crane. Her ﬁnal fairy tale book was The Wind Fairies, and Other Tales (1900).
Jean Ingelow (1820–1897) wrote Mopsa the Fairy in 1869. In it, a boy, Jack,
jumps into a hole and ﬁnds himself in a nest of fairies. He is soon involved in
great adventures in fairyland, sailing on an albatross. With Mopsa, he seeks
out a castle of magic.
Legends from Fairyland (1860) is a collection of short stories by Harriet
Parr (1828–1900), who wrote as Holme Lee. One of the characters who appears
in several of the stories in the collection is Tuﬂongbo. Parr wrote two fantasy
novels around the character, Wonderful Adventures of Tuﬂongbo (1861) and
Tuﬂongbo’s Journey in Search of Ogres (1862).
Several women were involved with creating and editing children’s magazines, many of which carried fantasy stories. Charlotte Yonge (1823–1901)
wrote mostly family stories with strong Christian values, but her Monthly
Packet published works of fantasy by other authors. Juliana Horatia Ewing
(1841–1885) ﬁrst published her story “The Brownies” there, and leading illustrator George Cruikshank illustrated the book version, The Brownies, and Other
Tales (1870). The Brownie Girl Scouts took their name from Ewing’s story.
Ewing also published a series of fairy tales in Aunt Judy’s Magazine, edited by
Margaret Scott Gatty, who also wrote The Fairy Godmothers (1851). Gatty edited
the magazine from 1866 to 1873. “Jackanapes” by Ewing was published by
Gatty’s magazine in 1879. Randolph Caldecott, for whom the Caldecott Medal
is named, illustrated Jackanapes in book form, published in 1884.
Andrew Lang collected and published fairy tales as many had done
before him, but on a grander scale. His twenty-ﬁve volumes of “color books”
began with The Blue Fairy Book (1889), and Lang owed its success to his wife,
Leonora Blanche Alleyne, who did most of the actual writing. The Blue Fairy
Book included retellings of the Norwegian tales of Asbjrnsen and Moe.
By the mid-nineteenth century, children’s fantasy was respectable
enough to induce writers of some renown to write for children, as Hawthorne
did with Greek myths. William Makepeace Thackeray wrote an original fantasy The Rose and the Ring; or, the History of Prince Giglio and Prince Bulbo (1855).
Charles Dickens wrote A Christmas Carol (1843) with its ghosts of Christmas
past, present, and future. In addition, his “Magic Fishbone,” part of All the Year
Round was published as a serial in 1868. Oscar Wilde wrote The Happy Prince,
262
................

The Creation of Literature for the Young
and Other Tales (1891) and A House of Pomegranates (1891). While in the not-sodistant past, fantasy had been written only for adults, and then adopted by
children, Wilde’s stories were written for children, but the works are read and
enjoyed by adults. Rudyard Kipling wrote The Jungle Book (1894) and Just So Stories (1902), books loved to this day by adults and children.
The collections of traditional fairy tales published over the hundred
previous years gave readers a taste for the fanciful, making room for a new
kind of story for children. Authors used their own imaginations to create stories and novels with original fantasy settings and new magical characters.
Two original fantasy works were The King of the Golden River (1851) by John
Ruskin and Granny’s Wonderful Chair and its Tales of Fairy Times (1857) by Frances
Browne (1816–1879). Browne was blind from a young age, and she wrote to
provide income. Her eight fairy stories in Granny’s Wonderful Chair are tied
together by a little girl’s plea for her grandmother’s chair to tell her a story.
The Last of the Huggermuggers (1855) is a sad story by American writer
Christopher Pearse Cranch (1813–1892) about shipwrecked sailors who are
befriended by a giant who dies for his kindness. In the sequel, Kobboltozo
(1856), the villain from the ﬁrst book is punished.
The 1860s saw the publication of several great fantasy works for children that are still read today. A country parson and a reformer, Charles Kingsley (1819–1875) was already known for his retold myths for children when he
published an original fantasy The Water Babies in 1863. Though the moral
message is a bit heavy-handed for today’s reader, it has seen several printings
with many excellent illustrators.
Another writer educated as a minister, George MacDonald (1824–1905)
was a Scottish poet and novelist. He wrote several enduring fantasies for children, beginning with “The Light Princess,” an airy tale published in the novel
Adela Cathcart (1864). He is best known for his allegorical fantasy At the Back of
the North Wind (1871). Its main character, Diamond, belongs to London’s
underclass of the working poor. His father is a coach driver who doesn’t make
enough money to adequately feed and clothe his family. Diamond ﬁnds a way
to escape his harsh world by occasional travels with the North Wind. The
North Wind is a beautiful woman, and Diamond rides in her long, ﬂowing hair
to a land where it is always May.
MacDonald’s friend broke fantasy free from the obvious moral. Charles
Lutwidge Dodgson (1832–1898) published Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland
(1865) under the name Lewis Carroll. An immediate success, it was followed
by Through the Looking Glass (1871). MacDonald’s children were among the ﬁrst
to hear the story of Alice’s adventures. Their mother read the novel aloud to
them from a handmade book Dodgson had given to Alice Liddell as a Christmas
present. Dodgson was a math professor at Oxford, and he socialized with
Dean Liddell of Christ Church and his three young daughters. The MacDonald
family encouraged and aided Dodgson in the publication of the book.
263
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

During this time, most women authors wrote the moral tales thought
so important to children’s development. However, Catherine Sinclair (1800–
1864) wished to change children’s books from dull lessons to something children enjoyed. Holiday House: A Book for the Young (1839) has two energetic (and
naughty!) children as the main characters. While most of the story is of their
escapades, the novel encloses a fantasy story about giants and fairies.
Mary Louisa Molesworth (1839–1921) supported herself and her family
with her writing. She published two volumes of story collections, mostly fairy
tales, as well as novels of original fantasies. Her latter included Cuckoo Clock
(1877), The Tapestry Room (1879), Adventures of Herr Baby (1881), and The Ruby
Ring (1904). She also wrote a number of family stories.
Two authors who wrote scary tales of the fantastic were Mrs. W. K.
Clifford and Margaret Hunter, who wrote as Maggie Browne. Browne created
bogeyman Grunter Grim in Wanted—A King (1890). Clifford’s scary woman
with a glass eye and a wooden tail was the star of “New Mother,” published in
her collection Anyhow Stories (1882).
The folktale was not forgotten in the latter half of the nineteenth century. Joel Chandler Harris wrote stories based on African-American folklore in
St. Nicholas: A Magazine for Boys and Girls, edited by Mary Mapes Dodge. His
stories of Uncle Remus, Br’er Rabbit, and Br’er Fox were published in book
form in 1880.
Howard Pyle (1853–1911), though American, was fascinated by old English legends. His The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood was published in 1883, The
Story of King Arthur and His Knights in 1903, The Story of Sir Launcelot and His
Champions of the Round Table in 1907, and The Story of the Grail and the Passing of
Arthur in 1910.
The nineteenth century brought a new kind of ﬁction, one that followed
the pattern of fantasy with works written for adults but claimed by the young.
In France, Jules Verne (1828–1905) published his ﬁrst “scientiﬁc adventure
story,” Five Weeks in a Balloon (1863), which is widely recognized as the ﬁrst
major science ﬁction novel. However, many others believe that honor goes to
Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley’s novel Frankenstein, published in 1818. Verne
established himself as the leader in the new class of literature with A Voyage
to the Center of the Earth (1864), From the Earth to the Moon (1866), Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Sea (1869), and Around the World in Eighty Days (1872).
H. G. Wells followed at the turn of the century, again with an intended audience of adults but read by young people. The Time Machine was published in
1895, War of the Worlds in 1898, and The First Men in the Moon in 1901.
Bertha Upton wrote a story of toys coming alive in The Adventures of Two
Dutch Dolls and a Golliwog (1895), illustrated by her sister Florence Upton. It is
entirely a doll and toy story with no humans intervening. Later, the dolls
264
................

The Creation of Literature for the Young
explored the wonders of air transportation with their one-propeller platform
in The Golliwog’s Air Ship (1902).
Better known today are the stories written and illustrated by Beatrix
Potter for very young children, beginning with The Tale of Peter Rabbit in 1901.
For older children, L. Frank Baum published the ﬁrst of the Oz series in 1900,
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.
The earliest woman writer recognized as a major author of children’s
speculative ﬁction is Edith Nesbit. Her ﬁrst fantasy novel Five Children and It
was published in 1902. The ﬁve children who are the main characters in the
ﬁrst novel appear again in two more stories, The Phoenix and the Carpet (1904)
and The Story of the Amulet (1906).
With the twentieth century, fantasy was no longer on the fringes of
children’s literature, and women became the clear leaders in the ﬁeld. The
fantasy novels of Susan Cooper and Robin McKinley (among others) have
won the Carnegie Medal and Newbery Medals and Honors, children’s books’
most prestigious awards. Science ﬁction was a new genre at the beginning of
the twentieth century, but it has also come of age in literature for young people. Madeleine L’Engle won the 1963 Newbery Medal for A Wrinkle in Time
and a 1981 Newbery Honor for A Ring of Endless Light. Lois Lowry’s science ﬁction novel The Giver won the 1994 Newbery Medal. Nancy Farmer won a 1995
Newbery Honor for The Ear, the Eye, and the Arm and the 2003 National Book
Award for Young People, as well as Newbery and Printz honors, for The House
of the Scorpion.
See also chapter 2.
Further Readings
Green, Roger Lancelyn. Teller of Tales: British Authors of Children’s Books from 1800 to 1964.
New York: Franklin Watts, 1965.
Meigs, Cornelia, Anne Thaxter Eaton, Elizabeth Nesbitt, and Ruth Hill Viguers, eds. A Critical History of Children’s Literature: A Survey of Children’s Books in English. 4 vols., rev. ed.
London: Macmillan, 1969.
Norton, Donna E., and Sandra E. Norton. Through the Eyes of a Child: An Introduction to Children’s Literature. 5th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill, 1999.
Summerﬁeld, Geoffrey. Fantasy and Reason: Children’s Literature in the Eighteenth Century. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1985.
Sutherland, Zena, Dianne L. Monson, and Mary Hill Arbuthnot. Children and Books. 6th ed.
Greenville, IL: Scott, Foresman, 1981.
Townsend, John Rowe. Written for Children: An Outline of English Language Children’s Literature.
6th American ed. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 1996.
Zipes, Jack, Lissa Paul, Lynne Vallone, Peter Hunt, and Gillian Avery, eds. The Norton Anthology of Children’s Literature: The Traditions in English. New York: W. W. Norton, 2005.

265
................

26

Girls and the Fantastic
DEBORAH KAPLAN

GIRLS appear as compelling primary characters through fantasy and science
ﬁction, in literature, comics, television, and ﬁlm. Their largest presence is,
unsurprisingly, in ﬁction for children and young adults, but girls have some
presence in crossover ﬁction consumed by adults as well. A close look at
girls in the fantastic over the last 150 years reveals changing cultural mores
of the place of young females in society. However, changing perspectives of
girlhood aside, girls and young women have been active and vital characters
in fantastic ﬁction since the modern introduction of the genre; after all, one
of the earliest modern fantasies is Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (1865). While many girls play secondary roles as background characters or, more substantially, spunky sidekicks to the boy heroes, fantastic
ﬁction has plenty of independent heroines with widely differing personalities and strengths.
When discussing ﬁction for very young children, it is sometimes
difﬁcult to draw the line between fantasy and realism. Picture books often tell completely realistic stories that are fantastic only inasmuch as
the characters depicted are animals: a badger who wants her bread and
jam, or a mouse who loves her purple plastic purse. Other picture books
offer human characters, but imbue mundane experiences with a touch
of magical realism, allowing readers to see the shapes in music or the
magical creatures in a favorite blanket. However, picture books also offer
stories that can be ﬁrmly placed in the genres of fantasy or science ﬁction. Maurice Sendak’s Outside Over There (1981), for example, tells the
story of a young girl who needs to rescue her baby sister from the elves.
Similarly, television and ﬁlms for young children can dance on the borders of the fantastic, depicting supernatural creatures in everyday
situations.

266
................

Girls and the Fantastic
C..............................................................................................................................
H I L D R E N ’ S A N D Y O U N G A D U LT L I T E R AT U R E
Girls have perhaps had their strongest ﬁctional showing in children’s written
ﬁction. Lacking strong romantic subplots, contemporary children’s fantasy
and science ﬁction offer the chance for girl protagonists to act for themselves
rather than being restricted to the stereotyped role of heroine or damsel in
distress. While the lack of romance plots has led to girls being largely absent
until recently, there has always been a strong presence of girls in fantasy literature, starting from its roots in myth and folklore.
Folktales, Fairy Tales, and Mythology

Girls have been major characters in fantastic ﬁction from its earliest roots in
the oral tales later recorded by the Brothers Grimm and Charles Perrault. As
feminist analysis has shown, the girls of European folktales range from the
completely passive (Sleeping Beauty) to the resourceful active heroine (Ashenputtel, parts of whose story can be seen in King Lear’s Cordelia). The Grimms
and Perrault had a tendency to weaken and desexualize the girl heroines of
the oral tales when they wrote them down. The process of reclaiming these
heroines to represent contemporary ideals of girlhood has continued ever
since, from the virginal pure children of the Victorian author Dinah Mulock
Craik to the sexually and physically empowered heroines of modern feminist
retellings.
Modern fairy-tale retellings often rework traditional tales speciﬁcally
from a feminist perspective, revisiting old tales from the point of view of
modern cultural ideas of gender and relationships. Donna Jo Napoli has
crafted retellings of the stories of Rumpelstiltskin (Spinners, 1999, with Richard
Tchen), Cinderella (Bound, 2004), Rapunzel (Zel, 1996), and others. Napoli’s versions often explore the tragedy in the underlying tale, constructing both boy
and girl heroes as well as the villains as people, with all the ﬂaws and needs
of rich characters. On the other hand, Gail Carson Levine’s Ella Enchanted
(1998), a Cinderella retelling, is a lighthearted adolescent romance with a
spunky and likable heroine. Robin McKinley has retold “Beauty and the
Beast” twice: once in Beauty (1978) and more recently with Rose Daughter
(1998). While in the earlier version McKinley’s beauty is a brave and bookish
girl, the later introspective heroine stars in a tale that is ultimately more
dreamlike and less plot driven. Ultimately, almost all nontragic fairy-tale
reworkings intended for younger readers reafﬁrm the marriage plot of the
original tales, albeit with a spunky and powerful heroine and a congenial
groom.
Fantasy Fiction

Girl characters in nonfolkloric fantastic ﬁction got off to a resounding start with
Carroll’s Alice (Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, 1865; Through the Looking-Glass,
267
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

1871). Whatever historical interpretations there might be to Carroll’s relationship with his muse Alice Liddell, there is no question that the ﬁctional Alice is
a strong and compelling young female character. She is curious and clever,
neither a sidekick nor a love interest.
Alice’s rough contemporaries include George MacDonald’s princess (The
Princess and the Goblin, 1872; The Princess and Curdie, 1883) and Edith Nesbit’s
pack of boys and girls (The Story of the Treasure Seekers, 1899; Five Children and
It, 1902; The Phoenix and the Carpet, 1904). While in some ways Nesbit’s girls
play out roles of female stereotypes in the presence of their brothers, who
seem less softhearted and less prone to nervousness, these girls do not fall
into modern stereotypes of weak-willed Victorian heroines. Older sister
Anthea, for example, frequently plays the role of the brave and clever leader
who extricates the siblings from their magical troubles.
L. Frank Baum’s Oz books (1900–20) are full of strong female characters,
from the hardy pioneer heroine Dorothy Gale to the witches (both good and
evil) who inhabit Oz to the beautiful and good Princess Ozma, who spent her
childhood magically transformed into a boy. Baum’s richly populated world
has large numbers of both male and female characters, many of whom have
distinct eccentricities; this series is far from what would become the standard
epic fantasy world, in which male is the default and the few female characters must represent all women. However, Baum’s female characters are not
completely free of gender stereotypes: General Jinjur, for example, leads an
army of girls to attack Oz and steal its gems—in order to make themselves
pretty. But Oz is densely packed with a variety of both girl and boy characters,
some of whom challenge not only gender conventions but the notion of static
gender itself.
Nineteenth- and early twentieth-century fantasy does not provide a
thoroughly feminist space. In many works of this period, female characters
are mostly absent or hold stereotyped roles as mother ﬁgures. In A. A. Milne’s
Winnie the Pooh (1926), Kenneth Grahame’s Wind in the Willows (1908), and
Hugh Lofting’s Doctor Doolittle (1920), girls do not appear at all, and women
appear only as mothers, cannibal princesses, or washerwomen. Perhaps one
of the strongest examples of a major character who is completely stereotyped
is J. M. Barrie’s Wendy (Peter Pan, 1911), who earnestly takes on the role of
mother ﬁgure to the Lost Boys and is contrasted to the somewhat cruel and
ﬂighty Tinkerbell.
Like many of the folklore heroines, Wendy has been revisited in recent
years by creators with a more feminist or sexualized perspective. In Disney’s
animated sequel Return to Neverland (2002), Wendy’s daughter Jane becomes
an active heroine rescuing Peter; Karen Wallace’s prequel Wendy (2004)
explains Wendy’s protective nature and escapism as the result of abusive and
irresponsible parenting; and in Alan Moore and Melinda Gebbie’s controversial
erotic graphic novel Lost Girls (2006), Wendy, Carroll’s Alice, and Baum’s
268
................

Girls and the Fantastic
Dorothy meet as adults to discuss their sexual histories. None of these retellings particularly empower Wendy, however: the ﬁrst maintains her role as
mother and gives all potential power to her daughter, the second explains her
passivity by describing her as victim, and the third merely moves her position
on the “Madonna–Whore” spectrum of female sexuality, changing her from
happy mother ﬁgure to repressed sexual object in an unhappy marriage.
However, all do reﬂect modern discomfort with Wendy as written, the virginal
and self-sacriﬁcing child/mother.
In the middle of the twentieth century, in the heart of what is often dismissed as an extremely conventional period of history, Mary Norton wrote
the delicately subversive Borrowers series (1952–82). The ﬁrst volume, which
won multiple awards including the prestigious Carnegie Medal, introduced
the Clock family: tiny people who live beneath the ﬂoorboards. In many ways,
the Clock family resembles Laura Ingalls Wilder’s Little House books (1932–43).
Arrietty, the Clock daughter, desperately wants to follow her father out on
his foraging adventures, but is constrained by her straitlaced and nervous
Edwardian mother. As the series progresses and the family’s surroundings
get wilder, Arrietty draws further into the dangerous and unconstrained
unknown, closer to her father’s life and further from her mother’s, mentored
by a feral boy who helps the family. Arrietty’s character arc is the reverse of
Wilder’s Laura, who begins her childhood as a wild girl playing outdoors on
the wild frontier but by late in the series has become consistently more constrained by romance and convention as she passes through adolescence and
young adulthood.
Many modern fantasies offer smart, athletic, gifted girl characters as
sidekicks to a destined boy hero. J. K. Rowling’s Hermione from the Harry
Potter series (1997–2007) is one such character, as is Michael Chabon’s Jennifer
T. from Summerland (2004). Other times, the girl is sister to the boy whose character development drives the fantasy, as in Nancy Farmer’s The Ear, the Eye, and
the Arm (1993) or Diana Wynne Jones’s Power of Three (1976).
Plenty of modern fantasies, however, offer girl protagonists the chance
to star in their own magical adventures. Terry Pratchett’s The Wee Free Men
(2003) stars nine-year-old witch Tiffany Aching, although her quest is to rescue her baby brother from the elves, in a maternal plot that persists from
Sendak’s Outside Over There (1989) to the Jim Henson/Frank Oz ﬁlm Labyrinth
(1986).
Jones offers slightly more boy than girl protagonists, although her
female characters include some of her older and sometimes maternally protective heroes, including The Spellcoats’ Tanaqui (1979), who reshapes the
world and becomes a god, and the romantic heroines Sophie of Howl’s Moving
Castle (1986) and Polly of Fire and Hemlock (1984). Though Jones’s work includes
a large number of truly horrifying mothers, she also provides a fair number of
girls wrestling with what it means to be caregivers/babysitters/mother
269
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

surrogates, such as Power of Three’s Ayna. Yet though Jones does have certain
repeated tropes in her female characters, she still provides a variety of models of girlhood. Helen of The Homeward Bounders (1981), for example, is powerful, clever, disabled, and extremely sullen. Perhaps Jones’s most unfortunate
girl character is the wife of Luke/Loki in Eight Days of Luke (1975), whose role
in the story is to patiently—and thanklessly—prevent snake poison from dripping into Luke’s eyes while he is imprisoned.
Girl characters have always had a richer fantastic world in which to
play in children’s literature than an adult literature, if only because the postTolkien epic fantasy, so frequently lacking in any strong female characters at
all, has never been a mainstay of fantasy for young readers. Lloyd
Alexander’s Prydain chronicles (1964–70), which is written in that epic fantasy structure, offers as the token female quest member the character
Eilonwy. The talkative and fearless redhead reappears as one character or
another in all of Alexander’s fantasy, although it was not until he switched to
writing nonfantasy historical ﬁction adventures that Alexander’s recurring
girl character became the protagonist in her own right, as the adventurer
Vesper Holly.
Robin McKinley’s Newbery Medal–winning The Hero and the Crown (1984)
has been both praised and criticized for reworking the traditional quest fantasy with a girl heroine, complete with the romantic prize of a passive (male)
partner waiting at home for the dragon-slaying rightful queen to save her
kingdom. Some critics accuse heroine Aerin of being nothing more than a boy
in drag, while others praise her for offering an alternative hero role for girl
readers.
Ursula K. Le Guin’s Earthsea trilogy (1968–74, followed by the adult
novels Tehanu in 1990 and The Other Wind in 2001), explore politics of gender,
race, and age slightly differently with each book, reﬂecting the author’s
changing perspective (as discussed by Le Guin in “Earthsea Revisioned,” 1993).
Tenar, the adolescent heroine of The Tombs of Atuan (1971), while a strong and
compelling ﬁgure, is rescued by Le Guin’s young hero Ged. Ged shows Tenar
that she is being exploited and wasted by her so-called servants—women and
eunuchs who are ostensibly powerful but actually obedient to a male king—
and convinces her to run away with him.
Twenty-nine years later, Tehanu revisits Tenar, now an old woman, who
realizes that she left one group of people who used her as a powerless symbol
of femininity only to ﬂee to a different, more attractive culture that also used
her as a powerless symbol of femininity. Tenar commits to ﬁnding a better set
of choices for the mute and victimized girl in her care, and ultimately does.
The girl child of Tehanu is particularly unusual, perhaps because she is the
center of the novel but not its protagonist: at no point during the novel is she
either spunky or physically attractive. This characterization is unusual in a
genre that often maps character development to the physical changes that
270
................

Girls and the Fantastic
take place during adolescence. The teenage heroine of Elizabeth Pope’s The
Perilous Gard (1974), for example, outwits the Fair Folk, comes of age, loses
weight, and gains a ﬁgure.
Girls as the protagonists in adventurous fantasy no longer need to be
defended within the fantasy as a necessary feature. As recently as 1983,
Tamora Pierce’s Alanna: The First Adventure told the story of a girl who disguised herself as a boy in order to become a knight; when her deception is
uncovered in the next book, it upsets the social structure of a world. In Pierce’s
most recent books, on the other hand, although her girl ﬁghters and magic
users need to confront a variety of sexist, racist, and classist social structures
in order to succeed, their gender is no longer so overwhelmingly important to
the story structure.
The transformation of the ﬁght for gender equality to the ﬁght for sexuality equality has been a growing trend in realistic young adult ﬁction for
some time. In Pierce’s Will of the Empress (2005), blacksmith and powerful
mage Daja admits that she is attracted to women. Daja’s coming-out may
indicate that that trend will be moving into fantasy and science ﬁction for
young readers.
Another heroine who is adventurous without apologies is Lyra, the
almost-feral heroine of Philip Pullman’s steampunk-style fantasy The Golden
Compass (1995). Lyra becomes a secondary character later in the trilogy, and
the brutish innocence that makes her such an active protagonist in the trilogy’s ﬁrst volume leaves her more of a passive follower by the third.
Garth Nix’s heroines Sabriel and Lirael (1997–2003), both clever and
driven ﬁghters, are not unusually active or brave for female characters in
their worlds. Though birthright is what drives both young women into a terrifying and draining ﬁght against the Dead, the completely nonmagical girls of
Lirael’s school are also brave ﬁghters when a war comes to their doorstep. In
Lirael’s story, the two weakest characters who, through foolishness or inaction, do most to endanger the world are both boys her own age.

Science Fiction

Early science ﬁction for children tended to be crossover ﬁction consumed by
both adults and young readers, such as the works of Edgar Rice Burroughs,
Jules Verne, and H. G. Wells. The Stratemeyer Syndicate began publishing
lines of science ﬁction series for both boys and girls at the turn of the twentieth century: the Great Marvel series and Tom Swift books. During this time
and during the forthcoming golden age of science ﬁction initiated by Hugo
Gernsback and John W. Campbell (editors of Amazing Stories and Astounding
Stories, respectively), girls were largely absent as major characters except in
the role of observer or romantic interest, such as Weena, the passive heroine
271
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

of Wells’s The Time Machine (1895). For most of the twentieth century, science
ﬁction for children featured adventurous boys and almost no girls.
Andre Norton, known as the grande dame of science ﬁction, was a proliﬁc author of sword-and-sorcery-in-space novels from 1934 until her death
in 2005. Though many of Norton’s later works included prominent and powerful girl characters (most notably in her Witch World series), she published
only under androgynous and male pseudonyms, initially because publishers
told her that her target audience was boys.
It was not until Robert A. Heinlein’s Podkayne of Mars: Her Life and Times
(1963) that science ﬁction gained a renowned female protagonist. Podkayne,
the last of Heinlein’s juvenile novels, is typical Heinlein in the ambiguity of its
gender politics. On the one hand, the story tells of a young girl’s coming-ofage in a genre that up until this time had been sadly lacking in female characters. On the other hand, Podkayne has been criticized as being an overly
weak character in a didactic tale that ultimately says a woman’s place is caring for her children, and that a mother (but not a father) who succeeds in her
chosen career but fails as a nurturer will produce tragedy. Though Heinlein
switched to writing adult science ﬁction after Podkayne, he continued to write
science ﬁction with ambiguous gender politics, which critics to this day either
praise as highly feminist or disparage as thoroughly misogynist.
Modern science ﬁction for children and young adults is a sadly sparse
ﬁeld, with far more fantasy available than science ﬁction. The truisms that
girls do not read science ﬁction and that only girls read as children may have
led to this dearth in a purely commercial sense. However, those current science ﬁction novels that do exist for young readers are full of interesting
female characters. Monica Hughes’s futuristic novels, such as Invitation to the
Game (1991) and her Arc One series, feature strong girls in a collapsing society.
While Invitation to the Game assumes a world with strictly heterosexual and
monogamous young adults, it also creates a large number of different types of
possible girl characters, active and passive, with different types of strengths.
Fantasy author Diana Wynne Jones has a few science ﬁction novels. For
a crossover audience of teens and adults, Hexwood (1994) presents a complex
world with a child/adult heroine Ann/Vierran who solves a bizarre mystery in
the face of changing perceptions. A Tale of Time City (1987) is a time-travel novel
for younger readers, in which an ordinary mid-twentieth-century evacuee girl
is presented with an extraordinary puzzle to solve in order to prevent the collapse of space-time. Garth Nix’s science ﬁction/horror novel Shade’s Children
(1997) features a number of female characters, including team leader Ella.
As with adult science ﬁction, science ﬁction for younger readers often
addresses questions of a changing society. Girls in these books frequently
need to address questions of gender identiﬁcation and their place in society.
A broad swath of top-notch books all place adolescent girls in situations
where self-identiﬁcation through physical appearance and attractiveness are
272
................

Girls and the Fantastic
called into question. For example, Hughes’s Isis trilogy (1980–82) features an
independent and solitary female protagonist who has had her body modiﬁed
(without her knowledge) to suit her environment.
Peter Dickinson’s Eva (1988) tells of an adolescent girl who, after a horrifying accident, has had her brain transplanted into a chimp’s body. Though
Eva’s parents are heartbroken at what they see as the loss of their beautiful
daughter, Eva is now supremely well suited to survival in a changing world.
Her casual rejection of human aesthetic mores calls current human values
into question.
Scott Westerfeld’s Uglies trilogy (2005–06) features a dystopia in which
all young adults, both boys and girls, are made “pretty” in order to create a
perfect society. Heroine Tally is adventurous and independent, and her
actions are strongly driven by those of her even more independent female
friend Shay. Through the course of the trilogy, Tally modiﬁes both her body
and her mind, and in doing so explores the connections between looks,
thoughts, and society.

C..............................................................................................................................
OMICS, GRAPHIC NOVELS, AND MANGA
United States

In the United States, comics have historically been thought of as a nonliterary, underground genre created exclusively for boys. In recent years, that
assumption has been changing, with mainstream publishers increasingly
adding lines of original and translated comics and marketing explicitly to
children’s librarians and teachers, as well as directly to both boys and girls.
With the growing popularity of comics among girls, there’s a new wealth of
interesting girl characters in a wide range of fantasy and science ﬁction comics for both children and adults. These works span nearly as wide a range of
genres and character types as prose ﬁction does.
Jeff Smith’s Bone (1991–2004) is a humorous yet serious reworking of the
traditional fantasy quest in which the lost prince role is taken by a female
character. Carla Speed McNeil’s Finder: Talisman (2002) is a single story set in
McNeil’s science ﬁction Finder universe (a universe chock-full of unusual gender play), in which a shy and introspective adolescent girl reﬂects on nostalgia
and the myths of her own childhood; as the nostalgia plot indicates, Finder,
while full of strong girls, is oriented toward adult readers. Ted Naifeh’s Courtney Crumrin (2002–04) stars a sullen and angry adventurer in the growing and
popular genre of gothic and twisted comics. Jill Thompson’s Scary Godmother
(1997–present) stars a fearless toddler who periodically enters a land called
the Fright Side where her friends are a variety of friendly monsters. Elizabeth
Watasin paid homage to the “Betty and Veronica” style of schoolgirl comic
heroines with her short series Charm School: Magical Witch Girl Bunny (2000),
273
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

about a schoolyard same-sex relationship between an adolescent witch and a
vampire.
Girls in superhero comics have had a mixed bag of experiences. Like
their adult female counterparts, girl superheroes and sidekicks are often
clothed in bikinis and high heels and overtly sexualized. The Batman line of
comics has been criticized for torturing and killing the one female Robin, a
teenage girl. Yet the same time, there have been some extremely powerful girl
superheroes in a genre that is perhaps kinder to female teenagers than to
adult women. The Marvel X-Men line of comics has always been full of powerful adolescents, both male and female, ranging from Jean Grey’s origins as
the sole girl among the adolescent X-Men in the 1960s to the far more gender-balanced teams of mutant children that were later developed in The New
Mutants, X-Factor, The New X-Men, and numerous other X-Men lines of comics.
The setting of many of the X-Men comics in Professor Xavier’s School
for Gifted Youngsters produces fertile ground for comics that deal with adolescent issues of romance and school as well as with battling evil, the primary
concern of any superhero comic. Current girl X-Men include such characters
as Surge, a formerly homeless Japanese teen, and Dust, a Sunni Muslim
Afghani girl who wears a veil. At the same time the X-Men were battling
supervillains and teen angst, DC Comics developed its own line of teenage
superheroes, the Teen Titans. The original Teen Titans were entirely male,
but they soon were joined by young female superheroes Wonder Girl, Raven,
and Starﬁre. The current Teen Titans include a wide variety of girl heroes,
including the one-eyed martial artist Ravager and the HIV-positive former
prostitute Speedy.

Japan

In Japanese comics, shoujo manga (comics for girls) began forming as a distinct genre at the turn of the twentieth century and is now a massive industry. Sixty percent of manga buyers in Japan are women or girls, and
publishers in the United States have begun realizing the market potential for
shoujo. Shoujo manga focuses on relationships rather than plot, and so while
many fantasy and science ﬁction plotlines exist, they are often secondary to
the intricacies of human relationships. Additionally, shoujo manga are comics
for girls, not necessarily about girls, and those magazines aimed at teens often
feature no girls at all.
The girls’ science ﬁction and fantasy magazine Uingusu (“Wings”), for
example, features primarily stories about attractive young men in homoerotic
relationships. However, girls are certainly present in shoujo manga, often in
unusual gender roles. Revolutionary Girl Utena (a 1996–97 manga, 1997 television series, and 1999 movie) features a schoolgirl who decides to become a
prince. Utena duels with other schoolboys in a magical setting in order to win
274
................

Girls and the Fantastic
the right to possess the “Rose Bride,” another schoolgirl who is passive, sweet,
and extremely girlish.
Boys’ manga (often written by women) also frequently features strong
female characters and similarly addresses a concern with gender roles. Ranma
1=2 (a 1987–96 manga, 1989–2003 series of television shows and movies, and
1994 computer game) stars a boy martial artist who turns into a girl when
splashed with water and the girl martial artist with whom he carries on a
continuing love/hate relationship. Though the story is at one level relentlessly
heterosexual, it constantly explores questions of gender identity and sexuality. Since the late 1960s, manga for both boys and girls have been very concerned with gender ambiguity, sexual identity, and sexuality ambiguity. While
the comics themselves are marketed explicitly to boy or girl audiences, gender roles within the comics are far more ﬂuid.

T..............................................................................................................................
ELEVISION AND FILM
Television and ﬁlm have been much harder on girl characters in the fantastic
than the written word has been, though a few characters stand out as notable. Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1992 movie, 1997–2003 television series) is perhaps the canonical example of girl power in television and ﬁlm. The girl
heroine was written in direct reaction to the bubble-headed blonde girls of
horror movies. Buffy is magically endowed with the power to ﬁght vampires,
and her band of sidekicks at various times includes two adolescent witches, a
5,000-year-old demon in the body of a teenage girl, and her non-super-powered
but brilliant younger sister. In fact, Buffy’s most ordinary and least powerful
sidekick is a young man; most of her powerful friends are female and her story
eventually culminates when she empowers girls and young women all over the
world with supernatural demon-ﬁghting abilities.
In recent years, television has been chock-full of powerful girl protagonists, from the genetically engineered Powerpuff Girls (1998–2004) ﬁghting monkey mad scientist Mojo Jojo, to the adolescent witch concerned with dating and
homework in Sabrina, the Teenage Witch (1996–2003), to the staff-wielding Gabrielle, Xena’s sidekick and possible lover on Xena: Warrior Princess (1995–2001).
At the immediate moment, in fantasy and science ﬁction television, girls are
far more likely to be spunky sidekicks and love interests: Smallville’s Lana, Lois,
and Chloe; Doctor Who’s Rose, Martha, and Donna. Girls in starring roles are
more common in nonfantastic television. Only the women of Charmed (1998–
2006), the longest-running television series with female leads, headlined their
own fantasy show (and with the heroines eventually ranging in age from 28 to
35, they hardly count as “girls,” as they arguably did when the show began).
Surprisingly, given its reputation for absent or evil mothers, Disney
offers some of the strongest girl heroines in children’s fantasy movies. Looking at a historical arc of Disney animated features reveals changing societal
275
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

ideas of gender over the years. Sleeping Beauty (1959) is a retelling of a traditional European fairy tale featuring one of the most passive heroines in all of
Western folklore. Mulan (1998), on the other hand, relates a traditional Chinese folktale of a girl who disguises herself as a boy and ﬁghts as a warrior in
order to rescue her family. While both stories (and most Disney movies) ultimately champion the conventional heterosexual marriage plot, the different
levels of agency exhibited by Sleeping Beauty and Mulan mirror changing
ideas of what it means to be a girl. Lilo and Stitch (2002) stars a much younger
girl and thus avoids the romance plot between primary characters altogether.
When the heroine (cared for by an older sister who is really only a girl herself)
encounters the troublemaking alien Stitch, the two cause utter chaos in a ﬁlm
that ultimately champions nontraditional gender roles and family structures.
Children’s movies based on books often have interesting girl characters
taken from the source text. Movie versions of Pippi Longstocking, Tuck Everlasting, and Ella Enchanted offer versions of compelling girl protagonists created in
books. Outside of Disney animated features and book adaptations, however,
fantastic ﬁlm is sadly lacking in girl protagonists. Movies about talking animals or magical creatures often default all the characters to male, except for
a spunky and smart female sidekick to the hero, as with The Dark Crystal’s Kira
(1982). The Spy Kids trilogy (2001–03) stars a sister-and-brother pair of child
spies who need to rescue their parents from an evil mastermind; similarly,
the loosely book-based A Series of Unfortunate Events (2003) offers equal screen
time to brother and sister Klaus and Violet.
Since 1998, the animated ﬁlms of Japanese director Hayao Miyazaki
have started becoming available in English. Miyazaki’s fantasy and science ﬁction ﬁlms feature a variety of types of heroines. The eleven- and four-year-old
girls who star in My Neighbor Totoro (1988) are everyday modern children who
exhibit a sense of awe when they encounter magical creatures in the woods,
while the thirteen-year-old witch protagonist of Kiki’s Delivery Service (1989)
takes magic for granted but has to struggle when she learns to live on her
own. The innocence of these younger girls is contrasted by the hard warrior
€ and Mononoke. The passive if couranature of Miyazaki heroines Nausicaa
geous heroine Sheeta of Castle in the Sky (1986), who is the object of adoration
for a host of male characters, is somewhat unusual in Miyazaki’s world.
Interesting girls can also appear in ﬁlms aimed at an adult market. The
science ﬁction movie Serenity (2005) has a leading role for character River
Tam, a super-powered but deranged heroine. While River’s psychic powers
and martial arts skills do make her a strong character, she is also waiﬁsh,
fragile, and doll-like, and her nearly supernatural powers contrast sharply
€. River is more
with the earned strength of Serenity’s adult warrior woman, Zoe
of a super-powered icon than she is a child, although the character as ﬁrst
envisioned in the Fireﬂy television series did occasionally act more familiarly
like an adolescent girl.
276
................

Girls and the Fantastic
The ﬁlm adaptations of the X-Men comic books (2000–2005) feature
powerful girls in the mutants Rogue and Kitty Pryde. Though both girls use
their powers in compelling and entertaining ways, they, like all the female
characters in these ﬁlms, are extremely underpowered compared to their
equivalents in the source text of the comics. The collective weakening of the
female mutants, both adults and children, angered many feminist critics.
See also Lindgren, Astrid; chapters 6, 9, 13, and 14.
Further Readings
Clark, Beverly Lyon, and Margaret R. Higonnet, eds. Girls, Boys, Books, Toys: Gender in Children’s Literature and Culture. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999.
Daugherty, Anne Millard. “Just a Girl: Buffy as Icon.” In Reading the Vampire Slayer, ed. Roz
Kaveney, 148–65. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001.
Paul, Lissa. “Enigma Variations: What Feminist Theory Knows about Children’s Literature.”
Signal 54 (1987): 186–211.
———. Reading Otherways. Portland, ME: Calendar Islands, 1998.
^ jo Manga” [online]. Http://www.matt-thorn.com/shoujo_manga/index.
Thorn, Matt. “Sho
html.
Trites, Roberta Seelinger. Waking Sleeping Beauty: Feminist Voices in Children’s Novels. Iowa
City: University of Iowa Press, 1997.
Zipes, Jack. Don’t Bet on the Prince. New York: Routledge, 1986.

277
................

27

Fandom
BERNADETTE LYNN BOSKY

AND

ARTHUR D. HLAVATY

IN THE SCIENCE ﬁction (SF) community, the word fan means more than just
an aﬁcionado. Rather, there are organized groups of appreciators, and just as
a tribe’s name for itself often means simply “the people,” so too different
groups of fans have called themselves fandom, with no explanatory adjective.
This chapter provides a brief history of fandom, focusing primarily on the
changing gender mixture as well as noting the contributions of a number of
women.

T
HE BEGINNINGS
..........................................................................................................................................
Science ﬁction fandom, like science ﬁction (SF) as a category, can be dated
from 1926, although similar phenomena, such as small groups exchanging independent publications, existed before then. In that year, Hugo Gernsback
began publishing Amazing Stories, promoting it by encouraging readers to
form science ﬁction fan clubs and to discuss the stories in his letter column.
Early science ﬁction, with its male protagonists and emphasis on hardware over emotions or even character, was seen as a masculine interest.
Gernsback admitted surprise when his letter column revealed that women
were actually interested in reading and discussing science ﬁction. In the June
1928 issue of Amazing Stories, Mrs. H. O. De Hart noted that she was an anomaly, a female reader, and that she did not expect Mr. Gernsback to “clutter”
his magazine with her letter. He did publish it, however, saying that he found
it interesting that a member of the “fair sex” would write. In the next issue,
letters from Mrs. L. Silverberg and Mrs. Lovina S. Johnson declared how
pleased and surprised they were to see that they were not the only female SF
readers.
As fandom developed in the 1930s and 1940s through clubs and
“fanzines” (magazines of original material produced by and for fans), almost
278
................

Fandom
no women participated on their own, though a few appeared as the girlfriends
of male fans. For instance, Myrtle R. Jones (better known as Morojo, her initials in Esperanto) attended the ﬁrst world science ﬁction convention in the
company of Forrest J. Ackerman. The Futurians, perhaps the best known of
the early fan groups, began in 1937, but did not have any female members
until Virginia Kidd and Judith Merril (then Judith Zissman) joined in 1944.
One Mary Helen Washington contributed to her brother Raym’s fanzine at the
age of nine but was not heard from again. Harry Warner Jr.’s All Our Yesterdays, the major history of fandom in the 1940s, covers women in a chapter,
“Feminine Fans,” that is slightly more than a page in length and also covers
racial minorities.

T
HE 1950S
...........................................................................................................................................
By the end of the 1940s, the presence of women was becoming more noticeable. A 1948 survey conducted by Wilson Tucker reported that 11 percent of
fans were female. Marion Zimmer Bradley, who claimed to be the ﬁrst major
female SF fan not following a male friend or partner into fandom, was
inspired by a fanzine review column in the ﬁrst SF magazine she ever saw, a
1946 issue of Startling Stories. Her ﬁrst fanzine, Astra’s Tower, appeared the following year. In 1949, she and her then-husband, Robert Bradley, published a
popular zine called Mezrab.
Perhaps the most notable of the early female fanzine fans was Lee
Hoffman, who published the ﬁrst issue of Quandry [sic] in 1950 when she was
eighteen. Her ﬁrst name and the overwhelmingly male nature of the fan community led many fans (knowing her only on paper) to assume that she was a
boy. Her writing had won her many admirers by the time she became known
in person. While she did not do anything to fool people, she did not do anything to correct the misapprehension either, and as a result, when she made
a public appearance at Nolacon, the 1951 Worldcon, many fans were shocked.
She had a major inﬂuence on fanzines because, while she did not ﬁnd science
ﬁction terribly interesting, she enjoyed the company of other fans. As a result,
she did much to encourage the idea that a truly “fannish fanzine” could be
about topics other than science ﬁction.
Many 1950s fans were comfortable with the overwhelmingly male nature of fandom and its boys’ club aspects, but others were bothered by it. Just
as the nearly all-white nature of fandom inspired the creation of Carl Brandon,
an imaginary African-American fan, in 1953, the following year there was
another case of more deliberate postal cross-dressing than Hoffman’s. A
group of British women, including Ethel Lindsay, Frances Evans, Pam Bulmer,
and Bobbie Wild, began Femizine, intended to be an all-woman production
except for the letter column. It was immediately inﬁltrated by a male British
fan named Sandy Sanderson, using the name Joan W. Carr. In 1956,
279
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Sanderson confessed to the hoax, reportedly leaving fans with a sense more
of loss than of betrayal. The women continued to publish the fanzine, now
called Distaff. Also in 1956, Marion Cox, in Sioux City, Iowa, published several
issues with the similar name of Femzine, also restricted to women’s writing.
Other female fans followed in the 1950s. Janie Lamb began a long career of leadership in the National Fantasy Fan Federation (N3F). Betty Jo
McCarthy, later known as Bjo Trimble, was one of the ﬁrst to organize art
shows at SF conventions. Gertrude Carr, generally known by her initials (G. M.
Carr), became notorious for attempting to keep fandom free of pornography
and generally supporting the views of the John Birch Society, to which she
belonged. These women all remained active in fandom for most of the twentieth century.

S..........................................................................................................................................
TA R T R E K
Star Trek changed everything. Although it had a higher percentage of males
in its audience than almost any nonsports television show of its time, it also
appealed to a far greater number of women than any previous form of science ﬁction and changed the gender balance of fandom forever.
Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry set out to evoke fandom’s enthusiasm for the show, previewing it at the 1966 Westercon and Worldcon. Soon
there were speciﬁcally Star Trek fanzines. The ﬁrst was Spockanalia, edited by
Devra Langsam and Sherna Comerford, published in September 1967. The
zine had its roots in fanzine fandom and was mimeographed, as fanzines traditionally had been, though soon Trekzines would be photo-offset and highly
illustrated. Langsam belonged to the Lunarians, a New York fannish organization, and participated in the organization of Lunacon, the annual SF convention in New York. Lois McMaster, later to write SF as Lois McMaster Bujold,
appeared in the second issue. Soon Spockanalia was joined by the short-lived
ST-Phile, edited by Kay Anderson and Juanita Coulson, and before long there
was a ﬂood of Trekzines.
The ﬁrst zines were almost entirely composed of articles, with a few
poems, but soon women were writing stories using the background and characters of the show, giving them a complexity far greater than could be offered
by a television series. Ruth Berman’s T-Negative (named after Spock’s blood
type) became a showcase for her own fan ﬁction and that of Jacqueline Lichtenberg, Jean Lorrah, Eleanor Arnason, and others. Lichtenberg created the
ﬁrst major series of Star Trek stories, the Kraith series (named after a goblet
used in Vulcan rituals), detailing Spock’s earlier life on Vulcan. All of this
material was published in fanzines, under some secrecy for fear of lawsuits
by copyright owners.
In 1968, the show faced the threat of cancellation after only two seasons, and Roddenberry enlisted the help of fandom in an unprecedented and
280
................

Fandom
successful effort to petition the network into keeping the show on for another
year. Bjo Trimble, already well known in South California fandom, was one of
the leaders of the campaign, publishing a newsletter entitled Where No Fan
Has Gone Before. Eventually, she and her husband John became employees of
Star Trek, in charge of handling fan mail and related duties.
In 1969, Trimble edited and self-published a book, The Star Trek Concordance, with information compiled by Dorothy Jones. Covering the ﬁrst two years
of the series, it set a precedent for books devoted to popular television series,
and a later edition was professionally published by Ballantine Books in 1976.
The ﬁrst convention devoted to Star Trek, called simply the Star Trek Conference, was a one-day event that took place on March 1, 1969, at the Newark
(New Jersey) Public Library. Organized by Sherna Comerford, it featured panels and discussions.
In 1972, the ﬁrst Star Trek Con to use that name, organized by Devra
Langsam and Al Schuster, was held in New York City. A full-weekend gathering, it featured actors from the TV series. Three thousand fans attended, and
it is generally considered the ﬁrst of the big-time media conventions. Before
then, science ﬁction conventions had been cooperative activities, in which all
were participants. Now there was a distinction between paid performers and
an audience that merely observed. Also in 1972, Shirley Maiewski started the
Star Trek Welcommittee, an organization to help newcomers ﬁnd their way
around Trek fandom.
Star Trek fandom began as, and somewhat remained, its own entity,
apart from and to some extent looked down on by the other science ﬁction
fandoms. However, female Star Trek fans mingled in and even left Trek fandom for more general SF zines, conventions, and clubs. This inﬂux marked
the beginning of the end of science ﬁction fandom as a boys’ club.
As Trek fan ﬁction continued to grow, it developed its own critical terminology. Many of these terms reﬂect the female authorship of the works. In
1973, Paula Smith coined the term Mary Sue for a story featuring the triumphs
of an idealized version of its own author. Other new terms were hurt/comfort
(typically involving two male characters) and slash.

S
LASH
...........................................................................................................................................
In 1974, a Trekzine called Grup published “A Fragment Out of Time,” a twopage story by Australian fan Diane Marchant that included a sex scene so
vague that the characters had neither names nor genders. In the next issue,
Marchant announced that the two participants were Spock and Captain Kirk.
That story is the ﬁrst recorded example of the subgenre that became known
as K/S (Kirk/Spock) or, when applied to ﬁctional characters in general, slash
ﬁction: tales of sex and/or love between male characters from TV series, movies, or books, almost always written by women. In 1976, the ﬁrst slashzine,
281
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Alternative: Epilog to Orion, by G. Downes, appeared. Like the romance genre,
slash has ranged from the ethereally romantic to the explicitly sexual (though
these latter, at least in the beginning, were notorious for their lack of knowledge of the technicalities of male–male intercourse). Joanna Russ considers
the latter stories important, discussing them in an essay titled, “Pornography
by Women, for Women, with Love.” Fan ﬁction, including slash, soon
branched out to other shows, notably Starsky and Hutch, and crossover ﬁction
involving two or more shows became popular.
By 1975, Trek fandom had become such a major phenomenon that
Bantam Books, which had published James Blish’s short-story versions of the
shows, issued Star Trek Lives!, by Jacqueline Lichtenberg, Sondra Marshak, and
Joan Winston, detailing the history of the fandom and including examples of
the ﬁction. Its success led to the publication of novels set in the Trek universe,
often by writers who had gotten their start writing fan ﬁction, such as Jean
Lorrah and Vonda McIntyre. The publishers (Bantam and then Pocket, a subsidiary of Paramount, which owned the Star Trek franchise), attempted to
maintain strict control of content, particularly avoiding slash.
In 1985, two writers with backgrounds in fan ﬁction caused trouble. Ishmael, by Barbara Hambly, was a crossover with the television show Here Come
the Brides, which had featured Mark Lenard, who played Sarek, Spock’s father,
on Star Trek. What was perceived as a more serious offense by the publishers
was Killing Time, by Della Van Hise, who had written K/S. An editor had
deleted several scenes as having potential slash appeal, but because of a trafﬁcking error at the publisher, the book was printed without the emendations.
Pocket Books recalled the book and printed an expurgated version, but many
copies of the original remained at large. The offending material was not explicitly sexual, but it described a mind-meld between Kirk and Spock too
emotionally.
The term slash was originally used for all imagined pairings between
characters who were not paired on the show, such as Spock and Nurse Chapel
on Star Trek, but it soon was restricted to male–male pairings, with the term
het used for male–female ones. While men have occasionally written slash,
including a group of gay male writers in British fandom, slash is considered to
be almost entirely a female phenomenon. In fact, the use of slash as a term
for male–male pairings in which stereotyped sex roles need not play a part
has become so prevalent that some critics have generalized it to woman-written
professional ﬁction in which the author’s own characters have that kind of
sex, such as Elizabeth Bear’s Carnival.
Fan ﬁction ﬂourished as computerized systems made it possible to circulate one’s work without paying to put it on paper. Almost as soon as they
had been invented, ftp (ﬁle transfer protocol) and gopher were used to transmit fan ﬁction; they were promptly supplanted by mailing lists, newsgroups,
and blogs.
282
................

Fandom
S
INGLE-AUTHOR FANDOMS
...........................................................................................................................................
The approach female fans took to Star Trek inﬂuenced fandom through the
creation of single-author fandoms. These were not entirely unprecedented;
The Baker Street Irregulars, mostly male Sherlock Holmes fans, wrote as if
the stories were real and discussed some of the apparent questions and
inconsistencies, and The Lord of the Rings generated its own fandom, particularly after its mass market publication in 1966.
In the late 1970s, when fan ﬁction based on text ﬁction began to appear
in quantity, the leading single-author fandom centered around Darkover, a
series of books combining elements of science ﬁction and fantasy written by
Marion Zimmer Bradley, who had been a fan in the 1950s. There were an
organization, the Friends of Darkover; an encyclopedia, The Darkover Concordance, by Bradley’s then-husband, Walter Breen; and a convention, Darkovercon,
or more formally, the Darkover Grand Council Meeting, which, like Star Trek
cons, began with a single-day gathering (in 1978). Darkovercon has become an
annual three-day convention, still chaired by Judy Gerjuoy, who organized the
ﬁrst one. Darkover fan ﬁction has been published in several zines, notably
Lynne Holdom’s Contes di Cottman IV. In 1980, Bradley edited The Keeper’s Price,
the ﬁrst of a continuing series of collections of Darkover stories, professionally
published by DAW, which also published the Darkover novels.
Jacqueline Lichtenberg, one of the original authors of Star Trek fan ﬁction, created the Sime/Gen novels, a series of tales of two symbiotic posthuman races beginning with House of Zeor (1974), and encouraged other writers
to create stories in her universe. Several other series begun in the 1960s and
1970s, such as Anne McCaffrey’s dragon books and Katherine Kurtz’s Deryni
series, also spawned fandoms, primarily but not exclusively composed of
women and girls.

F
ANZINE FANDOM AFTER STAR TREK
...........................................................................................................................................
1960s and 1970s

Along with the Trekzines, fanzines in general became more gender integrated
in the 1960s and 1970s. At Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Linda
Bushyager, Suzanne (Suzle) Tompkins, and Ginjer Buchanan (later to become
an SF editor at Ace) published Granfalloon (from the term Kurt Vonnegut Jr.
invented in Cat’s Cradle for a group of people who erroneously believe that
they have a meaningful connection). It was nominated for the Best Fanzine
Hugo in 1972 and 1973.
Two of the most successful fanzines of the time were published by couples, with both partners writing and numerous female contributors. Yandro,
edited by Juanita and Robert (“Buck”) Coulson, appeared on the Hugo ballot for
Best Fanzine from 1959 to 1970, winning in 1965. Elizabeth Fishman’s witty and
283
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

sardonic Yandro articles won her a Hugo nomination in 1971. Sandra Miesel
began in Yandro writing critical articles, particularly on Poul Anderson and
Gordon R. Dickson. She went on to have two monographs published by fannish
presses: Myth, Symbol, and Religion in “The Lord of the Rings” (1973, TK Graphics)
and Against Time’s Arrow: The High Crusade of Poul Anderson (1978, Borgo Press);
she was nominated for the Best Writer Hugo three times (1973–75). Miesel left
fannish writing for the Roman Catholic press in the 1980s and later cowrote a
professionally published refutation of Dan Brown’s The Da Vinci Code.
Despite lasting only four years, the second couple-led fanzine, Energumen, edited by Susan Wood and Mike Glicksohn, was one of the most important zines of the 1970s. It was nominated for the Best Fanzine Hugo in 1971
and 1972 and won in 1973. Rosemary Ullyot’s trip reports in Energumen gained
her Hugo nominations in 1972 and 1973, along with Wood, who wrote everything from academic discussion of SF to an encomium to teddy bears and who
won the award in 1974. Energumen stopped publishing in 1974, when the editors’ marriage broke up, but Wood went on to further Hugo nominations from
1975 through 1978, sharing the award with Richard E. Geis in 1977. In 1974,
four of the ﬁve Fan Writer nominees were female—Wood, Miesel, and Trek
writers Lichtenberg and Laura Basta—but the award went to the ﬁfth, Geis.
Other fanzines edited by couples that appeared on the Hugo ballot in
the 1970s were Outworlds (Bill and Joan Bowers, 1974–75), Locus (Charles and
Dena Brown, 1971–78; won in 1972, 1976, and 1978), Starling (Hank and Lesleigh
Luttrell, 1975), and The Spanish Inquisition (Suzanne Tompkins and Jerry Kaufman,
1977).

1980 to the Present

By the 1980s, the idea of women in fanzine fandom was taken for granted, to
the point that an issue of a zine with no female contributors would be noted.
Holier than Thou was nominated for the Fanzine Hugo in 1984 through 1986.
The editors, Marty and Robbie Cantor, met at a Worldcon when both were
established fans in different areas of fandom. In 1987, the Texas SF Inquirer,
edited for the Fandom Association of Central Texas by Pat Mueller (later Pat
Virzi), appeared on the Hugo ballot for the ﬁrst time, and the following year,
it won. The Mad 3 Party, a zine devoted to discussion of Noreascon 3, the
upcoming (1989) Worldcon in Boston and edited by Leslie Turek, was nominated for the Fanzine Hugo; it won in 1990, when it appeared on the ballot
along with Pirate Jenny, the zine Mueller began after fannish politics caused
her to be dropped from the Texas SF Inquirer. Turek herself was nominated for
the Fan Writer Hugo in 1988 and 1990.
From 1982 through 2003, Richard and Nicki Lynch, both already wellknown fans, began publishing Mimosa, a zine largely devoted to fan culture
and fan history. It was nominated for the Hugo every year from 1991 to 2004,
284
................

Fandom
winning in 1992, 1993, 1994, 1997, 1998, and 2003. Sharon N. Farber’s writings
in Mimosa, often centering on her experiences as an emergency-room doctor,
won her Hugo Fan Writer nominations four times (1994–97). Another popular
female fan writer, Evelyn Leeper, was nominated for the same award from
1990 to 2002 for her book reviews and trip and convention reports, in Lan’s
Lantern and elsewhere.
In the 1970s, British fandom had fewer female writers than America
did, but in the 1980s a new crop of female writers appeared in the United
Kingdom, including Simone Walsh, Lilian Edwards, and Christina Lake. American
fans Linda Pickersgill and Avedon Carol moved to Britain at that time, encouraging the trend. Carol was nominated for the Fan Writer Hugo in 1989, 1991,
and 1992.
The two major British fanzines that began in the 1990s were thoroughly
coeducational productions. Banana Wings, edited by Claire Brialey and Mark
Plummer and ﬁlled with much discussion of fandom and fanzines, began in
1995; Brialey was nominated for the Fan Writer Hugo in 2005 and 2006. The
graphically creative Plokta, edited by Alison Scott, Mike Scott, and Steve
Davies, began in 1996. It was nominated for the Fanzine Hugo from 1999 to
2006, winning in 2005 and 2006, and it inspired two conventions called Ploktacons. Maureen Kincaid Speller wrote a popular personal fanzine called Snufkin’s Bum (Snufkin was the name of her cat) and was nominated for the Best
Fan Writer Hugo in 1999.
During the 1990s, a good deal of fan publishing, although not all,
moved onto the World Wide Web. At ﬁrst, the Internet was mostly, though
never exclusively, a male domain, but as it became more user-friendly,
women logged on in greater numbers. The Net soon became an extension of
fanzines by other means, as fanzine fans began writing for GEnie, the Well,
the rec.arts.sf.* newsgroups, and eventually blogs. Teresa Nielsen Hayden, long
a popular fan writer, was nominated for the Fan Writer Hugo in 1991, mostly
for her online writing. Emerald City, a fanzine edited by Cheryl Morgan from
1995 to 2006 and largely devoted to reviews, was almost entirely an online production. It was nominated for the Fanzine Hugo three times (2003–05), winning
in 2004, and for the Semiprozine Hugo in 2006. Morgan herself was nominated
for the Best Fan Writer Hugo from 2004 to 2006. The editors of Plokta created
Plokta.net, an online fannish newsletter.

Fan Artists

Women have illustrated fanzines all along, and since the Best Fanzine Hugo
began in 1967, there have usually been women on the ballot: Alicia Austin
(1970–72, 1974; won 1971), Wendy Fletcher (1972), Jeanne Gomoll (1978), Victoria Poyser (1980–82, won 1981–82), Joan Hanke-Woods (1980–86, won 1986),
Diana Gallagher Wu (1988–89, tied for win 1989), Merle Insinga (1988–91, 1993),
285
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Peggy Ranson (1991–98), Diana Harlan Stein (1991–93), Linda Michaels (1993–
95), Freddie Baer (1999–2000), and Sue Mason (2001–06; won 2003, 2005)

F..........................................................................................................................................
EMINISM COMES TO FANDOM
The ﬁrst explicitly feminist fanzines appeared in 1974, discussing such topics
as the need for more female writers and more alternatives to contemporary
sex roles. Male SF writers and fans had been proud of their relative freedom
from or transcendence of the sexism of mundane society, but fanzines began
featuring women telling established professional writers such as Poul Anderson and Philip K. Dick that they were not as enlightened as they thought they
were. The Witch and the Chameleon was a short-lived zine edited by Canadian
fan Amanda Bankier. Janus, published in Madison, Wisconsin, was edited at
ﬁrst by Janice Bogstad, with Jeanne Gomoll joining her as coeditor with the
fourth issue. It was nominated for the Best Fanzine Hugo from 1978 through
1980.
In 1975, Khatru, a fanzine edited by Jeffrey D. Smith, published a major
discussion of women in science ﬁction, both as writers and as characters. It
featured contributions by Suzy McKee Charnas, Virginia Kidd, Ursula K. Le
Guin, Vonda N. McIntyre, Raylyn Moore, Joanna Russ, Luisa White, Kate Wilhelm, and Chelsea Quinn Yarbro. Alice Sheldon also participated, but she
was then posing as a male science ﬁction writer named James Tiptree Jr.,
and her masquerade went undetected.
In 1986, Susan Wood managed with some difﬁculty to talk the committee for MidAmericon, the Worldcon held in Kansas City, into letting her present a panel entitled “Women and Science Fiction.” It overﬂowed the small
room she was granted and sparked a groundswell of feminist activity.
One result was a demand for women’s space, often called “A Room of
One’s Own” (after a Virginia Woolf title), at conventions, with men either
excluded or allowed only if invited by a speciﬁc woman. That led to predictable debates over charges of reverse sexism and whether male-to-female
transsexuals were included. The ﬁrst such room was organized by Wood at
the 1978 Westercon in Vancouver.
At this time, too, Canadian fan Janet Small (later Janet Wilson) started
A Woman’s APA, which had some of the same issues. It was originally open to
anyone who wanted to participate in feminist discussion, but some of the
women felt uncomfortable with men in the group, so they started what they
called Subset, for women only. In 1978, after some disagreement, the group
decided to make the entire amateur press association (APA) all-woman, leading to the formation of three new APAs: Boy’s Own APA, for men only, and the
coeducational Spinoff and Mixed Company. A Woman’s APA remains allwoman, with members setting their own rules for availability of their zines,
from “members only” to “I don’t give a shit who reads this.” It inspired a
286
................

Fandom
British women’s APA, the Women’s Periodical, which, like A Woman’s APA,
has survived the general diminution of APAs in size and number.
The most notable result of the post-MidAmericon fervor was the formation of WisCon, the feminist SF con. The ﬁrst WisCon was held February
11–13, 1977, at the Wisconsin Center in Madison, chaired by Janice Bogstad
and Doug Price, with guests of honor Katherine MacLean (writer) and Amanda
Bankier (fan). It has been held in Madison every year since then. The inevitable rumors of sexual exclusion or ideological correctness tests for admission
were always baseless, and WisCon has become a popular gathering for both
sexes. WisCon was also where, in 1991, Pat Murphy announced the creation
of the James Tiptree Jr. Award for SF or fantasy that explores and expands
gender roles.
Another aspect of feminism in fandom has been the questioning of sexist assumptions about proper female appearance. In the 1990s, Debbie Notkin
began running convention panels on “Fat, Feminism, and Fandom.” She and
photographer Laurie Toby Edison put together Women en Large, a book of photos of fat naked women, many of them from fandom.

F
ILK
...........................................................................................................................................
Filk songs—song parodies and original songs on SF and fannish themes—have
been a signiﬁcant part of fandom since the 1950s. The term was originally a
typo for folk that appeared in the title of an essay, “The Inﬂuence of Science
Fiction on Modern American Filk Music,” written in 1954 by Lee Jacobs. It was
ﬁrst deliberately used by Karen Anderson in 1960 to describe a song written
by her husband, Poul, and it has been used ever since. There are now ﬁlk
sings at many conventions, ﬁlk recordings in all media, and books of ﬁlk
songs. Like fanzine fandom, ﬁlk is an area where women are considered as
likely to appear as men.
In 1978, Margaret Middleton began publishing Kantele, the ﬁrst ﬁlk fanzine; it continued until 1985. Lee Gold, teaming with her husband, Barry, has
been writing and performing ﬁlks since 1967 and has been publishing Xenoﬁlkia, a bimonthly zine of ﬁlks, since 1988. She is also the ofﬁcial editor of the
gaming APAs Alarums and Excursions.
Leslie Fish arrived in fandom at about the same time and soon wrote
two of the best-known ﬁlks: “Hope Eyrie,” a stirring tribute to the moon landing, and “Banned from Argo,” the hilarious tale of the misadventures of an
unnamed space crew strongly resembling the characters from the original
Star Trek.
Other popular female ﬁlkers include Julia Ecklar, Kathy Mar, Cynthia
McQuillin, Mary Ellen Wessels, and Dr. Jane Robinson, all of whom have been
elected to the Filk Hall of Fame.
287
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

A
SSORTED FANNISH ACHIEVEMENTS
..........................................................................................................................................
Worldcon Fan Guest of Honor

Juanita Coulson became the ﬁrst female Worldcon Fan Guest of Honor (GoH)
in 1982, sharing the title with her husband, Buck. Susan Wood and her
ex-husband Mike Glicksohn were likewise joint Fan GoHs in 1975.
Lee Hoffman became the ﬁrst woman to be the sole Fan GoH in 1982.
Since then, several women have been guests of honor as part of couples: Joyce
Slater (1987, with Ken Slater), Joni Stopa (1991, with Jon Stopa), Sachiko
Shibano (1996, with Takumi Shibano), Anne Passovoy (2000, with Bob Passovoy),
and Bjo Trimble (2002, with John Trimble).
Fan Funds

There are two major fan funds, TAFF (the Trans-Atlantic Fan Fund), begun in
1953, which sends an elected fan between America and Europe, and DUFF
(the Down Under Fan Fund), begun in 1972, which pays for a fan’s travel
between America and Australia. In the ﬁrst twenty years, TAFF honored two
well-known female fans: Lee Hoffman in 1956 and Ethel Lindsay in 1962. The
ﬁrst couple to win TAFF was June and Len Moffatt in 1973. Then there were
no female TAFF winners until Avedon Carol in 1983. Patrick and Teresa Nielsen
Hayden won in 1985, and since then, about half the winners have been
female: Jeanne Gomoll (1987), Lilian Edwards and Christina Lake (1988, as an
entry), Pam Wells (1991), Jeanne Bowman (1992), Abigail Frost (1993), Ulrika
O’Brien (1998), Maureen Kincaid Speller (1988), Vijay Bowen (1999), Sue Mason
(2000), and Suzanne Tompkins (2005). Some of these brought male companions, but all were elected on their own.
Lesleigh Luttrell won the ﬁrst DUFF in 1972. Since then, women have
won about one out of four, with a larger proportion since 1995, and more couples were elected than for TAFF. Christine McGowan (1976), Linda Lounsbury
(1979, with Ken Fletcher), Joyce Scrivner (1981), Robbie Cantor (1985, with
Marty Cantor), Marilyn Pride (1986, with Nick Stathopoulos and Lewis Morley),
Lucy Huntzinger (1987), Leah Smith (1993, with Dick Smith), Pat Sims (1995, with
Roger Sims), Janice Murray (1997), Janice Gelb (1999), Cathy Cupitt (2000), Naomi
Fisher (2001, with Patrick Molloy), and Rosy Lillian (2003, with Guy Lillian III)
have all won DUFF.
Worldcon Chairs

The World Science Fiction Convention (Worldcon) began in 1939. Like other
aspects of fandom, it was almost entirely male at ﬁrst, and then became
more sexually integrated. In 1952, Julian May became the ﬁrst woman to chair
a Worldcon. Since then, about a quarter of the Worldcons have had female
chairs or cochairs: Noreen Falasca (1955, with Nick Falasca), Anna S. Moffatt
288
................

Fandom
(1958), Ella Parker (1965), Joyce Fisher (1969, with Ray Fisher), Leslie Turek
(1980), Suzanne Carnaval (1981, with Don C. Thompson), Penny Frierson
(1986, with Ron Zukowski), Kathleen Meyer (1991), Karen Meschke (1997),
Peggy Rae Pavlat (1998), and Deb Geisler (2004).
Despite some fans’ self-image as superior beings and science ﬁction’s
claims to be the literature of the future, the role of women in science ﬁction
has just kept pace with, or slightly preceded, that of women generally in the
national cultures. Fandom has always been willing to acknowledge expertise
in women, yet for a long time it saw those women as exceptions to general
gender expectations. Even now, many women in fandom are known primarily
as members of couples; however, often the woman had achieved recognition
before meeting her partner or they became well known together. For many
possible reasons, ranging from its origins in the urban Northeast United
States to the prevalence of engineer-type personalities among the men, fandom has long been tolerant—even welcoming—of strong, even pushy women.
Thus, while not overly feminist, fandom has had more opportunity for and
encouragement of female success. As science ﬁction itself became more interested in and interesting to women, more women have participated in fandom
in all roles.
See also Cosplay; Editors, Fan; Editors, Professional; Vidding; chapter 28.
Further Readings
Bacon-Smith, Camille. Enterprising Women: Television Fandom and the Creation of Popular Myth.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992.
———. Science Fiction Culture. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2000.
Gomoll, Jeanne. Guest of Honor Speech, WisCon 24, Madison, WI, May 26–29, 2000 [online].
Http://www.wiscon.info/downloads/gomoll.pdf.
Jenkins, Henry. Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture. New York: Routledge, 1992.
Larbalestier, Justine. The Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2002.
Lichtenberg, Jacqueline, Sondra Marshak, and Joan Winston. Star Trek Lives! New York: Bantam Books, 1975.
Merril, Judith. Better to Have Loved: The Life of Judith Merril. Toronto: Between the Lines, 2002.
Russ, Joanna. “Pornography by Women, for Women, with Love.” In Magic Mommas, Trembling
Sisters, Puritans and Perverts. Trumansburg, NY: Crossing Press, 1985.
Trimble, Bjo. On the Good Ship Enterprise: My 15 Years with Star Trek. Norfolk, VA: Donning,
1982.
Verba, Joan Marie. Boldly Writing: A Trekker Fan and Zine History, 1967–1987. 2nd ed. Minnetonka, MN: FTL, 2003.
Warner, Harry, Jr. All Our Yesterdays: An Informal History of Science Fiction Fandom in the Forties.
Chicago: Advent Press, 1969.
———. A Wealth of Fable: An Informal History of Science Fiction Fandom in the Fifties. Van Nuys,
CA: SCIFI Press, 1992.

289
................

28

WisCon
JEANNE GOMOLL

HELD annually in Madison, Wisconsin, WisCon is the world’s oldest, largest,
and most respected convention focusing on feminist science ﬁction. It
began as a small weekend convention run by a University of Wisconsin student group and attended by two hundred people in 1977. The event is now a
four-day world-renowned convention run by a hundred-person committee
and attended by a thousand people in 2006. The majority of WisCon 1
attendees were Madison residents; in 2006, most attendees traveled from
outside Wisconsin, many from outside the United States. WisCon’s programming has encouraged serious exploration of science ﬁction (SF) and fantasy
from the perspectives of gender, class, race, and progressive politics. Many
members of its planning committee and attendees travel great distances to
participate in what has become the annual gathering place of the feminist
SF community.
WisCon’s longevity as a niche convention, the remarkable continuity
provided by convention committees (or “concoms”) containing several members who have worked throughout WisCon’s history, and the perseverance of
its feminist mission has inspired several scholars to look for an explanation
for the success of this unusual convention. More than likely, several factors
are responsible: ﬁrst, WisCon’s roots in the publication of Janus; second, the
coincidental birth of WisCon during the Second Wave of the women’s movement; third, the existence of a large community of writers and readers whose
interests were not being served by other, more traditional conventions; fourth,
the many contributions of speciﬁc individuals who cared passionately about
WisCon’s mission and devoted enormous amounts of time and energy to it;
and ﬁnally, the infusion of new energy and the periodic reinvention of WisCon
caused by such events as the announcement of the James W. Tiptree Jr.
Award in 1991 and the celebration of WisCon 20 in 1996.

290
................

WisCon
J..............................................................................................................................
ANUS
From 1975 until 1977 (the year of WisCon 1), a University of Wisconsin
(UW)–Madison student group calling itself “Madstf” met several times a
week and published the ﬁrst six issues of the fanzine (fan-published magazine) Janus. The group was founded in 1975 by Janice Bogstad, Phillip Kaveny,
Hank and Lesleigh Luttrell, and Thomas Murn. Within two years, the group
grew to about twenty members, primarily students attending UW-Madison.
Madstf resembled hundreds of other science ﬁction groups in the United
States at that time. Its members engaged in regular, animated discussion of
science ﬁction books and ideas; they published a fanzine and contributed
letters, essays, and artwork to other fanzines; and they traveled to SF conventions in other cities and created a social network. On the other hand, the
several strong-minded women who organized many of Madstf’s activities were
a group that differed signiﬁcantly from the more common male-dominated SF
groups.
The largest part of the young group’s energy was lavished upon the fanzine Janus, whose ﬁrst issue was edited by Bogstad. Madstf members wrote
for, typed, illustrated, designed, laid out, proofread, mimeographed, and distributed the issues. By the second issue, I joined Bogstad as managing editor,
primarily working as designer and illustrator. Janus issues 4–18 were jointly
edited by the two of us and received a great deal of attention from fanzine
fans and women writers emerging at the time as important SF authors. Janus
received three Hugo nominations for Best Fanzine in 1978, 1979, and 1980.
Janus had a profound inﬂuence upon WisCon. Indeed, two issues of
Janus were published as program books for the ﬁrst and second WisCons.
Bogstad and I had met in 1971 when we were enrolled in UW-Madison’s historic ﬁrst science ﬁction class, taught by Fannie LeMoine in the Department
of Comparative Literature. Our interest in feminism, the emergence of many
award-winning women science ﬁction writers in the 1970s, the highly politicized atmosphere of the Madison campus during the Vietnam War years,
and the Second Wave of the women’s movement all contributed to the zine’s
feminist and politically left voice, which eventually molded the themes of
WisCon.
The convention’s catalyst occurred not in Madison, but at one of the
ﬁrst conventions attended by most Madstf members: MidAmericon, the 1976
world science ﬁction convention (Worldcon), held on Labor Day weekend in
Kansas City, Missouri. The panel “Women and SF” and its aftermath deepened
the commitment of Janus’s editors to a feminist point of view and planted the
seeds of the idea for WisCon. The panel was organized by SF critic and feminist Susan Wood, who had successfully lobbied a reluctant Worldcon committee to allow her to develop the session. In 1976, neither feminism nor
women were generally considered important or interesting topics for serious
panel discussions at science ﬁction conventions.
291
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

This situation was considered by many to be inexcusable in a time
when Joanna Russ, Vonda McIntyre, Octavia Butler, Suzy McKee Charnas,
Elizabeth Lynn, Pamela Sargent, Chelsea Quinn Yarbro, and others were
writing and winning honors for their work. Although Wood’s panel was scheduled in an inconveniently located room, the standing-room-only audience
overﬂowed into the hallway outside and convened afterward in an adjacent
lounge for what turned out to be a deﬁning moment for the many women
who found one another in that place. Victoria Vayne proposed that everyone
keep in contact by forming an amateur press association (APA) and suggested
that it be named “A Women’s APA.” Its anthology of letters, essays, and
responses has been published monthly ever since and has succeeded in creating a network of women and men interested in the world-changing powers of
feminism and feminist science ﬁction.
Bogstad and I joined A Women’s APA and also began discussing a dream
convention with more than just a single pro-forma panel about women and
SF—a convention that might resemble a familiar SF convention but would also
include scholarly and literary conversation about feminist ideas and the ways
in which the new women writers were using them in their work.

L O C AT I O N S
...............................................................................................................................
In 1976, Richard Russell completed the paperwork involved in creating a taxexempt, nonproﬁt corporation that would function as an umbrella institution
sheltering both Janus and WisCon. The group’s name became SF3: the Society
for the Furtherance and Study of Fantasy and Science Fiction. The era of
Madstf was over; SF3 was now the ofﬁcial name of the group. Diane Martin
took over as treasurer, and Bogstad’s contacts at UW-Madison presented the
group with an ideal site for the ﬁrst WisCon.
George Hartung, the head of the Wisconsin Extension Humanities Division, suggested that Bogstad coordinate the convention as an ofﬁcial UWExtension program. Bogstad agreed and chaired not only WisCon 1 but also
WisCons 2, 3, and 4. She is the only WisCon chair to have coordinated so
many consecutive conventions. The UW-Extension cosponsored WisCons 1–5
(1977–81) and allowed WisCon free use of the campus’s beautiful convention
center (the Wisconsin Center, now renamed the Pyle Center) and visitor
dorms (Lowell Hall) two blocks to the east.
As WisCon grew, the divided space provided by the university became
problematic, especially during cold weather. Until WisCon 19, when WisCon’s
dates were changed to the Memorial Day weekend, WisCon weekend fell in late
February or early March, which in Wisconsin is still part of blizzard season.
Relying upon university facilities meant that, in some years, WisCon attendees
were forced to navigate extremely hazardous, icy sidewalks and brave subzero
temperatures between the conference center and Lowell Hall. In 1982, the
292
................

WisCon
convention therefore ended its agreement with UW-Extension and moved to
the Inn on the Park on the Capitol Square in downtown Madison, where convention events and sleeping rooms were housed under one roof.
Between 1982 and 1995, WisCon’s location shifted between two downtown hotels and a suburban location. WisCon 19 ﬁnally returned downtown
to Madison’s largest hotel, the Concourse Hotel and Governor’s Club, where it
has been located ever since. In 1995, WisCon negotiated a contract with the
new management of the Concourse Hotel and developed an excellent working
relationship so enduring that, eleven years later, WisCon 30 imposed an
attendance limit of 1,000 rather than even considering a move to a larger
hotel. WisCon attendees have also appreciated the Concourse’s central location, its layout, and the staff’s friendly attitude toward members. WisCon surveys have recorded many attendees’ opinion that the Concourse is the
“perfect convention hotel.”

G..............................................................................................................................
UESTS OF HONOR
WisCon has historically encouraged all attendees to nominate guests of
honor, but has reserved voting rights for those who work on concoms. With a
couple of exceptions, all WisCon’s guests of honor have been chosen by the
previous year’s concom. Many WisCon decisions have been made on this basis; the group’s unwritten philosophy has been that, in order to survive, a volunteer organization must be run democratically, empowering those who do
the work with the right to make decisions.
Not surprisingly, the percentage of women chosen as WisCon guests of
honor, as compared to males, has exceeded any other convention’s record.
This record reﬂects a deliberate choice on the part of most WisCon concoms,
who have considered it WisCon’s mission to celebrate the work of women in
the ﬁeld of science ﬁction. The list of those honored as guests of honor by
WisCon over the years, below, includes a remarkable group of science ﬁction
authors, artists, editors and fans. Also listed below, in parentheses, are the
chairs of each WisCon.
WisCon 1: Katherine MacLean, Amanda Bankier (Janice Bogstad)
WisCon 2: Vonda N. McIntyre, Susan Wood (Janice Bogstad)
WisCon 3: Suzy McKee Charnas, John Varley, Gina Clarke (Janice Bogstad)
WisCon 4: Joan D. Vinge, David Hartwell, Beverly DeWeese, Octavia Butler
(Janice Bogstad)
WisCon 5: Chelsea Quinn Yarbro, Don and Elsie Wollheim, Buck and Juanita
Coulson, Catherine McClenahand, Steven Vincent Johnson (Diane Martin
and Karen Jones)
WisCon 6: Terry Carr, Suzette Haden Elgin (Hank Luttrell and Georgie
Schnobrich)
WisCon 7: Marta Randall, Lee Killough (Diane Martin)
293
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

WisCon 8: Elizabeth A. Lynn, Jessica Amanda Salmonson (Peter Theron)
WisCon 9: Lisa Tuttle, Alicia Austin (Richard S. Russell)
WisCon 10: Chelsea Quinn Yarbro, Suzette Haden Elgin (Andrew P. Hooper)
WisCon 11: Connie Willis, Samuel R. Delany, Avedon Carol (Carrie Root)
WisCon 12: R. A. MacAvoy, George R. R. Martin, Stu Shiffman (Pete Winz)
WisCon 13: Gardner Dozois, Pat Cadigan (Hope Kiefer)
WisCon 14: Iain Banks, Emma Bull (Kim Nash)
WisCon 15: Pat Murphy, Pamela Sargent (Kim Nash)
WisCon 16: Howard Waldrop, Trina Robbins (Kim Nash)
WisCon 17: Kristine Kathryn Rusch, Lois McMaster Bujold (Lorelei Manney)
WisCon 18: Karen Joy Fowler, Melinda Snodgrass, Jim Frenkel (Matthew Raw)
WisCon 19: Barbara Hambly, Sharyn McCrumb, Nicola Grifﬁth (Tracy Benton)
WisCon 20: Ursula K. Le Guin, special guest Judith Merril (Jeanne Gomoll)
WisCon 21: Melissa Scott, Susanna Sturgis (Diane Martin and Jim Hudson)
WisCon 22: Sheri S. Tepper, Delia Sherman, Ellen Kushner (Thomas Havighurst)
WisCon 23: Terri Windling, Mary Doria Russell (Dan Dexter)
WisCon 24: Charles de Lint, Jeanne Gomoll (Kim Nash)

WisCon 25: Nancy Kress, Elisabeth
Vonarburg (Diane Martin)
WisCon 26: Nalo Hopkinson, Nina Kiriki Hoffman (Jennifer White)
ville, Carol Emshwiller (Scott Custis)
WisCon 27: China Mie
WisCon 28: Patricia McKillip, Eleanor Arnason (Victor Raymond)
WisCon 29: Gwyneth Jones, Robin McKinley (Jim Hudson)
WisCon 30: Kate Wilhelm, Jane Yolen (Jeanne Gomoll, Scott Custis)
WisCon 31: Kelly Link, Laurie Marks (Karen and Allan Moore, Debbie Notkin)
WisCon 32: Maureen McHugh, L. Timmel Duchamp (Betsy Lundsten, Carrie
Ferguson)

PROGRAMMING
...............................................................................................................................
WisCon 1 scheduled ten panels in two days, and only three events were speciﬁcally described as feminist or concerned with the writing of women SF
authors. The number of programs related to women and SF greatly increased
at WisCon 2. Guest of Honor Wood wrote an article, “People’s Programming,”
for the combination program book/Janus (vol. 4, no. 1) about the sad state of
such programming at conventions; she proposed a list of actions that might
improve the situation. Accepting one of Wood’s proposals, WisCon designated
a room for “general discussion (and retreat) for women and their friends …
who wish to meet and talk with other persons about sexual roles in SF, in fandom and in society” (Janus 4, no. 1, p. 14). WisCon was not able to close the
room to men for legal reasons, but the room nonetheless became de facto
women-only space.
Thereafter, a signiﬁcant percentage of WisCon programming was
devoted to feminist ideas, women authors, or women’s writing. Janice Bogstad
and I met privately during those ﬁrst few years of WisCon to pledge that we
would strive to maintain a minimum of 25 percent speciﬁcally feminist
294
................

WisCon
programs at future WisCons. There were years when the percentage of feminist
or women-related programs may have fallen beneath this goal, especially in
those years when those doing the work were less committed to feminist programming, but WisCon never mirrored most other conventions, which frequently preferred to schedule a single, pro-forma “Women in SF” panel, if that.
WisCon committees reveled in the fact that WisCon was perceived as
such a divergent convention. After WisCon 1 or 2, some Midwest SF fans
showed their disdain for WisCon’s women- and homosexual-friendly programming by calling WisCon “Pervertcon” in a fanzine letter column. Fairly
frequently critics who have never attended a WisCon and do not realize that
everyone is welcome have accused WisCon of barring men from attending.
The program book published for WisCon 3 included a comic strip drawn by
Richard Bruning lampooning this assumption, following a foolish guy who
decides to cross-dress in order to sneak into WisCon.
Of course, WisCon has always offered more kinds of programming than
explicitly feminist panels, including topics of class, race, politics, science ﬁction, fantasy, the craft and business of writing, science, and SF media. During
the ﬁrst nineteen years, the WisCon program also included such traditional
SF convention fare as a masquerade, role-playing games, and a ﬁlm program.
These three events were gradually dropped, however, because there were no
concom members interested in running them and because the events were
perceived as peripheral to WisCon’s mission.
WisCon programming can be divided into two eras: before and after
WisCon 20. Beginning with WisCon 2, the convention built a justiﬁable reputation for intense and serious multitrack programming—something that was
fairly unusual for such a small regional convention. Most Midwest conventions at the time preferred to call themselves “relaxicons,” scheduling as little
programming as possible in order to allow attendees to spend the bulk of
their time poolside or in the bar socializing with one another. WisCon originally attracted attendees primarily from Wisconsin and neighboring states,
although a growing contingent traveled to WisCon from Seattle and the San
Francisco Bay area. In 1977, WisCon 1 attracted just two hundred people, and
attendance rarely grew above ﬁve hundred until after WisCon 20. Nevertheless, those who attended WisCons tended to attend a large portion of the program. The committees regard programming as the heart and soul of the
event. In the early years, everyone on the concom contributed program ideas
and participated as panelists. The collaborative nature of program planning
and participation among the concom lessened over the years, but it was not
until WisCon 20 that it changed dramatically.
The backlash against feminism in the United States during the midand late 1980s was mirrored in the dampening of enthusiasm and less optimistic attitudes of WisCon programs in the same time period. As it became
clear that feminists would have to reﬁght the battle for choice and that the
295
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Equal Rights Amendment was probably doomed, science ﬁction written by
women in the previous decade was subtly attacked by fans of cyberpunk ﬁction, which was a popular genre of the time. Science ﬁction of the 1970s was
considered boring by these critics at the same time that 1970s feminists were
being called selﬁsh by mainstream critics. It was much less fun for WisCon
program planners to ﬁght a rear-guard action against attempts to rewrite history than it had been in those exciting earlier years when it seemed that
organizing a feminist convention, joining a women’s APA, or participating in a
consciousness-raising group would surely change the world in no time.
Thus, Guest of Honor Pat Murphy’s announcement of the James Tiptree
Jr. Award in her 1991 speech at WisCon 15 invigorated and galvanized the
audience and rekindled the energies of several concom members who had
begun drifting away from WisCon planning. WisCon hosted the ﬁrst two Tiptree Award ceremonies. During the award’s third year, I coordinated the panel
of judges reading for the following year’s Tiptree Award, and I subsequently
joined the Tiptree motherboard as one of the organization’s ofﬁcers. In spite
of the enormous popularity of the Tiptree Award among WisCon attendees, I
recommended that the award ceremony occasionally travel to different conventions, not only to involve more people but also to disentangle Tiptree’s
identity from WisCon’s.
The Tiptree Award seemed to be the more vital organization at the
time. WisCon seemed to be in the process of losing touch with its feminist
mission. We felt that it was important for the Tiptree Award’s survival that it
maintain an existence independent from WisCon. As it turned out, WisCon
did not lose sight of its feminist mission. The Tiptree Award actually reinvigorated WisCon planners and, in return, WisCon gave the Tiptree Award its
support and a home base during the award’s crucial start-up years. Interestingly, neither the award nor WisCon as a feminist SF convention may have
survived without the other.
Over the years, several Tiptree-related events were transformed into
essential WisCon traditions that were scheduled even during those years that
the award ceremony was hosted by another convention. The Tiptree bake
sale, T-shirts designed by collage artist Freddie Baer, and Ellen Klages’s annual
Tiptree auction have become hugely popular and indispensable parts of WisCon’s program. All proceeds from these fundraising activities are donated to
the Tiptree Award.

WISCON 20 AND BEYOND
...............................................................................................................................
Momentarily forgetting the conviction that WisCon was changing into a different, less ardently feminist convention, a group of current and former concom members met at a party on the last night of WisCon 18 in 1994 to
discuss an approaching anniversary: WisCon 20. We talked about what might
296
................

WisCon
be done as a sort of “ﬁnal hurrah” to celebrate what WisCon had accomplished over the years. With two years to plan, an ofﬁcial group formed and
began attending WisCon 19 committee meetings. In order to ask for leadership positions in WisCon 20, they felt obligated to work as staff on the WisCon
19 committee. In spite of these honorable intentions, their return to the concom was viewed as an attempted coup by some members of the existing committee, many of whom resigned. Tracy Benton stepped forward in midyear to
ﬁll the newly vacant position of WisCon 19 chair, while I began working on
WisCon 20 as its chair.
WisCon 20 was the ﬁrst WisCon to have been planned over the course
of two years (the second was WisCon 30, chaired by Scott Custis and myself).
Together, the WisCon 19 and 20 concoms elected Ursula Le Guin by acclamation to be WisCon 20’s guest of honor, and plans were begun to raise money
to bring as many previous guests of honor to WisCon 20 as possible. The new
WisCon 19 and 20 concoms introduced innovations that would change the
course of all future WisCons. In addition, the new concoms rediscovered their
enthusiasm for the original goals of WisCon in the course of planning WisCon
20 and forged new traditions that would energize a larger new membership.
The “ﬁnal hurrah” proved to be a mirage.
Among WisCon 20’s innovators was Ellen Franklin, whose professional
experience negotiating hotel contracts proved instrumental in winning WisCon the opportunity to return to the downtown Concourse Hotel. WisCon’s
new contract also moved WisCon 19 and all subsequent WisCons forward in
time—out of the depths of winter and into a four-day Memorial Day (springtime) weekend. Franklin also used her professional connections at the corporation Wizards of the Coast to secure a major grant for WisCon that paid for
transportation and housing for all returning guests.
Steve Swartz volunteered to create a database for managing a program
more elaborate than any WisCon had ever attempted; attendees of WisCon 20
were able to choose from among 234 programs. Swartz’s efforts laid the
groundwork for WisCon’s signature program schedule, so complex it
resembled a Worldcon’s program. Jane Hawkins worked on a new and even
more elaborate version of the database over the next few years. She completely transformed it and created an interactive online form, on which program participants suggested program ideas, signed up for programs, and
listed their availability and preferences. Program committee members also
interacted with the database, using its vast resources to choose, sort, and ﬁll
programs, avoid schedule and thematic conﬂicts, select appropriate rooms
for programs, and download ﬁnalized data for the pocket program book.
Prior to WisCon 20, programming was generally handled by one or two
people. After it, the online programming database and the huge number of
people who signed up for programs made it possible, and necessary, for a
large committee to run the department; twenty-seven people worked in
297
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

WisCon 30’s programming department. The new electronic programming
process had the advantage of making it possible to involve many more nonlocal attendees in programming, which was especially useful at WisCon 20 with
its record attendance.
It quickly became clear that Guest of Honor Le Guin, Special Guest
Judith Merril, and the twenty-ﬁve returning former guests of honor would
attract more attendees than had ever been registered before. In response, the
concom decided to impose a membership cap of 850 people, fearing that the
committee and hotel might be overwhelmed by larger numbers. The cap was
reached on the ﬁrst day of WisCon 20. At-the-door memberships were cut off
a short time after registration opened. Nearly everyone who asked to participate on programming was placed on panels and the result was a truly exciting program. However, with so many professional writers and academics
signed up, some local WisCon attendees and even some longtime concom
members did not feel welcome or “qualiﬁed” to participate on panels.
After WisCon 20, local fans and concom members no longer dominated
the schedule; in fact, many familiar names disappeared from the program
and the concom altogether. WisCon continued to request program ideas from
all its members and to schedule any attendee that wished to participate on
panels. The ﬁnalized programs were almost entirely the result of a democratic process: Participants essentially “voted” on panels by choosing which
panels they wanted to join; those panels that attracted no interest were
dropped. Nevertheless, the concom frequently needed to dispel mistaken
assumptions that only SF professionals were welcome to participate on programming or that the committee showed favoritism to professionals.
Another change wrought by WisCon 20 was that general concom meetings no longer featured animated discussions of panel ideas; such discussions
and decisions were delegated almost entirely to the programming committee.
While these changes proved helpful in dealing with a larger convention and
more complex program, it is true that some good things were lost as a result
of the changes.
Meg Hamel designed the WisCon 20 pocket program book and formatted it to display the program schedule in three formats: a grid, chronological
text, and indexes, all contained in a compact pocket-size booklet. She titled
the booklet The WisCon 20 Unsurpassed Perfectly Organized Mother-of-All-PocketPocket Program. And it was. Hamel’s pocket program book prototype design
was tweaked over the years but continues to be used years later.
Hope Kiefer ran WisCon 20’s hospitality suite and transformed what
had formerly been a lounge with snacks and beverages into a place where
attendees could relax and eat complete meals, open eighteen hours a day.
Many families and individuals who attended the convention on limited budgets appreciated the savings made possible by Kiefer’s hospitality suite. Almost
all U.S. conventions fund a hospitality suite and stock it with snacks and
298
................

WisCon
beverages that are free to members, but WisCon’s hospitality suite probably
ranks among the best of them in terms of providing a variety of both healthy
and decadent foods and beverages to its members.
Several other ambitious changes were made during or after WisCon 20:
free professional child care services, a kids’ programming room, a writers’
workshop, an academic track, the Gathering (a festival/welcome to WisCon/
tea party), and a thematic reading track were added. Also, a highly detailed
Web page was set up for the convention, and a new electronic newsletter
(eCube) was created. The Concourse Hotel turned over all parlors and sleeping
rooms on the hotel’s sixth ﬂoor to WisCon control for daytime meeting rooms
and evening parties; WisCon’s hotel liaison decided whom to assign sleeping
rooms on that ﬂoor. Moving WisCon to Memorial Day weekend permanently
changed the event from a three-day to a four-day convention, and, after WisCon 20, attendance stabilized to about 750–800 people until WisCon 30, when
it jumped to 1,000. The growth brought the need for more concom members,
but the number of local Madison volunteers dwindled after WisCon 20. Thereafter, more and more concom members were recruited from outside Madison.
Since WisCon 20, the programming department has been chaired by
several out-of-town volunteers. Most members of post–WisCon 20 programming teams have lived outside Madison; several have resided outside the
United States. The writers’ workshop and the Gathering have always been
organized by nonlocals. WisCon 28 in 2004 was chaired by Victor Raymond,
who lived in Iowa. Many other out-of-town volunteers have taken on small
and large responsibilities: editing and designing the WisCon 30 souvenir book,
updating the website, working on the safety staff, writing for the at-con newsletter, helping in the art show, organizing the Tiptree auction, recruiting volunteers, running the “SignOut” (author signing event on Monday morning),
and many other jobs. WisCon as it exists today would not survive without its
far-ﬂung committee.
Developing good communications among such a large and scattered
committee presented a particular challenge. Concom members began communicating more often by email or telephone conferences and less often in
face-to-face meetings. A two-day retreat was held in September 2003 for all
interested WisCon concom members to brainstorm about some of the challenges facing a growing WisCon, including that of communications. Twentyfour people attended.
The decision to limit WisCon 30’s attendance to a thousand and to encourage the establishment of other WisCon-like conventions in other cities
emerged from a long discussion of the implications of WisCon’s growing size.
The attendees afﬁrmed WisCon’s central feminist focus and talked about
ways to strengthen WisCon’s core mission and communicate it to attendees.
They also discussed the frequent and varied perception held by many
299
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

attendees that other attendees have been unfairly privileged. WisCon continues to work on some of these problems.

ACCOMPLISHMENTS
...............................................................................................................................
WisCon has become the gathering place for the feminist SF community and
also for SF professionals and fans interested in issues of gender, sexuality,
race, and class. WisCon’s linkage of two concepts—science ﬁction and social
change—has cultivated a sense of wonder in those who have always thought
that science ﬁction concerned only rocket ships and bug-eyed aliens or that
only teenage boys wanted to read it. In vivid contrast to this myth, WisCon’s
large community of scholars, authors, artists, editors, and readers appreciate
science ﬁction as serious art and literature and believe that science ﬁction
and feminism complement each other. This is the community WisCon serves
so well.
In 1991, former WisCon guests of honor Pat Murphy and Karen Joy
Fowler realized that no award for feminist science ﬁction existed, so they
invented one. WisCon proudly supports the James Tiptree Jr. Award and continues to explore ways to deepen its partnership with the Tiptree motherboard.
In 2000, a writers group decided to capitalize on WisCon’s large community of female science ﬁction writers by inventing the supportive organization it needed: Broad Universe (BU). BU promotes and celebrates writing by
women within science ﬁction, fantasy, and horror and seeks to support both
the women who produce those works and the readers who enjoy them. BU
has become one of WisCon’s major partners.
In 2001, WisCon nurtured the formation of the Carl Brandon Society,
founded speciﬁcally to promote knowledge about works of science ﬁction,
fantasy, horror, and magical realism by people of color. In 2006, the Carl
Brandon Society presented the Parallax Award (recognizing works of speculative ﬁction by writers of color) and the Kindred Award (recognizing works of
speculative ﬁction that explore or expand the conversation on race and
ethnicity).
In 2006, Guests of Honor Jane Yolen and Kate Wilhelm were joined by
thirty-seven former WisCon guests of honor for a gigantic and hugely successful celebration of thirty years of WisCon and feminist SF. The celebration
began on Wednesday, May 24, with a panel discussion on the UW-Madison
campus, hosted by the Center for the Humanities, entitled “A Feminist Utopia
in Madison? Global Communities, Science Fiction and Women.” It ended on
Monday night, May 29, as the ﬁnal party of the weekend wound down. It was
an exhausting, thrilling, once-in-a-lifetime event that included a telephone
interview of Joanna Russ by Samuel Delany, more than a hundred readings by
guests of honor, returning guests and other attending writers, scholarly
papers, amusing panels, contentious discussions, and WisCon’s largest
300
................

WisCon
dessert salon ever, followed by two award ceremonies, the Tiptree and the
Carl Brandon Society’s Parallax and Kindred.
T..............................................................................................................................
HE FUTURE
Several differences between the two largest WisCons cast light upon the
future of WisCon. WisCon 20 was initially conceived as a possible capstone of
the convention’s feminist SF tradition. WisCon 30 was never thought of as any
kind of capping event; it was planned with the assumption that lessons
learned at WisCon 30 (especially lessons of scale) would need to be applied at
future WisCons. The concom assumed that WisCons would continue happening. Furthermore, WisCon 30 actually attracted many more new volunteers
than WisCon 20 did, and it lost fewer to attrition. The high energy levels
exhibited by WisCon 31 planners after completing the exhausting project that
was WisCon 30 seem to predict a dynamic future for the gathering place of
the feminist SF community.
See also chapter 27.
Further Readings
Larbalestier, Justine. The Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2002.
Merrick, Helen, and Tess Williams, eds. Women of Other Worlds: Excursions through Science Fiction and Feminism. Claremont, W.A.: University of Western Australia Press, 1999.
WisCon [online]. Http://www.wiscon.info.

301
................

29

The James Tiptree Jr. Award
DEBBIE NOTKIN

THE James Tiptree Jr. Award was founded in 1991 by Karen Joy Fowler
(author of The Jane Austen Book Club [2004]) and Pat Murphy (author of Nadya
[1996]). The award recognizes the work or works of science ﬁction and fantasy that do the best job of exploring and expanding gender. It is awarded
once in every calendar year. The winners are chosen by a panel of ﬁve
jurors, who in turn are selected by the award’s board of directors (the
“motherboard”). Winners receive $1,000, along with an assortment of other
prizes.
The Tiptree Award has become something of a cause for readers of
feminist science ﬁction. Although the award itself is not expressly feminist,
since it rewards the exploration of gender, nonetheless the Tiptree Award is a
mainstay of the community that gathers around the annual feminist science
ﬁction convention, WisCon. Julie Phillips, author of James Tiptree, Jr.: The Double
Life of Alice Sheldon (2006), the multiple-award-winning biography of the
award’s namesake, embarked on her biographical project after writing an
article for Ms. magazine about the award. She credits her research on the
award, and the questions it raised, with starting her on the ten-year project
that resulted in a National Book Critics Circle Award for best biography. This
publication is perhaps the ﬁnest example of the effects the Tiptree Award has
on the wider world, but it is only one of many.
Murphy and Fowler founded the award when Murphy was guest of
honor at WisCon 15 in Madison, Wisconsin. Fowler had expressed some
annoyance that there were no science ﬁction awards named after women; the
two “founding mothers” immediately set the tone for the Tiptree Award by
somehow deciding that the best way to name an award after a woman was to
name it after “James Tiptree, Jr.,” a woman (Alice Sheldon) who wrote under a
male pseudonym for a variety of reasons. Murphy announced the award during her guest of honor speech.
302
................

The James Tiptree Jr. Award
Both founding mothers say that they never anticipated the level of enthusiasm with which the WisCon audience would greet Murphy’s speech. One
day after the speech, a group of Wisconsin science ﬁction fans began planning not only bake sales but also publications. Murphy asked me (then a consulting editor at Tor Books and now the current chair of the Tiptree Award
motherboard) to be the chair of the ﬁrst panel of jurors (then called “judges”).
The ﬁrst awards were given at WisCon 16 in 1992 and went to Eleanor Arnason for A Woman of the Iron People (1991) and Gwyneth Jones for The White
Queen (1991). Both Arnason and Jones attended the convention.
In the succeeding years, the award evolved in various ways: Murphy
and Fowler created the motherboard to relieve them of some administrative
responsibilities. A 501(c)(3) nonproﬁt corporation, the James Tiptree Literary
Award Council, was established to handle the award’s administration and
ﬁnances and to provide a mechanism for supporters to make tax-deductible
donations. The motherboard developed a mechanism to give “retrospective”
James Tiptree Awards to books published before 1991. The motherboard also
decided to award “fairy godmother awards,” $1,000 checks to writers in the
science ﬁction and fantasy ﬁelds who write about gender and who the motherboard believes will beneﬁt from a small grant to help their work.
The primary fundraising focus shifted from bake sales (although Tiptree bake sales are still a feature at many science ﬁction conventions) to an
extravaganza auction held each year on the Saturday night of WisCon,
emceed by Ellen Klages (author of The Green Glass Sea [2006] and a long-time
member of the motherboard). Other fundraising efforts are also ongoing.
Most recently, the motherboard renamed what had always been called the
“short list” to “honor books” (and short stories) in an attempt to better reﬂect
both the process of selection and the importance of the honored works.
For the ﬁrst few years, the founding mothers invited ﬁve jurors to choose
an award; now, the invitations come from the motherboard. Jurors are a mix of
writers, critics, and readers. Almost all are members of the feminist science ﬁction community, interpreted broadly. Previous winners are often invited to
serve as jurors. The motherboard strives for a mix of gender perspectives,
nationalities, ages, and ethnicities. One person is invited to chair the jury,
which entails monitoring the process, tracking recommendations, meeting
deadlines, and working with the motherboard to resolve issues as they arise.
By intent of the founding mothers, the juries “reinvent” the process every year. They are given the basic guideline: to recognize the work or works of
science ﬁction and fantasy that do the best job of exploring and expanding
gender. Each jury must deﬁne its own concept of that mandate, read a large
selection of nominees, and develop processes for sharing reactions and reaching a ﬁnal decision.
Jurors consider books published in the calendar year before the award
will be given, as well as any books that were left over from the previous jury
303
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

or published in the previous year but not seen. Deliberations are generally
done via email. The winner or winners, and the honor books and stories, are
announced in early March each year. The press release for the winners contains a sampling of juror comments, and a wider range of juror comments
and reactions are posted on the website (www.tiptree.org). Each jury also has
the option of publishing a “long list” of books, perhaps including books that
one juror was enthusiastic about or books with minimal gender content that
jurors really admired.
Once the award winners and honor books are announced, the winners
are invited to attend the annual award ceremony. The motherboard commissions original pieces of art for each winning work, as well as buying chocolate,
and creates an award plaque for each winner. The award ceremony itself
generally consists of a member of the jury reading either comments on the
winning work, the presentation of all of the winner’s gifts (including the
$1,000 check), the crowning of the winner with a ceremonial tiara, an acceptance speech, and a serenade by the Tips, an impromptu group of amateur
singers who sing a silly song somehow related to the work or the author.
In 1998, Edgewood Press published an anthology of Tiptree-award
short-listed ﬁction, Flying Cups and Saucers: Gender Explorations in Science Fiction
and Fantasy, edited by “Debbie Notkin and the Secret Feminist Cabal.” In 2005,
Tachyon Publications began producing an annual anthology, The James Tiptree
Award Anthology. With a somewhat larger reach than the initial anthology,
these annual volumes (edited by Fowler, Murphy, Jeffrey D. Smith, and myself)
include excerpts from the most recent winning novels, recent honor-listed
short stories, short stories that were honor-listed from earlier years, and nonﬁction that either is related to the award’s gender focus or conforms to
themes that arise as the anthology is put together. At this writing, three
Tachyon anthologies are available. Tachyon and the Tiptree motherboard are
currently reinventing the anthology; a fourth book in the current series will
not be published.
Bake sales around the world continue to be a source of funds for the
award, but they have long been eclipsed in prominence by the annual experience that is the Tiptree Auction. Showcased on the Saturday evening of each
WisCon for the past decade and more, the auction features auctioneer Klages
doing a mix of sales pitch, stand-up comedy, and audience participation. The
entire feminist science ﬁction community gets into the act, creating clever
auction items (both goods and services) as well as being purchasers. Auction
items range from the collectible to the bizarre: an annotated reference work
from Tiptree/Sheldon’s library might be sold immediately before a knitted
uterus and followed by a jar of Tiptree marmalade or a high-end handmade
quilted jacket.
Other fundraising efforts include two cookbooks: The Bakery Men Don’t
See and Her Smoke Rose Up from Supper. Both titles are parodies of titles of
304
................

The James Tiptree Jr. Award
James Tiptree Jr. short stories (“The Women Men Don’t See” and “Her Smoke
Rose Up Forever”). Khatru: Symposium on Women in Science Fiction, originally
edited by motherboard member Jeffrey D. Smith in 1975, was republished in
1993, with additional material, by the 1993 Corﬂu committee. Corﬂu is an annual convention of science ﬁction fans who care about and produce paper
fanzines. Copies of this publication continue to be sold for beneﬁt of the Tiptree Award.
The Tiptree Award art quilt, a superb art quilt designed by Jeanne
Gomoll and Tracy Benton and created by dozens of quilters was originally
conceived as a fundraiser. The ﬁnished quilt was unveiled at WisCon 30 in
2006 and will probably eventually ﬁnd a place in a science ﬁction or women’s
history museum.
The Retrospective Tiptree Awards were presented in 1996 to acknowledge
the award’s ﬁfth anniversary. They were administered by the two founding
mothers and me. The winners were nominated by polling everyone who had
been a juror up to that point, and then the winners were selected by a vote of
the same group. The result was eighteen honor works, and three winners (two
of which were combined by the administrators before voting). The retrospective
award winners are listed in the Winners List at the end of this chapter.
In 1997, the Tiptree jury named fantasy and science ﬁction author
Angela Carter (1940–1992) to receive a special lifetime achievement award of
appreciation. Gender issues suffuse everything written by Carter, author of
The Bloody Chamber (1979) and Black Venus (1980). Her stunningly varied body
of work offers profoundly original ideas to the genre.
The Fairy Godmother Award was announced in 1997. For the very ﬁrst
Fairy Godmother Award, the founding mothers created a special jury to
review candidates. After the ﬁrst award, however, the founding mothers, and
later the motherboard, decided to handle all Fairy Godmother Awards independently. Recipients are conﬁdential, except for a public Fairy Godmother
Award to allow Freddie Baer, artist for all Tiptree T-shirts and aprons, to
attend the World Science Fiction Convention in Australia. Most Fairy Godmother Awards function as “mini mini mini MacArthur ‘genius grants’” to
writers in need of a lift to their professional career. One or two of these
awards are given out in most years, consisting of a $1,000 check with a note
that says “The Fairy Godmother strikes without warning.” Amusingly enough
for the Tiptree Award, the name of the Fairy Godmother Award references a
Robert A. Heinlein novel (Glory Road, 1963), whose protagonist ironically
claims that military bureaucracies can be described as having three departments: the Surprise Party Department, the Practical Joke Department, and
the very small Fairy Godmother Department.
The Tiptree Award owes not only its continued existence but also its
ﬁnancial stability and signiﬁcant volunteer base to the energy and enthusiasm
of feminist science ﬁction fans around the world.
305
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

W I N N E R S O F T H E T I P T R E E AWA R D
...............................................................................................................................
2006
Shelley Jackson, Half-Life
Catherynne M. Valente: The Orphan’s Tales: In the Night Garden
Special Award: Julie Phillips, Alice Sheldon: The Double Life of James Tiptree, Jr.
(nonﬁction)

2005
Geoff Ryman, Air

2004
Joe Haldeman, Camouﬂage
Joanna Sinisalo, Troll: A Love Story (originally published in Finnish; title in
Britain: Not before Sundown)

2003
Matt Ruff, Set This House in Order: A Romance of Souls

2002
M. John Harrison, Light
John Kessel, “Stories for Men”

2001
Hiromi Goto, The Kappa Child

2000
Molly Gloss, Wild Life

1999
Suzy McKee Charnas, The Conqueror’s Child

1998
Raphael Carter, “Congenital Agenesis of Gender Ideation”

1997
Candas Jane Dorsey, Black Wine
Kelly Link, “Travels with the Snow Queen”
306
................

The James Tiptree Jr. Award
1996
Ursula K. Le Guin, “Mountain Ways”
Mary Doria Russell, The Sparrow

1995
Elizabeth Hand, Waking the Moon

1994
Ursula K. Le Guin, “The Matter of Seggri”
Nancy Springer, Larque on the Wing

1993
Nicola Grifﬁth, Ammonite

1992
Maureen McHugh, China Mountain Zhang

1991
Eleanor Arnason, A Woman of the Iron People
Gwyneth Jones, The White Queen

Retrospective Award Winners
Suzy McKee Charnas, Walk to the End of the World (1974) and Motherlines (1978)
(two sequential novels treated as one work)
Ursula K. Le Guin, The Left Hand of Darkness (1969)
Joanna Russ, “When It Changed” (1972) and The Female Man (1975) (two works
in the same universe treated as one work)

307
................

This page intentionally left blank

About

the Editor and

Contributors

Robin Anne Reid is a professor of literature and languages at
Texas A&M University–Commerce. She teaches creative writing,
critical theory, and new media. Her scholarship includes past work
on gender and race in feminist science ﬁction and current work on
fan ﬁction, J. R. R. Tolkien, and ﬁlm adaptation. She is the second
vice president of the International Association of the Fantastic in
the Arts and the organizer of Tolkien at Kalamazoo. She is active
in online Lord of the Rings fandom in LiveJournal.
Douglas A. Anderson is an independent scholar. He has published
widely on the works of J. R. R. Tolkien and is a founding coeditor of
Tolkien Studies: An Annual Scholarly Review. His Annotated Hobbit
(1988, revised and enlarged 2002) won the Mythopoeic Scholarship
Award.
Sarah A. Appleton is a professor of American and women’s literature at Murray State University in Kentucky and codirector of the
Multicultural, Class, and Gender Studies Program. She has written
numerous articles and is the author of The Bitch Is Back: Wicked
Women in Literature (2001). She is also the coeditor of He Said, She
Says: An RSVP to the Male Text (2001).
Sara Scott Armengot is a Ph.D. candidate in comparative literature at Pennsylvania State University. Her area of specialization is
contemporary inter-American literature.
Geetha B. is an assistant professor at Birla Institute of Technology
and Science, Pilani, India, where she teaches courses in Communication, Appreciation of Literature, and Films. Her doctoral thesis is
on the thematic concerns in Arthur C. Clarke’s science ﬁction, and
her research interests include the interfaces between science ﬁction, philosophy, and existential literature. She won the Science
Fiction Foundation Bursary for 2005. Her published works include
articles in journals and poems in different anthologies.
Anne Bahringer studied magical realism during her time at the
University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee in the Master of Foreign Language and Literature program. As a ﬁction writer, she incorporates
magical realism into her writing and is currently working on critical essays about magical realist works for publication.
309
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Ellen Baier, a 2004 graduate of Franklin and Marshall College, is a
writer and independent scholar who spends her days working as
an investment analyst. She has also contributed to Home Front Heroes and Customs and Cultures of the United States, edited by Benjamin
F. Shearer (Greenwood Press). She lives in Vermont with her
husband.
Neal Baker is a librarian at Earlham College. His articles on science ﬁction have appeared in such venues as Contemporary French
Civilization, Extrapolation, Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts, and
Quebec Studies.
Iva Balic is an associate professor of English and literature at Palm
Beach Community College in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida. She is
completing her dissertation on feminist utopias at the turn of the
twentieth century at the University of North Texas in Denton.
Amelia Beamer is an independent scholar specializing in the pulp
science ﬁction magazines. She is an assistant editor at Locus magazine, where she also writes reviews.
Candace R. Beneﬁel is an associate professor in the Texas A&M
University Libraries. She has written on vampires in literature and
numerous topics in librarianship and has published poetry in journals such as Concho River Review, Borderlands, and Classical Outlook.
She is the coeditor of the volume The Image and Role of the Librarian
(2003).
Janice M. Bogstad is a professor and head of Collection Development at the McIntyre Library, University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire,
and also teaches women’s studies and English. In the last twentyﬁve years, she has written more than a hundred articles for reference books, as well as essays and book chapters on science ﬁction,
women’s studies, literature, children’s literature, poetry, and Chinese history. Presently she reviews science ﬁction and fantasy for
Publishers Weekly. She also reviews ﬁction and critical theory for
SFRA Review, Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts, Extrapolation, Medieval
Feminist Forum, and Femspec, among others. One of the founders of
WisCon, the world’s largest feminist science ﬁction and fantasy
conference, held annually in Madison, Wisconsin, she is the former editor of Janus and New Moon and current managing editor of
SFRA Review.
Bernadette Lynn Bosky has published encyclopedia articles for
Salem Press, Scribner’s, and other publishers, as well as personal
essays and popular articles for Gnosis magazine, Crossing Press,
and Das Stephen King Buch (Germany). Her literary criticism has
been published in both academic and popular collections, and she
is a book reviewer for Publishers Weekly. She has taught at Duke
University; the College Transfer Program at Durham Technical
Community College in Durham, North Carolina; and the School of
310
................

About the Editor and Contributors
Excellence in Hartsdale, New York. She has an M.A. in English
from Duke.
Sarah Boslaugh is a senior statistical data analyst in the Department of Pediatrics at Washington University in Saint Louis, Missouri. She has published a number of technical and professional
articles and books and is the editor of The Encyclopedia of Epidemiology (2007). Her current research concerns how neurodiverse people
are creating a community for themselves on the Internet.
Karen Bruce has an M.A. in English from the University of
Kwazulu-Natal, South Africa. Her thesis and scholarship focuses
on science ﬁction written by women during the decades of Second
Wave feminism and how it informed and was informed by the
political and theoretical context of the time.
Charlene Brusso is a freelance writer and science ﬁction/fantasy
author living in Pepperell, Maine.
Alyson R. Buckman is an associate professor of humanities and
religious studies at California State University, Sacramento. Her
degrees, research focuses, and teaching interests are in American
studies, with special emphasis on literature, multiculturalism,
popular culture, media, and women’s studies. Her publications
and presentations include work on Octavia Butler, Marge Piercy,
Alice Walker, Meridel Le Sueur, and Joss Whedon.
Kristina Busse has a Ph.D. in English from Tulane University and
teaches in the Department of Philosophy at the University of South
Alabama. She is coeditor, with Karen Hellekson, of Fan Fiction and
Fan Communities in the Age of the Internet (2006) and has published a
variety of essays on fan ﬁction and fan culture. She is founding
editor with Hellekson of Transformative Works and Cultures and is
currently coauthoring a book-length study on fan artifacts and
new media. She has been an active media fan for a decade.
Edward Carmien is an author and editor of ﬁction and nonﬁction
and an academic with a long-standing interest in science ﬁction,
fantasy, and other fantastic literature. He is an associate professor
of English at Mercer County Community College of New Jersey,
where he teaches science ﬁction and other subjects. Editor of The
Cherryh Odyssey, he is an active member of the Science Fiction and
Fantasy Writers of America and the Science Fiction Research
Association.
Patricia Castelli has an MLS from Emporia State University and is
children’s librarian at the Orem (Utah) Public Library. She is a
board member of the Children’s Literature Association of Utah and
a regular speaker at Utah Valley State College’s annual Forum on
Children’s Literature and Brigham Young University’s annual symposium of science ﬁction and fantasy.
311
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Francesca Coppa is director of ﬁlm studies and an associate professor of English at Muhlenberg College in Allentown, Pennsylvania, where she teaches dramatic literature and performance
studies. She is currently coediting a book on stage magic and has
recently contributed two essays to Fan Fiction and Fan Communities
in the Age of the Internet (2006).
Casey Cothran is a lecturer at Winthrop University in Rock Hill,
South Carolina. Her publications focus on New Woman writers as
well as the presentation of disability in the works of Victorian
detective novelist Wilkie Collins.
Janice C. Crosby is a professor of English at Southern University in
Baton Rouge. Her publications include Cauldron of Changes: Feminist
Spirituality in Fantastic Fiction (2000), along with articles on feminist
spirituality, science ﬁction and fantasy, race, dance, and William
Faulkner.
Eric Leif Davin, Ph.D., teaches at the University of Pittsburgh. He is
the author of Pioneers of Wonder: Conversations with the Founders of
Science Fiction (1999) and Partners in Wonder: Women and the Birth of
Science Fiction, 1926–1960 (2006).
Neil Easterbrook teaches literary theory and comparative literature at Texas Christian University. He has published widely on
matters related to modern science ﬁction, including essays on
Stanislaw Lem, Philip K. Dick, Italo Calvino, Ursula K. Le Guin,
William Gibson, Robert A. Heinlein, Samuel R. Delany, and many
others.
Winter Elliott is an assistant professor of English at Brenau University in Gainesville, Georgia. She holds a Ph.D. in English literature from the University of Georgia and teaches medieval and
early modern British and contemporary multicultural literature
courses, often focusing on the intersections between gender, race,
and identity. She has presented at numerous conferences and has
published on medieval and speculative ﬁction topics. She is a
member of the Modern Language Association, Popular Culture
Association, and International Association of the Fantastic in the
Arts.
Heike Endter studied art history and is writing her doctoral thesis
on economic utopias in science ﬁction ﬁlms. She is an art critic
and works for an art gallery in Munich, Germany.
Kate Falvey holds a Ph.D. in English and American literature from
New York University, where she taught for many years. She currently teaches at the New York City College of Technology of the
City University of New York. She has published articles on women
writers such as Grace King and Sui Sin Far, numerous essays for a
variety of academic reference guides, poetry, and works for
children.
312
................

About the Editor and Contributors
Maria Aline Seabra Ferreira is an associate professor at the University of Aveiro, Portugal, where she teaches English literature.
Her main interests include women’s studies, feminine utopias, and
the intersections between literature and science and between literature and the visual arts. Her book I Am the Other: Literary Negotiations of Human Cloning was published by Greenwood Press in 2005.
Recent publications include articles on feminist utopias, eugenics,
and biotechnological dystopias.
Jason Fisher, from Dallas, Texas, is an independent scholar of language and literature, specializing in J. R. R. Tolkien and the Inklings. Most recently, he contributed a series of entries to The J. R. R.
Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment (2006) and a
chapter on free will for Tolkien and Modernity (2006). He is currently
working on a chapter for The Silmarillion: Thirty Years On (2007).
Michele Fry received an English and history degree at the University of Gloucestershire. She now lives in Oxford and is an independent scholar. She blogs at http://scholar-blog.blogspot.com,
mostly with reviews of fantasy ﬁction and occasionally fantasy
ﬁlms. Her publications include “The Wizards of Juliet E. McKenna
and Lynn Flewelling” (Masters of Magic: Essays on Wizards in Western
Culture, forthcoming), “Tolkien and Oxford” and “The Vale of White
Horse” (The J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment, 2006), and “Heroes and Heroines: Myth and Gender Roles in
the Harry Potter Books” (The New Review of Children’s Literature and
Librarianship, 2001).
Ximena Gallardo C. is an assistant professor at the City University
of New York–LaGuardia. She has written and presented widely on
issues of representation in popular culture and is coauthor of Alien
Woman: The Making of Lt. Ellen Ripley (2004), which won the 2005
Ray and Pat Browne Popular Culture Association National Book
Award. She is currently working on a comprehensive study of
women, embodiment, and gender in science ﬁction cinema.
Lyn C. A. Gardner is a librarian at the Hampton (Virginia) Public
Library and a freelance writer and editor whose work has appeared
in such venues as The Doom of Camelot (2000), the Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts, Leading Edge, Strange Horizons, and Talebones. Three
pieces earned honorable mention in The Year’s Best Fantasy and Horror. In 2004, Gardner attended the Clarion West Writers’ Workshop.
John Garrison is a Ph.D. student at the University of California,
Davis, and a staff member of the speculative ﬁction magazine
Strange Horizons. His work investigates the interplay among social
power, gender, and economics, as well as the role of the fantastic
in both early modern and twentieth-century literature. His scholarly work appears in a variety of publications, including Phoebe, the
Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts, DoubleTake, and Postmodern Culture.
313
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Lila Garrott-Wejksnora’s ﬁction has appeared in Not One of Us and
Cabinet des Fees. Her poetry has appeared in Jabberwocky, and her
criticism at the Internet Review of Science Fiction. She has been nominated for the Pushcart Prize and the British Science Fiction Association Award in the short story category.
Susan A. George holds a doctorate in cultural studies and feminist
theory from the University of California, Davis. She has taught a
range of courses, including advanced classes in media and ﬁlm
theory, feminist theory, and composition. Focusing on gender construction in science ﬁction ﬁlm and television, her work has
appeared in the Journal of Popular Film and Television, Post Script,
SFRA Review, and Reconstruction and in several anthologies, including Fantastic Odysseys (2003), No Cure for the Future: Disease and Medicine in Science Fiction and Fantasy (2002), and Space and Beyond: The
Frontier Myth in Science Fiction (2000). An essay on the new Battlestar
Galactica is forthcoming in the University Press of Kentucky’s
Essential Readers in Television series. She serves as the division
head of ﬁlm and media of the International Conference for the
Fantastic in the Arts and was recently asked to join the editorial
board of a new academic journal, Science Fiction Film and Television,
from the University of Liverpool Press.
Jeanne G’Fellers is a graduate student in English at East Tennessee
State University. She also writes science ﬁction.
Stacy Gillis is a lecturer in modern and contemporary literature at
Newcastle University in the United Kingdom. The editor of The
Matrix Trilogy: Cyberpunk Reloaded (2005) and coeditor of Third Wave
Feminism: A Critical Exploration (rev. ed., 2007), she is also the author
of The Edinburgh Critical Guide to Crime Fiction (2008). Her research
interests include cyberpunk and cybertheory, feminist theory, and
detective ﬁction.
Jeanne Gomoll ﬁrst joined the Madison Science Fiction Group in
1974, the ﬁrst year of its existence, and was instrumental in developing the group’s reputation as a promoter of feminist SF through
its publications and convention, WisCon. She received several
Hugo nominations as both a fan artist and editor, primarily for her
work on Janus, and later Aurora, both feminist SF fanzines. She has
been involved in planning every WisCon since the ﬁrst WisCon in
1977, including the legendary WisCon 20 and 30, which she
chaired. Pat Murphy inspired Jeanne to join the Tiptree juggernaut
in 1991 with her Guest of Honor speech at WisCon 15. Subsequently, Jeanne designed and published the Tiptree cookbooks (The
Bakery Men Don’t See and Her Smoke Rose up from Supper) and she
chaired the 1992 Tiptree Award Jury. Currently, Jeanne serves as a
member of the Tiptree Motherboard. In real life, she makes her living as an artist and owns the graphic design company, Union
Street Design, LLC.
314
................

About the Editor and Contributors
Dominick Grace is an associate professor of English at Brescia University College in London, Ontario. He teaches medieval and Renaissance literature but has wide research interests. He has
published or presented papers on Chaucer, Shakespeare, Robert
Browning, Tolkien, Michael Ondaatje, Margaret Atwood, William
Gibson, David Cronenberg, Phyllis Gotlieb, and others.
Scott Green has been active as a poet in the science ﬁction, fantasy, and horror genres for more than thirty years. He is the author
of Contemporary Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Poetry: A Resource
Guide and Biographical Directory (1989). He has chaired panels on
poetry both at Worldcons and regional cons. He is a past president
of the Science Fiction Poetry Association and the author of three
poetry collections, the most recent being Pulp (2004).
Susan Marie Groppi is a historian, writer, and editor. She received
a Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley, in 2006 and
teaches undergraduate history of science classes there. She is also
the editor-in-chief of Strange Horizons, an online science ﬁction
magazine, and was a World Fantasy Award nominee in 2007.
Alfred E. Guy Jr. is R.W.B. Lewis Director of the Yale College Writing Center. His science ﬁction scholarship examines post-1990 conﬁgurations of American feminism in the works of Patricia Anthony,
Octavia Butler, and Maureen McHugh, among others. He has also
written frequently on the relationships among writing, learning,
and intellectual development.
Karen Hall earned her Ph.D. in the discipline of English, communication and cultural studies at the University of Western Australia.
Her thesis examines the construction and negotiations of the
boundaries of the genre of science ﬁction through a focus on lostrace and lost-world stories, primarily those by women writers.
Erin Harde has an M.A. in communications from the University of
Western Ontario and has published on Second and Third Wave
feminism (an essay in Catching a Wave [2003], cowritten with
Roxanne Harde) and on gender in the work of Radiohead.
Roxanne Harde is an assistant professor of English at the University of Alberta–Augustana. She researches American women’s writing using approaches from feminist cultural studies. Her work has
appeared in several journals, including Christianity and Literature,
Legacy, Studies in Puritan American Spirituality, Critique, Feminist Theology, and Mosaic and in several edited collections.
Alexis Hart is an assistant professor of English at the Virginia Military Institute. Her research and teaching interests include computers and writing, technical writing, and science ﬁction as
literature.
Maryelizabeth Hart is a co-owner of Mysterious Galaxy, a specialty
genre bookstore in San Diego. Her duties for the store include
315
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

composing and editing the store newsletter. She has also contributed to several nonﬁction works on popular culture.
Jason Haslam is an assistant professor at Dalhousie University in
Halifax, Nova Scotia, where he teaches, among other courses, a
full-year undergraduate science ﬁction course. His scholarship is
in science ﬁction, especially in terms of critical gender and race
studies. His work bridges the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
as well as literary, ﬁlm, and television studies. He is currently focusing on Octavia Butler’s science ﬁction, as well as analyses of
gender and race in ﬁlm and television, including Joss Whedon’s
oeuvre.
Holly Hassel is an assistant professor of English and women’s
studies at the University of Wisconsin–Marathon County. She conducts research and publishes in the areas of twentieth-century
American women’s literature, scholarship of teaching and learning
in the literature classroom, popular culture and ﬁlm studies, and
feminist pedagogy.
Donald M. Hassler has taught at Kent State University in Ohio for
more than three decades. He has been editor and now executive
editor of the journal Extrapolation, which deals with science ﬁction,
since 1990. His current projects include work on Nancy Kress. He
coedited Political Science Fiction (1997) with Clyde Wilcox.
K. Stoddard Hayes has published hundreds of articles on genre
television, mainly in popular magazines, with a concentration on
themes, characters, and series mythology. The author of “Xena:
Warrior Princess”: The Complete Illustrated Companion (2003), she has
also contributed to anthologies and reference works in the ﬁeld.
Liz Henry has published poems, translations, stories, and articles
in Lodestar Quarterly, Xantippe, Poetry Flash, Two Lines, Cipactli, caesura, other, Literary Mama, Convergence, Fantastic Metropolis, and
Strange Horizons. She blogs about feminism, writing, and technology
at http://liz-henry.blogspot.com and is a cofounder of feministsf.net
and member of the Secret Feminist Cabal.
David M. Higgins is an associate instructor of American studies at
Indiana University, Bloomington. His research focuses on New
Wave science ﬁction in relation to postmodernism and imperialism. He is also an articles editor for Strange Horizons.
Christine Hilger is a doctoral student at Texas Woman’s University
and has more than twenty published articles in volumes such as
The Compendium of Twentieth Century Novels and Novelists, The Dictionary of Literary Biography, Facts on File, The Encyclopedia of Modern
Drama, The Encyclopedia of Ethnic Literature, and several others.
Arthur D. Hlavaty has been active in fandom since his ﬁrst con in
1977. He has written for a number of APAs (amateur press associations) and has also published articles for Salem Press and in the
316
................

About the Editor and Contributors
St. James guides, Supernatural Fantasy Writers, The Encyclopedia of
Fantasy and Science Fiction Literature, The Westerﬁlk Collection, the New
York Review of Science Fiction, Fantasy Review, Megavore, Libertarian
Review, Mythologies, Janus, Mimosa, Drood Review, and others.
Erica Hoagland teaches English at Mercyhurst College in Erie,
Pennsylvania. She has also taught at Purdue University, including
the Science Fiction and Fantasy class. Her scholarship deals
mainly with world literature. She also presents on science ﬁction
and is the faculty mentor for the science ﬁction/fantasy club at
Mercyhurst.
Yolanda Hood has her Ph.D. in English, with an emphasis in African American literature and folklore, from the University of Missouri. She is an assistant professor and Youth Collection librarian
at Rod Library at the University of Northern Iowa. She researches
and publishes in the areas of folklore/material culture, science
ﬁction/fantasy, and children’s/young adult literatures. She is the
coeditor (with Gwendolyn Pough) of the November 2005 special
issue of Femspec, “Speculative Black Women: Magic, Fantasy, and
The Supernatural.” She has presented on speculative ﬁction, black
feminism, and separatist communities in Toni Morrison’s Paradise.
Ann F. Howey is an assistant professor in the Department of English Language and Literature at Brock University, St. Catharines,
Ontario. Her Rewriting the Women of Camelot (2001) studies the intersection of the conventions of popular ﬁction with the discourses of
feminism in contemporary Arthurian fantasy novels and short stories by women writers. She has also published articles on fantasy
and children’s literature and has coauthored, with Stephen R.
Reimer, A Bibliography of Modern Arthuriana (2007).
Kellie M. Hultgren is a freelance editor and writer in Minneapolis,
Minnesota. She is currently researching women’s issues in publishing, especially genre ﬁction, in the Master of Liberal Studies program at Hamline University in St. Paul, Minnesota.
Ian Q. Hunter is the subject/program leader and principal lecturer
in Film Studies in Humanities, Media and Cultural Production at
De Montfort University, Leicester, England. He received his D.Phil.
from Oxford University and has published a monograph and coedited seven anthologies on media, ﬁlm, and trash cinema. He has
organized Slash Fiction Study Days at De Montfort for three years.
He is the author of British Science Fiction Cinema (1999) as well as a
number of journal articles and book chapters.
Kathryn Jacobs is a medievalist and poet with a Ph.D. from Harvard University, teaching in the Department of Literature and Languages at Texas A&M University–Commerce. She regularly teaches
an upper-level literature class on Harry Potter and is considering
developing a graduate course. Her book Marriage Contracts from
Chaucer to the Renaissance Stage was published by the University
317
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Press of Florida in 2001, and her poetry chapbook, Advice Column, is
forthcoming from Finishing Line Press. Roughly four dozen of her
poems have appeared in poetry journals in the United States and
the United Kingdom, among them The New Formalist, Measure, Acumen, Eclectic Muse, and Slant. She has also published sixteen articles
in such journals as Chaucer Review and Mediaevalia.
Paula Johanson writes and edits nonﬁction books, including Recipe
for Disaster: Processed Food and HIV and AIDS: Coping in a Changing
World. Bundoran Press released her novel Tower in the Crooked Wood
in 2008. She has been nominated twice for the national Prix Aurora
Award for Canadian Science Fiction.
Deborah Kaplan has an M.A. in children’s literature and an M.S. in
library and information science, both from the Simmons College
Center for the Study of Children’s Literature. She has published on
children’s literature, including about Diana Wynne Jones, and has
begun to include work on popular literature and fan ﬁction, with a
focus on gender and sexuality.
€ lische WilhelmsOlaf Keith earned his M.A. from the Westfa
€ t in Mu
€ nster, Germany, with his thesis “The Return of
Universita
the Kings: The Motif of the Hidden Monarch in Tolkien’s The Lord of
the Rings and Tad Williams’ Memory, Sorrow and Thorn.” He is currently researching a monograph on Tad Williams.
€
Mine Ozyurt
Kilic¸ is an instructor of English literature at Bilkent
University, Turkey. She has published on Jeanette Winterson,
Angela Carter, and the New Woman. She also writes reviews on
contemporary British novelists.
Eden Lee Lackner, M.A., is an independent scholar from Calgary,
Alberta. Her areas of study include nineteenth-century literature,
speculative ﬁction, and media and fandom studies. She has published on the latter with cowriters Barbara Lynn Lucas and Robin
Anne Reid in an article entitled “Cunning Linguists: The Bisexual
Erotics of Words/Silence/Flesh,” in Fan Fiction and Fan Communities in
the Age of the Internet (2006). She is a lifelong fan and has been
active in anime and manga fandoms since 1998.
Michelle LaFrance is a doctoral candidate in English at the University of Washington. Her dissertation research concerns the disciplinary nature of “writing about literature” and how the composition/
literature split within English departments impacts notions of writing about literature. In her free time, she reads alternative comics.
Her favorites include Julie Doucet, Dame Darcey, and Serena
Valentino.
Isiah Lavender III is an assistant professor of English at the University of Central Arkansas. His scholarship examines intersections of race and ethnicity in science ﬁction.
318
................

About the Editor and Contributors
Sandra J. Lindow lives in Menomonie, Wisconsin, where she
teaches part-time, edits manuscripts, writes poetry and reviews,
and has written most of a book on moral development in the ﬁction of Ursula K. Le Guin. She has ﬁve published books of poetry
and has won numerous awards, including the 1990 Posner Award
for best poetry collection by a Wisconsin writer and the 2004 CWW
Jade Ring for Poetry.
Susan Urbanek Linville has a Ph.D. in biology and works at the
Center for the Integrative Study of Animal Behavior, Indiana University, Bloomington. She has sold several science ﬁction and fantasy stories to publications such as Marion Zimmer Bradley’s Sword
and Sorceress anthologies and On Spec magazine. She has been a science writer for the WonderLab, a children’s science and technology
museum, and has written newspaper articles and published
articles on women in science ﬁction.
Elizabeth D. Lloyd-Kimbrel is the assistant to the vice president
for enrollment and college relations at Mount Holyoke College as
well as a freelance editor and writer. She did graduate and postgraduate work in English literature and medieval studies at Oxford
University, McGill University, the University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, and the University of York (UK). She has published
poetry and criticism in several literary and scholarly journals; her
biographical essays and briefs appear in numerous reference texts;
and she also serves on the advisory board of Paris Press of Ashﬁeld,
Massachusetts.
Alexis Lothian is a Ph.D. student in the Department of English at
the University of Southern California, where she specializes in
queer theory and feminist science ﬁction. She graduated from the
University of Sussex’s M.A. program in Sexual Dissidence and Cultural Change in 2005 with the thesis “Science Fiction in Queer
Space/Time: Samuel R. Delany and the Futures of Desire.” Her
recent work has focused on the gender, race, and sexual politics of
science ﬁction and online fan cultures, and she has published on
feminist and queer science ﬁction as well as queer aspects of
media fandom.
Rosaleen Love is an honorary research associate in the English
Departments at Monash and La Trobe universities, Melbourne,
Australia. She has published three collections of science ﬁction
short stories, the most recent being The Travelling Tide (Aqueduct
Press, 2005).
Barbara Lynn Lucas holds an M.A. in English from Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio. She is a member of the Science Fiction Poetry Association and Broad Universe and a division
head for the International Association for the Fantastic in the Arts.
She lives within walking distance of Lake Erie and is owned by a
very possessive dachshund.
319
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

Catherine Lundoff is the author of two collections of short ﬁction,
Night’s Kiss (Torquere Press) and Crave (Lethe Press), as well as various short stories and articles. She has interviewed Melissa Scott
for Queue Press (2003) and the SpecFicMe newsletter (January 2004).
Esther MacCallum-Stewart, of the University of Sussex, United
Kingdom, specializes in the representation of war in popular culture and science ﬁction.
Christine Mains is a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Calgary,
writing a dissertation on the signiﬁcance of knowledge-power in
fantasy and popular culture. Her M.A. thesis focused on the quest
of the female hero in the works of Patricia McKillip; she has also
published on Charles de Lint, Joan D. Vinge, and more recently, science ﬁction television. She is the vice president of the International Association for the Fantastic in the Arts.
Darja Malcolm-Clarke is a doctoral student at Indiana University
studying speculative ﬁction and feminist critical theory. Her
research focuses on gendered embodiment in fantasy and science
ﬁction. In 2006, she won the International Association for the Fantastic in the Arts Graduate Student Award for a paper on grotesque
bodies and urban space in New Weird texts, presented at the 27th
annual International Conference for the Fantastic of the Arts.
Marjorie Cohee Manifold is an assistant professor of art education
in the Department of Curriculum and Instruction, School of Education, Indiana University, Bloomington. Her research focuses on the
role of aesthetic experiences in learning, with particular interest in
the socio- aesthetic activities of youths who engage in online communities (fandoms) based on their interests in pop culture phenomena. She has published many book chapters and articles in
prestigious academic journals, including the Journal of Art Education, Visual Arts Research, the Journal of Cultural Research in Art Education, and the Journal of Social Theory in Art Education.
Anita K. McDaniel is an assistant professor of interpersonal communication at the University of North Carolina–Wilmington, where
she teaches in the Department of Communication Studies. For the
last ten years, she has presented papers at national conferences
and published in an international journal on the intertextual play
between the visual and written texts represented in comic books.
Her most recent publication, “Dave Sim on Guys,” appeared in the
International Journal of Comic Art (2005).
Theresa McGarry is a linguist in the English Department at East
Tennessee State University, specializing in sociolinguistics and
second-language acquisition. Her interests include gender and
language, the linguistic analysis of literature, language ideology
in second-language teaching materials, and the acquisition of
second-language pragmatics. She is currently working on a
320
................

About the Editor and Contributors
multimedia curriculum for instruction in basic Sinhala with Liyanage Amarakeerthi.
Richard L. McKinney is American-born but has lived in Sweden
since 1968. He was student counselor and division librarian at the
Human Ecology Division, Lund University, until his retirement in
2002. He has read, studied, lectured on, and written about science
ﬁction for most of his adult life. In 2004–05, he contributed to the
ﬁfth edition of Anatomy of Wonder (ed. Neil Barron) and The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy (ed. Gary Westfahl).
He is currently afﬁliated with the Center for Languages and Literature, Lund University, where he is working on a doctoral thesis tentatively entitled “Encountering Other Worlds in Popular Fiction.”
Alice Mills is an associate professor of literature and children’s literature at the University of Ballarat, Victoria, Australia. Her most
recent book is Stuckness in the Fiction of Mervyn Peake (2005).
Dunja M. Mohr is an assistant professor at the University of Erfurt
in Germany. She has written extensively on female utopias and
dystopias, transgression and transdifference, and gender and postcolonial issues. Her doctoral thesis, published as Worlds Apart?
Dualism and Transgression in Contemporary Female Dystopias (2005),
won the Margaret Atwood Best Doctoral Thesis Award in 2004.
Rebecca Munford is a lecturer in twentieth- and twenty-ﬁrstcentury literature at the University of Exeter, United Kingdom. The
editor of Re-visiting Angela Carter: Texts, Contexts and Intertexts (2006)
and the coeditor of Third Wave Feminism: A Critical Exploration
(2004), her forthcoming work includes Decadent Daughters and Monstrous Mothers: Angela Carter and the European Gothic (2008) and, with
Stacy Gillis, Feminism and Popular Culture: Readings in Post-feminism
(2007).
Debbie Notkin is the chair of the Tiptree Award motherboard,
which oversees all award activity. She is currently a contracts
manager at a large nonﬁction publishing company. She has been
an acquisitions editor for science ﬁction and fantasy at Tor Books
and other publishers, a copyeditor, a freelance editor, and a genre
bookseller. She has chaired one WisCon and volunteered for many
others. She is also the author of the texts for two books of photographs by Laurie Toby Edison. She blogs regularly on body image
at Body Impolitic (www.laurietobyedison.com/discuss).
Marı´a Ochoa, PhD, is a writer currently working on the co-edited
collection Succotash: critical reﬂections on the 2008 Presidential campaigns. Her books include: Shout Out: Women of Color Respond to Violence, an anthology co-edited with Dr. Barbara K. Ige; Voices of
Russell City: Life in a Rural California Town; Creative Collectives: Chicana
Painters Working in Community, as well as numerous essays, articles,
and lectures. She is the producer/director of Voices of Russell City, a
social documentary ﬁlm short that accompanies her book of the
321
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

same name. In recognition for her “contributions to the arts,” the
California State Assembly honored her as a Woman of the Year in
1999.
Kelly A. O’Connor-Salomon is an English instructor at Russell
Sage College in Troy, New York, and the College of Saint Rose in
Albany, New York. Her research interests include medieval Welsh
literature as well as modern fantasy written by women.
Kate O’Riordan has been working around issues of gender and
sexuality in relation to information and communication technologies and biotechnologies since the mid-1990s. Her Ph.D. focused on
female cyberbodies in new media/digital genres. Her research and
teaching has included considerations of science ﬁction literature
and ﬁlm. She has published and taught gender and cyberpunk literature; visual cultures of genomics in ﬁlm, with speciﬁc relation
to women’s bodies and sexuality; remaking Marvel ﬁlms in the
post-genomic period, again with a focus on women’s bodies; and
an examination of how gender and sexuality ﬁgures in info/
biotechnology discourses. She is a full-time media studies faculty member at the University of Sussex, United Kingdom, and is
currently engaged in an Ethics and Ethical Practice in Social Science Research-funded research project (based at the University
of Lancaster) looking at the discourses of human genomics with
a special remit to look at ﬁlm, literature, ﬁne art, and other science ﬁctions.
Eric Otto received his Ph.D. in English from the University of Florida in 2006. His dissertation, “Science Fiction and the Ecological
Conscience,” explored the intersections between science ﬁction
and various environmental philosophies. He has several published
and forthcoming essays on environmental rhetoric and environmental science ﬁction.
Shannan Palma is a speculative ﬁction writer, a ﬁlmmaker, and
an academic. She currently lives in Atlanta. Her website is http://
www.foulpapers.com.
Justin Parsler of the University of Brunel, United Kingdom, is a
researcher in digital culture and role-playing theory.
Julie Phillips is the author of James Tiptree, Jr.: The Double Life of
Alice B. Sheldon (2006).
Helen Pilinovsky is a professor of children’s literature at California State University, San Bernardino. She has written extensively
on fairy tales and Victorian literature and is the academic editor of
Cabinet des Fees.
Gillian Polack is a Medievalist and writer based at the Australian
National University.
June Pulliam is an instructor of English and women’s and gender
studies at Louisiana State University, where she teaches courses in
322
................

About the Editor and Contributors
horror ﬁction and adolescent literature. She is the managing editor
of Necropsy: The Review of Horror Fiction (http://www.lsu.edu/necroﬁle)
and the coauthor of Hooked on Horror: A Guide to Reading Interests in the
Genre and Read On … Horror Fiction.
Laura Quilter researches and writes about the possibilities and
perils of technology and information law. An attorney and librarian, she is currently a research fellow. In her spare time, she manages the feministsf.net blog, wiki, and other sites. She lives in
Boston with her partner and cats and thinks WisCon may be
utopia.
Amy Ransom teaches French at Central Michigan University and
bec and Francopublishes on the science ﬁction and fantasy of Que
phone Canada. She has presented and published on the relationbec’s
ship between texts of SFQ (science-ﬁction quebecoise) and Que
unique situation as a French-speaking “nation” within the dominantly English-speaking state of Canada. Her current project is a
book-length project that explores the articulations between Canada’s Francophone science ﬁction and fantasy and postcolonial
theory and criticism.
Terry Reilly is an associate professor of English at the University of
Alaska, where he teaches Shakespeare, Renaissance literature, and
world literature. His scholarship focuses on Doris Lessing, particularly the Canopus in Argos: Archives series. He has published
extensively on Lessing and is a member of the Board of Directors
of the Doris Lessing Society.
Brad J. Ricca is a full-time lecturer of English at Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio. He has written and published on Emily Dickinson, Herman Melville, and Superman,
among others.
Don Riggs teaches English at Drexel University in Philadelphia. He
has published a comparison between appearances of the Goddess
in Marie de France and Marion Zimmer Bradley in the Journal for
the Fantastic in the Arts.
Trina Robbins is a writer, critic, and pop culture herstorian. She
has written books and articles about every aspect of women in
comics and has curated six exhibits of women cartoonists in
Europe and the United States. She has also written about dark goddesses, women who kill, and Irish women.
Robin Roberts is associate dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, professor of English and women’s and gender studies at Louisiana State University, and the author of ﬁve books of science
ﬁction criticism.
Roberta Rogow has been writing, performing, and collecting ﬁlk
music since 1975. She has edited and published Rec Room Rhymes, a
fanzine of ﬁlk song lyrics, produced six audiocassettes of her own
323
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

ﬁlk songs, and appeared on convention compilation recordings.
She has also written Futurespeak: A Fan’s Guide to the Language of Science Fiction (Paragon, 1990), in which there is an extensive discussion of ﬁlk.
Sharon Ross is an assistant professor in the Television Department at Columbia College, Chicago. She teaches courses in the
areas of TV history and critical theory, and her research focuses
on issues of television reception. She is the associate editor of the
journal for the International Digital Media Arts Association. She is
the author of Beyond the Box: Television and the Internet (2008) and
the coeditor with Dr. Louisa Stein of the anthology Teen Television:
Essays on Programming and Fandom (2008).
Lynda Rucker received her M.A. in English with a focus on medieval English literature from Portland State University in Oregon. Her
ﬁction has appeared in such places as The Third Alternative and The
Mammoth Book of Best New Horror. She writes about ﬁlm and books
for various online and print publications.
Donelle R. Ruwe is an associate professor of English at Northern
Arizona University. She has published a collection of essays, Culturing the Child, 1690–1914 (2005), and her poetry has appeared in The
Year’s Best Fantasy and Horror: Fourteenth Annual Collection and
received several awards, including the 2006 Camber Press Chapbook Prize.
Inez Schaechterle is an assistant professor of English at Buena
Vista University in Storm Lake, Iowa.
Dorothea Schuller has studied English, German, and arts and
media studies at the University of Konstanz, Germany. She is an
€ ttingen University,
assistant professor of English literature at Go
where she is currently completing her Ph.D. thesis on the ﬁction of
the modernist writer H. D. (Hilda Doolittle). Her other research
interests include Shakespeare’s sonnets, gothic ﬁction, the preRaphaelites, and issues of gender and writing.
Nina Serebrianik is a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Texas at
Dallas, where she also teaches rhetoric and composition. Her
research interests include literature of the fantastic, medieval literature and history, and translation studies.
Nisi Shawl is the coauthor, with Cynthia Ward, of Writing the
Other: A Practical Approach, from Aqueduct Press. Her short stories
have been published widely, including in Asimov’s SF Magazine and
Strange Horizons, and reprinted in The Year’s Best Fantasy and Horror
#19 from St. Martin’s Press. A story collection, Filter House, is forthcoming in 2008. Her reviews and essays have appeared regularly in
the Seattle Times since the turn of the millennium. She is a contributor to The Encyclopedia of Themes in Science Fiction and Fantasy from
Greenwood Press. She is a founding member of the Carl Brandon
324
................

About the Editor and Contributors
Society and is currently a board member for the Clarion West
Writers’ Workshop. She has been a guest lecturer at Stanford University, Smith College, and the Science Fiction Museum and Hall of
Fame. In 2009, Wesleyan University will publish Strange Matings:
Octavia E. Butler, Science Fiction, and Feminism, an anthology of original essays she is coediting with Rebecca Holden.
C. Jason Smith, an assistant professor of English at the City University of New York–LaGuardia, is coauthor with Ximena Gallardo
C. of Alien Woman: The Making of Lt. Ellen Ripley (2004), which won
the Ray and Pat Browne Popular Culture Association National Book
Award. Smith has presented and published widely on issues of
gender, embodiment, and culture and is currently writing a booklength study on gender in virtual culture.
Victoria Somogyi is a writer, architect, and teacher living in New
York City. She has written about fan ﬁction and has presented
papers on sex in fan ﬁction, in romance novels, and in The Sims 2.
Naomi Stankow-Mercer is a major in the United States Army and
an assistant professor of English at the U.S. Military Academy. Her
specialty is feminist dystopian writing.
Staci Stone, chair of the Department of English and Philosophy at
Murray State University in Kentucky, is coauthor of A Mary Shelley
Encyclopedia (2003) and has published work on Margaret Veley,
Maria Edgeworth, and Susan Glaspell. She teaches courses in British literature, women’s literature, ﬁlm theory, and humanities.
Judith Anderson Stuart received her Ph.D. in 2004 from York University in Toronto. Her doctoral thesis, “Constructing Female Communities in Writings by Margaret Cavendish, Mary Astell, Eliza
Haywood, and Charlotte Lennox,” reﬂects her particular interest in
women’s literature of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
She is a contract faculty member of York University’s English and
Humanities departments.
Amy H. Sturgis is an assistant professor of interdisciplinary studies at Belmont University in Nashville, Tennessee. She has written
extensively in both science ﬁction/fantasy studies and Native
American studies. In 2006, she received the Imperishable Flame
Award for Achievement in Tolkien/Inklings Scholarship. Her ofﬁcial
website is www.amyhsturgis.com.
Laurie N. Taylor researches games, comics, and digital media at
the University of Florida in Gainesville. She has written extensively
on games, comics, and digital media in academic journals and the
online magazine GamesFirst!
Michael Underwood received a B.A. from Indiana University in
2005, with a double major in East Asian studies and an individualized major in creative mythology. He is now working toward an
M.A. in the interdisciplinary studies master’s folklore program at
325
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 1: Overviews

the University of Oregon. His primary area of interest is popular
culture, from graphic novels to fan culture, ﬁlm, and ﬁction, especially science ﬁction and fantasy and people’s uses of the narratives from these genres in their experiences and understandings of
the world.
Sherryl Vint is an assistant professor at Brock University, St.
Catharines, Ontario. She is the author of Bodies of Tomorrow (2007)
and an editor of The Routledge Companion to Science Fiction (2008) and
the journals Extrapolation and Science Fiction Film and Television. She
is currently completing Animal Alterity: Science Fiction and the Question of the Animal.
Elaine Walker, a writer based in North Wales, United Kingdom, is
currently working on a book on the horse for a series on animals
in cultural history. Her research interests include fantasy and magical realism ﬁction, and the writing of the ﬁrst Duke and Duchess
of Newcastle. Her publications include academic and popular material, as well as ﬁction and poetry.
Robyn Walton researches in the area of utopian studies and
teaches at La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia. She has contributed to academic publications in Europe and Australia. She
also writes ﬁction (as Robin Walton) and has published one collection of short stories.
Batya Weinbaum founded and edits Femspec. She has written
about Leslie F. Stone and other early American Jewish science ﬁction writers in Studies in American Jewish Literature, Foundation,
SFStudies, Extrapolation, and several anthologies and currently
teaches at Empire State College Center for Distance Learning, State
University of New York, and East Carolina University.
Pat Wheeler is principal lecturer in literature at the University of
Hertfordshire, United Kingdom. She has previously published on
feminist science ﬁction, including chapters and articles on the
work of Carol Emshwiller and Joanna Russ. She is currently writing
Introduction to Science Fiction for Continuum and editing a book on
dystopias in literature and ﬁlm for McFarland.
Lynda Williams is a graduate student in English at the University
of Northern B.C. She has a M.Sc. Computation from McMaster University and has received three awards in the ﬁeld of applied computing innovations in the social sphere. Her Okal Rel Universe
novel series is published by Edge Science Fiction and Fantasy of
Calgary, Alberta, Canada. She is also editor of books set in the Okal
Rel Universe published by Windstorm Creative in Port Orchard,
Washington, U.S.A.
Yan Wu, Ph.D., is on the faculty of the College of Education
Administration at Beijing Normal University. He has a long-standing
interest in English- and Chinese-language science ﬁction and fantasy
326
................

About the Editor and Contributors
and has published six works of science ﬁction (novels and short stories) and three works of science ﬁction criticism in Chinese. He is well
acquainted with many Chinese science ﬁction authors and with Science Fiction World, the best-known Chinese-language science ﬁction
magazine in that country, maintaining contacts in both the scholarly
and popular sides of science ﬁction. He is currently awaiting the publication of his ﬁrst book-length study of science ﬁction, to be published
in Chinese.
Lisa Yaszek is an associate professor in the School of Literature,
Communication, and Culture at the Georgia Institute of Technology, where she also curates the Bud Foote Science Fiction Collection. Her research interests include gender studies, science ﬁction,
and contemporary literature. Her recent publications include The
Self Wired: Technology and Subjectivity in Contemporary Narrative
(2002); “The Women History Doesn’t See: Recovering Midcentury
Women’s Science Fiction as a Literature of Social Critique” (Extrapolation, spring 2004); and “‘I’ll Be a Postfeminist in a Postpatriarchy,’
or, Can We Really Imagine Life after Feminism?” (ebr, spring 2005).
In 2005, she won the Science Fiction Research Association’s Pioneer
Award for best new science ﬁction scholarship. Her latest book is
Galactic Suburbia: Gender, Technology, and the Creation of Women’s
Science Fiction (2008).
Margaret Speaker Yuan is the author of the biography Philip Pullman for Chelsea House’s series Who Wrote That? Her other biographies include Avi, Beatrix Potter, and Agnes De Mille. She holds an
M.A. in French literature from the Claremont Graduate School and
teaches writing for children in the San Francisco Bay Area.

327
................

This page intentionally left blank

Index
ABBA: The Deﬁnitive Collection (album), 155
ABBA (music group), 154–55
Abbey, Lynn, 251
Abelard, Peter, 2
aboriginal culture, fantasy literature and,
67–68
“Accusing Voice, The” (Davis), 47
Ackerman, Forrest J., 279
Ackland, Valentine, 39
Action Comics #1, 54
Adam and Eve, though He Knew Better
(Erskine), 37
Addams Family, The (ﬁlm), 105
Addams Family, The (television), 137
Addison, Linda, 82, 99, 199
Adela Cathcart (MacDonald), 263
Adisa, Opal Palmer, 82
Adult Fantasy Series (Ballantine), 40,
63–64
Adventures of a Brownie, The (Mulock), 262
Adventures of Alyx, The (Russ), 77
Adventures of a Pincushion, 260
Adventures of Herr Baby (Molesworth), 264
Adventures of Prince Achmed,
The (ﬁlm), 103
Adventures of Two Dutch Dolls and a
Golliwog, The (Upton), 264–65
Aeon Flux (ﬁlm), 122, 186
Aeschylus, 148
Aesop’s Fables, 255
Afﬂeck, Ben, 153
African-Americans: feminist science
ﬁction and, 239–40; in folktales, 264; in
science ﬁction, 194–200; science ﬁction
poetry by, 99; on television, 138; women
writers, 78, 81–82. See also race
Against a Dark Background (Banks), 176
Against Time’s Arrow: The High Crusade of
Poul Anderson (Miesel), 284
“Agamenon” (Aeschylus), 148
age: gender and, 209–21; in science
ﬁction/fantasy, xi; transmission of
knowledge and, 219–20

Aikin, John, 259
Air (Ryman), 177, 212, 219
Alanna: The First Adventure (Pierce), 271
Alarums and Excursions APA, 287
Alba, Jessica, 188
alba (dawn songs), 4
Alderman, Gill, 81
Aldiss, Brian, 95, ix
Alexander, Lloyd, 63, 270
Alexander Romance, 8
Alexeiff, Alexander, 103–4
Algebraist, The (Banks), 176
Alias (television series), 143
Alice (ﬁlm), 108
Alice in Wonderland (ﬁlm), 108, 184–85
Alice Learmont (Mulock), 262
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (Carroll),
16–17, 108, 131, 160, 163, 263, 267–68
Alien 4: Alien Resurrection (ﬁlm), 115, 121,
185
Alien 3 (ﬁlm), 121, 185
Alien ﬁlms, 118, 120–22, 163, 185–86, 188
aliens, humans as, 206–7
aliens, on television, 137–47
Aliens and Lovers anthology, 97
Aliens (ﬁlm), 121, 186
Aliens vs. Predator (game), 163
Alien to Femininity: Speculative Fiction and
Feminist Theory (Barr), 245
Alien Woman: The Making of Lt. Ellen Ripley
(Gallardo and Smith), 185
allegorical ﬁgures, in medieval dream
visions, 5
Allen, Paula Gunn, 244
Alleyne, Leonora Blanche, 262
All in Color for a Dime, 59
Allison, Susan, 83
“All My Darling Daughters” (Willis), 213
All Our Yesterdays, 279
All-Story Magazine, 46
All-Story Weekly, 46, 50
All the Year Round (journal), 33, 262
Alone in the Dark, 163
329
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

“Alphabet of Ben Sira, The,” 11
Alphabet of Thorn (McKillip), 182
Alternative: Epilog to Orion slashzine, 282
alternative history: in fantasy literature,
69–70; spiritual feminism and, 248–49
alternative reality gaming, 160
Always Coming Home (Le Guin), 81, 220
“Alyx” stories (Russ), 77
Amadahy, Zainab, 82, 199
amateur press associations, feminist
fanzines and, 286–87
Amazing Stories magazine, 48, 50–51, 76,
96, 172, 235, 271, 278
Amazons: Alexander’s visit to city of, 8; in
comics, 58–59, 87–88; female heroes as,
181, 206; in pulp novels, 39–40; in
television series, 140
Amazons! (Salmonson), 65, 67, 181
“Amelia and the Dwarfs” (Ewing), 18
“American exceptionalism,” uptopian
ﬁction and, 191
American Film Institute, 104
American Library Association, 258
amime, women artists in, 128–33
“Among School Children” (Yeats), 207
“Amor Vincit Foeminan: The Battle of the
Sexes in Science Fiction” (Russ), 197
Amos, Tori, 155
Analog magazine, 78, 172
ancestresses, in medieval literature, 10
Ancient Enchantresses (Massie-Ferch), 65
Ancient Mirrors of Womanhood (Stone),
242
Ancient Muse, An (song), 151
“And Be Merry” (MacLean), 236
Andersen, Hans Christian, 261
Anderson, Gillian, 142–43
Anderson, Karen, 75, 287
Anderson, Kay, 280
Anderson, Poul, 284, 286, 287
Anderson, Susan Jane, 78
Andersson, Benny, 154
Andes, Karen, 244–45
Andy Grifﬁth Show, The (television show),
135
“Angel Island” (Gillmore), 50
Angel Island (Gillmore), 220
“Angel” (song), 154
Angel (television series), 143, 213
330
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Animal Farm (ﬁlm), 104
animals, 205; in children’s literature,
259–60; in fantasy books, 266; in
mid-twentieth century literature, 40; in
mythic fantasy, 66–67; in nineteenth
century poetry, 27; in science ﬁction,
80–81, 172; on television, 140
animated ﬁlm, 103–4, 106–10
anime: future trends in, 133; gaming and,
168; history of, 123, 125–27; women
artists in, 128–33; women’s images in,
127–28
Aniron (son), 152
Annual of the Year’s Best SF anthology, 75
Antieau, Kim, 81
 na, 150
Anu
Anyhow Stories (Clifford), 264
Aoike, Yasuko, 129
“Ape Cycle, The” (Harris), 50
Apuleius, 25
Aquaman comics, 86
Arabian Nights’ Entertainments, Consisting
of 1001 Stories told by the Sultaness of the
Indies, 255
Ariadne and the Bull (Farjeon), 42
Armed Camps (Reed), 75
Armless Maiden, The (Windling), 66
Arnason, Eleanor, 75, 78, 83, 211, 224–25,
280, 303
Around the World in Eighty Days (Verne),
264
Arrows of the Queen (Lackey), 64
Arthurian legends, 1, 4; in children’s
literature, 255, 264; in interwar fantasy
literature, 37–38; in medieval
romances, 8–9; in nineteenth-century
poetry, 29–30; spritual feminism and,
246–47; in twenthieth-century fantasy
literature, 63, 68–69
artiﬁcial beings, in science ﬁction, 80
Artiﬁcial Intelligence: AI (ﬁlm), 117
Artiﬁcial Things (Fowler), 79
Asaro, Catherine, 83
Asbjrnsen, Peter Christen, 261–62
Ash: A Secret History (Gentle), 69, 182
Ash, Constance, 66
Asian culture, fantasy literature from, 67
Asimov, Isaac, 170, 174, 207, 210
Asimov Reader’s Poll, 99–100

Index
Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine, 96, 98–99
Aspects of the Novel, 101
Association of College Alumnae, 232, 236
Astin, John, 137
“Astounding Enemy, The” (Rice/
Tonjoroff-Roberts), 50
Astounding Stories magazine, 47, 51,
172–74, 271
Astra’s Tower fanzine, 279
Atari game system, 160
Athena’s Daughters (television series), 187
“At Home” (Rossetti), 31
€, 102
Atkins, Zoe
Atkinson, Ruth, 54
Attack of the 50 Foot Woman (ﬁlm), 117, 216
At the Back of the North Wind (MacDonald),
263
Atwood, Margaret, 72, 79, 81, 219
At World’s End (ﬁlm), 150
Aude (in Chanson de Roland), 7
Auel, Jean M., 79, 210, 220
Auerbach, Nina, 17
Augustine (St.), 1
Aunt Judy’s Magazine (Ewing), 262
Aurora: Beyond Equality anthology, 78
Aurora fanzine, 97
Austen, Jane, 13
Austin, Alicia, 285
Authoress: A Tale, The (Tonna), 32
Avengers, The (comic), 90
Avengers, The (television series), 186–87
awards, fantasy literature, 62
Awiakta, Marilou, 244
Ayashi no Ceres (Ceres, Celestial Legend)
(Watase), 132–33
Ayesha, the Return of She (Haggard), 34
Babel-17 (Delany), 76, 174
Babylon 5 (television series), 141–42
Back to the Future, 215
Bacon-Smith, Camille, xii
Bad Seed, The (ﬁlm), 213
Baer, Freddie, 286
Bailey, Hilary, 75–76
Bain, Barbara, 140
Baker, Kage, 83
Baker, Matt, 57
Baker Street Irregulars, 283
Bakery Men Don’t See, The, 304

“Balinese Dancer” ( Jones), 239
Ballard, J. G., 176
Balrog Award, 96, 99–100
Balsamo, Anne, 81
Bamber, Jamie, 145
Banana Fish, 127
Banana Wings fanzine, 285
Banewreaker (Carey), 216
Bankier, Amanda, 78, 286
Banks, Iain, 170, 178
“Banned from Argo” (ﬁlk), 287
Bannerman, Anne, 32
Banner of Souls (Williams), 211
Bantam Books, 282
Baraka, Amiri, 196
Barbara of the Thorn (Syrett), 38
Barbarella (ﬁlm), 185
barbarian fantasy ﬁlms, 107
Barbauld, Anna Letitia (Aikin), 259
Barbot Gallon Villeneuve, GabrielleSuzanne, 257
Barnes, Steven, 196, 217, 218
Barr, Marleen, 193, 245
Barrett, Majel, 137
Barrie, J. M., 29, 35, 155, 268
Barstow, Anne, 243
Barton, Dr. Eustace Robert (pseud. Robert
Eustace), 46
Bassen, Lois, 98
Batchelor, Joy, 103–4
Batgirl comics, 88
Batgirl Special: The Last Batgirl Story comic,
88–90
Batman comics, 84, 86
Battle of the the Sexes in Science Fiction, xii
“Battle On!” (song), 156
Battlestar Galactia (television series),
145–46, 188, 211
Baudino, Gael, 71, 248–49
Baum, L. Frank, 35, 108, 150, 265, 268
Baxter, Stephen, 176
Bear, Elizabeth, 83
Bear, Greg, 80, 170, 177
Beastmaster, The (ﬁlm), 107
Beauclerk, Helen, 38
“Beauty and the Beast” (fairy tale), 258
Beauty (McKinley), 267
Beauty (Tepper), 66
Beck, Lily Adams, 38
331
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Bedknobs and Broomsticks (ﬁlm), 42
Beetlejuice (ﬁlm), 109
Beggars in Spain (Kress), 81
Behn, Aphra, 204
Bell, Andrea L., 83
Bellamy, Edward, 49
Benedict, Dirk, 145
Bennett, Gertrude Barrows (pseud.
Francis Stevens), 46–47, 50
Ben’s Game, 162
Benson, Stella, 42
Benton, Tracy, 297, 305
Berger, Karen, 85–87
Bergman, Ingmar, 107
Berman, Ruth, 96–97, 99, 280
Bester, Alfred, 170
Bethke, Bruce, 177
Bettelheim, Bruno, 150
Bewitched (television show), 135–36
Bible, as source for medieval drama, 9–10
Big Apple Comix, 85
Big (ﬁlm), 105, 109, 215
Bill and Ted’s Excellent Adventure (ﬁlm), 109
Bionic Woman, The (television show),
140–41, 188
biotechnology, science ﬁction and, 217
Bird-Bride, a Volume of Ballads and Sonnets,
The (Watson), 30
Birds of Prey (comic), 85
Birthday of the World, and Other Stories, The
(Le Guin), 226–27
“Birth of a Gardner” (Buck), 236
bisexuality: in interwar literature, 38;
in science ﬁction, 174, 225
Bishop, Anne, 64
Bishop, K. J., 72
Bishop, W. H., 49
, Alice Guy, 101, 103
Blache
Black Cat, 46, 55
Black Chalice (Jakober), 69, 210
Black Corridor, The (Bailey and Moorcock),
76
“Black God’s Kiss, The” (Moore), 40
Black Jewels trilogy, 64
Blackmore, Ritchie, 151
Black Panther comics, 84
“Black Princess: A True Fable of My Old
Kentucky Nurse, The” (Piatt), 30
Black Venus (Carter), 305
332
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Black Wine (Dorsey), 71
Blade Runner (ﬁlm), 114, 163
Blake, Katherine, 151
Blake, Marie, 137
Blanche de Castille, 3
“Bless the Child” (song), 154
Blish, James, 282
Blixen, karen, 41
Blonde Phantom comic, 56–57
Blondie (comic), 182
Blood Brothers (Barnes), 217, 218
“Blood Child” (Butler), 239
Blood of the Goddess trilogy (Dalkey), 67
BloodRayne (game), 163
Bloody Chamber, The (Carter), 65
Bloomsbury Group, 46
“Blue-Beard’s Closet” (Cooke), 30
Bluebeard’s Key, and Other Stories (Ritchie),
18
Blue Fairy Book, The (Lang), 262
“Blue Heart” (Smith), 217
Blue Sword, The (McKinley), 181
Boccaccio, Giovanni de, 7
Bogstad, Janice, 286, 287, 291–95
Bohnoff, Jeff and Maya, 155
Bolen, Jean Shinoda, 243
Bond, Octavia Zollicoffer, 46
Bone Doll’s Twin, The (Flewelling), 181, 224
Bone (Smith), 211, 273
Book callid Caton, 255
Book of Curtesye, 255
Book of Good Maners, 255
Book of Moons (Edghill), 249
Book of Secrets, The (album), 151
Book of the Dun Cow, The, 11
Book of the Three Dragons (Morris), 37
Borchard, Alice, 251
Bordertown series, 70
Borrowers, The (Norton), 42
Borrowers series, 269
“botanic” motif in ﬁction, 206–8
Bound (Napoli), 267
Bova, Ben, 78, 170, 174
Bowen, Velma, 82
Bowen, Vijay, 288
Bowers, Bill and Jone, 284
Bowie, David, 108
Bowl of Night (Edghill), 249
Bowman, Jeanne, 288

Index
Boy and the Bewitched Things, The (Ravel),
103
Boys from Brazil, The (Levin), 81
Brackett, Leigh, 105
Braddon, Mary Elizabeth, 30, 217
Bradley, Marion Zimmer, 62–63, 65, 67–68,
72, 76, 78, 181, 210, 219, 235, 246–47,
279, 283
Bradley, Robert, 279
Bradshaw, Gillian, 68
Bram Stoker awards, 96, 99, 199
Brave New World (Huxley), 172
Breen, Walter, 283
Brendon, Nicholas, 144
Brentano, Clemens, 12
Brialey, Claire, 285
“Bride of the Man-Horse, The” (Dunsany),
35
“Bright Illusion, The” (Moore), 51
Brin, David, 174, 217
“Bring Me to Life” (song), 153
Britain: celtic music from, 150; fanzines
in, 279–80, 285; science ﬁction in, 74,
174; science ﬁction poetry in, 95
British Academy of Film and Television
Arts Award (BAFTA), 104
Broad Universe, 300
Broner, E. M., 220
€, Anne, 29
Bronte
€, Emily, 29, 155
Bronte
Brooke-Rose, Christine, 79
Brooks, Avery, 141
Brooks, Terry, 64
Brother to Dragons, Companion to Owls
(Lindskold), 70
Brown, Charles and Dena, 284
Browne, Frances, 263
Browne, Maggie (pseud.). See Hunter,
Margaret
Brown Girl in the Ring (Hopkinson), 198,
210, 220, 239
Brownies, and Other Tales, The (Ewing), 262
“Brownies, The” (Ewing), 262
Browning, Tod, 105
Brundage, Margaret, 47
Brust, Steven, 70
Buchanan, Ginjer, 283
Buck, Doris Pitkin, 75, 94, 236
Buck Rogers (comic), 182

Buddha (Tezuka), 125
Buffy the Vampire Slayer (television series),
143–44, 163, 185, 187–88, 214–15, 218,
275
“Building a Mystery” (song), 154
Bujold, Lois McMaster, 64, 81, 83, 181,
211–12, 218, 280
Bull, Emma, 66, 70, 157, 251
Bulldozer Rising (Livia), 210
Bulmer, Pam, 279
Bulwer-Lytton, Edward, 21
Bunyan, John, 255
Burdekin, Katharine, 219
Burroughs, Edgar Rice, 106, 171, 271
Burton, Tim, 105, 150
Burwasser, Lee, 97
Bush, Kate, 155
Bushyager, Linda, 283
Butler, Octavia, 78, 81–83, 178, 193, 196,
198, 213, 217, 222, 229, 239, 251, 292
“Butterﬂy’s Ball and the Grasshopper’s
Feast, The” (Roscoe), 27
“Butterﬂy’s Funeral, The,” 27
Byatt, A. S., 72
Cabbage Fairy, The (ﬁlm), 101, 103
Cabell, James Branch, 36
Cabin in the Sky (ﬁlm), 109
Cadigan, Pat, 80, 176, 238
“Cage, The” (Star Trek television episode),
137
Cagebird (Lowachee), 200
Caldecott, Randolph, 262
Caldecott Medal, 261, 265
Call of Cthulhu (stories), 163
“Calypso Watching the Ocean” (Landon),
26
Cameron, James, 121, 188
Cameron, JoAnna, 140
Campbell, John W., 51, 172–74, 271
Canada: music from, 150–51; writers
from, 191
Canterbury Tales, The (Chaucer), 7
cantigas de amigo (songs of friendship), 4
Cantilene de Sainte Eulalie, 5
Cantine, Holley, 75
Cantor, Marty and Robbie, 284, 288
Capra, Frank, 104, 106
Card, Orson Scott, 174, 213
333
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Cardcaptor Sakura (manga), 131
career women, on television, 139–41
Carey, Jacqueline, 72, 216, 251
Caribbean writers, 191
Carl Brandon Parallax and Kindred
awards, 200, 300
Carl Brandon Society, 196, 300
Carnaval, Suzanne, 289
Carnegie Medal, 269
Carnival of the Spirit (Teish), 244
Carol, Avedon, 285, 288
Caroline, Queen of England, 203
Carr, Gertrude, 280
Carr, Jayge, 81
Carr, Terry, 195
Carrington, Leonora, 210
Carroll, Lewis (pseud.). See Dodgson,
Charles Lutwidge
Carter, Angela, 65, 79, 305
Carter, Chris, 142
Carter, Jason, 142
Carter, Lin, 40, 63–64
Carter, Lynda, 140
Carter, Raphael, 80
Cassandra Rising (Laurance), 78
Castell, Daphne, 75
Castle in the Sky (ﬁlm), 276
Castle of Otranto, The (Walpole), 12–13
“Castles and Dreams” (song), 151
Cather, Willa, 194
Catherine of Siena, 4
Catwoman comics, 84
Cauldron of Changes: Feminist Spirituality in
Fantastic Fiction (Crosby), 245
Cavendish, Lady Margaret, 45
Caxton, William, 255
celtic music, 150–51
Celtic Woman, 150
Century Child (album), 154
“Ceremonies of Light and Dark” (Babylon 5
television episode), 142
Cetaganda (Bujold), 211
Chabon, Michael, 269
Chalice and the Blade, The (Eisler), 242
Chanson de Roland, 7
chansons de geste, women in, 7
chansons de toile (songs of the loom), 4
Chant, Joy, 64
chapbooks, 256, 260
334
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Chapman, Vera, 68, 181
Charlie’s Angels (television show), 139
Charmed (television series), 144–45, 275
Charm School: Magical Witch Girl Bunny
(Watasin), 273–74
Charnas, Suzy McKee, 78, 83, 217, 237,
286, 292
Charwoman’s Shadow, The (Dunsany), 38
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 7
Cheap Repository Tracts, 260
Cher, 110
Cherry 2000 (ﬁlm), 115
Cherryh, C. J., 63, 78, 81, 83, 181, 217
Chesnutt, Charles W., 196
Chew, Kristen Pederson, 83
Chicks in Chainmail (Friesner), 65, 181
Child Garden, The (Ryman), 215
Childhood’s End (Clarke), 173
children: as heroes, 214; in science
ﬁction, 212–14
Children of God (Russell), 211
Children of the Atom (Shiras), 51, 213
Children’s and Household Tales, 14
children’s fantasy ﬁlms, 101
children’s literature: adult literature as,
255–57; in Edwardian era, 35–36;
fantasy vs. morality in, 259–64; girls in,
267–73; historical background, 254–55;
nineteenth-century fairy tales as,
12–17, 27–30; resistance to, 257; science
ﬁction, 51; space operas, 48
Children Star, The (Slonczewski), 217
China, fantasy ﬁction from, 37
Choju Giga (“Scrolls of Frolicking
Animals”), 123–24
Chorus of Mushrooms, A (Goto), 220
“Chosen” (Buffy the Vampire Slayer
episode), 144
Chow, Yun-Fat, 186
Chretien de Troyes, 9
Christian, Claudia, 142
Christianity, in fantasy literature, 69–70
Christina of Markyate, 4
Christine de Pizan (Pisan), 3
Christmas Carol, A (Dickens), 262
Chronicle Books, 60
Chronicles of Narnia (book series), 35, 43,
107–8, 163
Chronicles of Prydain, 63

Index
Chronicles of Riddick, The (game), 163
Chronicles of Tornor series, 193
Churchill, Joyce, 75
Cinderella fairy tale, cross-cultural
versions of, 254
Cinderella’s Daughter, and Other Sequels and
Consequences (Erskine), 37
“Circe” (Webster), 26
City Juvenile Library series, 260
City of Angels (ﬁlm), 110
City of Sorcery (Bradley), 246
Civilization and Its Discontents (Freud),
227–28
Claire of Assissi, 4
Clampitt, Amy, 98
CLAMP manga series, 131–32
Clamp School Detectives (manga), 131
Clan of the Cave Bear (Auel), 210
Clarion SF Writer’s Workshop, 76
Clarion West Workshop, 200
Clark Ashton Smith award, 96
Clarke, Arthur C., 173
Clarke, Susanna, 83
Clash of the Titans (ﬁlm), 107
class: feminist spirituality and, 243–44;
gender and, 202–8; in science ﬁction/
fantasy, xi
classical literature: in medieval
romances, 8, 11; nineteenth-century
poetry and, 25–27
Clayton, Jo, 81
Clifford, Mrs. W. K., 264
Clingerman, Mildred, 52
Cloned Lives (Sargent), 81
cloning, 81;
immortality and, 216–17;
in science ﬁction ﬁlms, 113–15
Close Encounters of the Third Kind (ﬁlm), 116
Cloven Hooves (Lindholm), 67
Cobbett, William, 203
Coffee, Lenore, 102
Cole, Sir Henry, 261
Coleman, Shirley Gibson, 82
Coleridge, Mary Elizabeth, 31–32
Coleridge, Samuel, 14
Coleridge, Sara, 29
College of Magics, A, 70
colonialism: in science ﬁction, 74, 76;
science ﬁction and, 197–200

Combs, Holly Marie, 144
Comerford, Sherna, 280, 281
comics, 54–60; fantasy and science ﬁction
in, x; female heroes in, 182–84; gaming
and, 168; girl heroes in, 273–75; Modern
Age of, 84–87; Post-Golden Age of,
84–92; Silver Age of, 84
“Coming of Age on Karhide” (Le Guin),
220
commedia dell’arte, fantasy literature
and, 69
“commodiﬁed femininity,” in comics,
90–91
Communism, 39; in science ﬁction ﬁlms,
115–18
computer games, 160–61
Conan stories, 39, 47
Conan the Barbarian comics, 85
Conan the Barbarian (ﬁlm), 107
Conan the Destroyer (ﬁlm), 107
, Maryse, 193, 251
Conde
“Coney Island of the Mind, A” (McHugh),
80
Conjunctions, 39, 72
Conjure Wife (Leiber), 41
Connelly, Jennifer, 108
“Conquest of Gola” (Stone), 234
console gaming, 160–61
Constantine, Storm, 81
Consumed, Reduced to Beautiful Grey Ashes
(Addison), 199
es (French fairy tales), 12–13
contes de fe
Contes di Cottman IV (Holdom), 283
“Contributions to the Study of Science
Fiction and Fantasy,” 193
Convergence Culture, xi
Coogan, Jackie, 137
“Cook Cooked, The” (Taylor), 37
Cooke, Rose Terry, 30
Coolidge, Martha, 105
Cooper, Susan, 69, 265
Corﬂu convention, 305
Corinne poets, 24–25
Corpse Bride, The (ﬁlm), 105
cosmological ﬁgures, in medieval
literature, 10
Coulson, Buck, 283
Coulson, Juanita, 280, 283, 288
“Council of Dogs, The,” 27
335
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Counselman, Mary Elizabeth, 47
“Countess Lamberti, The” (Howitt), 32
Courtney Crumrin (Naifeh), 273
Cox, Marion, 280
Cramer, Kathryn, 83
Cranch, Christopher Pearse, 263
Crane, Walter, 262
Cravens, Gwyneth, 75
Crawford Award, 64, 67, 70–71
“Creatures of Light,” 234
Creed, Barbara, 118
“Cristabel” (Coleridge), 14
Cronenberg, David, 222, 224
Crosby, Denise, 139
Crosby, Janice C., 245
CrossGen Comics, 88
Crossing the Line (Traviss), 218
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (ﬁlm), 186
Crowell, Dr. Mary, 157
Crowley, John, 176–77
“Crownless” (song), 154
Cruikshank, George, 16, 262
Crystal Cave, The (Stewart), 68
Crystal Ship, The (Silverberg), 78
Cuckoo Clock (Molesworth), 264
cultural changes: age and, 219–20;
science ﬁction and, 175; sexual
identity and, 223–25
Cupitt, Cathy, 288
Curran, Stuart, 24
Curse of the Wise Woman, The (Dunsany),
38
Custis, Scott, 297
“Cyberpunk” (Bethke), 177
cyberpunk movement: feminism and,
73–74, 177–78, 238–40; humanists and,
79–82
“Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology,
and Socialist-Feminism in the Late
Twentieth Century, A” (Haraway),
80–81, 223
cyborgs, 80–81, 217; sexual identity and,
223–24; women in science ﬁction ﬁlms
as, 113–15
Cyteen (Cherryh), 81, 217
Czerneda, Julie E., 83
€xaxicans: A Romance of
Daffodil and the Croa
History (Webster), 28
336
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Dahlgren (Delany), 198
Dalkey, Kara, 65, 67
Daly, Mary, 241–43
Dame Margot, 3
Damiano trilogy (MacAvoy), 69
Dance Dance Revolution (game), 162
Dance of Knives (McMahon), 211
Dancers of Arun (Lynn), 71
Dance the Eagle to Sleep (Piercy), 218
Dangerous Visions anthologies, 74–75, 175
Daniels, Les, 59
Daredevil comics, 85
Daredevil (ﬁlm), 153
Dark Angel (television series), 188
Dark Crystal, The (ﬁlm), 276
Dark Horse Comics, 84, 88, 90
Dark Is Rising series, 69
Dark Materials trilogy, 155
Dark Matter: A Century of Speculative Fiction
from the African Diaspora, 82, 195
Dark Matter: Reading the Bones, 195, 199
Darkovercon, 283
Darkover Concordance, The, 283
Darkover fantasy series, 62–63, 65, 76,
283
Darkover Grand Council Meeting, 283
Darkover novels, 246
Dark Passion Play (album), 153
Darwin, Erasmus, 203, 206, 231
Das Rheingold (opera), 149
Datlow, Ellen, 65–66, 82
Daughter of the Bear King (Arnason), 211
Daughter of Tintagel series, 68
“Daughters of the Earth” (Merril), 52, 236
Daughters of the Sun trilogy, 213–14
d’Aulnoy, Countess Marie-Catherine, 257
Davies, Steve, 285
Davin, Eric Leif, 22, 73, 197
Da Vinci Code, The, 284
Davis, Grania, 75, 78, 81
Davis, Kathe, 110
Davis, Meredith, 47
Dawn (Butler), 229
Day, Lucille, 98
“Day befor the Revolution, The (Le Guin),
210
“Day Million” (Pohl), 174
Day the Earth Stood Still, The (ﬁlm), 120
Day Without Rain, A (album), 152

Index
Dazzle of Day, The (Gloss), 212
DC Comics, 84–92; Vertigo Comics, 84–85;
women writers, editors and artists as,
85–92
“Dead Before Death” (Rossetti), 24
“Dead Center” (Merril), 236
“Dead Man Dating” (Charmed television
episode), 145
Dead Man’s Chest (ﬁlm), 150
Dead or Alive game, 167
“Dead” (Rossetti), 24
Dean, Pamela, 65
“Dear Jessie” (song), 155
Deathstalker (ﬁlm), 107
de Camp, L. Sprague, 39–40, 94
de Carlo, Yvonne, 136
Decimon Juydas: A Romance of Mars (Weiss),
45
Deep Purple (rock group), 151
Deerskin (McKinley), 66
Defoe, Daniel, 203, 256
deFord, Miriam Allen, 52–53, 75
De Hart, Mrs. H. O., 278
Delany, Samuel R., 76, 78, 81, 170, 174,
196, 198–99, 207–8, 216, 223, 300
de Lauretis, Teresa, 224
de Levis-Mirepoix, Philomene (Countess
Philomene de la Forest-Divonne), 204
de Lint, Charles, 66–67, 70–71, 177
“Demeter and Cora” (Greenwell), 26
De Morgan, Mary, 262
de Morgan, Mary, 20
De Morgan, William, 262
€nder (opera), 149–50
Der ﬂiegende Holla
Der Ring des Nibelungen (The Ring of the
Nibelung), 149
Deryni Chronicles, 69
€l, German, 24–25
de Stae
Destiny (ﬁlm), 103
Detective Comics, 88
DeTerlizzi, Toni, 261
Devil and Daniel Webster, The (ﬁlm), 109
devotional literature, by medieval women
writers, 4–5
DeWinter, Corrine, 99
Dhalgren (Delany), 174
Diamond Age (Stephenson), 177
Dianic Wicca, 243, 248
Diary of Anne Franke, The (ﬁlm), 104

Diary of Ma-chan (Tezuka), 125
Dick, Philip K., 286
Dickens, Charles, 16, 45, 262
Dickinson, Emily, 24, 32
Dickinson, Peter, 273
Dickson, Gordon R., 284
Die Niebelungen (ﬁlm), 103, 106
€re (opera), 149
Die Walku
difference, sexual identity and, 226–27
Dinesen, Isak, 41
Disch, Thomas, 78, 170, 176, 207–8
Discworld series, 211
Disney, Walt, 106; inﬂuence on anime,
127
Dispossessed, The (Le Guin), 77
Distaff fanzine, 280
Distant Soil, A (comic), 85
Divakaruni, Chitra Banerjee, 219
“Divided Loyalties” (Babylon 5 television
episode), 142
Dixon, Leslie, 105
Doane, Mary Ann, 114
Doctor Doolittle (Lofting), 103, 268
Doctor Who (television series), 275
Dodge, Mary Mapes, 264
Dodgson, Charles Lutwidge, 16–17, 27,
108, 263, 267–68
Doherty, Shannen, 144
Donaldson, Laura E., 244
Donawerth, Jane, 50–51
Donkey Konga (game), 162
“Donkeyskin” (Perrault), 66
Donnie Darko (ﬁlm), 110
Don Quixote (Cervantes), 12
Doom (game), 161–63
Doom Patrol, 85
Door into Ocean, The (Slonczewski), 81,
228–29
Doran, Colleen, 85
Dorman, Sonya, 94, 99
Dorman-Hess, Sandra (Sandra Dorman),
75
Dorset, Catherine Ann, 27
Dorsey, Candas Jane, 71, 81, 83
Double Indemnity (ﬁlm), 117
Douglas, Carol Nelson, 81, 251
Downbelow Station (Cherryh), 181
Downes, G., 282
Downing, Christine, 243
337
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Down Under Fan Fund (DUFF), 288
Doyle, Noreen, 83
Dracula (Stoker), 14, 21
Dragonﬂight (McCaffrey), 76, 180
“Dragonrider” (McCaffrey), 76
Dragonslayer (ﬁlm), 107
Dragonsword trilogy (Baudino), 248–49
Dragwyla, Yale, 97
Drake, Leah Bodine, 94
drama, in medieval literature, 9–10
Dreamfall game, 167
Dream of Scipio, 2
Dreams and Delights (Beck), 38
Dreams and Nightmares magazine, 99
Dreamsnake (McIntyre), 76, 211
Dreams of Decadence, 100
dream visions, by medieval women
writers, 5
Droege-Macdonald, Katy, 156
Duane, Diane, 81, 213, 251
Du Bois, W. E. B., 195–96
Duchamp, L. Timmel, 211
Duchovny, David, 142–43
Due, Tananarive, 82, 199
Duklyon: Clamp School Defenders (manga),
131
Dulac, Edmund, 38
Dumars, Denise, 97
Dune (Herbert), 81, 175, 210
Dungeons and Dragons (role-playing game),
163–66
Dunsany, Lord, 21, 34, 37–38
Durno, Allison, 156
Duskin, Ben, 162
Duursema, Jan, 90–92
Dwellers in the Mirage (Merritt), 34
dystopian ﬁlm, 113–15
dystopian games, 163–66
dystopian literature, 46, 49; girl heroes in,
273; postmodern feminsm and, 239;
science ﬁction and, 74, 78, 81–82, 171–
74; spiritual feminism and, 248–49
Eagle Comics, 58
Ear, the Eye, and the Arm, The (Farmer),
265, 269
Early, Frances, 187
“Earthsea Revisioned” (Le Guin), 270
Earth versus the Flying Saucers (ﬁlm), 116
338
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Earth Witch (Lawrence), 71
Easy Introduction to the Knowledge of Nature,
A (Trimmer), 259
Eberhart, Sheri, 75
Ecklar, Julia, 156, 287
economics, feminist science ﬁction and,
238–40
eCube (electronic newsletter), 299
Eddison, E. R., 36–37
Eden, Barbara, 136
Edgewood Press, 304
Edghill, Rosemary, 249–50
editors: biases of, 170; of science ﬁction,
74
Edo Period: art and literature in, 124;
Sakoku policy in, 126; women’s role in,
128–29
education: gender and class and, 202–8;
literature as tool for, 260–64; for
medieval women, 3; in science, 231–32
Educational Amendment Acts, 237
Edwardian era, fantasy literature in,
34–36
Edwards, Amelia B., 45
Edwards, Lilian, 285, 288
Edward Scissorhands (ﬁlm), 105, 109
Egan, Greg, 205
Eglee, Charles H., 188
Ehrilich, Helen, 98–99
Eight Days of Luke (Jones), 270
Eisenstein, Phyllis, 78
Eisler, Rianne, 242
Elana, Myrna, 210
Eldridge, Paul, 37
Elegaic Sonnets (Smith), 29, 31
Elgin, Jill, 54–55, 212
Elgin, Suzette Haden, 78, 81, 99, 210, 216
Eliot, George, 204–5
Ella Enchanted (ﬁlm), 276
Ella Enchanted (Levine), 267
Eller, Cynthia, 243
Ellis, Sophie Wenzel, 47, 50, 234
Ellison, Harlan, 74, 175
Elwood, Roger, 95
Emerald City fanzine, 285
Emmett, Elizabeth, 75
Empire Strikes Back, The (ﬁlm), 105
Emshwiller, Carol, 75, 83
Enchanted Castle (Nesbit), 35

Index
Ender’s Game (Card), 160, 213
“End of All Hope” (song), 154
Energumen fanzine, 284
Engh, M. J., 81
England, fantasy and science ﬁction in,
12–22
England Swings SF anthology, 75
“English Ladye and the Knight, The”
(Scott), 151
Enlightenment, science history and, 230
“Enterprise Incident, The” (Star Trek
television episode), 138
environmental issues, in fantasy
literature, 71
Enya (singer), 152, 155
Ephron, Nora, 105
epic fantasy, 34, 64–65, 149; girls in,
268–70
Equal Credit Opportunity Act, 77
Equal Rights Amendment, 77
Erasmus Magister (Shefﬁeld), 206
Erdrich, Louise, 72
Erec et Enide, 9
erotic science ﬁction, 247–48
Erskine, John, 37
“Escape to Witch Mountain,” 214
Estes, Clarissa Pinkola, 243
E.T: The Extra-Terrestrial (ﬁlm), 116
“Euminides, The” (Aeschylus), 148
Euryale (Dalkey), 67
Eustace, Robert. See Barton, Dr. Eustace
Robert
Eva (Dickinson), 273
Evanescence (band), 153
Evans, Frances, 279
“Evenings at Home” children’s series, 259
Eve of Destruction (ﬁlm), 115
EverQuest (online game), 162
Ewing, Julia Horatio, 18, 262
Excalibur (ﬁlm), 107
eXistenZ (ﬁlm), 224
Experiments in Knowing: Gender and Method
in the Social Sciences, 207
Extrapolation ( journal), 193
Fabian Society, 35
Fables, Ancient and Modern, 260
Faerie Queen, The (Spenser), 40
Fairbairns, Zoe, 79, 81

fairies, in medieval literature, 10–11
“Fairies’ Chatter” (Webster), 28
Fairy Book, The (Mulock), 262
Fairy Godmother Award, 305
Fairy Godmothers, The (Gatty), 262
Fairy Library (Cruikshank), 16
fairy tales: age and gender in, 210; as
children’s literature, 254–55, 257–64; in
comics, 59, 88; in Edwardian era, 35–36;
fantasy literature and, 63, 260–64;
feminist fantasy and, 65–66; ﬁlms
based on, 101; in games, 163–66; girls
in, 267; in musical theater, 150; in
nineteenth-century literature, 12–22; in
nineteenth-century poetry, 27–30; on
television, 137
Fairy Tale Series, 65
Fairy Tales of All Nations, 261
Falasca, Noreen and Nick, 288
Fallen (band), 153
Falling Tree (Bujold), 81
Falling Woman, The (Murphy), 79
“Fall of Frenchy Steiner, The” (Bailey), 76
€ltskog, Agnetha, 154
Fa
family relations, in science ﬁction, 220
Famous Fantastic Mysteries, 46, 50
fandom: awards and achievements,
286–89; fan artists, 285–86; fanzine era,
283–86; feminism and, 286–87; ﬁlk and,
287; history of, 278–80; single-author
fandom, 283; slash ﬁction and, 281–82;
Star Trek and, 280–81; women’s
contributions to, xii
fan ﬁction, 156, 281; single-author
fandoms, 283
Fantasia, 154
“Fantasmic” song, 154
Fantastic Adventures magazine, 235
Fantastic Four, 84
Fantastic Novels Magazine, 46, 50, 76
Fantastic Universe, 51–53, 95
fantasy ﬁlm: light and dark contemporary ﬁlms, 109–10; in nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, 101–10
fantasy gaming, 163–66
fantasy in music, 150–57, x
fantasy literature: from 1960-2005; for
children, 258–59; in comics, 55–60; in
Edwardian era, 34–36; fairy tales and,
339
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

fantasy literature (Continued)
65–72; feminist spirituality and, 245–51;
ﬁlm adaptations of, 107–8; genre
fantasy, 42–43; girls in, 267–71; in
interwar period, 36–39; morality vs.,
259–64; mythic fantasy, 66–69; in
nineteenth-century literature, 15–22; in
nineteenth-century poetry, 27–30;
sexual identity and, 222–29
fanzines, 193; current trends, 284–85;
feminism and, 286–87; ﬁlk fanzines,
287; history of, 278–79; post-Star Trek
era, 283–84; women artists in, 285–86
Far and Away (ﬁlm), 152
Farber, Sharon N., 285
Fargas, Laura, 98
Farjeon, Eleanor, 36, 42
Farmer, Nancy, 265, 269
Farrell, Terry, 141
Farscape (television series), 188
Fatal Frame game ceries, 167
“Fate of the Poseidonia, The” (Harris), 48,
233
Fates of the Princes of Dyfed (Morris), 37
Faulkner, William, 194
Feature Comics, 55
Feiwel, Jean, 83
Felice, Cynthia, 81
Felice, Jenna, 83
Fellowship of the Ring (ﬁlm), 152
female cyberbodies, in science ﬁction
ﬁlms, 113–15
female heroes, 179–80; in comics, 182–84;
in literature, 180–82; on television,
186–89
Female Man, The (Russ), 77, 180, 206, 224,
237
female protagonists: in fantasy ﬁlms,
102–10; on television, 135–47
Female Spectator, The (journal), 230
Feminine Mystique, The (Friedan), 116
feminism: in comics, 54–60, 59–60, 87–88;
critique of male editors and, 171–72;
cyberpunk critiqued by, 177–78; in fairy
tales, 267; fandom and, 286–87; in
fantasy ﬁlms, 102–10; fantasy literature
and, 65–72; female heroes and, 179–80;
intergenerational community and,
219–20; interwar literature and, 38–39;
340
................

Volume 1: Overviews

nineteenth-century poetry and, 23–27;
science and, 231–40; science ﬁction
ﬁlms and, 114–15; science ﬁction
literature and, 45–46, 49–53, 73–83, 193,
196–200, 237–40, xi–xii; in science ﬁction poetry, 97–100; sexual identity and,
224–25; spirituality and, 210, 241–51;
WisCon and, 290–301
Femizine, 279
femme fatales: in epic fantasy, 34; on
television, 138–47
Femspec (journal), 193
Fiction House Comics, 57
Fielding, Sarah, 15, 259
Field of Dreams (ﬁlm), 109
Fiﬁeld, Efﬁe W., 47
Fifth Sacred Thing, The (Starhawk), 210, 213
Fifty Degrees Below (Robinson), 177
Figures of Earth (Cabell), 36
ﬁlking, 97, 156–57; fandom and, 287
ﬁlm: female heroes in, 184–86; girl
heroines in, 275–77; women in, 102–10.
See also science ﬁction ﬁlm
Final Fantasy (game), 163
Finch, Sheila, 81, 83
Finder: A Talisman (McNeil), 273
Fionavar Tapestry, The (Kay), 68
Fire and Hemlock ( Jones), 65, 269
Firebrand, The (Bradley), 67
Fireﬂy (television series), 188, 276
Fire Tripper (Takahashi), 130
ﬁrst-person-shooter (FPS) games, 161–62
Fish, Leslie, 287
Fisher, Joyce, 289
Fisher, Naomi, 288
Fisher, Ray, 289
“Fishes’ Feast, The” (Taylor), 27
Fishman, Elizabeth, 283–84
Five Children and It (Nesbit), 35, 265, 268
Five Old Friends and a Young Prince
(Ritchie), 18
Five Weeks in a Balloon, 264
Flash Gordon (comic), 182
Flatley, Michael, 150
Fledging (Butler), 213
Fleet, Thomas, 258
Fletcher, Ken, 288
Fletcher, Wendy, 285
Flewelling, Lynn, 181, 224

Index
Flights: Extreme Visions of Fantasy, 72
ﬂims, fantasy ﬁlms, 101–10
Flower Phantoms (Fraser), 42
Flying Cups and Saucers: Gender Explorations
in Science Fiction, 304
folktales: children’s literature and,
261–64; fantsy literature and, 63, 65–72;
ﬁlms based on, 101; girls in, 267
Food Force (game), 162
Fools (Cadigan), 80
Fool There Was, A (ﬁlm), 117
Forbes, Caroline, 81
Forest House, The (Bradley), 247
Forests of the Heart (de Lint), 67–68
Forever War, The (Haldeman), 181, 216
Forgotten, The (ﬁlm), 117
Forgotten Beasts of Eld, The (McKillip), 64
Formicarium, 2
Forster, E. M., 101
“For the Sake of Grace” (Elgin), 81
Fortunate Fall, The (Carter), 80
Forty Signs of Rain (Robinson), 177
Foster, Gwen, 102
Fowler, Karen Joy, 79, 81, 83, 300, 302
Fox, Janet, 97
Fox Woman, The (Johnson), 67
frame tales, in medieval literature, 7
France: fairy tales in, 257–59; fantasy
literature and, 12, 70; musical inﬂuences from, 151
Francke, Lizzie, 02
Frankenstein (Shelley), 12, 14, 21–22, 202,
216, 231, 264
Franklin, Christine Ladd, 232, 236
Franklin, Ellen, 297
Fraser, Ronald, 42
“Frauds on the Fairies” (Dickens), 16
Freak Orlando (ﬁlm), 105
Freaks (ﬁlm), 105
Freaky Friday (ﬁlm), 105
Freaky Friday (Rodgers), 215
Free Amazon series, 246
Freedom and Necessity (Bull and Burst), 70
Freeman, Mary Wilkins, 45
Freewoman newspaper, 38
French Revolution, gender and class and,
202–3
Freud, Sigmund, 118, 204, 227–28
Frey, Michelle, 83

Friedan, Betty, 116, 236
“Friend in Need” (Xena: Warrior Princess
television episode), 146
“Friend Island” (Bennett), 46, 50
Friends of Darkover, 283
Frierson, Penny, 289
Friesner, Esther, 65, 81, 83, 181, 220
From Eroika With Love (Aoike), 129
“From Goddess Spirituality to Irigaray’s
Angel” The Politics of the Divine”
(Ingram), 241
From Reverence to Rape: The Treatment of
Women in the Movies (Haskell), 104
From the Choirgirl Hotel (album), 155
From the Earth to the Moon
From the Earth to the Moon (Verne), 264
Frost, Abigail, 288
Fudoki (Johnson), 67
Fukunichi Shimbunran newspaper, 128
Furlan, Mira, 142
Fur Magic (Norton), 63
Fushigi Yuugi (Watase), 132–33
Futurians, 270
Gage, Matilda Joslyn, 241
Gaiman, Neil, 34, 155
Galaxy magazine, 48, 172
Gallagher, Mark, 184
Galland, Antoine, 256
Gallardo, Ximena C., 121
“Gamesters of Triskellion, The” (Star Trek
television episode), 138
gaming: fantasy and science ﬁction in,
159–69, xi; history of, 160–61; styles and
genres, 161–62; women characters in,
166–67
“Garden, The” (Marvell), 207
Garden of Eden, The (Bishop), 49
Gardner, Gerald, 243
Garey, Terry, 97, 99
Garibaldi, and Other Poems (Braddon), 30
Garner, Alan, 63
Garner, Jennifer, 143
Garnett, David, 37
Garr, Carol, 75
Gaskell, Elizabeth, 45
Gaskell, Jane, 42
Gaston, Phillipe, 156
Gate of Ivrel (Cherryh), 63, 181
341
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Gate to Women’s Country, The (Tepper), 81,
211, 212
Gatty, Margaret Scott, 262
Gawain, in medieval romances, 9
Gaylactic Spectrum Award, 200
Gearheart, Sally Miller, 78, 81, 237
Gebbie, Melinda, 268
Geiger, Steve, 91
Geis, Richard E., 284
Geisler, Deb, 289
Gelb, Janice, 288
Gellar, Sarah Michelle, 143, 187
Geller, Allegra, 224
gender: age and, 209–21; anime and
manga and, 123, 125–28, 130; authorship of medieval literature and issues
of, 3; children and, 212–14; class intersections with, 202–8; in Edwardian-era
ﬁction, 35; in fairy tales, 267; in fantasy
ﬁlms, 102–10; in fantasy literature, 62;
female heroes and, 179–89; ﬂuid identities of, 227–28; girl heroines an, 271;
male editors and, 170–78; in nineteenth-century ﬁction, 12, 19–20; in
nineteenth-century poetry, 23–25; race
and, 197–200; in science ﬁction ﬁlm,
113–22; in science ﬁction literature,
46–47, 49–53, 73–83, 175–78, 191,
196–200; sexual identity and, 222–23;
television characters and, 135–47;
witchcraft and, 42
genetic engineering, 81, 275; of children,
214; gender ﬂuidity and, 227–28
Genji Monogatari Emaki, 124
Genpei (Dalkey), 67
genre fantasy, 42–43, 71–72; ﬁlms as,
102–10
genre poetry, in twentieth century,
94–100
Gentle, Mary, 69, 81, 182
Geoffrey of Monmouth, 9, 11, 255
George, Susan, 117–18
Gerald of Wales, 2
Gerjuoy, Judy, 283
German Popular Stories, 261
Germany: and fantasy literature, 12, 69;
ﬁlms from, 186; legends from, 149
Gernsback, Hugo, 48, 172–74, 271,
278, xii
342
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Gerrold, David, 215
“Get Out of My House” (song), 155
Ghost and Mrs. Muir, The (ﬁlm), 109
“Ghost at the Opera, A” (Piatt), 30
Ghostbuster (ﬁlm), 109
Ghost (ﬁlm), 109
ghosts: in children’s literature, 262; in
music, 151
ghost stories: in fantasy ﬁlm, 105; in
mid-twentieth-century literature, 41; in
nineteenth-century literature, 32–33,
204–5; women writers of, 45
Gibbon’s Decline and Fall (Tepper), 212
Gibson, William, 80
Gideon, Melanie, 67
Gilbert, Sandra, 23–24, 30–31
Gilbert, Sheila, 83
Gilda Stories, The (Gomez), 199
Gillmore, Inez Haynes, 50, 220
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, 45–46, 49, 232,
234
Gilman, Greer Ilene, 71
Gilman, Laura Ann, 83
Gimbutas, Marija, 242
Ginger Snaps (Lupoff), 214
girl heroines: in children’s and young
adult literature, 267–73; in ﬁlm and
television, 275–77; history of, 266
Girl Who Swallowed the Moon, The (Gideon),
67
“Girl Who Was Plugged In, The”
(Sheldon), 80
Girl with the Silver Eyes (Roberts), 214
Giver, The (Lowry), 265
“Gladys and Her Island” (Ingelow), 28–29
Glaser, Alice, 75
Glicksohn, Mike, 284
Glory Road (Heinlein), 305
Glory Season, The (Brin), 217
Gloss, Molly, 81, 83, 212
Gnaedinger, Mary, 50
Goa (Dalkey), 67
“Goblin Market, The” (Rossetti), 19, 27–28,
39, 225–26
Goddess: Mythological Images of the Feminine
(Downing), 243
Goddesses in Everywoman (Bolen), 243
Goddess theology, 242–44
Godmother’s Web, The (Scarborough), 67

Index
~a, The (Dunsany), 21, 34
Gods of Pegan
Godwin, William, 14
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 12
Goldberg, Whoopi, 139
Golden Ass, The (Apuleius), 25
Golden Compass, The, 155
Golden Compass, The (Pullman), 271
Golden Globe, The (Varley), 215
“Goldilocks and the Three Bears,” 14
Golding, William, 213
Goldstein, Lisa, 69–70, 79, 81, 83
Goldwin, William, 260
“Golfre, a Gothic Swiss Tale”
(Robinson), 32
Golliwog’s Air Ship, The (Upton), 265
Gomez, Jewelle, 82, 199
Gomoll, Jean, 285, 286, 288, 305
€), 29
Gondal poems (Bronte
Gong-Wong, Kirsten, 82–83
Goodrich, Frances, 103–4
Goodrich, Samuel, 260
Good Working Women model, in science
ﬁction ﬁlms, 118–20
Gordon, Bonnie B., 98
Gospel of Nicodemus, 10
Goss, Theodora, 72, 83
Gossamer Axe (Baudino), 71, 248
gothic ﬁlm, 105
gothic literature: in interwar period,
38–39; nineteenth-century boundaries
for, 12–13; nineteenth-century poetry
as, 24, 30–33
gothic manga, 130
gothic on television, 136
Goto, Hiromi, 83, 220
€merung, 149
G€otterda
Goudge, Elizabeth, 35, 42
Gould, Chester, 57
Governess, The (Fielding), 15, 259
Graham, Peter, 195
Grahame, Kenneth, 268
Grammy Awards, 153
Grand Canyon (Sackville-West), 46
Grand Master Nebula Award, 76
Grandmothers of the Light: A Medicine
Women’s Sourcebook (Allen), 244
Granfallon, 283
Granny’s Wonderful Chair and Its Tales of
Fairy Times (Browne), 263

Grant, Gavin, 72
graphic novels, 268; evolution of, 168; girl
heroes in, 273–75
€ nter, 213
Grass, Gu
Graves, Robert, 41
Gray, Efﬁe, 15
Grayson, Devin, 85
Great Marvel series, 271
“Great Sleep Tanks, The” (Montague), 46
Greenberg, Martin H., 65
Green Card (ﬁlm), 152
Green Glass Sea, The (Klage), 303
Green Lacquer Pavilion, The (Beauclerk), 38
Green Mile, The (ﬁlm), 110
Greenwell, Dora, 26
Grifﬁth, D. W., 117
Grifﬁth, Mary, 45
Grifﬁth, Nicola, 83
Grimm, Jakob and Wilhelm, 14, 254, 261
“Grimoire” (Marjesdatter), 99
“Griots of the Galaxy” (Hairston), 199
Groppi, Susan Marie, 83
Groundhog Day (ﬁlm), 109
Grup (Trekzine), 281–82
Gubar, Susan, 23–24, 30–31
Guest, Lady Charlotte, 37
Guiborc (in Chanson de Roland), 7
Guinevere (in Arthurian legend), 9
Guitar Hero (computer game), 162
Gulliver’s Travels (Swift), 256
Gull (Sasaya), 129
Gunn, Eileen, 81–83
Guy of Warwick, 8
Gwynne, Fred, 136
Gyn/ecology (Daly), 242–43
gynocentrism, spirituality and, 242–43
Gypsy and Ginger (Farjeon), 36
Haapanen, Gretchen, 75
Haber, Karen, 83
Hackett, Albert, 104
Hadewijch of Anvers, 5
Haggard, H. Rider, 21, 34–35, 171
Hagio, Moto, 129
hagiography, in medieval literature, 5–6
Hagman, Larry, 136
Hairston, Andrea, 82, 199–200, 214
Halas, John, 104
Halas and Batchelor Animation, Ltd., 104
343
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Haldeman, Joe, 78, 181, 216
Half Magic (Eager), 35
Hall, Jennifer A., 83
Halloween ﬁlms, 120
Halo (game), 163
Hambly, Barbara, 81, 282
Hamel, Meg, 298
Hamilton, Laurell K., 247–48
Hamilton, Peter, 176
Hamilton, Virginia, 78
“Hammer Horror” (song), 155
Hammett, Dashiell, 104
Hand, Elizabeth, 71, 83
Handmaid’s Tale (Atwood), 81, 219
Hanke-Woods, Joan, 285
Hanks, Tom, 105
Hannigan, Alyson, 144
Hansen, L. Taylor, 50
Hanson, Donna Maree, 83
Happy Prince, and Other Tales, The (Wilde),
262–63
Haraway, Donna, 73–74, 80–81, 114,
223, 238
Harding, Allison V., 47
Harding, Sandra, 238
hard science ﬁction, 172–74, 176–78
Harmon, Jim, 59
Harriet Hume: A London Fantasy (West), 38
Harris, Charlaine, 251
Harris, Clare Winger, 48–51, 233
Harris, Joel Chandler, 264
Harrison, Harry, 95
Harrison, Jane, 39
Harrison, M. John, 217
Harrowing of Hell by Jesus, 10
Harryhausen, Ray, 106–7
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone (ﬁlm),
108
Harry Potter novels, 160, 163, 220, 269
Hartung, George, 292
Hartwell, David, 176
Harvey Comics, 55
Hasegawa, Machiko, 128–29, 133
Haskell, Molly, 104
Hatch, Richard, 145
Hauer, Rutger, 143
Haunted House, The (Proctor), 33
“Haunted Lake: The Irish Minstrel’s
Legend, The” (Landon), 33
344
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Have Space Suit—Will Travel (Heinlein), 173
Hawkins, Jane, 297
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 261–62
Hayden, Teresa Nielsen, 285
Hayles, N. Katherine, 81
Haywood, Elizabeth, 230
He, She, and It (Piercy), 80, 239
Heads of Cerebrus, The (Bennett), 47
Hearing Trumpet, The (Carrington), 210
“Heat Death of the Universe, The”
(Zoline), 75, 207
Heaven Can Wait (ﬁlm), 109
Hecate’s Cauldron (Shwartz), 65
Heddle, Jennifer, 83
Heian Period (Japanese art), 123–24
Heinlein, Robert A., 76, 170, 173, 193, 207,
212, 213, 219, 272, 305
Heir of Sea and Fire (McKillip), 64
Hellboy comics, 84
Hellman, Lillian, 102
Hemingway, Ernest, 194
Henderson, Zenna, 51, 75, 214
Henrietta’s House (Goudge), 35
Henstridge, Natasha, 118
Herbert, Frank, 81, 174–75, 210
Here Comes Mr. Jordan (ﬁlm), 109
Herland (Gilman), 46, 49, 232
Hero and the Crown, The (McKinley), 180,
270
heroes and heroines (sheroes), 179–89;
children as, 214
Heroes of Asgard, 261
Heroine of the World, A (Lee), 180
Heroine’s Journey, The (Murdock), 243
Hershey, Jennifer, 83
“Her Smoke Rose Up Forever” (Sheldon),
305
Her Smoke Rose Up from Supper, 304–5
He-Who-Came? (Holme), 41–42
Hexwood (Jones), 272
Hieroglyphic Tales (Walpole), 13
high fantasy ﬁlms, 106–8
High Kamilan (Jakober), 210
Highlander (ﬁlm), 107
High Place, The (Cabell), 36
“Highwayman, The” (Noyes), 151
history, in fantasy literature, 69–70
History of Little Goody Two-Shoes, 258
History of the Kings of Britain, 255

Index
History of the Robins, The (Trimmer), 259
Histoires ou contes du temps passe (Tales of
Olden Times) (Perrault), 257
Hobbit, The (Tolkein), 43
Hoffman, Alice, 109
Hoffman, Lee, 279, 288
Hokusai, Katsushika, 124
Hokusai Manga, 124
Holdom, Lynne, 283
Holiday House: A Book for the Young
(Sinclair), 264
Holier Than Thou fanzine, 284
Holland, Cecilia, 78, 79
Holliday, Liz, 83
Hollinger, Veronica, 81
Holme, Constance, 41–42
Holopainen, Tuomas, 153
Homans, Margaret, 23
Home Treasury series, 261
Homeward Bounders (Jones), 270
homosexuality: in fantasy literature,
71–72, 222–29; female heroes and,
179–89; intersectional works and, 191;
in mid-twentieth-century literature, 41;
sameness and difference in, 226–27; in
science ﬁction, 78–81, 174, 222–29; on
television, 146; vanity and, 216
Honisch, Juliane, 156
Hope, Akua Lezli, 82
“Hope Eyrie” (ﬁlk), 287
Hopkinson, Nalo, 82, 196, 198–99, 210,
220, 239
Hopper, Fran, 54, 57
hornbooks, 255
horror: absence in medieval literature of,
1; child characters in, 213; fantasy and,
71–72; ﬁlms of, 101; in games, 161–62;
manga as, 130; music and, 155; in
nineteenth-century literature, 14, 21; role
of Other in, 192–93; on television, 136–37
Horror Writers Association, 199
Horsegirl, The (Ash), 66
Horse Goddess, The (Llwelyn), 66
“Horse Turned Driver, The” (Taylor), 27
Hossain, Rokeya Sakhawat), 36
“Hounds of Love” (song), 155
“Hourglass City” (Elana), 210
House Committee on Un-American
Activities hearings, 115

House of Pomegranates, A (Wilde), 262–63
House of the Scorpion (Farmer), 265
House of Zeor (Lichtenberg), 283
“Houston, Houston, Do You Read?”
(Sheldon), 217
Houston, Libby, 75
Howard, Robert E., 39, 41, 47, 94
Howitt, Mary, 29, 32, 261
Howl’s Moving Castle (Jones), 212
Huff, Tanya, 83
Hufford, Liz, 75
Hughes, Kerrie, 83
Hughes, Monica, 272–73
Hugo Award, 76–77, 83
humanists, science ﬁction and, 79–81
humans as aliens, 206–7
Humphrey, Elizabeth L., 83
Hunter, Anne, 26
Hunter, Jeffrey, 137
Hunter, Margaret, 264
Huntzinger, Lucy, 288
Huon of the Horn (Norton), 42
hurt/comfort ﬁction, 281
Hutton, Roxanne, 83
Huxley, Aldous, 172
Hwang, Ciney, 83
Ian, Janis, 83
I Dream of Jeannie, 136
Idylls of the King (Tennyson), 30
Idylls of the Queen (Karr), 68
“I felt a Funeral in my Brain” (Smith), 31
Igarashi, Satsuki, 131
“I Have a Dream” (song), 155
“I Heard a Fly Buzz When I Died”
(Dickinson), 24
Ikeda, Riyoko, 129
Image Comics, 84, 88
“Image of Women in Science Fiction,
The” (Russ), 192
“Imaginary” (song), 153
I Married a Monster from Outer Space (ﬁlm),
120
immortality, in science ﬁction, 216–17
incest, in interwar literature, 39
Incredible Hulk, The (comic), 85,
90–91, 163
India: in fantasy ﬁction, 37, 67; writers
from, 191, 200
345
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Indian Tomb, The (ﬁlm), 103
“Inﬂuence of Science Fiction on Modern
American Filk Music, The,” 287
Ingelow, Jean, 19–20, 28–30, 262
Ingram, Penelope, 241
“In Hiding” (Shiras), 51
Innamorati, The (Snyder), 69
Inness, Sherrie, 179, 184
“In Search of Peter Pan” (song), 155
Insinga, Merlie, 285
Interfaces, 95–96
intergenerational relations in science
ﬁction, 218
International Association of the Fantastic
in the Arts, vii
International Clark Smith award, 96
Internet: fanzines on, 285; gaming and,
159; science ﬁction magazines on, 82
Interstitial Movement, 71–72
Interview with the Vampire (Rice), 213
interwar period, literature of, 36–39
“In the Farm,” 175
Into the Darkness Peering: Race and Color in
the Fantastic, 193
“Into the 28th Century,” 234
InuYasha (Takahashi), 130
Invaders from the Dark (La Spina), 47
invasion narratives, nineteenth-century
emergence of, 21
Invisible Man, The, 46
Invisible Scarlett O’Neill, 57
Invitation to the Game (Hughes), 272
In Winter’s Shadow (Bradshaw), 68
Irving, Minna, 50, 233
Irving, Washington, 260
Irwin, Margaret, 38
Ishmael (Hambly), 282
Isis (television show), 140
Island of the Might, The (Walton), 64
Island Sonata (Livingston), 43
It Came from Beneath the Sea (ﬁlm), 119–20
It Came from Outer Space (ﬁlm), 116
It’s a Wonderful Life (ﬁlm), 104, 109
I Will Fear No Evil (Heinlein), 219
“Jackanapes” magazine, 262
Jackson, Peter, 107, 152, 154–56
Jack the Giant Killer (de Lint), 66
Jacobs, Lee, 287
346
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Jakober, Marie, 69, 210
Jambalaya (Teish), 244
James, Henry, 204, 213
James, M. R., 45
James Tiptree Award Anthology, The, 304
James Tiptree Jr.: The Double Life of Alice
Sheldon (Phillips), 302
James W. Tiptree Jr. Award, 71, 78, 225,
290, 296, 300–305; list of winners, 306–7
Janus fanzine, 286, 290–92
Japan: anime and manga in, 123; fairy
tales in, 65; gaming from, 160, 164, 168;
manga for girls in, 274–75
Jason and the Argonauts (ﬁlm), 107
e Fanonne, 82
Jeffers, Honore
Jeffords, Susan, 121–22
Jenkins, Henry, xi–xii
Jenkins, William F. (pseud. Murray
Leinster), 47
Jewett, Sarah Orne, 45
Jewish martyrs: in medieval hagiography,
5; in medieval romances, 8
Jewish science ﬁction writers, 96–97, 195–96
“Jirel Meets Magic” (Moore), 40
Jirel of Joiry (Moore), 40, 47, 64
Johnson, George Clayton, 218
Johnson, Kij, 67
John W. Campbell Award, 78
Jones, Carolyn, 137
Jones, Diana Wynne, 65, 212, 269–70, 272
Jones, Dorothy, 281
Jones, Gwyneth, 72, 81, 83, 239, 303
Jones, Lillian, 82
Jones, Myrtle R., 279
Jordan, Robert, 64
-Farmer, Philip, 175
Jose
josei ( young women’s manga), 127
Journey to the Center of the Earth (Verne), 21
Judgment Withheld (Syrett), 35
Julian of Norwich, 4
Jungle, Book, The (Kipling), 263
Jungle Taitei (Kimba the White Lion)
(Tezuka), 125
Jurgen, a Comedy of Justice (Cabell), 36
Justice League of America, 86
Just Like Heaven (ﬁlm), 105
Kadohata, Cyntha, 82
Kagan, Janet, 81, 83

Index
Kakuyu, 124
Kalogride, Jeanne, 251
Kantele fanzine, 287
Karr, Phyllis Ann, 68, 181
Katie Crackernuts tale, 66
Kaufman, Jerry, 284
Kavan, Anna, 78, 79
Kaveny, Phillip, 291
Kay, Guy Gavriel, 68–69
Keary, Anna and Eliza, 261
Keeper’s Price, The, 283
Keller, Evelyn Fox, 238
Kenin, Millea, 97
Kennealy-Morrison, Patricia, 68–69,
220, 251
Kennedy, John F., 74
Kennedy, Kathleen, 187
Kennedy, Leigh, 81
Kerby, Susan Alice, 42
Kessell, John, 225
Khatru fanzine, 286, 305
kibyoshi booklets, 124
Kidd, Virginia, 75, 78, 95–96, 279, 286
Kiefer, Hope, 298
Kihara, Toshie, 129
Kiki’s Delivery Service (ﬁlm), 276
Killing Joke, The (comic), 88–89
Killing Time (Van Hise), 282
Killough, Lee, 78, 81
Kilner, Dorothy, 259–60
Kilner, Mary Jane, 260
Kimura, Minori, 129
€rchen (Grimm), 261
Kinder- und Hausma
Kindred (Butler), 198
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 74, 175
King, Stephen, 110, 155, 193
King Arthur’s Daughter (Chapman), 68
Kingdoms of Elﬁn (Warner), 39, 64
King Kong (ﬁlm), 163
King of Elﬂand’s Daughter, The (Dunsany),
38
“King of the Golden River, The” (Ruskin),
15
King of the Golden River, The (Ruskin), 263
King’s Damosel, The (Chapman), 68, 181
King’s Daughter (Gaskell), 42–43
Kingsley, Charles, 263
King Solomon’s Mines (Haggard), 34
Kipling, Rudyard, 263

Klages, Ellen, 83, 303
Knight, Damon, 74, 76
“Knight of the Pale Horse” (Piatt), 30
Knighton, Gwen, 156
“Knights in White Satin” (song), 156
Knopﬂemacher, U. C., 17
knowledge, age and transmission of,
219–20
Kobayashi, Tamai, 82
Kobbotozo (Cranch)263
kodomo texts (Japanese children’s
literature), 127
Koja, Kathe, 81
Krangle, Jodie, 156
Krentz, Jayne Ann, 249
Kress, Nancy, 80–81, 83, 206–7, 211
Kriemhild’s Revenge (ﬁlm), 103
Kristeva, Julia, 118
Krull (ﬁlm), 107
K/S genre, 281–82
Kumin, Maxine W., 75
Kurtz, Katherine, 69, 283
Kushner, Ellen, 66, 70
L.A. Story (ﬁlm), 152
Labyrinth (ﬁlm), 108, 269
Lackey, Mercedes, 63–64, 67, 97, 211, 214,
217, 220, 251
Ladies Home Journal, 115
Lady Audley’s Secret (Braddon), 30
Lady Churchill’s Rosebud Wristlet, 72
“Lady Hamilton” (Lickbarrow), 32
“Ladyhawke” (ﬁlk song), 156
Ladyhawke (ﬁlm), 107, 156
“Lady in the Tower” (McCaffrey), 52
Lady in the Water (ﬁlm), 110
Lady into Fox (Garnett), 37
Lady Meed (allegorical ﬁgure), 5
Lady of Avalon (Bradley), 247
“Lady of Shalott, The” (Tennyson), 151
“Lady of the Black Tower, The”
(Robinson), 32
Lady of the Lake, in medieval literature,
11
Lai, Larissa, 67
lais, women writers of, 4
Lake, Christina, 285, 288
“Lake Poets,” 14
Lalli, Cele Goldsmith, 76
347
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

La Manekine, 8
Lamb, Charles and Mary, 260
Lambda Award, 71, 199, 248
Lamport, Felicia, 75
Landau, Martin, 140
Landon, Letitia Elizabeth, 26, 33
Land That Time Forgot, The (ﬁlm), 106
Lane, Mary E. Bradley, 49, 232, 234
Lang, Andrew, 262
Lang, Fritz, 103, 106, 113
Langelier, Frances, 97
Langsam, Devra, 280, 281
language, in science ﬁction, 81
Lan’s Lantern fanzine, 285
“Lanval,” 4
Lara Croft: Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life
(ﬁlm), 186
Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (ﬁlm), 186
Larbalestier, Justine, 22, 213, 218, xii
Larque on the Wing (Springer), 215
La Spina, Greye, 47
Last Enchantment, The (Stewart), 68
“Last of the Dragons, The” (Nesbit), 20–21
Last of the Huggermuggers, The (Cranch),
263
Latin American writers, 191, 197–200
Laughing Target (Takahashi), 130
Laurance, Alice, 78
Lauzen, Martha, 110
Laverne and Shirley (television show), 139,
144
Lawless, Lucy, 146, 187
Lawrence, Judith Ann, 75
Lawrence, Louise, 71
Layne, Deborah, 82
Lear, Edmund, 27
Lee, Amy, 153
Lee, Holme (pseud.). See Parr, Harriet
Lee, Sharon, 83
Lee, Stan, 56, 58, 66–67
Lee, Tanith, 65, 72, 78, 180, 251
Leech Woman, The (ﬁlm), 117, 216, 218
Leeper, Evelyn, 285
LeFanu, J. Sheridan, 45
Lefanu, Sarah, 193
Left Hand of Darkness, The (LeGuin), 77,
220, 228, 237
legend: in nineteenth-century poetry,
27–30; in opera, 149–50
348
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Legendary Adventures of Hercules, The
(television series), 146
Legend (ﬁlm), 107
“Legend of Sleepy Hollow, The” (Irving),
261
Legend of the Three Kingdoms, 163
Legend of Zelda game series, 161
Legends from Fairyland (Parr), 262
Legion of Superheros, The (comic), 85
“Legolas” (song), 157
Lego Star Wars, 163
Le Guin, Ursula K., 63, 75, 77, 79, 81, 83,
95–96, 99, 178, 180, 193, 205–6, 210, 212,
219–20, 220, 222, 226–27, 237, 270, 286,
297–98
Leiber, Fritz, 41, 94
Leighton, Angela, 24–25
Leinster, Murray. See Jenkins, William F.
Leiper, Esther, 97–98
LeMoine, Fannie, 291
Le Morte d’Arthur (Malory), 43, 255
Lenard, Mark, 282
L’Engle, Madeleine, 51, 265
Lennox, Annie, 155
Leonard, Elisabeth Ann, 193
Leonard, Eliza Lucy, 29–30
Lepovetski, Lisa, 97
Le Prince de Beaumont, Jeanne-Marie,
257–58
Lerman, Rhoda, 79
Leroux, Gaaston, 150
lesbianism: in comics, 59–60; Dianic
Wicca and, 243; in Edwardian
ﬁction, 35; in fantasy ﬁlm, 104–5; in
interwar literature, 38–39; in
nineteenth-century poetry, 28; race
and, 199–200; in science ﬁction, 77–79,
174; spiritual feminism and, 248–49;
in television series, 187
Lessing, Doris, 78–79, 220
Les Triplettes de Belleville (Pratchett), 211
Levin, Ira, 81
Levine, Gail Carson, 267
Levy, Mike, 174
Lewis, Al, 136
Lewis, C. S., 35, 43, 172
Lewis, Hilda, 41
Lewis, Matthew Gregory, 13
Liban (mermaid), 11

Index
“Libation Bearers, The” (Agamemnon),
148
Lichtenberg, Jacqueline, 280, 282, 283
Lickbarrow, Isabella, 32
Liddlell, Alice, 16–17, 268
Lief, Evelyn, 75
Life (Jones), 239
Light (Harrison), 217
“Light Princess, The” (MacDonald),
17, 263
Like a Prayer (album), 155
“Like Their Feet Have Wings” (song), 156
Li’l Abner (comic), 182
Lilith, in medieval literature, 11
Lilith (MacDonald), 17, 21
Lillian, Guy, 288
Lillian, Rosy, 288
Lilo and Stitch (ﬁlm), 276
Lindgren, Astrid, 35
Lindholm, Megan, 67, 70–71
Lindsay, Ethel, 279, 288
Lindskold, Jane, 67, 70
Link, Kelly, 72, 82–83
Linville, Joanne, 138
Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe, The (ﬁlm),
107–8
Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe, The
(Lewis), 43
Lisa Kane (Lupoff), 214
literary criticism, feminist spirituality
and, 245
literary genres, in medieval literature,
4–10
literature, female heroes in, 180–82
Little House books, 269
Little magazine, 99
Little Orphan Annie (comic), 182
Little Pretty Pocket-Book, A, 258–59
Little White Bird, The (Barrie), 35
LiveJournal website, viii
Livia, Anna, 81, 210
Living Alone (Benson), 42
Living Blood, The (Due), 199
Living in the Lap of the Goddess (Eller), 243
Livingston, Marjorie, 43
Llywelyn, Morgan, 66
Loathly lady, in medieval romances, 9
Lockhart, Anne, 145
Locus fancine, 284

Lofting, Hugh, 103, 268
Logan’s Run (Nolan and Johnson), 218
Lolly Willowes; or, The Loving Huntsman
(Warner), 39, 212
Longest Journey, The (game), 167
Looking Backward from the Year 2000
(Bellamy), 49
Loos, Anita, 102
Lord of the Dance, 150
Lord of the Flies (Golding), 213
Lord of the Rings, The (ﬁlms), 107, 152,
154–56
Lord of the Rings, The (Tolkien), 43, 64, 101,
149, 163, 165, 181, 283, ix
Lorete, 3
Loring, Lisa, 137
Lorrah, Jean, 280, 282
Lorraine, Lilith, 50, 234
“lost colony” fantasy series, 62–63
Lost Girls (Moore-Gebbie), 268–69
Lost Horizon (ﬁlm), 106
Loth, Pauline, 54, 57
“Lothlorien” (song), 152
Loudon, Jane Webb, 45
Lounsbury, Linda, 288
Lovecraft, H. P., 34, 94, 163
“Love Match, A” (Warner), 39
Love of the Foolish Angel, The
(Beauclerk), 38
love poetry, in medieval literature, 4
Lovsky, Celia, 138
Lowachee, Karin, 82, 199, 200
Lowry, Lois, 265
Lucas, George, 90, 105
Lud-in-the-Mist (Mirrlees), 39
Ludwick, Kathleen, 50
Lupoff, Richard, 214
Luttrell, Hank and Lesleigh, 284,
288, 291
Lynch, Nikki, 83, 284
Lynch, Richard, 284
Lyngstad, Anni-Frid “Frida,” 154
Lynn, Elizabeth A., 71, 78, 193, 211–12, 292
“Lyra” (song), 155
Lyric magazine, 99
lyric poetry, by medieval women, 4
Mabinogian (Morris), 37
Mabinogian (Walton), 40, 64
349
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

MacAvoy, R. A., 67, 69, 81
MacDonald, George, 17, 21, 263, 268
Machen, Arthur, 204
Mackerman, Dianne, 98
MacLean, Katherine, 75, 78, 83, 236, 287
Macrobius, 2
Madison, Cleo, 102
Madonna, 155
Mad 3 Party fanzine, 284
Madstf student group, 291
Magasin des enfas, Le, 258
magazine ﬁction: all-fantasy magazines,
47; science ﬁction as, 46
Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, 48,
52, 82; poetry in, 94–96, 99
Magazine of Speculative Poetry, The, 99
magic, in medieval literature, 2
magical realism, 191; in fantasy books,
266; science ﬁction and, 74, 79
“Magical World” (song), 151
Magic Bed-Knob, The (Norton), 42
Magic City, and Other Fairy Tales, The
(Syrett), 36
“Magic Fishbone, The” (Dickens), 16, 262
Magician’s Nephew, The (Lewis), 43
Magic Knight Rayearth (manga), 131
Magic London (Syrett), 35
Magic World, The (Nesbit), 35
Magniﬁcent 24s (manga artists),
129, 133
Maguire, Gregory, 150, 210
Maimonides, 2
Maison Ikkoku (Takahashi), 129–30
major, devorah, 82
Majors, Lee, 140
Make-a-Wish Foundation, 162
Malchon, Elissa, 97–98
Malcolm X, 74
male dominance, among science ﬁction/
fantasy authors, xi
male writers, depictions of women by,
170–78
Malleus Malleﬁcarum, 2
Malory, Sir Thomas, 9, 59, 68, 255
Malthus, Thomas, 203
manga: evolution of, 123–25; future
trends in, 133; gaming and, 168; girl
heroes in, 273–75; women artists in,
128–33; women’s images in, 127–28
350
................

Volume 1: Overviews

manhwa (Korean comics), 168
Manlove, Colin, 101
Man of Many Faces (manga), 131
Man Who Folded Himself, The (Gerrold), 215
Mar, Kathy, 287
Margaret of Antioch, 6
Marian cult, in medieval literature, 6
Mari and Shingo (Kihara), 129
Marie de France, 3–4
Marillier, Juliet, 66
Mario game series, 161
Marion, Frances, 102
Maris the Chojo (Takahashi), 130
Marjesdatter, Rebecca, 99
Marks, Laurie, 212
Marley, Louise, 220
Maroie de Diergnau, 3
Marquardt, Michelle, 83
Marshak, Sondra, 282
Marshall, Penny, 105
Marston, Ann, 251
Marston, Dr. William Moulton (pseud.
Charles Moulton), 58–60, 183–84
Martel, Arlene, 138
martial arts epics, 186
Martin, Diane, 292
Marvel Comics, 56–58, 84, 88, 90–92,
182–83
Marvel Family Comics, 55–56
Marvell, Andrew, 206–7
Marvelous Land of Oz, The, 35
Marvel’s Swimsuit Specials, 91–92
Marxism, 203
Mary Magdalene, in medieval literature, 6
Mary Sue (Smith), 281
Mason, Sue, 286, 288
Massie-Ferch, Kathleen, 65
massive multiplayer online role-playing
games (MMORPGs), 162, 165–66
Masuyama, Norie, 129
“Mathematics of Magic, The” (Pratt and
de Camp), 39–40
Matrix, The (ﬁlm), 163, 177
Matter of Life and Death, A (ﬁlm), 109
Mavor, Elinor, 96
Maxwell, Ann, 81
May, Julian, 81, 288
Mayhar, Ardath, 81, 100
McArthur, Maxine, 83

Index
McAuley, Paul J., 80
McCaffrey, Anne, 52, 62–63, 75–78, 83,
180, 217, 223, 283
McCarthy, Betty Jo, 280
McCarthy, Sen. Joseph, 115
McCarthy, Shawna, 83
McClintic, Winona, 94
McCoy, Paul, 153
McDonnell, Carole, 82, 199
McFadden, Gates, 139
McGowan, Christine, 288
McHugh, Maureen, 80, 83
McIlwraith, Dorothy, 47
McIntyre, Vonda N., 70, 75–76, 78, 81, 83,
211, 282, 286, 292
McKennitt, Loreena, 150–51
McKillip, Patricia, 64–65, 68, 71, 180, 182
McKinley, Robin, 66, 180, 265, 267, 270
McLachlan, Sarah, 154
McLeod, Ken, 170
McMahon, Donna, 212
McNeil, Carla Speed, 273
McQuillin, Cynthia, 287
Mead, L. T. See Elizabeth Thomasina
Meade Smith
Mechthild of Magdeburg, 5
“Medea in Athens” (Webster), 27
Medeiros, Teresa, 250
Mediaeval Babes (singing group), 151–52
medieval literature: genres of, 4–10; key
characters in, 10–11; overview of, 1;
themes of, 1–11; women readers and
writers of, 2–4
“Me from Myself—to Banish,” 24
Mehan, Uppinder, 82, 199
Meji Period: Japanese art in, 124; women’s
role in, 128–29
lie
s, Georges, 112
Me
Mellor, Anne, 24
Meluch, R. M., 81
Melusine ﬁgure: in interwar fantasy, 38;
in medieval literature, 10–11
Melusine (Monette), 71
Memoirs of a Peg-Top, 260
Memoirs of a Spacewoman (Mitchison), 76,
215
Memory and Dream (De Lint), 71
“Menace from Earth, The,” 173
“Men With Wings” (Stone), 234

Meredyth, Bess, 102
“Mer Girl” (song), 155
Meridian comic series, 88
Merlin’s Daughters: Contemporary Women
Writers of Fantasy (Spivack), 245
Merlin’s Mirror (Norton), 68
Merlin’s Ring (Munn), 40
mermaids, in medieval literature, 11
Mermaid Saga (Takahashi), 130
Merril, Judith, 52, 74–76, 82, 95, 178, 197,
236, 279, 298
Merritt, A., 34
Merry Adventures of Robin Hood, The (Pyle),
264
Meschke, Karen, 289
Messick, Dale, 54
Metal Gear Solid games, 163–64
Met by Moonlight (Edghill), 249
Metroid game, 166
Metropolis (ﬁlm), 113
Metropolis (manga), 125
Metropolitan Magazine, 46
Meyer, Kathleen, 289
Mezrab fanzine, 279
MGM Studios, 102
Michael (ﬁlm), 105
Michaels, Linda, 286
Middleton, Margaret, 287
Midnight Robber (Hopkinson), 198, 239
Midsummer Night’s Dream, A
(Shakespeare), 30
Miesel, Sandra, 284
ville, China, 170, 178, 226
Mie
Milano, Alyssa, 144
Miles, Rosalind, 68
Milestone Comics, 84
Milford SF Writer’s Conference, 76
Millennial Women (Kidd), 78
Miller and His Golden Dream,
The (Leonard), 29
Mills, Tarpe, 54–55
Milne, A. A., 268
Mimosa fanzine, 284–85
Mindplayer (Cadigan), 80
Mindscape (Hairston), 199–200, 214
“Minister without Portfolio”
(Clingerman), 52
Miokuri no Atode (Kimura), 129
“Miracle of the Lily, The” (Harris), 51
351
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

miracles, medieval interpretation of, 12
Mirrlees, Hope, 39
Mirror Dance (Bujold), 218
MirrorMask (ﬁlm), 108–9
Miss America Magazine, 57
Miss Carter and the Ifrit (Kerby), 42
“Missing Man, The” (MacLean), 75
Miss Lucifer (Fraser), 42
“Mistress of Kaer-Mor, The” (Walton), 41
Mistress of Mistresses (Eddison), 36–37
Mistress of Spices (Divakaruni), 219
Mists (Bradley), 68
Mists of Avalon, The (Bradley), 68, 210, 219,
246–47
Mitchell, Betsy, 83
Mitchison, Naomi, 76, 215
Miyazaki, Hayao, 276
Miyuki-chan in Wonderland (manga), 131
Mizora: A Prophecy (Lane), 49, 232
Modern Fantasy: Five Studies, 101
Modern Languages Association Database,
193
Modern Utopia, A (Wells), 205–6
Moe, Jrgen, 261–62
Moffatt, Anna S., 288
Moffatt, June and Len, 288
Moffett, Judith, 78, 81–82
Mohanraj, Mary Ann, 83
Mokona, 131
Molesworth, Mary Louisa, 264
Molina-Gavilan, Yolanda, 83
Molloy, Patrick, 288
Monette, Sarah, 71–72
Monk, The (Lewis), 13
“Monkey, The” (Dinesen), 41
Monolith Monsters, The (ﬁlm), 116
monstrous-feminine: in science ﬁction
ﬁlms, 118; on television, 136–37
Montague, Margaret P., 46
Montalba, Anthony, 261
Montgomery, Elizabeth, 136
Montgomery, Lucy Maude, 38
Monthly Packet magazine, 262
Moody, Ben, 153
Moody Blues, 156
Moon, Elizabeth, 83, 180–81, 211, 218, 219
Moon and the Sun, The (McIntyre), 70
Moon Is a Harsh Mistress (Heinlein), 173
Moon of Gomrath (Norton), 63
352
................

Volume 1: Overviews

“Moon-Slave, The” (Pain), 36
Moons of Palmares (Amadahy), 199
Moonwise (Gilman), 71
“Moon Woman” (Irving), 233
Moorcock, Michael, 34–35, 74, 76, 174, 217
Moore, Alan, 88–89, 268
Moore, C. L., 40, 47, 51, 64, 180, 197, 217
Moore, Raylyn, 75, 286
Moorehead, Agnes, 136
Mopsa the Fairy (Ingelow), 19, 28–29, 262
morality, fanatasy vs., 259–64
More, Hannah, 203, 260
More Than Human (Sturgeon), 213
More Women of Wonder anthology, 78
Morgaine Cycle (fantasy), 63
Morgan, Cheryl, 83, 285
Morgan, in Arthurian legend, 9
Morley, Lewis, 288
Morris, Kenneth, 37
Morris, William, 21
Morrison, Toni, 194, 251
Mortal Immortal, The (Shelley), 216
mortality, aging and, 214–16
Mortal Kombat (game), 163
Mortal Love (Hand)
Mother Goose’s Melody, 258
Mother Goose tales, 257–59
Mother Goose Tales (Perrault), 258
Mothering Heart, The (ﬁlm), 117
Motherlines (Charnas), 217
Moulton, Charles. See Marston,
Dr. William Moulton
Mountain and the Tree, The (Beauclerk), 38
“Mountain Ways” (Le Guin), 227
Mounts, Paul, 91
Moving the Mountain (Gilman), 46
Ms. Magazine, 59, 77
Mueller, Pat (Pat Virzi), 284
Mulan (ﬁlm), 276
Mulgrew, Kate, 139
Mulock, Dinah Maria, 261–62
Mulvey, Laura, 104
Munn, H. Warner, 40
Munsters, The, 136–37
Murasaki, Shikibu, 124
Murdock, Maureen, 243
Murn, Thomas, 291
Murphy, Pat, 78–79, 82, 287, 296, 300,
302–3

Index
Murray, Janice, 288
music: fantasy and science ﬁction in,
150–57, x; history of women in, 148–50
Music from Behind the Moon, The (Cabell), 36
Mussorgsky, Modest, 103
Myers, John, 36
“My Immortal” (song), 153
“My Invisible Friend” (Kip), 46
My Neighbor Totoro (ﬁlm), 276
Mysteries of Udolpho, The (Radcliffe), 13
Mysterious Island (ﬁlm), 106
Mysterious Island (Verne), 171
mystical literature, by medieval women
writers, 4–5
Mystic Comics, 56
Mystique Models, in science ﬁction ﬁlms,
115–17
Myth, Symbol, and Religion in “The Lord of
the Rings” (Miesel), 284
Mythic Delirium magazine, 99
mythic fantasy, 66–69
mythology: fantasy literature and, 66–72;
girls in, 267; in medieval literature, 10;
in nineteenth-century poetry, 25–27,
29–30; in opera, 149–50; transgenderism
in, 130
Nagata, Linda, 83
Naifeh, Ted, 273
Nakamura, Lisa, 81
Namora comic, 56–57
Nancy Drew games, 167
Napoli, Donna Jo, 267
Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym, The (Poe),
194
Nash, Ogden, 94
National Fantasy Fan Federation (N3F),
280
National Organization for Women, 236
National Woman’s Party, 50
Native American writers, 199; feminist
spiritualism and, 244
Native Tongue (Elgin), 81, 212
Native Tongue II: Judas Rose (Elgin), 81
Nature, as allegorical ﬁgure, 5
Naylor, Gloria, 251
Nebula Award, 64, 75–77, 79, 83
Necklace of Princess Fiorimonde, The
(de Morgan), 20, 262

Nectarebus, 8
Nekoi, Tsubaki, 131
Nesbit, Edith, 20–21, 35, 265, 268
networked games, 165–66
Neuromancer (Gibson), 80
Neverending Story (ﬁlm), 107
Newbery, John, 258–59
Newbery Award, 258; 265
“New Foundations” (Shiras), 51
Newman, Sharan, 68
New Mutants, The (comic), 274
New Wave Fabulists, 72
New Wave feminism, science ﬁction and,
77–83
New Wave science ﬁction, 74–77, 170
New Worlds magazine, 74–75, 95, 174–75
New Worlds Quarterly, 76
New X-Men comics, 274
New Yorker, 34, 39, 64
New York Quarterly, 100
Nichols, Nichelle, 138
Nicholson, Jack, 110
Nielsen, Patrick and Teresa, 288
Night, Candice, 151
Nightingale, The (Dalkey), 65
Nightmare before Christmas, The (ﬁlm), 105
Night of the Demon (ﬁlm), 155
Night on Bald Mountain (ﬁlm), 103–4
“Night on Bald Mountain” (Mussorgsky),
154
“Nights in White Satin” (song), 156
Nightwing (comic), 85
Nightwish (band), 153–54
Nine Lives (Le Guin), 81
nineteenth-century literature: fantasy
and horror ﬁction, 12–22; ghost stories
in, 32–33; gothic poetry in, 30–33; poetry
in, 23–33; women writers of, 17–22
Nintendo game systems, 160–61
Niven, Larry, 176, 217, 218
Nix, Garth, 271, 272
Nocenti, Ann, 85
Nolan, William, 218
nonﬁction, science ﬁction and, 75
Norse mythology, 37; fairies and
supernatural women in, 11
Norske folkeeventyr, 261
Northanger Abbey (Austen), 13
“Northanger Horrid” novels, 13
353
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Northern Girl (Lynn), 211–12
Norton, Andre, 42, 63, 68, 76, 170, 180,
214, 272
Norton, Mary, 42, 269
Notkin, Debbie, 83, 205
Not One of Us magazine, 99
Nove (Delany), 174
November, Sharyn, 83
“No Woman Born” (Moore), 217
Noyes, Alfred, 151
Number of the Beast, The (Heinlein), 212
“Nun’s Portrait, The” (Proctor), 33
Nuyen, France, 138
objectiﬁcation of women, in superhero
comics, 88–92
O’Brien, Ulrika, 288
“Ocean Gypsy” (song), 151
“Ocean Soul” (song), 154
Octagon Magic (Norton), 63
Off-Centaur recording studio, 97
“Of Mist, Grass, and Sand” (McIntyre), 76
“Ogre Courting, The” (Ewing), 19
Ohio Valley Filk Fest, 157
Ohkawa, Ageha, 131
Oh! My Goddess, 127
Okorafor-Mbachu, Nnedi, 82, 200, 214
older women, in science ﬁction and
fantasy, 209–21
Oliver, Glenis, 85
On a Pincushion, and Other Fairy Tales
(de Morgan), 20, 262
“On Being Cautioned Against Walking on
an Headland Overlooking the Sea
Because it Was Frequented by a
Lunatic” (Smith), 31
Once a Hero (Moon), 181
Once and Future King, The (White), 43
1,001 Arabian Nights, 103
“Only Time” song, 152
“On Medicine Women and White ShameAns: New Age Native Americanism and
Commodity Fetishism as Pop Culture
Feminism” (Donaldson), 244
Open Door, The (album), 153
“Opening Doors” (Shiras), 51
opera, history of women in, 149–50
“Operation Cassandra” (deFord), 52–53
Orbit anthologies, 74–75
354
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Ore, Rebecca, 215
Orenstein, Gloria, 242
Orientalisms (Said), 197
original video animations (OVA) (Japan),
126–27
Orlando: A Biography (Woolf), 38, 46, 105,
130
Orlando (ﬁlm), 105
Orwell, George, 104, 172
Osborne-Knight, Juilene, 251
Oshima, Yumiko, 129
Ostriker, Alicia, 23
Other, in science ﬁction, 192–93
Other Nature (Smith), 214
“Other Side of a Mirror, The” (Coleridge),
31–32
Other Wind, The (Le Guin), 270
Ottinger, Ulrike, 104–5
Our White Room (manga), 129
Outerworlds fanzine, 284
Outlaw School (Ore), 215
Out of the Past (ﬁlm), 117
Out of the Silent Planet (Lewis), 172
“Out of the Void” (Stone), 50
Outside Over There (Sendak), 266, 269
Owl Flight magazine, 97
Owl Service, The (Norton), 63
Ozark series, 210
Pain, Barry, 36
Pajama de Ojama (An Intrusion in Pamamas)
(Watase), 132
Paladin of Souls (Bujold), 64, 212
Palmer, Jane, 82
Palwick, Susan, 99
Pandora magazine, 97
“Pandora’s Aquarium” (song), 155
Panshin, Alexi, 76, 213
Pantheon, Ancient History of Schools and
Young People, 260
“Paradise Syndrome, The” (Star Trek
television episode), 138
Park, Grace, 146
Park, Severna, 83
Parker, Claire, 103–4
Parker, Dorothy, 102
Parker, Ella, 289
Parley, Peter (pseud.). See Goodrich, Frances
Parr, Harriet, 262

Index
Partners in Wonder: Women and the Birth of
Science Fiction, 1926–1965, 73
Passovoy, Anne and Bob, 288
pastorela (rural/pastoral songs), 4
Patrick, Butch, 136
patriotism, in comics, 55–60
Patternist series, 78
Patterson, Ama, 82
Paul, Alice, 50
Pavlat, Peggy Rae, 289
Paxson, Diana, 247
“Peacock ‘At Home,’ The” (Dorset), 27
“Peaerl,” 5
Pegasus Awards, 157
Peggy Sue Got Married, 215
Penelope’s Man: The Homing Instinct
(Erskine), 37
“People, The” (Henderson), 51–52
ville), 226
Perdido Street Station (Mie
Perez, George, 86–87
Perfect Dark game, 166
Perfume of the Rainbow, The (Beck), 38
Perilous Guard, The (Pope), 271
Perlman, Anne S., 98
Perrault, Pierre, 258
Perreault, Charles, 66, 258
Peter Pan and Wendy (Barrie), 365
Peter Pan (Barrie), 29, 35, 155, 163, 268
Petriﬁed Planet, The (Twayne), 52
Pettyjohn, Angelique, 138
Pfeiffer, Emily, 26
Pfeiffer, Michelle, 110
Pﬂug, Ursula, 83
Phantasmion (Coleridge), 29
Phantastes: A Faerie Romance
(MacDonald), 17
Phantasy Star game, 166
“Phantom Bride, The” (Landon), 33
Phantom of the Opera, The (musical), 150,
154
Philip K. Dick Award, 200
Philippe de Remi, 8
Philips, Sir Richard, 260
Phillips, Julie, 205, 302
Phoenix and the Carpet, The (Nesbit), 35,
265, 268
Piatt, Sarah Morgan Bryan, 30
Pickersgill, Linda, 285
“Picnic on Nearside” (Varley), 215

Picnic on Paradise (Russ), 76
Picture of Dorian Gray, The (Wilde), 216
Pierce, Tamora, 83, 213, 219, 271
Piercy, Marge, 78–80, 197, 202, 204, 206–7,
218, 219–20, 237, 239
Pilgrim’s Progress (Bunyan), 255
pinboard/pinscreen animation, 103–4
“Piper, The” (song), 154–55
Pipes of the Orpheus, The (Lindskold), 67
Pippi Longstocking, 35
Pippi Longstocking (ﬁlm), 276
Pirate Jenny fanzine, 284
Pirates of the Caribbean ﬁlms, 108, 149–50,
163
Piserchia, Doris, 75, 78
Planet Comics, 57
Planet Stories, 48
“Planners, The” (Wilhelm), 76
Plant, Sadie, 81
Plaskow, Judith, 241
play, gaming and, 159
Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the
Literary Imagination (Morrison), 194
Plokta fanzine, 285
Plummer, Mark, 285
Podkayne of Mars (Heinlein), 76, 173,
213, 272
Poe, Edgar Allan, 21, 94, 193–94
Poems (Ingelow), 19
poetry: American poets, 30; embedding in
novels of, 29–30; mythology and, 25–27;
in nineteenth-century literature, 23–33;
science ﬁction as, 75; twentieth-century
genre poetry, 94–100
Pohl, Frederick, 170, 174
Poictesme Cycle, 36
Point Pleasant (television series), 143
Police Woman (television show), 139
Polidori, John, 14
Pollack, Rachel, 82
“Poor Little Saturday” (L’Engle), 51
Popcorn Venus: Women, Movies and the
American Dream (Rosen), 102, 104
Pope, Elizabeth, 270
popular culture, feminist spiritualism
and, 244–45
Popular Fairy Tales, 260
Porcelain Dove, The, 70
Porete, Marguerite, 5
355
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

“Pornography by Women, for Women,
with Lofe” (Rus), 282
Portraits (Webster), 26
postcolonialism, science ﬁction and,
197–200
postfeminism, science ﬁction and, 80–81
postmodern liberation, 207–8; science
ﬁction and, 239–40
Potente, Franka, 186
Potter, Beatrix, 27, 265
Potter, Sally, 105
Powell, Frank, 117
power, gender and age in relation to,
209–10
Power of Three (Jones), 269–70
Powerpuff Girls (television series), 275
Poyser, Victoria, 285
Practical Magic (ﬁlm), 109
Pratchett, Terry, 211, 269
Pratt, Fletcher, 39–40
pregnancy, in fantasy literature, 37, 65
Price, Doug, 287
Pride, Marilyn, 288
Priest, Pat, 136
Priestess of Avalon (Bradley), 247
Prince Fabrique of Castile, 7
Prince of Morning Bells, The (Kress), 211
“Prince’s Progress, The” (Rossetti), 28
Princess and Curdie (MacDonald), 268
Princess and the Goblin, The (MacDonald),
17–18, 268
Princess Bride, The (ﬁlm), 107
Private Life of Helen of Troy (Erskine), 37
Prix Aurora Award, 200
Proctor, Adelaide, 33
Protector (Niven), 127
proto-feminism, 14, 197
proto-science ﬁction, 46, 231
Psalms of Herod (Friesner), 220
Psion (Vinge), 213
Psyche; or the Legend of Love (Tighe), 25
puer eternus ﬁgure, 35
Pull Down the Curtains, Suzie (ﬁlm), 112
Pullman, Philip, 155, 271
pulp comics, 84
pulp ﬁction, 34, 39–40; female heroes in,
180; feminism in, 50; race and gender
in, 191–92; science ﬁction and, 73,
172–74
356
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Pulphouse magazine, 82
pulp magazines, 46; poetry in, 94
Punisher comics, 84
Pushcart awards, 100
“Pushing Containment” (George), 117–18
Pushkin, Alexander, 12
Pyle, Howard, 264
Quandry fanzine, 279
“Queen Guinevere” (Braddon), 30
“Queen of the Black Coast” (Howard), 39
Queen of the Damned (Rice), 217
Queen Olympias of Macedonia, 8
quest genre, 63–64; female heroes in,
180–82; in ﬁlm, 150; ﬁlms, 106–8; in
gaming, 155–66; in manga literature,
132; older women in, 211
Quick, Amanda (pseud.). See Krentz,
Jayne Ann
Quick, Dorothy, 47, 94
Quilter, Laura, viii
Quinlan Road record label, 151
race: in fantasy literature, xi; feminism
and, 239–40; feminist spirituality and,
243–44; gender and, 197–200; in science
ﬁction, 75–76, 78, 175, 191–96, xi
“Racism and Science Fiction” (Delany), 196
Radcliffe, Anne, 13
Raimondin, Melusine and, 10
“Raining Blood” (song), 155
Ramasastry, Saira, 82
Rand, Ayn, 79
Randall, Barbara Kesel, 87–90
Randall, Marta, 78
Ranma 1/2 (Takahashi), 129–30, 275
Ranson, Peggy, 286
rape, 181; in manga literature, 132–33
Ravel, Maurice, 103
“Raven, The” (Poe), 193
Raymond, Victor, 299
“Ray of Displacement, The” (Spofford), 46
Ray of Light (album), 155
realism: in comics, 85–87; in fantasy ﬁlm,
105
Red as Blood: Tales from the Sisters Grimmer
(Lee), 65
“Red Nails” (Howard), 39
Red Sonja (ﬁlm), 107, 185

Index
Reed, Israel, 196
Reed, Kit (Lillian Craig Reed), 75
Reeve, Christopher, 110
Reﬂowering of the Goddess, The (Orenstein),
242
Reid, Mrs. Wallace (Dorothy Davenport),
102
Reiniger, Lotte, 103
“Rejoined” (Star Trek television episode),
141
religion: feminism and, 241; gender and
class and, 204–5; medieval hagiography
and, 5–6; in medieval literature, 1–2;
in science ﬁction/fantasy, xi–xii
Remnant Population (Moon), 211
“Renaissance Faire” (song), 151
Renaissance theater, women in, 149
Renee, Lily, 54
reproduction and breeding: science and,
232; in science ﬁction and fantasy,
210–23, 228–29
Resident Evil: Apocalypse (ﬁlm), 122, 186
Resident Evil (ﬁlm), 122, 163, 186
Resident Evil game series, 167
Return of the King, The (ﬁlm), 155
Return to Neverland (ﬁlm), 268
Return to Oz (Baum), 108
Reuther, Rosemary Radford, 241
Revolutionary Girl Utena (manga), 274–75
Reynard the Fox, 255
Reynolds, Richard, 59
RG Veda (manga), 131
Rhysling awards, 96–99
Ribon no Kishi (Princess Knight) (Tezuka),
125
Rice, Allison, 75
Rice, Anne, 213, 217, 218
Rice, Louise, 50
Richard Coer de Lyon, 8
Richards, Ellen Swallow, 232
Riddell, J. H. (Mrs.), 45
Riddle-Master trilogy, 64, 180
Ridpath, Debbie, 156
Ring, The (ﬁlm), 117
“Ring of Amurath, The,” 29
Ring of Endless Night, A (L’Engle), 265
Ring Two, The (ﬁlm), 117
“Rip Van Winkle” (Irving), 261
Ritchie, Anne Thackeray, 18

Rite of Passage (Panshin), 76, 213
Riverdance, 150
Roberts, Robin, 197, 216–17
Roberts, Willo Davis, 214
Robins, Madeline, 212
Robinson, Dr. Jane, 287
Robinson, Eden, 82, 200
Robinson, Kim Stanley, 78, 170–71, 177,
218
Robinson, Mary, 30, 32
Robinson Crusoe, 256
robots, women as, 113–15
Rocannon’s World (Le Guin), 63
Roddenberry, Gene, 137, 280–81
Rodgers, Mary, 215
Roessner, Michaela, 67
Rogue Reynard (Norton), 42
role-playing games, 163–67
romance: Arthurian romance, 9; fantasy
and, 65, 71–72; gender and age in
relation to, 209–10; in interwar period,
38–39; manga and, 125; medieval
romances, women in, 3, 7–8; scientiﬁc
romance, 12, 233–34
“Roman de la Rose,” 5
Roman de Silence, 8
Romanticism and Gender (Mellor), 24–25
Romantic period: fantasy poetry in,
27–30; gothic poetry in, 32–33; literature
of, 12–13; poetry of, 23–26
Roof, Katherine Metcalf, 47
Rorke, Hayden, 136
Roscoe, William, 27
Rose, Hilary, 238
“Rose and the Cup, The” (Morris), 37
Rose and the Ring, The (Thackeray), 16, 262
Rose Daughter (McKinley), 267
Rosen, Marjorie, 102, 104
Rose of Versailles, The (Ikeda), 129
“Rose’s Breakfast,” 27
Rosinsky, Natalie, 193
Ross, Deborah J., 63
Rossette Macmillan Letters, 19–20
Rossetti, Christina, 19–20, 24, 27–28,
30–32, 39, 225–26
Rossi, Alice S., 236
Roswell (television series), 143
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 203
Rowling, J. K., 220, 269, viii
357
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Ruby Ring: A Poem, The (Leonard), 29
Ruby Ring, The (Molesworth), 264
Rucker, Rudy, 218
“Rule That Worked Both Ways, The”
(Bond), 46
Rumble Roses game, 167
Run Lola, Run (ﬁlm), 186
Rupert, M. F., 50
Rusch, Kristine Kathryn, 82, 251
Ruskin, John, 15–16, 263
Russ, Joanna, 39, 48, 66, 75–78, 81, 171,
178, 180, 192–93, 196–97, 205–6, 220,
223–25, 237, 282, 286, 292, 300
Russell, Mary Doria, 211, 226
Russell, Richard, 292
Russia: fantasy literature in, 12; musical
inﬂuences from, 151
Ryman, Geoffrey, 171, 177, 212,
215, 219
Sabrina, the Teenage Witch (television
series), 275
Sackhoff, Katee, 145, 188
Sackville-West, Victoria (“Vita”), 38, 46
Sacred Ground (Lackey), 67
Sagara, Michelle, 82, 200
Said, Edward, 197
Sainte de Prez, 3
Saints’ lives, medieval hagiography, 5–6
Sakoku foreign policy, 126
Salmonson, Jessica Amanda, 65, 67, 181
Salome, the Wandering Jewess (Viereck/
Eldridge), 37
Salt Roads, The (Hopkinson), 198–99
sameness, sexual identity and, 226–27
Sampson, Fay, 68
Sand, George, 204
Sander, Alex, 243
Sanderson, Sandy, 279–80
Sandler, Bernice, 236–37
Sandman comics, 84
Sandoval, Chela, 238
Sappho poetry, 24–26
Sarandon, Susan, 110
Sarantine Mosaic, The (Kay), 69
Sarantonio, Al, 72
Sargent, Dick, 136
Sargent, Pamela, 48, 73, 78–79, 81, 83,
251, 292
358
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Sasaya, Nanae, 129
Sassinak (McCaffrey), 181
Saunders, Charles R., 196
Savage She-Hulk, The (comic), 91–92
Saxton, Josephine, 75, 78
Sazae-san (manga), 128
Scarborough, Elizabeth, 67, 82, 210, 251
Scarlet’s Walk (album), 155
Scary Godmother (Thompson), 273
Scavenger’s Newsletter, 97
Scharf, Sabrine, 138
Scheier, Elizabeth, 83
Schlobin, Roger C., 45
Schmitz, James H., 78
Schuster, Al, 271
Schwader, Ana K., 97
Schwartz, Susan, 65, 69, 82
science, science ﬁction and, 230–40
science fantasy, 71–72; women writers of,
62–64, 66, 71, 76
Science Fiction Culture, xii
science ﬁction ﬁlm: female heroes in,
184–86; Golden Age of, 115–22; nineteenth and twentieth centuries, 112–22;
older women heroines in, 211; vamps
in, 117–22
science ﬁction (generally): feminist science ﬁction, 237–40; in gaming, 163–66;
gender and age in, 209–21; girl heroes
in, 271–73; historical background,
191–93; in music, 147–57; science and,
230–40; sexual identity and, 222–29
science ﬁction literature: from 1960–2005,
73–83; in comics, 55–60; early to midtwentieth century literature, 45–53;
female heroes in, 181–82; in new millennium, 82–83; New Wave in, 74–77;
nineteenth-century emergence of,
21–22; poetry as, 75, 94; women in,
170–78
Science Fiction Poetry Association, 96, 98
Science Fiction Research Association, vii
Science Fiction Studies, 193
Science Fiction Writers of America
(SFWA), 48, 51, 96, 98
Science magazine, 98–99
science poetry, 98–100
Science Wonder Quarterly, 50
SCI FICTION, 82

Index
Scithers, George, 96
Scott, Alison, 285
Scott, Jody, 82
Scott, Melissa, 80, 82, 238
Scott, Mike, 285
Scott, Sir Walter, 151
Scoville, Pamela D., 83
Screening Space, 115
Scrivner, Joyce, 288
Search for a Woman-Centered Spirituality,
The (Van Dyke), 245
Second Wave Feminism, 236
Secret Mountain, and Other Tales, The
(Morris), 37
Secret Origins comic, 88–89
Seduction of the Innocents, 59
seinen (young men’s manga), 127
Selu: Seeking the Corn-Mother’s Wisdom
(Awiakta), 244
“semi-pro-zines,” 96
“Semley’s Necklace” (Le Guin), 63
Sendak, Maurice, 266
Sensational She-Hulk, The (comic), 91
Serenity (ﬁlm), 276
Serial Experiments LAIN, 165
Series of Unfortunate Events, A (ﬁlm), 276
Seven Days in New Crete (Graves), 41
Seven Gothic Tales (Dinesen), 41
“Seven Sages,” 7
Seventh Seal, The (ﬁlm), 107
Seventh Voyage of Sinbad, The (ﬁlm), 106
Sevenwaters trilogy, 66
Severin, Marie, 85
sex changes: in fantasy, 223; in interwar
literature, 46; in science ﬁction, 46, 174,
223; in television series, 145–46
sex discrimination, 77
sexism: older women and, 211; in science
ﬁction ﬁlm, 113–15
sexuality: in amime and manga, 127–28;
in children, 213–14; in comics, 58–60; in
epic fantasy, 34; in fantasy literature,
71–72; human-nonhuman relationships, 225–26; in manga literature,
132–33; in nineteenth-century fairy
tales, 17; of older women, 211–12;
sameness and difference in, 226–27;
in science ﬁction ﬁlms, 113–22; in
science ﬁction literature, 75–76, 78,

172–78; sexual identity and relationships in science ﬁction and fantasy,
222–29
Seymour, Jane, 110, 145
Shade’s Children (Nix), 272
Shadow of the Moon (album), 151
Shadow on the Hearth (Meril), 52
“Shambleau” (Moore), 51
Shange, Ntozake, 251
Shapiro, Shelly, 83
Shards of Empire (Shwartz), 69
Sharp, Evelyn, 21
Sharra’s Exile, 217
Shatner, William, 138
Shattered Chain, The (Bradley), 246
Shawl, Nisi, 82, 196, 199, 200
Shazam! (television show), 140
Sheepfarmer’s Daughter, The (Moon), 181
Shefﬁeld, Charles, 206
She (Haggard), 21
Sheldon, Alice (pseud. James Tiptree), 75,
78, 80–81, 197, 205, 217, 286
Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft, 12, 14, 21,
45, 202–3, 216, 231, 264
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 14, 202–4
Shepherd Lady, and Other Poems, The
(Ingelow), 29
Shepherd Moons (album), 152
Sherman, Delia, 65–66, 70
Shibano, Sachiko and Takumi, 288
Shiner, Lewis, 80, 177
Shining, The (ﬁlm), 155
Shinn, Thelma, 245
Shin Takarajima (Tezuka), 125
Ship of Ishtar, The (Merritt), 34
Ship Who Sang, The (McCaffrey), 76, 217
Shiras, Wilmar, 51, 213
Shirley, John, 80
Shockley, Evie, 82
Shogakukan Manga Award, 132
Shoujo Club, 128
shoujo (female-oriented mangas), 125,
127–29
shounen (boys’ manga), 127
Shounen Sunday, 129
Shumboku, Ook, 124
Shyamalan, M. Night, 110
Sidewise Award, 47
“Sidewise in Time” (Jenkins), 47
359
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Sidney, Kathleen M., 75
Siegfried (ﬁlm), 103
Siegfried (opera), 149
Signor Topsy Turvey’s Wonderful Magic
Lantern” (Taylor), 27
Signs (ﬁlm), 110
silhouette puppetry, 103
“Silken Swift, The” (Sturgeon), 42
Silko, Leslie, 251
Silla, Felix, 137
Silverberg, Robert, 78, 193
Silverlock (Myers), 36
Silver Metal Lover (Lee), 66–67
Sime/Gen novels, 283
Simians, Cyborgs, and Women (Harraway), 81
Simon, Marge, 98–99
Simone, Gail, 85, 183
Sims, Pat, 288
Sims, Roger, 288
Sims, The (game), 159–60
Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger (ﬁlm), 106–7
SInclair, Catherine, 264
Singh, Vandana, 82–83, 200
Sinisalo, Johanna, 83
Sirtis, Marina, 139
Sir Tristrem, 8
Sister Light, Sister Dark (Yolen), 64
Sisters in Fantasy, 65
Six Million Dollar Man, The (television
show), 140, 146
Sixth Sense, The (ﬁlm), 110
Sixty Days and Counting (Robinson), 177
Sketch Book, The (Irving), 260
slash ﬁction, 281–82
Slater, Joyce and Ken, 288
Sleeping Beauty fairy tale, cross-cultural
versions of, 254
Sleeping Beauty (ﬁlm), 276
“Sleeping Beauty” (Ritchie), 18
slipstream movement, 82
Slonczewski, Joan, 81, 206, 214, 217,
228–29, 251
Small, Janet, 286
Small Beer Press, 72
small presses, 71–72; magazines, 97
Small Press Writers and Artists
Organization, 98
Smallville (television series), 143, 275
Smith, C. Jason, 121
360
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Smith, Charlotte, 27, 29, 31–32
Smith, Clark Ashton, 94
Smith, Dick, 288
Smith, Elizabeth Thomasina Meade
(pseud. L.T. Meade), 46
Smith, Jeffrey D., 211, 273, 286, 305
Smith, Leah, 288
Smith, Stephanie, 214, 217
Snow Crash (Stephenson), 213
Snow Queen, The (Vinge), 71, 181, 217
Snow White and Rose Red (Wrede), 65–66
“Snow White Queen” (song), 153
Snufkin’s Bun fanzine, 285
Snyder, Marcia, 54
Snyder, Midori, 66, 69
Sobchack, Vivian, 115, 216
social conﬂict in science ﬁction, 218
Society for the Furtherance and Study of
Fantasy and Science Fiction (SF3), 292
Software (Rucker), 218
So Long Been Dreaming: Postcolonial Science
Fiction and Fantasy, 82, 199
Something Rich and Strange (McKillip), 70
Somewhere in Time (ﬁlm), 110
Sondheim, Steven, 150
Song of the Wind and the Trees, The
(Takemiya), 129
“Song” (Rossetti), 31
Songs from Unsung Worlds anthology, 98
Sopkanalia fanzine, 280
Sorbo, Kevin, 146
“Sorta Farytale, A” (song), 155
Soukup, Martha, 83
Soul Calibur game, 167
Southey, Robert, 14
Soward, Anne, 83
Space: 1999 (television show), 140
Space and Time magazine, 99
space opera movement, 48, 78, 83, 178;
in ﬁlm, 105
Spain, fantasy literature in, 12, 37
Spang, Laurette, 145
Spanish Inquisition, The fanzine, 284
Spark, Muriel, 75
Sparrow, The (Russell), 226
Spawn comics, 84
Speak Daggers to Her (Edghill), 249
“Speaking Likenesses” (Rossetti), 19
Species (ﬁlm), 118

Index
Species II (ﬁlm), 118
speculative ﬁction, 192; nineteenthcentury literature as, 12–17
speculative poetry, 97–99
Spellcoats, The (Jones), 269
Speller, Maureen Kincaid, 285, 288
“Spell of the Magician’s Daughter, The”
(Sharp), 21
“Spider and the Fly, The” (Howitt),
27, 261
Spider-Man comics, 84, 163
Spindle’s End (McKinley), 66
Spinners (Napoli-Tchen), 267
Spinrad, Norman, 176
Spiral Dance (Starhawk), 243, 248
Spirited Away (ﬁlm), 186
spiritualism, 45
spirituality: fantasy literature and,
245–51; feminism and, 210, 241–51
Spivack, Charlotte, 245
split identity, in nineteenth-century
gothic poetry, 31–33
Spofford, Harriet Prescott, 45, 46
Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue, 91
Sports of the Genii, The (Hunter), 26
Springer, Nancy, 82, 215, 220
Spy Kids trilogy, 276
St. John, Adela Rogers, 102
St. Nicholas: A Magazine for Boys and Girls,
264
Staiger, Janet, 117
€ wel, 255
Stainho
Stamm, Russell, 57
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 241
Stapleton, Olaf, 172
Star-Anchored, Star-Angered (Elgin), 216
Stargate SG-1 (television show), 136
Starhawk, 210, 213, 243, 248
Star*Line, 98–99
Starling fanzine, 284
Starmaker (Stapleton), 172
Starmother (Van Scyoc), 214
Star of Cottonland, The (Oshima), 129
Starsky and Hutch television show, 282
Star Studded Comics, 56
Startling Stories magazine, 52, 95, 279
Star Trek: Deep Space Nine (television
series), 141–42, 219
Star Trek: The First Contact, 217

Star Trek: The Next Generation (television
series), 138–40, 217, 219
Star Trek: Voyager (television series), 139,
217
Star Trek Concordance, The, 281
Star Trek Conference, 281
Star Trek ﬁlms, 118; older women
heroines in, 211
Star Trek Lives!, 282
Star Trek television series, 137–39, 163,
172, 280–81
Star Wars (comic), 90
Star Wars Episode Three: Return of the Sith
(ﬁlm), 90
Star Wars Episode Two: Attack of the Clones
(ﬁlm), 90
Star Wars (ﬁlms), 79, 105, 163, 219–20
Stathopoulos, Nick, 288
Static comics, 84
Stearns, Stephanie, 97
Steel Magic (Norton), 42, 63
Steet Fighter (game), 163
Stein, Atara, 184
Stein, Diana Harlan, 286
Stein, Gertrude, 204
Stein, Gloria, 236
Steinberg, Flo, 85
Steinem, Gloria, 59, 77
Stepford, Wives, The (ﬁlm), 113–14
“Stephen King’s Super-Duper Magical
Negroes” (Okorafor-Mbachu), 200
Stephenson, Neil, 80, 171, 177, 213
Steranko, James, 59
Steranko History of Comics, The, 59
Sterling, Bruce, 80, 177
Stevens, Francis. See Bennett, Gertrude
Barrows
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 21, 125
Stevermer, Caroline, 70
Stewart, Mary, 68
Stewart, Patrick, 139
Still She Wished for Company (Irwin), 38
Stirling, S. M., 211–12
Stoker, Bram, 14, 21
Stone, Leslie F., 50, 193, 197, 234
Stone, Merlin, 242
Stone War, The (Robins), 212
Stopa, Joni and Jon, 288
“Stories for Men” (Kessell), 225
361
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

“Stormy Weather” (Merril), 52
Story of King Arthur and His Knights, The
(Pyle), 264
“Story of Marpessa (As Heard in Hades),
The” (Watson), 26
Story of Sir Launcelot and His Champions of
the Round Table, The (Pyle), 264
Story of the Amulet, The (Nesbit), 35, 265
Story of the Grail and the Passing of Arthur,
The (Pyle), 264
Story of the Treasure Seekers, The (Nesbit),
268
ST-Phile fanzine, 280
Straczynski, J. Michael, 141–42
Strand Magazine, 34, 35, 46
Strands of Starlight (Baudino), 248
Strands of Sunlight (Baudino), 248
Strange Case of Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde,
The (Stevenson), 21
Strange Devices of the Sun and Moon
(Goldstein), 69–70
Strange Evil (Gaskell), 42
Strange Horizons Reader’s Choice Award
for Non-Fiction, 200
Strange Little Girls (album), 155
Stratemeyer Syndicate, 271
Straub, Peter, 72
Street Fighter game, 166–67
Strum und Drang (Lackey), 97
Sturgeon, Theodore, 42, 213
“Subjects for Pictures” (Landon), 26
suffragist movement, 205–6, 231–32;
spirituality and, 241
“Sultana’s Dream” (Hossain), 36
Summerland (Chabon), 269
Summerly, Felix (pseud.). See Cole, Sir
Henry
Summers, Jaime, 146
Sundering Flood, The (Morris), 21
Sun Girl comic, 56–57
Super Heroes: A Modern Mythology, 59
superhero/superheroines: in comics,
84–92; on television, 140–47
Superman comics, 86, 163, 182
Super Mario Brothers, 166
Supernatural (television series), 143
supernatural women, in medieval
literature, 10–11
Super Trooper (album), 154–55
362
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Supreme Court (U.S.), 77
Surfacing (album), 154
Surrender None (Moon), 219
“Survival Ship” (Merril), 52
Swamp Thing comic, 85
Swan Maiden, in medieval literature, 11
Swanson, Kristy, 143
Swartz, Steve, 297
Swastika Night (Burdekin), 219
Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet
Street (ﬁlm), 150
Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet
Street (musical), 150
Swift, Jonathan, 256
“sword and sandal” ﬁlms, 107–8
sword and sorcery ﬁlms, 106–8
sword and sorcery literature, 39–41, 63,
65, 71–72, 76; female heroes in, 181;
girl heroines in, 272
Sword and the Sorcerer (ﬁlm), 107
Sword of Shannara, The, 64
Sword of the Rightful King (Yolen), 69
Sword of Welleran, and Other Stories, The
(Dunsany), 34
Swordspoint (Kushner), 70
Sykes, S. C., 82
Sylve, Claude (pseud.). See de LevisMirepoix, Philomene (Countess
Philomene de la Forest-Divonne)
Synners (Cadigan), 80, 238
Syrett, Netta, 36, 38
Taaffe, Sonya, 99
Tabart, Benjamin (pseud.). See Philips,
Sir Richard
Tachyon Publications, 304
Takahashi, Rumiko, 129–30
Takemiya, Keiko, 129
Tale of Peter Rabbit, The (Potter), 265
Tale of the Genji, The (Murasaki), 124
Tale of Time/City, A (Jones), 272
Tales from Shakespeare (Lamb), 260
Tales of Superstition and Chivalry
(Bannerman), 32
Tales of the Unanticipated magazine, 97, 99
Tam Lin (Dean), 65
Tanglewood Tales for Boys and Girls
(Hawthorne), 261
Tank Girl (ﬁlm), 186, 220

Index
Tapestry Room, The (Molesworth), 264
Tarantula (ﬁlm), 119
Tarr, Judith, 66
Tarzan (comic), 182
Taylor, Ann, 27
Taylor, Edgar, 14, 261
Taylor, Jane, 27, 32
Tchen, Richard, 267
Tea with the Black Dragon (MacAvoy), 67
Tehanu (Le Guin), 63, 180, 212, 270
Teish, Luisah, 244
Tekken game, 167
television: female hero in, 186–89; girl
heroines on, 275–77; women characters
on, 135–47
Tenchu game, 166
Tennant., Emma, 79
Tennyson, Alfred Lord, 20, 30, 151
Tepes, Vlad, 97
Tepper, Sheri S., 66, 81, 211, 212, 251
Terminator, The (ﬁlm), 120–22
Terminator 2: Judgment Day (ﬁlm), 120–22,
185–86, 188
Terrorists of Irustan, The (Marley), 220
Tetsuwan ATOM, 125
Texas SF Inquirer fanzine, 284
Textual Poachers: Television Fans and
Participatory Culture, xii
Tezuka, Osama, 125; inﬂuence on
anime, 127
Thackeray, William Makepeace, 16, 18, 262
“That Only a Mother” (Merril), 75–76
theater: fantasy in, 149–50; history of
women in, 148–50
Them! (ﬁlm), 118
Thendara House (Bradley), 246
Theosophical Society, 37
These Mortals (Irwin), 38
“They Shut Me Up in Prose” (Dickinson),
31
They Were Eleven (Hagio), 129
Thief of Bagdad, The (ﬁlm), 106
Third Wave feminism: fantasy literature
and, 66; female heros on television
and, 187
13 Going on 30 (ﬁlm), 215
Thomas, Sheree R., 82, 195–96
Thompson, Andrea, 142
Thompson, Caroline, 105

Thompson, Don C., 289
Thompson, Jill, 85, 273
Thousand and One Nights, The, 254–56
“Thousand Ships, A” (song), 156
“Three Bears, The” (Southey), 14
Three Californias (trilogy), 177
Three Damosels series, 68
“Three Marked Pennies” (Counselman), 47
Three Wishes (ﬁlm), 105
Thrilling Comics, 54
Thrilling Wonder Stories, 172
Through a Brazen Mirror (Sherman), 65–66
Through the Looking Glass, and What Alice
Found There (Carroll), 16–17, 131, 263,
267–68
Thulur (Lackey), 97
Tieck, Ludwig, 12
Tighe, Mary Blachford, 25
Till We Have Faces (Lewis), 43
Time Machine: An Invention, The (Wells), 21,
171, 264, 272
time-travel stories, 215–16, 272
Tin Drum, The (Grass), 213
Tiptree, James Jr. (pseud.). See Sheldon,
Alice
Title IX of the Education Amendment
Act, 77, 237
T-Negative fanzine, 280
tobae (manga derivative), 124
Toba Sojo, 124
Todorov, Tzvetan, 13
Toklas, Alice B., 204
Tokyo Babylon (manga), 131–32
Tolkien, J. R. R., 36, 43, 64, 101, 149, 152,
181, 195, viii–ix
Tolkien Society, 68
Tomb Raiders game, 166
Tombs of Atuan, The (Le Guin), 63, 180, 270
Tomoe Gozen (Salmonson), 67, 181
Tompkins, Suzanne (Suzle), 283, 284, 288
Tom Swift series, 271
Tonjoroff-Roberts, 50
Tonna, Charlotte Elizabeth, 32
Tor Books, 70
Torres, Gina, 188
Totae Sankokushi, 124
Touch (album), 154
tough women, in science ﬁction ﬁlms,
120–22
363
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Tower at Stony Wood, The (McKillip), 68
“Toy Princess, The,” 20
Toys (ﬁlm), 152
Trampoline (Link), 72
Trans-Atlantic Fan Fund (TAFF), 288
transgenderism, 205; in manga, 130
transsexuality: cyberpunk ﬁction and, 80;
fandom and, 286
Trapeze Disrobing Act (ﬁlm), 112
Traplines (Robinson), 200
Travels into Several Remote Nations of the
World, 256
Traviss, Karen, 72, 218
Travolta, John, 105
Treasure Island, 125
Trekzines, 280–83
Tres Riches Heures, 10
Trillion Year Spree: The History of Science
Fiction, xi
Trimble, Bjo, 280, 281, 288
Trimble, John, 288
Trimmer, Sarah (Kirby), 259
“triple goddess” motif, 210
Trip to the Moon, A (ﬁlm), 112, 184
Tristian and Iseult, medieval romance
of, 9
Triton (Delany), 174, 216
Tron (ﬁlm), 163
Trouble and Her Friends (Scott), 238
trouveres, women as, 3
True Heart, The (Warner), 39
“Truth Is Out There, The” (song), 156
Tsubasa: Reservoir Chronicle (manga), 131
Tucker, Wilson, 279
Tuck Everlasting (ﬁlm), 276
Tuﬂonbgo’s Journey in Search of Ogres (Parr),
262
Turek, Leslie, 284, 289
Turn of the Screw (James), 213
Turzillo, Mary A., 83
Tuttle, Lisa, 78
Twain, Mark, 194
20 Million Miles to Earth (ﬁlm), 118–19
20,000 Leagues under the Sea (ﬁlm), 106
Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea
(Verne), 171, 264
Twilight Zone, The (television series), 213
“Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star”
(Taylor), 27
364
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Twin Knight (Tezuka), 125
Two of Them, The (Russ), 220
“Two Sonnets” (Ehrilich), 99
Uglies trilogy, 273
Uingusu magazine, 274
ukiyo (ﬂoating world), in Japanese
art, 124
Ullyot, Rosemary, 284
Ulman, Juliet, 83
Ultraviolet (ﬁlm), 122, 186
€ rn, 154
Ulvaeus, Bjo
Unbreakable (ﬁlm), 110
“Unchosen Love” (Le Guin), 227
Under a VIolet Moon (album), 151
Underworld: Evolution (ﬁlm), 186
Underworld Evolution (ﬁlm), 122
Underworld (ﬁlm), 122, 186
Union-Alliance series, 78
United States, comics and graphic novels
in, 273–74
Unknown (Unknown Worlds), 94
Up the Walls of the World (Sheldon), 217
Upton, Bertha, 264
urban fantasy literature, 67–68, 182
Urban Tapestry (ﬁlk trio), 156
Urth of the New Sun, The (Wolfe), 210
Urusei Yatsura (Takahashi), 129–30
Usack, Kendra, 97
Uses of Enchantment, The (Bettelheim), 150
utopia: culture contexts for, 224–25; in
Edwardian literature, 36, 204–5; feminist literature and, 50; intergenerational community and, 219–20; in
science ﬁction, 46, 49, 77–78, 81–82,
171, 191–92; scientic research and, 232;
spiritual feminism and, 249–50
Valley of the Horses, The (Auel), 220
Vampire game, 163
vampires: in music, 154; in Romantic
literature, 14; on television, 136
Vampyre, The (Polidori), 14
Van Dyke, Annette, 245
Van Hise, Della, 282
vanity, aging and, 216
Van Scyoc, Sydney J., 82, 213–14
Vanyel tirlogy, 211
Varley, John, 78, 81, 174, 215

Index
“Vaster Than Empires and More Slow,”
206
Vayne, Victoria, 292
Venus comic, 56–57
Verne, Jules, 21, 45, 106, 170–71, 264, 271
“Via the Hewitt Ray” (Rupert), 50
victimization of women, in superhero
comics, 88–92
Victorian period: gender and class in,
204–5; ghost stories in, 32–33, 45;
literature of, 12–22; women poets in,
23–30
video games, 160–61, 164–65
Viereck, George, 37
Viertels, Salka, 102
Village, The (ﬁlm), 110
Vindication of the Rights of Women, The
(Wollstonecraft), 14
Vine series, 206–7
Vinge, Joan D., 71, 75, 78, 176, 181, 213,
217, 251
Vinge, Vernor, 205
Virgin and the Swine, The (Walton), 40,
63–64
Virgin Mary, as allegorical ﬁgure, 5
virgins: as martyrs, in medieval
hagiography, 6; in mid-twentieth
century literature, 40–42
virtual reality, 80
visionary literature, by medieval women
writers, 4–5
Visit, The (album), 151
Visitor, Nana, 141
“Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema”
(Mulvey), 104

Vonarburg, Elisabeth,
176, 227
von Harbou, Thea, 103
Vonnegut, Kurt, 173
Vows of Honor series, 217
Voyage to the Center of the Earth, A (Verne),
264
“Voyage with the Nautilis, The”
(Howitt), 29
Vril: The Power of the Coming Race
(Bulwer-Lytton), 21
Waddy, Stacy, 75
Waggoner, Lyle, 140
Wagner, Lindsay, 140–41

Wagner, Richard, 149
“Waiting on Frodo” (songs), 156
Waking the Moon (Hand), 71
Walkabout Woman (Roessner), 67
Walker, Alice, 251
Walk to the End of the World (Charnas), 78,
218
Wallace, Karen, 268
Walpole, Horace, 12–12
Walsh, Simone, 285
Walton, Evangeline, 40–41, 63–64
Walton, Jo, 83
Wanderground: Stories of the Hill Women
(Gearheart), 237–38
Wanted—A King (Hunter), 264
Warchild (Lowachee), 200
Ward, Benedicta, 2
Ward, Cynthia, 200
War for the Oaks (Bull), 70, 157
Warner, Harry, Jr., 279
Warner, Marina, 72
Warner, Sylvia Townsend, 39, 41, 64, 212
War of the Worlds (ﬁlm), 116
War of the Worlds (Wells), 51, 264
Warrior Enchantresses (Massie-Ferch), 65
Wasp Woman, The (ﬁlm), 117, 216
Watase, Yuu, 132–33
Watasin, Elizabeth, 273–74
Watcher’s Mask, The (Marks), 212
Watchtower (Lynn), 71
Water Babies, The (Kingsley), 263
Waterhouse, J. W., 151
Water of the Wonderous Isles,
The (Morris), 21
Watson, Judy, 75
Watson, Rosamund, 26, 30
Weary Death, The (ﬁlm), 103
Weatherwax, Ken, 137
Weave of Women, A (Broner), 220
Webb, Sharon, 82
Webber, Andrew Lloyd, 150, 154
Weber, Lois, 102
Webster, Augusta, 26–28
“Wedding Among the Flowers”
(Taylor), 27
Wee Free Men, The (Pratchett), 269
Weird Tales, 38–40, 47–49, 51, 94
Weiss, Sara, 45
Weisstein, Naomi, 236
365
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Welcome, Chaos (Wilhelm), 218
Weldon, Fay, 79
Well at the World’s End, The (Morris), 21
“Well of Baln, The” (Le Guin), 99
Wells, H. G., 21, 38, 45–46, 170–71, 204,
207, 264, 271
Wells, Pam, 288
Wendell, Leilah, 97
Wendy (Wallace), 268
Wessels, Mary Ellen, 287
West, Michelle, 200. See Sagara, Michelle
West, Rebecca, 38
Westerfeld, Scott, 273
Wetware (Rucker), 218
“Weyr Search” (McCaffrey), 76
We (Zamyatin), 173
Wharton, Edith, 45, 204–5
What, Leslie, 83
Wheaton, Will, 139
Whedon, Joss, 143, 187–88, 214, viii
Wheel of Time, 64
When Fox Is a Thousand (Lai), 67
When God Was a Woman (Stone), 242
“When It Changed” (Russ), 77
“When I Was Miss Dow”
(Dorman-Hess), 75
When Voiha Wakes (Chant), 64
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang
(Wilhelm), 81
Where No Fan Has Gone Before fanzine, 281
“Where the Air Quivered” (Smith and
Barton), 46
White, Lori Anne, 83
White, Luisa, 286
White, T. H., 43
White as Snow (Lee), 67
White Crow (Gentle), 70
White Goddess, The (Graves), 41
White Jenna (Yolen), 64, 181
White Mare’s Daughter (Tarr), 66
White Queen, The (Jones), 303
White Witch, The (Goudge), 42
Whitney, Grace Lee, 138
Wicca, 243
Wicked: The Life and Times of the Wicked
Witch of the West (Maguire), 150
Wicked (musical), 150, 210
Wild, Bobbie, 279
Wild, Dortchen, 261
366
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Wilde, Oscar, 216, 262–63
Wilder, Cherry, 82
Wilder, Laura Ingalls, 269
Wild Seed (Butler), 217
Wildstorm Comics, 88
Wilhelm, Kate, 75–76, 78, 81, 178, 218,
286, 300
Williams, Liz, 211
WIlliams, Sheila, 83
Willis, Connie, 79, 83, 213
Will of the Empress (Pierce), 271
Willow (ﬁlm), 107
Wind Fairies, and Other Tales, The
(de Morgan), 262
Wind in the Willows (Grahame), 268
Windling, Terri, 65–66, 70, 72
“Wind People, The” (Bradley), 235
Wings of Desire (ﬁlm), 110
Winnie the Pooh (Milne), 268
Winning Colors (Moon), 218
Winston, Joan, 282
Winter, Laurel, 99
Winter Rose (McKillip), 65
WisCon, 78–79, 97, 193, 287, 290–301;
guests of honor list, 293–94;
programming, 294–95
WisCon 20 Unsurpassed Perfectly Organized
Mother-of-All-Pocket-Pocket Program, The,
298
Wisdom, as allegorical ﬁgure, 5
Wise Women’s Telling (Sampson), 68
Wishmaster (album), 154
“Witch, The” (Coleridge), 31–32
Witch and the Chameleon, The (fanzine), 79,
286
Witch and the Priest, The (Lewis), 41
Witchcraze: A New History of the European
Witch Hunts (Barstow), 243
witches and witchcraft: feminist
spiritualism and, 242–43; in medieval
literature, 2; in mid-twentieth-century
literature, 40–42; on television, 135–36
Witches of Eastwick, The (ﬁlm), 109–10
Witch House (Walton), 40
Witch World series, 180
Witch World series, 63, 65
Wittig, Monique, 78–79, 81
Wizard of Earthsea, The (Le Guin), 63, 219
Wizard of Oz (ﬁlm), 184–85

Index
Wizard of the Pigeons, A, 71
Wizards and Warriors game, 166
Wolf, Christa, 79
Wolfe, Gene, 210
Wollheim, Donald A., 47
Wollheim, Elizabeth R., 83
Wollstonecraft, Mary, 14, 203
Woman, Church, and State (Gage), 241
Woman of the Iron People, A (Arnason),
224–25
Woman on the Edge of Time (Piercy), 78,
197, 202, 206, 219–20, 237
Woman’s Bible, The (Stanton), 241
Woman’s Book of Power: Using Dance to
Cultivate Energy and Health in Mind, Body,
and Spirit (Andes), 244–45
women artists: in anime and manga,
128–33; comic producers, 85–92;
fanzines, 285–86
women directors, of fantasy ﬁlms, 102
women ﬁlmmakers, of fantasy ﬁlms,
102–10
Women in Space Early program, 235
“Women Men Don’t See, The” (Sheldon),
305
Women of the Iron People, A (Arnason), 303
Women of Wonder anthologies, 73, 78
women readers: of medieval literature,
2–4; of Weird Tales, 47–48
women’s movement: science ﬁction and,
77–83; suffragist movement and, 205–6
women warriors: in fantasy literature, 65,
69–70, 180–81; older women as, 211;
in pulp novels, 39–40; on television,
138–39
Women Who Run with the Wolves: Myths
and Stories of the Wild Woman Archetype
(Estes), 243
“Women with Wings” (Stone), 234
women writers: of children’s literature,
264–65; of comics, 85, 87–90; in
Edwardian era, 35–36; of fantasy ﬁlms,
102–10; of fantasy literature, 62–72; of
fanzines, 279–85; of genre fantasy,
42–43; genre poetry by, 94–100; of ghost
stories, 45; in interwar period, 38–39;
of medieval literature, 2–4; of midtwentieth century literature, 41–42;
of nineteenth-century ﬁction, 17–22;

of nineteenth-century poetry, 23–33; of
pulp literature, 40; of science fantasy,
62–63; of science ﬁction, 45–53, 73–83;
science in science ﬁction and, 230–40
Wonder-Book for Boys and Girls, A
(Hawthorne), 261
Wonderful Adventures of Tuﬂongbo (Parr),
262
Wonderful Wizard of Oz, The (Baum), 35,
108, 150, 265
Wonder Stories for Children (Andersen), 261
Wonder Stories Quarterly, 50
Wonder Woman, the Complete History
(Daniels), 59
Wonder Woman comics, 58–60, 84–87,
183–84
Wonder Woman (television series), 140
Wood, Susan, 284, 286, 291, 294
Wood Beyond the World, The (Morris), 21
Woolf, Virginia, 38–39, 46, 105
Woolfolk, Dorothy, 85
Worldcon, 288–89, 291
Worldcon Fan Guest of Honor
Award, 288
World Fantasy Award, 64, 181
World of Warcraft (online game), 162, 165
Worlds Beyond, 52
World Science Fiction Society, 98
Worlds Within Women: Myth and
Mythmaking in Fantastic Literature by
Women (Shinn), 245
Worm Ouroboros, The (Eddison), 36
Wow Comics, 56
Wrede, Patricia C., 65
Wren, M. K., 82
Wrinkle in Time, A (L’Engle), 51, 265
Writer’s Journal, 97
Writing the Other: A Practical Guide, 200
Wu, Diana Gallagher, 285
€), 29
Wuthering Heights (Bronte
“Wuthering Heights” (song), 155
Xena: Warrior Princess (television series),
146, 187, 275
Xenogenesis trilogy, 214, 229, 239
X-Factor comics, 90, 274
X-Files, The (television series), 142–43, 156,
163, 213, 218; 220
X/1999 (manga), 131–32
367
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

X-Men comics, 84, 90, 213–14, 274
X-Men ﬁlms, 277
Yamada, Mineko, 129
Yamagishi, Ryoko, 129
Yandro fanzine, 283–84
Yankee magazine, 100
Yarbro, Chelsea Quinn, 78, 218, 286, 292
Yarrow (de Lint), 71
Yaszek, Lisa, 197
Year 24 Group (manga artists), 129
Year’s Best Fantasy and Horror, The, 65, 72
Year’s Best Science Fiction anthologies, 75;
poetry in, 95
Yeats, William Butler, 207
Yeh, Phil, 58
Yeoh, Michelle, 186
Yolen, Jane, 64, 69, 81, 83, 99, 181,
251, 300

368
................

Volume 1: Overviews

Yonge, Charlotte, 262
York, Dick, 136
young adult literature, girls in, 267–73
Young Misses’ Magazine, 258
Younguncle Comes to Town (Singh), 200
Yuniko, 125
Yvain, 9
Zahrah the Windseek (Okerafor-Mbachu), 214
Zamyatin, Yevgeny, 173
“Zanzibar Cat, The” (Russ), 39
Zarah the Windseeker (Okorafor-Mbachu),
200
Zen (Napoli), 267
Zhang, Ziyi, 186
Zimiamvian Trilogy, 36–37
Z Miscellaneous journal, 97
Zoline, Pamela, 75, 204, 207
Zukowski, Ron, 289

Women

in Science Fiction
and Fantasy

This page intentionally left blank

Women

in Science Fiction
and Fantasy

VOLUME 2: ENTRIES
..............................................................................................................................
Edited by Robin Anne Reid

GREENWOOD PRESS
W E S T P O R T, C O N N E C T I C U T. L O N D O N

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Women in science ﬁction and fantasy / edited by Robin Anne Reid.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-313-33589-1 ((set) : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-313-33591-4 ((vol. 1) :
alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-313-33592-1 ((vol. 2) : alk. paper)
1. Science ﬁction—Women authors—History and criticism. 2. Fantasy ﬁction—Women
authors—History and criticism. 3. Science ﬁction, American—History and criticism.
4. Science ﬁction, English—History and criticism. 5. Fantasy ﬁction, American—History
and criticism. 6. Fantasy ﬁction, English—History and criticism. 7. Women and literature—
History—20th century. 8. Feminism in literature. 9. Gender identity in literature.
10. Women in literature. I. Reid, Robin Anne, 1955–
PS374.S35W63
2009
809.30 8762082—dc22
2008035424
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data is available.
Copyright 
C 2009 by Robin A. Reid
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be
reproduced, by any process or technique, without the
express written consent of the publisher.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2008035424
ISBN: 978-0-313-33589-1 (set)
ISBN: 978-0-313-33591-4 (vol. 1)
ISBN: 978-0-313-33592-1 (vol. 2)
First published in 2009
Greenwood Press, 88 Post Road West, Westport, CT 06881
An imprint of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc.
www.greenwood.com
Printed in the United States of America

The paper used in this book complies with the
Permanent Paper Standard issued by the National
Information Standards Organization (Z39.48–1984).
10

9 8 7

6 5

4 3

2 1

Contents
PREFACE
Robin Anne Reid

vii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

xv

LIST OF ENTRIES

xvii

GUIDE TO RELATED TOPICS

xxi

Entries A–Z

1

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

337

ABOUT THE EDITOR AND CONTRIBUTORS

345

INDEX

365

v
.............

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
THIS PROJECT is the ﬁrst general reference work focusing on women’s contributions to science ﬁction and fantasy in ﬁction, nonﬁction, poetry, ﬁlm, television, comics, graphic novels, art, and music. Its purpose is to serve as a
reference work for general readers on the historical presence and ongoing
engagement of a diverse group of women in the creation and reception of science ﬁction and fantasy in literature, media, and the arts.
This encyclopedia contains two volumes. Volume 1 is a collection of
essays about important periods, genres, media, and themes in the fantastic
literatures. Volume 2 contains shorter entries arranged alphabetically, on important writers and other ﬁgures, as well as on a number of topics, including
national traditions of science ﬁction and fantasy from countries other than
the United States. The essays and entries all contain lists of further readings,
including timely and specialized websites that will aid those wishing to learn
more about the topics. Care was taken to provide cross-references between
entries in both volumes that present additional information on authors,
topics, periods, or genres. In the text of each essay and entry, these are
denoted by a bolded word or phrase. In many cases, a list of further relevant
entries appears at the end.
Given the historical and international scope of the encyclopedia, as well
as the variety of media covered and required limits, this work does not
pretend to be comprehensive. While the encyclopedia gives some consideration to how male creators of science ﬁction and fantasy have dealt with the
topics of “women” and “gender” in a variety of media, the primary focus is on
women. The encyclopedia concentrates on works in English from the twentieth century to the present, covering ﬁction, nonﬁction, ﬁlm, television,
graphic novels, and music.
Choices for topics in both volumes were made based on a variety of factors, such as the amount of academic and popular/fan scholarship on the
subject. Writers and other individuals (artists, editors, fans, and scholars)
were selected for inclusion through a process that involved compiling lists of
the winners of all major and minor awards made by fan and professional
organizations; soliciting advice from scholars on the fantastic, primarily but
not solely those connected to the International Association of the Fantastic in
the Arts and the Science Fiction Research Association, the two oldest and
largest academic organizations devoted to the study of science ﬁction and
fantasy; and reviewing the existing scholarship. A session scheduled at the
2005 International Conference for the Fantastic in the Arts was held solely to
generate ideas for topics and writers. While a number of the contributors
vii
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

came from that session, open calls for contributors to apply to write essays
and entries were circulated via the Internet, on a range of academic listservs,
and on Laura Quilter’s feminist science ﬁction listserv, as well as being posted
on LiveJournal.
The overwhelming response of academic, independent, and fan scholars to those calls was outstanding: more than two hundred people sent proposals to write contributions. Assignments were made based primarily on
expertise, although in a number of areas, especially fan works, that expertise
might have been decades of work in fandom rather than academic publications, as academic scholarship simply does not cover the range of productions
created by fans. Of interest to future editors, perhaps, is the fact that the
three entries that received the most applications by contributors were those
on J. R. R. Tolkien, J. K. Rowling, and Joss Whedon. The proposals made by
potential contributors also revealed the growing importance of scholarship on
new media and visual texts as well as children’s and adolescents’ literature. A
number of entries were added later in the process based on persuasive evidence provided by contributors who made the case for their inclusion. The
one area where it proved most difﬁcult to ﬁnd contributors was in art and
illustrations. While literary and media scholars have apparently grown in
number in the past decades, the study of the cover art for magazines or books
and illustrations does not seem to have grown as rapidly, or perhaps disciplinary boundaries kept calls from circulating to those scholars. However, the
wealth of suggested topics, not all of which could be accommodated, argues
that there is a need for further and more specialized reference works in key
genre and media areas.
Some of the writers chosen as the subjects of encyclopedia entries have
written several hundred works of ﬁction and won numerous awards; others
have published fewer works but are seen as making particularly important
contributions in the realm of explorations of gender and race in science ﬁction and fantasy. The need to recognize as many of the subgenres of speculative ﬁction as well as mainstream science ﬁction and fantasy is addressed by
speciﬁc genre entries in volume 2. Topics and themes that are recognized as
important by fans, critics, and academics have also received entries. Most
importantly, although the United States and the United Kingdom are the primary focus of this work, science ﬁction and fantasy traditions and literatures
in a variety of other countries in the Americas, Asia, and Europe are included.
The growing awareness of international science ﬁction and fantasy, especially
in literatures other than English, is only beginning.
Volume 1 contains twenty-nine chapters. These essays provide sociohistorical context, analysis, and background information on key themes that
cross genre boundaries. Subjects cover major and minor ﬁgures, movements,
and conﬂicts in literature, art/graphic texts, and music. Consideration of sociohistorical contexts situates subjects in relation to the different waves of
viii
................

Preface
feminist movements as well as to different periods of science ﬁction and
fantasy development. Themes and formal elements of texts are considered,
along with genre issues. Transmission methods and media, audience and
reader issues, and fandom topics are also described.
Volume 1 is organized roughly chronologically, from the medieval period to the twenty-ﬁrst century, although individual chapters focusing on
later work may provide historical information as needed. The essays, each
written by a scholar who has published on the relevant topic, all provide
select but excellent lists of further readings to encourage readers, teachers,
and students who are interested in further study.
The ﬁrst three chapters (“The Middle Ages,” “Nineteenth-Century
Fiction,” and “Nineteenth-Century Poetry”) cover historical periods that
existed before the development of the contemporary genres of fantasy and
science ﬁction as they are understood by most people. However, these periods
are connected in important ways to both genres: a good deal of popular genre
fantasy published in the United States and the United Kingdom after Tolkien’s
The Lord of the Rings (1954–55) draws on mythologies and sources from the medieval period. While some critics, such as Brian Aldiss in his well-known
monograph Trillion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction (1986, originally published as Million Year Spree in 1973), argue that science ﬁction originated in
earlier mythic and heroic tales that deal with superhuman or supernatural
events, others see the genre as tied to the rise of Industrialism during the
nineteenth century with its accompanying development of science and technology. In this argument, the ﬁrst true science ﬁction—stories extrapolating
from contemporaneous ideas of science—was published during the 1800s.
During the nineteenth century, fantasy also became a more popular genre in
ﬁction and poetry.
The next group of chapters focuses on the period during which the genres of the fantastic become more and more distinct in both production and
reception, especially as “science ﬁction” and “fantasy” deﬁned themselves as
opposite, one focusing on technology and imagined futures, the other on
magic and imagined preindustrial pasts.
The growth of written fantasy and science ﬁction in the ﬁrst half of the
twentieth century was connected to rising literacy rates, which produced a
growing number of readers who were the audience for pulp science ﬁction
and fantasy in the United States and the United Kingdom. The ﬁrst half of
the century is considered by many to be the golden age of some of the genres
and is covered in chapters 4 and 5: “Fantasy, 1900–1959: Novels and Short
Fiction” and “Science Fiction, 1900–1959: Novels and Short Fiction.”
The dates are, as always, artiﬁcially imposed since historical, social,
and literary trends overlap, but most readers and critics agree that the social
changes connected to technology, especially in the areas of civil and human
rights, taking place in the post–World War II period were reﬂected in the
ix
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

writers and literature of the time. Writers experimented with new content
and experimental literary forms. Chapters 7 and 8, “Fantasy, 1960–2005: Novels and Short Fiction” and “Science Fiction, 1960–2005: Novels and Short
Fiction,” consider the literatures of the fantastic during that time and moving
into the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Although poetry has not always received the same attention as ﬁction,
especially in the twentieth century, it continues to be a genre in which writers
explore science ﬁction and fantasy themes, as detailed in chapter 10, “Genre
Poetry: Twentieth Century.” Just as the “popular,” and thus less elite, status of
science ﬁction and fantasy, which results in many critics separating “genre”
literatures from mainstream “literature,” is due in part to its origins in pulp
magazines, so too genre poetry is isolated, thriving primarily in small magazines and small presses, and ﬁnding new publication opportunities on the
Internet. Since the same can be said of much mainstream written poetry in
the United States, at least during the last half of the twentieth century, the
boundaries between categories of poetry may not be so strictly maintained in
the future.
Film was a new medium that was developed in the late nineteenth century and was associated with fantasy from the start. Chapters 11 and 12 cover
the origins and development of ﬁlm in both genres in “Fantasy Film: Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries” and “Science Fiction Film: Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries.” Film is a collaborative medium, and the participation of
women as creators is not always easy to document, but more work is being
done in that area in recent years with the development of ﬁlm studies as an
academic ﬁeld.
The twentieth century marked the rise of other popular visual media
that often incorporate science ﬁction and fantasy characters, plots, and
themes: comics and television. Chapters 6 and 9, “Comics: 1900–1959” and
“Comics: 1960–2005,” cover the former in two periods, while the latter is discussed in chapter 14, “Television: Twentieth Century.”
While comics in the United States have long been considered a genre ﬁt
only for children, as fantasy was during the nineteenth century, they have
long been taken seriously as art forms in Japan, originating in centuries-old
blending of graphic images and text, as discussed in chapter 13, “Anime and
Manga.” The growing popularity of these genres in North America and Britain
during the last decades of the twentieth century has presented new challenges concerning gender and audience demographics, with a growing number of women buying anime and manga as mainstream United States comic
companies struggle to maintain readership. Independent comics that are
spread through a variety of means, including the Internet, further diversify
the audience for visual media, with many dealing with fantastic themes.
Chapter 15, “Music: Twentieth Century,” turns to audio media. It
explores the extent to which music has long been intertwined with
x
.............

Preface
speculative ﬁctions, although the primary focus of the essay is on contemporary musicians.
The ﬁnal essay to focus on a genre or medium is chapter 16, “Gaming.”
Science ﬁction and fantasy have played an important role in the development
of games (tabletop, video, and online), a number of them arising directly from
Tolkien’s epic fantasy and related texts. As this essay explains, the growing
popularity of games in all media since the 1970s has resulted in even more
hybridization of genre conventions. These new technologies not only offer
new stories but can also supplement science ﬁction and fantasy narratives
released in other media, such as books, ﬁlm, and television. In his 2006 monograph Convergence Culture, Henry Jenkins began to develop methods of analyzing how the explosive growth of new technologies and new media are
changing ownership, production, and reception of content.
The last and largest group of essays in the encyclopedia focuses on
themes and topics that cross genre and media boundaries in tune with postmodern hybridity, that is, the mixing of genres and cultures, as well as certain
key audience and production issues. Chapter 17, “Men Writing Women,” considers the effect of the long dominance of male authors in science ﬁction and
fantasy. This essay considers how the constructions of female characters by
male writers has changed over time, reﬂecting sociohistorical developments.
It also discusses the rise of new and experimental forms and the inclusion of
social sciences as well as the hard sciences in the genres. Chapter 18, “Heroes
or Sheroes,” then covers the debates over the consequences of writing women
characters into the role of the epic hero, with four scholars presenting an
overview of strong female protagonists in literature, comics, ﬁlm, and television, created by both female and male writers, artists, directors, and
producers.
The next four chapters, 19–22, are based on contemporary intersectional theories that ask how the social constructions of race, class, and age
overlap with the social construction of gender, and how different constructions of sexuality are understood. The ﬁrst three essays—“Intersections of
Race and Gender,” “Intersections of Class and Gender,” and “Intersections of
Age and Gender”—provide information on the scholarship and writers dealing
with the questions of intersecting identities, as well as discussing writers
whose work incorporates characters, plots, and themes that show the interwoven and complex layers of identities. Chapter 22, “Speculating Sexual Identities,” then draws on contemporary gender and queer theories to discuss
authors whose work incorporates multiple constructions of sexualities.
Two essays consider the impact of science and religion on women in
science ﬁction and fantasy. The ﬁrst, “Science,” chapter 23, covers the history
of women’s relation to and participation in the scientiﬁc disciplines and institutions in the United States, showing how women’s relation to science ﬁction
is connected to their status in the scientiﬁc community. Chapter 24, “Feminist
xi
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

Spirituality,” discusses the range of feminist relations to religion, both the
institutions of the great world religions such as Christianity, Judaism, and
Islam and the growing movements related to Wicca. It considers how fantasy
novels by women played a major role in the development of these later
movements.
The nineteenth-century insistence that fantasy was suitable only for
the young, and the application of that attitude in the United States toward
science ﬁction, has often served as a reason for teachers, parents, and critics
to dismiss much fantastic literature without even reading it. Despite attempts
to control, ban, or censor such material, the growing sense that children, and
later adolescents or young adults, needed their own literatures has led to a
growing number of writers creating science ﬁction and fantasy texts and
media based on age, although the audience for both genres has always
included adults. Chapters 25 and 26, “The Creation of Literature for the
Young” and “Girls and the Fantastic,” consider the social context in which
children’s and young adult fantasy and science ﬁction developed, as well as
the portrayal of girls in literature, comics, television, and ﬁlm.
Finally, chapters 27–29—“Fandom,” “WisCon,” and “The James Tiptree
Jr. Award”—focus on the contributions of women to fandom, the creation of
the ﬁrst feminist SF convention in 1977, and the ﬁrst SF award named for a
woman. As Camille Bacon-Smith (Science Fiction Culture, 2000), Justine Larbalestier (The Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction, 2002), and Henry Jenkins (Textual
Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture, 1992), among others, have
argued: SF (whether “science ﬁction” or “speculative ﬁction”) is not just a body
of texts, it is a culture; moreover, it is a complex body of multiple communities that act to comment upon and at times transform the primary texts,
whether through reviews, essays, awards, or fan-created art, ﬁctions, and videos. Hugo Gernsback encouraged active reader participation through the letter columns of his SF magazines, and the ﬁrst fan clubs formed in the 1920s.
Arguably, science ﬁction fandom was the model for other popular and media
fandoms that have developed since, following everything from sports to soap
operas. Ever since the 1920s, fans have debated a wide variety of topics,
including the role of women along with larger social debates over gender,
class, race, and sexuality.
Volume 2 begins with an alphabetical list of 230 entries, followed by a
topical guide that groups related entries under ten categories:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
xii
...............

Awards and Publishing
Biographical Entries: Artists, Editors, Fans, Scholars, and Others
Biographical Entries: Authors
Ethnicity/Race
Fans and Fandom
Genres
National Literatures

Preface
8. Sex and Gender
9. Themes
10. Visual Media

Also in volume 2 is a selected bibliography of scholarship on all aspects
of science ﬁction and fantasy covered in this encyclopedia, including the
foundational bibliographies, other types of reference works in the genre, and
theory and applied criticism, in both journals and book form. This scholarship
is a part of the historical and cultural context that has created the opportunity for this encyclopedia to be published.

xiii
...............

This page intentionally left blank

Acknowledgments
WHILE I have served as editor, this encyclopedia, as is true for all works of
scholarship, could not exist without the efforts of many people who supported the project in every way possible. First, I must thank George Butler and
Kathleen Knakal at Greenwood Press for overseeing this project and dealing
with the spreadsheet problems. Second, my appreciation for the many people
who offered to contribute and especially the 127 contributors cannot be
adequately expressed in words. The enthusiasm among scholars and fans for
the ﬁrst encyclopedia about women in SF/F made even dealing with spreadsheets tolerable.
Special thanks must go to Hal Hall, curator of the Science Fiction and
Fantasy Research Collection at Texas A&M University, College Station, and his
staff who ably assisted a very nervous editor in her ﬁrst foray into archival
research: Valerie Coleman, reference assistant; Kristin Hill, reading room
supervisor; Melissa Zajicek, reference assistant; Stephanie Elmquist, reference
assistant; Naﬁsah Hankins, head of media services; and the student workers
at the Collection. The Internet database created and maintained by Hal and
others served as an invaluable aid during the time I was not privileged to
spend at College Station.
On my own campus, I owe thanks to Dean Allan Headley and Natalie
Henderson of the Ofﬁce of Graduate Studies and Research, Texas A&M
University–Commerce. The encyclopedia was supported by two Faculty
Research Enhancement Grants during the 2005–6 and 2006–7 academic years,
which provided research assistance, travel for archival research, supplies, and
most importantly for humanities scholars, release time to do the work. While
I may live and work in rural Texas, the Internet and the support of the Interlibrary Loan Ofﬁce, Gee Library, Texas A&M University–Commerce—especially
the work of Scott Downing and Jacob Pichnarcik, who never blinked an eye at
the number of requests for books with covers featuring bug-eyed monsters—
meant that I had access to a great deal of research from my home campus.
Cynthia Garza provided valuable research assistance in 2006.
Over the years, I have received encouragement and advice from Farah
Mendlesohn, Michael Levy, Faye Ringel, Veronica Hollinger, and Robert
Latham. Their busy schedules did not allow their direct participation, but
their scholarship and communications have shaped this work in ways that
must be acknowledged. A special note of thanks is due Marleen Barr, whose
work was the ﬁrst introduction I had to scholarship that yoked the “two
horses” of feminist theory and science ﬁction.
xv
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

I also beneﬁted immensely from my online friends’ list in LiveJournal, a
combination of social networking/blogging site for online science ﬁction fandom. While fandom remains active ofﬂine and in a variety of spaces on the
World Wide Web, LiveJournal was the space that brought me back into active
fandom. Academics, fan scholars, and fans read drafts of the earliest proposal, supplied suggestions for topics, networked both online and ofﬂine, and
together constituted one of the most amazing networks any writer could
have. Eden Lee Lackner and Barbara Lynn Lucas not only gave feedback on
topics and read early drafts, as well as volunteering to cover returned essays
and entries, but also introduced me to new genres and media texts and scholarship during the past years. We have collaborated on past work and will do
so again in the future. Christine Mains provided incredibly valuable insights
into genres and periods that are her areas of expertise, as well as taking on
additional entries at the last minute. Kristina Busse provided key feedback in
the proposal stages and ongoing support. Tamara Brummer, Deborah Kaplan,
Rachel McGrath-Kerr, Dorothea Schuller, Wilma Shires, and Ruth Veness ably
helped by copyediting essays and entries I wrote, understanding that it is
always easier to edit another writer’s drafts. Judy Ann Ford edited the further
readings and bibliography for conformity to Chicago Manual of Style
requirements.
A number of friends who are active in fandom and fandom scholarship
also provided feedback. They are listed under their fan pseudonyms at their
request: 10zlaine, Aprilkat, Boogieshoes, Cofax, Cryptoxin, The Drifter, Half
Elf Lost, Oursin, Rothesis, Slashfairy, Travelingcarrot, Werelemur, and Zellieh.
While it is not unknown for academic scholars to dismiss fans of a work, my
experience in fandom and academia is that fans often have an encyclopedic
knowledge of their favorite writers, genres, and media, as shown in a number
of published and online reference works, and are always happy to share information and resources. It strikes me as only appropriate to acknowledge the
importance of the fan scholars as well as the independent scholars and academics who have worked to make this encyclopedia what it is, while noting
that any remaining errors are solely my responsibility.

xvi
................

List of Entries

Aiken, Joan Delano
Alexander, Lloyd
Alien
Alternative History
Amazons
Androgyny
Animals
Architecture
Arnason, Eleanor
Arthurian Fantasy
Artiﬁcial Life
Asaro, Catherine
Asexuality
Asimov, Isaac
Atwood, Margaret Eleanor
Australia
Awards: Literature for Young
People
Awards: Science Fiction and
Fantasy Literature
Ballantine, Betty
Barr, Marleen
Battlestar Galactica
Bisexuality
Brackett, Leigh
Bradley, Marion Zimmer
Brin, David Glen
Britain
British Science Fiction Film
€ Sisters
Bronte
Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel
Bujold, Lois McMaster
Bull, Emma
Butler, Octavia
Cadigan, Pat
Canada (English-Speaking)
Canada (French-Speaking)
Carol, Avedon
Carter, Angela

Carter, Raphael
Cavendish, Margaret Lucas,
Duchess of Newcastle
Chant, Joy
Charnas, Suzy McKee
Cherryh, C. J.
China
Christine de Pizan
Clarke, Arthur C.
Clayton, Jo
Cloning
Coleridge, Sara
Colonization
Comedic Science Fiction and
Fantasy
Constantine, Storm
Cosplay
Cottington, Lady
Cyberbodies, Female
Czerneda, Julie E.
Datlow, Ellen
DeFord, Miriam Allen
Delany, Samuel R.
De Lint, Charles
Dickinson, Emily
Dillon, Diane
Disability
Duane, Diane
Due, Tananarive
Dystopias
Editors, Fan
Editors, Professional
Education
Elgin, Suzette Haden
Ellerman, Annie Winnifred (Bryher)
Environmental Science Fiction
Epic Fantasy
Erotic Science Fiction
xvii
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Fairy Tales and Folklore
Fan Fiction
Farmer, Nancy
Farscape
Female Friendship
Feminisms
Feminist Science Fiction
Femspec
Filk
Fireﬂy/Serenity
Flewelling, Lynn
Fonstad, Karen Wynn
Fontana, D. C.
France
Friesner, Esther M.
Gaiman, Neil
Game Designers
Gearhart, Sally Miller
Gender
Genetic Engineering
Gentle, Mary
Germany
Ghost Stories
Gibson, William
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins
Gomez, Jewelle
Gorey, Edward
Gothic
Gotlieb, Phyllis
Graphic Novels
Grifﬁth, Nicola
Hamilton, Laurell K.
Hamilton, Virginia
Heinlein, Robert A.
Henderson, Zenna
Homosexuality
Hopkinson, Nalo
Horror
Hyman, Trina Schart
Independent Comics
India
Internet
Jackson, Shirley
Janus/Aurora/New Moon
xviii
.................

Volume 2: Entries

Japan
Jewish Women
Jones, Diana Wynne
Jones, Gwyneth
Khatru
King, Stephen
Kornbluth, Cyril M.
Kress, Nancy
Kuttner, Henry
 adan
La
Lackey, Mercedes
Lalli, Cele Goldsmith
Languages and Linguistics
Latin and South America
Lee, Tanith
Lefanu, Sarah
Le Guin, Ursula K.
L’Engle, Madeleine
Lesbians
Lessing, Doris
Lindgren, Astrid
Lost-Colony Stories
Lynn, Elizabeth A.
MacAvoy, R.A.
MacLean, Katherine Anne
Magical Realism
Marie de France
Marxism
Matrix, The
McCaffrey, Anne
McCarthy, Shawna
McHugh, Maureen
McIntyre, Vonda
McKillip, Patricia A.
McKinley, Robin
Merril, Judith
ville, China
Mie
Mirrlees, Hope
Mitchison, Naomi Haldane
Moffett, Judith
Mohanraj, Mary Anne
Moon, Elizabeth
Moore, C. L.
Morrison, Toni

List of Entries
Neurodiversity
New Weird
Norse Mythology
Norton, Andre
Oates, Joyce Carol
Phelps, Elizabeth Stuart
Piercy, Marge
Pratchett, Terry
Pregnancy and Reproduction
Professional Magazines
Pullman, Philip
Pulp Science Fiction
Queer Science Fiction
Quest Fantasy
Quilter, Laura
Rice, Anne
Romance in Science Fiction and
Fantasy
Romantic Traditions in Science
Fiction and Fantasy
Rosinsky, Natalie Myra
Rossetti, Christina
Roszak, Theodore
Rowling, J. K.
Russ, Joanna
Russell, Mary Doria
Russia
Ryman, Geoffrey Charles
Sargent, Pamela
Scarborough, Elizabeth
Scott, Melissa
Seddon-Boulet, Susan Eleanor
Sex Changes
Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft
Slash Fiction
Slonczewski, Joan

Small Press
Space Opera
Star Trek
Stevens, Francis
Stewart, Sean
Stoker, Bram
Stone, Leslie F.
Sturgeon, Theodore
Sword and Sorcery
Tepper, Sheri S.
Thomas, Sheree R.
Tiptree, James, Jr.
Tolkien, J. R. R.
Transgender
Transsexuality
Urban Fantasy
Utopias
Vampires
Vidding
Vinge, Joan D.

Vonarburg, Elisabeth
Von Harbou, Thea Gabriele
Walton, Evangeline
War and Peace
Weird Tales
Whedon, Joss
Wilhelm, Kate Gertrude
Windling, Terri
Winterson, Jeanette
Wolheim, Betsy
Women’s Bookstores
Wood, Susan
Xena: Warrior Princess
Yarbro, Chelsea Quinn
Yolen, Jane

xix
...............

This page intentionally left blank

Guide to Related Topics
A
WA R D S A N D P U B L I S H I N G
.............................................................
Awards: Literature for the Young
Awards: Science Fiction and Fantasy Literature
Ballantine, Betty
Datlow, Ellen
Editors, Fan
Editors, Professional
Femspec
Janus/Aurora/New Moon
Khatru
McCarthy, Shawna
Mohanraj, Mary Anne
Professional Magazines
Pulp Science Fiction
Small Press
Thomas, Sheree R.
Tiptree, James, Jr.
Weird Tales
Windling, Terri
Women’s Bookstores

BIOGRAPHICAL ENTRIES:
ARTISTS, EDITORS, FANS,
S.............................................................
CHOLARS, AND OTHERS
Ballantine, Betty
Barr, Marleen
Carol, Avedon
Cottington, Lady
Datlow, Ellen
Dillon, Diane
Fonstad, Karen Wynn
Gorey, Edward
Hyman, Trina Schart
Lalli, Cele Goldsmith
Lefanu, Sarah
McCarthy, Shawna

Merril, Judith
Mohanraj, Mary Anne
Norton, Andre
Quilter, Laura
Rosinsky, Natalie Myra
Sargent, Pamela
Seddon-Boulet, Susan Eleanor
Thomas, Sheree R.
Windling, Terri
Winterson, Jeanette
Wolheim, Betsy
Wood, Susan
Yolen, Jane

BIOGRAPHICAL ENTRIES:
A
UTHORS
.............................................................
Aiken, Joan Delano
Alexander, Lloyd
Arnason, Eleanor
Asaro, Catherine
Asimov, Isaac
Atwood, Margaret Eleanor
Brackett, Leigh
Bradley, Marion Zimmer
Brin, David Glen
€ Sisters
Bronte
Bujold, Lois McMaster
Bull, Emma
Butler, Octavia
Cadigan, Pat
Carter, Angela
Carter, Raphael
Cavendish, Margaret Lucas, Duchess of
Newcastle
Chant, Joy
Charnas, Suzy McKee
Cherryh, C. J.
Christine de Pizan
xxi
...............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Clarke, Arthur C.
Clayton, Jo
Coleridge, Sara
Constantine, Storm
Cottington, Lady
Czerneda, Julie E.
DeFord, Miriam Allen
Delany, Samuel R.
De Lint, Charles
Dickinson, Emily
Duane, Diane
Due, Tananarive
Elgin, Suzette Haden
Ellerman, Annie Winnifred (Bryher)
Farmer, Nancy
Flewelling, Lynn
Fontana, D. C.
Friesner, Esther M.
Gaiman, Neil
Gearhart, Sally Miller
Gentle, Mary
Gibson, William
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins
Gomez, Jewelle
Gorey, Edward
Gotlieb, Phyllis
Grifﬁth, Nicola
Hamilton, Laurell K.
Hamilton, Virginia
Heinlein, Robert A.
Henderson, Zenna
Hopkinson, Nalo
Jackson, Shirley
Jones, Diana Wynne
Jones, Gwyneth
King, Stephen
Kornbluth, Cyril M.
Kress, Nancy
Kuttner, Henry
Lackey, Mercedes
Lee, Tanith
Le Guin, Ursula K.
L’Engle, Madeleine
Lessing, Doris
Lindgren, Astrid
Lynn, Elizabeth A.
MacAvoy, R. A.
xxii
.................

Volume 2: Entries

MacLean, Katherine Anne
Marie de France
McCaffrey, Anne
McHugh, Maureen
McIntyre, Vonda
McKillip, Patricia A.
McKinley, Robin
Merril, Judith
ville, China
Mie
Mirrlees, Hope
Mitchison, Naomi Haldane
Moffet, Judith
Mohanraj, Mary Anne
Moon, Elizabeth
Moore, C. L.
Morrison, Toni
Norton, Andre
Oates, Joyce Carol
Phelps, Elizabeth Stuart
Piercy, Marge
Pratchett, Terry
Pullman, Philip
Rice, Anne
Rossetti, Christina
Roszak, Theodore
Rowling, J. K.
Russ, Joanna
Russell, Mary Doria
Ryman, Geoffrey Charles
Sargent, Pamela
Scarborough, Elizabeth
Scott, Melissa
Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft
Slonczewski, Joan
Stevens, Francis
Stewart, Sean
Stoker, Bram
Stone, Leslie F.
Sturgeon, Theodore
Tepper, Sheri S.
Thomas, Sheree R.
Tiptree, James, Jr.
Tolkien, J. R. R.
Vinge, Joan D.

Vonarburg, Elisabeth
Von Harbou, Thea Gabriele
Walton, Evangeline

Guide to Related Topics
Wilhelm, Kate Gertrude
Winterson, Jeanette
Yarbro, Chelsea Quinn
Yolen, Jane

E.............................................................
THNICITY/RACE
Butler, Octavia
Colonization
Delany, Samuel R.
Due, Tananarive
Farmer, Nancy
Gomez, Jewelle
Hamilton, Virginia
Hopkinson, Nalo
Jewish Women
Morrison, Toni
Thomas, Sheree R.
Yolen, Jane

Ghost Stories
Gothic
Graphic Novels
Horror
Independent Comics
Lost-Colony Stories
Magical Realism
New Weird
Norse Mythology
Pulp Science Fiction
Queer Science Fiction
Quest Fantasy
Romance in Science Fiction and Fantasy
Romantic Traditions in Science Fiction
Slash Fiction
Space Opera
Sword and Sorcery
Urban Fantasy
Utopias
Vampires

F.............................................................
ANS AND FANDOM
Carol, Avedon
Cosplay
Editors, Fan
Fan Fiction
Filk
Janus/Aurora/New Moon
Khatru
Mohanraj, Mary Anne
Quilter, Laura
Slash Fiction
Vidding

G.............................................................
ENRES
Alternative History
Arthurian Fantasy
Comedic Science Fiction and Fantasy
Dystopias
Environmental Science Fiction
Epic Fantasy
Erotic Science Fiction
Fairy Tales and Folklore
Fan Fiction
Feminist Science Fiction

N
AT I O N A L L I T E R AT U R E S
.............................................................
Australia
Britain
British Science Fiction Film
Canada (English-Speaking)
Canada (French-Speaking)
China
France
Germany
India
Japan
Latin and South America
Norse Mythology
Russia

S.............................................................
EX AND GENDER
Androgyny
Asexuality
Bisexuality
Cyberbodies, Female
Female Friendship
xxiii
.................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Feminisms
Feminist Science Fiction
Gender
Genetic Engineering
Homosexuality
Janus/Aurora/New Moon
Khatru
Lesbians
Pregnancy and Reproduction
Queer Science Fiction
Sex Changes
Slash Fiction
Transgender
Transsexuality
Women’s Bookstores

THEMES
..............................................................
Amazons
Androgyny
Animals
Architecture
Artiﬁcial Life
Asexuality
Bisexuality
Cloning
Colonization
Disability
Education
Female Friendship
Feminisms
Gender
Genetic Engineering

xxiv
.................

Volume 2: Entries

Homosexuality
Languages and Linguistics
Lesbians
Marxism
Neurodiversity
Pregnancy and Reproduction
Romantic Traditions in Science Fiction
Sex Changes
Transgender
Transsexuality
War and Peace

V
ISUAL MEDIA
.............................................................
Alien
Battlestar Galactica
British Science Fiction Film
Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel
Cottington, Lady
Cyberbodies, Female
Farscape
Fireﬂy/Serenity
Fontana, D. C.
Game Designers
Gorey, Edward
Graphic Novels
Independent Comics
Internet
Matrix, The
Star Trek
Von Harbou, Thea Gabriele
Whedon, Joss
Xena: Warrior Princess

A
AIKEN, JOAN DELANO

(1924–2004)

Joan Aiken was an award-winning and
proliﬁc British science ﬁction and fantasy author. Born September 4, 1924, in
Rye, Sussex, England, to Canadianborn Jessie McDonald Aiken and American-born Pulitzer Prize–winning poet
Conrad Aiken, Joan Delano Aiken wrote
her ﬁrst story at age ﬁve. Her ﬁrst publication was at age sixteen, a story for
the BBC Children’s Hour. During the war,
after ﬁnishing secondary school at
Wychwood, Oxford, she worked as a librarian at the United Nations Information Centre in London. She married
Ronald Brown in 1945. He left her a
widow with two small children in 1955.
Though she wrote her stories at
night, Aiken continued to work, ﬁrst as
a magazine features editor then as a
copywriter, before taking up writing
full-time in 1962. She was a versatile
author of the fantastic for both children and adults, writing poetry, plays,
and short stories, as well as ninety-two
novels, the majority written for children. While she could never be accused
of predictability, she drew from wellestablished oral traditions, lending her
tales not just a fantastic, fairy-tale
quality but also a strong moral sense of
wrong and right. She had a Dickensian
ﬂair for creating worlds in which the
wicked and the grotesque frequently
ﬂourish—a ﬂair that can be seen in her
often colorful and telling character
names, such as Miss Slighcarp, a particularly vile villain, or Miss Hooting, a
retired enchantress. Aiken’s writing has
been described as both charming and

quirky, and three of those charming
and quirky children’s novels have won
awards: in 1965, The Wolves of Willoughby Chase won the Lewis Carroll
Shelf Award; in 1969, The Whispering
Mountain won the Guardian Award; and
in 1972, Night Fall won America’s Edgar
Allan Poe Award.
Aiken’s best-known series for children,
the dozen or so loosely connected
Wolves of Willoughby Chase novels written over the course of more than forty
years, are set in Victorian London, during an alternative history in which the
Hanoverians never replaced the House
of Stuart on the throne of England. The
series centers on the adventures of irrepressible Dido Twite and certain of her
working-class clan. In the 1960s, when
the series began, Twite was a unique
character for the times: an adventurous
Cockney girl with no regard for politeness and a knack for thwarting political
scheming. Her charm only grew over the
years, and though Aiken allowed Twite
to drown at the end of one novel, the
author, like Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, was
forced by readers’ demands to rescue
the beloved character.
In 1976, Aiken married American
painter Julius Goldstein, who left her a
widow for a second time in 2001. She
died on January 4, 2004, in Sussex, leaving her son and daughter from her ﬁrst
marriage as well as several grandchildren. Her ﬁnal novel, Midwinter Nightingale, was published posthumously.
Further Readings
Clere, Sarah V. “Joan Aiken.” In British Children’s Writers since 1960: First Series, ed.
1
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Caroline C. Hunt, 3–11. Detroit, MI: Gale,
1996.
Hunt, Peter. “Joan Aiken, British Children’s
Fantasy Fiction and the Meaning of the
Mainstream.” Foundation 34 (Autumn 2005):
23–28.
Ramsey, Inez. Joan Aiken Teacher Resource
File [online]. Internet School Library Media
Center, http://falcon.jmu.edu/ramseyil/
aiken.htm.

ELLEN BAIER

ALEXANDER, LLOYD (1924–2007)
Lloyd Alexander was one of the bestknown and most proliﬁc American
writers of fantasy ﬁction for children
and young adults. The author of some
forty books, Alexander created some of
the most enduring characters in adolescent literature. Most notably, he was
the author of the Chronicles of Prydain
(1964–68), a fantasy series loosely
inspired by the Celtic myths of the
Welsh Mabinogion.
In addition to a number of standalone books, Alexander was the author
of several series: the Chronicles of Prydain, the Westmark trilogy, and the
Vesper Holly series. He was known for
experimenting with a variety of settings
for his novels. These ranged across
time—from historical periods (the Vesper Holly books) to pseudohistorical
periods (the Westmark trilogy)—as well
as place, incorporating culturally
diverse mythological and folkloric traditions. Alexander’s sensitivity to ethnic and cultural diversity continues to
teach young readers about the cultural
mores of China, India, Greece, and the
Middle East as well as Europe.
Alexander also incorporated a marked
sensitivity to gender and feminist
issues into his works. His female protagonists are willful, resourceful, and
strong, transcending stereotype. They
are essential parts of each story, rather
than mere courtly embellishments.
2
.............

Volume 2: Entries

Some of his most memorable young
women are the indefatigable Vesper
Holly; Westmark’s Queen Augusta, who
undergoes a remarkable transformation
from the destitute street urchin, Mickle;
and, of course, the delightfully exasperating Princess Eilonwy of the Prydain
Cycle. Of Eilonwy, Alexander said:
Her personality … comes from my
personal observations and experiences. From as far back as I can
remember, my mother, and all the
women family members, my women
teachers, girl friends, and my daughter, and certainly Janine [Alexander’s
wife] were strong, active, competent. (quoted in Tunnell, Prydain
Companion, 87)

In addition to recurring characters,
many of Alexander’s stand-alone novels
have striking feminine presences—
Isabel in The Marvelous Misadventures of
Sebastian (1970), Nur-Jehan in The First
Two Lives of Lukas-Kasha (1978), Voyaging
Moon in The Remarkable Journey of Prince
Jen (1991), and more recently Aunt
Annie in The Gawgon and the Boy (2001),
Lidi in The Rope Trick (2002), and Shira in
The Golden Dream of Carlo Chuchio (2007).
And while many of his female characters can be grouped into a single and,
some have argued, facile “type”—willful,
stubborn, often secretly high-born but
living as a commoner—these characters
nevertheless help Alexander’s readers,
both young men and women alike, to
understand the value and importance
of strong women.
Among his many awards, Alexander
received the American Book Award for
Westmark (1981); the National Book
Award for The Marvelous Misadventures of
Sebastian (1970) and Westmark; the Newbury Honor for The Black Cauldron (1965);
and the 1969 Newbury Medal for The
High King (1968). The High King was also
a ﬁnalist for both the National Book

Alien
Award and the American Book Award.
Alexander died on May 17, 2007, age
eighty-three, two weeks after the death
of his wife of sixty-one years, Janine
Denni. His ﬁnal novel, The Golden Dream
of Carlo Chuchio, was in the galley stage
at the time of his death and reached
bookstores three months posthumously.
See also: “The Creation of Literature for the
Young” (vol. 1); Feminisms.
Further Readings
Ramsey, Inez. Lloyd Alexander Teacher
Resource File [online]. Internet School
Library Media Center, http://falcon.jmu.
edu/ramseyil/alexander.htm.
Tunnell, Michael O. The Prydain Companion:
A Reference Guide to Lloyd Alexander’s Prydain Chronicles. New York: Greenwood
Press, 1989. Reprint, New York: Henry
Holt, 2003.

JASON FISHER

ALIEN
The Alien series of ﬁlms is best known
for the female protagonist, Lt. Ellen
Ripley (Sigourney Weaver), and her
ever-present alien foe (designed by
H. R. Giger). The Alien ﬁlms opened the
science ﬁction, horror, and action genres to the strong female protagonist
who could defeat the enemy on her
own. Ripley appears in the ﬁrst four
ﬁlms: Alien (1979; dir. Ridley Scott), Aliens (1986; dir. James Cameron), Alien3
(1992; dir. David Fincher), and Alien Resurrection (1997; dir. Jean-Pierre Jeunet).
The tradition continued with a prequel
entitled AvP: Alien vs. Predator (2004;
dir. Paul W. S. Anderson) featuring
Alexa Woods (Saana Latham) as the
ﬁrst woman-of-color protagonist of a
big-budget science ﬁction ﬁlm.
By conﬂating the typical male hero of
science ﬁction with the female survivor
of slasher ﬁlms, Alien became the ﬁrst
science ﬁction ﬁlm with a female protagonist who represents all of humanity.

Ripley is the third ofﬁcer of the spaceship Nostromo, whose crew is awakened
from its cryo-sleep to answer a distress
call from an unexplored planet. After
discovering a derelict alien spaceship, a
male crewmember is attacked by an
alien life form, whose parasitic progeny
later bursts through his chest. This
scene effectively erased the basic sexual
distinction between men and women as
it invoked cultural anxieties about the
subversion of male power by representing the male body as a site of rape and
birth. The alien escapes, and, one by
one, it kills the crew. Ripley discovers
that the company the crew works for
has determined to bring back the alien
for its “weapons division.” She must
ﬁght the alien and the system represented by the ship’s computer, MU/TH/
UR 6000, and the company’s robot, Ash,
who tries to dispose of Ripley in a
mock-rape scene. Ripley’s confrontation
with, and ﬁnal destruction of, the alien
as the company’s object of desire
becomes the major theme of the series
and thereby gives voice to the feminist
goal of saving humanity from the destructive impulses of patriarchy.
In
Aliens,
Reagan-era
politics
informed writer/director James Cameron’s conservative revision of Ripley into
a socially authorized female action
hero, who ﬁghts the aliens to save an
orphaned child. Though Ripley returns
to the alien planet, LV-426, to confront
her fears, once there her motivation
comes from her maternal instincts toward the child Newt. The maternal
theme is mirrored in grotesque form by
the introduction of the Alien Queen as
a monstrous mother who dominates
the alien drones. Thus, monstrous birth
and rebirth become motifs of the series. Like the hero of many 1980s action
ﬁlms who ﬁghts to get his wife, lover,
or family back, Ripley ﬁghts to recover
her lost daughter and, importantly,
3
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

binds a male to her quest, creating an
impromptu family: she is a woman
ﬁghting women’s battles, not the patriarchal company as she did in Alien.
Alien3 rewrites Ripley as an abject
woman who will reject the patriarchal
imperatives she defends in Aliens. Ripley’s
violent landing on the hellish, prisonplanet Fury 161 casts her out from the
domestic promise of Aliens into a feminist
hell where she is surrounded by fundamentalist Christian, misogynist, hypermale convicts. Worse, within her lurks an
embryonic alien queen that could destroy
humanity once and for all. In the end,
Ripley chooses to leap into the burning
leadworks, taking her alien “baby” with
her: the mother-protector of Aliens is
replaced with the mother-destroyer.
In Alien Resurrection, writer Joss
Whedon (creator of Buffy the Vampire
Slayer) resurrects Ripley as the monstrous posthuman superwoman. As
always, the military-industrial complex
prizes the alien species over humanity,
only this time Ripley is a human–alien
hybrid, a freak treated variously as pet,
curiosity, or threat. Ripley is supported
in her quest by a young female
android, Call (Winona Ryder), who
embodies the angst and conﬂicting
motives associated with the postfeminist movement. Gender is most highly
interrogated by the Newborn. A product of mixed female (alien queen and
Ripley) DNA, the Newborn represents
the greatest fear of the patriarchal
power structure: a race produced solely
of woman. Though Ripley chooses to
terminate her alien progeny, she still
carries the posthuman potential it represented within her.
In the prequel to the series, AvP:
Alien vs. Predator, a group of archaeologists and adventurers come together to
explore an ancient pyramid buried
under the ice of Antarctica, only to get
caught in a confrontation between the
4
.............

Volume 2: Entries

aliens and another extraterrestrial species, the Predators, who use captive aliens for a warrior initiation ritual. By
the end, only the intrepid mountaineer
Alexa Woods is left standing. Her valor
is acknowledged by the Predators with
a warrior’s mark on her cheek. Though
AvP continues the tradition of the
female protagonist, the ﬁlm brings together two franchises where the alien
species are constantly connected to
representations of blackness, whether
archetypal or stereotypical: an idea
reinforced by the protagonist, Woods,
being a woman of color.
The Alien franchise also includes serial comics, novelizations, and graphic
novels (Dark Horse Comics); an Aliens
role-playing game (Leading Edge
Games); a collectible card game entitled Aliens/Predator (HarperCollins); a
successful video game series; and a signiﬁcant body of fan ﬁction.
See also: “Heroes or Sheroes” (vol. 1);
“Intersections of Race and Gender” (vol. 1);
“Science Fiction Film: Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Bell-Metereau, Rebecca. “Woman: The
Other Alien in Alien.” In Women Worldwalkers: New Dimensions of Science Fiction
and Fantasy, ed. Jane B. Weedman. Lubbock: Texas Tech Press, 1985, 9–24.
Constable, Catherine. “Becoming the Monster’s Mother: Morphologies of Identity in
the Alien Series.” In Alien Zone II: The Spaces
of Science Fiction Cinema, ed. Annette Kuhn,
173–202. New York: Verso, 1999.
Gallardo C., Ximena, and C. Jason Smith.
Alien Woman: The Making of Lt. Ellen Ripley.
New York: Continuum, 2004.
Giger, H. R. Giger’s Alien. Beverly Hills: Galerie Morpheus International, 1979.
Greenberg, Harvey R. “Fembo: Aliens’
Intentions.” Journal of Popular Film and TV
15, no. 4 (Winter 1988): 165–71.
Jeffords, Susan. “The Battle of the Big
Mamas: Feminism and the Alienation of

Alternative History
Women.” Journal of American Culture 10,
no. 3 (1987): 73–84.
Kuhn, Annette, ed. Alien Zone: Cultural
Theory and Contemporary Science Fiction Cinema. New York: Verso, 1990.

XIMENA GALLARDO C.

AND

C. JASON SMITH

ALTERNATIVE HISTORY
The genre of alternative history literature takes our own world and in some
way changes it through the alteration
of an event in our known past. The resultant story portrays a world that is
still clearly identiﬁable to readers, yet
is changed by this occurrence. Speciﬁcally, the premise involves the removal
of, or a different outcome to, a historical event. Alternative histories are
widely used in science ﬁction for mapping potential cultural, social, or political shifts and exploring how they might
have altered human development. In
doing so, these texts recognize the debt
that science ﬁction must acknowledge
when creating possible futures, as alternative history can be constructed
only with recourse to the past.
Alternative histories are usually either situated on Earth with something
subtly changed, in a place often
referred to as an “elseworld,” or in the
future with clear reference to the social
alteration that Earth has undergone as
a result of such historical change. Popular themes revolve around a historical
event occurring somewhat differently,
such as investigating different outcomes for major battles or wars, considering what may have happened had
one political group retained or gained
power over another, or introducing a
novum into the text that alters technological development or social and cultural expectation. Robert Harris’s
Fatherland (1992) portrays a contemporary world ruled by the Nazi Party after
history in World War II, for example,

and Mary Gentle’s Ash trilogy (2000)
explores a ﬁfteenth-century Europe
where Atlantis has been discovered.
Although alternative history may be
located ﬁrmly within a science ﬁction
and fantasy tradition, the close parallels to actual historical events or minor
changes in existing social structures
mean that it is frequently regarded as
more mainstream and marketed as
such by publishers. In this respect, alternative history skirts the borders of science ﬁction, and, in many cases, texts
are clearly not part of the genre. Narratives that deal with simple what-if questions, a genre also referred to as
“counterfactual history,” are often investigations of potential military alternatives, rather than genuinely engaging
science ﬁction devices. Originating with
^ teau’s
Louis
Napoleon
Geoffrey-Cha
^
Napoleon et le conquete de la monde 1812–
1823 (1836), these texts remain popular
and are frequently marketed as lighthearted military debate rather than
genuine science ﬁction. Despite this
apparent levity, these texts are also
known for expressing strong political
views, providing cautionary tales about
the current state of historical affairs, or
indeed warning that some ideas can be
taken too far. Susan Shwartz’s short story
“Suppose They Gave Peace a Chance”
(2001) is typical of this politicized speculation. However, both counterfactual and
alternative histories are concerned to
show how powerful underlying forces in
history can be turned aside by acts of
chance or hinge upon small, sometimes
arbitrary decisions by individuals. Blaise
Pascal’s Pensees (1670) epitomizes this historical chaos by remarking that had Cleopatra’s nose been shorter, history would
have changed.
In alternative histories, an entire system of possibility is exposed, and
female characters can be crucial in
establishing points of difference and
5
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

change. Alternative history speciﬁcally
objectiﬁes the role of women, since
their social development—in particular,
liberation—is a key moment in our own
known histories. Women are often chosen as narrators or protagonists, and it
is their exploration of difference that
highlights change to the reader. This
choice is particularly represented
through alternative histories that use
time travel, because narrators are in a
clear position to compare and contrast
women’s relative situations. Texts such
as Connie Willis’s The Doomsday Book
(1993) and Liz Jensen’s My Dirty Little
Book of Stolen Time (2005) use female
perspectives to explore the disassociation between past and present, as well
as to highlight the potential that an
alternate history may bring. These
build on the traditional representation
of difference that arises from texts
such as such as Mark Twain’s A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court
(1889), and they also speciﬁcally call on
readers to compare their own situation
with that of the text. Furthermore, time
travel is keen to represent the age-old
science ﬁction axiom that interference
in the natural course of history can
bring about great change through historical and time paradoxes.
Alternative histories are frequently situated within a nebulous potential future
or even the present. These texts trace
possible developments in history or
responses to potential future events,
although this has often come to pass
through a change in an aspect of the
past. Many feminist future histories envisage either the extension or total removal of moments of oppression or
liberation. The most famous of these is
Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale
(1985), where the women of the Republic
of Gilead must live under a bastardized
system of the biblical commandments.
Alternatively, society may have been
6
.............

Volume 2: Entries

irrevocably changed by events such as a
war, a plague, the arrival of an alien species, or technology.
The evolution of the human species
itself often changes the ways the future
is mapped. In Julian May’s ﬁction, the
advent of metaphysical ability in
humans ultimately prompts intervention
by an alien conglomerate, the Galactic
Milieu. This narrative development may
also be facilitated by the destruction of
the world through war, genocide, or
man-made disaster or by sending protagonists away from Earth and showing
how social evolution begins again in different ways. Kim Stanley Robinson’s
Mars series (1994–96) is perhaps one of
the most complex and well realized of
these histories, in particular in its use of
Areologist Ann Clayborne to express ecological debates over terraforming and
government.
Many future alternative histories are
often rather ironically retrospective in
vision, since they show what could
happen if an aspect of the present that
is currently considered negative or extremist were to be extended to its furthest possibilities. Here, readers cannot
escape making comparisons with their
own situation, and the alternative history deliberately accentuates difference
between contemporary settings. This
approach often involves the recovery or
repetition of past historical genres in
order to reselect appropriate social
codes: for example, Sophia McDougall’s
Romanitas (2005) explores a contemporary world where the Roman Empire
still holds sway, but identiﬁes the moral
wrongness of such acts as cruciﬁxion.
Alternative histories using more fantastic elements often involve the inclusion of magic or arcane forces as an
element of change. Of these, Harry Turtledove’s seemingly limitless ﬁction
spans the genre from straight counterfactual accounts to ones in which alien

Amazons
species actively change history. Sara
Douglass’s Crucible trilogy (2001–02)
reconﬁgures the Hundred Years’ War
as a period in which demons entered
the world and inﬁltrated the Church,
and Susanna Clarke’s Jonathan Strange
and Mr. Norrell (2004), which won the
2005 Hugo Award for best novel, simply
introduces magic into the Napoleonic
era. While Jonathan Norrell and Patricia
Wrede’s Regency series strive for
more accurate historical representations, aided by the fact they are set
nearer to the present and thus more
research is available to support them,
fantasy texts involving Arthurian and
Celtic pseudohistories such as Marion
Zimmer Bradley’s Avalon series are also
popular. Here, the rather nebulous historical landscape of Britain’s Dark Ages
prevails, and the stories are often less
historical than fantastic.
Alternative history is a popular subject for live-action role-playing games,
in particular those that encourage
more mature and, as a result, more
female players. Whereas many systems
focus on a more traditional form of
sword and sorcery, counterfactual history is used extensively by systems
such as Frail Realities and the 1920s
H. P. Lovecraft mythos game Call of
Cthulhu (1981). Both provide a setting
that allows characters to explore potential roles that may not have been available to women in the past: for example,
a player may freely choose a character
such as a female French Revolutionist.
“Steampunk” provides a similar opportunity to exploit historical (or sometimes ﬁctional) ﬁgures, giving them
more proactive roles in the progress of
history. Alan Moore’s Mina Harker is
the de facto leader of the superhero
team in The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen (1999–2003), whereas William
Gibson and Bruce Sterling’s The Difference Engine (1990) makes protagonists

Sybil Gerard and Ada Byron leading ﬁgures of political and scientiﬁc progress.
Above all, alternative history is a
genre that encourages self-reﬂection,
both of women’s roles and of their position within society. This is demonstrated not only in its persistent use of
female characters but also in its popularity. The fact that crossover texts
such as Dan Brown’s The Da Vinci Code
(2003) have become so popular with
readers is testimony to the fact that
they continue to play an important role
in science ﬁction narratives, and that
they are also more than capable of
transcending genres, moving into the
popular domain with ease.
Further Readings
Hellekson, Karen. The Alternate History: Reﬁguring Historical Time. Kent, OH: Kent
State University Press, 2001.
McKnight, Edgar Vernon, Jr. Alternative History: The Development of a Literary Genre.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill Press, 1994.
Turtledove, Harry, and Martin Greenberg,
eds. Best Alternate History Stories of the
20th Century. London: Ballantine, 2001.
Uchronia: The Alternative History List
[online]. Http://www.uchronia.net.

ESTHER MACCALLUM-STEWART AND
JUSTIN PARSLER

AMAZONS
The Amazons were a tribe of warrior
women from Asia Minor in Greek mythology. Amazon society was matriarchal, with women controlling warfare,
politics, and agriculture. Men either
served as household slaves or were
barred from Amazon territory altogether. In the latter case, the Amazons
mated with the neighboring Gargarians. The Amazons prized female children and banished, crippled, or killed
male ones. They also reputedly
removed their right breast to improve
7
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

their archery and spear-throwing,
although ancient visual representations
show them with both breasts intact.
According to Greek etiology, this practice gave them their name—a mazos (no
breast)—but it is more likely that the
name led mythographers to invent the
practice.
The Amazons’ historicity has been
widely debated. Some scholars argue
that archaeological evidence suggests
the presence of female warriors among
the Minoans and Scythians and that
these women were the basis for the
Amazon myth. Speciﬁcally, Minoan
frescoes show axe-wielding priestesses
accompanying male soldiers into battle, while Scythian tombs have yielded
female skeletons buried with weapons.
Either group may have inspired the
legend of the Amazons, although neither is identical with them.
Other scholars believe that the Amazons are a misogynist myth designed to
uphold patriarchal culture and to control female sexuality. Athenian legend
characterizes the Amazons as unnatural women who aspire to be like men
and are punished for it. For instance,
Heracles battles the Amazons and rapes
their queen, Hippolyta, before giving her
in marriage to Theseus. Later, Theseus
inherits the relationship with Hippolyta,
which suggests the popularity of the
story. The Iliad presents a more complex
version in its account of Achilles’ defeat
of Penthesilea. As he kills her, he notices her beauty and falls in love with
her. In death, therefore, the female warrior becomes a passive object of desire.
In these myths, the Amazons are doubly
defeated by the symbolic phallus of the
spear and the literal one of the hero
wielding it.
The early twentieth century saw
Amazons depicted in an equally repressive way. Despite exceptions like Natalie Clifford Barney’s lesbian Pensees
8
.............

Volume 2: Entries

d’une Amazone (1920) and William
Moulton Marston’s feminist Wonder
Woman (1941– ), Amazons were represented as women who hated men until
they fell in love with the right one.
During the 1960s, however, feminists
reclaimed Amazons as a source of
pride and an alternative to patriarchy.
Amazons became associated with separatism and lesbianism and appeared
frequently in feminist literature, the
most famous being Marion Zimmer
Bradley’s Free Amazons in the Darkover
series. Many female readers saw the
Free Amazons as a utopian model, and
some even began to live in imitation of
them. In the present day, Amazons continue to serve as role models for many
women, primarily due to the popular
series Xena: Warrior Princess, which
presented an edgy, sexy version of the
feminist myth yet remained faithful to
its core themes of female power, solidarity, and, perhaps, lesbian desire.
Further Readings
Crowder, Diane Grifﬁn. “Amazons.” Glbtq:
An Encyclopedia of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual,
Transgender, and Queer Culture, 2006
[online], http://www.glbtq.com/literature/
amazons.html.
Salmonson, Jessica. The Encyclopedia of Amazons. New York: Anchor, 1992.
Tyrrell, William Blake. Amazons: A Study in
Athenian Mythmaking. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1989.

KAREN BRUCE

ANDROGYNY
Androgyny, deﬁned as the possession
of attributes either of both sexes or of
neither sex, is one of the means by
which female science ﬁction writers
examine gender and its meaning in society. Authors have explored androgyny
in a number of ways: some create sexless characters, a few present characters that are both male and female,

Animals
some examine characters whose genders are ﬂuid or mutable, and others
construct societies in which gender differences are minimal.
The most famous science ﬁction
treatment of sexless androgyny comes
in Ursula K. Le Guin’s novel The Left
Hand of Darkness, published in 1969.
The story focuses on the inhabitants of
Gethen, who are without any sexual
characteristics until they go into
“kemmer” or heat. At this point, they
metamorphose, somewhat randomly,
into biological males or females and
are capable of (hetero)sexual activity
and reproduction. Although memorable, the novel has been criticized for
presenting a race of people who, while
theoretically androgynous, appear to
the reader to be male, a problem that
arises in part because Le Guin refers to
the Gethenians with male pronouns.
Other writers avoid this difﬁculty by
using gender-neutral pronouns or even
no pronouns at all. In her novel Halfway
Human (1998), Carolyn Ives Gilman calls
members of her sexless race “it,” an
appropriate choice since the novel’s
society does not view these beings as
fully human. In A Paradigm of Earth
(2001), Candas Jane Dorsey manages to
avoid all pronouns in referring to her
androgynous alien, though, pointedly, a
few of the other characters choose to
attribute a gender to the extraterrestrial. Despite these and similar experiments, however, both the stumbling
block of pronouns and the difﬁculty of
imagining genderless and sexless
beings have limited the number of
works featuring such characters.
Depictions of characters who are
both male and female are also fairly
rare in women’s science ﬁction,
although Melissa Scott’s Shadow Man
(1996) portrays a society of ﬁve genders
ranging from male to female. In the
middle of the group are characters she

deﬁnes as “true hermaphrodites,” in
the biological sense of possessing both
male and female reproductive organs.
More typical are works that challenge
the idea that the categories of male and
female are immutable and opposite.
As early as 1928, Virginia Woolf’s
classic Orlando offered a character who
switches sex in response to cultural attitudes toward gender. In Marge Piercy’s
Woman on the Edge of Time (1976), the
inhabitants of her future utopia appear
androgynous to the twentieth-century
protagonist because they have abandoned traditional sex roles. Since then,
many writers have used gender change
as a way of addressing issues of gender
construction. More recent works depict
computers helping to create characters
that are in some sense androgynous:
Susan Squires’s Body Electric (2002) features a sentient computer who was programmed by a woman but occupies a
man’s body, while in Exit to Reality
(1997), Edith Forbes questions the
meaning of gender in virtual reality.
Further Readings
Annas, Pamela J. “New Worlds, New Words:
Androgyny in Feminist Science Fiction.”
Science Fiction Studies 5, no. 2 (July 1978):
143–56.

VICTORIA SOMOGYI

ANIMALS
Animals have been included in science
ﬁction and fantasy texts from at least
as early as H. G. Wells’s The Island of
Doctor Moreau (1896). This Victorian
novel, deeply inﬂuenced by the contemporaneous vivisectionist debates, reveals
the complex relationship between
women and animals. Women were the
founders of animal rights movements,
yet also experienced the consequences
of being ideologically linked to animals—and thus further from God—by
patriarchy.
The
representation
of
9
.............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

animals in science ﬁction and fantasy
demonstrates this ambivalent heritage.
In Wells’s novel, for example, the hybrid
human/animal creature who suffers
most is a female puma, a ﬁgure that
demonstrates the similarities of how
animals and women are abused by technoscientiﬁc patriarchy.
Animals can appear in science ﬁction
and fantasy in a number of ways. Alien
characters may be represented in
terms typically associated with animals, thus raising questions about how
we interact with actual living animals
and the physical world in general. Such
narratives raise questions about environmentalism, human–animal symbiosis, and animals as companions or
fellow sentient beings. Some texts represent the human characters as
“animals” through the eyes of the alien
protagonists. These works draw our
attention to the damage caused by
some of our ways of conceiving of and
interacting with other species through
the totalizing logic of Enlightenment
rationality. Other texts explore the
implications, both social and philosophical, of the ever-eroding boundary
between animal-being and humanbeing through the narration of genetic
fusion, xenotransplantations, or other
technoscience interactions of the
human and the animal. These interactions were once solely the domain of
science ﬁction but are increasingly a
reality in what scholars such as Donna
Haraway have called our “science
ﬁctional” material world.
The resources of fantasy, similarly,
allow us to conceive of a world in
which our material relationships with
animals have arisen quite differently.
In fantasy worlds, the history of
human–animal relationships might be
changed, or animal characters might
be made equivalent to human characters through their shared facility with
10
...............

Volume 2: Entries

magic. Within science ﬁction, hybrid
creatures might be created, while fantasy can put us into a world in which
all sentient beings slip between human
and animal modes “naturally.”
The emerging ﬁeld of animal studies
offers a number of paradigms through
which ﬁctional representations of the
animal might be analyzed. The animal
has always been deﬁned as the “Other”
to humankind, a broad division that
often erases diversity within each category. Animals therefore occupy the
space of alterity in human culture that
is often associated with aliens in science ﬁction tradition. Animal imagery
has also long been pejoratively associated with the lower classes, women,
and nonwhites, and thus animal representations often critique such discourses. We interact with animals in a
variety of ways: as food, as tools for
research, as slave labor, as companions, and as competition for resources.
These contradictory ways of relating
materially to animals are something
with which human culture continues
to struggle, and the resources of science ﬁction and fantasy enable us to
explore the questions raised in a variety of creative ways. Within the conventions of these genres, animals may
be able to speak, as can the genetically
engineered animals in David Brin’s
Uplift series (1980–98); the reader
might be invited to enter a complex
animal culture, as in Erin Hunter’s
Warrior series (2003– ); or we might be
compelled to consider how we draw
the line between animals and humans
when confronted with a sentient alien
species that appears to be an animal,
as we are in Karen Traviss’s City of Pearl
(2004).
Women authors of fantasy and science ﬁction have tended to write more
of the work dealing with animals and
the questions of animal studies than

Architecture
have men, just as women have tended
to be at the forefront of animal rights
activism. Since women have often
not themselves been recognized as
fully human, they often question the
human/animal boundary in their work,
extending our understanding of sentience. Sheri S. Tepper’s work might be
characterized as sharing the philosophy of “deep ecology,” a perspective
that argues that humans are only one
of many living beings on Earth and are
not entitled to any particular privilege
in using its resources. Her novel The
Companions (2004) raises questions of
environmental conservation and the
coevolution of humans and domesticated animal species. Other authors,
such as Carol Emshwiller in The Mount
(2002), use the estranging techniques of
speculative genres to imagine a situation in which humans occupy the
social space of the companion animal
or to envision a symbiotic relationship
between humans and animals who
share a psychic connection, such as
that in Andre Norton’s Beastmaster series (1959–62). Science’s use of animals
for experimentation occurs in a gendered context, as Lynda Birke argues in
The Taming of the Shrew (1994), in which
women must prove their ability to be
scientiﬁc by distancing themselves
from “feminine” sympathy. “The Psychologist Who Wouldn’t Do Awful
Things to Rats” (1976) explores intersections of this masculine culture in
ways congruent with author Alice Sheldon’s exploration of the masculine culture of science ﬁction, facilitated by her
choice to write under a male pseudonym, James T. Tiptree Jr.
Ursula K. Le Guin’s Buffalo Girls and
Other Animal Presences (1987) might be
taken as a paradigmatic text that demonstrates the fruitful intersections of
animal studies and feminism and how
a speculative ﬁction text might use this

conjunction. It tells the story of a
woman who loses her eyes, but is given
new eyes by Coyote, a ﬁgure from
Native American mythology. These new
eyes allow her to see the world simultaneously from the human and animal
points of view. This short-ﬁction collection ably demonstrates how science ﬁction and fantasy by women might use
the ﬁgure of the animal to explore concerns with the environment, to show
the limitations of how we theorize sentience, and to question the gendered
heritage of our ways of thinking about
animals. As the ﬁrst ﬁgure of alterity in
human culture, the animal is an important symbol in science ﬁction.
See also: Environmental Science Fiction.
Further Readings
Donawerth, Jane. “Mothers Are Animals:
Women as Aliens in Science Fiction by
Women.” Graven Images 2 (1995): 237–47.
Hassler, Donald M. “Enlightenment Genres
and Science Fiction: Belief and Animated
Nature (1774).” Extrapolation 29, no. 4
(1988): 322–29.
Palmeri, Frank. “Deconstructing the Animal–
Human Binary: Recent Work in Animal
Studies.” Clio 35, no. 3 (2006): 407–20.

SHERRYL VINT

ARCHITECTURE
Architecture plays an important role in
the speculative ﬁction of women by
representing order, a concept that
many female science ﬁction writers
approach ambivalently or even critically, ﬁnding it oppressive or limiting.
In his study of women’s utopias, Chris
Ferns points out that while “the overwhelming majority of utopian dreams
of order have been written by men, it is
equally the case that the recent resurgence in utopian dreams of freedom
has been predominantly the work of
women” (Narrating Utopia, 27). Consequently, women’s works featuring
11
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

positive portrayals of highly designed
buildings and formally structured cities
are relatively rare.
Instead, architecture and urban
design in women’s speculative ﬁction
are frequently incidental and largely disordered, with more emphasis on organic
and intuitive elements than on structures that are manufactured or primarily (and literally) man-made. In women’s
utopias, architecture sometimes largely
disappears. Marge Piercy’s description
of a city in Woman on the Edge of Time
(1976) is typical:
little no-account buildings … a few
large terra-cotta and yellow buildings and one blue dome, irregular
buildings, none bigger than a supermarket of her day, an ordinary
supermarket in any shopping plaza.
… A few lumpy free-form structures
overrun with green vines. No skyscrapers, no spaceports, no trafﬁc
jam in the sky. (62)

As one character remarks, “We don’t
have big cities; they didn’t work” (62).
Sometimes, writers will eliminate
conscious architectural design altogether. One of the only science ﬁction
books by a woman to feature an architect as the main character is Maureen
F. McHugh’s China Mountain Zhang
(1992). The male protagonist helps produce buildings in an intuitive manner
that signiﬁcantly differs from traditional building design. Some novels
also offer architecture that is organic
not only in form but also in fact. Sarah
Zettel’s The Quiet Invasion (2000), for
example, describes cities that are
actually sentient, biological beings.
Because of their mixed feelings about
order, women writers have not played a
signiﬁcant role in the creation of traditional futuristic architecture. When formal architecture does show up on
future Earths, it is often viewed
12
...............

Volume 2: Entries

primarily as a reﬂection of a dystopian
social order. In “Entrada” (1993) and Chimera (1993), Mary Rosenblum criticizes
economic inequities by envisioning a
future in which the rich live isolated in
huge urban towers or underground in
Antarctica, and suburbia belongs to
the poor. In The Handmaid’s Tale (1985),
Margaret Atwood subverts any utopian
version of nuclear families in singlefamily homes by making such dwellings
the locus of women’s captivity and
oppression.
Further Readings
Barr, Maureen. Feminist Fabulation: Space/
Postmodern Fiction. Iowa City: University of
Iowa Press, 1992.
Ferns, Chris. Narrating Utopia: Ideology, Gender, Form in Utopian Literature. Liverpool:
Liverpool University Press, 1999.

VICTORIA SOMOGYI

ARNASON, ELEANOR

(1942– )

Eleanor Arnason is an award-winning
American author who has been publishing science ﬁction since 1971. Inﬂuenced by 1950s science ﬁction
television and New Wave science ﬁction writers, Arnason’s short stories “A
Clear Day in Motor City” (1971) and
“The Warlord of Saturn’s Moons” (1974)
have been anthologized in Women of
Wonder: The Classic Years and The Norton
Book of Science Fiction. The stories follow
disillusioned writers whose literary
space adventures are thwarted by intrusive urban surroundings. Her ﬁrst
novel, The Sword Smith (1978) is a midlife rite of passage in which a sword
maker and a baby dragon learn that, in
a world where evil is deﬁned by laziness and shoddy values, quality workmanship can and does prevail over
empty heroic gestures. To the Resurrection Station (1986), a gothic satire, blasts
off in a mansion/spaceship and examines self-identity. In Daughter of the Bear

Arthurian Fantasy
King (1987), a washing machine shortcircuits, transporting a Minneapolis
housewife into another dimension
where she ﬁnds she is the changeling
heir-apparent to a magical world. Arnason’s 1991 planetary adventure A
Woman of the Iron People won the Mythopoeic Fantasy Award and the ﬁrst
James Tiptree Jr. Award for science ﬁction or fantasy that explores gender.
Ring of Swords (1993), winner of the
Minnesota Book Award and perhaps
her most ambitious work, is set in an
alien society where homosexuality is
the norm and heterosexuality for
pleasure is considered perverse. A series of Hwarhath stories published in
Asimov’s, F&SF, and Tales of the Unanticipated provide history, mythology, and
backstory for the original novel. Several
of these received award nominations.
Arnason’s father, H. H. Arnason, was
born in Canada of Icelandic heritage.
During her childhood, he worked as a
museologist overseas and became
director of the Minneapolis Walker Art
Center. Her mother, Elizabeth Yard, a
social worker, grew up in China, the
child of American missionaries. Arnason’s family moved into Idea House
#2, a “house of the future” built by the
Walker Art Center, which became a
focus for artists and intellectuals. She
grew up arguing art, politics, and
social justice issues while reading
widely.
Arnason describes her work as “parascience ﬁction” or ﬁction about writing
that isn’t “limited by narrow ideas
about what is real.” Her writing is best
described as speculative thought
experiments that respond to contemporary problems. Informed by science,
cultural anthropology, Icelandic eddas,
Confucianism, and grassroots progressivism, her literary voice is distinct:
intelligent, humane, and wryly humorous, refusing to provide comfortable

answers. In her 2004 WisCon guest of
honor speech, she noted:
My own private image of capitalism
and capitalists is the great white
shark—a primitive animal, in many
ways limited, but very good at what
it does. One cannot build a humane
society on a base of great white
sharks. (http://www.inﬁnitematrix.
net/faq/essays/arnason.html)
Further Readings
Anderson, Kristine J. “The Great Divorce:
Fictions of Feminist Desires.” In Feminism,
Utopia, and Narrative, ed. Libby F. Jones,
85–99. Knoxville: University of Tennessee
Press, 1990.
Arnason, Eleanor. “Writing Science Fiction
during the Third World War.” In Ordinary
People. Seattle: Aqueduct Press, 2006.
Available at http://www.inﬁnitematrix.
net/faq/essays/arnason.html.
Attebery, Brian. “Ring of Swords: A Reappreciation.” New York Review of Science Fiction 16, no. 8 (April 2004): 1, 8–10.
Fitting, Peter. “Reconsiderations of the Separatist Paradigm in Recent Feminist Science Fiction.” Science Fiction Studies 19, no.
1 (March 1992): 32–48.
Gordon, Joan. “Incite/On-Site/Insight: Implications of the Other in Eleanor Arnason’s
Science Fiction.” In Future Females, the
Next Generation: New Voices and Velocities in
Feminist Science Fiction Criticism, ed.
Marleen S. Barr, 247–58. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2000.

SANDRA J. LINDOW

ARTHURIAN FANTASY
Arthurian fantasy refers to popular ﬁction that rewrites, alludes to, or incorporates characters from the legends of
King Arthur, also known as the “Matter
of Britain.” While Arthur himself is
thought to be based on a historical ﬁgure, legends about him are more ﬁction
than fact and often have supernatural
elements: characters such as Merlin
13
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

and Morgan can work magic; items such
as Excalibur or the Holy Grail have supernatural properties; and even warriors
(Arthur, Lancelot, Gawain, Kay) may have
abilities that are extraordinary. Thus, fantasy is a logical genre to use for rewritings of the legend today, although there
are also science ﬁction, detective, and historical ﬁctions about King Arthur.
Arthurian fantasy has become a signiﬁcant genre for many women writers.
As the popularity of the legend and the
publication of Arthurian novels and
short ﬁction increased during the twentieth century, more women created
original Arthurian tales, sometimes of
kings, knights, and wizards, but more
often of queens, ladies, and sorceresses. Women writers have treated the
legend seriously or used it for comedic
effect, have attempted to rationalize
events or emphasized the mystical,
and have rewritten male characters
or sought to imagine the voices and
lives of the legend’s women. Whatever
their approach, many women have
addressed sociopolitical issues of the
present by writing of an imagined past.
Written legends of King Arthur ﬁrst
appear in the Middle Ages, in supposedly factual chronicles such as Geoffrey
of Monmouth’s Historia Regum Britanniae
(History of the Kings of Britain, c. 1138)
or in romances such as Sir Thomas
Malory’s Le Morte d’Arthur (1470, printed
by William Caxton in 1485). Over the
centuries, writers of poetry, drama, and
prose ﬁction have retold and expanded
the medieval stories or have created
original tales of King Arthur’s Court.
Women have long been creators of
Arthurian ﬁction. Before the twentieth
century, Marie de France wrote Lais
(narrative poems, twelfth century),
Lady Charlotte Guest translated Welsh
tales (Mabinogion, 1838–49), and Elizabeth Stuart Phelps published original
Arthurian poems and short stories
14
...............

Volume 2: Entries

(1871–83). These are just a few examples of women’s engagement in (re)producing the legend.
The twentieth century, however, saw
changes in the transmission of the
legend and in the uses made of it by
women writers. Novels and short ﬁction became the preferred genres for
Arthurian ﬁction. The conventions of
fantasy, including its acceptance of
multivolume series, makes it conducive
to rewriting the rise and fall of Arthur’s
Camelot, while the publication of
theme anthologies in the last twentyﬁve years has promoted Arthurian
short ﬁction. Women writers have
increasingly found opportunities within
both these popular markets.
While Arthurian science ﬁction (SF)
is much less common than fantasy,
women writers have produced signiﬁcant examples of the genre. Andre
Norton’s Merlin’s Mirror (1975) provides
a typically SF explanation for traditionally magical plot devices such as Merlin’s abilities or Arthur’s sleep in
Avalon. C. J. Cherryh has transposed
Arthurian characters to outer space in
her Port Eternity (1982); like many other
contemporary writers, Cherryh alludes
to previous versions of the legend, in
this case The Idylls of the King (1886) by
Alfred, Lord Tennyson.
Arthurian fantasy for adolescents often features young protagonists who
mature during the story. Vera Chapman’s protagonists are young women
deﬁning roles for themselves (sometimes unconventional ones) in King
Arthur’s society (The Three Damosels: A
Trilogy, 1978); Gillian Bradshaw in Hawk
of May (1980) tells the story of young
Gwalchmai as he ﬁnds a place
among Arthur’s warriors; and Anne
McCaffrey’s Black Horses for the King
(1996) is the story of a young stableboy
with Arthur’s cavalry. Other authors,
such as Susan Cooper in her Dark Is

Arthurian Fantasy
Rising series (1965–77) or Welwyn Welton Katz in The Third Magic (1988), have
young twentieth-century protagonists
who meet Arthurian characters or who
ﬁnd themselves in Arthurian times.
The most proliﬁc author of Arthurian
children’s fantasy is Jane Yolen. She
has published picture books (The Acorn
Quest, 1981; Merlin and the Dragons, 1995),
edited an anthology (Camelot, 1995), and
written original Arthurian tales (The
Dragon’s Boy, 1990; the Young Merlin trilogy, 1996–97; Sword of the Rightful King,
1993). Merlin is a frequent character in
Yolen’s Arthurian ﬁction; she imagines
his childhood in her trilogy and elsewhere explores the teacher–student relationship he has with Arthur, or in some
stories, with Guinevere.
Twentieth-century
archaeological
investigations into Cadbury and the
“real” King Arthur have fueled theories
about the historical Arthur. Such historical and archaeological theories
have inﬂuenced Arthurian fantasy, particularly its settings. Mary Stewart, for
example, in her Merlin series (The Crystal Cave, 1970; The Hollow Hills, 1973; The
Last Enchantment, 1979; The Wicked Day,
1983; The Prince and the Pilgrim, 1995),
incorporates
historically
plausible
details of architecture and religious
practices, yet retains fantastic elements such as the supernatural source
of many of Merlin’s abilities.
Not all writers treat the legend seriously, however; Esther M. Friesner’s
short ﬁction provides many examples of
comedic Arthurian fantasy, as suggested by punning titles such as “Goldie,
Lox, and the Three Excalibearers” (in
Excalibur, 1995). Parody and irony create
humor and, by mocking romantic conventions and chivalric assumptions, can
be used for political and social commentary as well.
Feminism—particularly liberal feminism with its focus on equality and the

recuperation of women’s stories—has
inﬂuenced Arthurian fantasy and
women writers in three major ways.
First, many women writers have given
voice to female characters of the
legend, particularly Guinevere and
Morgan (often traditionally a villain).
Sharan Newman emphasizes the
queen’s youthful innocence through a
companion unicorn (Guinevere, 1981;
The Chessboard Queen, 1983; Guinevere
Evermore, 1985); Gillian Bradshaw, in
contrast, downplays the fantastic to explain the queen’s motivations (In Winter’s Shadow, 1982). Persia Woolley (Child
of the Northern Spring, 1987; Queen of the
Summer Stars, 1990; The Legend in
Autumn, 1991) and Nancy McKenzie
(The Child Queen, 1994; The High Queen,
1995) also tell the queen’s story from
childhood to the end of the queen’s
reign. Alice Borchardt calls her series
the Tales of Guinevere, highlighting the
queen’s importance even when providing other characters’ points of view
(The Dragon Queen, 2001; The Raven Warrior, 2003). Nancy Springer, who has
also written Mordred’s story (I Am
Mordred, 1998), recounts Morgan’s childhood in I Am Morgan le Fay (2001). Mary
J. Jones’s Avalon (1991), a lesbian novel,
is narrated by Argante, Guinevere’s
daughter.
Second, feminism and postmodernism combine to affect narrative structures. Narrative strategies of multiple
voices interrogate the authority of
storytelling, questioning the possibility
of the “true” story. All Arthurian rewritings are metaﬁctional; as Anne CrannyFrancis argues when discussing new
versions of fairy tales, rewritings of
traditional tales “operate via an implicit
comparison with the traditional tale as
an absent referent” (Feminist Fiction, 94).
Some authors foreground the metaﬁctional role of their texts: in Fay Sampson’s Herself (1992), Morgan comments
15
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

on representations of her character
throughout Arthurian literary tradition;
Patricia McKillip’s The Tower at Stony
Wood (2000), by rewriting Tennyson’s
“The Lady of Shalott,” interrogates that
poem’s assumptions about gender
roles and the conventions of knightly
rescue.
The third inﬂuence of feminism on
Arthurian fantasy has been to encourage writers to critique patriarchy explicitly. Authors use the legend to
explore patriarchal deﬁnitions of
masculinity and femininity and the
gender roles encoded in notions of
chivalry; examples include Phyllis Ann
Karr’s “Galahad’s Lady” (in Chronicles of
the Holy Grail, 1996) and “Two Bits of
Embroidery” (in Invitation to Camelot,
1988) and Cherith Baldry’s Exiled from
Camelot (2001). Writers also use the
legend to examine women’s relationship to power—personal and political—
and the way that access to power is not
part of the “natural” order but changes
with shifts in cultural practices and religious beliefs.
Marion Zimmer Bradley’s The Mists
of Avalon (1982) is the most famous
example of feminist Arthurian fantasy;
it appeared on the New York Times list
of the best-selling hardcover books for
twelve weeks (February 20 to May 8,
1983) and was adapted into a made-fortelevision ﬁlm in 2001. Bradley’s protagonists are the women of the legend;
while Morgaine (Morgan) is the main
character and narrator, Bradley uses
the point of view of six other women
(Gwenhwyfar, Igraine, Viviane, Morgause, Niniane, and Nimue) throughout
the novel as she depicts the status of
women in a period of cultural and
religious conﬂict as Christianity is displacing Goddess-worship. Although followed by a number of prequels, Mists
remains the most inﬂuential of Bradley’s Arthurian texts.
16
...............

Volume 2: Entries

See also: “The Creation of Literature for the
Young” (vol. 1); Feminisms; “The Middle
Ages” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Cranny-Francis, Anne. Feminist Fiction: Feminist Uses of Generic Fiction. New York:
St. Martin’s Press, 1990.
Fries, Maureen. “Female Heroes, Heroines,
and Counter-Heroes.” In Popular Arthurian
Tradition, ed. Sally K. Slocum, 5–17. Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1992.
Heilbrun, Carolyn G. Reinventing Womanhood.
New York: W. W. Norton, 1979.
Pearson, Carol, and Katherine Pope. The
Female Hero in American and British Literature. New York: R. R. Bowker, 1981.
Pratt, Annis, with Barbara White, Andrea
Loewenstein, and Mary Wyer. Archetypal
Patterns in Women’s Fiction. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1981.
Russ, Joanna. “What Can a Heroine Do? Or
Why Women Can’t Write” In To Write Like
a Woman: Essays in Feminism and Science
Fiction, 79–93. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995.

ANN F. HOWEY

ARTIFICIAL LIFE
Artiﬁcial life, also known as alife and alife, refers to the creation and study of
life through the use of human-made
analogs of living systems. The term
was coined by Christopher Langton in
1987 at the International Conference
on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems (also known as Artiﬁcial
Life I) in Los Alamos, New Mexico. Artiﬁcial life is sometimes mistaken for artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), but while there
are some similarities between the two,
these ﬁelds have a distinct history. Discussions of AI date from the eighteenth
century, as evidenced by the writings in
 Desmechanistic philosophy by Rene
cartes and Thomas Hobbes, with
research in the ﬁeld dating from the
early years of the twentieth century.

Artiﬁcial Life
While the interest in artiﬁcial life could
be traced back to the eighteenth century as well—for example, Jacques de
Vaucanson’s
automaton
Canard

Digerateur (“Digesting Duck”)—artiﬁcial
life was not an organized ﬁeld of study
until the 1980s.
The ﬁeld can be broadly divided into
two groups: “strong alife” and “weak
alife.” The former understands life as a
process that can be abstracted away
from any medium, while the latter
refutes the possibility of creating a living process outside of a carbon-based
chemical solution. Both these positions
draw upon a number of traditional
ﬁelds, including computer science, philosophy, mathematics, physics, anthropology, sociology, and linguistics, and
the ﬁeld is characterized by the extensive use of computer simulations.
The automaton was to play a key role
in the development of the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial life. John Von Neumann deﬁned an
automaton as any machine whose
behavior proceeded logically from step
to step by combining information from
both its environment and its own programming. Von Neumann and Stanislaw Ulam created the ﬁrst cellular
automaton in the 1950s. It had thousands of cells that could exist in
twenty-nine different states; the project was discussed in the posthumous
Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata
(1996). Von Neumann and Ulam’s
“universal constructor” read from a
tape of instructions and wrote out a series of cells that could then be made
active to leave a fully functioning copy
of the original machine. This notion of
self-replication is key to artiﬁcial life,
as evident from John Horton Conway’s
Game of Life (1970), whose famous cellular automaton was an inﬁnite twodimensional grid of cells, each of which
is either alive or dead. It has continued
to attract much attention because of

the surprising ways in which patterns
can evolve. Langton became interested
in the Game of Life. Working on the idea
that the computer could emulate a living creature, he succeeded in creating
the ﬁrst self-replicating computer organism in October 1979 and thus founded
the new discipline of artiﬁcial life.
The Logic of Computers group at the
University of Michigan; the Information
Mechanics Group at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology; the Institute
for Advanced Study in Princeton, New
Jersey; the Center for Nonlinear Studies
at Los Alamos National Laboratory; and
the Unit of Theoretical Behavioral Ecology at the Free University of Brussels
have all been key players in the theorization and formulation of artiﬁcial life.
Much work has concentrated on cellular automata and complexity theory,
and currently the focus of research is
on creating cellular models of artiﬁcial
life and building biochemical models of
cellular behavior through the use of
digital organism simulators. This business is ﬁnancially viable, and computer
animation has been a key driver of
research in AI as animators seek more
realistic (and less expensive) ways to
animate such natural forms as plant
life, animal movement, and organic
textures.
As artiﬁcial life seeks to cultivate
synthetic, lifelike behaviors—such as
growth,
adaptation,
reproduction,
socialization, and learning—it is widely
used in computer games such as the
Civilization and Simlife series. It is also
widely referenced in contemporary
science ﬁction and cyberpunk texts,
notably by William Gibson in his Neuromancer and San Francisco trilogies
and by Neal Stephenson. The ﬁelds of
artiﬁcial life and artiﬁcial intelligence
are moving closer together and are
redeﬁning the boundaries of human
and machine.
17
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Further Readings
Doyle, Richard. Wetwares: Experiments in
Postvital Living. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2003.
Heudin, Jean-Claude, ed. Virtual Worlds: Synthetic Universes, Digital Life and Complexity.
Reading, England: Perseus, 1998.
Kember, Sarah. Cyberfeminism and Artiﬁcial
Life. London: Routledge, 2002.
Langton, Christopher G. Artiﬁcial Life: An
Overview. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
Levy, Steven. Artiﬁcial Life: The Quest for a
New Creation. New York: Pantheon Books,
1992.

STACY GILLIS

ASARO, CATHERINE (1955– )
Catherine Asaro is an award-winning
American author who is known for
combining the science ﬁctional subgenres of hard science ﬁction (SF) and
space opera with prominent elements
and structures of the romance genre.
Her most important work to date is the
cycle of novels and shorter ﬁction
known as the Skolian Empire series.
Asaro began telling the story of the
Skolian Empire in her ﬁrst novel, Primary Inversion, published in 1995. Later
works in the series, which can be
termed a “dynastic space opera,” are
set (in terms of internal chronology)
parallel to, before, and after the events
described in the ﬁrst book.
Even though Asaro is sometimes
compared to Lois McMaster Bujold or
Anne McCaffrey, hers is a distinctive
voice. Her extensive and active background in natural science includes a
doctorate in chemical physics from
Harvard, work as a physics professor,
and the founding of the research company Molecudyne Research. Her SF
often displays considerably more scientiﬁc content than that of either Bujold
or McCaffrey. Although her work has
been criticized by romance fans for
containing too much science and by
18
...............

Volume 2: Entries

members of the SF audience for placing
too much emphasis on love and
romance, in her best work Asaro has
managed to combine generically disparate materials into entertaining and
thoughtful stories that can legitimately
claim a place of honor in both genres.
In fact, testing generic conventions
often distinguishes her better ﬁction.
Asaro frequently presents strong, capable, and interesting women characters, many of whom defy gender
stereotypes, and certain of her books
raise signiﬁcant questions concerning
gender roles or depict nontraditional
social relationships and structures,
such as the male harems found in The
Last Hawk (1997). She is an author who
exhibits care in creating her imaginary
worlds, as is evident not only in her
descriptions of biological and physical
environments but also in the details of
the societies that inhabit them. Welldeveloped characters with psychological depth demonstrate another of
Asaro’s strengths. The potential impact
of genetic engineering, which is practically ubiquitous at the personal and
sociocultural levels in the interstellar
empire depicted in the Skolian saga, is
a central theme in Asaro’s work and
deserves further study. Finally, it
should be noted that Asaro’s ﬁction displays a diversity of experience and
expertise that demonstrates not only a
command of quantum theory and
the mathematics of interstellar transportation but also, among other things,
a knowledge and love of dance—
reﬂecting the fact that she has herself
performed both ballet and modern jazz
dance.
The Quantum Rose won a Nebula
Award as the best novel of 2001, and
other works have been nominated for
or won diverse romance and SF awards.
Asaro has also written near-future SF
thrillers and romantic fantasy, as well

Asexuality
as having been an anthology editor.
From 2003 to 2005, Asaro was president
of the Science Fiction and Fantasy
Writers of America.
Further Readings
The Books of Catherine Asaro [online].
Http://www.catherineasaro.net.
Jonas, Gerald. Review of The Quantum Rose.
New York Times Book Review. October 12,
2003. Http://query.nytimes.com/gst/full
page.html?res¼9B04E6DD173CF931A25753
C1A9659C8B63.

RICHARD L. MCKINNEY

ASEXUALITY
Asexuality has a variety of deﬁnitions
but generally describes the state in
which individuals lack sexual desire or
interest in sexual activity of any kind.
While used less frequently in discussions of sexual orientation, asexuality is
typically understood to be a relatively
ﬁxed sexual identity, such as homosexuality
and
heterosexuality.
Little
research has been done on the nature
of asexuality, but studies of both
humans and animals suggest that it
represents a small but stable percentage
of the overall population. In fact, a
study in Britain suggests that 1 percent
of the overall (human) population is
asexual. Asexuality should not be confused with abstinence or celibacy, which
entails an individual choosing not to act
on existing sexual desire.
Asexual characters appear throughout both fantasy and science ﬁction.
For example, Mercedes Lackey’s Vows
and Honor trilogy and Elizabeth
Moon’s Legend of Paksenarrion series
both feature asexual protagonists.
Many authors go beyond simply including asexual characters, however, to
focus their works on the nature of
asexuality in order to more broadly
explore the nature of sexual desire in
relation to personal identity and one’s

role in society. In Carolyn Ives Gilman’s
Halfway Human (1998), an asexual class
of “blands” serve fellow humans. This
dynamic allows Gilman to explore the
relationship between sexuality, gender
roles, and social power. In Mary
Gentle’s Golden Witchbreed (1983), children are born asexual, possessing no
genitalia until they reach puberty,
offering a metaphor for psychoanalytic
questions of whether one is naturally
born with a sexual identity or this is
acquired as one matures. Samuel R.
Delany’s classic short story “Aye and
Gomorrah” (1967) takes place in a
world where space travelers are neutered before puberty to obviate the negative effects of space radiation on their
bodies. These asexual individuals are
fetishized within the society. This scenario allows Delany to explore the
experiences of intimacy and marginalization among sexual minorities.
Because asexuality is a relatively
unexplored issue, the term itself is
open to different deﬁnitions and interpretations. Because of the variety of
bodies and beings found in science ﬁction and fantasy, “asexual” sometimes
connotes individuals who completely
lack a sex or gender identity. Asexual
reproduction also ﬁgures largely in the
genre, especially amongst science ﬁction texts, populated by new bodies
and new biotechnologies.
Further Readings
Haraway, Donna. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism
in the Late Twentieth Century.” In Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of
Nature, 149–82. New York: Routledge,
1991.
Mohanraj, Mary Ann. Alternative Sexualities in Fantasy and SF Booklist [online].
Http://www.mamohanraj.com/altsex.
html.

JOHN GARRISON
19
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

ASIMOV, ISAAC (1920–1992)
Isaac Asimov is an American author
born to Russian parents who is remembered for his proliﬁc contributions to a
wide variety of literary ﬁelds and genres.
The author of more than ﬁve hundred
books, Asimov gained notoriety for his
innovative science ﬁction and for his distinct ability to “translate” science for the
general reader. Born in Petrovichi, Russia, Asimov immigrated to the United
States with his family shortly after his
birth. His education included a B.S. in
chemistry from Columbia University, an
M.A., and a Ph.D. During the 1940s and
1950s, he popularized what are now
some of the most widely used conventions of science ﬁction. His most popular
works include the Foundation series and
his collection I, Robot, which became a
popular 2004 movie starring Will Smith.
The I, Robot series comprise nine stories centered around robot psychologist
Dr. Susan Calvin as she investigates the
impact of robots on society. Calvin is a
woman scientist, the chief robopsychologist, at a company that manufactures
robots. She is presented as having never
married, being totally devoted to her
work, and preferring the compnay and
character of robots to men. Little academic research has been published on
Asimov’s construction of a woman scientist in a ﬁeld that tended to relegate
women to the position of wife or daughter, but readers and fans have noted the
importance of seeing a woman married
to her work. Other critics dismiss her as
a “man with breasts,” a characterization
of a number of female characters created by male writers. As the protagonist
in a number of the Robot stories, one
who speaks for the robots at times, Calvin remains an important example of an
early portrayal of a woman scientist.
Calvin is one of the main characters
through which Asimov creates a world
20
...............

Volume 2: Entries

in which he can exlore the rapidly
changing and increasingly complex technological world as it may relate to the
future of humanity. The stories emphasize that moral and ethical responsibility
will also become more complex. The
old philosophical questions daunting
humanity will not go away. Instead, with
the adaptation of new technologies, such
as the robot, these old questions will
take on new perspectives.
As a nonﬁction writer, Asimov displayed the clear ability to take the complexities of science and synthesize the
data into prose that invites the general
reader to grow in scientiﬁc knowledge.
He demonstrates a true dexterity for
balancing the jargon and speciﬁc data
of science with the readability of narrative prose. By taking a historical
approach to a scientiﬁc topic, Asimov
guides the reader back to a time in
which that science was in its simplest
form, giving those without technical
scientiﬁc backgrounds foundations in
numerous topics. Whether writing
about atomic theory, chemistry, or biology, Asimov strove to present science
as an approachable and enjoyable subject worthy of a reader’s leisure hours.
Further Readings
Candelaria, M. “The Colonial Metropolis in
the Work of Asimov and Clarke.” Journal
of American & Comparative Cultures 25,
nos. 3/4 (Fall 2002): 427–32.
Hassler, Donald M. “World Weavers: Globalization, Science Fiction, and the Cybernetic Revolution.” Extrapolation 47, no. 1
(Spring 2006): 168–70.
Miller, J. Joseph. “The Greatest Good for
Humanity: Isaac Asimov’s Future History
and Utilitarian Calculation Problems.” Science Fiction Studies 31, no. 2 ( July 2004):
189–206.
Seiler, Edward. Isaac Asimov Home Page
[online]. Http://www.asimovonline.com.

CHRISTINE HILGER

Australia

ATWOOD, MARGARET
ELEANOR (1939– )
Margaret Atwood is a well-known feminist author who has won major literary
awards. She is a Canadian novelist and
poet and, as the daughter of an entomologist, spent her early years in the
largely uninhabited Northern Territories. She later explained that the experience left her unprepared for the ways
of girls and women. She published her
ﬁrst book of poetry in 1961 while
attending the University of Toronto and
later received degrees from both Radcliffe College and Harvard University.
Her writings treat such issues as feminism, mythology, and Canada; she
often focuses on the damage that
humankind perpetuates on the environment through technology. Atwood’s
work has been regarded as an indicator
of feminist thought as it has evolved
from the 1960s through the 2000s, and
several of her works can be classiﬁed
as science ﬁction or, as she prefers to
call it, speculative ﬁction. Atwood was
the 2000 recipient of the Booker Prize
and has been recognized with numerous other awards.
Atwood’s best-known novel, The
Handmaid’s Tale (1986), is set in a midtwenty-ﬁrst-century American misogynist dystopia dictated by religious
extremists. Written during a period of
renewed conservatism, The Handmaid’s
Tale depicts a society where women’s
rights have been revoked. Classiﬁed by
function and deprived of the rights to
possess money and to read and write,
the women of the novel are limited to
the roles of wives, servants, daughters,
and
reproductive
slaves
called
“handmaids.” The narrator, Offred,
relates a nightmare of powerlessness
and hypocrisy. While the novel owes a
debt to George Orwell’s 1984, The Handmaid’s Tale is one of a small number of

dystopian novels that examines a particularly female dystopia.
Oryx and Crake (2003) also portrays a
dystopian future; this apocalyptic novel
demonstrates the disastrous consequences of the technological developments that are hailed today as progress.
Using a male narrator for the ﬁrst time,
Atwood treats such topics as gene splicing, medical technology being used for
vanity and greed, and a growing rift
between science and the arts, as well as
consequences of the sexual revolution.
Narrated by the sole surviving human,
Jimmy, Oryx and Crake relates how
humanity has been destroyed. The most
horrifying aspect of the novel lies in the
fact that the tragedy occurs because of
the very same discoveries and misuses
of those discoveries that are evident in
our own society.
See also: Canada (English-Speaking); Environmental Science Fiction; Neurodiversity.
Further Readings
Deery, June. “Science for Feminists: Margaret Atwood’s Body of Knowledge.” Twentieth Century Literature 43, no. 4 (1997):
440–86.
Ingersoll, Earl G. “Survival in Margaret
Atwood’s Novel Oryx and Crake.” Extrapolation 45, no. 2 (2004): 162–75.
Stein, Karen F. “Margaret Atwood’s The
Handmaid’s Tale: Scheherazade in Dystopia.” University of Toronto Quarterly 61,
no. 2 (1991): 269–79.

SARAH A. APPLETON

AUSTRALIA
It is debatable whether such a thing as
distinctively Australian fantasy exists,
except in the trivial sense that authors
of fantasy ﬁction happen to have been
born in Australia or spent some or their
entire working career in Australia.
Almost all fantasy by Australian writers, whether male or female, is indistinguishable in general style and
21
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

content from the bulk of North American and British fantasy. The great
majority of fantasies written by Australians are set outside Australia,
drawing on the medieval European
trappings of sword and sorcery and
the Western gothic apparatus of horror. Science ﬁction, by deﬁnition,
observes no national boundaries, but it
is disappointing that so few examples
of the other forms of fantasy take up
speciﬁcally Australian opportunities to
thrill, appall, and charm the reader.
Indigenous Australian tales of the
Dreamtime have yet to reach much ﬁctional accommodation with white
Western fantasy; there is as yet no
nationally or internationally prominent
indigenous Australian writer of fantasy,
male or female.
In the ﬁeld of science ﬁction, too little has been published by Australian
women to permit generalizations such
as the tendency among American and
British women to explore their science
ﬁction characters’ psyches and relationships more deeply and empathically than their male counterparts do.
Early Australian female science ﬁction
writers favored utopian ﬁction, sometimes with a time-travel component.
The ﬁrst Australian writer of science
ﬁction was a woman, Catherine Helen
Spence, who emigrated from Scotland
in 1839 and published her novel, Handfasted: A Romance in 1879 under the
nom de plume of Hugh Victor Keith.
This novel draws on her Scottish background to explore the outcome of
setting up a utopian community.
Spence’s work is now known only to
scholars, as is Helen Simpson’s 1933
novel, The Woman on the Beast, an apocalyptic dystopian tale set in 1999. The
best of these utopian/dystopian novels,
M. Barnard Eldershaw’s Tomorrow and
Tomorrow and Tomorrow, is a little better
known now than at its publication in
22
...............

Volume 2: Entries

1947, for in 1983 its authors (the pseudonym blends the names of Marjorie
Faith Barnard and Flora Sydney Patricia
Eldershaw) were presented the Patrick
White Award for writers whose works
have been unjustly neglected. Their
politically astute novel concerns a
future Australian society with both utopian and dystopian attributes.
More contemporary Australian science ﬁction written by women focuses
on alien worlds and scientiﬁc and technological possibilities rather than on
social utopias and dystopias. It is modernist rather than postmodern in style.
This science ﬁction is mostly in
the short story form, in part as a
response to the publishing opportunities afforded by the setting up of science ﬁction magazines such as Omega
Science Digest in the 1980s and Aurealis
in the 1990s. Among these contemporary writers, Lucy Sussex has won a
name for herself not only as a writer
of science ﬁction and fantasy but also
as an anthologist. The 1995 anthology
She’s Fantastical, edited by Sussex and
Judith Raphael Buckrich, offers a representative range of contemporary science ﬁction, magical realist, and
fantasy short stories by Australian
women writers.
There are not many of these contemporary female writers of science ﬁction
in Australia, nor are there many such
writers of horror or dark fantasy. From
1995 onward, however, female horror
writers have equaled the achievements
of their male rivals, as measured by the
Australian Aurealis Awards inaugurated in that year. In 1999, Christine
Harris won an Aurealis in the horror
novel category for Foreign Devils, while
Kim Wilkins has won the award three
times: for The Infernal in 1997 (this novel
received the Aurealis fantasy novel
award), The Resurrectionists in 2000, and
Angel of Ruin in 2001. Wilkins’s ﬁction

Australia
draws on the British and European tradition of gothic horror and the dark
fantasy of fairy tale. One of her books
is set in Berlin, another in nineteenthcentury London. While horror ﬁction
such as this ﬁnds a comfortable niche
within the gothic genre, it bears little
trace of its Australian origin. Arguably
the most idiosyncratic voice in contemporary Australian horror writing is that
of Anne Bishop, whose Black Jewels trilogy combines settings in hell with an
exploration of sadistic sexual practices
performed not by demons but upon
them: her fantasy world is one in
which cruel witches reign, subduing
vampiric males by means of magically
contracting penis rings.
The sudden ﬂowering of Australian
women’s horror ﬁction in the 1990s was
paralleled by a surge of women’s
sword-and-sorcery and historically and
mythically inspired fantasy. Sara Douglass (the pen name of Sara Warneke) is
the best known of these writers. After a
series of short-listings, starting with
her ﬁrst novel, BattleAxe (1995), Douglass won the Aurealis Award for best
fantasy novel in 2001 with The Wounded
Hawk. When not inventing new worlds,
Douglass draws her inspiration in part
from classical Greek mythology, as in
her Troy Game series, and also from
the Bible, as in Threshold.
Trudi Canavan is a sword-andsorcery practitioner offering her own
d dark lord of posttwist on the cliche
Tolkien fantasy in her Black Magician
trilogy. Gillian Rubinstein, already established as a science ﬁction writer for
young adults with her Space Demons trilogy, turns to ancient Japan for the settings, social order, and ninja-like exploits
of her Tales of the Otori trilogy, published
under the pseudonym Lian Hearn.
These and a host of other Australian
fantasies by women writers offer
engrossing entertainment to their

readers, while staying well within the
boundaries of their respective subgenres. There is as yet no female Australian writer of fantasy for adults as
innovative or as profoundly challenging
to the reader’s beliefs and values as the
great American fantasist Ursula K. Le
Guin.
It is in literature for children and
young adults that Australian writers,
male and female, have most fully taken
up Australian settings and themes for
fantasy adventures, though here again
the great majority of writers have
set their fantasies in lands and landscapes far from Australia, drawing on
societies and belief systems in no sense
Australian for their fantasy kingdoms
and priesthoods. Isobelle Carmody’s
Legendsong series, for example, is
introduced with a prelude set on the
polar ice and an attribution to the
“unykorn,” while the characters of her
Obernewtyn Chronicles include guildmasters and a Druid. Margo Lanagan’s
haunting short story “Singing My Sister
Down,” which won the Aurealis for best
young adult fantasy story in 2004—
appearing in the collection Black Juice,
which won the Best Collection World
Fantasy Award for 2005—is set in a tar
pit (a geological feature not to be
found in Australia). Where fantasy for
children and young adults is set in
Australia, as in Rubinstein’s Space
Demons trilogy, this setting is hardly
integral to the story and could quite
readily be replaced by locations in, say,
Canada.
With regard to Australian fantasy
whose Australianness is ingrained and
essential, there are few candidates. In
the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century,
the outstanding fantasy work was Norman Lindsay’s 1918 The Magic Pudding,
the Australian equivalent of England’s
The Wind in the Willows—equally male
oriented, equally alive to the charms of
23
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

life on the road and bachelor freedom.
Mem Fox’s 1983 picture story book Possum Magic, illustrated by Julie Vivas, is
the female answer to The Magic Pudding.
Where Lindsay celebrates male roguery
and Australian mateship, Vivas and Fox
celebrate female affection within the
family between two anthropomorphized possums (a small marsupial found
in Australia and elsewhere), Grandma
Poss and her granddaughter Hush.
Where Lindsay’s pudding aggressively
demands to be eaten, Hush and
Grandma search out characteristic
Australian dishes such as pavlova and
pumpkin scones in order to break the
spell that has consigned Hush to invisibility. Gently humorous, touching, and
a paean to family affection, Possum
Magic confronts the masculine model
of quest story at all points.
Possum Magic celebrates Australian
wildlife and white Australian cities and
foodstuffs, but nowhere acknowledges
the traditional Aboriginal ways of life.
The fantasy writer who has most fully
acknowledged and made creative use
of indigenous Australian understandings of the land and its inhabitants is
Patricia Wrightson, winner of the Hans
Christian Andersen medal in 1986. At
the start of her young adult Wirrun trilogy, Wirrun, a young urban Aborigine,
knows nothing of his people’s tribal
lore but is called to save all Australians—indigenous peoples, immigrants,
and Dreamtime spirit beings alike.
Wrightson is alive to the dangers of
cultural appropriation and takes care
not to incorporate into her ﬁctions the
more sacred beings and stories of ancient Aboriginal culture. Within these
self-imposed constraints, the Wirrun
trilogy is to date the most successful
attempt by any writer of fantasy, male
or female, to bring Western fantasy
into dialogue with indigenous understandings of Australia.
24
...............

Volume 2: Entries

See also: “The Creation of Literature for the
Young” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Attebery, Brian. “Patricia Wrightson and
Aboriginal Myth.” Extrapolation 46, no. 3
(2005): 327–37.
Blackford, Russell, Van Ikin, and Sean
McMullen. Strange Constellations: A History
of Australian Science Fiction. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1999.
Bradford, Clare. “Exporting Australia:
National Identity and Australian Picture
Books.” Children’s Literature Association
Quarterly 20, no. 3 (1995): 111–15.
Foster, John. “‘Your Part in This Adventure
is Over. You Have Lost.’: Gillian Rubinstein’s Novels for Older Readers.” Children’s Literature in Education 22, no. 2 (1991):
121–27.
Nieuwenhuizen, Agnes. No Kidding: Top
Writers for Young People Talk about Their
Work. Chippendale, N.S.W.: Pan Macmillan, 1991.

ALICE MILLS

AWARDS: LITERATURE
PEOPLE

FOR

YOUNG

Categories of literature, including science ﬁction and fantasy (SF/F), are not
clearly delineated in works for children
and teens. The literature for young
people can be considered a genre that
eclipses the traditional genre lines. Picture books are a genre in themselves
among works for children. Because so
many picture books feature animal
characters or fantastical elements,
awards for picture books are not considered here. Instead, the focus is on
the major awards for authors of young
adult (YA) and children’s literature.
Works of science ﬁction and fantasy,
including those written by women, are
among the winners of all the major
awards in this ﬁeld, where women are
well represented.
The international Hans Christian
Andersen Award for Writing is awarded

Awards: Literature for Young People
every other year by the International
Board on Books for Young People (IBBY).
From its inception in 1956 through 2006,
women have won roughly half the
awards. Of those fourteen women
authors, eleven have written at least
some speculative ﬁction. In the early
days of the award, it was given to an
author for a particular book rather than
a body of work. The ﬁrst winner, Eleanor
Farjeon (UK, 1956), won for her collection of short stories, The Little Bookroom,
which includes works of fantasy. Sweden’s Astrid Lindgren won in 1958 for
Rasmus Pa Luffen (Rasmus and the
Vagabond), but she is best known for
her fanciful books starring Pippi
Longstocking.
Since 1962, an author’s entire set of
works has been considered as the basis
for the award. Three women authors
from the United States have won for
their life’s work, two of whom wrote
speculative ﬁction. Virginia Hamilton
(1992) wrote more than thirty books,
including science ﬁction, fantasy, and
collections of folktales. Katherine Patterson (1998) is best known for realistic ﬁction, but she also wrote folktales. Other
women writers of speculative ﬁction
who have won the award are Tove Jansson (Finland, 1966), Maria Gripe
€ stlinger
(Sweden, 1974), Christine No
(Austria, 1984), Patricia Wrightson (Australia, 1986), Annie M. G. Schmidt (Netherlands, 1988) and Anna Maria Machado
(Brazil, 2000), who writes ghost stories
as well as contemporary ﬁction for
young readers. New Zealand author
Margaret Mahy won the 2006 Hans
Christian Andersen Award. Her works
include science ﬁction, fantasies, ghost
stories, adventures, and mysteries.
The world’s largest children’s and
youth literature award is the Astrid
Lindgren Memorial Award founded by
the Swedish government in Lindgren’s
memory after her death in 2002. The

prize of ﬁve million Swedish crowns
(approximately $700,000) is given for a
signiﬁcant contribution to children’s
literature in the broadest sense—thus,
winners can be writers, storytellers,
illustrators, or organizations. Two
Andersen Award winners have also
€ stlinger
won the Lindgren Award: No
(2003) and Patterson (2006). A third
woman to win the Lindgren Award is
Lygia Bojunga (Brazil, 2004), who combines fantasy and reality in her works
for young people.
The longest-lived major children’s literature award is the John Newbery
Medal, given annually since 1922 by
the American Library Association (ALA)
to an author for the most distinguished
contribution to American literature for
children. Nonﬁction and poetry titles
have won the award, though generally
it goes to a work of ﬁction. In eightyﬁve years, the Newbery Medal has been
awarded to a writer of speculative ﬁction eighteen times, ten of those to
women. Of the 279 Newbery Honor
books from 1922 through 2007, 59 were
speculative ﬁction, of which 61 percent
were written by women. Well-known
women authors in the ﬁelds of science
ﬁction and fantasy who have won are
Ursula K. Le Guin for The Tombs of
Atuan from the Earthsea series (1972
Newbery Honor); Susan Cooper for two
books in the Dark Is Rising series, The
Dark is Rising (1974 Newbery Honor)
and The Grey King (1976 Newbery
Medal); Madeleine L’Engle for A Ring of
Endless Light (1981 Newbery Honor); and
Robin McKinley for The Blue Sword
(1983 Newbery Honor) and The Hero and
the Crown (1985 Newbery Medal).
Works for young people translated
into English are eligible for the ALA’s
Mildred L. Batchelder Award, which
was ﬁrst given in 1968. A work of science ﬁction or fantasy has won the
Batchelder eight times, half going to
25
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

women. Astrid Lindgren won the 1984
Batchelder for the fantasy Ronia, the
Robber’s Daughter. The 2000 Batchelder
went to Danielle Carmi’s story of two
boys’ otherworldly experience from
Israel to Mars, Samir and Yonatan. Cornelia Funke won the Batchelder Medal
in 2003 for The Thief Lord, translated
from the German by Oliver Latsch;
since that award several of her fantasy
books have been published in the
United States including Inkheart and its
sequels. A ﬁrst novel, The Last Dragon
by Silvana De Mari, translated from the
Italian by Shaun Whiteside, won a
Batchelder Honor in 2007.
The Michael L. Printz Award for Excellence in Young Adult Literature was ﬁrst
awarded by the ALA in 2000. One-fourth
of all the Printz Award and Honor books
are speculative ﬁction. Margo Lanagan
won a 2006 Printz Honor for her collection of short stories, Black Juice; the title
story was also a ﬁnalist for the 2006
Hugo in the Short Story category. Meg
Rosoff won the 2005 Printz for her nearfuture story of war and love, How I Live
Now. Nancy Farmer’s science ﬁction
novel House of the Scorpion was a 2003
Printz Honor, as well as a 2003 Newbery
Honor. In addition, Farmer won Newbery Honors in 1995 for the science ﬁction work The Ear, the Eye and the Arm: A
Novel and in 1997 for the fantasy A Girl
Named Disaster.
The National Book Foundation has
presented the National Book Award to
outstanding books since 1950, and in
1996, the foundation added the
National Book Award for Young People’s
Literature. The ﬁrst year of the award,
Farmer’s A Girl Named Disaster was a
ﬁnalist, and in 2002 she won the award
for House of the Scorpion. Canadian
author Martine Leavitt’s fantasy Keturah
and Lord Death was a 2006 ﬁnalist.
Between 1969 and 1983, the National
Book Foundation had several awards
26
...............

Volume 2: Entries

for children’s literature. Le Guin won
the 1973 National Book Award for children’s books for the Farthest Shore, Eleanor Cameron won the award in 1974
for Court of the Stone Children, and
L’Engle won in 1980 for children’s
paperback book for A Swiftly Tilting
Planet.
The British equivalent of the
National Book Award is the Costa Book
Awards, which from its establishment
in 1971 until 2006 was known as the
Whitbread Book Awards. The annual
prize is administered by the Booksellers
Association of Great Britain and Ireland. A children’s book category was
added in 1972. In 1976, Penelope Lively
won for A Stitch in Time, a novel with
some fantasy elements, and in 1991,
Diana Hendry won for the fantasy Harvey Angell. In 1999, J. K. Rowling won
the Whitbread Award for Harry Potter
and the Prisoner of Azkaban. The YA
novel Not the End of the World by Geraldine McCaughrean won in 2004; it tells
the story of the women in Noah’s ark.
Kate Thompson’s The New Policeman is a
YA fantasy in which an Irish teen discovers a time leak between our world
and the land of fairies.
The UK’s Library Association awards
the Carnegie Medal to an author for a
work for young readers. Since 1936,
only six women have won for a work of
speculative ﬁction. Mary Norton won
the 1953 Carnegie Medal for The Borrowers, Philippa Pearce in 1958 for Tom’s
Midnight Garden, Lively in 1973 for The
Ghost of Thomas Kempe, Margaret Mahy
in 1984 for The Changeover: A Supernatural Romance, Susan Price in 1984 for The
Ghost Drum: A Cat’s Tale, and McCaughrean in 1988 for Pack of Lies: Twelve Stories in One.
Awards speciﬁcally for science ﬁction
or fantasy works are not well known in
the children’s literature ﬁeld, but they
are known to the SF/F community. The

Awards: Science Fiction and Fantasy Literature
Science Fiction Writers of America, the
organization that awards the Nebula,
recently added an award for YA science
ﬁction or fantasy, the Andre Norton
Award, and the ﬁrst two award winners
were women. The ﬁrst award, given in
2006, went to Holly Black for Valiant: A
Modern Tale of Faerie. In 2007, Justine
Larbalestier won for Magic or Madness.
The Golden Duck Awards are given by a
committee organized for the purpose of
recognizing children’s science ﬁction
literature. Since 1992, an award has
been given in three categories: Picture
Book, Middle Grade, and Young Adult.
Five women have won the Eleanor
Cameron Award for Middle Grades, and
ﬁve have won the Hal Clement Award
for Young Adults.
See also: Awards: Science Fiction and Fantasy
Literature.
Further Readings
American Library Association [online].
Http://www.ala.org.
Association for Library Services to Children.
The Newbery and Caldecott Awards: A Guide
to the Medal and Honor Books, 2004 Edition.
Chicago: American Library Association,
2004.
Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award [online].
Http://www.alma.se.
CILIP Carnegie and Kate Greenaway Children’s Book Awards [online]. Http://www.
carnegiegreenaway.org.uk.
Golden Duck Awards for Excellence in
Children’s Science Fiction Literature
[online]. Http://www.goldenduck.org.
International Board on Books for Young People (IBBY) [online]. Http://www.ibby.org.
Jones, Dolores Bythe. Children’s Literature
Awards and Winners: A Directory of Prizes,
Authors, and Illustrators. 3rd ed. Detroit:
Gale Research, 1994.
National Book Foundation [online]. Http://
www.nationalbook.org.
Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of
America [online]. Http://www.sfwa.org.

PATRICIA BEZZANT CASTELLI

AWARDS: SCIENCE FICTION
FANTASY LITERATURE

AND

Three awards are generally recognized
within the science ﬁction and fantasy
ﬁeld as the most important: the Hugo,
the Nebula, and the World Fantasy.
Several others are prominent, including
the British Fantasy Awards, the British
Science Fiction Awards, the Locus, and
the Sunburst. Awards named in honor
of writers include the Stoker, Campbell,
Sturgeon, Clarke, Dick, and the Tiptree,
all but the Tiptree named for male
writers. In addition, some newer
awards show potential for becoming inﬂuential, including the Spectrum, the
Fountain, and the Carl Brandon Society’s twin literary prizes, the Parallax
and the Kindred.
For much of science ﬁction and fantasy’s modern history, recipients of the
genre’s awards have primarily been
men, reﬂecting the larger number of
published works by men. Current informal surveys of published short ﬁction
generally result in a female-to-male
author ratio of anywhere from 1:5 to
2:5. Most current awards’ nominee lists
in all ﬁction categories yield a ratio of
one to four. In the case of artists and
illustrators, the inequalities are more
marked: to date, the sole woman who
has won a Hugo for professional artist
did so as part of a collaborative team
(Diane Dillon, 1971 winner with her
husband, Leo Dillon, ﬁrst nominated in
1969). The roster of the Chesley
Award’s twenty-plus-years of winners,
given out annually by the Association
of Science Fiction and Fantasy Artists,
is overwhelmingly male.
The ﬁrst woman to win a major
genre award was Juanita Coulson,
coeditor with husband Robert Coulson of Yandro, which took the Hugo for
best fanzine in 1965. This landmark
was achieved twelve years after the
27
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

awards were established. The ﬁrst
woman to win a major award for a professional work of speculative or fantastic ﬁction was Anne McCaffrey for her
novelette “Weyr Search,” which tied for
the Hugo in 1968 with Philip Jose Farmer’s “Riders of the Purple Wage.” McCaffrey was also one of the ﬁrst women to
receive a Nebula; her novel Dragonrider
won in 1969, three years after the
award’s inception, and the same year
that Kate Wilhelm won for her short
story “The Planners.” The World Fantasy Awards produced woman winners
in their ﬁrst year, 1975, selecting Patricia A. McKillip’s The Forgotten Beasts of
Eld as best novel and giving Betty Ballantine the Professional Special Award
along with her husband, Ian Ballantine.
Since critics, historians, and scholars
often refer to the lists of earlier award
winners when surveying the ﬁeld, the
past predominance of male winners
can extend into the present and further
the idea that, within the genre, women’s contributions are of little signiﬁcance. An example of one extreme in
women’s status in relation to genre
awards is the Grand Master Award,
given by the ofﬁcers of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America
(SFWA) to “a living author for a lifetime’s achievement in science ﬁction
and/or fantasy.” Andre Norton’s selection in 1984 was the ﬁrst time a woman
was given this award. The “Grand Master”—its name unfortunately genderspeciﬁc—was founded nine years earlier, in 1975; not for nearly twenty more
years would another woman receive
this honor: Ursula K. Le Guin in 2003.
Although far fewer women than men
receive genre literary awards, by some
systems of reckoning the two most frequent winners to date are women: Le
Guin and Connie Willis. Willis has
taken the top three awards more times
than any other author: she has nine
28
...............

Volume 2: Entries

Hugos, six Nebulas, and two World Fantasy Awards, as well as winning numerous readers’ polls and nine Locus
Awards. Le Guin holds ﬁve Hugos, ﬁve
Nebulas, two World Fantasy Awards,
nineteen Locus Awards, three Tiptrees,
and many other honors; in addition
to her SFWA Grand Master status, she
is the recipient of three other recognitions for her overall lifetime literary
achievements.
In contrast to all the other awards in
the ﬁeld, the James Tiptree Jr. Award,
founded in 1991, has recognized a majority of women. The award, for science
ﬁction or fantasy that “expands or
explores our understanding of gender,”
was named with conscious irony for
the male pseudonym of author Alice
Sheldon. Of the twenty-ﬁve Tiptrees
given as of 2006 (there have been some
years in which nominees were tied),
seven have gone to men and eighteen
to women. Three retrospective awards
have been given. The James Tiptree Jr.
Award was founded by two women, Pat
Murphy and Karen Joy Fowler. It is
administered by a “motherboard” and
funded in part by bake sales stereotypically associated with the smaller and
more “domestic” scope of women’s
causes.
Two women designed the physical
emblem of the Nebula Award: Kate
Wilhelm and Judy (Blish) Lawrence.
From Wilhelm’s sketches of spiral nebulae, she and Lawrence developed a
glittering, swirling shape for the award
in Lucite and supported on a black
plastic base.
A woman became the ﬁrst genre
author awarded the prestigious nongenre MacArthur Foundation fellowship when it was granted to Octavia
Butler in July 1995. Ursula Le Guin was
named a “Living Legend” by the U.S.
Library of Congress in April 2000. As of
2007, no genre equivalent of the

Awards: Science Fiction and Fantasy Literature
Orange Prize, given to the best novel in
English by a woman, exists.
See also: Awards: Literature for Young People; “The James Tiptree Jr. Award” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Broad Universe. Statistics [online]. Http://
broaduniverse.org/stats.html.
James Tiptree, Jr., Literary Award Council
[online]. Http://www.tiptree.org.
Kelly, Mark R. The Locus Index to Science
Fiction Awards [online]. Http://www.
locusmag.com/SFAwards/index.html.

Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of
America [online]. Http://www.sfwa.org.
World Fantasy Convention [online]. Http://
www.worldfantasy.org.
World Science Fiction Society. The Hugo
Award [online]. Http://www.wsfs.org/
hugos.html.

NISI SHAWL

29
..............

This page intentionally left blank

B
BALLANTINE, BETTY

(1919– )

Betty Ballantine, or Elizabeth Norah Bale Jones, is an editor and publantine ne
lisher of science ﬁction and fantasy. She
was born in India on September 25,
1919, to a second-generation colonial
family. She moved to the Channel
Islands at the age of twelve and there,
seven years later, met Ian Ballantine.
After a whirlwind courtship, they married on June 22, 1939. The couple moved
almost immediately to the United States
to open a new branch of Penguin Books,
which imported British books in the
increasingly popular paperbound format. As vice president of the company,
Betty Ballantine handled bookkeeping,
invoicing, and secretarial tasks. In 1945,
the Ballantines left Penguin to assist in
the formation of Bantam Books, a general-interest paperback reprint house.
With increasing interest in publishing
original works, the couple left Bantam
in 1952 to found Ballantine Books, a
general-interest press. Although it is notable as the ﬁrst press to publish simultaneously in hardcover and paperback,
the house found its niche with paperback originals, especially science ﬁction,
fantasy, mystery, and western novels.
Over time, Betty Ballantine herself took
on the bulk of the editorial work, pursuing a commitment to mentoring young
writers. She also took a personal interest
in bringing science ﬁction, then available almost exclusively in the pulp science ﬁction magazines, to a larger
audience. Authors like Arthur C. Clarke
and Anne McCaffrey ﬂocked to the
press, drawn by excellent pay and

respect for their work. In 1965, the press
released the ofﬁcial American paperback edition of J. R. R. Tolkien’s The Lord
of the Rings (1954–55). Its popularity
inspired Ballantine and Lin Carter to
open the Ballantine Adult Fantasy Series, which brought classic works by
Lord Dunsany, H. P. Lovecraft, Evangeline Walton, and others to readers hungry for fantastic ﬁction.
Random House purchased Ballantine
Books in 1973, and the couple managed
its paperback imprint until their retirement in 1974. In 1972, the Ballantines created Rufus Publications, a private
company that handles a variety of commercial and personal projects, among
them several books released in partnership with Peacock Press, an imprint of
Bantam devoted to fantasy art books such
as Faeries (1981) and Dinotopia (1992). The
company also employs their son, Richard.
The Ballantines shared their professional awards until Ian’s death in 1995.
They received special World Fantasy
Awards in 1975 and 1984, a Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America
(SFWA) award for professional achievement in 1985, and the 1995 Literary Marketplace Lifetime Achievement Award
for their pioneering work in massmarket paperback publishing. Betty
Ballantine received a special SFWA President’s Award in 2002 and a special Hugo
Award for lifetime achievement in 2006.
She lives in Bearsville, New York, and
still works as a freelance editor. She also
serves on the Advisory Board of the Science Fiction Museum and Hall of Fame
in Seattle.
31
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Further Readings
Aronovitz, David. Ballantine Books: The First
Decade. Rochester, MI: Bailiwick Press,
1987.
Ballantine, Betty. “Betty Ballantine: Publishing Pioneer.” Locus 49, no. 5 (November
2002): 6, 61–64.

KELLIE M. HULTGREN

BARR, MARLEEN (?– )
Marleen Barr, Ph.D., won the Science
Fiction Research Association’s Pilgrim
Award in 1997 for her feminist scholarship on science ﬁction (SF). She has
also won three Fulbright awards (1983,
1989, and 2006) to universities in Germany. Barr is among the ﬁrst generation of feminist academic scholars who
worked to bring speculative ﬁction by
women writers into academic discourse
and the literary canon.
Barr has published a number of
essays in major anthologies dedicated
to the fantastic, edited or coedited ﬁve
major anthologies, and published four
monographs, as well as a novel (Oy Pioneer! A Novel, 2003). In 2004, she coedited with Carl Freedman the ﬁrst Special
Topic issue on SF (Science Fiction and Literary Studies: The Next Millennium) for
PMLA, the quarterly journal of the Modern Language Association, the largest
academic association of literature and
languages scholars. While this collection was controversial, among both academics who work with science ﬁction
and those in literary studies, it remains
an important milestone for academic
study of science ﬁction.
Barr’s major contributions to the ﬁeld
of feminist science ﬁction criticism are
her groundbreaking anthologies, which
include essays and chapters on major
women writers, and her monographs.
The latter are ambitious attempts to
draw on critical theories and increasingly on a range of texts from popular
32
...............

Volume 2: Entries

culture in order to argue for the inclusion of feminist SF into the literary
canon and as an appropriate subject for
feminist academic work. Her later work
has also considered questions of genre
and the theories and methods of cultural criticism.
Of interest to scholars interested in
the development of feminist SF criticism are two of Barr’s edited anthologies. The ﬁrst, Future Females: A Critical
Anthology (1981), contains ﬁfteen essays
and a bibliography by Roger Schlobin.
The scholars and writers are Barr herself, Arthur Asa Berger, Jeffrey Berman,
Suzy McKee Charnas, Norman N.
Holland, Anne Hudson Jones, Susan
Kress, James D. Merrit, Carol Pearson,
Eric S. Rabkin, Joanna Russ, Scott Sanders, Lyman Tower Sargent, and Edward
Whetmore. Nearly twenty years later,
Barr edited Future Females, the Next Generation: New Voices and Velocities in Feminist Science Fiction Criticism (2000), with
essays by a number of major feminist
SF critics, including Veronica Hollinger,
Anne Cranny-Francis, Joan Gordon,
Jeanne Cortiel, Robin Roberts, and Elyce
Ray Helford. A comparison of the essay
topics, critical arguments, theories, and
methodologies in these two books
shows the development of the ﬁeld of
feminist SF criticism.
In her monographs, Barr argued in
1987 for the use of feminist theory in
reading speculative ﬁction by women
(Alien to Femininity: Speculative Fiction and
Feminist Theory). The use of speculative ﬁction rather than science ﬁction shows her
interest in a wide range of fantastic subgenres. Her questioning of genre boundaries has continued over the years,
with later work such as Feminist Fabulation: Space/Postmodern Fiction (1992) and
Genre Fission: A New Discourse Practice for
Cultural Studies (2000). Barr increasingly
works to make critical spaces in literary
and cultural discourses for women’s

Battlestar Galactica
work to exist, at times linking fantastic
works by women with works by men
that would not necessarily be considered “science ﬁction”: authors such as
Salman Rushdie, Buchi Emecheta, Haruki Murakami, and Paul Theroux (Lost in
Space: Probing Feminist Science Fiction and
Beyond, 1993).
See also: Lefanu, Sarah; Rosinsky, Natalie
Myra.
Further Readings
Freedman, Carl. “Science Fiction and the
Triumph of Feminism.” Review of Future
Females, the Next Generation: New Voices
and Velocities in Feminist Science Fiction
Criticism, by Marleen S. Barr. Science
Fiction Studies 27, no. 2 (July 2000): 278–89,
available at http://www.depauw.edu/sfs/
review_essays/freedman81.htm.
Smith, C. Jason, and Ximena Gallardo C.
“Oy Science Fiction: On Genre, Criticism,
and Alien Love” [interview with Marleen
Barr]. Reconstruction 5, no. 4 (Fall 2005)
[online], http://reconstruction.eserver.org/
054/barr.shtml.

ROBIN ANNE REID

BATTLESTAR GALACTICA
Battlestar Galactica was a science ﬁction
series that originally aired in 1978 but
returned in 2004 in a new incarnation
that depicts humanity’s desperate
struggle for survival after a surprise
attack by the Cylons. The Cylons are an
artiﬁcial life form, a race of machines
created to serve humanity that rebelled,
escaped, and disappeared into space for
more than forty years without contact.
In the new series, Cylons have learned
to use biomechanical engineering and
have evolved into twelve clones modeled on humanity. The clones can pass
for human, and the Cylons inﬁltrate
the twelve colonies—human worlds—
sabotage defense computer mainframes, achieve complete surprise in a
coordinated nuclear attack, and reduce

humanity to a population of less than
ﬁfty thousand in a genocidal campaign.
Led by the aging warship Galactica, the
remnants of humanity gather together
in a motley ﬂeet of ships and ﬂee into
the deep of space, harried by the pursuing Cylons, while searching for the
mythical lost thirteenth colony—Earth.
Battlestar Galactica explores contemporary issues such as terrorism, torture,
rape, abortion, election fraud, identity
politics, and racism, among many
others, displaced through science ﬁction motifs such as robots and clones.
One of the things that make this rendition of the show different from the
original series is that women hold positions of power and importance in the
government and the military. On the
human side of the equation, Laura
Roslin (Mary McDonnell), former secretary of education, becomes the de facto
president of the twelve colonies after
forty-two others ahead of her in the
chain of succession die in the attacks.
She has to make difﬁcult decisions in
her capacity as president to safeguard
the future of the human race: leaving
people behind to die on ships incapable
of making light-speed jumps, sanctioning the torture of a Cylon prisoner, or
declaring abortion illegal with humanity on the brink of extinction. Lt. Kara
“Starbuck” Thrace (Katee Sackhoff) is
a promiscuous, card-playing, harddrinking maverick of a ﬁghter pilot
recognized as the best in the ﬂeet
(the Starbuck of the original series
was male). Finally, the ill-fated Adm.
Helena Cain (Michelle Forbes) of the
recently discovered battlestar Pegasus is
the highest-ranking military ofﬁcer,
who temporarily assumes command of
the colonial ﬂeet when Comdr. William
Adama (Edward James Olmos) yields
control to his superior ofﬁcer.
The Cylon characters feature two signiﬁcant female Cylons considered to be
33
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

the “Heroes of the Cylon.” The ﬁrst is
Number Six (Tricia Helfer), a beautiful
blonde Cylon, who seduces brilliant
human scientist Gaius Baltar ( James Callis) into betraying humanity by giving her
access to humanity’s computer defense
networks. The second, Sharon Valerii,
call sign “Boomer” (Grace Park), is a Cylon
sleeper agent who thinks she is human.
Copies of Sharon, the eighth Cylon
model, are instrumental in the assassination attempt on Adama as the ﬁrst season concludes, as well as in the Cylon
fertility experiment that proves to be successful as the series unfolds. Lucy Lawless, star of Xena: Warrior Princess, also
appears as Cylon Model Three, posing as
D’anna Biers, an investigative journalist.
See also: Colonization; Dystopias; Genetic
Engineering; Space Opera; War and Peace.
Further Readings
Battlestar Galactica [online]. Http://www.sciﬁ.
com/battlestar/.
Muir, John K. An Analytical Guide to Television’s “Battlestar Galactica.” Jefferson, NC:
McFarland, 2005.
Ward, Cynthia. “Battlestar Galactica: Season
One: Television’s New Math.” Locus 55, no. 4
(October 2005) [online], http://www.locusmag.com/2005/Features/10_Ward_Battle
star.html.

ISIAH LAVENDER III

BISEXUALITY
Bisexuality has generally been portrayed positively in science ﬁction by
women. It is most frequently depicted
as the natural result of a questioning of
gender and sexuality and not as unusual or as an indication of characters’
incomplete acceptance of their homosexuality. A number of authors have
created bisexual characters, most of
whom live in societies in which bisexuality is acceptable or even the norm.
Marge Piercy’s Woman on the Edge of
Time (1976) presents a utopian future
34
...............

Volume 2: Entries

society in which gender differences are
not signiﬁcant enough for most people
to have an exclusive interest in one sex
or the other. Ursula K. Le Guin’s The
Dispossessed (1975) has a bisexual male
protagonist in a society that is accepting of a variety of orientations. And the
world of Elizabeth A. Lynn’s Chronicles
of Tornor trilogy (1979–80) is essentially
bisexual.
Bisexual cultures are not necessarily
egalitarian. In Marion Zimmer Bradley’s Ruins of Isis (1978) and N. Lee
Wood’s Master of None (2004), women are
in control. Their bisexuality is the result
of that inequality and is an approximate
mirror of male sexual behavior in some
historical societies. Women are interested in men sexually and reproductively (and sometimes dynastically), but
generally form deeper romantic relationships only with other women.
Some books that do not explicitly
address sexual orientation take place
in worlds in which orientation does not
appear to exist as an identity category.
Such is the case in Melissa Scott’s The
Jazz (2000), in which characters do not
use the label bisexual, but a particular
gender is not a prerequisite for a sexual
relationship.
Most frequently, bisexual characters
are depicted as having had a past lover
or lovers opposite in sex to the present
one. Chris Moriarty, author of Spin State
(2003), describes her protagonist Catherine Li’s sexuality as “equal opportunity,”
adding that Li “lives in a future with
much more ﬂuid attitudes about gender
and sexuality” (http://www.lesbianscience
ﬁction.com/LSFCharbyAuth0004.html).
While a number of authors have thus
suggested that bisexuality would be the
logical outgrowth of a culture with less
socially enforced difference between
men and women or of a matriarchy, a few
argue for the acceptance of bisexuality in
our world. Candas Jane Dorsey makes

Brackett, Leigh
that argument in her book A Paradigm of
Earth (2001), where she creates characters who are bisexual, polyamorous
(simultaneously having male and female
lovers), and, ultimately, happy.
Sometimes speciﬁc aspects of the plot
render exclusive homo- or heterosexuality unimportant, unnecessary, or impossible. Octavia Butler’s (biological, not
supernatural) vampires in Fledgling
(2005) are attracted to both sexes; the
author reportedly explained that vampires have “no reason not to be bisexual,
since both men and women have blood”
(http://community.livejournal.com/octa
viabutler/7679.html). An erotic interest
in a clone group (Le Guin’s “Nine
Lives,” 1969; Kate Wilhelm’s Where
Late the Sweet Birds Sang, 1976) or in fellow machine-bred people (Maureen
McHugh’s Nekropolis, 2001) result in
characters that are in effect bisexual.
The ability of characters to change gen
der (Elisabeth
Vonarburg’s Silent City,
1981; Tanith Lee’s Drinking Sapphire Wine,
1977) or to inhabit synthetic bodies
(Laura Mixon’s Proxies, 1998) also results
in bisexual behavior.
See also: Lesbians; Queer Science Fiction.
Further Readings
Riemer, James. D. “Homosexuality in Science Fiction and Fantasy.” In Erotic Universe: Sexuality and Fantastic Literature, ed.
Donald Palumbo, 145–64. New York:
Greenwood Press, 1986.
Science Fiction for Lesbians. List of science
ﬁction books with lesbian characters
[online].
Http://www.lesbianscienceﬁc
tion.com/LSFCharbyAuth0004.html.

VICTORIA SOMOGYI

BRACKETT, LEIGH

(1915–1978)

Leigh Brackett was a popular presence
in mid-twentieth-century American science ﬁction. She is best known for her
skill in writing space opera—she was

labeled the “Queen of Space Opera”—as
well as for her screenplay for the second Star Wars ﬁlm, The Empire Strikes
Back (1980). Brackett’s writing is characterized by vivid imagery and realistic
dialogue. She worked across a range of
media and inﬂuenced numerous other
writers.
Brackett’s early works, short stories
such as “Martian Quest” and “Enchantress
of Venus,” were published in the pulp
science ﬁction magazines: her ﬁrst stories
appeared in Astounding Stories in 1940.
Despite the reputation of the pulps as a
male-dominated ﬁeld of production,
women writers such as Brackett did play a
role in the shaping and development of
the genre. In a period where space opera
was popular, Brackett’s work showed
the inﬂuence of key writers in this ﬁeld—
particularly, Edgar Rice Burroughs—while
still constructing an original voice. Her
knowing, even playful, reworkings of
common ideas in the subgenre led her
to construct intricately imagined societies, rounded characters, and memorably vivid landscapes. Despite using male
protagonists, she portrayed female characters as active, capable, and complex.
Brackett’s longer ﬁction, including The
Sword of Rhiannon (1953), The Ginger Star
(1974), and The Hounds of Skaith (1976),
depicted worlds and societies undergoing social change, embedded within
their environment and with their own
histories. She also explored the consequences of a nuclear apocalypse and the
construction of a rural religious community in The Long Tomorrow (1955).
Brackett’s adaptability was shown in
her ability to cross media, demonstrated
by the plays and television and ﬁlm
screenplays she wrote. She also crossed
genres, writing westerns (Rio Bravo,
1959) and ﬁlm noir (The Big Sleep, 1946).
She wrote the ﬁrst draft of the screenplay for The Empire Strikes Back shortly
before her death. Brackett was an active
35
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

part of the science ﬁction writing community: she collaborated with Ray Bradbury and with her husband, Edmond
Hamilton. Other science ﬁction writers,
notably Marion Zimmer Bradley and
Michael Moorcroft, have acknowledged
Brackett’s inﬂuence.
Brackett has occupied an uneasy
place in the feminist science ﬁction
canon, caught between the desire to reclaim a “herstory” of science ﬁction and
a critical preference for explicitly feminist texts. Brackett is a key example of
women that published science ﬁction
before Second Wave feminism. However, a number of factors have resulted
in the lack of critical attention to her
work. She is cited as an exemplar in
response to feminist critiques but
worked mainly in the subgenre of space
opera—not known as an especially fertile area for feminist writers. She was
not engaged with feminism either in her
life or in her texts. Nonetheless, Brackett’s work exempliﬁes the negotiation of
generic tropes undertaken by women
writers of science ﬁction.
Further Readings
Arbur, Rosemary. “Leigh Brackett: No Long
Goodbye Is Good Enough.” In The Feminine
Eye: Science Fiction and the Women Who
Write It, ed. Tom Staicar, 1–13. New York:
Frederick Ungar, 1982.
———. Leigh Brackett, Marion Zimmer Bradley,
Anne McCaffrey: A Primary and Secondary
Bibliography. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1982.

KAREN HALL

BRADLEY, MARION ZIMMER
(1930–1999)
Marion Zimmer Bradley was an awardwinning American author best known
for her long-running Darkover series of
science ﬁction novels and her worldwide best-selling fantasy novel The Mists
of Avalon (1983). In her long and proliﬁc
career, Bradley published more than
36
...............

Volume 2: Entries

sixty novels in several genres and more
than thirty anthologies as editor. She
encouraged and published many young
writers in her Sword and Sorceress anthology series (1984–2004) and her own
small-press magazine, Marion Zimmer
Bradley’s Fantasy Magazine (1988–2000).
She was married twice and had three
children.
Bradley grew up in a farming community near Albany, New York, in the midst
of the Great Depression. She tried very
early to escape from her poor family and
ﬂed into the literary world of the early
pulp science ﬁction magazine. She ﬁrst
started contributing to the letter columns of the pulp magazines of the era,
then began writing stories of her own.
Eventually, two stories, “Keyhole” and
“Women Only,” were published in October 1953. Bradley’s ﬁrst science ﬁction
novel, The Door through Space, followed in
1961. Her early novels and stories are
especially inﬂuenced by the works of
Leigh Brackett and C. L. Moore.
In the 1960s, Bradley developed her
series of science ﬁction romances set
on the planet Darkover, a lost colony
of Earth. Her ﬁrst few novels in the series, such as The Planet Savers (1962)
and The Sword of Aldones (1962), are typical examples of the male-centered
adventure stories of the time. Starting
in the early 1970s, Bradley expanded
the scope and depth of her novels considerably by focusing on female characters and exploring gender roles and
questions of sexual identity. Bradley’s
maturation as a writer culminated in
the Amazon trilogy: The Shattered Chain
(1976), Thendara House (1983), and City
of Sorcery (1984).
The Mists of Avalon is probably Bradley’s best known and undoubtedly her
most commercially successful novel. It
has received by far the most critical
attention of all her many works, and its
success encouraged Bradley to write

Brin, David Glen
several prequel novels. The novel was a
best-seller all over the world and was
adapted into a successful television
miniseries in 2001. Some critics have
accused Bradley of being too overtly
anachronistic in her portrayal of clashing
religions, while others have praised her
innovative portrayal of female Arthurian
characters.
Although Bradley’s novels have been
translated into more than a dozen languages, much of her early work is out of
print. The Mists of Avalon won a Locus
Award in 1984. In 2000, Bradley was
posthumously awarded a World Fantasy
Award for lifetime achievement. Several
other novels have been nominated for
both Hugo and Nebula awards.
See also: Feminist Spirituality.
Further Readings
Arbur, Rosemarie. Marion Zimmer Bradley.
Starmont Reader’s Guide no. 27. Mercer
Island, WA: Starmont, 1985.
Volk-Birke, Sabine. “The Cyclical Way of the
Priestess: On the Signiﬁcance of Narrative
Structures in Marion Zimmer Bradley’s The
Mists of Avalon.” Anglia 108 (1990): 409–28.
Wise, Diane S. “Gender Roles in the Darkover Novels of Marion Zimmer Bradley.”
In Women Worldwalkers: New Dimensions of
Science Fiction and Fantasy, ed. Jane B.
Weedman, 237–46. Lubbock: Texas Tech
Press, 1985.

OLAF KEITH

BRIN, DAVID GLEN

(1950– )

David Brin is an award-winning American author who writes science ﬁction
from a pro-science, rationalist point of
view in which progress toward a responsible, caring society grows out of
technological empowerment. His protagonists typically triumph through
intelligence and their ability to inspire
loyalty in others. Ten-time winner of
science ﬁction’s most coveted awards in
the decade following his debut novel,

Sundiver, in 1980, Brin’s work is complex
enough to acknowledge the obstacles
that frustrate his generally optimistic
worldview. In a typical Brin novel, systems of social control based on prejudice,
greed, or duplicity prevent humanity
from achieving utopia, or at least something closer to a just society. Brin’s characters often exemplify how champions
can help humanity learn from such mistakes without necessarily resorting to the
same methods as their unscrupulous
enemies. In The Postman, for example,
which received four awards in 1985 and
was made into a movie in 1997, the protagonist gives hope to a fallen, post-holocaust world by restoring reliable mail
delivery between communities struggling to reestablish civilization.
Brin’s vision of a just society includes
equality for women in particular, and for
all sentient beings. The Uplift series,
starting with Sundiver, deals with the
struggle to get new species launched as
sentient beings in the right way. Paternalistic overtones occur in some books,
in which sympathetic male characters
empower the success of more vulnerable
beings, including important female characters. Other books go out of their way to
grant women a central role in the action.
Glory Season, published in 1993, features
the world of Stratos, where groups of biologically altered women, created through
cloning, dominate a low-technology
society in which men have been marginalized. Even here, however, the journey
undertaken by the female protagonist,
from malcontent to progressive leader, is
mediated by her association with an offworld male visitor from an unaltered
branch of humanity. Whether Brin’s novels are feminist in their outlook toward
women is debatable, but female heroes
abound in his work and are sympathetically portrayed.
Brin trained as a scientist, receiving a
Ph.D. in space science from the
37
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

University of California in 1981, and has
taught at the postsecondary level. His
nonﬁction publications and appearances as guest speaker cover a wide range
of interdisciplinary interests, including
evolution, communication, and exobiology. His book The Transparent Society
argues the case for benign surveillance
in the name of accountability. Brin has
received two Hugo Awards (1984 and
1987), the Nebula Award (1984), the Balrog Award (1985), the John W. Campbell
Jr. Memorial Award (1986), and four
Locus Awards (between 1984 and 1995).
Further Readings
Bear, Greg, Gregory Benford, and David Brin.
“Building on Isaac Asimov’s Foundation:
An Eaton Discussion with Joseph D. Miller
as Moderator.” Science Fiction Studies 24,
no. 1 (March 1997): 17–32.
Kushner, David. Interview of David Brin.
Discover 28, no. 6 (June 2007): 64–67.
Ravenwood, Emily. “Rightwise Born Kings:
Feudalism and Republicanism in Science
Fiction.” Extrapolation 46, no. 4 (Winter
2005): 500–516.

LYNDA WILLIAMS

BRITAIN
Fantastic literature in Great Britain is
crowned by Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley’s Frankenstein (1818), and female
British science ﬁction is known for its
diversity of authors, characters, and
approaches. At the same time, British
science ﬁction and fantasy (SF/F) literature by or concerning women often
noticeably clusters in certain areas.
A roll call of British authors is an eclectic one, and a brief list to indicate this variety includes the following names:
Susanna Clarke, Daphne Du Maurier,
Mary Gentle, Nicola Grifﬁth, Frances
Hardinge, Liz Jensen, Diana Wynne
Jones, Gwyneth Jones, Tanith Lee,
Doris Lessing, Naomi Mitchison, Celia
Rees, Justina Robson, J. K. Rowling,
38
...............

Volume 2: Entries

Josephine Saxton, Steph Swainston,
Karen Traviss, Jo Walton, and Liz Williams. Britons Pat Cadigan, Gwyneth
Jones, and Tricia Sullivan have won the
Arthur C. Clarke Award, with several
others receiving Hugo or World Fantasy
awards for their work. While many of
these writers have provided a consistent
presence in SF/F writing, others have
had dramatic and often sudden success.
British authors excel in their ability to
effectively present strong SF/F themes
to mainstream audiences. Writers such
as Du Maurier, Jensen, Diana Wynne
Jones, Lessing, and Rees are testimony
to this. Although different, all ﬁve have
produced non-SF/F texts that present
different writing styles and effectively
subvert traditional perceptions of science ﬁction or fantasy writing. These
authors in particular also demonstrate
an ability to depict real female characters who could easily exist outside a science ﬁction context. Various different
attitudes underscore this success, however. While Du Maurier’s writing is
unequivocally accepted as mainstream,
despite her use of alternative history,
time travel, and the uncanny in much of
her writing, it is alleged that Lessing’s
Canopus in Argos series (1979–83)
caused her to be removed from the
short list of the Nobel Prize for Literature for The Golden Notebook (1962). This
attitude may account for the tendency
of British writers and their publishers to
cater their writing to a more general
reader and to advertise it as such. Lessing’s 2007 Nobel win may lead to
changes in attitudes.
More recently, historical fantasy has
become a much more accepted form of
popular writing. Susanna Clarke’s Elseworld novel Jonathan Strange and Mr Norrell (2004) was published without the
usual trappings of fantasy literature, despite being a tale of magic during the
Napoleonic War, and Michelle Paver’s

Britain
Chronicles of Ancient Darkness series
(2004–06) has also become a huge success. Paver’s children’s books are marked
for their blend of history and fantasy,
most notably the use of magic and ritualism within a strongly researched historical backdrop.
An obvious addition to these popular
texts is Rowling’s phenomenally successful Harry Potter series. Sales have
made her one of the most well-known
and wealthy authors in the world, with
each book selling in the millions and followed by rapid dramatization as ﬁlms.
Rowling’s intense authorial control is
reﬂected by the fact that the Harry Potter books cannot be quoted from
directly in literary or critical reviews,
although her stories have provoked one
of the largest fan ﬁction fandoms on
the Internet, with over four million sites
containing stories and slash ﬁction
about her characters.
The British Isles themselves also have
a potent effect on many authors. The
richness of Arthurian legend and Celtic
mythology have inﬂuenced many international authors, including Marion
Zimmer Bradley’s Avalon series—a
feminist retelling of the Arthur story
with a series of prequels that reinvented
pagan mythology from a woman’s point
of view—and Juliet Marillier’s Celtic stories, which focus on the experience of
women in a fantastic version of Ireland
and the Scottish Isles. There is as well a
long-running tradition of reinscribing
these tales through books such as
Thomas
Malory’s
Morte
d’Arthur,
Edmund Spenser’s The Faerie Queene
(1596), and Christina Rossetti’s “Goblin
Market” (1862). Although many of these
stories bear little resemblance to historical events, British folklore and legends
contain a number of powerful female
characters who have been adapted in a
variety of ways. There is often a degree
of research with these books that

provides a historicized veneer and is
thus appealing, but the fantastic aspect
of this writing enables authors to
enhance the potential role of women
within these books. The result is often a
modern interpretation of historical
practice, which often contains actions
that women simply could not take during the historical period. However, this
genre of writing is popular for this exact
reason: the fantastic allows historical
ﬂexibility that more mainstream ﬁction
does not permit.
Characterization of signiﬁcant female
ﬁgures is something at which the British
excel. These ﬁgures span the spectrum
of SF/F genres and media. The eponymous Alice from Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s
Adventures in Wonderland (1865) and
Through the Looking-Glass (1872) has, of
course, been the progenitor of many
imitations, as well as setting a precedent for surrealist fantasy in the twentieth century. Carroll’s texts demonstrate
the enduring ability of British authors to
transcend readership groups, in this
case nominally aiming their authorship
at children but actually employing adult
subtexts, often in disturbing ways. At
the other end of the century, Lyra Belaqua of Philip Pullman’s His Dark Materials trilogy (1995–2000) undergoes a
sexual awakening and the reinscription
of original sin. Pullman’s representation
of Lyra as a new but determinedly ﬂawed
Eve has caused considerable controversy,
as have his strongly anti-church, antiestablishment views. Molly, from William
Gibson’s Neuromancer (1984), is another
ﬁgure frequently cited as a pioneer. As
the ﬁrst female character in cyberpunk
writing, her characterization is distinctive, helping to set the tone for the genre.
She inverts the traditional protector role
and is a streetwise warrior who defends
the more vulnerable Case. Molly is
slightly one-dimensional, but has had a
clear inﬂuence on women characters in
39
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

the genre, as seen in such characters as
Trinity from The Matrix (1999), who clearly
emulates Molly.
The British comic-book industry has
also contributed a series of lasting
female icons, among them the characterization of Death as a gamine goth
teenager in Neil Gaiman’s Sandman
books and Death, the High Cost of Living
(1994), the psionic Judge Anderson from
the 2000AD comic series, and, perhaps
most notably, the feminist pastiche Tank
Girl created by Jamie Hewlitt and Alan
Martin in Deadline magazine (1988–94).
Tank Girl, a baseball-bat-carrying outlaw who drives around an apocalyptic
Australian outback causing mayhem,
gathered a cult following in the late
1980s and was made into a ﬁlm in 1995.
In this case, the ﬁlm proved that the
subtleties of the comic did not translate
well, as Tank Girl became a simple heroine ﬁgure rather than the deliberately
subversive character of the comics.
Ultimately, the British literary scene
is both diverse and ﬂourishing, with
both male and female authors contributing to the ﬁeld in a positive and
ongoing manner. While contributions
from the United Kingdom also have
their share of vague or reductively portrayed women, it is encouraging to see
that authors like Terry Pratchett are
capable of producing strong female ﬁgures such as Susan Sto Helit without
needing to draw unnecessary attention
to this aspect of their work.
See also: British Science Fiction Film.
Further Readings
Albinski, Nan Bow. Women’s Utopias in British
and American Fiction. London: Routledge,
1988.
British Science Fiction Association [online].
Http://www.bsfa.co.uk.
Harris-Fain, Darren. British Fantasy and Science Fiction Writers before World War I. London: Gale Research, 1997.
40
...............

Volume 2: Entries

———. British Fantasy and Science Fiction Writers 1918–1960. London: Gale Research,
2002.
———. British Fantasy and Science Fiction Writers since 1960. London: Gale Research,
2002.

ESTHER MACCALLUM-STEWART AND
JUSTIN PARSLER

BRITISH SCIENCE FICTION FILM
Ever since The Perfect Woman (1949), in
which a male scientist tried to construct
an entirely obedient female robot, one of
the deﬁning themes of science ﬁction (SF)
ﬁlm in Britain has been an eroticized
fear of uncontrollable women. In the
1950s and 1960s, the main period of
genre production, British science ﬁction
ﬁlms’ chief source of anxiety was not
Communism, as it was for American
ﬁlms, but the growing assertiveness and
independence of housewives and career
women. Transmuting paranoia into allegory, British SF ﬁlms habitually represented women as alien threats to
normality and the British way of life: “a
passionate, carnal, destabilizing presence in opposition to the emotionally
cool scientiﬁc, military and political
establishments which so closely delineate the ﬁlms’ masculinist notions
of
nationhood”
(Chibnall,
“Alien
Women,” 72).
In Four Sided Triangle (1952) and Spaceways (1953), terrestrial working women
encroached on the realm of the male
scientist, while in Devil Girl from Mars
(1954), Fire Maidens from Outer Space
(1954), The Strange World of Planet X
(1957), Unearthly Stranger (1963), Invasion
(1966), and The Body Stealers (1969),
women were literally creatures from
another world, whose alluring Otherness both threatened men and fed their
masochistic fantasies. This erotic component of the “alien women” cycle
became especially overt in exploitation

Bront€e Sisters
movies such as Zeta One (1969), Toomorrow [sic] (1970), The Sexplorer (1975), and
Lifeforce (1985), in which alien femmes
fatales either seduced earthmen or kidnapped them as studs to repopulate
their dying planets.
Although it is arguable that the most
intelligent and ambitious British SF
ﬁlms—for example, The Damned (1961),
2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), A Clockwork Orange (1971), Zardoz (1973), The
Man Who Fell to Earth (1976)—are pessimistic fables of masculine alienation
and violence, a surprising number of
British SF ﬁlms do boast sympathetic
central roles for women. Compared
with the alien women cycle, however,
such ﬁlms as The Day the Earth Caught
Fire (1961), Quatermass and the Pit (1967),
Memoirs of a Survivor (1981), 1984 (1984),
and Supergirl (1984) have relatively little
in common thematically or in terms of
gender representation. The one exception—and at present the most commercially viable category of British science
ﬁction ﬁlm—is the run of SF-slasher
movies from Alien (1979) and Saturn 3
(1980) to Hardware (1990), Resident Evil
(2002), Creep (2005), and The Descent
(2005), in all of which (male) monsters
pursue and are killed by beautiful
young “ﬁnal girls.” The “ﬁnal girl,”
deﬁned as the last character in the ﬁlm
left alive, is a horror ﬁlm convention.
Further Readings
Chibnall, Steve. “Alien Women: The Politics
of Sexual Difference in British SF Pulp Cinema.” In British Science Fiction Cinema, ed.
I. Q. Hunter, 57–74. London: Routledge,
1999.
Hutchings, Peter. “‘We’re the Martians
Now’: British SF Invasion Fantasies of the
1950s and 1960s.” In British Science Fiction
Cinema, ed. I. Q. Hunter, 33–47. London:
Routledge, 1999.
Leman, Joy. “Wise Scientists and Female
Androids: Class and Gender in Science
Fiction.” In Popular Television in Britain, ed.

John Corner, 108–24. London: British Film
Institute, 1991.

IAN Q. HUNTER

BRONTE€ SISTERS
Charlotte (1816–1855), Emily (1818–
€ are
1848), and Anne (1820–1849) Bronte
the most celebrated literary sisters in
the world. They wrote some of the most
popular, and shocking, novels in English
€s grew up in
literature. The Bronte
Haworth, a remote village on the Yorkshire moors. After the deaths of their
mother (in 1821) and two elder sisters
Maria and Elizabeth (in 1825), the sisters
were left alone with their brother Branwell and their father, the Reverend
€. Their daily routines
Patrick Bronte
included painting, reading, and a daily
regimen of writing. Branwell died in
1848, followed by Emily, of tuberculosis,
in 1848. Anne would follow in 1849, leaving Charlotte alone. She lived until 1855,
dying nine months after being married.
The sisters published a joint book of
poetry in 1846 using the pseudonyms of
Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell. They followed with three novels published in
1947: Charlotte’s Jane Eyre, Emily’s
Wuthering Heights, and Anne’s Agnes
Grey. Anne went on to publish The Tenant
of Wildfell Hall in 1948, and Charlotte
wrote three more novels: Shirley (1849),
Villette (1853), and The Professor (1857).
Their work is realistic in its frank portrayals of gender and socioeconomic
power, but it can be fantastic as well:
Wuthering Heights has ambiguous supernatural elements and Villette has passages that evoke spiritualism.
€
But the most fantastical of the Bronte
ﬁctions were written years before.
Begun after Branwell received a set of
wooden toy soldiers as a gift, the Angria
stories were about an alternate Earth as
imagined primarily by Charlotte and
Branwell. Its Romantic kingdoms were
41
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

led by generals based on the soldiers
and ruled by the Duke of Zamorna.
There were maps, plays, watercolors,
imaginary magazines, and countless little books, all added to for years. When
Charlotte went off to school, Emily and
Anne countered with their own imaginary kingdom: the land of Gondal.
Though very little of the Gondal tales
survive (only as bits and pieces in their
poetry), the Angria tales can be read in
four volumes attributed to Charlotte:
High Life in Verdopolis, Juvenalia, Stancliffe’s Hotel, and The Green Dwarf.
See also: Alternative History; Fan Fiction.
Further Readings
Barker, Juliet. The Bront€es. New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 1994.
€ Parsonage Museum and Bronte
€ SociBronte
ety [online]. Http://www.bronte.info.
Fraser, Rebecca. The Bront€es: Charlotte Bront€e
and Her Family. New York: Ballantine,
1988.

BRAD J. RICCA

BRYHER
See: Ellerman, Annie Winnifred

BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER
AND ANGEL
Created by Joss Whedon, Buffy the Vampire Slayer aired on the WB network from
1997 to 2002. Inspired by Whedon’s 1992
movie of the same name, the television
series featured Sarah Michelle Gellar as
Buffy Summers, a teenager with superhuman powers who subverts the tradition of the blonde who inevitably dies in
horror ﬁlms. This subversion of conventional horror characterization not only
drew fans to the show but inspired academic scholarship on gender issues.
Buffy is the “Chosen One” who
defends the world from evil. Initially a
reluctant hero who just wants to be a
normal girl in Sunnydale, California,
42
...............

Volume 2: Entries

the clever and fashion-conscious Buffy
is quickly empowered by her gift, with
the help of her “Watcher” Giles (Anthony Head). Flanked by friends Xander
(Nicholas Brendon), lesbian witch
Willow (Alyson Hannigan), and Angel
(David Boreanaz), a vampire with a
soul, Buffy frequently faces and averts
the apocalypse, but constantly suffers
tragedy in her personal life. The death
of her mother in Season 5 gives the
devastated slayer even more responsibility as guardian of her younger sister
Dawn (Michelle Trachtenberg). Alongside Buffy’s development, Willow’s
powers grow until she emerges as the
most powerful witch on Earth and
nearly destroys the world in the wake
of her partner Tara’s (Amber Benson)
death in Season 6. Season 7 brings back
Faith (Eliza Dushku), a slayer from the
third season, and introduces dozens of
young women who could potentially be
the next slayer. Willow unites their
power in a ﬁnal battle of good against
evil, and the women are victorious. The
vampire Spike (James Marsters), a foeturned-ally, sacriﬁces himself, but later
returns in the spin-off series Angel.
Angel premiered in 1999 on the WB
and picks up at the end of Buffy’s third
season. Tortured by his murderous past
as a savage killer, which is recapped in
ﬂashbacks, the centuries-old vampire
repents his sins by protecting the people
of Los Angeles. In the ﬁrst episode,
Angel reunites with wealthy and spoiled
Cordelia (Charisma Carpenter), a frequent character on Buffy. She becomes
an employee at Angel Investigations,
which handles supernatural cases.
Through the ﬁve seasons of Angel, Cordelia’s character evolves into a prophet,
love interest, and higher being. She
sheds the vanity of her youth to become
a woman devoted to helping others,
even in the ﬁnal moments before her
death in Season 5. The other prominent

Bujold, Lois McMaster
female character is Fred Burkle (Amy
Acker), a bookish Southern girl who is
rescued by Angel from a hell dimension.
Like Cordelia, she is a crucial player at
Angel Investigations and also transforms into a female with great power. In
the ﬁnal season, her body and soul are
possessed by the ancient demon Illyria.
Further Readings
Burr, Vivien. “Ambiguity and Sexuality in
Buffy the Vampire Slayer.” Sexualities 6
(2003): 343–60.
Early, Frances H. “Staking Her Claim: Buffy
the Vampire Slayer as Transgressive
Woman Warrior.” Journal of Popular Culture
35, no. 3 (2001): 11–27.
Jowett, Lorna. Sex and the Slayer: A Gender
Studies Primer for the “Buffy” Fan. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press,
2005.
Wilcox, Rhonda V., and David Lavery, eds.
Fighting the Forces: What’s at Stake in “Buffy
the Vampire Slayer.” Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2002.

ROXANNE HARDE

AND

BUJOLD, LOIS MCMASTER

ERIN HARDE
(1949– )

Lois McMaster Bujold is an American
author who was the only science ﬁction
writer besides Robert A. Heinlein to have
won ﬁve Hugo Awards as of 2005. As a
child, she read science ﬁction (SF) and fantasy brought home by her father, an engineering professor. She began writing at a
young age but decided to write professionally only after she was married and had
two children. Bujold ﬁnished and submitted one novel while beginning another. As
a result, she received contracts for three
books in 1985. She has published over
twenty books (novels, novellas, and short
story and essay collections), including
coediting the ﬁrst anthology of original
military SF by women (Women at War, with
Roland J. Green, 1988).
Bujold writes both science ﬁction and
fantasy. Her primary genre was science
ﬁction, but in recent years she seems

to be publishing primarily fantasy novels. Her early work is space opera,
both stand-alone works and the Vorkosigan series set in a future history after
Earth has colonized multiple planets.
Because of cultural and historical
differences, each planet and space station has a different political and
economic system. Technology levels
differ, and Bujold foregrounds the connections between education, civil
rights, technology, political systems, economics,
and
family
structures.
Bujold’s futures are not utopias; there
are planets where individuals and corporations can enslave human beings.
Genetic material is bought and sold.
Wars are fought over planetary resources. Bujold’s galactic scenario allows
her to explore the intersections
between technology and economics,
such as genetic engineering and cloning, within different political systems
such as feudalism, electoral democracy, or the interstellar corporate control of a space habitat or planet.
Bujold has been praised by fans and
critics for her strength in character development. She blends genre conventions of space opera with characters,
male and female, who are not the conventional heroes of military space stories. Miles Vorkosigan, the protagonist
of ten of her books, is born with a disability due to an assassination attempt
using poison gas. Born into a noble
family on a feudal planet, Miles’s physical disabilities would have resulted in
his death a generation earlier. On Barrayar, because of past nuclear bombing, any “mutant” (deﬁned as any child
with a visible deformity) was killed at
birth. Raised by his Barrayaran father
and Betan mother, who met and married while serving in warring systems’
armies and whose marriage is
described in two of Bujold’s earlier novels (Shards of Honor, 1986; Barrayar,
43
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

1991), Miles cannot meet Barrayar’s
physical requirements for military
training. He ends up hijacking a spaceship and leading a double life through
the creation of a conventionally heroic
mercenary military leader. Over time,
he moves from the military to the diplomatic service, marries, and has children. Miles’s character development is
from adolescent arrogance to mature
awareness of tragedy.
In other novels, Bujold has created
the only all-male planetary society that
is not a dystopia, in Ethan of Athos
(1986). On Athos, men who wish to start
a family must earn social credit points
before they can sire children. One of the
easiest ways to earn social credit points
is by being a caretaker for children. Male
children are created by fertilizing
selected ova from ovarian tissue cultures with the potential father’s sperm,
with the resulting male fetus being
brought to term in a technological
womb. In an exploration of parenting
combined with engineering, Leo Graf, in
Falling Free (1988), is an engineer hired to
train a genetically engineered race
called Quaddies. The Quaddies, who
have four arms and no legs, were created in a corporate research and development project to serve as perfect space
workers. Their natural environment is
space, and they live well without gravity,
unlike humans who cannot work long in
freefall without irreversible physical
effects. When the Betan invention of artiﬁcial gravity makes the Quaddies
“obsolete,” the corporate administrators
decide to sterilize them and imprison
them on Earth. Leo ﬁnds himself helping the Quaddies capture their space
habitat and travel to another system to
establish their own colony.
Bujold has written fantasy novels
as well as science ﬁction. The novels blend
conventional elements of sword-andsorcery novels with Bujold’s trademark
44
...............

Volume 2: Entries

characterizations. Her fantasy novels
have both male and female protagonists
who suffer the effects of being chosen by
deities. The protagonist of The Curse of
Chalion (2001), Cazaril, fought in a war,
was captured, and was tortured as a
rower on an enemy ship. The sequel,
The Paladin of Souls (2003), focuses on an
older noblewoman, Ista Dy Baocia, who
is widowed and embarks on a spiritual
quest. Neither magic nor swordplay
provides easy solutions to the problems
these characters face, ranging from
curses and demonic possession to
distrust among family members and
the failure to ﬁnd respect and love.
The Hallowed Hunt (2005) is set in
the same world as Chalion and Paladin,
and her latest, the Sharing Knife duology (Beguilement, 2006; Legacy, 2007)
begins a new series. The two latest novels focus on men and women brought
together by the need to save their
worlds and people from evil. Bujold’s
fantasy novels have been praised for the
rich levels of spirituality and cultural
detail she provides.
Some critics argue that Bujold’s novels tend to the formulaic and that her
focus on characterization softens the
focus of the science ﬁction material.
Others, including some feminist critics,
praise her blend of key science ﬁction
and fantasy conventions with a more
complex sense of characterization, as
well as her use of a physically disabled
character. Bujold’s work has been translated into ﬁfteen languages and has
won a number of prizes. Her Hugoes are
for “The Mountains of Mourning” (1989),
The Vor Game (1990), Barrayar, Mirror
Dance (1995), and The Paladin of Souls.
Two of Bujold’s novels and a novella
have won Nebula Awards: Falling Free
(1988), Mirror Dance, and “The Mountains
of Mourning.” The Curse of Chalion won
the Mythopoeic Society’s Award for
Adult Fantasy. Other novels have been

Bull, Emma
nominated for both Hugo and Nebula
awards.
Further Readings
Bartter, Martha A. “‘Who Am I, Really?’
Myths of Maturation in Lois McMaster
Bujold’s Vorkosigan Series.” Journal of the
Fantastic in the Arts 10, no.1 (Winter 1998):
30–42.
Bernardi, Michael. The Nexus: Ofﬁcial Lois
McMaster Bujold Homepage [online].
Http://www.dendarii.com/.
Kelso, Sylvia. “Lois McMaster Bujold: Feminism and ‘The Gernsback Continuum’ in
Recent Women’s SF.” Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts 10, no. 1 (Winter 1998): 17–
29.
Levy, Michael M. “An Interview with Lois
McMaster
Bujold.”
Kaleidoscope
34
(Winter-Spring 1997): 6–19.
Lindow, Sandra J. “The Inﬂuence of Family
and Moral Development in Lois McMaster
Bujold’s Vorkosigan Series.” Foundation 30,
no. 83 (Autumn 2001: 25–34.

ROBIN ANNE REID

BULL, EMMA

(1954– )

Emma Bull is an award-winning American writer who has written, individually
and in collaboration, works in a number
of fantastic genres including urban fantasy (War for the Oaks, 1987), science ﬁction (Falcon, 1989), postapocalyptic
ﬁction (Bone Dance, 1991), and epistolatory historical ﬁction (Freedom and Necessity, coauthored with Steven Brust,
1997). She has produced blended-genre
works such as the fantasy/western
novel Territory (2007) and the fantasy/detective novel Finder: A Novel of the Borderlands (1994). Bull coedited the Liavek
and Borderlands shared-world anthology series with husband Will Shetterly
for Terri Windling. She has also created
a picture book, The Princess and the Lord
of Night (1994), illustrated by Susan
Gaber, and has cowritten a script for The
X-Files and a number of screenplays
with Shetterly.

Bull is a musician who has performed and recorded music with two
groups (Cats Laughing and Flash Girls).
Her appreciation of and love for music
informs a number of her novels. Eddi
McCandry, the protagonist of War for
the Oaks, which won a Locus Award for
best ﬁrst novel, is an out-of-work guitar
player pulled into the war between the
Dark (Unseelie) and Light (Seelie)
Courts of Fairy. The Phouka, who has
chosen her as the Seelie Court’s representative human to bring actual death
to the battleﬁeld, says he picked her
because of her music. He explains that
Fairy has always been drawn to musicians because they exist in both the
material and nonmaterial worlds. Sparrow, the protagonist of Bone Dance,
makes a living in postnuclear Minneapolis by scavenging videos and CDs to
sell.
Born in Torrance, California, Bull
attended Beloit College, graduating
with a B.A. in English in 1976. She married Shetterly in 1976, and they moved
to Minneapolis. She worked as a freelance journalist, but attending her ﬁrst
science ﬁction (SF) convention introduced her to others interested in writing SF. They formed a writing group,
ofﬁcially the Interstate Writers’ Workshop but also known as “the Scribblies.”
In addition to Bull and Shetterly, the
group included Brust, Kara Dalkey,
Pamela Dean, and Patricia Wrede.
Bull and Shetterly currently live in Arizona. They are members of the Endicott
Studio of Mythic Arts founded by Windling. The Endicott Studio focuses on
“interstitial” arts, art forms that blend
the conventions of multiple genres.
Bull’s interest in blending genres, especially ﬁnding a mythic element in stories, has been clear from her ﬁrst novel
War for the Oaks, which showed the
Courts of Fairy battling over control of
Minneapolis, to her latest novel Territory,
45
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

which shows the mythic underpinnings
of the Gunﬁght at the OK Corral.
Bull’s female protagonists are independent, working as musicians, journalists, or police ofﬁcers. Sparrow of
Bone Dance is an asexual androgyne,
ambiguously gendered, who turns out
to be a clone created for the use of telepathic soldier-assassins called the
Horsemen. During the novel, the
Horsemen come to Minneapolis and
precipitate a crisis in Sparrow’s life.
See also: “Music: Twentieth Century” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Adams, John Joseph. “Territory Finds Magic
in the West.” Sci Fi Wire, September 14,
2007 [online], http://www.sciﬁ.com/sciﬁ
wire/index.php?category¼5&id¼44130.
Emma Bull [online]. Http://emmabull.word
press.com/about.
“Emma Bull.” Authors and Artists for Young
Adults, vol. 31. Detroit: Gale, 2000.

ROBIN ANNE REID

BUTLER, OCTAVIA

(1947–2006)

In 1995, Octavia Butler became the ﬁrst
science ﬁction writer to receive the MacArthur Foundation Genius Grant for her
writing; in addition, she has won science
ﬁction’s most prestigious awards—the
Hugo and Nebula—several times. She
was one of very few black, and even
fewer black female, science ﬁction writers. In 1995, in Bloodchild, and Other Stories, Butler stated she could count only
four black science ﬁction writers who
made a living from their science ﬁction:
Samuel R. Delany, Steven Barnes,
Charles R. Saunders, and herself. By
2006, it became possible to add Nalo
Hopkinson and Tananarive Due to the
list. Butler wrote three series—Xenogenesis, Patternist, and Parable—as well as
stand-alone novels and short stories.
Born and raised in Pasadena, California, Butler was the only child of Laurice
and Octavia Butler; Laurice, a shoe
46
...............

Volume 2: Entries

shiner, died when she was a baby, and
her mother, who worked as a maid,
raised her with the help of Octavia’s
grandmother. Butler began to write at
the age of ten; at twelve, after seeing a
poorly made science ﬁction ﬁlm, she
decided she could write better material
and began her work in the genre. A
daydreamer by disposition, she also
was diagnosed with dyslexia—a combination that made school difﬁcult. However, she received an associate’s degree
from Pasadena City College in 1968 and
then attended California State University, Los Angeles; University of California, Los Angeles, Extension; and the
Clarion Science Fiction Writer’s Workshop while working odd jobs.
Butler’s ﬁrst publication was “Crossover,” printed in the 1971 anthology of
the Clarion Science Fiction Writer’s
Workshop, but she experienced several
years of rejection after this success. In
1976, she published her ﬁrst novel,
Patternmaster, which would become part
of the Patternist series. Kindred, published in 1979, is her best-known novel; it
was reissued in a twenty-ﬁfth anniversary edition in 2004. Many of her earlier
novels have been republished lately,
illustrating the recent surge of interest in
Butler’s work.
Writing what more accurately might
be described as science fantasy since it
is not concerned with the mechanics of
technology, Butler focuses on the relations of domination and subordination,
especially in reference to race, gender,
and sexuality. Community, difference,
and the human body are central to her
focus as well. The human body is imaged
as a site of contestation, adaptation, and
mutation within these relations of
power, and the formation of community
is an imperative for the well-being of her
characters: those who resist community
and favor isolation or insist upon dominating others are doomed.

Butler, Octavia
Although the master–slave relationship is literalized in Kindred, which concerns itself with a contemporary black
woman pulled into antebellum Maryland and forced to act as both slave and
savior to a man who would become her
ancestor, other texts have concerned
themselves with contests of power. The
Patternist series focuses on a society
inhabited by both “mutes” (humans
with no psychic abilities) and those with
psychic (and other) abilities. The Xenogenesis series shows how human survivors are rescued by aliens from a
holocaust of their own creation. The aliens are driven to control the reproduction of humans (by the need for
biological diversity and a sense that the
combination of violence and hierarchical behavior in humans causes them to
self-destruct). The Parable series shows
conﬂicts between humans in a near
future suffering the effects of global
warming, pollution, racial and ethnic
tensions, new diseases, and increased
disparities between rich and poor.
Although she wrote Fledgling (2005),
her last novel, as a self-described
“lark,” these motifs are central to this
text as well, since the protagonist, who
seems to humans to be a young girl, is
a black vampire in her ﬁfties who relies
upon both male and female human
symbionts (to whom she gives and
receives pleasure) for her survival and
with whom she must form community.
She also must battle those who believe
in maintaining a “pure” vampiric form
untainted by the DNA of humans,
echoing the practice of racial eugenics.
The relationships of domination and
subordination within these texts are
not simply oppressor and victim narratives, however: those in her texts who
existed as subordinates often either
exercise their own forms of power and/
or resistance or gain something from
the dominant–subordinate relationship.

Neither was she a believer in utopias,
often constructing dystopias instead.
The belief of the Oankali in the Xenogenesis series—that humans have a
tragic combination of intelligence and
hierarchical behavior—seems to inform
all of her texts. Her work clearly articulates the construction of power and
identity in our own world through a
strategy of displacement, as does most
science ﬁction.
Butler’s work has been well received
by critics and readers alike. Her work
has been the subject of dissertation
chapters, journal articles, and book
chapters due to its complexity, beauty,
and sociopolitical awareness. She won
Hugo Awards for best novel (Parable of
the Talents, 1999), best novelette (Bloodchild, 1984), and best short story
(“Speech Sounds,” 1984) and the Nebula
Award for best novelette (Bloodchild);
Parable of the Sower and The Evening and
the Morning and the Night were nominated for Nebula Awards for best novel
(1994) and best novelette (1987), respectively. Parable of the Sower was also a
New York Times Notable Book of the
Year. The PEN Center West presented
her with a lifetime writing achievement
award in 2000.
See also: “Intersections of Race and Gender” (vol.
1); “Speculating Sexual Identities” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Agusti, Clara Escoda. “The Relationship
between Community and Subjectivity in
Octavia E. Butler’s Parable of the Sower.”
Extrapolation 46, no. 3 (Fall 2005): 351–59.
Becker, Jennifer. “Octavia Estelle Butler,
1947–2006.” VG: Voices from the Gaps
[online], http://voices.cla.umn.edu/vg/bios/
entries/butler_octavia_estelle.html.
Bonner, Frances. “Difference and Desire,
Slavery and Seduction: Octavia Butler’s
Xenogenesis.” Foundation 48 (Spring 1990):
50–62.
Buckman, Alyson R. “‘What Good Is All This
to Black People?’: Octavia Butler’s
47
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Reconstruction of Corporeality.” Femspec
4, no. 2 (2004): 201–18.
Peppers, Cathy. “Dialogic Origins and Alien
Identities in Butler’s Xenogenesis.” Science
Fiction Studies 22 (1995): 47–62.
Steinberg, Marc. “Inverting History in Octavia Butler’s Postmodern Slave Narrative.”

48
...............

Volume 2: Entries

African American Review 38, no. 3 (Fall
2004): 467–76.
White, Eric. “The Erotics of Becoming: Xenogenesis and The Thing.” Science Fiction Studies 20 (1993): 394–408.

ALYSON R. BUCKMAN

C
CADIGAN, PAT

(1953– )

Pat Cadigan is an American author
who is one of the key writers of the
cyberpunk movement. Her unofﬁcial
title of the “Queen of Cyberpunk” indicates her role as the only female ﬁrstgeneration cyberpunk writer. However,
like William Gibson, Cadigan does not
identify herself as writing cyberpunk.
Her ﬁrst novel was Mindplayers (1987),
but it was her second and third novels—Synners (1991) and Fools (1992),
both of which won the Arthur C. Clarke
Award—that placed her in the forefront of contemporary science ﬁction.
Synners is concerned with human
“synthesizers” (individuals who can create music videos from their minds),
and the familiar cyberpunk theme of
jacking into someone else’s brain raises
questions about identity and memory.
Cadigan’s work draws heavily upon
the detective genre, as is evident in
Fools, in which an actress wakes up in a
hologram pool with a memory of murder. This work is concerned with the
ethics of identity exchange. Cadigan
has published short stories in numerous magazines, for example, Omni and
Isaac Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine,
as well as in her collections Patterns
(1989), Dirty Work (1993), and Home by
the Sea (1993) and in numerous anthologies, including such key science ﬁction
works as Mirrorshades: The Cyberpunk
Anthology (1986). Among her recent
works are the acclaimed Tea from an
Empty Cup (1998) and Dervish Is Digital
(2001), both of which blend science ﬁction with crime thriller. She has also

published two novelizations of ﬁlms
(Cellular, 2004; Jason X, 2004) and edited
The Ultimate Cyberpunk (2002), which
showcased a new generation of cyberpunk writers.
Proﬁled by Elle magazine (May 1992)
as one of the women writers whose
work is reshaping the ﬁeld of science
ﬁction, Cadigan has been a key feature
on the lecture circuit. However, much
of her work is out of print, and the
commercial success of other cyberpunk
authors like Gibson and Neal Stephenson has eluded her. Born in New York,
Cadigan was educated at the University
of Massachusetts and the University of
Kansas, graduating from the latter
in 1975. She worked as a writer for
Hallmark Cards before becoming a fulltime writer in 1987. She moved to
England in 1996, where she now lives.
Further Readings
Calvert, Bronwen, and Sue Walsh. “Speaking
the Body: The Embodiment of ‘Feminist’
Cyberpunk.” In Speaking Science Fiction:
Dialogues and Interpretations, ed. Andy Sawyer and David Seed, 96–108. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2000.
Chernaik, Laura. “Pat Cadigan’s Synners:
Reﬁguring Nature, Science and Technology.” Feminist Review 56 (Summer
1997): 61–84.
Kraus, Elisabeth. “Real Lives Complicate
€dinger’s World: Pat CadiMatters in Schro
gan’s Alternative Cyberpunk Vision.” In
Future Females, the Next Generation: New
Voices and Velocities in Feminist Science Fiction, ed. Marleen S. Barr, 129–42. Lanham,
MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2000.
Murphy, Graham. “Imaginable Futures: Tea
from an Empty Cup and the Notion of
49
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Nation.” Extrapolation 45, no. 2 (Summer
2004): 145–61.

STACY GILLIS

CANADA (ENGLISH-SPEAKING)
Literature of the fantastic—science ﬁction (SF), fantasy, and horror—in Canada has its roots in the myths and
legends of North America’s aboriginal
peoples, though the primary inﬂuences
on most Canadian fantastic literature
have been European (notably English)
and American literature. The economic
realities of Canada, a geographically
vast but sparsely populated country,
have meant that the primary markets
for Canadian SF and fantasy have been
outside the country. Figures such as A.
E. van Vogt and Gordon R. Dickson left
the country, while only a few (such as
Spider Robinson) have come in. Most of
the writers who have stayed, including
major literary ﬁgures such as Margaret
Atwood and genre authors like Phyllis
Gotlieb and Robert J. Sawyer, publish
some or all of their work outside of
Canada. Consequently, only comparatively recently has Canada developed a
signiﬁcant number of genre writers.
The earliest signiﬁcant example of
English-language Canadian SF is James
de Mille’s A Strange Manuscript found in a
Copper Cylinder (1888), a satirical fantastic-voyage narrative with debts to Edgar
Allan Poe’s Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym
(1838). Its originality lies in the way it
problematizes and destabilizes “normal”
values and systems as it satirically interrogates Eurocentric, white ethnocentric,
and patriarchal schemata. It is one of
the great Canadian novels of the nineteenth century. Much of the best subsequent Canadian SF adopts a similar,
skeptical outsider stance.
Canadian literature is especially concerned with the individual’s difﬁcult
relationship with the landscape and
50
...............

Volume 2: Entries

nature, and the earliest developments
in fantasy especially reﬂect this interest. Many early works play on the
possibility of supernatural forces
inhabiting the landscape or on the possibilities of anthropomorphic or animistic
treatments
of
the
natural
environment (e.g., Howard O’Hagen’s
Tay John, 1939). In the late nineteenth
century, writers such as Charles G. D.
Roberts and Ernest Thompson Seton
developed animal tales that combined
realism with deep sympathy for animal
protagonists, treated not quite anthropomorphically but not quite naturalistically. Such interests are reﬂected
widely in subsequent Canadian SF and
fantasy, from the works of Atwood to
Marian Engel’s novel Bear (1976), about
a woman who has an affair with the
eponymous animal. However, perhaps
the most signiﬁcant such work is Frederick Philip Grove’s Consider Her Ways
(1947, but apparently planned in 1892–
98), which recounts the quest of thousands of ants from Venezuela to New
York. Again, the focus is a satirical view
of humanity from an unconventional
outside perspective.
The genre market for SF and fantasy
did not bloom in Canada as it did elsewhere, so the majority of writers
exported their work, and many mainstream writers felt freer to explore the
genres than they might have in
more ghettoized markets. Consequently, many of Canada’s mainstream
writers, such as John Buchan, Roberston Davies, Timothy Findley, Thomas
King, W. P. Kinsella, Stephen Leacock,
Brian Moore, P. K. Page, E. J. Pratt, Leon
Rooke, Duncan Campbell Scott, Jane
Urquhart, Sheila Watson, and others,
have written at least some work that
qualiﬁes as SF or fantasy. Margaret
Atwood is the most notable of these,
with two SF novels (including The Handmaid’s Tale, 1985) and several short

Canada (English-Speaking)
stories and poems that have SF or fantastic elements. She uses SF tropes
effectively to engage critically with
North American culture from a feminist perspective. Atwood, however, has
denied she writes SF—despite being the
guest of honor at the 2003 Academic
Conference on Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy.
Canadians have made signiﬁcant
contributions within the genre. Horace
L. Gold, for instance, was Canadian.
Van Vogt, one of the most important
architects of the Golden Age, was also
Canadian and wrote most of his most
highly regarded work before immigrating
to the United States. Dickson is another
signiﬁcant early Canadian contributor
to genre SF.
Phyllis Gotlieb deserves special recognition as the major homegrown Canadian SF author. Her ﬁrst work
appeared in the late 1950s, and though
she has not been proliﬁc, her particularly dense, complex, challenging,
insightful, and poetic SF (some in fact
published as poetry) was until at least
the 1980s the high-water mark in Canadian SF. Gotlieb transforms Canadian
thematic interests in inimical landscapes, survival, and the contingency
of civilization into powerful SF tropes.
She also offers incisive critiques of colonialism and capitalism and uses the
SF milieu to interrogate concepts of
cultural difference, especially in her
depiction of highly original aliens and
her exploration of pregnancy and
reproduction.
As Gotlieb is to SF, Guy Gavriel Kay is
to fantasy. He worked with Christopher
Tolkien in the 1970s on J. R. R. Tolkien’s
Silmarillion, and his fantasy is clearly
indebted to Tolkien structurally and thematically. Kay’s Fionavar Tapestry trilogy
(1984–86) is a parallel-world fantasy in
which several characters from Earth are
transported to the “ﬁrst world,” of which

all others are reﬂections, and engage in
an epic conﬂict with the forces of evil.
His subsequent work has been more
adventurous, imagining a series of
worlds paralleling various periods in
human history (medieval Europe, AngloSaxon England, the Byzantine Empire)
but often featuring no other overt fantasy element. These works problematize
binary concepts of good and evil, often
basing their plots on cultural clashes in
which reader identiﬁcation is invited for
opposed groups in the novel. The Lions of
Al-Rassan (1995), set in an analogue of
medieval Spain, is especially interesting
in its depiction of cultures analogous to
Catholic, Jewish, and Islamic ones, none
of which is depicted as either unambiguously good or evil. Kay’s cultural evenhandedness applies to fantasy the Canadian ideal of a cultural mosaic, a multicultural society in which cultural
difference is encouraged rather than
assimilated into a dominant cultural
model.
The artistic, if not always commercial,
success of such writers underscores the
explosion in Canadian SF and fantasy
since 1980. The ﬁrst anthology of Canadian-themed SF, Other Canadas, edited
by John Robert Colombo, appeared in
1979, and numerous subsequent collections of new and reprinted material,
notably the Tesseracts series (beginning
in 1988, with nine volumes published as
of 2006), reﬂect the burgeoning of Canadian SF. Fantasy-related anthologies
have focused on supernatural horror
and ghost stories, reﬂecting the strong
gothic theme in Canadian literature, as
well as the inﬂuence of aboriginal myths
and legends. The Northern Frights series,
edited by Don Hutchinson (beginning in
1992, with ﬁve volumes published as of
2006), attests to the health of such ﬁction in Canada.
Major Canadian authors of SF and
fantasy to emerge since this explosion
51
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

include such immigrants as Americanborn William Gibson, who played a
major role in creating cyberpunk and
whose work demonstrates the genre’s
ability to incorporate powerful and
complex treatments of the female
cyberbody, despite cyberpunk’s reputation as a masculine genre; Gibson’s
term for cyberspace, matrix, foregrounds the fundamental role of the
feminine in his vision. Another immigrant is Caribbean-born Nalo Hopkinson, a slipstream writer whose mixture
of SF, fantasy, magic realism, horror,
and other generic forms reﬂects her
sense of her hybrid status. Her ﬁrst
novel, Brown Girl in the Ring (1998), won
the 1997 Warner Aspect First Novel
Contest and the 1999 Locus First Novel
Award; Hopkinson also won the John
W. Campbell Award as best new writer
that year. Other Canadian SF and fantasy writers of note to emerge in this
period include Charles de Lint, Candas
Jane Dorsey, Dave Duncan, Terence M.
Green, Tanya Huff, Garﬁeld and Judith
Reeves-Stevens, Robert J. Sawyer, Karl
Schroeder, S. M. Stirling, Peter Watts,
Andrew Weiner, and Robert Charles
Wilson. Both the Aurora Award (established in 1980) and the Sunburst Award
(established in 2001 and named for
Gotlieb’s ﬁrst novel) recognize accomplishments in Canadian SF and fantasy.
The growth in literature of the fantastic has generated a signiﬁcant academic
and critical interest in Canadian SF and
fantasy, beginning with David Ketterer’s
study Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy
(1992). A series of eight (as of 2006) Academic Conferences on Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy have been
held since the mid-1990s; two volumes
of proceedings, with a third forthcoming, and an issue of Foundation (no. 81,
Spring 2001) have published papers
from these conferences. The series of
symposia on Canadian literature held at
52
...............

Volume 2: Entries

the University of Ottawa dedicated one
year (2001) to Canadian SF and fantasy,
with a volume of proceedings appearing
in the Reappraisals: Canadian Writers
series.
Canadian SF and fantasy in the early
twenty-ﬁrst century is more diverse,
popular, and acclaimed than it has ever
been and promises to grow only more
successful.
See also: Canada (French-Speaking); Czerneda, Julie.
Further Readings
Ivison, Douglas, ed. Canadian Fantasy and Science-Fiction Writers. Dictionary of Literary
Biography, vol. 251. Detroit: Gale, 2002.
Ketterer, David. Canadian Science Fiction and
Fantasy. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1992.
re, Camille R., and Jean-Francois
La Bossie
Leroux, eds. Worlds of Wonder: Readings in
Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy. Reappraisals: Canadian Writers, vol. 26.
Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press, 2004.
Paradis, Andrea, comp. Out of This World: Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy. Ottawa:
Quarry Press, National Library of Canada,
1995.
Weiss, Allan, ed. Further Perspectives on the
Canadian Fantastic: Proceedings of the 2003
Academic Conference on Canadian Science
Fiction and Fantasy. Toronto: ACCSFF, 2005.

DOMINICK GRACE

CANADA

(FRENCH-SPEAKING)

Women have played a key role in contemporary Canadian French-language
science ﬁction (SF), and they continue
to make signiﬁcant contributions to
French-Canadian science ﬁction and
fantasy (SF/F). Indeed, it may be argued
that their presence has shaped the way
in which genre writing is practiced in
bec, for their works often blur the
Que
lines between science ﬁction and fantasy. Furthermore, some of the most
respected French-Canadian women

Canada (French-Speaking)
writers of the so-called mainstream
have used elements of SF/F in their
works, developing a contemporary,
neo-fantastic form. Today, a new generation of female writers is contributing
to the growth of heroic and dark fanbec.
tasy as signiﬁcant genres in Que
Although the ﬁeld of SF/F illustration is
limited, women have also ventured into
this realm.

French immigrant Elisabeth
Vonarburg’s literary direction of the specialized review Solaris and her organization
bec
of the ﬁrst Science Fiction of Que
s
(SFQ) convention, the annual Congre
al, mark 1979 as a watershed year
Bore
in the development of an SF/F movebec. That same year,
ment in Que
Esther Rochon cofounded another
genre-based periodical, imagine ….
s Guitard, Francine Pelletier, and
Agne
Annick Perrot-Bishop soon joined the
growing movement. In addition to short
stories like “Coineraine” (1983), Guitard
published a novel exploring extrasensory perception and possession, Les
Corps
communicants
(Communicating
Bodies, 1981), but she left the ﬁeld soon
after. Pelletier remains an important
ﬁgure in the milieu. In addition to a
number of young adult SF/F novels, she
published the Sand and Steel trilogy (Le
Sable et l’acier, 1997–99) and another
novel, Les Jours de l’ombre (Days of
Shadow, 2000), for adults. Her works all
feature female protagonists exploring
their roles in future or extraterrestrial
worlds. Her short stories “Guinea Pig”
(1987), “The Mother Migrator” (1987),
“Empty Ring” (1996), and “The Sea
Below” (1999) have been published in
the English-language Tesseracts anthologies. The brightest new star on the
rard. Her prizeSFQ horizon is Sylvie Be
winning novel of Terran colonization
of the desert planet Sielxth, inhabited
by intelligent lizards, Terre des autres
(Land of Others, 2004), provides a

sophisticated exploration of race relations and will appear in English.
Often viewed as Siamese twins, science ﬁction and fantasy have developed in dialogue with each other in
bec, and the lines between them
Que
may often be blurry, as best illustrated
by the work of one of the province’s
most respected writers, Esther Rochon.
nalik novels (1974–2002) have
Her Vre
bec in
been seen as an allegory for Que
their depiction of the isolated Asven
people, the four-hundred-year-old curse
that brought them almost to the brink
of extinction, and their ultimate return
to prosperity. Her Chroniques infernales
(Hell Chronicles, 1995–2000) series, concerned with redemption rather than
punishment, represents the ﬁrst attempt
by a French-Canadian writer to envision hell. Rochon’s only novel available
in translation, The Shell (1985), explores
the sensual relationship between a
human family and a giant nautilus; its
imagery links it to feminist experimental writing. Feminism is central to
Louky Bersianik’s The Eugelionne (1976),
a critique of sexual inequality on Earth,
which features an extraterrestrial as its
title character but has only a marginal
relationship to SF.
Even before feminism’s call for the
portrayal of positive female images, a
number of women pioneered SF/F
works in the ﬁeld of juvenile literature.
In the 1960s, Suzanne Martel (Robot
Alert, 1981) and her sister Monique Corriveau typically featured male protagonists, but they broke new ground in
bec’s budding youth literature.
Que
Martel’s The City Underground (1964)
became a young adult Canadian classic
and Corriveau’s trilogy Compagnon du
soleil (Companion of the Sun, 1976) was
the ﬁrst multivolume SF novel pubbec. Since then, such
lished in Que
^ te

women writers as Marie Warnant-Co
,
(The Diabolicave, 1992), Johanne Masse
53
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

vesque and
and more recently Louise Le
le Laframboise have regularly
Miche
published SF/F for the young. Even
Rochon and Vonarburg occasionally
contribute to this ﬁeld, and female
main characters in youth literature
have become commonplace today, even
in works by men, as in Fredrick
D’Anterny’s Storine novels.
Heroic fantasy, a new genre for
bec at least, has developed in part
Que
because of the support of a young audience.
Anne
Robillard’s
Chevaliers

d’Emeraude (Emerald Knights) series
(2002– ), selling more than 500,000 copies, owes its popularity to the inclusion
of both male and female knights and an
engaging main character, Princess Kira,
whose sense of difference and physical
awkwardness (she is a cross-species
hybrid) reﬂects the perspective of its
teenage readers. While Julie Martel has
contributed a number of youth novels
lo€ise Co
^ te
’s ambitious
to this ﬁeld, He
trilogy Les Chroniques de l’Hudres (The
Chronicles of Hudres, 2004–06) targets
an adult audience. Although it includes
a powerful priestess, its ﬁrst volume
mostly reproduces traditional gender
roles with predominantly male heroes.
The related genre of dark fantasy
appears in the work of Natasha Beaulieu, as found in her story “Laika” (1994).
Outside the active community that
openly declares an afﬁliation with SF/F,
a number of women associated with
the literary mainstream have experimented with motifs from those genres.
These sometimes ambiguous works
bec’s
include several novels by Que
bert. Her
best-known author, Anne He
Children of the Black Sabbath (1975)
depicts a nun haunted by a childhood
of incest and witchcraft in rural,
bec. He
bert’s Helo€ise
Depression-era Que
(1980) presents a tale of vampires in
contemporary Paris; In the Shadow of the
Wind (1982) concludes with an
54
...............

Volume 2: Entries

enigmatic disappearance of two girls
on the shores of the Gulf of St. Lawrence; and several stories in The Torrent
(1950) ﬂirt with the fantastic.
 The
riault, daughter of
Marie Jose
riault, explores the
writer Yves The
themes of witchcraft and metamorphosis in her collection of stories The Ceremony (1978). It depicts female ﬁgures
from legend and mythology, often in
a threatening light and includes
riault’s retelling of the biblical story
The
of Bathsheba from the pagan queen’s
point of view. Carmen Marois also published a collection of traditional fantastic tales, L’Amateur d’art (The Art Lover,
1985).
In contrast with the classic French
fantastic, in which a bizarre, often supernatural, incident intrudes upon and
destabilizes what is an otherwise realist
narrative, critics have begun to identify
 be
cois literature
a neo-fantastic in Que
from the 1970s and 1980s. This contemporary form reﬂects a postmodern
destabilization of reality itself; the protagonists in the neo-fantastic narrative
encounter a world that is absurd and
random, in which relativism and multiplicity reign. The work of Claudette
Charbonneau-Tissot (under the pseudonym Aude) typiﬁes this style. In her collection of stories The Compulsion (1976),
a female ﬁrst-person narrator grapples
with reality as it is deﬁned by the rest of
society, fading in and out of states that
could be dreams, madness, or simply a
more accurate perception of the
absurdity of the postmodern world.
This type of experimental writing
may borrow from several genres without conforming to the reader’s expectations of any single form. For example,
Claire de Lamirande’s novel L’Operation
fabuleuse (The Fabulous Operation, 1978)
depicts a world-class surgeon, Maude
Vermeer, who invents a machine that
can perform the “fabulous operation”

Carol, Avedon
of the title, although the SF trope of
scientiﬁc advance is not presented in
any plausible way. Lamirande’s idiosyncratic novel of espionage and intrigue
La Rose du temps (The Rose Window of
Time, 1984) reveals a relationship to
alternative histories and time-travel
stories in the title’s use of the ﬁgure of
time as a stained-glass rose window
and in its focus upon a 1967 assassination attempt of Charles de Gaulle and
al that never
the mayor of Montre
happened.
Twin sisters Anne Dandurand (Deathly
Delights, 1991; The Cracks, 1992; Small

Souls under Siege, 1995) and Claire De
(Desire as Natural Disaster, 1995) also use
the tropes of SF/F in their postmodern
feminist texts. Their story written in
collaboration, “Metamorphosis,” plays
with Franz Kafka’s text; set in the near
future, it depicts a woman buying a lobster, then turning into one when she is
raped and avenging the crime by ripping her assailant apart with her claws.
In the narrow ﬁeld of SF/F illustration, two women stand out for their
le Laframboise
contributions. Miche
illustrates comic books, as well as adult
and young adult SF novels, and Laurine
Spehner has impacted the look of SFQ
with her cover art and illustrations for
novels and magazines.
See also: Canada (English-Speaking); “The
Creation of Literature for the Young” (vol. 1);
“Intersections of Race and Gender” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Hannan, Annika. “Esther Rochon.” In Canadian Fantasy and Science-Fiction Writers, ed.
Douglas Ivison, 225–36. Dictionary of Literary Biography, vol. 251. Detroit: Gale,
2002.
Ketterer, David. Canadian Science Fiction and
Fantasy. Bloomington: University of Indiana Press, 1992.
Paradis, Andrea. Out of This World: Canadian
Science Fiction and Fantasy Literature.
Ottawa: Quarry Press, 1995.

Ransom, Amy J. “Francine Pelletier.” In Canadian Fantasy and Science-Fiction Writers,
ed. Douglas Ivison, 207–11. Dictionary of
Literary Biography, vol. 251. Detroit: Gale,
2002.

AMY RANSOM

CAROL, AVEDON

(1951– )

Avedon Carol is an American-born fan
writer and blogger noted for her feminist views, her distrust of governmental and religious authority, and her
opposition to censorship. She was born
in Maryland in 1951 and discovered
fandom in 1974, joining the Washington Science Fiction Association and
attending Disclave, the Washington,
DC, science ﬁction convention, for the
ﬁrst time that year. Soon she was publishing a personal fanzine, The Invisible
Fan. In addition, she was a charter
member of A Woman’s APA, the feminist amateur press association that
soon became all-woman writing and
publishing AC/DC. She has also written
for other amateur press associations,
including Oasis, Mixed Company, ALPS,
and Intercourse.
In the 1980s, she continued to publish fanzines, including Blatant, another
personal zine, and Rude Bitches, coedited with Lucy Huntzinger. In 1983, she
won the Trans-Atlantic Fan Fund, a
fannish fund that alternately brings
popular fans from the United States to
Great Britain and vice versa, and traveled to the United Kingdom. There she
met British fan Rob Hansen, and she
urged him to run the following year. He
won, and after his visit, they married
and Carol moved to London, where she
remains.
Carol and her husband joined with
Vince Clarke, Pam Wells, and John Harvey to edit Pulp, one of the most popular British fanzines of the 1980s. In
1987, she was a guest of honor at WisCon, along with Samuel R. Delany and
55
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Connie Willis. She was nominated for
the Hugo Award for best fan writer in
1989, 1991, and 1992.
Carol became a spokesperson for
Feminists against Censorship, making
public appearances, writing Nudes,
Prudes and Attitudes: Pornography and
Censorship (1994), and coediting (with
Alison Assiter) Bad Girls and Dirty Pictures: The Challenge to Reclaim Feminism
(1994). In the 1990s, she moved onto
the Internet, appearing
in the
rec.arts.sf.* newsgroups, and since 2001
she has run the popular blog The Sideshow (http://sideshow.me.uk).
See also: “Fandom” (vol. 1); “WisCon” (vol. 1).

ARTHUR D. HLAVATY

CARTER, ANGELA

(1940–1992)

Angela Carter was a major British
writer of the twentieth century whose
multifaceted work is marked by an idiosyncratic blend of surrealism, gothic
horror, fantasy, magical realism, speculative ﬁction, and black humor as well
as an acute awareness of current
trends in feminist thought. Born in
Eastbourne, Sussex, and educated at
Bristol University, she is the author
of nine critically acclaimed novels,
four short-story collections, numerous
sharply perceptive journalistic pieces
(collected in Shaking a Leg, 1997), and a
provocative book on the Marquis de
Sade (The Sadeian Woman, 1979).
Carter is best known for her erotically charged postmodern reworkings
of popular fairy tales. Published in
1979 as The Bloody Chamber, these stories have become landmarks of fantastic literature and helped to initiate a
wave of innovative approaches to the
fairy-tale genre by both literary critics
and other female writers. Carter also
edited the two-volume Virago Book of
Fairy Tales (1990, 1992), a collection of
lesser-known tales from across the
56
...............

Volume 2: Entries

world featuring a wide variety of
female protagonists.
Most of Carter’s texts are concerned
with deconstructing patriarchal images
of femininity and female sexuality as
they are perpetuated in myth, literature, and art. Her preferred method for
“demythologizing” these powerful ﬁctions, which insist on women’s passivity and subordination, was to create
intricate intertextual webs. Intertextuality refers to a writer reworking or referring to previously produced cultural,
literary, or artistic materials. By drawing from the cultural archive of Western European imagination to rewrite
familiar stories from a female perspective and using irony, exaggeration, and
pastiche, Carter not only emphasizes
the artiﬁciality and inherent contradictions of these myths but also points
out liberating possibilities for transformation. Her postmodern preference for
writing about liminal, or threshold, and
grotesque ﬁgures and her constant
efforts to stretch the limits of genre by
mixing characteristics of realist and
antirealist modes of writing express a
wish to transcend the ﬁxed binaries at
the heart of Western culture.
Despite their realistic settings, her
early novels Shadow Dance (1966), Several Perceptions (1968), and Love (1971)
evoked a disturbingly gothic atmosphere, but it is in The Magic Toyshop
(1967) that Carter’s distinctive style,
with its use of folklore and fantastic
elements, fully emerges for the ﬁrst
time. In images drawn from Sigmund
Freud, E. T. A. Hoffmann, Greek mythology, and the Bible, this novel
describes the rite of passage of ﬁfteenyear-old Melanie, orphaned and sent to
live with her estranged relatives. Her
domineering uncle is a puppeteer who
prefers his artiﬁcial creatures to the living members of his silently rebelling
family. The mechanical doll is a

Carter, Angela
recurring image in Carter’s work, used
here to illustrate the conditioning of
men and women into prescribed societal roles.
Heroes and Villains (1969) is a dystopian novel with parodic elements set in
a postnuclear world. The protagonist,
Marianne, is torn between the elite society of the “Professors” and the tribal
culture of the “Barbarians.” Referencing
Jean-Jacques Rousseau and other utopian writers, Carter exposes the violence underlying the patriarchal ideals
on which both surviving factions have
based their collective ﬁctions. The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman
(1972), a mixture of the phantasmagoric and the picaresque, tells the tale
of a city under attack from devices
capable of producing hallucinations.
The performative qualities of gender
and its cultural construction are
explored in The Passion of New Eve (1977),
Carter’s most radical novel. In this surreal and darkly satirical tour de force,
Evelyn, a chauvinistic Englishman, ﬁnds
himself in a nightmarish America,
where he is surgically transformed into
the perfect woman, Eve, by a self-proclaimed Mother Goddess. Enslaved by a
violent patriarch, Eve is ﬁnally united
with his/her idol, Tristessa, a gorgeous
ﬁlm star, famous for portraying suffering heroines, who turns out to be a
female impersonator. Carter’s last two
novels are more celebratory and comedic in nature. The carnivalesque Nights
cle
at the Circus (1984), set in ﬁn-de-sie
England and Russia, tells the sprawling
tale of Fevvers, a winged trapeze artist.
Wise Children (1991) is a bawdy comedy
about the twin daughters of a Shakespearean actor.
Carter’s short stories, collected in
Burning Your Boats (1995), continue her
explorations of cultural myths and fantasies. Her subversively sensual interpretations of European fairy tales are

written in an ornate, densely poetic
prose decidedly different from the simple style typical for the genre. These
stories both restore details salvaged
from older versions of the subsequently
“sanitized” tales and interfere with the
expected progression of the plot,
mostly by radically changing the conventional ending: Bluebeard’s young
bride is rescued not by her brothers but
her pistol-wielding mother (“The
Bloody Chamber”); the animal bridegroom’s tongue reveals the hidden fur
beneath the heroine’s skin (“The Tiger’s
Bride”).
The notion that the power of the heroine’s sexuality might match that of
her predatory male counterpart is a
theme Carter also explores in her most
famous tale, “The Company of Wolves.”
Mixing folklore with variations of “Little
Red Riding Hood,” Carter changes
Charles Perrault’s gullible girl back into
a “wise child,” resourceful and fearless,
and the Grimm Brothers’ introduction
of a fatherly rescuer is countered by
fusing the hunter and the beast into
the ﬁgure of a werewolf. Both the adolescent girl and the werewolf are presented as borderline creatures, each
responding to the outsider status perceived in the other: The taming of the
monster is a moment of self-discovery.
Carter also supplied the screenplay
for Neil Jordan’s ﬁlm The Company of
Wolves (1984), based on several of her
wolf stories. By explicitly dealing with
cannibalism, incest, bestiality, and
female sexuality, Carter highlights the
latent violence and eroticism at the
heart of the fairy-tale genre. She
rewrites texts originating in a predominately female oral tradition, which
male writers sought to “ﬁx” into static,
more conventional forms, and thereby
emphasizes the essential ﬂuidity of
meaning and the close relationship
between reading and writing.
57
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Further Readings
Easton, Alison, ed. Angela Carter. New York:
St. Martin’s Press, 2000.
Gamble, Sarah. Angela Carter: A Literary Life.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
Peach, Linden. Angela Carter. New York:
St. Martin’s Press, 1998.
Roemer, Danielle M., ed. Angela Carter and
the Fairy Tale. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2001.
VanderMeer, Jeff. “The Infernal Desire
Machines of Angela Carter.” The Modern
Word: The Scriptorium, 2001 [online],
http://www.themodernword.com/scripto
rium/ carter.html.

DOROTHEA SCHULLER

CARTER, RAPHAEL

(?– )

Raphael Carter identiﬁes alternately as
androgyne,
intersexual,
epicene
(having the characteristics of both the
male and the female), neuter, gender
outlaw, or transgendered and has
expressed preference for the genderneutral pronouns zie and zir. Carter’s
interest in reexamining conventional
notions of sex and gender is clear in
the short story “Congenital Agenesis of
Gender Ideation,” which won the 1998
James Tiptree Jr. Award and was nominated for the 1999 Theodore Sturgeon
Memorial Award. After The Fortunate Fall
(1996), Carter was a nominee for the
John W. Campbell Award for best new
writer two years running.
“Congenital Agenesis” is structured
as a scientiﬁc paper by K. N. Sirsi and
Sandra Botkin, two researchers who
discover a disorder that impairs gender
perception. The ﬁctional researchers
discover subjects who cannot successfully identify individuals as “male” or
“female,” but instead have twenty-two
categories they use to identify people
they meet on a scale that covers subtle
variations of biological sex characteristics. This so-called disorder calls into
question the researchers’ own, more
58
...............

Volume 2: Entries

conventional understanding of both biological sex and gender as corresponding to a simple binary.
The Fortunate Fall (1996), Carter’s debut novel, raises many more conventional questions about gender and
sexuality. The cyberpunk novel tells the
story of Maya Andreyeva, a twentythird-century reporter who transmits
her thoughts and experiences to the
viewing public. While conﬂicts between
external and internal identity are
brieﬂy touched on in Andreyeva’s story,
her main concern is with the secret
that has been excised from her memory: Andreyeva is sexually attracted to
women, which is a harshly punished
crime for the women of her world.
While critics loved the book, none
noted the novel’s questions of sexuality, love, and desire. Instead, the
reviewers focus on the technology and
other cyberpunk aspects of the world.
Carter has also written nonﬁction on
issues of intersex and gender ambiguity. Zir “The Murk Manual: How to
Understand Medical Writing on Intersex” is a tongue-in-cheek glossary of
medical terms used with intersex
patients, and “The Androgyny RAQ
(Rarely Asked Questions)” was at one
time a heavily cited Internet resource
(now no longer available) in which Carter raised questions of philosophy,
etiquette, and terminology. In “403 Forbidden: Online Androgyny: M or F—r
None of the Above?,” zie discusses the
gender-invisibility of adopted online
personae.
Further Readings
Baird, Neil P. “Deﬁning/Redeﬁning the Masculine ‘Other’ in Science Fiction.” Strange
Horizons, July 1, 2002 [online], http://www.
strangehorizons.com/2002/20020701/mas
culine_other.shtml.

DEBORAH KAPLAN

Cavendish, Margaret Lucas

CAVENDISH, MARGARET LUCAS,
DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE (1623–1673)
Margaret Cavendish was responsible
for many literary “ﬁrsts” at a time when
the reading public was extremely critical of women writing. She was the ﬁrst
Englishwoman to publish widely and
the ﬁrst to write a biography of her
husband, her own autobiography, and
what can be called a science ﬁction
novel, complete with a new planet,
alien life, out-of-body travel, and inventions that anticipate modern scientiﬁc
developments.
She was born the eighth and youngest child in the aristocratic Lucas family of Essex, England. Like most
seventeenth-century noblewomen, she
was educated at home. When the English Civil War erupted, she became a
lady-in-waiting to Queen Henrietta
Maria, following her into French exile.
There she met and married William
Cavendish, Marquis (later Duke) of
Newcastle. After Charles II’s restoration
to the throne, the couple returned to
the duke’s English properties.
Lady Cavendish’s central characters
are usually women. Female utopias ﬁgure in several works, most notably her
1668 play Convent of Pleasure, in which
the heroine establishes an all-woman
refuge of sensual delights before falling
in love with and marrying a crossdressing prince.
Cavendish wrote The Description of a
New World, Called The Blazing World in
1666. In this narrative, a lady is
abducted and carried off to sea. Her
captor’s ship is driven far north by a
storm, and all but the lady freeze to
death. She discovers that her planet is
joined at its North Pole to another
planet, the Blazing World, which is perpetually lit by its own sun and passing
comets. As her ship drifts from one
planet into the other, the lady is

rescued by bear-men and taken to the
new world’s emperor, who marries her.
The Blazing World is occupied by
numerous intelligent and friendly species: among these are multihued men,
philosophical bear-men, bird-men who
reveal the secrets of weather, and
worm-men who discuss subterranean
matters. The Blazing World is also
home to “immaterial spirits” who speak
to the empress about such spiritual
matters as the Cabbala, a method of
interpreting the mysteries of life. In
order to write a new Cabbala, the
empress seeks the aid of a character
named the Duchess of Newcastle. The
two women learn to create imaginative
worlds and to travel outside of their
bodies. When the empress’s Earthly
home is threatened by war, the resources of the Blazing World—including
submarines—are used to subdue the
attackers. The story concludes with the
parting of the friends: the empress
remains in the Blazing World, while the
Duchess of Newcastle returns to her
husband on Earth.
In her desire for literary fame, Cavendish inserted herself into her works.
She died at the age of ﬁfty in 1673 and
is buried beside her husband in Westminster Abbey. Her monument shows
her holding an open book, with pen
and ink pot at hand.
Further Readings
Bowerbank, Sylvia, and Sara Mendelson,
eds. Paper Bodies: A Margaret Cavendish
Reader. Peterborough: Broadview, 2000.
Cavendish, Margaret. The Description of a
New World Called The Blazing World, and
Other Writings, ed. Kate Lilley. London:
Pickering, 1992.
Whitaker, Katie. Mad Madge: The Extraordinary Life of Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of
Newcastle, the First Woman to Live by her
Pen. New York: Basic Books, 2002.

JUDITH ANDERSON STUART
59
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

CHANT, JOY

(1945– )

Joy Chant (pronounced CHAINT) is an
award-winning English fantasy writer.
She was born Eileen Joyce Chant on
January 13, 1945, in London. She
became Eileen Joyce Rutter when she
married Peter Brown Sayers Rutter on
August 29, 1981, but has maintained
her original name professionally. A
graduate of the College of Librarianship
in Wales, where she produced Fantasy
and Allegory in Literature for Young People
(1971), Chant served as a librarian and
lecturer on librarianship from 1966 to
1978. Noted for her part in the strong
wave of original fantasy that followed
J. R. R. Tolkien and C. S. Lewis, Chant
published three novels set in the world
of Khendiol: Red Moon and Black Mountain: The End of the House of Kendreth
(1970), The Grey Mane of Morning (1977),
and When Voiha Wakes (1983). A further
Khendiol story, “The Coming of the
Starborn,” appeared in Maxim Jakubowski’s anthology Lands of Never
(1983). Chant also wrote The High Kings
(1983), a collection of Arthurian stories
that combines the Matter of Britain
with the Mabinogion.
Chant’s novels of Khendiol appeal
equally to young adults and adults. Her
early reading experiences—folklore,
myth, legend, and history—predisposed
her to heroic language and legendary
tales. She began developing the history,
customs, and religions of Khendiol
while still a child, accumulating so
much information that new facts
seemed more discovery than invention.
The novels take place in a variety of
time periods and focus on several distinct cultural groups. The Khentorei
are unicorn-riding nomads whose
horse-worship, royal sacriﬁce, code of
honor, and respect for nature are reminiscent of Native American, Mongol,
and Celtic traditions; a goddess
60
...............

Volume 2: Entries

associated with earth magic plays a
strong role. The Starborn, descendants
of gods and wielders of the Star Magic,
are led by a princess; the life-force of
each enchanter is linked to an actual
star, which goes out if that enchanter
dies or marries a mortal. The people of
Halilak have a matriarchal society, run
cooperatively by women who rear their
children independent of their transient
male lovers; the men live in a separate
town, each belonging to a craft lodge,
denied literacy and limited in the types
of crafts they may pursue.
Chant’s awards include Mythopoeic
Fantasy Awards for Red Moon and Black
Mountain in 1972 and When Voiha Wakes
in 1984. The High Kings won the World
Fantasy Special Award for Professional
Work in 1984.
See also: “The Creation of Literature for the
Young” (vol. 1); Fairy Tales and Folklore.
Further Readings
Elgin, Don D. “The Comedy of Fantasy: An
Ecological Perspective of Joy Chant’s Red
Moon and Black Mountain.” In Aspects of
Fantasy: Selected Essays from the Second
International Conference on the Fantastic in
Literature and Film, ed. William Coyle, 221–
30. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1986.
Sullivan, C. W., III. “The Khendiol Novels.”
In Survey of Modern Fantasy Literature, ed.
Frank Magill, 2:839–43. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Salem, 1983.

LYN C. A. GARDNER

CHARNAS, SUZY MCKEE (1939– )
Suzy Mckee Charnas is an American
science ﬁction and fantasy author, best
known for her Holdfast series, a unique
feminist science ﬁction (SF) series that
not only reﬂects twenty-ﬁve years of
feminist theorizing but also anticipates
many of the key issues (hybridity, postcolonial concerns) of postmodern
theory. Extraordinary for the genre, the

Charnas, Suzy McKee
third part of the Holdfast series, The
Furies (1994), presents a yet unrivaled
savage description of a literal war of
the sexes, with women (“fems”) committing the atrocities they were once
subjected to as slaves.
As a descendant of a long line of
strong women and born into a family
of artists, Charnas claims to have
begun writing at the age of six. She
lives with her husband, her two children, and other relatives in New Mexico. Charnas has written more than
ﬁfteen books and short stories of SF,
(dark) fantasy, and horror as well as
young adult ﬁction, some under her
pseudonym Rebecca Brand, and two
nonﬁction books. In My Father’s Ghost
(2002), Charnas commemorates her
estranged relationship with her father.
Some of her work is available as electronic ﬁction online.
Initially inspired by the Women’s Liberation Movement, Charnas looks at
the intersection of gender, race, and
class in her science ﬁction. In her postapocalyptic
Holdfast
series,
she
explores the pathology of society’s sexism and racism taken to extremes and
alternatively inﬂicted by both sexes.
With Walk to the End of the World (1974),
the series sets out as a harsh (eco)feminist colonial dystopia in a bleak
post-holocaust patriarchal and homogeneous society where fems, women
reduced to animal status, are used as
breeders and slaves and people of color
are referred to as “unmen.” The almost
pastoral Motherlines (1978) presents two
separatist all-female societies. While
the escaped Free Fems of the Tea Camp
establish a matriarchal dystopia, the
parthenogenic Riding Women of the
Grasslands, modeled on Amazons, represent an alternative potential utopia.
The Furies, about the fems’ return to
the Holdfast, describes a masculinist
dystopia, the fems’ establishment of a

neocolonial system, and a raging war
of the sexes. The Conqueror’s Child (1999)
concludes the series with a utopian
reconciliation of the two sexes and the
races that depicts the continuous process of a utopia in the making rather
than the unattainable utopia of perfection. Charnas’s allegory of the building
of a new utopian world moves from
one patriarchal society to a plurality of
ﬁve societies, and from a white
supremacist society to a multicultural,
multiethnic, multireligious society.
In the Holdfast novels, Charnas
stresses particularly the necessity of
experiencing both victimization and
mastery for a catharsis, a shift from the
nuclear biological family to families of
psychological afﬁnity, from genetic
to nonpossessive generational progeny.
Other utopian issues are “shareparenting” and, most poignantly, the
individual experience of “borderwalking,”
the slipping in and out of different societies, cultures, and other modes of existence (male/female, sane/mad, human/
animal). Borderwalking these binaries
empowers the female protagonist Alldera, who develops from passive slave
runner and messenger of men’s words in
Walk to messenger of fems’ freedom in
the sequels, from escapee and societal
outsider to conqueror, politician, and
ﬁnally mythic god-ﬁgure.
Charnas’s dark fantasy The Vampire
Tapestry (1980), a recasting of the vampire legend as a postmodern survival
story, continues to explore the theme
of the beast within, the similarity
between humans and animals, and the
nonsensicality of stereotyping and
binarisms. Just as Servan, one of the
main male characters in the Holdfast
series, is characterized as a slick,
malicious human predator, Charnas
depicts vampires here as our estranged
cousins, an almost extinct branch
of humankind. The anachronistic
61
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

protagonist, Dr. Weyland, has adapted
so well to the twentieth century that he
undergoes therapy. He is a respectable
professor of anthropology and the
director of a sleep lab, clearly an evolutionary deviation rather than a supernatural monster. Weyland is a very
civilized vampire, who uses the sleep
lab as a convenient means for a steady
supply of victims, whom he does not
kill, but only feeds on. When this tragic
hero is savagely victimized and persecuted, he retaliates and goes into hibernation to wait for more civilized times.
Charnas’s work has been nominated
for a variety of awards and has won
the Hugo for the short story “Boobs” in
1990, the Nebula for the novella “The
Unicorn Tapestry” in 1980 (a chapter
out of The Vampire Tapestry), the Tiptree
Retrospective Award for three books of
the Holdfast series (Walk and Motherlines in 1996 and Conqueror’s Child in
1999), and the Gaylactic Network Spectrum Award in 2003, again for the Holdfast series. In addition, her novel The
Kingdom of Kevin Malone won the Mythopoeic Fantasy Award for Children’s Literature in 1994.
Further Readings
Attebery, Brian. “Women Alone, Men Alone:
Single-Sex Utopias.” Femspec 1, no. 2
(2000): 4–15.
Barr, Marleen S. “Utopia at the End of a
Male Chauvinist Dystopian World: Suzy
McKee Charnas’s Feminist Science
Fiction.” In Women and Utopia: Critical
Interpretations, ed. Marleen Barr and Nicholas D. Smith, 43–66. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1983.
Clemente, Bill. “Apprehending Identity in
the Alldera Novels of Suzy McKee Charnas: Intersection of Feminist Science Fiction and Postcolonial Studies.” In The
Utopian Fantastic: Selected Essays from the
Twentieth International Conference on the Fantastic in the Arts, ed. Martha Bartter, 81–90.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2004.
62
...............

Volume 2: Entries

Cranny-Francis, Anne. “Man-Made Monsters: Suzy McKee Charnas’s Walk to the
End of the World as Dystopian Feminist
Science Fiction.” In Science Fiction Roots
and
Branches:
Contemporary
Critical
Approaches, ed. Rhys Garnett and R. J.
Ellis, 183–206. New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 1990.
Davis, Kathy S. “Beauty in the Beast: The
‘Feminization’ of Weyland in The Vampire
Tapestry.” Extrapolation 43, no. 1 (2002):
62–79.
King, Maureen. “Contemporary Women
Writers and the ‘New Evil’: The Vampires
of Anne Rice and Suzy McKee Charnas.”
Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts 5, no. 3
(1993): 75–84.
Mohr, Dunja M. Worlds Apart? Dualism and
Transgression in Contemporary Female Dystopias. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2005.

DUNJA M. MOHR

CHERRYH, C. J. (1942– )
C. J. Cherryh is the pen name chosen
by Carolyn Janice Cherry. She began
writing at a young age, earned a B.A. in
Latin and an M.A. in classics, and
taught high school for ten years before
undertaking a full-time career as a
writer. She won the John W. Campbell
Memorial Award for best new writer in
1977. With almost no publications to
her credit prior to her ﬁrst novel, Cherryh represents an early example of
writers of her era who circumvented
the strong science ﬁction magazine
market yet became a novelist. Her varied output includes as of 2006 more
than sixty novels, short-story collections, and works of nonﬁction, translations, and edited texts.
Writing a wide range of ﬁction, Cherryh’s work includes an ongoing science
ﬁction series that began with Foreigner
(1994) and a “high fantasy” series that
began with Fortress in the Eye of Time
(1995). Her books are strongly realistic,
the psychologically oriented prose reminiscent of Henry James. The most

China
important challenges her characters
face and overcome are internal. Cherryh frequently structures conﬂicts in
her novels between the status quo and
an unjust usurper, and her characters
often struggle to discover or maintain
their loyalty to existing authority in a
way that promotes the best outcome.
Cherryh consistently demonstrates
the ability to craft worlds that work in
a comprehensive way. Her training in
history and interest in archaeology
inform her construction of ﬁctive environments that reﬂect plausible connections
between
biology,
the
environment, and culture in ﬁelds as
varied as economics, psychology, linguistics, architecture, and the hard sciences. Although less overtly political
than some of her early contemporaries,
Cherryh is recognized for her strong
women characters, including military
leader Signy Mallory, marine Bet
Yeager, and scientist-political leaders
Arianne Emory I and II. She claims the
only overt attention she has given to
gender issues appears in the Chanur
novels, which include a subplot about a
lone male’s struggle against cultural
stereotypes for acceptance by his
female spacefaring relatives.
Cherryh’s critical reception has at
times been mixed. Her use of what she
calls “third-person intensive” narration,
coupled with elegantly complex prose
and vocabulary, has proven more challenging than some readers would prefer. Others see this complexity as
validation of Cherryh’s prose as literary
in nature. In addition, whereas her
early work showed remarkable variety,
recent reviewers note the formulaic nature of the latest texts in her series
ﬁction.
A builder of complex and rich worlds
in many genres, some of her memorable creations include the Alliance/
Union background of her company war

novels, such as Hugo Award winners
Downbelow Station (1981) and Cyteen
(1989). Foreigner (1994) is one of Cherryh’s most vivid creations. It includes
the atevi, tall, ebony-skinned humanoids who share their planet with a
human lost colony, and tells the story
of Bren Cameron, a translator who is
(initially) nearly the only human able
to competently translate the mathematically intense and biologically
impacted atevi language.
Cherryh’s main contributions to the
world of fantastic ﬁction include commercially risky early novels that highlight alien languages and experimental
prose, her rigorously developed ﬁctional backgrounds, and her use of rich
yet challenging prose in a ﬁeld that
more frequently rewards ease of reading. Entering her thirtieth year as a
published novelist in 2006, Cherryh
shows no sign of slowing her output.
Further Readings
Carmien, Edward. The Cherryh Odyssey. Holicong, PA: Borgo Press, 2004.
C. J. Cherryh’s World [online]. Http://www.
cherryh.com.
Monk, Patricia. “Gulf of Other Minds: Alien
Contact in the Science Fiction of C. J.
Cherryh.” Foundation 37 (Autumn 1986):
5–21.

EDWARD CARMIEN

CHINA
In the West, science ﬁction (SF) and fantasy have a reputation as children’s literature and popular ﬁction, both of
which dominated the assessment of
this genre until at least the later 1960s.
With subsequent increased interest in
academic circles as well as the advent
of a wave of authors who both took their
craft seriously and were taken seriously,
some Western science ﬁction has
escaped this dismissive framework. It is
unfortunately still there for Chinese SF.
63
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

There has been an active, if small,
science ﬁction community of some
twenty to thirty active SF writers in
China for at least two decades, as veriﬁed in the pages of Science Fiction World
(Ke Huan Shi Jie), the major publishing
venue for Chinese-language ﬁction in
China. But Chinese SF writers suffer
from two other barriers to success both
within the Chinese-speaking world and
outside of it. The ﬁrst is indigenous to
China and is both a political and an
economic barrier: a limitation on the
genres approved for indigenous publishers and the writing community. As
described in Qingyu Wu’s critical work
Female Rule in Chinese and English Literary
Utopias (1995):
Creative writing has been limited to
the methods of realism or romantic
revolutionary realism and Communism, the paradigm of Marxist scientiﬁc utopia, which offers the
vision of an afﬂuent society without
class, state, family, marriage or private ownership, has dwarfed all
other possible utopian dreams and
has become the only permitted
legitimate and ultimate Chinese
utopia. (11)

The second hurdle is similar to that
encountered by writers of other nonEnglish-language SF: the public taste
for SF among non-English-speaking
readers is for translations from English—a problem identiﬁed by many
European writers in Italy, France,
Germany, Spain, and Scandinavian and
Slavic countries.
Despite these barriers to success,
there is a small body of Chinese SF and
even of feminist Chinese SF, beginning
with a tradition of feminist utopias that
Wu chronicles in the English-language
Female Rule. Even then, several of the
works she mentions—while either representing strong women or arguing for
64
...............

Volume 2: Entries

the liberation of women from such
problems as footbinding and the Confucian ethical system that dictates
their “natural” second-class status—
were written by men. They nevertheless deserve mention because they
have inﬂuenced later writers.
Wu takes a historical view with ﬁve
Chinese utopian novels, two of which
are worth mentioning in the present
context. The Destiny of the Next Life
(1751), by Chen Duansheng, was written as seventeen books in poetic form
of the tanci, the book for singing that
was supposed to be uniquely suited to
women’s literary interests. In this work,
Duansheng’s heroine Meng Lijun, reincarnated from a concubine, “becomes
an avenging agent who resists a woman’s fate of marriage and reaches the
position of Zaixiang (prime minister)”
(53), thus embodying an alternative
future for women. The modern novel
Remote Country of Women (1994) brings a
woman from a “minority peoples” feminist utopia into the modern China of
the Cultural Revolution (1966–76) and
its disastrous aftermath for normal
human social relations. Although the
novel is by a male author, Bai Hua, his
sensitive use of a marginalized, femaleoriented society to reﬂect on the
destructive forces of contemporary,
politicized patriarchy creates a lens
into the dilemmas of Chinese men and
women trying to imagine past the utopian dreams that have failed.
There are a few women writers
among the small number of SF writers
in China; perhaps one in ten is female.
Yan Wu, himself a writer, critic, and
college professor in Beijing, has provided a short list that gives an idea of
the genre writers, starting in the 1980s
when Science Fiction World began publishing. The earliest is Ji Wei, originally
from Shanghai, who began in SF but
later became a mainstream writer and

China
moved to Great Britain. Her several
anthologies of SF were largely aimed at
younger readers. The 1990s brought a
much larger number of women writers
into the SF ﬁeld, including Bi Shumin, a
doctor, clinical psychologist, and famous mainstream writer living in Beijing. Her novelette Prof.’s Ring is science
ﬁction, the story of a doctor of Chinese
medicine whose ﬁngers have a special
ability to sense the feelings of the
patients. Ling Chen, now an editor of a
computer magazine, lives in Beijing
and has published a dozen SF novels,
novelettes, and short stories; her most
famous SF work is Messenger. Zhao Haihong worked as a teacher in a college
in Hangzhou and published several SF
short stories as well as translating
some works from English. Her most
recent work is a short-story collection,
Gathering in 1937 (2006). Zhang Jing is a
children’s SF writer living in Qingdao,
Shandong province, while Mi Lan, living
in Wuhan, published a story titled Red
Dancing Shoes in the 1990s that was
very popular with SF readers.
There are also a few mainstream
writers whose talent is considerable
and who have been honored within the
Chinese literary community. They
sometimes make use of recognized science-ﬁctional techniques or themes,
often to connect their contemporary
characters to the past through a mythic
dimension. One of the more famous, as
well as controversial, of these writers is
Can Xue, whose works have started to
appear in translation. Her work has
been critiqued as magical realism, and
she states that she is striving to ﬁnd a
language for the dislocation of normal
human relationships that are caused
by the extreme control exerted by the
government over the people of China.
One of her claims is that many normal
human emotions must be suppressed
due to economic and social hardship,

causing an atomization of individuals.
Her works have a dreamlike quality
where husband and wife, as in “The
Date” or “Dialogues in Paradise” (in the
anthology of that name), cannot make
human connections with each other.
She symbolizes this atomization with
many ﬁrst-person representations of
events with only an abstract causeand-effect relationship. In “Dialogues,”
for example, a series of pastiches in
nonlinear time are linked for the
female narrator only by the smell of
the tuberose. The unreality of her life is
both ﬁgured and represented by her
dislocation from usual time.
Other writers such as Hong Ying
illustrate the corruption of government
at all levels by reincarnating historical
individuals who have been destroyed
by the system into current ones, but as
a psychic, not a physical, reincarnation.
Thus her novel Peacock Cries (2003,
2004), known for its criticism of the
Yangtse River dam projects, also plays
on mythology to expose two generations of corruption.
Both of these writers use magical realism, and mythic time- and charactersymbols, in order to speak what can
hardly be spoken. In fact, some of Hong
Ying’s work is banned in China because
it is too easily read as criticism, and
Can Xue, like many of her female precursors in the Western world, is often
dismissed as being crazy, although, at
the same time, her talent as a writer is
widely acknowledged.
As both of these writers assert, and
as Wu details in Female Rule, there are
many issues of gender injustice in
China that can be addressed through
science ﬁction. Unfortunately, while
the genre is still seen as children’s literature, leaders in China have always
taken literature seriously, so the writers
cannot count on getting their message
across under the guise of a children’s
65
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

story as they could in the United States
during the 1950s and 1960s. Still, SF
readers can expect to see more of their
work in the future as more individuals
in the SF community learn the language and work to translate and make
their works available to a larger world.
Further Readings
Bai Hua. Remote Country of Women. Trans. by
Wu and T. Beebee. Honolulu: University
of Hawaii Press, 1994.
Can Xue. Dialogues in Paradise. Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press, 1989;
reprint, Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1995.
Chen Duangsheng. Jungua Yuan (The Destiny
of the Next Life). Beijing: Renmin wenhsueh, 1751; reprint, 1955.
Hong Ying. Peacock Cries: A Story Set at the
Three Gorges. Trans. Mark Smith and Henry
Zhao. New York: Marion Boyars, 2003.
Wu, Qingyun. Female Rule in Chinese and English Literary Utopias. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1995.

JANICE BOGSTAD

CHRISTINE

DE

PIZAN

AND

YAN WU

(C. 1365–C. 1431)

Christine de Pizan is one of the few
female writers of the fourteenth century
to achieve renown during her own lifetime. She has returned to popularity
among modern writers, as well, primarily due to the perceived feminist stance
of many of her works. Indeed, Christine’s
most famous work, Le Livre de la Cite des
Dames (The Book of the City of Ladies) may
even have begun a centuries-long literary
querelle des femmes, a debate echoed in
the medieval and Early Modern English
“woman question.” Despite her repeated
defenses of women, though, Christine
issued no demands for reform. Her work
is more of an apologia on women than
an assault on the structure of her own
society, and even City of Ladies cannot
truly be considered a feminist work by
contemporary deﬁnitions.
66
...............

Volume 2: Entries

Despite that qualiﬁcation, Christine’s
achievements remain remarkable. Born
in Italy, Christine’s family moved to
France when her father joined the
Court of Charles V. Like her father,
Christine depended upon royal patronage for most of her adult life. Her childhood and early adulthood were
unusually edenic; she received the intellectual training that she later
deployed as a professional writer, and
she was fortunate enough to marry for
love. When her husband died after ten
years of marriage, though, Christine
was left a virtual pauper and turned to
writing for a means of support.
Christine’s early lyric poems gained
her popularity, and in minor ways they
echo the concerns of her more mature
poetry, letters, and political works. But
it is not until her entry into the Querelle
de la Rose (Quarrel of the Rose) that Christine’s concerns over courtly love and
the treatment of women become fully
apparent. Responding to the misogynist
elements of the allegory Romance of the
Rose, Christine ﬁrst wrote against it in
1401. She followed that letter with several other works defending her own
stance against the Rose and continuing
to decry its negative portrayals of
women. In City of Ladies, written around
1404 or 1405, Christine writes her own
allegory of virtuous women.
Later in her life, Christine entered
the political arena, writing impassioned
pleas for a just government of her
adopted country. Disturbed by a France
torn apart by rival factions and left
almost anarchic in the wake of civil
war, Christine’s works encouraged
peace and unity. Toward the end of her
life, after a literary silence lasting more
than ten years, she returned to writing
with her last work, a celebration of
Joan of Arc and her victories over the
English. Biographers, dependent upon
Christine’s works for most of the details

Clarke, Arthur C.
of her life, are uncertain whether she
died before or after Joan’s own terrible
execution at English hands.
Notable as the ﬁrst woman in Europe
to write professionally, Christine de
Pizan remains signiﬁcant in our own
era for her spirited defense of women
and her engagement in the varied controversies of her time. If not truly a
feminist, she is nonetheless a signiﬁcant writer in the literary canon.
See also: “The Middle Ages” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Altmann, Barbara K., ed. Christine de Pizan:
A Casebook. New York: Routledge, 2003.
Blumenfeld-Kosinski, Renate, ed. The
Selected Writings of Christine de Pizan. New
York: Norton, 1997.
Brabant, Margaret, ed. Politics, Gender, and
Genre: The Political Thought of Christine de
Pizan. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1992.
Holderness, Julia Simms. “Feminism and
the Fall: Boccaccio, Christine de Pizan,
.” Essays in Medieval Studand Louise Labe
ies 21 (2004): 97–108.
Richards, Earl Jeffrey. “Christine de Pizan.”
In Literature of the French and Occitan Middle
Ages: Eleventh to Fifteenth Centuries, ed.
Deborah M. Sinnreich-Levi and Ian S.
Laurie. Detroit: Gale, 1999.

WINTER ELLIOTT

CLARKE, ARTHUR C.

(1917–2008)

Arthur C. Clarke is an award-winning
British science ﬁction (SF) author who
long made his home in Sri Lanka. He
was one of the most celebrated science
ﬁction writers of the twentieth century,
known for his inspiring visions of the
future and hard extrapolation. With
more than thirty science ﬁction novels
and numerous short stories to his
credit, he is one of the most widely read
SF writers. Even though one of the common criticisms against his ﬁction writings concerns the lack of depth in his
characterization, his female characters

make an interesting conglomeration of
intelligent, attractive, and self-driven
women. In contrast to the stereotypical
female characters that the space
operas of the early twentieth century
exhibited, Clarke’s female characters
are neither treated as sex symbols nor
are portrayed as the marginalized
“other” sex. They are independent,
assertive, nonmanipulative women,
comfortable with their sexuality and
feminine charm. They carry themselves
with dignity and mostly share an equal
footing with their male counterparts.
The characters of Dr. Laura Ernst and
Ruby Barnes in Rendezvous with Rama
(1972), as well as Sasha, Tanya, and
Zenia in 2010: Odyssey Two (1982), are
examples. These women are experts in
their chosen ﬁelds and are as excited
and committed as are the men aboard
the spaceships. In 3001: Final Odyssey
(1996), Clarke makes the female characters of the third millennium more vocal;
they are seen to be freely airing their
views on all matters, including sex.
While Indra refers to circumcision that
was being followed in the twenty-ﬁrst
century as “genital mutilation” that she
considers “atrocious,” Aurora, the
woman protagonist Frank Poole meets
while ﬂying, rejects him because he is
“mutilated.” Mirissa in Songs of Distant
Earth (1986) is the most intelligent person of her land, Thalassa. Though she is
married to Brant, the plot has her falling
in love with the spacefarer Loren. Her
decision to be with Loren for a while and
mother his child is indicative of Clarke’s
commitment to delineate independent
women. In Imperial Earth (1976), he
speaks of another category of women
referred to as “Mothers” who are
involved in the technology of cloning.
Female characters in Clarke’s science
ﬁction seem to be sexually liberated
and know how to exercise their right to
choose. They enjoy a freedom that only
67
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

a society which treats both the sexes as
equal can offer. Clarke’s ﬁctional worlds
are often futuristic, and the cultures attribute maturity to men and women
who view the world not through the
prism of sexual bias but with a clearsightedness that ﬁts Clarke’s vision of
an evolved society.
Further Readings
Arthur C. Clarke Foundation [online].
Http://www.clarkefoundation.org.
Hollow, John. Against the Night, the Stars: The
Science Fiction of Arthur C. Clarke. London:
Harcourt, 1983.
Reid, Robin Anne. Arthur C. Clarke: A Critical
Companion. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 1997.

GEETHA B.

CLAYTON, [PATRICIA] JO

(1939–1998)

Jo Clayton is an American author of science ﬁction (SF) and fantasy who began
publishing her novels in 1977, during
what is considered by Marleen Barr
and other scholars to be the golden age
of feminist science ﬁction. More than
a million copies of Clayton’s thirty-ﬁve
books have sold worldwide. Her background included a childhood of storytelling, perhaps as a result of her being
named in part for the character of Jo
March in Little Women. She spent signiﬁcant time in academia in both student
and teacher roles, and even a brief period at a teaching convent, leaving
before taking ﬁnal vows.
Due to the timing of her ﬁrst publication, Clayton was able to enjoy the relative freedom of creating a strong female
protagonist who could stand alongside
those of contemporaries such as C. J.
Cherryh and Andre Norton. Aleytys,
the protagonist of the nine-novel Diadem Saga, is the involuntary bearer of
the Diadem, an ancient artifact that
bonds itself inseparably to its wearer,
enhancing psi powers and entrapping
68
...............

Volume 2: Entries

the bearer’s soul upon death. Aleytys
and her comrades bound in the Diadem
embody many traditional female archetypes, including Mother, Maiden, Crone,
and even Warrior.
Although powerful, self-reliant heroines who triumph over barriers to
their success typify Clayton’s novels,
her ﬁction is characterized by an
awareness of multicultural concerns as
well. The novels in the Diadem Saga, in
particular, describe the adventures of
fully realized characters of different
sexes, sexualities, and species. Aleytys
has several diverse relationships over
the decades-long search for her
mother. Clayton even explored borderline taboo subjects, such as underage
sexuality, through Shadith, a woman
trapped in the Diadem for centuries,
released into the body of an adolescent
in one of the several Diadem subseries.
Clayton’s science ﬁction also predicted
several contemporary technological
devices, including a security tracking
bracelet in the Shadow novels.
Clayton is often praised her for
appealing and three-dimensional heroines, the originality of her characterizations, the gripping action and
adventure of her plots, and her readable prose. On the other hand, she has
been criticized for writing novels that
are too intricate and complex, developing too many subplots and characters,
and having insufﬁcient or unsatisfying
endings to both novels and series.
Clayton was an early participant in
the speculative ﬁction community on
the Internet through GEnie. She was
diagnosed with multiple myeloma, a
bone marrow cancer, in 1996, and
remained an active part of the electronic community through her hospitalization until her death. The Oregon
SF Emergency Fund, established as the
Clayton Memorial Medical Fund,
remains active. Upon her death,

Cloning
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa entered a
tribute to her into the Congressional
Record.
Further Readings
Jo Clayton: The Ofﬁcial Home Page [online].
http://joclayton.deepgenre.com.

MARYELIZABETH HART

AND

ALEXIS HART

CLONING
The fantasy of human cloning, or
related processes such as parthenogenesis (a form of reproduction in which the
egg develops into an individual without
being fertilized), has found imaginative
expression in ﬁctional texts throughout
the ages. This work has provided representations of the coded sexual politics
of creation myths, reproductive scenarios, and utopian visions of gender egalitarianism and autonomy, even if at the
price of removing the opposite sex.
Examples of cloning range from the
story of the conception of the Virgin
Mary to the women-only worlds of, for
instance, Mary E. Bradley Lane’s Mizora
(1890), Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Herland (1915), Joana Russ’s utopian Whileaway in The Female Man (1975), and
James Tiptree Jr.’s “Houston, Houston,
Do You Read?” (1976). Separatist communities, which these women-only societies represent—with the exception of
Herland, where they are receptive to
men provided the latter accept their
rules—are based on a powerful wish for
independence from men and can be
regarded as a forceful strategic political
gesture toward that self-sufﬁciency and
self-government. Other relevant examples of societies of women where they
reproduce without men are Sally Miller
Gearheart’s The Wanderground (1976),
Suzy McKee Charnas’s Motherlines
(1978) and Furies (1994), Joan Slonczewski’s A Door into Ocean (1986), and David
Brin’s Glory Season (1993).

The instances of narratives explicitly
about cloning written by women or featuring cloned women are plentiful,
including Aldous Huxley’s Brave New
World (1932), but they reach a peak in
the 1970s, coinciding with the rise of
Second Wave feminism. Thought-provoking narratives dealing with human
cloning and its multiple and far-reaching ramiﬁcations—in terms of sexual
politics, maternal genealogies, and a
new psychological map for society—
include Ursula K. Le Guin’s “Nine
Lives” (1969), Naomi Mitchison’s Solution Three (1975), Pamela Sargent’s
Cloned Lives (1976), Kate Wilhelm’s
Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang (1976),
Joan D. Vinge’s The Snow Queen (1980),
C. J. Cherryh’s Cyteen (1988), and Fay
Weldon’s The Cloning of Joanna May
(1989). Eva Hoffman’s The Secret: A Fable
for Our Time (2001) concerns a woman
who decides to have a cloned daughter,
and Mitchison’s “Mary and Joe” (1962)
also deals with a mother and cloned
daughter.
In philosophical terms, these narratives deconstruct the long-standing patriarchal tradition that considers
woman as the “Other” of man, a narrative to which Simone de Beauvoir so
forcefully called attention in The Second
Sex (1949). From a psychological point
of view, in turn, the narratives signal
the end of the Oedipus Complex, suggest alternative family conﬁgurations,
and remind us of the necessity to
reﬂect on the bioethics of these potential social players. The idea of human
cloning seems to hold a particular fascination for women writers, who see in
it a way of circumventing a patriarchal
attitude toward science, women’s
bodies, and power hierarchies, providing the possibility of separating women’s reproductive capacities from male
input and thus bringing about Shulamith Firestone’s vision that the
69
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

reproduction of the species by one
sex for the beneﬁt of both would be
replaced by (at least the option of)
artiﬁcial
reproduction:
children
would be born to both sexes equally,
or independently of either, however
one chooses to look at it. … The tyranny of the biological family would
be broken. (Dialectic of Sex, 11)

In addition, cloning could offer gay
and lesbian couples the chance to have
their own biological children, a vision
ﬁctionally dramatized in Leona Gom’s
The Y Chromosome (1993) and Nicola
Grifﬁth’s Ammonite (2002). Indeed, the
advent of human cloning might potentially lead to greater equality between
women and men in the social and family arenas, especially if coupled with
the introduction of artiﬁcial wombs,
which would mean that women would
be autonomous from men in terms of
reproduction, a scenario that would
effectively amount to the fulﬁllment of
the old dream of parthenogenesis.
Cloning and parthenogenesis, on the
other hand, could also spell male procreative autonomy from women, with
worrying consequences in both cases.
Even therapeutic cloning could result
in women’s exploitation, since many
eggs would be necessary to carry out
the cloning procedure.
See also: Feminist Science Fiction.
Further Readings
Attebery, Brian. “Women Alone, Men Alone:
Single-Sex Utopias.” Femspec 1, no. 2
(2000): 4–15.
Corea, Gena, ed. Man-Made Women: How New
Reproductive Technologies Affect Women. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985.
Ferreira, Maria Aline. I Am the Other: Literary
Negotiations of Human Cloning. Westport,
CT: Praeger, 2005.
Firestone, Shulamith. The Dialectic of Sex: The
Case for Feminist Revolution. New York:
Bantam Books, 1972.
70
...............

Volume 2: Entries

Fitting, Peter. “So We All Became Mothers:
New Roles for Men in Recent Utopian
Fiction.” Science Fiction Studies 12, no. 2
(1985): 156–83.
Levick, Stephen E. Clone Being: Exploring the
Psychological and Social Dimensions. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2004.
Nussbaum, Martha C., and Cass R. Sunstein, eds. Clones and Clones: Facts and Fantasies about Human Cloning. New York: W.
W. Norton, 1998.
Williams, Lynn. “Separatist Fantasies, 1690–
1997: An Annotated Bibliography.” Femspec 1, no. 2 (2000): 30–42.

MARIA ALINE SEABRA FERREIRA

COLERIDGE, SARA

(1802–1852)

Sara Coleridge was a British author
best known for Phantasmion (1837), the
ﬁrst fantasy novel for children. Phantasmion recounts the adventures of a
young orphan, Prince Phantasmion,
who is given miraculous powers by his
fairy guardian Potentilla. She materializes out of a pomegranate tree and
grants him the powers of insects, such
as a spider’s sucker-feet, grasshopper
legs, butterﬂy wings, and a warrior
ant’s strength. Phantasmion uses his
powers to journey to neighboring kingdoms, where he becomes embroiled in
political intrigues, discovers the secret
history of his parents’ marriage and his
father’s treachery, and falls in love with
the beautiful young maiden Iarine. All
ends well, and when Phantasmion
returns home, he returns as a strong,
even militaristic, national leader.
Although the novel was never widely
known, it was well received by critics,
who appreciated its poetic language
and the many poems embedded
throughout the narrative.
Coleridge was a lifelong sufferer of
“nervousness,” a somewhat unspeciﬁc
nineteenth-century term for a physical
and emotional disorder, and she took
laudanum, an opium derivative, to

Colonization
alleviate its symptoms. She soon
became addicted. Her father, poet and
philosopher Samuel Taylor Coleridge,
had been an opium addict, and Coleridge’s writings often questioned if a
predilection for opium use and nervousness was inherited. Phantasmion was
written during a period of Sara Coleridge’s life when her opium intake was
extreme and she was suffering from an
emotional breakdown. Because Phantasmion contains repeated motifs of intoxicating potions, ruby-colored liquors,
and ﬂowers that cause sleep or paralysis, scholars have interpreted the work
as a thinly veiled exploration of the
effects of opiate use and the struggle
for self-mastery over bodily cravings.
As the daughter of Samuel Taylor
Coleridge and an author in her own
right, Sara Coleridge’s life story has
interested feminist scholars. She
barely knew her father, for he abandoned his family when she was very
young. However, after his death in
1834, she dedicated the rest of her life
to recuperating his works for posterity.
Coleridge (initially in conjunction with
her husband and ﬁrst cousin Henry
Nelson Coleridge) collected, edited, and
then published almost all of her
father’s miscellaneous writings in
scholarly editions. Most of Coleridge’s
literary output was in the ﬁeld of scholarly editing and translation, but she did
write creative works for children. In
addition to Phantasmion, these include
several volumes of unpublished poetry
and the popular poetry collection Pretty
Lessons in Verse (1834), from which
“January Brings the Snow” is frequently
reprinted in nursery rhyme books.
Although scholars such as Virginia
Woolf and Bradford Mudge Keyes have
suggested that her devotion to her
father’s memory stiﬂed her own creative output, Pretty Lessons in Verse and
Phantasmion are carefully crafted

children’s books, and selections from
both works are still in print.
See also: “The Creation of Literature for the
Young” (vol. 1); “Nineteenth-Century Fiction”
(vol. 1); “Nineteenth-Century Poetry” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Mudge, Bradford Keyes. Sara Coleridge: A Victorian Daughter. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989.
Ruwe, Donelle. “Opium Addictions and
Meta-Physicians: Sara Coleridge’s Biographia Literaria.” In Nervous Reactions: Victorian Recollections of Romanticism, ed. Julie
Wright and Joel Faﬂak, 229–51. Albany:
State University of New York Press, 2004.
Woolf, Virginia. Death of the Moth, and Other
Essays. New York: Harcourt, 1970.

DONELLE RUWE

COLONIZATION
Colonization, a recurrent theme in science ﬁction (SF) and fantasy, can be
broadly understood as the act of establishing settlements on another territory, uninhabited or inhabited. Thus, a
colony is a territory under the political
control of a parent or “metropolitan”
state. Although colonization has been a
repeated and long-standing characteristic of human history, it has a particularly
important
meaning
and
signiﬁcance in terms of the particular
form of empire-building undertaken by
European countries over the past ﬁve
centuries. Especially during the nineteenth century, colonization was presented as being a vital part of a
laudable “civilizing” mission, centered
around the development of “savage” or
“barbaric” populations. However, the
rhetoric of progress disguised the often
violent and economically exploitative
actualities
of
European
colonial
endeavors: the conquest and control of
land was synonymous with the conquest and control of people and material resources.
71
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

A genre very much concerned with
ideas about exploration, expansion,
and territory, science ﬁction is replete
with references to and images associated with colonization, from the representation of the cannibalistic Morlocks
in H. G. Wells’s The Time Machine (1895)
to the off-world colonies in Philip K.
Dick’s Do Androids Dream of Electric
Sheep? (1968) and the Fiorina 161 penal
colony in David Fincher’s Alien3 (1992).
In addition to futuristic visions and allegorical representations of colonial
encounters between humans and aliens, the science ﬁction device of time
travel has been used to explore the history of colonization and enslavement.
Octavia Butler deploys this device in
her novel Kindred (1979), in which an
African-American woman, Dana, travels back in time to a plantation in pre–
Civil War Maryland to save the life of
her white ancestor. Feminist writers
have been particularly concerned to
explore the conjunction of colonial and
gender oppression, examining the
forms of double colonization experienced by women subjected to both colonial and patriarchal oppression.
Ursula K. Le Guin’s collection of novellas Four Ways to Forgiveness (1995) engages
with this dual concern in its depiction of
the planet Werel and the uprising of its
colony Yeowe, while Nalo Hopkinson’s
novel Midnight Robber (2000) draws on
Caribbean mythology to reconceptualize
technological possibilities from the perspective of an African diasporic culture.
Hopkinson’s representation of the artiﬁcial intelligence network Granny Nanny
playfully references the revolutionary
and matriarchal ﬁgure Nanny of the
Maroons and nanotechnology. Such postcolonial science ﬁction brings together
the explorations of colonial histories and
legacies central to postcolonial theory
and the futuristic visions and reimaginings of fantasy writing.
72
...............

Volume 2: Entries

See also: “Intersections of Race and Gender”
(vol. 1); “Nineteenth-Century Fiction” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Grifﬁths, and Helen
Tifﬁn. The Empire Writes Back: Theory and
Practice in Post-colonial Literatures. 2nd ed.
London: Routledge, 2002.
Hopkinson, Nalo, and Uppinder Mehan, eds.
So Long Been Dreaming: Postcolonial Science
Fiction and Fantasy. Vancouver: Arsenal
Pulp Press, 2004.
Weldes, Jutta, ed. To Seek Out New Worlds:
Exploring Links between Science Fiction and
World Politics. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.

REBECCA MUNFORD

COMEDIC SCIENCE FICTION
AND FANTASY
Many writers of science ﬁction (SF) and
fantasy employ humorous anecdotes,
plot points, or outright jokes in their
books without making the humor the
focus of the work. However, with the
advent of works such as Henry Kuttner’s serials for Thrilling Wonder Stories
in the late 1930s, L. Sprague de Camp
and Fletcher Pratt’s Compleat Enchanter
in the 1940s and 1950s, some of Fritz
Leiber’s stories about Fafhrd and the
Grey Mouser at around the same time,
and singleton novels such as James
Schmidt’s The Witches of Karres (published as a novelette in 1949) and
Robert A. Heinlein’s Have Space Suit—
Will Travel (1958), there began to be a
recognizable subgenre of comedic SF
and fantasy.
Over time, humorous fantasy and
science ﬁction have broken up into several categories. First, there are works
which are outright and direct parodies
of other speciﬁc books, television
shows, or genres, such as National
Lampoon’s Bored of the Rings (1969) or
the 2002 Barry Trotter and the Unauthorized Parody. These are written almost

Comedic Science Fiction and Fantasy
entirely by groups of men, with one notable exception: Diana Wynne Jones’s
The Tough Guide to Fantasyland (1996),
which is both a riff on the standardissue medieval-feudal Dungeons-andDragons-like fantasy novel and a parody of a popular European series of
travel books. Generally, the life span of
this kind of work is linked closely to
the popularity of the work or genre that
inspired it; highly speciﬁc parodies may
be brieﬂy and intensely popular but
tend to fade quickly, whereas works of
more general parody such as Jones’s
have an intrinsically longer shelf life.
Second, there are works that are not
direct parodies but are set in universes
which allow for the inclusion of multiple references and parodies either
around the edges or occasionally centrally. This area is where Terry Pratchett, Douglas Adams, Jasper Fforde, Piers
Anthony, Robert Asprin, and Tom Holt,
among others, work and is the most
popular mode for writers whose output
is entirely or almost entirely comedic.
Very few women have devoted their
careers to speculative comedy to the
extent that the male writers previously
listed have, but there are several. One
notable example is Esther Friesner,
whose trilogy of novels including Gnome
Man’s Land (1991), Harpy High (1991),
and Unicorn U. (1992) are teen-comedymeets-magic romps. She also edits the
Chicks in Chainmail series of anthologies,
which are sword-and-sorcery spoofs.
Other examples include Jody Lynn Nye,
who wrote an elves-in-the-universitylibrary trilogy, among other works, and
Connie Willis, whose To Say Nothing of
the Dog (1997) is a send-up of Victorian
literature, time-travel fantasy, and Jerome K. Jerome’s humor classic Three
Men in a Boat (1889). The Jane Austen–
like Cecelia and Kate series, beginning
with Sorcery and Cecelia; or, The Enchanted
Chocolate Pot (1988), by Caroline

Stevermer and Patricia C. Wrede also
ﬁts into this category.
Lastly, there are works of speculative
comedy that are not intended to be
parodies or references of any sort. Connie Willis’s Bellwether (1996) is a notable
example of this kind of work, as are
portions of Lois McMaster Bujold’s
Vorkosigan series. Many books of this
type wind up labeled as young adult literature, including most of the work of
Diana Wynne Jones, the work of Ysabeau Wilce, and Tanith Lee’s Black Unicorn (1989).
As mentioned previously, it is rare for
women to make comedic speculative
works the central work of their careers.
In fact, the rarity of women writing humorous fantasy and SF can be shown
by an examination of the tables of contents of several short-story collections:
The Mammoth Book of New Comic Fantasy
contains twenty-nine male contributors
and ﬁve female ones, and The Mammoth
Book of Awesome Comic Fantasy contains
twenty-seven male contributors and
ﬁve female contributors, of which one
(Friesner) is represented twice. The
Mammoth Book of Seriously Comic Fantasy
has twenty-eight male contributors
and eight women. This ratio is fairly
consistent, especially since it should be
noted that, although these anthologies
share the same editor and publisher,
the Mammoth series of anthologies is
the only regularly printed series of
comic speculative short story anthologies now extant, and no similar series
exists for science ﬁction.
In addition, the subcategories of dark
or ironic humor, postmodernist and
metaﬁctional humor, and speciﬁcally
political humor, all of which are already rare in speculative humor, are
even scarcer when written by women.
Angela Carter’s short ﬁction contains a
streak of dark comedy, as does Joanna
Russ’s work; Carter also dabbled in
73
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

metaﬁctional
deconstruction
and
experimentation
in
pieces
like
“Overture and Incidental Music for A
Midsummer Night’s Dream,” and Russ’s
s from Outer Space”
short story “Cliche
is a speciﬁcally feminist look at the
process of SF editing and story selection. However, the comic novel that is
most notable for explicitly examining
feminism and the position of women in
a fantasy environment is Terry Pratchett’s Equal Rites (1987). Pratchett’s work
has often had well-rounded female
protagonists and subsidiary characters,
and Equal Rites, written early in his career, is a rare example of a political
comedy that does not entirely fail at either politics or comedy.
Further Readings
Ashley, Mike, ed. The Mammoth Book of Seriously Comic Fantasy. New York: Carroll &
Graf, 1999.
———. The Mammoth Book of Awesome Comic
Fantasy. New York: Carroll & Graf, 2001.
———. The Mammoth Book of New Comic Fantasy. New York: Carroll & Graf, 2005.

LILA GARROTT-WEJKSNORA

CONSTANTINE, STORM (1956– )
Whether working in short or long
forms, British dark fantasy writer
Storm Constantine’s work demonstrates her distinctive vision, one which
focuses on marginalized characters
who exist on the fringes of society,
incorporates magical and mythic elements, and includes sex and sexuality,
often neither heterosexual nor heteronormative, that is often the catalyst for
or provides access to the fantastic and
transformative.
Constantine is best known for her
Wraeththu trilogy: The Enchantments
of Flesh and Spirit (1987), Bewitchments of
Love and Hate (1988), and Fulﬁllments of
Fate and Desire (1989), which were ﬁrst
published individually and then in an
74
...............

Volume 2: Entries

omnibus edition called simply Wraeththu (1993). The novels are set in a world
where the human race is in decline
and a new race of androgynous hermaphrodites, the Wraeththu, has risen
to power. The Wraeththu have the ability to infect humans with their blood, a
process called inception that begins to
change the humans to Wraeththu. The
change is sealed through an act of sexual union, aruna, with another Wraeththu. Constantine revisited the world of
the Wraeththu, expanding its cosmology, in her Wraeththu Histories trilogy:
The Wraiths of Will and Pleasure (2003),
The Shades of Time and Memory (2004),
and The Ghosts of Blood and Innocence
(2005).
In addition to her Wraeththu novels,
Constantine produced several other
popular series. She moved from the
secondary-world
fantasy
of
the
Wraeththu to dark urban fantasy in
her Grigori trilogy: Stalking Tender Prey
(1998), Scenting Hallowed Blood (1999),
and Stealing Sacred Fire (2001). The Grigori series also features characters that
are offshoots of humanity, in this case
fallen angels who mated with mortal
women to produce the Nephilim.
Constantine’s contribution to the
epic fantasy genre is her Magravandias
trilogy: Sea Dragon’s Heir (2000), The
Crown of Silence (2001), and The Way of
Light (2002). This series focuses on the
saga of the royal Palindrake family and
blends the tropes of the epic fantasy
genre with a decidedly dark gothic sensibility and sexuality.
Constantine’s short ﬁction can be
found in several collections. The Oracle
Lips (1999) features some stories from
her Wraeththu, Grigori, and Magravandias Chronicles sagas, as does The Thorn
Boy, and Other Dreams of Dark Desire
(2002).
While she is best known for her ﬁction, Constantine has also released

Cosplay
several nonﬁction books on occult
topics. She is one of the founders of Visionary Tongue (1996), a small-press
magazine with both print and electronic incarnations. The magazine,
inspired by Constantine’s work teaching
creative-writing
classes,
was
intended to nurture and promote new
talent. In 2003, she launched Immanion Press, where she is the managing
editor and commissioning director.
While she began the press in order to
keep her back-catalogued novels in
print and available to her readers, it
now provides similar services for other
writers as well as soliciting submissions
from and publishing new and aspiring
writers.
Further Readings
Immanion Press [online]. Http://www.
immanion-press.com.
Inception [online]. Http://www.inceptionmagazine.com.
Storm Constantine: Dreams of Dark Angels
[online].
Http://www.stormconstantine.
com.
Wraeththu Companion [online]. Http://
www.metrogirl.com/wcompanion.

BARBARA LYNN LUCAS

COSPLAY
Cosplay refers to the practice of dressing and performing as a favorite character from popular culture media. The
term cosplay, a portmanteau of costume
and play, came into use during the
1980s among fans of Japanese graphic
stories
(manga)
and
animations
(anime) that had been disseminated via
mass media to worldwide audiences.
Eventually the term came to be applied
to masquerades and performances of
characters from Euro-American mediaconveyed fantasies and science ﬁctions,
such as characters from the Star Trek
television series, Star Wars movies, or
more recent Harry Potter narratives.

Also, cosplayers create and masquerade as original characters of a general
type, such as anthropomorphic creatures or furries, fairies, vampires,
schoolgirls, or little girls in erotic costumes (gothic Lolitas) without a speciﬁc character reference. Although
there are precedents for period dress
play, as, for example, in the Civil War
battle enactments or Renaissance festivals of North America, cosplay differs
in that the masqueraded persona represents not historical reality but a ﬁctional character imaged in ahistorical
time and space.
Interest in cosplay generally begins
in early to mid-adolescence among
young people who share common fan
interests in a particular media narrative or expression of popular culture,
and it may continue to be practiced
well into adulthood. Private cosplay
masquerades take place among parties
of friends or members of local fan
clubs. Occasionally, nightclubs and
amusement parks will cater to cosplay
crowds by offering semiprivate environments for cosplay.
The most spectacular displays of
cosplay, however, occur at huge public
events such as manga, anime, science
ﬁction, fantasy, or gaming conventions.
Amateurs cosplay as a way of expressing affection for a favorite character,
meeting other fans and cosplayers,
practicing poses, and enjoying the
attention of photographers. Experienced cosplayers may enter formal costume and performance competitions,
which are major features of fan conventions, with awards given at several
levels of competence for excellently
crafted costumes or performances.
Highest accolades go to those who create elaborate costumes entirely by
hand. These events are quite competitive. Contestants often begin planning
well
ahead
of
time,
spending
75
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

thousands of dollars and hours creating costumes, and practicing poses,
monologues, or skits. Contest winners
can expect to receive small gifts or
monetary prizes, but these are rarely
sufﬁcient to offset the cost of the costumes created for the events. The true
satisfaction comes from having created
excellently crafted costumes and
receiving praise, recognition, and elevated status within fan communities.
Cosplayers report many reasons for
their interests in this creative activity,
such as the pleasure of dressing up and
pretending to be someone else, the
obsessive desire to experience the
“soul” or gestalt of a beloved ﬁctive,
the craving for praise and recognition,
the satisfaction of creative expression,
or the fulﬁlled sense of belonging to a
community of persons with similar
interests. There is a common misconception about those who engage in
these activities, however, that can be
readily dismissed: that cosplayers tend
to be misﬁts, socially inept or immature individuals who lack realistic goals
or opportunities for successful careers
in the real world. In fact, the knowledge, skills, and social interactions
required of cosplay participation
demand intelligence, interdisciplinary
knowledge, imagination, and developed
talents in one or several of the creative
arts. Cosplay activities stimulate interest in history and culture and encourage a range of complex cognitive and
social abilities, including analytical and
predictive reasoning, problem solving,
perseverance, social ﬂexibility, tolerance for others, skills of negotiation,
and ability to work collaboratively toward a common goal.
The hobby appeals equally to adolescent and young adult women and men,
although some fandom genres attract
more participants of one gender than
another. For example, male cosplayers
76
...............

Volume 2: Entries

are less likely to cosplay delicately featured characters and more likely to
portray characters from stories featuring robots, American comic heroes like
Batman or Superman, or characters
from male-dominated epics like J. R. R.
Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings (1954–55).
The physical demands of a particular
character place limitations on what
might be convincingly recreated in
terms of physique or characteristic features; nevertheless, cosplayers masquerade as an amazingly wide variety
of male and female characters, and it
is not unusual to ﬁnd representations
of opposite-sex personas. In fact, the
popularity of cross-dress cosplay
(females dressing as male characters or
vice versa) among heterosexual youths
has attracted the attention of social
and cultural researchers. Antonia Levi
in Samurai from Outer Space (1996) suggests that the phenomenon may be
traced to manga and anime’s story-line
roots in ancient Shinto folktales of sexually ambiguous gods, warriors, and
other heroes or to more recent inﬂuences of all-male Kabuki and all-female
Takarazuki theaters. Many cosplayers
downplay concerns regarding sexual
identity and cross-dressing by describing the beneﬁts of experiencing life
from different points of view. Nevertheless, Western academics ponder implications of this socio-aesthetic fad on
the self and social identities of youths.
Detractors argue that cosplay is a
self-indulgent hobby that may trigger
obsessive consumerist behaviors. The
time and expense required of cosplay
participation suggests an upper-middle-class demographic with disposable
income and leisure time. The extravagances of cosplay increase the distinctions between the social and cultural
worlds of upper-middle and lower
social classes. Cosplayers’ aesthetic
preferences for slender androgynous

Cottington, Lady
bodies, pale skin, and delicate features
may inadvertently promote racial hierarchies. Casually cross-dressed representations challenge social taboos and
threaten the status quo of mainstream
standards regarding gender and sexual
identity.
The positive effects of cosplay, on the
other hand, may include a revival of
traditional needlework and craft-making skills. The concept of transforming
a two-dimensional image of a manga,
anime, or other imagined character
into three-dimensional form is a
spatial challenge. The accoutrements
of cosplay require the knowledge and
advice of seamstresses, milliners, wigmakers, cosmetologists, shoemakers,
weapon makers, and others with skills
of couture, stagecraft, and theater. Ultimately, the international popularity of
cosplay and signiﬁcant number of
cosplayers who are being inspired to
pursue careers in the fashion, craftmaking, theatrical special effects, and
the performance arts may inﬂuence
social ideals and cultural aesthetics
well into the twenty-ﬁrst century.
See also: “Anime and Manga” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
 Fan
Chen, Jin-shiow. “The Comic/Anime
Culture in Taiwan: With Focus on Adolescent’s Experience.” Journal of Social Theory
in Art Education 23 (2003): 89–103.
Levi, Antonia. Samurai from Outer Space:
Understanding Japanese Animation. Chicago:
Open Court Press, 1996.
Manifold, Marjorie Cohee. “Imaged Voices,
Envisioned Landscapes: Storylines of Information-Age Girls and Young Women.”
Journal for Social Theory in Art Education 24
(2004): 234–56.
———. “Life as Theater, Theater as Life:
Spontaneous Expressions of InformationAge Youth.” Journal of Cultural Research in
Art Education 23 (2005): 1–16.

MARJORIE COHEE MANIFOLD

COTTINGTON, LADY
Lady Angelica Cottington is a creation
of illustrator Brian Froud and writer
Terry Jones. First appearing in Lady Cottington’s Pressed Fairy Book in 1994, she
is the central character of both it and
Lady Cottington’s Pressed Fairy Letters
(2005). The Fairy Book appears in the
manner of personal pressed ﬂower collections and wildlife-spotting books, as
Angelica, sorely taunted by fairies that
appear only to her, begins snapping the
pages of her book closed and squashing
the fairies between the pages. She then
annotates the resultant images, often
alongside commentary on her daily life.
Subsequent works in the series build
on this motif, adding epistolary, photographic, tactile, and even olfactory
elements.
Not simply a clever take on scrapbook collections, a narrative unfolds
within and between the various notes,
letters, and works, which—as of this
writing—includes the Fairy Book (both
the 1994 original and an updated and
expanded “103=4 Anniversary Edition”
in 2005), Fairy Letters, Lady Cottington’s
Fairy Album (2002), and Strange Stains
and Mysterious Smells: Quentin Cottington’s Journal of Faery Research (1996). Fairy
Letters is especially notable in this
respect as it builds on the pattern
established by the Fairy Book; the
squashed fairies and annotations are
joined by correspondence between
Angelica and a number of historical
and literary ﬁgures, including Sir
Arthur Conan Doyle, Beatrix Potter,
Annie Oakley, and Rudyard Kipling,
thus making this work the most extratextual of Froud and Jones’s Cottington
series.
While the Fairy Book and Fairy Letters
are presented as penned by Angelica
Cottington, the other books in the series
are by different members of the
77
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Cottington family, whose separate narratives expand on and ﬁll in missing
details in Angelica’s own story. The
Fairy Album is the creation of Angelica’s
missing older sister, Euphemia, while
Strange Stains is by Quentin, Angelica’s
institutionalized twin brother. As
Strange Stains is the second book in the
series, it expands on the Fairy Book format with a more rounded sensory
focus, adding to the catalogue of fairies
in stain and smell form. It is, however,
solely concerned with Quentin; the
Fairy Album, on the other hand, contains Euphemia’s photographs and journal entries, accompanied by Angelica’s
annotations and more pressed fairies,
thus creating a layered narrative
between the two sisters.
Additionally, the ﬁctional Lady Cottington and her encounters with fairies
invoke the real case of the Cottingley
Fairies, as represented in ﬁve photographs taken by Frances Grifﬁths and
Elsie Wright beginning in 1917 in Cottingley, England. The photographs were a
source of great controversy for a number
of years as, until the late 1980s, the cousins alternately evaded answering questions and insisted that they were true
representations of the fairies that lived at
the bottom of Wright’s garden. Conan
Doyle became a staunch supporter of the
legitimacy of the photographs; thus his
appearance as Angelica’s correspondent
in Lady Cottington’s Pressed Fairy Letters
brings the real and ﬁctional worlds full
circle, simulating authenticity within
Froud and Jones’s work.
See also: Britain; Fairy Tales and Folklore.
Further Readings
Cooper, Joe. The Case of the Cottingley Fairies.
Eureka, CA: Firebird, 1998.
Silver, Carole G. Strange and Secret Peoples:
Fairies and Victorian Consciousness. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2000.

EDEN LEE LACKNER
78
...............

Volume 2: Entries

CYBERBODIES, FEMALE
Cyberbodies can be deﬁned as bodies
that are produced through, or imagined
in, digital media or cyberspace. They
include game avatars, virtual personas,
synthespians, animations, and ﬁgures
of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) or artiﬁcial
life (alife). Cyberbodies appear in computer game spaces, virtual reality scenarios, digital art installations, AI and
alife programming, ﬁlm, novels, and
multiple Internet applications. The
most commonly interchangeable term
is avatar, and one of the most famous
female game avatars is Lara Croft. The
Lara Croft character ﬁrst appeared in
the Tomb Raider (1996) game series,
which originated in Britain for the
PlayStation and Sega Saturn consoles.
Male programmers, writers, graphic
artists, and large commercial technology and communications companies
have
predominantly
constructed
female cyberbodies as young, white,
sexualized females. However, female
cyberbodies have also been signiﬁcant
in feminist science ﬁction (SF) novels
such as Melissa Scott’s Trouble and Her
Friends (1995) and Dreaming Metal
(1997), Pat Cadigan’s Synners (2001),
and Caitlin Sullivan and Kate Bornstein’s Nearly Roadkill (1997). Female
cyberbodies have also appeared in visual art installations, such as Victoria
Vesna’s Bodies Incorporated (1996), and in
feminist SF ﬁlm.
In feminist SF, female cyberbodies
are used to represent and emphasize
the blurring of boundaries between
machines and bodies, but they are also
used to destabilize and redeﬁne other
binary categories such as natural/artiﬁcial, male/female, and homosexual/
heterosexual. Examples of the use of
cyberbodies to destabilize categories
include Shu Lea Cheang’s Brandon
(1999), the ﬁrst virtual installation

Czerneda, Julie E.
commissioned by the Guggenheim Museum, and Teknolust (2002), a feature
ﬁlm by visual artist and ﬁlmmaker
Lynn Hershman Leeson. In the ﬁrst
example, Cheang coordinated a virtual
exhibit about Brandon Teena, the
Nebraska transsexual who was raped
and murdered in 1997. In this exhibit,
the interactivity and mobility of digital
media were exploited to examine the
relationality and mobility of identity,
materiality, sex, gender, and sexuality.
In Technolust, three “self-replicating
automata” (SRAs) are ﬁgured as both
materially and virtually instantiated, in
an exploration of the relationship
between these characters, their creator,
and other humans. Tilda Swinton plays
four characters: the scientist creator
and the three SRAs. This text combines
the image of the twin or clone with
that of the cyborg and replicant in a ﬁguring of female cyberbodies that allows
them to move out of cyberspace into
the built environment.
Female
cyberbodies
have
the
capacity to connect material bodies
and virtual spaces, and virtual bodies
and material spaces. They disrupt and
reinforce categories of gender, materiality, and genre. And they inhabit multiple ﬁctions and digital cultures,
including online and virtual pornography, game spaces, art installations,
medical imaging, and Hollywood ﬁlm.
Further Readings
Kolko, Beth, Lisa Nakamura, and Gilbert
Rodman, eds. Race in Cyberspace. New
York: Routledge, 2000.
Munt, Sally R., ed. Technospaces: Inside the
New Media. New York: Continuum Books,
2002.
Springer, Claudia. Electronic Eros: Bodies and
Desire in the Postindustrial Age. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1996.

KATE O’RIORDAN

CZERNEDA, JULIE E.

(1955– )

Julie Czerneda is an award-winning
Canadian author who is best known
for her biology-based science ﬁction
(SF) series, including the Trade Pact
Universe, the Web Shifter books, and
the Species Imperative trilogy. Her 2001
stand-alone novel In the Company of
Others won the Prix Aurora Award and
the Romantic Times Reviewer’s Choice
Best SF Award and was a ﬁnalist for the
Philip K. Dick Award for Distinguished
SF. Czerneda is also the editor of more
than nine anthologies, several of which
are geared for use in her innovative Science Fiction in the Classroom program.
Czerneda grew up on air force bases
around Canada. She attributes her love
of writing to her mother, who gave her
a typewriter when she complained
about the end of a story and told her to
write her own version. As an adult, she
earned a degree in biology and wrote
nonﬁction and textbooks before settling
with her husband and children in Ontario and turning to ﬁction. Her ﬁrst
novel, A Thousand Words for Stranger,
was published by DAW Books in 1997.
The ﬁrst in the growing Trade Pact Universe series, it explores the long-term
effects of selective breeding among the
powerful telepathic species known as
the Clan.
Imaginative extrapolations on the
interactions of biology and culture in
spacefaring civilizations have earned
Czerneda the respect of critics and fans
alike. Her second novel, Beholder’s Eye
(1998), was the ﬁrst of her popular Web
Shifter series. Esen, the protagonist, is
the youngest of an extremely long-lived
species of energy beings who use their
ability to take any material form at will
to collect information about the various
civilizations they encounter. When an
unknown assailant begins hunting her
elders down one by one, the immature
79
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Esen reveals her true nature to a
human and partners with him on the
run for her life. The grim subject matter is leavened by Esen’s cheerful curiosity toward the various aliens she
encounters. The universe, through
Esen’s eyes, hosts immeasurable good
as well as evil, and acknowledgment of
and respect for difference is the key to
navigating either successfully.
The theme of friendship across all
boundaries increasingly dominates
Czerneda’s work, tempering the grim
question at the heart of her Species Imperative trilogy, which asks what might
happen if differences become irreconcilable on an evolutionary scale.
Czerneda is one of the most accessible modern SF writers, maintaining
daily contact with her fans and peers

80
...............

Volume 2: Entries

through her popular Sff.net newsgroup.
She also uses the informal venue to
mentor and recruit ﬁrst-time authors
for her anthologies. Her mentoring
efforts extend to teachers as well as
writers. Through Science Fiction in the
Classroom, she trains grade-school
teachers to generate interest in science
through the use of ﬁction and ﬁlm. Her
efforts to incorporate speculative ﬁction into the classroom have also
spawned the Wonder Zone anthology
series.

Further Readings
“Julie Czerneda” [online]. Http://www.czerneda.com/author.htm.

SHANNAN PALMA

D
DATLOW, ELLEN

(1950– )

Ellen Datlow is an American editor and
writer who is perhaps best known for
her long and successful collaboration
with Terri Windling on the popular The
Year’s Best in Fantasy and Horror series.
Datlow is widely recognized as an inﬂuential voice in science ﬁction (SF), fantasy, and horror. Her extensive
contributions to those genres have garnered numerous awards, including
seven World Fantasy Awards, two Bram
Stoker Awards, two Hugo Awards (Best
Editor, 2002 and 2005), an International
Horror Guild Award, and a Locus Award
(Best Fiction Editor, 2005). Datlow has
also been acknowledged for her contributions to the SciFiction website, which
won the 2005 Hugo Award for best website and the Wooden Rocket Award for
best online magazine for 2005.
As the ﬁction editor of Omni from 1981
to 1998, Datlow published the works of
famous SF, horror, and fantasy writers,
including Ursula K. Le Guin, Peter
Straub, Stephen King, Pat Cadigan, Clive
Barker, William Gibson, and K. W. Jeter.
Her work with Omni also led to editing
the Omni Best Science Fiction compilations
(1991–93), OmniVisions One (1993), and
OmniVisions Two (1994). She has edited
seven volumes of the Omni Book of Science
Fiction and also worked as the editor for
Omni Online. With her former colleagues
at Omni, Datlow created Event Horizon: Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror, another
website, which ran in 1998–99.
A signiﬁcant amount of Datlow’s editorial work has been collaborative. In
1987, she was assigned, along with

Windling, to the Year’s Best Fantasy and
Horror project. Datlow’s background in
horror and dark fantasy was complemented by Windling’s knowledge of
fairy tales and high fantasy. Together
they edited sixteen volumes of the popular, groundbreaking anthology that
introduced readers to up-and-coming
as well as established authors in the
genres. Their collaboration led to other
projects, including the fairy-tale anthologies Snow White, Blood Red (1993), Ruby
Slippers, Golden Tears (1995), Black Thorn,
White Rose (1994), Silver Birch, Blood Moon
(1999), and Black Heart, Ivory Bones
(2000). Another fairy-tale anthology,
this one for young adults, The Green
Man: Tales from the Mythic Forest (2002),
won the World Fantasy Award for best
anthology in 2003. Datlow and Windling
have collaborated further on two
anthologies of children’s fairy tales, A
Wolf at the Door, and Other Retold Fairy Tales (2000) and Swan Sister: Fairy Tales
Retold (2003), and another young adult
anthology, The Faery Reel (2004).
Datlow’s solo editing work has
included two anthologies on vampirism, Blood Is Not Enough (1989) and A
Whisper of Blood (1991); two anthologies
on gender and SF, Alien Sex (1990) and
Off Limits (1996); and recently the anthology The Dark: New Ghost Stories
(2003), which received an International
Horror Guild Award.
More recently, Datlow has collaborated with Windling on The Coyote Road:
Trickster Tales (2007), an examination of
trickster myths. The two are also working on more anthologies for both adolescent and adult readers. Datlow now
81
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

collaborates with Kelly Link and Gavin
J. Grant on The Year’s Best. Her proliﬁc
and stellar contributions to the ﬁelds of
fantasy, science ﬁction, and horror
have made her one of the most
respected editors working in the ﬁelds
today. The Ellen Datlow Papers may be
found at the University of Liverpool
Library’s Special Collections and Archives Reading Room. Her website,
www.datlow.com, offers a comprehensive background on her career history,
publications, and awards and includes
numerous interviews.

ERICKA HOAGLAND

DEFORD, MIRIAM ALLEN

(1888–1975)

Miriam Allen deFord is an American
writer who is responsible for one of the
pithiest and most concise differentiations between science ﬁction (SF) and
fantasy. In the foreword to her collection Elsewhere, Elsewhen, Elsehow (1971),
she noted that SF and fantasy dealt, on
the one hand, with implausible possibilities and, on the other, with plausible
impossibilities.
DeFord was born in Philadelphia in
1888; both her parents were medical
doctors and both were supporters of
more liberal attitudes toward woman,
including suffrage. Nevertheless, even
within her family, she saw examples of
male dominance. She became a suffragist in her teens and supported other
issues important to women, such as
birth control, as well as left-wing and
radical social causes. She determined
early never to have children—issues of
pregnancy and reproduction feature
frequently in her ﬁction—and she was
determined to support herself, even
when
married.
Signiﬁcantly,
she
retained her own name professionally
rather than adopting her husband’s.
The bulk of her career as a writer
was spent outside of SF and fantasy;
82
...............

Volume 2: Entries

deFord spent years as a reporter and as
a contributing editor to the Humanist,
and she also wrote poetry, biographies,
histories, and literary criticism, as well
as several books about crime—notably
biographies of Bonnie and Clyde and of
Ma Barker—and numerous mystery
stories. She began publishing within
the SF and fantasy genres in 1946, with
the story “Last Generation?” (collected
in 1969 in Xenogenesis), producing some
ﬁfty SF and fantasy stories through
1973. The bulk of her output was
published during the 1950s and 1960s,
including almost half her SF and fantasy stories. Many of these are collected in Xenogenesis and Elsewhere,
Elsewhen, Elsehow, but some twenty stories remain uncollected, including “The
Malley System,” her contribution to the
groundbreaking anthology Dangerous
Visions (1967). She also edited Space,
Time, and Crime (1964), bringing together her interests in speculative ﬁction and crime.
DeFord wrote both SF and fantasy
with several common themes and
recurring tropes—ﬁrst contact, alien
invasions, end-of-the-world scenarios.
Several of her stories are about crime
and punishment, and her wide literary
interests are reﬂected in her work. Her
most interesting stories, however,
address issues of special importance to
women’s issues and societal roles. The
bulk of the stories in Xenogenesis problematize and destabilize issues of
reproduction. Her style is clear and economical, her wit dry. She is fond of
twist endings or punch-line conclusions, which sometimes work to the
detriment of her ﬁction, but at her best
she powerfully challenges sexual stereotypes. “The Smiling Future,” for
instance, skewers human (and especially male) pretensions by depicting
humans as being surpassed by intelligent female dolphins, and “The Season

Delany, Samuel R.
of the Babies” turns Jonathan Swift’s “A
Modest Proposal” upside-down in its
conversion of motherhood from the
epitome of nurturing to the epitome of
Epicureanism.
Further Readings
Interview with Miriam Allen deFord [online].
VOAHA: The Virtual Oral/Aural History
Archive, http://www.csulb.edu/voaha.

DOMINICK GRACE

DE FRANCE, MARIE.
See: Marie de France

DELANY, SAMUEL R. (1942– )
Samuel R. Delany is one of the male
science ﬁction writers most committed
to the exploration of gender, race, and
sexuality. A gay black American, he has
multiple minority perspectives, and his
work has long been inﬂuenced by feminist theory and practice.
Delany published his ﬁrst science ﬁction novel, The Jewels of Aptor (1962), at
the age of twenty and has continued to
publish proliﬁcally since. He is best
known for his substantial and inﬂuential body of science ﬁction and science
ﬁction criticism, though he works in a
wide range of genres: his more than
thirty books include autobiography,
pornography, historical ﬁction, comics,
queer theory, and literary criticism.
Delany has been awarded four Nebula
and two Hugo awards, in addition to
the Pilgrim Award for lifetime achievement in science ﬁction criticism and
scholarship and the William Whiteread
Memorial for lifetime achievement in
gay and lesbian writing.
Delany’s radical envisionings of unconventional gender and sexuality are not
especially evident in his earliest texts, but
his sympathies with feminism are usually visible. His ﬁrst published novels
merge science ﬁction with fantasy in

baroque postapocalyptic settings, where
gender roles seem relatively ﬁxed but
there is always a wide array of strong,
interesting female characters: Argo in The
Jewels of Aptor, the aristocratic physicist
Clea in the Fall of the Towers trilogy
(1963–65), and San Severina in Empire Star
(1966), to name a few. Babel-17 (1966) was
the ﬁrst of his novels to feature a female
protagonist—poet Rydra Wong—in an
intellectually dense novel that takes its
readers into the realms of linguistic
theory and semiotics. Babel-17 was also
the ﬁrst of Delany’s novels to explicitly
invoke the unconventional sexual life the
author was living (as recounted in
Delany’s 1987 autobiography): several
characters in the novel live in three-way
sexual partnerships. Sex and gender
arrangements outside the norm are further explored in The Einstein Intersection
(1968), which features a three-sexed nonhuman species that lives among the
ruins of human mythology.
Dhalgren, published in 1975 after a
silence of several years, marked a turning point in Delany’s work as he moved
away from traditional science ﬁction
settings and into more experimental
territory. Issues of race, class, and gender as well as language, perception,
and consciousness are central to many
of the narrative strands in this labyrinthine novel, which is a circular exploration
of
an
uncertainly
named
protagonist in a mysterious, postapocalyptic city. Dhalgren has been celebrated
for its representations of sexuality as
well as its postmodern style and structure: its relatively frequent, frank, and
explicit portrayals of the protagonist’s
bisexual promiscuities and unconventional relationships anticipate Delany’s
later pornographically explicit work.
After Dhalgren, Delany published two
science ﬁction novels that reworked the
conventions of space opera to offer
feminist-inﬂected comments on the
83
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

nature of gender and sexuality. Triton
(1976; republished under the original
title Trouble on Triton in 1996) describes
a society where any individual can
switch between sex and race categories
at will; for most individuals, these categories seem to hold meaning mainly
when inﬂected with sexual desire. The
protagonist of Triton, Bron Helstrom, is
an anachronistic bigot who maintains
twentieth-century ideas of a singular,
essential masculinity and femininity. In
the course of the novel, he undergoes
surgery to become a woman, but
because the woman he wishes to be
could never exist outside of a sexist
mind, he is unable to ﬁnd any kind of
fulﬁllment.
In Stars in My Pocket Like Grains of Sand
(1984), Delany further explores gender
and sexuality in a future placed several
thousand years after that of Triton. This
novel presents a galactic society of millions of worlds where, with myriad
alien species in existence, biological
sex is far from limited to male and
female. Gender has no meaning except
as a signiﬁer of desire: in the galactic
lingua franca of Arachnia spoken by
protagonist Marq Dyeth, all sentient
beings are referred to as women, and
the gendered pronoun he is reserved for
the object of a speaker’s sexual desire.
The reader must adapt to this shifting
use of language (when Marq loses his
desire for an individual, that person
moves from a “he” to a “she”) and in
the process accept a world where
“woman” rather than “man” is the
standard for humanity and heterosexual male desire is no longer privileged.
Delany’s major project in the 1980s
ry
€on series: a
was the Return to Neve
four-volume collection of stories,
essays, one novel, and several less classiﬁable texts, many of which continue
the sequence of philosophical reﬂections on representation called “Informal
84
...............

Volume 2: Entries

Remarks toward the Modular Calculus”
that began in Trouble on Triton. The series
makes use of the conventions of swordand-sorcery fantasy in conjunction
with philosophy and poststructuralist
theory: Delany has called the series a
“child’s garden of semiotics.” Return to
 ry
€on has a framing narrative that
Neve
focuses on mathematical theories and
archaeological discoveries by the intellectual polymath K. Leslie Steiner, a ﬁctional black woman under whose
identity Delany has also published several pieces of criticism.
ry
€on series
The Return to Neve
explores
stigmatized
sexualities
through the ﬁgure of Gorgik, a former
slave who leads a revolutionary movement against slavery and who wears an
iron slave collar for erotic satisfaction.
“The Tale of Plagues and Carnivals” in
€on (1985) was one of
Flight from Nevery
the ﬁrst ﬁctional responses to the AIDS
epidemic and merges fantasy with
Delany’s own autobiographical narratives in a style that preﬁgures the frequent use of personal material in his
later work. Among the most memorable
of many feminist passages in this series
is a creation myth told by the character
Raven, who comes from a tribe of Amazons, in “The Tale of Potters and Dragons.” In Raven’s story, instead of the
ﬁrst woman’s creation from the ﬁrst
man’s rib, the second woman is made
into man as punishment.
Delany’s criticism explores the parameters of the science ﬁction genre,
most famously in The Jewel-Hinged Jaw
(1978) and Starboard Wine (1984); in
interviews and essays, he has insisted
that women’s science ﬁction be allocated its rightful place in genealogies
of the genre. Though he continues to
write and publish abundantly both in
ﬁction and nonﬁction, in recent years
Delany has moved away from science
ﬁction and fantasy. His critical and

De Lint, Charles
ﬁctional works in the 1990s and 2000s
include the set of literarily allusive historical ﬁctions Atlantis: Three Tales
(1995), the personal and cultural history Times Square Red, Times Square Blue
(1999), and the “pornotopic fantasy” The
Mad Man (2002).
See also: Homosexuality; Sex Changes;
“Intersections of Race and Gender” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Delany, Samuel R. The Motion of Light in
Water: Sex and Science Fiction Writing in the
East Village, 1957–1965. New York: Masquerade Books, 1993.
Freedman, Carl. “Samuel Delany: A Biographical and Critical Overview.” In A Companion
to Science Fiction, ed. David Seed, 398–407.
Oxford, England: Blackwell, 2005.
Sallis, James, ed. Ash of Stars: On the Writing
of Samuel R. Delany. Jackson: University
Press of Mississippi, 1996.
Schuster, Jay. “Samuel R. Delany Information,” 2001 [online]. Http://www2.pcc.
com/staff/jay/delany/.
Steiner, K. Leslie [Samuel R. Delany]. “Samuel
R. Delany,” 2005 [online]. Http://www.
pseudopodium.org/repress/KLeslieSteinerSamuelRDelany.html.
Tucker, Jeffrey A. A Sense of Wonder: Samuel
R. Delany, Race, Identity, and Difference. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press,
2004.

ALEXIS LOTHIAN

DE LINT, CHARLES

(1951– )

Prominent Canadian writer Charles de
Lint has endeared himself to contemporary feminist readers of fantastic ﬁction for his multidimensional female
heroes. These women often discover
their selfhood by discovering previously
unknown powers when facing dangers
from the fantastic realms that cross
into the consensus world we call
“reality.” The persistent lens de Lint
directs on the abuse of women and
children and of the homeless, displaced, and marginalized people of the

modern urban landscape only intensiﬁes the power of his work.
Born in the Netherlands, de Lint
immigrated to Ottawa, Canada, with
his family at the age of four months in
1951. Counting from his ﬁrst book, Riddle of the Wren (1984), to the present, he
has published more than thirty-ﬁve
novels or short-story collections, and
he has also made his mark as a folk
musician, cultural writer, and reviewer.
De Lint’s earliest stories were set in secondary worlds that relied on Celtic and
Druidic mythologies such as standing
stones, horned gods, elves, hobs, and
fairies, yet even these included pivotal
female protagonists. With the 1984
award-winning novel Moonheart, as well
as Jack the Giant Killer (1987) and its
sequel Drink Down the Moon (1990), he
began exploring urban-fantasy plots
where the worlds of faerie and of the
mundane could be traversed by some
inhabitants of each, including his
female protagonists.
While the ﬁrst Canadian-urban fantasies were set in contemporary Ottawa,
de Lint’s more recent novels have given
birth to the invented modern city of
Newford, Ontario. Built on the ruins of a
city destroyed in the nineteenth century,
it has all the trappings of urban life: a
university, arts community, parks, and
shopping malls. However, it is also
inhabited by both welcome and unwelcome visitors from the spirit world. Newford provides a setting for commentary
on the urban condition, in both its creative and darker aspects. Many of the
characters, especially female ones, have
been abused as children, wives, or lovers, only to discover that they have great
destinies. De Lint also uses this setting
to intermingle Celtic and Native American mythological practices, ﬁgures, and
traditions.
While the Newford novels and stories
can stand on their own, certain
85
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

characters appear in more than one
work, such as the Crow Girls, shapeshifter-musicians who sometimes show
up just in time to save a sister or a kindred spirit from some dark fate. The familiar characters from story to story
are attractive because they share a secret knowledge: not only that is there a
world of faerie, and a borderland into
it, but also that our reality is held together by selective forgetting of occurrences that do not ﬁt our current
consensus.
In addition to the powerful, admirable, sometimes terrifying women on
whom he focuses many of his stories,
de Lint’s male characters—shamans,
shape-shifters, hobs, gypsies, computer
nerds, musicians, writers, and artists—
are not only romantic ﬁgures but also
dependable helpmates, or grow into
that state. De Lint’s female characters
are
absorbing
precisely
because
they triumph over evil circumstances
often in spite of insecurities, social criticism, and marginalized lives, suggesting to readers the heroism of survival
itself.
Further Readings
Charles de Lint [online]. Http://www.
charlesdelint.com.
Kondratiev, Alexei. “Tales Newly Told.”
Mythlore 13 (Winter 1986): 36, 54.
Mains, Christine. “Charles de Lint.” In Supernatural Fiction Writers, ed. E. Bleiler, 267–
76. New York: Scribner, 1985.
Reid, Robin. “Charles de Lint.” In Canadian
Fantasy and Science-Fiction Writers, ed.
Douglas Ivison, 49–60. Dictionary of Literary Biography, vol. 251. Detroit: Gale,
2002.
Speller, Maureen. “De Lint, Charles (Henri
Diedrerick Hoefsmit).” In St. James Guide
to Science Fiction Writers, ed. Jay P. Pederson, 240–43. New York: St. James Press,
1996.

JANICE BOGSTAD
86
...............

Volume 2: Entries

DE PIZAN, CHRISTINE
See: Christine de Pizan

DICKINSON, EMILY

(1830–1886)

Emily Dickinson was an American poet
who was born and lived much of her
life in Amherst, Massachusetts. Some
studies paint Dickinson as a shy recluse, but others claim the opposite,
saying that she not only had a wide
circle of friends and family but also
enjoyed visiting them. Her personal
life—especially her sexuality—has long
been a topic of controversy among
some scholars. Her genius, though, has
not. She published a few poems in her
lifetime, but the majority would remain
undiscovered until after her death
when they were found by her sister.
Carefully stitched into tiny bundles,
Dickinson’s poems were heavily edited
before being published in 1890. Other
editions followed, but it was only in
1955 that Thomas Johnson published
her poems based on the original manuscripts. This new version sparked a
critical renaissance for her meticulously drafted poems.
Dickinson’s approach to her many
subjects—whether they be volcanoes,
suns, bees, or Death—is irregular, imaginative, and often fantastical. In some of
her most famous poems, Dickinson
imagines not only “stopping” Death but
experiencing awareness after it occurs,
as well. She also imagines communing
with an otherworldly “Master” through a
controversial set of poems and letters.
Science, too, plays a key role in Dickinson’s poetry. The product of an excellent
girl’s education at Amherst and Mount
Holyoke, Dickinson often inserts speciﬁc
scientiﬁc and astronomical facts into her
verse. This method gives greater weight
to her metaphors, acting, as science ﬁction does, to make the imagined more
believable.

Dillon, Diane
The ﬁgure of Dickinson has also
inspired more traditional science ﬁction tales. Jane Yolen’s Nebula Award–
winning story “Sister Emily’s Lightship”
(1997) tells of Dickinson meeting an
alien. In The Bird of Time (1986), George
Alec Efﬁnger peppers his science ﬁction
tale with Dickinson allusions. Similarly,
Paul DiFilippo’s Steampunk trilogy
includes a Walt Whitman–Emily Dickance story titled “Walt and
inson se
Emily” (1995). Lastly, Connie Willis’s
Hugo
Award–winning
“The
Soul
Selected Her Own Society” (1997) offers
a humorous “Wellsian perspective” on
the Amherst poet.
Further Readings
Dickinson Electronic Archives [online].
Http://www.emilydickinson.org.
Grabher, Gudrun, Roland Hagenbuchle, and
Cristanne Miller, eds. The Emily Dickinson
Handbook. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1998.
Habegger, Alfred. My Wars Are Laid Away in
Books: The Life of Emily Dickinson. New
York: Random House, 2001.

BRAD J. RICCA

DILLON, DIANE

(1933– )

Diane Dillon is an American artist and
illustrator (with her husband, Leo) of
hundreds of book covers, chapter illustrations, album covers, posters, advertisements, and other media. The
Dillons’ work is notable for its blend of
motifs derived from their respective
heritages—African, African American,
and American folk traditions. Their
style relies upon strongly outlined
shapes and bright colors, reminiscent
of woodcuts or other block-print illustrations. This technique was popularized by the couple in the late 1950s and
through the 1960s.
Diane Dillon was born Diane Sorber
in Glendale, California. Her father was a
schoolteacher and sometimes inventor,

and her mother was a concert pianist
and organist. Encouraged that her favorite artist, fashion cartoonist Dorothy
Hood, was also a woman, Diane determined at an early age to pursue her
own career in the arts. She began taking
classes in art and design at Los Angeles
City College and Skidmore College. At
the Parsons School of Design, she met
Leo Dillon for the ﬁrst time. The two
became close, despite their competitive
tendencies, and married in 1957 following their graduation from Parsons. Their
proliﬁc career in illustration for literature began through their connection
with science ﬁction author Harlan Ellison, who introduced the couple’s work
to Terry Carr, the editor of the Ace Specials science ﬁction series. The Dillons’
distinctive woodcuts and drawings were
used as cover designs and in the interiors of the books and quickly earned
trademark recognition for this series.
The Dillons have been recognized
many times for the vision, skill, and
uniqueness of their collaborative work.
They are the only artists to win the
prestigious Caldecott Medal for children’s book illustration two years in a
row: they took the award in 1976 for
their work on Why Mosquitos Buzz in
People’s Ears, and in 1977 for Ashanti to
Zulu. Leo Dillon was the ﬁrst AfricanAmerican artist to be awarded the
Caldecott. The Dillons are also the multiple recipients of the Boston Globe–
Horn Book Award, the Coretta Scott
King Award, the Hamilton King Award,
the Gold Medal for Children’s Book
Illustration from the Society of Illustrators, and, in 1971, the Hugo for their
Ace Specials illustrations.
The couple lives in New York City,
where they now often write the children’s books that they illustrate. Their
son, Lee, is also a talented artist. Diane
celebrated her fortieth anniversary
with Leo in 1999.
87
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Further Readings
Belting, Natalia Maree, Joseph Bruchac,
Diane Dillon, and Leo Dillon. Whirlwind Is
a Spirit Dancing: Poems Based on Traditional
American Indian Songs and Stories. 1974.
Reprint, New York: Milk & Cookies Press,
2006.
Carlstrom, Nancy White, Diane Dillon, and
Leo Dillon. Northern Lullaby. New York:
Philomel Books, 1992.
Dillon, Diane, and Leo Dillon. Rap a Tap Tap,
Here’s Bojangles—Think of That! New York:
Blue Sky Press, 2002.
Jackson, Ellen B., Diane Dillon, and Leo Dillon. Earth Mother. New York: Walker, 2005.
Preiss, Byron. The Art of Leo and Diane Dillon.
New York: Ballantine Books, 1981.

MICHELLE LAFRANCE

DISABILITY
Disabled characters are a staple of science ﬁction and fantasy: it may be
more challenging to think of works
which do not include a disabled character than to think of those which do.
The fact of disability can assume many
meanings within a ﬁctional world.
The deﬁnition of disability rests in
part on what is considered “normal” in
a particular context. Science ﬁction
writers can create entirely new worlds
and societies within their stories, and
in so doing expose and question common assumptions about what is considered normal. A good example of this
theme is the Twilight Zone episode “Eye
of the Beholder,” in which an attractive
(by our standards) woman is considered hideously deformed and banished
to a special “community” because she
looks different from the identically
monstrous people who are the norm
within her world. The theme of nonconformity deﬁned as disability within
a society was treated with speciﬁcally
feminist intent by Joanna Russ in The
Two of Them (2005), which includes the
female character Aunt Dunya, whose
88
...............

Volume 2: Entries

desire to be a poet causes those around
her to deﬁne her as mentally ill and
keep her conﬁned to a ﬁlthy cell.
A related theme is that of superior
abilities deﬁned as disability by the majority within society who lack such abilities. The X-Men series is based on this
theme: the X-Men are mutants who
have special abilities (Marvel Girl is telepathic and kinetic, Storm can control
the weather, and so on) and are therefore feared and shunned by the
“normal” people. The series develops
another interesting theme—the mutant
person as evil—in characters such as
Mystique and Magneto. Notably, both
the good and evil X-Men form associations and pool their abilities: the X-Men
alliance and academy, and the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants, respectively.
A third theme treated in science ﬁction and fantasy is reconsidering what
disability might mean and how disabled
people might be treated in worlds that
are more advanced medically and technologically than ours. Anne McCaffrey’s
Ship series, beginning with The Ship Who
Sang (1969), is a good example of this
theme. The series is set in a society in
which children born with deformed
bodies but normal minds may be trained
to serve as “encapsulated brains” that
provide the intelligence to operate
machinery such as spaceships; the alternative for these children is extermination. James Tiptree Jr.’s “The Girl Who
Was Plugged In” explores a similar
theme: a woman with a deformed body
is allowed to live in a perfect female
body grown speciﬁcally for that purpose.
See also: Neurodiversity.
Further Readings
Bemis, Virgina T. “Barrayar’s Ugliest Child:
Miles
Vorkosigan.”
Kaleidoscope
34
(Winter–Spring 1997): 20–22.
Kanar, Hanley E. “No Ramps in Space: The
Inability to Envision Accessibility in Star

Duane, Diane
Trek: Deep Space Nine”. In Fantasy Girls:
Gender in the New Universe of Science Fiction
and Fantasy Television, ed. Elyce Rae Helford, 245–64. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littleﬁeld, 2000.
Perusek, Darshan. “Disability and Future
Worlds.” Kaleidoscope 34 (Winter–Spring
1997): 1–19.
Stemp, Jane. “Devices and Desires: Science
Fiction, Fantasy and Disability in Literature for Young People.” Disability Studies
Quarterly 24, no. 1 (Winter 2004): n.p.

SARAH BOSLAUGH

DUANE, DIANE [ELIZABETH] (1952– )
Diane Duane is an American writer living in Ireland with her husband, Peter
Morwood. Her work includes the original series the Tale of the Five (fantasy)
and the Young Wizards (science fantasy). She has also created television
episodes for a variety of children’s
shows; screenplays for educational videos; Star Trek, Spider-Man, and X-Men
tie-in novels; television scripts; and an
interactive movie/computer game.
Duane was born in New York City. She
became a registered nurse in 1974 and
worked as a psychiatric nurse. Her training includes an interest in astronomy as
well as languages and linguistics.
Duane’s original fantasy and science
fantasy novels share common themes of
alternative sexualities and the importance of healing and contain a pan-spirituality shown in a mythic structure that
crosses genre boundaries.
The Tale of the Five series includes
The Door into Fire (1979), The Door into
Shadow (1984), and The Door into Sunset
(1992), with a fourth and concluding
book planned. This series is an alternate-world quest fantasy with a twist.
The protagonist, Herewiss, is a prince
who has spiritual-magical power that
only women normally have. While
searching for a focus for his power, he
is called to help his lover, Freelorn, an

exiled prince. The third of the Five
named in the series title is Segnbora, a
warrior. Her power is so strong she has
not been able to use it; while journeying with Freelorn and Herewiss, Segnbora encounters a dying dragon
(Hasai), whose personality enters her
mind after he dies. The ﬁfth of the
group is Sunspark, a ﬁre elemental who
loses a game of skill with Herewiss and
becomes his companion and lover. In
this world, bisexuality is the norm,
marriage can be between any two individuals or any group as long as childrearing responsibilities are agreed
upon, and the major religion worships
a goddess who exists in three forms
(Mother, Maiden, Crone).
The Young Wizard series includes So
You Want to Be a Wizard? (1983), Deep Wizardry (1985), High Wizardry (1990), A Wizard Abroad (1993), The Wizard’s Dilemma
(2001), A Wizard Alone (2002), The Wizard’s
Holiday (2003), and Wizards at War (2003).
Written for young adults, the series
focuses on Nita and Kit, who are twelve
and thirteen. Both are bullied at school,
Nita for being a girl who likes reading
and astronomy, and Kit, who is Hispanic,
for his accent and for having skipped a
grade. In the ﬁrst novel, they ﬁnd their
Wizard’s Manuals. Wizardry, though
based on talent, must be learned,
including the Speech, a language allowing wizards to communicate across species. Some books focus on Dairene,
Nita’s young sister, who creates an intelligent race of computers on her ﬁrst
quest. The series follows the three protagonists through their education as
wizards, but also through realistic problems, including Nita and Dairene’s
mother’s death from cancer in The Wizard’s Dilemma. Magic, in Duane’s worlds,
works like natural law, requiring time,
energy, and sacriﬁce to master.
See also: “Feminist Spirituality” (vol. 1).
89
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Further Readings
Diane Duane. [online]. Http://www.dianeduane.com.
“Diane Duane.” In St. James Guide to Young
Adult Writers. 2nd ed. New York: St. James
Press, 1999.
Reid, Robin Anne. “Lost in Space between
‘Center’ and ‘Margin’: Some Thoughts on
Lesbian-Feminist Discourse, Bisexual
Women, and Speculative Fiction.” In Feminist Nightmares: Women at Odds; Feminism
and the Problem of Sisterhood, ed. Susan
Ostrov Weisser, 343–57. New York: New
York University Press, 1994.

ROBIN ANNE REID

DUE, TANANARIVE

(1966– )

Tananarive Due is an African-American
author who has won the American
Book Award for her ﬁction. Her writing
ranges from horror to supernatural
thrillers to science ﬁction to historical
ﬁction and includes a civil rights memoir coauthored with her activist mother,
Patricia Stephens Due. Originally from
Florida, Due earned a journalism
degree from Northwestern University
and continued her education as a Rotary Foundation Scholar at the University of Leeds, England, where she
obtained an M.A. in English literature.
While working as a columnist and feature writer for the Miami Herald in 1995,
Due published her ﬁrst novel, The
Between, a supernatural tale depicting
the life of Hilton James, a black judge
living on borrowed time whose dreams
are the key to protecting his family
from a racist killer.
Most of Due’s novels belong to the
supernatural genre, although her short
stories cover the spectrum of the fantastic. For example, the 2000 short
story “Patient Zero” was anthologized
in two of the best-known annual science ﬁction anthologies: David Hartwell’s Year’s Best SF 6 and Gardner
Dozois’s The Year’s Best Science Fiction:
90
...............

Volume 2: Entries

18th Annual Collection. Likewise, her
work appears in both of the pioneering
Dark Matter anthologies edited by
Sheree Thomas. Due’s other supernatural novels include My Soul to Keep
(1997); The Living Blood (2001), which
garnered a 2002 American Book Award;
The Good House (2003); and Joplin’s Ghost
(2005). Her ﬁctional account of the historical Madame C. J. Walker, a pioneer
in black beauty products, was based on
research conducted by author Alex
Haley. Entitled The Black Rose (2000), the
book was nominated for a National
Association for the Advancement of
Colored People (NAACP) Image Award.
Her civil rights memoir Freedom in the
Family: A Mother–Daughter Memoir of the
Fight for Civil Rights (2003), written with
her mother, utilizes alternating chapters to cover events like sit-ins and jailins across the South of the turbulent
1960s of her mother’s time juxtaposed
against the younger Due’s college days
in the 1980s.
As companion novels, My Soul to Keep
and The Living Blood comprise an
unconventional vampire tale that
describes the life of the African immortal Dawit and his love affair with an
African-American
woman,
Jessica,
which moves from Florida to various
African countries and back again as supernatural and mundane forces shatter
the family life the two have built together and threaten the world through
their child Fana. The Good House
involves Angela, the descendant of
New Orleans voodoo priestess Marie
Toussaint, a haunted house in a northwestern town, and a deadly curse. And
Joplin’s Ghost is a story about Phoenix
Smalls, a young woman haunted by the
ghost of the famous ragtime composer
Scott Joplin, and how she makes it to
the top of the music industry.
Due has taught at several writers’
workshops, notably the Clarion Science

Dystopias
Fiction and Fantasy Writer’s Workshop.
She currently lives in Southern California with her family, where she and her
husband, SF novelist and screenwriter
Steven Barnes, practice their craft.
See also: Fairy Tales and Folklore;
“Intersections of Race and Gender” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Carter, Zakia Munirah. “Patricia Stephens
Due and Tananarive Due.” Black Issues
Book Review 5, no. 2 (March/April 2003):
10–11.
Hood, Yolanda. Interview with Tananarive
Due. Femspec 6, no. 1 (2005): 155–64.
Tananarive Due [online]. Http://www.
tananarivedue.com.

ISIAH LAVENDER III

DYSTOPIAS
In contrast to utopias, dystopias depict
societies or realities in which all or parts
of the population are oppressed and/or
live in a horriﬁc political, ecological, or
socioeconomic environment. A dystopian work demonstrates to the reader
how a ﬁctional reality can critique contemporary society by taking the conditions, and contradictions, in that
society to extremes. Feminist dystopias
speciﬁcally address gender ideologies
and issues and often use current social
conditions to show the sexism inherent
in societies that follow a patriarchal
model. This examination of societal
norms through the lens of dystopian
novels, and the elements of hope in
feminist dystopias in particular, can aid
readers in moving toward change.
Although several feminist utopias
were written in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, the ﬁrst truly
feminist dystopia, Katharine Burdekin’s
Swastika Night, did not appear until
1937. In this novel, set six centuries in
the future, Burdekin supposes that the
Nazis succeeded in conquering all of
Europe and, as a result, ignorant

women live in cages, reduced to their
biological function of providing children. While several dystopias also
appeared in the 1970s during the height
of feminist utopian writing as an outgrowth of the Second Wave of the feminist movement, such as Suzy McKee
Charnas’s Walk to the End of the World
(1974) and Angela Carter’s Heroes and
Villains (1969), the 1980s witnessed a
movement toward dystopia in feminist
writing as a result of the conservative
backlash against the women’s movement taking place in the United States.
The production of feminist dystopias
began in earnest with Margaret
Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale (1984) and
Suzette Haden Elgin’s Native Tongue
(1984) and its sequel Judas Rose (1987), as
€ Fairbairns’s Beneﬁts (1983).
well as Zoe
Atwood’s near-future novel depicts an
oppressive, fundamentalist Christian regime that categorizes and valorizes
women by their reproductive functions,
while Elgin’s novels, set three hundred
years in the future, show a United States
in which women have been constitutionally returned to the status of minors
subject to their fathers and husbands.
Beneﬁts also engages the reproductiverights debate, in that mothers are paid
by the government to stay home with
their children; later, women become
subject to state-controlled birth control
in the drinking water. Pamela Sargent’s
The Shore of Women (1986) ostensibly
begins as a feminist utopia, but the text
ultimately reveals a dystopia in which
men are treated as animals, needed
only for breeding purposes, and an elite
class of women controls the rest of society, which has stagnated under their
abuse of power.
Octavia Butler’s Parable of the Sower
(1993) and Parable of the Talents (1997)
explore a politically and socially chaotic United States in which a young
woman founds a new religion and a
91
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

utopian community that is destroyed
by the fundamentalist Christian government. Ursula K. Le Guin returns to
her Hainish worlds in Four Ways to Forgiveness (1995), using four narratives—
from a slave, a historian, a soldier, and
an ex-revolutionary—to interrogate
how gender and equality intertwine.
Kim Stanley Robinson also explores
this theme in The Years of Rice and Salt
(2002), which imagines a dystopic
alternative history in which 99 percent
of Europeans have perished from the
bubonic plague and Muslim and Chinese societies, with their patriarchal
structures that severely disadvantage
women, control most of the Earth.
Many feminist novels in the utopian
genre juxtapose dystopian and utopian
societies in order to demonstrate the
advantages and disadvantages in both
and to give the reader a clearer frame
of reference for comparison to our own
societal conditions. In Joanna Russ’s
postmodern novel The Female Man
(1975), three of the four characters
come from dystopic societies in which
women are oppressed or in combat
with men. Le Guin’s The Dispossessed
(1974) contrasts the utopian Anarres
with the capitalist and militaristic
Urras, while Always Coming Home’s
(1985) protagonist leaves her utopian
tribal community to live in her father’s
gender-segregated
military
state.
Marge Piercy’s Woman at the Edge of
Time (1976) ﬂuctuates among the future
utopia of Mattapoisett; the contemporary reality of a marginalized, lowerclass Chicana forced into mental institutions; and, very brieﬂy, two dystopic
futures that might result from the
mind-control experiments on the protagonist. He, She and It (1988), also by
Piercy, depicts a utopian community of
scientists alongside the “Glop,” a teeming megapolis that encompasses most
of the eastern United States and is
92
...............

Volume 2: Entries

ruled by gang warfare, bordered by a
corporate “city” whose employees are
protected but heavily watched and
tightly controlled, even in their personal lives. In The Fifth Sacred Thing
(1993), Starhawk contrasts a future San
Francisco that has transformed into a
communal, pan-religious, pan-sexual
society whose denizens have developed
psychic powers with the militaristic
state that attempts to take it over.
In Sheri S. Tepper’s The Gate to Women’s Country (1988), the women live in
an ostensibly utopian community, contrasted with a fundamentalist Christian
society in danger of extinction because
of rampant polygamy and in-breeding.
However, as the narrative eventually
reveals, the seemingly benign women’s
community is not perfect: the ruling
class is engaged in a covert war against
men and militarism through a eugenics
program. Gibbon’s Decline and Fall (1996),
by the same author, projects the United
States into the near future where a religious cult and antiquated Catholicism
are actively engaged in limiting women’s reproductive freedom and, by
extension, women’s autonomy.
Other dystopias written by women
that do not necessarily focus on gender
equality include Bone Dance (1991) by
Emma Bull, The Ragged World (1991) by
Judith Moffett, Slow River (1995) by Nicola
Grifﬁth, Dreaming Metal (1997) by Melissa
Scott, Gaia’s Toys (1997) by Rebecca Ore,
and Speaking Dreams (1997) by Severna
Park.

Further Readings
Cranny-Francis, Anne. Feminist Fiction: Feminist Uses of Generic Fiction. Cambridge, MA:
Polity Press, 1990.
Moylan, Tom. Scraps of Untainted Sky: Science
Fiction, Utopia, Dystopia. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 2000.

NAOMI STANKOW-MERCER

E
EDITORS, FAN
Fan editors print and distribute fanzines,
amateur journals published for the love
of the genre, generally priced cheaply
or available in trade for other fanzines
or for letters of comment. Fanzines
developed from the letters sections of
pulp science ﬁction magazines in the
1920s and 1930s. Originally mimeographed and later distributed via photocopies and Internet websites, fanzines
vary in size, format, and circulation.
Published by clubs and as personal missives by individuals, couples, and small
groups, many are distributed through
amateur press associations (APAs). The
content includes a variety of social, humorous, and intellectual discussions
about science ﬁction (SF) and fandom,
with specialized language—puns, acronyms, and shorthand (e.g., fanac for fan
activities, gaﬁate for “getting away from
it all” or abandoning fandom, and words
like slan taken from SF works).
There are some negative connotations to the word fan, but a basic deﬁnition is someone who does activities out
of interest rather than for income. Fandom is a social network as well as a literary discourse, so the distinction
between fans and professionals is difﬁcult to deﬁne, and categories are not
mutually exclusive. Many associated
with fandom also write, edit, or do
scholarly work in a professional
capacity (e.g., Judith Merril, Ginjer
Buchanan, and Sandra Miesel), while
some fanzines, including Locus, have
evolved to what is called a “semi-professional magazine,” a Hugo Award

category generally involving regular
publication, with paid contributors and
staff. Recent scholarly interest in science ﬁction and popular culture has
further blurred the line between fan
writing and scholarly writing. Women’s
contributions to science ﬁction culture
also include writing fan ﬁction, including the subgenre of slash ﬁction
(romantic stories between male characters, originating with Star Trek’s Kirk
and Spock), and related activities like
organizing conventions and regional
clubs, cosplaying, and ﬁlking (performing SF parodies set to folk songs).
Many editors discussed in this entry
have won the Hugo Award for fanzines,
the terminology for which has
shifted over the years, including both
“Best Fan Magazine” and “Best Amateur
Magazine.” Other notable fan editors
include Marsha Brown for Locus,
Noreen Shaw for Axe, Avedon Carol for
various fanzines, Susan Wood Glicksohn for Energumen, and Joan W. Carr—
a ﬁctitious personality invented by H. P.
“Sandy” Sanderson—for Femizine, the
ﬁrst feminist fanzine, which, although
meant as a hoax, inadvertently helped
create a proto-feminist SF community.
e Benatan; 1951– )
Dena Brown (ne
coedited Locus with Charles N. Brown,
winning four fanzine Hugos. A member
of the Pittsburgh science ﬁction
group, Brown is noted for the comment
at the 1970 Science Fiction Research
Association conference, “Let’s take
science ﬁction out of the classrooms
and put it back in the gutter where
it belongs” (http://www.smithway.org/
history/chap3d.html).
93
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

e Doub; 1924– ) coedElinor Busby (ne
ited Cry of the Nameless with F. M. Busby,
Burnett Toskey, and Wally Weber, winning a 1960 Hugo. Cry was the organizational voice of the Seattle fan group,
the Nameless Ones. Elinor Busby has
been fan guest of honor at several
Westercons and a member of the 1961
Worldcon committee and of several
APAs; she has self-published two fantasy novels in the Throwaway Princess
series: part 1, Lindorny, and part 2, The
Quest Requested.
Juanita Coulson (Ruth Wellons; 1933– )
coedited Yandro with her husband,
Robert “Buck” Coulson, winning the 1965
Hugo. She is author of at least sixteen
science ﬁction, fantasy, or gothic novels,
including Dark Priestess (1977), The Web of
Wizardry (1984), and the Children of the
Stars series. Coulson’s ﬁction is inspired
by her music. A prominent ﬁlk singer,
she received the Grand Mistress of Filking Award, has multiple nominations for
Pegasus Awards, and was inducted into
the Filk Hall of Fame at FilKONtario in
1996.
Lee Hoffman (Shirley Bell Hoffman;
1932–2007) was an author and fan,
nominated for Hugos and Retro Hugos
for her fanzine Quandry, a misspelling
of “Quandary.” A Big Name Fan (BNF)
who was ﬁrst assumed to be male,
Hoffman became known as HoffWoman after attending the 1951 Worldcon. Hoffman’s westerns are better
known than her science ﬁction novels.
The latter include The Caves of Karst
(1969) and Change Song (1972), centering
on adventure plots and coming-of-age
themes. In and Out of “Quandry” (1982)
collects essays and stories from
Quandry.
Pat Lupoff (1937– ) coedited Xero with
Richard A. Lupoff and Bhob Stewart,
winning the 1963 fanzine Hugo. Xero
helped start comics fandom, with color
coverage and serious articles by a range
94
...............

Volume 2: Entries

of contributors. Lupoff has been a
bookseller for more than twenty years
and is the children’s buyer for Cody’s
Books in Berkeley, California. Two volumes collect articles from Xero: All in
Color for a Dime (1970) and The Best of
Xero (2004).
Nicki Lynch coedits Mimosa (1982–
present) with her husband, Richard
Lynch. They have won six fanzine
Hugos. Nicki Lynch has served on various con committees, is a member of
several fan groups and APAs, was fan
guest of honor at several conventions,
and published fanzine Chat (1977–81).
She received the 1981 Rebel Award for
service to Southern fandom.
e Perew)
Felice Rolfe (now Maxam, ne
coedited Niekas with Edmund R. Meskys
and Anne Chatland. Along with Bjo
Trimble, Rolfe was involved with the
Society for Creative Anachronism when
it was closely tied to fandom in the
1960s. Niekas (the Lithuanian word for
“nothing”) helped start Georgette Heyer
fandom and is still printed by Meskys
as an irregular sixty-four-page photooffset fanzine, with a near-academic
approach referred to as “sercon” (serious and constructive).
Bjo Trimble (Betty JoAnn Conway;
1933– ) coedited a number of fanzines,
including Shangri l’Affaires; Trimble
coined “Bjo” as a fannish name. Trimble was instrumental in the “Save Star
Trek” and “Name the Shuttle Enterprise”
campaigns; she also directed the Los
Angeles Science Fantasy Society, served
on numerous convention committees,
and is credited with starting art shows
at the 1960 Worldcon. Trimble received
the Big Heart Award (1964) and the
International Costumers Guild Lifetime
Achievement Award (1992) and has
been recognized with guest of honor
and fan guest of honor roles at numerous cons, including the 2002 Worldcon
(with husband John).

Editors, Professional
Leslie Turek (1946– ) received a 1990
fanzine Hugo for The Mad 3 Party, a planning and public relations fanzine for
Noreascon 3. She also coedited the mimeographed Twilight Zine with Radcliffe
college roommate Cory Seidman (now
Panshin). A founding member of the
New England Science Fiction Association, Turek was the ﬁrst woman to chair
a Worldcon (Noreascon II, 1980) and has
been recognized with fan guest of honor
roles at several regional conventions.
See also: Editors, Professional; “Fandom”
(vol. 1).
Further Readings
Classic and Older Fanzines (before 1980)
[online directory]. Http://www.fanac.org/
fanzines/Classic_Fanzines.html.
Eney, Richard. Fancyclopedia II. Alexandria,
VA: Operation Crifanac, 1959.
Larbalestier, Justine. The Battle of the Sexes in
Science Fiction. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
University Press, 2002.
Sanders, Joe. Science Fiction Fandom. Westport, CT: Greenwood University Press,
1994.

AMELIA BEAMER

EDITORS, PROFESSIONAL
While the iconic representation of science ﬁction editors has traditionally
been a male face (as evidenced by the
prominence of Hugo Gernsback in the
history of the ﬁeld or the dominance of
male winners in the Best Editor category of the Hugo Awards), the reality is
that women have also played an important and inﬂuential role as professional
editors since the earliest days of the
ﬁeld. While it would be too simplistic
to say that the presence of female editors in science ﬁction publishing has
necessarily contributed a feminist
perspective, it is nonetheless possible
to see a distinct inﬂuence of these editors on the shape and development of
the ﬁeld.

During the canonical Golden Age of
science ﬁction publishing, from the
1930s through the 1950s or early 1960s,
a number of prominent genre magazines had female editors at the helm.
Mary Gnaedinger edited the classic
pulp magazine Famous Fantastic Mysteries (along with its companion publication, Fantastic Novels Magazine) from
1939 to 1953; during roughly that same
period, Dorothy McIlwraith was editor
at Weird Tales, and it was during McIlwraith’s tenure that Weird Tales moved
away from its emphasis on Lovecraftian ﬁction and became more broadly
embracing of new “weird” ﬁction from
authors such as Theodore Sturgeon,
C. L. Moore, and Ray Bradbury. In the
period after the collapse of most of the
classic pulp magazines (sometimes
considered the end of the Golden Age),
editor Cele Goldsmith Lalli used her
role at Amazing Stories and Fantastic to
help modernize genre ﬁction, encouraging a generation of newer writers
(including Thomas M. Disch and
Ursula K. Le Guin) to move away from
the pulp model and toward a more literary style.
As professional editors of short ﬁction, women played a major role as
anthologists from the 1970s onward.
The most prominent editor in this period was Judith Merril. In professional
terms, Merril was more active as a
writer than an editor, but her work as
the editor of a popular Year’s Best series
(beginning in 1956) helped to solidly
establish a new sense of identity in the
ﬁeld and helped Merril in her role as an
American advocate of the New Wave.
In the 1970s, Pamela Sargent’s Women
of Wonder anthology series, while possessed of a self-described antifeminist
sensibility, nonetheless acted as a
major venue for both female authors
and strong female protagonists, as did
Marion Zimmer Bradley’s multiauthor
95
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Darkover anthologies. Throughout the
1970s and 1980s, women played a fairly
prominent role as editors or coeditors
of high-prestige showcase anthologies,
a category that includes Hilary Bailey
with the New Worlds series and Victoria
Schochet and Melissa Singer with the
Berkley Showcase anthologies. The most
commercially successful female-edited
anthologies in this later period, though,
are undoubtedly the Year’s Best Fantasy
and Horror series, edited from 1988
through 2003 by Ellen Datlow and Terri
Windling.
Examining the history of book-length
ﬁction publishing, one also ﬁnds a signiﬁcant presence of female editors,
perhaps more signiﬁcantly in the later
period. Windling and Beth Meacham
were both signiﬁcant forces in developing strong fantasy and science ﬁction
lines at Ace Books in the early 1980s,
and both continued that work at Tor
Books after leaving Ace. Since the
1990s, women have had an indisputably prominent role in genre publishing
at all levels and in all forms.
One interesting trend throughout the
history of science ﬁction publishing is the
prominence of women who established
their careers as professional editors working in conjunction with their husbands.
Betty Ballantine, famous for advancing a
more modern and innovative style of science ﬁction beginning in the 1950s,
cofounded Ballantine Books with her husband, Ian. Judy-Lynn Del Rey, a similarly
inﬂuential force in expanding the public
face of the genre through the 1970s
and 1980s, partnered with her husband,
Lester, to start the Del Rey Books imprint.
Other married editorial teams in modern
science ﬁction publishing include Kristine
Kathryn Rusch and Dean Wesley Smith
(Pulphouse Press), Kelly Link and Gavin
Grant (Small Beer Press), and Kathryn
Cramer and David Hartwell (New York
Review of Science Fiction).
96
...............

Volume 2: Entries

Noting this pattern of collaboration
between spouses should not be taken
as an indication that the female editor’s role is in any way diminished; to
the contrary, in most of these pairs one
could easily argue that the woman was
the more signiﬁcant or inﬂuential force.
It does, however, reﬂect one typical
pattern of female achievement in traditionally male-dominated ﬁelds; both
science and politics provide a number
of historical examples that support this
pattern.
See also: Editors, Fan.

SUSAN MARIE GROPPI

EDUCATION
The theme of education is frequent
and prominent in many science ﬁction
and fantasy texts. A focus on the education of a character (or characters)
allows authors the opportunity to educate—and delight—readers. As characters learn about the science or the
magic that delineates the worlds that
they inhabit, readers are given the opportunity to experience that science or
magic as well. In turn, the education of
characters is often an important step
in their evolution into heroes or heroines. Frequently, authors show characters gaining wisdom and ability as
they are educated.
The wonders of science ﬁction or fantasy worlds are put on display as characters attend schools, learn from wise
leaders, or study rare texts. Many of
Mercedes Lackey’s Valdemar novels
take place at the Collegium of Valdemar,
where heralds, mages, and healers are
trained. In Anne McCaffrey’s Dragonriders of Pern novels, texts follow characters as they are educated in music at
Harper Hall. Diane Duane’s Young Wizard series describes characters who ﬁnd
and study Wizards’ Manuals that have
been hidden away in modern public
libraries. Elizabeth Moon’s Legend of

Elgin, Suzette Haden
Paksenarrion trilogy follows the main
character as she is educated in the military arts as well as in diplomacy and
magic. Gregory Maguire’s Wicked: The Life
and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West
(1995) shows how the heroine Elphaba is
driven to reject the politically and
socially corrupt Oz as a result of her
experiences at college.
The best-selling and enormously
popular Harry Potter series by J. K.
Rowling revolves, for the most part,
around the education of the main characters and the epic battles between
good and evil that often take place on
the grounds of the boarding school
(Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and
Wizardry) that they inhabit. Large sections of the seven-novel series depict
Harry, Ron, and Hermione listening to
lectures, writing papers assigned by the
foot, or conducting magical laboratory
experiments.
Often writers celebrate education as
a means to better the self. Characters
mature and strengthen as they attend
school; they develop new ideas and
master vital skills. Some authors focus
on the ways in which characters must
ﬁght against class, race, or gender bias
in order to receive these beneﬁts of education. For example, Alanna, the main
character in Tamora Pierce’s Song of the
Lioness quartet, must disguise herself
as a man in order to learn the ways of a
knight. Despite the prejudice she faces,
Alanna’s dedication to learning allows
her to master the physical, tactical, and
magical challenges she faces and to
become the king’s champion.
Finally, some science ﬁction can be
used as a teaching tool for real-world
readers. As educator Andrew Love
explains on his Web page, students can
sometimes learn more about science
from science ﬁction than from the
classroom. Science ﬁction can illustrate
basic principles and methods in

engaging stories about situations and
characters that do not and never did
exist.
Further Readings
Duvivier, Damien, and Michel Wautelet.
“From the Microworld to King Kong.”
Physics Education 41, no. 5 (2006): 386–90.
Fardad, Firooznia. “Giant Ants and Walking
Plants.” Journal of College Science Teaching
53, no. 5 (2006): 26–31.
Love, Andrew. “Andy’s ‘Using Science Fiction
for Education’ Page,” 2003 [online]. Http://
groups.msn.com/AndysUsingScienceFictionForEducationPage.

CASEY COTHRAN

ELGIN, SUZETTE HADEN (1936–)
Suzette Haden Elgin is an American
author who has published numerous
science ﬁction novels, short stories,
and poems. She has also published
popular linguistics books and is known
 adan, a language
as the creator of La
designed to express the perceptions of
women. Themes frequently addressed
in her works include language, women’s societal roles and interpersonal
relationships, and the effects of religious and political structures on individuals; she frequently addresses these
themes with satire and other forms of
humor. Elgin is an accessible public
resource in these areas; for example,
she maintains an active blog (http://
ozarque.livejournal.com)
in
which
these themes are frequently addressed,
has published a bimonthly linguistics
and science ﬁction newsletter since
1981, and keeps freely available online
 adan tutorial and vocabulary
a La
updates
responding
to
readers’
requests. She also founded the Science
Fiction Poetry Association in 1978, in
which she continues to participate.
Born in Missouri, Elgin studied French,
English, and music as an undergraduate
97
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

and linguistics as a graduate student,
earning a Ph.D. at the University of San
Diego in 1973. She began writing science
ﬁction as a graduate student; her ﬁrst
publication in the genre, “For the Sake of
Grace,” appeared in 1969. In the 1970s,
Elgin published the ﬁrst four novels
about Coyote Jones, a reluctant, bumbling agent of the Tri-Galactic Intelligence Service. His style of working
clearly reﬂects Elgin’s concern with possible modes of communication; he has
both a gift—the power to control large
numbers of people by mass telepathy—
and a handicap: he lacks the ability,
which has become commonplace in his
time, to receive mental messages himself. In Jones’s adventures on various
planets, we see social structures such as
religious and legal systems affecting
interactions from the levels of individual
to interplanetary.
The Ozark trilogy, which appeared in
the early 1980s and was reissued in
2000 by the University of Arkansas
Press, concerns one planet in this
future universe; the ancestors of its
population left Arkansas in the twentieth century and founded Planet Ozark,
with a magic system based on principles of twentieth-century generative
transformational grammar. In the mid1980s, Yonder Comes the Other End of
Time followed, in which a Coyote Jones
mission to Ozark results in his failure
to persuade the independent Ozarkers
to join the Tri-Galactic Federation.
In these books, women take a variety
of interesting roles, both as groups (the
designated “Grannies” on Ozark) and as
individuals, such as the divinity Drussa
Silver in the Coyote Jones series;
however, it is in the Native Tongue
trilogy, published by DAW Books
and later by Feminist Press, that the
place of women in society becomes
most overtly a central concern. A
twenty-third-century group of women
98
...............

Volume 2: Entries

linguists, on an Earth where repression
of women has become far more severe
and institutionalized than in the present, secretly create and spread a lan adan, speciﬁcally designed to
guage, La
communicate women’s perceptions; on
the premise that language can also
affect ideas, they hope that the eventual widespread acquisition of the language will end violence on Earth. In the
third novel, the plan fails, but the
women characters succeed in using
knowledge gained from the project to
end world hunger.
In 1989, Elgin tied for the Rhysling
Award for best short science ﬁction
poem of the year. Works since 1993
have included science ﬁction short stories, poetry, and art, in addition to
many nonﬁction books on linguistics
and communication.
See also: Feminist Science Fiction; “Genre
Poetry: Twentieth Century” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Chapman, Edgar. “Sex, Satire, and Feminism in the Science Fiction of Suzette
Haden Elgin.” In The Feminine Eye: Science
Fiction and the Women Who Write It, ed.
Tom Staicar, 89–102. New York: Frederick
Ungar, 1982.
Suzette Haden Elgin [online]. Science
Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America
Net Ring, http://www.sfwa.org/members/
elgin.

THERESA MCGARRY

ELLERMAN, ANNIE WINNIFRED
(BRYHER) (1894–1983)
Bryher was a British writer best known
for her historical novels and her long
relationship with the American imagist
poet Hilda Doolittle. However, Bryher
wrote one pre-dystopia, Visa for Avalon,
that was published in the United States
in 1965, but never in the United Kingdom; out of print for decades, it was
reissued by Paris Press in 2004.

Environmental Science Fiction
Bryher was born Annie Winnifred
Ellerman on September 2, 1894, in Margate, England. Her father, Sir John
Reeves Ellerman, was a shipping magnate and reputedly the wealthiest man
in Britain. She read voraciously from
an early age, especially histories and
legends, both classical and British. Hers
was an atypical Victorian girlhood: She
accompanied her parents on their travels around Europe, the Mediterranean,
North Africa, and the Middle East. Even
though hers was a fairly liberal family
environment for the time, she always
resented not being born a boy. When
the outbreak of World War I ended
Bryher’s formal study of archaeology,
she turned to writing.
Ellerman took her pseudonym from
her favorite of the Isles of Scilly. Married ﬁrst to the American writer Robert
McAlmon and then to the Scottish ﬁlmmaker and writer Kenneth Macpherson, Bryher’s life companion was more
particularly Doolittle, the American
imagist poet known as H.D. Financially
independent, broadly philanthropic,
and multilingual, Bryher was friend, associate, publisher, and often ﬁnancial
supporter of the expatriate writers and
artists who converged on Paris in the
1920s and 1930s. She repeatedly raised
alarms about activities in Germany
and the rise of fascism in the early
1930s. By 1940, she had been the
means of escape for more than a hundred refugees from Nazi Germany, providing money, documents, respite, and
conduit through her home in Switzerland until she too had to evacuate to
England.
Bryher reinterpreted her experiences
of the 1940s for the story of men and
women trying to escape in Visa for Avalon. Although the country is not named
in the novel, the world is clearly England, although it is a marginally futuristic culture where characters seem to

have little historical awareness or cultural memory. The name Avalon has no
signiﬁcance for them even though they
hope to immigrate there. The story is
about the impending end of a comfortable and inattentive way of life, of people caught between an uncaring
impotent government and an uncaring
destructive insurgency.
Further Readings
Atwood, Margaret. “After the Last Battle.”
New York Review of Books 52, no. 6 (7 April
2005): 38–39.
Duhamel, P. Albert. “Civilization Leaves Its
Wounds.” New York Times Book Review,
April 25, 1965, 4.
Friedman, Susan Stanford, ed. Analyzing
Freud: Letters of H.D., Bryher, and Their
Circle. New York: New Directions, 2002.

ELIZABETH D. LLOYD-KIMBREL

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE FICTION
This subgenre of science ﬁction (SF)
known as environmental SF deals with
humanity’s place and actions within
the biosphere, the ecological system of
biological and nonbiological interdependencies that can be referred to as
the “web of life.” While nearly all science
ﬁction examines the ways humans interact with and within their surroundings—
whether those surroundings comprise
spaces with advanced technology,
estranging other worlds, or even
alternate presents—environmental SF
speciﬁcally engages the concerns of
environmentalism: species extinction,
global warming, deforestation, overpopulation, pollution, and other humancaused threats to the biospherical web.
Further, this type of SF often expresses
the theoretical underpinnings of modern
environmental philosophies such as
deep ecology, ecofeminism, and ecosocialism, while it also contributes to
such philosophies with its narrative
reﬂections.
99
..............

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Though science ﬁction’s foundational
works of the nineteenth century predate the emergence of the environmental movement in the 1960s, themes of
current environmentalist interest show
up in some of these works. Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley’s Frankenstein (1818),
for example, questions undisciplined
science, and H. G. Wells’s War of the
Worlds (1898) comments on humanity’s
historical oppressions of nonhuman
species and “inferior races.” SF of the
early and mid-twentieth century continued this pre-environmentalist tradition: Olaf Stapledon’s Last and First Men
(1930) and John W. Campbell’s
“Twilight” (1934), to name two, scrutinize the modern world’s wasteful use
of its natural base and the destruction
of ecological systems in the name of
human progress, respectively. But only
after the publication of Rachel Carson’s
scientiﬁc treatise Silent Spring in 1962—
that is to say, only after the popularization of environmentalism as a social
cause—did science ﬁction, in its New
Wave, begin to reﬂect regularly a critical attention to ecological themes and
thus sprout the environmental SF
subgenre.
Considered by many environmental
historians to initiate the modern environmental movement, Silent Spring
investigated the harmful impacts of
industrial pesticide use on humans and
nonhuman species. Carson’s analysis
provoked scathing and often sexist criticism from the chemical industry it
challenged. She was dismissed as a
hysterical woman, by the industry as
well as by those in the scientiﬁc community who held fast to the belief that
with science man could control nature.
Silent Spring demonstrated that in controlling nature with chemical pesticides, “man” had only proven himself
unaware of ecosystemic dynamics and
as a result introduced ecologically
100
................

Volume 2: Entries

devastating contaminates into the environment. Signiﬁcantly, with its attention to human-caused ecological
problems, Carson’s book shifted the
relatively quiet conservation and preservation movement of the early and
mid-twentieth century to the more
vocal and proactive environmentalist
movement that has since germinated a
host of critical ecological perspectives
and merged with other social causes.
Though still interested in saving this
or that piece of land for its aesthetic
beauty, modern environmentalism is
most concerned with the fundamental
beliefs and practices of society that
lead to ecological decline. In its various
forms, environmentalism today asks
questions about the ecological viability
of prevailing ideas and customs. For
example, the deep ecology movement
perceives a human-centeredness in
modern ideas and practices; it calls
on individuals to recognize the importance of all species in and of themselves, as it also emphasizes the
spiritual interconnectedness that all
species share. Another environmental
movement, ecofeminism, blends the
interests of various feminisms, including feminist spirituality, with those of
ecological movements, locating the
oppression of women, racism, and ecological breakdown as related consequences of ideologies informed by
gender hierarchies. Drawing from
Marxism, ecosocialism ﬁnds capitalism’s
obligation to produce more and more
products for the market to be incompatible with the material realities of
environmental limits and the ecological
principle that everything is connected
to everything else. Whatever their philosophical leanings, modern environmental movements are united in
interrogating those elements of modern culture that have contributed to
the rapid depletion and destruction of

Environmental Science Fiction
ecosystems. These movements hope to
affect changes in social consciousness
with such questioning.
In Silent Spring’s ﬁrst chapter, “A Fable
for Tomorrow,” Carson used the science
ﬁction conventions of dystopias as a
rhetorical tool to envision a scenario of
a future American town degraded by
indiscriminate pesticide use. A vast
spectrum of science ﬁction that similarly addresses such nightmarish settings, as well as other situations of
environmentalist concern, has been
written since the inception of environmentalism in the 1960s. Notable examples include Ursula K. Le Guin’s The
Word for World Is Forest (1972), Marge
Piercy’s Woman on the Edge of Time
(1976), and Joan Slonczewski’s A Door
into Ocean (1986).
Cognizant of the ecological and
social devastation of napalm use in the
Vietnam War, Le Guin’s Hugo and Nebula award-winning novella The Word for
World Is Forest traces the effects of
deforestation on the landscape and
inhabitants of the ﬁctional planet
Athshe. With wood on Earth scarce and
expensive, Terran loggers invade
Athshe for its forests, enslaving the
native population to provide labor for
the operation. The ensuing story
addresses a range of environmentalist
issues, from observing soil erosion and
the loss of food crops as consequences
of deforestation to questioning the
ethics and logic of an economic system
that permits both environmental degradation and social exploitation.
Piercy’s Woman on the Edge of Time
envisions an ecological utopia, or ecotopia, in which the ideals of the environmental movements have been
realized. The novel’s main character,
Connie Ramos, is an abuse victim living
an alienating life in the city. Residents
of a future town called Mattapoisett go
back in time to pull Ramos from her

disheartening reality and into their
pastoral utopian society, which disdains any type of human or ecological
mistreatment. Mattapoisett’s egalitarian social principles go hand in hand
with its ecological way of being. Using
futuristic methods of reproduction in
which babies are grown in “brooders,”
the human population is deliberately
kept low in an effort to avoid the consequences of overpopulation. Smallscale organic gardening replaces industrial agriculture in Mattapoisett, and all
of the town’s citizens demonstrate
through ritual and language a sense of
their community’s place in the local
ecosystem.
In Slonczewski’s A Door into Ocean,
the colonialism of a patriarchal world
named Valedon threatens the independence of an all-female, all-water
world named Shora. Shora’s inhabitants, called Sharers, display a remarkable knowledge of planetary ecology.
The living rafts upon which Sharer
communities ﬂoat are intricate biological networks of organisms in symbiotic
relationships. The Sharers understand
their society as a part of this relationship, rather than apart from it, and
thus live harmoniously not only upon
their rafts but within the entire ocean
ecology. Wanting to subsume Shora
economically for minerals and textiles,
the rulers of Valedon invade the planet,
introducing pesticides and other means
of biological destruction to undermine
both its ecology and its inhabitants.
The Sharers resist the colonization,
however, setting the stage for a conﬂict
that reﬂects the sociopolitical tensions
between real-world environmentalism
and its opponents.
Other works of environmental SF
include Frank Herbert’s Dune (1965),
John Brunner’s The Sheep Look Up
(1972), Ernest Callenbach’s Ecotopia
(1975), Sally Miller Gearhart’s The
101
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Wanderground: Stories of the Hill Women
(1979), Sheri S. Tepper’s The Gate to
Women’s Country (1988), David Brin’s
Earth (1990), Starhawk’s The Fifth Sacred
Thing (1993), Octavia E. Butler’s Parable
of the Sower (1993), and Kim Stanley
Robinson’s Mars trilogy (1993, 1994, and
1996). In ﬁlm, notable examples of environmental SF include Douglas Trumbull’s Silent Running (1972), Richard
Fleicher’s Soylent Green (1973), James
Bridges’s The China Syndrome (1979), and
more recently Roland Emmerich’s The
Day after Tomorrow (2004).
See also: “Feminist Spirituality” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Heise, Ursula K. Letter to the editor. Proceedings of the Modern Language Association
114, no. 5 (1999): 1096–97.
Le Guin, Ursula K. “The Carrier Bag Theory
of Fiction.” In The Ecocriticism Reader: Landmarks in Literary Ecology, ed. Cheryll Glotfelty and Harold Fromm, 149–54. Athens:
University of Georgia Press, 1996.
Murphy, Patrick D. Farther Aﬁeld in the Study
of Nature-Oriented Literature. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 2000.
Robinson, Kim Stanley, ed. Future Primitive:
The New Ecotopias. New York: Tor, 1994.
Stableford, Brian. “Science Fiction and
Ecology.” In A Companion to Science Fiction,
ed. David Seed, 127–41. Malden, MA:
Blackwell, 2005.
Yanarella, Ernest J. The Cross, the Plow, and
the Skyline: Contemporary Science Fiction and
the Ecological Imagination. Parkland, FL:
Brown Walker Press, 2001.

ERIC OTTO

EPIC FANTASY
Epic fantasy includes those stories that
follow in the tradition of J. R. R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings (1954–55).
Such tales typically take place in a secondary world of the author’s invention,
a world that tends to be pseudomedieval technologically and European
102
................

Volume 2: Entries

culturally. The epic fantasy focuses on
a group of characters from different
classes, races, and cultures who come
together to ﬁght a supernatural evil
that threatens them and their world. In
this regard, it shares some similarities
with another genre: horror. Just like
the horror genre, at the end of an epic
fantasy series, evil has been confronted
and either defeated or contained, and
the characters, changed by their adventures, are left to return to their normal
lives or to assume their new places in
the world.
However, while horror focuses on
building and sustaining dread, often in
a real-world setting and often without any supernatural elements at all,
epic fantasy focuses on adventure, on
magic, and on discovering and exploring the secondary world. This focus
accounts for the familiar plot of such
stories where a party traverses a
strange land visiting many different
spaces. It is also common for the action
of the novel to spread over that same
distance with multiple plotlines, each
with its own point-of-view character,
occurring at different locations. As the
epic fantasy unfolds, readers become
acquainted with the geography, history,
religions, languages, and cultures of
the world, making the form an immersive experience for readers who are
learning the world as they are experiencing the story. The need to learn the
world explains the tendency for epic
fantasy novels to have young, na€ive, or
sheltered protagonists at the heart of
the quest: protagonists who are learning along with the reader.
In terms of story arc, epic fantasy
tends to follow patterns Joseph Campbell outlined in his The Hero with a Thousand Faces (1949). These tales typically
involve a reluctant and/or improbable
hero (or, in some cases, heroes) who,
despite objection and resistance, is

Epic Fantasy
called to action and ends up playing a
pivotal role in a battle between good
and evil. The hero travels the world,
learning from various mentors, confronting challenges and obstacles, and
growing stronger and more invested in
his companions and his world. All this
prepares him to face the darkness, confront it, and usually defeat it. At its
heart, epic fantasy is concerned about
the making of heroes.
In the popular epic fantasies written
in the wake of the success of The Lord of
the Rings, and, indeed, in Tolkien’s work
itself, the hero and his companions are
generally male. This choice is not surprising, considering that the heroes of
myth and legend—two areas frequently
tapped by writers of epic fantasy—tend
to be male. The role of women in such
works tends to be minimal or conﬁned
to prescribed areas. For example, the
female characters in The Lord of the
Rings, such as Galadriel and Goldberry,
do not get called to adventure; instead,
they provide safe havens of comfort

and healing. Like Arwen and Eowyn,
they can also be prizes for the heroes
at the end of the quest. When a woman

breaks out of those roles, as Eowyn
does when she disguises herself as a
man in order to ride into battle, she
does so at the expense of her woman
hood, which in Eowyn’s
case is restored
at the end when she is wooed by and
later marries Faramir. Similar patterns
can be found in David Eddings’s Belgariad and Mallorean series and Terry
Brooks’s Shanarra series, two of the
many multivolume works of epic fantasy that appeared in the wake of
Tolkien.
The proliferation of “Tolkien clones”
in fantasy literature and in role-playing
gaming provided Diana Wynne Jones
with material she incorporated into The
Tough Guide to Fantasyland (1996), a
tongue-in-cheek dictionary of the

standard character, plot, and setting
tropes in epic fantasy. Presented as a
guide for tourists who are looking to
sojourn in Fantasyland, the book offers
a comprehensive listing of the people
and creatures they can expect to meet,
items they might expect to stumble
across, places they could ﬁnd themselves, and situations they might
encounter. Despite the humorous
approach the book takes, it does docud and formulaic
ment the most cliche
devices of the genre.
While such formulaic stories still
have a core audience of readers, the
genre itself is changing as the writers
working in it stretch the conventions of
epic fantasy. One of the ways it is being
altered is by complicating the characters and giving women characters
more visible and essential roles. Some
authors, like Robert Jordan in his
sprawling Wheel of Time series (consisting of twelve novels at the time of
the author’s death in 2007), have provided female characters more visible
and active roles in the plot, but those
characters still remain in supporting
roles. Their actions, even as they
embark on hero journeys of their own,
most often serve to advance or hinder
the main quest, which is being undertaken by a male character. In fact,
despite having a large cast of female
point-of-view
characters,
Jordan
stresses and emphasizes divisions
between the sexes. The ﬁrst example
appears in The Eye of the World (1990),
the ﬁrst book in the series, when readers meet an all-male village council
that is advised by a female Wisdom, a
local wise woman and healer.
George R. R. Martin’s Song of Ice and
Fire series (A Game of Thrones, 1996; A
Clash of Kings, 1998; A Storm of Swords,
2000; A Feast for Crows, 2005) features
characters who are more psychologically complex and morally ambiguous
103
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

than is typical in epic fantasy. He also
twists expectations that readers familiar with the fantasy formula bring with
them to a text. For example, in A Game
of Thrones, Martin shows a child bride
Daenerys Targaryen married off to a
barbarian warlord in a deal that provides her brother with ﬁnancial and
political beneﬁt. However, instead of
being a helpless and victimized trophy
wife, Daenerys manages to both care
for and outlive her warlord husband
and to eclipse him in power and signiﬁcance as a ruler in her own right.
Complicating characters and developing their inner lives as much as the
world itself allows for more personal
and intimate plotlines to be woven
through the overall adventure. It also
allows for less conventional sorts of
heroes and storytelling. Sarah Monlusine novels (Melusine, 2005;
ette’s Me
The Virtu, 2006; The Mirador, 2007) focus
on two such characters, neither of
which ﬁt comfortably in the traditional
hero role. Felix Harrowgate, a wizard
and former male prostitute, is used by
his master in a sexual ritual that shatters the magical crystal that stabilizes
the city’s magic and its wizards’ power.
It also shatters Felix’s mind. Mildmay
the Fox, a cat burglar, assassin, and
Felix’s half-brother, becomes caught up
in events as a simple heist brings him
more trouble than money. The novels,
told in alternating ﬁrst-person points of
view, allow the readers to immerse
themselves in the characters and their
personalities as much as they do in the
world itself.
Delving deeper into the inner lives of
characters has also allowed epic fantasy writers to infuse the erotic into
the genre. In her Black Jewels series
(Daughter of the Blood, 1998; Heir to the
Shadows, 1999; Queen of the Darkness,
1999; The Invisible Ring, 2000), Anne
Bishop explores a world where witches
104
................

Volume 2: Entries

keep aggressive warlords as sex slaves,
controlling their magic and sexuality. It
also focuses on the rise to power of Jaenelle, who grows from child to woman
to witch, the living embodiment of
magic, during the course of the novels.
Jacqueline Carey’s Kushiel’s Legacy trilogy (Kushiel’s Dart, 2001; Kushiel’s Chosen, 2002; Kushiel’s Avatar, 2003) follows
dre n’Delauney, a courtesan and
Phe
spy. As a devotee of the demigods of
sensual pleasure and pain, she is also
dre’s
an “anguissette”—a masochist. Phe
tale is part political intrigue, part
adventure, and part romance and
features an array of strong female
characters. In fact, many of the crossover novels that blend the erotic and
the fantastic are written by female
writers and focus on strong female
protagonists.
Further Readings
Attebery, Brian. The Fantasy Tradition in
American Literature: From Irving to Le Guin.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1980.
———. Strategies of Fantasy. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992.
Austin, Alec. “Quality in Epic Fantasy.”
Strange Horizons, June 24, 2002 [online],
http://www.strangehorizons.com/2002/
20020624/epic_fantasy.shtml.
Donaldson, Stephen R. “Epic Fantasy in the
Modern World: A Few Observations.”
Kent, OH: Kent State University Press,
1986. Available at http://www.stephenr
donaldson.com/EpicFantasy.pdf.
Moorcock, Michael. Wizardry and Wild
Romance: A Study of Epic Fantasy. London:
Gollancz, 1987.

BARBARA LYNN LUCAS

EROTIC SCIENCE FICTION
Although women have written a fair
amount of science ﬁction about sex, little of it has been what most readers
would consider erotic. However, the

Erotic Science Fiction
rise of literary erotica in the 1980s, fan
ﬁction and its expansion on the Internet, and the growing popularity of
e-books have all had an effect on women’s sex writing. Erotic science ﬁction
by women falls into four main groups:
science ﬁction erotica, or professional
works that exist simultaneously as sex
writing and as speculative writing; science ﬁction with erotic elements, that
is, professional work in which there is
an erotic element but the focus is not
erotic; fan ﬁction; and science ﬁction/
speculative erotic romance.
Few works of science ﬁction erotica
exist in the collections of women’s literary erotica (short stories with explicit
sexual content) that were ﬁrst published in the mid-1980s. Lonnie G.
Barbach, a sex therapist, edited several
of the earliest collections. For her second such anthology (Erotic Interludes,
1985), Barbach solicited a contribution
from James Tiptree Jr. The resulting
story and its publishing history are illustrative of both the intersection of
mainstream erotica and science ﬁction
and the rarity of that combination.
In “Trey of Hearts,” Tiptree describes
a casual sexual encounter between a
woman and a male couple: “It had
started as the most ordinary of encounters, in this age of star travel and
shape-changing” (96). In many ways,
this piece should be a classic of the
genre, since it contains a number of
elements that show up in other speculative sex writing: descriptions of sexual activity that avoid both euphemism
and slang, a woman having sex with
two men, shape-shifting, sex with aliens, two men in a committed relationship. But when Barbach reportedly
asked that the story be shortened, Tiptree refused. Her agent believed that
“Trey of Hearts” was not suitable for
the science ﬁction market, and it
remained unpublished until it was

included in a posthumous collection,
Meet Me at Inﬁnity (2000).
Tiptree’s agent was right. The science
ﬁction market has not been open to
erotic writing in general. Conﬂict
between readers’ expectations of science ﬁction novels and of erotica may
account for the rarity of erotic fulllength works classiﬁed primarily as science ﬁction (SF). The fact that mainstream SF focuses on the male and
young adult markets may also play a
role. Gay and lesbian erotic science ﬁction does get published, mostly as short
stories, as in Lynne Jamneck’s Anthology
of Erotic Lesbian Science Fiction (2007).
Perhaps surprisingly, the area least
represented in SF sex writing is what
might seem the most acceptable: mainstream, essentially heterosexual stories
such as “Trey of Hearts.” Somewhat
more common in the 1990s and early
2000s were stories dealing with alternative sexualities: lesbian, gay, and Bondage and Discipline, Dominance and
Submission, Sadism and Masochism
(BDSM). The best known writer in the
category of science ﬁction erotica is
Cecilia Tan, whose work ﬁts into the
alternative category well.
Finding little market for her erotic
science ﬁction in the 1980s, Tan
founded Circlet Press in 1992. Her work
and that of her authors has what she
terms a “sex-positive approach,” existing, at least in part, as a conscious
attempt to positively portray both
bisexuality and consensual sado-masochism. Circlet has published a number
of anthologies and a few novels. In
addition to short stories that combine
erotica and SF or fantasy elements, Tan
herself has written a novel, The Velderet
(2001). Conceived as a series of short
stories for a fetish magazine, The Velderet combines cybersex and BDSM
with a plot about aliens, politics, and
saving the world.
105
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

A number of mainstream science ﬁction novels by women do include erotic
sexual descriptions, though these elements remain subordinate to the science ﬁction elements. Some writers
write about sex in a way that may be
erotic but is not openly proclaimed as
such. Nicola Grifﬁth’s Slow River (1995),
for instance, contains descriptions of
future sex clubs, pornography, prostitution, an aphrodisiac drug, and what
the characters do under its inﬂuence.
Although the protagonist ultimately
ﬁnds the sex degrading and, once off
the drug, unarousing, her response
does not guarantee that the reader
will feel similarly. Other, less graphic
books have themes—sex slaves (Susan
Wright’s Slave Trade, 2003), a hero/
sadist (Susan R. Matthews’s Prisoner of
Conscience, 1998), prostitution (Jane
Lindskold,
“Smoke
and
Mirrors,”
1996)—that suggest an erotic impetus
for the novels, if not a conscious erotic
intent. A few anthologies, such as Alien
Sex (1992) and Cybersex (1996), contain
a number of stories by women that also
explore sexual themes, but in primarily
nonerotic terms.
The term fan ﬁction refers to original,
amateur creative works featuring the
characters of various television shows,
books, or ﬁlms, written by the fans of
these shows. The phenomenon began
in the 1970s with amateur stories written about a romantic and/or sexual
relationship between Captain Kirk and
Mr. Spock of the original Star Trek television series. With the arrival of the
Internet, fan ﬁction has found a much
wider audience and far more writers.
The stories are too diverse for a single
deﬁnition, but most are written by
women, most focus on romantic relationships or “pairings,” and a signiﬁcant
majority use as their starting points television shows or books in the science
ﬁction or fantasy category. Slash, fan
106
................

Volume 2: Entries

ﬁction that features male/male pairings, is common. Stories that feature
female/female
pairings,
variously
called femslash or f/f slash, also exist,
although only in small numbers. The
level of sexual description varies, as
does the degree to which individual
stories are concerned with sexuality,
but in many, the erotic elements are
signiﬁcant and explicit.
Although the science ﬁction elements are subservient to the characters in most fan ﬁction, the popularity
of Star Trek, Battlestar Galactica, Xena:
Warrior Princess, and Harry Potter fan
work is signiﬁcant. Science ﬁction and
fantasy settings function similarly in
erotic works, allowing the creation of
characters who exist outside of contemporary or historical limitations.
This situation offers writers a liberating
ﬂexibility in dealing with gender and
sexuality. For example, same-sex couples can pair up without the authors
having to address issues of sexual orientation or social disapproval. Male/
male pairs allow depictions of sexuality
without gender as an overt issue; dominance/submission in male/male relationships can be explored erotically
without raising issues of nonerotic gender-based power inequities. And in
male/female pairings, men with power
equal to or less than that of their
female partners are not marked as
socially undesirable. Sex with (very
humanoid) aliens is popular and is
used to explore both gender differences
and sexual possibilities. Although new
(and improved) male genitalia show up
in a few stories, telepathy is probably
the most popular alien sexual
attribute.
By the early 2000s, the fastest-growing area of professional sexual science
ﬁction was classiﬁed as science ﬁction/
futuristic
erotic
romance.
These
romances are similar to fan ﬁction in

Erotic Science Fiction
that they subordinate the science ﬁction elements to the erotic story, but
the futuristic or fantastical setting is
not incidental.
It makes sense that science ﬁction
sex writing by women found a market
in the romance genre. Romance has
long sold very well, and, while it is possible to argue that non–sexually explicit
romance has always been one form of
women’s erotica, after the 1980s, the
genre became increasingly open to
explicit sexual descriptions. Although
the occasional futuristic romance did
exist before the twenty-ﬁrst century,
the 2000s saw an increased interest in
romance novels that combined a futuristic setting with explicitly erotic
writing.
In 2004, Harlequin added “Luna,” a
line speciﬁcally for romance in fantasy
settings. The rise of the e-book aided in
the creation of several additional publishing companies that focus on erotic
romance. Loose Id and Ellora’s Cave,
for instance, both specialize in romantic erotica that crosses genres.
Although they publish subcategories
such as westerns and mysteries, a signiﬁcant portion of their booklists take
place in neither our past nor present.
For example, Loose Id tellingly requires
its illustrators to be able “to create

realistic people and anthropomorphs
(aliens of various types and shapeshifters) and paranormal beings (vampires, elves, etc) with a highly sensual
look and feel” (http://www.loose-id.net/
employment.aspx).
Erotic romance sometimes bears a
striking resemblance to fan ﬁction.
Publishers such as Loose Id carry
extensive lines of male/male stories
aimed at female readers. Even stories
focusing on male/female sex can carry
overtones of Kirk and Spock. For
instance, in Interstellar Service and Discipline: Victorious Star (2004) by Morgan
Hawke, a (powerful, heroic) woman is
kidnapped by a spaceship captain and
his alien ﬁrst mate/lover. The female
protagonist experiences submissive
sex, telepathy, unusual alien genitalia,
and sexual slavery, all in the course of
falling in love with the heroes.
Further Readings
Palumbo, Donald, ed. Erotic Universe: Sexuality and Fantastic Literature. New York:
Greenwood, 1986.
Perry, Ava. “Cecilia Tan Speaks Out on the
Life of a Bisexual Erotica Writer” [online].
Http://www.ceciliatan.com/inter.html.
Tan, Cecelia. Afterword to The Velderet, 182–
83. Cambridge, MA: Circlet Press, 2001.

VICTORIA SOMOGYI

107
................

This page intentionally left blank

F
FAIRY TALES

AND

FOLKLORE

The genres of fairy tales and folklore
are linked in common parlance by their
subject matter, but they are broadly
differentiated by their means of transmission: the fairy tale is acknowledged
as a literary genre, but the folktale is
seen as a form of oral storytelling. It is
only recently that folklore has begun to
be accurately recorded: the literary
fairy tale represents our earliest extant
record of the stories told in the past.
However, those fairy tales link fantastic
stories to female community.
The ﬁrst literary fairy tales are attributed Giovan Francesco Straparola, born
in Italy in the late ﬁfteenth century and
commonly considered the “father” of
the literary fairy tale for his publication
of Le piacevoli notti (The Pleasant Nights)
in the mid-sixteenth century. Straparola began the process of genre formation by organizing a grouping of tales
within his collection, clearly constructing a format that is still recognizable
today.
The next notable author of literary
fairy tales, Giambattista Basile, born in
nearby Naples less then twenty years
after Straparola’s death, continued the
ﬂedgling tradition with his publication
of Lo cunto de li cunti (The Tale of Tales),
also known as Il pentamarone, a collection consisting of forty-nine fairy tales
framed within a ﬁftieth frame narrative,
echoing a device used in Straparola’s
writing. Basile produced the ﬁrst pure
collection of literary fairy tales to be
published in Europe. He both consciously borrowed from the oral

tradition—crediting “a group of wizened
and misshapen crones,” as Straparola
before him had credited “a circle of
ladies,” two interesting instances of
apparent masculine ventriloquism at
the roots of the fairy tale—and then
changed it to suit his own image of
what the tale should be. The Tale of Tales
contains the stories of Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty, and Rapunzel, although in
versions very different from the ones
we know today. Even though The Tale of
Tales was subtitled “Entertainment for
Little Ones,” its contents were intended
for all ages, and for those of an age to
read for themselves most of all.
The literary fairy tale came into its
own in seventeenth-century France
with the literary movement known as
the contes de fees, literally, tales of the
fairies. The authors of the contes de
es were at least partially inspired by
fe
the works of Straparola and Basile:
between 1573 and 1612, there were six
editions of the French translation of
es
Straparola alone. The contes de fe
began in the literary salons of such
upper-class woman as Marie Catherine
D’aulnoy, Henriette-Julie de Murat,
Catherine Bernard, and Marie-Jeanne
ritier. Their authors, more than
L’He
two-thirds of them female, used their
stories to critique the social conventions of the day.
es were initially met
The contes de fe
with both intense curiosity and popularity, as well as fear and opprobrium.
The public of seventeenth-century
France was incredibly receptive: the
es were the single most
contes de fe
popular form of literature published in
109
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

France at the time. However, the bluebooks, the cheap editions that made
es so readily available,
the contes des fe
were also scorned on the basis of their
popularity. Their success among a
largely female readership was attributed by their critics largely to fashionableness, rather than to any inherent
value or potential identiﬁcation with
their themes.
es were marked by
The contes de fe
their style, consisting of baroque and
complicated language and highly
detailed descriptions, a style that won
them many admirers in their own time
but did not necessarily travel as well as
those of one member of the circle who
wrote in a more restrained manner:
Charles Perrault. The uncle of one of
the founding members of the contes
es, Mme. L’He
retier, Perrault was
des fe
an active participant in the telling of the
tales for many years. He is best known,
however, for merging several popular
folktales that had previously provided
the source material for baroque versions into modern tales designed to
appeal to audiences “of all ages.” Perrault is the ﬁrst author to have marked
the fairy tale as a genre for children,
with the publication of his Histoires ou
contes du temps passe, or Contes de ma
Mere l’Oye, designed to present the tales
as they had been told by “governesses
and grandmothers to little children.”
Though Perrault credited the female
tellers of the tales broadly, he never cited
his sources by name. Unlike the conteuses, who took pride in their authorship and claimed their work as a
concrete literature, Perrault assumed
the mantle of translator as well as collector: the translation here was one of
class and gender, involving the editingout of the voice of the Third Estate in
favor of a more appropriate message.
This presentation minimizes what he
considered “coarser” elements of the
110
................

Volume 2: Entries

tales, as well as those we might today
think of as being empowering; one famous example comes from Perrault’s
version of “Little Red Riding Hood,”
which, in contrast to other versions
dated to the period, shows a marked lack
of agency on the part of the heroine.
The process of the normalization of
the fairy tale began in a small way with
es, but did not truly
the contes de fe
catch ﬁre until nearly a hundred years
later with the works of Jacob Ludwig
Grimm and Wilhelm Carl Grimm, spe€rchen
ciﬁcally, their Kinder- und Hausma
(Children’s and Household Fairy Tales).
The Grimms did not write their stories
themselves, nor did they collect them
directly from the mouths of the Volk;
rather, they collaborated with largely
uncredited women of the middle and
upper classes. The Grimms’ most proliﬁc sources included the Wilde and
Hassenpﬂug sisters, Frederike Mannel,
and Dorothea Viehmann. However,
only one female contributor, Viehmann, was ever mentioned by name in
their editions, and even she was
included under false pretense as a
farmer’s wife, rather than in her actual
persona of poor bourgeois. Of the 210
fairy tales that the Brothers Grimm
included in their collections, over half
were present as the result of a woman’s
contribution.
The Grimms applied their revisionist
approach to fairy tales in general, not
only to the process of collection but
also to the tales themselves. They
edited their tales heavily to make them
more appropriate for a younger audience by removing mature themes, particularly those of overt sexuality. Thus,
when the literary fairy tale reached
England in the nineteenth century, it
arrived in an idealized form, voided of
all potentially offensive material and
tailored to guide children into “proper”
forms of socialization. This form

Fan Fiction
appealed to the Victorians, just coming to a new appreciation of the
“innocence” of childhood. It is held as
fact that the Edgar Taylor translation of
€rchen, titled simthe Kinder- und Hausma
ply German Popular Stories (1823), was
the single most important text to stimulate the nineteenth-century renewal
of interest in fairy tales among children
and adults alike.
Mirroring the imperialist tendencies
of the nation as a whole, much of the
work done on fairy tales in Victorian
England consisted of collecting the output of other nations. Andrew Lang’s
Colored Fairy Books (1889–1910) are representative of this pattern: while Lang’s
ﬁrst three volumes focused mainly on
the French and German tales that had
sparked the popularity of the fairy tale
in England, the next eight would
include tales from every corner of the
world (or as near as he could come).
Though Lang selected the tales to be
included, the majority of them were
also collected or translated by anonymous female contributors, with Mrs.
e Alleyne) performing
Lang (Leonora, ne
the bulk of the work.
During the Victorian period, extreme
changes were made to modify fairy tales from their original forms to versions
that might be more palatable to their
target audience. Although some fairy
tales were “native” to the traditions of
England, it was not the content, but the
form of the fairy tale that was ﬁnalized
in Victorian England. Fairy tales were
tidied and made suitable for the modest readership that was seen as their
proper audience: women and children.
They became the target audience at
whom later consumerist strategies
would be aimed.
In the twentieth century, certain elements of the pattern established by the
Brothers Grimm and the Victorians
were successfully repeated: certainly,

Disney utilized the didacticism of the
form to reinforce gender roles in his ﬁlmic retellings of Snow White (1937), Cinderella (1950), and Sleeping Beauty (1959),
among others, which have since been
roundly criticized for their softening of
original themes. However, the fairy tale
has been reinvigorated in what some
call a “fairy-tale renaissance” by female
fantasy authors: writers such as
Angela Carter, Tanith Lee, Robin
McKinley, and Emma Donoghue have
done much to revitalize the form, with
encouragement from editors such as
Terri Windling in collections like Faery!
(1985) and Snow White, Blood Red (1993;
coedited with Ellen Datlow), creating
tales rooted in tradition but also
expanded to include broader themes
and broader audiences. Fairy tales, and
their female authors, continue to
enchant.
See also: “The Creation of Literature for the
Young” (vol. 1); “Nineteenth-Century Fiction”
(vol. 1).
Further Readings
Harries, Elizabeth Wanning. Twice upon a
Time: Women Writers and the History of the
Fairy Tale. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Paradiz, Valerie. Clever Maids: The Secret History of the Grimm Fairy Tales. New York:
Basic Books, 2005.
Warner, Marina. From the Beast to the Blonde:
On Fairy Tales and Their Tellers. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1994.

HELEN PILINOVSKY

FAN FICTION
Even though the term fan ﬁction can be
found in print as early as 1944 (in J. B.
Speer’s Fancyclopedia), its early deﬁnition differs from current usage. Speer
describes it as ﬁction written about fans
rather than by them, a genre that now
in science ﬁction (SF) fanzines is more
often called faanﬁction.
111
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Since the 1960s, fan ﬁction has generally been understood as derivative
creative writing by fans. Most inclusively, it can describe any derivative
expansions of a ﬁctional universe and
thus can include everything from postmodern rewrites like Wide Sargasso Sea
(1996) by Jean Rhys and Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern Are Dead (1967) by Tom
Stoppard to medieval hagiography to
the collective storytelling resulting in
the Iliad and Odyssey. More restrictively,
fan ﬁction denotes a movement whose
roots originated in media—especially
television—fandom, speciﬁcally in the
Star Trek fandom arising out of science
ﬁction fan culture in the 1960s, but
that has since spread to encompass a
range of media and generic strains. As
such, fan ﬁction as it is most commonly understood is historically situated and pertains to particular forms
of media texts as well as a speciﬁc
amateur infrastructure.
Media fandom is the preferred term
describing what was, especially in the
beginning, primarily a female fan community revolving around mostly television shows. Fans in fandom share not
just theoretical and critical but also
creative responses to the texts. In its
early stages, media fandom primarily
focused on television and clearly
showed its science ﬁction heritage in
its vibrant convention (con) and fanzine culture. In fact, the very ﬁrst Star
Trek fanzine, Spockanalia (1967), already
contained the ﬁrst creative piece, Dorothy Jones’s “The Territory of Rigel.”
Likewise, Jacqueline Lichtenberg, Sondra Marshak, and Joan Winston’s “Star
Trek” Lives! (1975) describes the development of Star Trek fandom’s infrastructure, including fanzines, letter
campaigns, and conventions, dedicating an entire chapter to fan writers and
the community of women who enjoyed
such ﬁctional expansion.
112
................

Volume 2: Entries

While media fandom initially may
have coalesced around Star Trek, by
the mid- to late 1970s, it had added
other ﬁctional universes. Amateur ﬁction, self-published and disseminated
among other fans, the ﬁction fanzines,
and amateur press associations (APAs),
as well as the cons, built on the infrastructure of science ﬁction fandom
even as the writers’ demographics
changed to include a majority of
women, as opposed to the more maledominated science ﬁction fandom.
With the rise of the Internet, the
infrastructure changed to include a
more diverse demographic as fandom
became
more
widely
accessible.
Through usenet groups, mailing lists,
and weblogs, as well as central archives
and personal Web pages, fans shared
their stories.
Within the last few years, many fan
writing communities, like the ones
revolving around comics, anime, soap
opera, music and celebrities, and literary texts, have cross-fertilized so that
clear lineage of traditions, terminology,
and literary tropes becomes hard to
trace. At the same time, the two largest
fandoms in recent years, those of Harry
Potter and The Lord of the Rings,
expanded the base to involve ever
younger fans who often are not connected to traditional fan cultures. As a
result, fan ﬁction has become more inclusive and less clearly deﬁnable in
terms of generic conventions, stylistic
markers, or fannish tropes. Also, the
recent rise and acceptance within the
fan community of real people ﬁction
(RPF) has complicated the boundaries
with other forms of writing. Yet
throughout, fan ﬁction’s central characteristic remains its derivative nature
and the writers’ amateur status. In this
sense, fan discourse continues to identify fan ﬁction less by its textual characteristics than by its anticommercial

Farmer, Nancy
impetus, which excludes professional
narrative revisions or commercial tie-in
novels, and its community base, which
determines its modes of production,
dissemination, and reception.
Ever changing in its deﬁnition, fan
ﬁction cannot easily be categorized in
generic or even procedural terms. Most
comprehensively, it must be understood as a cultural phenomenon that
may include any story written by a fan
about a source text, but, in a stricter
sense, it requires a speciﬁc infrastructure and community context. In fact,
one of the difﬁculties of deﬁning fan
ﬁction properly is that it describes both
a cultural phenomenon and an artistic
practice. As the former, it is tied into
modes of production, dissemination,
and reception and thus distinguishes
tie-in novels from fan novels simply by
commercial context; as the latter, it
encompasses any number of professional texts that resemble fan stories stylistically and thematically. What
characterizes fan ﬁction in such a literary and structural reading is its inherent dependence upon intertextuality,
most importantly with the source text
it expands but often also with the stories and discussions within the fannish
community in which it is created.
Fan ﬁction is a form of creative interpretation insofar as most stories make
a particular statement about a given
character or a situation. Often ﬁlling in
scenes or thoughts that are missing in
the source text, the fan story negotiates
between different interpretations of the
characters, their dynamics, and general
events. In so doing, it can offer insight
into the text that rivals any academic
analysis. At the same time, fan ﬁction
creates a canvas where writers can
explore characters already familiar to
and beloved by their readers and can
write stories unrestricted by commercial impetus.

Fan ﬁction may be accessible to outsiders, and some fan texts have even
become commercial successes after
their authors changed characters’
names and identifying characteristics.
Mostly, however, its audience is clearly
deﬁned as those other fans who are
intimately familiar with the source text
and, quite often, the surrounding fandom and the discussions and stories it
produces. In fact, the most characteristic aspects of the fan community are
the way people share ideas, brainstorm
together, cowrite, and edit one another’s stories, as well as the way ideas
travel and get picked up in different
venues and forms by different fans. As
such, fan ﬁction is both a vital aspect
of and vitally dependent on the fandoms it creates and of which it is a
part.
See also: Cosplay; “Fandom” (vol. 1); Vidding.
Further Readings
Coppa, Francesca. “A Brief History of Media
Fandom.” In Fan Fiction and Fan Communities in the Age of the Internet, ed. Karen
Hellekson and Kristina Busse, 41–59. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2006.
Jenkins, Henry. Textual Poachers: Television
Fans and Participatory Culture. New York:
Routledge, 1992.
Lichtenberg, Jacqueline, Sondra Marshak,
and Joan Winston. “Star Trek” Lives! New
York: Corgi, 1975.
Verba, Joan Marie. Boldly Writing: A Trekker
Fan and Zine History, 1967–1987. 2nd ed.
Minnetonka, MN: FTL, 1996.

KRISTINA BUSSE

FARMER, NANCY

(1941– )

Nancy Farmer has won numerous
awards, including Newbery Honors
(1995, 1997, 2003), a Michael Printz
Award (2003), and a National Book
Award (2002), for her children’s and
young adult science ﬁction and fantasy.
Farmer, who was born in Phoenix,
113
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Arizona, attended college in Oregon.
Upon graduation, she served in the
Peace Corps in India for three years and
later went on to work as a chemist and
entomologist in Mozambique and Zimbabwe, where she met her husband.
Farmer decided to try her hand at
writing after reading a bad book to her
four-year-old son. She did not become a
full-time writer, however, until she
moved back to the United States and
received a National Endowment for
the Arts grant, which she used to
write the book Do You Know Me? (1993), a
young adult novel set in Zimbabwe. Her
adventuresome spirit and travel and
work experiences are reﬂected in her
novels in the form of settings, characters, language, point of view, and
culture.
Farmer’s characters are always heroes or heroines. Her endings are triumphant as a protest against books about
victims. The theme of self-reliance in
the face of adversity stands out in most
of her works. Nhamo, the female
protagonist in her book A Girl Named Disaster (1996), especially exempliﬁes selfreliance and strength. In an attempt to
escape an arranged marriage with a
man twice her age, eleven-year-old
Nhamo ﬂees her Mozambique home for
Zimbabwe. Fantastical elements are
incorporated into this novel, as Nhamo’s
two-day trip takes over a year, and in her
quest for survival, she comes into contact with the spirit world.
Self-reliance, familial relationships,
and courage also stand out as themes
in Farmer’s well-known science ﬁction
novel The Ear, the Eye and the Arm
(1994). This futuristic novel, again set
in Zimbabwe, follows the antics of
three siblings who escape the sheltered
protection of their father’s home and
the three mutant detectives with extrasensory powers who are sent to search
for the children.
114
................

Volume 2: Entries

In her most celebrated work, The
House of the Scorpion (2002), Farmer
departs from her African landscapes
and returns to the arid land on the
United States–Mexico border. In this
book, Farmer tackles the difﬁcult topics
of what it means to be human, how life
is valued, and cloning. Matt, the protagonist, is raised unaware that he is a
clone, created to provide spare body
parts for a 142-year-old drug lord. The
novel follows his quest to attain human
status. Farmer also departs from the
African landscape in her fantasy novel
The Sea of Trolls (2004). In this novel,
Farmer draws upon Norse mythology
to create a matriarchy where the
female characters are larger than life,
have harems, and capture males for
mates.
Although Farmer is relatively new to
the ﬁeld, critics continue to refer to her
as a solid and exciting writer who has
great appeal to all kinds of readers.
Further Readings
Brock-Servais, Rhonda. “Intracultural Travel
or Adventures at Home in The Ear, the Eye,
and the Arm.” Children’s Literature in Education 32 (2001): 155–65.
Brown, Jennifer M. “Nancy Farmer: Voices of
Experience.” Publishers Weekly 249 (2002):
154–55.
Farmer, Nancy. Interview by James Blasingame. Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy 48 (2004): 77–78.
Horning, Kathleen. “The House of Farmer.”
School Library Journal (2003): 49–50.

YOLANDA HOOD

FARSCAPE
Farscape (1999–2004) was a science ﬁction series produced by the Jim Henson
Company and Hallmark Entertainment
and ﬁlmed in Australia. It featured
John Crichton (Ben Browder) as a present-day astronaut who is accidentally
shot through a wormhole to another

Female Friendship
part of the galaxy, where he immediately becomes caught up in various
conﬂicts between galactic empires,
including the Peacekeepers. He joins
forces with a group of escaped prisoners on the living Leviathan ship Moya.
Unlike earlier generations of science
ﬁction television in which the main
characters were involved in exploration
or law enforcement, Farscape is similar
to shows like Babylon 5 (1994–98), Star
Trek: Voyager (1995–2001), and Fireﬂy
(2002–03), in which the main characters
struggle to survive in a hostile and
sometimes chaotic universe and the
focus is on interpersonal relationships.
The involvement of the Jim Henson
Company ensured a high quality of visual and special effects, particularly the
Dominar Rygel XVI and the ship’s Pilot,
a multiarmed creature physically and
emotionally bonded to Moya.
In 2000, 2001, and 2002, Farscape won
Saturn Awards for best syndicated/
cable TV series and best TV actor for
Browder. The other main characters in
the show are the Luxan warrior K
D’Argo (Anthony Simcoe), the Delvian
priestess Pa’u Zotoh Zhaan (Virginia
Hey), the Nebari thief Chiana (Gigi Edgley), the former Peacekeeper soldier
Aeryn Sun (Claudia Black), and the
Sebacean-Scarran
hybrid
Scorpius
(Wayne Pygram). It is the latter two with
whom Crichton has complicated emotional relationships, falling in love with
Sun and seeking for most of the second,
third, and fourth (and ﬁnal) seasons to
escape the villainous Scorpius.
Farscape explored complex gender
dynamics and endorsed interspecies
relationships. However, while Sun was
a powerful and active female character, often the female characters were
deﬁned largely by their sexuality
(Chiana), their penetrable and vulnerable bodies (Moya), or their caring
natures (Zhaan), all of which deﬁnitions

Sun was also to take on at different
points. Farscape was the ﬂagship program on the Sci-Fi channel and criticially acclaimed as one of the most
innovative contemporary science ﬁction
television series. When the show was
suddenly canceled by the Sci-Fi Channel at the end of the fourth season, ending the show on the cliffhanger, fans
mounted a massive campaign to bring
it back. The effort was unsuccessful,
but resulted in a miniseries in 2004 that
wrapped up the major plotlines. Moving
the science ﬁction television series far
beyond the Star Trek remit, Farscape has
a strong place in science ﬁction history.
Further Readings
Christopher, Renny. “Little Miss Tough Chick
of the Universe: Farscape’s Inverted Sexual
Dynamics.” In Action Chicks: New Images of
Tough Women in Popular Television, ed.
Sherrie A. Inness, 257–81. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
Iaccino, James. “Farscape’s John Crichton and
Buck Rogers in the 25th Century: Revisited
for a New Millennium.” Popular Culture
Review 12, no. 2 (August 2001): 101–10.
Scodari, Christine. “Resistance Re-Examined: Gender, Fan Practices and Science
Fiction Television.” Popular Communication
1, no. 2 (2003): 111–30.
Sherry, Ginn. Our Space, Our Place: Women in
the Worlds of Science Fiction Television. Lanham, MD: University Press of America,
2005.
Yeffeth, Glenn, ed. Farscape Forever! Sex,
Drugs and Killer Muppets. Dallas: BenBella
Books, 2005.

STACY GILLIS

FEMALE FRIENDSHIP
Science ﬁction and fantasy television
series have been peopled traditionally
by active men and passive women.
Female characters showing heroism
were marked as unique in their abilities. The trend of characterizing strong
women as evil or unusual has resulted
115
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

in decades of isolation for the rare
female science ﬁction or fantasy hero.
Female friendships remained uncommon in the world of the fantastic, even
as feminism’s rising popularization
affected other male-dominated genres
such as crime shows, allowing bonding
between women via shared experiences
in patriarchal arenas.
This lack of female friendship in fantastic genres is important for two reasons. First, science ﬁction and fantasy
often deal with the concept of possibility, asking how our lived reality might
be different, even better. Second, feminism has been ﬁrst and foremost about
collectivity:
the possibilities
that
emerge when women come together to
effect change. While science ﬁction
and fantasy on television have historically addressed issues of race, government, the nation, and occasionally
class, thorough explorations of gender
and sexuality do not exist. When strong
female characters have appeared in
these texts, they have been isolated. It
was not until the late 1990s that new
TV networks reached out to writers,
producers, and viewers who had grown
up with feminism.
The most signiﬁcant science ﬁction
franchise on TV has been Star Trek, beginning in the 1960s and running into
the twenty-ﬁrst century across several
different series and in different media.
While female characters always populated the ships and space stations of
this franchise, women received little
screen time unless serving the lead
male characters’ stories, often romantically. This situation began to change
in later spin-offs, especially with the
introduction of Kathryn Janeway as the
ﬁrst starring female Star Trek captain
in 1995, on Star Trek: Voyager.
Captain Janeway, like many female
science ﬁction heroes before her, did
not have a signiﬁcant female friendship
116
................

Volume 2: Entries

with any of the women she worked
with. Much like Dana Scully in The
X-Files (1993–2002), female heroes in
the dangerous worlds of science ﬁction
and fantasy have little time for bonding
with other women, even though there
often is time for heterosexual romances. The world of television science ﬁction and fantasy is primarily one of
lone heroism, with leaders—male or
female—making difﬁcult decisions on
their own and suffering emotional isolation. One signiﬁcant development
with Janeway’s character was that she
stressed a less traditionally masculine
form of power in which there was room
for cooperation rather than constant
aggression in decision-making.
As more strong women began to populate television science ﬁction and fantasy throughout the 1990s, bonding
between women began to occur more
regularly. The majority of such shows,
while offering realistic and gratifying
relationships, have relegated these
female bonds to secondary status. Key
plot points and overarching mythologies
seldom revolved around women working
together as friends; still, female friendships were shown as beneﬁcial to women’s abilities to be heroic in the face of
the uncertainties rife in these worlds. Series in the 1990s and 2000s that followed
this trend include Andromeda, Smallville,
Babylon 5, Stargate SG-1, Stargate Atlantis,
Ghost Whisperer, and the short-lived Wonderfalls, Joan of Arcadia, Fireﬂy, and Dark
Angel. One reason that such shows could
exist was the growth of new networks
seeking new audiences, ﬁnding room for
experiments. Viewers with access were
treated to some visions of strong women
working together in fantastic worlds,
although the majority of these characters were white, relegating ethnic minority women to stereotypical guest roles.
While labeling such series “feminist”
is problematic given the range of

Feminisms
meanings feminism has and the extent
to which many of the major producers
and directors were male, a number of
these series consistently raised gender
issues important to feminism, and all
have featured women working together
regularly to solve problems. Drawing
much from the genres of soap opera
and female melodrama, programs such
as Xena: Warrior Princess and Cleopatra
2525 (syndicated); Roswell, Buffy the
Vampire Slayer, and Charmed (WB, with
both Roswell and Buffy ending up on
UPN); and Battlestar Galactica and Farscape (SciFi), offer narratives immersed
in what feminist epistemologist Lorraine Code refers to as processes
involving women’s traditions of knowledge building and decision making that
rest on seeking to understand others’
points of views and experiences, then
discussing possibilities for action based
on competing perspectives.
Two of these series—Buffy and perhaps most famously Xena—also offered
viewers the ﬁrst fantastic television
depictions of sustained lesbian relationships between key characters.
While on Buffy the lesbian relationship
between Wiccas Willow and Tara was
open, on Xena the undeﬁned bond
between the two lead characters Xena
and Gabrielle was a constant point of
debate and at times contention for fans
and became famous for the ambiguous
nature of the leads’ relationship. One
of the greatest accomplishments of
both these series is how they addressed
issues of gender and sexuality through
the mechanics of the fantastic, offering
fans satisfying depictions of lesbianism
alongside of rich platonic relationships
between female characters.
The ensemble casting of these programs stresses the importance of community and friendship. The shows have
ushered in a new era of science ﬁction
and fantasy television in which the

lone hero can no longer survive. In
some (e.g., Buffy, Farscape, and Battlestar Galactica), male characters have
embraced this way of living and working; these shows feature platonic bonds
between men and women and have
managed to incorporate romances
without sacriﬁcing friendships between
women.
However, the fact is that most science ﬁction and fantasy series are coming primarily from male writers and
producers, including those mentioned
here. This is not to say that men cannot write about strong women working
together as friends or that they are
shutting doors on female writers and
producers. For example, Joss Whedon,
the creator of Buffy and Fireﬂy, has long
credited his feminist mother for inﬂuencing the way he writes his characters;
the
show
also
employed
numerous female producers and writers. And while Xena was produced by
Ron Tapert, the executive producer—
the one who made the show run—was
Liz Friedman, and it too employed
many female writers and producers,
including fan ﬁction writer Melissa
Good.
Further Readings
Code, Lorraine. Rhetorical Spaces: Essays on
Gendered Locations. New York: Routledge,
1995.
Helford, Elyce Rae, ed. Fantasy Girls: Gender
in the New Universe of Science Fiction and
Fantasy Television. Lanham, MD: Rowman
& Littleﬁeld, 2000.

SHARON ROSS

FEMINISMS
Feminism names the interdisciplinary
political understanding focused on
questions of social justice and inequality in the status and treatment of
women. All versions of feminist inquiry
interrogate the dominant culture’s
117
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

constraints on women’s lives, subject
normative patriarchy to vigorous critique, and promote the empowerment
of women. But feminism is not now nor
has it ever been a monolithic view; we
must speak, therefore, of feminisms,
plural. Perhaps the four categories typically used to group feminist thought
best suggest feminism’s diversity.
The two most common models—
“waves” and “phases”—differ primarily
in their emphasis on, respectively, continuity and change. The “waves” model
suggests two or three overlapping historical trends, the ﬁrst beginning with
Mary Wollstonecraft and ending somewhere between 1920 and 1960. Oriented around civil liberties within
republican democracies, by midcentury
the movement had entered a period of
dormancy.
Revived after World War II, a Second
Wave of feminism turned to address
economic equality. By the early 1960s,
feminism had moved into institutions:
universities, government bureaus, and
state legislatures. Second Wave women’s groups focused on community
activism or solidarity. In the academy,
feminists focused on such matters as
including women writers within the literary canon; outside the academy,
there developed a new emphasis on
such things as legislation to defeat sexual and domestic violence.
By the mid-1990s, both younger academics and younger activists who
focused more on diverse individualities
came to think a distinct Third Wave
had emerged. Abandoning attempts to
articulate or impose a single theory
forms the signal characteristic of Third
Wave feminism: it embraces heterogeneity—the complex, possibly irresolvable dynamics of sex, gender, race,
class, and culture.
The “phases” model usually offers
four sharply distinct periods, each with
118
................

Volume 2: Entries

a different focus: enfranchisement
(human liberties and law), equity (economic, political opportunity), difference (sexual, biological), and critical
reﬂection (philosophical, analytical).
Because of widespread disagreement
about when these waves or phases
begin and end, and what precisely they
signify, some feminists prefer alternatives. Often presented to supplement
more historical views, a third model
stresses “themes”: subjectivities, sexualities, ethnicities, hybridities, and—
especially relevant in the context of science ﬁction (SF)—technologies. A First
World white bourgeois women’s feminism will take rather different forms
from that of a Third World peasant
woman of color; the same is true
for straight and lesbian feminisms,
political and literary feminisms, and
so forth. Within literature, for example,
a “themes” structure might distinguish between British (materialist,
Marxist), American (liberal, pluralist),
and French (linguistic, psychoanalytic)
approaches. Such labels serve merely
as shorthand terms to indicate styles
and topical emphases, however, rather
than nationalities: many “French” feminists are American, many “British” feminists French.
A paradigm of a fourth model
appears in Feminist Futures (1984) by
Natalie Rosinsky, who with Joanna
Russ, Jenny Wolmark, Veronica Hollinger, Wendy Pearson, and Helen Merrick
is among the best feminist critics of
science ﬁction and fantasy. Rosinsky
presents a square of opposition to situate all views of sex/gender: the horizontal line extends from male to
female, while the vertical line ranges
between essentialist (the belief that
some innate biological or spiritual
essence constitutes sex/gender) and
anti-essentialist (the position that some
cultural ideology constructs sex/

Feminist Science Fiction
gender). One can then chart the four
corners of sex/gender epistemology:
androcentric and gynocentric essentialism, androcentric and gynocentric
androgyny.
See also: Feminist Science Fiction; “Feminist
Spirituality” (vol. 1); Queer Science Fiction.
Further Readings
Howard, Judith A., and Carolyn Allen, eds.
Feminisms at a Millennium. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Kemp, Sandra, and Judith Squires, eds. Feminisms. New York: Oxford University Press,
1997.
Mohanty, Chandra. Feminism without Borders:
Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
2003.

NEIL EASTERBROOK

FEMINIST SCIENCE FICTION
It is impossible to deﬁne feminism as a
single theory about the status and
treatment of women. Instead, it is necessary to consider a diverse group of
feminisms that incorporate conﬂicting
theories and practices. However, it is
possible to argue that writers’ works
are connected to the social and historical contexts in which they live, including feminist movements. Scholarship
has identiﬁed a group of science ﬁction
(SF) novels published during the 1970s
by writers who deal with themes that
were a part of that decade’s feminist
theory. These novels, whether set in
various futures or on alternate worlds,
all consider ways in which technology
changes gender relations and social
roles. Fantasy novels tend to be considered primarily in relation to speciﬁc
types of feminist spirituality, with less
emphasis on technology. Given how
writers have incorporated various elements of feminist theories within their
works in the past, it is possible to speculate that the twenty-ﬁrst century will

see the growth of a wider range of
texts, by a more diverse group of writers, incorporating a spectrum of feminist theories—most importantly, the
intersectional approaches that show
the signiﬁcance of considering issues of
race and ethnicity, alternative sexualities, class, age, and ability status,
along with gender.
As Justine Larbalestier argues in her
2002 monograph The Battle of the Sexes
in Science Fiction, readers, writers, and
critics of science ﬁction and fantasy
have been debating the impact and importance of women in SF since the
1920s without reaching consensus.
One reason for such disagreement
includes the controversial nature of the
term feminist. Not all women—even
those choosing to defy patriarchal
expectations for women in their lives
or writing—choose to be identiﬁed as
feminists. Some even refuse to be discussed or analyzed as “women writers,”
choosing to identify simply as writers,
without what they perceive as limiting
qualiﬁers.
However, it is possible to look at conferences, archives, essays, and books
created by fans, writers, critics, and
academics since the 1970s to see that
many consider feminist works to play
an important role in science ﬁction and
fantasy. WisCon, the ﬁrst feminist SF
convention (con), which started in
1977, is one of the earliest institutions
to proclaim publicly the importance of
feminist science ﬁction. WisCon was
started by fans, but programming has
grown to include an academic track as
well.
A growing body of ﬁction collections
and critical work by writers, fans, and
academics trained in feminist theory
focuses on works by female and,
increasingly, male authors dealing with
gender. The earliest generation of feminist critics included Marleen Barr,
119
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Sarah Lefanu, Lucy Freibert, Natalie
Myra Rosinsky, Joanna Russ, and Lynn
F. Williams. Their scholarship during
the past three decades has given some
authors and works the status of a feminist SF canon. The works, which are
primarily utopias or dystopias, are often taught at the university level, primarily the 1970s feminist utopias.
Since the critics and scholars began
publishing during the 1980s, they naturally looked at contemporary work,
reﬂecting the growth of women publishing in the 1970s.
However, other scholarship and publications by editors and scholars such
as Eric Leif Davin, Larbalestier, Robin
Roberts, Pamela Sargent, and Lisa Yaszek, to name a few, have extended the
emergence and production of what can
be called feminist SF backward in time,
arguing that ﬁction written by women
publishing in the pulp science ﬁction
magazines during in the ﬁrst half of
the twentieth century can be described
as “proto-feminist,” the authors engaging with the feminist ideas of
their time. The changes in feminist
theory have accompanied the changes
in interpretation of such works as
“The Yellow Wallpaper,” a nineteenthcentury ﬁction by Charlotte Perkins
Gilman, which was earlier anthologized and read as a ghost story but is
now read as a feminist critique of the
medical practices she experienced.
The works most often analyzed as
feminist SF in academic scholarship
include Ursula K. Le Guin’s Left Hand of
Darkness (1969), Joanna Russ’s The
Female Man (1975), Suzy McKee Charnas’s Holdfast series (Walk to the End of
the World, 1974; Motherlines, 1978; The
Furies, 1994; The Conqueror’s Child, 1999),
and Marge Piercy’s Woman on the Edge
of Time (1976). The Left Hand of Darkness
by Le Guin differs from the others in
two respects: it was published before
120
................

Volume 2: Entries

the others, and it postulated the existence of a different but related group of
humans living on another planet who
are androgynes. The Gethenians exist
for most of the time in a neuter state;
during regular periods of kemmer, they
can manifest either male or female
secondary sexual characteristics. Sexual differences in the novel are coded
as “racial” differences; Le Guin’s protagonist, a human male on a diplomatic
visit, is seen as pervert in a society
where people have gender only during
kemmer and become either male or
female at that time.
Critical analysis of these works has
shown connections between the feminist theory of the time and the utopias.
Feminist concerns shaping the worlds
of these utopias include: the importance of collective process; consideration of technology’s impact on nature
and environmentalism; the source of
violence; the dynamics of lesbian separatism; and the nature of racism (Gearhart, “Future Visions,” 296). In writing
these utopias, which Williams classiﬁes
as egalitarian rather than as maledominated and authoritarian, the writers create worlds that share a number
of characteristics. Societies are communal or tribal, consisting of nonpatriarchal or extended family units and
lacking a centralized government or
rigid class structure. Most are concerned with ecological issues and how
human beings can exist within the
natural world. Technology is often
reduced or destroyed, or is so advanced
as to be both invisible and nonpolluting. Although violence can and does
occur between individuals, the patriarchy’s national or territorial wars are
absent.
How the utopias describe sexuality
and reproduction is also strikingly different compared both to past science
ﬁction and to the general American

Feminist Science Fiction
culture of the 1970s. Russ points out
that the utopias’ sexual permissiveness
is there “not to break the taboos but to
separate sexuality from questions of
ownership, reproduction and social
structure” (“Recent Feminist Utopias,”
76). Some, but not all, of the utopias are
separatist, excluding men from their cultures entirely, often by elimination through
natural disasters or war. In those utopias
that include males, writers construct both
genders as androgynous, valuing egalitarian relationships in nonpatriarchal cultures where childrearing, separated from
sexuality, is often shared by more people
than the biological mother.
Critics have pointed out that the utopias, in considering what white women
felt was lacking in their culture at the
time, tend not to show the possible
consequences of racially and culturally
diverse populations of women, let
alone men. As Sally Miller Gearhart
points out, the writers in the 1970s for
the most part made “no successful
attempt to paint ethnic differences
among women or to identify conﬂicts
that might arise because of such differences” (“Future Visions,” 307), with the
notable exception of Piercy’s Woman at
the Edge of Time, whose protagonist is
Chicana. Piercy’s novel remains important reading today because of its strong
and complex portrayal of the intersections of gender, class, and race in its
future portrait of a multicultural tribal
culture.
Woman on the Edge of Time shows a
potential future where sex as well as
race and class distinctions have been
eradicated. Consuelo, or Connie, Ramos
is imprisoned in a mental hospital in
1970s America but sustains a connection with a possible future that somehow depends upon her. An alternative
dystopian future also exists. Connie
visits or has visions of both futures.
Luciente, who visits Connie at ﬁrst,

later brings her into the utopian future
where all humans are androgynous.
When Connie ﬁrst sees Luciente, she
thinks “he” is a male because of “his”
dress and hair and is later surprised to
discover the error. Androgyny only
starts with appearance: all parents,
whether male or female, nurse babies.
Luciente angers Connie by telling her
that, in order for women to gain access
to shared power in all areas of society,
they had to give up exclusive rights to
the power that is assigned to the
realms of childbirth and child care.
The growing number of women publishing in all genres of the fantastic
since the 1970s has not been matched
by an equal growth in the genre of feminist utopias. Peter Fitting considers
three novels published after 1985 to
support his argument that the feminist
utopias based on lesbian separatism
were tied to a speciﬁc historical context: Pamela Sargent’s The Shore of
Women (1986), Sheri S. Tepper’s The
Gate to Women’s Country (1988), and
Joan Slonczewski’s A Door into Ocean
(1986). He argues that the backlash
against feminism during the 1980s is
one reason fewer feminist utopias were
published. The novels Fitting analyzes
are not utopian in the same way earlier
work was, nor do they connect with the
same feminist theories. His analysis of
the reworking of feminist themes by
these writers identiﬁes changes in
regard to issues of violence, separatism, and the role of men.
Changes in the social institutions
and cultures of the United States since
the 1970s, reﬂected in the changes in
feminist theories, have started to incorporate awareness of the interlocking
nature of exclusions based on race and
class as well as ethnicity. Additionally,
changes in technology allow for a wider
spread of information than was possible in earlier decades, making it
121
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

possible for groups to raise awareness
and make connections on the Internet.
These changes are reﬂected in science
ﬁction communities and resources on
the Internet as fans, writers, and critics
bring feminist movements into science
ﬁction communities.
Laura Quilter founded the Feminist
Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Utopia
website (http://feministsf.org) in 1994,
along with a feminist SF discussion listserv. Eventually, Quilter and others,
frustrated with gender conﬂicts on
Wikipedia, launched the Feminist SF
Wiki (http://wiki.feministsf.net) in April
2006; as of January 2008, it has more
than four thousand articles. Broad Universe, founded in 2000 and supported
by the James Tiptree Jr. Literary Award
Council, is an “international organization with the primary goal of promoting
science ﬁction, fantasy, and horror
written by women” (http://www.broad
universe.org).
WisCon supported the founding of
the Carl Brandon Society in 2001 after
people of color in the science ﬁction
community, inspired by an article on
racism and science ﬁction by Samuel
R. Delany, requested more conference
programming addressing issues of race.
Named after a ﬁctional black fan created by Terry Carr and Peter Graham,
who wrote under that name during the
1950s, the Carl Brandon Society is dedicated to addressing the representation
of people of color in genres of the fantastic, promoting publication opportunities, and celebrating the work of
writers of color. The group offers the
ﬁrst award for works of speculative ﬁction by writers of color: The Carl Brandon Parallax Award (http://www.
carlbrandon.org).
See also: Arthurian Fantasy; Environmental
Science Fiction; “Feminist Spirituality”
(vol. 1); Magical Realism; Queer Science Fiction; “WisCon” (vol. 1).
122
................

Volume 2: Entries

Further Readings
Barr, Marleen S. Alien to Femininity: Speculative Fiction and Feminist Theory. Contributions to the Study of Science Fiction and
Fantasy, no. 27. New York: Greenwood
Press, 1987.
Fitting, Peter. “Reconsiderations of the Separatist Paradigm in Recent Feminist Science Fiction.” Science Fiction Studies 19
(March 1992): 32–48.
Freibert, Lucy. “World Views in Utopian
Novels by Women.” In Women and Utopia:
Critical Interpretations, ed. Marleen S. Barr
and Nicholas D. Smith, 67–84. Lanham,
MD: University Press of America, 1983.
Gearhart, Sally Miller. “Future Visions: Feminist Utopias in Review.” In Women in
Search of Utopia: Mavericks and Mythmakers,
ed. Ruby Rohrlich and Elaine Hoffman
Baruch, 296–309. New York: Schocken
Books, 1984.
Rosinsky, Natalie M. Feminist Futures: Contemporary Women’s Speculative Fiction. Ann
Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1982.
Russ, Joanna. “Recent Feminist Utopias.” In
Future Females: A Critical Anthology, ed.
Marleen S. Barr, 71–85. Bowling Green,
OH: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1981.

ROBIN ANNE REID

FEMSPEC
Femspec is “an interdisciplinary feminist journal dedicated to critical and
creative works in the realms of SF, fantasy, magical realism, surrealism,
myth, folklore, and other supernatural
genres” (http://femspec.org). The two
founding editors are Batya Weinbaum
and Robin Anne Reid, and Weinbaum
continues to edit the journal through
the present time. The journal has survived since 1999 without having a stable institutional home at a university or
being under the oversight of a separate
professional
organization.
Support
comes from subscriptions and donations from individuals and institutions
and through fundraising activities by

Filk
the editorial board, advisors, and
supporters.
The idea for the journal originated at
the 1997 meeting of the Science Fiction/Fantasy Area of the American/Popular Culture Association. Weinbaum,
the founding editor in chief, and Reid
committed to an interdisciplinary and
multicultural focus for the journal.
They saw a bias against feminist fantastic and magical realist work in journals that published feminist literary
criticism or creative works and wished
to provide another venue for feminist
and multicultural scholarship on fantastic genres in addition to the existing
journals. Femspec deﬁnes itself as a
crossover journal, open to academic
and activist work. It prints academic
scholarship and essays, reviews, ﬁction
and poetry, historical documents, ethnography, interviews, art, and girls’ art.
Translations of original works not in
English are also published. The goal of
the editors and editorial group was to
bring together those writers and artists
interested in challenging ideas—in
regard to age, ethnicity, and race, in
academic disciplines at all levels, in
fandom, and in creative ﬁelds. The journal has hosted readers in bookstores as
well as at academic conferences and
has partnered with women’s groups in
the community.
Special theme issues have focused
on speculative works by African-American women writers (“Speculative Black
Women: Magic, Fantasy, and the Supernatural,” vol. 6, no. 1, coedited by
Gwendolyn D. Pough and Yolanda
Hood) and Native women’s speculative
art and writing (vol. 2, no. 2, edited by
Batya Weinbaum). A special issue was
also devoted to the theme of Girl Power
(vol. 5, no. 2, edited by Donna Varga
and Roxanne Harde). Additionally, the
journal includes a girls’ feature where
writings about girls’ literature or

writing by girls is regularly published. It
has published work on Asian-American
women’s writing, Latina magical realism, and Jewish women’s magical realism. Conference reports are also a
featured part, covering feminist academic conferences in a number of disciplines as well as WisCon, the feminist
science ﬁction convention created by
fans in 1977. The journal tries to bridge
gaps between fans, readers, critics, and
academics. Scholarship covers all genres
and media (literature, poetry, nonﬁction,
television, ﬁlm, art). Information on past
issues and selected readings as well as
an index can be found at the website:
http://femspec.org.
See also: Feminist Science Fiction; Queer Science Fiction

ROBIN ANNE REID

FILK
Filk is usually described as the folk
music of science ﬁction. The term has
been traced back to a typographical
error in a fanzine article by Lee Jacobs,
in which “folk” was misspelled as “ﬁlk.”
Karen Anderson then picked it up, and
the name stuck. Science ﬁction fans
had been writing and performing parodies of popular songs long before they
had a word for it; now ﬁlk became the
accepted term for both the parodies
and original songs written by science
ﬁction fans. Filk has verb, noun, and
adjective forms. A ﬁlker is one who
writes or performs ﬁlk. A song that is
parodied is said to have been ﬁlked. A
ﬁlk-sing is a gathering at which ﬁlk is
performed, either at a convention (con)
or in a private party, that is, a house-ﬁlk.
Filk has its roots in the folk revival
of the 1950s and 1960s, but much of
the classic ﬁlk repertoire was written in
the 1970s and 1980s. Musically speaking, original ﬁlk tends to use the traditional ballad structure of verses and
123
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

choruses, for group singing, often in a
minor or modal key. On the other hand,
much of ﬁlk is parody, using tunes borrowed (or stolen) from almost every
popular song genre: pop songs, show
tunes, rock, folk, jazz in all its varieties,
even Gilbert and Sullivan operettas.
Since ﬁlk is usually performed in an
intimate circle rather than onstage, the
words are often more important than
the actual tune to which they are set.
Filk lyrics deal with the various
worlds encompassed by the science ﬁction community. There are songs that
are essentially short stories or novellas
in verse, set to music. There are songs
that encapsulate the plot or characters
of a particular book or series of books.
Some deal with a ﬁlm or television
show, or favorite characters from ﬁlm
series. Others praise or excoriate the
U.S. space program, including a whole
series on the Challenger and Columbia
disasters. There are songs about the
activities and interests of science ﬁction fans and fandom—computers,
cats, cons, and much more. There are
even ﬁlk songs about ﬁlkers and their
experiences with the rest of science ﬁction fandom.
Although ﬁlk began as humorous
and satiric commentary on science ﬁction, more serious themes are also
tackled, in lyrics that range from
touching to bawdy to wry. The only factor linking the thematic material is that
the subjects are connected to or of interest to at least some science ﬁction
fans of whatever gender. While some
ﬁlk songs contain political statements,
these are not particularly aimed at
feminist issues.
Filk is usually performed at ﬁlksings—hootenanny-style gatherings at
science ﬁction cons, where ﬁlkers congregate to sing, accompanied by guitars, banjos, mandolins, and the
occasional electronic piano. Everyone is
124
................

Volume 2: Entries

expected to participate in the circle by
performing individually, joining in the
choruses, or just listening and laughing
at the appropriate moments.
Filk began as a peripheral activity,
but now most conventions include a
Filk Track in their program, with panels
on styles, genres, and history of ﬁlk;
concerts by individual ﬁlkers or ﬁlk
groups; and ﬁlk theme circles that
focus on a particular area of ﬁlk. There
are also cons devoted exclusively to
ﬁlk, and a Filk Hall of Fame which was
established in 1987.
Women have played a major part in
the development and expansion of ﬁlk
into the wider science ﬁction community. Juanita Coulson and Karen Anderson were the earliest proponents of ﬁlk
in the 1960s. Leslie Fish, who is responsible for the famous (or infamous) ﬁlk
song “Banned from Argo,” got her start
in the early 1970s. Julia Ecklar, Kathy
Mar, and the late Cynthia McQuillan
have been writing original music and
lyrics since the early 1980s. Dr. Jane
Robinson and Jane Mailander began
their ﬁlk careers in the late 1980s and
early 1990s, and Heather Rae Jones and
Heather Alexander continue the ﬁlk
tradition into the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Filkers who have become major writers
include C. J. Cherryh, who incorporated ﬁlk into her “Merovingen Nights”
shared-universe
anthologies,
and
Mercedes (“Misty”) Lackey, who expanded the universe of her lyrics into a
whole series of books.
Publication of ﬁlk lyrics has been a
major effort of ﬁlkers since the very
beginnings of the genre. The earliest
song sheets were mimeographed, but
photo-offset ﬁlk-zines were on sale at
conventions by the mid-1970s. Collections such as the NESFA Hymnal put
lyrics, original music, and illustration together into one package. Lee
Gold’s Xenoﬁlkia is the longest-running

Fireﬂy/Serenity
ﬁlk-zine as of this writing. Filk lyrics
are available on many Internet sites.
Filk music has been recorded since
the mid-1970s, when Leslie Fish and
the De-Horn Crew produced “Solar
Sailors” on vinyl LP records. As soon as
the technology was available, audiocassettes were produced by semi-pro studios like Off-Centaur. Filk sessions at
Worldcons were recorded and reproduced for sale during the 1980s. With
the development of the compact disc,
many of the older audiocassettes have
been remastered as CDs and are now
being offered for sale by dealers on the
Internet as well as at conventions.
Filk is now a major component of science ﬁction fandom, and women are a
major inﬂuence in ﬁlk music, as lyricists, composers, and distributors.
Where ﬁlk is going, no one can say, but
ﬁlkers will be singing even if no one
else is listening.
See also: “Fandom” (vol. 1); “Music: Twentieth
Century” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Axelrod, Alan. “Filk Music.” In The Penguin
Dictionary of American Folklore. New York:
Penguin Group, 2000.
Interﬁlk [online]. Http://www.interﬁlk.org.

ROBERTA ROGOW

FIREFLY/SERENITY
Joss Whedon’s short-lived television
show Fireﬂy (2002–03) and its cinematic
sequel Serenity (2005) constitute one
continuous story, set ﬁve hundred years
in our future. The Earth has been used
up, leading humans to terraform and
settle new planets, centrally governed
by the Alliance (so named because it
formed as an alliance between the
United States and China). A civil war
has taken place between the Alliance
and the Independents (or Browncoats),
which the Browncoats lost. The

inhabitants of the system must also
cope with Reavers: humans who were
rendered unnaturally violent by the
government’s use of a drug designed to
pacify the population. Explicitly combining science ﬁction (SF) and western
narrative conventions, Fireﬂy and Serenity were inspired in part by Michael
Shaara’s novel The Killer Angels (1974),
set during the U.S. Civil War. Both works
center on the smuggling ship Serenity,
captained
by
Malcolm
Reynolds
(Nathan Fillion), a former Independent
soldier. The Civil War trappings bring
with them a historic context, which
Whedon possibly attempts to ameliorate by alluding to the fact that the Alliance permits slavery, while the heroes
steal from slavers. By creating those
story elements, and by transforming
the violence of the Reavers into the
result of government intrusion and
expansion, the show attempts to present the central or “federal” government
as supporting slavery and oppression
and the Browncoats as supporting individual freedoms.
The Fireﬂy universe thus seems radically different from Whedon’s other
well-known creation, the “Buffyverse,”
in Buffy the Vampire Slayer, which
focuses more on gender concerns. In
contrast, Fireﬂy/Serenity raises on its
surface issues of sovereignty and utopia-driven politics. Whedon’s cultural
work in expanding deﬁnitions of feminist concern does, however, continue
in Fireﬂy/Serenity, largely through the
rewriting of generic character types.
We see the warrior woman of both
western and SF tradition, a rewriting of
Whedon’s own adolescent superheroine, and Bret Harte’s “prostitute with a
heart of gold” (that phrase even being
used as the title of an episode about a
group of prostitutes ﬁghting for basic
rights on a planet governed by a violent
patriarchy). Like the characters in Buffy,
125
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

the crew of Serenity negotiates a range
of social spheres: the family and domestic sphere, the public arena of government oversight and control, and the
underground world of political and
economic rebellion.
Each of these narratives can comment ironically on both patriarchal
stereotypes and some of the more
problematic assumptions of Second
Wave feminism. Thus, Inara (Morena
Baccarin), the prostitute in a culture
with not only legalized but honored
“companion” academies, becomes the
most respectable ﬁgure on the ship
with the most direct connections to the
centers of power; Zoe (Gina Torres), the
warrior, is also the only woman in a
traditional domestic relationship, married to Wash (Alan Tudyk), the pilot;
and River (Summer Glau), the powerful,
Buffy-like superhero, fully realizes her
mental and physical powers only
because of the Alliance’s violent medical procedures. Fireﬂy and Serenity thus
explore the fact that women’s negotiations of power are not easily predictable
nor
containable—not
by
patriarchal apparatuses, by science ﬁction or western generic traditions, nor
by Whedon’s oeuvre itself.
Further Readings
Espenson, Jane, and Glenn Yeffeth, eds.
Finding Serenity: Anti-Heroes, Lost Shepherds, and Space Hookers in Joss Whedon’s
“Fireﬂy.” Dallas: BenBella, 2004.
Whedon, Joss. Serenity: The Ofﬁcial Visual
Companion. London: Titan Books, 2005.

JASON HASLAM

FLEWELLING, LYNN

(1958– )

American author Lynn Flewelling has
garnered critical praise for her complex
portrayals of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transsexual (LGBT) characters and
unconventional twists on high-fantasy
126
................

Volume 2: Entries

tropes. Her books have been translated
into twelve languages and distributed
all over the world, and she occasionally
teaches workshops on creativity and
writing. Born and raised in Presque Isle,
Maine, Lynn Beaulieu earned a B.S. in
English from the University of Maine
before marrying Douglas Flewelling in
1981.
Her ﬁrst novel, Luck in the Shadows,
was published in 1996. It introduces
Lord Seregil, a nobleman, thief, and
spy, and Alec, his apprentice and
friend. The fantasy kingdom of Skala,
which both men swear loyalty to, is
protected by prophecy as long as it is
ruled by a line of warrior queens, and
gender relations are egalitarian as a
result. Flewelling has a knack for turning the unspoken assumptions of
Tolkienesque world-building on their
heads without preaching. Women
make war as well as babies, and longtime companions occasionally express
their affection for each other sexually,
regardless of gender. Seregil is a gay
man, which somewhat surprises the
more provincial Alec but is not presented as shocking or taboo within the
culture at large. As the Nightrunner
series continues in Stalking Darkness
(1997) and Traitor Moon (1999), Seregil
and Alec eventually become lovers.
The Tamir Triad (The Bone Doll’s Twin,
2001; Hidden Warrior, 2003; The Oracle’s
Queen, 2006) takes readers back to an
earlier time in Skala’s history. A prince
has stolen the throne from his infant
sister, killing all other female relatives
in an effort to protect his claim. The
infant princess, protected by her brother’s affection, grows up, marries, and
has twins, a boy and a girl. Before the
king can slaughter the girl-child, conspirators desperate to restore the
prophecy smother the boy and use
magic to give the infant Tamir her
brother’s form.

Fonstad, Karen Wynn
The Tamir trilogy garnered immediate critical attention for its unusual
premise and transgender heroine.
Tamir’s situation is so perilous that she
herself is left unaware of her sex at
birth. She believes herself to be a boy
named Tobin, and the revelation of her
“true” sex does not occur until adolescence. Tamir’s experience of her body
in both its sexes is thought through
with the same meticulous attention to
detail as the rest of Flewelling’s worldbuilding. Likewise, Tamir’s companions’
reactions to her eventual change are
idiosyncratically appropriate.
Though the Nightrunner series is not
as grounded in moral ambiguity as the
Tamir books, all of Flewelling’s Skalan
novels share a thematic emphasis on
the complexities of love, the inextricability of good and evil, and the juxtaposition of prophecy and choice.
Gender and sexuality are consistently
treated as complicated and occasionally mutable aspects of the characters’
multilayered selves. Flewelling maintains a light touch with her plotting
and characterization, avoiding didacticism and keeping her emphasis on
storytelling.
Further Readings
Lynn Flewelling [online]. Http://www.sff.
net/people/Lynn.Flewelling.

SHANNAN PALMA

FONSTAD, KAREN WYNN (1945–2005)
Karen Fonstad was an American author
who created several important atlases
to fantasy lands, making a contribution
by helping readers to better visualize
ﬁctive worlds as varied as J. R. R.
Tolkien’s Middle-earth, Stephen R.
Donaldson’s The Land, and Anne
McCaffrey’s Pern. Born in Oklahoma
City, Fonstad earned her M.A. in geography—with a special emphasis in

cartography—from the University of
Oklahoma. From 1993 to 1998, she was
a part-time lecturer in the Department
of Geography at the University of Wisconsin, Oshkosh, where her husband,
Todd Fonstad was also a faculty member. She was also active in the Oshkosh
community and served as a member of
the City Council.
Fonstad’s ﬁrst major contribution to
science ﬁction and fantasy (SF/F) was
the internationally successful Atlas of
Middle-earth (1981; a fully revised edition, incorporating a wealth of newly
available information on Tolkien’s
world, was published ten years later).
She went on to research, write, and
illustrate The Atlas of Pern (1984), treating the ﬁctive worlds of McCaffrey’s
Rukbat planetary system, for which
McCaffrey herself wrote the introduction; The Atlas of the Land (1985), concerned with Donaldson’s Thomas
Covenant books; Atlas of the Dragonlance
World (1987); and The Forgotten Realms
Atlas (1990). Her work ranged from
topographic maps depicting a landscape’s features and terrain to complex
diagrams of battles, journeys, and
migrations and from the evolution of
social and political borders to charts of
climate, vegetation, population, and
language distribution as well as many
other kinds of charts and maps.
In addition to the beauty and clarity
of her maps, her work was based on
sound academic research methodologies, centered on the primary texts of
her subject and taking them seriously,
but also incorporating a wide range of
supplementary information. She shuttled back and forth easily between ﬁctive histories and arcane geographical
knowledge—the likelihood of a speciﬁc
kind of limestone occurring in a particular imaginary location, for example—
uniquely bridging the gap between the
real-world sciences of geography and
127
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

cartography and the imaginative worlds
of her subject authors. Widely considered indispensable, Fonstad’s atlases
have been translated into many languages and reprinted many times. Without them, innumerable SF/F readers
would have become literally lost without
a map in these richly imagined and complex worlds.
In addition to her cartographic work,
Fonstad was very active in the SF/F fandom community and was a frequent
guest and speaker at academic conferences and fan conventions. Recognized
for her SF/F as well as for her civic contributions, Fonstad has been featured
in Who’s Who of American Women, The
World’s Who’s Who of Women, and Who’s
Who in the Midwest. Fonstad died from
complications of breast cancer in
March 2005. Her ﬁnal published article,
“Writing ‘TO’ the Map,” appeared posthumously in Tolkien Studies 3 (2006)
with an introduction by her friend,
Tolkien scholar Verlyn Flieger.
Further Readings
Brown, Charles N., ed. “Obituary: Fonstad,
Karen Wynn.” Locus 54, no. 4 (April 2005): 65.
Fonstad, Karen Wynn. “Writing ‘TO’ the
Map.” Tolkien Studies 3 (2006): 133–36.

JASON FISHER

FONTANA, D[OROTHY]
C[ATHERINE] (1938– )
D. C. Fontana is an American writer
who is best known for her work on the
original Star Trek series (1966–69). She
began work as creator Gene Roddenberry’s secretary but soon moved into
assisting in production as well as writing. She was screen editor for the second season and wrote several notable
episodes, including “Tomorrow Is Yesterday,” “Friday’s Child,” “Journey to
Babel,” and “This Side of Paradise.” Her
writing was in keeping with the
128
................

Volume 2: Entries

stereotypical characters and classichero-adventure science ﬁction plots
that characterized the majority of Star
Trek episodes, as well as ﬁtting the
scope and limitations of 1960s network
television. She also wrote and published a Star Trek novel, Vulcan’s Glory,
for the original Star Trek novel series. It
provides backstory to the original
series, presenting Spock’s history as a
Starﬂeet Academy student and an early
story of human and Vulcan differences.
The often-cited conﬂicts between his
loyalties as a Vulcan and a Starﬂeet ofﬁcer are initiated while he is an ensign
in the Academy serving under Capt.
Christopher Pike, the captain of the
Enterprise in the classic Star Trek pilot.
Fontana also wrote episodes for Star
Trek: The Next Generation, including the
pilot, “Encounter at Farpoint” (1987), and
for Star Trek: Deep Space Nine (“Dax,” which
created a backstory for Jadzia Dax, the
space station’s science ofﬁcer who is a
joined Trill, a young female joined with a
nearly immortal symbiont who has survived seven previous hosts, both male
and female). Other credits include writing
for Babylon 5 and Earth: The Final Conﬂict
as well as gaming and cartoon series
based on Star Trek (“Yesteryear”) and the
stories of the upcoming video games Star
Trek: Legacy and Star Trek: Tactical Assault
(Bethesda Softworks). She has used the
pseudonyms of Michael Richards and
J. Michael Bingham.
Fontana’s writing reﬂects the major
themes that dominated the plots of the
television episodes, but she has also
discussed the extent to which Roddenberry rewrote episodes in an online
interview. Her work is formulaic, in
keeping with the producer, publisher,
and television-series expectation that
Star Trek and its characters were an
economic property to be furthered,
over any desire of individual authors to
develop their own sense of the

France
characters. While she began writing
and producing in the 1960s during the
foundational era of Second Wave feminism in the United States, her work did
not challenge gender stereotypes.
Nevertheless, her work inspired later
writers with reputations outside the
Star Trek industry, including Vonda
McIntyre and Diane Duane, to create
novels exploring some of the characters Fontana developed, especially the
Vulcans and Romulans. She is memorable as one of the few women who
were able to succeed in the male-dominated television and science ﬁction
industries of the 1960s and 1970s.
Further Readings
“DC Fontana—StarTrek Legacy Interview.”
Firing Squad, September 16, 2006 [online],
http://www.ﬁringsquad.com/news/newsarticle.asp?searchid=12419.

JANICE BOGSTAD

FRANCE
Like their counterparts in many nonEnglish-speaking countries, French science ﬁction (SF) authors complain of
the substantial barriers to achieving
worldwide notice. In the ﬁrst place,
many of their potential readers associate SF with America and with technological subjects. Furthermore, SF has
long been dismissed by those in the
more established literary community
either as suitable only for children or
as substandard literature. The competing trend that favors French SF is the
tendency to widen the deﬁnition of the
genre, even in the nineteenth century,
to include fantastic ﬁction, thus allowing for the association with established
literature. French SF in general tends to
be more philosophical and moral than
its American counterparts, often much
more concerned with the social and political than the technological. Despite

these potential barriers to dissemination, a number of proliﬁc writers have
ﬂourished in France and Francophone
bec, since
countries or regions, like Que
soon after the end of World War II,
with a few precursors in the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries.
One of the acknowledged fathers of
science ﬁction was French: Jules Verne
(1828–1905). Verne represented very
few women in his many works, however, and, when he did, he wrote them
in very stereotypical roles as wives,
mothers, and sisters with conservative,
middle-class values and behaviors.
French women writers of SF have
always been in the minority. This picture changed in the 1970s, though, with
the advent of the feminist movement.
Although women are still in the minority, Jean-Marc and Randy Lofﬁcier,
whose reference work links a long history of fantastic ﬁction to the emergence of SF in the twentieth century,
list more than two hundred French
women writers in the genre, starting as
early as Henriette Robitaillie (1909– )
€lle Roger (He
le
ne Pittard, 1874–
and Noe
1953). The latter was very proliﬁc, and
some of her novels have been translated, including The New Adam (1926).
Robitaillie wrote juvenile ﬁction about
strange voyages and places. Still, these
names are scattered among 170 pages
of male authors in the Lofﬁciers’ directory, reﬂecting a tendency to consider
SF a male preserve in France, as in the
United States and Britain, especially
before the 1970s.
In the early 1980s, most major publishers of Metropolitan French SF such
as Jai Lu, Denoil, Presence du Futur,
and Fleuve Noir, when asked, denied
publishing any women SF writers—
despite the fact that this was the era
€lle Wintrebert
when such women as Joe
(1949– ), with at least ten SF novels to
her name and who was to come to
129
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

prominence also as an editor, was
establishing her career with works that
were later to win awards, such as Le
Createur chimerique (Chimerical Creator,
1988, winner of the French ScienceFiction Award) and Les Ma^itres-feu (Fire
Masters, 1982). At least twenty more
women were writing in French by the
1980s, including the classic writer
Nathalie
Hennenberg
(1911–1974);
Louky Bersianik (Lucille Durand; Canadian, 1930– ), whose work was known
outside the SF community; Katia Alexandre; Francine Pelletier (Canadian,
1959– ); Jacqueline Harpman (Belgian,
liane
1929– ); and Julia Verlanger (He
Ta€ieb; 1929–1985).
These writers, like their Englishlanguage female counterparts, wrote
some of their stories to extrapolate on
the emerging feminist issues such as
social equality, sexuality, reproductive
choice, and the nature/nurture debates
that began with anthropologists like
Margaret Mead. For example, Harpman, author of ten novels, won prizes
for her I Who Have Never Known Men
(Moi qui n’ai pas connu les hommes, 1995),
which creates a nonessentialist society
by starting off with a sort of tabularasa young girl. And Verlanger, writing
sometimes under the name Gilles
Thomas, published in the Fleuve
Noir Anticipation imprint between 1976
and 1980. Best known for her Savage
trilogy about a young survivor of postcataclysmic France, she was successful
for writing much like her male
colleagues.
The somewhat more popular Wintrebert’s ﬁrst novel was Les Olympiades
truquees (1980), but Les Ma^itres-feu
gained her a readership in adult SF.
Wintrebert consciously included feminist issues of the day in her ﬁction, and
this novel, which is often humorous,
embodies traditional ideas about women’s and men’s essential nature in the
130
................

Volume 2: Entries

speech of the alien, sentient, saurian
protagonist, while the young female
human counters his essentialist statements with assertions that humans “no
longer believe that sort of thing.” The
subsequent success of her novels Chromoville (1984), Bebe-miroir (Baby Mirror,
1988), and the more recent Le Canari
fant^ome (The Ghost Canary, 2006) and
Les Amazones de Boh^eme (The Amazons
of Bohemia, 2006) attest to her popular
appeal in a ﬁeld still dominated by
male writers. The Lofﬁciers identify
Wintrebert as the single, major new
female writer of the 1980s, including in
this praise her career as a young adult
(YA) author. Her Nunatak (1983) won
her attention in this category as did La
ﬁlle de terre deux (The Girl of Two
Worlds, 1987) and Les Ouraniens de
Brume (1996).
In addition to writing about feminist
issues, of course, Wintrebert also
included many female adventurers in
both her adult and YA ﬁction. As is the
case in other countries, women writers
are often encouraged to write children’s
and YA SF imprints, even in periods like
the 1980s and 1990s when SF audiences
and publishing opportunities were
re
increasing. In fact, Huguette Carrie
published exclusively YA novels in the
1970s and 1980s and is remembered for
her Tony series, published by Hachette’s Bibliotheque Rose, a children’s
re
se Roche won
book imprint. And The
the 1984 juvenile category for her novels about children and alien life forms
for Magnard. Unfortunately, it is not
possible to feature any but the most
prominent French women SF authors
of the twentieth century here, but the
interested reader is directed to the Lofﬁcier and Valery texts listed below.
Further Readings
Lofﬁcier, Jean-Marc, and Randy Lofﬁcier.
French Science Fiction, Fantasy, Horror and

Friesner, Esther M.
Pulp Fiction. A Guide to Cinema, Television,
Radio, Animation, Comic Books and Literature
from the Middle Ages to the Present. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2000.
Ransom, Amy. “Oppositional Postcolonialism in Quebecois Science Fiction.” Science
Fiction Studies 33, no. 2 (July 2006): 291–
312.
Valery, Francis. Passeport pour les etoiles.
Paris: Folio SF/Editions Denoel, 2000.

Vonarburg, Elisabeth,
and Jane Brierley, eds.
TesseractsQ. New York: Tesseract Books,
1996.

JANICE BOGSTAD

FRIESNER, ESTHER M.

(1951– )

Esther Friesner holds multiple degrees
in drama and Spanish and taught college-level Spanish for several years
before turning to a full-time writing career. While working on her doctorate in
Spanish at Yale, where she later taught,
Friesner was inspired by fellow Yale
grad student and published science ﬁction author Sharianne Lewitt to begin
her ﬁrst speculative ﬁction venture as
an exercise in world-building. Known
primarily for her comedic fantasy,
Friesner has published several dozen
novels for adult and young adult readers, written numerous short stories,
and edited a number of anthologies.
Her stories “Death and the Librarian”
and “A Birthday” won Nebula Awards
for best short story in 1995 and 1996,
respectively.
Friesner’s formal training in research
and her fascination with the histories
and folklore of other cultures are apparent in her writing. For example, her
ﬁrst fantasy, Mustapha and His Wise Dog
(1985), and the three other novels in
the Chronicles of the Twelve Kingdoms
are unusual in the genre because of
their Arabian Nights background.
While her other novel-length works
most often take place in contemporary

settings, they frequently feature mythical creatures from various ethnic and
cultural traditions. Some notable
exceptions to the contemporary settings include Child of the Eagle (1996), a
retelling of the story of Julius Caesar
and Brutus, and Yesterday We Saw Mermaids (1992), a fantasy of Columbus’s
discoveries.
Friesner may be best known for
infusing her fantasies with humor,
something for which she has drawn
occasional criticism. Having cited Pogo
comic creator Walt Kelly as an inﬂuence, Friesner’s stylistic choice of humorous storytelling as a medium for
thoughtful content—such as the suppression of people’s ethnic heritage, the
limitation of women’s rights, and the
effects on children of single-parent
families—might be viewed as a tribute
to Kelly’s style of interjecting social and
political commentary into his comic
strips.
Never one to shy away from embracing and redeﬁning stereotypes and
tropes in her work, Friesner proposed
the idea of an anthology of Amazon
comedy to Baen Publishers. The popularity of her Chicks in Chainmail (1995)
anthology proved that there was a
market for stories in which strong,
capable female fantasy protagonists
could also be in humorous stories or
situations, and Friesner subsequently
edited four similar anthologies. In the
introduction to the ﬁfth of these, Turn
the Other Chick (2004), Friesner praises
ﬁctitious women who refuse to back
down when told, “But you’re a girl, so
you can’t.”
Her most overtly feminist novels
are The Psalms of Herod (1996) and The
Sword of Mary (1996), dystopias set in
a post-holocaust future similar to
Margaret Atwood’s The Haidmaid’s Tale
or Sheri S. Tepper’s The Gate to Women’s Country. Friesner’s pair of novels is
131
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

set in a civilization where, following
an eco-catastrophe, life is held sacred
in the womb, and young children are
ritually sacriﬁced. Protagonist Becca
questions the system when her baby
sister is selected for sacriﬁce.
See also: Comedic Science Fiction.

132
................

Volume 2: Entries

Further Readings
Esther Friesner [online]. Http://www.sff.net/
people/e.friesner.
Friesner, Esther. Introduction to Death and
the Librarian, and Other Stories. Farmington
Hills, MI: Five Star, 2002.

MARYELIZABETH HART

AND

ALEXIS HART

G
GAIMAN, NEIL [RICHARD]

(1960– )

Neil Gaiman became the ﬁrst writer
ever to win a literary award for a comic
when his Sandman #19: A Midsummer
Night’s Dream (1991), a retelling of the
Shakespeare play with a twist, won a
World Fantasy Award for best short
story; overall, his Sandman series won
nine Will Eisner Comic Industry Awards.
He returned to the Sandman universe
twice more for the Stoker Award–
winning The Dream Hunters (1999), a
short novel illustrated by Yoshitaka
Amano, and for Endless Nights (2003),
the ﬁrst graphic novel to reach the New
York Times Best Sellers list.
While ostensibly about the title character Dream, the Lord of Stories, the
Sandman series is not as much about
him as it is about the other characters
impacted by his story. Female characters, both mortal and immortal, play
especially pivotal roles in the overall arc
and outcome of the series, and several
of the graphic novels focus on them. The
Doll’s House (1990) tells the story of Rose
Walker, a young woman who is searching for her missing brother Jed, while
Barbie’s quest to deﬁne herself plays
out across real and fantastical realms in
A Game of You (1993).
Dream’s sister Death, the not-so-grim
Goth who eases souls into the next life,
became so popular that Gaiman continued her story, which is collected in
the graphic novels Death: The High Cost
of Living (1993) and Death: The Time of
My Life (1997). His Black Orchid comic series also focuses on a unique female
hero who manages to defeat her

enemies without the typical ﬁnal battle
one expects in a superhero series.
Like the Sandman series, Gaiman’s
novel American Gods (2000), winner of
Hugo, Nebula, and Stoker awards, is an
epic fantasy. Its protagonist, Shadow,
ﬁnds himself caught up in a war
between the old and new gods of America, and his ﬁctional journey is shaped
as much by his own actions as it is by
the intervention of various goddesses
and the presence and assistance of his
undead wife, Laura.
In Coraline (2002) and Mirrormask (2005)
(two of Gaiman’s young adult fantasy
novels), the female protagonists are dissatisﬁed with their lives. Like Dorothy in
The Wizard of Oz, both Coraline and
Helena ﬁnd themselves in other worlds,
where they must face temptations and
dangers in order to win back the lives
they once took for granted.
Gaiman’s short ﬁction and poetry is
collected in Angels and Visitations (1993),
Smoke and Mirrors (1998), and Fragile
Things (2006), as well as appearing in a
number of anthologies. He scripted the
“Day of the Dead” episode for J. Michael
Straczynski’s Babylon 5 television series,
and the BBC produced his Neverwhere
as a television miniseries in 1996. Mirrormask, a ﬁlm collaboration with artist
Dave McKean, was released in 2005,
and a ﬁlm adaptation of his Mythopoeic Award–winning illustrated novel
Stardust came out in 2007. Gaiman is
an active advocate and fundraiser for
the Comic Book Legal Defense Fund,
which combats censorship and protects
free speech in the comics community.
133
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Further Readings
Bender, Hy. The Sandman Companion. New
York: Vertigo/DC Comics, 1999.
Gaiman, Neil. Adventures in the Dream Trade.
Ed. Tony Lewis and Priscilla Olson. Framingham, MA: NESFA Press, 2002.
McCabe, Joel. Hanging Out with the Dream
King: Conversations with Neil Gaiman and
His Collaborators. Seattle: Fantagraphics,
2004.
Neil Gaiman [online]. Http://www.neilgaiman.
com.
Sanders, Joe. The Sandman Papers. Seattle:
Fantagraphics, 2006.

BARBARA LYNN LUCAS

GAME DESIGNERS
Video games began with arcade games
and the Magnavox Odyssey in the
1970s, popularized largely by the table
tennis–based game Pong, which used
two lines for paddles and a circle for
the ball. Since that time, of course,
video games have grown enormously in
complexity and popularity. From the
beginning, video games have been a
male-dominated ﬁeld. Despite the gender imbalance for designers and players, though, video games have
garnered many women players and
created numerous new women characters, and many women have worked
and continue to work as game designers. The most well-known game
designers are those who have changed
the ﬁeld in some manner, by designing
important games, shaping industry
developments, or popularizing certain
aspects of gaming. Because women are
underrepresented in games and in
game design, signiﬁcant contributions
often alter aspects that affect the gender imbalance.
The most notable game designers are
prominent because of their impact on
gaming and their notoriety. Since gaming is a new ﬁeld, game design contributions often lack the more complete
134
................

Volume 2: Entries

crediting found in other media such as
ﬁlm. With the lack of complete attribution, game designers must have a noticeable impact on gaming in order to
be recognized within or outside the
ﬁeld. New designers who create such
an impact are recognized regularly.
Some of the most famous game designers are not only well recognized in
game materials and the media but also
often have their names on their games.
Game designers whose names have
become synonymous with their games
or even with entire gaming genres
include Will Wright for simulations, Sid
Meier for world-building, and Shigeru
Miyamoto for Nintendo’s playful variety of games. Other game designers like
American McGee have their names
listed on their games, as is the case with
American McGee’s Alice, a game based on
Lewis Carroll’s books Alice’s Adventures in
Wonderland and Through the Looking-Glass.
While McGee’s name is listed on his
game and his name is well known, he
still is not as famous as designers like
Wright, whose name is listed with his
games and has come to stand for his
own simulations and open “sandbox”style games more generally. Like
Wright’s signature open-gameplay-style
games, other designers have similarly
shaped the design of their games,
although often with far less acclaim.
Many other game designers, including
women, have also affected game design.
Some of the more renowned women
game designers include Brenda Braithwraite, Elonka Dunin, Mary Flanagan,
Tracy Fullerton, Megan Gaiser, Jane Jenson, Jane McGonigal, Sheri Graner Ray,
and Roberta Williams, among others.
Because so much of the work in gaming
is unrecognized—with games presented
like animated ﬁlms where the studio is
credited and creators are relatively
unacknowledged—and because the ﬁeld
is gender imbalanced, women game

Gearhart, Sally Miller
designers have an even more difﬁcult
time being credited for their work.
Women who have managed to earn recognition for their accomplishments have
often done so through innovative game
concepts and games. This includes
focusing on plot; offering nontraditional
play; blending with other media, such as
art and education, as in many projects
by Fullerton and Flanagan; and using
games for advertising, as with alternative reality games like those by McGonigal, among others. Other women game
designers are famous for their place in
the history of game development. Williams earned acknowledgement for her
King’s Quest series in part because she
was the ﬁrst woman to produce a major
game series, in part because the game
featured a female protagonist, and in
part because of the quality of her games.
Jenson followed Williams, working with
Williams’s Sierra Entertainment game
design company to develop games in the
Gabriel Knight series.
Some women game designers have
targeted women players in particular, a
group ignored by mainstream gaming.
Brenda Laurel developed the Purple
Moon series of games for girls, Ray and
Gaiser have worked on Herinteractive’s
games for girls, and Braithwraite has
worked on games to incorporate sex
and sexuality. Whether the designers
speciﬁcally design their games for
women players or not, all of these
designers and many others have successfully designed games for all players
that have inﬂuenced gaming in one
manner or another.
Interestingly, because video games
draw so much of their history from the
history of the military and of technology,
many game designers have also worked
on other aspects of technology for other
corporate spheres and for the military.
Video games are tied to corporations, the
military, and other media forms for their

production, development, and distribution. However, they are also tied to particular genres because of their form. For
instance, many games feature fantasy or
science ﬁction settings, because these
genres allow games to reconﬁgure their
operations within worlds that operate
entirely by rules constructed in the game
world. Game designers also frequently
use existing tales from ﬁlm, comics, novels, cartoons, and history in order to develop their games. For this reason, many
games are based on European medieval
history, fantastic ﬁction set across the
world in medieval or other preindustrialized times, the Three Kingdoms period of
Chinese history, and dystopian science
ﬁction worlds, among others.
Game designers shape their games
and the forms their games inﬂuence.
As they do so and as gaming continues
to expand, more game designers continue to contribute to the gaming and
more game designers are recognized.
Game design magazines and websites
highlight new design studios and new
designers.
Further Readings
Burnham, Van, ed. Supercade: A Visual History of the Videogame Age, 1971–1984.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
International Game Developers Association
[online]. Http://igda.org.
Ray, Sheri Graner. Gender Inclusive Game
Design: Expanding the Market. Hingham,
MA: Charles River Media, 2004.
Salen, Katie, and Eric Zimmerman. Rules of
Play: Game Design Fundamentals. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Women in Games International [online].
Http://www.womeningamesinternational.
org.

LAURIE N. TAYLOR

GEARHART, SALLY MILLER

(1931– )

Sally Miller Gearhart is an American
scholar, activist, and writer of feminist,
135
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

lesbian, and environmental science ﬁction and fantasy. In her academic career,
she has coedited the critical study Loving
Women/Loving Men: Gay Liberation and the
Church (1974), coauthored A Feminist
Tarot (1976)—a reinterpretation of the
tarot deck from a feminist perspective—
and written essays on feminist rhetoric,
radical feminism, lesbianism, and political activism. Gearhart has been a leader
in gay rights politics since the 1970s,
once facing former California Senator
John Briggs in a televised debate over the
senator’s proposition to ban homosexuals from teaching in California public
schools. As she discusses in her 1995
essay “Notes from a Recovering Activist,”
she has also been involved in activism
for disability dignity, AIDS awareness,
peace, and numerous other causes.
The Wanderground: Stories of the Hill
Women (1979) is Gearhart’s most widely
read and discussed work. The separatist Hill Women of the novel live harmoniously in the wilderness and can ﬂy,
communicate telepathically, and send
energy through the ground to their
companions in need. These capacities
have developed in them as a result of
the absence of men and their oppressive, virile masculinity from the woods.
Years before the time frame of The
Wanderground, various forms of male
potency—aggressive sexuality, militarism, and destructive technology—were
made impotent in the wilderness by a
natural event the Hill Women call the
“Revolt of the Earth” or “Revolt of the
Mother.” With this revolt, the women
were liberated from male domination
and thus left free to cultivate their remarkable aptitudes. As the effects of
the revolt wear away, however, the
women debate whether or not to work
in partnership with a group of nonaggressive men called “gentles” in an
effort to prevent the return of violence
to the woods and the women living
136
................

Volume 2: Entries

there. This debate and its outcome
become central to The Wanderground,
carrying the ultimate sociopolitical,
feminist message of the book.
With the ﬁrst two novels of her
recent Earthkeep trilogy, The Kanshou
(2002) and The Magister (2002), Gearhart
continues to explore many of the
themes introduced in The Wanderground, including female friendship,
feminist spirituality, and supernatural
capabilities such as unassisted human
ﬂight and telepathy. Central to these
books is Gearhart’s characteristic interest in the nature of violence. And while
critics have pointed out the essentialism of The Wanderground—particularly
because of its identiﬁcation of aggression and brutality with maleness—The
Kanshou and The Magister engage the
issue of violence from a range of perspectives, in the end displaying a more
nuanced philosophical position.
Further Readings
Delrosso, Jeana. “The Womanization of Utopias: Sally Miller Gearhart’s Rhetorical
Fiction.” Extrapolation 40, no. 3 (1999):
213–23.
Keulen, Margarete. Radical Imagination: Feminist Conceptions of the Future in Ursula Le
Guin, Marge Piercy and Sally Miller Gearhart.
New York: Peter Lang, 1991.
Stratton, Susan. “Intersubjectivity and Difference in Feminist Ecotopias.” Femspec 3,
no. 1 (2001): 33–43.

ERIC OTTO

GENDER
The term gender is used to signify a set
of cultural assumptions about women
and men. Formally the terms sex and
gender were virtually synonymous and
were linked intrinsically to essentialist
assumptions about women and their
role in society. The essentialist position
assumes a universal and natural equation of biological sex and gender

Gender
behavior. The separation of “sex” from
“gender,” however, allows feminist critics such as Judith Butler to argue that
gender is socially constructed—that
it is the product of cultural circumstances and therefore can be changed.
Feminist critics argue that women
interpret their discrimination through
inherited notions of gender identity
and through designated roles ascribed
to them. They contend that essentialism is a product of patriarchy and privileges men’s interests over women’s.
Feminist science ﬁction and fantasy
(SF/F) frequently foreground the politics of gender and challenge essentialist notions of “femininity.” Charlotte
Perkins Gilman’s satire Herland (1915)
is generally accepted as the ﬁrst novel
to politicize gender, but Katharine Burdekin’s Swastika Night (1937), C. L.
Moore’s “No Woman Born” (1944), and
Naomi Mitchison’s Memoirs of a Spacewoman (1962) are, retrospectively, signiﬁcant in their representation of
women in a male-centered genre. In
television, A for Andromeda (1962) saw
one of the ﬁrst signiﬁcant roles for a
woman, but did little to challenge gender stereotyping. It was not until the
late 1960s and the advent of Second
Wave feminism that gender became
recognized as an area for political
debate and Joanna Russ, James Tiptree Jr., and Samuel R. Delany became
notable for their writing. Russ’s Picnic
on Paradise (1968) has one of the ﬁrst
women protagonists, Alyx, who transgresses pernicious gender assumptions.
Marion Zimmer Bradley, Tanith Lee,
and Anne McCaffrey introduced strong
women characters into their swordand-sorcery tales, and in 1969 Ursula
K. Le Guin’s important novel The Left
Hand of Darkness was published.
The 1970s and 1980s proved proliﬁc
for gender-related feminist SF/F: Russ’s
The Female Man (1975), Marge Piercy’s

Woman on the Edge of Time (1976), Suzy
McKee Charnas’s Motherlines (1978),
Sally Miller Gearhart’s The Wanderground

(1980), and Elisabeth
Vonarburg’s The
Silent City (1988) prioritize gender
debates. Angela Carter’s The Passion of
New Eve (1977) and Esme Dodderidge’s
The New Gulliver (1988) use reverse gender dialectics in their portrayal of injustices against women. These novels form
part of a recognized legacy that interrogates the social, political, and gendered
lives of women. In television and ﬁlms,
gender was not on the agenda, although
Star Trek and its subsequent spin-offs
elevated women to more prominent
roles, as did the Alien and Terminator
ﬁlms. SF/F in both media were still very
male centered at this stage.
In the late 1990s, Carolyn Ives Gilman’s Halfway Human (1998), Charnas’s
The Conqueror’s Child (1999), and Nancy
Farmer’s Sea of Trolls (2004) reignited
the gender debate. Cyberpunk ﬁctions
such as Pat Cadigan’s Tea from an
Empty Cup (1998) and Dervish Is Digital
(2000), with their interface of human/
machine and virtual worlds, have
opened up new nongendered spaces
for women. Recent television programs
such as Xena: Warrior Princess and
Buffy the Vampire Slayer have also presented powerful women who eschew
gender stereotyping. Feminist SF/F literature offers women the opportunity
to reﬂect upon and explore the question of writing and reading as a gendered subject.
See also: “Heroes and Sheroes” (vol. 1);
Lesbians; “Science Fiction Film: Nineteenth
and Twentieth Centuries” (vol. 1); “Television:
Twentieth Century” (vol. 1); Transgender;
Utopias.
Further Readings
Butler, Judith. Gender Trouble: Feminism and
the Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge, 1990.
137
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Haraway, Donna Jeanne. Cyborgs and
Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New
York: Routledge, 1991.
Russ, Joanna. To Write Like a Woman. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995.

PAT WHEELER

GENETIC ENGINEERING
Genetic engineering refers to the practice of altering genetic material so that
organisms or cells have new or different functions. This process has been
long practiced in plants. Gregor Mendel’s cross-pollination experiments in
the 1860s, in some ways, laid the
ground for contemporary genetics.
Other events that have contributed to
this area include the visualization of
the structure of DNA as a double helix
in the 1950s, the development of gene
splicing or recombinant DNA in the
1970s, and the completion of the
Human Genome Project in the early
part of the twenty-ﬁrst century. However, genetic engineering encompasses
a range of activities including gene
splicing, recombining DNA, transgenics, cloning, and genetic modiﬁcation
(GM). This range of practices has met
with controversy since the development of industrial-scale gene splicing
in the 1970s, including the GM crop
debates of the 1990s. Genetic engineering is both a trope of science ﬁction
and an actual scientiﬁc practice and is
often associated with horror and science ﬁction.
In the 1970s, genetic scientists in the
United States developed recombinant
DNA molecules and techniques for
gene splicing, making possible the
genetic engineering of molecules and
organisms. There was concern about
the potential risks involved, from the
scientiﬁc community as well as from
civic groups and the public. Paul Berg,
a prominent geneticist in this area,
138
................

Volume 2: Entries

contributed to a voluntary moratorium
while the scientiﬁc community tried to
anticipate both the dangers and beneﬁts of these new technologies. The
moratorium was eventually lifted, however, allowing some diagnostic and
agricultural applications to enter the
market from the 1980s on. The ﬁrst
patent on an organism was issued in
the United States in 1981. So far, the
hopes that genetic engineering might
enable “gene therapy,” or cures and
treatments for genetic disorders, have
not been realized.
Science ﬁction representations of
genetic engineering are dominated by
images of mutation, hybridity, and bioweaponry and concerns about the
development of a genetic underclass,
eugenics, or cosmetic selection. In science ﬁction ﬁlm, genetic engineering is
ﬁgured through bioengineered and
hybrid human bodies, primarily as a
trope of horror. In common with other
forms of monstrosity, these bioengineered bodies often take female form.
An example of this is the last ﬁlm of the
Alien series, Alien Resurrection (1997), in
which Sigourney Weaver plays a genetically engineered Ellen Ripley in which
the alien and Ripley’s own bodily materials are mixed. In this ﬁlm, alien and
human forms continue to mutate. Other
ﬁlmic images of genetically engineered
monstrosities include The Fly (1958;
remade in 1986), The Hulk (2003), and the
character Sil in Species (1995) and its
sequel. Genetically engineered mutants
also populate graphic novels, emerging
from both intentional experiments in
genetic engineering (The Hulk) and from
technoscientiﬁc accidents (The Fly).
Genetic engineering has been a rich
source of inspiration for science ﬁction
writers and ﬁlmmakers. Octavia Butler
explores genetic engineering in her
Xenogenesis trilogy (1987–89) to address
issues of difference and hybridity in

Gentle, Mary
relation to race, ethnicity, and species.
Nancy Kress also uses genetic engineering as a central focus to explore both
social justice and agency. In Kress’s Beggars trilogy (1994–97), genetic engineering is used to change the genetic traits of
some humans, creating different classes
of genetic citizenship. These SF narratives about genetic engineering explore
both the fears and hopes around such
technologies.

KATE O’RIORDAN

GENTLE, MARY

(1956– )

Mary Gentle, a British writer, has
written both interplanetary science ﬁction (SF) and quest fantasy, but is best
known for alternative history and secret history. In all genres, her writing is
characterized by wit, imagination, richness of description, and a willingness
to deal with eroticism, violence, and
the gritty details of life.
Born March 26, 1956, in Eastbourne,
East Sussex, England, Gentle left school at
age sixteen and worked a number of jobs,
then in the 1980s went back for a B.A. in
English and Politics at the University of
Bournemouth. She has since returned to
school for master’s degrees in seventeenth-century history and war studies
as part of the research for her ﬁction.
Her young adult fantasy A Hawk in
Silver was published in 1977, but Gentle
ﬁrst came to general notice with Golden
Witchbreed (1983), a ﬁrst-contact SF
novel in which a representative of
Earth journeys in the technologically
primitive but spiritually advanced society of Orthe and attempts to discover
the nature of an earlier culture that
had controlled the planet. A sequel, Ancient Light (1987), deals with more conﬂicts between the cultures.
The three stories and three novels
collected in the omnibus volume White

Crow share the assumption that Renaissance Hermetic magic works as science does in our world. They have the
same two protagonists, but Rats and
Gargoyles (1990) is SF about a world
where intelligent rats rule, while The
Architecture of Desire (1991) is set in an
alternate seventeenth century with a
female analogue of Oliver Cromwell
and is centered on the building of a
magical temple, and Left to His Own
Devices takes place in a future similar
to that of cyberpunk.
The stand-alone novel Grunts (1992)
reverses standard fantasy conventions:
its protagonists are orcs. Moreover, they
have reached into our world to steal
Marine Corps equipment. The book
parodies fantasy, war movies, and alien
invasion, among other tropes.
Ash: A Secret History (2002) is over a
thousand pages long in its original British edition. The American publisher
broke it into four volumes: A Secret History, Carthage Ascendant, The Wild
Machines, and Lost Burgundy. It is centered around what purports to be a
previously undiscovered manuscript
detailing the career of a ﬁfteenth-century warrior woman who resembles
Joan of Arc, only more so, and suggests
that Carthage was more important at
that time than we have supposed.
1610: A Sundial in a Grave (2003) is
more closely connected to consensus
history than its predecessor, as it is
built around the actual reigns of Henry
IV in France and James I in England, as
well the theories of Edward Fludd, here
developed into a mathematical system
capable of predicting the future. The
book also features the ﬁctitious Valentin Rochefort and his teenage sidekick
Dariole, who share a perversely complicated relationship, along with a Japanese swordsman who has found his
way to Europe.
139
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Further Readings
Jonas, Gerald. Review of Ancient Light, by
Mary Gentle. New York Times Book Review,
July 2, 1989, 15.
Turner, Rodger. “A Conversation with Mary
Gentle.” SF Site, July 2000 [online], http://
www.sfsite.com/10b/mg91.htm.

ARTHUR D. HLAVATY

GERMANY
Germany is not currently known for its
science ﬁction or fantasy production.
The reasons include the opinion (slowly
diminishing) that these genres are not
of great intellectual value as well as
the break in the cultural production
because of the National Socialist rule
and World War II. The golden age of
German cinema was ending with the
rise of the Nazis at the beginning of the
1930s. Many intellectuals and artists
emigrated. Some of them had enriched
the German culture with ﬁlms of the
fantastic, full of vampires, dop€ ngers, ghosts, and artiﬁcial men.
pelga
These images helped deﬁne the idea of
Germany as a nation uneasy with itself.
Some who stayed sympathized with
the National Socialist ideology and
therefore it was difﬁcult in postwar
Germany to accept their work. In literature, there had been a great tradition of
utopian ideas in philosophy as well as
metaphysics and horror in German
Romantic literature. The collection of
legends, myths, and fairy tales were an
important part of creating a national
identity. After World War II, the science
ﬁction (SF) literature and ﬁlm of the
United States began to inﬂuence German work.
One legend of artiﬁcial life is a medieval German tale where it is said that
the humanoid-shaped Alraune, German
for the mandrake root, is produced by
the semen of hanged men under the
gallows. In the story Alraune, published
140
................

Volume 2: Entries

in 1911 by German novelist Hanns Heinz
Ewers (1871–1943), the author modernizes the myth by concentrating on the
issues of artiﬁcial insemination. A scientist fertilizes a female prostitute with
the sperm of a man hanged for murder.
The scientist then brings the child up
himself because he wishes to prove
that the character of a child is formed
by her or his social environment and
education and is not linked with the biological origin. However, the child
Alraune is affected by her criminal
genes. She understands her life’s purpose in ruining and destroying men,
forcing them to commit suicide. Her
nature seems a consequence of not only
her genetic makeup but also her
unnatural birth, which makes an
unnatural monster of her. The story
was adapted for several ﬁlms, the best
known being the 1928 German version
(A Daughter of Destiny) with Brigitte
Helm, who also played the parts of the
two Marias in the SF ﬁlm Metropolis
(1927), written by Thea von Harbou.
Leni Riefenstahl (1902–2003) was
another successful woman in the early
era of German cinema. For Das blaue
Licht (The Blue Light, 1932), she wrote
the script and directed the ﬁlm together with Bela Balaz. Riefenstahl also
played the role of an outcast girl who
knows and protects the secret of a
mysterious blue light coming from the
mountains. Many young men try to ﬁnd
the light, but they are lured to death.
The mystic story was combined with a
visual style that became famous. She
was also known for her documentary
ﬁlms on the 1936 Berlin Olympic
Games and the Nazi Reichsparteitag,
for which Riefenstahl won international prizes.
After World War II, Germany was divided in two parts, East and West. That
division and the accompanying different political systems resulted in

Ghost Stories
different cultural productions. In East
Germany, utopian or “scientiﬁc-fantastic” ﬁlms were produced; the term science ﬁction was avoided. One of these
ﬁlms was Der schweigende Stern (First
Spaceship on Venus, 1960), based on a
story by Stanislaw Lem. The ﬁlm shows
international cooperation in outer
space as well as a mild form of female
emancipation. There is one female
member of a mostly male spaceship
crew. She is a Japanese scientist who
cannot give birth to children because
she experienced the effects of the
atomic bomb at Hiroshima. Her sterility is given as the reason for her obsession with her work.
The only superﬁcial emancipation of
women in the sciences is found in the
work of one of the most important East
German authors, Christa Wolf (1929– ),
in her SF story “Selbstversuch” (Selfexperiment) from 1972. In it, a young
female scientist gives a report about
her voluntary transformation into a
man in a risky scientiﬁc experiment.
The story was interpreted as a feminist
critique, as a utopian story about the
reunion of man and woman as one
gender, as a condemnation of the political socialist system in East Germany,
and also as the promotion of a society
where women and men are working
equally for the improvement of a
socialist utopia in which characteristics
of both genders are accepted. At the
end of the story, the protagonist
reverses the sex change and becomes
a woman again.
An important West German author
of the fantastic was Michael Ende
(1929–1995). In his novel Momo (1973),
the female protagonist Momo ﬁghts
against a society of gray men. The gray
men cheat others of their time, representing a Western social model that is
oriented only on economic principles.
They can also be read as representing a

male rational principle that is opposed
to an irrational childlike and female
principle. The novel stands in the tradition of social critique in the form of a
romantic fairy tale.
Another West German tradition in
fantasy and science ﬁction follows the
model of American SF. Claudia Kern
was editor in chief for the science ﬁction magazine Space View and writes for
German SF series similar to the pulp
science ﬁction magazines in the United
States, such as Professor Zamorra, Maddrax, and Perry Rhodan. She also developed the narrative for the space-action
computer game Darkstar One.
An annual German science ﬁction
prize, the Deutsche Science Fiction
Preis, has been awarded since 1985.
Two female writers have won the
award so far: Gudrun Pausewang for
her story “Die Wolke” (The Cloud) in
1988 and Maria J. Pfannholz for “Den
Ueberlebenden” (For the Survivors) in
1990. In both stories, the point of view
is primarily inﬂuenced by German regional and political matters.
Further Readings
Elsaesser, Thomas. Weimar Cinema and After:
Germany’s Historical Imaginary. London:
Routledge, 2000.
Engler, Friederike. “Rereading Christa Wolf’s
Selbstversuch: Cyborgs and Feminist Critiques of Scientiﬁc Discourse.” German
Quarterly 73, no. 4 (Fall 2000): 401–15.

HEIKE ENDTER

GHOST STORIES
Ghost stories are part of an enduring
ﬁctional tradition that emerged from
the haunted recesses of oral narrative
and folklore, gained thrilling dimension
from popular gothic and sensation
novels of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and appeared in an
eerily familiar form in a proliferating
host
of
eagerly
read
Victorian
141
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

magazines. The ghost story proper—
one in which there is some sort of spectral visitation, with some decided and
consequential encounter between the
living and the dead—is an expression
of the darker moods of literary Romanticism. Ghost stories are a distinct and
difﬁcult-to-master genre, developing in
concert with the burgeoning magazine
trade and ﬂourishing in the last half of
the nineteenth through the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth centuries, the latter years haunted by the real horrors of
World War I.
Scores of ghost stories were supplied
to an increasingly literate public by
most of the era’s leading authors. Char€ and her biographer Elizalotte Bronte
beth Gaskell, Charles Dickens, George
Eliot, Robert Louis Stevenson, renowned children’s author E. Nesbit,
Sherlock Holmes’s creator Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle, and social realists Henry
James and Edith Wharton all wrote
ghost stories. Some of the best practitioners were women. Though no exact
tally can be made, by some scholarly
reckonings fully half of what may be
several thousand tales were written by
women. While its ancestry may be
found in the outsized dramas, convoluted plots, and unrecognizable locales
of the literary gothic, the classic English-language ghost story brings the
uncanny to life in domestic settings,
within the realms of middle-class
households and minds.
In the annals of psychical research,
ghosts appear as portents of pending
disaster, as beneﬁcent protectors of the
grieving, or as redundantly prosaic
loops of ethereal ﬁlm, playing over and
over in a particularly susceptible places. Fictional ghosts borrow luster and
motivation from their “real” counterparts in lore and legend, but their visits
always reveal some secret meaning or
instigate some dramatic reckoning for
142
................

Volume 2: Entries

the living. Ghosts may be vengeful
and malevolent, tortured and needy,
or even, less frequently, lonely and
dear. The tales they inhabit tell of living fears and desires, repressed or
expressed, suggestively ambiguous or
overtly pronounced.
Early literary ghosts appeared in
works by Roman writers such as Plautus, Seneca, Lucian, and Pliny the
Younger. In Europe, medieval balladeers sang of spells and specters, dead
lovers in thrall to the living. Shakespeare and other Renaissance playwrights employ ghosts who incite or
accuse and lend an otherworldly
import to the action. Daniel Defoe’s
True Relation of the Apparition of one Mrs.
Veal, the Next Day after her Death; to One
Mrs. Bargrave at Canterbury the 8th of
September, 1705, published in 1706, is
often credited as the ﬁrst ghost story.
However, Defoe’s tale purports to be a
recounting of facts. More than a hundred years would pass before the ﬁctional ghost story gained substance
and materialized as a separate literary
form.
Sir Walter Scott’s 1824 historical
novel Redgauntlet contained the cautionary “Wandering Willie’s Tale” and
his “The Tapestried Chamber” was
printed in the 1829 annual The Keepsake. The themes and motifs in these
stories would become mainstays of the
genre: the dynamics of power and identity, psychological torment, guilt, class,
betrayal, the past, and the inescapable
certainty of evil.
Annual collections of prose, verse,
and engravings like The Keepsake
appeared individually or as special, often best-selling, Christmas supplements to magazines. The ghost story, a
regular feature of these periodicals,
became a Christmas tradition, due, in
part, to the marketing acumen of
Charles Dickens, editor of Household

Ghost Stories
Words (1850–59) and the ghost-storyladen All the Year Round (1859–70; succeeded by Charles Dickens Jr., 1870–88).
Dickens published now-classic works
by Elizabeth Gaskell (The Old Nurse’s
Story); journalist, Egyptologist, and novelist Amelia Edwards (The Phantom
Coach); and Irish writer Rosa Mulholland (Not to Be Taken at Bed-time, which
was printed with Dickens’s own To Be
Taken with a Grain of Salt). Dickens also
published the weirdly sinister Green Tea
and other tales by Joseph Sheridan Le
Fanu, considered to be one of the ﬁnest
artists of the genre. Women writers of
the period also edited magazines in
which they printed their own and
others’ ghost tales. Notable editor/
authors include the almost preternaturally proliﬁc Mary Elizabeth Braddon
(Belgravia, later the Mistletoe Bough,
1866–93) and Mrs. Henry (Ellen) Wood
(Argosy, 1867–87).
As a peculiarly Victorian phenomenon, the preponderance of ghost stories produced during this era may
reﬂect fears prompted by destabilizing
cultural changes: industrialization,
increasing secularization, and shifting
class and gender roles. The ghost story
was particularly congenial to women,
who were often subversively critical of
their restrictive social worlds under the
cloak of darkness their uncanny tales
provided. Issues of gender and power,
challenges to Victorian codes, and
depictions of women’s social and economic place are of particular interest
to feminist scholars. Hauntings in
women’s stories are often personal,
rather than historical. Braddon, author
of the scandalous Lady Audley’s Secret
(1862), imbued her uncanny tales with
believable supernatural trappings, but
everyday cruelty and moral ambiguity
are thematically central. The Shadow in
the Corner (1879), for instance, is a
heart-rending
exposure
of
class

indifference and female vulnerability.
In Cecilia de Noel (1891), by mystery
author Lanoe Falconer (Mary Elizabeth
Hawker), genuine compassion is contrasted with the show and sham of
empty religious pieties. American realist Mary E. Wilkins Freeman describes
the bleak conditions of ordinary women’s lives and the ﬁerceness and delicacy of their often-thwarted passions.
The Lost Ghost (1903) is an unnerving
tale of child abuse and the differing faces of motherhood. Margaret
Oliphant, Charlotte Riddell, Rhoda
Broughton,
Marie
Corelli
(Mary
Mackay), and Vernon Lee (Violet Paget)
all contributed signiﬁcantly to the
genre.
A mix of inﬂuences inspirit these tales: legend and song; the lingering
fascination with medievalism; the aesthetic of the picturesque, which privileged exotic, wild, and desolate locales
over symmetrical prettiness and
charm; Romanticism’s dark sublime
and the moody mayhem of the gothic,
as well as intense interest in nineteenth-century spiritualist movements:
their multifarious ghostly worlds can
be seen as embattled psychic landscapes, with haunted houses symbolizing haunted selves. The irresolvable
mysteries of the human heart confronting inner and outer demons is as
understandably familiar as the stock
gothic effects of isolated houses, winding passageways, and dark stormy
nights. The painful sense of foreboding
exacerbated by the war years brought
a new spate of ghost story writers to
the fore: W. W. Jacobs, E. F. Benson,
Algernon Blackwood, Oliver Onions,
and the grand master of the
“antiquarian” ghost story, Eton provost
M. R. James, among numerous others.
James, like fellow scholar/fantasy
writers Lewis Carroll, C. S. Lewis, and
J. R. R. Tolkien, brings his erudition to
143
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

his tightly constructed narratives and
disrupts precisely ordered worlds with
mystery and menace.
The popularity of the ghost story
abated somewhat as twentieth-century
technologies developed. New opportunities for leisure pursuits, new media
venues, and special-interest magazines
promoted new outlets for our supernatural penchants. While the genre persists in its short-story form, it also
melds and branches into the related
genres or subgenres of futuristic ﬁction, “fairy” and fantasy ﬁction, horror
ﬁlm and ﬁction, and magical realism.
From Anne Rice’s vampire saga to J. K.
Rowling’s Death Eaters, deﬁance of
death remains as terrifying, titillating,
and weirdly comforting as ever. Modern
writers as diverse as M. F. K. Fisher,
Muriel Spark, Joyce Carol Oates, Joan
Aiken, Mavis Gallant, and Penelope
Lively have all written ghost stories.
Longer works, such as Shirley Jackson’s 1959 psychological thriller The
Haunting of Hill House, Susan Hill’s The
Woman in Black (1983), and Toni Morrison’s harrowing Beloved (1987) are new
classics in an abiding, ever-alluring
genre.
See also: “Nineteenth-Century Fiction” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Carpenter, Lynette, and Wendy K. Kolmar,
eds. Haunting the House of Fiction: Feminist
Perspectives on Ghost Stories by American
Women. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1991.
Cox, Michael, and R. A. Gilbert, eds. The
Oxford Book of English Ghost Stories. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Dalby, Richard, ed. Victorian Ghost Stories by
Eminent Women Writers. New York: Carroll
& Graf, 1989.
Dark, Larry, ed. The Literary Ghost: Great Contemporary Ghost Stories. New York: Atlantic
Monthly Press, 1991.
Dickerson, Vanessa D. Victorian Ghosts in the
Noontide:
Women
Writers
and
the
144
................

Volume 2: Entries

Supernatural. Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1996.
Felton, D. Haunted Greece and Rome: Ghost
Stories from Classical Antiquity. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1998.
Jackson, Rosemary. Fantasy: The Literature of
Subversion. New York: Methuen, 1981.
Lundie, Catherine A., ed. Restless Spirits:
Ghost Stories by American Women, 1872–
1926. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1996.
Weinstock, Jeffrey Andrew, ed. Spectral
America: Phantoms and the American Imagination. Madison, WI: Popular Press, 2004.

KATE FALVEY

GIBSON, WILLIAM

(1948– )

William Gibson is an American author
who is widely acknowledged as the father of cyberpunk and is credited with
coining the term cyberspace in his ﬁrst
novel, Neuromancer (1984). This novel
was the ﬁrst to win all three major science ﬁction awards—the Nebula,
Hugo, and Philip K. Dick Memorial
awards—and has had an inﬂuence on
contemporary science ﬁction. Like
other cyberpunk writers, including Pat
Cadigan, Gibson has distanced himself
from the cyberpunk genre.
The Neuromancer (or Sprawl) trilogy
consists of Neuromancer, Count Zero
(1986), and Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988)
and is broadly concerned with how the
computer–human interface functions
in cyberspace. The ﬁgure of Case, the
console cowboy, in Neuromancer draws
explicitly on ﬁlm noir motifs with his
addictions, inability to form lasting
emotional relationships, and knowledge of the virtual cityscape. One of
the key characters in the trilogy is the
femme fatale Molly Millions, whose
cybernetic implants enhance her street
samurai prowess.
The San Francisco (or Bridge) trilogy
is set in a nearer future than his ﬁrst
trilogy. Virtual Light (1993), Idoru (1996),

Gilman, Charlotte Perkins
and All Tomorrow’s Parties (1999) are
about technological and spiritual
transcendence and engage with the
economics and ethics of the human–
machine interface. More so than the
Sprawl books, this trilogy is concerned
with
cyborg
identity
and
selfperception.
Gibson has also published numerous
short stories, particularly in Omni and
in his short-story collection Burning
Chrome (1986), and several of these have
been turned into ﬁlms, including Johnny
Mnemonic (1995) and New Rose Hotel
(1998). He also published the electronic
poem “Agrippa: A Book of the Dead”
(1992), consisting of a self-erasing
ﬂoppy disk intended to display the text
only once. Gibson and Bruce Sterling
coauthored The Difference Engine (1990),
a steampunk novel that posits what
might have happened had Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine been built.
Gibson has gradually moved toward
a more realist style of writing, as evidenced by his recent Pattern Recognition
(2003). Set in the near future, this novel’s female protagonist Cayce has a
psychological
hypersensitivity
that
causes her to have allergic reactions to
brands, which makes her an ideal
advertising consultant. Gibson’s writings are generally concerned with what
human can mean in the presence of the
fundamentals put forward by information-based “soft” technology, while
strong class and economic interests
mean that his works also use the
cyber-self to imagine versions of the
capitalist subject. Perhaps not surprisingly, considering that his work draws
upon noir tropes and motifs, many of
the women in his stories are represented as powerful but often highly
sexualized.
Gibson moved to Canada to avoid
the Vietnam War draft in 1972 and currently lives in Vancouver.

Further Readings
Cavallaro, Dani. Cyberpunk and Cyberculture:
Science Fiction and the Work of William Gibson. London: Athlone, 2000.
Rapatzikou, Tatiani G. Gothic Motifs in the Fiction of William Gibson. Amsterdam:
Rodopi, 2004.
William Gibson [online]. Http://www.williamgibsonbooks.com.

STACY GILLIS

GILMAN, CHARLOTTE PERKINS
(1860–1935)
Charlotte Perkins Gilman was an American author best known during her
lifetime for her work Women and Economics (1898), which was translated
into seven languages and used as a college textbook in the 1920s. Today,
Gilman’s name is more likely to be
known because of her feminist short
story “The Yellow Wallpaper” (1892),
which is widely read in literature
courses around the country. The story is
based on Gilman’s personal experience
and explores gender prejudice relating
to the treatment of mental illness.
While Gilman engaged in frequent public speaking, her utopias—A Woman’s
Utopia (fragment; 1907), What Diantha
Did (1910), Moving the Mountain (1911),
Herland (1915), and With Her in Ourland
(1916)—reached a wider audience and
let her develop her thoughts about gender, femininity, and mothering.
Many home economists and authors
of utopias in the late nineteenth century argued that human evolution
would eventually help free women
from their domestic drudgery, but Gilman demanded immediate changes
that would enable women to leave the
isolation of their marriages and homes
and develop their potentials to the fullest by involvement in the public
sphere. She viewed women’s position in
society as anti-evolutionary and argued
145
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

that women could contribute tremendously to the process of social evolution if they were not conﬁned solely to
household chores and motherhood.
Responding to Darwin’s theory of evolution, which left its mark on all
aspects of nineteenth-century American society, Gilman fought for social
reorganization that would encourage
progress by including women in society’s political, social, and economic
activities.
In her best-known utopia, Herland, Gilman created an all-female community
that provided women with a place
outside of the restricting reach of patriarchy. The strictly imposed boundaries
between the private sphere (usually
assigned to women) and the public
sphere (usually managed by men) disappear in this community, offering an
almost barrier-free society with a diminished need for a hierarchical order.
Juxtaposing the society of her time and
the utopian land of women, Gilman
reshapes our notions of gender, femininity, community, and progress and challenges the hierarchical structures
associated with these terms. She argues
against a capitalist, male-dominated society when she offers her vision of the
space more favorable to the progress of
human race and creates an alternative
society through which our social failures
can be better comprehended. Even as
Gilman’s sharp intellect pinpoints with
great precision many deﬁciencies in her
society, her narrow focus on middleclass women and the racist and xenophobic undertones in her works reveal
the social atmosphere of the time as well
as Gilman’s own shortcomings she was
unable to overcome.
Further Readings
“Charlotte (Anna) Perkins Gilman (1860–
1935).” Books and Writers, 2003 [online],
http://www.kirjasto.sci.ﬁ/gilman.htm.
146
................

Volume 2: Entries

Hill, Mary A. Charlotte Perkins Gilman: The Making of a Radical Feminist,1860–1896. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1980.
Lane, Ann J. To Herland and Beyond: The Life and
Work of Charlotte Perkins Gilman. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1997.

IVA BALIC

GOLDSMITH, CELE.
See: Lalli, Cele Goldsmith

GOMEZ, JEWELLE

(1948– )

Jewelle Gomez is an American writer,
born in Boston. She is the author of The
Gilda Stories (1991), a two-time Lambda
Award–winning novel that has been
consistently praised by critics as being
a work that originated a new vampire
mythology. Gomez has received numerous other awards, including a National
Endowment for the Arts Fellowship.
Gomez considers herself to be a
writer-activist, inspired by the life of
her great-grandmother, who witnessed
and survived major milestones of
American history. Her grandmother’s
strength fueled Gomez’s desire to write
speculative ﬁction that integrates her
black feminist-grounded politics. Her
work, which includes poetry and political essays, has appeared in the New
York Times, Village Voice, and Advocate.
The Gilda Stories has been adapted into
a play, Bones and Ash: A Gilda Story, and
performed by the Urban Bush Women,
a woman-centered dance company in
Brooklyn, New York.
The Gilda Stories comprises a series of
short stories written and revised over a
ten-year period. The stories begin in
1850 and follow the journey of Gilda,
an African-American lesbian vampire
who carries a cross, through two centuries to 2050. The stories center on Gilda’s historical experiences as a black
woman in America and her quest to
create a family that supersedes race,

Gorey, Edward
gender, and sexual orientation. When
the reader ﬁrst meets Gilda, she is a
nameless runaway slave who kills her
would-be rapist and ﬁnds sanctuary in
a brothel owned by vampire lesbians.
The nameless runaway is given a
home, an education, and a name—the
very name of her benefactress who
chooses to relinquish her own life.
Aside from the central themes of
power, isolation, recreating family, and
maintaining honor, Gomez builds her
own vision of a vampire mythology by
shifting the undertones of her novel
from that of control and exploitation,
themes common to earlier vampire
novels, to the importance of community
by creating a system of reciprocity and
choice. Gilda’s seeking of blood is never
an act of violation, but one where her
“victim” often chooses to become a willing participant. Those who are not given
a choice, however, do not die and are often taken in their sleep and left human
and whole with visions, dreams, and
hopes to cling to upon waking.
Gomez’s most recent offering in the
science ﬁction/fantasy genre has been
an anthology of fantasy ﬁction, Swords
of the Rainbow (1996), coedited with Eric
Garber.
See also: “Intersections of Race and Gender”
(vol. 1).
Further Readings
Helford, Elyce Rae. “The Future of Political
Community: Race, Ethnicity, and Class
Privilege in Novels by Piercy, Gomez, and
Misha.” Utopian Studies 12 (2001): 124–42.
Jewelle Gomez [online]. Http://www.jewelle
gomez.com.
Koolish, Lynda. African American Writers: Portraits and Visions. Jackson: University Press
of Mississippi, 2001.
Ricketts, Wendell. “Gomez, Jewelle (b.
1948).” Glbtq: An Encyclopedia of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Culture, 2002 [online], http://www.glbtq.com/
literature/gomez_j.html.

Winnubst, Shannon. “Vampires, Anxieties,
and Dreams: Race and Sex in the Contemporary United States.” Hypatia 18
(2003): 1–20.

YOLANDA HOOD

GOREY, EDWARD (1925–2000)
Author, artist, and illustrator Edward
St. John Gorey created more than a
hundred works over a forty-seven-year
career. His writing and artwork are
characterized by strong gothic sensibilities coupled with fantastical moments
of surreality and absurdity. His characters are androgynous in appearance
and presentation, an ambiguousness
that is echoed in his play with anagrams and pseudonyms. Animals—
including cats, bats, and unnatural
creatures—appear in his texts almost
as frequently as human ﬁgures.
Gorey was born in Chicago on February 22, 1925. He was an only child and,
from an early age, displayed an appetite
for reading that grew to encompass
other media, most notably television;
Agatha Christie’s works and Buffy the
Vampire Slayer were particular favorites.
Gorey began writing plays between
1944 and 1946 while serving as a company clerk in the U.S. Army. He
attended Harvard between 1946 and
1950, receiving a B.A. in French, and
moved to New York in 1953, where he
began illustrating the jackets of classic
works for Anchor Books. His ﬁrst two
books, The Unstrung Harp; or, Mr. Earbrass Writes a Novel and The Listing Attic,
were published by Duell, Sloan, and
Pearce in 1953 and 1954, respectively.
Between 1959 and 1962, Bobbs-Merrill;
Dodd, Mead; Doubleday; Little, Brown;
and Simon and Schuster published a
smattering of Gorey’s stories; in 1962,
however, Fantod Press released The
Beastly Baby, marking the beginning of a
series of Fantod-published Gorey titles.
147
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Gorey had a special love of ballet and
a great admiration for ballerinas, and
he attended the New York City Ballet
from 1956 through 1979 without missing a season. In fact, The Gilded Bat is
dedicated to his favorite ballerina,
Diana Adams. The cover of the ﬁrst edition of The Lavender Leotard; or, Going a
Lot to the New York City Ballet, sports a
hand-painted leotard, as Gorey wanted
to be sure it was the correct shade. Both
works display a wide knowledge of not
only the world of ballet but also the particular quirks and challenges faced in
general by companies and more speciﬁcally by the New York City Ballet itself.
Additionally,
Gorey
was
avidly
involved with the theater. In 1949, he
cofounded the Cambridge, Massachusetts, Poet’s Theater with John Ashbery,
V. R. Lang, Alison Lurie, William Matchett, Frank O’Hara, Thornton Wilder, and
William Carlos Williams. As well as creating sets and illustrating posters, Gorey
wrote and directed, including 1952’s The
Teddy Bear: A Sinister Play. He continued
to work in a variety of theatrical venues
right up to the turn of the century, and
his set design for the 1977 Broadway production of Dracula won a Tony Award.
Throughout his career, Gorey provided illustrations to numerous publications, and for a short period he wrote
movie reviews for the Soho Weekly. He
also animated the opening sequence
for the PBS show Mystery! and in 1999
designed the cover for the Freeze’s
album “One False Move.” In 1988, Gorey
moved to Cape Cod, where he
remained—writing and illustrating—
until his death in 2000.
Further Readings
Goreography [Online October 3, 2007].
Http://www.goreyography.com/.
Gorey, Edward. Ascending Peculiarity: Edward
Gorey on Edward Gorey. Ed. Karen Wilkin.
New York: Harcourt, 2001.
148
................

Volume 2: Entries

Theroux, Alexander. The Strange Case of
Edward Gorey. Seattle: Fantagraphics,
2000.

EDEN LEE LACKNER

GOTHIC
Gothic is a term loosely associated with
all things spooky, macabre, darkly supernatural, and ancient. As a literary
genre, the gothic can be identiﬁed by
certain conventions. Gothic texts are
typically set in haunted or decayed
structures like medieval castles, graveyards, mansions, or abbeys. Gothic narratives are obsessed with the past,
particularly in terms of family lineage
and ancient curses, and they usually
contain multiple embedded or inset tales. The gothic heroine is often physically trapped or conﬁned or, in a more
psychological sense, caught in an
untenable situation from which there
is no escape. Other typical elements of
gothic works include the use of unreliable or compulsive narrators, night€ ngers,
mares, doubled ﬁgures, doppelga
supernatural events, and circular or
convoluted plots. The gothic is often
associated with its effects upon readers
such as shivers of terror, a sense of
revulsion, or an uneasy feeling of the
uncanny.
The most signiﬁcant convention of
gothic narratives is the use of dop€ ngers. A doppelga
€ nger is the doupelga
ble, evil twin, alter ego, or ghostly
counterpart of a character and is often
a psychic projection caused by one of
the characters’ unresolved anxieties or
fears. It often possesses qualities that a
given character is attempting to
repress. However, as Freud notes, we
can never truly repress that which is
inside us. Gothic works explore the
return of the repressed—in other
words, that which cannot be denied
explodes (or creeps) onto the pages of

Gothic
the text in the form of a character that
haunts the protagonist. A classic exam€ nger is the woman
ple of a doppelga
behind the wallpaper in Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s “The Yellow Wallpaper.”
€ nger pairs
Other examples of doppelga
include Jekyll and Hyde, Victor Frankenstein and the creature, and Jane Eyre
and Bertha.
Ann Radcliffe (1764–1823), a novelist
and an important founder of the gothic
genre, theorized that there were two
strains of gothic works: the literature of
terror and the literature of horror.
Works of terror are associated with
higher forms of literature and the
Romantic sublime; these works create
a sense of suspense and arouse an
obscure dread and anxiety that causes
the reader to struggle to make sense of
the cause of the fear. Henry James’s The
Turn of the Screw (1898), in which a governess cannot escape her fears that her
two young charges are uncanny and
evil, exempliﬁes the literature of terror.
Works of horror are lower forms of
writing in which readers feel shock,
revulsion, or disgust. Radcliffe argued
that horror appeals to lower mental
faculties, such as curiosity and
voyeurism.
The gothic as literary genre began in
1764 with the publication of Horace
Walpole’s The Castle of Otranto, a Story.
Otranto depicts the downfall of a
twelfth-century
corrupt
patriarch,
Manfred. Because his ancestor had
unlawfully gained the castle of Otranto,
the family curse has now fallen upon
Manfred. A series of calamitous events
begin after Manfred’s son is killed by
the sudden, supernatural descent of an
enormous
helmet,
and
Manfred
schemes to marry his son’s unwilling
e. The Castle of Otranto contains at
ﬁance
least three separate family histories, a
beleaguered heroine, a violent and destructive patriarch, a haunted castle,

dungeons, caves, a monk, and family
dysfunction. The ﬁgure of Manfred, the
despotic and powerful nobleman, is a
precursor of the Byronic or Satanic
hero, a type of hero that is a mainstay
of the gothic genre. Otranto was an
instant success. When it was reprinted,
Walpole changed the title to The Castle
of Otranto: A Gothic Story, and thus the
term gothic came to describe a type of
literary ﬁction that was set in medieval
times and that combined supernatural
images and traditional themes of chivalry and romance. The gothic was a
particularly strong literary form in the
Romantic era (1780–1830), the ﬁn de
siecle (1880–1900), and the late twentieth century.
From its inception, the gothic
appealed to women readers and writers—to such an extent that critics now
identify a feminine and masculine tradition of gothic writing. As deﬁned by
Ellen Moers, the female gothic focuses
on the distress, perils, and victimization of women who are under the control of unscrupulous men. The ﬁrst
gothic novel written by a woman is
Clara Reeve’s 1777 The Champion of Virtue (later renamed The Old English Baron:
A Gothic Story). Reeve intended her text
to correct the supposed faults of Walpole’s Otranto, and it is notable in that
it contains the ﬁrst use of the haunted
chamber motif. Other important early
gothic novels by women include Charlotte Dacre’s Zoﬂoya; or, The Moor (1806),
which responds to Matthew Lewis’s
misogynistic The Monk (1796); Jane
Austen’s satirical spoof of gothic ﬁction, Northanger Abbey (1818); Mary
Wollstonecraft Shelley’s Frankenstein
(1818), a gothic work that is also the
ﬁrst science ﬁction novel; and the novels of Ann Radcliffe, such as The Mysteries of Udolpho (1794).
The gothic as a genre is remarkably
resilient, and it can be found in all art
149
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

forms from high art to pulp ﬁction and
pop culture events, as well as being a
mainstay of television and ﬁlm. In the
Romantic era, the gothic appeared in
novels, poetry, plays, opera, and short
ﬁction. In the nineteenth century,
Charles Dickens, Elizabeth Gaskell,
Edgar Allan Poe, Mary Wilkins Freeman, and Vernon Lee are notable
authors of gothic tales and ghost stories. Victorian novels such as Charlotte
€ ’s Jane Eyre (1847) and Emily
Bronte
€’s Wuthering Heights (1847) are
Bronte
masterworks of the female gothic. Notable twentieth-century gothic works
by women include Toni Morrison’s
Beloved (1987); Daphne du Maurier’s
Rebecca (1938), a retelling of Jane Eyre;
Anne Rice’s vampire series; Angela
Carter’s The Bloody Chamber, and Other
Stories (1979); Shirley Jackson’s The
Haunting of Hill House (1959); Margaret
Atwood’s poetry and novels such as
The Blind Assassin (2000) and Lady Oracle
(1976); and Joyce Carol Oates’s short
ﬁction as well as novels like Belleﬂeur
(1980).
See also: “Nineteenth-Century Fiction” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Castle, Terry. “The Female Thermometer”:
Eighteenth-Century Culture and the Invention
of the Uncanny. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Heiland, Donna. Gothic and Gender: An Introduction. Oxford, England: Blackwell, 2004.
Hoeveler, Diana Long. Gothic Feminism: The
Professionalization of Gender from Charlotte
Smith to the Bront€es. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1998.
Hoeveler, Diane Long, and Tamar Heller,
eds. Approaches to Teaching Gothic Fiction.
New York: Modern Language Association
Press, 2003.
Moers, Ellen. “The Female Gothic.” In The
Endurance of Frankenstein: Essays on Mary
Shelley’s Novel, ed. George Levine and
U. C. Knoepﬂmacher, 77–87. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1979.
150
................

Volume 2: Entries

Radcliffe, Ann. “On the Supernatural in
Poetry.” New Monthly Magazine 16 (1826):
145–52.

DONELLE RUWE

GOTLIEB, PHYLLIS

(1926– )

Phyllis Gotlieb is the most important
female author of science ﬁction (SF) in
English-speaking Canada and one of
that country’s most important authors
in the genre. She was born Phyllis Fay
Bloom in Toronto and received her B.A.
and M.A. from the University of
Toronto. In 1949, she married Calvin
Gotlieb. They had three children.
Gotlieb began her career in the 1950s,
writing poetry initially but turning to
SF, at her husband’s suggestion, to help
overcome a writer’s block.
Her ﬁrst stories (“A Grain of Manhood” and “Phantom Foot,” the latter
being the ﬁrst set in the Galactic Federation, the space opera world in which
most of her novels take place) appeared
in 1959. Gotlieb is known in Canada primarily for her poetry and has described
herself as a Canadian poet and American SF writer. However, her importance
to Canadian SF can hardly be overestimated. Though recent years have seen
an explosion in Canadian SF, Gotlieb
remains one of the country’s most signiﬁcant practitioners of the genre. She
has published nine SF novels and two
short-story collections, as well as three
volumes of poetry, two collected and
selected volumes of poems, and one
mainstream novel (Why Should I Have All
the Grief?, 1969).
Her ﬁrst novel, Sunburst (1964), is a
classic novel of atomic mutation. Its
protagonist, Shandy Johnson, lives in a
town isolated from the rest of America
because it was the site of a nuclear disaster; many children, mutated by radioactivity,
have
developed
various
paranormal
powers
(telekinesis,

Graphic Novels
teleportation, etc.) and have been
imprisoned. The novel involves Johnson’s discovery of her own unusual
mutation and the new understanding of
the mutated children she helps inculcate. Gotlieb’s second SF novel, O Master
Caliban! (1976), is a complexly plotted
novel dealing with the attempt of artiﬁcial intelligences to gain autonomy. It
also explores questions of parent–child
relations, maturation, and pregnancy
and reproduction, all common themes
in Gotlieb’s work. It was followed by a
sequel, Heart of Red Iron (1989).
Gotlieb has also written two trilogies.
A Judgment of Dragons (a closely linked
set of short stories, 1980), Emperor,
Swords, Pentacles (1982), and The Kingdom
of the Cats (1985) deal with the Ungrukh,
sentient alien cats and their adventures
as they come to terms with the alien life
form that created them. Flesh and Gold
(1988), Violent Stars (1999), and Mindworlds (2002) continue Gotlieb’s interest
in the complexities of identity and
autonomy as they explore an elaborate
plot to use genetically engineered life
forms as slaves. Gotlieb’s Jewish heritage is rarely displayed in her SF, but it is
central to her mainstream novel and
poetry and is a major element in “Tauf
Aleph,” her most highly regarded short
story. Gotlieb’s writing is dense, allusive,
and poetic, her plotting often complex.
As a consequence, her work is demanding, but it is also powerful and deeply
rewarding.
Further Readings
Barbour, Douglas. “Phyllis Gotlieb’s Children
of the Future: Sunburst and Ordinary,
Moving.” Journal of Canadian Fiction 3, no. 2
(1974): 72–76.
Ketterer, David. “Phyllis Gotlieb Is Canadian
SF?” in Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy,
67. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1992.

DOMINICK GRACE

GRAPHIC NOVELS
The term graphic novel is used in many
different ways for different purposes.
Most simply, it refers to a work of
sequential art (or comics) in a larger
bound format, collecting multiple
issues in some cases or presenting a
complete narrative in one volume. For
some, the term is used to differentiate
some works from the denigrated term
comics. Most story arcs of individual
issues of series from Marvel, DC, and
other major comics publishers are collected into graphic novel format, following the popularity of early graphic
novels such as Alan Moore’s Watchmen
and Frank Miller’s The Dark Knight
Returns, among others.
The graphic novel medium, like its
antecedent the comic book, is dominated within the United States by the
superhero genre. Manga are sometimes
included when referring to graphic novels, and sometimes not.
Women have traditionally held subordinate roles in the superhero genre,
and in science ﬁction and fantasy in
general, although many of the more
recent graphic novels have worked
against that trend. With the inception
of the superhero genre and its subsequent takeover of the comics form,
women’s roles continued to be stratiﬁed in most cases. As most superheroes were men, women in comics were
deﬁned by their relationship to these
superheroes—as
girlfriends,
wives,
mothers, or villains. Lois Lane is the
prototypical example of the role most
women were placed into during the
golden age of superheroes. Wonder
Woman stands out as a notable counterexample, reversing the standards as
the central character around which
other characters were arrayed, though
early Wonder Woman is complicated
by the near-constant inclusion of
151
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

allusions to and utilizations of Bondage
and Discipline, Dominance and Submission, Sadism and Masochism
(BDSM) and fetish elements in her narratives, as well as her early weakness
of losing her powers whenever her
hands were bound by a man.
In contrast, given that the graphic
novel is more recent than the superhero genre, women have had many
strong leading and supporting roles
in science ﬁction and fantasy (SF/F)
graphic novels, even though many
graphic novels are collections of older
series that may be less balanced. The
following are three emblematic SF/F
graphic novels that have women in
prominent roles.
Miller’s The Dark Knight Returns,
released in 1986, was one of the ﬁrst
widely popular graphic novels, making
a case for calling graphic novels a form
set apart from comic books. The Dark
Knight Returns is notable for being
the ﬁrst story to include a female
Robin. Carrie Kelly is thirteen years old,
adopting the role of Robin when
Batman comes out of retirement, being
accepted in the role after saving Batman’s life.
Published ﬁrst as an intermittent serial by America’s Best Comics, Promethea was created by writer Alan Moore
and artist J. H. Williams III, released
from 1999 to 2005 in thirty-two issues,
and collected in ﬁve graphic novels.
Promethea is nominally a superhero
story, though the term used in the setting is “science-hero” or in Promethea’s
case, “science-heroine.”
Promethea is a metaﬁctional character/goddess/incarnation of creativity
who has taken many forms as women
(and one man) have taken on the mantle of Promethea since ancient Egypt,
when the original Promethea, a child
in Alexandria in the ﬁfth century is
taken by Thoth and Hermes to the
152
................

Volume 2: Entries

Immateria, the world of creativity and
imagination. The series primarily follows Sophie Bangs, a female college
student with a troubled family life who
feels powerless in her life, but gains
great power when she becomes the latest Promethea and learns about her
powers, the Immateria, and magical
traditions, including traversing the
Kabbala of Jewish mysticism. Sophie/
Promethea trades sexual favors to
learn magic early in the series, and
throughout the Kabbala journey, the
story addresses themes such as goddess worship and the Madonna/Whore
dichotomy.
Given that Promethea is always
female—even when the mortals who
embody her need not be—and can be
powerful physically as well as intellectually and spiritually, the character
exists as a strong female icon within
the graphic novel form during the late
twentieth
and
early
twenty-ﬁrst
centuries.
Published by Vertigo, Y: The Last Man
(projected for sixty issues) is written by
Brian K. Vaughn with art directed by Pia
Guerra. The series of ten graphic novels
(published 2003–2008) follows Yorick
Brown, the only man to survive a worldwide plague that simultaneously killed
every male mammal on Earth (aside
from his Capuchin monkey, Ampersand). As a result of the premise, the
characters in the series are almost
exclusively female, though it focuses on
Yorick, the last man. The two other
main characters are Agent 355 (real
name not given), an African-American
woman who is an expert ﬁghter
assigned to protect Yorick by the Culper
Ring, a U.S. government secret society,
and Dr. Alison Mann, of Chinese and
Japanese descent, a lesbian geneticist
who blames herself for the plague, since
it coincided with her failed attempt to
give birth to her own clone.

Grifﬁth, Nicola
The series investigates the international fallout that could occur in a
world where all of the men die: the
induction of a female president; the
rededication of the Washington Monument as a memorial for the men (due
to its phallic shape); the creation of the
“Amazons,” a radical gang that blames
men for all of society’s ills and claims
that the plague was Earth ridding itself
of the men who threatened to destroy
it; the sudden demand for male impersonators; and other elements.
While the world undoubtedly suffers
from the loss of the men, it is not portrayed in a simplistic misogynist fashion, instead examining the ways in
which gender norms are conceived and
propagated, as well as the division of
labor—especially with regard to different countries, as Israeli military forces
seek to capture Yorick for their country.
Y: The Last Man takes one science-ﬁctional event and uses it as a lens to
examine conceptions of what it means
to be male or female and the ﬂuid or
not-so-ﬂuid nature of sexuality.
See also: “Anime and Manga” (vol. 1); “Comics,
1960–2005” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Columbia University’s Graphic Novels Page
[online].
Http://www.columbia.edu/cu/
lweb/eguides/graphic_novels/index.html.
Johnsen, Rosemary. “Making Comics: Storytelling Secrets of Comics, Manga and
Graphic Novels.” Journal of Popular Culture
40, no. 5 (October 2007): 890–92.
Loertscher, David, and Esther Rosenfeld.
“Graphic Novels: A Genre Guide to Comic
Books, Manga, and More.” Teacher Librarian 34, no. 5 (June 2007): 50–51.
Ryan, Jennifer D. “Black Female Authorship
and the African American Graphic Novel:
Historical Responsibility in Icon; A Hero’s
Welcome.” Modern Fiction Studies 52, no. 4
(Winter 2006): 918–46.

MICHAEL UNDERWOOD

GRIFFITH, NICOLA

(1960– )

Nicola Grifﬁth is a British writer who
has won numerous awards for her science ﬁction (SF). Born in Leeds, England, she fronted a rock band and
taught women’s self-defense in Yorkshire before turning to writing. Grifﬁth
relocated to the United States in the
late 1980s to live with Kelley Eskridge,
whom she married in 1993. Her immigration case helped set a legal precedent, and a front-page article in the
Wall Street Journal reported on the
“peculiar” decision to issue Grifﬁth a
green card in the national interest
because she was a lesbian science ﬁction writer.
Grifﬁth won a Lambda and a Tiptree
award for her ﬁrst novel, Ammonite
(1993). Its lesbian protagonist is an
anthropologist sent by an interstellar
company to Grenchstom’s Planet, a
world inhabited solely by women after
a virus has decimated all male life. The
anthropologist is testing a vaccine
against the virus, but forgoes the treatment in order to experience intimacy,
female friendships, and mothering
among the indigenous populace. She
must also contend with nomadic Amazons and the machinations of her offworld sponsors.
Slow River (1995), Grifﬁth’s second
novel, won a Lambda and a Nebula
award. Its lesbian protagonist is the
scion of a wealthy bioengineering family in a near-future Europe. Kidnapped
and tortured, she escapes to fall in love
with a computer hacker and ﬁnds work
in a water treatment facility. As she
reconstructs her identity and attempts
to solve the reasons behind her kidnapping, the narrative unfolds across three
separate timelines in her life that interweave themes of abuse and class conﬂict with minute descriptions of waste
management technology.
153
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Grifﬁth’s other works also feature
strong lesbian characters. Her Nebulanominated novella “Yaguara” (1995) uses
erotic fantasy to depict the relationship
between a photographer and an archaeologist transforming into a jaguar within
the Belize jungle. Together with Stephen
Pagel, she edited three anthologies
devoted to gay and lesbian genre ﬁction,
the World Fantasy– and Lambda-awardwinning Bending the Landscape: Fantasy
(1997), the Lambda-winning Bending the
Landscape: Science Fiction (1998), and Bending the Landscape: Horror (2001). Grifﬁth’s
most recent novels—The Blue Place (1998)
and Stay (2002)—are crime ﬁction featuring a lesbian ex-cop.
Grifﬁth has received wide acclaim for
her
characterization
and
prose.
Although she chafes at being labeled a
lesbian writer, her contributions to
introducing lesbian characters and
themes to genre ﬁction cannot be overlooked. Inasmuch as Grifﬁth’s body of
work moves into different genres, it
ultimately resembles a signature element underlying the bulk of her ﬁction,

154
................

Volume 2: Entries

that of vivid women protagonists
 -vis
(re)negotiating their identity vis-a
new environments.
See also: Environmental Science Fiction;
Homosexuality.
Further Readings
Baker, Neal. “Paradoxa Interview with Nicola
Grifﬁth.” Paradoxa: Studies in World Literary
Genres 4, no. 10 (1998): 335–47.
Moller, Pia. “The Unsettled Undercurrents
of Hedon Road: Power, Knowledge, and
Environmental Risk Management in Nicola Grifﬁth’s Slow River.” Interdisciplinary
Studies in Literature and Environment 9, no.
2 (Summer 2002): 133–53.
Newman, Barry. “Alien Notions: The
‘National Interest’ Causes INS to Wander
Down Peculiar Paths—Or How a Roving
Acrobat Got a Visa While Doctor Probing
Cancer Didn’t—Is the Curio Cabinet
Closed?” Wall Street Journal, August 20,
1998.

NEAL BAKER

GROSSMAN, JUDITH JOSEPHINE.
See: Merril, Judith

H
HAMILTON, LAURELL K. (1963– )
Laurell K. Hamilton is an American
writer who is a New York Times bestselling fantasy/horror author. She is
best known for her Anita Blake
Vampire Hunter (ABVH) series and the
Meredith “Merry” Gentry novels, both
incorporating urban fantasy as well as
romance elements. Her current work is
moving into erotic science ﬁction and
fantasy.
Anita Blake, Hamilton’s best-known
character, has undergone controversial
changes over the course of the series.
Appearing ﬁrst as a ﬁercely independent persona whose identity was that of
a vampire hunter (“the Executioner”)
as well as a necromancer who raises
the dead for a living, Anita is driven
and rage-ﬁlled and has little emotional
life outside her work, primarily due to
a failed engagement. Jean Claude, who
becomes the Master Vampire of St.
Louis in Guilty Pleasures (1993), becomes
attracted to Anita and seeks her for his
romantic partner and human servant.
Her resistance and attraction to him
become further complicated by her
relationship with Richard Zeeman, part
of the local werewolf pack. Events
cause Anita to sexually consummate
her ties with Jean Claude in The Killing
Dance (1997); however, she also
becomes intimate with Richard in Blue
Moon (1998). At this point in the series,
the sexual, emotional, and power relations between the three are explored in
Obsidian Butterﬂy (2000), but reach a
climax in Narcissus in Chains (2001),
where they bond as a preternatural

triumvirate of Master Vampire, Necromancer/Human Servant, and “animal
to call”/Ulfric (werewolf pack leader).
Later novels contain increasingly
explicit explorations of sexuality and
have drawn mixed reaction from readers and critics. Some desire a return to
the mystery/horror components of the
series, while others view the sexual
issues in the recent novels as being
indicative of a leaning toward romantic fantasy, as well as a plot device
designed to force Anita to challenge
her most deeply held beliefs about love,
commitment, Christian faith, and
humanity. Over the course of the series, Anita has become a preternatural
force like those beings she once killed.
Unlike the ABVH series, the Meredith
Gentry novels, which involve UnSeelie
Princess Meredith NicEssus and the
world of faerie, incorporated explicit
sexuality via involvement with multiple
partners in the course of the ﬁrst novel,
A Kiss of Shadows (2000). Forcing Merry
out of hiding from the UnSeelie court,
her sadistic Aunt Andais, Queen of Air
and Darkness, compels her to vie for
the throne by becoming pregnant.
Thus, members of the Queen’s Guard,
many of whom have endured centuries
of enforced celibacy, are commanded
to impregnate her, a goal pursued during the following novels: A Caress of
Twilight (2002), Seduced by Moonlight
(2004), and A Stroke of Midnight (2005).
Both of Hamilton’s series explore the
nature of evil from different religious
viewpoints. While Anita’s traditional
Christian beliefs are part of the foundation of her conﬂicts, the Merry Gentry
155
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

novels are based on Celtic pagan
beliefs, including Goddess/feminist spirituality. Like Anita, Merry is of mixed
racial background; in this case, both
ostensibly “good” Seelie blood, both
high (Sidhe) and low (brownie), as well
as UnSeelie and human. In both series,
Hamilton explores what a true equality
should be, using the supernatural
worlds and characters to comment on
mainstream American values and practices, a traditional use of the fantastic
as social commentary.
Further Readings
Holland-Toll, Linda J. “Harder than Nails,
Harder than Spade: Anita Blake as ‘The
Tough Guy’ Detective.” Journal of American
Culture 27, no. 2 (June 2004): 175–89.
Laurell K. Hamilton [online]. Http://www.
laurellkhamilton.org.
West, Michelle. “Musing on Books.” Fantasy &
Science Fiction 98, no. 6 (June 2000): 41–47.

JANICE C. CROSBY

HAMILTON, VIRGINIA

(1936–2002)

Virginia Hamilton is an American
writer and one of the most award-winning children’s and young adult
authors in the world. She is the ﬁrst
African-American author to win the
Newbery Medal (for most distinguished
children’s author), and the ﬁrst children’s author to receive a MacArthur
“Genius” grant (in 1995). Hamilton is
credited with writing sophisticated,
intricate, and imaginative tales about
African-American children. Her work
embraces a wealth of African-American diversity. Her characters come in a
variety of hues and include mixed
racial heritages and range from
“average” young people to mermaids,
ghosts, and ﬂying people. Hamilton’s
settings are often rural, and her protagonists are usually surrounded by loving
and supportive, if troubled, family and
156
................

Volume 2: Entries

extended family. Her thirty-ﬁve books
include realistic ﬁction, historic ﬁction,
biographies, folktales, legends, and
speculative ﬁction.
Many of Hamilton’s works include
elements of magic and the fantastical.
While three of her books—the Justice
trilogy (Justice and Her Brothers, 1978;
Dustland, 1980; The Gathering, 1981)—
are referred to as science ﬁction by
scholars, Hamilton considers them fantasy. To date, it is the only science ﬁction trilogy written for children and
young adults with African-American
children as the protagonists. The four
children are gifted with extrasensory
powers that they must use together as
a unit to travel through space and time
to alter an environmentally desolate
future.
At the heart of this trilogy are the
themes of survival, cultural consciousness, and environmentalism. But the
trilogy is also the coming-of-age story
of Justice Douglass, an eleven-year-old
girl who spends her summer days frolicking in the neighborhood while her
father is away at work and her mother
attends classes at a local college. Justice must learn to take responsibility
and control her gift as well as to
become comfortable with her ability to
lead others who are ordinarily considered stronger or smarter than she
is because of their age or gender.
Throughout the trilogy, Justice has
moments of deep insight concerning
meaning-making and language, social
hierarchies, and pollution—which is
one reason why critics have also categorized these books as books of social
action, because the reader is forced to
ask similar questions and assume
deeper reﬂections.
Hamilton, who grew up on a farm in
rural Ohio and was married to the
famed poet Arnold Adoff, died in February 2002 of breast cancer.

Heinlein, Robert A.
Further Readings
Dressel, Janice Hartwick. “The Legacy of
Ralph Ellison in Virginia Hamilton’s Justice Trilogy.” English Journal 73 (1984):
42–48.
Lenz, Millicent. “Virginia Hamilton’s Justice
Trilogy: Exploring the Frontiers of Consciousness.” In African-American Voices in
Young Adult Literature: Tradition, Transition,
Transformation, ed. Karen Patricia Smith,
293–310. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press,
1994.
Mikkelson, Nina. Virginia Hamilton. New
York: Twayne, 1994.
Muse, Daphne. “The World She Dreamed,
Generations She Shared, Visions She
Wrote: A Tribute to Virginia Hamilton.”
New Advocate 15 (2002): 171–73.
Virginia Hamilton [online]. Http://www.
virginiahamilton.com.

YOLANDA HOOD

HEINLEIN, ROBERT A[NSON]
(1907–1988)
Robert A. Heinlein was an American
author whose accomplishments include
ﬁve Hugos and many ﬁrsts: in 1961,
Stranger in a Strange Land became the
ﬁrst work of science ﬁction (SF) to make
the New York Times best-seller list; in
1975, he was named the ﬁrst Grand
Master of what was then the Science
Fiction Writers of America (SFWA).
Heinlein was born in Missouri and
raised outside Kansas City. He attended
the U.S. Naval Academy, graduating in
1929 and serving on active duty until
tuberculosis forced his discharge in
1934. For ﬁve years, he tested various
professions until seeing an advertisement offering $50 for an amateur’s
story. He sent “Lifeline” to John W.
Campbell’s Astounding Science-Fiction,
beginning a career that would continue
until his death, after twelve collections
of stories and thirty-two novels.
One cannot overstate Heinlein’s importance to the history of science

ﬁction. He brought literary maturity to
a genre then still in its infancy. Along
with the realistic extrapolation of science and scientiﬁc method, Heinlein’s
wit and linguistic acumen, acute observations of social conditions, and
attention to individual character development sharply distinguished him
from contemporaries such as Isaac
Asimov or Arthur C. Clarke. Perhaps
his most important trait concerns his
“lived-in” worlds—he assumes a familiarity with the future that renders a
sense of wonder built from the reader’s
discovery of small details.
Heinlein’s eclectic inﬂuences and
interests produced many uneasy contradictions. He has been both praised
as a radical progressive debunking popular myths and condemned as a fascist. Probably the best assessment of
his politics identiﬁes him as a libertarian implicitly inﬂuenced by social theorists such as Herbert Spencer, Friedrich
Hayek, and Ayn Rand. In terms of sexuality, he was libertine; in economics,
he advocated free markets; about professions, he favored meritocracy, and
so believed in equality for women. But
he nevertheless remained fundamentally nostalgic for traditional patriarchal hierarchies, and, as he aged, he
became increasingly reactionary. Despite their political messages, Heinlein’s stories usually continued the
tradition of pulp science ﬁction adventure and therefore appealed most to a
young male reader seeking, as one
leading critic remarked, his own
dream. Perhaps the most prominent of
male fantasies Heinlein promoted was
his depiction of women and sexuality.
While hardly feminist science ﬁction, his early stories and juveniles frequently present empowering pictures
of strong, competent woman: the fearless Sister Maggie Andrews in “If This
Goes On—,” chess champion Ellie
157
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Coburn in Starman Jones (1953), the precocious scientiﬁc genius Peewee in
Have Spacesuit—Will Travel (1958), engineer Hazel Meade and physician Edith
Stone in The Rolling Stones (1952). In
Starship Troopers (1959), many of the
senior ofﬁcers are women, and women
serve in infantry combat roles. Unusually, if not uniquely, Heinlein also
had women protagonists, as in Podkayne
of Mars (1962). These books occasionally contain pointed critiques of
misogyny or sexism. Heinlein frequently extended the concept from
individuals to entire cultures: in Citizen
of the Galaxy (1957) or Space Cadet
(1948), matriarchies are sensible rather
than aberrant.
However progressive such depictions
were, in his mature work Heinlein’s
women eventually collapse back to traditional roles. Scholars generally focus
on
how Heinlein
simultaneously
depicts women as powerfully independent subjects while simultaneously
subjugating them through the prurient
male gaze. Take Gillian Boardman in
Stranger in a Strange Land (1961), who at
ﬁrst is independent, then cooperates
with the journalist Ben Caxton, then
simply follows his lead. The relationship may be social or sexual, but the
woman may be passed from one man
to the other, with each man more
powerful than the last, so Caxton is
replaced by Jubal Harshaw, and Jubal
by Mike the Martian, who is then
replaced by Jubal. Or take the matter of
“free love.” While Stranger does advocate the dismissal of bourgeois conventions of marital ﬁdelity and sexual
abstinence, it remains reactionary in at
least two pertinent respects: ﬁrst, repressive conventions are presented as
ideas originating from women rather
than conditions imposed by patriarchy;
and second, Gillian’s epiphany to overcome these conventions comes when
158
................

Volume 2: Entries

Mike uses psi powers to project
male lust, which allows her to feel
male desire for the utterly objectiﬁed
female body, whether hers or another
woman’s. This second feature is especially disturbing, for her recognition of
male desire is what structures her conversion to free love—not her own desire
for either the female body (as she
remarks, she is “relieved” to discover
she has no lesbian latency) or the male
body.
After 1961, this pattern dominates
Heinlein’s work. A covert operative for
a mysterious unnamed agency, the
eponymous protagonist of Friday (1982),
begins the novel by murdering an opponent. Next, she is gang raped, humiliated, and tortured. Remarkably, she
experiences no psychological trauma,
something explained away because she
is an “Artiﬁcial Person,” not a human
woman. Late in the novel, she encounters one of the rapists. Asked how he
could have participated in such an
egregious crime, he replies that she
was “very sexy,” a “wild cat.” Rather
than killing him, as she had threatened
to do if he failed to provide a satisfactory answer, she offers ﬂirtatious banter—and eventually marries him.
When the novel ends, Friday thinks she
has achieved her greatest potential. As
a married housewife, the president of
the local volunteer Parent–Teacher
Association, and a mother cooking and
gardening, she is someone who embraces the staid conventions of Heinlein’s
Midwestern past rather than the liberatory ideal of the feminist 1970s. While
feminism has never denigrated motherhood, Heinlein presents careers
and mothering as mutually exclusive.
Further, he deﬁnes Friday’s potential humanness as genetic, but her
actual humanness as the “natural”
acceptance of socially constructed
gender conventions.

Henderson, Zenna
A splendid, ﬂawed writer, Heinlein is
rife with the contradictions and innovations that identify our genre, and perhaps even America itself.
See also: Artiﬁcial Life; “Heroes or Sheroes”
(vol. 1); “Men Writing Women” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Easterbrook, Neil. “Anarchy, State, Heterotopia: The Political Imagination in Heinlein, Le Guin, and Delany.” In Political
Science Fiction, ed. Clyde Wilcox and Donald Hassler, 43–75. Columbia: University
of South Carolina Press, 1997.
Frank, Marietta A. “Women in Heinlein’s
Juveniles.” In Young Adult Science Fiction,
ed. C. W. Sullivan III, 119–30. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press, 1999.
Franklin, H. Bruce. Robert A. Heinlein: America as Science Fiction. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1980.
The Heinlein Society [online]. Http://www.
heinleinsociety.org/.
Parkin-Speer, Diane. “Almost a Feminist.”
Extrapolation 36, no. 2 (1995): 113–25.
Rochelle, Warren G. “Dual Attractions: The
Rhetoric of Bisexuality in Robert A. Heinlein’s Fiction.” Foundation 28 (Summer
1999): 48–62.

NEIL EASTERBROOK

HENDERSON, ZENNA

(1917–1983)

Zenna Henderson, an American writer,
was one of the ﬁrst women to write science ﬁction (SF) professionally without
disguising her gender by means of a
masculine pseudonym or the use of initials. Henderson was a proliﬁc short
story writer throughout the 1950s,
1960s, and 1970s. Her work has been
cited as an inﬂuence by numerous
others, including writers Lois McMaster
Bujold and Orson Scott Card.
Born in Tucson, Arizona, Henderson
grew up as a member of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Though
she married a non-Mormon man in 1944
and, by all accounts, had no more to do
with the religion of her youth, questions

of spirituality became a recurring theme
in her work, especially in her stories
about the People. She worked as a
schoolteacher, and much of her ﬁction
concerns young people.
Henderson’s best-known ﬁctional
creations, the human-looking People,
are psychics who are refugees from a
doomed world. Scattered during their
great Crossing, some ﬁnd a New Home.
Others crash-land on Earth and struggle to ﬁnd each other again, many
succeeding and forming isolated communities of their own kind, but a few
are stranded alone, wondering if they
are the last survivors. Decades later,
visitors from the New Home return for
their lost brethren, and the survivors
and their progeny must decide whether
to go where they can live among their
own kind or to stay on Earth, which
has become home of a different kind.
In Pilgrimage: The Book of the People,
published in 1961, the People on Earth
hold a gathering and tell stories of their
exile as they struggle with this choice.
The People: No Different Flesh, published
in 1966, takes place some years later,
when travel between Earth and the
New Home is possible, albeit rare and
dangerous. The travel back and forth
between the two worlds inspires some
of the People to chronicle their original
Crossing from the ﬁrst Home to Earth,
making No Different Flesh both sequel
and prequel to its predecessor.
Henderson also published two shortstory collections, The Anything Box
(1965) and Holding Wonder (1971). Many
of her stories are grounded in schoolhouses. Prejudice and alienation are
common themes. Henderson mixes
tales of domestic violence and religious
intolerance in with her sense of wonder. She integrates scathing cultural
commentary into the simplest interactions, and the majority of her critiques
have remained relevant.
159
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Another of the reasons her stories have
stood the test of time is their general lack
of scientiﬁc incongruity. There is not
enough explicit technology in the texts to
give later readers much pause. Many of
the women are schoolteachers or healers,
and the men, farmers or mechanics.
While the gendered division of labor is
certainly dated, the characters themselves are well-rounded and complex.
Henderson’s characters are often rural or working class. The People are
advanced beyond technology, although
they begin to reclaim their knowledge
of machines in order to take to the
stars. Both before and after the Crossing, they prefer slow-paced lives with
an emphasis on family and community.
This emphasis on simple, though never
simpliﬁed, life runs throughout Henderson’s work.
Further Readings
Mendlesohn, Farah. “Gender, Power, and
Conﬂict Resolution: ‘Subcommittee’ by
Zenna Henderson.” Extrapolation 35, no. 2
(Summer 1994): 120–29.
Zenna and Her People: The Zenna Henderson Homepage [online]. Http://www.
adherents.com/lit/bk_Zenna.html.

SHANNAN PALMA

HOMOSEXUALITY
Homosexuality refers to an individual’s
sexual and romantic attraction toward
others of the same sex. The word was
coined in the late 1800s, and many
scholars argue that the codiﬁcation of
the word in socio-medical discourse
marked a signiﬁcant shift in thinking
around sexuality by grouping a number
of behaviors under a single cohesive
identity category. Today, homosexuality
is typically contrasted with heterosexuality, the desire for the opposite sex,
though the ﬂuidity of sexual and gender identities has made this binary
opposition less and less relevant.
160
................

Volume 2: Entries

Homosexuality commonly appears in
science ﬁction and fantasy (SF/F),
whether as a simple aspect of a particular character or as the primary focus
of a given work. In fact, fantastic genres offer unique opportunities to
explore the implications of sexuality,
and many of the most noteworthy
works dealing with gender and sexuality are acknowledged by the annual
James Tiptree Jr. Award. Historically,
several major SF/F authors have chosen
to explore what worlds would look like
if homosexuals represented the majority sexual orientation in society. Joe
Haldeman’s Forever War (1974), for
example, considers an alternate Earth
where homosexuality is the norm, and
a later short story set in the same
world, “A Separate War,” explores how
a woman and a man from our own
Earth adapt differently when transported to that cultural context. By
contrast, other works imagine worlds
where homosexuals are an even
smaller minority or more deeply oppressed than they are today.
The presence of magic, new technology, and alien cultures in SF/F allow
the genre to imagine unique homosexual situations to explore issues related
to gender. In Lynn Flewelling’s The
Bone Doll’s Twin (2001), for example, a
young girl is given male form at birth
through the use of dark magic in order
to disguise her from assassins. The boy
infant is given the name Tobin and
grows up unaware of his true gender
identity. Throughout his boyhood,
Tobin struggles with how his own
“feminine” behaviors and attraction
to other boys are at conﬂict with
others’ expectations of how a young
boy should act. Ursula K. Le Guin’s
The Birthday of the World, and Other
Stories (2002) features a world where
four-person marriages are the custom, comprised of two heterosexual

Hopkinson, Nalo
relationships, two homosexual relationships, and two forbidden heterosexual relationships. By forbidding
opposite-sex relationships by two people of the same “moiety,” or tribal unit,
Le Guin illuminates the degree to
which sexual relationships are often
deemed appropriate based on categories of sameness and difference,
notions that are largely culturally
deﬁned.
See also: Bisexuality; Lesbians; Queer Science Fiction.
Further Readings
Halperin, David M. One Hundred Years of
Homosexuality, and Other Essays on Greek
Love. New York: Routledge, 1989.

JOHN GARRISON

HOPKINSON, NALO

(1960– )

Toronto-based writer Nalo Hopkinson
was born in Jamaica and lived in Trinidad, Guyana, and the United States
before settling in Canada in 1977. Hopkinson identiﬁes herself as a writer of
speculative ﬁction. She describes her
work as woman-centered and often
deals with histories of exploitation,
complex power relationships, and their
effects on the African diaspora. Her ﬁction incorporates Caribbean history,
folklore, and language, highlighting the
multicultural and multiethnic composition of Caribbean societies. Hopkinson
has published four novels, a collection
of short stories, and four edited or
coedited collections of stories. She has
also published a number of stories and
dramatic monologues in journals and
edited collections. She is a graduate of
the Clarion Science Fiction and Fantasy
Writers’ Workshop at Michigan State
University and holds an M.A. in Writing
Popular Fiction from Seton Hill College
in Pennsylvania. Among her many
acknowledged inﬂuences are Samuel

R. Delany, Octavia Butler, Ursula K. Le
Guin, and Charles de Lint.
Hopkinson’s ﬁrst novel, Brown Girl in
the Ring (1998), won the Warner Aspect
First Novel Contest, the Locus Award,
and the John W. Campbell Award. She
also received the Ontario Arts Council
Foundation Award for Emerging Writers in 1998. An urban dystopia set in
an economically shattered near-future
Toronto, Brown Girl in the Ring relates
the story of Ti-Jeanne and her grandmother, a healer and practitioner of the
Afro-Caribbean religion Obeah.
Midnight Robber (2000), Hopkinson’s
second novel, was a New York Times Notable Book of the Year. The novel combines history, legend, myth, and
futuristic technology to explore themes
of exile, abuse of power, and coming of
age. Midnight Robber employs a hybrid
of Trinidadian and Jamaican creoles
and, as in much of Hopkinson’s ﬁction,
linguistic code-switching is used as
a way of
subverting
dominant
hierarchies.
Her collection of stories, Skin Folk
(2001), won the World Fantasy Award
and the Sunburst Award for Canadian
Literature of the Fantastic. Her third
novel, The Salt Roads (2003), is a historical fantasy focusing on African and
African diasporic women’s sexuality.
The novel won the Gaylactic Spectrum
Award in 2004 for exploring gay, lesbian, bisexual, or transgendered
issues. Hopkinson’s edited collections
include Whispers from the Cotton Tree
Root: Caribbean Fabulist Fiction (2000), a
collection of stories written by Caribbean writers, and Mojo: Conjure Stories
(2003). Hopkinson is also the coeditor
of the anthology So Long Been Dreaming:
Postcolonial Visions of the Future (2004)
with Uppinder Mehan and of Tesseracts
9 (2005) with Geoff Ryman. Hopkinson’s
most recent novel, The New Moon’s Arms
(2007), is set on a ﬁctional Caribbean
161
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

island where Calamity (born Chastity)
begins to ﬁnd things, including a mysterious toddler who washes up on her
beach, after she enters menopause.
Hopkinson actively advocates for the
diversiﬁcation of the science ﬁction
community and the increased participation and acceptance of writers
exploring concepts of race, ethnicity,
class, gender, sex, and culture. She is
one of the founding members of the
Carl Brandon Society, which was conceived in 1999 at WisCon, the feminist
science ﬁction convention in Madison,
Wisconsin, with the goal of increasing
the visibility of people of color in the
science ﬁction community.
See also: “Feminist Spirituality” (vol. 1);
“Intersections of Race and Gender” (vol. 1);
Magical Realism; “Speculating Sexual Identities” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Anatol, Giselle Liza. “Maternal Discourses in
Nalo Hopkinson’s Midnight Robber.” African
American Review 40, no. 1 (Spring 2006):
111–24.
Nalo Hopkinson [online]. Http://nalohopkinson.com.
Ramraj, Ruby. “Power Relationships and Femininity in Nalo Hopkinson’s The Salt Roads.”
Foundation 33 (Summer 2004): 25–35.
Reid, Michelle. “Crossing the Boundaries of
the ‘Burn’: Canadian Multiculturalism
and Caribbean Hybridity in Nalo Hopkinson’s Brown Girl in the Ring.” Extrapolation
46, no. 3 (Fall 2005): 297–314.

SARA SCOTT ARMENGOT

HORROR
Horror as a genre has its roots in the
bloody and violent patterns of fairy
tales and myths, but is primarily an
offspring of the gothic genre developed
by writers such as Horace Walpole,
Clara Reeve, Ann Radcliffe, the Marquis
de Sade, Matthew Lewis, and their successors from the second half of the
162
................

Volume 2: Entries

eighteenth century. Sharing some of
its themes and motifs with the eighteenth-century gothic such as enclosure, familial conﬂict, violence, and
states of confusion and chaos, horror
emerges in particular from nineteenthcentury gothic novels and short stories.
The most well-known are those dealing
with ideas about physical and psychological monstrousness: Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley’s Frankenstein (1818), Edgar
Allan Poe’s Tales of the Grotesque and
Arabesque (1839), Robert Louis Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and
Mr. Hyde (1886), Bram Stoker’s Dracula
(1897), and Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s
“The Yellow Wallpaper” (1899).
Horror is particularly concerned with
representations of monstrosity and
deviant, deformed, and degenerative
bodies. The central role of the body in
horror is linked to its traditional deﬁnition in contradistinction to terror.
Related to the “terriﬁc” and the realm
of the sublime, terror is linked to awe
and wonderment and presents the possibility of eventual escape from the
object that threatens it. In this respect,
it suggests an experience of transcendence. In contrast, horror is associated
with feelings of fear, loathing, and disgust. It represents the potential dissolution of the boundaries demarcating
life and death and, by implication, the
obliteration of the individual’s sense of
a coherent identity. Thus, horror is frequently concerned with physical and
psychological corruption and decomposition, mortality, haunting, and the
limits of consciousness and reason. In
her introduction to the 1831 version
of Frankenstein, Shelley describes her
desire to write a story that would create the physical response associated
with fear in readers. This emphasis
continues to shape horror, which is
best described in terms of the intense
emotional and physical responses it

Horror
produces in its audience, rather than a
speciﬁc set of generic conventions and
tropes.
Given its particular relationship with
the body and notions of corporeality, it
is no surprise that horror is populated
by various monsters. Zombies, vampires, ghosts, ghouls, witches, and
werewolves, not to mention reclusive
and vengeful serial killers, are only
some of the gruesome beings inhabiting horror stories, comics, television series, ﬁlms, and music videos. The
vampire in particular is one of literary
horror’s most proliﬁc and powerful
archetypes. From John William Polidori’s novella The Vampyre (1819), to J.
Sheridan Le Fanu’s Carmilla (1872) and
Stoker’s Dracula, to Anne Rice’s Interview with the Vampire (1976) and Joss
Whedon’s television series Buffy the
Vampire Slayer (1997–2003), the vampire encodes anxieties about the fragile
border between life and death and
between the human and the inhuman.
Cinema has also provided a fruitful site
for horror. In Western cinema, the
1950s until the early 1970s were dominated by “Hammer Horror,” including a
high number of adaptations of and
sequels to gothic novels, most notably
Frankenstein and Dracula, as well as
ﬁlms based around other iconic monsters of the horror genre, such as the
Mummy and the Phantom of the
Opera.
The 1970s, however, saw an explosion of horror ﬁlms centered on the
occult, as well as the release of slasher
ﬁlms such as The Texas Chain Saw Massacre (1974) and Halloween (1978). Developments of the latter now dominate
the self-reﬂective teen horror genre,
exempliﬁed by Wes Craven’s Scream
trilogy (1996–2000). Popular Japanese
horror ﬁlms, such as Ringu (1998) and
Ju-on: The Grudge (2003), emphasize psychological horror in the form of ghostly

hauntings and curses, themes that are
also explored in horror manga. In traditional horror, monstrous bodies are
often in some way marked by race,
gender, sexual, or class difference. For
example, the portrayal of Mr. Hyde as
the “dark” side of Dr. Jekyll links ideas
about criminality and race, while representations of pubescent femininity as
monstrous in The Exorcist (1973) and
Carrie (1976) encode anxieties about
female sexual identity.
Feminist approaches to the horror
ﬁlm have tended to focus on two
key motifs: woman-as-monster and
woman-as-victim. Barbara Creed describes the positioning of the female
body as a particular source of horror in
terms of the “monstrous-feminine.” For
example, Carrie examines some of the
traditional fears and mythologies surrounding menstruation, while Rosemary’s Baby (1967) presents a horrifying
representation of the pregnant body
and childbirth. Such codiﬁcations of
the female body as monstrous have
been considered as expressions of anxieties about women’s sexuality and
reproductive bodies. In the case of the
woman-as-victim, feminist ﬁlm criticism has examined the ways in which
the genre is preoccupied with (sexual)
violence against women, as well as the
ways in which twentieth-century horror ﬁlms reproduce and reinforce patriarchal structures of seeing.
In her analysis of gender in the modern horror ﬁlm, critic Carol Clover analyzes this view by highlighting how in
horror ﬁlms such as Halloween the audience is led to identify with the young
female protagonist who survives the
serial killer’s attack. Clover describes
this ﬁgure as the horror ﬁlm’s “ﬁnal
girl” and proposes that she is a “girlvictim-hero.” Television series such as
Buffy the Vampire Slayer provide an alternative representation of the ass-kicking
163
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

ﬁnal girl of the horror genre, while The
Company of Wolves (1984), a horror ﬁlm
directed by Neil Jordan and based on
some of the short stories of its cowriter
Angela Carter, returns to horror’s fairytale roots to offer a bewitching retelling
of an adolescent girl’s sexual awakening. Women writers working within the
horror mode, such as Rice in Interview
with the Vampire and Emma Tennant in
Two Women of London: The Strange Case of
Ms. Jekyll and Mrs. Hyde (1989), have
similarly reworked traditional horror
narratives, while writers such as Carter,
Toni Morrison, Poppy Z. Brite, Octavia
Butler, and Joyce Carol Oates have
reimagined the traditional conventions
and bodies central to the genre.
See also: “Intersections of Class and Gender”
(vol. 1); “Intersections of Race and Gender”
(vol. 1).
Further Readings
Clover, Carol J. Men, Women and Chainsaws:
Gender in the Modern Horror Film. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992.
Creed, Barbara. The Monstrous-Feminine: Film,
Feminism, Psychoanalysis. London: Routledge, 1993.
Halberstam, Judith. Skin Shows: Gothic Horror
and the Technology of Monsters. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press, 1995.
Wisker, Gina. Horror Fiction: An Introduction.
London: Continuum, 2005.

REBECCA MUNFORD

HYMAN, TRINA SCHART (1939–2004)
An American artist, Trina Schart
Hyman illustrated more than 150
books, primarily for children, many
with a fantastic element, during her
decades as an illustrator. Hyman
received
numerous
honors
and
awards, including a Caldecott Medal
and multiple Caldecott awards. A
highly imaginative child, Hyman honed
her lifelong passion for illustration
through studies at art schools in
164
................

Volume 2: Entries

Philadelphia, Boston, and Sweden,
where she produced her ﬁrst professional illustrations for a book written in
Swedish. Upon returning to the United
States with her husband, Harris
Hyman, Trina launched her professional career as an illustrator in earnest.
They had one daughter, Katrin, and
separated a few years later, after
which Trina Hyman and a fellow
single mother and artist moved to New
Hampshire, where she would make her
permanent studio home.
Perhaps her best-known works are
her adaptation of Little Red Riding Hood
(1983), one of her Caldecott Honor
books, and her illustrations for Margaret Hodges’s retelling of Saint George
and the Dragon (1984), which won the
Caldecott Medal. Her illustrations
appeared in a diverse range of books,
from fairy tales and folklore to bread
cookbooks to poetry collections, as well
as magazines and textbooks. Hyman
also served in the inﬂuential position of
art director for Cricket magazine from
1973 to 1979 and was a storyteller herself, writing original ﬁction. Her ﬁrst
original book was How Six Found Christmas (1969).
Hyman’s penchant for storytelling in
her illustrations of others’ texts drew
criticism from some, who felt her richly
detailed drawings distracted readers
from or even overtook the written stories. She was also criticized for overly
romanticizing physical beauty. Other
critics, however, praised Hyman for her
beautiful princesses and handsome
knights and lauded the expressiveness
of her illustrations for the clear feelings
of good and evil they evoked. Hyman
also stirred up debate over the controversial nature of some of her illustrations in works for children, including
complaints about the inclusion of a
bottle of wine in Little Red Riding
Hood’s basket and the revealing

Hyman, Trina Schart
see-through dress the princess wore in
King Stork (1998).
Hyman worked in black-and-white
line art and hand-separated colors,
then acrylics, and ﬁnally oils, always
producing extremely detailed delicate
works. Following her daughter’s marriage to a man from Cameroon, Hyman
made a conscious effort to add cultural

and ethnic diversity to her characters.
She and daughter Katrin Tchana collaborated on three books, including an
anthology of stories about strong
women, The Serpent Slayer (2000), and the
posthumously published collection of
goddess stories, Changing Woman (2006).

MARYELIZABETH HART

AND

ALEXIS HART

165
................

This page intentionally left blank

I
INDEPENDENT COMICS
“Independent” is one of several labels
applied to a variety of genres and styles
of comics. It is difﬁcult, however, even
among industry professionals, to establish a consistent working deﬁnition for
“independent comics.” For some, the
label can be applied to comics that are
not published by the “Big Four” of
mainstream comic book publishing:
Marvel, DC, Dark Horse, and Image.
Many industry professionals and readers rely (somewhat skeptically) upon
Previews, a monthly catalog published
by Diamond Comics, the predominant
comics distributor in the United States,
to determine the “independent” status
of comic books.
The ﬁrst three-quarters of Previews
offers prominent advertisements and
supplemental minicatalogs for works
forthcoming from the Big Four. Independent comics run the remaining
advertisements for upcoming releases;
these appear in the back of Previews and
represent a little less than 5 percent of
the comics market. Even though these
independent publishers may release
comics based on licensed properties
such as movies, television shows, and
cartoons, they do not yet have the mass
sales and market recognition associated
with DC, Marvel, Dark Horse, and Image.
To complicate matters, many readers
and industry professionals regard
Image and Dark Horse as publishers of
independent comics because they allow
their creators to retain ownership
rights. Some readers also consider
“alternative” releases from DC, Dark

Horse, and Image to be independent,
because the works released by these
publishers often challenge or recast the
foundational aesthetics of comic books
and previously established genre conventions, such as the superhero story,
which has inordinately dominated the
comics market for the last ﬁfty years.
The story lines, characters, and art in
alternative comics are thought to be
more artistic and to challenge formalist
styles and may often be intended for
“mature” audiences seeking moody,
edgy, or gritty releases. Notably, comics
released by Vertigo and Top Cow—such
as Neil Gaiman’s Sandman, V for Vendetta, and Transmetropolitan—are often
considered to be independent publications, but these comics are actually
published under “imprints” that in
effect belong to DC, so their independent nature is questionable.
Some industry professionals tend to
exclude from independent status any
comics published by any of the larger,
established publishers who reach some
mass demographics, such as manga
publishers. Others consider only comics
that have been self-published by the
artists to be independent, while still
others include only certain types of
stories and genres. What ultimately
becomes the crucial test of a comic’s independent status is whether it is published by a company that is privately
owned and allows creators to retain
ownership of their creations. Following
these somewhat more precise guidelines, comics publishers and distributors such as Fantagraphics, Slave
Labor Graphics, Top Shelf Productions,
167
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Alternative Comics, Oni Press, and
Drawn and Quarterly are very often considered to be the primary publishers of
independent comics in North America.
Compounding the difﬁculty in understanding what qualiﬁes as an independent comic is the confusion between the
labels independent, alternative, and underground as applied to comics. Alternative
comics of the 1980s grew out of the
1960s and 1970s underground comics
movement—which gave rise to the
careers of artists such as Peter Bagge,
Mark Beyer, Howard Cruise, R. Crumb,
Aline Crumb-Kominsky, Kim Deitch,
Roberta Gregory, Spain Rodriguez,
Patrick Rosenkrantz, and S. Clay Wilson,
among others. Often, comics described
as alternative are independently created
by a single artist (as opposed to being
produced by a team of artists who subsequently write, pencil, ink, color, and letter story lines under the direction of a
creative team more interested in capturing a demographic than producing a
work of artistic merit).
Alternative comics are also usually
intended for an adult audience and
may contain mature content, but more
importantly their plots and styles
may include experimental techniques
or lesser-known stylistic choices and
references, and they may also demonstrate a refusal to adhere to the conventions of previously established
genres. These sorts of comics have
also been labeled “post-underground,”
“small press,” “art comics,” or “adult
comics.” “Mini-comics” that are selfpublished by their artist-creators (often
photocopied and hand-bound by the
artist themselves) are also included in
this loose classiﬁcation.
Many independent comics have
gained in popularity in recent years.
Some popular “indie” comics include
Charles Burns’s Black Hole; Daniel Clowes’s Ghost World and Eightball; Roman
168
................

Volume 2: Entries

Dirge’s Lenore; Frank Miller’s Sin City; Jeff
Smith’s Bone; Art Spiegelman’s Maus I: A
Survivor’s Tale and its sequel Maus I and
II; Craig Thompson’s Goodbye, Chucky
Rice; Serena Valentino’s Gloom Cookie;
Jhonen Vasquez’s Johnny the Homicidal
Maniac; and Chris Ware’s Jimmy Corrigan,
among numerous others.
Noting the difﬁculty new comics creators have breaking into the North
American comics market, a nonproﬁt
corporation, the Xeric Foundation, was
established in 1992 by Peter A. Laird,
cocreator of the Teenage Mutant Ninja
Turtles and Planet Racers. This foundation seeks to defer some of the costs of
self-publishing for independent comic
book creators of artistic and innovative
merit. Further, a Xeric grant often
accords winning creators hard-to-attain
networking connections with comic
book distributors in United States. The
Xeric Foundation is among a growing
body of organizations and publications
that seek to support independent comics creators and artists through the
ﬁrst phases of career- and audiencebuilding. Other organizations that seek
to promote and support independent
comics as they enter the marketplace
include the Comics Journal, a quarterly
that includes reviews as well as interviews, articles, and advertisements;
Comic Geek Speak (www.comicgeek
speak.com), an online site that spotlights new indie releases on a monthly
basis; and the online Indie Spinner Rack
(http://indiespinnerrack.blogspot.com)
and Indie Message Board, which each
hosts forums for fans of independent
comics.
See also: “Anime and Manga” (vol. 1);
“Comics, 1960–2005” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Caputo, Tony. How to Self-Publish Your Own
Comic Book. New York: Watson-Guptil,
1997.

India
Harvey, Robert C. The Art of the Comic Book:
An Aesthetic History. Studies in Popular
Culture. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1996.
McCloud, Scott. Understanding Comics: The
Invisible Art. Northampton, MA: Tundra,
1993. Reprint, New York: Harper Paperbacks, 1994.

MICHELLE LAFRANCE

INDIA
In recent years, Indian works of science
ﬁction (SF) and fantasy have garnered
increasing attention, as well as recognition in Western literary circles. The rich
legacy of fantastic literature embodied
in Hindu mythology and the rapid
spread of technology throughout India
have created fertile ground for both
genres. Like their Western counterparts, Indian science ﬁction and fantasy have employed the cinema as
another stage for the genres, and the
Internet has provided yet another productive avenue for Indian writers working in those genres. While male writers
predominate in both genres, particularly science ﬁction, there are a growing number of female writers. These
writers reﬂect the multilingual nature
of India—with Bengali, Marathi, Kannada, and English being the primary
languages employed—and the multicultural makeup of its Hindu, Buddhist,
Muslim, and Christian populace. Literary production has branched out to the
Internet—the Indian Science Fiction
and Fantasy website (www.indiansciﬁ.
com) is one of the most active Internet
sites showcasing Indian writers.
Over the last forty years, Indian SF
has gained a considerable foothold in
the subcontinent’s literary landscape.
Before that, it was dominated by translations and original adventure tales
modeled after European writers such
as Jules Verne and H. G. Wells. Indian

SF has always blended familiar science
ﬁction tropes with Indian traditions
and issues. Nowhere is this more evident than in “The Sultana’s Dream,” by
Bengali Rokeya Sakhewat Hossain. The
tale, originally published in Indian
Ladies Magazine in 1905, describes a
utopia called Ladyland, a technologically advanced society run by women,
which uses solar energy, has developed
methods to control the weather, and
has placed its men in purdah, thus
eradicating war and crime. Hossain
pairs the triumph of science with the
emancipation of women, and the two
together create the story’s utopia.
One of the most proliﬁc and wellknown women writers of contemporary
Indian SF is Manjula Padmanabhan, who
frequently explores the relationship
between technology and power in her
works. In her 1997 play Harvest, a young
Indian woman, Jaya, discovers that her
husband, Om, has sold his body to an
international organ transplant company,
InterPlanta, in exchange for material
comforts. The theme of First World comfort at the expense of Third World bodies
is heightened by the ubiquitous presence
of technology, the seemingly inﬁnite
power of InterPlanta, and Jaya’s limited,
though still signiﬁcant, attempts at resistance. Padmanabhan’s often dark and
typically cautionary tales of the consequences of relying on technology for
power and comfort can also be seen in
her stories “Sharing Air” and “2099,” both
set in worlds devastated by or recovering
from massive air pollution, and in
“Stolen Hours,” in which a young man’s
attempts to literally steal hours of life
from his father through the use of a selfcreated device backﬁres, and he comes
close to dying himself. Padmanabhan
consistently peoples her stories with
marginal ﬁgures like the povertystricken Jaya, and the physically strange
Rat in “Stolen Hours.”
169
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Padmanabhan’s women protagonists
are the exception, however, rather than
the norm in Indian science ﬁction,
which, like North American and European science ﬁction, typically has more
male protagonists than female ones.
When present, women characters in
Indian SF frequently occupy secondary
roles as wife or secretary, such as
Urmila, the wife of the brilliant scientist Laxman in Jayant V. Narlikar’s The
Return of Vaman (1990), and most of the
women characters in the 1993 Indian
SF collection It Happened Tomorrow.
Mangala, the powerful sweeper-woman
in Amitav Ghosh’s The Calcutta Chromosome (2001) is a noteworthy exception.
The leader of a counter-science cult in
Calcutta in 1898, Mangala manipulates
the malaria research of Ronald Ross,
the British scientist who was awarded
the Nobel Prize for discovering the disease’s method of transmission. Though
she is not the protagonist of Ghosh’s
novel, Mangala’s character drives the
action of the text as she searches for
immortality.
A few stories in It Happened Tomorrow
do offer female protagonists, though
they are usually not scientists or in
positions of power as is typical of most
male protagonists of Indian SF. In “A
Journey into Darkness” by Subodh
Jawadekar, Sanjyot, a young survivor of
a nuclear holocaust, details her family’s survival in letters to a school
friend. Her last letter, written shortly
before her death from radiation exposure, reveals that she has known all
along that her friend is dead, and she
worries about who her brothers and
sisters born after the radiation has dispersed will marry. Asavari, an expectant mother in “Birthright” by Shubhada
Gogate, uncovers a government conspiracy to indoctrinate children in the
womb and limit the number of girls
born. She escapes with her husband to
170
................

Volume 2: Entries

the country to insure that their son will
be born free. Only one story features a
female protagonist in a socially recognized position of power: The astronaut
Mala in Sujatha’s “Dilemma,” is torn
between her human loyalties to Dileep,
whose behavior grows increasingly
erratic, and the robot nicknamed “Em,”
whose cool logic may be a disguise for
its murderous intentions.
Fantasy is a long-standing literary
tradition in India. The roots of this tradition can be traced back thousands of
years to the sacred texts of Hinduism
and Buddhism. The signiﬁcant presence of both faiths in Indian culture
continues to inﬂuence contemporary
Indian literature, and modern retellings
of the tales, particularly the Ramayana,
are common. More so than Indian science ﬁction, Indian fantasy, especially
the Hindu epics, is also a popular subject for ﬁlmmakers.
Writers such as Suniti Namjoshi,
Saira Ramasastry, and Chitra Banerjee
Divakaruni use fantasy to explore such
complex issues as female empowerment, sexuality, gender roles, and marriage and the family. Divakaruni’s The
Mistress of Spices (1998) and Ramasastry’s Heir to Govandhara (2000) blend the
supernatural with meditations on the
emotional and physical sacriﬁces often
expected of women. The protagonists
in both novels are extraordinary
women: one is the granddaughter of a
god, idolized by her people, the other
blessed with powerful foresight, and
yet both women struggle to carve out
meaningful lives not manipulated by
others. Namjoshi’s feminist fantasies
include Conversations of Cow (1985) and
The Mothers of Maya Diip (1991). The latter is set in a dystopic matriarchy
known as Maya Diip, which is visited by
the Blue Donkey and her friend Jyanvi.
Though initially impressed by the
seemingly well-organized society, the

India
two learn that deep class divisions
based on reproductive rights, disagreement about the treatment of males,
and power struggles for the throne
have made the kingdom vulnerable to
outside interference.
Fantasy ﬁlms have examined similar
themes, using the familiar tales of
Hindu mythology to examine, for example, the ways in which Indian
women are caught up in the clash between tradition and modernity. Noted
Indian ﬁlmmaker Satyajit Ray explores
this theme in his 1960 ﬁlm Devi, subtitled “The Goddess.” A father-in-law
believes his daughter-in-law to be an
incarnation of the goddess Kali and
sets her up in the family temple, where
she heals a sick child. She is driven
mad both by her failure to save her favorite nephew and the clash between
the traditional expectations of women
and the modern ideals represented
by her father-in-law and husband,
respectively.
Science ﬁction and particularly fantasy have long ﬂourished in Indian
children’s literature. The association of
the two genres with juvenile literature
remains strong in India even today.
Hindu mythology and Indian history
and traditions, as well as contemporary
settings and objects, are featured in
the children’s and young adult works of
fantasy by Indian women writers such
as Swapna Dutta, Monisha Mukundan,
Suniti Namjoshi, Vandana Singh, and
Kalpana Swaminathan. Likewise, science ﬁction and science fact have
been blended together to educate as
well as entertain juvenile readers. The
National Council of Educational Research and Training website (www.
ncert.nic.in) offers access to a number
of resources on using science ﬁction in
science education.
The pairing of Indian tradition with
contemporary literary styles and issues

in the pages of Indian science ﬁction
and fantasy—like the magical realism
in The Mistress of Spices, ecological conservation in “The Sultana’s Dream,” or
exploitation of the Third World in Harvest—create culturally distinct forms of
the genres. Much that can be found in
Indian SF will be familiar to Western
readers, as Indian writers of science ﬁction utilize the same tropes—utopias/
dystopias, artiﬁcial intelligence, space
and time travel—that are common to
North American and European SF. In
Indian fantasy, although Western readers may not be familiar with the Indian
cultural traditions that are often at the
core of the story, they will recognize
the epic scope of the tales, the inclusion of magical creatures and forces,
and the faraway settings that typically
mark the genre. For Indian women
writers, these two genres provide expansive spaces for their female characters and for explorations of such
complex issues as reproductive rights,
patriarchal oppression, female emancipation, and other global concerns such
as war, pollution, and the often divisive
collision between modernity and tradition that has marked the twentieth and
twenty-ﬁrst centuries.
Further Readings
Divakaruni, Chitra Banerjee. The Mistress of
Spices. New York: Anchor Books, 1997.
Ghosh, Amitav. The Calcutta Chromosome: A
Novel of Fevers, Delirium, and Discovery.
New York: Avon Books, 1995.
Hossain, Rokeya Sakhawat. “Sultana’s Dream.”
Two Eyes no. 2 (Winter 2000/01) [online], http://
home.earthlink.net/~twoeyesmagazine/
issue2/sultana.htm.
Namjoshi, Suniti. The Mothers of Maya Diip.
London: Women’s Press, 1989.
Padmanabhan, Manjula. “Harvest.” In Postcolonial Plays: An Anthology, ed. Helen
Gilbert, 214–49. London: Routledge, 2001.
———. Hot Death, Cold Soup: Twelve Short Stories. Reading, England: Garnet, 1997.
171
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

———. Kleptomania: Ten Stories. New York:
Penguin, 2004.
Phondke, Bal. It Happened Tomorrow: A Collection of 19 Select Science Fiction Stories from
Various Indian Languages. New Delhi:
National Book Trust, 1993.
Ramasastry, Saira. Heir to Govandhara. San
Jose, CA: Writers Club Press, 2000.

ERICA HOAGLAND

INTERNET
The Internet is a set of communication
networks and protocols that facilitates
networked data transmission. It was
developed as a way of linking computers during the 1960s from the U.S.
Defense Department project ARPANet.
The Internet has continued to undergo
development and change ever since,
and it now enables the communication,
dissemination, and broadcasting of visual and audio ﬁles as well as text, on a
global scale. It has been associated
since the mid-1990s with the World
Wide Web.
The Internet originated as a packet
switching system for transporting data
ﬁles, primarily text. It was devised
through the establishment of common
communication protocols (such as
TCP, ASCII, and ftp) for data transfer
between computers, as a robust system
that could be rerouted if damage to
the system or disruption of the data
occurred. Like many contemporary
technoscientiﬁc developments, the Internet emerged from the U.S. military. It
began as a military and academic communication infrastructure, with the ﬁrst
node at the University of California, Los
Angeles. It has now been developed as a
set of networked communication technologies, used at multiple levels, in most
countries on the planet.
An organizing principle of early Internet development was that it would
provide a set of systems that were
172
................

Volume 2: Entries

open-ended so that other applications
could operate. The TCP/IP protocols
that continue to underpin the network
supported the development of ftp and
email and later the World Wide Web.
Pre-Web Internet users would have
dealt with different protocols for different tasks. After the advent of the Web,
this changed to a convergent interface.
The World Wide Web (a term attributed to Tim Berners-Lee) operates
through a shared protocol system,
which means that most Internet applications look as though they work in a
similar way. The unifying aspect of
the Web is the hyperlink and the
shared protocol—hypertext transfer
protocol (http). This application has
become dominant, and although email
still uses different protocols, http can
also accommodate email. One way to
describe the Web is as a form of convergence of Internet technologies.
The practice of the Internet and the
depiction of the Internet in ﬁctional
forms was simultaneous. Unlike other
technosciences, such as cloning, there
was not an existing repertoire of visual
and textual resources predicting the
practices of Internet development.
However, in the twentieth century, the
Internet became a trope of science ﬁction and fantasy. The genre in which it
was most dominant was cyberpunk,
although it also proliferated across
other forms and now permeates all
forms of cultural production. As the
Internet became subsumed into everyday life in the 1990s and reemerged as
a cultural form, so its presence in ﬁction has also become mundane, and it
appears in multiple forms, not just science ﬁction.
The Internet was viewed early on
through the powerful trope of cyberspace and the concept of the virtual.
Cyberspace became a dominant Internet metaphor in the late 1980s and

Internet
early 1990s. The coining of this term is
attributed to William Gibson’s novel
Neuromancer (1982). However, preﬁgurations of a global information and communication infrastructure appear in
much earlier work. “The Machine
Stops,” a short story by E. M. Forster
published in 1909, describes a communication system (the machine) through
which almost all human interaction
takes place. As a result, human bodies
become enclosed and immobile, using
screen interfaces instead of transportation to communicate. This early version presages many of the concerns
raised in later work, including the pervasive fear, articulated in ﬁction and
factual media discourses alike, that
people would become alienated from
their bodies. These fears have also
been accompanied by the attendant
utopian dreams that human bodies
would become irrelevant and that
humans would become immortal or
more robust through a post-human
uplift to data forms.
Fictional descriptions of the Internet
from the 1980s and 1990s, as well as
later science ﬁction texts, often involve
a physical interface directly connecting
the senses of the body with virtual
worlds, nets, cyberspaces, or datascapes. In many cyberpunk novels, this
extension
of
sensory
perception
through a physical interface (jack)
allows a freedom from the material
conditions of the body. This liberation
is often portrayed as seductive and
addictive, and even in utopian versions
there are anxieties about this new
dimension of the world.
In Marge Piercy’s Body of Glass (U.S.
title He She It; 1991), cyberspace is a virtual reality through which communication and information is exchanged or
traded. However, damage to the body
during immersion is enacted on the

physical body, and thus virtual and
actual death are the same. In Trouble
and Her Friends (1997) by Melissa Scott,
on the other hand, damage to the body
in virtual space results in disconnection from the nets of the novel rather
than in physical death. In both books,
freedom from the actual body is experienced, but at different kinds of cost to
the user.
The metaphor of the Internet as
cyberspace has been much less prevalent in ﬁlm than in novels. Although
ﬁlms such as Tron (1982), WarGames
(1983), and Lawnmower Man (1992) used
different representational techniques
to create onscreen cyberspaces, it was
not until the release of The Matrix in
1999 that cyberspace became a pervasive visual trope. The Matrix was partly
successful in providing a visualization
of cyberspace because the plot begins
within this space and gradually reveals
the “real” through the course of the
ﬁlm. This process naturalizes cyberspace as a subjective experience on a
continuum with the actual.
The Lynn Hershman Leeson ﬁlm Conceiving Ada (1998) imagined cyberspace
as a way of mediating time. This ﬁlm
also provides a continuum between virtual and actual experience, but allows
an exploration of the past through the
virtual space. The visualization of the
Internet as a space is a dominant trope
across ﬁlm and literature. As such, it
intersects with other spatial ﬁgures
such as dystopia and utopia and is often imagined in these terms.
Further Readings
Abbate, Janet. Inventing the Internet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
Wertheim, Margaret. Pearly Gates of Cyberspace: A History of Space from Dante to the
Internet. New York: W. W. Norton, 1999.

KATE O’RIORDAN
173
................

This page intentionally left blank

J
JACKSON, SHIRLEY

(1916–1965)

Shirley Jackson is an American author
known for her considerable power and
versatility. Her work is primarily modern gothic. Famous primarily for her
widely anthologized story “The Lottery”
(1948), a deeply disturbing fable of
human brutality, as well as The Haunting of Hill House (1959), a harrowing
story of psychic disintegration and despair, Jackson is a canny stylist, with a
range that includes humor, children’s
stories, and family memoirs. Like Flannery O’Connor, Jackson reveals the
grim, horriﬁc underbelly of the commonplace. Like fellow fabulist Nathaniel Hawthorne, she reckons with the
inherent potential for cruelty within
the divided psyche and within the sinister single-mindedness of the mob.
Like Edgar Allan Poe, she unmasks
human perversity and probes the
darker recesses of the human heart
with its yearning for transcendence
and inexorable destructive impulses.
Her settings and themes are often
domestic and familial.
Born in San Francisco to socially conscious, well-to-do parents, Jackson
rebelled all her life against her mother’s world of fashion and position. Her
ﬁrst novel, The Road through the Wall
(1948), exposes the ugliness beneath
sham suburban rectitude. She began
writing as a child, fostering the selfdiscipline that would later enable her
to produce a substantial body of work
in her too-short life while mothering
her four children. Jackson’s critically
lauded
output—six
novels,
two

memoirs, over a hundred short stories,
numerous articles, and four works for
children—is all the more remarkable
given the constraints of her mental
health. She suffered from bouts of
depression and anxiety so extreme
that, toward the end of her life, she
became agoraphobic.
At Syracuse University, she met and
later married fellow student Stanley
Edgar Hyman, who became a literary
critic and professor at Bennington College. They eventually settled in North
Bennington, Vermont. The genesis for
“The Lottery,” ﬁrst published in The New
Yorker in 1948, may well have been
Jackson’s own ostracism as an eccentric
faculty wife; the story’s provincial village setting is certainly modeled on her
perceptions of North Bennington.
Critical valuation of her work has, by
and large, been respectful and appreciative, although ambiguity caused by
her plain style and the riddling dimensionality of her themes perplexes some
critics. Jackson’s depiction of women’s
social place and psychic vulnerability
are of particular interest to feminist
scholars. Hangsaman (1950) and The
Bird’s Nest (1954) both feature imaginative, mentally unbalanced young
women, forerunners of Hill House’s terrifyingly troubled Eleanor Vance. The
Sundial (1958) ironically exposes the
weakness and petty miseries of a group
of survivalists waiting for the world’s
end. Many critics consider the gothically charged We Have Always Lived in
the Castle (1962) to be her best and most
terrifying work. Her husband edited
two posthumous collections, The Magic
175
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

of Shirley Jackson (1966) and Come Along
with Me (1968). Just an Ordinary Day was
brought out in 1995 after a cache of
uncollected and unpublished tales was
discovered in the family barn.
Further Readings
Bloom, Harold, ed. Shirley Jackson. Broomall,
PA: Chelsea House, 2001.
Hague, Angela. “‘A Faithful Anatomy of Our
Times’: Reassessing Shirley Jackson.”
Frontiers 26, no. 2 (June 2005): 73–96.
Lootens, Tricia. “ ‘Whose hand was I holding?’: familial and sexual politics in Shirley Jackson’s The Haunting of Hill House” in
Haunting the House of Fiction: Feminist Perspectives on Ghost Stories by American
Women, 166–92. Knoxville: University of
Tennessee Press, 1991.
Murphy, Bernice M., ed. Shirley Jackson:
Essays on the Literary Legacy. Jefferson, NC:
McFarland, 2005.

KATE FALVEY

JANUS/AURORA / NEW MOON
As with WisCon, various fanzines, and
ultimately the James Tiptree Jr. Award,
the three-time Hugo-nominated fan
magazine Janus and its two successors,
Aurora and New Moon, were the result of
intersections of individual interest, talent, effort, and cooperation among various members of the science ﬁction (SF)
community in Madison, Wisconsin, during the 1970s and 1980s. A core group of
individuals, including Janice Bogstad,
Jeanne Gomoll, Philip Kaveny, Hank
Luttrell, Diane Martin, and Richard
S. Russell, was joined by many others
for different projects. They worked together to join the voices of the critical,
fan, and feminist communities to create the hybrid that was Janus.
Janus started out as a mimeographed
fanzine run off on Luttrell’s equipment
and paid for with money Bogstad
earned at various student jobs while at
University of Wisconsin–Madison. The
176
................

Volume 2: Entries

ﬁrst of seventeen issues of Janus was
published, in mimeo form, under the
editorship of Bogstad in early fall 1975.
This was quickly followed by the
second issue in December 1975. By this
time, Bogstad and Gomoll, who had
done much of the layout and artwork
for the ﬁrst issue, were working as
coeditors, but they received a great
deal of help from others in the core
group, especially Luttrell, who had
much experience in fannish publishing
and was also advising on the upcoming
and ﬁrst WisCon in February 1977, and
Phil Kaveny, who helped to stage and
organize the work. By the fourth issue,
the fanzine was being produced on an
offset press with multicolor art and
covers.
Janus ﬂourished by publishing a mixture of articles, reviews, letters of comment from readers, convention (con)
reports, and author interviews, the latter of which became an important part
of both Janus and one of its successors,
New Moon. Several members of the
Madison community attended the Kansas City Worldcon in summer 1976,
bringing back ideas of what they did
and did not want to do with Madison
fandom and with Janus. An interview
conducted by Bogstad and Gomoll with
Suzy McKee Charnas and Amanda
Bankier was pivotal, because it established the value of interview transcripts
and the fact that emerging women
writers of SF would prove a fertile
ground for the attention of Madison
fans. New Moon was nominated for a
Hugo Award in 1978, 1979, and 1980,
the only all-woman-edited fanzine to
achieve that distinction up to that point
and for many decades (Marsha Brown’s
Locus won in 1978 and 1980, and Richard Geis’s Science Fiction Review in 1979).
However, as individuals developed interest in different directions, Janus split
off into two journals. Aurora was edited

Japan
by a team that included many of the
individuals listed above and appealed
to the feminist fan community, while
New Moon, edited by Bogstad, moved toward the developing feminist, theoretical, and literary-critical community
interested in fantastic ﬁction. In the
course of this bifurcation, some of the
creative tension may have been lost,
but each of the constituencies felt that
they had more scope for exploring their
interests. Aurora continued the numbering of Janus for eight more issues, 18
through 26, from 1980 to its last issue
in 1990, although the original understanding was that it was a new journal,
just like New Moon.
As represented by Diane Martin in
the ﬁnal issue, a summary of the Janus/
Aurora history, which excluded New
Moon altogether, described the gradual
hiatus of several years between issues
25 and 26 and reprised the focus of
each Aurora, from education to gender.
Meanwhile, New Moon came out in four
issues between 1981 and 1987, continuing with author interviews, publication
of critical articles and panel-transcripts
from WisCon, and even original material by Samuel R. Delany (in issue 4),
before also ceasing publication.
Aurora and New Moon were part of
the successive redeﬁnitions of feminist
issues in science ﬁction that was eventually taken up by journals such as
Femspec. And their focus on women SF
authors and gender issues being
explored in the science ﬁction of the
period helped to foreground these important developments for about three
generations of SF fans, and to expand
the cultural work of WisCon, which has
become a venue for feminist non-SF
fans and members of the literary-critical community as well as those from
the fan community. The three journals
taken together were part of what is
now called, in the cyber community,

the “earliest adopters” of the developing social consciousness concerning
feminism and the fantastic.
See also: “Fandom” (vol. 1); “WisCon” (vol. 1).

JANICE BOGSTAD

JAPAN
Science ﬁction and, to a lesser extent,
fantasy in Japan have historically been
strongly inﬂuenced by North American
and British traditions, but in recent
decades,
Japanese
creators
have
reworked the genre to include speciﬁcally Japanese elements and themes,
most notably in regard to the construction of gender and women’s roles. Japanese folklore has been incorporated
into fantasy. Science ﬁction in Japan
appears primarily in the mediums of
manga (graphic novels) and anime
(animation). The majority of motion
pictures produced in Japan are anime,
outnumbering live-action ﬁlms.
Japanese folklore is full of fantastic
creatures, mournful and hungry ghosts,
and demons (oni), many of them
women. The most famous of those
female creatures is the kitsune, a fox-spirit trickster often depicted as a lady of
court. Many of these folkloric tales have
inspired contemporary horror ﬁlms,
which have in turn been adapted
abroad, such as Ringu (The Ring, 1998)
and Ju-On (The Grudge, 2003).
The archetype of the shoujo is highly
important when considering women in
Japanese science ﬁction. The word
translates to “little girl,” but when used
as in reference to an archetype, it
describes a female character who
exists in a liminal space between childhood and adolescence. The character is
on the cusp, in a time just before or at
the onset of puberty. Shoujo is considered a genre or subgenre of its own,
albeit one that mixes with others as
well. An anime, manga, or story is
177
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

considered shoujo when its principal
characters are shoujo or when it is
designed or marketed to young adolescent girls. Like any literary genre, there
is argument over classiﬁcations of
works as shoujo. Shoujo narratives
focus on relationships, whether friendships or romantic/sexual relationships.
There have been numerous science ﬁction shoujo narratives, including the
popular “magical girl” subgenre, which
involves characters possessing superpowers leading a double life as the
characters simultaneously try to ﬁght
evil and maintain their lives and relationships. The most well-known example of this type of narrative is Sailor
Moon, with the title character, whose
secret identity is Usagi Tsukino, also
being a junior high student.
Also of note is the age disparity that
appears in some anime. Characters often are depicted visually as being more
mature than their given age would suggest. For example, in the series Witch
Hunter Robin, the title character is said
to be ﬁfteen but is drawn looking more
like a late adolescent or young adult.
This disparity is widespread in manga
and anime, perhaps more pronounced
for female characters than male ones.
This recurring trend could be the result
of two impulses working against one
another. The ﬁrst impulse is having
characters that are closer to the
younger end of the spectrum to appeal
to younger audiences, while the second
is the desire to have the characters be
sexually appealing to audiences of all
ages.
As cyberpunk grew in popularity, it
gained prominence in Japan. Many
Western-made cyberpunk stories featured Japan as the setting, which Japanese creators took and reversed or
transferred. The action of the anime
Ghost in the Shell takes place in what
appears to be an analogue of Hong
178
................

Volume 2: Entries

Kong, for instance, rather than Tokyo.
However, the series Bubblegum Crisis,
one of the other internationally popular Japanese cyberpunk anime, is set in
a rebuilt Tokyo (“Megatokyo”) and is explicitly Japanese. Bubblegum Crisis also
features a team of female protagonists
who ﬁght crime while protected by mechanical body armor. Bubblegum Crisis
had several spinoffs that continued to
address the themes and questions of
cyberpunk.
Gender politics and norms shift in
society, and science ﬁction and fantasy
in Japan have moved toward a greater
focus on and depiction of strong female
characters in leading roles in television,
anime, and other media. Examples
include Masamune Shirow’s protagonists—including
the
cyborg
Maj.
Motoko Kusanagi (Ghost in the Shell)—
powerful women who mirror female
cyberpunk icons like William Gibson’s
Molly Millions from the Sprawl trilogy.
Hayao Miyazaki’s ﬁlms are well known
for their female leading characters,
from the ferocious warrior San in Princess Mononoke (1997) to the clever Sen in
Spirited Away (2001) and the plucky
young witch Kiki in Kiki’s Delivery Service
(1989). Miyazaki’s shoujo leads are conﬁdent young women ﬂung into uncertain circumstances, where they display
their compassion as well as their
strength, though that strength manifests mentally and socially as well as
physically.
Anime and manga are not genres but
rather entertainment media that
encompass every genre imaginable,
including pornography. Women play
varying roles in print and animated
pornography. The material varies
greatly in content and degree of explicitness, but in many of the more
extreme (and infamous) pornographic
anime, women are subjected to supernatural sexual abuse and mutilation.

Jewish Women
Examples include Legend of the Overﬁend
(1992) and Wicked City (1987), although
Wicked City features violent sexuality
on the part of female characters as well
as men.
One Japanese manga production
company, CLAMP, is notable for being
composed entirely of women. It began
as a group that produced fan comics
(doujinshi) and later consolidated down
to a smaller group that began producing original manga for publication.
Their works, such as Cardcaptor Sakura,
X/1999, and Chobits, have been made
into anime and have achieved international popularity.
Tokusatsu means “special effects” and
is generally used to refer to live-action
ﬁlms that rely on special effects. The
Kaiju (giant monster) and Sentai series fall
under this header. Historically, Kaiju stories such as Godzilla (Gojira in Japanese)
feature women mostly in supporting
roles, rather than as the protagonists.
Kaiju stories were primarily oriented toward young boys, depicting (male) scientists, military ofﬁcers, or other young
boys as the heroes of the story. When
women feature in Kaiju stories, it is often
as priestesses or in magical support roles.
See also: “Anime and Manga” (vol. 1).

MICHAEL UNDERWOOD

JEWISH WOMEN
There are many women among the
Jewish writers of science ﬁction (SF) in
English. Leslie F. Stone was a writer of
pulp science ﬁction stories in the
1920s and 1930s, and the 1940s and
1950s saw the publication of stories
such as “That Only a Mother” by Judith
Merril. Both women used SF as a medium to explore various aspects and
feelings of mothering, in spite of the
fact that the SF of this period is usually
thought of as written entirely by men.
In stories such as “The Human Pets of

Mars” and “Cosmic Joke,” Stone used SF
to introduce issues of parenting during
the 1930s. The stereotypical aspect of
Jewish mothering—the inability to see
fault in one’s child—is aptly and satirically depicted in Merril’s story, published in the late 1940s. She also
depicted environmental concerns that
became evident after the war and went
on to become a major editor of anthologies, changing the face of science ﬁction forever by collecting more such
“soft” works that broke the paradigm of
the journey through outer space that
was based on hard science but handled
like adventures in the wild west.
Not surprisingly, Jewish SF has a rich
and long record, including fantasies of
creating forms of human artiﬁcial life
by nonheterosexual reproduction that
have existed in the Jewish legend of the
Golem of Prague—as explored by
Marge Piercy in He, She and It (1991).
Piercy was born into a poor Jewish family in Cleveland and was raised in
Detroit. She has said in an interview in
Femspec—a journal dedicated to SF,
fantasy, and other speculative works
challenging gender—that both the Holocaust and anti-Semitism in the United
States inﬂuenced her work. She
recalled her childhood being tainted by
the hatred of social movements being
expressed around her, which caused
her to try to do what science ﬁction
does: imagining what it would be like if
things could be different in history.
Many such Second Wave feminists
were Jewish and turned to SF and fantasy to explore expression of both utopian feminist fantasies and Jewish
roots. The proliﬁc Pamela Sargent
would have to be included in such a
list. Unlike Piercy, she was raised as a
nonobservant Jew. However, although
raised in an assimilationist manner, as
many postwar Jews were, she felt destined to be an outsider. Even though
179
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

her father was not Jewish, she was
made to feel Jewish by the 1967 SixDay War, to which she had a different
reaction than many of her friends,
as she writes in a memoir published
in Femspec, “Jewish Enough.” Sargent
remembers antiwar activists who were
against the war in Vietnam all of a sudden trying to ﬁgure out how to get to
Israel, and being confronted with “Why
are you learning about our enemies?”
when she was taking a class in Islamic
history. She relates seeing many parallels between the SF and Jewish communities, both of which were perceived
as and often self-deﬁned as ghettoes.
Sargent sees that both communities
have people who have abandoned their
roots within the enclave that supported
and deﬁned them in the beginning, and
also that both communities have Talmudic commentaries on what are considered to be key texts.
In addition, numerous lesser-known
Jewish women writers have used fantasy as well. For example, short story
writer Julia Ecklar has skillfully created
a Jewish character named Rachel Tovin
who seems to have an Israeli Jewish
name. In addition, Batya Yasgur wrote
with the better-known Jewish fantasist
Barry Malzberg. In their story “Job’s
Partner,” doctors commit a woman
character named Judith to a mental
ward. She reports having seen three
alien creatures that demanded she give
them her baby once he is born. Judith
converses with the aliens, who convince her that her baby is to be the
Messiah and suggest the name Jesus.
Lesley What’s “How to Feed Your Inner
Troll” also includes ethnic-based dialogue, in which the defamiliarization of
the fantastic is used to satirically
depict the extremes of cross-cultural
experiences. In fact, many Jewish SF
writers, not only female ones, have often used SF tropes to show how
180
................

Volume 2: Entries

intermarriages between Jews and
Christians seem as unnatural as marriages between Jews and aliens to the
conservative parent generation (e.g.,
see Wandering Stars, by Jack Dann,
1974). In What’s story, dybbuks become
trolls as a sign of the times, keeping up
with assimilation.
Thus science ﬁction and fantasy have
allowed space for American Jewish women
writers to explore collective trauma and
memory. Many other women writers have
not been canonized within our small
ghetto of literary life as fantasy writers,
even though they are. For example, in her
short story “The Shawl,” Cynthia Ozick
creates a character who imagines her
shawl to be a baby she is nursing as she is
becoming delirious in a concentration
camp during the Holocaust. Ozick also
explores science ﬁction modalities and
techniques in The Cannibal Galaxy (1983),
which deals with immigrants surviving
the Holocaust in the United States, and
the Perlmutter stories, in which a woman
becomes mayor of New York by creating a
dybbuk to help her.
Israeli women writers have tried
their hand at the medium, too. Not to
be missed is “And She Is Joseph” by
Nurit Zarchi. In this story of note, the
Biblical Joseph is radically reimagined
as a woman, which jolts the reader into
examining assumptions. The male
authority of the Bible and religious discourse is immediately deconstructed.
Gender merging, transgressing, and
boundary crossing are ripe for analysis
in such explorations.
Further Readings
Kray, Susan. “Refamiliarization: Jewish
Women in the Narrative Strategies of
‘Pulp’ Science Fiction Magazines, 1993–
2000.” Femspec 4, no. 2 (2004): 7–13.
Piercy, Marge. Interview by Batya Weinbaum (Summer 2001). Femspec 3, no. 2
(2002): 101–3.

Jones, Diana Wynne
Sargent, Pamela. “Jewish Enough.” Femspec
4, no. 2 (2004): 83–89.
Weinbaum, Batya. “Early U.S. Sci Fi: Post
Nationalist Exploration for Jews in Outer
Space?” Studies in American Jewish Literature 24 (2005): 180–201.

BATYA WEINBAUM

JONES, DIANA WYNNE

(1934– )

Diana Wynne Jones is exceptional
among fantasy writers in that she writes
for all age groups. She has won the
Mythopoeic Award for fantasy twice
and also the Guardian Fiction Award.
Jones was evacuated from London
during the Blitz and was, according to
her autobiography, neglected by both
parents. As a child, she sought comfort
and meaning in her writing, as some of
her heroines do. Very often in her stories, the central ﬁgure of evil turns out
to be an older woman, utterly sure of
her right to rule, supernaturally manipulative. Jones has acknowledged the
relationship all these wicked sorceresses bear to her childhood experiences
of her mother.
Jones’s ﬁrst novels for children show
the inﬂuence of Edith Nesbit, most
obviously in the case of the children
advertising their services as avengers
in Wilkin’s Tooth (1973), but Nesbit’s
world is less dangerous and more innocent. One of Jones’s themes here and
throughout her ﬁction is the cost of
magic, however innocently invoked,
which links her fantasy philosophically
to the works of Ursula K. Le Guin.
Though magic can be benevolent and
life-enhancing, it is neither safe nor
tame. Jones’s imaginative worlds allow
for the triumph of good but also dwell
on the chaos wrought by magic within
the normal everydayness of her characters’ lives. Evil is often very hard to recognize, partly because characters have
so much invested in not admitting to

themselves the role they and their
loved ones play in condoning or even
colluding with it.
In almost all of Jones’s novels, the
central characters begin with a single,
seemingly comprehensive understanding of their world, their individual situation, and their quest. In Conrad’s Fate
(2005), for example, Conrad believes
that he is cursed by bad karma. Sophie
in Howl’s Moving Castle (1986) expects
failure simply because she is the eldest
daughter. By the end of each book, the
mythic play of supernatural powers
forces a reassessment of these seemingly self-evident truths. Luke, in Eight
Days of Luke (1975), turns out to be Loki;
the strange goings-on in nasty Aunt
Maria’s village turn out to be part of a
Merlin–Nimue story; each of the Dalemark quartet of novels moves from the
everyday to manifestations of Dalemark’s deities; and in Fire and Hemlock
(1984), Polly’s ordinary memories of
adolescence prove to be a malign magic
overlay on a Tam Lin story.
Characteristically, Jones’s protagonists are deprived of both knowledge
and power. But when such characters
remember, or re-member, themselves
and recognize that they live in a mythic
world, they can use their powers to put
all right again. Jones’s ﬁction does not
follow the conventions of quest fantasy, which usually deals with the making of a traditional male hero. Rather,
the stories offer the subtler pleasures
of disclosure, recognition, and recovery.
Further Readings
Diana Wynne Jones [online]. Http://www.
leemac.freeserve.co.uk.
Jones, Diana Wynne. Interview by Maureen
Kincaid Speller (London, June 1997).
Charmed Lives 2 (1998). Available at http://
www.leemac.freeserve.co.uk/cl2int.htm.
Rosenberg, Teya, Martha Hixon, Sharon
Scapple, and Donna White, eds. Diana
181
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Wynne Jones: An Exciting and Exacting Wisdom. New York: Peter Lang, 2002.

ALICE MILLS

JONES, GWYNETH

(1952– )

Gwyneth Jones is an award-winning
British author and critic whose feminist
ﬁction and nonﬁction proceeds from
the idea that living life as a truly human
being is an effort undermined by the
pseudo-feminist, gender-focused, biological determinism she refers to as
“gender nationalism.” In White Queen,
co-winner with Eleanor Arnason’s A
Woman of the Iron People of the 1991
James Tiptree Jr. Award, the aliens who
conquer Earth accord gender assignment the bemused condescension most
people give astrology. A nonlethal
plague appearing in the two subsequent
Aleutian trilogy novels, North Wind
(1994) and Phoenix Cafe (1997), erases
human secondary sexual characteristics. This trope is developed more fully
in her Philip K. Dick Award–winning Life
(2004) in which geneticist Anna Senoz
discovers a fast-spreading mutation
that produces the same effect.
Another theme important to Jones’s
work is that of the effects of colonization on the colonized. In the Aleutian
trilogy, she analogizes from historical
colonialism the effects on Earth’s cultures of seemingly technologically
superior aliens, as faux vermin and
surgically induced cleft palates become
fashionable among humans imitating
their conquerors. Rainbow Bridge (2005),
the ﬁnal book of the Bold as Love series, ﬁnds Jones inverting Britain’s former position as an imperialist power
when China invades England.
The Bold as Love series consists of
ﬁve books titled after musical works by
Jimi Hendrix: Bold as Love (winner of the
2002 Arthur C. Clarke Award), Castles
Made of Sand (2002), Midnight Lamp
182
................

Volume 2: Entries

(2003), Band of Gypsies (2005), and Rainbow Bridge. Variously classiﬁed as fantasy or science ﬁction, depending on
whether or not the emergent technology of “neuroscience” is seen as magic,
the novels depict a near-future world of
social chaos, ecological catastrophe,
and ambitiously radical yet pragmatic
political solutions.
Jones’s critical essays and genre analyses are collected in Deconstructing the
Starships (1998). Her book reviews, written for the New York Review of Science
Fiction between 1989 and 2005, generally rise above the level of commentary
on a particular work to consider questions at the heart of understanding
how the fantastic genres relate to feminist concerns.
Since 1981, Jones, under the name
Ann Halam, has published young adult
ﬁction ranging from the postapocalyptic Inland trilogy to the supernatural
thriller The Fear Man (1995) to the mythbased fantasy Snakehead (2007).
Born in England’s industrial North
near the city of Manchester, as a child
Jones alternated between immersing
herself in books during sickbed conﬁnements and exploring nearby semiurbanized landscapes with siblings and
friends. After obtaining a degree in the
history of ideas at the University of
Sussex, she worked brieﬂy for the British Civil Service and as a scriptwriter
for a television cartoon show before
settling into full-time writing.
In addition to the previously mentioned Tiptree, Dick, and Clarke
awards, Jones won two World Fantasy
Awards in 1996 for her short story “The
Grass Princess” and her story collection
“Seven Tales and a Fable.” Her “La Cenerentola” won the British Science Fiction Society’s 1998 short story award.
As Ann Halam, she received the Children of the Night Award from the
Dracula Society in 1995 for The Fear Man.

Jones, Gwyneth
Jones’s ﬁction can be characterized
as complex, exhilaratingly audacious,
well researched, and carefully extrapolated, with all the implications of a
given change fully realized.
Further Readings
Csicsery-Ronay, Istvan, Jr. “Discretion and
Common Sense.” Science Fiction Studies 28,
no. 1 (March 2001): 119–23.
Gwyneth Jones [online]. Http://homepage.
ntlworld.com/gwynethann.

Luckhurst, Roger. “Culture Governance,
New Labour, and the British SF Boom.”
Science Fiction Studies 30, no. 3 (November
2003): 417–35.
Vint, Sherryl. “Double Identity: Interpellation in Gwyneth Jones’s Aleutian Trilogy.”
Science Fiction Studies 28, no. 3 (November
2001): 399–425.

NISI SHAWL

183
................

This page intentionally left blank

K
KHATRU
Khatru, a popular science ﬁction (SF)
fanzine of the 1970s, is best known for
its 1975 symposium “Women in Science
Fiction,” which featured many of the
most important female writers in the
ﬁeld at the time, including James Tiptree Jr., who was not yet known to be a
woman named Alice Sheldon. The term
fanzine comes from blending “fan” and
“magazine” and is used to describe
print publications by fans that include
ﬁction, critical essays, interviews, art,
and reports on fan activities.
In the early 1970s, after Sheldon had
published a few stories under the Tiptree name, she began corresponding
with SF writers and fans. One of the
latter, Jeffrey D. Smith, became particularly close to this pseudonymous ﬁgure,
publishing letters and articles from her
in virtually every issue of his fanzine.
Feminism was beginning to be a major
topic of discussion in SF, and Smith
had the idea of conducting a discussion
on the issues of women and feminism
in Khatru.
Smith obtained contributions by mail
from most of the best-known feminist
writers of the time, including Suzy
McKee Charnas, whose Walk to the End
of the World, a searing tale of a misogynistic post-holocaust dystopia, had
been published in 1974; Joanna Russ,
known for her uncompromising critique of sexism, who was about to publish The Female Man; Vonda N.
McIntyre, who was compiling Aurora:
Beyond Equality, the ﬁrst major allwoman original SF anthology; Chelsea

Quinn Yarbro; Raylyn Moore; and Luise
White. Tiptree, along with Samuel R.
Delany, was invited to provide a male
perspective.
Many of the ideas discussed seemed
radical or unheard-of at the time but
have since become familiar. The contributors wondered why male topics
such as war were considered inherently worthy to be subjects for literature while housekeeping was not. They
noted that the rockets that visited
other worlds returned to family structures like those of America in the
1950s. They pointed out that even a
major writer like Arthur C. Clarke
could see women in space as merely a
distraction, their breasts jiggling provocatively in zero-g.
One of the new concepts introduced
into the discussion by the mysterious
Tiptree was that, instead of the two
sexes deﬁned by biology, one should
speak of “men” and “mothers,” the latter the essential nurturers of the species, while the former were almost a
biological freak, driven like many Tiptree protagonists to sexual and violent
adventure, to the point of self-destruction. (Tiptree “himself” was a man in
this dichotomy.)
Despite the effort to cut the discussion loose from anatomical determinism, this approach, especially perceived
as coming from a male, was not
accepted by the other participants, and
Tiptree politely withdrew from the conversation.
The
symposium
was
reprinted in 1993, edited by Jeanne
Gomoll, with new material from some
185
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

original participants and commentary
by others.
Further Readings
Smith, Jeffrey D., ed. Khatru: Women in Science Fiction. 2nd ed. Madison, WI: James
Tiptree Jr. Literary Award Council, 1993.

ARTHUR HLAVATY

KING, STEPHEN

(1947–)

As proliﬁc as he is controversial, American writer Stephen King has published
no fewer than forty novels and two
hundred short stories, as well as two
nonﬁction books, movie and television
scripts, and graphic novels as of 2006.
King’s literary contributions have been
recognized with the 2003 National Book
Foundation Award for Distinguished
Contribution to American Letters and
the 2003 Lifetime Achievement Award
from the Horror Writer’s Association.
He has also received numerous awards
including the Bram Stoker, Horror
Guild, Locus, Nebula, O. Henry, Quill,
and World Fantasy awards.
While King’s writing is typically classiﬁed in the genre of horror, such categorization does not capture his ability
to craft multilayered narratives. The
result of his hybridized writing style is
stories that are a mix of horror, science
ﬁction, psychological thriller, social
commentary, love story, fairy tale, parable, and humor, woven throughout
with wry, apt observations regarding
American popular culture, especially
rock and roll.
Female characters in King’s works
are most often working class, white,
and heterosexual and display some diversity of age and marital status. There
are feminist critics who believe that
his depiction of women promotes
female stereotyping, and some literary
critics argue that his prodigious output
and widespread popularity indicate a
186
................

Volume 2: Entries

lack of literary worth, but there is no
denying his inﬂuence as a writer.
A critical element of his ﬁrst published novel, Carrie (1974), is his linking
of Carrie’s emergent telekinesis with
the start of menstruation. In The Firestarter (1980), Charlie McGee is an
eight-year-old with pyrokinetic powers;
Charlie, unlike Carrie, comes to understand how to control her pyrokinetic
ability, and in doing so, learns how to
survive. Trisha McFarland, a nine-yearold lost in the woods of New Hampshire in The Girl Who Loved Tom Gordon
(1999), draws her strength by imagining
her favorite pitcher assisting her.
King casts mothers as survivors of
abusive husbands, antagonistic social
systems, and natural phenomena run
amuck. In the novel Cujo (1981), Donna
Trenton protects herself and her son
from a rabid dog while trapped in a
broken-down car. Rosie Daniels, a target of domestic violence in Rose Madder
(1995), ﬂees her nightmare marriage
and constructs a new life by entering a
painting that she acquires.
Women are sometimes depicted as
victims who become the perpetrators of
a wretchedness born of their misfortune.
The title character of Dolores Claiborne
(1992) is such a woman. How Dolores
comes to resolve her relationships to
those who abuse her is central to the
story, which shows the psychological
legacy that maltreatment brings. The
troubled, disgraced former nurse portrayed in Misery (1987), Annie Wilkes, is a
character through which King explores
bilateral relationships such as reader/
writer, nurse/guard, and high literature/
popular writing, while suggesting the
devastating effects of bipolar disorder.
The institution of marriage is at the
heart of much of King’s work; his families are not usually happy ones, and
those that are usually come to some
externally driven demise. In Gerald’s

Kornbluth, Cyril M.
Game (1992), Jessie Burlingame, after the
death of her husband, revisits the sexual
history of her marriage. Bag of Bones
(1998) contains the twinned story of two
marriages dissolved by the death of a
spouse. Lisey’s Story (2006) is notable for
its nuanced description of the daily rituals that emerge from an intimate relationship. Any discussion regarding King’s
female characters must acknowledge
one of his anthropomorphic creations:
Christine (1983), a red-and-white 1958
Plymouth Fury, who lives up to the qualities evoked in that name.
Further Readings
Burns, Gail E. “Women, Danger, and Death:
The Perversion of the Female Principle in
Stephen King’s Fiction.” In Sexual Politics
and Popular Culture, ed. Diane Raymond,
158–72. Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green
State University Popular Press, 1990.
Russell, Sharon A. Stephen King: A Critical
Companion. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 1996.
Stephen King [online]. Http://www.ste
phenking.com.

MARIA OCHOA

KORNBLUTH, CYRIL M.

(1923–1958)

Cyril Kornbluth, an American author,
was one of the original Futurians, a
group of brash young science ﬁction
enthusiasts and writers in New York
City in the late 1930s that included such
notables as Isaac Asimov, Frederik
Pohl, Donald Wollheim, Damon Knight,
and Judith Merril. Kornbluth was
described as one of the best writers in
the business. He had a boundless vocabulary and was known for his eccentricities, including educating himself by
reading through an entire encyclopedia,
not brushing his teeth, and drinking
black coffee because that was what was
expected of professional writers. Notorious for his satirical and often humorous
style and able to turn out a thousand

words in an hour, he published his ﬁrst
solo work, “King Cole of Pluto,” at the
age of ﬁfteen. More than a hundred
short stories and twenty-eight books
followed, some written with coauthors,
including Merril.
As a teenager, Kornbluth published
thirty stories under a half-dozen pseudonyms before his career was interrupted by World War II. He served in
the U.S. Army, receiving a Bronze Star,
and returned home with hypertension
and a bad heart. Setting his ﬁction writing aside, he moved to Illinois with his
wife Mary G. Byers and attended the
University of Chicago on the G.I. Bill
before taking on an editorial position
for the Trans-Radio Press in Chicago.
In 1951, while married to Merril, Pohl
convinced Kornbluth to return to New
York. Kornbluth resumed his writing
career, serializing the novel Mars Child,
which he had cowritten with Merril
under the pseudonym Cyril Judd. It was
later published in novel form as Outpost
Mars (1952) and Sin in Space (1961).
Their second book together, Gunner
Cade (1952), was a satirical military tale
of fraternity that is still readable today.
Kornbluth’s collaborative writing with
Merril ended in 1953, when she and Pohl
divorced, but Kornbluth and Pohl continued to work together. Their most famous
novel, The Space Merchants (1953), was
ﬁrst serialized in Galaxy as Gravy Planet.
This space opera set in the twenty-second century exaggerated the role of
advertising in commerce and politics
and comes uncomfortably close to the
reality of what we see today, as megacorporations monopolize and control both
trade and governments. The novel was
reprinted in seven English-language editions and twenty-ﬁve foreign languages
and sold ﬁlm rights. Kornbluth’s most
notable short works included “The Little
Black Bag” (1950), which was adapted for
TV’s Night Gallery series in 1970, and
187
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

“The Marching Morons” (1951), which
depicted an overpopulated world of
morons controlled by an intelligent elite.
In 1958, Kornbluth became consulting editor for the Magazine of Fantasy
and Science Fiction, but his untimely
death from heart failure at the age of
thirty-four ended his prodigious writing
career and robbed the ﬁeld of one of its
brightest stars.
Further Readings
Knight, Damon. The Futurians. New York:
John Day, 1977.
Palmer, James. “Cyril M. Kornbluth: One of
Science Fiction’s Forgotten Greats.”
Strange Horizons, January 3, 2005 [online],
http://www.strangehorizons.com/2005/
20050103/kornbluth-a.shtml.
Pohl, Frederik. The Way the Future Was. New
York: Ballantine Books, 1978.

SUSAN URBANEK LINVILLE

KRESS, NANCY [ANNE] (1948– )
Nancy Kress is an American author who
began as a schoolteacher and mother,
but her interests as a writer and creator
of ideas led her to a full-time vocation in
science ﬁction, fantasy, and fandom. Her
later marriage to scientist and writer
Charles Shefﬁeld, who died of a brain
tumor in 2002, seems to have increased
her exposure to the history of the ﬁeld,
and her work is building more resonance
on concepts such as methodology, social
organization, and politics. Kress began
with an interest in issues of individual
responsibility, supermen, and freedom,
drawing on some of the notions of Ayn
Rand, but she has now moved on to analyze ideas from H. G. Wells and even
Erasmus Darwin, who was a favorite of
Shefﬁeld’s, as well as collectivist ideas
that offer the hope of “modern” utopias.
From the start, Kress was acknowledged as a good writer and storyteller.
Her ﬁrst ﬁction was fantasy with rather
dark visions of aging and the retelling of
188
................

Volume 2: Entries

Greek myth in its somber moods. The
Prince of Morning Bells (1981) is a tale about
the surprising aging of a young princess.
Kress published a collection of short stories in 1985 that included a story that
won the Nebula: “Out of All Them Bright
Stars.” With her fourth novel, An Alien
Light (1988), she moved to the science ﬁction themes of planet-building, political
extrapolation, and genetic engineering
that she has now built upon for two decades. Her stories that began as the novella
“Beggars in Spain” (1991) explore Rand’s
ideas concerning individual superiority
and genetic engineering. The novella won
another Nebula for Kress, and the tale
appeared as a novel in 1992.
Kress continues to produce popular
science ﬁction at a steady rate, but perhaps her most interesting turn has been
to the development recently of a less
dark and more utopian world that
includes echoes of the “botanist” speaker
in Wells’s A Modern Utopia (1905) and
replaces “supermen” with her wonderful
alien species of collectivist Vines. Kress
has said that she is now ﬁnished with
the Vines, but her two important novels
Crossﬁre (2003) and Crucible (2004), which
pit the gentle collectivists against the
fascist and more human Furs, are an important contribution to political science
ﬁction. Further, the Vines offer a solution to the problem of death as well as a
sort of warfare in which one does not
have to kill in order to win.
Further Readings
Hassler, Donald M. “The Renewal of Hard
Science Fiction.” In A Companion to Science
Fiction, ed. David Seed, 248–58. Oxford,
England: Blackwell, 2005.

DONALD M. HASSLER

KUTTNER, HENRY (1915–1958)
Henry Kuttner is an American author
who cowrote with his wife, C. L. Moore.

Kuttner, Henry
He was one of the most proliﬁc writers
in the mid-twentieth century. Using
more than seventeen pseudonyms,
including Paul Edmonds, Hudson Hastings, Kelvin Kent, Lawrence O’Donnell,
and Woodrow Wilson Smith, Kuttner
and Moore made so many sales that
they often had two or three stories
appearing in the same issue of a magazine. During 1943, they had thirteen
stories published in Astounding.
The Kuttner–Moore collaborative
machine began with a mutual interest
in Weird Tales and subsequent membership in the Lovecraft circle of correspondents in the 1930s. At the time,
Kuttner, who was born in Los Angeles
in 1915, worked for his cousin in a Los
Angeles literary agency. Moore lived
halfway across the country in her birthplace, Indianapolis, Indiana. After corresponding with her, Kuttner stopped
to visit Moore on a trip to New York
City in 1938. They married in 1940.
Kuttner’s ﬁrst sales were to Weird Tales: the poem “Ballad of the Gods”
(1936) and the short story “The Graveyard Rats” (1936). After his marriage to
Moore, he wrote almost everything
through collaboration. Moore insisted
that it was impossible to tell which of
them wrote which part of a story. They
began the process by discussing the basic story ideas and the characters’
backgrounds. One of them would start
the story and continue until tired; the
other would then take over the writing,
letting the action develop as the story
progressed. Both were involved in the
ﬁnal editing process, and they had few
disagreements over content and style.

During World War II, Kuttner was
stationed at Fort Monmouth, New Jersey, working for the Medical Corps. At a
time when many writers were shipped
overseas to ﬁght, Kuttner and Moore
remained in the United States. They
sustained the Golden Age of science ﬁction. From 1942 to 1947, they published
forty-one stories in Astounding. Some of
their stories were later adapted for cinema and television, including “The
Twonky,” as a 1953 ﬁlm of the same
title; “What You Need,” as an installment of The Twilight Zone; and “Vintage
Season,” as a made-for-TV movie,
Grand Tour: Disaster in Time. Their only
signiﬁcant novel was Fury (1947).
Kuttner and Moore did more than
just produce large volumes of material.
They broadened science ﬁction into a
more literate art form by writing with
more attention to human experience
and culture and referencing classical
myths, legends, and literature. Their
stories looked at how humans would
survive in the new worlds created by
science and technology. Unfortunately,
this unique and successful collaboration was cut short in 1958 when Kuttner died of a heart attack at the age of
forty-two while writing his English thesis at the University of California.
Further Readings
Gunn, James. “Henry Kuttner, C. L. Moore,
Lewis Padgett et al.” In Voices of the Future:
Essays on Major Science Fiction Writers, ed.
Thomas D. Clareson, 1:185–215. Bowling
Green, OH: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1976.

SUSAN URBANEK LINVILLE

189
................

This page intentionally left blank

L
LA´ADAN
 adan is a language that was
La
designed to express women’s perceptions. Its grammar and basic vocabulary were constructed by linguist and
science ﬁction writer Suzette Haden
Elgin in 1982, as part of the preparation
for writing the Native Tongue trilogy
(Native Tongue, 1984; The Judas Rose,
1987; Earthsong, 1993) in which the language is an important element. The vo adan has been and
cabulary of La
continues to be expanded by cooperation among Elgin and other interested
people.
In Native Tongue and The Judas Rose,
Elgin explores the idea that a language
created by and for women can change
societal structures. In the society of
twenty-third century Earth and its colonies, in which women are legally
minors and are severely repressed,
 adan
women linguists secretly create La
and attempt to spread the language to
all the women of the Earth in the hope
that the new language will bring about
a new social order.
In creating the language, Elgin
addressed the position that English and
other languages embody male dominance in society and are not well suited
to expressing what women want to say,
which may lead to women being perceived as unskillful speakers, speciﬁcally as unable to be direct and
concise. The grammar and lexicon of
 adan attempt to remedy this situaLa
tion and also to make it more difﬁcult
to dominate conversation by such
means as denying the implications of

or the intentions behind an utterance
or contradicting a speaker’s expressed
 adan senperception. For example, La
tences begin with one of six words that
indicate the speech act undertaken,
such as statement, question, or promise; each of these six words can be further modiﬁed with one of eight sufﬁxes
to indicate the mood or purpose of the
speech act, such as, in love, in pain, or
for teaching, or left unmodiﬁed to indicate the speaker’s neutrality toward
the utterance. A notable feature of the
lexicon is the highly speciﬁc nature of
many words referring to emotions. For
example, the word anger in English cor adan, the
responds to ﬁve words in La
choice of word specifying whether the
anger has a reason, projects blame,
and/or is futile.
A basic grammar and lexicon of the
language has been available in print
form since 1988. While Elgin and others
 adan has
have pointed out that La
engendered less interest than other
constructed languages such as Klingon,
reader response has been sufﬁcient to
motivate electronic interaction formats, including a Web tutorial, a LiveJournal discussion forum, and a Web
dictionary that is still being updated.

Further Readings
Elgin, Suzette Haden. A First Dictionary and
adan. 2nd ed. Madison, WI:
Grammar of La
Society for the Furtherance and Study of
Fantasy and Science Fiction, 1988.
 adan, the Constructed Language in
———. “La
Native Tongue” [online]. 1999. Http://www.
sfwa.org/members/elgin/Laadan.html.
191
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

———. Suzette Haden Elgin Talks about “Native
Tongue” and the Problem of Woman’s Language [video]. Produced and directed by
George Elgin. Magic Granny Line, 1986.
 adan Working Group.” Feminist SF
“La
Wiki [online], http://wiki.feministsf.net/
index.php?title=L%C3%A1adan_Working_
Group.

THERESA MCGARRY

LACKEY, MERCEDES

(1950– )

Mercedes Lackey is an American fantasy writer and one of the earliest writers of young adult literature to feature
a homosexual protagonist. Vanyel
Ashkevron is the protagonist of the Last
Herald-Mage series (Magic’s Pawn, 1989;
Magic’s Promise, 1990; Magic’s Price,
1990). While Vanyel’s father disapproves, the culture of Valdemar and a
number of Lackey’s other cultures
accept same-sex relationships. Vanyel
is ﬁrst seen as a legend; Talia, the protagonist of the Queen’s Own series, is
reading the story of Vanyel’s heroic last
stand when she is chosen by her Companion. Companions, white horses who
embody spirits, are a magical sentient
species who choose their Heralds.
Born in Chicago, Lackey received a
B.S. in biology from Purdue University
in Indiana. She worked as an artist’s
model, then in data processing and
computer programming. Lackey began
writing for science ﬁction and fantasy
fan magazines and became active as a
ﬁlk writer and singer at science ﬁction
conventions (cons). She met C. J. Cherryh at a con, and Cherryh encouraged
her to begin writing professionally.
Lackey and her husband, Larry
Dixon, are licensed rehabilitators who
work with injured birds. Her novels
include various magical and sentient,
nonhuman races, and several of her
protagonists come from cultures where
close relationships with companion
and working animals are valued, such
192
................

Volume 2: Entries

as the Shin’a’in horses and the Hawkbrothers’ bondbirds. A number of Lackey’s protagonists are female, including
fourteen-year-old Rune, who runs away
from home to become a Bard (and is
rejected despite her talent because she
is female); Kerowyn, who becomes a
mercenary captain in By the Sword
(1991); the Queen of Valdemar; and a
priestess who becomes head of a
powerful religious institution.
Most of Lackey’s stories are comingof-age tales. Besides a group of interrelated series set in Velgarth, the setting
for twenty-seven novels that take place
in and around Valdemar, she has written an urban fantasy series featuring
Diana Tregarde, a spiritual/psychic investigator (Burning Water, 1989; Children
of the Night, 1990; Jinx High, 1991). She
also has created the Bardic series (The
Lark and the Wren, 1992; The Robin and
the Kestrel, 1993) about a group of musicians. More recent novels, such as Firebird (1996) and The Black Swan (1999),
retell fairy tales or other alternateworld fantasies; the Dragon Jouster series includes Joust (2003), Alta (2004),
and Sanctuary (2005).
Lackey has collaborated with a number of writers, including Cherryh,
Andre Norton, Ellen Guon, Josepha
Sherman, Marion Zimmer Bradley,
and Anne McCaffrey. She publishes in
Jim Baen’s SERRAted Edge series,
urban-fantasy novels featuring children and adolescents who run away
from home (other writers in the series
are Holly Lisle and Mark Shepherd). At
the end of each novel is a page with
toll-free numbers to agencies that can
help missing or abused children.
Further Readings
The World of Mercedes Lackey [online].
Http://www.mercedeslackey.com.
“Mercedes Lackey.” Authors and Artists for
Young Adults, vol. 13. Detroit: Gale, 1994.

Lalli, Cele Goldsmith
“Mercedes Lackey.” Contemporary Authors
Online. Detroit: Gale, 2007.

ROBIN ANNE REID

LALLI, CELE GOLDSMITH

(1933–2002)

Cele Goldsmith was an American editor best known for her work on Amazing Stories and Fantastic between 1955
and 1965. She brought a fresh perspective to the genre of science ﬁction (SF)
and helped introduce the New Wave
aesthetic to America. Not a reader of
science ﬁction before working as an
editor, Goldsmith chose stories on
instinct and paid for them quickly, revitalizing Amazing and Fantastic and
publishing creative, literary, and experimental stories, some with feminist
themes.
One of the earliest female magazine
editors, Goldsmith grew up in Scranton,
Pennsylvania, and graduated from Vassar College in 1955. Her introduction to
editorial work, as an editorial assistant
for Ziff-Davis (her ﬁrst job), was a
throwaway task editing Pen Pals, a letter
magazine that quickly failed. Nevertheless, Goldsmith demonstrated both a
good story sense and the ability to help
writers turn questionable stories into
publishable ones. She became an associate editor of Fantastic and Amazing
when she refused to return to secretarial work. Goldsmith was promoted to
managing editor of both magazines in
1957 and took over editing in 1958 at
the age of twenty-ﬁve, although Norman M. Lobsenz wrote the editorials
and was credited as editorial director—
probably to draw attention away from
the fact that a woman successfully ran
a male-oriented SF magazine. Goldsmith also edited Dream World, which
ran for three issues in 1957. Goldsmith
married Michael Lalli in 1964 and
changed her name to Cele G. Lalli.
When Amazing and Fantastic were sold

in 1965, Goldsmith chose to stay with
Ziff-Davis, editing Modern Bride until
her retirement in 1998 and coauthoring
two books of wedding advice.
Goldsmith introduced serials in Fantastic, pioneered single-author focus
issues with the November 1959 Fantastic, and attracted a range of new and
established authors, including Marion
Zimmer Bradley’s ﬁrst Darkover
novella, “The Planet Savers” (Amazing,
1958), as well as bringing J. G. Ballard to
an American audience. Goldsmith published Ursula K. Le Guin’s ﬁrst SF story,
“April in Paris,” in Fantastic in 1962.
Other debut authors included Phyllis
Gotleib, Thomas M. Disch, and Roger
Zelazny, whose novella “He Who
Shapes” (Amazing, 1965) won the Nebula Award. She also published new
authors Piers Anthony, Ben Bova, R. A.
Lafferty, and Harlan Ellison and
attracted back previous contributors,
including Leigh Brackett, Isaac Asimov, Ray Bradbury, Edmond Hamilton,
and Fritz Leiber.
Under Goldsmith, Amazing focused
on fantasy and “soft” or socially oriented science ﬁction. Nascent feminist
themes showed up in stories like
“Fireman” by J. F. Bone (Fantastic, May
1960), in which female prisoners are
“plastiformed” into standardized body
types; in the story, the character
Annalee earns respect from the male
main character for helping him overthrow the government. Goldsmith was
recognized in 1962 with a Worldcon
Special Convention Award for editing
Amazing and Fantastic, and with Amazing’s ﬁrst Hugo nomination in 1964.
Further Readings
Malzberg, Barry. “Cele Goldsmith Lalli—Furthering the True Unwritten History.” In
Synergy SF, ed. George Zebrowski, 300–
306. Waterville, MI: Gale, 2004.

AMELIA BEAMER
193
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

LANGUAGES

AND

LINGUISTICS

The ways in which language and linguistics ﬁgure in women’s science ﬁction reference communication both
within human societies and among
humans and other societies. While the
general trend is for writers to largely
gloss over the question of communication within and among future or alternate societies, perhaps creating a few
new words for alien concepts, those
who deal with language in more depth
show interest in the power of language
to shape, maintain, and transform societies and in the importance of the positions of those who work closely with it.
The role of linguists and linguistics is
most prominent in the work of C. J.
Cherryh, Sheila Finch, and Suzette
Haden Elgin. Each takes the premise
that, in a future where communication
between vastly different populations of
various worlds is necessary, the linguists who provide linguistic bridges
between communities will be important
because their work yields new cultural
and socioeconomic structures. Cherryh’s Hunter of Worlds duology (Brothers
of Earth, 1976, and Hunter of Worlds, 1977)
and Foreigner series (Foreigner, 1994; Invader, 1995; Inheritor, 1996; Precursor,
1999; Defender, 2001; Explorer, 2002) are
notable examples of works exploring
the relationship between worldview and
language through the experience of a
cultural and linguistic liaison. In Finch’s
“lingster” stories, many of the protagonists are members of a guild of
“xenolinguists,” and the plots often
involve moral conﬂicts arising when
their work puts them in situations that
make it difﬁcult to maintain the ofﬁcial
neutrality required of them.
In Elgin’s Native Tongue trilogy
(Native Tongue, 1984; The Judas Rose,
1987; Earthsong, 1993), the linguists form
a closed and largely isolated social class
194
................

Volume 2: Entries

on twenty-third-century Earth, where
intense oppression of women is legalized by their constitutional status as
children. This work constitutes an
explicit exploration of the power of language to transform society, in that the
women linguists secretly create a lan adan, speciﬁcally designed to
guage, La
express the perceptions of women, in
the hope that the spread of the language will engender the end of violence
on Earth. The (separate) grammar/
dictionary shows a language going far
beyond typical innovation in lexicon,
reaching elements of syntax, morphology, and discourse.
Another writer who shows women
attempting societal change by linguistic
change is Monique Wittig; in The Warriors (Les Guerilleres, 1969), the women
of Earth, rejecting attempted domination by men with physical warfare,
remove from their language all elements indexing male domination. The
Dispossessed (1974) by Ursula K. Le
Guin also shows a revolutionary group
creating a new language to enact and
maintain a new social order, though
the focus is broader than gender
equality. Researchers have also pointed
out the power accorded the linguistic
act of naming in the works of Le Guin,
Elgin, Mary Staton, Marge Piercy, and
others.
In Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s
Tale (1985), women are restricted to
speciﬁc forms of language, and the protagonist’s exploration of forbidden
forms, while private, constitutes a
rebellion against male hegemony. A
more extreme reaction to the inadequacy of language appears in Lisa Tuttle’s “The Cure,” in which language is
portrayed as a trap from which characters are liberated by means of a treatment that protects from all diseases
and also renders them permanently
speechless.

Languages and Linguistics
In other works, the processes of
rejecting, changing, and creating language are emphasized less, but the language used evinces similar principles.
Janet Kagan’s Hellspark (1988)—similar
to the “lingster” stories in that an interpreter deciphering the culture and language of an alien society communicates
with a computer by means of body
implants—extensively explores how
culture shapes language and language
shapes society. More speciﬁcally related
to feminist goals is Monique Wittig and
Sande Zeig’s Lesbian Peoples: Material for
a Dictionary (Brouillon pour un dictionnaire
des amantes, 1975), which shows a
future feminist society by means of encyclopedia-like deﬁnitions and explanations of terms both created and
radically redeﬁned. Writers such as
Piercy and Le Guin invent and use new
pronouns to provide different opportunities for invoking, or not invoking,
gender.
Conversely, some writers show language simultaneously reﬂecting and
maintaining dominance, as many linguists have argued actual current
human languages do. Notable in this
regard is Esther Friesner’s The Psalms of
Herod (1995), in which characters speak
a future version of English in which
male domination is tied to signiﬁcant
changes in the English lexicon, involving both new words and signiﬁcant
changes in the meanings of existing
words. Many writers also create words
in the languages of alien societies to
show the worldview of those societies,
and in Joan Slonczewski’s A Door into
Ocean (1986), the syntax of an alien
group’s language corresponds to their
beliefs regarding concepts such as
agency, force, and violence.
A related prevalent theme is the possibilities of various modes of language.
An interesting example occurs in Amy
Thomson’s Through Alien Eyes (1999), in

which alien visitors to Earth communicate by changing color patterns on
their skins. Several writers postulate
the danger of foreign linguistic elements: In Janine Ellen Young’s The
Bridge (2000), a message from an alien
society is encoded in a virus that kills
most people on Earth; those not killed
are so changed as to be no longer fully
human, suggesting the power of worldviews intrinsic in language to alter the
mind of the person acquiring the language. This concept also appears in the
Native Tongue trilogy, in which human
babies exposed to nonhumanoid language input in the hope of them
becoming interpreters are extremely
damaged if they survive at all.
However, the mode that has received
attention in the greatest number of
works is telepathic communication. It
is often not clear whether telepathy is
linguistic or whether concepts and/or
feelings are communicated directly.
The second description is more likely
to apply to works such as Joanna
Russ’s And Chaos Died (1970), in which
the superior power of telepathy
answers to the deﬁciency of human
language, and Sally Miller Gearhart’s
The Wanderground: Stories of the Hill
Women (1980), in which the various
forms of telepathy practiced by the Hill
Women give them capabilities men do
not have. A prevalent theme is the
community-building power of telepathy; another, compatible, recurring
notion is the casting of telepathy as
taboo.
Finally, a few writers are beginning to
take up the theme of language as a commodity. In Cherryh’s Chanur series (The
Pride of Chanur, 1981; Chanur’s Venture,
1984; The Kif Strike Back, 1985; Chanur’s
Homecoming, 1986; Chanur’s Legacy, 1992),
machine interpretation among several
space-traveling species depends on initial linguistic input from a native
195
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

speaker; when humans ﬁrst arrive in the
area, a trade advantage is to be gained
from access to their language, and both
a tape of input data and the native
speakers themselves become objects of
violent contention. In Elgin’s “We Have
Always Spoken Panglish” (2004), a disadvantaged culture allows its ancient language to die out rather than give
dominant cultures access to it.
Further Readings
Cavalcanti, Ildney. “Utopias of/f Language
in Contemporary Feminist Literary Dystopias.” Utopian Studies 11, no. 2 (2000):
152–80.
Romaine, Suzanne. “Writing Feminist
Futures.” In Communicating Gender, 323–
56. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1999.

JEANNE G’FELLERS

AND

THERESA MCGARRY

LATIN AND SOUTH AMERICA
Science ﬁction and fantasy have a long
history in Latin and South America.
The Latin American countries with the
highest production of science ﬁction
and fantasy works are Argentina, Brazil, Cuba, and Mexico. While the works
of many Anglophone and Francophone
science ﬁction and fantasy authors
have been translated into Spanish and
Portuguese, relatively few Latin American science ﬁction works have been
translated into English. A number of
Latin American writers, both male and
female, working in the genres of magical realism and fantastic literature,
have attained signiﬁcant commercial
success in translation. However, many
important texts that do not easily ﬁt
these generic categories are not yet
available in English.
The ﬁrst known work of science ﬁction written in Latin America was produced in 1775 in the colonial town of
rida, Yucata
 n (in present-day MexMe
ico) by the Franciscan friar Manuel
196
................

Volume 2: Entries

Antonio de Rivas. Rivas included the
story “Sizigias y cuadraturas lunares […]”
about a lunar voyage as a preface to
his treatise on astronomy. Rivas’s
protagonist is a Frenchman named
simo Dutalo
 n, who is a student of
One
 n travels to
Newtonian physics. Dutalo
the moon, where he encounters humanoid extraterrestrials, or anctitonas. Rivas’s
work was the subject of a lengthy investigation by the Inquisition and was not
widely disseminated until the twentieth
century.
A much more important inﬂuence on
Latin American literature, including
science ﬁction and fantasy, is the philo~o” (First
sophical poem “Primero suen
s de la
Dream, 1692) by Sor Juana Ine
Cruz from New Spain (colonial Mexico).
The poem details the soul’s quest for
knowledge and imagines a space where
gender is no longer a constraint. The
legacy of Sister Juana—a literary genius
who lived and wrote under the inﬂuence of scholasticism, hermetic mysticism, and the baroque, as well as
newly available scientiﬁc knowledge—
has frequently been an inspiration to
writers and artists of all genres, including Octavio Paz, Carlos Fuentes, and
Rosario Castellanos.
In the late nineteenth century, Emilia
Freitas of northeastern Brazil published
one of the earliest works of Brazilian
fantasy, A Rainha do Ignoto (1899). The
subject of this novel is a secret utopian
community of women ruled by a mysterious queen on the island of
Nevoeiro. The novel was republished in
Brazil in 1980 and 2003, and although
Freitas’s novel is generally considered
to have had little impact on later writers, it is a signiﬁcant precursor of fantastic ﬁction in South America.
The majority of science ﬁction and
fantasy literature from Latin America
has been produced in the period from
1960 to the present. However, there are

Latin and South America
a few notable exceptions, including
works by women as well as men. In the
early twentieth century, Adela Zamudio
(1854–1928), a Bolivian feminist, educator, and author best known for her poetry, wrote a number of short stories.
One, “El vertigo” (Vertigo), describes an
abandoned miniature architectural
marvel with an elaborate system of
communication maintained through a
series of vibrating strings.
Examples of fantastic literature from
the early twentieth century that profoundly inﬂuenced later writers, both
male and female, include the works of
Argentine writers Jorge Luis Borges and
Adolfo Bioy Casares. A major landmark
in the development of fantastic ﬁction
as a genre in Latin America was the
publication in 1940 of an anthology of
fantastic literature edited by Borges,
Bioy Casares, and Silvina Ocampo. This
anthology, later published in English as
The Book of Fantasy, included stories by
writers from around the world, including several from Argentina. A second
major event was the publication in
1949 of Cuban author Alejo Carpentier’s essay “Lo real maravilloso” (The Marvelous Real). In 1955, Colombian
 rquez, one of
author Gabriel Garcia Ma
the leading representatives of magical
realism, published his ﬁrst book of
short stories.
There has been a signiﬁcant increase
in the contributions of women to the
genres of science ﬁction and fantasy in
Latin America from the 1960s to the
present. In Brazil, Dinah Silveira de
Queiroz published two collections of
~o a Terra
fantastic stories: Eles herdara
(“They will inherit the Earth,” 1960) and
Comba Malina (“Bad Valley,” 1969).
Queiroz was a major literary ﬁgure in
Brazil who worked in multiple genres
and was elected as a member of the
Brazilian Academy of Letters in 1980.
Another highlight of Brazilian science

ﬁction was the publication by Ruth
Bueno of Asilo nas Torres (Asylum in the
Towers, 1979). Additional female Brazilian authors who have written fantasy
or science ﬁction include Martha Argel,
Finisia Fideli, Marcia Kupstas, Clarice
lida
Lispector, Carla Cristina Pereira, Ne
~ on, and Anna Creusa Zacharias.
Pin
lica Gorodischer is
In Argentina, Ange
the most widely read contemporary
author of works of fantasy and science
ﬁction. Her collection of interconnected
stories, Kalpa Imperial (1983/1984), was
translated by Ursula K. Le Guin and
published in English as Kalpa Imperial:
The Greatest Empire That Never Was
(2003). Gorodischer has won many
prizes, including the 1994 Konex Award
for Science Fiction and, in 1996, the
Dignity Award from the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights for her work
as a champion for women’s rights.
Other important ﬁgures in Argentine
science ﬁction and fantasy include
Claudia de Bella, Magdalena Moujan
~ o, Silvina Ocampo, Graciela Parini,
Otan
Paula Ruggeri, Ana Maria Shua, and
Luisa Valenzuela.
In Cuba, Daina Chaviano, who has
also worked with radio, television, and
ﬁlm scripts, published a number of
award-winning science ﬁction and fantasy works, including the collection of
ﬁve stories Los mundos que amo (The
Worlds That I Love, 1980). After Chaviano left Cuba and relocated to the
United States in 1991, her best-selling
bulas de una abuela extraterrestre
novel Fa
(Tales of an Extraterrestrial Grandmother, 1988) and a number of her
other science ﬁction works were republished outside Cuba. Chaviano has won
numerous prizes for her work, including the Azorin Award for best novel in
1998, the Goliardos International Award
in 2003, and the Florida Book Award for
best Spanish-language book in 2007.
She has recently completed her series
197
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

on the occult side of Havana with the
publication of La isla de los amores inﬁnitos (Island of Inﬁnite Love, 2006).
Other
notable
Latin
American
authors of science ﬁction or fantasy
include Cristina Peri Rossi from Uru from Puerto Rico;
guay; Rosario Ferre
Susana Sussmann, who lives in Venezuela; Marcela del Rio, Elena Garro, Sue
Giacoman Vargas, Alejandra Medina,
and Elena Poniatowska in Mexico; Elena
Aldunate Bezanilla, Isabel Allende, Ilda

 diz, and Maria Luisa Bombal
Avila
Ca
from Chile; and Guyanese-born Pauline
Melville.
Further Readings
Agosin, Marjorie, ed. The Secret Weavers: Stories
of the Fantastic by Women of Argentina and
Chile. New York: White Pine Press, 1991.
Bell, Andrea L., and Yolanda Molina n, eds. Cosmos Latinos: An Anthology
Gavila
of Science Fiction from Latin America and
Spain. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2003.
Daina Chaviano [online]. Http://www.daina
chaviano.com.
Ginway, M. Elizabeth. Brazilian Science Fiction:
Cultural Myths and Nationhood in the Land
of the Future. Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell
Press, 2004.
Lockhart, Darrell B., ed. Latin American Science Fiction Writers: An A-to-Z Guide. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2004.
 n, Yolanda. “Alternative RealMolina-Gavila
lica Gorodischities from Argentina: Ange
er’s ‘Los embriones del violeta.’” Science
Fiction Studies 26, no. 3 (1999): 401–11.

SARA SCOTT ARMENGOT

LEE, TANITH

(1947– )

Tanith Lee is an award-winning British
author who is among the most proliﬁc
and successful genre authors working
today, producing fantasy, science ﬁction, horror, and young adult (YA) literature with impressive speed and
quality. She has been nominated for
the Nebula Award twice (for The
198
................

Volume 2: Entries

Birthgrave in 1976 and Red as Blood in
1980), the Mythopoeic Award three
times, and the World Fantasy Award six
times, including two wins for the short
stories “The Gorgon” (1983) and “Elle est
trois (La morte)” (1984).
Since her ﬁrst chapbook, “The
Betrothed” (1968), Tanith Lee has produced more than 120 short stories and
more than 70 novels and wrote two episodes of the science ﬁction television
series Blake’s 7. Lee’s style is imageheavy, lyrical, and sensual; her closest
literary forebear is probably C. L.
Moore, whose uses of mythic material,
combinations of science ﬁction, fantasy, and horror within one story, and
strong female protagonists all ﬁnd echoes within Lee’s work. However, Lee
uses folkloric source material more
directly than Moore ever did. Lee’s fairy
tale retellings are notable for their
uncompromising darkness, and her
collection Red as Blood (1982) is one of
the ﬁrst instances of the modern movement toward reclaiming fairy tales as
adult ﬁction. Along with Angela Carter’s The Bloody Chamber (1979) and
Ellen Datlow and Terri Windling’s
fairy tale–themed anthologies, Lee’s
work has been at the forefront of those
bringing fairy tale elements into the
mainstreams of fantasy and horror.
The Birthgrave (1975), Lee’s breakout
novel, is a sword-and-sorcery epic in
which the amnesiac protagonist might
be a demon, a goddess, a conqueror, or
a healer. Marion Zimmer Bradley’s
introduction to the ﬁrst edition mentions the agency and intelligence of the
protagonist with delight: “Here is a
woman writer whose protagonist is a
woman—yet from the very ﬁrst she
takes her destiny in her own hands, neither slave nor chattel. Her adventures
are her own” (6).
Lee’s later work includes Black Unicorn
(1989), a charming and surprisingly

Lefanu, Sarah
lighthearted YA fantasy featuring a
witty heroine and her (literal) pet peeve
(which is furry), and The Gods Are
Thirsty (1996), a nonfantastical French
Revolution novel with Lee’s typical decadence and luster. The Silver Metal Lover
(1981) is an SF novel set in a souldestroying utopia. Lee’s most important short story collection, including
both World Fantasy Award winners, is
Dreams of Dark and Light (1986). She has
published a few short stories using the
pseudonym Esther Garber.
Further Readings
Heldreth, Lillian Marks. “The Alchemical
Tanith Lee.” Science Fiction Studies 29, no. 2
(July 2002): 287–89.
Pattison, Jim, Paul A. Soanes, and Allison
Rich. Daughter of the Night: An Annotated Tanith Lee Bibliography [online].
Http://www.daughterofthenight.com.
Smith, Jeanette C. “The Heroine Within:
Psychological Archetypes in Tanith Lee’s
A Heroine of the World.” Extrapolation 39,
no. 1 (Spring 1998): 52–56.

LILA GARROTT-WEJKSNORA

LEFANU, SARAH (1953– )
Sarah Lefanu is a British writer, editor,
and broadcaster best known in science
ﬁction circles for her critical study of
female science ﬁction authors, In the
Chinks of the World Machine: Feminism
and Science Fiction (1988). She is the ﬁction editor of the Women’s Press
(London) and has edited many anthologies of stories, including, with Jen
Green, Dispatches from the Frontiers of the
Female Mind (1985), a collection of science ﬁction stories by female authors.
Lefanu has also written introductions
to several editions of works by Joanna
Russ, including the collection To Write
Like a Woman: Essays in Feminism and
Science Fiction (1995) and the novel The
Two of Them (2005). Lefanu is the artistic
director of the Bath Literary Festival

and a tutor at the University of Bristol
and has recently completed a biography of British writer Rose Macaulay.
In In the Chinks, Lefanu argues that
science ﬁction, despite the historical
fact that most writers and fans have
been male, affords women greater freedom than more conventional forms of
literature because in science ﬁction
they have been able to imagine worlds
independent of the restrictions of patriarchal culture. In the Chinks consists of
two parts. The ﬁrst is a collection of
essays touching on many subjects,
including early female science ﬁction
writers and male critical responses,
female characters in science ﬁction,
connections between gothic novels
and science ﬁction, Amazon characters, feminist utopias and dystopias,
female writers’ relationships to science
ﬁction conventions, and deconstructions of male and female essentialism
by female science ﬁction writers. The
second part consists of essays on four
women science ﬁction writers—James
Tiptree Jr., Ursula K. Le Guin, Suzy
McKee Charnas, and Russ—and
focuses in particular on how each
author has dealt with the issue of
essentialism: do they conceive of male
and female roles as based on the
intrinsic qualities of men and women
or as social constructions?
See also: Barr, Marleen; Feminist Science Fiction; Rosinsky, Natalie Myra.
Further Readings
Green, Jen, and Sarah Lefanu, eds. Dispatches from the Frontiers of the Female
Mind. Topsﬁeld, MA: Women’s Press;
Salem House, 1987.
Lefanu, Sarah. Foreword to The Two of Them,
by Joanna Russ. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2005.
———. In the Chinks of the World Machine:
Feminism and Science Fiction. Topsﬁeld, MA:
Women’s Press, 1991. Reissued as
199
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Feminism and Science Fiction. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1989.

SARAH BOSLAUGH

LE GUIN, URSULA K[ROEBER] (1929– )
Ursula K. Le Guin is an American
author who is a Science Fiction and
Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA)
Grand Master and the winner of a multitude of Hugo, Nebula, and Tiptree
awards. She is known for her science
ﬁction and fantasy for both children
and adults. Raised as a reader of fairy
tales and science ﬁction by her anthropologist father and author mother, Le
Guin gained an early respect for anthropology, ethical philosophies, and
Taoism, which inform her work.
Though Le Guin began writing as a
child, she didn’t begin publishing until
after she had received her master’s
degree and had her ﬁrst two children.
She has been writing proliﬁcally ever
since, with more than thirty novels for
adults and children, as well as a number of short-story and poetry collections. She has also written four books
of literary criticism and published a
translation of the Tao Te Ching.
The majority of Le Guin’s novels are
either fantasy or science ﬁction. The
common thread among most of her
novels is their philosophical bent, with
stories focused around explorations of
racism, sex and gender, language, and
power. The thought-experiment nature
of Le Guin’s work means that she is often revisiting her prior work as she
reconsiders her earlier opinions. Tehanu
(1990), for example, was written partially in response to Le Guin’s changing
opinions on gender since she wrote The
Tombs of Atuan (1970) twenty years
before. Similarly, she followed up The
Left Hand of Darkness (1969) with a
reconsidering essay entitled “Is Gender
Necessary?” seven years later, which
200
................

Volume 2: Entries

she then proceeded to rewrite once
again in 1988 when she rethought her
position yet again. The novels, however,
are not mere window dressing for philosophical essays. Instead, Le Guin creates complete science ﬁction and
fantasy worlds, which she views
through a number of lenses. Each further book has the opportunity to offer
not just new plot and characters, but a
different view of Le Guin’s created
worlds.
Le Guin’s most well-known series for
younger readers is her Earthsea trilogy
(A Wizard of Earthsea, 1968; The Tombs of
Atuan, 1971; The Farthest Shore, 1972),
which she two decades later reframed
with two novels and a short-story collection for adults (Tehanu, 1990; The
Other Wind, 2001; Tales from Earthsea,
2001) as well as a nonﬁction book
(Earthsea Revisioned, 1993). In many
ways, Earthsea resembles a typical
high-fantasy world, complete with wizards, dragons, and a quest to rescue
the fair maiden, but it differs in two
notable ways. First, Le Guin’s world
does not have clearly identiﬁable good
or evil, tending toward Jungian archetypes and Taoist notions of balance.
Second, the civilized peoples of Earthsea’s island nations are dark skinned,
with white-skinned outlanders as
exotic, superstitious barbarians. This
choice was deliberately made by Le
Guin, who has written that she does
not understand why the default color
of fantasyland people is white and she
wanted to provide an alternate set of
physical role models for fantasy heroes. While the Earthsea books were
consciously written to subvert some
fantasy conventions, the early volumes
do follow genre conventions of gender
politics, and the follow-up novel Tehanu
was written in response to the passive
female characters of the earlier books.
The series also explores old age, death,

L’Engle, Madeleine
evil, and physical inﬁrmity in ways that
are somewhat unusual in both children’s books and genre fantasy. Both
male and female characters are presented as heroic while aged, inﬁrm,
disabled, or disﬁgured.
Many of Le Guin’s most famous adult
works are science ﬁction novels in what
is alternately called her Hainish or Ekumen universe. The Hugo and Nebula
award-winning The Left Hand of Darkness
(1969) posits a world with ﬂuid biological sex, where the inhabitants are
asexual until the time comes for reproduction, at which point they randomly
take on either male or female biological
roles. The Word for World Is Forest (1972),
a short novel that has been interpreted
by some critics as a critique of the Vietnam War, explores environmental degradation, racism, and war. The sexual
violence which happens to the subject
species in this novel is inextricably
entangled with both war and abuse of
the environment. She continues her exploration of environmental concerns in
The Dispossessed (1974) as well as in
many of her later works.
In response to a writing career that
has spanned more than four decades
so far and has never shied from strong
statements, critics have found much to
both praise or attack in Le Guin’s work.
Feminist scholars (and Le Guin herself,
in later self-referential essays) have
attacked her for her use of male pronouns when referring to characters
that are androgynes. Others have
criticized her for what seems like an
angry representation of gender politics,
presenting gender imbalances as an
unwinnable war, with either men or
women required to be losers in a battle.
The Left Hand of Darkness has been
denounced for reinforcing heterosexuality even while breaking down gender expectations. Alternatively, Le Guin
has been praised for her indictment of

patriarchal power structures and for
revealing some of the subtleties of gender politics and physical representation, as well as for her groundbreaking
representations of androgyny. She has
been praised as well for her representation of skin color in fantasy and science
ﬁction.
Le Guin has won ﬁve Hugo awards,
four Nebulas, and three Tiptrees, with
The Left Hand of Darkness winning all
three. The Wizard of Earthsea won the
Boston Globe–Horn Book Medal, and The
Tombs of Atuan was a Newbery Honor
book. Le Guin has also won a lifetime
achievement award from the Young
Adult Library Services Association.
Further Readings
McLean, Susan. “The Power of Women in
Ursula K. Le Guin’s Tehanu.” Extrapolation
38, no. 2 (1997): 110–18.
Nodelman, Perry. “Reinventing the Past:
Gender in Ursula K. Le Guin’s Tehanu and
the Earthsea Trilogy.” In Children’s Literature, ed. Francelia Butler, R. H. W. Dillard,
and Elizabeth Lennox Keyser, 179–201.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1995.
Ursula K. Le Guin [online]. Http://www.
ursulakleguin.com/UKL_info.html.

DEBORAH KAPLAN

L’ENGLE, MADELEINE

(1918–2007)

Madeleine L’Engle was an awardwinning American author of children’s
science ﬁction. She won the most prestigious award in the ﬁeld of children’s
and young adult literature, the Newbery Medal, for A Wrinkle in Time (1963).
In addition, A Ring of Endless Light
(1980) received a Newbery Honor and A
Swiftly Tilting Planet (1978) was also
nominated for the award. Her best
known novels are grouped in two series: the Murray Family series, which
blends theology and science, and the
Austin Family series, which is realistic.
201
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

In both series, the characters develop
spiritually over the course of time. A
major theme through all her work concerns her characters’ choices in the
conﬂict between good and evil, with
her Christian beliefs actively informing
the lives of her characters.
The Murray Family series includes
the Time Quintet (A Wrinkle in Time; A
Wind in the Door, 1973; A Swiftly Tilting
Planet; Many Waters, 1986; An Acceptable
Time, 1989), along with The Arm of the
Starﬁsh (1965), Dragons in the Waters
(1976), and A House Like a Lotus (1984).
The Austin Family series includes Meet
the Austins (1960), The Moon by Night
(1963), The Twenty-Four Days before
Christmas (1964), The Young Unicorns
(1968), A Ring of Endless Light, The AntiMufﬁns (1980), Troubling a Star (1994),
Miracle on 10th Street (1998), and A Full
House (1999).
L’Engle was an only child who was
born in New York City. She began writing stories as a child. Her family moved
to Switzerland because of her father’s
health, and after attending Swiss
boarding schools, she went to Smith
College, where she became involved in
acting and writing plays. L’Engle
worked on Broadway after graduation,
where she met her husband, Hugh
Franklin. They later left the city to try
running a store in Connecticut while
raising their family. She describes the
conﬂict between her writing and her
family in A Circle of Quiet (1972), one of
her four autobiographical works. While
L’Engle wrote a great deal during the
1940s and 1950s despite her work and
family, she published only sporadically.
After they moved back to New York,
she began to publish more frequently
while working as a church librarian at
the Cathedral of St. John the Divine.
Although A Wrinkle in Time is popular
and critically praised, it was initially
rejected
by
more
than
twenty
202
................

Volume 2: Entries

publishers and is still thought by some
critics to be too complicated for children. Despite the complicated and
interconnected nature of her series,
L’Engle is considered to be one of the
best-selling and most popular children’s
authors of the century. While she is best
known for her children’s and young
adult literature, she has also published
essays on scripture, prayers, plays, and
poetry. Her work has been honored by a
number of awards, including a lifetime
achievement award by the World Fantasy Convention in 1997. L’Engle’s
papers are in a special collection at
Wheaton College in Illinois.
See also: “The Creation of Literature for the
Young” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Chase, Carole F. Suncatcher: A Study of Madeleine L’Engle and Her Writing. Philadelphia:
Innisfree Press, 1998.
Madeleine L’Engle [online]. Http://www.
madeleinelengle.com.
“Madeleine L’Engle.” Authors and Artists for
Young Adults, vol. 28. Detroit: Gale, 1999.

ROBIN ANNE REID

LESBIANS
Lesbians have made many contributions to the ﬁeld of speculative literature and have been depicted in science
ﬁction, fantasy, and horror with
increasing frequency in the years since
the gay rights movement became more
visible. However, the emergence of lesbian speculative ﬁction as a subgenre,
the increasing prominence of lesbian
authors, and the greater presence of
lesbians as protagonists and other positively portrayed characters are ongoing
processes in reaction to decades of
invisibility or negativity toward lesbians
and their works.
“Carmilla” (1872), by J. Sheridan Le
Fanu, can be read as the ﬁrst speculative story to contain a lesbian character,

Lessing, Doris
although the story is allusive rather
than explicit. Carmilla is a sexually seductive ﬁgure who exercises her allure
on the young and inexperienced heroine, but as it turns out, Carmilla is a
vampire. This work set the tone for the
depiction of lesbians in speculative ﬁction for many years: predatory, unnatural or supernatural, and interested in
the corruption of young women. The
.
lesbian vampire became a horror cliche
The ﬁrst steps toward more positive
portrayals came in early feminist utopias, such as Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Herland (1915), which is set in a
culture in which only women exist.
Although the women of Herland reproduce parthenogenetically, the portrayal
of competent, complex, and interesting
societies composed entirely of women
began to leave a space for the expression of lesbian identities. One example
of this is Djuna Barnes’s Ladies’ Almanack (1928), which is a playful ﬁctionalization of the author’s lesbian social
circle. At the same time, Virginia
Woolf’s Orlando (1928) played with the
conventions of romance by including a
protagonist with a ﬂuid gender.
The ﬁrst science ﬁction stories to be
published with awareness on the part
of both the author and the readership
that the work was both lesbian and science ﬁction were almost certainly Lisa
Ben’s short stories in the gay periodical
Vice Versa, beginning in 1948. Lisa Ben,
the writer’s pen name, is an anagram
of lesbian. Gay and lesbian periodicals
helped authors work out political and
literary theories as well as providing
ﬁction venues; Marion Zimmer Bradley’s contributions throughout the
1950s to the gay periodical The Ladder
preﬁgured the lesbianism and ﬂuid sexualities in the ﬁction she would write in
the 1980s.
The impact of the feminist movement
produced
many
important

lesbian speculative texts, including
postmodern and experimental works
such as Monique Wittig’s Les Guerilleres
(1969). Joanna Russ’s novel The Female
Man (1975) updated the utopian tradition by explicitly including lesbian sexuality. Jewelle Gomez’s The Gilda Stories
(1991) reclaimed the lesbian vampire
legends, complicating them with a
black female vampire protagonist, and
Bradley’s Renunciates trilogy explored
the complex interactions of gender
roles with personality and society.
Currently, there are more visible lesbian writers than ever before, including
names such as Nicola Grifﬁth, Laurie J.
Marks, Ellen Kushner, Delia Sherman,
and Tanya Huff. Lesbians are more acceptable as characters to writers of every gender and orientation, as well,
and awards such as the Lambda Literary Award and the Gaylactic Spectrum
Award are helping increase the visibility of lesbian speculative literature.
See also: Bisexuality; Homosexuality.
Further Readings
Russ, Joanna. To Write Like a Woman: Essays
in Feminism and Science Fiction. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995.

LILA GARROTT-WEJKSNORA

LESSING, DORIS

(1919– )

Winner of the 2007 Nobel Prize for literature, Doris Lessing is a British author
who began writing science ﬁction in an
unusual way. After writing a number of
conventional short stories and social
novels in the 1950s and 1960s, she
came to believe that what she has
called “inner space ﬁction” was the way
to express her concerns about the
future. She began writing science ﬁction literally in midst of the novel The
Four-Gated City (1969), the ﬁfth and ﬁnal
novel of what is now known as the
Children of Violence series (in the
203
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

British single-volume editions: Martha
Quest, 1952, Proper Marriage, 1954, A Ripple from the Storm, 1958, Landlocked,
1965, and The Four-Gated City).
Lessing’s most productive period for
writing
science
ﬁction
occurred
between 1969 and 1983. During that
time, she wrote seven novels that can
be classiﬁed as science ﬁction, and several others which include features or
elements traditionally associated with
science ﬁction. In Brieﬁng for a Descent
into Hell (1971), for example, as doctors
explore the apparent madness of a
classics professor from Cambridge, a
narrative emerges that traces the professor’s journey from an ancient ruined
city to a whirling trip on a crystal
among the stars. In The Memoirs of a
Survivor (1974), set in “the near future,”
a young woman trapped in her apartment with a foundling child loses all
sense of time and duration as she
experiences the anarchic breakdown of
society from her window. Both of these
novels explore themes of individual
madness and social decay within
fantastic narrative landscapes free of
conventional spatial and temporal
constraints.
Lessing’s Canopus at Argos: Archives
series, which she has described as her
most important work, consists of ﬁve
novels: Re: Colonized Planet 5, Shikasta
(1979); The Marriages between Zones
Three, Four and Five (1980); The Sirian
Experiments: Report of Ambien II of the
Five (1981); The Making of the Representative for Planet 8 (1982); and The Sentimental Agents in the Volyen Empire (1983).
While the ﬁve novels share a common
framework, the stories are nonsequential and have different characters. As
they trace interrelationships between
various galactic civilizations at different stages of development, the novels
move both forward and backward in
time and between real and ﬁctitious
204
................

Volume 2: Entries

celestial locations. Rather than concentrating on details and speculation
about the future of scientiﬁc technology, the narratives focus on human
characters to explore and critique utopian and dystopian sociocultural
issues and developments.
Although they can be read as traditional science ﬁction, the Canopus novels are heavily inﬂuenced by themes
from classical mythology, Eastern
philosophy, Marxist notions about
tensions between urban and rural populations, and Suﬁsm as deﬁned by
Lessing’s mentor, Idries Shah. Lessing,
in Walking in the Shade, 1949–1962
(1997), the second volume of her autobiography, has argued that science ﬁction will replace literary ﬁction as the
important literature of the twentieth
century because conventional ﬁction
based on realism is now provincial.
Further Readings
Chown, Linda E. “Revisiting Reliable Narration
and the Politics of Perspective.” Doris Lessing
Studies 25, no. 1 (Spring 2005): 16–18.
Hanford, Jan. Doris Lessing: A Retrospective
[online]. Http://www.dorislessing.org.
Lacey, Lauren. “Genealogy and Becoming in
the Canopus in Argos: Archives Series.”
Doris Lessing Studies 25, no. 2 (Winter
2006): 18–23.
Petrovic-Ziemer, Ljubinka. “Ideology and
History in the Contemporary British Novel.” Pismo 3, no. 1 (2005): 176–96.

TERRY REILLY

LINDGREN, ASTRID

(1907–2002)

One of the world’s most beloved and
inﬂuential authors of children’s literature and a formidable advocate for humanitarian and environmental causes,
Astrid Lindgren celebrated the transformative power of the imagination and the
splendors of the natural world. Drawing
on her own memories of growing up on a
farm in Vimmerby in the southern

Lindgren, Astrid
Swedish province of Sma˚land, Lindgren
infused her spirited, singular characters
with venturesome independence and an
innate sense of moral decency. Her
clear-eyed recognition of children’s complex needs and abiding respect for her
young readers resulted in more than a
hundred works in multiple genres,
including fantasy, detective stories, fairy
tales, and songs. From the indomitable
Pippi Langstrump (Pippi Longstocking)
living grown-up-free in Villekulla Cottage with her horse, her monkey, and
her superhuman strength to Ronja, the
ﬁercely courageous wild-child marking
her ethical territory in her enchanted
forest home, Lindgren’s creations pay
homage to her twin beliefs in self-reliance and the potent magic inherent in
every life.
Astrid Anna Emilia Ericsson was, as
she often recounted, treated to a genuinely happy childhood. Her parents
encouraged a rare and vital interplay of
freedom and discipline and honored
their children’s individuality. These
early years are given ﬁctional expression in Lindgren’s Bullerbyn series, the
ﬁrst of which was published in 1947
and, in 1962, as The Children of Noisy Village in the United States. In these affectionately rendered, charming stories,
Lindgren details the exquisite pleasures
of rural life, familial closeness, and
unstructured, unhampered play. Lindgren’s idyllic childhood informed all of
her work and inspired the reverence for
life that is demonstrated in her activism as well as in her ﬁction.
As a young woman, Lindgren moved
to Stockholm, where she married,
found work as a children’s book editor,
and raised her two children. The famous story of Pippi Longstocking’s birth
has an almost mythic resonance, given
the character’s continuing global
appeal. When Lindgren’s seven-yearold daughter Karin was ill, she asked

for stories about Pippi Langstrump—a
name she purportedly made up. For
Karin’s tenth birthday, her mother
committed the Pippi stories to paper
and attempted to have them published.
At ﬁrst rejected, the controversial Pippi
Longstocking ﬁrst appeared in 1945, followed by Pippi Goes on Board (Swedish
edition, 1946), and Pippi in the South Seas
(1948)—after Lindgren had already published two more conventional works
(The Conﬁdences of Britt-Mari, 1944; Kerstin and I, 1945). Pippi was, to say the
least, an unorthodox character: a rude,
ungovernable, utterly conﬁdent nineyear-old who blasts through codes of
mannerly little-girl behavior with her
tall-tale self-sufﬁciency and preternatural strength. Other equally compelling and enduring characters followed:
detective Bill Bergson (beginning in
1946); Madicken or Mischievous Meg
(beginning in 1960); and the prankster
Emil (beginning in 1963). Fantasy works
include Mio min Mio (1954), the Karlsson
and Eric stories (beginning in 1955); Broderna Lejonhjarta (The Brothers Lionheart,
1973), and Ronja rovardotter (Ronia, the
Robber’s Daughter, 1981).
Internationally renowned, Lindgren’s
numerous accolades include the prestigious Hans Christian Andersen
Award (1958) and the Albert Schweitzer Medal from the U.S. Animal Welfare
Institute (1989) “for achieving enactment of the world’s most comprehensive law against cruel factory farming
practices” in Sweden. The Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award for Literature was
established posthumously by the Swedish government to honor and continue
Lindgren’s legacy.
Further Readings
Edstrom, Vivi. Astrid Lindgren: A Critical
Study. Stockholm: Raben an Sjogren,
1992. American edition, trans. Eivor Cormack, Stockholm: R&S Books, 2000.
205
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Metcalf, Eva-Maria. Astrid Lindgren. New
York: Twayne, 1995.
Russell, David L. “Pippi Longstocking and the
Subversive Afﬁrmation of Comedy.” Children’s Literature in Education 31, no. 3 (September 2000): 167–77.

KATE FALVEY

LOST-COLONY STORIES
The science ﬁction or fantasy “lost
colony” story has a lost colony as its
primary setting, and its plot turns on
the nature of life there and its discovery. The colonists may have made a
deliberate choice to become lost, in
search of a better way of life, or they
may have become lost by accident,
whether in post-catastrophe scenarios
or as a galactic empire declines and
falls. The lost colony offers the opportunity to rebuild society afresh, with
further plot twists as the colony is
found again. The colony may not consider itself lost and may be surprised to
learn of its history, as colonists and
intruders react to each other’s cultural
preconceptions. Feminist science ﬁction or fantasy writers can explore a
range of gender issues in lost-colony
stories. Strong female protagonists
become cultural interpreters, creating
a feminist speculative anthropology.
Lost-colony stories proliferated in
industrialized cultures from the midtwentieth century, when the empires of
the Old World powers were breaking
up, most regions on Earth had been
touched by human visitation, and
space exploration was becoming a reality. They grew out of largely Earthbound utopias, dystopias, and escapist
fantasies; incredible travel narratives;
quests involving expedition, separation, and rediscovery; and tales of lost
races, cities, civilizations, lands, and
worlds. Authors also drew on the tradition of scientiﬁc romances in which
206
................

Volume 2: Entries

colonies were planted and rediscovered
at the Antipodes, underwater, on newly
surfaced
continents,
underground
within the hollow Earth, at the Poles, in
other periods of time, in other dimensions, or in space. As far back as 1687,
dramatist Aphra Behn in her farce The
Emperor of the Moon had made fun of
those ready to believe in elaborate societies outside the known world. And for
philosophically and spiritually minded
authors, metaphors of colonies and offspring lost, sought, and found were
familiar from many texts published in
previous centuries.
For a motherland, the failure of a
colonization sortie meant loss—of
prestige, territory, resources outlaid,
future income, and skilled personnel.
So did the disappearance of a young
settlement, such as the American colony established on Roanoke Island
in 1587 by Walter Raleigh. Women
authors of speculative prose and drama
about that mystery include Augusta
Stevenson (Dramatized Scenes from American History, c. 1929), Jean Bothwell (Lady
of Roanoke, 1965), and Barbara T.
Karmazin (Covenants, 2003).
Cherry Wilder (Second Nature, 1986;
Signs of Life, 1996) draws on the nineteenth-century colonial experiences of
Australia and New Zealand in her lostcolony story of the planet Rhomary,
where colonists from a future Earth
have crash-landed. Wilder tells a tale
of the lost being found again, with her
characters retaining strong memories
of their cultural origins. The Australasian animal world is another inﬂuence:
a marsupial humanoid civilization is
visited in Wilder’s 1977–83 trilogy comprising The Luck of Brin’s Five, The Nearest
Fire, and The Tapestry Warriors. In Windhaven (1981), by Lisa Tuttle in collaboration with George R. R. Martin, colonists
create a new technology of ﬂight from
the ruins of their spacecraft.

Lost-Colony Stories
Colonists may deliberately set out to
become lost, with the intention of creating a utopian colony, as happens in
the Pern series by Anne McCaffrey,
beginning with Dragonﬂight (1968). The
plot may center on the discovery
of common origins, as in Juliet E.
McKenna’s The Swordsman’s Oath (2000) and
Katharine Kerr’s far-future Snare (2003).
The 1870s through the 1930s saw a
boom in ﬁction about lost races and
cultures. For some male writers, such
stories set in warm and fertile regions
were a pretext for indulging in
what Anne McClintock has labeled the
“porno-tropic tradition.” For some
women authors, on the other hand, the
arrival of male humans in a femaledominated colony or isolated society
spelled conﬂict: for example, feminist
author Inez Haynes Gillmore supplied
an allegorical picture of female freedom lost in her Angel Island (1914).
Other women used the lost race/
culture format positively to advocate
social reforms and granting females
more administrative power. Australian
activist-author Catherine Helen Spence,
a contemporary of political economist
and author Millicent Garrett Fawcett,
set her 1879 novel Handfasted in a lost
Scottish colony in Central America and
gave serious consideration to socialism
and trial marriage.
Theosophy,
a
philosophy
that
includes belief in reincarnation and the
reality of the occult, fueled fascination
with human origins in mythic lands
such as Lemuria and Hyperborea,
which were often starting points for
nostalgic lost-land fantasies. The proposition that Atlantis had spawned colonies or reappeared in a new location
was also fruitful, while the ancient
Tibetan, Mayan, Phoenician, Egyptian,
and Chaldean civilizations supplied
models for long-hidden cities. Examples include Mrs. J. Gregory Smith’s

1886 Atla: A Story of the Lost Island;
Frona Eunice Wait’s Yermah the Dorado:
The Story of a Lost Race (1897); Nancy
McKay Gordon’s 1898 Her Bungalow: An
Atlantian Memory; Rosa Praed’s 1902 Fugitive Anne: A Romance of the Unexplored
Bush; Zona Gale’s Romance Island (1906);
Louise Jordan Miln’s 1922 novel The
Green Goddess, adapted from a play by
William Archer; and Louis Moresby’s
(pseudonym of Lily Moresby Adams
Beck) The Glory of Egypt: A Romance
(1926). Alternatively, the author could
produce a planetary romance: an early
twentieth-century instance is Ella
Scrymsour’s 1922 The Perfect World: A
Romance of Strange People and Strange Places, in which escapees from the
destruction of Earth go to Jupiter.
The lost tribe of Israel was another
perennial explanation for remote communities, and this convention persists:
for example, Jane Downing’s 2005 The
Lost Tribe, set in Polynesia. Another
modern variant of the alternative society on Earth is Storm Constantine’s
Wraeththu trilogy (1987–88) in which a
hermaphrodite race, the har, psychologically male, is created.
A colony may be lost to a galactic
empire centering on Earth. The galactic
empire collapses, and the colonies lose
knowledge of their origins, often reverting to more primitive technology as
they create new social and political systems, as in Ursula K. Le Guin’s The Left
Hand of Darkness (1969) and The Dispossessed (1974). Or there may be reversion
to a feudal system, as with Marion
Zimmer Bradley and the Darkover series; the planet Darkover is a lost colony of Earth rediscovered by the Terran
Empire in The Shattered Chain (1976),
Thendara House (1983), and City of Sorcery (1984).
While societies may devolve to a less
advanced state of technology, the colonists may evolve new biological or
207
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

psychological features that mark a signiﬁcant difference with the Motherworld: psi powers, for instance, as
found in McCaffrey’s Pern and Bradley’s
Darkover series. Isolation and other
factors create the blood-mind in Liz
Williams’s The Ghost Sister (2001) and
the anti-aging factor in Louise Marley’s
The Child Goddess (2004). Stories about
all-female worlds must (of necessity)
explore the possibilities of all-female
methods of reproduction, as do Nicola
Grifﬁth in Ammonite (1993) and Joanna
Russ in “When It Changed” (1972), “A
Few Things I Know about Whileaway”
(1975), and The Female Man (1975). A different take on the possibilities of cultural change is given in Zahrah the
Windseeker (2005), where Nnedi Okorafor-Mbachu sketches a complex interaction of two cultures that meet in the
creation of a new creole culture.
Lost-colony settings have particular
appeal to feminist science ﬁction writers as sites for female empowerment,
autonomy, or pleasure. Suzy McKee
Charnas coined the term “Boys’ Own
all-girl fantasies” for the stories of the
1970s and 1980s in which feminist writers asserted their independence from
male expectations and rules. Societies
may be all-female, or gender may be a
much more ﬂuid and changeable thing,
way beyond the binary gender distinction. Societies may evolve beyond patriarchy or reinvent it in ways either more
liberating or more repressive of women.
In Mutagenesis (1993), Helen Collins has
a female scientist, a visitor to a lost colony, uncover a genetic engineering
plot that would be to the detriment of
women.
Societies without men may come
about because the men have all died
through a virus or war, such as in
Russ’s “When It Changed” and Grifﬁth’s
Ammonite. Perhaps only a few men survive, as in the Holdfast Chronicles
208
................

Volume 2: Entries

(Walk to the End of the World, 1974; Motherlines, 1978; The Furies, 1994; The Conqueror’s Child, 1999), in which Charnas
describes a postdisaster world where
men and women have become lost to
each other; the few men who survive
initially keep women in slavery, and it
is up to the women to work out a
future worth living for everyone. Ruth
Nestvold, in “Looking through Lace”
(2003), creates a world where women
are dominant, with men and women
speaking different languages. In Shadowman (1996), Melissa Scott posits ﬁve
genders created as a side-effect of
space exploration technology. When
exploration stops, colonies become lost
to each other, so that when contact is
reestablished, people ﬁnd themselves
alien to each other as much in their
attitudes to gender difference as in the
difference itself.
In using the lost-colony theme, feminist science ﬁction and fantasy writers
take delight in exploring the complex
possibilities of culture contact beyond
the usual homogeneous Star Wars culture conﬂict, creating the possibilities
of a speculative anthropology that
deals imaginatively with the concept of
difference.
See also: Feminisms; “Feminist Spirituality”
(vol. 1).
Further Readings
Rousseau, Yvonne. Minmers Marooned and
Planet of the Marsupials: The Science Fiction
Novels of Cherry Wilder. New Lambton,
Australia: Nimrod, 1997.

ROSALEEN LOVE

AND

ROBYN WALTON

LYNN, ELIZABETH A[NNE] (1946– )
Elizabeth Lynn is an award-winning
American author of science ﬁction and
fantasy (SF/F). Her Watchtower (1979)
won the 1980 World Fantasy Award,
and her story “The Woman Who Loved

Lynn, Elizabeth A.
the Moon” won the World Fantasy
Award for short ﬁction the same year.
She is one of the earliest SF/F writers to
create gay, lesbian, bisexual, and
queer protagonists. Her ﬁrst novel, A
Different Light (1978), is a science ﬁction
novel featuring same-sex lovers. The
novel’s title inspired the name of a
well-known gay, lesbian, bisexual, and
transgender bookstore that opened in
San Francisco in 1979. Her second SF
novel, The Sardonyx Net (1981), has a
secondary character who is a sadist,
achieving satisfaction only with nonconsenting victims.
The Chronicles of Tornor series consists of three novels, Watchtower (1979),
The Dancers of Arun (1979), and The
Northern Girl (1980), set at different
times and featuring different protagonists. The protagonists include two
men: Ryke, a watch commander of Tornor Keep, in the ﬁrst, and Kerris, a
scribe whose arm was amputated as a
child, in the second. Sorren, an indentured servant who travels north to Tornor Keep, is the young female
protagonist in the last novel.
All of the protagonists in the Tornor
novels are queer, although Ryke does
not realize his attraction to and love for
the heir of Tornor, whom he rescues
from captivity, until the end of the
novel. He is not able to act upon his
feelings. Kerris, a young man who is
mind-bonded with his long-absent
brother, leaves the Keep with that
brother, who soon becomes his lover.
They travel with a group called the
chearis, trained in dance, martial arts,
and a philosophy of balance. The chearis appear in all three novels at different stages of development. Other
characters are queer as well; Sorren
and Norres, two female messengers
who are lovers, help Ryke and Errel
escape the conquered Keep of Tornor.

Sorren eventually becomes Lady of the
Keep.
Lynn was born in New York City and
received a B.A. at Case Western Reserve
University and an M.A. at the University of Chicago; she was a Woodrow
Wilson Fellow. She then worked as a
teacher and a manager in hospitals
and taught in the Women’s Studies Program at San Francisco State University.
She is trained in and teaches martial
arts. For some years, she stopped publishing, but began writing again with
Dragon’s Treasure (1998) and Dragon’s
Winter (2004). Her work presents a realistic approach to the difﬁculty of surviving in the medieval world that J. R.
R. Tolkien popularized, focusing on the
impact of war on a country and its people who must struggle to survive and to
love in its shadow.
See also: “Speculating Sexual Identities”
(vol. 1).

Further Readings
“Elizabeth A(nne) Lynn.” St. James Guide to
Fantasy Writers. New York: St. James
Press, 1996.
“Elizabeth A. Lynn: A New Spring.” Locus, no.
441 (October 1997). Excerpted online at
http://www.locusmag.com/1997/Issues/
10/Proﬁle.html.
Leonard, Elisabeth A. “‘Differences Make Me
Curious’: Race, Sexuality, and Class in
The Chronicles of Tornor.” In Into Darkness
Peering: Race and Color in the Fantastic, ed.
Elisabeth A. Leonard, 171–81. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press, 1997.
Reid, Robin Anne. “Lost in Space between
‘Center’ and ‘Margin’: Some Thoughts on
Lesbian-Feminist Discourse, Bisexual
Women, and Speculative Fiction.” In Feminist Nightmares: Women at Odds; Feminism
and the Problem of Sisterhood, ed. Susan
Ostrov Weisser, 343–57. New York: New
York University Press, 1994.

ROBIN ANNE REID
209
................

This page intentionally left blank

M
MACAVOY, R[OBERTA] A[NN] (1949– )
R. A. MacAvoy is an award-winning
American author who writes across
multiple genres of the fantastic. In a
ten-year period, she published eleven
well-received novels, including historical fantasy, contemporary fantasy, and
a vivid far-future world. Her work
stands out for detailed settings and
characters that differ from the traditional fantasy heroes. MacAvoy’s male
and female characters believe themselves merely ordinary even as their
extraordinary
actions
demonstrate
otherwise.
A 1971 graduate of Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio,
MacAvoy worked as a college ﬁnancial
aid ofﬁcer’s assistant and a computer
programmer. She became a full-time
writer in 1982 and won the John W.
Campbell Award for best new writer in
1984 after publication of her ﬁrst novel,
Tea with the Black Dragon (1983), in
which middle-aged Celtic ﬁddler Martha Macnamara teams up with Mayland Long, a centuries-old Chinese
dragon disguised in human form, to
ﬁnd her missing daughter. In the
sequel Twisting the Knot (1986), Long,
now manager of Martha’s band, pursues the murderer of a band member.
The Trio for Lute trilogy, consisting of
Damiano (1983), Damiano’s Lute (1984),
and Raphael (1984), is set in an alternative history in Renaissance Italy and
follows the picaresque travels of wizard’s son Damiano and his companions, a talking dog and the archangel
Raphael. The series is especially

notable for the way MacAvoy weaves
layered themes, presenting a battle
between good and evil amid parallel
rite-of-passage stories.
In The Book of Kells (1985), artist John
Thorburn and historian Derval O’Keane
are transported back a thousand years
to ancient Ireland, with all its danger
and beauty. Ireland is also the setting
of The Grey Horse (1987) where a pooka
insists on courting a human woman in
a nineteenth-century village. MacAvoy’s
science ﬁction novel The Third Eagle
(1989) explores Native American philosophies while following the adventures
of Wanbli, a young warrior of the
Wacaan clan, who leaves his backwater
home world to try his hand as an actor.
MacAvoy’s most ambitious work is
the Nazhuret trilogy: Lens of the World
(1990), King of the Dead (1991), and Belly
of the Wolf (1993). Nazhuret of Sordaling, an abandoned orphan who rises to
become the advisor to the king, recalls
his life in epistolary form. The series
boasts no large-scale magic, nor any
ancient, eldritch evils to trouble the
land, only societies at odds with one
another. Nazhuret himself remains
innocent, without subtext, continually
casting himself as an insigniﬁcant
player even as he is pulled from the
center of one pivotal event to the next.
Further Readings
Brown, Charles. “Tea with R. A. MacAvoy.”
Locus, no. 278 (March 1984): 1–40.
MacAvoy, R. A. “Writing Hystericals.” Empire
for the SF Writer 9, no. 3 (Spring 1985): 8–9.
Sargent, Pamela. “Science Fiction, Historical
Fiction, and Alternate History.” Science
211
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Fiction and Fantasy Writers Association Bulletin 29, no. 3 (Fall 1995): 3–7.
Sullivan, C. W., III. “Celtic Myth and English
Language Fantasy Literature: Possible
New Directions.” Journal of the Fantastic in
the Arts 10, no. 1 (Winter 1998): 88–96.
Walton, Evangeline. “Celtic Myth in the
Twentieth Century.” Mythlore 3, no. 3
(1976): 19–22.

CHARLENE BRUSSO

MACLEAN, KATHERINE ANNE (1925– )
Katherine MacLean is an award-winning
American science ﬁction writer who
began publishing her work in the 1940s.
Her work was always published under
her own name, with the exception of
one story published under her husband’s
name, Charles Dye. She sold her ﬁrst
short story, “Defense Mechanism,” to
Astounding Science Fiction in 1949.
After receiving her B.A. from Barnard
College in 1947, MacLean did postgraduate work in psychology and worked as a
biological laboratory technician. This
early experience inﬂuenced her work,
much of which deals with the “soft” sciences of biology and psychology. Her
work focuses on ethical issues in medicine, characterization, and humor. In
“Defense Mechanism,” she posits that all
humans are born telepaths, but that the
unbearable trauma of real-life experiences forces us to shut down and lose this
ability. In “Games” (1953), a telepathic
child touches the mind of a dying political prisoner. The telepathic protagonist
of The Missing Man (1971), MacLean’s
Nebula Award–winning novel, tunes in
to strong emotions of anger and distress,
thus saving people in peril and preventing violence. In her stories, MacLean predicts such now-common concepts as
cloning and in-vitro fertilization (The
Diploids, 1953), iPods (“Incommunicado,”
1950, and The Missing Man, 1971), and
debit cards (The Missing Man).
212
................

Volume 2: Entries

Possibly due to the period in which
she wrote most of her short stories,
MacLean’s work is male-centric. The
telepathic baby from “Defense Mechanism” and the telepathic child from
“Games” are male. “The Snowball
Effect” (1952), in which a women’s sewing circle takes over the world, condescendingly represents women’s groups
as absurd and trivial. The women in
her stories tend to be helpful, loving
wives or worried mothers.
An exception is “And Be Merry”
(1950), in which a female laboratory
biologist discovers a way to regenerate
herself indeﬁnitely. As a result, she
develops a psychotic hypochondria and
winds up in a mental ward, from which
she is rescued by her husband who
convinces her that she has inoperable
cancer. Faced with unavoidable mortality, she regains her senses.
Further Readings
“Katherine (Anne) MacLean.” St. James Guide
to Science Fiction Writers. 4th ed. Farmington Hills, MI: St. James Press, 1996.

TRINA ROBBINS

MAGICAL REALISM
The term magical realism was coined by
Franz Roh in his 1925 essay discussing
Post-Expressionist art. His goal was to
advocate for a new style of painting. He
claimed that all artists should recognize
reality in their painting, yet at the same
time incorporate a sense of magic. Magical realism in contemporary literature
blends the imaginary concepts of realistic images into a perceived reality of the
characters, therefore cementing the
relationship between dreams and reality as one reality.
Magical realism is considered by
some literary critics to be a postcolonial invention that serves as an outlet
for authors to break free from political

Magical Realism
conformity in order to express their
cultures in ways that would not otherwise be accepted by their governments.
Postcolonial literature has been classiﬁed
as literature written by a native of a
country that has been colonized by
another country and where the indigenous political structure has been
suppressed and replaced with the government of the colonizers. The writers
of colonized countries were allowed to
write, but many of them had to write in
code, utilizing cultural secrets that only
certain people would understand. They
also used metaphors and allegory liberally to help get their message through.
The presence of metaphor and allegory
in magical realism is an important aspect. The magic of the character’s reality in a story is based on a metaphor
that has become real, meaning that
what may be unreal and even unbelievable to the reader becomes true and
real to the character.
The majority of magical realist writers, especially women, are from postcolonial countries, and the oppression
endured by women from such countries has produced many literary works
that deal with issues often found in
nonﬁctional postcolonial writings. The
female presence is an important aspect
of magical realism. Throughout literary
history, especially in fairy tales and
fables and other stories of magic,
women have been portrayed as the
magic holders, the healers, the caregivers, and the ones who hold the secrets
of birth and, often, death. It is their
magic that helps feed the magic of the
story to the characters.
The women characters in this genre
often
show
incredible
emotional
strength, however oppressed they are
by their male, and sometimes female,
counterparts. Magical realism frequently deals with the manifestation of
certain stress factors, either alleviating

the struggle or deﬁning it by bringing a
stronger focus to the problem, or even
to the fear of the problem. An example
is Tita, a character in the novel Like
Water for Chocolate (1989) by Mexican
author Laura Esquival. Tita is a victim
of mental and verbal abuse from her
mother, Mama Elena, and as a result
reverts to the domain of the kitchen, a
place of comfort where she can indulge
in her culinary talent. The recipes she
creates are an outlet for her forbidden
feelings—her suppressed anger and her
denied love for a man. Food, as an
emotional release for Tita, is enhanced
by magic, though magic is not a perfect
remedy for what ails her, but only a
temporary comfort. The magic itself is
mostly perceived by Tita and other
characters that desire her happiness to
be fulﬁlled.
Another example of the power of
women is in the Earth element found
’s novel I, Tituba, Black
in Maryse Conde
Witch of Salem (1992). The CaribbeanFrench writer based the lead female
character on an actual historical ﬁgure,
creating a past for one of the most famous “witches” in American history.
Tituba is connected to the Earth and
the magic that stems from nature. She
is gifted with the ability to communicate with her dead mother and teacher,
who continue to guide her and advise
her on the use of plants for healing, life
choices, and spiritual awareness. The
magic in the story is real to Tituba, but
not to the other characters in the story.
Many women writers incorporate
their culture into their characters, often incorporating the superstitions and
legends of their culture as the magic of
~ a Castillo,
their stories. For example, An
a Chicana, utilizes the folklore and
legend of the Chicano culture in the
southwestern United States, blending
ancient beliefs, superstitions, and religion into her women characters, giving
213
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

them extraordinary talents such as
prophecy and healing. Another example is Amy Tan, a Chinese American
who shows Chinese beliefs held by
characters who no longer live in
their native land but must now conform to a new culture in America. Toni
Morrison, an African American, focuses
her novels on the experiences of black
Americans, especially women’s experiences, in an unfair society, often searching for cultural identity, all the while
incorporating fantasy and mythical elements with realistic depiction of gender, racial, and class issues.
Other magical realist writers include
Margaret Atwood (Canada), Isabelle
Allende (Chile), Virginia Woolf (Britain),
Ana€is Nin (France), Zora Neale Hurston
(African-American; United States), Keri
Hulme (New Zealand), Chitra Banerjee
Divakaruni (India), and Aimee Bender
(United States).
See also: “Intersections of Race and Gender”
(vol. 1); Latin and South America.
Further Readings
Faris, Wendy B. Ordinary Enchantments: Magical Realism and the Remystiﬁcation of Narrative. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University
Press, 2004.
Zamora, Lois Parkinson, and Wendy B. Faris,
eds. Magical Realism: Theory, History, Community. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 1995.

ANNE BAHRINGER

MARIE

DE

FRANCE

(FL. 1160–1178)

Marie de France is an enigmatic literary
ﬁgure. While interest in Marie and her
works continues to grow, biographical
knowledge of this problematic twelfthcentury author remains minimal.
Although this woman poet gives readers her name—she designates herself
as “Marie” in the epilogue to her Fables
and reveals that she is from France—
she never discloses her identity.
214
................

Volume 2: Entries

Linguistic examinations of her works
conﬁrm their twelfth-century provenance, but despite a few traces of
Marie’s history, patrons, and parentage
found in the works themselves, critics
cannot concretely identify this remarkable “Marie of France.” Nor can they
state for certain where Marie composed
her works. She wrote in French, as was
common for a courtly poet in the Norman courts of England. However, her
awareness of English and Breton stories
and words and geographic references
in the works themselves do suggest
that Marie wrote her works in England.
Her works, in some sense, speak for
their largely anonymous author. Marie’s
is one of the few female voices actively
participating in and responding to the
twelfth-century phenomenon of courtly
love and chivalry; her works do not
merely reﬂect their social context but
actively criticize and engage problems of
gender, love, social status, and social
inequity. Although best known for her Lais
and Fables, Marie also probably authored
a third work, the Espurgatorie Seint Patriz—
the Purgatory of Saint Patrick—and possibly
a fourth, a life of Saint Audrey.
Both the Espurgatorie Seint Patriz and
the Fables reﬂect the standards of their
particular genres. A hagiographic work,
the Espurgatorie examines the adventures—some supernatural—of Saint Patrick and an Irish knight, Owen. Marie’s
fables almost always feature animals
and contain an explicit moral. Both the
Espurgatorie and the Fables are, in different senses, didactic; the Espurgatorie contains a Christian message, and the Fables
relay political ones. Somewhat surprisingly, while many of the fables emphatically preserve the existing social and
political order, many others criticize the
government or the Court for perceived
excesses and abuses of power.
It is in the Lais, though, that Marie’s
aptitude for social criticism ﬁnds its

Marxism
fullest expression. These lays—short,
poetic narratives, frequently containing supernatural elements—deal with
problems of love and the different
social concerns facing men and
women. One of the most overtly fantastical of them, “Bisclavret,” deals with
troubles of the unlucky-in-love title
character, a werewolf. Bisclavret’s wife,
unable to deal with her husband’s furry
nature, steals his clothing, rendering
him unable to transform back into a
human form. Finding sanctuary at the
side—literally—of a wise king, Bisclavret eventually revenges himself upon
his unfaithful spouse by biting off her
nose. Questioning why a cute pet
should suddenly turn vicious, the king
and his court discover Bisclavret’s dual
identity, enable the werewolf to turn
human again, and punish the unfortunate wife. Surprising for its tolerant
portrayal of a werewolf, the lay also
investigates issues of loyalty and
understanding. “Bisclavret” has also
been retold by a modern science ﬁction
and fantasy author, Ursula K. Le Guin.
Thanks to a variety of accessible
translations, Marie de France’s works
are readily available—and her unique
views of male and female relationships
and social problems offer as much to
interest twenty-ﬁrst-century readers as
they did for her original twelfth-century audience.
See also: “The Middle Ages” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Bruckner, Matilda Tomaryn. “Marie de
France.” In Literature of the French and Occitan Middle Ages: Eleventh to Fifteenth Centuries, ed. Deborah M. Sinnreich-Levi and Ian
S. Laurie, 199–208. Dictionary of Literary
Biography, vol. 208. Detroit: Gale, 1999.
chal, Chantal A., ed. In Quest of Marie
Mare
de France: A Twelfth-Century Poet. Lewiston,
NY: Mellen, 1992.

WINTER ELLIOTT

MARXISM
Karl Marx wrote romantic love poems
as a young man, studied philosophy,
and acknowledged that his greatest intellectual inspiration came from the
beautifully abstract work of G. W. F.
Hegel on balance and equilibrium.
Later, the work of Marx on what the
nineteenth century called “political
economy” became heavily grounded
upon concrete observation, early statistical survey work, and analyses in the
new science of sociology established by
Auguste Comte. Thus all of his and
Friedrich Engels’s theories for the values associated with labor and for the
inevitable breakup of capitalist hegemonies conveyed the persuasive sense of
fact.
Nevertheless, the Marxian theories
for change in the economy and in society have always been mainly utopian—
in both senses of that favorite word for
science ﬁction and fantasy readers.
The theories suggest both that there
can be “the good society” and that this
society does not now exist—that it is as
yet “no place” (which is what utopia’s
Greek roots, ou “not” þ topos “place,” literally means). The twentieth century
actually witnessed this sense of insubstantiality in the collapse of Marxist
economies built on the theories of collectivist labor and historical inevitability in major nations such as Russia
and China.
One dynamic in Marxian thought,
insofar as it is utopian thought, has to
do with the translation of theory and
survey data into material practice.
From the several labor congresses following the wonderful and frightening
events of the Paris Commune in the
1870s to the small meetings of New
York City fan groups of hopeful revolutionaries such as the Futurians in the
1930s, the question has continually
215
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

been whether or not the revolution
ﬁnally can be located in the solid materiality of some future. But when that
future comes, it is often somehow not
like the theory at all. And so the question of translation remains open.
Marx was a devoted husband and
family man with the nice sense of progress from his youthful romanticism
that these domestic values carry, and
one of the major interests in sociology
for Engels had to do with marriage and
the role of the family, for which he
gathered massive data as he managed
his father’s textile ﬁrm in England. The
important topic of the family as a key
unit in any economy or society can be
used as a point of translation for Marxian utopian theories to the real world.
And that is also the case for some of
the more interesting writers who have
been inﬂuenced by Marx and Engels
when they write about the role of
women and the family. Emma Goldman, Marge Piercy, and others strongly
suggest that the utopian future that
Marxian materialistic determinism is
moving toward will be a classless and
even genderless mix so that, in fact,
the family will have disappeared as
other capitalist institutions will disappear. The brilliant Marxian teacher and
writer of the 1930s Simone Weil makes
the link between Sigmund Freud’s analysis of personality and the analyses of
deterministic materialism.
Finally then, and to end on a note of
paradox, Marxian utopists are often
forced into a sardonic tone of sneering
and satire because of the huge discrepancy between what they hope for in
revolution and the material reality
itself. This “translation gap” that produces the hard tone can be seen in ﬁctions as far removed from one another
as Frederik Pohl and Cyril Kornbluth’s
The Space Merchants (1952) and Piercy’s
Woman on the Edge of Time (1976). The
216
................

Volume 2: Entries

inevitability of history ought to make
such ﬁctions hopeful. But the tone in
them is often one of bitterness and
frenzy, as in Jonathan Swift. He had
hoped in the early eighteenth century
for a Christian and “human” revolution.
Marxists hope for an economic and
social revolution. Revolutionary speakers in both, however, must settle for
less with some sardonic irony.
Further Readings
Berlin, Isaiah. Karl Marx. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1959.
Delphy, Christine. “Close to Home: A Materialist Analysis of Women’s Oppression.”
In Women and Romance, ed. Susan Ostrov
Weisser, 154–56. New York: New York
University Press, 2001.
Hassler, Donald M. “Swift, Pohl, and Kornbluth: Publicists Anatomize Newness.” In
Political Science Fiction, ed. Donald Hassler
and Clyde Wilcox, 18–25. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1997.
Marx, Karl. Writings of the Young Marx on Philosophy and Society. Ed. and trans. Loyd D.
Easton and Kurt H. Guddat. New York:
Doubleday, 1967.
McLellan, David. Marx before Marxism. New
York: Harper & Row, 1970.

DONALD M. HASSLER

THE MATRIX
The Matrix is a 1999 science ﬁction ﬁlm
written and directed by Larry and Andy
Wachowski. It was followed by two
feature-length
sequels—The
Matrix
Reloaded (2003) and The Matrix Revolutions (2003)—as well as a series of nine
animated short ﬁlms, released as The
Animatrix (2003), and the computer
games Enter the Matrix (2003), The Matrix
Online (2004), and The Matrix: Path of Neo
(2005).
The ﬁlm describes a future Earth in
which, in order to subdue humans so
that they can be grown and their neural electricity and body heat can be
used as an energy source, a race of

McCaffrey, Anne
sentient machines has created an artiﬁcial reality, the Matrix, into which
adult
humans
are
permanently
plugged, unaware that they are a
harvested crop or even that it is no longer 1999. The battle against the
machines is led by a group of freed and
“homegrown” (nonharvested) humans.
The “One” to save the humans is identiﬁed as Thomas Anderson/Neo (Keanu
Reeves). Freed by Morpheus (Laurence
Fishburne) and his crew, including Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss), Neo’s battle
with the machines most often takes
the form of battles with Agent Smith
(Hugo Weaving). At the end of The Matrix, Neo accepts that he is the One,
which he realizes through his emotional relationship with Trinity. At the
end of the ﬁlm trilogy, Neo sacriﬁces
himself in order to achieve a truce
between the humans and machines.
The Matrix contains numerous references to Hong Kong action ﬁlms, Japanese animation, Eastern philosophy,
and Western thinkers, most notably
Jean Baudrillard. Perhaps the greatest
debt the ﬁlm has is to cyberpunk; the
notion of the Matrix has its origins in
William Gibson’s Neuromancer (1984).
The Matrix was an unexpected commercial and critical success—but the two
sequels failed to live up to the promise
of the ﬁrst, which won four Oscars and
two British Academy Film and Television Awards (BAFTAs). Like other cyberpunk texts, The Matrix draws heavily
upon ﬁlm noir tropes, with a tortured
male protagonist, dark cityscapes, and
a femme fatale. While Trinity complicates the notion of the femme fatale in
that her identity outside of the Matrix
is that of a handmaiden serving Neo,
women in the ﬁlm are most often sexualized; for example, a beautiful
blonde woman in a tight red dress is
used to teach Neo the dangers of the
Matrix.

Further Readings
Clover, Joshua. The Matrix. London: British
Film Institute, 2004.
Gillis, Stacy, ed. The Matrix Trilogy: Cyberpunk
Reloaded. London: Wallﬂower, 2005.
Haslam, Jason. “Coded Discourse: Romancing the (Electronic) Shadow in The Matrix.”
College Literature 32, no. 3 (Summer 2005):
92–115.
Kimball, A. Samuel. “Not Begetting the
Future: Technological Autochthony, Sexual Reproduction and the Mythic Structure of The Matrix.” Journal of Popular
Culture 35, no. 3 (Winter 2001): 175–203.
Wegenstein, Bernadette. “Shooting Up
Heroines.” In Reload: Rethinking Women
and Cyberculture, ed. Mary Flanagan and
Austin Booth, 332–54. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2002.

JASON HASLAM

MCCAFFREY, ANNE

(1926– )

Anne McCaffrey, an award-winning
American writer, is best known for her
Dragonriders of Pern series. She is a
groundbreaking science ﬁction writer
who was the ﬁrst woman to win both
of the genre’s coveted awards, the Nebula, presented by the Science Fiction
and Fantasy Writers of America
(SFWA), and the Hugo, presented annually by World Science Fiction Convention members. In addition to dozens of
other awards, she was named a Grand
Master in 2005 by the SFWA. Only the
twenty-second writer to be so recognized, McCaffrey is the third woman to
receive this prestigious honor. An important and inﬂuential writer who has
helped many other woman authors by
cowriting books with them, McCaffrey’s
effect has been widespread and positive. In addition to the Dragonriders of
Pern, consisting of twenty-one volumes
as of 2008, she has also written a number of other series including the Tower
and the Hive series and the Brain Ship
series.
217
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

McCaffrey was among the ﬁrst writers to develop strong female protagonists, and her combination of
romance and science ﬁction proved to
be tremendously popular. Many of her
characters have special skills, such as
singing or second sight, that are presented as scientiﬁcally plausible. She
focused on female protagonists and
women’s
issues—childrearing,
for
example—at a time when women protagonists were largely absent from the
genre. One of the most popular writers
of a group of women who began publishing science ﬁction in the 1960s and
1970s, McCaffrey helped femininize the
genre. She challenged traditional ideas
about women and science and women
as heroes and brought great emotional
depth to science ﬁction.
Inverting the stereotypical association of women with the natural world,
McCaffrey makes it positive, a strength
for her female characters. Her dragons,
for example, are genetically engineered telepathic creatures that bond
with their humans. The dragons enable
humans to live on Pern, providing an
alternative to machine transportation
and a way for the colonists to ﬁght a
life-threatening spore. In making dragons—previously featured almost exclusively as evil beasts—into attractive
companions, McCaffrey reshaped our
cultural image of them. Signiﬁcantly,
she did so in a structure in which
queen dragons were the species’ leaders. Bonding with female humans, the
dragons enable women on Pern to
assume positions of leadership.
McCaffrey helped popularize the
mental powers that have become one
of science ﬁction’s mainstays. Her creation of characters with psionic talents
in the Dragonriders and Tower and
Hive series, or powerful voices, as in
the Crystal Singer series, shows misﬁts
who become valuable to their societies
218
................

Volume 2: Entries

and ﬁnd self-worth in their usefulness
through their special powers. The short
story that later developed into the
Tower and Hive series reveals McCaffrey’s view on such qualities: the title is
“A Womanly Talent,” even though the
talent is one available to males.
See also: Lost-Colony Stories.
Further Readings
McCaffrey, Todd J. Dragonholder. New York:
Del Rey, 1999.
Roberts, Robin. Anne McCaffrey: A Critical
Companion. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 1996.
———. Anne McCaffrey: A Life with Dragons.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi,
2007.
The Worlds of Anne McCaffrey [online].
Http://www.annemccaffrey.net.

ROBIN ROBERTS

MCCARTHY, SHAWNA

(1954– )

Shawna McCarthy is an American editor, the ﬁrst woman to win a Hugo
Award for her work. She has been
active in science ﬁction publishing
since the late 1970s and has exerted a
stylistic inﬂuence on the ﬁeld through
her work with a number of different
publications. McCarthy began working
in genre publishing as an assistant to
George Scithers, the ﬁrst editor of Isaac
Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine. At Asimov’s, McCarthy soon moved up from
editorial assistant to managing editor,
and in 1983 she became the publication’s editor-in-chief. Her tenure as editor of Asimov’s was relatively brief,
lasting only until 1985, but her work
earned her the 1984 Hugo in the Best
Professional Editor category.
McCarthy’s own description of her
time as editor-in-chief indicates that
she purposefully chose to move the
magazine in a different artistic direction; she described the ﬁction published under Scithers’s leadership as

McHugh, Maureen
being much more in the direct tradition
of Isaac Asimov’s writing—namely,
relying on straightforward plots, transparent prose, and a Golden Age sensibility. Under McCarthy’s direction, the
magazine began publishing ﬁction that
took more risks, both in terms of content and style. While her editorial
choices provoked some measure of
controversy, they also proved successful in terms of modernizing both the
readership and the image of the
publication.
McCarthy left Asimov’s in 1985 and
worked for several years in book publishing, ﬁrst at Bantam Spectra and then at
Workman Press. In 1993, she began
working as a literary agent with Scovil
Chichak Galen, and in 1999 she began
the McCarthy Agency. As a literary
agent, McCarthy has represented Sarah
Zettel, Tanith Lee, Nalo Hopkinson,
and other signiﬁcant feminist writers.
She has also been editor of Realms of Fantasy since the magazine’s launch in 1994.
While sometimes criticized for its glossy
and oversexualized covers, Realms has
developed, under McCarthy’s leadership,
a reputation for showcasing new writers.
McCarthy has been married to fantasy
artist Wayne Douglas Barlow since 1983;
they have two children.

SUSAN MARIE GROPPI

MCHUGH, MAUREEN (1959– )
Maureen McHugh is an award-winning American science ﬁction writer
who is celebrated for her sensitive,
nuanced depiction of ordinary people
whose lives—and often loves—are distorted by oppressive social conditions.
Her ﬁrst novel and best-known work,
China Mountain Zhang (1992), won the
Locus, Tiptree, and Lambda awards,
was nominated for Hugo and Nebula
awards, and is admired for its textured
and nonsensationalist portrayal of a

homosexual protagonist. Set in a nearfuture China, the novel follows the
efforts of an architect, Zhang, to integrate love and art amid the pressures
of social and sexual conformity in Chinese society. McHugh’s novels Mission
Child (1998) and Nekropolis (2001) also
engage themes of alternative gender
roles and taboo relationships.
McHugh’s exploration of how oppression shapes identity moves beyond
gender and sexuality to also consider oppressions based on class (Nekropolis), colonialism (“The Cost to Be
Wise,” 1996), race and ethnicity (“The
Lincoln Train,” 1995), and disability
(“Presence,” 2002). Far from presenting
a dogmatic attention to issues, however, McHugh’s ﬁction is known for its
subtle, realistic depiction of human
relationships. Her richly drawn characters and elegant prose have earned her
comparison to Ursula K. Le Guin: The
two writers share an interest in how
small, imagined technological changes
allow exploration of contemporary
social realities.
In Nekropolis, for instance, developed
from the previously published short
story “Nekropolis,” McHugh introduces
the concept of “jessing,” a procedure
that creates a biochemical bond
between servant and employer. This
condition helps account for the loyalty
and even love that the main character,
a domestic servant, feels for her master, despite the oppression and mistreatment she suffers. But, of course,
loyalty like this is visible in the contemporary world without technology, and
McHugh uses its literal embodiment to
explore how even people dominated by
an external power still struggle to
maintain human agency. Octavia Butler’s work employs similar metaphors
as it explores the complex effects of
race on relationships in the contemporary United States.
219
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

McHugh’s work spans a wide range
of science ﬁction motifs. Her short stories have won or been nominated for
several major awards, and many are
collected in Mothers and Other Monsters
(2005), which in addition to science ﬁction includes several stories with elements of fantasy (such as “Ancestor
Money” and “Laika Comes Back Safe”).
See also: “Intersections of Class and
Gender” (vol. 1); “Intersections of Race and
Gender” (vol. 1); “Speculating Sexual Identities” (vol. 1).

Further Readings
Kandel, Michael. “Twelve Thoughts, Not All
Equally Important, on Reading Maureen F.
McHugh’s China Mountain Zhang and Half
the Day Is Night.” New York Review of Science
Fiction 7, no. 5 (January 1995): 21–22.
Maureen F. McHugh [online]. Http://my.en.
com/mcq/.
“Maureen F. McHugh: Family Matters.”
Locus, no. 465 (October 1999). Excerpted
online
at
http://www.locusmag.com/
1999/Issues/10/McHugh.html.
McHugh, Maureen. “No Feeling of Falling”
[blog]. Http://maureenmcq.blogspot.com.
Worthington, Marjorie. “Bodies That Matter:
Virtual Translations and Transmissions
of the Physical.” Critique 43, no. 2 (Winter
2002): 192–208.
Zhou, Yupei. “Beyond Ethnicity and Gender: China
Mountain Zhang’s Transcendent Techniques.”
Extrapolation 42, no. 4 (Winter 2001): 374–83.

ALFRED E. GUY JR.

MCINTYRE, VONDA (1948– )
Vonda N. McIntyre is an American science ﬁction writer whose work includes
short stories, novellas, novels, and
essays. Praised for the imaginative
detail, optimism, and fully realized
female characters in her work, McIntyre’s work has been compared to
Ursula K. Le Guin’s. McIntyre’s work
is noted for its frequent treatment
of the biologically or technologically
220
................

Volume 2: Entries

enhanced human and alien body. Her
work is often called feminist science
ﬁction because she quite frequently
writes about female outsiders who
must choose between comfortable conformity within society or a solitary path
that allows them ﬁdelity to their true
selves. Nontraditional sexual relationships and other unusual freedoms of
sexuality and gender also occur in
McIntyre’s works.
McIntyre holds a B.S. from the honors program of the University of Washington and pursued a year of graduate
work in genetics before turning to writing full-time. The birth of her proliﬁc
career is often linked to the Clarion Science Fiction Writers’ Workshop in 1970.
After successfully publishing several
short stories in Analog Science Fiction/
Science Fact, the Magazine of Fantasy and
Science Fiction, and Quark/4, McIntyre’s
debut novel, The Exile Waiting, was published in 1975. Her second novel,
Dreamsnake, won both the Nebula and
the Hugo awards for best novel in 1978.
During the 1980s, McIntyre was hired
to adapt the screenplays of three Star
Trek ﬁlms, The Wrath of Khan, The Search
for Spock, and The Voyage Home, into
novels; these treatments quickly
became best-sellers. The audiotaped
version of her adaptation of The Voyage
Home (narrated by George Takei and
Leonard Nimoy) was nominated for a
Grammy Award in 1986. In 1994, McIntyre accepted a fellowship with the
Chesterﬁeld Film Company’s Writers
Film Project, cosponsored by Universal
Studios and Amblin Entertainment.
During this time, she wrote a screenplay that would later become her sixteenth full-length work, The Moon and
the Sun, a novel which won her a second Nebula in 1997.
In 2000, McIntyre served as the Evans
Chair at Evergreen State College in
Washington, a program that links

McKillip, Patricia A.
academic programs with communities
of artists. McIntyre has also twice
been writer-in-residence at Clarion
West, the Paciﬁc Northwest’s version of
the writer’s workshop that gave McIntyre her start in professional science
ﬁction writing. She has been a visiting
author at several colleges, universities,
and professional conferences and
has judged numerous contests for creative writing and science ﬁction. She is
known in writing circles as a generous
supporter of aspiring writers, endangered species, and civil liberties.
Further Readings
Jameson, Fredric. “Science Fiction as a Spatial Genre: Generic Discontinuities and
the Problem of Figuration in Vonda McIntyre’s The Exile Waiting.” Science-Fiction
Studies 14, no. 1 (March 1987): 44–59.
Kilgore, De Witt Douglas. “Changing
Regimes: Vonda N. McIntyre’s Parodic
Astrofuturism.” Science Fiction Studies 27,
no. 2 (2000): 256–77.
Wolmark, Jenny. “The Destabilisation of
Gender in Vonda McIntyre’s Superluminal.”
In Science Fiction Roots and Branches: Contemporary Critical Approaches, ed. Rhys
Garnett, 168–82. New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 1990.
Wood, Diane S. “Breaking the Code: Vonda
N. McIntyre’s Dreamsnake.” Extrapolation
31, no. 1 (Spring 1990): 63–72.

MICHELLE LAFRANCE

MCKILLIP, PATRICIA A.

(1948– )

Patricia McKillip is an American fantasist who holds an M.A. in English literature. She began writing fantasy
because, despite her great love for his
work, she was dissatisﬁed with J. R. R.
Tolkien’s portrayal of female characters. Although her writing has received
little critical attention until recently,
she has won several awards and been
a guest of honor at WisCon. With few
exceptions, McKillip’s two dozen novels

and numerous short stories are genre
fantasy, often featuring women in the
roles of wizards, warriors, rulers, and
heroes.
The best known of McKillip’s work is
the Riddle of Stars trilogy: The RiddleMaster of Hed (1976), The Heir of Sea and
Fire (1977), and Harpist in the Wind
(1979). This epic fantasy features the
quests of the peaceful farmer-prince
Morgon and Raederle, who is initially
Morgon’s love object but, in the second
volume, becomes a hero who comes
into her own power. Although McKillip
usually resolves her plots nonviolently,
she has no problem with putting
swords in the hands of female characters; for example, it is the young Lyra
who teaches Morgon how to wield a
sword. And in the short story “The Fellowship of the Dragon” (1992), the
theme of female friendships is
explored through the relationship
between ﬁve warrior companions.
Wizards of all ages and genders are
prominent in McKillip’s work. The protagonist of The Forgotten Beasts of Eld
(1974), winner of the ﬁrst World Fantasy Award, is a young female wizard,
Sybel, who leaves the isolation of her
garden after a near-rape to become
involved in civil war between her new
husband’s family and the father of the
child she has raised.. The Sorceress and
the Cygnet (1991) features another
female wizard, Nyx, who performs
morally ambiguous acts in her quest
for knowledge.
McKillip often draws on the traditions of fairy tales and folklore, as in
Winter Rose (1996) and its sequel Solstice
Wood (2006), an urban fantasy. Both
works feature a powerful goddess ﬁgure who impedes the hero’s path but is
not an evil force; similar characters
include the Queen of the Wood in The
Book of Atrix Wolfe (1995), Faey in
Ombria in Shadow (2002), a World
221
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Fantasy Award winner, and the Baba
Yaga–inspired witch of In the Forests of
Serre (2003).
How men see women is an explicit
theme in much of McKillip’s work: a
male artist reﬂecting on his muse, a
soldier denigrating the woman who
guards enchanted treasure, history
misremembering the gender of a longdead queen. However, McKillip’s female
characters succeed in both public and
private worlds, able to combine love
and work without need for sacriﬁce or
disguise.
See also: “WisCon” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Mains, Christine. “Bridging World and Story:
Patricia McKillip’s Reluctant Heroes.” Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts 16, no. 1
(Spring 2005): 37–48.
———. “Having It All: The Female Hero’s
Quest for Love and Power in Patricia
McKillip’s Riddle-Master Trilogy.” Extrapolation 46, no. 1 (Spring 2005): 23–35.
Pilinovsky, Helen. “The Mother of All
Witches: Baba Yaga and Brume in Patricia
McKillip’s In the Forests of Serre.” Extrapolation 46, no. 1 (Spring 2005): 36–50.
Senior, William A., ed. Special Issue on Patricia McKillip. Journal of the Fantastic in the
Arts 16, no. 3 (Fall 2005).

CHRISTINE MAINS

MCKINLEY, [JENNIFER] ROBIN
[CAROLYN] (1952– )
Robin McKinley is an award- winning
American author of fantasy. Her novel
Sunshine (2003), a vampire novel set in
a future history after “voodoo wars”
leave humans struggling for survival,
won the 2004 Mythopoeic Fantasy
Award for adult literature. The second
published book in her acclaimed Damar
series, The Hero and the Crown (1984),
won the 1985 Newbery Medal, and
The Blue Sword (1982) was named a
Newbery Honor Book in 1983. McKinley’s
222
................

Volume 2: Entries

fantasies for young adults are popular
among her readers and are often
included as assigned reading in middle schools and junior highs.
McKinley was born in Warren, Ohio,
in 1952. Her father served in the Navy,
and so the family moved often. She
graduated from Bowdoin College in
Maine in 1975, and her ﬁrst novel,
Beauty: A Retelling of the Story of Beauty
and the Beast, was accepted for publication in 1978. She has worked as an editor, a bookstore clerk, a teacher, and a
barn manager on a horse farm. She
and her husband, Peter Dickinson, currently live in England.
As a reader of fantasy from childhood, McKinley draws on legends, fairy
tales, and folktales for her novels. The
Outlaws of Sherwood (1988), a retelling of
Robin Hood in a more realistic and
character-driven mode, features a Maid
Marian who can outshoot Robin (who is
in fact not that good an archer); a
number of major narrative threads
focus on female outlaws who are
original to McKinley’s tale. Deerskin
(1993), a revisioning of Charles Perrault’s “Donkeyskin,” is a dark fantasy
novel. The original fairy tale is one often ignored or at least edited heavily in
modern anthologies because the plot
concerns a father’s incestuous rape of
his daughter after her mother’s death.
In McKinley’s powerful novel, the protagonist, Princess Lissar, escapes after
her father rapes her. She is aided by a
hound, given as a gift by Prince Ossin,
and by the Lady, a powerful spirit who
gifts her with healing, a new name,
and a magical deerskin dress. Lissar is
seen by others as a mythical ﬁgure
because of her connection to animals
and the help she offers others.
McKinley’s rich novels tend to focus
on adolescents, primarily women, who
learn and grow into courage, honor,
and not only romance but loving

Merril, Judith
partnerships. She has written two novels based on the “Beauty and the Beast”
fairy tale, both praised for their feminist approach: the ﬁrst was her ﬁrst
novel, Beauty (1978, reprinted 1993); the
second is Rose Daughter (1997). Maddy,
in The Stone Fey (1985), deals with the
complexity of loving both a stone fey
, Donal. In the Damar
and her ﬁance
novels, Harry and the legendary Aerin
both struggle to move away from their
clumsy adolescence and learn their
warrior’s skills. McKinley identiﬁes as a
feminist and says in interviews that
she chooses to address concerns of
gender in her stories written for girls
and women because of her own life
experiences.
Further Readings
Robin McKinley [online]. Http://www.
robinmckinley.com.
Rutledge, Amelia A. “Robin McKinley’s Deerskin: Challenging Narcissisms.” Marvels &
Tales 15, no. 2 (2001): 168–82.
Woolsey, Daniel P. “The Realm of Fairy
Story: J. R. R. Tolkien and Robin McKinley’s Beauty.” Children’s Literature in Education 22, no. 2 (June 1991): 129–35.
Hains, Maryellen. “Beauty and the Beast:
20th Century Romance?” Merveilles & Contes 3, no. 1 (May 1989): 75–83.

ROBIN ANNE REID

MERRIL, JUDITH

(1923–1997)

“Judith Merril” was the pen name of
Judith Josephine Grossman, an American science ﬁction writer and political
activist. She was one of the few women
writing science ﬁction during the late
1940s and 1950s, and most of her writing centered on female characters, a
rarity at the time. Merrill published
three novels and numerous short stories and edited many anthologies of
science ﬁction stories, including Year’s
Best volumes for Dell for the years 1956
and 1957. She was named author

emeritus of the Science Fiction and
Fantasy Writers of America for 1997.
Merril was one of the few female
members of the Futurians, a group of
New York science ﬁction fans and
authors who also shared an interest in
radical
politics;
other
members
included Isaac Asimov, Cyril M.
Kornbluth, and Merril’s second husband, Frederik Pohl. Merril’s short story
“That Only a Mother” (1948), told from
a female point of view, is typical of her
early work. It takes place in a future
galactic suburbia similar in social relations to the postwar United States: men
go to work as scientists, while women
stay home to keep house and have
babies. However, in Merril’s imagined
world, wide-scale exposure to radiation
has led to an upsurge in mutant births,
and the crux of the story is the differing reactions of a mother and father to
a deformed child. Merril’s only solo
novel, Shadow on the Hearth (1951), is
also told from a woman’s point of view,
in this case that of a housewife who
must care for herself and her daughters after a nuclear attack. Merril wrote
the novels Outpost Mars and Gunner
Cade in 1952 with Kornbluth (as “Cyril
Judd”) and published a number of short
stories in 1948–59, but did very little
original writing after 1960.
Merrill was a book reviewer for the
Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction
and the editor of numerous science ﬁction anthologies: in these roles, she
helped expand the deﬁnition of science
ﬁction to include “soft” science ﬁction
focused on psychology and relationships, as well as science ﬁction incorporating
experimental
form
and
content. Merril had been politically
active from her teenage years and in
1968 immigrated to Canada partly as a
protest against the Vietnam War. She
settled in Toronto and donated her
book collection to the Toronto Public
223
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Library; it is now known as the Merril
Collection of Science Fiction, Speculation, and Fantasy. Merril’s autobiography, Better to Have Loved, written with
her granddaughter, Emily Pohl-Weary,
won a Hugo Award in 2003.
Further Readings
Cummins, Elizabeth. “Judith Merril: A Link
with the New Wave—Then and Now.”
Extrapolation 36, no. 3 (1995): 198–209.
LeBlanc, Michael. “Judith Merril and Isaac
Asimov’s Quest to Save the Future.” Foundation 35, no. 98 (2006): 59–73.
Merril, Judith, and Emily Pohl-Weary. Better
to Have Loved: The Life of Judith Merril.
Toronto: Between the Lines, 2002.
Yaszek, Lisa. “Stories ‘That Only a Mother’
Could Write: Midcentury Peace Activism,
Maternalist Politics, and Judith Merril’s
Early Fiction.” National Women’s Studies
Association Journal 16, no. 2 (2004): 70–97.

SARAH BOSLAUGH

MIEVILLE
, CHINA (1972– )

ville is an award-winning
China Mie
British author of science ﬁction and
fantasy whose reputation has grown
primarily out of a series of three novels
set in a genre-blurred setting known as
Bas-Lag. The ﬁrst, Perdido Street Station
(2000), won the Arthur C. Clarke Award,
and the two latter Bas-Lag novels, The
Scar (2002) and The Iron Council (2004),
developed different ideas and settings
ville’s
within the Bas-Lag world. Mie
very ﬁrst novel was a contemporary
fantasy, King Rat (1998), and his latest,
Un Lun Dun (2007), is a young adult fantasy set in a world with an unseen London, UnLondon. He has one collection
of short ﬁction, Looking for Jake (2005).
ville’s work is associated with the
Mie
New Weird, a contemporary movement within fantastic literature that
has not been clearly deﬁned but which
involves rejection of the genres of
standard commercial fantasy and
224
................

Volume 2: Entries

transcending the limitations of genre.
ville’s novels, The Scar and
Two of Mie
Un Lun Dun, have female protagonists.
In The Scar, Bellis Coldwine is the central character, the action of the novel
following her expedition that gets kidnapped/press-ganged by Armada, a
ﬂoating pirate city. Bellis works to try to
save her home city, New Crobuzon,
even though she was ﬂeeing it. She is
described as cold and calculating, but
also intelligent and insightful. In Un
Lun Dun, two preadolescent girls stumble into the fantastic “abcity” called
UnLondon, which is threatened by sentient smog. Deeba’s friend Zanna is recognized as the “chosen one” (Shwazzy)
who will save UnLondon, but when
Zanna is incapacitated, Deeba presses
on to help save the weird city, in deﬁance of prophecy.
ville also feature
Other novels by Mie
a range of female characters. Perdido
Street Station is set in the city New Crobuzon; the most important female
character is Lin, the Khepri lover of the
main character, a scientist named
Isaac. The Khepri are a race of mute
scarab-headed women who communicate with sign language or writing. The
men of the species are nonsentient
scarabs who mate with the head scarab
of the females. Lin is disgusted by the
males of her species and seeks a
human lover.
Iron
Council
centers
on
the
“renegopolis” of the Iron Council, a
train whose workers rebelled against
their corporate bosses and became independent, chased across the continent
by the forces of their former superiors.
The most prominent women of the
council are Ann-Hari and the criminal
known as Toro. Ann-Hari is a campfollower-turned-revolutionary who has
an on-and-off relationship with the
bisexual main character, a man named
Judah Low. Ann-Hari violates the social

Mirrlees, Hope
taboo against sexual relations with the
Remade (criminals who are transformed by science and magic, gaining
mechanical or nonstandard biological
body parts), helping to bring the Remade
to equal status in the moving city.
Further Readings
ville’s The Scar:
Christakos, N. G. “China Mie
Pulp Weird Fiction Revisited.” Studies in
Modern Horror 3 (2004): 3–6.
Freedman, Carl. “To the Perdido Street Station: The Representation of Revolution in
ville’s Iron Council.” Extrapolation
China Mie
46, no. 2 (Summer 2005): 235–48.
———. “Towards a Marxist Urban Sublime:
ville’s King Rat.” ExtrapReading China Mie
olation 44, no. 4 (Winter 2003): 395–408.
Gordon, Joan. “Hybridity, Heterotopia, and
ville’s Perdido Street
Mateship in China Mie
Station.” Science Fiction Studies 30, no. 3
(November 2003): 456–76.
ville, China. “Reveling in Genre: An
Mie
ville.” Interview
Interview with China Mie
by Joan Gordon. Science Fiction Studies 30,
no. 3 (November 2003): 355–73.

MICHAEL UNDERWOOD

MIRRLEES, HOPE (1887–1978)
Helen Hope Mirrlees is an English
author whose one fantasy novel, Lud-inthe-Mist (1926), has risen from obscurity
to acknowledgment as a signiﬁcant contribution to the genre. A translator,
poet, and novelist, Mirrlees’s circle
included Virginia Woolf and T. S. Eliot.
Her
greatest
inﬂuence,
however,
was Jane Ellen Harrison, after whose
death in 1928, Mirrlees wrote only
sporadically.
A quotation from Harrison opens Ludin-the-Mist, with the reminder that the
siren-songs of life, obeyed or rejected,
will still be sung. Mirrlees draws broadly
on European fairy tale traditions to create her landscape around this theme of
longing, adding the urbane wit of the intellectual bluestocking in the narrative

voice. Lud-in-the-Mist is in the country
of Dorimare, which borders uneasily on
Fairyland, while its comfortable, complacent citizens reject the wildness of
their neighbors, securing themselves in
everyday concerns. The novel moves
casually from comedy to mystery, with
touches of the gothic, as the plot balances the lure of forbidden fairy fruit
against the demands of an unsolved
murder. The crisis that leads Mayor Nathaniel Chanticleer into Fairyland both
frees and unsettles his people, as the
barriers between the countries are
swept aside.
The simplicity of the tale is deceptive, and the light storytelling style
highlights uneasy aspects it seems at
ﬁrst to gloss. Only through distress
does Chanticleer realize that he loves
his son, while his daughter and her rescue from Fairyland remain almost incidental. The Dorimarites grow from
prosaic merchants, discussing fairy
matters through euphemism, to hosts
welcoming their alarming neighbors
into their midst. Yet just how Chanticleer resolves matters is never
revealed, nor does the reader witness
the ﬁrst meeting of these opposites.
This handling of the reader is subtle,
illustrating the depth of Mirrlees’s technique. Her richness of language, with
vivid descriptions and overblown
aphorisms, is balanced neatly by the
ironic persona of the narrator, whose
comments to the reader continue to
the ﬁnal sentence, warning against the
deceptions of the written word. It
becomes apt, therefore, that the
author’s creative imagination awakens,
but never fully satisﬁes, the reader’s
own longings. Rather than offering reconciliation between the mundane and
the fantastic, by evading revelation the
novel becomes instead a gentle joke at
the reader’s expense. Like Chanticleer,
who remains unsettled despite his
225
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

successful venture, the reader must
accept that there is never a completely
happy ending.
Lud-in-the-Mist, ﬁrst published in 1926,
appeared again in 1970 in the Ballantine
Adult Fantasy series. Although published without Mirrlees’s permission,
this edition awoke new interest in the
novel, which was published again, by
Del Ray, in 1977. Until recently, scholarship on Mirrlees’s work was limited.
However, she has contemporary champions in Neil Gaiman, who wrote a new
introduction for the Gollancz Fantasy
Masterworks edition of 2001, and
Michael Swanwick, whose articles on
Mirrlees include a comprehensive analysis of her life and work.
Further Readings
Gaiman, Neil. “Curiosities.” Review of Ludin-the-Mist, by Hope Mirrlees. Fantasy &
Science Fiction 97, no. 1 (1999): 162.
Swanwick, Michael. “Hope-in-the-mist.”
Foundation 87 (Spring 2003): 14–48.
———. “The Lady Who Wrote Lud-in-theMist.” Inﬁnity Plus, 2000 [online], http://
www.inﬁnityplus.co.uk/introduces/mirrlees.
htm.

ELAINE WALKER

MITCHISON, NAOMI HALDANE
(1897–1998)
Naomi Mitchison was a proliﬁc British
writer who published more than eighty
books and numerous periodical articles
during her century of life. She was a
member of various literary and cultural
circles and befriended such ﬁgures as
Andrew Lang and Aldous Huxley.
Mitchison created many strong female
protagonists, both in her adult ﬁction
and her children’s stories. Her ﬁction
and nonﬁction alike demonstrate a
ﬁrm commitment to social justice,
women’s rights, and her gradual conviction that the tribe is the ideal social
unit, although this last is more evident
226
................

Volume 2: Entries

in her fantasy and historical ﬁction
than in her science ﬁction.
Her major work, The Corn King and the
Spring Queen (1931), is a novel set in
Hellenistic Scythia, Greece, and Egypt.
The protagonist, Erif Der, is a witch
engaged in a general cultural shift from
the primitive agricultural religion, in
which the titular characters affect the
growing cycle through ritual magic, to
the more cosmopolitan and rational
worldview represented by Greek philosophy. This novel precedes Marion
Zimmer Bradley’s similarly conceived
novel The Mists of Avalon (1983) by more
than ﬁfty years.
Mitchison’s young adult novel Travel
Light (1952) presents a young woman
saved from her stepmother by a shapeshifting nurse who raises her as an
infant among bears and sends her to
be with the dragons when the bears go
into hibernation. Halla, the girl, survives the killing of her dragon foster
parent and, with a magical cloak from
the All-father—apparently Odin—travels
to Byzantium. There she meets descendants of The Corn King’s Erif Der. In both
cases, the evolution of human culture
and consciousness is shown to develop
through different stages, and a strong
female protagonist uses magic and
strength of will to succeed while passing through several cultures.
To the Chapel Perilous (1955) sets the
Grail quest of Arthurian literature in
the context of two journalists, one male
and one female, who camp outside the
chapel of the title to get scoops for their
newspapers. The woman’s photographer is a dwarf, similar to those who
populate the medieval French Vulgate
cycle; the novel is a humorous treatment of this material, the element of
the Marvelous being presented in a
quasi-objective journalistic manner.
Three of Mitchison’s works deal
with variations on pregnancy and

Moffett, Judith
reproduction. Memoirs of a Spacewoman
(1962) is narrated by Mary, a space
explorer, whose specialty is communication. Her communications with a
wide array of alien species bring her
into contact with different modes of
cognition arising from widely varying
physiologies and environments. As a
result of a sexual accident with a Martian, Mary gives birth to a haploid
daughter genetically identical to herself. The short story “Mary and Joe”
(1970) features a geneticist, Mary, who
has a daughter, Jaycie, by parthenogenesis. In Mitchison’s Solution Three (1975),
the principle of not needing any chromosomes to reproduce has led to the
widespread practice of cloning.
Further Readings
Benton, Jill. Naomi Mitchison: A Biography.
London: Pandora, 1990.
Calder, Jenni. The Nine Lives of Naomi Mitchison. London, Virago, 1997.

DON RIGGS

MOFFETT, JUDITH

(1942– )

Judith Moffett is an award-winning
American writer of science ﬁction, poetry, literary criticism, and creative
nonﬁction. Her science ﬁction is often
concerned with gender norms, human
sexuality, unorthodox relationships,
feminist understandings of social problems, and teasing out the complexities
within challenging public issues such
as overpopulation and environmental
concerns.
Moffett was born, in Louisville, Kentucky, the daughter of James S. Moffett,
a commercial artist, and Margaret Cowherd Moffett. She began her undergraduate education at Hanover College,
receiving her B.A. in 1964 and continuing on to receive an M.A. from Colorado
State University in 1966. In 1967, she
completed a year of postgraduate study

at the University of Wisconsin–Madison
and received her Ph.D. in 1971 from the
University of Pennsylvania. Moffett
held an assistant professorship at Behrend College, in Erie, Pennsylvania,
from 1971 to 1975 and taught writing
at the University of Iowa in 1977–78. In
1978, she returned to the University of
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia as an assistant professor, continuing to teach
on and off there until 1993.
Moffett has received numerous grants
to support her poetry and translation
work and has been awarded numerous
prizes and honors for her writing. Moffett
is best known, however, as the author of
the science ﬁction novels Pennterra (1987),
The Ragged World (1991), and Time, Like an
Ever-Rolling Stream (1992). Her ﬁrst publication occurred when Ursula K.
Le Guin’s agent placed Moffett’s short
story “Surviving” in the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. This short story
put Moffett on the map of contemporary
science ﬁction authors: it appeared on
the ﬁnal ballot for the Nebula, won the
ﬁrst Theodore Sturgeon Memorial Award
for the best short story published in 1986,
and was reprinted in numerous anthologies. Moffett was named Best New Writer
in 1988 by the John W. Campbell Award
committee. Upon publication, The Ragged
World and Time were listed by The New
York Times as “notable books.” These novels tell the story of evolving relations
between the alien races Hrossa and Hefn
and the humans that encounter them on
Earth and planets that humans have
colonized.
Her nonﬁction works include The
North! To the North! Five Poets of Nineteenth-Century Sweden (2001), a collection of translations of and critical
essays on turn-of-the-twentieth-century Swedish poetry, and Homestead
Year: Back to the Land in Suburbia (1995),
a selection of journal entries detailing
the year she turned her one acre of
227
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

land in the suburbs of Philadelphia into
a self-sustaining farm.
See also: Feminisms; “Speculating Sexual
Identities” (vol. 1).

Further Readings
Mendlesohn, Farah. “The Profession of Science Fiction, 46: Grinding Axes.” Foundation 62 (Winter 1994): 10–21.
Moffett, Judith. “Confessions of a Metamorph.” Kenyon Review 15, no. 4 (Fall
1993): 112–22.
———. Homestead Year: Back to the Land in Suburbia. New York: Lyons & Burford, 1995.

MICHELLE LAFRANCE

MOHANRAJ, MARY ANNE

(1971– )

Mary Anne Mohanraj is an American
writer and editor respected for her
work as an advocate for literary quality
in speculative and erotic ﬁction. She
served as cofounder and editor-in-chief
of the speculative ﬁction webzine
Strange Horizons and founded the Speculative Literature Foundation (SLF), of
which she also became the ﬁrst director. Mohanraj has edited numerous
anthologies of erotica and authored
two short-story collections of her own,
Torn Shapes of Desire (1997) and Silence
and the Word (2004). In 2005, she published Bodies in Motion, a mainstream
novel comprised of interrelated Sri
Lankan immigrant tales.
Born in Sri Lanka in 1971, Mohanraj
immigrated to the United States with
her family when she was two. The majority of her family pursued careers in
medicine, but Mohanraj chose writing
instead. She received a B.A. from the
University of Chicago, an MFA in writing
from Mills College, and a Ph.D. in English
literature from the University of Utah.
Bodies in Motion was her dissertation.
While in college, Mohanraj began to
publish erotic short ﬁction, some of which
had a speculative component, and in 1997
228
................

Volume 2: Entries

she attended Clarion West, the wellknown workshop for writers of speculative
ﬁction. After participating in an eroticafocused workshop the following year,
Mohanraj and others cofounded Clean
Sheets, an online magazine of literary erotica, and Mohanraj became its ﬁrst editorin-chief (1998–2000). In 2000, she used
those skills in founding a second professional online magazine, Strange Horizons,
again becoming the ﬁrst editor-in-chief
(2000–03). Under her leadership, the magazine made a point of emphasizing diversity
and inclusiveness toward traditionally
underrepresented groups. In 2002, Strange
Horizons was nominated for a Hugo Award
for best website. Both magazines continue
to receive critical acclaim.
In January 2004, Mohanraj sent out a
call for those interested in the possibility of forming a literary arts foundation
speciﬁcally geared toward writers of
speculative ﬁction. The SLF was the
result. The SLF offers a short ﬁction
prize, an older writers’ grant, a travel
grant, and a small press cooperative. It
also maintains a comprehensive website with resources for writers, editors,
readers, and academics. In 2005,
Mohanraj founded a second literary organization, DesiLit, to promote South
Asian and diaspora ﬁction.

Further Readings
Mary Anne Mohanraj [online]. Http://www.
mamohanraj.com.
Roy, Sandip. “Sexing Sri Lanka: How a Tamil
Immigrant Girl Grew Up to Become an
Erotica Queen and New Voice in South
Asian Literature.” SFGate, August 11, 2005
[online], http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/
article.cgi?f=/g/a/2005/08/11/apop.DTL.
Sheth, Sumita. “An Interview with Mary
Ann Mohanraj.” Bookslut, November
2005 [online], http://www.bookslut.com/
features/2005_11_007069.php.

SHANNAN PALMA

Moon, Elizabeth

MOON, ELIZABETH

(1945– )

Elizabeth Moon is an American author.
Her near-future novel, The Speed of
Dark, told from the point of view of an
autistic man, won the 2003 Nebula
Award for best novel and was a ﬁnalist
for the Arthur C. Clarke Award.
Another stand-alone novel, Remnant
Population, was a Hugo Award nominee
in 1997. Moon’s other works include
two short-story collections and several
omnibus editions, as well as various
short ﬁction pieces. However, Moon is
best known for her fantasy and science
ﬁction series: the Legend of Paksenarrion, Serrano Legacy, and most
recently, Vatta’s War.
She was born and raised in McAllen,
Texas. After earning a B.A. in history
from Rice University, she joined the
U.S. Marine Corps and served as a lieutenant from 1968 to 1971. She married
Richard Moon, an Army ofﬁcer and
later a medical doctor, in 1969, and
began pursuing her interest in biology,
completing a second bachelor’s degree
in 1975 at University of Texas, San
Antonio. Moon’s adopted son, Michael,
was born in 1983 and has lived with the
Moon family since infancy.
Moon began writing stories and
poems as a child and turned to writing
science ﬁction as a teenager. She
treated her writing as a hobby until her
mid-thirties. In 1985, Moon sold her
ﬁrst story, “Bargains,” to Marion
Zimmer Bradley’s Sword and Sorceress
III anthology, followed quickly by the
sale of “ABCs in Zero G” to Analog, both
of which were published the following
year. Moon’s ﬁrst novel, Sheepfarmer’s
Daughter, was published in 1987; in
addition to winning the Compton Crook
Award in 1989, Sheepfarmer’s Daughter
became the ﬁrst book in her Legend of
Paksenarrion series, quickly followed
by Divided Allegiance (1988) and Oath of

Gold (1989) and two prequels, Surrender
None (1991) and Liar’s Oath (1992), all
set in a Tolkienesque Middle-earth
realm.
Turning her focus from fantasy to
science ﬁction, Moon then collaborated
with Anne McCaffrey on two novels for
the Planet Pirates series and began the
Serrano Legacy books with Hunting
Party (1993). This series, which also
includes Sporting Chance (1994) and Winning Colors (1995), has branched into
four more books featuring Esmay Suiza
(Once a Hero, 1997; Rules of Engagement,
1998; Change of Command, 1999; Against
the Odds, 2000). The series is set in a
futuristic
universe
where
Moon
explores the idea of human rejuvenation—a process that allows the wealthier segments of the population to live
several hundred years—and its ramiﬁcations for society. The Serrano/Suiza
books also depict women in the military who have a greater aptitude for
command than the military men in
their lives.
The Vatta’s War series, which
includes Trading in Danger (2003), Marque and Reprisal (2004), and Engaging the
Enemy (2006), focuses on Kylara Vatta, a
prominent member of the Vatta shipping cartel, who is expelled from her
planet’s space-naval academy shortly
before graduation and then must deal
with attacks on her family from an
unknown source. Vatta’s War delves
into the effects of massive communications losses on spacegoing economies
and planetary defenses.
See also: Neurodiversity.
Further Readings
Blaschke, Jayme Lynn. Voices of Vision: Creators of Science Fiction and Fantasy Speak. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2005.
Moon,
Elizabeth.
“Elizabeth
Moon:
Explorations” [interview]. Locus 52, no. 3
(March 2004): 76–78.
229
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

MoonScape [online]. Http://www.elizabethmoon.com.

NAOMI STANKOW-MERCER

MOORE, C[ATHERINE] L[UCILLE]
(1911–1987)
C. L. Moore is an American author
known for her collaborations with her
ﬁrst husband, Henry Kuttner, as well
as her own ﬁction. She explored feminist ideas and featured strong-willed,
independent female characters in her
work. Moore’s vivid, metaphorical writing helped raise pulp science ﬁction
standards for prose, characterization,
and mood. She wrote a range of fantasy and science ﬁction that bordered
on horror, concerning aliens, mythological creatures, and time travel.
Born in Indianapolis, Indiana, Moore
was a voracious reader due to ill health
during childhood. Dropping out of college to take a secretarial job at an Indianapolis bank, she started the classic
story “Shambleau” while practicing typing. Published in Weird Tales in 1933,
when Moore was twenty-two, the story
is an updating of the Medusa myth that
likens the female to the alien and introduces the morally complex spaceman
Northwest Smith.
“Black God’s Kiss” (Weird Tales, 1934)
introduces Jirel of Joiry, the courageous
warrior maiden who obtains a powerful
weapon to kill the man who has
usurped her castle and kissed her without consent. A striking departure from
the standard male hero, Jirel was a
beautiful female protagonist equal in
battle to men. Moore’s story “No
Woman Born” (Astounding, 1944) questions the nature of human identity
through the tale of a badly burned
dancer resurrected as a robot. Moore
reworked myths and archetypes,
including Lilith, the Amazons, the Living Doll, and the Sirens, to construct
230
................

Volume 2: Entries

feminist themes. Her choice to publish
under her initials (originally to hide the
income from the bank) reﬂected the
largely male readership of the pulps,
but her complex romance plotlines
were popular with those readers.
Any discussion of Moore would be
incomplete without reference to Kuttner because of their numerous collaborations. After a letter from Kuttner to
“Mr. Moore” started their friendship
and collaboration, they married and
moved to New York in 1940, working together or consulting one another on
nearly everything they wrote. Much of
the work that appeared under Kuttner’s
name was cowritten, and their eighteen
pseudonyms included Lewis Padgett,
Keith
Hammond,
and
Lawrence
O’Donnell. Though it is difﬁcult to
parse collaborations for authorship,
Moore is credited with the emotionally
moving, lyrical elements and Kuttner
with the plotting; two of their notable
stories include “Mimsy Were the
Borogoves” (1943) and “Vintage Season”
(1946). Kuttner and Moore moved to
California in 1950 to pursue Hollywood
writing, where Moore earned B.S. (1956)
and M.A. (1964) degrees from the University of Southern California. After
Kuttner’s death in 1958, Moore wrote
screenplays for mystery and other genres, until marrying Thomas Reggie in
1963, whereupon she ceased writing.
Moore’s accomplishments have been
recognized by a 1981 World Fantasy
Lifetime Achievement Award, a 1981
Worldcon guest of honor role, a 1998
induction into the Science Fiction Hall
of Fame, and (with Kuttner) the 2004
Cordwainer Smith Rediscovery Award.

Further Readings
Letson, Russell. “C. L. Moore.” In Supernatural Fiction Writers, ed. E. F. Bleiler, 891–98.
New York: Scribner, 1985.

Morrison, Toni
Moskowitz, Sam. “C. L. Moore.” In Seekers of
Tomorrow: Masters of Modern Science Fiction.
New York: Ballantine, 1967.

AMELIA BEAMER

MORRISON, TONI

(1931– )

Toni Morrison was born Chloe Anthony
Wofford in Lorain, Ohio, the second of
four children in a black working-class
family. She studied humanities at
Howard and Cornell universities and
worked as an editor for Random House
and as a professor at Texas Southern,
Howard, Yale, and Princeton universities. Her ﬁrst novel, The Bluest Eye,
was published in 1970; the story was
developed in a writer’s workshop and
depicted the pain of a young black girl
named Pecola Breedlove who believed
she would be loved if she had blue
eyes.
Morrison’s richly written novels of
African-American history, mythology,
separation, and loss as well as empowerment and love have been awarded
numerous literary awards, including
the Pulitzer Prize in 1988 and the Nobel
Prize in 1993. To date, she has published eight novels, as well as critical
essays, children’s books, a play, and a
libretto based on her novel Beloved
(1987).
Morrison’s novels are noted for their
complex portrayals of African Americans and, in particular, the women
characters who defy conventional stereotypes. The stories are woven together
in a fusion of folklore, legend, gossip,
religion, and the supernatural to create
a unique style of magical realism that
is propelled through narratives reﬂecting the use of an African-American oral
tradition ﬁlled with beauty and pain.

In Song of Solomon (1977), protagonist
Milkman Dead discovers that he is
descended from a “ﬂying” African, and
in Paradise (1998) the main characters
are four women who may actually be
dead taking refuge from both life and
death in an abandoned convent. The
house in Beloved, Morrison’s Nobel
Prize–winning novel, is plagued by a
baby ghost, which later manifests itself
as an eighteen-year-old woman. Many
of the female characters in the novels
such as Pilate (Song of Solomon), Baby
Suggs (Beloved), Consolata and Lone
(Paradise), and “L” (Love, 2003) are
known to have mystical powers like
being able to heal, prophesize, or prolong life. A blend of realistic narrative
and African folklore lends credence to
the elements of the fantastic in all of
these novels.
See also: “Intersections of Race and Gender”
(vol. 1).
Further Readings
Harris, Trudier. Fiction and Folklore: The Novels of Toni Morrison. Knoxville: University
of Tennessee Press, 1991.
Rigney, Barbara Hill. “‘A Story to Pass On’:
Ghosts and the Signiﬁcance of History in
Toni Morrison’s Beloved.” In Haunting the
House of Fiction: Feminist Perspectives on
Ghost Stories by American Women, ed.
Lynette Carpenter and Wendy K. Kolmar,
229–35. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1991.
Warner, Anne. “New Myths and Ancient
Properties: The Fiction of Toni Morrison.”
In Twayne Companion to Contemporary Literature in English, vol. 2, Macleod–Williams,
ed. R. H. W. Dillard and Amanda Cockrell,
87–97. New York: Thomson Gale, 2002.

SARAH A. APPLETON

231
................

This page intentionally left blank

N
NEURODIVERSITY
The term neurodiversity refers to the
concept that people differ in their sense
perceptions and intellectual processing.
This term is usually used in a context
which assumes that deviations from
what is considered “average” or “normal”
should be treasured as part of the diversity of human experience—analogous to
differences in race or gender—rather
than as defects. The word was coined in
the 1990s and ﬁrst referred to people
with autism and related conditions such
as Asperger’s Syndrome, but today it is
applied to a wide range of people who
may not ﬁt into a scientiﬁc or medical
category. The term neurotypical (NT) is
used, particularly within the neurodiverse community, to refer to people who
are not neurodiverse—that is, to those
whose nervous systems as considered
normal or typical.
Science ﬁction has proved a fertile
ground for the exploration of neurodiversity: some authors have created
new types of neurodiversity—such as
“hyperempathy syndrome” in Octavia
Butler’s Parable of the Sower (1993)—and
others have included characters who
are neurodiverse without labeling them
as such. Famous examples of the latter
include the Star Trek characters Spock
and Seven of Nine, both noted for their
superior logic and lack of social skills.
The well-known popularity of science
ﬁction among neurodiverse people
may stem partly from identiﬁcation
with such characters, as noted by, for
instance, the autistic authors Temple
Grandin and Dawn Prince-Hughes.

Some science ﬁction writers have
treated neurodiversity more directly,
identifying characters as autistic or having other disabilities and exploring the
consequences for the character and their
society. For instance, Elizabeth Moon’s
novel The Speed of Dark (2002) explores
the question of whether autism is a disease that should be cured if possible or
an acceptable segment of the spectrum
of human behavior. Moon’s novel is set
in the near future and narrated by Lou
Arrendale, an autistic man who is living
reasonably successfully in the NT world.
When a cure for autism is discovered,
however, Lou must decide if he will take
the cure and become “normal” or retain
his identity as an autistic person.
Margaret Atwood’s Oryx and Crake
(2003) portrays a dystopic future world
ruled by the brilliant genetic scientist
Crake. Notably, Crake was educated
at a school colloquially referred to as
“Asperger’s U” because many students
had both great abilities in science and a
remarkable lack of social skills. The disconnect between autistic individuals
and NTs is also explored in Pat Murphy’s story “Inappropriate Behavior”
(2004): the protagonist, Annie, has many
autistic traits, and her inability to communicate leads to tragedy. However, the
story can also be read as a criticism of
the therapeutic community, which is
more interested in cultivating conventional behavior than in a real understanding of the diversity of humanity.
Further Readings
Lindow, Sandra J. “Living on a High Place:
Asperger’s Syndrome in Joan Slonczewski’s
233
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

The Children Star.” Kaleidoscope 47 (Summer–
Fall 2003): 27–30.
Murphy, Pat. “Inappropriate Behavior” [online].
Http://www.sciﬁ.com/sciﬁction/originals/
originals_archive/murphy/murphy1.html.
Perusek, Darshan. “Disability and Future
Worlds.” Kaleidoscope 34 (Winter–Spring
1997): 1–19.
Willmott, Gail. “Autism … A Life Apart.”
Kaleidoscope 47 (Summer–Fall 2003): 4–62.
Seidel, Kathleen. Neurodiversity.com [online].
Http://www.neurodiversity.com/main.html.

SARAH BOSLAUGH

NEW WEIRD
The New Weird is a movement currently in progress in speculative ﬁction.
Exactly what it consists of has been
disputed by writers and critics at
length, but a general consensus uses
the term to describe a group of texts
s of the fantastic in
that subvert cliche
order to put them to discomﬁting,
rather than consoling, ends. This literature tends to challenge the generic
boundaries between fantasy, science
ﬁction, and horror. Writers that have
been associated with the New Weird
include K. J. Bishop, Steven Cockayne,
Paul Di Filippo, John Harrison, Thomas
ville,
Ligotti, Ian R. MacLeod, China Mie
Alastair Reynolds, Justina Robson,
Steph Swainston, and M. Jeff VanderMeer, among others. Since the New
Weird is a nascent phenomenon, a list
of those who write in this mode must
be provisional and ﬂuid.
Contention is one of the keystones of
New Weird’s history. Harrison is credited with coining the moniker “New
ville’s
Weird” in the introduction to Mie
novella The Tain (2002). The movement
began to coalesce as an entity and was
subject to scrutiny on the online bulletin boards associated with Third Alternative magazine and Nightshade Books in
mid-2003. The idea that a New Weird
movement even exists—or that such a
234
................

Volume 2: Entries

group of writers or texts exists—was
contested in these discussions, and
some whose work has been described
as New Weird have eschewed the association (VanderMeer, for example). One
argument is that the term does a disservice to authors writing with varied
approaches, veiling the disparateness
of their work rather than highlighting
it; another is that subcategorizing already-categorized genre literature cannot beneﬁt speculative literature as a
whole.
Key texts that have come to be associated with the New Weird are
ville’s Bas-Lag novels (Perdido Street
Mie
Station, 2001; The Scar, 2002; Iron Council,
2005); Harrison’s Light (2004); VanderMeer’s City of Saints and Madmen (2001);
Bishop’s The Etched City (2004); Di Filippo’s A Year in the Linear City (2002);
MacLeod’s The Light Ages (2003);
Robson’s Natural History (2004); and
Swainston’s The Year of Our War (2005).
ville, whose novels Perdido Street StaMie
tion and The Scar were gaining critical
attention, became a vocal proponent of
the New Weird and published a discussion of it as guest editor in issue 35 of
Third Alternative (Summer 2003).
Mirroring the array of writers whose
works are associated with it, the New
Weird’s inﬂuences are heterogeneous.
Important precursors include the
“weird” ﬁction of pulp, particularly H. P.
Lovecraft, Mervyn Peake’s Gormenghast
trilogy, and Harrison’s Viriconium stoville, modern “weird” literaries. For Mie
ture also stems from works by Clark
Aston Smith, T. F. Powys, Lucy Lane
Clifford, Gene Wolfe, and Jane Gaskell.
Absurdist and surrealist inﬂuences are
evident. Moreover, New Weird works
tend to be executed with attention to
writing craft and “literary” thoughtfulness and earnestness.
The New Weird has been described
at times as a contestation of familiar

New Weird
literary genres: a blending of science
ﬁction, fantasy, and horror genre strategies. At other times, it has been
described as a blending of realism and
genre, as a movement or a “moment,”
and as a marketing category. It can also
be viewed as an aesthetic informed by a
ville has sugpolitical sensibility. Mie
gested that the New Weird has a political
function that goes beyond the blurring
of genre boundaries. The resulting
“weirdness” may arise from its inversion
and subversion of familiar fantasy
tropes, which the New Weird mobilizes
to ends that are politically radical. These
ends challenge the consolatory effect of
s. In
some fantasy that works in cliche

particular, Mieville has criticized Tolkienesque fantasy, as well as J. R. R. Tolkien’s
notion that fairy tales (and fantasy literature by extension) should have a consolatory function. The latter suggests a
retreat from questioning, subverting,
and challenging the status quo, an effect
the New Weird disdains, according to
ville.
Mie
Furthermore, the New Weird is said to
be secular and political. It has an
awareness of how power is wielded, and
shows normative morality and religion
to be implicated in maintaining oppressive power structures, rather than being
the answer to the woes of the world as
in “consoling” fantasy. Bearing a sensibility that grounds it in a sense of
“realness,” these works confront the
mechanics and manifestations of power
in our own world, rather than using the
invented world to lull and comfort
readers. The aesthetic that tends to
manifest in these texts presents the
grittiness and unsavory aspects of
human experience and can play within
the register of the grotesque, rather
than presenting a moralized, sanitized,
idealized vision of the world.
Women have been well represented
in discussions about the emergence of

and involved in the evolution of ideas
about the New Weird in online venues.
And while the majority of ﬁgures central to the New Weird moment have
been men, Bishop’s Etched City is considered to be one of its central texts.
This novel tells the tale of two former
marauders, Raule and Gwynn, who
confront class inequity from opposite
sides of the power divide in the surreal
city of Ashamoil. The Etched City was
the winner of the William L. Crawford
Award for best ﬁrst novel, and Bishop
herself was a ﬁnalist for the John W.
Campbell Award for best new writer in
2005 and 2006, among other awards.
Robson’s and Swainston’s work has
also been associated with the New
Weird. Robson’s ﬁction tends toward
hard science ﬁction and has been recognized with numerous awards and
nominations. Her novels include Silver
Screen (1999) and Mappa Mundi (2000),
both short-listed for the Arthur C.
Clarke Award; Natural History (2003),
short-listed for the British Science Fiction Association Award in 2004; and Living Next Door (2005). Robson came in
second for the John W. Campbell
Award. Swainston was also a ﬁnalist for
the Campbell in 2005 and 2006. The
Year of Our War (2004) and No Present
Like Time (2005) have both been claimed
as instances of New Weird novels by
afﬁliates of that set. Thus far, the New
Weird, as a conglomeration of disparate texts and literary tendencies or idiosyncrasies,
has
displayed
more
preoccupation with class politics than
matters of sex and gender.
See also: “Intersections of Class and Gender”
(vol. 1); Marxism.
Further Readings
ville, China. “Long Live the New Weird.”
Mie
Third Alternative 35 (Summer 2003): 3.
———. “Messing with Fantasy.” Locus (March
2002): 4–5, 75–76.
235
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Tolkien, J. R. R. “On Fairy-Stories.” In Tree
and Leaf, 3–86. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin,
1965.

DARJA MALCOLM-CLARK

NORSE MYTHOLOGY
Norse mythology, also known as Viking
mythology or more generally as Scandinavian mythology, refers to the preChristian religion, legends, and beliefs
of the Scandinavian people. It is the
most well-known version of the ancient
Germanic mythology and includes the
closely related Anglo-Saxon mythology.
The Nordic legends were the basis of
the religion of the Vikings and Saxons,
who were responsible for settling much
of western Europe in the period
between the ﬁfth and eleventh centuries. The Nordic legends, along with
Greek and Celtic mythology, incorporate the largest body of folklore and
folk-memory in Western tradition. The
origins of the Nordic legends are more
recent than Greek, Hebrew, or Celtic
mythology, dating from the early years
of the ﬁrst millennium AD. At the heart
of Norse mythology are the adventures
of the Aesir, a clan of gods who were
led by Odin and battled the Jotun, the
Titans and giants of Norse mythology,
who lived in Jotunheim. The Aesir lived
in Asgard, whose location is uncertain
but is believed to be in the sky since it
is reached by way of a rainbow, the
Bifrost Bridge.
The story of the Aesir is recounted in
the Icelandic Eddas, the most important of which are the Elder Edda, which
is attributed to Icelandic historian Saemund around the eleventh century,
and especially the Younger or Prose
Edda, attributed to Icelandic historian
Snorri Sturlason around the thirteenth
century. The Prose Edda was not
rediscovered until 1625. The Eddas portray the gods and giants as larger-thanlife characters who can be seen as
236
................

Volume 2: Entries

archetypes for human behavior; thus
Odin embodies wisdom and magic,
Freya is the desire of every man, and
Bragi is the “super-poet.” The gods were
also portrayed as having human interests and faults. This mythology lacks
the sharp good-versus-evil dualism of
Christianity; while the giants were usually opposed to the gods, they were not
inherently evil—merely rude, uncivilized, and boisterous. Therefore, it is
possible to negotiate with them and
even, occasionally, to relax with them.
The other well-known Nordic legend is
Beowulf, which, although its authorship
is unknown, almost certainly originated
in Denmark prior to the Saxon invasions of Britain.
Examples of authors who feature
Norse mythology in their work include
Kate Elliot (King’s Dragon, 1997; Prince of
Dogs, 1997; The Burning Stone, 1998; Child
of Flame, 2000; The Gathering Storm,
2003; In the Ruins, 2005; Crown of Stars,
2006), Margaret Elphinstone (The SeaRoad, 2000), Nancy Farmer (The Sea of
Trolls, 2004), Catherine Fisher (the Snow
Walkers trilogy, 2003), Jude Fisher (Sorcery Rising, 2002; Wild Magic, 2003; Rose
of the World, 2005), Neil Gaiman (American Gods, 2000), Cecilia Holland (The
Ravens, 1997), Diana Wynne Jones
(Eight Days of Luke, 1975), Edith Pattou
(Hero’s Song, 1991; Fire Arrow, 1997),
Diana Paxson (Brisingamen, 1984; The
Paradise Tree, 1987; The Wolf and the
Raven, 1993; The Dragons of the Rhine,
1995), Susan Price (Odin’s Voice, 2005;
Odin’s Queen, 2006), Sigrid Undset (Gunnar’s Daughter, 1998), and Kim Wilkins
(Giants of the Frost, 2005).
Further Readings
Lindemans, M. F. “Norse Mythology.” Encyclopedia
Mythica
[online],
http://www.
pantheon.org/areas/mythology/europe/
norse/articles.html.

MICHELE FRY

Norton, Andre

NORTON, ANDRE

(1912–2005)

Andre Norton was an American science
ﬁction and fantasy author who was the
ﬁrst woman awarded the Nebula Grand
Master award for lifetime achievement
by the Science Fiction and Fantasy
Writers of America. While her early
work, written primarily for young
adults but enjoyed by readers of all
ages, was not critically recognized,
she later received more than twenty
awards for her ﬁction, including the
Gandalf (a special Hugo Award) and the
Life Achievement Award from the
World Fantasy Convention.
Born Mary Alice Norton, she began
writing for the school newspaper in high
school and ﬁnished her ﬁrst novel in her
senior year. Her interest in history led her
to enroll at the Flora Stone Mather College of Western Reserve University. Norton planned to teach history but had to
leave school during her ﬁrst year because
of the Depression. She then worked as a
children’s librarian and took writing and
journalism classes at night. She also
worked as an editor for Gnome Press.
Norton’s earliest publications were
children’s historical novels. Her ﬁrst
novel, published when she was twentytwo, was The Prince Commands (1934).
She published it under masculinesounding pseudonym “Andre Norton”
at her publisher’s request, and the
pseudonym was continued when she
began publishing her science ﬁction
during the 1950s. She later took it as
her legal name. Her historical novels
included a series about the World War
II underground in the Netherlands,
which won an award from the Dutch
government in 1964. Norton’s keen interest in history and historical research
led her to found and run the High Hallack Genre Writers’ Research and Reference Library, the sole research center
devoted to creating, preserving, and

promoting genre ﬁction. High Hallack
had to be closed in 2004 after she was
no longer able to run it due to her
health.
Whether science ﬁction or fantasy,
Norton’s novels focus on young adults,
male and female, facing important rites
of passage. Many of her protagonists
have lost a parent or their entire families and must search for new families
and homes. Her interest in telepathy
that allows human beings to have closer
ties to animals and the natural world
make her an author who dealt with
environmental and spiritual themes
from the beginning. During the seventy
years of her writing career, she published almost 100 short stories and
more than 130 novels in the genres of
gothic, historical, fantastic, mystery,
and science ﬁction. Her work also
stands out as among the earliest science ﬁction and fantasy to include multiracial characters. One of her mother’s
grandmothers was Wyandot Indian, and
one of her father’s ancestors spoke out
against the Salem Witch Trials. Her earliest work, published during the maledominated 1950s, focused on male characters, but starting in 1963 with the
publication of Witch World, female characters were more often her protagonists
and main characters.
In 2005, the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America established the
Andre Norton Award for Young Adult
Science Fiction and Fantasy, an annual
award. In addition, the International
Association of the Fantastic in the Arts
worked with her to establish the Crawford Award, given for an outstanding
new writer’s ﬁrst fantasy book.
Further Readings
“Andre Norton.” Authors and Artists for Young
Adults, vol. 14. Detroit: Gale, 1995.
Andre Norton Forum [online]. Http://www.
andre-norton.org.
237
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Archell-Thompson, Pauline. “Fairytale, Myth
and Otherness in Andre Norton’s Juvenile
Science Fiction.” Foundation 70 (Summer
1997): 25–31.
“High Hallack: Genre Writers’ Research and
Reference Library” [online]. Http://www.
andre-norton.org/highhallack/index.html.
McGhan, Barry R. “Andre Norton: Why Has
She Been Neglected?” Riverside Quarterly 4
(1970): 128–31.

238
................

Volume 2: Entries

Schlobin, Roger C. “The Formulaic and Rites
of Transformation in Andre Norton’s
Magic Series.” In Science Fiction for Young
Readers, ed. Charles William Sullivan, 37–
45. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1993.
Wolf, Virginia L. “Andre Norton: Feminist Pied
Piper in SF.” Children’s Literature Association
Quarterly 10, no. 2 (Summer 1985): 66–70.

ROBIN ANNE REID

O
OATES, JOYCE CAROL

(1938– )

Proliﬁc among contemporary writers,
Joyce Carol Oates is an American writer
who began her distinguished literary
career at the age of twenty-ﬁve with the
publication of a short-story collection
entitled By the North Gate in 1963. Her
career has spanned more than forty
years, and in that time she has published numerous novels, short stories,
poetry collections, theatrical dramas,
screenplays, books of nonﬁction, critical
essays, and works of literary criticism.
Born into a modest working family in
rural New York, Oates was educated at
Syracuse University and the University
of Wisconsin. She currently teaches at
Princeton University.
As a ﬁction writer, Oates demonstrates exceptional versatility, largely
attributed to her personal fascination
with the colliding social and economic
forces at play in American life. From
the broad perspective, Oates portrays
the philosophical contradictions as violent energies creating a portrait of contemporary America as a disordered
and psychologically tumultuous place.
Whether her protagonists are afﬂuent
or gripped in the depths of inner-city
poverty, intellectuals or uneducated
migrant workers, the characters of
Oates’s ﬁction suffer the conﬂicts and
contradictions at the core of American
culture, and suffer them intensely.

Beginning with her ﬁrst novel, With a
Shuddering Fall (1964), Oates foreshadowed her obsession with the dark side
of human nature. In this novel, a teenager ﬁnds herself in a destructive
relationship with an older man that
concludes with his accidental death.
However, as Oates’s publications
increased, so did her level of graphic
violence. Not limiting herself to any
single social taboo, Oates wrote on a
variety of dark subjects including incest in You Must Remember This (1987),
serial killers in Zombie (1995), sexualpolitical power in Black Water (1992),
and murder in Mysteries of Winterthurn
(1984). While critics often emphasize
Oates as a gothic writer, it becomes
clear that her genius lies in her distinct
ability to convey the complexities of
vulnerable psychological states at the
literal edge of sanity.
Further Readings
Kalpakian, Lura. “Gothic in the Garden: A
Joyce Carol Oates Bouquet.” Southern
Review 29, no. 4 (Fall 1993): 802.
Smiley, Pamela. “Incest, Roman Catholicism, and Joyce Carol Oates.” College Literature 18, no. 1 (1991): 38–49.
Wesley, Marily. “The Transgressive Heroine:
Joyce Carol Oates’ ‘Stalking.’” Studies in
Short Fiction 27, no. 1 (1990): 15.

CHRISTINE HILGER

239
................

This page intentionally left blank

P
PHELPS [WARD], ELIZABETH STUART
(1844–1911)
Elizabeth Stuart Phelps was an American writer who supported herself from
her twenties, publishing hundreds of
short stories, essays, and poems and
sixty-three books, including The Gates
Ajar (1868), the second best-selling
novel in nineteenth-century America.
Several of her novels have been reprinted, and many of her stories, particularly those that feature the fantastic,
appear in contemporary collections.
Phelps’s interest in the fantastic
began in her childhood, when she
heard her paternal grandfather’s stories about his haunted parsonage. A
Congregational minister, he eventually
became a professor at Andover Theological Seminary in Massachusetts—as
did her father—but his stories about
his rather lively Connecticut poltergeist
gained national interest as the subject
of several researchers. Phelps incorporated this phenomenon in her early
ghost story “The Day of My Death”
(Harper’s, October 1868), in which a
young couple contends with a haunted
house and several mediums who incorrectly predict the day of the husband’s
death. Phelps collected this story with
others that feature the supernatural in
Men, Women, and Ghosts (1879), including “What Did She See With” (published
as “What Was the Matter” in the Atlantic Monthly, August 1866), about a servant with second sight, and “Kentucky’s
Ghost” (Atlantic Monthly, August 1868),
about a ship haunted by a child’s
vengeful ghost. She wrote one story

from the perspective of a ghost: the
speaker of “Since I Died” (Scribner’s, February 1873; collected in Sealed Orders,
1880) lingers after her death to comfort
her bereaved.
A Christian feminist reformer, Phelps
frequently connected fantasy to Christianity and used the combination to envision social change. Men, Women, and
Ghosts features two stories in which Jesus Christ appears to desperate or dying
women. In “The Tenth of January” (Atlantic Monthly, March 1868), based on
Phelps’s research into the collapse of the
Pemberton Mill, Jesus comforts a mill
girl as she dies under the rubble. In “One
of the Elect” (published as “Magdalene”
in Hours at Home, September 1985), he
takes away the soul of a fallen woman.
He also appears in order to redeem a
wayward, working-class wife in “The
True Story of Guenever” (The Independent,
June 1876; collected in Sealed Orders) and
to preach a sermon on social reform in
“The Bell of St. Basil’s” (Atlantic Monthly,
May 1889; collected in Fourteen to One,
1891).
While The Gates Ajar only hints at an
ideal domestic heaven, Phelps followed it
with her most extended fantasy works.
Beyond the Gates (1883) is the ﬁrst-person
narrative of a female reform worker who
dies, examines a Christian heaven, and
returns to suggest her story may be a
fever-induced fantasy. The Gates Between
(1887) is presented as a written communication from the spirit of a self-absorbed
physician who resides in an interim
space so that his spirit may be rehabilitated—a space that is one of several intermediate worlds scattered around the
241
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

galaxy, on a higher plane than Earth but
not quite heaven. Popular in its day and
entertaining today, Phelps’s fantasy writing and its fantastic social revisions offer
insight into the impetus for reform in the
nineteenth century.
Further Readings
Voller, Jack G. “Phelps, Elizabeth Stuart [Elizabeth Ward].” Literary Gothic [online], http://
www.litgothic.com/Authors/phelps.html.

ROXANNE HARDE

PIERCY, MARGE

(1936– )

Marge Piercy is an American author
and activist whose published work
comprises ﬁfteen novels and an equal
number of poetry collections, as well
as a range of coauthored materials,
including a play and a nonﬁction guide
to writing. Two of her novels are written as works of science ﬁction. Piercy
has received four honorary doctorates
and more than ﬁfteen awards for
excellence in letters, including a grant
from the National Endowment for the
Arts. She received the 1993 Arthur C.
Clarke Best Science Fiction Novel
Award for Body of Glass, which was published under the title He, She, It (1991)
in the United States.
Even her works that are not written
in the science ﬁction or fantasy genres
often include characters who apply extrasensory or intuitive powers in the
conduct of their lives. Piercy’s ﬁrst
novel that contains such a story line is
Woman on the Edge of Time (1976). This
novel tells the story of Consuelo
“Connie” Ramos, a thirty-seven-yearold Chicana mother living in New York
City, who is unable to successfully navigate the tough social and personal circumstances of her life. She is
diagnosed as schizophrenic, her daughter removed from her care, and then is
sent to a mental hospital. There she is
tormented by the effect of the drugs
242
................

Volume 2: Entries

administered to her and by her jailers/
caregivers. Connie escapes the horror
of her daily life by projecting herself
into the year 2137, where she ﬁnds an
egalitarian community in which she
can exist. The future is an imperfect
one, but Connie is able to assert her
leadership qualities and learn lessons
that she attempts to apply during those
times when she is forced to travel back
to the present and confront the reality
of her life. Piercy’s contrasting narrative
of realism and science ﬁction remind
readers about the social phenomena
that sometimes inspire science ﬁction
writers.
Piercy’s novel He, She, It has a structure similar to Woman on the Edge of
Time, with two parallel story lines taking place in different time frames and
geographic locations. The present in
this work is the year 2059 on the East
Coast of the former United States; the
past takes place in the sixteenthcentury Jewish ghetto in Prague.
Piercy’s novel is notable for its interpolation of Jewish lore in the form of the
Golem tale and its reworking in the
presentation of the cyborg as a futuristic cultural metaphor. The female protagonist Shira travels from one time
period to another, loses custody of her
child, and ﬁnds that the future contains both utopian and dystopian elements, yet the inhabitants of this world
are sustained through the possibilities
of their imagination.
All of Piercy’s writing, both novels
and poetry, but especially her science
ﬁction, is replete with characters whose
sometimes heroic and other times
mundane actions are exemplary of
how collective human agency simultaneously affects social change and
serves as nourishment to people who
are faced with the grinding severity of
the conditions in which they live.
See also: Feminist Science Fiction.

Pratchett, Terry
Further Readings
Curtis, Claire P. “Rehabilitating Utopia: Feminist Science Fiction and Finding the
Ideal.” Contemporary Justice Review 8 (June
2005): 147–62.
Neverow, Vara. The Repair of the World: The
Novels of Marge Piercy. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1994.
Maciunas, Billie. “Feminist Epistemology in
Piercy’s Woman on the Edge of Time.” Women’s Studies 20 (January 1992): 249–58.
Marge Piercy [online]. Http://www.marge
piercy.com. Piercy, Marge. Interview by
Batya Weinbaum (Summer 2001). Femspec
3, no. 2 (2002): 101–3.

MARIA OCHOA

PRATCHETT, TERRY (1948– )
Terry Pratchett, an English author, has
published more than forty books for
the adult, young adult, and children’s
markets, consistently featuring strong
female characters in secondary and
primary roles. After reading The Wind in
the Willows (1908) at age ten, Pratchett
became an avid consumer of fantasy,
mythology, and folklore. He published
his ﬁrst story at age ﬁfteen and his ﬁrst
novel in 1971. Working as a journalist
and later as press ofﬁcer for a utility
company, Pratchett continued to write
and publish several more novels,
becoming a full-time writer in 1987. His
books have been widely translated and
have garnered many awards, including
the Carnegie Medal. In 1998, Pratchett
was named an Ofﬁcer of the British
Empire (OBE).
Pratchett writes fantasy, and his
work is most often classiﬁed as comedy, parody, or satire; most of his novels function within all three genres, but
the earlier works are more comic and
the later ones darker and more satirical. The bulk of Pratchett’s fantasy is
set on the Discworld, a ﬂat planet carried through space on the back of
a cosmic turtle. The Discworld is

ever-expanding in its history, geography, peoples, magics, and technology,
allowing Pratchett to mirror popular
culture and recent events without violating world parameters or reader
expectations; this ﬂuidity is, in fact, the
Discworld’s one true constant.
Pratchett has said that he ﬁrst created the Discworld as a parody of the
sword-and-sorcery fantasy genre, and
in keeping with that origin, the world
is nominally patriarchal. Governments, industries, most city guilds, law
enforcement, and criminal organizations are headed by men, and the wizards’ Unseen University is an all-male
institution. Within this patriarchal
structure, though, female characters
gain and exercise power by both fulﬁlling and subverting gender norms.
Although Pratchett has not, to date,
presented a fully formed lampoon of
feminism or feminist movements to
the same extent he has parodied academia (the Unseen University) or police
work (the city of Ankh-Morpork’s night
watch), themes based on feminist
thought and feminist issues do appear.
The most common feminist theme
is the question of balancing career
expectations and traditional gender
roles, a problem shared by several
young female characters and exempliﬁed by Magrat Garlick, a young witch
who gives up her place in the coven to
marry the king, and by Susan Sto Helit,
a young noblewoman whose education
and, later, teaching career are interrupted whenever her adoptive grandfather, Death, involves her in his plans or
problems. In keeping with the Discworld’s role as a reﬂection of our world,
Pratchett resists easy resolutions for
such situations.
Two instances of more direct treatment of feminist issues are a dwarven
female watch ofﬁcer who appears in
several books and the novel Monstrous
243
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Regiment. Like all dwarven females,
Cheery Littlebottom is, in her ﬁrst appearance, indistinguishable from a
male dwarf; dwarven culture recognizes no gender differences. Soon after
arriving in the city of Ankh-Morpork,
however, Cheery becomes the Discworld’s ﬁrst feminine dwarf: she wears
lipstick amid her beard, dons a heavy
leather skirt instead of breeches, and
welds heels to her iron boots. Her
determination to adopt feminine gender markers and still participate in
both her masculine-identiﬁed culture
and traditionally male job as an ofﬁcer
of the city watch reﬂects the Third
Wave feminism of the latter part of
the twentieth century. Additionally,
Cheery’s challenge to traditional dwarven
gender expectations emboldens other
dwarven females to challenge them as
well; in this, Cheery practices de facto
feminism: individual actions that ease
barriers for other women regardless of
whether the originator acts purely in selfinterest.
De facto feminism is also at work in
Monstrous Regiment (2003), a novel about
a number of young women who, for
various reasons, disguise themselves as
men and enlist to ﬁght in their patriarchal homeland’s long-standing war.
Although the characters are pursuing
their own ends, the women’s incognito
military service results in both an end
to the war and the opening of military
service (and the accompanying wages,
nontraditional work, and travel) to
women. This novel also reﬂects tensions between Second and Third Wave
feminism. The young women discover
that the military’s upper echelon is
largely run by older women passing as
men, women who ran away from traditional gender roles and expectations in
their own youth and who achieved and
maintained power by adapting to masculine norms—and who are reluctant
244
................

Volume 2: Entries

to allow or support the next generation’s vision of gender equality.
Ironically in light of these more
obvious commentaries on feminism,
Pratchett’s most popular female characters occupy the most traditional
gender roles. The witches Granny
Weatherwax and Nanny Ogg fully
inhabit their stereotypical roles of
prudish spinster and much-married
beldam, respectively, and perform traditional wise woman services, such as
midwifery. Clad in black dresses and de
rigueur pointy hats, they also wield
considerable social, psychological, and
magical power, and it is the tension
between their traditional gender ideals,
their power, and ultimately their sense
of justice that creates both drama and
comedy in their stories. Pratchett has
recently introduced another popular
witch into the Weatherwax/Ogg storyline, young adult character Tiffany
Aching.
See also: Fairy Tales and Folklore.
Further Readings
Misciagno, Patricia S. Rethinking Feminist
Identiﬁcation: The Case for de Facto Feminism. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997.
Pratchett, Terry. “Imaginary Worlds, Real
Stories: The Eighteenth Katharine Briggs
Memorial Lecture, November 1999.” Folklore 111 (2000): 159–68.

INEZ SCHAECHTERLE

PREGNANCY AND REPRODUCTION
Women’s childbearing abilities have
historically been central to constructions of femininity. Women were (and,
in certain cultures, still are) deﬁned
primarily by their ability to carry and
give birth to children. In turn, this
gender construction functioned to
legitimate women’s exclusion from the
public sphere. Because of reproduction’s fundamental impact on women
and society, many science ﬁction (SF)

Professional Magazines
writers have addressed the subject in
their texts.
Generally, authors adopt two attitudes towards reproduction. On the
one hand, conservative or antifeminist
authors characterize pregnancy and
childbirth as women’s highest calling
and greatest achievement, as in Robert
A. Heinlein’s Friday (1982) or Edmund
Cooper’s Gender Genocide (also published
as Who Needs Men?, 1972). This view is
also prevalent in women’s SF from the
late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. In Charlotte Perkin Gilman’s
Herland (1915), individuals have to show
themselves worthy of bearing children.
On the other, feminist authors tend to
present pregnancy as positive but to be
aware of how it can oppress women,
since it emphasizes sexual difference
and enables patriarchy to reduce people to biological functions. For example, Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s
Tale (1985) imagines a dystopian future
where most of the population has
become sterile and the remaining fertile women serve as breeders. Similarly,
Marge Piercy’s Woman on the Edge of
Time (1976) depicts a community that
has reluctantly replaced pregnancy
with procreative technology as a means
of ensuring equality.
Because many feminist science
ﬁction writers are skeptical about heterosexuality and advocate lesbian separatism, they explore new modes of
reproduction within their texts. Biotechnology is a popular alternative,
whether it takes the form of cloning
facilities (as in James Tiptree Jr.’s
“Houston, Houston, Do You Read?”
1976), ova-fusion (Leona Gom’s Y Chromosome, 1990), artiﬁcial wombs (Woman
on the Edge of Time), or genetic engineering (Suzy McKee Charnas’s
Holdfast Chronicles, 1974–99). In other
cases, writers are inspired by the ecofeminist belief in a mystical connection

between women and nature. For
instance, Shelley Singer’s Demeter Flower
(1980) tells of a ﬂower that causes pregnancy when ingested, and Merril Mushroom’s Daughters of Khaton (1988) has a
supernatural Hylantree that creates
children from genetic material.
Alternatively, science ﬁction shows
women developing their “female nature” to procreate. Such texts are not
concerned with providing scientiﬁc
explanations, but with empowering
women by granting them exceptional
qualities. Nicola Grifﬁth’s Ammonite
(1992) has women entering trances during which one impregnates the other,
while Jane Fletcher’s The World Celaeno
Chose (1999) imagines telekinetics who
create embryos by fusing DNA. Finally,
writers have aliens act as substitutes
for human men, as in Octavia Butler’s
Xenogenesis trilogy (1987–89).
Science ﬁction can also consider how
men might experience pregnancy. Lois
McMaster Bujold’s Ethan of Athos (1986)
invents an all-male world where children are grown in artiﬁcial wombs
but where men feel certain emotions
associated with pregnancy. Butler’s
“Bloodchild” (1984) explores male pregnancy more literally with its men who
carry the insect-like Tlics’ young. Male
pregnancy is a popular theme within
slash ﬁction as well.
Further Readings
€
Barr, Marleen. “Suzy McKee Charnas, Zoe
Fairbairns, Katherine Marcuse, and Kate
Wilhelm Blur Generic Conventions: Pregnancy and Power in Feminist Science
Fiction.” In Lost in Space: Probing Feminist Science Fiction and Beyond, 81–96. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1993.

KAREN BRUCE

PROFESSIONAL MAGAZINES
The Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA), the largest
245
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

organization for authors of speculative
ﬁction, deﬁnes a professional magazine
as one that pays for all works of ﬁction,
in advance or on publication, has a circulation of at least 1,000 copies, and
has published consistently for at least
one year. In the case of online magazines, circulation may be determined
by a demonstrated number of downloads per issue. The term differentiates
paying publications from amateur fanzines and from self-publishing venues
in which an author has paid to appear.
Science ﬁction stories ﬁrst appeared
in pulp science ﬁction magazines in
the late nineteenth century. In 1926,
Amazing Stories became the ﬁrst magazine devoted entirely to “scientiﬁction,”
stories that extrapolated from scientiﬁc
fact. Short works of fantasy tended to
appear alongside horror stories in magazines like Weird Tales. As fantasy
developed a more modern character, it
was paired with science ﬁction as often
as with horror.
The longest-lived science ﬁction
magazine, Astounding Stories of Super
Science, which began in 1930, was at
ﬁrst just another sensationalistic pulp.
In 1960, editor John W. Campbell
changed its title to Analog Science Fiction
and Fact, reﬂecting his preference for
realistic portrayals of science rather
than gadget-packed action. He also
developed a reputation for supporting
new authors with detailed feedback
and encouragement, even in rejection
letters. Now under the editorial direction of Stanley Schmidt, Analog counts
among its discoveries authors Lois
McMaster Bujold and Anne McCaffrey.
The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction (F&SF) debuted in 1949. Founding
editors J. Francis McComas and Anthony Boucher quickly established a
reputation for printing award-winning
works of high literary quality, including
novellas and serialized works. By the
246
................

Volume 2: Entries

early 1960s, the magazine had earned
two Hugo Awards for best magazine
and issued several anthologies. Kristine
Kathryn Rusch won a Hugo for best
professional editor during her six-year
term before handing it off to current
editor Gordon Van Gelder. Notable
alumni of F&SF include Shirley Jackson, Ursula K. Le Guin, and Daniel
Keyes. The magazine is also known for
nonﬁction columns by notable authors,
including Judith Merril and Isaac
Asimov.
Genre-magazine giant Davis Publications expanded into the burgeoning
ﬁeld of science ﬁction in 1977 with Isaac
Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine, counting on Asimov’s name recognition
among science ﬁction fans and good
reputation outside the genre to attract
serious readers. Asimov himself was a
regular contributor to the magazine
until his death in 1992. It developed a
reputation for stories that blurred the
line between science ﬁction and fantasy and, less explicitly, for its interest
in works by women authors, including
Octavia Butler and Connie Willis. It
has also had three woman editors:
Kathleen Moloney, Shawna McCarthy,
and current editor Sheila Williams.
In 1994, McCarthy opened Realms of
Fantasy as the counterpart of Sovereign
Media’s Science Fiction Age. The magazine outlived its sister publication,
offering a combination of original
ﬁction, genre news, and ﬁlm and
game reviews, as well as glossy covers
and full-color interior illustrations. The
magazine has been nominated for several Hugos and has featured authors
Kristine Kathryn Rusch and Kelly Link,
among many others. Additional features include book reviews, a science
column, and a “Folkroots” column
established by Terri Windling.
By 2000, many print magazines
had developed some promotional or

Pullman, Philip
supplementary presence on the Internet. Two online magazines debuted
that year, Ellen Datlow’s SciFiction, now
closed, and Strange Horizons, a weekly
magazine of speculative ﬁction and poetry founded by Mary Anne Mohanraj.
The longest-running Web-based professional magazine, it is unique in being
supported entirely by donations and
biannual fund drives. Susan Marie
Groppi became editor in 2004, heading
a staff of about thirty volunteers. The
site has published two stories nominated for Nebula Awards and has itself
been nominated for a Hugo Award for
best website.
Professional magazines played a vital
role in deﬁning science ﬁction and fantasy as genres. When publishers ﬁrst
began seeking out original works, they
combed through magazines for stories
that could be reprinted or expanded for
an audience hungry for paperback ﬁction. Periodicals are now an integral part
of the market, a place where readers
can sample a variety of new and established authors, and where publishers
can scout up-and-coming talent. Magazine editors rely on this pool of amateur
talent, not only because of the prestige
inherent in discovering the next bestseller but also because well-known
authors, whose names sell copies, come
at a higher cost. Writers beneﬁt from
this arrangement, ﬁnding in magazines
a crucial proving ground for ﬂedgling
authors and a venue where veterans
can push the bounds of their craft.
Magazines also foster a sense of
community
among
readers
and
authors. Readers can get to know the
people behind the books in interviews
and nonﬁction columns where authors
share their expertise in areas of personal interest. Some magazines also
host chat rooms, discussion groups, or
real-time author events on their websites, giving readers and authors a

chance to interact. In 1999, Locus magazine, which reports on science ﬁction
and fantasy publishing, noted a steep
decline in circulation for the top three
magazines: Analog, Asimov’s, and F&SF.
The popularity of online publications is
increasing, but overall readership for
short ﬁction has decreased, putting a
major source of new work in question.
Some magazines seek a wider audience
by covering a broader range of topics,
especially science, gaming, or ﬁlm and
television media, while others focus on
niche audiences in speciﬁc subgenres.
Grim predictions aside, science ﬁction
and fantasy magazines, in print or onscreen, retain a reputation for printing
the newest and most exciting work in
the ﬁeld.
Further Readings
Linville, Susan Urbanek. “SF & Fantasy in
the New Millennium: Women Publishing
Short Fiction.” SFWA Bulletin no. 156
(Winter 2002) [online], http://www.sfwa.
org/bulletin/articles/linville.htm.
O’Neill, John. “Love, Money, and the Future
of Science Fiction Magazines: A Salute to
Asimov’s SF and Analog, Part 1.” SF Site,
1998 [online], http://www.sfsite.com/
vault/john33.htm.

KELLIE M. HULTGREN

PULLMAN, PHILIP

(1946– )

Philip Pullman is an award-winning
English writer, born on October 19,
1946, in Norwich, England, the son of
Alfred and Aubrey Pullman. Alfred was
an airman in the Royal Air Force, and
the family was stationed in Rhodesia
(modern Zimbabwe) when Pullman was
six. Later in life, he wrote that the fragrance of roasting ears of corn, called
mealies, which he had ﬁrst smelled in
Africa, still brought tears to his eyes.
As the violence in neighboring Kenya
threatened to engulf Rhodesia, the children and their mother returned to
247
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

England to live with Aubrey’s parents.
Alfred was killed in action in 1954. After his death, Aubrey went to London
to work, while the children stayed with
their grandparents. Aubrey soon remarried, and the family moved to Australia. Pullman recalled the trip to
Australia by sea: the immensity of the
ocean, the glamour of the adults in
evening clothes, the smells and sounds
of the ship, and the excitement of making landfall.
In Australia, Pullman discovered that
he had a knack for telling stories to his
brother Francis. Pullman found storytelling to be immensely thrilling as well
as challenging. He never knew ahead of
time if he would be able to concoct a
fabulous twist that would tie the story
together. The family moved again, to
Wales in 1957. After graduating from
secondary school, Pullman went to
Exeter College in Oxford, where he
studied literature. He moved to London
after college, where he met his future
wife, Judith Speller. They returned to
Oxford, where Pullman worked as a
teacher. The family’s garden shed
became the ofﬁce where he wrote, longhand, three pages every day.
In 1985, the ﬁrst Sally Lockhart book
appeared. Titled The Ruby in the Smoke,
the book tells the story of the young
Sally Lockhart, who lives in Victorian
London. In search of clues to her
father’s death, Lockhart learns the
truth about her ancestry, and about a
priceless ruby. Pullman’s reading of
comic books as a boy and his knowledge of the Victorian comics called
“penny dreadfuls” (comic books from
the nineteenth century that cost one
penny) provided him with melodramatic plot elements that gave the story
energy and tension.
Published in 1995, The Northern Lights,
ﬁrst of the His Dark Materials trilogy,
begins the story of Lyra Belacqua. The
248
................

Volume 2: Entries

subsequent volumes, The Subtle Knife
(1997) and The Amber Spyglass (1999),
built the story into an epic struggle of
good and evil. The trilogy won many
awards, including the 2002 Whitbread
Book of the Year Award for The Amber
Spyglass, the ﬁrst children’s book to be
so honored.
The worlds of Pullman’s imagination
are populated by scores of strong,
dynamic female characters. Glamorous
and power-hungry Mrs. Coulter is contrasted with the equally beautiful witch
Seraﬁna Pekkala, who embodies the
natural world. Sally Lockhart discovers
her true identity as she unravels the
mystery of the ruby and learns about
the diabolical actions of the evil Molly
Holland. Richly textured, compellingly
realized, Pullman’s characters transcend traditional gender roles in their
various heroes’ journeys through landscapes and trials of mythic proportions.
Further Readings
Butler, Robert. The Art of Darkness: Staging
the Philip Pullman Trilogy. London: Oberon
Books, 2003.
Gribbin, Mary, and John Gribbin. The Science
of Philip Pullman’s His Dark Materials. London: Hodder Children’s Books, 2003.
Philip Pullman [online]. Http://www.philippullman.com.
Shohet, Lauren. Dark Materials Illuminated:
Critical Essays on Philip Pullman’s Trilogy.
Detroit: Wayne State University Press,
2005.
Yuan, Margaret Speaker. Philip Pullman. Philadelphia: Chelsea House, 2005.

MARGARET SPEAKER YUAN

PULP SCIENCE FICTION
The term pulp refers to the cheap,
chemically processed wood-pulp paper
on which early popular ﬁction magazines were printed; it also refers to
page size (7 inches by 10 inches, as
opposed to the smaller digest size, as

Pulp Science Fiction
pioneered by Reader’s Digest, or the
larger bedsheet size of “slicks” like Collier’s). By extension, “pulp” came to
stand for a literary aesthetic that
included formulaic adventure plots,
clunky prose, heroic themes, and, in
the case of science ﬁction (SF), outer
space settings. Although the ﬁrst actual
pulp-paper ﬁction magazines date from
1896, the “pulp era” in SF usually refers
to the period between the founding of
the ﬁrst specialist magazines, Weird
Tales in 1923 and Amazing Stories in
1926, and the pulp die-off in the mid1950s. The “golden age” of pulp science
ﬁction usually refers to John Campbell’s
tenure at Astounding from 1938 to 1955.
Famous for lurid cover art, printed with
bright coal-tar dyes, pulps tended to
run between 80 and 200 pages, often
with untrimmed edges; they cost
twenty to thirty-ﬁve cents and were
geared toward working-class men, with
an emphasis on entertainment and
escapism.
Science ﬁction as a commercial category was born in the pulp magazines,
which printed a combination of stories, serialized novels, and nonﬁction,
including editorial columns, letters,
and factual articles, as well as advertising. Most writers and editors were
male; notable exceptions included
Leigh Brackett, C. L. Moore, and Leslie
F. Stone. Some editors contracted
authors to turn in a set number of
words per month, paid on salary, and
printed under house names with little
if any editing—sometimes sent to the
printer without even having been read.
Stories were also written in-house or
bought from established authors and
from the “slush pile” of unsolicited
manuscripts.
Each magazine had a recognizable
editorial direction, ranging from the
hard-SF Astounding (now Analog) to the
planetary romance and science fantasy

of Planet Stories and the fantasy-horror
mix of Weird Tales. Editorial leanings
were evidenced by the cover art: often
a spaceship for Astounding and a pretty,
half-naked woman in the clutches of
some alien or monster for Planet Stories.
The pulps were killed in part when
the American Distribution Company
stopped distributing them in 1955; the
distribution company itself collapsed
two years later. By 1958, pulp magazines had all switched to digest size or
ceased production.
Pulp magazines were important in
establishing fandom—the science ﬁction community—through editorials
and especially the letter columns,
enabling the correspondence that fans
(whose addresses were generally
printed with their names) started with
each other. They were even used as
ballast for trans-Atlantic ships during
World War II, thus reaching and inﬂuencing British readers. Because of their
cover art and content, pulps received
little respect as literature, but recently
scholars have begun to take interest in
the literature and art of the pulps.
The most stereotypical portrayals of
women in pulp SF were found in the
cover art, although some prominent
artists, such as Margaret Brundage of
Weird Tales, were themselves women.
Pulp cover illustrations tended to be
misogynistic portraits of women, with
exaggerated proportions that emphasized reproduction and reproductive
power. Scantily clad women on cover
illustrations were regularly juxtaposed
with either male characters or aliens,
or both, and the women were sometimes portrayed as gigantic, towering
over male characters who, later in the
stories, generally won the women’s acquiescence or outwitted them with
technology. In some later revisionist
pulp ﬁction, the exaggerated feminine
powers of sexuality actually tended to
249
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

undercut the misogyny of the pulp tradition by stressing female power over
the weaker, relatively helpless human
male characters. A classic example of
 Farmer’s “The
such a story is Philip Jose
Lovers” (1952).
In terms of characterization, women
in the SF pulps were often stereotypically dull types: the Scientist’s Beautiful Daughter and the Hero’s Girlfriend.
These roles were often combined, with
the female character serving as an audience for the male characters’ science
soliloquies or staying in the background (unless captured by an alien or
monster) until the end of the story
when the hero succeeds in his efforts,
whereupon she falls in love. The
female character was usually an object
to be rescued from the monster or
to be won over by the hero, although
there were a few notable exceptions of
strong female main characters such as
Moore’s Jirel of Joiry. Other common
types were the Woman as Alien and
the Amazon Queen, where strong
females or female societies are seen as
decadent dystopias to be redeemed by
the arrival of human males.
Stereotypical female characters also
reﬂect the overall trend of cardboard
characters in early pulps; female characters written by men include Isaac
Asimov’s Dr. Susan Calvin and various
military and scientiﬁc personnel in
Robert A. Heinlein’s stories. As capable
and courageous as these women were,
they were also subordinate to men and
often unsympathetic, perhaps because

250
................

Volume 2: Entries

they rejected traditional family roles.
Since the pulps were largely a maledominated genre, many female authors
also wrote of heroic characters on
quests, such as Moore’s Northwest
Smith and Brackett’s Eric John Stark,
although the authors undercut the
overly muscled hero archetype in favor
of a morally complex antihero. Women
writers increasingly entered the ﬁeld
after SF pulps had given way to novels,
anthologies, and digest magazines.
Research on pulp authors, stories, fan
letters, and cover art provides compelling evidence that the feminism of the
1970s and beyond had roots in these
much earlier works.
Further Readings
Ashley, Mike. The Time Machines: The Story of
the Science Fiction Pulp Magazines from the
beginning to 1950. Liverpool, England: Liverpool University Press, 2000.
———. Transformations: The Story of the Science Fiction Magazines from 1950 to 1970.
Liverpool, England: Liverpool University
Press, 2005.
King, Betty. Women of the Future: The Female
Main Character in Science Fiction. Metuchen,
NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1984.
Larbalestier, Justine. The Battle of the Sexes in
Science Fiction. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
University Press, 2002.
Russ, Joanna. “The Image of Women in Science Fiction.” In Images of Women in Science Fiction: Feminist Perspectives, ed. Susan
Koppelman Cornillon, 79–94. Bowling
Green, OH: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1972.

AMELIA BEAMER

Q
QUEER SCIENCE FICTION
Science ﬁction has often been seen as a
particularly straight genre, but it offers
a fertile ﬁeld for the exploration of sexuality and gender. Feminist science
ﬁction uses the tools of feminism in
conjunction with genre conventions to
criticize patriarchal models of gender,
and, in a similar way, the term queer—
an originally derogatory term that has
been reclaimed to positively refer
to people who do not identify as
straight—can be used to describe texts
that challenge exclusively heterosexual
ways of looking at gendered and sexual
identities and social structures.
“Queer” is frequently used as shorthand for “gay and lesbian” or for the
more inclusive “LGBT,” meaning lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender.
The acronym is sometimes further
extended to include those who identify
as “two-spirit,” “queer,” “questioning,”
or “intersex.” However, many queer
activists and theorists of the 1990s dismissed the idea that sexual identities
can or should be narrowly deﬁned,
insisting that sex and gender identities
are not natural but are artiﬁcially constructed through social and cultural
factors. Theorists express dissatisfaction with a gendered stereotyping that
insists on exclusionary, simplistic identity categories—including that of the
homosexual; Riki Wilchins’s Queer
Theory, Gender Theory (2004) is a useful
guide to this perspective.
Queer academic and activist discourses stand against the heteronormative in society. By “heteronormative,”

they mean the dominant forces in culture—linked to, though not identical
with, the masculine domination of
patriarchal society—that deﬁne all sexual and family bonds in terms of the
monogamous marital union of one
(stereotypically masculine) man with
one (stereotypically feminine) woman.
Queer science ﬁction can imagine alternative worlds in which this model of
sex, gender, and reproduction is not the
norm, reminding readers of sexual possibilities beyond those which are most
conventional. And queerness can make
itself felt in the way we read science ﬁction as well as the way it is written:
recent criticism has used the tools of
queer theory to examine a range of
speculative ﬁction texts.
Unusual relationships to gender and
sexuality are explored in some of the
earliest works the science ﬁction genre
has claimed. Aldous Huxley in Brave
New World (1932) explored a society
where promiscuity rather than marriage was the socially enforced norm.
Victor, in Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley’s Frankenstein (1818), experiments
with separating reproduction from gendered motherhood. Both of these are
cautionary tales that show the dreadful
consequences of such changes, but
they still suggest that it is possible to
differ from the norm. A more positive
example from the early twentieth century is Virginia Woolf’s historical fantasy Orlando (1928), whose protagonist
switches gender quite calmly, preﬁguring narratives of transexuality and
such queer science ﬁction works as
251
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Samuel R. Delany’s Trouble on Triton
(1976).
In the early science ﬁction that was
published in American pulp magazines
from the 1930s to the 1950s, exploration of gender mainly served to reinforce the domination of a straight male
perspective. Even the work celebrated
as the ﬁrst positive depiction of
homosexuality in science ﬁction,
Theodore Sturgeon’s “The World Well
Lost” (1953), represents same-sex desire
as a tragic ﬂaw: the alien “loverbirds”
whose existence offers hope to the
human man in love with his straight
male partner are sentenced to death by
the homophobia of both their homeworld and Earth. Sturgeon’s later novel
Venus Plus X (1960) seems to challenge
conventional gender when it posits a
utopian society inhabited by technologically advanced androgynes. However, when their lack of distinguishable
sex is revealed as a product of social
and genetic engineering, we are
expected to share the male human protagonist’s righteous, homophobic horror: even in an imagined society,
changes to the system of gender are often explored only up to a point.
The upsurge in feminist science ﬁction that began in the 1960s politicized
visions of alternative models of sexuality. One of the most famous works of
feminist science ﬁction, Ursula K. Le
Guin’s The Left Hand of Darkness (1968),
imagines a world where human beings
are androgynes who take on sexual
characteristics according to monthly
cycles: there is no gender, and sexual
preference bears no relation to anyone’s identity. Woman on the Edge of
Time (1976) by Marge Piercy features a
utopian society where gender has been
transcended to the extent that everyone appears androgynous to the twentieth-century protagonist; partnerships
occur in multiple pairings of “sweet
252
................

Volume 2: Entries

friends,” and children are raised by
devoted groups of parents unrelated to
them and with no sexualized relations
to each other. The representations of
gender and sexuality in both of these
texts have been criticized for their relatively heterosexual viewpoints and the
assumption that a colorless androgyny
would be the natural result of complete
freedom of gender expression, but they
have deeply inﬂuenced portrayals of
sexuality in later science ﬁction texts.
In the 1970s and 1980s, many works
of feminist science ﬁction showed
women living without men in societies
where sexuality between women had
become the norm, with women reproducing through mystical and/or scientiﬁc parthenogenesis. Motherlines (1978)
by Suzy McKee Charnas depicts a society of women who escaped enslavement by men through ﬁnding a way to
reproduce parthenogenetically by mating with their horses—a transgressive
vision of female sexuality that encourages readers to confront the limits of
acceptability. Charnas’s Riding Women
are not represented as a utopian community, but many science ﬁctions by
lesbian feminists in this period portrayed sexuality between women as an
ideal, redemptive model that could provide a way out of a repressive, patriarchal dominant heterosexuality. Sally
Miller Gearhart’s The Wanderground
(1979) and Katherine V. Forrest’s Daughters of a Coral Dawn (1984) are two useful examples.
These lesbian texts may not be
usefully described as queer, since
they insist on the biological superiority of a nurturing, communicative,
caring female nature—Forrest’s women
actually belong to a superior race—
rather than preﬁguring the queer
movements’ emphasis on the social
construction and contingency of gender roles. A decade after the height of

Queer Science Fiction
these ﬁctions’ popularity, Nicola Grifﬁth’s Ammonite (1993) updated the tradition of feminist women-only worlds
from a contemporary queer perspective. Grifﬁth eschewed the idea of a
world constructed around biologically
determined femininity to show cultural
diversity, conﬂict, and a range of
gender presentations on a planet
where, due to a viral infection, only
female-sexed people can survive.
While feminist science ﬁction has
frequently embraced nonstraight sexualities, it has at times been more
concerned with privileging female
standpoints and experiences than with
the queer project of questioning what a
female or male, gay or straight identity
might actually mean. The writers
whose work correlates most to the perspectives of queer theory are often
those who have been most formally experimental within the genre. Joanna
Russ’s The Female Man (1975) deals
with a women-only world and a battle
between the sexes, but its multivocal
form—sections are told from the viewpoints of four women, each representing the way a different construction of
gender would allow a “Joanna” from a
different world to develop—allows it to
critique gender norms more deeply
than many of the texts so far mentioned. Delany’s Trouble on Triton represents a future of non-normative gender
and sexual freedom in a non-normative
space structured around theorist
Michel Foucault’s concept of the
“heterotopia.”
Some of the most interesting combinations of queer sexuality and science
ﬁction writing come from writers not
primarily associated with the science
ﬁction genre and community. Kathy
Acker’s experimental ﬁction Empire of
the Senseless (1988) takes place in a
futuristic setting where fathers routinely rape, love is indistinguishable

from hate, and women ﬁnd it impossible to exist simultaneously as intellectual subject and desired object: the
novel performs its queer critique by
bombarding readers unﬂinchingly with
the dark, violent side of heteronormative patriarchy. Writer and queer activist Pat (now known as Patrick) Caliﬁa
has published several pieces that use
science ﬁction settings to make queer
points. The short story “The Hustler,”
published in the queer pornographic collection Macho Sluts (1988), critiques
mainstream 1980s feminism’s oppression of people with unusual gender presentation or sexual preferences by
telling the erotic story of a sexual outcast (a butch dyke whose sexuality
revolves around bondage, domination,
and sadomasochistic play) in a futuristic
lesbian-feminist utopia. The story highlights the way that, even in feminist
communities, insistent conformity to
acceptable sex and gender roles and
styles forces those who cannot ﬁt in into
the position of the outcast, the “pervert.”
The ﬁgure of the misunderstood,
mislabeled outsider is common in
queer writing in general and in the science ﬁction genre where the outsider is
often literally an alien. This convergence of tropes might explain not only
the usefulness of science ﬁction as a
tool for a writer like Caliﬁa but also the
queer appeal of outsider ﬁgures in science ﬁction texts: from the abandoned
and frustrated “monster” in Frankenstein
to the oppressed minorities and
coming-out narratives of the X-Men ﬁlms.
See also: Pulp Science Fiction; Sex Changes.
Further Readings
Garber, Eric, and Lyn Paleo. Uranian Worlds:
A Guide to Alternative Sexuality in Science
Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror. 2nd ed. Boston:
G. K. Hall, 1990.
Gay and Lesbian Science Fiction. Special
issue: Foundation 86 (Autumn 2002).
253
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

On Science Fiction and Queer Theory. Special issue: Science Fiction Studies 26, no. 1
(March 1999), available at http://www.
depauw.edu/sfs/covers/cov77.htm.
Pearson, Wendy. “Science Fiction and Queer
Theory.” In The Cambridge Companion to
Science Fiction, ed. Edward James and
Farah Mendlesohn, 149–62. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Quilter, Laura. Bibliography of Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, Transgender SF [online]. Http://
feministsf.org/bibs/lbg.html.
Wilchins, Riki. Queer Theory, Gender Theory:
An Instant Primer. Los Angeles: Alyson
Books, 2004.

ALEXIS LOTHIAN

QUEST FANTASY
Broadly speaking, there are two kinds
of quest fantasies: external and internal. In external quest narratives, protagonists embark on journeys in which
they search for particular objects, people, or wisdom that is important to
their personal survival or the survival
of the land for which they are, or will
become, responsible. During the journey, they are tested in order to become
worthy of winning the prize or accomplishing the goal. They then normally
return home with the desired person,
object, or knowledge and use it to the
greatest advantage. The earliest wellknown example of an external quest is
Homer’s Odyssey.
The goal of the internal quest is usually self-knowledge, and it is usually
achieved via a rite of passage that
allows the protagonist to become an
integrated (often adult) being. The
internal quest enables young protagonists to acquire self-knowledge, experience, and greater maturity, moving
from awkward childhood or youth,
through puberty to adulthood, acquiring power, autonomy, and responsibility (often for self and for others). The
rite-of-passage quest is, therefore,
254
................

Volume 2: Entries

especially popular in fantasies for
children and young adults, but may
be engaged upon by any who seek
greater self-knowledge and maturity. In
a straightforward rite-of-passage tale,
(young) protagonists are faced with a
challenge or dilemma, the solving of
which allows them to achieve greater
maturity. Early examples of internal
quests include Dante Alighieri’s The
Divine Comedy (1306–21), John Bunyan’s
Pilgrim’s Progress (1678), and Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland (1864). A more
complex rite-of-passage tale sees the
protagonist engage in a pattern of departure, absence, and return, such as
Bilbo Baggins experiences in J. R. R.
Tolkien’s The Hobbit (1937).
Quest narratives are one of the most
basic forms of storytelling, and as the
fantasy genre is inherently tied to story,
most modern fantasy novels involve a
quest of one sort or the other. Modern
fantasy novelists often choose to combine into one tale both an internal and
an external quest, in which the protagonist achieves full self-knowledge and
an external goal that saves the land.
Thus, in Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings
(1954–55), Frodo sets out to save the
Shire (and by extension, Middle-earth)
by destroying the One Ring, but he also
learns his own strengths and weaknesses in the process of journeying to
Mordor.
Until relatively recently, the majority
of external quests were undertaken
only by male protagonists. It was more
common for female protagonists to
undertake internal quests, which generally involve less sword-wielding, journeying, and ﬁghting. However, women
fantasy writers have begun to create
protagonists who embark on external
quests, rather than the traditional internal ones. Instead of creating masculine sword-wielding heroes who battle
monsters and/or madmen bent on the

Quest Fantasy
destruction of their world, and one of
whose goals/prizes is a bride—who
may have helped or hindered the hero
in his quest—women fantasists are
allowing female protagonists to seize
power (and swords if necessary) to
ﬁght battles. These “Lady Heroes” (to
borrow Robin McKinley’s term) challenge myths, psychological theories,
and literary conventions, refusing the
immobility and passivity that has traditionally been their role, and setting off
to battle the madmen and monsters
themselves.
Such feminized quests often recount
an early experience of abuse, abandonment, or injustice toward the protagonist. This experience serves as the call
to action for the protagonist, and s/he
sets out to recover from, or seek justice
for, the treatment s/he has received.
Feminized quests challenge the myth
of the solitary male hero who must
stand alone against the foe, as they
recognize the empowerment that can
be achieved through the protagonist’s
identiﬁcation with others. The recognition that other individuals are subjects
in their own right allows a relationship
between two or more equal subjects—
whether female and male, female
and female, or male and male—to
strengthen the protagonist’s heroic development and sense of responsibility
to others. This heroic pairing or grouping of subjects in a community of
equals strengthens the sense of duty in
the protagonist, allowing him or her to
ﬁght not only for themselves but for
everyone.
Examples of feminized quest tales
include McKinley’s The Blue Sword
(1982) and The Hero and the Crown
(1984), both of which feature a female
protagonist who is taught or teaches
herself traditionally masculine skills
such as riding a warhorse, sword ﬁghting, and military tactics and leadership.

Both Harry (Angharad) Crewe and
Aerin are endowed with kelar, a power
of magic, which they must also learn to
recognize and control in order to save
their land—Damar in both cases, but
several hundred years apart in time—
from the incursion of an evil being. In
addition, Harry has to unite the people
to whom she was born, the Homelanders, with her adopted people,
the Damarians, in order to succeed in
defeating the enemy. Harry is aided in
her heroic endeavors by two human
companions—one male, one female—
both King’s Riders, a war stallion, and a
female feline. She acts as a bridge
between both her worlds and as a military leader to those Homelanders who
agree to go to the aid of the Damarians
in their battle.
Juliet E. McKenna has written two series of novels that contain feminized
quests. Livak and Ryshad, the two main
protagonists of the Tales of Einarinn,
and Kheda, the main protagonist of the
Aldabreshin Compass series, all engage
in quests in order to save their people
and lands from invaders; all three team
up with other skilled individuals of
both sexes to achieve their quests, and
all three employ intelligence or cunning as much as magic and swordﬁghting skills to complete their goals.
Livak’s call to action is prompted by
her attempt to get revenge on a local
lord who had tried to rape her several
years earlier, while Ryshad becomes
involved in Livak’s quest as he and his
mate—and fellow swordsman—Aiten
are on a quest for revenge against
those who brutally attacked a nephew
of their patron, Messire D’Olbriot. Kheda’s call to action comes when he ﬁnds
his islands full of refugees from a
neighboring domain ﬂeeing from savage, magic-wielding invaders. Kheda
makes his ﬁrst quest to discover how to
defeat magic and travels to the
255
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

northern domains of the Aldabreshin
Archipelago, seeking knowledge from
the Warlords there who have encountered the wizards of the “unbroken
lands” (Livak and Ryshad’s homeland).
In the ﬁrst book of the series, Southern
Fire (2005), Kheda is aided by a female
poet named Risala and a rogue wizard
named Dev, and in the sequels, other
wizards aid him in his quest against
the savage wizards.
Two male fantasy authors who use
feminized quests are Philip Pullman
and Terry Pratchett. Pullman, in the
His Dark Materials series, teams up
Lyra Silvertongue with Will Parry—
each of whom has a daemon of the opposite gender—to achieve their quests.
Will’s call to action is the search of his
Oxford home by two unknown men in
the middle of the night; he escapes
from them, believing he has killed one,
and goes in search of his father, John
Parry, who disappeared while on an
Oxford University Institute of Archaeology survey in Alaska. Lyra, meanwhile, is hoping to achieve redemption
for unwittingly leading her friend
Roger to his death at the hands of her
father, Lord Asriel.
In the Tiffany Aching series, Terry
Pratchett’s young witch, Tiffany, is
learning how to be a witch in order to
protect her people and the country of
the Chalk, as her grandmother, the
shepherd Granny Aching, did before
her. The feminized nature of Tiffany’s
quest is made especially clear in the
ﬁrst book of the series, The Wee Free
Men (2003), when Tiffany is facing down
the Queen of Fairyland and she thinks
about defending her dreams, her
brother, her family, her land, and her
world from the queen, because she has
a duty to them that the queen cannot
take from her.
See also: “The Creation of Literature for the
Young” (vol. 1); “Heroes or Sheroes” (vol. 1).
256
................

Volume 2: Entries

Further Readings
Heller, Dana A. The Feminization of QuestRomance: Radical Departures. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1990.
Lichtman, Susan A. The Female Hero in Women’s Literature and Poetry. New York: Edwin
Mellen Press, 1996.

MICHELE FRY

QUILTER, LAURA

(1968– )

Laura Quilter is a lawyer and a librarian who has been responsible for creating the most comprehensive and
valuable collection of online resources
for the feminist science ﬁction and
fantasy community. The Feminist SF
Community Webpage began in 1994 as
a single-author bibliography, but Quilter soon realized that there was a need
for a more general reference, and later
that year she began compiling a bibliographic index of feminist science ﬁction and fantasy. Quilter’s site—the
Feminist Science Fiction, Fantasy, and
Utopia website (http://feministsf.org)—
has grown to include not only reviews
and criticism but also historical essays,
email lists, a wiki, a weblog, and other
pointers to feminist science ﬁction
resources. It now serves as a centralized reference source and a community-building resource for the feminist
science ﬁction community. Quilter’s
work in developing and maintaining
the site has facilitated not only the
access of many people to a feminist
online community but also the propagation of a feminist viewpoint in the
analysis and critique of science ﬁction
and fantasy.
Quilter received a law degree from
Boalt Hall School of Law at the University of California, Berkeley, in 2003 and is
currently employed in private practice as
a legal consultant on intellectual property and new media. In her work as both
a lawyer and a librarian, Quilter has paid

Quilter, Laura
special attention to the issues surrounding information access and control. She
has written extensively about the effect
of new technologies on communication,

especially as they relate to people or
groups who are excluded from traditional power structures.

SUSAN MARIE GROPPI

257
................

This page intentionally left blank

R
RICE, ANNE

(1941– )

Anne Rice is an American author
whose works (twenty-seven novels to
date) fall into two general categories:
supernatural ﬁction and historical ﬁction. She has also published works of
erotica and mainstream ﬁction under
the pseudonyms Anne Roquelaure and
Anne Rampling, respectively. Best
known as the author of the Vampire
Chronicles (Interview with the Vampire,
1976; The Vampire Lestat, 1985; The Queen
of the Damned, 1988; The Tale of the Body
Thief, 1992; Memnoch the Devil, 1995; The
Vampire Armand, 1998; Merrick, 2000;
Blood and Gold, 2001; Blackwood Farm,
2002; Blood Canticle, 2003), Rice has sold
more than a hundred million books
since the publication of her ﬁrst novel,
Interview with the Vampire. Rice’s work
draws upon Romantic, horror, and
gothic traditions. Critics identify her
major inﬂuences as Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, H. P. Lovecraft, and Edgar
Allan Poe.
Rice was born on October 4, 1941, in
New Orleans, Louisiana, to Howard
O’Brien and Katherine (Allen) O’Brien.
She married the poet Stan Rice in 1961
(d. 2002). The loss of her mother to alcoholism when Anne was fourteen
and of Anne’s daughter, Michele, from
leukemia at the age of ﬁve were,
according to some critics, key sources
of Rice’s creative energy during the
composing process and central to her
protagonists’ characterizations. She
has lived in California and New Orleans, the latter setting becoming central to her Lives of the Mayfair Witches

series (The Witching Hour, 1990; Lasher,
1993; Taltos, 1994).
Rice’s vampire series begins with
Interview with the Vampire and ends with
Blood Canticle. The story of reluctant
vampire Louis, child vampire Claudia,
and particularly the sinister and tormented Lestat, the series follows the
characters through what critics have
read as “the journey from innocence to
experience caused by loss or change …
the liberation of self that comes
through this awareness, and the construction of an individual morality that
afﬁrms a human capacity for goodness”
(Roberts, Anne Rice, 8). Through Lestat,
Rice poses questions about immortality, change, loss, sexuality, and power.
Less critically vaunted but still popular with Rice fans, the three Lives of
the Mayfair Witches novels make up
Rice’s second series, an epic narrative
chronicling generations of the Mayfair
family of witches. She began to fuse
the Mayfair series with the Vampire
Chronicles in Merrick and merged them
entirely in Blackwood Farm and Blood
Canticle. Other supernatural works by
Rice include The Mummy (1989), Servant
of the Bones (1996), and Violin (1997).
Periodically throughout her writing
career, Rice has departed from supernatural settings and characters to
explore dimensions of human experience, although those works have also
engaged themes similar to her supernatural ﬁction: life and death, good and
evil, belonging and exile. Novels such
as The Feast of All Saints (1980) and Cry
to Heaven (1982) chronicle characters on
the margin of mainstream society: free
259
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

people of color in 1840s New Orleans
in the former, and castrati in eighteenth-century Italy in the latter. Most
recently, Rice has taken her renewed
religious commitment to Christianity
into her creative work (after abandoning her childhood Catholicism in 1959),
penning the ﬁrst of an anticipated series of books written from the perspective of the historical Jesus Christ,
though the exploration of his divine
origins and powers could place this
book squarely within the tradition of
her other supernatural ﬁction.
See also: Ghost Stories.
Further Readings
Anne Rice [online]. Http://www.annerice.com.
Ramsland, Katherine. Prism of the Night: A
Biography of Anne Rice. New York: Dutton
Books, 1991.
Roberts, Bette B. Anne Rice. Twayne’s United
States Authors Series, ed. Frank Day. New
York: Twayne, 1994.
Smith, Jennifer. Anne Rice: A Critical Companion.
Critical Companions to Popular Contemporary Writers Series, ed. Kathleen Gregory
Klein. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1996.

HOLLY HASSEL

ROMANCE
FANTASY

IN

SCIENCE FICTION

AND

Science ﬁction/fantasy (SF/F) romance
novels are texts that focus on the introduction, courtship, and eventual union
of male and female characters within
an imaginary world that may allow for
magic, futuristic technology, or time
and space travel. Although the plots
and settings of these texts are wideranging and unique, SF/F romance novels can be identiﬁed by their detailed
depictions of heterosexual romantic
love. As Janice Radway has noted, “To
qualify as a romance, the story must
chronicle not merely the events of a
courtship but what it feels like to the
object of one” (Reading the Romance, 64).
260
................

The modern SF/F romance novel
evolved from the merger of two different genres: romance and SF/F.
Although contemporary publishing
houses consider those to be two distinctive types of popular literature,
with different reading audiences and
different narrative patterns, the two
share the same literary ancestry. Both
modern romance novels and modern
SF/F texts evolved from fairy tales and
folklore. Twenty-ﬁrst century SF/F
novels trace their roots back to works
that describe wonders, powers, and
enchantments, to ancient stories of
gods, witches, and mythological creatures. The romance novel traces its
roots back to stories that describe
the courtship and betrothal of one or
more female characters: stories like
“Cinderella,” “Beauty and the Beast,”
and the myth of Cupid and Psyche. It
therefore makes sense that the two
genres should merge successfully with
one another; indeed, modern SF/F
romance novels are similar to the wonder tales that are told to children and
that have been passed down through
cultures for centuries.
In order to study SF/F romance, one
should be aware of the more general
history of the romance. The modern
romance novel provides readers with
detailed descriptions of a character’s
search for his or her ideal mate and
may also include descriptions of the
hero and heroine’s sexual experiences
with one another. Some inﬂuences on
the twenty-ﬁrst-century mainstream
romance include eighteenth-century
gothic texts, nineteenth-century sensation novels, and canonical works of literature (such as Jane Austen’s Pride and
€ ’s
Prejudice [1813] and Charlotte Bronte
Jane Eyre [1847]). The contemporary
notion of the romance novel arose in
the 1950s with the growing popularity
of books that described the successful

Romance in Science Fiction and Fantasy
marriages of orphaned heroines with
wealthy, brooding men. Romance novels published between 1950 and 1970
often featured heroines that held
lower-order jobs (such as secretaries,
teachers, and nurses); in these novels,
the gentle heroine was typically celebrated for transforming the tormented
hero with her love. In the 1970s and
1980s, romance novels changed dramatically in response to the women’s
movement. The radically shifting social
positions of women led to new ideas
about romantic courtship and female
sexuality; consequently, romance novels began to feature more independent
and more sexual heroines. Today, the
twenty-ﬁrst-century romance novel
(and consequently the twenty-ﬁrst-century SF/F romance novel) is known for
presenting readers with power heroines; these tremendously capable, talented, and beautiful characters often
obtain wealth and personal success in
addition to love and sexual fulﬁllment.
The SF/F romance novel began to
appear in bookstores over the course of
the 1990s. Often focused on the internal struggles of the heroine, these texts
provide a formula for romantic success—one that frequently instructs
female readers to search for a mate
with whom they have physical chemistry, who is himself a strong leader or
ﬁghter, and who supports and encourages them in their own quests for fulﬁllment and personal accomplishment.
For example, in Susan Grant’s 2006
novel Your Planet or Mine?, the hero is a
courageous alien who wants to save
Earth from being invaded and who also
respects the heroine’s position as a California state senator and her dreams of
one day becoming president of the
United States. Novels like this one prescribe particular, predictable gender
roles—heroines are loyal and loving,
heroes are noble protectors; however,

these gender roles can be interpreted
as empowering and positive. Frequently, modern SF/F romance novels
incorporate feminist themes while
still reafﬁrming traditional notions
about marriage and family. Mercedes
Lackey’s half-Indian heroine Maya
Witherspoon, a Brahmin sorceress and
physician (as well as abortionist) in
Edwardian London, takes joy in the creation of her beautiful home and is happily married to Lord Peter Almsley at
the end of The Serpent’s Shadow (2001).
The genre experienced a boom
in 2003 when two major publishers
(Tor and Harlequin) announced that
they would be establishing imprints
designed speciﬁcally for romantic science ﬁction readers. Harlequin’s Luna
line (ﬁrst release, January 2004) features
fantasy romances; often, the plots
involve a heroine who is driven to come
to terms with her powers and/or her society while falling in love. The imprint’s
tagline is: “Powerful, Magical and Beautiful.” Such advertising indicates to
readers that Luna heroines are modern,
in that female characters either are
placed in positions of inﬂuence or possess extraordinary abilities; fantastic, in
that they possess the ability to control
or channel magical forces; and traditional, in that they possess physical
beauty. Heroines range from fantasy
mages on quasi-medieval planets to
Native American shamans to paranormal women who ﬁght evil in the crimeriddled streets of enchanted cityscapes.
The Luna line is also known for its striking cover art, which features traditionally pretty white women. Tor Romance
(ﬁrst release, November 2004) covers a
wider range of texts, including futuristic
science ﬁction and horror novels. Works
may include shape-shifters, time travel,
alternative history, reincarnation, and
witches, though plots always feature
heterosexual love as a focus.
261
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

The genre is a varied one. Some popular authors include Marilyn Campbell,
Susan Grant, Dara Joy, Sharon Shinn,
and Linnea Sinclair for the futuristic or
interplanetary romance; Catherine
Asaro, Lois McMaster Bujold, Susan
Carroll, and Mercedes Lackey for the
fantasy romance; Sherrilyn Kenyon,
Susan Krinard, and Christina Skye for
the paranormal romance; and Jude
Deveraux and Diana Gabaldon for the
time-travel romance.
The most popular author of SF/F
romances is Nora Roberts. In addition to
writing fantasy romances that prominently feature women with magical
powers (the Three Sisters Island trilogy,
the Irish trilogy, and others), Roberts has,
under the pseudonym J. D. Robb, written
more than twenty-seven (as of 2006)
romantic mysteries set in the year 2058.
The futuristic In Death series focuses on
a continual set of core characters, police
detective Eve Dallas and her enigmatic
billionaire husband, Roarke. As of October 2005, Roberts had more than 280 million copies of her 161 book titles in print.
Generally, SF/F romance novels celebrate heterosexual romantic love. Some
authors (Lackey and Tanya Huff, for
example) do acknowledge and promote
long-term, loving relationships between
same-sex characters; however, these
characters are rarely, if ever, the primary focus of the novel’s romance plot.
One may note the existence of ﬁlm versions of SF/F romance; Disney’s (1989) The
Little Mermaid and NBC/Hallmark’s television miniseries The Tenth Kingdom (2000),
for example, both focus on the introduction, courtship, and union of a male and
a female character much in the way of a
textual SF/F work. It is unclear why
there are not more examples of multimedia SF/F romance. It may be because the
genre focuses so much on the internal
struggles of its characters (and such
struggles are more easily represented by
262
................

Volume 2: Entries

the novel form), or because these works
have traditionally been seen as simplistic
or “for women only” (and thus unappealing to mass audiences).
Over the past two decades, literary
critics have begun to claim that neither
of the above critiques are accurate, and
that these novels perform complex, important functions for a broad range of
readers. Romance novels describe
intense and meaningful connections
between people—connections that may
seem impossible amidst the isolation
many feel in the modern world. These
works celebrate both physical and emotional intimacy, and they present readers with hopeful descriptions of how
good life can be and what it feels like to
be happy and in love. In turn, SF/F
romance texts describe recognizable
“human” characters living in wondrous
worlds that are inﬂuenced by alien life,
by future technology, and/or by magic.
Indeed, some argue that these novels
allow readers to imagine potential life
situations more varied and dramatic
than those offered by (the often academically celebrated) realist literature.
See also: “Nineteenth-Century Fiction” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Juhasz, Suzanne. Reading from the Heart:
Women, Literature, and the Search for True
Love. New York: Viking, 1994.
Radway, Janice A. Reading the Romance: Women,
Patriarchy, and Popular Literature. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1984.
Regis, Pamela. A Natural History of the
Romance Novel. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2003.
Speculative Romance Online. Http://www.
specromonline.com/index.cfm.

CASEY COTHRAN

ROMANTIC TRADITIONS
FICTION AND FANTASY

IN

SCIENCE

Most contemporary discussions of classicism and Romanticism begin with

Romantic Traditions in Science Fiction and Fantasy
M. H. Abrams’s The Mirror and the Lamp:
Romantic Theory and the Critical Tradition
(1953), in which the classical tradition—and other various isms of recent
history, including realism, regionalism, naturalism, and modernism—is
described as a mirror, while Romanticism is described as a lamp. Romantic
literature can be said to be writing that
privileges the imagination, in contrast
to writing that aims to accurately
reﬂect the real world. While no deﬁnition can be said to apply universally,
this distinction has useful application
to the world of science ﬁction and fantasy literature.
Though inherently unreal and on the
surface not representative of the classical or realist tradition, “hard” science
ﬁction—that ﬁction that postulates one
or a very small number of changes from
the existing world and goes on to speculate about the effects of that change—
can be said to represent the mainstream modernist literary impulse of
much of the last century. Beyond hard
science ﬁction, much “soft” science ﬁction, such as space opera, and nearly
all fantasy, can be viewed as Romantic
literature. Story lines that focus on unusual members of society (spaceship
captains, world leaders, spies, heroes)
coupled with ﬁctive environments that
are more colorful than inherently functional or consistent result in writing
that is inherently Romantic.
Writers as diverse as Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, Anne McCaffrey, C. J.
Cherryh, Lois McMaster Bujold, Marion
Zimmer Bradley, Connie Willis, and
Catherine Asaro write science ﬁction
and/or fantasy works that are Romantic
in nature. McCaffrey’s Pern novels
take place on a world visited so closely
by a nearby planet that spores leap from
it to threaten the human inhabitants,
who ﬁght back with giant dragons that
spit ﬁre.

Cherryh’s work is particularly instructive: her early work includes indisputably hard-science ﬁction texts. Cyteen
(1988), the award-winning novel about
cloning and identity, remains relevant
to present-day discussions about medical research and is part of a larger body
of works in her company war setting, a
ﬁctive environment that postulates
faster-than-light (FTL) travel. By carrying out the logical consequence of FTL
travel, Cherryh is faced with notable
problems for narrative continuity
because of time-dilation issues. Those
who travel on an FTL space vessel will
be “out of synch” with their planetaryor space-station-based timeline. In her
more recent Foreigner series, however,
Cherryh postulates a less realistic
method of FTL that does not cause narrative difﬁculties between those who
travel and those who remain at home.
This series, notably more Romantic in
nature, privileges other aspects of story
and character development.
Romantic literature affords women
writers of science ﬁction and fantasy
opportunity to deal with gender issues.
On McCaffrey’s Pern, women are ﬁghting free of an oppressive patriarchal society after a high-technology colony’s
demise at the hands of the interplanetary spores now successfully fought by
dragons and their riders. Another culture reviving from a Dark Ages period
back into a time of technological development is portrayed by Bradley; her
Darkover books feature both oppressive
cultures and an organization of warrior
women who ﬁght for equality.
While some writers present a future
where gender is not a particular issue of
divisiveness, as Cherryh does, others
employ common tenets of Romanticism,
such as a focus upon unusual members
of society, to retell stories of struggle
against patriarchy, as both Asaro and
Willis have done. Differences in how the
263
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

genders are described in ﬁction can be
seen in both the Romantic noir tradition
of Raymond Chandler and the follow-up
reinterpretation and expression of that
tradition exempliﬁed by the cyberpunk
movement commonly acknowledged to
have begun with works by Rudy Rucker
and William Gibson.
In both Chandler and Gibson, male
narrators perceive women as attractive
yet threatening. Images that provoke a
fear of castration are attached to the
primary love interest of the male narrators of The Big Sleep (1939) and Neuromancer (1984), for example. The obvious
corollary presented by women authors
writing in the Romantic vein is the
consistent representation of males as
oppressive, as in Bradley’s chained
brides and McCaffrey’s villains, abusive
male dragonriders. Romantic ﬁction by
women tends to acknowledge the traditional fonts of male domination—
muscle and control—in contrast to
male noir’s portrayal of an oppressor’s
nightmare, retribution that must by
deﬁnition be served indirectly.
By privileging the imagination in
their writing, women writers of fantastic ﬁctions ranging from soft science
ﬁction to fantasy either establish a
future world in which today’s gender
distinctions have been washed away,
leaving other considerations in place
that transcend gender, or describe
characters and settings where struggles
with gender issues continue to play
out. Romanticism remains a choice for
writers seeking elbow room in which to
address issues that might be too
uncomfortable to examine using a
more realistic mode of expression.
Further Readings
Bourgault Du Coudray, Chantal. “The Cycle of
the Werewolf: Romantic Ecologies of Selfhood in Popular Fantasy.” Australian Feminist Studies 18, no. 40 (March 2003): 57–72.
264
................

Volume 2: Entries

Hammond, Kim. “Monsters of Modernity:
Frankenstein and Modern Environmentalism.” Cultural Geographies 11, no. 2
(April 2004): 181–98.
McCaffery, Larry. “Introduction: The Desert
of the Real.” In Storming the Reality Studio:
A Casebook of Cyberpunk and Postmodern
Science Fiction. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1991.

EDWARD CARMIEN

ROSINSKY, NATALIE MYRA

(?– )

Natalie Rosinsky, Ph.D., is one of the
earliest academic critics to make the
critical link between Second Wave feminism theory and speculative ﬁction by
women published in the 1970s and
1980s. Her work Feminist Futures: Contemporary Women’s Speculative Fiction
(1984) was revised from her doctoral
thesis in English literature (University of Wisconsin–Madison, 1982). The
monograph set a standard for links
between feminist theory and activism;
feminist, poststructuralist, and deconstructivist literary theory; and critical
and literary publications that largely
occurred outside the established literary canon. Her objects of study were
varied, including works whose literary
merit was established outside the subgenre of science ﬁction (SF) literature,
literary texts published within canonical science ﬁction circles, and emerging
feminist speculative ﬁctions that ﬁt
neither of those more easily identiﬁed
categories.
In linking the study of texts like Monique Wittig’s Guerilleres (1969), Joanna
Russ’s The Female Man (1975), and
Marge Piercy’s Woman on the Edge of
Time (1976), which all used innovative
narrative techniques in the process of
being identiﬁed with feminist activism
at the time Rosinsky wrote her thesis,
with the phenomenally successful but
more SF-traditional The Left Hand of
Darkness (1969) by Ursula K. Le Guin,

Rossetti, Christina
on the one hand, and canonical literary
texts such as Virginia Woolf’s Orlando
(1928), on the other, Rosinsky was foundational to an explosion of critical
analyses of a greater range of texts
published within the framework of SF
and a basic questioning of such seemingly ﬁxed categories as literary versus
subgenre texts, theory versus ﬁction,
literary versus market analysis, fan versus critical communities. In order to
support her rich argument, she made
intense critical references to each of
these areas as if that were an authoritative and validated approach to critical analysis.
Rosinsky also turned the lens of
emerging theories of psychosocial gender development and poststructuralist
literary analysis practiced by such
critics as Nancy Chodorow, Samuel R.
Delany, Theresa De Lauretis, Mary
Daly, Julia Kristeva, Carolyn Heilbrun,
Mary Louise Pratt, and a host of others
who became the canonical feminist, SF,
and critical theorists in the many
instances of feminist and gender analysis that followed Rosinsky’s work. To
this day, feminist critics of SF start
their work, knowingly or unknowingly,
with Rosinsky’s critical gestures from
this one book, one Extrapolation article
on Russ, and a few of her conference
papers.
Rosinsky went on to a career as a
very successful writer of almost forty
nonﬁction works for children in the sixand-up age range, publishing with
Compass Point Books, Picture Window
Books, Thompson-Gale, and Tandem
Library Books, among others. Her series
books covered holidays from Christmas
to Juneteenth. Her science subjects are
also wide-ranging, from Earth science
to satellites, and one historical series
focuses on various Native American
tribes, including the Arapaho, Creek,
Inuit, and Ojibwa, as well as other

historical individuals and modern
authors such as Amy Tan.
Her critical legacy allowed subsequent generations of feminist science
ﬁction scholars to justify their work to
often-skeptical academic departments
and to validate the reality of a dynamic
interpenetration of theory, amateur
and professional criticism, and publications that range from Science Fiction
Studies to feminist fan magazines (fanzines) such as Janus/New Moon/Aurora.
Rosinsky was one of the sources that
made this possible for many other SF,
feminist, and gender-critical scholars,
scholars of popular culture, and writers
from small presses to megapresses to
contextualize their work as part of the
larger feminist movement.
See also: Barr, Marleen; Lefanu, Sarah.
Further Readings
“Natalie M. Rosinsky.” Children’s Literature
Network [online], http://www.childrensli
teraturenetwork.org/aifolder/aipages/ai_r/
rosinsky.html.

JANICE BOGSTAD

ROSSETTI, CHRISTINA (1830–1894)
Christina Rossetti was a major British
Victorian-era poet. She was the youngest of four children born to Frances
Polidori and Gabriel Rossetti. She
is afﬁliated with the Pre-Raphaelite
Brotherhood, an artistic and literary
movement founded in part by her two
brothers, painter-poet Dante Gabriel
Rossetti and critic William Michael Rossetti. Although she was not an ofﬁcial
member, she published several poems
in the Brotherhood’s journal The Germ;
she also modeled for Dante Gabriel’s
paintings, and her poetry contains PreRaphaelite elements such as an
emphasis on morality and religious imagery. Christina Rossetti’s most important works are Goblin Market, and Other
265
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Poems (1862), The Prince’s Progress, and
Other Poems (1866), Sing-Song (1872), A
Pageant and Other Poems (1881), and
Verses (1893).
Rossetti is best known for “Goblin
Market.” Two virginal sisters are
tempted by goblins selling succulent
fruit. Lizzie resists temptation, but
Laura falls. She begins to die for lack of
the deadly fruit. The goblins will no
longer deal with her. Lizzie tries to save
her sister by buying the fruit. The goblins attack Lizzie violently, smearing
fruit juices all over her body and face.
When Lizzie returns home, she asks
her sister to “Eat me, drink me, love
me.” Lizzie’s sacriﬁce saves Laura.
The complex and sensual imagery of
the poem has resulted in a spectrum of
critical arguments. The violent imagery
of the goblin attack suggests a gang
rape; the sensual imagery of the sisters
suggests a lesbian sexual fantasy. There
are resonances of a feminine Christian
resurrection scene alongside warnings
about promiscuity and venereal disease.
Imagery of drug addiction and anorexia
appear alongside a critique of the Victorian empire, a global market where
goods are available to all, but women’s
agency is restricted. Some critics see
“Goblin Market,” with its insistence that
women aid their less fortunate sisters,
as having been inspired by Rossetti’s
volunteer work at the Highgate Penitentiary for fallen women. Since 1862,
“Goblin Market” has been continuously
republished in different forms, including children’s books, versions with
erotic illustrations for Playboy (1973) and
Paciﬁc Comics (1984), and as an offBroadway musical (1985).
Rossetti also authored gothic lyric
poems, such as “A Chilly Night,” in
which the speaker imagines being
haunted by her dead mother, and the
eerie “Song,” “At Home,” “Remember,”
“A Pause,” and “Cobwebs,” all of which
266
................

Volume 2: Entries

imagine the experience of being dead
and reaching out from beyond the
grave. These latter works partake in a
literary aesthetic associated with nineteenth-century women poets. To speak
from the dead is an indirect form of
social protest over women’s enforced
passivity, and it also confronts the
poetic tradition that assumes that
women are suitable objects (but not
authors) of poetry. In these poems, the
woman author is both the dead object
and the speaker.
See also: “Nineteenth-Century Poetry” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Kooistra, Lorraine Janzen. “Modern Markets
for Goblin Market.” Review of Christina Rossetti, 1830–1894, ed. A. H. Harrison. Victorian Poetry 32, no. 4 (1992): 249–71.

DONELLE RUWE

ROSZAK, THEODORE

(1933– )

Theodore Roszak is an American
author, history professor, and cultural
critic best known as the ﬁrst man to
win a James Tiptree Jr. Award (for his
1995 novel The Memoirs of Elizabeth Frankenstein) and for his The Making of a Counter Culture (1969), an analysis of the
1960s youth movements in which he
coined the term counter culture. Roszak
is also a founding father of the
“ecopsychology” movement, a synthesis
of psychology and ecology that views
mental illness as deriving in part from a
lack of connection to the natural world.
Roszak’s nonﬁction denigrates the
technocratic worldview that puts the
interests of government and corporate
entities above those of individuals. He
pays special attention to how this
worldview promotes sexism. In The
Gendered Atom (1999), Roszak excoriates
the macho scientiﬁc mindset that commits unfeeling and selﬁsh acts in the
name of progress while eschewing
qualities traditionally associated with

Rowling, J. K.
the feminine such as compassion, gentleness, and intuition. In The Making of
a Counter Culture, he deplores modern
consumer culture and the prevailing
mentality that views all problems as
necessitating technical intervention.
Roszak’s other works explore alternatives to technocratic culture. In Person/
Planet (1978), he predicts the decline of
large institutions, as they lack enough
loyal followers to support them. In
Where the Wasteland Ends (1972), he posits that the dissolution of these institutions will ultimately make possible
small decentralized social groups
where technology has a more appropriate and limited role in human life.
Roszak’s ﬁction likewise exempliﬁes
his philosophy that science should be
tempered with compassion and gentleness and be respectful to all life on
Earth. Memoirs of Elizabeth Frankenstein, a
feminist retelling of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley’s novel Frankenstein (1818)
through the perspective of Elizabeth Lave, is arguenza, Victor’s doomed ﬁance
ably the best example of Roszak’s
worldview expressed through his ﬁction.
From Elizabeth, we learn that Victor’s
rejection of his mother’s teachings about
the sacredness of nature led to his
downfall. Victor turns from his mother’s
beliefs and instead embraces the philosophy of Enlightenment intellectuals,
who would rape and pillage nature in
the name of furthering scientiﬁc discovery. This mindset permits Victor to create his malformed creature with no
compunction about its subsequent suffering. Roszak’s fascination with Frankenstein is not surprising: he has taught this
novel in his courses for more than thirty
years and views the story as embodying
a central myth of our time.
Roszak’s other ﬁction is equally concerned with what he describes as “the
demonic element in modern science
and technology” (quoted in Pringle,

“Theodore Roszak,” 491). The theme of
Bugs (1981) is prescient in its representation of computer viruses, although
these are created by a telepathic child
rather than malicious hackers. In Flicker
(1991), an obscure director inserts subliminal messages in his ﬁlms in order
to manipulate his audience. Roszak has
been twice nominated for the National
Book Award.
See also: Environmental Science Fiction.
Further Readings
Pringle, David. “Theodore Roszak.” In St.
James Guide to Horror, Ghost and Gothic
Writers. Detroit: St. James Press, 1998.

JUNE PULLIAM

ROWLING, J[OANNE] K[ATHLEEN]
(1965– )
All sorts of myths have circulated about
British writer J. K. Rowling. Joanne
Kathleen Rowling was born July 31,
1965, in Sodbury, England, and raised in
Winterborne (near Bristol). The story of
Rowling as a single welfare mother was
circulated widely in the media. Newspapers in both the United States and the
United Kingdom have claimed that she
wrote Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s
Stone (1997; U.S. title Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer’s Stone) on coffeehouse napkins
because she could not afford to buy paper. The same stories report that she
and her baby were driven to spend the
winter days in the coffeehouse because
she could not afford to heat her Edinburgh apartment. Finally, readers
impressed by the idea of Rowling’s poverty have cast her as an uneducated
woman who made good despite a lack
of formal education.
None of the widely circulated media
stories about Rowling’s poverty or lack
of education are true, and their persistence in the face of contradiction says
more about what we value as a culture
than they do about J. K. Rowling. To
267
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

begin with, Rowling was far from
uneducated: a graduate of the University of Exeter, she majored in French
and minored in classics. After graduating, she worked in London for a time,
and it was on a train from Manchester
to London that she ﬁrst conceived of her
seven-book series. In 1990, however, the
shock of her mother’s death from multiple sclerosis led her to take a job teaching English in Portugal, where she met
and married her ﬁrst husband, Jorge
Arantes. When the marriage failed, she
moved to Edinburgh (where her sister
lived), along with her daughter Jessica (b.
1992) and a mostly ﬁnished manuscript
of the ﬁrst Harry Potter novel. There she
was brieﬂy on welfare before teaching
French in England.
What Rowling had created was a
full-ﬂedged saga, centering on Hogwart’s School for Witchcraft and Wizardry and a cluster of Wizarding
children caught in the hiatus between
two civil wars. As the children age
(from eleven to seventeen), the world
of Rowling’s imagination becomes progressively darker and more complicated, and the choices before them
become increasingly difﬁcult. Given the
immense popularity this series was to
achieve, it is ironic to note that all the
major publishing houses in England
rejected the ﬁrst novel. When Bloomsbury Press agreed to publish it in 1997,
however, the work was well received by
critics, and its appearance in the United
States freed her from the necessity of
teaching. Rowling continued to live and
write in Scotland, publishing the rest of
the series: Harry Potter and the Chamber
of Secrets (1998), Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (1999), Harry Potter and
the Goblet of Fire (2000), Harry Potter and
the Order of the Phoenix (2003), Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (2005), and
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows
(2007). The series, complete at seven
268
................

Volume 2: Entries

books, is immensely popular, appealing
to both children and adult readers. The
books have inspired one of the largest
fandoms on the Internet and have been
adapted into popular ﬁlms.
In 2001, Rowling married Dr. Neil
Murray, a Scottish physician. They have
had two children since: a son, born in
2003, and a daughter in 2005.
Further Readings
J. K. Rowling [online]. Http://www.jkrowling.
com.
Kirk, Connie Ann. J. K. Rowling: A Biography.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2003.
Mabe, Chauncey. “J. K. Rowling: Busting the
Myths.” Age, August 28, 2002 [online],
http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2002/
08/27/1030053057866.html.

KATHRYN JACOBS

RUSS, JOANNA

(1937– )

Joanna Russ is one of the most radical,
postmodern, pioneering, feminist science ﬁction (SF) writers, particularly
noted for her avant-garde style. She
was educated at Cornell and Yale universities, and both her ﬁction and her
theoretical work are strongly inspired
by feminist literary theorizing. She was
infatuated with SF as a child and began
publishing stories at the age of twentytwo. The author of seven novels, ﬁve
collections of short stories, and numerous critical essays on women and science ﬁction, she is best known for her
experimental and fragmented novel
The Female Man (1975) and her awardwinning short story “When It Changed”
(1972), both of which deconstruct and
humorously play with gender roles,
gender identity in relation to sexual
identity, (sexist) narrative SF conventions, and stereotypical reader expectations. Both works were also received as
coming-out lesbian texts.
Russ’s non-SF novel On Strike against
God (1979) extends the criticism

Russ, Joanna
contained in her earlier works to
include the blatant sexism of both the
fan and academic SF communities. Her
feminist theoretical work How to Suppress Women’s Writing (1983), and her
two essay collections Magic Mommas,
Trembling Sister, Puritans and Perverts
(1985) and To Write Like a Woman: Essays
in Feminism and Science Fiction (1995) also
bitingly criticize the gender bias and
treatment of women in SF. With What
Are We Fighting For? Sex, Race, Class and
the Future of Feminism (1998), Russ provides an analysis of the radical feminism of the 1960s and 1970s and its
potential for the future.
In her satirical and rather complex
novel The Female Man, Russ experiments
with shifting between four alternative
parallel utopias and dystopias mediated through the four interlocking
female consciousnesses of Jeannine,
Joanna, Janet, and Jael. On a different
level, the novel can also be read as feminist inner-space ﬁction, with the four
female characters representing different
versions of the same person, particularly since the narrative I takes on the
sometimes indistinguishable roles of the
four J’s. Jeannine’s conservative patriarchal society is located in a United States
still locked in economic depression in
an alternative history of the world
where World War II never happened
because Hitler died in 1936. The narrator of the book’s present time, Joanna—
possibly not only the namesake but also
the ﬁctional alter ego of the author—
lives in a world similar to the sexist
1970s. To escape the misogynist patriarchal stereotyping of her present, Joanna
decides to turn into the title’s “female
man.” Russ contrasts these two dystopian societies with two alternative
futures: Janet’s utopian all-female society of Whileaway, where men had died
of a plague nine centuries before (or in
another version were killed), and Jael’s

military dystopian world, where the segregation of the sexes has led to a war of
the sexes in which both sides violently
mistreat the opposite sex.
Russ’s novels feature a diverse cast
of strong and rebellious female protagonists; only And Chaos died (1970), a
novel about telepathy and homosexuality as an illness to be cured,
presents a male protagonist. Her novel
We Who Are About To (1977) describes
an inverted robinsonade variation of
the SF trope of male colonization of
space and women’s bodies. As the survivors of a crashed spaceship attempt
to colonize an uninhabited planet, one
of the females in the group resists the
social role of victim and responds to
the suggested forced breeding by killing
the others. This antisurvival story is
exceptional compared to science ﬁction’s traditional lost-colony stories.
Her famous short story “When It
Changed,” another tale of Whileaway,
won the Nebula Award in 1972 and, together with The Female Man, garnered a
retrospective James Tiptree Jr. Award in
1996. In 2002, The Female Man also won
the Gaylactic Network Spectrum
Award. In 1983, Russ’s novella Souls
won both the Nebula and Hugo awards,
as well as the Locus Poll Award. For her
SF criticism, Russ received the Florence
Howe Criticism Award, and the Science
Fiction Research Association honored
her in 1988 with the Pilgrim Award.
Further Readings
Boulter, Amanda. “Unnatural Acts: American
Feminism and Joanna Russ’s The Female
Man.” Women 10, no. 2 (1999): 151–66.
Cortiel, Jeanne. Demand My Writing: Joanna
Russ/Feminism/Science Fiction. Liverpool,
England: Liverpool University Press, 1999.
Delany, Samuel R. “Orders of Chaos: The
Science Fiction of Joanna Russ.” In Women
Worldwalkers: New Dimensions of Science
Fiction and Fantasy, ed. Jane B. Weedman,
95–123. Lubbock: Texas Tech Press, 1985.
269
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Malmgren, Carl. “Meta-SF: The Examples of
Dick, Le Guin, and Russ.” Extrapolation 43,
no. 1 (2002): 22–35.
Rosinsky, Natalie M. “A Female Man? The
‘Medusan’ Humor of Joanna Russ.”
Extrapolation 23, no. 1 (1982): 31–36.
Shinn, Thelma J. “Worlds of Words and
Swords: Suzette Haden Elgin and Joanna
Russ at Work.” In Women Worldwalkers:
New Dimensions of Science Fiction and Fantasy, ed. Jane B. Weedman, 207–22. Lubbock: Texas Tech Press, 1985.
Spector, Judith. “The Functions of Sexuality
in the Science Fiction of Russ, Piercy, and
Le Guin.” In Erotic Universe: Sexuality and
Fantastic Literature, ed. Donald Palumbo,
197–207. New York: Greenwood Press,
1986.

DUNJA M. MOHR

RUSSELL, MARY DORIA

(1950– )

Mary Doria Russell is an American
author who won the James Tiptree Jr.,
Arthur C. Clarke, and British Science
Fiction Association awards, among
others, for her 1996 debut novel The
Sparrow. The sequel, The Children of God,
appeared in 1998, the year Russell was
awarded the John W. Campbell Award
for the best new writer in Science Fiction. Russell worked for many years as
a paleoanthropologist and later as a
technical writer and did not turn to
writing ﬁction until she was in her forties. Her anthropological background is
a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on her science
ﬁction.
Her ﬁrst two novels were both ﬁrstcontact stories (her third, A Thread of
Grace [2005], is outside the speculative
genre). Russell has said she was
inspired to write them by thoughts of
Columbus and the notion that even the
most well-meaning among us would
make similar mistakes on encountering
an alien culture. Russell was raised as
a Catholic and after a period of atheism
converted to Judaism; both books deal
with the loss of faith by her central
270
................

Volume 2: Entries

character, Father Emilio Sandoz, a
Jesuit priest. The Sparrow opens as a
Vatican inquest is beginning into the
events surrounding the Jesuit-organized mission, of which Sandoz is the
sole survivor and stands accused of
prostitution and murdering a child, and
goes on to tell the tale of the doomed
mission and of the two intelligent species that inhabit the planet Rakhat: the
Runa and the Ja’anata. Children of God
returns the maimed, spiritually broken
Sandoz to Rakhat where, as a result of
their original mission, revolution now
foments.
Russell has been praised for her
insightful portrayal of men, and of
Sandoz in particular; she also explores
such themes as sexuality—from celibacy to rape—and power, masculinity,
and gender roles, both alien and
human. The Sparrow (and, by association, Children of God) was criticized
by some for a lack of scientiﬁc underpinnings and explanations of technological improbabilities as well as
implausible logic and was defended by
others as solid anthropological science
ﬁction. Some critics argued that it
could not be considered science ﬁction
due to its insufﬁcient explanations of
science, and that the story could have
taken place in any era featuring colonization; this claim is arguable, however, since one of Russell’s aims
seemed to be to frame a story of wellintentioned colonizers in a context
that would make them utterly sympathetic to—in fact, indistinguishable
from—modern liberal readers, and the
setting of an alien planet accomplished
this in a way that a historical novel
could not have done. The Sparrow has
been frequently compared (and considered an homage to) James Blish’s 1959
novel A Case of Conscience, although
Russell was unfamiliar with the book
prior to writing her own.

Russia
Further Readings
Knight, Judson. “Mary Doria Russell.” In Contemporary Authors, vol. 162, ed. Scot Peacock, 302–4. Detroit: Gale, 1998.
Mary Doria Russell [online]. Http://marydoria
russell.info.

LYNDA E. RUCKER

RUSSIA
Russia has produced a vast body of fantastic literature written by women.
Until the 1990s, science ﬁction was the
dominant genre, with authors focusing
on future societies, space exploration,
and alien civilizations. Lydia Obukhova
(1922–1991) became one of the ﬁrst
Russian women science ﬁction writers.
Her Daughter of Night: A Tale of Three
Worlds (1966), a novella about a prehistoric girl’s encounter with an extraterrestrial civilization, has been acclaimed
by readers and critics for its vibrant
narrative and the strong, unconventional character of the heroine, Lilith,
who teaches an alien what it is to love
and be human. Obukhova has also
been praised for A Dialogue with the
Man on the Moon (1977), a collection of
her short ﬁction, for her irony and
wittiness.
Another proliﬁc author who debuted
in science ﬁction in the 1960s is Olga
Larionova (1935– ). Women play important roles in all of her writing, either as
the heroines or the heroes’ main inﬂuences. Larionova’s ﬁrst novel, A Leopard
from the Top of Kilimanjaro (1965),
brought her recognition. In this novel,
the spaceship Overator brings back to
Earth information about the dates of
all people’s deaths and thus changes
the lives of the hero, Ramon, and the
two women in his life, Ille and Sana. In
1985, Larionova published the novella
The Sea Sonata, followed by The Checkered Tapir (1989) and The Labyrinth for
Troglodytes (1991). This trilogy’s heroine,

Varvara Norega, goes to the animalinhabited planet Stepanida and, to her
male colleagues’ amazement, discovers
that the life on the planet is controlled
by a mechanism hidden in the sea. The
discovery causes Varvara and others to
reevaluate their relationship with nonhuman life-forms. In 1996, Larionova
published her latest cycle of novels, the
Crowned Kreg series, a space opera
about planet Jasper, whose inhabitants
are blind and see only through the eyes
of intelligent birds called kregs. With
both these cycles, Larionova has been
praised for creating strong female
characters, for drawing attention to
environmental problems, and for her
poetic language, especially in each
series’ opening parts.
Other prominent women writing science ﬁction in Russia include Lyubov
Lukina (1950–1996) and Irina Andronati
(1966– ). With her husband, Evgeny
Lukin, Lukina coauthored numerous
short stories and novellas, included in
collections such as When Angels Retreat
(1990) and Cherchez la Grandma (1994).
Andronati also works in collaboration
with other writers. With Andrey Lazarchuk, she coauthored several novels,
such as For the Right to Fly (2001), Sky
Orphans (2003), and With Little Blood
(2005), and with Lazarchuk and Mikhail
Uspensky, Andronati coauthored The
March of the Ecclesiastics (2006).
In the 1990s, fantasy and alternative
history became extremely popular in
Russia, and Yelena Khaetskaya, Marina
Dyachenko, and Maria Semyonova
became some of the genre’s leading
writers. Khaetskaya (1963– ) has written
more than twenty fantasy novels and
novellas. Under the anglicized pseudonym of Madeline Simmons, she published The Sword and the Rainbow (1993),
a story of a French knight’s adventures
in Anglo-Norman England and his travels through parallel worlds. Between
271
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

1993 and 2005, using the male pseudonym of Douglas Brian, she wrote
several novellas continuing the story
of Conan the Barbarian. Many of
Khaetskaya’s works, like The Conquerors
(1996), The Obscurantist (1997), and the
Languedoc cycle (2001–03), are set in
medieval Europe and have been praised
for the author’s seamless blending of
historical material with the fantastic,
her use of myth and legend, and her
humorous style.
Like Khaetskaya, Dyachenko (1968– )
has produced over twenty major fantasy works, which she coauthored with
her husband, Sergey Dyachenko. The
novel that brought them fame was The
Door-Keeper (1994), about the wizard
Rual Ilmarannen, who loses most of his
power and struggles to reclaim it, and
the door-keeper Luar, who keeps the
mysterious Third Power from entering
his world. It became part of the Wanderers series (1994–2000), each part of
which portrays characters who are conﬂicted, feel incomplete, and become
wanderers to recover their sense of
self. Wanderings, whether symbolic or
real, are important in most of the Dyachenkos’ other works, such as The Age
of the Witch (1997), a love story of the
Grand Inquisitor and an outlawed
witch; The Execution (1999), the heroine
of which is a writer traveling between
the worlds created by her ex-husband;
and The Key to the Kingdom (2005), in
which a schoolgirl discovers parallel
worlds. These works have been praised
for the authors’ use of emotion and
their characters’ psychological depth.
Unlike many other Russian fantasists, Semyonova (1958– ) focuses on
Slavic history and mythology, rather
than the themes adopted from AngloAmerican fantasy. Her Wolf-Hound series (1995–2006) tells the story of the
last warrior of the Grey Hounds clan
who journeys through the pagan Slavic
272
................

Volume 2: Entries

lands to avenge the murder of his kin,
ﬁnding love and reconsidering his life’s
goals on the way. In another novel, The
Battle with the Dragon (Poedinok so
Zmeem, 1996), Semyonova presents her
reworking of the Slavic and Norse
mythologies. In these works, women
play an important role as the carriers
of tradition. Semyonova has been
referred to as the founder of Slavic fantasy and praised for her use of cultural
anthropology and folklore.
Among other prominent Russian
writers of fantasy are Olga Grigorieva,
the author of The Berserker (1997), The
Warlock (1999), and Ladoga (2000); Yulia
Latynina, author of the Vey Empire
cycle (1999–2000); and Victoria Ugryumova, author of The Name of the Goddess
(1998), The River of Fire (1998), and other
works.
See also: Fairy Tales and Folklore.
Further Readings
Bushnell, John. “Ante-Kiev in Fantasy and
Fable.” Slavic and East European Journal 45,
no. 2 (2001): 275–88.
Greene, Diana. “An Asteroid of One’s Own:
Women Soviet Science Fiction Writers.”
Irish Slavonic Studies 8 (1987): 127–39.
Kaplan, Vitalii. “A Look beyond the Wall: A
Topography of Contemporary Russian
Science Fiction.” Russian Studies in Literature 38 (2002): 62–84.
Laboratoriya Fantastiki (Laboratory of the
Fantastic) [online; Russian only]. Http://
www.fantlab.ru.
Russian Science Fiction and Fantasy
[online]. Http://www.rusf.ru/english/.

NINA SEREBRIANIK

RYMAN, GEOFFREY CHARLES

(1951– )

Geoffrey Ryman is a Canadian-born
author living in the United Kingdom.
His nine books and anthologized short
stories have been nominated for the
most highly acclaimed science ﬁction
and fantasy awards, and to date he

Ryman, Geoffrey Charles
has garnered nine top awards, including the James Tiptree Jr., World Fantasy,
Arthur C. Clarke, Philip K. Dick, John W.
Campbell Memorial, and British Science Fiction Association awards. Much
of his work is classiﬁed as science ﬁction or fantasy, but he writes mainstream and slipstream ﬁction, too.
Ryman’s ﬁctions are driven by strong
characterization and complex narrative
strands. Many of his novels have compelling women protagonists. These
women are often perceived as being
powerless, but he endows them with
unusual power so that they might
transform themselves and the society
in which they live. The Unconquered
Country (1984) is noteworthy for its
forthright political narrative and strong
protagonist, who uses her body as capital in an impoverished, futuristic society; Third Child’s womb, in which she
grows military weaponry, is a powerful
metaphor that encapsulates the horror
of invasion, genocide, and occupation.
In The Warrior Who Carried Life (1985),
the female protagonist transforms into
a great male warrior in order to save
her people.
Among Ryman’s incredibly imaginative body of work, The Child Garden
(1989) stands out in its memorable portrayal of a love affair between Milena, a
young actress/artist—“the last of her
kind” in a world where people have
heterosexuality imposed on them by a
virus—and
Rolfa,
a
genetically
engineered polar woman. Was …
(1992) has an inventive three-stranded
narrative that explores the vulnerability of childhood and the ways in which
powerlessness can be transcended. It
draws on L. Frank Baum’s Oz books
and the 1939 ﬁlm The Wizard of Oz to
explore the lives of Judy Garland, the
“real” Dorothy (Dorothy Gale/Gael), and

an actor, Jonathon, who is dying of
AIDS. The novel was inducted into
Gaylactic Spectrum Award’s Hall of
Fame in 2002.
Of his later work, Air; or, Have Not
Have (2002) stands out as a notable
text. In it, he imagines a future where a
worldwide communications system is
implanted in everyone’s mind. The protagonist Chung Mae lives in a rural
community, one of the last to go “on
stream.” When the system is tested,
Mae’s mind is melded to that of an
older woman who dies, and she retains
her link to the network, enabling her to
see both past and future worlds. Mae
has to help her community survive. In
this and his other ﬁctions, Ryman’s use
of powerful imagery and metaphor produces highly articulate and politically
nuanced ﬁction that allows for the exploration of the roles of women (and
men) in society.
Ryman’s other work includes an original hypertext and interactive Web
novel, 253; the original hypertext version was later published in hard copy
as 253: The Print Remix (1998). Other
novels include The Remix (1998); Lust
(2000); V.A.O. (2002); and The King’s Last
Song (2005). He has also adapted science ﬁction for the stage: Philip K.
Dick’s The Transmigration of Timothy
Archer (1982) and “Disappearing Acts”
(Virtual Unrealities, 1997) from Alfred
Bester’s short stories. Ryman teaches
creative writing at Manchester University in the United Kingdom.
Further Readings
Pearson, Wendy. “From The Bush Garden to
The Child Garden: Canadian Literary
Tropes in the Science Fiction and Fantasy
of Geoff Ryman.” Foundation 30, no. 81
(Spring 2001): 10–21.

PAT WHEELER

273
................

This page intentionally left blank

S
SARGENT, PAMELA

(1948– )

Pamela Sargent is an American science
ﬁction author and editor. Her novelette
“Danny Goes to Mars” won the Nebula
and Locus awards in 1992 and was a
nominee for the Hugo and Sturgeon
awards the same year. Sargent is perhaps better known for her work as an
editor of science ﬁction anthologies.
She ﬁrst published Women of Wonder in
1974, which won a retroactive James
Tiptree Jr. Award and spawned four follow-up anthologies: More Women of
Wonder (1976); The New Women of Wonder (1978); Women of Wonder, the Classic
Years (1995); and Women of Wonder, the
Contemporary Years (1995). All of her
anthologies were noted by Tiptree
judges on shortlists and readings “of
note” lists. In addition to her editing
and contributions to anthologies, Sargent is an engaging author of short stories and novels in her own right.
Sargent was born in California but
moved to New York as a child and has
lived in upstate New York for many
years. She attended the State University
of New York–Binghamton, where she
earned an M.A. in philosophy. Although
Sargent had written stories from a
young age, she threw them away until
classmate George Zebrowski, later her
partner, convinced her to submit a short
story, “Landed Minority,” for publication.
After writing short stories and editing
several anthologies, Sargent published
her ﬁrst novel, The Sudden Star, in 1979.
She quickly followed up with the
Watchstar trilogy, Watchstar (1980), Eye
of the Comet (1984), and Homesmind

(1984). Sargent then embarked on the
Venus trilogy, about the terraforming of
Venus by Terrans, with Venus of Dreams
in 1986 and Venus of Shadows in 1988;
the ﬁnal novel, Child of Venus, was not
released until 2000. In the meantime,
she wrote several stand-alone novels
such as The Alien Upstairs (1983) and
Earthseed (1983), the latter chosen as a
Best Book for Young Adults by the
American Library Association.
Her critically acclaimed The Shore of
Women (1986) explores a separatist society in which the women retain control of
technology and men live in nomadic
tribes, serving as sperm donors for the
women in walled cities. This novel critiques elements of 1970s feminist separatist utopian novels. Following Alien
Child (1988), Sargent wrote a non–science
ﬁction novel, Ruler of the Sky: A Novel of
Genghis Khan (1993), which recounts the
life of the Mongolian conqueror through
the eyes of the women in his life. The alternative history Climb the Wind: A Novel
of Another America (1998) supposes how
America would have evolved if not
colonized by Europeans.
Sargent’s
short-story
collections
include Cloned Lives (1976), Starshadows
and Blue Roses (1977), The Golden Space
(1982), The Best of Pamela Sargent (1983),
Behind the Eyes of Dreamers, and Other
Short Novels (2002), The Mountain Cage,
and Other Stories (2002), Eyes of Flame:
Fantasies (2003), and Thumbprints (2004).
Sargent cowrote four Star Trek novels
with Zebrowski and edited four Nebula
Awards Stories anthologies. Her additional credits include editing Three in
Space (1981) and Three in Time (1997)
275
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

with Zebrowski and Jack Dann, Afterlives (1986) with Ian Watson, Bio-Futures
(1976), Metamorphosis (1976), and Conqueror Fantastic (2004). She has published one nonﬁction book, Firebrands:
The Heroines of Science Fiction and Fantasy
(1981).
Further Readings
Hassler, Donald M. “Ambivalences in the
Venus of Pamela Sargent.” Extrapolation
38, no. 2 (Summer 1997): 150–56.
Pamela Sargent [online]. Http://www.
engel-cox.org/sargent.

NAOMI STANKOW-MERCER

SCARBOROUGH, ELIZABETH

(1947– )

Elizabeth Scarborough is an awardwinning American science ﬁction and
fantasy writer. Her ﬁrst publications were
comedic and historical fantasies focusing
on strong female protagonists who did
not ﬁt the mold of the stereotypical heroine. These protagonists are much more
likely to rescue their future or current
husbands than the other way around.
She has written novels for young adults
under the name Elizabeth Scarboro and
has published a number of series.
The Argonia series consists of Song of
Sorcery (1982), The Unicorn Creed (1983),
Bronwyn’s Bane (1983), and The Christening Quest (1985). These novels are set in
an alternate world with a landscape
reminiscent of Alaska, with twists on
standard fairy-tale plots and a good
deal of humor. The protagonist of
the ﬁrst two novels is Maggie Brown,
a young witch who is plump, darkhaired, and intelligent. The later novels
focus on her niece, Bronwyn, the extremely large and powerful child of a
frost giant and Maggie’s sister, a beautiful blonde. The Songkiller series, consisting of The Phantom Banjo (1991),
Picking the Ballad’s Bones (1991), and
Strum Again? (1992), relates an attempt
by devils to destroy folk music. A group
276
................

Volume 2: Entries

of folk musicians must go on a quest
to save music for humanity.
Beginning with the 1989 Nebula
Award–winning novel The Healer’s
War, Scarborough has dealt with
serious themes of war while retaining
the focus on female protagonists. The
Healer’s War is a fantasy novel that
grew from Scarborough’s experience as
a nurse in Vietnam; the protagonist,
Kitty, is a nurse who is given an amulet
by a Vietnamese mystic she has cared
for. The amulet gives her the power of
understanding the character and intentions of those she meets and allows her
to survive both capture by enemy
troops and the threat of rape from men
ﬁghting on her own side. Nothing Sacred
(1991) is a future war novel, written by
a woman ﬁghting in a post-holocaust
war in 2069 who becomes a prisoner of
war in Tibet. A sequel, Last Refuge
(1992), focuses on her granddaughter.
Scarborough’s war novels blend realistic depictions of combat and imprisonment with fantastic elements that in
no way soften or disguise the effects of
war on her characters.
She has published a number of other
fantasy series, including the Godmother series, set in contemporary
Seattle, and has collaborated with
Anne McCaffrey on the Peytabee series: Powers That Be (1993), Power Lines
(1994), and Power Play (1995). In this series, Maj. Yanaba Maddock is invalided
onto a frontier planet, where she is also
asked to spy on the population, a mixture of Inuit and Irish who had been
forcibly relocated from Earth. This series blends environmental themes,
including a sentient planet, with story
lines of corporate and military oppression of people forced to settle in a hostile environment.
Scarborough was born in Kansas City,
Missouri, in 1947. She received her RN
in 1968 from Bethany Hospital School

Scott, Melissa
of Nursing and her B.A. in history from
the University of Alaska, Fairbanks, in
1968. She served in Vietnam in the U.S.
Army Nurse Corps, achieving the rank
of captain, before she began full-time
publishing in 1979. She currently lives
in the Puget Sound area of Washington.
Further Readings
“Elizabeth Ann Scarborough.” Authors and
Artists for Young Adults, vol. 28. Detroit:
Gale, 1999.

ROBIN ANNE REID

SCOTT, MELISSA

(1960– )

Melissa Scott is an American author
who is considered to be one of the key
writers of contemporary lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) science ﬁction and fantasy. Her work has
won numerous awards. Scott published
her ﬁrst novel, The Game Beyond, in 1984
while she was still a graduate student in
comparative history at Brandeis University. She completed her Ph.D. and has
continued writing science ﬁction and
fantasy since then. To date, she is the
author of eighteen novels, including two
written in the Star Trek and Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine universes, one nonﬁction book on writing science ﬁction, and
several short stories and monologues.
She is also the coauthor of three fantasy
novels written with life partner Lisa Barnett (1958–2006).
While many of her novels have been
groundbreaking in their depiction of
LGBT characters, several stand out.
Shadow Man (1995) is set in a society
where ﬁve genders exist, but only two
are recognized as legitimate. The protagonist, Warreven Stiller, who is neither male nor female, must confront a
world where people of nonstandard
genders are viewed as defective.
Another novel, Trouble and Her Friends
(1994), was one of the few cyberpunk
novels of the mid-1990s to feature a

lesbian as the protagonist. Scott paints
a detailed picture of a near-future
world where corporate control of virtual reality is commonplace.
Many of Scott’s novels feature
complex world-building, as well as protagonists who live in a shadowy underworld where arts and technology meet.
Whether on Earth or outer space, her
characters, like Trouble, are generally
outside the mainstream looking in.
Scott says that she wants to use science ﬁction to approach “the question
of who gets to deﬁne themselves as
‘people’—who gets to be the norm”
(“Melissa and Her Friends”).
In contrast to her cyberpunk novels,
the three novels that she cowrote with
Barnett are fantasies with a strong historical ﬂavor. Armor of Light (1988) is set
in a magical alternative Elizabethan
England peopled by real historical personages such as Christopher Marlowe,
Sir Philip Sidney, and the Earl of
Bothwell. The Points novels (Point of
Hopes, 1995; Point of Dreams, 2001) are
set in a fantastic world where alchemy,
magic, and astrology meet. The focus
of these novels is on class structures
and the impact of magic use, rather
than gender and sexuality.
While Scott’s work has been criticized for slow-moving plots where the
reader gets lost in the cyber-landscape,
it has also been consistently praised by
critics for her world-building and her
realistic depiction of a diverse underclass in technology-dominated societies. Her work has won a number of
awards, including the 1986 Campbell
Award for best new writer for The Kindly
Ones (1987). She won the Lambda Literary Award for Science Fiction and Fantasy in 1995 for Shadow Man, in 1996 for
Trouble and Her Friends, and again in
2001 for Point of Dreams. She is a frequent guest lecturer at Odyssey: The
Fantasy Writing Workshop. In addition,
277
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

several of her monologues have been
featured in various theater productions
and competitions.
See also: Feminist Science Fiction; Queer Science Fiction.
Further Readings
Chernaik, Laura.”Difference, the Social and
the Spatial: The Fictions of Melissa Scott.”
Foundation 82 (Summer 2001): 25–43.
Haran, Joan. “Destabilising Sex/Gender/Sexuality in Melissa Scott’s Shadow Man.”
Foundation 82 (Summer 2001): 9–24.
“Melissa and Her Friends.” Spaced Out
interview [online], http://spacedoutinc.
org/DU-17/MelissaScottInterview.html.

CATHERINE LUNDOFF

SEDDON-BOULET, SUSAN ELEANOR
(1941–1997)
Susan Seddon-Boulet is considered one
of the founders of the “visionary art”
movement in the United States. Visionary art is a genre in which artists fantastically depict imagined, spiritual,
and magical realms and beings. The
distinctive nature of Seddon-Boulet’s
painting arises from her skillful layering of concentrated color and light,
techniques that lend a dreamlike quality to her work. Frequently, her paintings interweave human ﬁgures with
elements of myth and mysticism,
drawing upon a sense of a “magical” or
“sacred” center within the natural
world.
Susan Eleanor Seddon was born to
ex-patriot English parents in Brazil in
1941. In her early years, she developed
her love of fantasy and folk tales while
living on the family’s citrus farm,
where she was ﬁrst encouraged by her
father to draw the farmyard animals
and to connect with nature. Very religious as a young woman, Seddon contemplated becoming a nun. Her father
declined to support his daughter in this
endeavor, however, instead sending her
278
................

Volume 2: Entries

to ﬁnishing school in Switzerland.
There she began her formal arts training. Seddon’s international education
not only introduced her to numerous
cultures and beliefs but also instilled in
her the desire to travel and learn about
the world—a coupling of experiences
and predilections that would later provide the artistic impulse and subject
matter of her most well-known works.
Seddon emigrated to the United
States in 1967, where she met and married Lawrence Boulet. With her husband’s support and encouragement,
Seddon-Boulet began to develop her
skill with oil pastels, inks, and pencil,
eventually beginning to sell her paintings from the fences in a local park on
Saturday afternoons. Upon the birth of
her son Eric, Seddon-Boulet and family
moved to the San Francisco Bay area,
where she continued to live and work.
Her husband died of cancer in 1980.
Seddon-Boulet, too, died of cancer, in
Oakland, California, on April 28, 1997.
She was ﬁfty-six years old.
An array of traditions inspired Seddon-Boulet’s work, from myths and
epics to fairy tales and folklore to classical, indigenous, and New Age religious and spiritual beliefs. She is
particularly known for her representations of Goddess forms, shamans,
anthropomorphized animal “teachers”
(in the shamanistic tradition of totem
animals), and other imagined and supernatural beings that are said to traverse the boundaries between the
everyday world and the spirit realm.
Her early work tended more toward the
speculative and the fantastic, such as
portrayals of medieval and fantasy
characters rendered in vivid colors.
Later, her work evolved to include a
stronger sense of human beings’ spiritual need to recognize the sacred character of all life. Seddon-Boulet’s
paintings are collected worldwide and

Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft
have appeared as book covers, popular
greeting cards, posters, and calendars.
See also: “Feminist Spirituality” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Babcock, Michael. Susan Seddon-Boulet: A
Retrospective. New York: Pomegranate
Communications, 2004.
———. Susan Seddon-Boulet: The Goddess
Paintings. New York: Pomegranate Communications, 1994.
Seddon-Boulet, Susan. Shaman: The Paintings
of Susan Seddon Boulet. New York: Pomegranate Communications, 1989.

MICHELLE LAFRANCE

SEX CHANGES
A sex change occurs when an individual shifts from her or his current sex to
a different one (male to female or vice
versa). This change can be physical—
through genital and other kinds of surgery that transform the body—or can
refer more broadly to the process
through which someone comes to selfidentify as a different sex. Indeed,
ongoing discussions among gender
studies scholars, such as Judith Butler,
focus on the extent to which one’s sex
or gender is deﬁned by physical characteristics or by larger or external attributes such as clothing, behavior, and the
personal declaration of identiﬁcation
with a particular sex. In some cases,
individuals, including many members
of the intersex community, may not
identify with either male or female
gender identity. While there is some
debate and variance in the use of the
two terms, sex is often used to describe
one’s anatomical sexual identity and
gender to refer to sexual identity as it is
deﬁned within a broader cultural and
societal contexts.
Many science ﬁction and fantasy (SF/
F) narratives explore the possibility of
sex change beyond what is present in
our own world in terms of transexuality

or the transgender community. Sex
changes take diverse forms, sometimes
simply in the form of body-switching, as
in the Farscape episode “Out of Their
Minds,” which offers a narrative trope
that allows characters to explore living
in a different person’s body, whether of a
different species or gender (or both).
Some SF/F worlds are populated by alien
species that naturally change sex
throughout their lifetimes, as in Ursula
K. Le Guin’s The Left Hand of Darkness
(1969), or by individuals who live several
lifetimes as both a man and a woman,
as in Virginia Woolf’s Orlando (1928).
Texts such as these allow authors to
explore the extent to which one’s gender
might impact not only personality but
also one’s relationship to others and the
larger society. Many works contain individuals who can change their gender or

bodily form at will, as in Elisabeth
Vonarburg’s The Silent City (1988) or Joe
Haldeman’s James Tiptree Jr. Award–
winning Camouﬂage (2004).
See also: Queer Science Fiction.
Further Readings
Butler, Judith. Undoing Gender. London: Taylor & Francis, 2004.
Mohanraj, Mary Ann. Alternative Sexualities
in Fantasy and SF Booklist [online]. Http://
www.mamohanraj.com/altsex.html.

JOHN GARRISON

SHELLEY, MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT
(1797–1851)
English author Mary Shelley wrote
what many critics consider to be the
ﬁrst science ﬁction (SF) novel, Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus (1818,
rev. 1831). Born to leading Enlightenment thinkers, philosopher and novelist William Godwin (1756–1836) and
feminist writer Mary Wollstonecraft
(1759–1797), Mary grew up in London in
a social circle that included literary, political, and scientiﬁc notables. She
279
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

eloped with her future husband, poet
Percy Bysshe Shelley, in 1814. This liaison was scandalous primarily because
he was already married; they did not
marry until 1816. During their eight
years together, Mary Shelley had four
children and a miscarriage; Percy Florence Shelley was the only child to survive to adulthood. The Shelleys spent
the summer of 1816 on Lake Geneva,
where, with fellow poet Lord Byron,
they challenged one another to a ghost
story competition that produced Frankenstein. Shelley’s husband drowned July
1822, leaving her without ﬁnancial
resources. She became a professional
writer, publishing reviews, travel writing, short stories, biographies, poetry,
drama, and novels, as well as collecting
and editing her husband’s works. Shelley died from a brain tumor in 1851.
With Frankenstein, Shelley secured literary fame and began the genre of SF,
anticipating such SF writers as Poe,
Wells, and Stevenson. As Brian Aldiss
convincingly argues, Frankenstein pioneered the way for “later diseased creation myths” (Billion Year Spree, 26). The
frame story of sea captain Robert Walton’s letters to his sister contains the horrifying tale of Victor Frankenstein’s
experiment of bringing to life a corpse
patched together from human remains.
Benevolent until rejected by everyone,
including his creator, the nameless creature seeks vengeance on Frankenstein.
Frankenstein combines new scientiﬁc
ideas, such as those expounded by Erasmus Darwin, Humphrey Davy, and Luigi
Galvani, with social criticism and political
theory reminiscent of Godwin’s writings.
Shelley’s The Last Man (1826), a gothic,
apocalyptic novel set in the twenty-ﬁrst
century, inﬂuenced future-history ﬁction.
Its narrator Lionel Verney recounts a
plague’s annihilation of humanity until
he is the sole survivor. The theme of
reanimation, seen in Frankenstein, is also
280
................

Volume 2: Entries

prominent in Shelley’s “Valerius the
Reanimated Roman” (1986) and “Roger
Dodsworth: The Reanimated Englishman” (1863). Both stories describe the
main character’s struggle to understand
the new world in which he has awakened. Surpassing his life expectancy is
also achieved by the 323-year-old protagonist in Shelley’s “The Mortal Immortal”
(1834), who drinks the elixir of immortality when working for alchemist Cornelius Agrippa (idolized by a young
Frankenstein). In Shelley’s fantastic story
“Transformation” (1830), the main character exchanges his body with that of a
dwarf in return for treasure. This story’s
emphasis on doubles is also prominent
in Frankenstein.
In her 1831 introduction to Frankenstein, Shelley writes, “I bid my hideous
progeny go forth and prosper”; these prophetic words came true, as her creature
stepped from page to stage to screen, living again in sequels—both literary and
ﬁlm—cartoons, comic books, and hypertexts and inﬂuencing subsequent SF.
See also: Artiﬁcial Life; Britain; Cloning;
Dystopias; Genetic Engineering; Horror;
“Nineteenth-Century Fiction” (vol. 1); “Science Fiction Film: Nineteenth and Twentieth
Centuries” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Aldiss, Brian W. Billion Year Spree: The True
History of Science Fiction, 7–39. New York:
Doubleday, 1973.
Clayton, Jay. “Frankenstein’s Futurity: Replicants and Robots.” In The Cambridge Companion to Mary Shelley, ed. Esther Schor,
84–99. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2003.
Seymour, Miranda. Mary Shelley. London:
Murray, 2000.

STACI STONE

SLASH FICTION
Slash ﬁction is the large subgenre of fan
ﬁction best known for its exploration of

Slash Fiction
the same-sex romantic and sexual
interests of established characters, traditionally males. Stories depicting a
romantic relationship between Star Trek
characters Kirk and Spock were circulating in private at least by the early
1970s, and Diane Marchant’s 1974
“A Fragment Out of Time” is generally
cited as the ﬁrst published slash story.
Throughout the 1970s, fanzine stories
announced the central romantic pairing
through initials separated by a virgule
(/). The stories were initially described
as KirkSpock or KayEss, then as K/S;
eventually, the dividing mark became
the deﬁning term, with such stories
called stroke or slash. With the rise of
these stories in other pairings and fandoms, especially the late 1970s television
show Starsky and Hutch, the term slash
started to denote any and all male–male
pairings. With the rise of female–female
pairings, such as Xena: Warrior Princess’s Xena and Gabrielle, the genre
expanded to include all-female romantic
and sexual pairings, oftentimes calling it
femmeslash or femslash.
The initial slash dynamic of pairing
the two male leads who are best
friends and partners continues through
fandoms for shows such as The Professionals, Due South, The Sentinel, or The
Phantom Menace. Other slash fandoms,
including those for Buffy the Vampire
Slayer and Harry Potter, use minor
characters to create their central slash
pairings, while some, including The
X-Files and Smallville, may focus on
enemy pairings. Shows with ensemble
casts may have multiple and often
competing pairings. In recent years,
slash based on celebrities (such as the
male vocal group ’N Sync or the actors
from The Lord of the Rings) has become
widely popular and real people slash
(RPS) is now part of media fandom.
The most commonly asked question
about slash is why mostly straight

women write romantic and often
highly pornographic sex between two
men, and the answers are as varied as
the women who enjoy slash. Most
(especially older) television shows
invite identiﬁcation with male heroes
and often fail to offer female role models worthy of identiﬁcation, inviting
female viewers to create stories around
the male leads. Additionally, some
slash readers ﬁnd erotic appeal in stories about attractive men making love.
The relationships between the male
protagonists, which are often presented
in the source material within a homosocial environment and occasionally
only thinly veiled homoerotic subtext,
invite explorations of gender equality
impossible in heterosexual pairings.
Placing two (often highly masculine)
men in a romantic relationship allows
slash to portray a type of love that does
not fall prey to hierarchical notions
and which explores both the masculine
and feminine sides of the characters.
As a result of the female fans’
relationship idealizations, slash tends
to interpret partnership and deep emotional attachment as erotic and sexual love. Slash habitually valorizes
inner compatibility, true love, and deep
friendship over sexuality, suggesting
that the bond between the protagonists
is stronger than sexual identity. Such a
reading of the characters’ sexual identity is at the center of the important
and highly contested subgenre of
early slash ﬁction shorthanded as
WNGWJLEO (We’re Not Gay, We Just
Love Each Other). Drawing from the
characters’ seemingly explicit onscreen heterosexuality, such stories
depict partners whose love for one
another is strong enough to overturn
their clearly deﬁned heterosexual
identity.
Over the years, slash writers have
started dismissing as homophobic this
281
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

trope of men having sex with men
without identifying as homosexual or
bisexual; nevertheless, much slash
ﬁction retains the trope’s underlying
sentiment of true love and devotion
transcending all external rules. Rather
than emphasizing the characters’
straightness, however, many slashers
adamantly argue the impossibility of
knowing any character’s sexual identity. While cultural norms usually suggest that unspoken sexuality be read as
straight, slashers simply read it as
unspoken: any character has the
potential to be gay or bisexual unless
explicitly (and possibly inaccurately)
stated otherwise in the text.
Some fans require nominal straightness as part of the deﬁnition for slash,
claiming that relations between characters that are known to be gay or
bisexual cannot be called slash. This
issue was not important before the
media began to portray major gay characters, but the discussion within the
fan community over whether Queer as
Folk fan ﬁction constitutes slash is still
continuing. Another deﬁnition requires
that the pairing not be explicit onscreen, so slash can only be stories that
explore the subtext of sexual attraction; in this context, slash constitutes
an inversion of norms, usually in the
service of love. Thus, to slash a text
describes the act of depicting seeming
sexual tension as actual sexual
engagement.
More recently, slash has also become
an umbrella term for gay romantic ﬁction with explicit content when written
by fans. The existence of a category
called original slash, which describes
stories that are not based on outside
media source texts but still follow slash
tropes, suggests that many readers feel
they can identify a particular aesthetic
that characterizes slash in stylistic,
emotive, and thematic markers. The
282
................

Volume 2: Entries

sites and modes of creation, distribution, and reception clearly demarcate
original slash from other forms of
homoerotica, suggesting that, for many
fans, slash ﬁction is more than just any
pairing of same-sex characters but
instead describes a particular genre.
See also: “Fandom” (vol. 1); “Television: Twentieth Century” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Green, Shoshanna, Cynthia Jenkins, and
Henry Jenkins. “Normal Female Interest
in Men Bonking: Selections from the Terra
Nostra Underground and Strange Bedfellows.” In Theorizing Fandom: Fans, Subculture, and Identity, ed. Cheryl Harris and
Alison Alexander, 9–38. Cresskill, NJ:
Hampton Press, 1998.
Lamb, Patricia Frazer, and Diane Veith.
“Romantic Myth, Transcendence, and Star
Trek Zines.” In Erotic Universe: Sexuality and
Fantastic Literature, ed. Donald Palumbo,
236–55. New York: Greenwood Press, 1986.
Marchant, Diane. “A Fragment Out of Time.”
Grup 3 (1974).
Russ, Joanna. “Pornography by Women, for
Women, with Love.” In Magic Mommas,
Trembling Sisters, Puritans and Perverts:
Feminist Essays, 79–99. Trumansburg, NY:
Crossing Press, 1985.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. Between Men: English
Literature and Male Homosocial Desire. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1985.
Woledge, Elizabeth. “From Slash to the Mainstream: Female Writers and Gender Blending Men.” Extrapolation 46 (2005): 50–66.

KRISTINA BUSSE

SLONCZEWSKI, JOAN

(1956– )

Joan Slonczewski is an American writer
and professor of biology at Kenyon College in Gambier, Ohio, specializing in
bacteriology and genetics. She is the
author of six novels, beginning with
Still Forms on Foxﬁeld (1980), published
when she was only twenty-four. Her father was a theoretical physicist at IBM.
Profoundly inﬂuenced by science, the

Small Press
Cold War, Ursula K. Le Guin, and Quakerism, Slonczewski’s science ﬁction
attempts to balance scientiﬁc advances
with religious and ethical concerns.
The heart of each book evolves from an
ethical dilemma that develops from a
society’s decisions regarding the use of
scientiﬁc knowledge.
Still Forms on Foxﬁeld looks at an
extraterrestrial community of Quakers
whose sound decisions regarding an
alien ecology are challenged by a technologically resurgent Earth. A Door into
Ocean (1986), winner of the John W.
Campbell Memorial Award, similarly
examines a water-covered world inhabited by genetically engineered purplepigmented women who successfully
thwart a military invasion through
Gandhi-like means. Nonviolent crisis
resolution also plays an important role
in The Wall around Eden (1989), which
describes a devastated post-holocaust
Earth where small enclaves of humans
must make do with limited resources
as well as deal with the incomprehensible behavior of the insectlike spacefarers who now supervise the planet.
Daughter of Elysium (1993), set in the
same universe as Door, observes several
conﬂicting cultures who disagree on
scientiﬁc and reproductive issues like
terraforming, population control, and
the nanotechnological advances and
machine sentience brought on by
genetic engineering. Slonczewski, the
mother of two sons, gives considerable
import to children’s involvement in
solving major problems. The Children
Star (1998) continues to examine the
ecological coexistence of religion and
technology. Living on a dangerous, arsenic-based world, Brother Rod, a
retired soldier and Jesuit; Reverend
Mother Artemis, a nanoplastic wet
nurse; and Brother Geode, a sentient
tarantula-like
mining
and
farm
machine, set up an asylum for

orphaned children. In Brain Plague
(2000), not only is nanotechnology used
to grow enormous buildings but the
rights of intelligent microbes inhabiting
people’s
brains
must
also
be
considered.
Slonczewski’s worlds are rigorously
constructed and vividly described,
based on the most recent advances in
scientiﬁc thinking. Although intellectually and morally challenging, her work
is also delightful for its quirky humor.
In her June 2000 Nature spoof,
“Tuberculosis Bacteria Join UN,” Slonczewski concludes, “If Stalin joined the
UN, why not TB?”
Further Readings
Higgins, Edward F. “Quaker Ethos as Science
Praxis in Joan L. Slonczewski’s A Door into
Ocean.” In Biotechnological and Medical
Themes in Science Fiction, ed. Domna
Pastourmatzi, 299–343. Thessalonika,
Greece: University Studio Press, 2002.
Lindow, Sandra J. “Living on a High Place:
Asperger’s Syndrome in Joan Slonczewski’s The Children Star.” Kaleidoscope 47
(Summer/Fall 2003): 27–30.
Sobstyl, Edrie. “All the Sisters of Shora: An
Anarcha/Ecofeminist Reading of Slonczewski’s A Door into Ocean.” Anarchist Studies 7 (1999): 127–53.
Wolf, Virginia. “The Kin-dom of God in Joan
Slonczewski’s Novels.” New York Review of
Science Fiction 103 (March 1997): 23.

SANDRA J. LINDOW

SMALL PRESS
The term small press refers to print
periodicals that are sold primarily
through direct subscription and niche
book/magazine dealers. These periodicals generally pay less than ﬁve cents
per word and appear at least twice a
year. The principal venue for science
ﬁction, fantasy, and horror prose and
poetry during the 1950s consisted of
the professional magazines sold on
newsstands and the fanzines, which
283
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

paid nothing but complimentary copies. There were only a few exceptions
such as the magazine Fantasy Book.
This situation changed during the
1960s. Newsstand publications started
to dwindle in number from the mid1950s on because of the diminishing
number of newstands and more intense competition from paperback
books. The birth of the small-press segment in the genre-publishing community began in the mid-1960s. The acute
shortage of commercial newsstand
magazines to which new writers could
sell short ﬁction meant that established
writers dominated the ﬁeld. Even the
nature of the copies-only fanzine market was changing: Fanzines that were
publishing ﬁction had become media
fanzines, publications devoted to particular television series and movies.
Not only did the market change, but
the new writers entering the ﬁeld had
changed as well. Writers and editors
coming into the ﬁeld had formal college and graduate school backgrounds
in literature, writing, and the humanities. They were well aware of the general literary “little” magazines and saw
a need for transferring this tradition to
the science ﬁction/fantasy/horror markets, with one change: the magazines
would pay, though not at the rates that
newsstand publications could offer.
In the eyes of most historians of the
genre, the small-press community was
started by the semiannual Space & Time,
launched in 1966 by Gordon Linzner,
who retitled and reformatted a fanzine
he operated. Initially he paid only for
prose, but within a few years was paying for poetry as well. He also developed a book imprint, a practice
emulated by other publishers of smallpress magazines. After forty years,
Linzner folded the magazine in order to
concentrate on other professional work
as a writer.
284
................

Volume 2: Entries

A number of women writers and editors were inﬂuential in the development of science ﬁction, fantasy, and
horror small-press magazines. Lois
Wickstrom founded Pandora, which was
a showcase for both speculative and
surreal work. It gave writers an opportunity to write stories that moved
beyond the conventional boundaries
and limitations of the genre. Wickstrom now writes books for e-publishers in the ﬁeld of children’s ﬁction and
gardening.
Janet Fox was a proliﬁc writer of prose
and poetry for both newsstand and
small-press periodicals as well as several novels. She was the publisher and
editor-in-chief of Scavenger’s Newsletter.
During the publication’s peak in the
1980s and early 1990s, it was an important source of information on trends
and the structure of the small press
above and beyond its role as a market
newsletter for writers and artists.
Stephanie Stearns is a proliﬁc writer
of articles for the women’s magazine
market. During the 1970s and 1980s,
she was also a proliﬁc poet, appearing
in both fan and small-press venues.
Stearns was also an ofﬁcer and editor
for the Small Press Writers and Artists
Organization (SPWAO). SPWAO’s purpose was to promote and be a voice for
the small-press community. However,
conﬂict between members who wanted
to focus on professional issues and
those who wanted to be fan-oriented
soon caused the organization to close.
Roberta Rogow is a major fan activist
and fan writer, especially in media fandom. In the 1980s, she published and
edited Beyond, a lighthearted smallpress magazine devoted to space opera. At that time, and to this day,
small-press magazines tend to be
showcases for horror and dark fantasy.
Peggy Nadramia is the cofounder of
Grue, which was the prototype for

Space Opera
publications specializing in horror, both
supernatural and psychological. She
has since left the ﬁeld and become an
activist in the Church of Satan.
Some of the major women writers
from a variety of genres of speculative
ﬁction whose work has appeared in
small-press publications include Hope
Athearn, Ruth Berman, Valerie Colander, Jo Anna Dale, Sonya Dorman,
Eileen Kernaghan, Ursula K. Le Guin,
Esther Leiper, Ardath Mayhar, Susan
Palwick, and Jane Yolen—showing that
these magazines are important venues
for established writers as well as new
writers.

SCOTT E. GREEN

SPACE OPERA
The term space opera was coined in
1941 by Wilson “Bob” Tucker as a label
for poor-quality science ﬁction (SF). It
was intended to be analogous to horse
opera, used to describe formulaic westerns, and soap opera, which referred to
popular daytime radio series, usually
sponsored by soap companies. As time
passed, however, the term became less
pejorative and more descriptive, and
although it still retains a degree of its
former derogatory implication in certain contexts, in what follows the designation is exclusively descriptive and
aesthetically neutral.
Even though the majority of space
operas have been written by men,
the list of noteworthy works by women
is respectably long. Lois McMaster
Bujold is probably the most widely
honored contemporary female author
of space opera, having won multiple
awards for her Barrayar series. Some of
the most elaborate and richly imagined
space operas are those of C. J. Cherryh,
especially the Alliance/Union and Foreigner series. Cherryh’s narrative style
is a traditional one, and her ﬁctional

societies are densely depicted, with
attention given to cultural detail and
psychological depth. A recurring central theme in her ﬁction is that of the
outsider, stranded in and trying to
understand a culture not his or her
own. Space opera of note has also been
written by Melissa Scott, Joan D.
Vinge, James Tiptree Jr., and Kristine
Kathryn Rusch.
It is sometimes difﬁcult to ﬁnd consensus among fans and scholars concerning what to include in the category,
but certain elements and characteristics of most, if not all, space operas can
be discerned. Space operas tend to be
set in the relatively or far distant
future, off-Earth, in a culture or society
(often, though not inevitably, a multispecies one, including aliens) in which
interstellar, or even intergalactic, space
travel is common. At times, the subgenre’s cosmic vistas and vast scale
approach the sublime.
Action and adventure elements are
usually strong in space opera, which is
occasionally referred to as “adventure
SF.” Early authors Leigh Brackett and
Andre Norton are known for their
adventure stories, and the tradition
ﬂourishes in the twenty-ﬁrst century,
for example, in Kristine Smith’s Jani
Kilian series and Syne Mitchell’s Murphy’s Gambit. Hard SF, with its characteristic emphasis on scientiﬁc accuracy
(or at least plausibility), is another
overlapping subgenre, since space
opera frequently includes scientiﬁcally
informed extrapolation alongside more
extreme speculations about the nature
and future of the universe and its
inhabitants.
In her Skolian Empire novels, Catherine Asaro successfully blends hard SF,
space opera, and the contemporary
romance genre to produce scientiﬁcally
informed adventure tales with love stories at their cores. The planetary
285
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

romance, despite its strong focus on
a vivid portrayal of a particular
world, frequently establishes that
world within the context of a space opera universe. Examples include Mary
Gentle’s Golden Witchbreed (1983) and
Ancient Light (1987), Ursula K. Le Guin’s
The Left Hand of Darkness (1969) and The
Dispossessed (1974), Joan Slonczewski’s
A Door into Ocean (1986), and the Pern
series by Anne McCaffrey. Finally, a
not insigniﬁcant number of space
operas can be classed as military SF,
with main characters who are members of military organizations such as a
space navy. Such characters are not
usually women, but exceptions can be
found in Joe Haldeman’s The Forever
War (1974), David Weber’s Honor Harrington series, and several novels by
Elizabeth Moon. Interesting female
protagonists in the work of male
authors include Rydra Wong in Samuel
R. Delany’s Babel-17 (1966); Dorothy
Yoshida in Paul J. McAuley’s Four Hundred Billion Stars (1991) and Eternal Light
(1991); Tabitha Jute in Colin Greenland’s Plenty series; Maia in David
Brin’s Glory Season (1993); Priscilla
Hutchens in Jack McDevitt’s Deepsix
(2001), Chindi (2002), and Omega (2003);
and Rue Cassels in Karl Schroeder’s Permanence (2002).
The most widely known examples of
contemporary space opera are those
found in popular media. Somewhat surprisingly, perhaps, there are not a great
many major cinematic space operas,
nor is there a great deal of diversity
among those which do exist. Star Wars
(1977) and its sequels and prequels are
undoubtedly among the most famous
movies of all times, but the women in
the ﬁlms play distinctly subordinate
roles. On the other hand, the four Alien
ﬁlms provide, in the Ellen Ripley character, one of the most fascinating women
in all of science ﬁction cinema.
286
................

Volume 2: Entries

It is television, however, that has
produced both a greater variety of interesting and thought-provoking space
operas and a larger number of the subgenre’s more interesting women characters. The Star Trek franchise, in both
television series and ﬁlms, is the most
prominent example here, if not consistently the most original or well done. Of
particular interest is the manner in
which depictions of female characters
in the diverse incarnations of the show
have varied over time. The responses of
fans to, and their complex interactions
with, the Star Trek phenomenon are
also signiﬁcant, as evidenced, for
instance, in the development of slash
ﬁction.
A number of other TV space operas
deserve mention, among them Blakes
7, Andromeda, Babylon 5, and the new
version of Battlestar Galactica. Special
attention should be paid to Farscape,
in many ways the most innovative and
original television space opera yet produced. This series dared to experiment—both visually and in terms of
story—with form, format, and content
in its imaginative exploration of
diverse issues ranging from identity
and loyalty to gender and sexuality.
The show’s female characters were
unconventional, memorable, and well
developed. Finally, there is Joss Whedon’s Fireﬂy (and its companion ﬁlm,
Serenity), a short-lived but highly
praised series that managed to combine space opera with the western,
and whose principal women characters
are strong individuals who display
their respective strengths in quite different ways.
Observers of science ﬁction have, in
the years following the millennium,
begun to speak of a resurgence in both
the quantity and quality of space opera. Terms such as new space opera and
space opera renaissance have been

Star Trek
introduced to describe this phenomenon, the detailed origins and exact
contours (or even existence) of which
are still being debated. One issue of
contention is the nature and importance of differences between British
and American space opera.
Among the characteristics claimed
for a reinvented subgenre are more
sociopolitical sophistication, greater
narrative density and complexity of
story, richer historical awareness, and
increased generic openness. In addition to several authors already mentioned, women involved in the
reinvigoration of space opera include
British writers Justina Robson and
Karin Traviss; Americans Nancy Kress,
Susan R. Mathews, and Sarah Zettel;
Julie Czerneda, a Canadian; and Maxine McArthur, an Australian. In conclusion, it can safely be said that the
best space opera of the late twentieth
and early twenty-ﬁrst century is literate, complex, engaging ﬁction of the
highest quality, appropriately placed at
the cutting edge of the science ﬁction
genre.
See also: “Television: Twentieth Century” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Ginn, Sherry. Our Space, Our Place: Women in
the Worlds of Science Fiction Television. Lanham, MD: University Press of America,
2005.
Hartwell, David G., and Kathryn Cramer,
eds. The Space Opera Renaissance. New
York: Tor, 2006.
Lamont, Victoria, and Dianne Newell. “House
Opera: Frontier Mythology and Subversion
of Domestic Discourse in Mid-Twentieth
Century Women’s Space Opera.” Foundation
34, no. 95 (Autumn 2005): 71–88.
Monk, Patricia. “Not Just ‘Cosmic Skullduggery’: A Partial Reconsideration of Space
Opera.” Extrapolation 33, no. 4 (Winter
1992): 295–316.
New Space Opera. Special issue: Locus 51,
no. 2 (August 2003).

Westfahl, Gary. “Beyond Logic and Literacy:
The Strange Case of Space Opera.” Extrapolation 35, no. 3 (Fall 1994): 176–85.

RICHARD L. MCKINNEY

STAR TREK
Star Trek (1966–69) was one of the most
popular and inﬂuential science ﬁction
television series ever aired; the show
broke new ground for female characters in television and science ﬁction. Its
fundamental optimism about an egalitarian future provided the space for an
exploration of contemporary gender
roles and race, as implied by its enthusiastic voiceover, which included the
claim that the spaceship Enterprise
would “boldly go where no man has
gone before.”
The various Star Trek series have
reﬂected social change, and the show’s
creator, Gene Roddenberry, tried to
stretch the parameters of what was
socially accepted for women. For example, in the pilot, the second-incommand was female (and played by
Majel Barrett, Roddenberry’s wife). Test
audiences disliked this character, so
Roddenberry replaced her with the Vulcan Spock (Leonard Nimoy), but
brought Barrett back in the role of
Nurse Christine Chapel.
The original series included not only
a female character, but, unusually for
1967, an African-American female
character, Lieutenant Uhura (Nichelle
Nichols). Dissatisﬁed with her limited
role, however, Nichols decided to leave
the show, but changed her mind when
Martin Luther King Jr. asked her to stay
on the air. He considered the character
a positive role model. Actress Whoopi
Goldberg conﬁrms the importance of
seeing a black female on a spaceship
on a show set in the future, and she
later joined the second series, Star Trek:
The Next Generation (1987–94) in a
287
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

recurring role as Guinan, a wise and
ancient alien who often advised the
captain. Star Trek also made television
history when Nichols and William
Shatner, who played Capt. James T.
Kirk, exchanged the ﬁrst on-air kiss
between a black woman and a white
man.
Although the show was threatened
with cancellation after two seasons, a
fan writing campaign kept the show on
the air for one more year. Despite its
brief three seasons, Star Trek retained
its tremendous popularity with fans
and was kept alive through fan conventions and fan ﬁction. Star Trek fans,
especially its female fans, created what
became known as slash ﬁction, or K/S,
for erotic or explicitly homosexual ﬁction involving Kirk and Spock. Eventually, impressed by the tremendous
amount of fan interest and activity,
Paramount produced a feature ﬁlm in
1979 with the original cast, Star Trek:
The Motion Picture. Nine subsequent
ﬁlms expanded the Star Trek audience,
but the world was primarily developed
through new television series, which
introduced
new
characters
and
settings.
In 1987, Star Trek: The Next Generation
aired, as a straight-to-syndication series. Remaining faithful to the original
series’ emphases, The Next Generation
expanded the number of important
female characters featuring not only
Goldberg’s character Guinan but also a
female doctor, Beverly Crusher (Gates
McFadden); ship’s counselor, Deanna
Troi (Marina Sirtis); and chief of security (in the ﬁrst season only), Tasha Yar
(Denise Crosby). Signiﬁcantly, one of
television’s most famous voiceovers,
heard in the original series as “to boldly
go where no man has gone before,” was
changed “to go where no one has gone
before,” a sign of the show’s attempt to
be non-sexist, which was reﬂected in
288
................

Volume 2: Entries

many plots. A number of the series’
episodes dealt sympathetically with
feminist issues.
Star Trek: Deep Space Nine (1993–99)
continued to expand the Star Trek universe’s complex treatment of social
issues. It is signiﬁcant as the ﬁrst series
developed without any input from Star
Trek’s creator Gene Roddenberry, who
died in 1991. Deep Space Nine’s lead
character, Capt. Benjamin Sisko (Avery
Brooks), was Star Trek’s ﬁrst black commander in a permanent starring role.
The character of Dax (Terry Farrell)
featured a Trill, a species that changed
bodies (and sexes). In addition to the
gender-bending Trills, this series also
featured the overtly sexist Ferengi.
These aliens (and others) typify Star
Trek’s openness to questioning gender
norms through other species. Another
of the show’s major female characters
was a Bajoran, Col. Kira Nerys (Nana
Visitor), who wrestled with ethical
issues related to ﬁghting an invasion of
her home world. As the only series set
in a ﬁxed place, a space station, and
dealing repeatedly with the topic of terrorism, Deep Space Nine was critically
acclaimed, though less popular than
The Next Generation.
The next series, Star Trek: Voyager
(1995–2001), returned to the popular
formula of a ship traveling through
space. This show was the ﬁrst to feature a female captain in the lead role:
Capt. Kathryn Janeway (Kate Mulgrew),
in a “lost in space” scenario. As powerful aliens ﬂung her ship into the Delta
Quadrant, Captain Janeway rescued a
ship of terrorists and had to integrate
them into her crew. The relationships
of Janeway with B’Elanna Torres
(Roxann Dawson), a female halfhuman, half-Klingon Starﬂeet dropout;
Kes (Jennifer Lien), a female alien with
psychic powers; and Seven of Nine (Jeri
Ryan), a human female who been

Stevens, Francis
assimilated and then rescued from
the Borg, made the show’s central emphasis on female characters more
obvious.
Dropping “Star Trek” from its title,
Enterprise (2001–05) was a prequel, set
in time before the original Star Trek series. Where the other sequels ran for at
least six years, Enterprise ran for only
four. Strong fan support kept the show
on the air after its ﬁrst year of high ratings declined. The sparring relationship
between the human male Capt. Jonathan Archer (Scott Bakula) and the
female Vulcan advisor on board, SubCommander T’Pol (Jolene Blalock),
raised many issues about gender and
power.
In all its forms, Star Trek has had a
particularly powerful and compelling
relationship with its fans. Their conventions and related activities, including fan writing and cosplaying, kept
the series’ original actors and premise
alive, prompting Paramount to reinvigorate the franchise in feature ﬁlms
and syndicated series. Star Trek is popularly credited with attracting female
fans to science ﬁction, and the reasons
for this undoubtedly include not only
fan appropriation of the characters but
also the many compelling female characters in this vibrant ﬁctional universe.
See also: “Television: Twentieth Century” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Bacon-Smith, Camille. Enterprising Women:
Television Fandom and the Creation of Popular Myth. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992.
Bernardi, Daniel. Star Trek and History: Raceing toward a White Future. New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1998.
Gregory, Chris. Star Trek: Parallel Narratives.
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2000.
Harrison, Taylor, Sarah Projansky, Kent A.
Ono, and Elyce Rae Helford, eds. Enterprise Zones: Critical Positions on Star Trek.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996.

Joseph-Witham, Heather. Star Trek Fans and
Costume Art. Jackson: University Press of
Mississippi, 1996.
Roberts, Robin. Sexual Generations: “Star Trek:
The Next Generation” and Gender. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1999.
Star Trek [online]. CBS Paramount Television. Http://www.startrek.com.

ROBIN ROBERTS

STEVENS, FRANCIS

(1883–1948)

The work of the American writer
“Francis Stevens,” the pseudonym of Gertrude Barrows Bennett, is distinguished
primarily for its inventive imagination
through which new motifs were brought
into pulp science ﬁction, while retaining
such pulp faults as stereotyped characters and poor dialogue. This reputation
is based on a handful of stories published between 1917 and 1923. Stevens’s
total published output numbers thirteen
works: ﬁve short stories and eight longer
works, most of which were serials, ranging in length from novellas to full novels.
After some of her best work was
reprinted in the 1940s, “Francis Stevens”
was believed for a while to have been a
pseudonym of A. Merritt, with whose
works Stevens’s shares some similarities.
More recently, in trying to assess Stevens’s standing, some critics have
claimed that her writings inﬂuenced H.
P. Lovecraft, but this assertion is based
on the misattribution to Lovecraft of two
letters, signed “Augustus Swift” (a real
person in Lovecraft’s hometown of Providence), praising Stevens’s writings after
they had appeared in Argosy. Lovecraft in
fact left no commentary on Stevens’s
works. Critic Gary Hoppenstand has also
made the untenable claim that Stevens
invented “dark fantasy”—a label that
easily applies to many works predating
hers.
Stevens’s ﬁrst story, “The Curious Experience of Thomas Dunbar,” appeared
as by “G. M. Barrows” in Argosy for
289
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

March 1904. More than a decade
passed before she returned to writing,
by which time she had married, given
birth to a daughter, and been widowed
and left to care for her invalid mother.
When she resumed publishing in 1917,
it was with a novella called “The Nightmare,” originally submitted under the
gender-neutral byline “Jean Vail” but
published under the male name Francis Stevens. Her motivation for writing
was primarily ﬁnancial. Within three
years, ten other stories appeared and
Stevens’s mother passed away, lessening her ﬁnancial need. After a threeyear hiatus, Stevens then published her
ﬁnal story, “Sunﬁre,” a lost-race serial
in Weird Tales, before relapsing into
silence. According to Stevens’s daughter, “Sunﬁre” was not (as some critics
have claimed) a trunk story that eventually found publication; it was Stevens’s renewed attempt at ﬁctionwriting after surviving the inﬂuenza
epidemic of 1920.
Stevens’s most signiﬁcant works are
three novels and two short stories. The
Citadel of Fear (seven parts, Argosy, September 14–October 26, 1918) is a lostrace romance. The Heads of Cerberus
(ﬁve parts, Thrill Book, August 15–October 15, 1919) is probably her ﬁnest
work, a dystopian story about travelers
to an alternative Philadelphia—probably the ﬁrst use of the concept of a
parallel world. Claimed! (three parts, Argosy, March 6–20, 1920) concerns a
mysterious artifact and its devastating
impact upon those who come into contact with it. “Friend Island” (All-Story
Weekly, September 7, 1918) is Stevens’s
most feminist work, a short story set
in the future in which gender roles are
reversed and the titular island is sentient. “The Elf Trap” (Argosy, July 5,
1919) concerns “gypsies” who seem sordid to most eyes, their dangerous and
beautiful real nature hid by magic.
290
................

Volume 2: Entries

Further Readings
Hoppenstand, Gary. Introduction to The
Nightmare, and Other Tales of Dark Fantasy,
by Francis Stevens, ix–xxv. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2004.

DOUGLAS A. ANDERSON

STEWART, SEAN

(1965– )

Sean Stewart was born in Texas in 1965
but raised in Canada from the age of
three. He has family ties and residence
in both countries. Stewart writes fantasy and science ﬁction (SF), but most of
his ten novels can be described as nearfuture magical realism. His books have
won the Prix Aurora and Sunburst
awards for Canadian SF, the Arthur Ellis
Award for mystery writing, and the
World Fantasy Award. Inﬂuenced by J.
R. R. Tolkien and Ursula K. Le Guin,
Stewart shows in plain language what
happens to people when extraordinary
things are happening all around them.
Using both male and female viewpoints in his novels, Stewart writes
with conﬁdence in the voices of women
as diverse as a career soldier, an artist,
and a bitter comedian. Some of his protagonists are failures in their own eyes,
and some are more secure in their
strengths and successes. Each has
strong relationships with at least one
person of the other gender and, in all
but his ﬁrst novel Passion Play (1992),
with a person of the same gender as
well. While the relationships between
men and women may be that of family
or lovers or friends, in Stewart’s novels
only about 10 percent of the same-sex
relationships are at all sexual. His work
does not devalue homosexuality or
bisexuality, but reinforces Stewart’s
conscious stating and restating that responsible adults must accept that parenting needs trump any other concern.
The erotic elements of his storytelling
are powerful, but not explicit.

Stoker, Bram
When working with female characters,
Stewart writes not as a man telling what
he thinks women ought to feel, but as a
human writing about people. Where
women think and feel like any person,
he understands them extremely well. It
can be argued that male authors cannot
perceive the world as women do, in spite
of androgynous experience. Stewart
is also profoundly color-blind, yet in The
Night Watch (1997), he describes an artist
teaching herself color work to illustrate
perspective and temperature and also
human warmth in a world of awakened
magic. The passage is a marvel, not only
as a metaphor for the artist observing
her own marriage but also as an example of Stewart’s mastery of describing
human perceptions of which he is not
personally capable.
Stewart may not be writing as a
woman does, but he writes women in
translation well. He creates protagonists
who are identiﬁably relating to people
and the world as gendered individuals,
whether they are strong or weak, brave
or fearful, sour or centered. Tolkien
wrote about home life in the Shire as a
frame for the quest in The Lord of the
Rings, but in Stewart’s novels, adventure
enters characters’ home lives.
See also: “Men Writing Women” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Irvine, Alexander C. “Autocannibalistic Tradition and the Individual Talent: An
Interview with Sean Stewart.” Journal of
the Fantastic in the Arts 10, no. 3 [39]
(1999): 262–75.
———. “Sean Stewart.” In Canadian Fantasy
and Science-Fiction Writers, ed. Douglas Ivison, 258–62. Dictionary of Literary Biography, vol. 251. Detroit: Gale, 2002.

PAULA JOHANSON

STOKER, BRAM

(1847–1912)

Bram Stoker is known today primarily
as the man who wrote Dracula (1897),

the most important vampire novel of
the nineteenth century. Stoker was
born in Dublin, the son of a civil servant, and spent several years of his
childhood bedridden with an undiagnosed illness. As a young man, Stoker
followed in his father’s footsteps, but
freelance work as a theater reviewer
led him, in 1878, to a position as manager for the celebrated actor Sir Henry
Irving. Their relationship would deﬁne
much of the rest of Stoker’s career, and
Irving is thought to be a model for the
mesmerizing Count Dracula.
Stoker’s fascination with the supernatural was evident as early as 1882,
with the publication of his ﬁrst book of
ﬁction, a collection of macabre fairy
tales entitled Under the Sunset. Other
unsuccessful works followed, until the
publication
of
Dracula
cemented
Stoker’s reputation as a writer of supernatural ﬁction. The Jewel of Seven Stars
(1903) concerns resurrection of a malevolent mummy queen, and The Lair of
the White Worm (1911) shows a decadent aristocrat, Lady Arabella, who is
the human manifestation of the foul
title monster.
In both of these latter books, as in
Dracula, Stoker displays considerable
ambivalence, if not antipathy, toward
his female characters. Since the 1970s,
critics have produced hundreds of
articles and books attempting to
explain the gender issues in Stoker’s
ﬁction. While Stoker does introduce
characters putatively representing the
liberated “New Woman” of the 1890s,
his characterizations of them inevitably
lead back to their reestablishment as
domestic angels or destroyed demons.
Lucy Westenra is polluted by the vampire Dracula and must be destroyed,
while Mina Harker, ﬁrst portrayed as a
New Woman, is saved and repuriﬁed
when the men in her life slay the
vampire.
291
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

The importance of Dracula to vampire and horror literature cannot be
overstated. Film adaptations of the
novel are numerous enough to warrant
a ﬁlmography, while multiple novelists
have used Stoker’s text as a starting
point for their own work.
See also: “Nineteenth-Century Fiction” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Hughes, William. Beyond Dracula: Bram
Stoker’s Fiction and Its Cultural Context.
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2000.
Joslin, Lyndon W. Count Dracula Goes to the
Movies: Stoker’s Novel Adapted, 1922–2003.
2nd ed. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2006.
Miller, Elizabeth. A Dracula Handbook. Philadelphia: Xlibris, 2005.
———. Dracula’s Homepage [online]. Http://
www.ucs.mun.ca/emiller/index.html.
Skal, David. Hollywood Gothic: The Tangled Web
of Dracula from Novel to Stage to Screen. 2nd
ed. New York: Faber & Faber, 2004.

CANDACE R. BENEFIEL

STONE, LESLIE F. (1905–1987)
Leslie Stone is an American author
who lived through science ﬁction’s
birth and popularization. In her bestknown story, “The Conquest of Gola”
(1931), which has been reprinted in various anthologies, she posits a matriarchal planet where women keep men as
houseboys and playthings. Men from
another planet want to colonize Gola
for their own purposes, and they
invade, but the women of Gola do not
take them seriously. Instead, the
women use superior technology and
thought-forms to defend themselves in
a war with the men. In this reversal,
Stone spoofs sex roles, imperialism,
and colonialism. Her story predicts
inventions such as laser beams and
demonstrates the strong inﬂuence of
H. G. Wells. Stone’s work reﬂects intellectual currents of the times, including
psychoanalysis and egalitarianism. She
292
................

Volume 2: Entries

created sympathetic aliens prior to
those of her more famous contemporary, Stanley Weinbaum, though he is
generally attributed with the creation
of the ﬁrst nonthreatening aliens.
Stone began publishing in the late
1920s but stopped by the end of the
next decade. Her famous “Rape of the
Solar System” (1934) inspired Isaac
Asimov to begin science ﬁction writing.
Married to a labor journalist, she featured social and political issues in her
writing. Stories such as “Men with
Wings” (1929) and “Women with Wings”
(1930) fantasized the growth of special
races and imagined an important role
for the League of Nations. Topics such
as eugenics and breeding, which
caused social conﬂict in the United
States and Europe in the era between
the two world wars, ﬁgured in her
works. At times, her Great Dictator stories have been interpreted as depictions
of Nazism; in other moments, as
visions of Communism. “The Human
Pets of Mars” (1936) has leading characters that include teenage girls, old
senators, and African Americans kidnapped by aliens who sell them along
with other strange pets. Some stories
depict scientiﬁc experiments performed upon human subjects as in
Nazi camps; others were less political
in nature. She is remembered for an
address, “The Day of the Pulps,” where
she discusses editorial sexism. Discouraged by the dropping of the atom
bomb, she turned away from science
and the ﬁctions it had inspired in her,
growing tropical ﬁsh in her later years.
Further Readings
Weinbaum, Batya. “Leslie F. Stone as a Case
of Author-Reading Responding.” Foundation 29, no. 80 (Autumn 2000): 40–50.
———. “Race and Color Coding in Leslie F.
Stone’s ‘The Human Pets of Mars’: Reﬂection for the Repertoire of the Multicultural
Classroom.” In Into Darkness Peering: Race

Sturgeon, Theodore
and Color in the Fantastic, ed. Elisabeth
Leonard, 57–70. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 1997.
———. “Space and Frontier in ‘The Fall of
Mercury’ by Leslie F. Stone.” In Space and
Beyond: The Frontier Theme, ed. Gary Westfahl, 109–14. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 2000.

BATYA WEINBAUM

STURGEON, THEODORE

(1918–1985)

Theodore Sturgeon was an award-winning American author of more than
two hundred science ﬁction novels and
stories. His birth name was Edward
Hamilton Waldo. Sturgeon’s writing career spanned from the pulp science
ﬁction era of the 1930s into the New
Wave of the 1970s. One of his stories,
“Slow Sculpture,” won both the Nebula
Award (1970) and the Hugo (1971); he
was posthumously awarded a lifetime
achievement award by the World Fantasy Convention in 1986.
Sturgeon’s work was seen as radical
in its time, using more sophisticated literary techniques, such as stream-ofconsciousness, and incorporating a
greater focus on emotional relationships and explicit descriptions of sex
than did many of his peers. He is
known for creating sympathetic homosexual characters, not a common element in 1940s and 1950s science
ﬁction. His short story “If All Men Were
Brothers, Would You Let One Marry
Your Sister?” (1967) considered the cultural taboos against incest. Some of his
work was rejected by American magazines and published only in Britain or
after his death. While Sturgeon was
respected by critics and fellow writers,
his work did not sell well during his
lifetime. He is credited with inﬂuencing
a number of major authors, including
Samuel R. Delany and Ursula K. Le
Guin. His work has been widely
reprinted in recent years.

His characters, male and female,
universally experience loneliness and
frustration. Some of his nonhuman
characters have male or female gender, but others are nongendered. He
wrote with visible affection from the
viewpoint of young girls or boys. In The
Dreaming Jewels (1950), a male character, Horty, passes for female, ﬁrst as a
youth and then brieﬂy as an adult.
Sturgeon openly explored gender roles
in Venus Plus X (1960), in which a
human male wakes up in the future in
a world where technology has solved
all the problems of his time (the 1960s),
including gender differences. The narrative is interrupted at intervals by a
counterplot, set in suburban America,
with overt comments on social gender
roles, love, and marketing. Godbody
(1986), written during the 1960s but
published posthumously, focuses on religion and sexual intimacy as experienced by eight ﬁrst-person narrators,
male and female.
Sturgeon’s story production was disrupted by years in which he wrote nothing, due largely to writer’s block and the
concerns of daily life. He sometimes
wrote stories involving men and women
recognizably similar to those in stories
written years or decades earlier, but with
one crucial element changed. How these
characters behave differently because of
that changed circumstance aligns his
work with sociological SF, but the scientiﬁc ideas in many of his stories shows
that Sturgeon was well informed about
new developments in science and could
make informed guesses about the effects
these discoveries and inventions would
have on people.
Further Readings
Kucera, Paul Q. “Intimate Isolation: Sturgeon’s More Than Human and the Power of
Privacy.” Extrapolation 44, no. 4 (Winter
2003): 435–45.
293
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

McGuirk, Carol. “NoWhere Man: Towards a
Poetics of Post-Utopian Characterization.”
Science Fiction Studies 21, no. 2 (July 1994):
141–55.
Parrett, Aaron. “Another Fine Kettle of
Sturgeon.” Science Fiction Studies 29, no. 2
(July 2002): 294–96.
Theodore Sturgeon [online]. Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust, http://www.physics.
emory.edu/weeks/sturgeon.

PAULA JOHANSON

SWORD AND SORCERY
“Sword and Sorcery” is one of the most
commonly associated terms for fantasy
literature, often used in a pejorative or
dismissive manner by those outside the
genre. This disdain is related to the perceived male bias in these texts,
although in recent years sword-andsorcery epics have become extremely
popular with female authors and writers keen to present strong images of
women in fantasy literature.
First coined by Frank Leiber at the
request of Michael Moorcock in 1961,
sword-and-sorcery texts sit ﬁrmly in
the fantasy potboiler camp and usually
contain several commonalities that distinguish them. They are predominantly
concerned with a quest narrative, usually involving a protagonist surrounded
by a band of loyal heroes. The plot is
often episodic, and sword-and-sorcery
texts often lean toward multiple volumes or collections. Since another aspect involves the inclusion of multiple
characters, often based on recognizable
fantasy stalwarts such as mage, priest,
warrior, dwarf, and elf, the texts usually have a split narrative. Although the
protagonist’s rite of passage is usually
clearly depicted within this, several
characters may share this position
throughout the text.
The basic structure of most swordand-sorcery texts is similar to that outlined by Joseph Campbell in The Hero
294
................

Volume 2: Entries

with a Thousand Faces (1949), and later
in Christopher Vogler’s The Hero’s Journey (1996). The character types are similar to those ﬁrst identiﬁed by Vladimir
Propp’s Morphology of the Folktale (1928).
Thus, the structure, narrative, and
characterization of sword-and-sorcery
texts is both repetitive and recognized
as such by a reader. However, repetition
does not curtail their popularity—
indeed, sword-and-sorcery tales remain
an integral and much-loved aspect of
fantasy literature.
The genre contains clear boundaries
of good and evil and, as the name suggests, also uses elements such as high
magic (magic with no scientiﬁc explanation) and challenges to the heroes
that involve combat, sometimes even
large-scale wars, that must be overcome. This linear aspect has meant
that, in the past, authors such as Raymond Fiest, David Gemmell, and Robert Jordan have dominated the sphere.
In their works, sword-and-sorcery
conventions have not served women
characters well. Texts have usually
included central alpha male ﬁgures
and rather hastily sketched or stereotyped women of the “woman warrior”
or passive “healer girlfriend” type. In
Tracy Hickman and Margaret Weiss’s
Dragonlance Chronicles (1984–85), for
example, the three central female characters typify the worst of these stereotypes as a placid healer (Goldmoon); a
spoiled, feisty, but insecure princess
who later redeems herself (Laurana);
and a sexually avaricious, dangerous
war leader with a history of mistreatment in her past (Kitiara).
Sword-and-sorcery texts have very
strong links with tabletop and online
gaming, in that the two are mutually
compatible in terms of episodic narrative and characterization. Indeed,
Weiss and Hickman based several of
their central characters on roles they

Sword and Sorcery
had played during tabletop campaigning. In more recent years, sword-andsorcery Multiplayer Massively Online
Role-Playing Games (MMORPGs) such
as World of Warcraft (Blizzard, 2004–
present) have begun to develop this
representation in more obvious ways.
The games allow standard choices of
recognizable character classes based
on those which have evolved from the
Dungeons and Dragons tabletop game
(Gygax & Arneson, 1974), where players
may choose between male and female
avatars of all character classes. The
overwhelming choice of female avatars
by players, many of whom are also
female, has led to a signiﬁcant female
population within each game. Both the
dominance of female players and the
choice by male and female players of
female avatars show steady but often
unconscious
developments
toward
stronger sword-and-sorcery females.
In literature, the limitations of
sword-and-sorcery texts have recently
been challenged by a new wave of
female writers, including Robin Hobb
and Trudi Canavan, who have taken
traditional settings and applied more
feminist perspectives to the texts. Jude
Fisher’s Rose of the World series (2002–
05) exploits the idea of the traditional
Earth Mother goddess, as well as providing a series of complex female characters. Trudi Canavan uses her Black
Magician series (2004) to explore the
development of a female mage—taking
over the scholarly aspect of wizardry
often devoted to more masculine representations. In a genre that typically
frowns on alternative depictions of sexuality, Canavan has also used her texts
to explore the role of gay characters.

Similarly, Peter Jackson’s 2001–3 ﬁlm
adaptation of J. R. R. Tolkien’s Lord of
the Rings (1954–55) increased the role of
all three main female characters while
also highlighting their differences,
including promoting the strength of the
elven leader Galadriel to narrator of
the three ﬁlms and strengthening the
proactive roles of Arwen and the

shield-maiden Eowyn.
All of these point not only to the new
directions that sword and sorcery is
taking but also to the recognition that a
signiﬁcant percentage of readers are
women who want more multifaceted
characters within each text. The initial
linearity of the stories is now something that is often subverted by
authors, and stereotypes are repeatedly
challenged or exaggerated to strong
effect within a genre that continues to
be a staple of the fantasy genre.
See also: “Heroes or Sheroes” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Campbell, Joseph. The Hero with a Thousand
Faces. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1949; reprint, 1979.
Jones, Howard Andrew. “Deﬁning Sword and
Sorcery” [online], http://www.swordand
sorcery.org/deﬁning-sword-and-sorcery.
htm.
Propp, Vladimir. Morphology of the Folktale.
Ed. Svatava Pirkova-Jakobson; trans. Laurence Scott. Bloomington: Research Center, Indiana University, 1958.
Vogler, Christopher. The Writer’s Journey:
Mythic Structure for Storytellers and Screenwriters. London: Boxtree, 1996.
Yee, Nick. The Deadalus Project: The Psychology
of
MMORPGs
[online].
Http://www.
nickyee.com/daedalus.

ESTHER MACCALLUM-STEWART
AND JUSTIN PARSLER

295
................

This page intentionally left blank

T
TEPPER, SHERI S.

(1929– )

Sheri Tepper is an American author
who has written thirty science ﬁction
and fantasy novels, as well as a number of horror (under the pseudonym E.
E. Horlak) and mystery (as B. J. Oliphant
and A. J. Orde) novels. She came to
writing late in life, after a career working for relief agencies at home and
abroad, most prominently as the executive director of Planned Parenthood in
Colorado for twenty-four years. She is
the recipient of the Locus Award for
best fantasy novel for Beauty (1991), a
revision of a number of fairy tales,
most centrally “Sleeping Beauty.” She
was nominated for the Hugo Award for
Grass (1990) and was short-listed for
the Arthur C. Clarke Award for Gibbon’s
Decline and Fall (1996). She is perhaps
best known for her feminist science
ﬁction novel The Gate to Women’s Country (1988), set in a postapocalyptic
future in which men and women live
separately and women are engaged in a
clandestine attempt to purge the gene
pool of the male tendency toward
violence.
Most of Tepper’s work shares features of both science ﬁction and fantasy. Her futures or alternative worlds
tend to be set in pre- or postindustrial
landscapes, often sharing many qualities with the medieval settings typical
of fantasy novels. Her worlds are
almost always ultimately explained in
science ﬁction terms, however: postapocalyptic settings, time travel, lost or
failed planetary colonization, including
the nine Books of the True Game series

(1983–86) set in a world in which what
seem to be magical powers are really
the heritage of genetic mutations.
Tepper returns in many novels to a
number of core themes, most of which
emerge from her engagement with the
concerns of Second Wave feminism
around women’s reproductive rights
and violence against women under patriarchy. Her vision tends toward the
sociobiological, as many novels ultimately explain these problems as the
consequence of male genetic propensities toward violence and acquisition,
which gives rise to a patriarchal culture
of competition among men and oppressive strategies for men to control
women’s fertility. More recently, the
environmental concerns that have
always been a part of her vision have
come to the forefront, with novels
increasingly focusing on the ethical
dilemmas of colonization and plots
that suggest humanity needs to learn
to respect and value other living beings
if it is to have a future, thereby connecting her work with the philosophy
of deep ecology.
Tepper’s work can seem to be homophobic because her concern with the
problems of heterosexual reproduction
can mean that the possibilities for
other affective or sexual relationships
are presented negatively or are simply
absent. This limitation may accurately
reﬂect the values of the patriarchal cultures Tepper creates to critique. Similarly, racial diversity among humans
within her ﬁction is often minimized,
replaced by a focus on multiple notions
of sentience and subjectivities as
297
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

human characters interact with other
species. The Fresco (2000) has a Chicana
protagonist, however, and the plot of
the novel makes clear that it is both
her gender and racial marginalization
within the ailing human culture that
lead the aliens to consider her a worthy
contact. Tepper focuses on complex
social problems of poverty, overpopulation, and gender discrimination, tending to make the solutions problems of
individual pathology (ﬁxed by breeding
with the “right” men), rather than seeing exploitative social relationships as
having complex determinants, including economic ones.
Further Readings
Kelso, Sylvia, and Wendy Pearson. “On The
Gate to Women’s Country: An Exchange.”
Science Fiction Studies 25, no. 1 (March
1998): 137–43.
Pearson, Wendy. “After the (Homo)Sexual: A
Queer Analysis of Anti-sexuality in Sheri
S. Tepper’s The Gate to Women’s Country.”
Science Fiction Studies 23, no. 2 (July 1996):
199–226.
Sheri S. Tepper [online]. Http://www.sheri-stepper.com.
“Sheri S. Tepper: Speaking to the Universe.”
Locus,
no.
452
(September
1998).
Excerpted online at http://www.locus
mag.com/1998/Issues/09/Tepper.html.
Wagner-Lawlor, Jennifer A. “The Play of
Irony: Theatricality and Utopian Transformation in Contemporary Women’s
Speculative Fiction.” Utopian Studies 13,
no. 1 (2002): 114–35.

SHERRYL VINT
 ) (?– )
THOMAS, SHEREE R(ENEE

Sheree Thomas is an African-American
author born in Memphis, Tennessee.
She now lives in New York City, where
she writes, edits, publishes, and
teaches ﬁction related to the African
diaspora. Thomas holds memberships
in organizations such as the Carl Brandon Society and Beyond Dusa Women’s
298
................

Volume 2: Entries

Collective. She publishes and edits the
literary journal Anansi: Fiction of the
African Diaspora and also founded
Wanganegresse Press. She teaches creative writing and short ﬁction at the
Frederick Douglass Creative Arts Center
in Manhattan. Thomas is a Cave Canem
Poetry Fellow, 1999 Clarion West
alumna, and a 2003 New York Foundation for the Arts Fellow in Poetry. Her
ﬁction, poetry, and reviews are anthologized in various publications, such as
2001: A Science Fiction Poetry Anthology
(2001), Mojo: Conjure Stores (2003), and So
Long Been Dreaming: Postcolonial Science
Fiction and Fantasy (2004), as well as
numerous national publications.
To date, Thomas is best known as an
editor in science ﬁction circles for her
Dark Matter anthologies, a groundbreaking series devoted to the speculative
creations of writers from the African
diaspora. Her ﬁrst anthology, Dark Matter: A Century of Speculative Fiction from
the African Diaspora (2000), won the
2001 World Fantasy Award for an anthology, in addition to the Gold Pen
Award. Thomas uses the scientiﬁc
phrase “dark matter”—referring to a
nonluminous form of matter thought
to exist because of unexplained gravitational effects on other bodies—to create a metaphor that suggests the
inexorable inﬂuence of black authors
on science ﬁction, fantasy, and supernatural tales as it shapes her collection
of twenty-nine stories and ﬁve essays.
As the ﬁrst of its kind, Dark Matter
spans more than a hundred years of
black contributions to the speculative
genres by important and emerging
writers, including Amiri Baraka, Octavia Butler, Samuel R. Delany, W. E. B.
Du Bois, Tananarive Due, Nalo Hopkinson, and many others.
Thomas’s second anthology, Dark
Matter: Reading the Bones (2004), also
won a World Fantasy Award, in 2005.

Tiptree, James, Jr.
Comprising twenty-four stories and
three essays by established and emerging writers, this volume is signiﬁcantly
different from the ﬁrst in terms of
direction: Here, Thomas focuses on the
notion of occult practices and supernatural happenings as they occur
across the African diaspora from slavery to the far future.
These anthologies have brought critical attention to existing and emerging
writers of color in science ﬁction and
other speculative ﬁelds, as well as
deﬁning a clear and urgent demand for
scholarship on this body of writing.
Currently editing a third volume in her
momentous series, tentatively titled
Dark Matter: Africa Rising, Thomas
exerts tremendous inﬂuence on the
developing study of black speculative
literatures and is poised to continue
this inﬂuence.
See also: “Intersections of Race and Gender”
(vol. 1); Magical Realism.
Further Readings
Jenkins, Candice M. Review of Dark Matter:
A Century of Speculative Fiction from the
e
African Diaspora, by Sheree Rene
Thomas. African American Review 34, no. 4
(2000): 726–28.
Lavender, Isiah, III. “Occult Gambling with
Loaded Bones.” Review of Dark Matter:
e
Reading the Bones, by Sheree Rene
Thomas. Science Fiction Studies 31, no. 3
(2004): 473–76.
e. “Black Pot Mojo:
Thomas, Sheree Rene
Occasional Musings, Magick, and Lore”
[blog]. Http://www.blackpotmojo.blogspot.
com.

ISIAH LAVENDER III

TIPTREE, JAMES, JR.

(1915–1987)

“James Tiptree Jr.” was one of two pseudonyms created by Alice Bradley Sheldon, who also wrote as “Raccoona
Sheldon.” Tiptree was born in 1967
when Sheldon chose the pseudonym

from a jam jar in a supermarket. She
was then a ﬁfty-one-year-old experimental psychologist who wanted to
submit some science ﬁction stories
without damaging her academic reputation. Tiptree’s ﬁrst story was published in Analog in 1968. For almost ten
years, until 1977, Sheldon wrote as Tiptree, not only ﬁction but also increasingly intimate letters to fellow writers.
In 1972, she created another persona,
Raccoona Sheldon, whose best-known
story is “The Screwﬂy Solution.”
Alice Bradley was born in Chicago on
August 24, 1915, the only child of Herbert Bradley, a lawyer, and Mary Hastings Bradley, a writer. In 1921–22, she
accompanied her parents to Central
Africa on an expedition to study and
collect mountain gorillas. The Bradleys
later made two more trips to Africa,
the last when Alice was ﬁfteen, and
Mary Bradley wrote ﬁve books about
their travels. In Africa, Alice experienced ﬁrsthand the exploration and
contact with unfamiliar cultures that
are such a dominant theme in science
ﬁction. Later, she would say that she
saw Star Trek as a story about her
childhood.
In December 1934, at age nineteen,
Alice made her debut in Chicago. A few
days later, she eloped with William
Davey, an ambitious young writer. The
Daveys’ six-year marriage was not a
success. Alice struggled with her
attraction to women—which she didn’t
dare express, particularly since it
would almost certainly have meant
cutting herself off from her beloved
parents.
In her early twenties, Alice Davey
had some success as a painter, but after she and her husband divorced in
1941, she gave up her ﬁrst career and
became an art critic for the Chicago
Sun. In September 1942, she enlisted in
the Army, where she was eventually
299
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

assigned to Air Corps intelligence. Tiptree’s later comments about Army service contributed to the widespread
conviction that he must be a man. In
September 1945, in Paris, Alice married
her commanding ofﬁcer, Huntington
Denton “Ting” Sheldon. They lived and
worked for a few months in occupied
Germany, an experience she wrote
about for The New Yorker in her 1946
non–science ﬁction story “The Lucky
Ones.”
From 1946 to 1952, Alice Sheldon
drafted essays on art and feminism
and wrote mainstream and genre ﬁction, but she was not able to get her
work published. In 1952, the couple
moved to Washington, D.C., to work for
the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
CIA settings and characters appear in
Tiptree’s ﬁction, and most of her readers believed that Tiptree’s secrecy
resulted from “his” career as a spy.
Alice Sheldon’s career in the CIA was
relatively brief, however; she left in
1955 to study psychology. She undertook graduate work at George Washington University, wrote her Ph.D. thesis
on reactions to novelty in rats, and
received her degree in 1967. Not long
afterward, she began writing science
ﬁction and chose the Tiptree name.
A pseudonym can be a liberating
strategy for a writer; as Tiptree, Sheldon adopted a new style, fast-paced
and structurally and psychologically
complex. In stories such as “And
I Awoke and Found Me Here on the
Cold Hill’s Side” (1972), “Love Is the
Plan, the Plan Is Death” (1973), and
“The Screwﬂy Solution” (1977), Sheldon
evoked humans (and aliens) doomed by
their own erotic drives. “The Girl Who
Was Plugged In” (1973) describes an
ugly teenager who, through a secret
remote hookup, animates the beautiful
body of a movie star. Critics have read
this story as a metaphor for Tiptree’s
300
................

Volume 2: Entries

own relationship to Sheldon, for women’s distance from their bodies, or for
how modern media alienate people
from their lives.
Sheldon’s most famous story is also
one of her most clearly feminist: “The
Women Men Don’t See” (1973). The
ﬁrst-person narrator is a ﬁgure much
like Tiptree, a middle-aged government
employee traveling to a remote part of
Mexico to ﬁsh. The women of the
title are a government librarian and
her daughter who, when aliens arrive,
choose to leave Earth with them
rather than go on living among men.
The story is complicated by its sympathy for both the male and female
characters.
A similar complexity occurs in
“Houston, Houston, Do You Read?”
(1976), but in this story the men, not
the women, are depicted as aliens.
Three male astronauts are accidentally
sent forward in time to a future in
which a virus has eliminated Earth’s
male population. The females regard
the men as strange creatures from a
distant past, while the men, deposed
from their position of authority, feel
disoriented and are unable to communicate with the women.
In 1974, Tiptree won her ﬁrst Nebula
and Hugo awards. The attention
depressed Sheldon and made her feel
she could no longer treat her writing or
her pseudonym as a game. At the same
time, although—as Tiptree—she was
corresponding intimately with a number of fellow writers (including Joanna
Russ, Harlan Ellison, Vonda N. McIntyre, and Ursula K. Le Guin), Sheldon
felt isolated in her daily life. She was
struggling to write the major novel she
felt her fans expected, and her mother’s increasing illness contributed to
her depression. In October 1976, her
mother, Mary Bradley, died at age
ninety-four. Her obituary in the Chicago

Tolkien, J. R. R.
Tribune gave so many clues linking Tiptree to Alice Sheldon that Tiptree’s
identity became public knowledge in
1977.
Afterward, Sheldon continued to suffer from writer’s block and depression.
In the late 1970s, she ﬁrst discussed a
suicide pact with her husband, Ting;
they agreed that they did not want to
live into inﬁrm old age. On May 19,
1987, when she was seventy-one and
Ting eighty-four, she shot him and then
herself.
Her work remains inﬂuential, as
much for her uncompromising vision
of humanity’s weaknesses and her
questioning of traditional heroism as
for her feminism and her subtle understanding and revision of gender roles.
See also: Feminist Science Fiction.
Further Readings
Boulter, Amanda. “Alice James Raccoona
Tiptree Sheldon Jr: Textual Personas in
the Short Fiction of Alice Sheldon.” Foundation 63 (Spring 1995): 5–31.
Lavery, David. James Tiptree Jr. World Wide
Website [online]. Http://davidlavery.net/
Tiptree/.
Phillips, Julie. James Tiptree, Jr.: The Double Life
of Alice B. Sheldon. New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 2006.
———. James Tiptree, Jr.: The Double Life of
Alice B. Sheldon [online]. Http://www.
jamestiptreejr.com.
Platt, Charles. Dream Makers. Vol. 2, The
Uncommon Men and Women Who Write Science Fiction, 257–72. New York: Berkley,
1983.
Van der Spek, Inez. Alien Plots: Female Subjectivity and the Divine in the Light of James
Tiptree’s “A Momentary Taste of Being.” Liverpool, England: University of Liverpool
Press, 2000.

JULIE PHILLIPS

TOLKIEN, J. R. R.

(1892–1973)

John Ronald Reul Tolkien was a medievalist and historical linguist. While he

was a professor at the University of
Oxford (1925–59), he wrote scholarship,
fairy stories, and letters of note, but he
is known best for his epic fantasy ﬁction, especially those works set in his
created universe of Middle-earth,
including The Hobbit (1937), the three
volumes of The Lord of the Rings (1954–
55), The Adventures of Tom Bombadil
(1962), and a number of posthumous
publications: The Silmarillion (1977), Bilbo’s Last Song (1978), Unﬁnished Tales of
 menor and Middle-earth (1980), and
Nu
the multivolume The History of Middleearth (1983–96). He often chose Pauline
Baynes to illustrate his ﬁction, which
he hoped would serve as a mythology
for Britain.
Tolkien’s women characters continue
to be the subject of academic and popular debate. Part of this interest links to
Tolkien’s personal relationships with
women. He lost his mother at an early
age and revered her as near-holy martyr ﬁgure. He married the sweetheart
of his teens, after loving her from afar
for years of imposed separation. Furthermore, the Inklings—his literary and
personal circle at Oxford, including
C. S. Lewis and Charles Williams,
among others—was an all-male society
that excluded women. Some claim
these factors, combined with the centrality of the Virgin Mary to his Roman
Catholicism, combined to lead Tolkien
to place his women characters on a pedestal (such as the beautiful Elf Arwen
 thien) or to paint
and her ancestor, Lu
them as absolutes (such as the evil spider Shelob and her predecessor, Ungoliant) or even to omit them altogether
(as in the case of the missing mothers of
Bilbo Baggins, Frodo Baggins, Aragorn,
and Boromir, to name a few).
Others suggest that Tolkien’s depiction of women follows in the tradition
of epic world literature, drawing upon
such inspirations as Norse mythology
301
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

and the Icelandic Eddas to create in
Middle-earth female characters who
reﬂected leadership and foresight (such
as the powerful Maia ruler Melian and
the awe-inspiring Elf leader Galadriel),
martial skill (such as the Lady of

the Shield-arm Eowyn),
and the ability
to inspire (such as Sam’s hobbit sweetheart Rosie Cotton). Still working
within preexisting mythic traditions,
some critics continue, Tolkien’s Middleearth women also display the ability to
evolve and change; for example, the
hobbit Lobelia Sackville-Baggins grows
from a shrewish, self-centered annoyance to a deﬁant hero of the Shire who
exhibits both remorse and generosity.
Despite the fact that Tolkien focused
predominantly on male characters, he
shared with classical mythology a conviction that there must be gender balance in creation. For instance, Tolkien’s
Valar, the fourteen powerful spirits
who joined the created world of Arda
to bring order and oppose evil, are
comprised of an equal number of
males and females, the masculine King
€ paired with the feminine Queen
Manwe
Varda, and so on. Moreover, it is Varda,
or Elbereth Gilthoniel, who is most
revered and invoked by the Elder Kindred of Middle-earth, the Elves.
The most visible of Tolkien’s women

characters may be Eowyn,
who turns
the tide of the War of the Ring by her
valiance in battle, fulﬁlling the proph^l
ecy of slaying the Lord of the Nazgu
precisely because she is not a man.
Some claim that, although The Lord of
the Rings in its structure and emphases
is arguably a medieval work, Tolkien
gave his White Lady of Rohan a
complex and sympathetic—and perhaps modern—internal landscape, with
grave concerns about the expectations
and limits assigned to her by her gender. Others posit that the character’s
ultimate fate, a marriage and domestic
302
................

Volume 2: Entries

life, lessens the impact of the woman
warrior’s character.
Less visible, but equally controversial, are the noble mother-daughter
€. Erendis
pair Erendis and Ancalime
 menor, but grows
weds the prince of Nu
tired of and hurt by his extended
absences and inattention. She eventually deﬁes the royal family and separates from her husband, raising their
€ alone, with a disdaughter Ancalime
€
trust of men and marriage. Ancalime
 menor, a
becomes the ﬁrst Queen of Nu
powerful, albeit unhappy, monarch.
The tragedy of the unsuccessful union
of Erendis and Aldarion creates a striking contrast with more harmonious
partnerships in Middle-earth, such as
 thien.
that of Beren and Lu
In the twenty-ﬁrst century, two new
issues have arisen related to Tolkien’s
women characters. First, Peter Jackson,
in his Academy Award–winning ﬁlm
trilogy adaptation of The Lord of the
Rings (2001–03), altered the original plot
of Tolkien’s text to create different dramatic opportunities for Arwen and

Eowyn
in particular, raising the question of why these changes were
deemed necessary and how satisfactory or problematic the “old” and “new”
characterizations of these female heroines are. Second, the success of Tolkien’s books and Jackson’s ﬁlms
together has fueled an explosion of
fan participation, in particular the production and consumption of fan
ﬁction. Reading and writing fan ﬁction
provides an opportunity for fans—
statistically speaking, usually female
fans—to revisit, reinterpret, and reimagine the women of Middle-earth.
See also: “Heroes or Sheroes” (vol. 1); “Men
Writing Women” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Chance, Jane. “Tolkien’s Women (and Men):
The Films and the Book.” In Tolkien on

Transgender
Film: Essays on Peter Jackson’s “The Lord of
the Rings,” ed. Janet Brennan Croft, 175–
94. Altadena, CA: Mythopoeic Press, 2004.
Donovan, Leslie. “The Valkyrie Reﬂex in J. R.
R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings: Galadriel,

Shelob, Eowyn,
and Arwen.” In Tolkien the
Medievalist, ed. Jane Chance, 106–32. London: Routledge, 2003.
Fredrick, Candice, and Sam McBride. Women
among the Inklings: Gender, C. S. Lewis, J. R.
R. Tolkien, and Charles Williams. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press, 2001.
Hopkins, Lisa. “Female Authority Figures in
the Works of Tolkien, C. S. Lewis and
Charles Williams.” In Proceedings of the J.
R. R. Tolkien Centenary Conference, 1992, ed.
Patricia Reynolds and Glen H. Goodknight, 364–66. Altadena, CA: Tolkien
Society; Milton Keynes, England: Mythopoeic Press, 1995.
Partridge, Brenda. “No Sex Please—We’re
Hobbits: The Construction of Female Sexuality in The Lord of the Rings.” In J. R. R.
Tolkien: This Far Land, ed. Robert Giddings,
179–97. London: Vision, 1983.
Sturgis, Amy H. “Reimagining Rose: Portrayals of Tolkien’s Rosie Cotton in
Twenty-First-Century Fan Fiction.” Mythlore 24 (1993/94 ): 165–88.

AMY H. STURGIS

TRANSGENDER
The term transgender is used to signify
people who wish to live their lives
(or part of their lives) as the opposite
gender without necessarily resorting
to permanent reassignment. Transgender people and transvestites (crossdressers) frequently have no desire to
change their sex—or at least have not
yet decided to do so—and are happy
with their bodies, including their genitalia. They occupy transgressive subject
positions that contradict the binary
sex/gender system, in that they are not
either/or—they are both/and. Critics
argue that we now need to think about
a “transgender continuum,” where gender is not ﬁxed: rather it is a spectrum,

a process, continually renegotiated and
never ﬁnally realized. Science ﬁction
and fantasy offer useful sites for challenging both the binaries of male/
female sex and of the cultural constructions of gender that are attached
to those categories. Protagonists of fantastic ﬁctions can perform gender: they
can be male or female, but they can
also be neuters (have no deﬁnable sexual category), be intersexed, or switch
between genders. The body (whether
human or other) is a tabula rasa, capable of multiple and contradictory
readings.
The transgendered body has been
theorized as an in-between body.
Ursula K. Le Guin’s The Left Hand
of Darkness (1969) is set on a planet,
Gethen, where the androgynous inhabitants are sexually inactive and impotent apart from periods of “kemmer.”
When in kemmer, Gethenians secrete
hormonal substances until either
male or female dominance is established. Individuals have no predisposition to being male or female, and as
they undergo periods of kemmer
throughout their lives, they can be
male and female, fathers and mothers, at different times. The male/
female binary is still obvious here, as
is the propensity to assign male dominance to the characters in the book,
but Le Guin’s novel about love and
betrayal clearly articulates a gender
continuum.
Joanna Russ’s The Female Man (1975)
is well known for its queering of the
gendered body, as is Samuel R.
Delany’s Triton (1976). However, Russ’s
“The Mystery of the Young Gentleman”
(1982) is even more ambiguous. This
transgender narrative has a protagonist
of unknown gender and race who masquerades as a man. When confronted
she/he/it says: “A woman pretending to
be a man, who pretends he’s a woman
303
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

in order to pretend to be a man? Come,
come, it won’t work” (88). These and
other narratives clearly do work to
make the transgendered body a viable
and transgressive option.
More recent ﬁction that foregrounds
transgender protagonists include Octavia Butler’s Dawn (1987), whose Ooloi
occupy transgendered spaces; Maureen
McHugh’s Mission Child (1998); Lois
McMaster Bujold’s A Civil Campaign
(1999); Melissa Scott’s Shadow Man
(1995), which has ﬁve gender categories: woman, fem, herm, mem, or man;
and Suzy McKee Charnas’s The Conqueror’s Child (1999), the fourth in the
Holdfast series. In ﬁlm, anime has
shown more willingness to explore
transgender than mainstream ﬁlm.
Hentai, or sexually explicit anime, often
has transgendered characters.
See also: Transsexuality.
Further Readings
Butler, Judith. Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex.” New York: Routledge, 1993.
Garber, Marjorie. Vested Interests: CrossDressing and Cultural Anxiety. New York:
Routledge, 1991.
Halberstam, Judith. In a Queer Time and
Place: Transgender Bodies, Subcultural Lives.
New York: New York University Press,
2005.

PAT WHEELER

TRANSSEXUALITY
Transsexuals believe they are, or ought
to be, the opposite of their birth sex
and undergo hormone treatment or sex
reassignment surgery in order to
change their sex to the correct one.
Most prominent is male-to-female
(MTF) reassignment; female-to-male
(FTM) sex change is less common. MTF
transsexuals differ from homosexual
men in that they see themselves as
heterosexual females born into the
304
................

Volume 2: Entries

wrong bodies, rather than men who
sexually desire other men. Likewise,
FTM transsexuals are different from
lesbians who experience themselves as
female and desire other women; FTM
transsexuals think of themselves as
male. The desire to become the “other”
is not always related to gender issues,
but frequently linked to the material
body—hence the desire to physically
change it. While some critics equate
transsexuality with sexual desire, this
claim is frequently refuted within the
transsexual community. Transsexuals
say they undergo reassignment mainly
to express their perceived inner
identities.
For feminist science ﬁction (SF) and
fantasy writers, the transsexual body
holds great potential for gender
debates. Angela Carter’s The Passion of
New Eve (1977) recounts the tale of the
transsexual Eve, formerly Evelyn, who
as a result of his appalling treatment of
women as sex objects is captured by
radical feminists and forced to undergo
surgical reassignment. He is physically
a woman but escapes before s/he
undergoes the psychological training to
become a woman. Carter’s savage satire uses transsexuality as a metaphor
for the unﬁxed body; Eve is a man
inhabiting a body that has been deliberately reassigned in order to invite the
male gaze. As a transsexual, Eve experiences a speciﬁc history of gender and
sexuality with its concomitant subjugation and violence.
In Samuel R. Delany’s Triton (1976),
the protagonist Bron starts as a sexist
male and changes into a woman. The
novel explores the motivations and,
more speciﬁcally, the aftermath of
changing sex. Poppy Z. Brite’s fantasy/
horror The Crow: The Lazarus Heart
(1998) and George Efﬁnger’s SF/crime
story When Gravity Fails (1986) are
two crossover novels that feature

Transsexuality
transsexual characters. In ﬁlm, Glen or
Glenda? (1953), although not strictly SF
or fantasy, is worth watching for its
early discussion of transsexuals, transvestites, and sex change operations; it
stars Bela Lugosi as a scientist who
helps the police after a transvestite has
been murdered. The cult SF musical The
Rocky Horror Picture Show (1975) is well
known for its transsexual Dr. Frank-NFurter. The French fantasy Ma Vie en rose
(1997) features a young boy, Ludovic,
who wishes to live his life as a girl.
The transsexual represents the
breaking down of boundaries within
the corporeal body, not within the
terms of culturally constructed gender.
As with transgendered people, transsexuals can be categorized as exhibiting a third gender term. However,

critics argue that transsexuals do not
simply break down cultural or sexual
boundaries, they merely make those
boundaries visible.
See also: Queer Science Fiction.
Further Readings
Butler, Judith. Undoing Gender. New York:
Routledge, 2004.
Felski, Rita. “Fin de siecle, Fin de sexe: Transsexuality, Postmodernism, and the Death
of History.” New Literary History 27, no. 2
(Spring 1996): 337–49.
Hall, Donal E., and Maria Pramaggiore, eds.
RePresenting Bisexualities: Subjects and Cultures of Fluid Desire. New York: New York
University Press, 1996.
Quilter, Laura. Bibliography of Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, Transgender SF [online]. Http://
feministsf.org/bibs/lbg.html.

PAT WHEELER

305
................

This page intentionally left blank

U
URBAN FANTASY
Urban fantasy, although having precursors in literature written in earlier
centuries, is connected to the nineteenth- and twentieth-century growth
of cities as centers of social power. Critics do not agree on whether urban fantasy is a genre or a mode that can exist
in a number of genres. Some narrative
conventions associated with urban fantasy overlap with those of magical realism and those of the New Weird, as well
as existing in earlier texts not always
considered fantasies. John Clute argues
that it may be more appropriate to consider urban fantasy as a mode rather
than a subgenre of fantasy. As a mode,
urban fantasy is ﬂexible enough to operate across a range of themes, from the
mythic and spiritual to the political and
economic. Additionally, the mode need
not be limited to written texts but is important in visual media as well.
Considering urban fantasy as a mode
allows useful discussion of works in
cyberpunk, gothic, horror, time-travel,
and vampire ﬁction, including television shows and ﬁlms. In addition, the
mode exists in that variant of fantasy
often described by critics as “elves in
shopping malls”—stories in which the
creatures from European fairy tales
and folklore are placed in contemporary cities. Writers are increasingly
drawing from the myths and folkore of
indigenous cultures in the Americas,
Africa, China, Japan, and the Caribbean, as well. Urban settings distinguish these stories from epic fantasy
and quest fantasy narratives, in which

characters travel through preindustrial
landscapes set with villages that are
based on Britain or other European
countries (France, Italy, or Spain).
Urban fantasies describe different
cultures in large cities due to chosen or
forced immigration of peoples. Some
authors set their fantasies in major
world cities such as Mercedes Lackey’s
and Diane Duane’s New York, Charles
de Lint’s Ottawa, Tanya Huff’s Toronto,
Neil Gaiman’s London, Katherine
Kurtz’s Dublin, Diane Paxson’s and Pat
Murphy’s San Francisco, or Anne Rice’s
New Orleans. However, readers should
realize that writers construct their tales, interweaving fantasy elements with
the mundane world, just as other
authors weave elements of big cities
into their fantasy settings. Some writers, such as de Lint, blend characteristics of various cities they know to
create their own unique cityscapes,
such as Newford. De Lint, a Canadian,
notes that his “Canadian readers tend
to think of Newford as an American
city, while Americans usually think of
it as Canadian” (http://www.sfsite.com/
charlesdelint/faq.htm#newford).
There are also “alternate Earths,”
such as the multiple ones existing in
some Diane Wynne Jones novels.
These are often some version of England, or the alternate United States of
Kim Harrison’s Rachel Morgan series.
Examples of primary world cities being
reimagined on alternate Earths for popular consumption include Superman’s
Metropolis and Batman’s Gotham City,
both clearly based on New York City. A
popular television show, Beauty and the
307
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Beast (1987–90), a remake of the fairy
tale, featured Linda Hamilton as an attorney working in New York who meets
a man-beast (Ron Perlman) who lives in
a hidden world under the city.
The idea of concealed cities or worlds
hiding in or under major cities is a
common one, as in Clive Barker’s
Weaveworld (2001) or the London of
Gaiman’s Neverwhere (1996). The idea of
a hidden civilization living among
humans is also used in works written
for children and adolescents, such as
Mary Norton’s Borrower series, about
tiny people living in the walls and
under the ﬂoors, and Terry Pratchett’s
Bromeliad series, about “nomes” living
under a department store.
In other tales, the City is an invented
one, set in a completely different secondary world, such as Mary Gentle’s
nameless city in Rats and Gargoyles,
lusine, and PratchSarah Monette’s Me
ett’s Ankh-Morpork.
Some critics include fantasies set in
suburbs and exurbs or even small towns
in the genre of urban fantasy, although
others disagree. However, the twentieth
century’s reliance upon technology and
the mentality of living in a nonmagical
world exists even in small towns in
industrialized countries, so their residents are just as likely to experience
shock at learning that vampires and
werewolves are sharing the planet.
Authors writing in more rural and suburban settings include Charlaine Harris
(the Southern Vampire series), Patricia
Briggs (the Mercy Thompson series),
and Esther Friesner.
Terri Windling is credited with the
development of the literary urban fantasy mode when she worked at Ace
Books. Her anthologies collaboratively
edited with Ellen Datlow as well as her
own publications are important, but she
also acquired major works of urban fantasy and magical realism by a number
308
................

Volume 2: Entries

of important authors, including Pamela
Dean, Charles de Lint, Gregory Frost,
Ellen Kushner, Delia Sherman, Midori
Snyder, and Patricia C. Wrede. Other
authors whose publications include
urban fantasy are Emma Bull, Tanith
Lee, Elizabeth Scarborough, Joan
Vinge, and Jane Yolen.
ville, in an online interChina Mie
view, traces elements of urban fantasy
back to the 1960s and 1970s New Wave
in science ﬁction, which took place in
the United Kingdom and the United
States. His work draws on the historical
materialism of Marxism to question
the nostalgia for the rural past that is a
convention of the popular genre fantasy following J. R. R. Tolkien’s work.
ville explores the potential of shiftMie
ing the fantastic mode to urban settings where politics, economics, and
contemporary social problems such as
racism and colonialism are part of the
landscape and can be questioned and
subverted.
Further Readings
Clute, John. “Urban Fantasy.” In The Encyclopedia of Fantasy, 1st U.S. ed., ed. John
Clute and John Grant, 975–76. New York:
St. Martin’s Press, 1997.
ville, China. “Appropriate Means.” InterMie
view by Mark Bould. New Politics 9, no. 3
n.s. (Summer 2003), available at http://
www.wpunj.edu/newpol/issue35/bould35.
htm.

ROBIN ANNE REID

UTOPIAS
The term utopia originates from Greek
words outopia (“no place”) and eutopia
(“good place”) and usually signiﬁes a
nonexistent, ideal place. Because the
word utopia has both these meanings, it
encourages a variety of connotations,
ranging from a better and possible
social design that we should seek to
imitate, to a different vision of reality

Utopias
intended to shake readers out of their
common way of perceiving the world
around them, to a mere ﬂight of fancy
aimed at entertaining readers. Often,
the utopian genre has been used as a
platform for presenting political and
social agendas to a wide audience.
The woman question as a consistent
theme in utopian literature did not
emerge until the nineteenth century,
although women writers such as Christine de Pizan in The Book of the City of
Ladies (1405), Margaret Cavendish in
The Description of a New World, Called the
Blazing World (1666), and Sarah Scott in
A Description of Millennium Hall (1762)
had presented their utopian visions
long before. Since the ﬁrst utopia published by a female author in the United
States, Mary Grifﬁth’s Three Hundred
Years Hence, appeared in 1836, the production of utopias by American women
has undergone two proliﬁc periods—a
smaller one around the turn of the
twentieth century and a greater one in
the 1970s. Mary Bradley Lane’s Mizora
(1881) and Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s
Herland (1915) are among the most discussed works of the ﬁrst period. Where
Mizora focuses on science and education as crucial to the positive changes
in women’s lives, Herland redeﬁnes femininity and rewrites Darwin’s theory of
evolution. As these two works and
numerous others of that time reﬂect
the concerns of the women’s movement
in the late nineteenth century, utopias
written during the latter peak, such
as Dorothy Bryant’s The Kin of Ata Are
Waiting for You (1971), Ursula K. Le
Guin’s The Dispossessed (1974), Joanna
Russ’s The Female Man (1975), Mary Staton’s From the Legend of Biel (1975),
Marge Piercy’s Woman on the Edge of
Time (1976), Suzy McKee Charnas’s
Motherlines (1978), and Sally Miller
Gearhart’s The Wanderground: Stories
of the Hill Women (1979), are often

considered to be major contributors to
the Second Wave feminist movement,
bringing to the forefront the issues of
gender and sexuality.
The political, social, and cultural
changes of this tumultuous time instigated an increased number of feminist
narratives, and the conventions of the
utopian genre provided a perfect tool
for the exposition of women’s inferior
position on one hand and the delineation of a better social order on the other.
The fact that the majority of contemporary utopias pursue feminist issues solidiﬁes the relationship between the
utopian genre and feminism. Consequently, the literary study of utopia as
the means of expression for women’s
political and social agenda grew
tremendously in the second half of
the twentieth century and produced
numerous critics who have explored the
connection between contemporary utopias by female authors and feminism.
Historically, however, utopian literature has been male-dominated, focusing on social conventions and economic
and political issues but neglecting the
problems of sexism, racism, patriarchy,
and gender inequality. Thomas More,
who coined the term utopia in his famous work of the same name (1516),
came to be known as the founder of the
utopian literary genre, but numerous
thinkers before him had already
dreamed of better societies and social
designs. In the epic Gilgamesh, written
sometimes in the second millennium
BC, we can ﬁnd a description of an
earthly paradise. Plato in his Republic
(360 BC) provided an outline of an ideal
society ruled by a philosopher-king. The
City of God (AD 413) by St. Augustine
developed the notion of an attainable
paradise, even though for Augustine it
was a heavenly rather than an earthly
city. There have also been many legends
and stories of the land of plenty known
309
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

as Arcadia, Cockaigne, or Golden Age,
where people do not have to work, food
is plentiful, and the general feeling of
pleasure, ease, and luxury prevails.
Until the end of the eighteenth century, the major emphasis of utopian
works followed More’s example, concentrating on authority, Christianity, and hierarchy; the rigidity of utopian visions
lessened slightly in the seventeenth century, during which portrayals of less authoritarian and more centralized forms
of government began to emerge. The
well-known utopias of the time are Francis Bacon’s New Atlantis (1626), focusing
on the quest for knowledge and the
power of science, and Henry Neville’s
The Isle of the Pines (1668), satirizing English and Dutch systems of colonization.
The signiﬁcance of reason as a major
theme appeared in the eighteenth century with works such as Jonathan Swift’s
Gulliver’s Travels (1726) and Samuel Johnson’s Rasselas (1759).
The nineteenth century produced
almost three times as many utopias as
all previous centuries put together, and
among the most memorable are Erewhon (1872) by Samuel Butler, Looking
Backward, 2000–1887 (1888) by Edward
Bellamy, and News from Nowhere (1892)
by William Morris. H. G. Wells, the pioneer of science ﬁction, also contributed
to the genre with A Modern Utopia
(1905). The extreme boom of utopian

310
................

Volume 2: Entries

writing was followed by a dramatic
diversion in the genre, propelled mainly
by the two world wars and the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia. Dystopias
such as Jack London’s Iron Heel (1908),
Eugene Zamiatin’s We (1924), Aldous
Huxley’s Brave New World (1932), and
George Orwell’s 1984 (1949) characterize the mindset of this period.
Despite the continuous production of
utopian literature, its second boom, tied
to the feminist movement, ended in the
1980s, although numerous contemporary science ﬁction novels—for example,
Octavia Butler’s Parable of the Sower
(1993) and Parable of the Talents (1998)—
include signiﬁcant utopian elements.
The ﬁeld of utopian scholarship keeps
growing and expanding the ways we
read and understand such literature.
See also: “Nineteenth-Century Fiction” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Albinski, Nan Bowman. Women’s Utopias in
British and American Fiction. London: Routledge, 1998.
Bammer, Angelika. Partial Visions: Feminism
and Utopianism in the 1970s. New York:
Routledge, 1991.
Barr, Marleen S., and Nicholas Smith, eds.
Women and Utopia. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1983.
Bartkowski, Frances. Feminist Utopias. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1989.

IVA BALIC

V
VAMPIRES
The living dead, cursed with immortality, fearing sunlight and holy items, and
stalking the night to drain the blood of
unsuspecting victims, have been a staple in fantastic ﬁction and drama since
the early nineteenth century. Beginning
with The Vampyre (1819) by John Polidori,
vampires experienced a wave of popularity leading to stage adaptations and
appearances in popular literature such
as the “penny dreadful” Varney the Vampyre (ﬁrst published serially in the
1840s) by James Malcolm Rymer. These
early vampires preyed on female victims, but were characterized by their
relationships with men. The main
exception to this in the nineteenth century was Sheridan LeFanu’s Carmilla
(1872), a novelette centering on the
dead-and-returned Countess Carmilla
Karnstein and a young girl who is both
lover and prey for the vampire.
In 1897, Bram Stoker published
the seminal English-language vampire
novel, Dracula. This work culminated
the traditions of the vampire in nineteenth-century British literature and
set the stage for vampires’ enduring
presence in the popular culture of the
twentieth century. Dracula has been
much debated by the critics in regard to
gender issues. The novel portrays its
female characters as more than victims,
with Lucy Westenra displaying an open
interest in her own sexuality, and Mina
Murray Harker, ﬁrst introduced as a relatively liberated “New Woman,” providing the secretarial skills oddly crucial to
the work of the vampire hunters. Yet in

the end, the plot hinges more on the
contest between Van Helsing and Dracula for the souls of Lucy and Mina than
on their agency and choices.
The popularity of Dracula led to stage
and screen adaptations, and with these
the essential nature of the gender relationships in vampire ﬁction began to
change. Shedding their single-mindedly
predatory viewpoint, vampires began to
be portrayed as seducers, and the importance of women in these dramas
increased. Universal Pictures’ 1931 ﬁlm
Dracula, by Tod Browning, adapted from
the Hamilton Deane and John L. Balderston play, is an important milestone in
this regard, and it launched a series of
notable horror ﬁlms from that studio.
Still, the vampire of ﬁlm and ﬁction
was almost invariably portrayed as an
evil being, whose detection and
destruction is the main point of the
plot. From the demise of the Universal
series of Dracula movies in the mid1940s through most of the 1950s, the
vampire languished in obscurity. Then,
in 1958, The Horror of Dracula appeared,
the ﬁrst in a new series of Dracula
movies from Hammer Films starring
the darkly charismatic Christopher Lee,
technicolor blood, and a series of
buxom young beauties swooning under
the erotic pressure of his fangs.
In the 1960s, the brooding, Byronic
vampire image received a boost when
Dark Shadows, a ﬂoundering gothic daytime serial, introduced a story line centering on Barnabas Collins, a vampire
tormented by memories of his lost love.
This, along with a popular Broadway
revival of the old Balderston and Deane
311
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

play in 1977, ﬁlmed by John Badham in
1979, romanticized the vampire as a
sexy (if evil) leading man and may have
paved the way for new developments
in vampire literature.
In the late 1970s, Anne Rice’s bestselling Interview with the Vampire (1976)
and Chelsea Quinn Yarbro’s Hotel
Transylvania (1978) and The Palace
(1978) popularized the concept of a
sympathetic vampire. Vampires became
protagonists, not villains, and began to
function as outside commentators on
the foibles and follies of human society.
Yarbro particularly used her ongoing series of vampire novels to illustrate the
social position of women throughout
recorded history.
The 1990s saw the beginning of two
related but disparate trends in vampire
literature. Joss Whedon’s Buffy the
Vampire Slayer, both the 1992 movie
incarnation and the highly successful
1997–2003 television series, portrayed
an empowered young woman who was
more than a match for any supernatural creature her world could throw at
her. While vampires were the primary
villains of the series, Buffy developed a
relationship with the “good” vampire
Angel, who later spun off into his own
series (1999–2004), and other vampires
became memorable adjuncts to the
main crew of vampire-hunting teens.
This concept of a world where supernatural creatures are commonplace
and vampires are the apex of the food
chain has been further explored in
Laurell K. Hamilton’s Anita Blake–
Vampire Hunter novels. This series,
which began in 1993 with Guilty Pleasures, features a tough-as-nails woman
battling the forces of supernatural
darkness. In Hamilton’s world, vampires, much like living human beings,
are sometimes good, sometimes bad,
but always dangerous. A newer series,
by Kim Harrison, similarly explores a
312
................

Volume 2: Entries

world where supernatural creatures,
including vampires, demons, pixies,
and werewolves, are encountered by a
witch in the course of her employment
as a private investigator.
The other main thread of vampire literature is currently found in the vampire romance novel. The examples are
plentiful, but mention of a few series
will sufﬁce to illustrate the trend. Charlaine Harris’s Southern Vampire series,
beginning with Dead until Dark (2001),
uses the vampiric elements of her created world to blend seamlessly with
mystery and romance conventions.
MaryJanice Davidson, beginning with
Undead and Unwed (2004), takes a chicklit approach to the vampire story, with
her tales of twenty-something Betsy
Taylor, who suddenly and unwillingly
ﬁnds she is the local vampire queen.
Sherrilyn Kenyon, in her Darkhunter
series, beginning with Night Pleasures
(2002), presents a complicated pseudomythology involving Greek gods, vampires, and shape-shifters to underpin
her series of romance novels.
Vampires in literature are so numerous that it is difﬁcult to characterize
them succinctly; however, the bulk of
the more popular vampire literature
for the past thirty years has been produced by women, with a primary audience of women in mind. The eroticism,
charisma, and sexuality of the vampire
have been emphasized, and the violence of the vampiric encounter has
been minimized. The ﬁctional vampire
appears to have become a major theme
in fantastic literature and should
remain a vital character into the
future.
See also: Urban Fantasy.
Further Readings
Altner, Patricia. Vampire Readings: An Annotated Bibliography. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 1998.

Vidding
Auerbach, Nina. Our Vampires, Ourselves. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Flynn, John L. Cinematic Vampires: The Living
Dead on Film and Television from “The Devil’s
Castle” (1896) to “Bram Stoker’s Dracula”
(1992). Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1992.
Frost, Brian J. The Monster with a Thousand
Faces: Guises of the Vampire in Myth and Literature. Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green
State University Popular Press, 1989.
le Olivia, ed. Blood and Roses:
Gladwell, Ade
The Vampire in Nineteenth-Century Literature.
Rev. ed. London: Creation Books, 1999.
Stuart, Roxana. Stage Blood: Vampires of the
Nineteenth-Century Stage. Bowling Green,
OH: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1994.

CANDACE R. BENEFIEL

VIDDING
Vidding is a form of grassroots ﬁlmmaking in which found footage, most
frequently from television shows or
movies, is edited to music. The resulting videos, known as vids or songvids,
may comment on or otherwise interpret the ﬁlmic source material, or tell
new stories that feature the characters.
One of the many arts to have emerged
from Star Trek and subsequent media
fandoms, vidding is particularly notable as a form of ﬁlmmaking primarily
practiced by women, perhaps because
women dominate media fandom generally or because telling stories with
extant footage has been one way to
surmount the bar that hinders women’s entry into the expensive and maledominated ﬁlm world.
The form is widely acknowledged to
have originated in a work by Kandy
Fong, who, inspired by the Beatles’ Yellow Submarine, constructed a slide show
that set Star Trek images to music. The
slides were made from Star Trek footage
that had been left on the cutting-room
ﬂoor and sold to fans; the audio track
was the ﬁlk song “What Do You Do

with a Drunken Vulcan?” which Fong
and her friends recorded on audiocassette. This slide show was performed at
a meeting of a Star Trek fan club, the
United Federation of Phoenix, in late
1974 and at the Equicon/Filmcon convention in spring 1975. It is this later,
more public, showing that vidders use
to date the form; accordingly, vidding’s
thirtieth anniversary was celebrated in
2005 at Vividcon, the only convention
dedicated to the art of fannish vidding.
In her initial slide shows, Fong followed along with a script of the lyrics
and clicked her projector at the appropriate moment, essentially making her
cuts “live” during the performance. She
created and toured with a number of
different Trek slide shows, including one
set to the Rocky Horror Picture Show
soundtrack, then moved to using two
slide
projectors
and
intercutting
between them. Eventually, she began
videotaping the results of these two
projector shows; her vid “Both Sides
Now” is an example of this kind of slide
show. Fong was also the ﬁrst fan to
make and distribute a “con tape”: a record of the vids shown at a convention
for home viewing.
By the late 1970s and early 1980s,
videocassette recorders (VCRs) had
become commercially available, and
vidders began to create songvids using
two VCRs: one for playing footage and
the other for recording it. VCR vidding
was arduous: the song needed to be
timed with a stopwatch (as a VCR’s numerical counter rarely corresponded to
actual time or even to any particular
position of the footage on the tape), the
clips had to be selected and measured
in advance, and then the clips had to
be played on one VCR and recorded on
the other in the exact order in which
they were to appear. Only once all the
clips had been recorded was the audio
track ﬁnally laid down, so a vidder who
313
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

wanted to edit to the beat or have internal motion synchronized with the
music had to be meticulous in the
extreme.
Because of vidding’s technical difﬁculty, and the relative expense of the
equipment (editing VCRs could run in
the thousands of dollars), VCR vidders
tended to join vidding collectives that
served as sites of technical and aesthetic mentoring. Unlike the later (and
largely male) community of anime vidders, who distribute vids under individual names or pseudonyms, many
media vidders released their vids under
such collective names as the California
Crew, the Media Cannibals, GloRo Productions, or the Chicago Loop.
According to Rache of the Media Cannibals, there were three great houses of
VCR vidding, each of which had its own
aesthetic. The ﬁrst of these was the
MediaWest vidders (Bunnies from Hell,
California Crew, Apocalypse West) who
created vids for the annual MediaWest convention in Lansing, Michigan.
Because the convention attracted fans
of many different television shows and
ﬁlms, vidders who premiered work
there could not count on their audience
knowing the nuances of any one ﬁlmic
source. Instead, they made vids for
large and diverse audiences who were
assumed to have no context for the
images; the resulting vids tended to be
straightforward, literal, and often
broadly comedic, with all necessary information contained in the vid itself.
The second major house of VCR vidding was that of Mary Van Duesen
(“MVD”) and her descendants (DJ Driscoll, Judy Chien). MVD began vidding in
1985 on an RCA 800 editing VCR, which
was superior to previous machines in
that it let her lay down the audio track
ﬁrst. MVD’s career in technology
allowed her to develop her skills and
gave her access to superior equipment;
314
................

Volume 2: Entries

she has made more than 360 vids and
has taught countless others how to vid.
Perhaps MVD’s most important legacy is
aesthetic; in the vidding chapter of Textual Poachers, Henry Jenkins discusses
MVD’s particular insistence on vids as a
mode of character analysis. Her vids
ﬁrmly emphasize story and have a
strong sense of narrative arc; her own
word for them is “literary.” Like short
stories, MVD’s vids have strongly rooted
points of view and use literary devices
like ﬂashbacks and metaphor; unlike
MediaWest vids, they are designed for
viewers already familiar with the source
material.
The third house, the San Francisco
vidders (Tashery, JKL, Morgan Dawn),
became known for their focus on aesthetics, particularly color, movement,
and song choice. While these vidders
shared MVD’s interest in character and
theme, they tended to put more emphasis on the tone and tempo of the
music and less on the narrative of the
lyrics; they also focused on the look
and movement of their clips, telling a
more purely visual story than MVD and
her followers did.
These three schools began to intermingle and be inﬂuenced by each other,
eventually producing a fusion aesthetic
that aimed to be both thematic and
accessible.
Over its thirty-year history, vidding
has produced many forms and genres.
Vidders distinguish between “con vids”
and “living room vids.” Con vids are
designed to be watched once during a
convention by an audience with little
or no context, while living room vids
are meant to be watched repeatedly for
nuance by someone already familiar
with the source. More recently, the annual Vividcon dance party has brought
about the “dance vid” (a broad and
showy vid designed to be watched from
the dance ﬂoor). Each of these forms

Vinge, Joan D.
has a different operating aesthetic.
Beyond these broad categories, important forms include “multimedia” or
“trash can vids” (which incorporate
multiple ﬁlmic sources, often drawing
thematic or visual parallels between
them), “recruiter vids” (designed to create interest in the source), “relationship
vids,” (which interpret the relationships
between characters), and “constructed
reality vids” (which create relationships
or events not in the original source).
The rise of digital editing has made
vidding more accessible than ever;
nowadays, every computer comes with
some form of moviemaking software.
Moreover, the widespread availability of
broadband means that vids can be
shared over the Internet; no longer do
vidders have to attend conventions or
order con tapes in order to see vids. As a
result, there has been an explosion in
the number and variety of vids. However, the accessibility of the means of
production has meant that people are
less likely to join collectives or be
mentored. The result has been a rise in
the number of so-called feral vidders,
that is, vidders who develop their
skills in isolation. While many of these
vidders do eventually join the larger
vidding community, others take advantage of video distribution sites like YouTube and continue to vid in relative
isolation.
Digital editing software such as
Adobe Premiere or Final Cut Pro has
given vidders many new tools, allowing
for faster cutting, more professional
edits, and a host of special effects and
image manipulations. The recent work
of computer vidders such as Killa, Luminosity, Laura S., and Sisabet is indistinguishable from professional-quality
video. A panel entitled “Professional
Inspiration” at Vividcon in 2006 discussed what fan vidders can learn from
the pros—a conversation made possible

by the fact that amateurs and professionals now use the same tools. The
mainstreaming and professionalization
of vidding also raises questions about
whether there is a fan aesthetic that
needs to be preserved. Still, the digital
age and the democratization of video
editing has resulted in more vids, and
more diverse and experimental kinds
of vids, than ever before.
Further Readings
Bacon-Smith, Camille. “Visual Meaning.” In
Enterprising Women. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992.
Jenkins, Henry. “How to Watch a Fan Vid.”
September 18, 2006 [online], http://www.
henryjenkins.org/2006/09/how_to_watch_
a_fanvid.html.
———. “‘Layers of Meaning’: Fan Music
Video and the Poetics of Poaching.” In
Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture. New York: Routledge, 1992.

FRANCESCA COPPA

VINGE, JOAN D. (1948– )
Joan D. Vinge has a B.A. in anthropology from San Diego State University
and has worked as a salvage archaeologist. Her ﬁrst story, “Tin Soldier,” was
published in 1974, followed shortly by
stories in several science ﬁction (SF)
magazines. Self-described as Analog’s
“token female hard SF writer,” she was
asked to write the cover story for that
magazine’s All-Women Issue; the
resulting story, “Eyes of Amber,” won
the 1977 Hugo Award. She also won
the Hugo for The Snow Queen (1980) and
has been nominated for Nebula and
John W. Campbell awards.
Vinge is best known for The Snow
Queen and its sequels, World’s End (1984)
and The Summer Queen (1991). The trilogy is set in the Hegemony, a far-future
galactic empire called the Hedge by its
inhabitants, struggling to recover the
secrets of advanced technology—a
315
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

theme also explored in Heaven Chronicles
(1991), stories originally serialized in
Analog. The Snow Queen adapts sources
from fairy tales and folklore, notably
Hans Christian Andersen’s tale of the
same name, to recount the quest of a
young woman named Moon, a sibyl
considered touched by the goddess by
her own people of Tiamat and a human
dataport by those on other worlds.
Moon learns that she is the clonedaughter of the current ruler of Tiamat,
created in an attempt to free their
people from economic and political exploitation. Vinge also explores environmental themes in the third volume, as
Moon and her lover BZ, a technocrat
from the dominant world, struggle to
preserve the fragile sibyl-net against
corporate greed.
Concerns about ecocriticism, economic oppression, and the consequences of colonization are also explored in
Vinge’s Cat series: Psion (1982), Catspaw
(1988), and Dreamfall (1996). Cat is
an orphan, half human and half
Hydran, a nonviolent species exploited
by humans. He lives on the margins of
society, discriminated against because
of his alien heritage but occasionally
useful for his telepathic abilities and
knowledge of the criminal underworld.
In Psion, he is a teenager in the slums,
his telepathic powers blocked when he
kills in self-defense. The second volume uses cyberpunk motifs, when Cat
is hired as a bodyguard by the taMings,
a wealthy corporate family. In the ﬁnal
volume, Cat’s attempt to learn more
about his heritage involves him in planetary revolution.
Other works by Vinge include the
short-story collections Phoenix in the
Ashes (1985) and Eyes of Amber, and
Other Stories (1979). She is currently
working on a new project reﬂecting her
background in archaeology: Ladysmith,
a novel set in prehistoric Europe.
316
................

Volume 2: Entries

Further Readings
Byrd, Deborah. “Gynocentric Mythmaking in
Joan Vinge’s The Snow Queen.” Extrapolation
27, no. 3 (Fall 1986): 234–44.
Crosby, Janice. “The Snow Queen and the
Goddess in the Machine.” Femspec 2, no. 1
(2000): 5–10.
Joan D. Vinge [online]. Http://www.sff.net/
people/jdvinge/home.htm.
Mains, Christine. “The Scientist/Wizard in
Joan D. Vinge’s Hegemony.” Foundation 89
(Autumn 2003): 56–65.
Sullivan, C. W., III. “Mother, Daughter, Self:
Joan Vinge’s The Snow Queen.” In Mother
Puzzles: Daughters and Mothers in Contemporary American Literature, ed. Mickey
Pearlman, 101–8. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1989.

CHRISTINE MAINS

 LISABETH
VONARBURG, E

(1947– )


Elisabeth
Vonarburg is arguably the
most signiﬁcant woman writer of science ﬁction (SF) from French-speaking
Canada, and a number of her works
have been translated into English. Bantam’s publication of The Silent City
(1988; Le Silence de la cite, 1981), In the
Mother’s Land (1992; Chroniques du
Pays des Meres, 1992), and Reluctant Voyagers (1995; Les Voyageurs malgre eux,
1994) brought her work to readers in
the United States. Her parents met
in French Indochina, but Vonarburg
grew up in rural France, reading
avidly as a child. She discovered SF as
a teenager, but her emigration to
bec, in 1973 deterChicoutimi, Que
mined her future. Beginning a career in
teaching, she soon built a reputation
as a writer and critic within the
bec
budding Science Fiction of Que
(SFQ) movement and has been a central ﬁgure in it ever since. In addition to
her many publications in France and
bec, a number of her stories have
Que
been translated for Canada’s Tesseracts
anthologies.

Von Harbou, Thea Gabriele
The development of characters often,
but not always, female provides the basis for Vonarburg’s unique, intellectual,
“soft” science ﬁction. Along with the
themes of space-time travel, parallel
universes, and alternative histories,
her early novels and short stories
explore issues of identity, gender, and
the nature of humanity. Her work
reﬂects concepts of feminist science
ﬁction and dystopia.
Vonarburg’s ﬁrst two novels, The Silent
City and In the Mother’s Land, are set on a
postapocalyptic Earth where female
births outnumber male by nearly ten to
one. Her more recent Tyrana€el novels
(1996–97), translated as Dreams of the
Sea (2003) and A Game of Perfection
(2006), develop a future history. In this
pentalogy, Terrans have colonized a distant planet and must come to terms
with its indigenous civilization, as well
as the mysterious “Sea” of energy that
periodically covers half of this exotic
world.
Religion and philosophy play key
roles in many of Vonarburg’s works,
most particularly feminist revisions of
Christianity. Magic and exceptional psychological powers also ﬁgure strongly in
some works. Critics complain that
Vonarburg’s novels are overly complex
or leave the strict bounds of science ﬁction; her most recent series is labeled
“historic fantasy.” But for some, her
appeal lies precisely in the richness and
complexity of the interwoven universes
developed in her works.
Vonarburg’s ﬁction has won more
than two dozen prizes in the United
States, France, and Canada, and she
bec’s top
has twice been laureate of Que
honor for writers of science ﬁction and
fantasy. In addition to an extensive
body of criticism, Vonarburg has published a manual for creative writing.
She has also translated into French
such major writers as James Tiptree

Jr., Chelsea Quinn Yarbro, Marion
Zimmer Bradley, Guy-Gavriel Kay, and
Nancy Kilpatrick.
Further Readings

rard, Sylvie. “Elisabeth
Be
Vonarburg.” In Canadian Fantasy and Science-Fiction Writers,
ed. Douglas Ivison, 294–308. Dictionary of
Literary Biography, vol. 251. Detroit: Gale,
2002.
Burwell, Jennifer, and Nancy Johnston, eds.
“A Dialogue on SF and Utopian Fiction,
between Nalo Hopkinson and Elisabeth
Vonarburg.” Foundation 30, no. 1 (Spring
2001): 40–47.

Van Belkom, Edo. “Elisabeth
Vonarburg.” In
Northern Dreamers: Interviews with Famous
Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror Writers.
Kingston, ON: Quarry Press, 1998.

AMY RANSOM

VON HARBOU, THEA GABRIELE

(1888–

1954)
Thea von Harbou wrote novels and
scripts for the ﬁlms of the international
and inﬂuential Weimar Cinema, named
after the interwar German republic
and known for its often fantastic and
metaphysical topics. She worked with
several important directors of this period, but mostly she is known for her
script for one of the most famous science ﬁction ﬁlms, Metropolis (1927), and
her teamwork with her husband, the
ﬁlm’s director, Fritz Lang.
Von Harbou had an early love for
legends and mystic stories. As a schoolgirl, she published poems and animal
tales. During World War I, she wrote exotic fairy tales and patriotic stories
about women during the war. The stories often focused on women who sacriﬁce themselves for their country or a
beloved man. Those themes meant that
her successful books were recognized
as ideal models for motion pictures. An
example is the 1922 ﬁlm Der muede Tod
(U.S. title Between Two Worlds). In one
317
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

scene of this fantastic melodrama, a
young woman kneels before the personiﬁed Death pleading for the life of
her dearest man, for whom she had
searched in exotic parts of the world.
Many women in postwar Europe could
recognize their own grief. At the end of
the ﬁlm, the woman dies to be together
with her love. This ﬁlm was von Harbou’s ﬁrst work with Lang.
In 1926, von Harbou wrote the novel
Metropolis, which is a mixture of futuristic, magical, and Christian elements.
Little scholarship on how her visual
language inﬂuenced the ﬁlm exists.
The 1927 ﬁlm version was scripted by
von Harbou and directed by Lang. In it,
several male characters revolve around
a dual female character, Maria, whose
name alludes to Christianity. Maria is a
woman preaching to workers in old catacombs beneath a splendid futuristic
city. The workers, however, suffer from
doing hard and dangerous work on
great machines. She tells them to wait
for a man who can mediate between
their needs and the ruler of the city.
This man is a ruler working with a scientist to create a robot. One of the
most famous sequences in ﬁlm history
is the one when the metallic robot
takes on the appearance of Maria. The

318
................

Volume 2: Entries

robot-Maria is a dangerous, seditious
ﬁgure who threatens the whole city.
Although von Harbou was one of the
most successful creators in an important era of the German cinema, her
work has not been considered important or good. One reason is that she
herself, although emancipated as a
working woman, played down her contributions in favor of her husband in
public. At the time, she was considered
to be the muse of the genius director
and responsible for the kitschy, pompous, or political-reactionary elements
of his ﬁlms. Since von Harbou joined
the National Socialist Party of Germany
in 1940, she is remembered as a Nazi—
in contrast to Lang, who emigrated to
the United States. New research on her
work is challenging these earlier views,
however, focusing more on her contributions to cinema.
Further Readings
Stoicea, Gabriela. “Re-Producing the Class
and Gender Divide: Fritz Lang’s Metropolis.” Women in German Yearbook (2006):
21–42.
“Thea von Harbou.” [online]. Http://www.
cyranos.ch /metrop-e.htm#harbou.

HEIKE ENDTER

W
WALTON, EVANGELINE

(1907–1996)

Evangeline Walton is the working name
of American writer Evangeline Walton
Ensley, best known for her fantasy novelizations of the Four Branches of the
Mabinogion, the ﬁrst four in a collection
of medieval Welsh tales. Her ﬁrst novel,
The Virgin and the Swine, was originally
published in 1936 but was not successful. It was later republished in 1970 as
part of a new line of adult fantasy for
Ballantine. A new title, The Island of
the Mighty, may have contributed to its
greater success the second time
around, and the remaining novels, previously shelved, were subsequently
published: The Children of Llyr (1971),
The Song of Rhiannon (1972), and The
Prince of Annwn (1974). The series has
been recently republished as a single
text titled The Mabinogion Tetralogy.
Walton’s retellings actually go much
deeper than that word may initially
indicate. The original tales are short;
^r” is 15
for example, “Branwen ferch Lly
pages long, while Walton’s novelized
version is 221 pages. Like other female
fantasy writers who cover this subject,
Walton emphasizes the matriarchal
aspects of Celtic society and religion,
and the conﬂicts between matriarchy
and the spread of patriarchy. Although
she seems to favor the old over the
new, Walton scrutinizes both traditions,
so the reader is able to see the good
and bad in each. Critics have noted
the series’ well-developed characters,
strong themes, and stunning imagery.
Walton was born on November 24,
1907, in Indianapolis, Indiana; moved to

Tucson, Arizona, in 1946; and spent the
rest of her life there. Her manuscripts
and correspondence, most notably with
Welsh writer John Cooper Powys, are
housed at the University of Arizona at
Tucson. Often ill as a child, Walton
was schooled at home and was an avid
reader. She began writing stories at age
six. Three of Walton’s Mabinogion-based
novels, Llyr, Rhiannon, and Annwn, were
nominated for Mythopoetic Fantasy
Awards, and Rhiannon won the award in
1973. Llyr was also nominated for a Nebula. Walton herself won the Fritz Leiber
Award in 1979, was given a special World
Fantasy Award in 1985, and received a
Lifetime Achievement Award in 1989. She
died on March 11, 1996, of pneumonia.
In addition to her traditional fantasy,
for which she is most famous, Walton
also published Witch House (1940), a supernatural fantasy, and the historical
novel The Cross and the Sword (1956).
She began work on a series about the
Greek hero Theseus, but it was never
completed, probably because Mary
Renault’s work appeared ﬁrst. Only the
ﬁrst volume, The Sword Is Forged (1983),
was ultimately published. Two short
stories Walton wrote in her twenties,
“Above Ker-Is” and “The Mistress of
Kaer Mor,” were published in The Fantastic Imagination II (1978) and The Phoenix Tree (1980), respectively.
See also: “The Middle Ages” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Spivack, Charlotte. “Evangeline Walton.” In
Merlin’s Daughters: Contemporary Women
Writers of Fantasy. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1987.
319
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Zahorski, Kenneth J., and Robert Boyer.
Lloyd Alexander, Evangeline Walton Ensley,
and Kenneth Morris: A Primary and Secondary Bibliography. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1981.

KELLY A. O’CONNOR-SALOMON

WAR

AND

PEACE

War is one of the most obvious and
dominant themes of science ﬁction and
fantasy literature. Whether a conﬂict
instigated during the course of the narrative, the theme upon which a text
rides, or the inﬂuence that has caused
characters and worlds to exist as they
do, war is as prevalent in these genres
as it is in real life. War texts are always
comments on warfare itself, and thus often incorporate contemporary attitudes
toward conﬂict. It is unusual to ﬁnd
texts that do not present speciﬁc ideologies of how war should be regarded—as
either a necessary evil or a futile waste.
War in science ﬁction and fantasy is
inextricably linked with our own history.
It frequently employs a series of devices
that refer to current social thought
regarding conﬂict or tries to reconﬁgure
war along a speciﬁcally politicized
agenda. War is rarely presented as a
neutral state (unless it is long in the
past of a text), and all texts reﬂect the
cultural and social beliefs of the authors
and the time in which they live. Sheri S.
Tepper’s The Gate to Women’s Country
(1999) imagines a world where the battle between genders is made explicit by
the women’s isolationist practices toward men—ritually making them warriors and then ostracizing them into a
separate community where martial
honor is exercised in meaningless ways.
Similarly, Joe Haldeman’s The Forever
War (1974) is speciﬁcally identiﬁed by
the author as reconstructing ideas from
the Vietnam War, in particular the isolation felt by returning combatants.
Science ﬁction texts are notable for
their integration of female characters
320
................

Volume 2: Entries

into the realm of combat. While the
feisty woman warrior of fantasy literature has become a rather hackneyed
, science ﬁction is able to tackle
cliche
this topic more directly. Both Haldeman and Robert A. Heinlein include
female soldiers as part of their futures,
and although the communality of sexual relations seems to become a
default expectation, the characterization of these women is for the most
part persistent and convincing. Paul
Verhoven attempted to show this in his
1997 ﬁlm adaptation of Heinlein’s Starship Troopers (1959), most notably
through his inclusion of a group shower
scene in which soldiers of both sexes
casually discuss their reasons for
enlisting.
David Weber’s re-creation of C. S.
Forester’s Horatio Hornblower through
his central character Honor Harrington
(1993–present) deliberately creates a
character who becomes known for her
military tactics and expertise rather
than her gender. Although Harrington
does portray all of the characteristics
of a wish-fulﬁllment heroine to the
reader, by transferring the Napoleonic
wars to space battles Weber also
ensures that the military detail in his
texts is privileged. He is typical of writers who deliberately place political
belief in their texts: liberalism is
frowned upon, and very often feminized
or weak male ﬁgures are used to symbolize this.
More recently, the remake of the
1978–79 television series Battlestar
Galactica (2004–08) has brought critiques of war to the forefront of popular attention. Battlestar Galactica was
voted Time magazine’s best series of
2004 and was praised for its ability to
contextualize attitudes to war while at
the same time presenting progressive,
complex images of women. The new
series inverted many of the roles

War and Peace
previously taken by male actors, in particular casting Katee Sackhoff as Kara
“Starbuck” Thrace. Starbuck retains the
same bellicose characteristics as her
namesake in the earlier series, who was
male (played by Dirk Benedict). Other
lead female characters include the president, a pilot who is an unwitting enemy
clone, and a villainous femme fatale
who is also an enemy Cylon. This last
character, known as Number Six, is particularly pointed as she initially exists
only in the imagination of traitor and
womanizer Gaius Baltar and is deliberately overtly sexualized. A clone of
Number Six in the second series
becomes the victim of gang rape by the
humans of the battlestar Pegasus, once
again deliberately raising questions of
sexual appearance and ethics.
These diverse portrayals were praised
by critics, but Battlestar Galactica cleverly used a pantheon of gods to promote the subtextual idea of continual
equality throughout the centuries.
Thus the characters within the show
paid no attention to the sex of each
person. Simultaneously, the viewer was
presented with not only a series of
complex female parts but ones who
attracted the gaze in interesting ways—
most notably in the ﬁrst episode of the
television series “33,” in which all the
characters were in a state of physical
and mental exhaustion, and through
the ﬁgures of President Laura Roslin
(Mary McDonnell), a mature actress
whose character has breast cancer, and
the noticeably butch appearance of
Starbuck. Importantly, the plot concerns a human race in retreat from an
indomitable enemy, which becomes
increasingly sympathetic as its motives
are revealed as a need to raise its own
children, something which cannot be
done without human cells. Shown at
the time of ongoing conﬂicts in the
United States, the series offers subtle

portrayals of war and the responses by
the people involved in it.
While war is almost endemic to sagalength fantasy and science ﬁction, the
struggle for peace is less clearly presented in science ﬁction, with many
texts instead using the aftermath of
war as a starting point for their tales.
Although these texts strive toward
peace, it is less common to ﬁnd texts
that deal speciﬁcally with peace. Those
that do, often show a process preﬁgured
by uneasy alliances or the need to integrate and understand a race or society.
Iain Banks’s Culture novels, for example,
claim that war has been eradicated in
favor of a largely socialist, utopian society, yet most of the Culture novels
involve characters such as Diziet Sma
who actively seek life outside the normal
parameters of the Culture and are in fact
involved in negotiating or controlling
acts of colonization through warfare.
Aftermath and recovery from war is a
ﬁnal aspect of these texts, with a persistent theme being responses to nuclear
apocalypse. In these cases, leading
female characters are often preferred to
men, and equality is often forced by the
fact that few survivors remain in these
shattered worlds. In particular, the resilient female hero is a popular trope here:
examples include Sister from Robert
McCammon’s Swan Song (1987), Octavia
Butler’s Lilith Iyapo in Dawn (1988), and
Ann Burden of Robert O’Brien’s Z for
Zachariah (1976). These texts often cross
the realm from science ﬁction to horror,
and once again, the experiences of
women and the potential for violence toward them is a useful motif for introducing threats.
See also: Dystopias; “Heroes or Sheroes” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Brians, Paul. Nuclear Holocausts: Atomic War
in Fiction, 1895–1984. Kent, OH: Kent State
University Press, 1987.
321
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Clarke, I. F. Voices Prophesying War: Future
Wars, 1763–3749. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1992.
Davies, Philip John, ed. Science Fiction, Social
Conﬂict, and War. Manchester, England:
Manchester University Press, 1990.

ESTHER MACCALLUM-STEWART

JUSTIN
PARSLER

AND

WEIRD TALES
Throughout its initial incarnation from
1923 to 1954, the magazine Weird Tales,
then the leading magazine in the United
States for supernatural ﬁction, had a
sizable if minor presence of work by
women. Over the course of 279 issues,
the magazine had three editors. Dorothy McIlwraith (1891–1976), the third
and only female editor, took over with
the May 1940 issue. McIlwraith, who
came from a distinguished Canadian
family, immigrated to the United States
in 1916 and was soon employed as an
associate editor of Short Stories. She
became its editor in 1937, and in 1940,
after Short Stories and Weird Tales were
switched from monthly to bimonthly
publication, she edited both magazines
until their demise in 1954, at the end of
the pulp magazine era. For Weird Tales,
McIlwraith edited eighty-seven issues,
nearly one-third of the run.
Of the more than eight hundred
names that appear as bylines to Weird
Tales ﬁction, over one hundred of them
are female names. Unquestionably, the
most signiﬁcant woman writer to have
emerged from Weird Tales is C. L.
Moore. She used her initials so that her
employer would not learn she was writing for the pulp magazines, though her
gender was known to readers via the
magazine’s letters column. Her stories
in Weird Tales about Jirel of Joiry, a sophisticated female pulp hero, are
rightly acclaimed as classics of the fantasy genre. Moore published sixteen
stories in Weird Tales, all in the 1930s.
322
................

Volume 2: Entries

Another prominent women writer to
have grown up with Weird Tales is Mary
Elizabeth Counselman (1911–1994),
with thirty stories published between
1933 and 1953. Other proliﬁc and
noteworthy female contributors include Greye La Spina (1880–1969; 18
stories, 1924–51); “Bassett Morgan”
(Grace Morgan Jones, 1884–1977; 13
stories, 1926–36); British writer “G. G.
Pendarves” (Gladys Gordon Trenery,
1885–1938; 19 stories, 1926–39); Amelia
Reynolds Long (1904–1978; 6 stories,
1928–36); Dorothy Quick (1900–1962; 15
stories, 1935–54); Margaret St. Clair
(1911–1995; 10 stories, 1950s); and two
relatively unknown writers, “Allison V.
Harding” (Jean Milligan; 30 stories,
1943–51) and Eli[zabeth] Colter (12 stories, 1925–39).
Notable contributors of just one or two
stories include the early pioneer of science ﬁction Clare Winger Harris (1891–
1968; two stories in 1926 and 1927); Danish writer Signe Toksvig (1891–1983; one
story, 1928); British editor Christine
Campbell Thomson (1897–1985), writing
as “Flavia Richardson” (two stories in the
late 1920s); Phyllis A. Whitney (1903–
2008; one story, 1935); and Evangeline
Walton (1907–1996; one story, 1950). The
only contribution by “Francis Stevens”
(Gertrude Barrows Bennett, 1883–1948)
was an undistinguished two-part serial
in 1923, “Sunﬁre.”
Approximately 175 people contributed
poetry to Weird Tales, and a third of these
poems appeared under female bylines.
The two most proliﬁc women poets in
Weird Tales were Leah Bodine Drake
(1914–1964) and Dorothy Quick, each
with twenty-four poems. Mary Elizabeth
Counselman also published six poems.
In terms of cover artists, three stand
out signiﬁcantly in terms of quantity: Curtis C. Senf with forty-ﬁve covers; Wyatt
Nelson, with thirty-seven; and Margaret
Brundage, with thirty-one. Brundage

Whedon, Joss
(1900–1976) was a Chicago artist, and her
work, often featuring a partially clothed
but prominent female ﬁgure, became a
stylistic trademark for the magazine during its heyday in the 1930s.

DOUGLAS A. ANDERSON

WHEDON, JOSS

(1964– )

Joss Whedon, born Joseph Hill Whedon, is an American movie and television writer, director, producer, and
sometime actor. He was born June 23,
1964. His ﬁrst big break came when he
was hired to write episodes of the television series Rosanne in 1989. Whedon’s
work includes screenwriting for the
animated Toy Story (1995), Alien: Resurrection (1997), X-Men (2000, unused),
and Speed (1994, uncredited). He is
most famous for the creation of Buffy
the Vampire Slayer and its spin-off,
Angel. Whedon developed Buffy on the
premise of inverting the horror ﬁlm
formula in which young girls are typically depicted as helpless, hysterical
victims of violence. Whedon’s vision
featured a young woman who was
dainty and feminine but also a powerful leader and exceptional ﬁghter.
Buffy originally debuted in a 1992
movie, but the ﬁnal product was not
what Whedon envisioned. Television
offered Whedon more creative control
and an opportunity to ﬂesh out his characters as he attempted to recreate Buffy
as an hour-long drama series. What followed was a television show starring
Sarah Michelle Gellar as Buffy Summers
the vampire slayer and leader of the
“scooby gang.” The show was less campy
than the movie and the dialogue more
natural and honest, earning it the name
“Whedonspeak.” Buffy the Vampire Slayer
has spun off into various other media as
well. Fray, a six-issue comic book series,
is about a New York vampire slayer
named Melaka Fray, set two hundred

years in the future. Whedon also teamed
up with former Buffy cast member
Amber Benson, who played Willow’s
partner Tara, to help pen Tales of the Vampires, an anthology of stories from the
“Buffyverse.”
Whedon carried his fascination with
empowered young women into other
projects. He followed Buffy and Angel
with a short-lived television series on
the Fox Network called Fireﬂy, best
described as a space western. Among
its female characters are the engineer,
the ﬁrst ofﬁcer, and a Companion, a
kind of courtesan. All of them, including the courtesan, demand and receive
respect from their male crewmates.
Whedon developed the Fireﬂy story further in the ﬁlm Serenity, which centers
on a teenage girl named River. She
possesses superhuman strength but,
unlike Buffy, River is a victim of her
strength rather than a master of it.
Whedon has often noted the impact
of comic books on his work. The character Kitty Pride from the X-Men comics
was an early model for Whedon’s
strong teenage girl characters. Whedon, also a writer of the Astonishing
X-Men comic, is now creating new
adventures for the character that
inspired him as a child. Mothers play a
much more prominent role in Whedon’s
work than fathers. His deepest inﬂuence is his mother Lee Stearns. Whedon
often portrays fathers negatively or just
completely excludes them from his
characters’ lives. In March 2005, Whedon was signed to write the movie script
for another feminist icon, DC Comics’
Wonder Woman, but left the project in
2007, citing creative differences.
See also: “Heroes or Sheroes” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Amy-Chinn, Dee. “’Tis Pity She’s a Whore.”
Feminist Media Studies 6, no. 2 (June 2006):
175–89.
323
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Whedonesque: Joss the Way We Like It
[online]. Http://whedonesque.com.
Wilcox, Rhonda V. “There Will Never Be a
‘Very Special’ Buffy.” Journal of Popular Film
& Television 27, no. 2 (Summer 1999): 16.

ERIN HARDE

WILHELM, KATE GERTRUDE

(1928– )

Kate Wilhelm is an American author
who has achieved both popular success
and critical acclaim primarily in the
genres of science ﬁction, fantasy, and
mystery novels. She wrote her ﬁrst
short story, “The Pint-Sized Genie,” in
1956 and published her ﬁrst novel, a
mystery entitled More Bitter than Death,
in 1963. She has won several major
awards in the course of her career,
including the Nebula Award for best
short story in 1968 (for “The Planners”)
and 1987 (for “Forever Yours, Anna”),
the Nebula for best novelette in 1986
(for The Girl Who Fell into the Sky), the
Hugo for best novel in 1977 (for Where
Late the Sweet Birds Sang), and the Prix
Apollo in 1982 (for Jupiter Time). She has
frequently been nominated for these
same awards.
Wilhelm was born in Ohio in 1928 to
Jesse and Ann Meredith and grew up in
Kentucky. After graduating high school,
she worked as a model, switchboard
operator, sales clerk, and insurance
underwriter before she became a fulltime writer. In 1947, she married Joseph
Wilhelm, but the marriage did not last
and they divorced in 1962. A year later,
she married Damon Knight (1922–
2002), the well-known science ﬁction
author, editor, and critic in whose
memory the Grand Master Award is
named. She has three children from
her two marriages.
Wilhelm rose to prominence as a science ﬁction author in the 1960s during
the New Wave, a movement characterized by a high degree of literary
324
................

Volume 2: Entries

experimentation and an interest in
human and social concerns. Wilhelm’s
work resonated with these new tendencies in the ﬁeld, due to her intelligent
and innovative use of narrative techniques and her exploration of psychology
and sociology. Much of her writing
examines the workings of the human
mind, dealing with themes like intelligence and consciousness, individualism and collectivism, and self-deceit
and deception. Her work also draws
on debates about contentious social
issues, including women’s marginal
position in society, the destruction of
the environment, and the importance
of reproductive rights. Moreover, like
many members of the New Wave, Wilhelm is interested in ordinary people
who ﬁnd themselves in extraordinary
events. Her novels and short stories are
often character studies, showing how
humans cope with extreme situations
and looking at the inner resources and
social networks on which they depend.
In particular, she has won praise for
her perceptive portrayals of the complex relationships between couples and
family members.
Together with Knight, Wilhelm is responsible for fostering the careers of
younger writers like Kim Stanley Robinson and Nicola Grifﬁth, most of whom
have gone on to become successful in
their own right. The couple cofounded
the Clarion Writer’s Workshop and the
Milford Writer’s Conference, two of the
most highly respected workshops for science ﬁction and fantasy authors. They
also have acted as guests of honor and
panelists at numerous conventions, both
within the United States and abroad.
Since Knight’s death, Wilhelm continues
to teach and to host workshops.
Further Readings
Jones, Anne Hudson. “Kate Wilhelm.” In
Twentieth-Century American Science Fiction

Windling, Terri
Writers, ed. David Cowart and Thomas
L.Wymer, 2:194–200. Detroit: Gale, 1981.
Kate Wilhelm [online]. Http://www.katewil
helm.com.
Lukin, Josh. “Cold War Masculinity in the
Early Work of Kate Wilhelm.” In Daughters of Earth: Feminist Science Fiction in the
Twentieth Century, ed. Justine Larbalestier,
107–29. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2006.
Wood, Susan. “Kate Wilhelm Is a Writer.”
Starship 17, no. 4 (1980): 7–16.

KAREN BRUCE

WINDLING, TERRI

(1958– )

An American editor, author, poet,
artist, and critic focusing on fairy tales
and fairy-tale retellings, Windling is a
founding member of the Interstitial
Arts movement and the leader of the
Endicott Circle. Her career in the ﬁeld
of fantasy began in 1979, when she
came to New York from Antioch College to begin working for Ace Books/
Grosset & Dunlap as Jim Baen’s editorial assistant. Windling moved up
through the ranks rapidly, from associate editor at the age of twenty-two to
fantasy editor, senior editor, and then
executive editor in 1984. Her duties as
fantasy editor centered on her creation
of the new Ace Fantasy imprint, and it
can be speculated that she was, in her
own way, as inﬂuential as Lin Carter in
expanding the fantasy ﬁeld. Certainly,
this is true in the subgenre of the fairytale retelling within the ﬁeld of fantasy.
During her time at Ace, Windling
acquired seminal works by writers who
would rise to great prominence in the
ﬁeld, including Pamela Dean, Charles
de Lint, Gregory Frost, Ellen Kushner,
Delia Sherman, Midori Snyder, and Patricia C. Wrede, to list only a few. She
left Ace for Tor Books in 1986, where
she still works as a consulting editor.
Windling is credited with encouraging
a new thread in fantasy literature,

concentrating on urban fantasy and
magical realism. This propensity can
certainly be seen in her edited collections, which include Elsewhere, Borderlands, and of course the Year’s Best
Fantasy and Horror and the Adult Fairy
Tale series (coedited with Ellen Datlow).
Windling has also edited a number
of groundbreaking stand-alone collections, foremost among them The
Armless Maiden, and Other Tales for Childhood’s Survivors, a collection of modern
fairy-tale retellings focusing on abuse
narratives. She is a World Fantasy
Award winner seven times over.
Windling’s creative work crosses
media: she is an author, illustrator, and
artist. Her ﬁrst novel, The Wood Wife, a
magical realist text drawing upon both
fairy tales and Native American lore set
in the Sonoran desert, won the Mythopoeic Society Award for best novel of
the year in 1997. She is currently at
work on her second novel, titled The
Moon Wife. She has also collaborated
with Wendy Froud on a series of children’s picture books, the Old Oak Wood
series, with Windling providing the text
and Froud the tableaus of fairy dolls
posed to accompany the stories. Windling’s own art runs the gamut from the
line-sketched illustrations featured in
the Elsewhere anthologies to the complex mixed-media collages that have
been featured in galleries and museums such as the Boston Museum of
Fine Arts, the Mythic Garden, and the
Abbaye Daoulas.
The interstitiality of Windling’s work
leads naturally to her work with the Interstitial Arts movement, which aims
to promote art that exists on the borderlands between media, disciplines,
and cultures. Windling advances these
aims not only in her own work but also
more broadly through the Endicott Studio, which began in Boston as a studio
group for women artists before
325
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

expanding outward into Endicott West,
an interstitial arts center in Tucson,
and The Endicott Studio for the Mythic
Arts, an online quarterly journal.
Further Readings
Endicott
Studio
[online].
http://www.
endicott-studio.com.
Murray, Robin. “Terri Windling’s The Wood
Wife: A Space for Complementary Subjects.” Femspec 3, no. 1 (2001): 22–32.
“Terri Windling: Border Coyote.” Locus 51,
no. 4 (October 2003): 76–78.

HELEN PILINOVSKY

WINTERSON, JEANETTE

(1959– )

One of the most innovative writers of
contemporary British literature, Jeanette Winterson uses fantastic elements as means of highlighting her
topics: desire, boundaries of gender,
love, identity, and time. She often generates the material for the fantastic
through a rewriting of fairy tales, folk
stories, and grand narratives. For
instance, not only does she mimic the
titles in the Old Testament as chapter
names in Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit
(1987), but she also follows the trend in
Sexing the Cherry (1989) by reworking
“The Twelve Dancing Princesses.”
In most of her novels, Winterson
resorts to anachronistic fantasy. Sexing
the Cherry—in which the seventeenthcentury Puritans coexist with an ecologist girl with her ageless gargantuan
mother, a grotesque ﬁgure, all situated
in the English Civil War—enables the
reader to re-vision the past with a fresh
perspective. The Passion (1987), which
employs fantastic elements like metamorphosis, is also an example of fantasy achieved through rewriting: The
English victory over the French is
viewed not through Napoleon but
through a young soldier, Henri, the
neck-wringer in Napoleon’s army. This
shift in perspective is complemented
326
................

Volume 2: Entries

by a contrast in gender roles. Henri has
feminine qualities, whereas his love,
the web-footed Villanelle, is the only
woman to walk on water, a trait of the
Venetian men who are told to be the
only beholders of this privilege. Such
contrasts help the reader redeﬁne gender roles. Fantastic images such as the
priest’s telescopic left eye catching
glimpses of naked bodies and love
scenes, and Villanelle’s heart acting as
a separate piece, also blur the boundaries of the real and the fantastic.
The PowerBook (2000), with its play on
time through a sixteenth-century heroine diving into today’s cyberspace, follows Winterson’s interest in quantum
physics, as does the interpretation of
time and space she practices in Written
on the Body (1992), Art and Lies (1994),
Gut Symmetries (1997), and The World
and Other Places (1998). The PowerBook
also questions whether a virtual identity is real enough to force coherence
upon its holder.
Through the fantastic image of metamorphosis—an Ottoman tulip transforming into a phallus—masculine and
feminine roles are discussed as the
image raises the question of whether it
is a speciﬁc bodily part that determines
the power mechanisms. Science and
the nature of time, sources of inspiration for most of Winterson’s novels,
occupy a key position in Weight (2005),
a retelling of the Atlas myth. Although
almost all her ﬁction displays a lengthy
discussion of time past, present, and
future, her recent novel Tanglewreck
(2007) places the topic at the center.
Further Readings
Grice, Helena, and Tim Woods, eds. “I’m Telling You Stories”: Jeanette Winterson and the Politics of Reading. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1998.
Jeanette Winterson [online]. Http://www.
jeanettewinterson.com.
Makinen, Merja. The Novels of Jeanette Winterson. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.

Women’s Bookstores
Reynolds, Margaret. Jeanette Winterson. London: Vintage, 2003.

€ ZYURT KILIC¸
MINE O

WOLLHEIM, BETSY (1951– )
Elizabeth Rosalind Wollheim is the
owner of DAW Books, which publishes
original works of science ﬁction and
fantasy. She was born in New York on
December 5, 1951, to paperback editor
Donald A. Wollheim and his wife, Elsie.
Her father edited science ﬁction for
Ace Books and later for DAW Books,
which her parents founded in 1971,
and Wollheim grew up in the company
of science ﬁction and fantasy authors.
She enrolled at Beloit University in
Wisconsin in 1969, but later moved to
Massachusetts, where she attended
Clark University and the Worcester Art
Museum School simultaneously. Wollheim graduated in 1973 with an English
degree and enrolled in graduate school,
intending to study photography. However, she left the program to work as a
magazine proofreader and darkroom
technician. In 1975, she returned to
New York and became an associate editor at DAW. She met musician Peter
Stampfel that same year; the two were
married in 1982 and now have two
sons.
Wollheim became president of DAW
Books in 1985, when ill health forced
her father to step down. Under her
leadership, the house made several signiﬁcant changes without compromising
DAW’s commitment to careful editing,
excellent writing, and high-quality
cover art and packaging. She initiated a
controversial design shift, dropping the
house’s traditional yellow spines with
red and black lettering and moved the
DAW Collectors’ Book Number from
the cover to the copyright page.
Responding to an increasing demand
for original fantasy, she sought out new

voices, including Mercedes Lackey and
Jennifer Roberson. She also published
the ﬁrst DAW hardcover title, Angel with
the Sword (1985) by C. J. Cherryh.
Wollheim now runs the company
with publisher and co-owner Sheila Gilbert. In 2002, they celebrated thirty
years of best-selling science ﬁction and
fantasy with two anthologies featuring works by DAW authors, including
Andre Norton, Tanith Lee, Frederik
Pohl, and C. S. Friedman. The house is
distributed by the international Penguin Group, but Wollheim and Gilbert
strive to maintain the atmosphere and
high standards of a small, familyowned publishing house.
Further Readings
DAW Books [online]. Http://www.dawbooks.
com.
Wollheim, Betsy. “Betsy Wollheim: The Family
Trade.” Locus 56, no. 6 (June 2006): 35–37.

KAREN HALL

WOMEN’S BOOKSTORES
The role of women’s bookstores in promoting and selling science ﬁction and
fantasy by and about women has primarily focused on small press and overtly
feminist work. This focus has been due
to both the history of the Women’s Liberation movement and the general perception that science ﬁction was a maledominated genre of literature.
Bookstores that specialize in books
by, for, and about women were an outgrowth of the women’s movement of
the 1970s in North America and
Europe, and of later eras around the
world. Activists recognized the need for
publications to spread their messages
and to serve as organizing tools. When
many of the existing publishers and
printers refused to publish or print
their work, the activists created publishing houses, printing collectives, and
newspapers. Bookstores followed soon
327
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

after, as a vehicle for distributing these
new works.
The early bookstores were often run
by women’s collectives, which were
born from the feminist goal to create
new, nonhierarchical models of cooperation in achieving common objectives.
Many of these stores were part of a
larger, collectively run organization,
such as a women’s center or a restaurant, while others were run as standalone businesses. In general, these
stores were operated more as public
services than as for-proﬁt enterprises.
Because there were few other venues
where new feminist writing could be
found, the early bookstores provided
an essential service to the feminist
movement. They sold books and crafts,
provided referrals to the newly established safe houses and shelters for victims of assault and domestic abuse,
and provided a space where women
could read explicitly lesbian and/or
feminist poetry, ﬁction and nonﬁction.
Included in those early works was, of
course, science ﬁction and fantasy. But
because these genres were perceived as
being a male-dominated ﬁeld, they
were never as signiﬁcant to the overall
sales of the stores as mystery, romantic ﬁction, or poetry.
One exception was the utopian novel.
Authors such as Sally Miller Gearhart
(The Wanderground, 1980) and Marge
Piercy (Woman on the Edge of Time, 1976)
created visions of what the world could
be. Other prominent women authors
like Joanna Russ and Suzy McKee
Charnas offered up critiques, dystopias
as well as utopias. The bookstores also
sold mimeographed chapbooks, handprinted utopian works by women writers who wanted to share their visions
and their words. Most of these are no
longer available.
As the initial energy of the movement died away or was channeled in
328
................

Volume 2: Entries

new directions, women’s bookstores
changed along with the other institutions the movement had created. By
the early 1980s, most women’s bookstores were no longer run by collectives. The surviving feminist presses
and publishing houses were more
established, and both they and the
bookstores were run more as business
enterprises than as public services.
Authors like Ursula K. Le Guin, Octavia Butler, Elizabeth Lynn, Marion
Zimmer Bradley, and Melissa Scott
attracted a new audience of women
readers to the science ﬁction and
fantasy genres, and the bookstores
expanded these sections as a result.
Small and medium-size presses such
as the Women’s Press and Crossing
Press also began to publish more feminist science ﬁction and fantasy as the
market expanded.
The later 1980s saw an upsurge in
the number of women’s bookstores in
the United States, Canada, England,
Australia, Japan, and other countries.
While many were situated in large
cities, there were a number of stores in
smaller towns as well, especially those
near universities and colleges. Many of
the stores joined together in the Feminist Bookstore Network, which provided the subscriber base of the journal
Feminist Bookstore News (1976–2000).
At the height of its circulation, the
journal went to 350 feminist and feminist-friendly bookstores around the
world. In addition to articles on many
topics of interest to bookstore owners,
the journal also published reviews.
These included a long-running science
ﬁction and fantasy review column that
was written at various times by Susanna Sturgis, Julie Mitchell, Heather
Whipple, and Laura Quilter.
Unique among non–science ﬁction
publications, this column included
short descriptions of novels that were

Wood, Susan
either written by women or had a feminist focus. In addition to reviews, the
authors publicized the feminist science
ﬁction convention WisCon, as well as
the James Tiptree Jr. Award, all of
which helped make feminist booksellers more aware of new works in the
ﬁeld.
But by the late 1990s, the whole landscape of independent bookselling was
transformed. Large chain bookstores
like Barnes and Noble, Borders, Amazon.com, and their afﬁliates controlled
most book sales in the United States by
the end of the decade. Small bookstores, distributors, and many publishers went out of business as the chain
stores increased their sales, in part by
extracting extra discounts from publishers. While the larger stores continue to sell science ﬁction and fantasy
written by women, smaller presses
and unknown authors often have not
received the promotion essential to
selling well in the new environment.
The effect of the changes in publishing and bookselling over the last ﬁfteen
years caused the Feminist Bookstore
Network to shrink from hundreds of
stores to less than ﬁfty and the Feminist
Bookstore News to cease publication. Its
successor publication, Books to Watch
Out For, no longer includes a regular
science ﬁction and fantasy review
column.
But while the science ﬁction and fantasy sections of the remaining women’s
bookstores are often fairly small, store
owners are generally more open to the
genre than they were previously. In
some communities, fans, authors, and
bookstore owners have worked together to stage readings and promote
each other. The Room of One’s Own
Bookstore in Madison, Wisconsin,
works with WisCon to sponsor readings
and events at the store, as well as tabling at the convention. Other feminist

bookstores, such as Charis Books and
More in Atlanta and Amazon Bookstore
Cooperative in Minneapolis, host readings by local and national science ﬁction and fantasy authors as part of an
ongoing reading series. As authors like
Kelly Link and Audrey Niffenegger
appear on more feminist bookstores’
best-seller lists, they attract a new audience to science ﬁction and fantasy as
well as to the stores themselves, suggesting that women’s bookstores may play a
larger role in promoting science ﬁction
and fantasy by women in the future.
Further Readings
Chesnut, Saralyn, and Amanda Gable.
“‘Women Ran It’: Charis Books and More
and Atlanta’s Lesbian-Feminist Community, 1971–1981.” In Carryin’ On in the Lesbian
and Gay South, ed. John Howard, 241–84.
New York: New York University Press, 1997.
Feminist Bookstore News. Archive, 1976–2000,
San Francisco Public Library, San Francisco.
McGrath, Kathryn. “Pushed to the Margins:
The Slow Death and Possible Rebirth of
the Feminist Bookstore.” Bitch 21
(Summer 2003): 60–67, 93.

CATHERINE LUNDOFF

WOOD, SUSAN

(1948–1980)

Susan Wood was an award-winning
fanzine writer, an academic critic and
scholar of science ﬁction (SF) and Canadian literature, and one of the leading feminists in science ﬁction fandom
in the 1970s. She was born in Ottawa in
1948 and earned a master’s degree in
literature at Ottawa’s Carleton University, followed by a doctorate in Canadian literature from the University of
Toronto. She taught at the University of
Saskatchewan, then became a tenured
member of the English Literature
Department at the University of British
Columbia in Vancouver.
Wood gained notice in fanzine fandom in the early 1970s as coeditor of
329
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Energumen with her then-husband Mike
Glicksohn. Energumen was nominated
for the Best Fanzine Hugo from 1970 to
1973, winning at TorCon, the 1973
Worldcon that she helped organize. In
her own right, she was nominated for
the Best Fan Writer Hugo from 1974
through 1978, winning in 1974 and
1977. While Wood was best known as a
feminist and academic writer, she
wrote on a variety of other topics,
including a lighthearted Outworlds article on teddy bears.
She and Glicksohn (by then separated) shared the fan guest of honor
position at the 1975 Worldcon in Australia, but Wood made perhaps her biggest impression on fandom at the
following year’s Worldcon, MidAmericon, where, over some opposition, she
led the ﬁrst Worldcon panel ever on the
subject of feminism. The MidAmericon
panel sparked several important developments, particularly A Woman’s APA,
the ﬁrst feminist amateur press association and one that soon became allwoman, and “A Room of One’s Own,”
the women-only space at SF conventions that was a popular concept for
several years. The founders of WisCon,

330
................

Volume 2: Entries

the feminist science ﬁction convention, credit the MidAmericon panel,
and Wood’s contributions in general,
for inspiring them.
Wood wrote The Poison Maiden and the
Great Bitch: Female Sterotypes in Marvel
Superhero Comics (1974) and, after Energumen, published Amor de Cosmos, a
personal fanzine. She also edited
Ursula K. Le Guin’s ﬁrst nonﬁction collection, The Language of the Night: Essays
on Fantasy and Science Fiction (1979). Her
book reviews were published in the
Washington Post, Locus, and the Paciﬁc
Northwest Review of Books, and she
wrote “Propeller Beanie,” a fanzine
review column, for Amazing, in which
she encouraged feminist, queer, and
other personal writing, as well as discussion of science ﬁction and fandom.
Susan Wood died on November 12,
1980. Fandom remembered her with a
third Best Fan Writer Hugo the following
year, and a scholarship in her memory
was set up at Carleton College.
Further Readings
Porter, Andrew. “Susan Wood.” Starship,
Spring 1981, 41.

ARTHUR D. HLAVATY

X
XENA: WARRIOR PRINCESS

(1995–

2001)
Xena: Warrior Princess (1995–2001) was
the ﬁrst truly successful television series to feature a female action hero in
the lead role. By showing television
executives that a series headed by a
woman warrior could win a large audience, Xena opened the way for femaleled series like Buffy the Vampire Slayer
(1997–2003), Alias (2001–06), and Dark
Angel (2000–02), as well as many heroic
female characters in mixed casts. In
addition, Xena portrayed a complex
friendship between two women, in a
genre that has generally overlooked
female friendships in favor of male
“buddy” relationships.
Xena began as a spin-off of Hercules:
The Legendary Journeys (1995–99), a lighthearted adventure series set loosely in
the Greek mythical world. Created by
three men, Robert Tapert, John Schulian, and R. J. Stewart, and modeled on
the conﬂicted heroines of Hong Kong
action ﬁlms, Xena is a former warlord
who seeks to atone for past atrocities.
Filmed in New Zealand and starring
New Zealand native Lucy Lawless, Xena
premiered in American syndication in
the fall of 1995 and became the highest-rated syndicated series to that date.
Accompanied by her best friend Gabrielle (Renee O’Connor, who was quickly
promoted from mere sidekick to costar),
Xena wandered across the ancient world
for six seasons, seeking her own
redemption by defending the downtrodden. Within this simple format, Xena’s
mixed-gender writing team used genres

as varied as sword and sorcery, alternative history, tragedy, mystery, parody,
and farce. Major themes included war
and nonviolence, the value of the individual, and the responsibility of power.
The Greek gods ﬁgured prominently,
especially a seductive Ares and a comic
Aphrodite, alongside a few historical ﬁgures such as Julius Caesar. The Greek
Amazons played an important role, representing a community where Xena and
Gabrielle were welcomed as family, in
contrast to the more usual portrayal of
Amazons as an alien culture. The writers
also drew on nonclassical cultures and
mythologies, including those of China,
Japan, Scandinavia, Siberia, North Africa,
and India.
While some critics dismiss Xena’s
historical anachronisms, over-the-top
action sequences, and often campy tone,
the series is widely considered an entertaining and well-crafted adventure and
an important feminist milestone in pop
culture. Controversy arose chieﬂy from
the possibility of a lesbian relationship
between Xena and Gabrielle. The producers and cast preferred, for artistic
and commercial reasons, to leave the
question unresolved on screen, allowing
viewers to make their own interpretation
of the relationship.
Lesbian or not, the friendship between
Xena and Gabrielle is often cited by fans
and critics as a signiﬁcant reason for
Xena’s enduring popularity. Portrayed with
both humor and drama, the relationship
explored a wide range of women’s
life experiences, including romance, family, motherhood, bereavement, rape,
331
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

betrayal, reconciliation, spiritual discovery, and the quest for identity.
See also: “Heroes or Sheroes” (vol. 1).
Further Readings
Early, Frances H., and Kathleen Kennedy,
eds. Athena’s Daughters: Television’s New
Women Warriors. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University Press, 2003.

Volume 2: Entries

Hayes, K. Stoddard. “Xena: Warrior Princess”:
The Complete Illustrated Companion. London: Titan Books, 2003.
Morreale, Joanne. “Xena: Warrior Princess as
Feminist Camp.” Journal of Popular Culture
32, no. 2 (1998): 79–86.
Weisbrot, Robert. “Xena: Warrior Princess”:
The Ofﬁcial Guide to the Xenaverse. New
York: Doubleday, 1998.
Whoosh [online]. Http://www.whoosh.org.

K. STODDARD HAYES

332
................

Y
YARBRO, CHELSEA QUINN

(1942– )

Chelsea Quinn Yarbro is one of only
two women ever to be named a Grand
Master of the World Horror Convention,
and in 2005 she was given the ﬁrst ever
“Living Legend” award by the International Horror Guild. She is the author,
under her own name and several pseudonyms, of more than sixty novels, in
genres as diverse as science ﬁction,
westerns, romance, and fantasy, but
she is best known for her horror ﬁction, especially her novels and stories
of the vampire Comte Saint-Germain.
Yarbro was born in Berkeley, California, and grew up in the atmosphere of
academia. After early jobs in theater
and as a cartographer, she became a
professional writer in 1968, her primary
career since.
The novels detailing the four-thousand-year career of Saint-Germain, as
well as the associated novels concerning
his sometime lover Atta Olivia Clemens,
have been widely praised for meticulous
re-creation of historical periods as varied
as Imperial Rome (Blood Games, 1980;
Roman Dusk, 2006), Depression-era California (Midnight Harvest, 2003), and
seventeenth-century colonial Peru (Mansions of Darkness, 1996). The estimable
Count, in each of the nineteen novels of
the series, proves more human and compassionate than the societies through
which he moves. This vampire, far from
preying on women, is more usually cast
as the protector and defender of women
who, despite their intelligence and
strong personalities, are oppressed or
endangered in patriarchal cultures. The

taking of blood for sustenance is
depicted erotically, with the vampire
needing not simply ﬂuid but the intimacy of lovemaking.
Although the early Saint-Germain
novels were described as “historical
horror” novels, the horriﬁc elements are
downplayed in favor of romance and
social commentary. Yarbro’s emphasis
on the status of women throughout history gives her work a unique perspective,
and her attention to historical settings
and richly detailed characterizations
have gained her a wide following. Since
the ﬁrst Saint-Germain novel, Hotel Transylvania (1978), her work has inﬂuenced
the development of the hero-vampire
and the vampire romance genre.
Further Readings
Bogstad, Janice M. “Chelsea Quinn Yarbro.”
In Supernatural Fiction Writers: Contemporary Fantasy and Horror, ed. Richard Bleiler,
993–1002. New York: Thomson Gale,
2003.
Chelsea Quinn Yarbro [online]. Http://www.
chelseaquinnyarbro.net.
Russell, Sharon A. “Introducing Count
Saint-Germain: Chelsea Quinn Yarbro’s
Heroic Vampire.” In The Blood Is the Life:
Vampires in Literature, 141–54. Leonard G.
Heldreth and Mary Pharr, eds. Bowling
Green, OH: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1999.

CANDACE R. BENEFIEL

YOLEN, JANE [HYATT] (1939– )
Jane Yolen is an award-winning and proliﬁc Jewish American writer and editor
of fantasy and science ﬁction novels and
short ﬁction for children, young adults,
333
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

and adults. She has published more than
three hundred books, writing in a range
of genres, including mystery, nonﬁction,
poetry, and realistic ﬁction. She is also
noted as an editor of more than twenty
anthologies, mostly for children and
adolescents. Inﬂuenced by a gift copy of
a journal on George Fox, who founded
the Religious Society of Friends
(Quakers), she became a member of that
denomination in 1971. Feminist and
humanist themes connect her work
across genres and media, with a special
interest in creating quality children’s
and young adult (YA) literature.
The greatest inﬂuence on Yolen’s
work is her interest in fairy tales and
folktales. She began writing poetry and
songs in grade school. Yolen earned a
B.A. with a double major in English and
Russian from Smith College for Women
in Massachusetts in 1960. She then
completed an M.Ed. in 1976 as well as
the coursework for a doctorate in children’s literature at the University of
Massachusetts. She has served as president of the Science Fiction and Fantasy
Writers of America and as an ofﬁcer
for the Science Fiction Poetry Association. Her work has been nominated for
and received numerous awards, including the Caldecott Medal, the Jewish
Book Award, three Mythopoeic Fantasy
Awards, two Nebulas, and the World
Fantasy Award.
After graduating from Smith College,
Yolen worked brieﬂy as a journalist, living in Greenwich Village, where she met
her husband, David Stemple, whom she
married in 1962. She disliked writing for
newspapers and soon moved on to work
as an assistant editor. She also began
writing and submitting children’s books
and worked as a ghostwriter. Yolen identiﬁes meeting Frances Keene, who
became head of Macmillan’s children’s
literature department, as the start of
her writing career. Her ﬁrst published
334
................

Volume 2: Entries

book was Pirates in Petticoats (1963), a
nonﬁction work about women pirates.
Her publication record since then is vast.
Yolen has written ﬁction and nonﬁction books for beginning readers. The
Commander Toad picture books series is
well known for poking fun at the conventions and elements of Star Wars and
Star Trek. She also writes for young adult
readers. Her Pit Dragon Chronicles
(Dragon’s Blood, 1982; Heart’s Blood, 1984;
A Sending of Dragons, 1987) are compared
favorably to Ursula K. Le Guin’s Earthsea trilogy in terms of the completely
realized alternate world. She is currently
working on a fourth novel in the series
(Dragon’s Heart). The Chronicles are set
on a former penal colony, Austar IV,
where the native dragons are trained to
ﬁght in competitive games. The culture
is feudal hierarchy, with masters and
slaves. The protagonist is a slave boy,
Jakkin, who steals a female dragon
hatchling to raise and train in secret.
Over the course of the novels, he is
freed, becomes a Dragon Master, and
gets involved in the complex political
conﬂicts between the ruling class, those
rebelling against the power structure,
and a hidden group of cave-dwelling
humans.
Yolen is also known for using fantastic conventions such as time travel and
alternative history to give readers new
perspectives on historical events. The
Devil’s Arithmetic (1988) is one of Yolen’s
most praised books and is taught in
Holocaust Studies classes. This YA
time-travel story describes how twelveyear-old Hannah Stern is suddenly
transported from her home in contemporary New York to 1942 Poland. There,
Hannah is known as “Chaya,” and she
is soon captured and taken to a death
camp. Chaya meets Rivka, a young girl,
and they become friends. Chaya chooses to take Rivka’s place in the gas
chamber, and when the doors close

Yolen, Jane
behind her, Hannah is suddenly back in
her own time, at home. She learns that
Rivka is her Aunt Eva.
Yolen wrote Briar Rose (1992) for Terri
Windling’s fairy-tale series, to create a
Holocaust story through a retelling of
“Sleeping Beauty.” The novel, written
for adults, has been taught in a number of high school classes, which has
led to controversy. Because Yolen
included a gay character as well as information on the pink triangle camps,
where the Nazis imprisoned homosexuals or suspected homosexuals, the
book has been banned in a number of
places and has even been burned in
public in Missouri.
Others of Yolen’s books have aroused
controversy as well, including her picture book Encounter for children, published in 1992 to mark the ﬁve
hundredth anniversary of Christopher
Columbus’s arrival in the Americas.
Yolen’s narrator is a Taino elder who
was enslaved by Columbus as a child
and whose warnings to other indigenous cultures were ignored. She has
also published the nonﬁction collection
Favorite Folktales from Around the World
(1986), with what she considers to be
her major essay on the importance of
folk and fairy tales.
Yolen has written a number of fantasy novels for adults. One of her bestknown works, a feminist sword-andsorcery novel, is The Books of Great Alta
(1997)—an omnibus edition consisting
of two separately published parts: Sister
Light, Sister Dark (1988) and White Jenna
(1989). The story focuses on Jenna, a
white-haired warrior woman raised by
women. Jenna is a child of prophecy,
born to reunite her broken kingdom.
She is taught how to call out her dark
sister, a shadow self. Even though the
major characters are killed off at the
end of the second book, Yolen later
published a third book that is not as

well known, focusing on Jenna’s children and named after Jenna’s daughter: The One-Armed Queen (1998). The
structures of all three books are interwoven threads of different types of narrative: the story, the ballad, the tale,
the history. The idea that all stories are
connected,
from
earliest
myths,
through fairy and folktales, through
modern retellings, and the blending of
poetry and song with prose is a major
element of her work.
She has published more than twentyﬁve books of poetry for children and
adults, some now out of print. Most critically acclaimed is The Radiation Sonnets
(2003), a series of sonnets written during
the period between when her husband
was diagnosed with a cancerous tumor
and the end of his radiation therapy,
forty-three days. Yolen wrote one sonnet
a day during that time. She is still writing
after the death of her husband in 2006
and maintains a journal on her website
about writing and life, “Telling the True.”
See also: Amazons; “Feminist Spirituality”
(vol. 1).
Further Readings
Hanlon, Tina L. “‘To Sleep, Perchance to
Dream’: Sleeping Beauties and Wide-Awake
Plain Janes in the Stories of Jane Yolen.”
Children’s Literature 26 (1998): 140–67.
Jane Yolen [online]. Http://www.janeyolen.
com.
Martin, Michael J. “Experience and Expectations: The Dialogic Narrative of Adolescent Holocaust Literature.” Children’s
Literature Association Quarterly 29, no. 4
(Winter 2004): 315–28.
Yolen, Jane. “From Andersen On: Fairy Tales
Tell Our Lives.” Marvels & Tales 20, no. 2
(2006): 238–49.
———. “Once upon a While Ago: Folktales
in the Course of Literature.” In Children’s
Literature Remembered: Issues, Trends, and
Favorite Books, ed. Linda Pavonetti, 39–48.
Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited, 2004.

ROBIN ANNE REID
335
................

This page intentionally left blank

Selected

Bibliography
Aldiss, Brian W. Trillion Year Spree: The History
of Science Fiction. New York: Atheneum, 1986.
Anderson, Timothy J. “I Want to Be Your Sex
Symbol: Exploring Objectiﬁcation, Cultural Deﬁnition and the Manipulation of
Desire Via the Metaphor of Bio-Engineering in Resisting Adonis.” In Biotechnological
and Medical Themes in Science Fiction, ed.
Domna Pastourmatzi, 39–48. Thessaloniki, Greece: University Studio, 2002.
Andriano, Joseph. Immortal Monster: The
Mythological Evolution of the Fantastic Beast
in Modern Fiction and Film. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1999.
Armitt, Lucie, ed. Where No Man Has Gone
Before: Women and Science Fiction. London:
Routledge, 1991.
Ash, Brian. The Visual Encyclopedia of Science
Fiction. New York: Harmony Books; London: Triune Books, 1977.
Asimov, Isaac. Gold: The Final Science Fiction
Collection. New York: Harper Prism, 1995.
Atteberry, Brian. Decoding Gender in Science
Fiction. New York: Routledge, 2002.
———. The Fantasy Tradition in American Literature: From Irving to Le Guin. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1980.
Auerbach, Nina. Our Vampires, Ourselves. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Bacon-Smith, Camille. Enterprising Women:
Television Fandom and the Creation of Popular Myth. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992.
———. Science Fiction Culture. Feminist Cultural Studies, the Media, and Political
Culture. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2000.
Barr, Marleen S. Alien to Femininity: Speculative Fiction and Feminist Theory. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press, 1987.

———, ed. Future Females: A Critical Anthology. Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green
State University Popular Press, 1981.
———, ed. Future Females, the Next Generation: New Voices and Velocities in Feminist
Science Fiction Criticism. New York: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2000.
———. Lost in Space: Probing Feminist Science
Fiction and Beyond. Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press, 1993.
Barr, Marleen S., and Richard Feldstein. Discontented Discourses: Feminism/Textual Intervention/Psychoanalysis. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press, 1989.
Barr, Marleen S., and Nicholas D. Smith,
eds. Women and Utopia: Critical Interpretations. Lanham, MD: University Press of
America, 1983.
Barron, Neil. Fantasy and Horror: A Critical
and Historical Guide to Literature, Illustration, Film, TV, Radio, and the Internet. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 1999.
———. Horror Literature: A Reader’s Guide.
New York: Garland, 1990.
Beahm, George W. The Unauthorized Anne
Rice Companion. Kansas City, MO: Andrews
& McMeel, 1996.
Becker, Susanne. Gothic Forms of Feminine Fictions. Manchester, England: Manchester
University Press; New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 1999.
Bell, Elizabeth, and Lynda Haas. From Mouse
to Mermaid: The Politics of Film, Gender, and
Culture. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1995.
Benton, Mike. Science Fiction Comics: The Illustrated History. Dallas: Taylor, 1992.
Bittner, James W. Approaches to the Fiction of
Ursula K. Le Guin. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI
Research Press, 1984.

337
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Bleiler, Everett Franklin. Supernatural Fiction
Writers: Fantasy and Horror. New York:
Scribner, 1985.
Booker, M. Keith. Dystopian Literature. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994.
Brizzi, Mary T. Anne McCaffrey. Mercer
Island, WA: Starmont House, 1986.
Brunsdon, Charlotte, and Julie Acci. Feminist
Television Criticism: A Reader. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press, 1997.
Bucknall, Barbara J. Ursula K. Le Guin. New
York: Ungar, 1981.
Buhle, Paul. Popular Culture in America. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987.
Bunson, Matthew. The Vampire Encyclopedia.
New York: Crown, 1993.
Burgess, Michael. Reference Guide to Science
Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror. Englewood, NJ:
Libraries Unlimited, 1992.
Burgess, Michael, and Lisa R. Bartle. Reference Guide to Science Fiction, Fantasy, and
Horror. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited,
2002.
Burwell, Jennifer. Notes on Nowhere: Feminism, Utopian Logic, and Social Transformation.
Minneapolis:
University
of
Minnesota Press, 1997.
Byron, Glennis, and David Punter. Spectral
Readings: Towards a Gothic Geography. New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1999.
Carlson, Eric W. A Companion to Poe Studies.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1996.
Carter, Margaret L. Dracula: The Vampire and
the Critics. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research
Press, 1988.
Carter, Paul Allen. The Creation of Tomorrow:
Fifty Years of Magazine Science Fiction. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1977.
Chevigny, Bell, and Laguardia Gale. Reinventing the Americas: Comparative Studies of Literature of the United States and Spanish
America. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1986.
Clareson, Thomas D. Many Futures, Many
Worlds: Theme and Form in Science Fiction.
Kent, OH: Kent State University Press,
1977.
———. Voices for the Future: Essays on Major
Science Fiction Writers. Bowling Green, OH:
Bowling Green State University Popular
Press, 1976.
338
................

Volume 2: Entries

Clark, George, and Daniel Timmons. J. R. R.
Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: Views of
Middle-earth. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 2000.
Clery, E. J. Women’s Gothic: From Clara Reeve
to Mary Shelley. Tavistock, England: Northcote House in association with the British
Council, 2000.
Clover, Carol J. Men, Women, and Chain Saws:
Gender in the Modern Horror Film. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992.
Clute, John. Science Fiction: The Illustrated Encyclopedia. Surry Hills, NSW, Australia: RD
Press, 1995. Reprint, London: Orbit, 1999.
Clute, John, and John Grant. The Encyclopedia of
Fantasy. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997.
Clute, John, and Peter Nicholls. The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1995.
Cole, Malcolm S., and John Koegel. Music in
Performance and Society: Essays in Honor of
Roland Jackson. Warren, MI: Harmonie
Park Press, 1997.
Cornillion, Susan Koppelman. Images of
Women in Fiction: Feminist Perspectives.
Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State
University Popular Press, 1972.
Cortiel, Jeanne. Demand My Writing: Joanna
Russ/Feminism/Science Fiction. Liverpool,
England: Liverpool University Press, 1999.
Cummins, Elizabeth. Understanding Ursula K.
Le Guin. Columbia: University of South
Carolina Press, 1990.
D’Ammassa, Don. The Encyclopedia of Science
Fiction. New York: Facts on File, 2004.
Davies, Catherine. A Place in the Sun? Women
Writers in Twentieth-Century Cuba. London:
Zed Books; New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1997.
DeLamotte, Eugenia C. Perils of the Night: A
Feminist Study of Nineteenth-Century Gothic.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Delany, Samuel. The Jewel-Hinged Jaw:
Essays on Science Fiction. New York: Berkley, 1977.
———. Longer Views: Extended Essays. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England,
1996.
———. Silent Interviews: On Language, Race,
Sex, Science Fiction, and Some Comics. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, 1994.

Selected Bibliography
Del Rey, Lester. The World of Science Fiction,
1926–1976. New York: Garland, 1980.
Dickson, Gordon. The Final Encyclopedia. London: Sphere, 1984.
Disch, Thomas. The Dreams Our Stuff Is Made
Of: How Science Fiction Conquered the World.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000.
Donawerth, Jane L. Frankenstein’s Daughters:
Women Writing Science Fiction. Syracuse,
NY: Syracuse University Press, 1997.
Donawerth, Jane L., Carol A. Kolmerten,
and Susan Gubar. Utopian and Science Fiction by Women: Worlds of Difference. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1994.
Drew, Bernard A. Heroines: A Bibliography of
Women Series Characters in Mystery, Espionage, Action, Science Fiction, Fantasy, Horror,
Western, Romance and Juvenile Novels. New
York: Garland, 1989.
Du Pont, Denise, ed. Women of Vision: Essays
by Women Writing Science Fiction. New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1988.
Durant, David S. Ann Radcliffe’s Novels:
Experiments in Setting. New York: Arno
Press, 1980.
Ellis, Kate Ferguson. The Contested Castle:
Gothic Novels and the Subversion of Domestic
Ideology. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1989.
Fetterley, Judith. The Resisting Reader: A Feminist Approach to American Fiction. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978.
Finch, Alison. Women’s Writing in NineteenthCentury France. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2000.
Fishburn, Katherine. The Unexpected Universe of
Doris Lessing: A Study in Narrative Technique.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1985.
Flanagan, Mary, and Austin Booth. Reload:
Rethinking Women and Cyberculture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.
Fleenor, Juliann E. The Female Gothic. Montreal: Eden Press, 1983.
Florescu, Radu. In Search of Frankenstein:
Exploring the Myths behind Mary Shelley’s
Monster. London: Robson Books, 1996.
Freeman, Carl. Critical Theory and Science Fiction. Hanover, NH: University Press of
New England, 2000.
Friedman, Lenemaja. Shirley Jackson. Boston:
Twayne, 1975.

Fry, Carrol L. Charlotte Smith, Popular Novelist.
New York: Arno Press, 1980.
Fulton, Roger. The Encyclopedia of TV Science
Fiction. London: Boxtree, 1990. Reprint,
1997. 4th rev. ed. London: Boxtree, 2000.
Fulton, Roger, and John Betancourt. The SciFi Channel Encyclopedia of TV Science Fiction.
New York: Aspect, 1998.
Gallardo C., Ximena, and C. Jason Smith.
Alien Woman: The Making of Lt. Ellen Ripley.
New York: Continuum, 2004.
Garrett, John. Gothic Strains and Bourgeois
Sentiments in the Novels of Mrs. Ann Radcliffe and Her Imitators. New York: Arno
Press, 1980.
Ginn, Sherry. Our Space, Our Place: Women in the
Worlds of Science Fiction Television. Lanham,
MD: University Press of America, 2005.
Giorgio, Adalgisa. Writing Mothers and
Daughters: Renegotiating the Mother in Western European Narratives by Women. New
York: Berghahn Books, 2002.
Glut, Donald F. The Frankenstein Legend: A
Tribute to Mary Shelley and Boris Karloff.
Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1973.
Goddu, Teresa A. Gothic America: Narrative,
History, and Nation. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1997.
Gordon, Joan, and Veronica Hollinger, eds.
Blood Read: The Vampire as Metaphor in Contemporary Culture. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press, 1997.
Grant, Barry Keith. The Dread of Difference:
Gender and the Horror Film. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1996.
Grant, John, and Ron Tiner. The Encyclopedia
of Fantasy and Science Fiction Art Techniques.
Philadelphia: Running Press, 1996.
Greenberg, Martin. All about the Future. New
York: Gnome Press, 1955.
Gunn, James E. Inside Science Fiction: Essays
on Fantastic Literature. San Bernardino, CA:
Borgo Press, 1992.
———. The New Encyclopedia of Science Fiction.
New York: Viking, 1988.
Habegger, Alfred. Gender, Fantasy, and Realism in American Literature. New York: Columbia University Press, 1982.
Haraway, Donna J. Simians, Cyborgs, and
Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New
York: Routledge, 1991.
339
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Hardy, Phil. The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction
Movies. London: Octopus; Minneapolis,
MN: Woodbury Press, 1986.
———. The Overlook Film Encyclopedia. Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press, 1991. Reprint,
1994.
———. Science Fiction. New York: Morrow;
London: Aurum Press, 1984. Rev. ed. London: Aurum Press, 1991. Reprint, 1995.
Harris, Cheryl, and Alison Alexander, ed.
Theorizing Fandom: Fans, Subculture and
Identity. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton, 1998.
Hartwell, David G., and Kathryn Cramer,
eds. The Ascent of Wonder: The Evolution of
Hard SF. New York: Tom Doherty, 1994.
Hawthorne, Melanie, and Richard Golsan. Gender and Fascism in Modern France. Hanover,
NH: University Press of New England, 1997.
Hazen, Helen. Endless Rapture: Rape,
Romance, and the Female Imagination. New
York: Scribner, 1983.
Heiland, Donna. Gothic and Gender: An Introduction. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004.
Helford, Elyce Rae, ed. Fantasy Girls: Gender
in the New Universe of Science Fiction and
Fantasy Television. Lanham, MD: Rowman
& Littleﬁeld, 2000.
Heller, Lynne Epstein. Ann Radcliffe’s Gothic
Landscape of Fiction and the Various Inﬂuences Upon It. New York: Arno Press, 1980.
Heller, Tamar. Dead Secrets: Wilkie Collins and
the Female Gothic. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1992.
Henderson, C. J. The Encyclopedia of Science
Fiction Movies. New York: Checkmark
Books, 2001.
Herzog, Kristin. Women, Ethnics, and Exotics:
Images of Power in Mid-Nineteenth-Century
American Fiction. Knoxville: University of
Tennessee Press, 1983.
Hills, Matt. Fan Cultures. London: Routledge,
2000.
Hoeveler, Diane Long. Gothic Feminism: The
Professionalization of Gender from Charlotte
Smith to the Bront€es. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1998.
Holdstock, Robert. Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. London: Octopus, 1978.
Hollinger, Veronica, and Joan Gordon.
Edging into the Future: Science Fiction
and Contemporary Cultural Transformation.
340
................

Volume 2: Entries

Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 2002.
Hoppenstand, Gary, and Ray Broadus
Browne. The Gothic World of Anne Rice.
Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State
University Popular Press, 1996.
Horn, Maurice. Women in the Comics. New
York: Chelsea House, 1977.
Horner, Avril, and Sue Zlosnik. Daphne du
Maurier: Writing, Identity and the Gothic
Imagination. New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1998.
Howey, Ann F. Rewriting the Women of Camelot: Arthurian Popular Fiction and Feminism.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2001.
Hunter, J. Paul, ed. “Frankenstein”: The 1818
Text, Contexts, Nineteenth-Century Responses,
Modern Criticism. New York: W. W. Norton,
1996.
Ingram, Angela J. C., and Daphne Patai.
Rediscovering Forgotten Radicals: British
Women Writers, 1889–1939. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press,1993.
Inness, Sherrie A. Action Chicks: New Images
of Tough Women in Popular Culture. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
———. Tough Girls: Women Warriors and Wonder Women in Popular Culture. Feminist
Cultural Studies, the Media, and Popular
Culture. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999.
Irons, Glenwood H. Gender, Language, and
Myth: Essays on Popular Narrative. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1992.
James, Edward, and Farah Mendlesohn. The
Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2003.
Jenkins, Henry. Textual Poachers: Television
Fans and Participatory Culture. New York:
Routledge, 1992.
Joannou, Maroula. Contemporary Women’s
Writing: From “The Golden Notebook” to “The
Color Purple.” Manchester, England: Manchester University Press; New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 2000.
———. Women Writers of the 1930s: Gender,
Politics, and History. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1999.
Jones, Anny Brooksbank, and Catherine Davies. Latin American Women’s Writing:

Selected Bibliography
Feminist Readings in Theory and Crisis.
Oxford, England: Clarendon Press; New
York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Joshi, S. T. The Modern Weird Tale. Jefferson,
NC: McFarland, 2001.
Justice, Keith L. Science Fiction, Fantasy, and
Horror Reference: An Annotated Bibliography
of Works about Literature and Film. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1989.
Kidd, Kenneth B. Making American Boys: Boyology and the Feral Tale. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2004.
King, Betty. Women of the Future: The Female
Main Character in Science Fiction. Metuchen,
NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1984.
King, Emily. A Century of Movie Posters: From
Silent to Art House. Hauppauge, NY: Barron’s, 2003.
Klaus, H. Gustav, and Stephen Knight
Thomas. British Industrial Fictions. Cardiff:
University of Wales Press, 2000.
Kuhn, Annette. Alien Zone: Cultural Theory
and Contemporary Science Fiction Cinema.
London: Verso, 1990.
Kuribayashi, Tomoko, and Julie Tharp. Creating Safe Space: Violence and Women’s Writing. Albany: State University of New York
Press, 1998.
Lant, Kathleen Margaret. Imagining the
Worst: Stephen King and the Representation
of Women. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 1998.
Larbalestier, Justine. The Battle of the Sexes in
Science Fiction. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
University Press, 2002.
Ledoux, Trish. The Complete Anime Guide: Japanese Animation Film Directory and Resource
Guide. Issaquah, WA: Tiger Mountain
Press, 1997.
Lee, Stan. The Superhero Women. New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1977.
Lefanu, Sarah. Feminism and Science Fiction.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989.
———. In the Chinks of the World Machine:
Feminism and Science Fiction. London:
Women’s Press, 1988.
Le Guin, Ursula K. Dancing at the Edge of the
World: Thoughts on Words, Women, Places.
New York: Perennial, 1999.
Lentz, Harris M. Science Fiction, Horror and
Fantasy Film and Television Credits: Over

10,000 Actors, Actresses, Directors. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1983.
Lerner, Frederick Andrew. Modern Science Fiction and the American Literary Community.
Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1985.
Levine, George Lewis. The Cambridge Companion to George Eliot. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Lewes, Darby. Dream Revisionaries: Gender
and Genre in Women’s Utopian Fiction, 1870–
1920. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama
Press, 1995.
Lewis, Lisa. The Adoring Audience: Fan Culture
and Popular Media. London: Routledge, 1992.
Lofﬁcier, Jean-Marc. French Science Fiction, Fantasy, Horror and Pulp Fiction: A Guide to Cinema, Television, Radio, Animation, Comic
Books and Literature from the Middle Ages to
the Present. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2000.
Lucanio, Patrick, and Gary Coville. Smokin’
Rockets: The Romance of Technology in American Film, Radio, and Television, 1945–1962.
Jefferson, NC: McFarland. 2002.
Lunde, Erik S., and Douglas Noverr. Film
Studies. New York: Wiener, 1989.
Magill, Frank. Survey of Modern Fantasy Literature. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Salem, 1983.
———. Survey of Science Fiction Literature: Five
Hundred 2,000-Word Essay Reviews of
World-Famous Science Fiction Novels with
2,500 Bibliographical References. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Salem, 1979.
Magistrale, Tony. The Dark Descent: Essays
Deﬁning Stephen King’s Horrorscape. New
York: Greenwood Press, 1992.
Mann, George. The Mammoth Encyclopedia of
Science Fiction. London: Robinson; New
York: Carroll & Graf, 2001.
Martin, Robert K., and Eric Savoy. American
Gothic: New Interventions in a National Narrative. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press,
1998.
McIntyre, Clara Frances. Ann Radcliffe in
Relation to Her Time. Hamden, CT: Archon
Books, 1970.
Mead, David G. An Encyclopedia of Jack Vance,
Twentieth-Century Science Fiction Writer.
Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 2002.
Melton, J. Gordon. The Vampire Book: The
Encyclopedia of the Undead. 2nd ed. Detroit:
Visible Ink Press, 1999.
341
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Melzer, Patricia. Alien Constructions: Science
Fiction and Feminist Thought. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2006.
Meyers, Helene. Femicidal Fears: Narratives of
the Female Gothic Experience. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 2001.
Miles, Robert. Ann Radcliffe: The Great
Enchantress. Manchester, England: Manchester University Press; New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 1995.
Mise, Raymond W. The Gothic Heroine and the
Nature of the Gothic Novel. New York: Arno
Press, 1980.
Modleski, Tania. Loving with a Vengeance:
Mass-Produced Fantasies for Women. New
York: Methuen, 1984. Reprint, New York:
Routledge, 1990.
Muller, Gilbert H. Nightmares and Visions:
Flannery O’Connor and the Catholic Grotesque. Athens: University of Georgia
Press, 1972.
Murphy, Patrick. The Poetic Fantastic: Studies
in an Evolving Genre. New York: Greenwood Press, 1989.
Murray, E. B. Ann Radcliffe. New York:
Twayne, 1972.
Mussell, Kay. Women’s Gothic and Romantic
Fiction: A Reference Guide. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1981.
Nicholls, Peter, ed. The Encyclopedia of Science
Fiction: An Illustrated A to Z. London: Granada, 1979. Reprint, 1981.
———. The Science Fiction Encyclopedia. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1979.
Olander, Joseph D., and Harry Martin
Greenberg. Ursula K. Le Guin. New York:
Taplinger, 1979.
Palmer, Paulina. Lesbian Gothic: Transgressive
Fictions. New York: Cassell, 1999.
Palumbo, Donald. Eros in the Mind’s Eye: Sexuality and the Fantastic in Art and Film. New
York: Greenwood Press, 1986.
———. Erotic Universe: Sexuality and Fantastic
Literature. New York: Greenwood Press,
1986.
Parker, Emma. Contemporary British Women
Writers. Cambridge, England: D. S. Brewer,
2004.
Patten, Fred. Watching Anime, Reading
Manga: Twenty-Five Years of Essays and
Reviews. Berkeley, CA: Stone Bridge, 2004.
342
................

Volume 2: Entries

Paxton, Nancy L. George Eliot and Herbert
Spencer: Feminism, Evolutionism, and the
Reconstruction of Gender. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1991.
Penley, Constance, and Elizabeth Lyon. Close
Encounters: Film, Feminism, and Science Fiction. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1991.
Pinedo, Isabel Cristina. Recreational Terror:
Women and the Pleasures of Horror Film
Viewing. Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1997.
Pinsky, Michael. Future Present: Ethics and/as
Science Fiction. Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 2003.
Powers, Katherine Richardson. The Inﬂuence
of William Godwin on the Novels of Mary
Shelley. New York: Arno Press, 1972.
Reprint, 1980.
Prickett, Stephen. Victorian Fantasy. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1979.
Pringle, David. The Ultimate Encyclopedia of
Science Fiction: The Deﬁnitive Guide. Chicago: Advent, 1974. Reprint, North
Gighton, MA: JG Press, 1996.
Radstone, Susannah, ed. Sweet Dreams: Sexuality, Gender and Popular Fiction. London:
Lawrence & Wishart, 1988.
Ramsland, Katherine M. The Anne Rice
Reader. New York: Ballantine Books, 1997.
Redmond, Sean. Liquid Metal: The Science Fiction Film Reader. London: Wallﬂower, 2004.
Reid, Robin Anne. Arthur C. Clarke: A Critical
Companion. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 1997.
———. Ray Bradbury: A Critical Companion.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2000.
Reid, Suzanne Elizabeth. Presenting Ursula K.
Le Guin. New York: Twayne; London: Prentice Hall International, 1997.
———. Presenting Young Adult Science Fiction.
New York: Prentice Hall, 1998.
Rhodes, Gary Don. Horror at the Drive-In:
Essays in Popular Americana. Jefferson, NC:
McFarland, 2003.
Riley, Dick, ed. Critical Encounters: Writers and
Themes in Science Fiction. New York: Frederick Ungar, 1979.
Robbins, Tina. From Girls to Grrrlz: A History
of Women’s Comics from Teens to Zines. San
Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1999.

Selected Bibliography
———. The Great Women Superheroes. Northampton, MA: Kitchen Sink Press, 1996.
Roberts, Adam. Science Fiction. London: Routledge, 2000.
Roberts, Bette B. Anne Rice. New York:
Twayne; Toronto: Maxwell Macmillan
Canada, 1994.
———. The Gothic Romance: Its Appeal to
Women Writers and Readers in Late Eighteenth-Century England. New York: Arno
Press, 1980.
Roberts, Robin. Anne McCaffrey: A Critical
Companion. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 1996.
———. A New Species: Gender and Science in
Science Fiction. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993.
Rohrlich, Ruby, and Elaine Hoffman Baruch,
eds. Women in Search of Utopia: Mavericks
and Mythmakers. New York: Schocken,
1984.
Rosinsky, Natalie M. Feminist Futures: Contemporary Women’s Speculative Fiction. Ann
Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1982.
Reprint, 1984.
Rubenstein, Roberta. “Nature and Nurture
in Dystopia: The Handmaid’s Tale.” In Margaret Atwood: Vision and Forms, ed.
Kathryn Van Spanckeren and Jan Garden
Castro, 101–12. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1988.
Russ, Joanna. Magic Mommas, Trembling Sisters, Puritans and Perverts: Feminist Essays.
Trumansburg, NY: Crossing Press, 1985.
———. To Write Like a Woman: Essays in Feminism and Science Fiction. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995.
———. What Are We Fighting For? Sex, Race,
Class, and the Future of Women. New York:
St. Martin’s Press, 1998.
Russell, Miles. Digging Holes in Popular Culture: Archaeology and Science Fiction.
Oxford, England: Oxbow, 2002.
Sardar, Ziauddin, and Sean Cubitt, eds. Aliens R Us: The Other in Science Fiction Cinema. London: Pluto, 2002.
Sargent, Pamela. Women of Wonder: Science
Fiction Stories by Women about Women. New
York: Random Vintage, 1975.
Schlobin, Roger C. Urania’s Daughters: A
Checklist of Women Science Fiction Writers,

1692–1982. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont
House, 1983.
Scholes, Robert E., and Eric Rabkin. Science
Fiction: History, Science, Vision. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1977.
Science Fiction Studies. Chronological Bibliography of Science Fiction History, Theory,
and Criticism [online]. Http://www.
depauw.edu/sfs/biblio.htm.
Scodari, Christine. Serial Monogamy: Soap Opera, Lifespan, and the Gendered Politics of Fantasy. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 2004.
Seed, David. American Science Fiction and the
Cold War: Literature and Film. Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1999.
Selinger, Bernard. Le Guin and Identity in Contemporary Fiction. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI
Research Press, 1988.
Sellers, Susan. Myth and Fairy Tale in Contemporary Women’s Fiction. Houndmills,
Basingstoke, England: Palgrave, 2001.
Senf, Carol A. Dracula: Between Tradition and
Modernism. New York: Twayne, 1998.
Shaw, Debra Benita. Women, Science and Fiction: The Frankenstein Inheritance. New
York: Palgrave, 2000.
Sherman, Leona F. Ann Radcliffe and the
Gothic Romance: A Psychoanalytic Approach.
New York: Arno Press, 1980.
Shinn, Thelma J. Worlds within Women: Myth
and Mythmaking in Fantastic Literature by
Women. New York: Greenwood Press, 1986.
Silver, Alain, and James Ursini. The Horror
Film Reader. New York: Limelight Editions,
2000.
Silverman, Kenneth. New Essays on Poe’s
Major Tales. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Slusser, George Edgar. Between Two Worlds:
The Literary Dilemma of Ursula K. Le Guin.
San Bernadino, CA: Borgo Press, 1996.
———. The Farthest Shores of Ursula K. Le
Guin. San Bernardino, CA: Borgo Press,
1976.
Slusser, George Edgar, and Eric S. Rabkin.
Shadows of the Magic Lamp: Fantasy and Science Fiction in Film. Carbondale: Southern
Illinois University Press, 1985.
Small, Christopher. Ariel Like a Harpy: Shelley, Mary and Frankenstein. London: Gollancz, 1972.
343
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

———. Mary Shelley’s “Frankenstein”: Tracing
the Myth. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1973.
Smith, Jennifer. Anne Rice: A Critical Companion. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1996.
Smith, Nelson C. Ann Radcliffe’s Major Novels.
New York: Arno Press, 1980.
Sobchack, Vivian. The Limits of Inﬁnity: The
American Science Fiction Film, 1950–1975.
South Brunswick, NJ: A. S. Barnes, 1980.
———. Screening Space: The American Science
Fiction Film. New York: Ungar, 1987.
Spivack, Charlotte. Merlin’s Daughters: Contemporary Women Writers of Fantasy. New
York: Greenwood Press, 1987.
———. Ursula K. Le Guin. Boston: Twayne,
1984.
Staicar, Tom. The Feminine Eye: Science Fiction
and the Women Who Write It. New York:
Ungar, 1982.
Staton, Shirley F. Literary Theories in Praxis.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 1987.
Stephens, John. Ways of Being Male: Representing Masculinities in Children’s Literature
and Film. New York: Routledge, 2002.
Stoler, John A. Ann Radcliffe: The Novel of Suspense and Terror. New York: Arno Press,
1980.
Suvin, Darko. Metamorphoses of Science Fiction: On the Poetics and History of a Literary
Genre. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 1979.
Telotte, J. P. Replications: A Robotic History of
the Science Fiction Film. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press, 1995.
———. Science Fiction Film. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Thomas, Sheree R., ed. Dark Matter: Reading
the Bones. New York: Aspect, 2004.
Thurston, Carol. The Romance Revolution:
Erotic Novels for Women and the Quest for a
New Sexual Identity. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 1987.
Tompkins, J. M. S. Ann Radcliffe and Her Inﬂuence on Later Writers. New York: Arno
Press, 1980.
Tropp, Martin. Mary Shelley’s Monster: The
Story of Frankenstein. Boston: Houghton
Mifﬂin, 1976.

344
................

Volume 2: Entries

Tuck, Donald H. The Encyclopedia of Science
Fiction and Fantasy through 1968: A Bibliographic Survey of the Fields of Science Fiction,
Fantasy, and Weird Fiction through 1968. 2
vols. Chicago: Advent, 1974.
Tucker, Jeffrey A. A Sense of Wonder: Samuel
R. Delany, Race, Identity, and Difference. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press,
2004.
Turner, J. Neville, and Pamela Williams. The
Happy Couple: Law and Literature. Sydney,
Australia: Federation Press, 1994.
Vieira, Mark. A Hollywood Horror: From Gothic
to Cosmic. New York: Harry N. Abrams,
2003.
Weedman, Jane B., ed. Women Worldwalkers:
New Dimensions of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Lubbock: Texas Tech Press, 1985.
Westfahl, Gary. Science Fiction, Children’s Literature, and Popular Culture: Coming of Age in
Fantasyland. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 2000.
Wilcox, Clyde, and Donald Hassler, eds. Political Science Fiction. Columbia: University
of South Carolina Press, 1997.
Winter, Kari J. Subjects of Slavery, Agents of
Change: Women and Power in Gothic Novels
and Slave Narratives, 1790–1865. Athens:
University of Georgia Press, 1992.
Wolmark, Jenny. Aliens and Others: Science
Fiction, Feminism and Postmodernism. Iowa
City: University of Iowa Press, 1994.
Wolstenholme, Susan. Gothic (Re)Visions:
Writing Women as Readers. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1993.
Wood, Robin. Hollywood from Vietnam to Reagan—and Beyond. New York: Columbia
University Press, 2003.
Wood, Susan, ed. The Language of the Night:
Essays on Fantasy and Science Fiction. New
York: Berkley, 1980. Reprint, New York:
G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1979.
Wright, Gene. The Science Fiction Image: The
Illustrated Encyclopedia of Science Fiction in
Film, Television, Radio and the Theater.
London: Columbus; New York: Facts on
File, 1983.
Yntema, Sharon. More Than 100 Woman Science Fiction Writers. Freedom, CA: Crossing
Press, 1988.

About

the Editor and

Contributors

Robin Anne Reid is a professor of literature and languages at
Texas A&M University–Commerce. She teaches creative writing,
critical theory, and new media. Her scholarship includes past work
on gender and race in feminist science ﬁction and current work on
fan ﬁction, J. R. R. Tolkien, and ﬁlm adaptation. She is the second
vice president of the International Association of the Fantastic in
the Arts and the organizer of Tolkien at Kalamazoo. She is active
in online Lord of the Rings fandom in LiveJournal.
Douglas A. Anderson is an independent scholar. He has published
widely on the works of J. R. R. Tolkien and is a founding coeditor of
Tolkien Studies: An Annual Scholarly Review. His Annotated Hobbit
(1988, revised and enlarged 2002) won the Mythopoeic Scholarship
Award.
Sarah A. Appleton is a professor of American and women’s literature at Murray State University in Kentucky and codirector of the
Multicultural, Class, and Gender Studies Program. She has written
numerous articles and is the author of The Bitch Is Back: Wicked
Women in Literature (2001). She is also the coeditor of He Said, She
Says: An RSVP to the Male Text (2001).
Sara Scott Armengot is a Ph.D. candidate in comparative literature at Pennsylvania State University. Her area of specialization is
contemporary inter-American literature.
Geetha B. is an assistant professor at Birla Institute of Technology
and Science, Pilani, India, where she teaches courses in Communication, Appreciation of Literature, and Films. Her doctoral thesis is
on the thematic concerns in Arthur C. Clarke’s science ﬁction, and
her research interests include the interfaces between science ﬁction, philosophy, and existential literature. She won the Science
Fiction Foundation Bursary for 2005. Her published works include
articles in journals and poems in different anthologies.
Anne Bahringer studied magical realism during her time at the
University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee in the Master of Foreign Language and Literature program. As a ﬁction writer, she incorporates
magical realism into her writing and is currently working on critical essays about magical realist works for publication.
345
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

Ellen Baier, a 2004 graduate of Franklin and Marshall College, is a
writer and independent scholar who spends her days working as
an investment analyst. She has also contributed to Home Front Heroes and Customs and Cultures of the United States, edited by Benjamin
F. Shearer (Greenwood Press). She lives in Vermont with her
husband.
Neal Baker is a librarian at Earlham College. His articles on science ﬁction have appeared in such venues as Contemporary French
Civilization, Extrapolation, Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts, and
Quebec Studies.
Iva Balic is an associate professor of English and literature at Palm
Beach Community College in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida. She is
completing her dissertation on feminist utopias at the turn of the
twentieth century at the University of North Texas in Denton.
Amelia Beamer is an independent scholar specializing in the pulp
science ﬁction magazines. She is an assistant editor at Locus magazine, where she also writes reviews.
Candace R. Beneﬁel is an associate professor in the Texas A&M
University Libraries. She has written on vampires in literature and
numerous topics in librarianship and has published poetry in journals such as Concho River Review, Borderlands, and Classical Outlook.
She is the coeditor of the volume The Image and Role of the Librarian
(2003).
Janice M. Bogstad is a professor and head of Collection Development at the McIntyre Library, University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire,
and also teaches women’s studies and English. In the last twentyﬁve years, she has written more than a hundred articles for reference books, as well as essays and book chapters on science ﬁction,
women’s studies, literature, children’s literature, poetry, and Chinese history. Presently she reviews science ﬁction and fantasy for
Publishers Weekly. She also reviews ﬁction and critical theory for
SFRA Review, Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts, Extrapolation, Medieval
Feminist Forum, and Femspec, among others. One of the founders of
WisCon, the world’s largest feminist science ﬁction and fantasy
conference, held annually in Madison, Wisconsin, she is the former editor of Janus and New Moon and current managing editor of
SFRA Review.
Bernadette Lynn Bosky has published encyclopedia articles for
Salem Press, Scribner’s, and other publishers, as well as personal
essays and popular articles for Gnosis magazine, Crossing Press,
and Das Stephen King Buch (Germany). Her literary criticism has
been published in both academic and popular collections, and she
is a book reviewer for Publishers Weekly. She has taught at Duke
University; the College Transfer Program at Durham Technical
Community College in Durham, North Carolina; and the School of
346
................

About the Editor and Contributors
Excellence in Hartsdale, New York. She has an M.A. in English
from Duke.
Sarah Boslaugh is a senior statistical data analyst in the Department of Pediatrics at Washington University in Saint Louis, Missouri. She has published a number of technical and professional
articles and books and is the editor of The Encyclopedia of Epidemiology (2007). Her current research concerns how neurodiverse people
are creating a community for themselves on the Internet.
Karen Bruce has an M.A. in English from the University of
Kwazulu-Natal, South Africa. Her thesis and scholarship focuses
on science ﬁction written by women during the decades of Second
Wave feminism and how it informed and was informed by the
political and theoretical context of the time.
Charlene Brusso is a freelance writer and science ﬁction/fantasy
author living in Pepperell, Maine.
Alyson R. Buckman is an associate professor of humanities and
religious studies at California State University, Sacramento. Her
degrees, research focuses, and teaching interests are in American
studies, with special emphasis on literature, multiculturalism,
popular culture, media, and women’s studies. Her publications
and presentations include work on Octavia Butler, Marge Piercy,
Alice Walker, Meridel Le Sueur, and Joss Whedon.
Kristina Busse has a Ph.D. in English from Tulane University and
teaches in the Department of Philosophy at the University of South
Alabama. She is coeditor, with Karen Hellekson, of Fan Fiction and
Fan Communities in the Age of the Internet (2006) and has published a
variety of essays on fan ﬁction and fan culture. She is founding
editor with Hellekson of Transformative Works and Cultures and is
currently coauthoring a book-length study on fan artifacts and
new media. She has been an active media fan for a decade.
Edward Carmien is an author and editor of ﬁction and nonﬁction
and an academic with a long-standing interest in science ﬁction,
fantasy, and other fantastic literature. He is an associate professor
of English at Mercer County Community College of New Jersey,
where he teaches science ﬁction and other subjects. Editor of The
Cherryh Odyssey, he is an active member of the Science Fiction and
Fantasy Writers of America and the Science Fiction Research
Association.
Patricia Castelli has an MLS from Emporia State University and is
children’s librarian at the Orem (Utah) Public Library. She is a
board member of the Children’s Literature Association of Utah and
a regular speaker at Utah Valley State College’s annual Forum on
Children’s Literature and Brigham Young University’s annual symposium of science ﬁction and fantasy.
347
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

Francesca Coppa is director of ﬁlm studies and an associate professor of English at Muhlenberg College in Allentown, Pennsylvania, where she teaches dramatic literature and performance
studies. She is currently coediting a book on stage magic and has
recently contributed two essays to Fan Fiction and Fan Communities
in the Age of the Internet (2006).
Casey Cothran is a lecturer at Winthrop University in Rock Hill,
South Carolina. Her publications focus on New Woman writers as
well as the presentation of disability in the works of Victorian
detective novelist Wilkie Collins.
Janice C. Crosby is a professor of English at Southern University in
Baton Rouge. Her publications include Cauldron of Changes: Feminist
Spirituality in Fantastic Fiction (2000), along with articles on feminist
spirituality, science ﬁction and fantasy, race, dance, and William
Faulkner.
Eric Leif Davin, Ph.D., teaches at the University of Pittsburgh. He is
the author of Pioneers of Wonder: Conversations with the Founders of
Science Fiction (1999) and Partners in Wonder: Women and the Birth of
Science Fiction, 1926–1960 (2006).
Neil Easterbrook teaches literary theory and comparative literature at Texas Christian University. He has published widely on
matters related to modern science ﬁction, including essays on
Stanislaw Lem, Philip K. Dick, Italo Calvino, Ursula K. Le Guin,
William Gibson, Robert A. Heinlein, Samuel R. Delany, and many
others.
Winter Elliott is an assistant professor of English at Brenau University in Gainesville, Georgia. She holds a Ph.D. in English literature from the University of Georgia and teaches medieval and
early modern British and contemporary multicultural literature
courses, often focusing on the intersections between gender, race,
and identity. She has presented at numerous conferences and has
published on medieval and speculative ﬁction topics. She is a
member of the Modern Language Association, Popular Culture
Association, and International Association of the Fantastic in the
Arts.
Heike Endter studied art history and is writing her doctoral thesis
on economic utopias in science ﬁction ﬁlms. She is an art critic
and works for an art gallery in Munich, Germany.
Kate Falvey holds a Ph.D. in English and American literature from
New York University, where she taught for many years. She currently teaches at the New York City College of Technology of the
City University of New York. She has published articles on women
writers such as Grace King and Sui Sin Far, numerous essays for a
variety of academic reference guides, poetry, and works for
children.
348
................

About the Editor and Contributors
Maria Aline Seabra Ferreira is an associate professor at the University of Aveiro, Portugal, where she teaches English literature.
Her main interests include women’s studies, feminine utopias, and
the intersections between literature and science and between literature and the visual arts. Her book I Am the Other: Literary Negotiations of Human Cloning was published by Greenwood Press in 2005.
Recent publications include articles on feminist utopias, eugenics,
and biotechnological dystopias.
Jason Fisher, from Dallas, Texas, is an independent scholar of language and literature, specializing in J. R. R. Tolkien and the Inklings. Most recently, he contributed a series of entries to The J. R. R.
Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment (2006) and a
chapter on free will for Tolkien and Modernity (2006). He is currently
working on a chapter for The Silmarillion: Thirty Years On (2007).
Michele Fry received an English and history degree at the University of Gloucestershire. She now lives in Oxford and is an independent scholar. She blogs at http://scholar-blog.blogspot.com,
mostly with reviews of fantasy ﬁction and occasionally fantasy
ﬁlms. Her publications include “The Wizards of Juliet E. McKenna
and Lynn Flewelling” (Masters of Magic: Essays on Wizards in Western
Culture, forthcoming), “Tolkien and Oxford” and “The Vale of White
Horse” (The J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment, 2006), and “Heroes and Heroines: Myth and Gender Roles in
the Harry Potter Books” (The New Review of Children’s Literature and
Librarianship, 2001).
Ximena Gallardo C. is an assistant professor at the City University
of New York–LaGuardia. She has written and presented widely on
issues of representation in popular culture and is coauthor of Alien
Woman: The Making of Lt. Ellen Ripley (2004), which won the 2005
Ray and Pat Browne Popular Culture Association National Book
Award. She is currently working on a comprehensive study of
women, embodiment, and gender in science ﬁction cinema.
Lyn C. A. Gardner is a librarian at the Hampton (Virginia) Public
Library and a freelance writer and editor whose work has appeared
in such venues as The Doom of Camelot (2000), the Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts, Leading Edge, Strange Horizons, and Talebones. Three
pieces earned honorable mention in The Year’s Best Fantasy and Horror. In 2004, Gardner attended the Clarion West Writers’ Workshop.
John Garrison is a Ph.D. student at the University of California,
Davis, and a staff member of the speculative ﬁction magazine
Strange Horizons. His work investigates the interplay among social
power, gender, and economics, as well as the role of the fantastic
in both early modern and twentieth-century literature. His scholarly work appears in a variety of publications, including Phoebe, the
Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts, DoubleTake, and Postmodern Culture.
349
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

Lila Garrott-Wejksnora’s ﬁction has appeared in Not One of Us and
Cabinet des Fees. Her poetry has appeared in Jabberwocky, and her
criticism at the Internet Review of Science Fiction. She has been nominated for the Pushcart Prize and the British Science Fiction Association Award in the short story category.
Susan A. George holds a doctorate in cultural studies and feminist
theory from the University of California, Davis. She has taught a
range of courses, including advanced classes in media and ﬁlm
theory, feminist theory, and composition. Focusing on gender construction in science ﬁction ﬁlm and television, her work has
appeared in the Journal of Popular Film and Television, Post Script,
SFRA Review, and Reconstruction and in several anthologies, including Fantastic Odysseys (2003), No Cure for the Future: Disease and Medicine in Science Fiction and Fantasy (2002), and Space and Beyond: The
Frontier Myth in Science Fiction (2000). An essay on the new Battlestar
Galactica is forthcoming in the University Press of Kentucky’s
Essential Readers in Television series. She serves as the division
head of ﬁlm and media of the International Conference for the
Fantastic in the Arts and was recently asked to join the editorial
board of a new academic journal, Science Fiction Film and Television,
from the University of Liverpool Press.
Jeanne G’Fellers is a graduate student in English at East Tennessee
State University. She also writes science ﬁction.
Stacy Gillis is a lecturer in modern and contemporary literature at
Newcastle University in the United Kingdom. The editor of The
Matrix Trilogy: Cyberpunk Reloaded (2005) and coeditor of Third Wave
Feminism: A Critical Exploration (rev. ed., 2007), she is also the author
of The Edinburgh Critical Guide to Crime Fiction (2008). Her research
interests include cyberpunk and cybertheory, feminist theory, and
detective ﬁction.
Jeanne Gomoll ﬁrst joined the Madison Science Fiction Group in
1974, the ﬁrst year of its existence, and was instrumental in developing the group’s reputation as a promoter of feminist SF through
its publications and convention, WisCon. She received several
Hugo nominations as both a fan artist and editor, primarily for her
work on Janus, and later Aurora, both feminist SF fanzines. She has
been involved in planning every WisCon since the ﬁrst WisCon in
1977, including the legendary WisCon 20 and 30, which she
chaired. Pat Murphy inspired Jeanne to join the Tiptree juggernaut
in 1991 with her Guest of Honor speech at WisCon 15. Subsequently, Jeanne designed and published the Tiptree cookbooks (The
Bakery Men Don’t See and Her Smoke Rose up from Supper) and she
chaired the 1992 Tiptree Award Jury. Currently, Jeanne serves as a
member of the Tiptree Motherboard. In real life, she makes her living as an artist and owns the graphic design company, Union
Street Design, LLC.
350
................

About the Editor and Contributors
Dominick Grace is an associate professor of English at Brescia University College in London, Ontario. He teaches medieval and Renaissance literature but has wide research interests. He has
published or presented papers on Chaucer, Shakespeare, Robert
Browning, Tolkien, Michael Ondaatje, Margaret Atwood, William
Gibson, David Cronenberg, Phyllis Gotlieb, and others.
Scott Green has been active as a poet in the science ﬁction, fantasy, and horror genres for more than thirty years. He is the author
of Contemporary Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Poetry: A Resource
Guide and Biographical Directory (1989). He has chaired panels on
poetry both at Worldcons and regional cons. He is a past president
of the Science Fiction Poetry Association and the author of three
poetry collections, the most recent being Pulp (2004).
Susan Marie Groppi is a historian, writer, and editor. She received
a Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley, in 2006 and
teaches undergraduate history of science classes there. She is also
the editor-in-chief of Strange Horizons, an online science ﬁction
magazine, and was a World Fantasy Award nominee in 2007.
Alfred E. Guy Jr. is R.W.B. Lewis Director of the Yale College Writing Center. His science ﬁction scholarship examines post-1990 conﬁgurations of American feminism in the works of Patricia Anthony,
Octavia Butler, and Maureen McHugh, among others. He has also
written frequently on the relationships among writing, learning,
and intellectual development.
Karen Hall earned her Ph.D. in the discipline of English, communication and cultural studies at the University of Western Australia.
Her thesis examines the construction and negotiations of the
boundaries of the genre of science ﬁction through a focus on lostrace and lost-world stories, primarily those by women writers.
Erin Harde has an M.A. in communications from the University of
Western Ontario and has published on Second and Third Wave
feminism (an essay in Catching a Wave [2003], cowritten with
Roxanne Harde) and on gender in the work of Radiohead.
Roxanne Harde is an assistant professor of English at the University of Alberta–Augustana. She researches American women’s writing using approaches from feminist cultural studies. Her work has
appeared in several journals, including Christianity and Literature,
Legacy, Studies in Puritan American Spirituality, Critique, Feminist Theology, and Mosaic and in several edited collections.
Alexis Hart is an assistant professor of English at the Virginia Military Institute. Her research and teaching interests include computers and writing, technical writing, and science ﬁction as
literature.
Maryelizabeth Hart is a co-owner of Mysterious Galaxy, a specialty
genre bookstore in San Diego. Her duties for the store include
351
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

composing and editing the store newsletter. She has also contributed to several nonﬁction works on popular culture.
Jason Haslam is an assistant professor at Dalhousie University in
Halifax, Nova Scotia, where he teaches, among other courses, a
full-year undergraduate science ﬁction course. His scholarship is
in science ﬁction, especially in terms of critical gender and race
studies. His work bridges the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
as well as literary, ﬁlm, and television studies. He is currently focusing on Octavia Butler’s science ﬁction, as well as analyses of
gender and race in ﬁlm and television, including Joss Whedon’s
oeuvre.
Holly Hassel is an assistant professor of English and women’s
studies at the University of Wisconsin–Marathon County. She conducts research and publishes in the areas of twentieth-century
American women’s literature, scholarship of teaching and learning
in the literature classroom, popular culture and ﬁlm studies, and
feminist pedagogy.
Donald M. Hassler has taught at Kent State University in Ohio for
more than three decades. He has been editor and now executive
editor of the journal Extrapolation, which deals with science ﬁction,
since 1990. His current projects include work on Nancy Kress. He
coedited Political Science Fiction (1997) with Clyde Wilcox.
K. Stoddard Hayes has published hundreds of articles on genre
television, mainly in popular magazines, with a concentration on
themes, characters, and series mythology. The author of “Xena:
Warrior Princess”: The Complete Illustrated Companion (2003), she has
also contributed to anthologies and reference works in the ﬁeld.
Liz Henry has published poems, translations, stories, and articles
in Lodestar Quarterly, Xantippe, Poetry Flash, Two Lines, Cipactli, caesura, other, Literary Mama, Convergence, Fantastic Metropolis, and
Strange Horizons. She blogs about feminism, writing, and technology
at http://liz-henry.blogspot.com and is a cofounder of feministsf.net
and member of the Secret Feminist Cabal.
David M. Higgins is an associate instructor of American studies at
Indiana University, Bloomington. His research focuses on New
Wave science ﬁction in relation to postmodernism and imperialism. He is also an articles editor for Strange Horizons.
Christine Hilger is a doctoral student at Texas Woman’s University
and has more than twenty published articles in volumes such as
The Compendium of Twentieth Century Novels and Novelists, The Dictionary of Literary Biography, Facts on File, The Encyclopedia of Modern
Drama, The Encyclopedia of Ethnic Literature, and several others.
Arthur D. Hlavaty has been active in fandom since his ﬁrst con in
1977. He has written for a number of APAs (amateur press associations) and has also published articles for Salem Press and in the
352
................

About the Editor and Contributors
St. James guides, Supernatural Fantasy Writers, The Encyclopedia of
Fantasy and Science Fiction Literature, The Westerﬁlk Collection, the New
York Review of Science Fiction, Fantasy Review, Megavore, Libertarian
Review, Mythologies, Janus, Mimosa, Drood Review, and others.
Erica Hoagland teaches English at Mercyhurst College in Erie,
Pennsylvania. She has also taught at Purdue University, including
the Science Fiction and Fantasy class. Her scholarship deals
mainly with world literature. She also presents on science ﬁction
and is the faculty mentor for the science ﬁction/fantasy club at
Mercyhurst.
Yolanda Hood has her Ph.D. in English, with an emphasis in African American literature and folklore, from the University of Missouri. She is an assistant professor and Youth Collection librarian
at Rod Library at the University of Northern Iowa. She researches
and publishes in the areas of folklore/material culture, science
ﬁction/fantasy, and children’s/young adult literatures. She is the
coeditor (with Gwendolyn Pough) of the November 2005 special
issue of Femspec, “Speculative Black Women: Magic, Fantasy, and
The Supernatural.” She has presented on speculative ﬁction, black
feminism, and separatist communities in Toni Morrison’s Paradise.
Ann F. Howey is an assistant professor in the Department of English Language and Literature at Brock University, St. Catharines,
Ontario. Her Rewriting the Women of Camelot (2001) studies the intersection of the conventions of popular ﬁction with the discourses of
feminism in contemporary Arthurian fantasy novels and short stories by women writers. She has also published articles on fantasy
and children’s literature and has coauthored, with Stephen R.
Reimer, A Bibliography of Modern Arthuriana (2007).
Kellie M. Hultgren is a freelance editor and writer in Minneapolis,
Minnesota. She is currently researching women’s issues in publishing, especially genre ﬁction, in the Master of Liberal Studies program at Hamline University in St. Paul, Minnesota.
Ian Q. Hunter is the subject/program leader and principal lecturer
in Film Studies in Humanities, Media and Cultural Production at
De Montfort University, Leicester, England. He received his D.Phil.
from Oxford University and has published a monograph and coedited seven anthologies on media, ﬁlm, and trash cinema. He has
organized Slash Fiction Study Days at De Montfort for three years.
He is the author of British Science Fiction Cinema (1999) as well as a
number of journal articles and book chapters.
Kathryn Jacobs is a medievalist and poet with a Ph.D. from Harvard University, teaching in the Department of Literature and Languages at Texas A&M University–Commerce. She regularly teaches
an upper-level literature class on Harry Potter and is considering
developing a graduate course. Her book Marriage Contracts from
Chaucer to the Renaissance Stage was published by the University
353
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

Press of Florida in 2001, and her poetry chapbook, Advice Column, is
forthcoming from Finishing Line Press. Roughly four dozen of her
poems have appeared in poetry journals in the United States and
the United Kingdom, among them The New Formalist, Measure, Acumen, Eclectic Muse, and Slant. She has also published sixteen articles
in such journals as Chaucer Review and Mediaevalia.
Paula Johanson writes and edits nonﬁction books, including Recipe
for Disaster: Processed Food and HIV and AIDS: Coping in a Changing
World. Bundoran Press released her novel Tower in the Crooked Wood
in 2008. She has been nominated twice for the national Prix Aurora
Award for Canadian Science Fiction.
Deborah Kaplan has an M.A. in children’s literature and an M.S. in
library and information science, both from the Simmons College
Center for the Study of Children’s Literature. She has published on
children’s literature, including about Diana Wynne Jones, and has
begun to include work on popular literature and fan ﬁction, with a
focus on gender and sexuality.
€ lische WilhelmsOlaf Keith earned his M.A. from the Westfa
€ t in Mu
€ nster, Germany, with his thesis “The Return of
Universita
the Kings: The Motif of the Hidden Monarch in Tolkien’s The Lord of
the Rings and Tad Williams’ Memory, Sorrow and Thorn.” He is currently researching a monograph on Tad Williams.
€
Mine Ozyurt
Kilic¸ is an instructor of English literature at Bilkent
University, Turkey. She has published on Jeanette Winterson,
Angela Carter, and the New Woman. She also writes reviews on
contemporary British novelists.
Eden Lee Lackner, M.A., is an independent scholar from Calgary,
Alberta. Her areas of study include nineteenth-century literature,
speculative ﬁction, and media and fandom studies. She has published on the latter with cowriters Barbara Lynn Lucas and Robin
Anne Reid in an article entitled “Cunning Linguists: The Bisexual
Erotics of Words/Silence/Flesh,” in Fan Fiction and Fan Communities in
the Age of the Internet (2006). She is a lifelong fan and has been
active in anime and manga fandoms since 1998.
Michelle LaFrance is a doctoral candidate in English at the University of Washington. Her dissertation research concerns the disciplinary nature of “writing about literature” and how the composition/
literature split within English departments impacts notions of writing about literature. In her free time, she reads alternative comics.
Her favorites include Julie Doucet, Dame Darcey, and Serena
Valentino.
Isiah Lavender III is an assistant professor of English at the University of Central Arkansas. His scholarship examines intersections of race and ethnicity in science ﬁction.
354
................

About the Editor and Contributors
Sandra J. Lindow lives in Menomonie, Wisconsin, where she
teaches part-time, edits manuscripts, writes poetry and reviews,
and has written most of a book on moral development in the ﬁction of Ursula K. Le Guin. She has ﬁve published books of poetry
and has won numerous awards, including the 1990 Posner Award
for best poetry collection by a Wisconsin writer and the 2004 CWW
Jade Ring for Poetry.
Susan Urbanek Linville has a Ph.D. in biology and works at the
Center for the Integrative Study of Animal Behavior, Indiana University, Bloomington. She has sold several science ﬁction and fantasy stories to publications such as Marion Zimmer Bradley’s Sword
and Sorceress anthologies and On Spec magazine. She has been a science writer for the WonderLab, a children’s science and technology
museum, and has written newspaper articles and published
articles on women in science ﬁction.
Elizabeth D. Lloyd-Kimbrel is the assistant to the vice president
for enrollment and college relations at Mount Holyoke College as
well as a freelance editor and writer. She did graduate and postgraduate work in English literature and medieval studies at Oxford
University, McGill University, the University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, and the University of York (UK). She has published
poetry and criticism in several literary and scholarly journals; her
biographical essays and briefs appear in numerous reference texts;
and she also serves on the advisory board of Paris Press of Ashﬁeld,
Massachusetts.
Alexis Lothian is a Ph.D. student in the Department of English at
the University of Southern California, where she specializes in
queer theory and feminist science ﬁction. She graduated from the
University of Sussex’s M.A. program in Sexual Dissidence and Cultural Change in 2005 with the thesis “Science Fiction in Queer
Space/Time: Samuel R. Delany and the Futures of Desire.” Her
recent work has focused on the gender, race, and sexual politics of
science ﬁction and online fan cultures, and she has published on
feminist and queer science ﬁction as well as queer aspects of
media fandom.
Rosaleen Love is an honorary research associate in the English
Departments at Monash and La Trobe universities, Melbourne,
Australia. She has published three collections of science ﬁction
short stories, the most recent being The Travelling Tide (Aqueduct
Press, 2005).
Barbara Lynn Lucas holds an M.A. in English from Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio. She is a member of the Science Fiction Poetry Association and Broad Universe and a division
head for the International Association for the Fantastic in the Arts.
She lives within walking distance of Lake Erie and is owned by a
very possessive dachshund.
355
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

Catherine Lundoff is the author of two collections of short ﬁction,
Night’s Kiss (Torquere Press) and Crave (Lethe Press), as well as various short stories and articles. She has interviewed Melissa Scott
for Queue Press (2003) and the SpecFicMe newsletter (January 2004).
Esther MacCallum-Stewart, of the University of Sussex, United
Kingdom, specializes in the representation of war in popular culture and science ﬁction.
Christine Mains is a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Calgary,
writing a dissertation on the signiﬁcance of knowledge-power in
fantasy and popular culture. Her M.A. thesis focused on the quest
of the female hero in the works of Patricia McKillip; she has also
published on Charles de Lint, Joan D. Vinge, and more recently, science ﬁction television. She is the vice president of the International Association for the Fantastic in the Arts.
Darja Malcolm-Clarke is a doctoral student at Indiana University
studying speculative ﬁction and feminist critical theory. Her
research focuses on gendered embodiment in fantasy and science
ﬁction. In 2006, she won the International Association for the Fantastic in the Arts Graduate Student Award for a paper on grotesque
bodies and urban space in New Weird texts, presented at the 27th
annual International Conference for the Fantastic of the Arts.
Marjorie Cohee Manifold is an assistant professor of art education
in the Department of Curriculum and Instruction, School of Education, Indiana University, Bloomington. Her research focuses on the
role of aesthetic experiences in learning, with particular interest in
the socio- aesthetic activities of youths who engage in online communities (fandoms) based on their interests in pop culture phenomena. She has published many book chapters and articles in
prestigious academic journals, including the Journal of Art Education, Visual Arts Research, the Journal of Cultural Research in Art Education, and the Journal of Social Theory in Art Education.
Anita K. McDaniel is an assistant professor of interpersonal communication at the University of North Carolina–Wilmington, where
she teaches in the Department of Communication Studies. For the
last ten years, she has presented papers at national conferences
and published in an international journal on the intertextual play
between the visual and written texts represented in comic books.
Her most recent publication, “Dave Sim on Guys,” appeared in the
International Journal of Comic Art (2005).
Theresa McGarry is a linguist in the English Department at East
Tennessee State University, specializing in sociolinguistics and
second-language acquisition. Her interests include gender and
language, the linguistic analysis of literature, language ideology
in second-language teaching materials, and the acquisition of
second-language pragmatics. She is currently working on a
356
................

About the Editor and Contributors
multimedia curriculum for instruction in basic Sinhala with Liyanage Amarakeerthi.
Richard L. McKinney is American-born but has lived in Sweden
since 1968. He was student counselor and division librarian at the
Human Ecology Division, Lund University, until his retirement in
2002. He has read, studied, lectured on, and written about science
ﬁction for most of his adult life. In 2004–05, he contributed to the
ﬁfth edition of Anatomy of Wonder (ed. Neil Barron) and The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy (ed. Gary Westfahl).
He is currently afﬁliated with the Center for Languages and Literature, Lund University, where he is working on a doctoral thesis tentatively entitled “Encountering Other Worlds in Popular Fiction.”
Alice Mills is an associate professor of literature and children’s literature at the University of Ballarat, Victoria, Australia. Her most
recent book is Stuckness in the Fiction of Mervyn Peake (2005).
Dunja M. Mohr is an assistant professor at the University of Erfurt
in Germany. She has written extensively on female utopias and
dystopias, transgression and transdifference, and gender and postcolonial issues. Her doctoral thesis, published as Worlds Apart?
Dualism and Transgression in Contemporary Female Dystopias (2005),
won the Margaret Atwood Best Doctoral Thesis Award in 2004.
Rebecca Munford is a lecturer in twentieth- and twenty-ﬁrstcentury literature at the University of Exeter, United Kingdom. The
editor of Re-visiting Angela Carter: Texts, Contexts and Intertexts (2006)
and the coeditor of Third Wave Feminism: A Critical Exploration
(2004), her forthcoming work includes Decadent Daughters and Monstrous Mothers: Angela Carter and the European Gothic (2008) and, with
Stacy Gillis, Feminism and Popular Culture: Readings in Post-feminism
(2007).
Debbie Notkin is the chair of the Tiptree Award motherboard,
which oversees all award activity. She is currently a contracts
manager at a large nonﬁction publishing company. She has been
an acquisitions editor for science ﬁction and fantasy at Tor Books
and other publishers, a copyeditor, a freelance editor, and a genre
bookseller. She has chaired one WisCon and volunteered for many
others. She is also the author of the texts for two books of photographs by Laurie Toby Edison. She blogs regularly on body image
at Body Impolitic (www.laurietobyedison.com/discuss).
Marı´a Ochoa, PhD, is a writer currently working on the co-edited
collection Succotash: critical reﬂections on the 2008 Presidential campaigns. Her books include: Shout Out: Women of Color Respond to Violence, an anthology co-edited with Dr. Barbara K. Ige; Voices of
Russell City: Life in a Rural California Town; Creative Collectives: Chicana
Painters Working in Community, as well as numerous essays, articles,
and lectures. She is the producer/director of Voices of Russell City, a
social documentary ﬁlm short that accompanies her book of the
357
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

same name. In recognition for her “contributions to the arts,” the
California State Assembly honored her as a Woman of the Year in
1999.
Kelly A. O’Connor-Salomon is an English instructor at Russell
Sage College in Troy, New York, and the College of Saint Rose in
Albany, New York. Her research interests include medieval Welsh
literature as well as modern fantasy written by women.
Kate O’Riordan has been working around issues of gender and
sexuality in relation to information and communication technologies and biotechnologies since the mid-1990s. Her Ph.D. focused on
female cyberbodies in new media/digital genres. Her research and
teaching has included considerations of science ﬁction literature
and ﬁlm. She has published and taught gender and cyberpunk literature; visual cultures of genomics in ﬁlm, with speciﬁc relation
to women’s bodies and sexuality; remaking Marvel ﬁlms in the
post-genomic period, again with a focus on women’s bodies; and
an examination of how gender and sexuality ﬁgures in info/
biotechnology discourses. She is a full-time media studies faculty member at the University of Sussex, United Kingdom, and is
currently engaged in an Ethics and Ethical Practice in Social Science Research-funded research project (based at the University
of Lancaster) looking at the discourses of human genomics with
a special remit to look at ﬁlm, literature, ﬁne art, and other science ﬁctions.
Eric Otto received his Ph.D. in English from the University of Florida in 2006. His dissertation, “Science Fiction and the Ecological
Conscience,” explored the intersections between science ﬁction
and various environmental philosophies. He has several published
and forthcoming essays on environmental rhetoric and environmental science ﬁction.
Shannan Palma is a speculative ﬁction writer, a ﬁlmmaker, and
an academic. She currently lives in Atlanta. Her website is http://
www.foulpapers.com.
Justin Parsler of the University of Brunel, United Kingdom, is a
researcher in digital culture and role-playing theory.
Julie Phillips is the author of James Tiptree, Jr.: The Double Life of
Alice B. Sheldon (2006).
Helen Pilinovsky is a professor of children’s literature at California State University, San Bernardino. She has written extensively
on fairy tales and Victorian literature and is the academic editor of
Cabinet des Fees.
Gillian Polack is a Medievalist and writer based at the Australian
National University.
June Pulliam is an instructor of English and women’s and gender
studies at Louisiana State University, where she teaches courses in
358
................

About the Editor and Contributors
horror ﬁction and adolescent literature. She is the managing editor
of Necropsy: The Review of Horror Fiction (http://www.lsu.edu/necroﬁle)
and the coauthor of Hooked on Horror: A Guide to Reading Interests in the
Genre and Read On … Horror Fiction.
Laura Quilter researches and writes about the possibilities and
perils of technology and information law. An attorney and librarian, she is currently a research fellow. In her spare time, she manages the feministsf.net blog, wiki, and other sites. She lives in
Boston with her partner and cats and thinks WisCon may be
utopia.
Amy Ransom teaches French at Central Michigan University and
bec and Francopublishes on the science ﬁction and fantasy of Que
phone Canada. She has presented and published on the relationbec’s
ship between texts of SFQ (science-ﬁction quebecoise) and Que
unique situation as a French-speaking “nation” within the dominantly English-speaking state of Canada. Her current project is a
book-length project that explores the articulations between Canada’s Francophone science ﬁction and fantasy and postcolonial
theory and criticism.
Terry Reilly is an associate professor of English at the University of
Alaska, where he teaches Shakespeare, Renaissance literature, and
world literature. His scholarship focuses on Doris Lessing, particularly the Canopus in Argos: Archives series. He has published
extensively on Lessing and is a member of the Board of Directors
of the Doris Lessing Society.
Brad J. Ricca is a full-time lecturer of English at Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio. He has written and published on Emily Dickinson, Herman Melville, and Superman,
among others.
Don Riggs teaches English at Drexel University in Philadelphia. He
has published a comparison between appearances of the Goddess
in Marie de France and Marion Zimmer Bradley in the Journal for
the Fantastic in the Arts.
Trina Robbins is a writer, critic, and pop culture herstorian. She
has written books and articles about every aspect of women in
comics and has curated six exhibits of women cartoonists in
Europe and the United States. She has also written about dark goddesses, women who kill, and Irish women.
Robin Roberts is associate dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, professor of English and women’s and gender studies at Louisiana State University, and the author of ﬁve books of science
ﬁction criticism.
Roberta Rogow has been writing, performing, and collecting ﬁlk
music since 1975. She has edited and published Rec Room Rhymes, a
fanzine of ﬁlk song lyrics, produced six audiocassettes of her own
359
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

ﬁlk songs, and appeared on convention compilation recordings.
She has also written Futurespeak: A Fan’s Guide to the Language of Science Fiction (Paragon, 1990), in which there is an extensive discussion of ﬁlk.
Sharon Ross is an assistant professor in the Television Department at Columbia College, Chicago. She teaches courses in the
areas of TV history and critical theory, and her research focuses
on issues of television reception. She is the associate editor of the
journal for the International Digital Media Arts Association. She is
the author of Beyond the Box: Television and the Internet (2008) and
the coeditor with Dr. Louisa Stein of the anthology Teen Television:
Essays on Programming and Fandom (2008).
Lynda Rucker received her M.A. in English with a focus on medieval English literature from Portland State University in Oregon. Her
ﬁction has appeared in such places as The Third Alternative and The
Mammoth Book of Best New Horror. She writes about ﬁlm and books
for various online and print publications.
Donelle R. Ruwe is an associate professor of English at Northern
Arizona University. She has published a collection of essays, Culturing the Child, 1690–1914 (2005), and her poetry has appeared in The
Year’s Best Fantasy and Horror: Fourteenth Annual Collection and
received several awards, including the 2006 Camber Press Chapbook Prize.
Inez Schaechterle is an assistant professor of English at Buena
Vista University in Storm Lake, Iowa.
Dorothea Schuller has studied English, German, and arts and
media studies at the University of Konstanz, Germany. She is an
€ ttingen University,
assistant professor of English literature at Go
where she is currently completing her Ph.D. thesis on the ﬁction of
the modernist writer H. D. (Hilda Doolittle). Her other research
interests include Shakespeare’s sonnets, gothic ﬁction, the preRaphaelites, and issues of gender and writing.
Nina Serebrianik is a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Texas at
Dallas, where she also teaches rhetoric and composition. Her
research interests include literature of the fantastic, medieval literature and history, and translation studies.
Nisi Shawl is the coauthor, with Cynthia Ward, of Writing the
Other: A Practical Approach, from Aqueduct Press. Her short stories
have been published widely, including in Asimov’s SF Magazine and
Strange Horizons, and reprinted in The Year’s Best Fantasy and Horror
#19 from St. Martin’s Press. A story collection, Filter House, is forthcoming in 2008. Her reviews and essays have appeared regularly in
the Seattle Times since the turn of the millennium. She is a contributor to The Encyclopedia of Themes in Science Fiction and Fantasy from
Greenwood Press. She is a founding member of the Carl Brandon
360
................

About the Editor and Contributors
Society and is currently a board member for the Clarion West
Writers’ Workshop. She has been a guest lecturer at Stanford University, Smith College, and the Science Fiction Museum and Hall of
Fame. In 2009, Wesleyan University will publish Strange Matings:
Octavia E. Butler, Science Fiction, and Feminism, an anthology of original essays she is coediting with Rebecca Holden.
C. Jason Smith, an assistant professor of English at the City University of New York–LaGuardia, is coauthor with Ximena Gallardo
C. of Alien Woman: The Making of Lt. Ellen Ripley (2004), which won
the Ray and Pat Browne Popular Culture Association National Book
Award. Smith has presented and published widely on issues of
gender, embodiment, and culture and is currently writing a booklength study on gender in virtual culture.
Victoria Somogyi is a writer, architect, and teacher living in New
York City. She has written about fan ﬁction and has presented
papers on sex in fan ﬁction, in romance novels, and in The Sims 2.
Naomi Stankow-Mercer is a major in the United States Army and
an assistant professor of English at the U.S. Military Academy. Her
specialty is feminist dystopian writing.
Staci Stone, chair of the Department of English and Philosophy at
Murray State University in Kentucky, is coauthor of A Mary Shelley
Encyclopedia (2003) and has published work on Margaret Veley,
Maria Edgeworth, and Susan Glaspell. She teaches courses in British literature, women’s literature, ﬁlm theory, and humanities.
Judith Anderson Stuart received her Ph.D. in 2004 from York University in Toronto. Her doctoral thesis, “Constructing Female Communities in Writings by Margaret Cavendish, Mary Astell, Eliza
Haywood, and Charlotte Lennox,” reﬂects her particular interest in
women’s literature of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
She is a contract faculty member of York University’s English and
Humanities departments.
Amy H. Sturgis is an assistant professor of interdisciplinary studies at Belmont University in Nashville, Tennessee. She has written
extensively in both science ﬁction/fantasy studies and Native
American studies. In 2006, she received the Imperishable Flame
Award for Achievement in Tolkien/Inklings Scholarship. Her ofﬁcial
website is www.amyhsturgis.com.
Laurie N. Taylor researches games, comics, and digital media at
the University of Florida in Gainesville. She has written extensively
on games, comics, and digital media in academic journals and the
online magazine GamesFirst!
Michael Underwood received a B.A. from Indiana University in
2005, with a double major in East Asian studies and an individualized major in creative mythology. He is now working toward an
M.A. in the interdisciplinary studies master’s folklore program at
361
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Volume 2: Entries

the University of Oregon. His primary area of interest is popular
culture, from graphic novels to fan culture, ﬁlm, and ﬁction, especially science ﬁction and fantasy and people’s uses of the narratives from these genres in their experiences and understandings of
the world.
Sherryl Vint is an assistant professor at Brock University, St.
Catharines, Ontario. She is the author of Bodies of Tomorrow (2007)
and an editor of The Routledge Companion to Science Fiction (2008) and
the journals Extrapolation and Science Fiction Film and Television. She
is currently completing Animal Alterity: Science Fiction and the Question of the Animal.
Elaine Walker, a writer based in North Wales, United Kingdom, is
currently working on a book on the horse for a series on animals
in cultural history. Her research interests include fantasy and magical realism ﬁction, and the writing of the ﬁrst Duke and Duchess
of Newcastle. Her publications include academic and popular material, as well as ﬁction and poetry.
Robyn Walton researches in the area of utopian studies and
teaches at La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia. She has contributed to academic publications in Europe and Australia. She
also writes ﬁction (as Robin Walton) and has published one collection of short stories.
Batya Weinbaum founded and edits Femspec. She has written
about Leslie F. Stone and other early American Jewish science ﬁction writers in Studies in American Jewish Literature, Foundation,
SFStudies, Extrapolation, and several anthologies and currently
teaches at Empire State College Center for Distance Learning, State
University of New York, and East Carolina University.
Pat Wheeler is principal lecturer in literature at the University of
Hertfordshire, United Kingdom. She has previously published on
feminist science ﬁction, including chapters and articles on the
work of Carol Emshwiller and Joanna Russ. She is currently writing
Introduction to Science Fiction for Continuum and editing a book on
dystopias in literature and ﬁlm for McFarland.
Lynda Williams is a graduate student in English at the University
of Northern B.C. She has a M.Sc. Computation from McMaster University and has received three awards in the ﬁeld of applied computing innovations in the social sphere. Her Okal Rel Universe
novel series is published by Edge Science Fiction and Fantasy of
Calgary, Alberta, Canada. She is also editor of books set in the Okal
Rel Universe published by Windstorm Creative in Port Orchard,
Washington, U.S.A.
Yan Wu, Ph.D., is on the faculty of the College of Education
Administration at Beijing Normal University. He has a long-standing
interest in English- and Chinese-language science ﬁction and fantasy
362
................

About the Editor and Contributors
and has published six works of science ﬁction (novels and short stories) and three works of science ﬁction criticism in Chinese. He is well
acquainted with many Chinese science ﬁction authors and with Science Fiction World, the best-known Chinese-language science ﬁction
magazine in that country, maintaining contacts in both the scholarly
and popular sides of science ﬁction. He is currently awaiting the publication of his ﬁrst book-length study of science ﬁction, to be published
in Chinese.
Lisa Yaszek is an associate professor in the School of Literature,
Communication, and Culture at the Georgia Institute of Technology, where she also curates the Bud Foote Science Fiction Collection. Her research interests include gender studies, science ﬁction,
and contemporary literature. Her recent publications include The
Self Wired: Technology and Subjectivity in Contemporary Narrative
(2002); “The Women History Doesn’t See: Recovering Midcentury
Women’s Science Fiction as a Literature of Social Critique” (Extrapolation, spring 2004); and “‘I’ll Be a Postfeminist in a Postpatriarchy,’
or, Can We Really Imagine Life after Feminism?” (ebr, spring 2005).
In 2005, she won the Science Fiction Research Association’s Pioneer
Award for best new science ﬁction scholarship. Her latest book is
Galactic Suburbia: Gender, Technology, and the Creation of Women’s
Science Fiction (2008).
Margaret Speaker Yuan is the author of the biography Philip Pullman for Chelsea House’s series Who Wrote That? Her other biographies include Avi, Beatrix Potter, and Agnes De Mille. She holds an
M.A. in French literature from the Claremont Graduate School and
teaches writing for children in the San Francisco Bay Area.

363
................

This page intentionally left blank

Index
Abrams, M. H., 263
Acker, Kathy, 253
African American writers: Butler, 46–47;
Delaney, 83–85; Dillons (Leo and Diane),
87; Due, 90–91; Gomez, 146–47;
Hamilton, 156; Hopkinson, 161–62;
Morrison, 231; Thomas, 298–99
€), 41
Agnes Grey (Bronte
Aiken, Joan Delano, 1–2
Air; or Have Not Have (Ryman), 273
Alexander, Lloyd, 2–3
Alien (ﬁlm), 3, 286
Alien3 (ﬁlm), 3–4, 72
Alien ﬁlm series, 3–4
Alien Resurrection (ﬁlm), 3–4; genetic
engineering, 138–39
alternative comics, 168
alternative history, 211, 269, 271–72,
334–35; by Aiken, 1; British writers of,
38; characteristics of, 5–7; in dystopian
literature, 92; by French-Canadian
writers, 55
Always Coming Home (Le Guin), 92
Amazing Stories magazine, 193, 249
Amazons, 7–8
Amazon trilogy (Bradley), 36–37
Amber Spyglass, The (Pullman), 248
Ammonite (Grifﬁth), 153, 253
Analog Science Fiction and Fact, 246, 249
Anansi: Fiction of the African Diaspora
journal, 298
And Chaos Died (Russ), 195
Anderson, Karen, 124
androgyny, 303–4; feminist science ﬁction
and, 120–21; in queer science ﬁction,
251–53; in science ﬁction, 8–9, 46
Andronati, Irina, 271
Angel of Ruin (Wilkins), 22
Angel (television), 42–43
animals, 147–48; in dystopian literature,
91–92; in fantasy and science ﬁction,
9–10, 50; in medieval literature, 214–15
anime series (Japan), 178–79

Anita Blake Vampire Hunter series, 155
Anthology of Erotic Lesbian Fiction
(Jamneck), 105
Anything Bos, The (Henderson), 159
architecture: in Arthurian legend, 15;
in speculative ﬁction, 11–12
Argonia series (Scarborough), 276
Arnason, Eleanor, 12–13
Arnason, H. H., 13
Arthurian legend: alternative history
ﬁction and, 7; in British ﬁction, 39;
in fantasy ﬁction, 13–16
artiﬁcial intelligence, 16–17
artiﬁcial life, 140; cyberbodies and, 78–79;
in science ﬁction, 16–17
Asaro, Catherine, 18–19, 285–86
asexuality, 19, 46
Ash: A Secret History (Gentle), 139
Ash trilogy, 5
Asimov, Isaac, 20
Astounding Stories of Super Science, 246, 249
Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award, 25
Atlas of Middle-earth, 127
Atlas of Pern, 127
Atwood, Margaret Eleanor, 6, 12, 21,
50–51, 91, 194
Aurealis magazine, 22
Aurora fan magazine, 176–77
Australian writers, of fantasy and science
ﬁction, 21–24
automaton, artiﬁcial life and, 16–17
AvP: Alien vs. Predator (ﬁlm), 3–4
awards: for children’s and adolescents’
literature, 24–26; for fanzine editors,
93–94; for science ﬁction and fantasy
literature, 27–29
“Aye and Gomorrah” (Delany), 19
Babel-17 (Delaney), 83–85
Bag of Bones (King), 187
Bailey, Hilary, 96
Baldry, Cherith, 16
Ballantine, Betty, 31, 96
365
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Ballantine, Ian, 31
Ballantine Books, 31
Barbach, Lonnie G., 105
Barnes, Steven, 46
Barney, Clifford, 8
Barr, Marleen, 32–33, 119–20
Barrayar (Bujold), 43–44
Basile, Gambattista, 109
BattleAxe (Douglass), 23
Battle of the Sexes in Science Fiction, The
(Larbalestier), 119
Battlestar Galactica television series, 33–34,
286, 320–21
Bear (Engel), 50
Beastmaster series, 11
Beaulieu, Natasha, 54
Beauty: A Retelling of the Story of Beauty and
the Beast (McKinley), 222–23
Beauty (Tepper), 297
Behn, Aphra, 206
Beloved (Morrison), 231
rard, Sylvie, 53
Be
Bersianik, Louky, 53
Beyond magazine, 284
Beyond the Gates (Phelps), 241
Big Sleep, The (Chandler), 264
Bioy Casares, Adolfo, 197
Bird’s Nest, The ( Jackson), 175
Birke, Lynda, 11
Birthgrave, The (Lee), 198–99
bisexuality: in erotic science ﬁction,
105–6; in science ﬁction and fantasy,
34–35, 89; in slash ﬁction, 281–82
Bishop, Anne, 23, 104
Black Horses for the King (McCaffrey), 14
Black Jewels trilogy (Bishop), 23, 104
Black Magician trilogy, 23
Black Rose, The (Thomas), 90
Black Unicorn, 198–99
Black Water (Oates), 239
Blatant (fanzine), 55
Blood Canticle, 259
Bloodchild (Butler), 46–47
Bloody Chamber, The (Carter), 56
Bluest Eye, The (Morrison), 231
Blue Sword, The (McKinley), 255
Body Electric (Squires), 9
Body of Glass (Piercy), 173
Bold as Love series ( Jones), 182
366
................

Volume 2: Entries

Bone Dance (Bull), 45–46
Book of Fantasy, The, 197
Book of Kells, The (MacAvoy), 211
Books of Great Alta, The (Yolen), 335
Borchardt, Alice, 15
Borges, Jorge Luis, 197
Brackett, Leigh, 35–36, 285
Bradley, Marion Zimmer, 7, 8, 16, 34,
36–37, 39, 95–96, 203, 207
Bradshaw, Gillian, 14, 15
Brain Plague (Slonczewski), 283
Brandon (Cheang), 78–79
Briar Rose (Yolen), 335
Bridge, The (Young), 195
Brieﬁng for a Descent into Hell (Lessing), 204
Brin, David Glen, 10, 37–38, 102, 286
Britain: science ﬁction and fantasy
literature from, 38–40, 153, 265–68,
301–2; science ﬁction ﬁlm in, 41–42.
See also speciﬁc British writers
€ sisters, 41–41
Bronte
Brown, Dena, 93–94
Brown Girl in the Ring (Hopkinson), 52,
161–62
Bryher, Annie Winnifred Ellerman, 98–99
Bubblegum Crisis series, 178
Buchan, John, 50
Buchanan, Ginjer, 93
Bueno, Ruth, 197
Buffalo Girls and Other Animal Presences
(Le Guin), 11
Buffy the Vampire Slayer (television series),
42, 117, 125–26, 281, 312, 323
Bujold, Lois McMaster, 18, 43–45, 285
Bull, Emma, 45–46
Burdekin, Katharine, 91
Burning Your Boats (Carter), 57
Busby, Elinor, 94
Butler, Octavia, 35, 46–47, 72, 102, 138–39
By the North Gate (Oates), 239
Cadigan, Pat, 38, 49
Caliﬁa, Pat, 253
Call of Cthulhu (Lovecraft), 7
Cameron, James, 3–4
Camilla (LeFanu), 311
Campbell, Joseph, 102–3, 294
Canada: fantasy and science ﬁction
writers from, 50–52, 79–80, 85–86, 150,

Index
316–17, 329–30; French-speaking
Canadian writers, 52–55, 316–17
Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy, 52
Canard Digerateur (“Digesting Duck”), 17
Canavan, Trudi, 23
Cannibal Galaxy, The (Ozick), 180
Canopus at Argos: Archives series
(Lessing), 204
Carl Brandon Society, 122
Carmody, Isobelle, 23
Carnegie Medal, 26
Carol, Avedon, 55–56
Carrie (King), 186
Carter, Angela, 56–57, 304
Carter, Raphael, 58
Castellanos, Rosario, 196
Castle of Otranto, a Story, The, 149
Cavendish, Margaret Lucas (Duchess of
Newcastle), 59
Caxton, William, 14
riault), 54
Ceremony, The (The
Chandler, Raymond, 263–64
Chant, Joy, 60
Chapman, Vera, 14
Charbonneau-Tissot, Claudette, 54
Charnas, Suzy McKee, 60–62, 208, 252
Chaviano, Daina Chaviano, 197–98
Cheang, Shu Lea, 78–79
Chen, Ling, 65
Cherryh, C. J., 14, 62–63, 124, 194–96,
263–64, 285
Chesley Award, 27
Chessboard Quee, The (Newman), 15

Chevaliers d’Emeraude,
54
Child Garden, The (Ryman), 273
Children of God, The (Russell), 270
bert), 54
Children of the Black Sabbath (He
Children of Violence series (Lessing),
203–4
children’s literature, awards for, 24–26
China, fantasy and science ﬁction
literature from, 63–66
China Mountain Zhang (McHugh), 12, 219
Christine (King), 186
Chronicles of Prydain series (Alexander),
2–3
Chronicles of the Holy Grail (Karr), 16
Chronicles of Tornor series, 209
Chroniques infernales (Rochon), 53

Citadel of Fear, The (Stevens), 290
Citizen of the Galaxy (Heinlein), 158
City of Pearl (Traviss), 10
City Underground, The (Martel), 53
Claimed! (Stevens), 290
CLAMP ( Japanese production company),
179
Clarke, Arthur C., 67–68
Clarke, Susanna, 7, 39
Clayton, Patricia Jo, 68–69
“Clear Day in Motor City, A” (Arnason), 12
Clockwork Orange, A (ﬁlm), 41
cloning, 33–34, 69–70; bisexuality and, 35;
cyberbodies and, 79; genetic
engineering and, 138–39
“Coineraine” (Guitard), 53
Coleridge, Sara, 70–71
colonization, 269, 270, 309–10, 321;
environmental science ﬁction and,
101–2; in fantasy and science ﬁction,
71–72, 182; lost-colony stories, 206–8
Colored Fairy Books, 111
Come Along With Me (Jackson), 176
comedy, in science ﬁction and fantasy,
72–74
comics: in Britain, 40; independent
comics, 167–68
Compagnon du soleil (Corriveau), 53
Companions, The (Tepper), 11
Compulsion, The (Charbonneau-Tissot), 54
computer games, artiﬁcial life in, 17
Conceiving Ada (ﬁlm), 173
, Maryse, 213
Conde
“Congenital Agenesis of Gender Ideation”
(Carter), 58
Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court, A
(Twain), 6
Conqueror’s Child, The, 61
Conrad’s Fate (Jones), 181
Consider Her Ways (Grove), 50
Constantine, Storm, 74–75
es, 109–10
contes de fe
Contes de ma Mere l’Oye, 110
Convent of Pleasure (Cavendish), 59
Conway, John Horton, 17
Cooper, Susan, 14–15
Corn King and the Spring Queen, The
(Mitchison), 226
Corriveau, Monique, 53
367
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

cosplay, 75–77, 289
Costa Book Award, 26
^te, He
loise, 54
Co
Cottington, Lady Angelica (ﬁctional
character), 77–78
Coulson, Juanita, 94, 124
Cross and the Sword, The (Walton), 319
“Crossover” (Butler), 46
Crown of Silence (Constantine), 74
Crucible trilogy, 7
Cry to Heaven (Rice), 259
“Curious Experience of Thomas Dunbar,
The” (Stevens), 289–90
Curse of Chalion (Bujold), 44
cyberbodies, female, 78–79
cyberpunk literature, 52, 277–78; in Japan,
178–79
Cyteen (Cherryh), 63, 263
Czerneda, Julie I., 79–80
Dacre, Charlotte, 149
Damned, The (ﬁlm), 41
Dandurand, Anne, 55
D’Antemy, Fredrick, 54
Dark Knight Returns (Miller), 151–52
Dark Materials trilogy, 39, 248, 256
Dark Matter anthologies, 298–99
Darkover trilogy, 36–37
Das blaue Licht (ﬁlm), 140
Datlow, Ellen, 81–82, 96
Daughter of Elysium (Slonczewski), 283
Daughter of Night: A Tale of Three Worlds
(Obukhova), 271
Daughter of the Bear (Arnason), 12–13
Daughters of a Coral Dawn (Forrest), 252
Davies, Robertson, 50
Da Vinci Code, The (Brown), 7
DAW Books, 327
“Day of My Death, The” (Phelps), 241
Day the Earth Caught Fire, The (ﬁlm), 41
, Claire, 55
De
de Beauvoir, Simone, 69–70
deep ecology movement, 100–102
Deerskin (McKinley), 222
DeFord Miriam Allen, 82–83
de France, Marie, 14
de Lamirande, Claire, 54
Delany, Samuel R., 19, 46, 83–85, 122, 252,
286, 303–5
368
................

Volume 2: Entries

de Lint, Charles, 52, 85–86
de Mille, James, 50
de Pizan, Christine, 66–67
Dervish Is Digital (Cadigan), 49
, 16
Descartes, Rene
Description of a New World, Called the
Blazing World, The (Cavendish), 59
Destiny of the Next Life, The (Duansheng),
64
de Vaucanson, Jacques, 17
Dhalgren (Delaney), 83–85
Diadem Saga, 68–69
Dick, Phlip K., 72
Dickens, Charles, 142–43
Dickinson, Emily, 86–87
Difference Engine, The (Sterling), 7
Different Light, A (Lynn), 209
Dillon, Diane, 87
Dillon, Leo, 87
disability: in fantasy and science ﬁction,
88; neurodiversity motif and, 233
Dispossessed, The (Le Guin), 34, 92, 194,
201, 207
Divakaruni, Chitra Banerjee, 170
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (Dick),
72
Dolores Claiborne (King), 186
Doomsday Book, The (Willis), 6
Door into Ocean, A (Slonczewski), 101–2,
195, 283
€ ngers, 148–50
doppelga
Dorsey, Candas Jane, 9, 52
Douglass, Sara, 7
Douglass, Sara (pseud.). See Warneke,
Sara
Downbelow Station (Cherryh), 63
Dracula (Stoker), 291, 311
Dreams of Dark and Light (Lee), 199
Duane, Diane (Elizabeth), 89, 96
Duangsheng, Chen, 64
Due, Tananarive, 46, 90–91
Du Maurier, Daphne, 38
Duncan, Dave, 52
Dune (Herbert), 101
Dyachenko, Marina, 271–71
dystopian literature, 91–92, 269, 309–10;
architecture in, 12; by Atwood, 21;
environmental issues in, 101–2;
feminism and, 120

Index
Ear, the Eye and the Arm, The (Farmer), 114
Earthsea trilogy, 200–201
Ecklar, Julia, 180
ecofeminism, 100–102
ecosocialism, 100–102
Ecotopia (Callenbach), 101
editors: fanzine editors, 93–95;
professional editors, 95–96; small
presses, 284
education, in science ﬁction and fantasy,
96–97
Eight Days of Luke (Jones), 181
Einstein Intersection, The (Delaney), 83–85
Eldershaw, M. Barnard, 22
Elgin, Suzette Haden, 91, 97–98, 191,
194–96
Ellerman, Annie Winnifred, 98–99
Elsewhere, Elsewhen, Elsehow (DeFord),
82–83
Emperor of the Moon, The (Behn), 206
Empire of the Senseless (Acker), 253
Empire Star (Delany), 83–85
“Empty Ring” (Pelletier), 53
Emshwiller, Carol, 11
“Enchantress of Venus” (Brackett), 35
Encounter (Yolen), 335
Ende, Michael, 141
Endicott Studio of Mythic Arts, 45–46
End of the House of Kendreth, The (Chant),
60
Energumen magazine, 330
Engel, Marian, 50
Enterprise television series, 289
environmental issues, in fantasy and
science ﬁction, 50, 99–102, 271
epic fantasy, 102–4, 301–2
epic ﬁction: alternative history literature
as, 5–7; by Canadian writers, 51
erotic fantasy, 56–57
erotic science ﬁction, 104–7, 155
Espurgatorie Seint Patriz, 214–15
Ethan of Athos (Bujold), 44
Eugelionne, The (Bersianik), 53
Evening and the Morning and the Night, The
(Butler), 47
Ewers, Hanns Heinz, 140
Excalibur (Friesner), 15
Exiled from Camelot (Baldry), 16
Exit to Reality (Forbes), 9

Fables (de France), 214–15
Faerie Queene, The (Spenser), 39
€, 91
Fairbairns, Zoe
“fairy-tale renaissance” by twentiethcentury writers, 111
fairy tales, 109–11, 334; magical realism
in, 213–14; postmodern interpretations
of, 56; as romance ﬁction source,
260–62
Falcon (Bull), 45
Falling Free (Bujold), 44
Fancyclopedia, 111
fan ﬁction, 111–13, 288–89; editors of,
93–95; erotica as, 105–6. See also slash
ﬁction
Fantastic magazine, 193
Fantasy Book magazine, 284
fantasy literature: animals in, 9–11;
asexuality in, 19; by Australian writers,
21–24; awards for, 27–29; bisexuality in,
34–35; from Canda, 50–52; colonization
in, 71–72; comedic themes in, 72–74;
disability in, 88; epic fantasy, 102–4;
by French-speaking Canadian writers,
52–55; in India, 170
fanzines, 176–77; editors of, 93–95
Farmer, Nancy, 113–14
Farscape television series, 114–15, 279, 286
Fatherland (Harris), 5
Feast of All Saints, The (Rice), 259
female friendship, 115–17, 221–22, 331–32
Female Man, The (Russ), 92, 253, 264,
268–69, 303–4
Female Rule in Chinese and English Literary
Utopias (Wu), 64
feminism: alternative history genre and,
6–7; Amazon ﬁgures and, 8; animal
imagery in ﬁction and, 11; Arthurian
legend and, 15–16; Atwood’s
contributions to, 21; Barr’s anthologies
on, 32–33; basic principles, 117–19;
Brackett’s contributions to, 36; in
Canadian fantasy and science ﬁction,
51; by Carol, 55–56; in Chinese science
ﬁction, 64–65; cloning and, 69–70;
colonization themes in fantasy and
science ﬁction and, 71–72; comic
themes in science ﬁction and fantasy
and, 73–74; cyberbodies and, 78–79;
369
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

feminism (Continued)
disability in fantasy and science ﬁction,
88; dystopian literature and, 91–92;
environmental movement and,
100–102; in fantasy ﬁction, 2–3; female
friendship and, 115–17; by French
Canadian writers, 53–54; French
science ﬁction and, 129–30; gender
theory and, 136–37; Jewish women and,
179–80; in Le Guin’s work, 200–201;
in medieval literature, 66–67; online
science ﬁction sources, 256–57;
pregnancy and reproduction and,
244–45; in science ﬁction, 119–22, 265,
268–69; in science ﬁction ﬁlms, 3–4;
in science ﬁction literature, 60–62; in
Sheldon’s ﬁction, 299–301; sword and
sorcery literature and, 295;
transsexuality and, 304–5; women
editors and, 95–96
Feminist Futures: Contemporary Women’s
Speculative Fiction (Rosinsky), 118–19,
264
Feminists against Censorship, 56
Feminist Science Fiction, Fantasy, and
Utopia website, 122
femslash (f/f slash) ﬁction, 106
Femspec journal, 122–23
Ferns, Chris, 11
ﬁlk, 123–25, 313
Final Odyssey (Clarke), 67
Finder: A Novel of the Borderlands (Bull), 45
Findley, Timothy, 50
Fire and Hemlock (Jones), 181
Fireﬂy (television series), 125–26, 286, 323
Firestarter, The (King), 186
Firestone, Shulamith, 69–70
Fish, Leslie, 124
Fledgling (Butler), 47
Flewelling, Lynn, 126–27, 160
folklore, 109–11, 334; as romance ﬁction
source, 260–62
folk music. See also ﬁlk
Fonstad, Karen Wynn, 127–28
Fontana, Dorothy Catherine, 128–29
Fools (C¸adigan), 49
Forbes, Edith, 9
Foreign Devils (Harris), 22
Foreigner (Cherryh), 63
370
................

Volume 2: Entries

Forever War, The (Haldeman), 320
Forrest, Katherine V., 252
Fortress in the Eye of Time (Cherryh), 62–63
Fortunate Fall, The (Carter), 58
Foundation magazine, 52
Four-Gated City, The (Lessing), 203–4
Fox, Janet, 284
Fox, Mem, 24
France: fairy tales and folklore in, 109–10;
science ﬁction from, 129–30. See also
speciﬁc French writers
Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus
(Shelley), 39, 100, 279–80
Freedom and Necessity (Bull), 45
Freedom in the Family: A Mother-Daughter
Memoir of the Fight for Civil Rights (Due),
90
Freibert, Lucy, 120
French-speaking Canadian writers, 52–55
Fresco, The (Tepper), 298
Friday (Heinlein), 158
“Friend Island” (Stevens), 290
Friesner, Esther M., 15, 131–32, 195
Froud, Brian, 77–78
Fuentes, Carlos, 196
Furies, The (Charnas), 61
Futurians, 223–24
Gaiman, Neil, 40, 133, 167
Game Beyond, The (Scott), 277
game designers, 134–35
Game of Life, 17
“Games” (MacLean), 212
Gates Ajar, The (Phelps), 241
Gates Between, The (Phelps), 241
Gate to Women’s Country, The (Tepper), 297
Gathering In (Haihong), 65
Gearhart, Sally Miller, 101–2, 121, 135–36,
252
Gendered Atom, The (Roszak), 266–67
gender issues: androgyny, 8–9; animals
in fantasy and science ﬁction and, 11;
in Arthurian legend, 16; bisexuality,
34–35; cloning and, 69–70; in Delaney’s
ﬁction, 83–85; in dystopian literature,
91–92; dystopian literature and, 91–92;
environmental movement and, 100–
102; erotic science ﬁxtion and, 106–7;
fairy tales and folklore and, 110–11;

Index
in fantasy literature, 2–3; female
friendship and, 116–17; feminist
science ﬁction, 119–22; in Japanese
science ﬁction, 177–79; in lost-colony
stories, 206–8; magical realism and,
213–14; overview of, 136–37; pregnancy
and reproduction, 244–45; in pulp
science ﬁction, 248–50; queer science
ﬁction, 251–53; in romance science
ﬁction/fantasy, 260–62; in romantic
science ﬁction/fantasy, 263–64; in
science ﬁction ﬁlms, 4; in Scott’s ﬁction,
277–78; sex changes, 279; in slash
ﬁction, 281–82; Star Trek series, 287–89;
in Stewart’s work, 290–91; transgender,
303–4; transsexuality, 304–5
genetic engineering, 18; of animals,
10–11; basic principles, 138–39
Gentle, Mary, 5, 19, 38, 139, 286
^ teau, Louis Napoleon, 5
Geoffrey-Cha
Geoffrey of Monmouth, 14
Gerald’s Game (King), 186–87
German Popular Stories, 111
Germany: fantasy and science ﬁction
literature and ﬁlm from, 140–41,
317–18; Norse mythology in, 236
Ghost in the Shell, 178
ghost stories, 141–44
Gibson, William, 7, 17, 39, 52, 144–45,
217, 264
Giger, H. R., 3
Gilda Stories, The (Gomez), 146
Gilman, Carolyn Ives, 9
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, 145–46, 150,
162
Girl Named Disaster, A (Farmer), 114
Girl Who Loved Tom Gordon, The (King), 186
“Girl Who Was Plugged In, The”
(Sheldon), 88, 300
Glicksohn, Mike, 330
Glory Season (Brin), 37
Gnaedinger, Mary, 95
Goblin Market, and Other Poems (Rossetti),
265–66
“Goblin Market” (Rossetti), 39
Gods Are Thirsty, The (Lee), 199
Gold, Horace L., 51
Golden Dream (Alexander), 2
Golden Duck Award, 27

Golden Notebook, The (Lessing), 38
Golden Witchbreed (Gentle), 19
Goldsmith, Cele. See Lalli, Cele Goldsmith
Gomez, Jewelle, 146–47, 203
Good House, The (Due), 90
Gorey, Edward, 147–48
lica, 197
Gorodischer, Ange
gothic literature, 147–48, 148–50, 175–76,
239, 266
Gotlieb, Phyllis, 50–51, 150–51
Grand Master Award, 28
Grant, Susan, 261
graphic novels, 133, 151–53
Green, Terence M., 52
Grey Horse, The (MacAvoy), 211
Grey Mane of Morning, The (Chant), 60
Grifﬁth, Nicola, 38, 106, 153–54, 253
Grigorieva, Olga, 272
Grimm, Jacob Ludwig and Wilhelm Carl,
110–11
Grove, Philip, 50
Grue magazine, 284–85
Grunts (Gentle), 139
Guest, Charlotte, 14
Guilty Pleasures (Hamilton), 155
“Guinea Pig” (Pelletier), 53
Guinevere (Newman), 15
s, 53
Guitard, Agne
Haihong, Zhao, 65
Halam, Ann (pseud.). See Jones,
Gwynneth
Haldeman, Joe, 320
Halfway Human (Gilman), 9
Hallowed Hunt, The (Bujold), 44
Hamilton, Laurel K., 155–56, 312
Hamilton, Virginia, 156
Handfasted: A Romance (Spence), 22, 207
Handmaid’s Tale, The (Atwood), 6, 12, 21,
50–51, 194
Hangsaman (Jackson), 175
Hans Christian Andersen Award for
Writing, 24–25
Hardinge, Frances, 38
Harris, Christine, 22
Harris, Robert, 5
Harry Potter series, 39, 281; fan ﬁction
and, 112–13
Harvest (Padmanabhan), 169
371
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Haunting of Hill House, The (Jackson), 175
Have Spacesuit—Will Travel (Heinlein), 158
Hawke, Morgan, 107
Hawk in Silver, A (Gentle), 139
Hawk of May (Bradshaw), 14
He, She and It (Piercy), 92, 179, 242
Heads of Cerberus, The (Stevens), 290
Healer’s War, The (Scarborough), 276
bert, Anne, 54
He
Heinlein, Robert, 157–59, 320
Helit, Susan Sto, 41
Hellspark (Kagan), 195
bert), 54
Helo€ise (He
Henderson, Zenna, 159–60
Herbert, Frank, 101
Herland (Gilman), 146, 203
Hero and the Crown, The (McKinley), 255
Heroes and Villains (Carter), 57
heroic fantasy, by French-Canadian
writers, 54
Hero’s Journey, The (Vogler), 294
Hero with a Thousand Faces, The
(Campbell), 102–3, 294
Her Watchtower (Lynn), 208–9
High King (Alexander), 2
High Kings, The (Chant), 60
Histoires ou contes du temps passe, 110
Historia Regum Brittanniae, 14
historical fantasy, 38–39
Hobbes, Thomas, 16
Hoffman, Lee, 94
Holdfast series, 60–62
Holding Wonder (Henderson), 159
Hollinger, Veronica, 118
homosexuality: bisexuality and, 34–35;
cloning and, 69–70; in Delany’s science
ﬁction, 83–85; in Lackey’s ﬁction, 191; in
McHugh’s ﬁction, 219; queer science
ﬁction, 251–53; in science ﬁction and
fantasy, 160–61; in Scott’s ﬁction,
277–78; slash ﬁction and, 280–82; in
Sturgeon’s ﬁction, 293; transsexuality
and, 304–5
Hopkinson, Nalo, 46, 51, 72, 161–62
horror ﬁction, 162–63; from Australia,
22–23; epic fantasy and, 102–4; gothic
themes in, 149
horror ﬁlms, 163–64; from Japan, 177–79
House of the Scorpion, The (Farmer), 114
372
................

Volume 2: Entries

“Houston, Houston, Do You Read?”, 300
Huff, Tanya, 52
Hugo Award, 27–29
humor, in science ﬁction and fantasy,
72–73
Huntzinger, Lucy, 55
“Hustler, The” (Caliﬁa), 253
Hwarhath stories (Arnason), 13
Hyman, Trina Schart, 163–64
“hyperempathy syndrome,” 233
I, Robot series (Asimov), 20
), 213
I, Tituba, Black Witch of Salem (Conde
Idylls of the King (Tennyson), 14
“Inappropriate Behavior” (Murphy), 233
India, science ﬁction and fantasy from,
169–71
Infernal, The (Wilkins), 22
Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman,
The (Carter), 57
internet: fan ﬁction and, 112–13; fantasy
and science ﬁction on, 172–73; online
magazines on, 247; vidding on, 315.
See also online science ﬁction sources
Interstellar Service and Discipline: Victorious
Star, 107
Interstitial Arts movement, 325–26
Interview with the Vampire (Rice), 259, 312
In the Chinks (Lefanu), 199
In the Company of Others (Czerneda), 79
In the Mother’s Land (Vonarburg), 317
bert), 54
In the Shadow of the Wind (He
Invisible Fan, The (fanzine), 55–56
Invitation to Camelot (Karr), 16
ville), 224–25
Iron Council (Mie
Isaac Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine, 219,
246–47
Island of Dr. Moreau, The (Wells), 9–10
It Happened Tomorrow (Narlikan), 170
Jackson, Shirley, 175–76
James Tiptree Jr. Award, 27–29
Jamneck, Lynn, 105
€), 41
Jane Eyre (Bronte
Janus fan magazine, 176–77
Japan: cosplay festivals in, 75–77; science
ﬁction and fantasy from, 177–79
Jazz, The (Scott), 34
Jensen, Liz, 6, 38

Index
Jewels of Aptor (Delaney), 83–85
Jewish women, as fantasy and science
ﬁction writers, 179–80
*Jonathan Strange and Mr. Norrell (Clarke),
7, 38
Jones, Diana Wynne, 38, 103, 181
Jones, Gwynneth, 38, 182–83
Jones, Mary J., 15
Jones, Terrt, 77–78
Joplin’s Ghost (Due), 90
s de la Cruz, 196
Juana Ine
Judas Rose (Elgin), 191
Just an Ordinary Day (Jackson), 176
Justice trilogy, 156
Kalpa Imperial (Gorodischer), 197
Karr, Phyllis Ann, 16
Katz, Welwyn Welton, 15
Kay, Guy Gavriel, 51
Keepsake, The, 142–43
Kern, Claudia, 141
Ketterer, David, 52
Khaetskaya, Yelena, 271–72
Khatru fanzine, 185–86
Killer Angels, The (Shaara), 125
€rchen (Grimm),
Kinder- und Hausma
110–11
Kindred (Butler), 47, 72
King, Stephen, 186–87
King, Thomas, 50
Kinsella, W. P., 50
Kluttner, Henry, 188–89
Kornbluth, Cyril M., 187–88
Kress, Nancy, 139, 188
Kushiel, Carey, 104
Kuttner, Henry, 230
 adan (fantasy language), 97–98, 191,
La
194
Lackey, Mercedes, 19, 96, 124, 191, 261
Lady Cottington’s Pressed Fairy Book, 77–78
“Lady of Shalott, The,” 16
le, 54, 55
Laframboise, Miche
“Laika” (Beaulieu), 54
Lais (de France), 14, 214–15
Lalli, Cele Goldsmith, 95, 193
L’Amateur d’art (Marois), 54
Lan, Mi, 65
Lanagan, Margo, 23

Lang, Andrew, 111
Langton, Christopher, 16–17
languages and linguistics: created
languages, 97–98; in fantasy and
science ﬁction, 194–96
Larbalestier, Justine, feminist science
ﬁction, 119–22
Larionova, Olga, 271
La Rose du temps (de Lamirande), 54
Last and First Men (Stapledon), 100
Last Hawk, The (Asaro), 18
Last Man, The (Shelley), 280
Latin and South America, science ﬁction
and fantasy from, 196–98
Latynina, Yulia, 272
Lazarchuk, Andrey, 271
Leacock, Stephen, 50
League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, The
(Moore), 7
Lee, Tanith, 38, 198–99
Leeson, Lynn Hershman, 173
Le Fanu, J. Sheridan, 202–3
Lefanu, Sarah, 120, 199
Left Hand of Darkness, The (Le Guin), 9, 201,
207, 252, 264–65, 279, 303
Legacy (Bujold), 44
Legacy trilogy, 104
Le Guin, Ursula K., 9, 11, 34, 72, 92, 160,
200–201, 207, 264–65
Le Livre de la Cite des Dames (de Pizan),
66–67
Le Morte d’Arthur (Malory), 14, 39
L’Engle, Madeleine, 201–2
Leopard from the Top of Kilimanjaro, A
(Larionova), 271
Le Sable et l’acier (Pelletier), 53
lesbian ﬁction, 153–54, 202–3; Amazon
ﬁgures in, 7–8; Arthurian legend and,
15; cloning and, 70; erotic science
ﬁction and, 105–7; female friendship
and, 117; feminism and, 120–21. See also
homosexuality; queer science ﬁction
^ te), 54
Les Chroniques de l’Hudres (Co
Les Corps communicants (Guitard), 53
Les Jours de l’ombre (Pelletier), 53
Lessing, Doris, 38, 203–4
vesque, Louise, 54
Le
Lindgren, Astrid, 204–5
Lindsay, Norman, 23
373
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Linzner, Gordon, 284
Lions of Al-Rassan, The (Kay), 51
Lisey’s Story (King), 186
Little Mermaid, The (ﬁlm), 262
Living Blood, The (Due), 90
Lo cunto de li cunti (Basile), 109
Long Tomorrow, The (Brackett), 35
L’Operation fabuleus (de Lamirande), 54
Lord of the Rings (ﬁlm), 295, 302
Lord of the Rings (Tolkien), 102–4, 253,
301–2; fan ﬁction and, 112–13
lost-colony stories, 206–8, 269
“Lottery, The,” 175
Lovecraft, H. P., 7
Love (Morrison), 231
Luck in the Shadows (Flewelling), 126
Lud-in-the-Mist (Mirrlees), 226–27
Lukina, Lyubov, 271
Luna line of romance science ﬁction/
fantasy, 261–62
Lupoff, Pat, 94
Lynch, Nicky, 94
Lynn, Elizabeth, 34, 208–9
Mabinogion trilogy (Walton), 14, 319
MacArthur Foundation fellowships, 28
MacAvoy, Roberta Ann, 211
Macho Sluts, 253
MacLean, Katherine Anne, 212
Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, 246
magical realism, 212–14; in Indian
fantasy, 171; in Latin American fantasy,
196–98; in Morrison’s ﬁction, 231; urban
fantasy and, 307–8
Magic of Shirley Jackson, The, 175–76
Magic Pudding, The (Lindsay), 23–24
Magic Toyshop (Carter), 56–57
Magravandias Chronicles (Constantine),
74–75
Maguire, Gregory, 97
Making of a Counter Culture, The (Roszak),
266
Malory, Sir Thomas, 14, 39
Malzberg, Barry, 180
manga ( Japanese graphic novels), 177–79
Man Who Fell to Earth (ﬁlm), 41
Marchant, Diane, 281
Marie de France, 214–15
Marillier, Juliet, 39
374
................

Volume 2: Entries

Marois, Carmen, 54
Marston, William Moulton, 8
Martel, Suzanne, 53
“Martian Quest” (Brackett), 35
Martin, George R. R., 103–4
Marvelous Misadventures of Sebastian
(Alexander), 2
Marxism, 215–16; ecosocialism and,
100–102
Master of None (Wood), 34
Matrix, The (ﬁlm), 40, 173, 216–17
May, Julian, 6
Mayfair Witches series (Rice), 259
McCaffrey, Anne, 14, 18, 88, 96, 207,
217–18, 229, 286
McCarthy. Shawna, 218–19
McDougall, Sophia, 6
McHugh, Maureen F., 12, 219–20
McIlwraith, Dorothy, 95, 322
McIntyre, Vonda, 220–21
McKenna, Juliet E., 255
McKenzie, Nancy, 15
McKillip, Patricia, 16, 221–22
McKinley, [Jennifer] Robin [Carolyn],
222–23, 255
media fandom, 112–13
MediaWest vidders, 314
medieval literature, 66–67
Memoirs of a Spacewoman (Mitchison), 227
Memoirs of a Survivor (ﬁlm), 41
Memoirs of Elizabeth Frankenstein (Roszak),
266–67
Men, Women, and Ghosts (Phelps), 241
Meredith Gentry series, 155–56
Merlin series (Stewart), 15
Merlin’s Mirror (Norton), 14
Merrick, Helen, 118
Merril, Judith, 93, 95–96, 179, 187, 223–24
Messenger (Chen), 65
Metropolis (ﬁlm), 318
Metropolis (Von Harbou), 318
Michael L. Printz Award for Excellence in
Young Adult Literature, 26
Midnight Robber (Hopkinson), 161
Midwinter Nightingale (Aiken), 1
Miesel, Sandra, 93
ville, China, 224–25
Mie
Mildred L. Batchelder Award, 25–26
Mindplayers (Cadigan), 49

Index
Mirrlees, Hope, 225–26
Mirror Dance (Bujold), 44
Misery (King), 186
Missing Man, The (MacLean), 212
Mistress of Spices, The, 171
Mists of Avalon, The (Bradley), 16, 36–37
Mitchison, Naomi, 38, 226–27
Moffett, Judith, 227–28
Mohanraj, Mary Anne, 228
Mojo: Conjure Stories (Hopkinson), 161–62
Momo (Ende), 141
Monette, Sarah, 104
Monstrous Regiment (Pratchett), 244
Moon, Elizabeth, 19, 96–97, 229, 286
Moore, Alan, 7
Moore, Brian, 50
Moore, C. L., 188–89, 230, 322
More Bitter than Death (Wilhelm), 324
Morphology of the Folktale (Propp), 294
Morrison, Toni, 213, 231
Motherlines (Charnas), 252
“Mother Migrator, The” (Pelletier), 53
Mount, The (Emswiller), 11
“Mountains of Mourning, The” (Bujold), 44
Multiplayer Massively Online Role-Playing
Games, 295
My Dirty Little Book of Stolen Time, My, 6
My Father’s Ghost (Charnas), 61
My Soul to Keep (Due), 90
Mysteries of Winterthurn (Oates), 239
Nadramia, Peggy, 284–85
Namjoshi, Suniti, 170
Napoleon et le conqu^ete de la monde, 5
Narlikar, Jayant V., 170
Narrating Utopia, 11–12
National Book Award, 26
Native Tongue (Elgin), 191
Nazhuret trilogy (MacAvoy), 211
Nebula Award, 27–29
NESFA Hymnal, 124
neurodiversity, 233
Neuromancer (Gibson), 39, 144–45, 217, 264
New Adam, The, 129
Newbery Medal, 25
Newman, Sharan, 15
New Moon fan magazine, 177
New Moon’s Arms, The (Hopkinson), 161–62
New Weird movement, 224, 234–35, 307–8

Night Fall (Aiken), 1
Nights at the Circus (Carter), 57
Night Watch, The (Stewart), 290–91
Norse mythology, 114, 236, 301–2
Northern Frights series, 51
Northern Lights, The (Pullman), 248
North Wind (Jones), 182
Norton, Andre, 11, 14, 237, 285
Nothing Sacred (Scarborough), 276
Oates, Joyce Carol, 239
Obernewtyn Chronicles, 23
Obukhova, Lydia, 271
Ocampo, Silvina, 197
Odyssey Two (Clarke), 67
O’Hagen, Howard, 50
Omega Science Digest magazine, 22
Omni magazine, 80–81
online science ﬁction sources: fan ﬁction,
112–13; fantasy and science ﬁction,
172–73; feminist science ﬁction, 256–57;
magazines, 247. See also internet
On Strike against God (Russ), 268–69
original slash ﬁction, 282
Orlando (Woolf), 9, 251, 265, 279
Oryx and Crake (Atwood), 21, 233
Other Canadas anthology, 51
Outlaws of Sherwood, The (McKinley), 222
Oy Pioneer! A Novel (Barr), 32
Ozark trilogy (Elgin), 98
Ozick, Cynthia, 180
Padmanabhan, Manjula, 169–70
Page, P. K., 50
Paladin of Souls, The (Bujold), 44
Parable of the Sower (Butler), 47, 233
Parable of the Talents (Butler), 47
Paradigm of Earth, A (Dorsey), 9
Pascal, Blaise, 5
Passion of New Eve (Carter), 57
Passion Play (Stewart), 290
patriarchy, Arthurian legend and, 16
Patternmaster (Butler), 46
Paver, Michelle, 38–39
Paz, Octavio, 196
Peacock Cries (Yong), 65
Pearson, Wendy, 118
Pelletier, Francine, 53
Pensees d’une Amazone (Barney), 8
375
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Pensees (Pascal), 5
People: No Different Flesh, The (Henderson),
159
ville), 224
Perdido Street Station (Mie
Pern series (McCaffrey), 263
Perrault, Charles, 110
Perroto-Bishop, Annick, 53
Peytabee series (Scarborough/McCaffrey),
276
Phantasmion (Coleridge), 70–71
Phelps, Elizabeth Stuart, 14, 241–42
Phoenix Cafe (Jones), 182
Piercy, Marge, 9, 12, 34, 92, 101, 121, 173,
179, 216, 242, 264
Pilgrimage: The Book of the People
(Henderson), 159
Planet Stories, 249
Podkayne of Mars (Heinlein), 158
Poe, Edgar Allan, 50
Points series (Scott), 277
Port Eternity (Cherryh), 14
Possum Magic (Fox), 24
Postman, The (Brin), 37
PowerBook, The (Winterson), 326
Pratchett, Terry, 40, 243–44, 256
Pratt, E. J., 50
pregnancy, in science ﬁction and fantasy,
244–45
Pretty Lessons in Verse (Coleridge), 71
~ o” (poem), 196
“Primero suen
Prince Commands, The (Norton), 237
Princess and the Lord of Night (Bull), 45
professional magazines, 245–47, 283–84
€), 41
Professor, The (Bronte
Prof.’s Ring (Shumin), 65
Promethia graphic novel series, 152
“Psychologist Who Wouldn’t Do Awful
Things to Rats” (Sheldon), 11
Pullman, Philip, 39, 247–48, 256
Pulp (fanzine), 55–56
pulp science ﬁction, 35–36, 246–47,
248–50; feminism and, 120–21
Quantum Rose, The (Asaro), 18–19
Quartermass and the Pit (ﬁlm), 41
queer science ﬁction, 251–53
Queiroz, Dina Silveiara de, 197
Querelle de la Rose (de Pizan), 66–67
quest fantasy, 89, 253–56, 294–95, 309–10
376
................

Volume 2: Entries

Quiet Invasion, The (Zettel), 12
Quilter, Laura, 122, 256–57
Radcliffe, Ann, 149
Rainha,do Ignoto, A (Freitas), 196
Ramasastry, Saira, 170
“Rape of the Solar System” (Stone), 292
Realms of Fantasy, 246–47
Reappraisals: Canadian Writers, 52
Red Dancing Shoes (Lan), 65
Redgauntlet (Scott), 142
Red Moon and Black Mountain (Chant), 60
Rees, Celia, 38
Reeve, Clara, 149
Reeves-Stevens, Garﬁeld and Judith, 52
Remnant Population (Moon), 229
Remote Country of Women (Duansheng), 64
Rendezvous with Rama (Clarke), 67
reproduction, in science ﬁction and
fantasy, 244–45
Resurrectionists, The (Wilkins), 22
Resurrection Station, The (Arnason), 12
Return of Vaman, The (Narlikan), 170
ry
€on series (Delaney),
Return to Neve
84–85
Rice, Anne, 259–60, 312
Riddle of Stars trilogy (McKillip), 221–22
Riefenstahl, Leni, 140–41
Ring of Swords (Arnason), 13
Rivas, Antonio de, 196
Road through the Wall, The (Jackson), 175
Roberts, Charles G. D., 50
Robillard, Anne, 54
Robinson, Kim Stanley, 6
Robitaillie, Henriette, 129
Robot Alert (Martel), 53
Robson, Justin, 38
Rochon, Esther, 53
€lle, 129
Roger, Noe
Rogow, Roberta, 284
Rolfe, Felice, 94
Rolling Stones, The (Heinlein), 158
romance ﬁction, 155; Arthurian legend
and, 14; science ﬁction and fantasy as,
260–62
Romanitas (McDougall), 6
romanticism: ghost stories and, 142–44;
gothic literature and, 149; noir ﬁction,
264; in science ﬁction and fantasy, 262–64

Index
Rooke, Leon, 50
Rose Daughter (McKinley), 223
Rose Madder (King), 186
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead
(Stoppard), 112
Rosinsky, Natalie, 118, 120, 264–65
Rossetti, Christina, 39, 265–66
Roszak, Theodore, 266–67
Rowling, J. K., 38–39, 96, 97, 267–68
Ruby in the Smoke (Pullman), 248
Rude Bitches (fanzine), 55
Ruins of Isis (Bradley), 34
Rusch, Kristine Kathryn, 285
Russ, Joanna, 88, 92, 118, 120, 195, 203,
253, 264, 268–69
Russell, Mary Doria, 270
Russia, science ﬁction/fantasy in, 271–72
Ryman, Geoffrey Charles, 272–73
Saint-Germain novels (Yarbro), 333
Salt Roads, The (Hopkinson), 161
Sandman series, 133
San Francisco (Bridge) trilogy, 144–45
San Francisco vidders, 314
Sargent, Pamela, 91–92, 95–96, 121,
179–80, 275–76
Saunders, Charles R., 46
Sawyer, Robert J., 50, 52
Saxton, Josephine, 38
ville), 224
Scar, The (Mie
Scarborough, Elizabeth, 276–77
Scavenger’s Newletter (Fox), 284
Schochet, Victoria, 96
Schroeder, Karl, 52
Science Fiction Age, 246–47
Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of
America, 28
science ﬁction ﬁlm: in Britain, 40–41;
environmental issues in, 102; in
Germany, 140–41
science ﬁction literature: animals in,
9–11; Arthurian legend in, 14;
asexuality in, 19; by Australian writers,
21–24; awards for, 27–29; bisexuality in,
34–35; from Canda, 50–52; cloning in,
69–70; colonization in, 71–72; comedic
themes in, 72–74; cyberbodies in, 78–79;
disability in, 88; environmental issues
in, 99–102; erotic science ﬁction, 104–7;

feminist science ﬁction, 119–22; by
French-speaking Canadian writers,
52–55; queer science ﬁction, 251–53;
women editors of, 95–96
Science Fiction World anthology, 64–66
Science Fiction Writers of America, 26–27
SciFiction, 247
Scott, Duncan Campbell, 50
Scott, Melissa, 9, 34, 277–78, 285
Scott, Sir Walter, 142–43
“Sea Below, The” (Pelletier), 53
Sea Dragon’s Heir (Constantine), 74
Second Wave feminism, 264, 297
Seddon-Boulet, Susan Eleanor, 278–79
Selbstversuch (Wolf), 141
Semyonova, Maria, 271–72
Serenity (ﬁlm), 125–26, 286, 323
Serpent’s Shadow, The (Lackey), 261
Seton, Ernest Thompson, 50
Several Perceptions (Carter), 56
sex changes, 279, 304–5
Sexing the Cherry (Winterson), 326
sexuality: androgyny and, 9; asexuality,
19; bisexuality and, 34–35; in erotic
science ﬁction, 105–7; queer science
ﬁction, 251–53; sex changes, 279;
transgender and, 303–4. See also gender
issues; homosexuality
Shadow Dance (Carter), 56
Shadow Man (Scott), 9
Shadow on the Hearth (Merril), 223
Shards of Honor (Bujold), 43
Sheep Look Up, The (Brunner), 101
Sheldon, Alice, 11, 88, 105, 185–86, 285,
299–301
Shell, The (Rochon), 53
Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft, 39, 100,
162, 279–80
Shetterly, Will, 45
Ship Who Sang, The (McCaffrey), 88
€), 41
Shirley (Bronte
Shore of Women, The (Sargent), 276
shoujo ( Japanese science ﬁction), 177–79
Shumin, Bi, 65
Silence and the Word (Mohanraj), 228
Silent City, The (Vonarburg), 317
Silent Sprint (Carson), 100–101
Silmarillion, 51
Silver Metal Lover, The (Lee), 199
377
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

Simpson, Helen, 22
Singer, Melissa, 96
“Singing My Sister Down,” 23
Skin Folk (Hopkinson), 161
slash ﬁction, 93, 280–82, 286, 288–89;
erotic science ﬁction and, 106. See also
femslash (f/f slash) ﬁction
Slonczewski, Joan, 101, 121, 195, 282–83,
286
Slow River (Grifﬁth), 106, 153–54
small press publishing, 283–85, 327–28
Small Press Writers and Artists
Organization, 284
Smallville (television series), 281
Smith, Jeffrey D., 185–86
Snow Queen, The (Vinge), 315–16
Solaris magazine, 53
Song of Solomon (Morrison), 231
Songs of Distant Earth (Clarke), 67
Space Cadet (Heinlein), 158
Space Odyssey, A (ﬁm), 41
space opera, 35–36, 43, 271, 285–87
Space & Time (fanzine), 284
Sparrow, The (Russell), 270
speculative ﬁction, 68–69; architecture in,
11–12; comic themes in, 73–74; by
Hopkinson, 161–62
“Speech Sounds” (Butler), 47
Speed of Dark, The (Moon), 229, 233
Speer, J. B., 111
Spence, Catherine Helen, 22, 207
Spenser, Edmund, 39
Springer, Nancy, 15
Squires, Susan, 9
Stalking Darkness (Flewelling), 126
Stapledon, Olaf, 100
Starman Jones (Heinlein), 158
Starship Troopers (Heinlein), 158
Stars in My Pocket Like Grains of Sand
(Delaney), 84–85
Star Trek series, 128–29, 281, 287–89; fan
ﬁction and, 112; female friendship and,
116–17; neurodiversity in, 233
“steampunk,” 7
Stearns, Stephanie, 284
Sterling, Bruce, 7
Stevens, Francis (pseud.), 289–90
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 162
Stewart, Mary, 15
378
................

Volume 2: Entries

Stewart, Sean, 290–91
Still Forms on Foxﬁeld (Slonczewski),
282–83
Stirling, S. M., 52
Stoker, Bram, 162, 291–92, 311
Stone, Leslie F., 179, 292–93
Stone Fey, The (McKinley), 223
Stoppard, Tom, 112
Strange Horizons webzine, 228, 247
Strange Manuscript found in a Copper
Cylinder, A (de Mille), 50
Stranger in a Strange Land (Heinlein), 157
Straparola, Giovan Francesco, 109
Sturgeon, Theodore, 252, 293
Sullivan, Tricia, 38
Summer Queen, The (Vinge), 315–16
Sunburst (Gotlieb), 150–51
Sundial, The ( Jackson), 175
Sundial in a Grave, A (Gentle), 139
Sunshin (McKinley), 222
Sussex, Lucy, 22
Swainston, Steph, 38
Swastika Night (Burdekins), 91
sword and sorcery literature, 198–99,
294–95; alternative history, 7; by Bujold,
44; comic spoofs of, 73
Sword Smith, The (Arnason), 12
Synners (Cadigan), 49
Tale of the Five series, 89
Tales of Guinevere series, 15
Taming of the Shrew, The (Birke), 11
Tamir Triad (Flewelling), 126–27
Tan, Cecilia, 105–6
Tay John (O’Hagen), 50
Taylor, Edgar, 111
Tea from an Empty Cup (Cadigan), 49
Tehanu (Le Guin), 200–201
Teknolust (Cheang), 79
television, space operas on, 286
€), 41
Tenant of Wildfell Hall, The (Bronte
Tennyson, Alfred Lord, 14, 16
Tenth Kingdom, The (television series), 262
Tepper, Sheri S., 11, 92, 102, 121, 297–98,
320
rard), 53
Terre des autres (Be
Territory (Bull), 45–45
Tesseracts anthology, 53
“That Only a Mother” (Merril), 223

Index
riault, Marie Jose
, 54
The
Third Eagle, The (MacAvoy), 211
Third Magic, The (Katz), 15
Thomas, Sherree, 90, 298–99
Thousand Words for Stranger, A (Czerneda),
79–80
Thread of Grace, A (Russell), 270
Three Damosels: A Trilogy, The (Chapman),
14
Threshold (Douglass), 23
Tiffany Aching series, 256
Time Machine, The (Wells), 72
Tiptree, James T. Jr. (pseud.). See Sheldon,
Alice
Tolkien, Christopher, 51
Tolkien, J. R. R., 51, 102–4, 253, 301–2
Tombs of Atuan, The (Le Guin), 200
Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow
(Eldershaw), 22
Torn Shapes of Desire (Mohanraj), 228
bert), 54
Torrent, The (He
To the Chapel Perilous (Mitchison), 226
Tower at Stony Wood, The (McKillip), 16
Traitor Moon (Flewelling), 126
transgender, 303–4
Transparent Society, The (Brin), 38
transsexuality, 279, 304–5; cyberbodies
and, 79
Traviss, Karen, 10, 38
“Trey of Hearts,” 105
Trimble, Bjo, 94
Trio for Lute trilogy, 211
Triton (Delaney), 84, 303–5
Trouble and Her Friends (Scott), 277
Trouble on Triton (Delaney), 252–53
Turek, Leslie, 95
Turtledove, Harry, 6–7
Twain, Mark, 6
Two of Them, The (Russ), 88
Ugryumova, Victoria, 272
ville), 224
Un Lun Dun (Mie
urban fantasy, 45, 85–86, 155, 307–8
Urquhart, Jane, 50
Uspensky, Mikhail, 271
utopian ﬁction, 269, 308–10, 321;
architectural motif in, 11–12; by
Australian writers, 22–24; feminism
and, 120; Marxism and, 215–16

Vampire Chronicles (Rice), 259–60
vampires, 311–12; bisexuality of, 35
Vampire Tapestry, The (Charnas), 61–62
Van Duesen, Mary, 314
Varney the Vampire, 311
Venus Plus X (Sturgeon), 252
Vesper Holly series (Alexander), 2–3
Victorian literature, ghost stories and,
143–44
vidding ﬁlmmaking, 313–15
€), 41
Villette (Bronte
Vinge, Joan D., 285, 315–16
Virago Book of Fairy Tales (Carter), 56
Visa for Avalon (Bryher), 98–99
visionary art movement, 278
Vivas, Julie, 24
Vogt, Van, 51

Vonarburg, Elisabeth,
53, 316–17
Von Harbou, Thea Gabriele, 317–18
Von Neumann, John, 17
Walpole, Horace, 149
Walton, Evangeline, 319
Walton, Jo, 38
Wanderground: Stories of the Hill Women
(Gearheart), 136, 252
war and peace in science ﬁction/fantasy,
320–22
War for the Oaks (Bull), 45
“Warlord of Saturn’s Moons, The”
(Arnason), 12
^ te
, Marie, 53–54
Warnant-Co
Warneke, Sara, 23
War of the Worlds (Wells), 100
Was … (Ryman), 273
Watchmen (Moore), 151
Watson, Sheila, 50
Watts, Peter, 52
Way of Light, The (Constantine), 74
Weaver, Sigourney, 3
Weber, David, 320
We Have Always Lived in the Castle
( Jackson), 175–76
Wei, Ji, 64–65
Weiner, Andrew, 52
Weird Tales, 189, 230, 246, 249, 322–23
Wells, H. G., 9–10, 72, 100
Westmark (Alexander), 2
Westmark trilogy (Alexander), 2–3
379
................

Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy

We Who Are About To (Russ), 269
What, Lesley, 180
Whedon, Joss, 4, 42, 117, 125–26, 312, 323
“When It Changed” (Russ), 268–69
When Voiha Wakes (Chant), 60
Where the Wasteland Ends (Roscak), 267
Whispering Mountain, The (Aiken), 1
Whispers from the Cotton Tree Root:
Caribbean Fabulist Fiction (Hopkinson),
161–62
Whitbread Book Award, 26
White Queen (Jones), 182
Wide Sargasso Sea (Rhys), 112
Wilder, Cherry, 206
Wilhelm, Kate Gertrude, 324
Wilkins, Kim, 22
Wilkin’s Tooth (Jones), 181
Williams, Liz, 38
Williams, Lynn F., 120
Willis, Connie, 6
Wilson, Robert Charles, 52
Windling, Terri, 45, 80–81, 96, 325–26
Winterson, Jeanette, 326
WisCon, 122
Wise Children (Carter), 57
Witch House (Walton), 319
With a Shuddering Fall (Oates), 239
Wittig, Monique, 194, 264
Wollheim, Betsy, 327
Wolmark, Jenny, 118
Wolves of Willoughby Chase (Aiken), 1
Woman of the Iron People, A (Arnason), 13
Woman on the Beast, The (Simpson), 22
Woman on the Edge of Time (Piercy), 9, 12,
34, 92, 101, 121, 242, 252, 264
Women and Economics (Gilman), 145–46
women heroines, in graphic novels,
151–53
“Women Men Don’t See, The,” 300
women’s bookstores, 327–29
women writers, of French science ﬁction,
129–30
Wonder Woman (Marston), 8

380
................

Volume 2: Entries

Wood, N. Lee, 34
Wood, Susan, 329–30
Wooley, Persia, 15
Woolf, Virginia, 9, 265
Word for World Is Forest, The (Le Guin), 101,
201
World Fantasy Award, 28–29
World of Warcraft (online game), 295
World’s End (Vinge), 315–16
“World Well Lost, The” (Sturgeon), 252
Wounded Hawk, The (Douglass), 23
Wrede, Patricia, 7
Wrightson, Patricia, 24
Wu, Qingyu, 64
Wu, Yan, 64–65
€), 41
Wuthering Heights (Bronte
Xena: Warrior Princess (television series), 8,
117, 281, 331–32
Xenoﬁlka, 124
Xenogenesis (DeFord), 82–83
Xeric Foundation, 168
X-Files, The (television series), 116, 281
X-Men comics, 88
Xue, Can, 65
Y: The Last Man graphic novel series,
152–53
“Yaguara” (Grifﬁth), 154
Yarbro, Chelsea Quinn, 312, 333
Yard, Elizabeth, 13
Yasgur, Batya, 180
Yolen, Jane, 15, 87, 333–35
Yong, Hong, 65
You Must Remember This (Oates), 239
Young, Janine Ellen, 195
Young Wizard series, 89
Your Planet or Mine? (Grant), 261
Zamudio, Adela, 197
Zardoz (ﬁlm), 41
Zettel, Sarah, 12
Zombie (Oates), 239

