Lone Star Stories
Speculative Fiction and Poetry

The Tailor and the Fairy
by Samantha Henderson

Once upon a time in a faraway kingdom there lived a hard-working
tailor named Albert. Albert was a conscientious craftsman: his
hems were precisely stitched with the best silken threads, and the
silver buttons on his waistcoats lined up with mathematical
precision. His tailcoats were, quite simply, masterpieces of the
haberdasher’s art, and his trouser legs made atheists believe in
divine perfection.
I am sorry to say that Albert’s wife, whose name was Euridice, was
not at all a nice woman. In fact, she had the soul and manners of a
three-week’s-dead geoduck.
(What is a geoduck, you ask, my dears? Best not to know. It is a
creature of unspeakable evil. It lives in a wet land, and when good
little girls and boys meet it, they run mad from the horror.
Bad little girl and boys take it home to scare their mothers.)
Like most of his fellow villagers, Albert was rather shabby. You see,
he could never afford to wear any of his creations: just like the baker
would never eat one of his own sugar-silvered wedding cakes, and
the mason would never live in one of his own tastefully appointed
Craftsman-style river rock houses, and the seamstress would never
don one of her own high-necked, ruby-sequined ball gowns.
These things were for the rich alone, and most of the villagers
learned to accept that cold, immutable fact.
But in his heart of hearts, Albert never did.
When he touched the bespoken suits and stitched the collar of a
lordling’s shirt, he couldn’t help but dream of life in fine marble halls,
of glamour and intrigue, of assignations in the courtyard at
midnight. The glint of diamonds around a woman’s neck in the
moonlight, the delicious menace of an assassin’s blade poised
behind a curtain.
He wondered if the seamstress had similar thoughts as she
stitched at cloth-of-gold. He thought he caught a glimpse of it,
sometimes, in her eyes. But she never said anything, and he never
asked her.
Although his love for Euridice (his wife—were you paying attention,
pets?) was a pale, timid thing compared to his flights of fancy, the
tailor couldn’t help but notice that the sharp edge of her tongue was
blunted and that she was becoming sullen and morose rather than
sarcastic and acid. In fact, the virago was suffering from a severe
case of ennui: less a fishwife and more a limp fish.
So concerned was Albert that he called in the village wizard, a
cut-rate mage who moonlighted as a leech-.
(No, not that kind of leech, my darlings. It’s an old word for a doctor.

Home | Current Issue | Past Issues | Staff | Submissions | Contact |
Links

