“I understand the Enterprise
is ready to get under way….

I hope you were able to enjoy some of the brief leave time you had
while here on Earth?”
“Yes, Madam President, thank you,” Picard answered, wondering.
“And you’re wondering why I’m bothering to call you, while you’re
waiting to receive your next orders,” the president said, interrupting
his thoughts.
Picard allowed himself a small smile. “I admit, the question did
occur to me, ma’am.”
“Captain,” Admiral Akaar interjected, “this isn’t being shared
outside of Command, but the fleet is in far worse shape than is being
publicized. We have possibly billions of homeless refugees to
resettle; catastrophic damages suffered on Vulcan, Andor, and
Tellar; not to mention the help the Klingons are going to need from
us, with Qo’noS now barely habitable.”
Intellectually speaking, none of this was particularly shocking to

Picard. But hearing it so bluntly, he felt his heart fall in his chest. “I
see.”
President Bacco leaned forward, elbows on her desk, and looked
directly at Picard. “The debt the Federation owes you can never be
adequately repaid, Jean-Luc. And I wanted to be certain you
understood that this assignment is in no way meant to diminish
that.”
Picard nodded, and waited.

OTHER BOOKS
FEATURING
STAR TREK: THE NEXT
GENERATION
Greater Than the Sum
by Christopher L. Bennett

Star Trek: Destiny

Book I: Gods of Night

Book II: Mere Mortals

Book III: Lost Souls
by David Mack

Pocket Books
A Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and
incidents either are products of the author’s imagination or are used
fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events or locales or persons,
living or dead, is entirely coincidental.

Copyright © 2009 by Paramount Pictures
Corporation.
All Rights Reserved.
™, ® and © 2009 by CBS Studios Inc. STAR TREK and related
marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. All Rights Reserved.
This book is published by Pocket Books, a division of Simon &
Schuster, Inc., under exclusive license from CBS Studios Inc.
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or
portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information address
Pocket Books Subsidiary Rights Department,

1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.
POCKET and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon &
Schuster, Inc.
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your
live event. For more information or to book an event, contact the
Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our
website at www.simonspeakers.com
[http://www.simonspeakers.com].
Cover art by John Blackford; cover design by Alan Dingman
ISBN 13: 978-1-4391-2341-6
ISBN 10: 1-4391-2341-1
Visit us on the web:
http://www.SimonSays.com/startrek
[http://www.SimonSays.com/startrek]
http://www.StarTrek.com [http://www.StarTrek.com]

To those who survive
and who persevere

HISTORIAN’S NOTE

The main events in this book take place in late February to early
March of 2361 (ACE). This is just after the Borg Invasion and the
Caeliar’s resolution of the crisis (Star Trek: Destiny—Book III: Lost
Souls) and prior to the Federation’s discovery of a new force at work
in the galaxy (Star Trek: A Singular Destiny).

But to my mind, it is of vast importance that our people reach some
general understanding of what the complications really are, rather
than react from a passion or a prejudice or an emotion of the
moment. As I said more formally a moment ago, we are remote from
the scene of these troubles. It is virtually impossible at this distance
merely by reading, or listening, or even seeing photographs or
motion pictures, to grasp at all the real significance of the situation.
And yet the whole world of the future hangs on a proper judgment.
—George C. Marshall,
U.S. Secretary of State
June 5, 1947

CONTENTS

PROLOGUE
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

13
14
15
EPILOGUE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

PROLOGUE

“Here’s to the Borg: may they all rot and burn in hell!”
A new wave of cheers filled the transport ship’s Latinum Lounge, as
various glasses of alcohol—the genuine article; replicated or
syntheholic drinks wouldn’t do for such an occasion—were raised
aloft to celebrate the greatest feat in Federation history since the
defeat of the Dominion, perhaps since the very founding of the
Federation itself.
Arandis raised her glass also, though hers was filled only with
quinine water. She had never actually left Risa before—like most
Risians, she never felt any desire to do so—and had been fighting
space-sickness since leaving orbit. But she never let anyone else see
her discomfort; a good hostess, after all, always put her guests’
needs above her own. Even though they were all light-years away
from Risa, these people were still technically guests of the Temtibi
Lagoon Resort, making their contentment her responsibility.
Keeping them content hadn’t been easy, either, at least not at first.
The order to evacuate the planet had gone out earlier that morning,
“just as a precaution,” as the Minister of Safety had put it in his
broadcast. Arandis knew that there had been a series of sneak attacks
on other Federation worlds over the past several weeks, and in
response, Starfleet had assigned a fleet of six starships to defend her
homeworld. But then today, just as she was getting the weekly beach
hoverball tournament under way, reports had started coming in of a

massive armada of Borg cubes breaking a combined Starfleet,
Klingon, and Romulan blockade at the Azure Nebula, and fanning
out all across the Alpha and Beta quadrants. All events were
canceled, and the guests were all ushered out of the resort, as
quickly and calmly as possible, and taken to the nearby spaceport.
There had been only minimal panic, thank the Givers. The simple
mention of the Borg was enough to inspire horror in the hearts of
most citizens of the Federation. This was particularly true of her
human guests; all the Borg incursions into the Alpha quadrant had
been targeted against their homeworld, Earth, the most recent one
having come less than a year earlier. But Arandis made it a point to
take those worried souls aside, place a comforting hand on their
shoulders, and remind them that, in all those past incidents, Starfleet
had been successful in ultimately defeating the cyber netic invaders.
And she let them know that she had complete faith that Starfleet
would ultimately save them all once again.
And her faith had been rewarded. The Borg had been defeated—not
just this invasion force, but the entire race, having been transformed
in some way that she did not understand. When the transport’s pilots
relayed the news they were learning through official channels, the
entire passenger cabin—which until then had seemed to be holding
its collective breath—erupted into a near-deafening victory roar.
When Arandis later learned that one of the three ships most
instrumental in Starfleet’s triumph was commanded by Captain Ezri
Dax, the current host of her dear, sweet friend Curzon’s Trill
symbiont, she felt a particular surge of pride in Starfleet’s
accomplishment fill her chest.
Arandis moved through the crowded lounge in the direction of the
bar, making certain everyone’s glasses were filled and none of her
guests wanted for anything. As she signaled to one of her assistants
to bring a drink tray around to the far corner of the room, she was
intercepted by the man who had made the latest toast—a young
human with tousled sandy blond hair, wearing multicolored

beachwear and still sporting a striped hotel beach towel around his
neck. “Hey, sweetheart!” he said, flashing her a broad, inebriated
smile. “Izza great day, izinit?” he said, raising his wineglass to her.
She had to fight back a new wave of space-sickness, triggered by the
overpowering scent of alcohol on his breath. Her young guest—
Donald Wheeler, she remembered, was his name—had been
drinking fairly heavily during the news blackout in the first hours
after the evacuation, and he had continued to do so following the
victory announcement. “Yes, it is, Donald,” Arandis said with a
smile, giving his arm a grazing touch as she turned to move along.
Wheeler caught hold of her wrist, not tightly, but firmly enough to
force her to turn back to him. “So, I was thinkin’, we oughta
celebrate this momon…mo…momentous moment in history,” he
told her, struggling mightily to make his lips and tongue do what he
wanted them to. “I forgot my horga’hn on Risa, so’s it okay to just
out and out say, I want me some jamaharon with you, darling?”
Arandis gave him a perfect, practiced smile. “Of course; all that is
ours is yours,” she told him, “but it would be impossible, with so
many others on so small a vessel, to establish the proper ambience.”
“Hey, I’m on vacation.” Wheeler gave her what he no doubt thought
was a charming wink and loosened his hold on her wrist, running his
fingers up her arm. “I don’t need to be proper.”
Without letting her smile waver, Arandis removed the man’s hand
and pressed it gently between both of hers. “You may seek
jamaharon,” she said, looking him in his brown, bleary eyes, “but
you will not find it with this outlook. It is not merely a physical
experience, but an emotional and spiritual one.” As long as Arandis
had worked in the guest service industry, it never ceased to amaze
her how many visitors came to Risa claiming to seek jamaharon,
thinking it was nothing but an exotic form of copulation, as if her
people had no deeper philosophies than simple hedonism. “But I
promise you, once we have returned to Risa, that I will show you
how all these aspects, properly combined, can become something

greater and unexpected.”
Wheeler gazed back into her eyes for a moment, as if he had
momentarily seen something within them beyond the superficial.
Then the moment was over. “I need me a horga’hn,” he shouted as
he turned away from her, nearly sloshing his glass of red wine down
the back of the Bolian man behind him. “C’mon! Who’s got a
horga’hn I can borrow?” he called, moving away as he scanned the
lounge for someone who wasn’t pointedly ignoring him.
As relieved as she was to have him move away, Arandis regretted
that she couldn’t meet his desires. That was, after all, the nature of
the Risian people. She resolved, once they’d returned to Risa (and
Wheeler had hopefully sobered up somewhat), to seek him out and
offer to rectify the situation. Arandis glanced at the ornate old clock
that hung behind the lounge’s bar, noting that it was getting close to
first sunset back home—time for the evening banquet. A grand
seafood feast had been planned for this evening, with over two
dozen different dishes harvested fresh from Risa’s crystal blue
oceans, to be followed by a choice of…
Arandis looked again at the bejeweled clock, and it struck her that
they’d been aboard this vessel for almost eight hours. News of the
Borg’s defeat had come about three and a half hours after they left
Risa. Shouldn’t they have turned around at that point? And if they
had, shouldn’t they have made it back to Risa an hour ago? Thinking
back now, Arandis didn’t recall the ship slowing from its high-warp
speed away from the Borg, nor did she feel it executing any kind of
course change. Of course, as unfamiliar with space travel as she was,
she wouldn’t be expected to. And maybe there was a very good
engineering reason why the second leg of their flight was taking
longer than the first—subspace eddies and anomalies, all sorts of
things her Starfleet friends would often talk about.
When another hour went by, Arandis realized it wasn’t subspace
anomalies, and she noticed more and more guests, like herself,
regularly glancing at the antique timepiece with confused

expressions playing across their faces. Arandis instructed the other
members of the Temtibi Lagoon staff to start offering more hors
d’oeuvres along with the drinks, while she slipped out of the lounge
and moved forward through the restricted areas of the vessel to the
cockpit.
She made her way down an unfamiliar corridor, and after a
moment’s hesitation, pressed the signal chime at the sealed forward
hatch. Once she identified herself as director of the resort where the
passengers had been staying, the door opened, and a tall, perfectly
muscled and toned Risian male, wearing the uniform of the Risian
Safety Ministry, stepped out. “Is something wrong?” he asked her,
his brow furrowing around the gold-hued ja’risia on his forehead.
“What is the mood amongst our guests?”
“They are generally content,” Arandis answered, confused. “What’s
happening? Why have we not yet returned to Risa?”
The man’s placid blue eyes started to fill with tears as he first looked
over Arandis’s shoulder for eavesdroppers, then fixed his sad gaze
on her. “Because…there is no more Risa.”
Arandis simply stared for a moment. Then a mirthless laugh escaped
her tightening throat. “What do you mean, ‘no more Risa’?”
“I mean, the Borg razed the planet,” he answered, his tone harsh and
rough. “They killed every living thing. There’s nothing…” His voice
cracked, and he covered his mouth with his hand.
“No,” Arandis said in disbelief. “The Borg were beaten.
Starfleet…the reports said…”
“The Borg weren’t beaten until after they had reached Risa,” the
officer said. “We kept those reports from being piped back to the
passengers; it would only have upset…the images they were
showing…”
Arandis stopped listening as every other conscious thought fled her
mind, as if washed away with the tide, with only the maddening roar
of waves filling her head.
No more Risa.

It was too enormous, too unimaginable. How could Starfleet have
failed them? There had been six ships, with hundreds of crew on
each. Had they all been killed too? And Risa itself…Catona Bluff
was gone. The Tolari Tower, from now on, existed only in her
memory. There was no longer any such thing as a Risian Grand
Delight. Arandis felt her knees begin to buckle underneath her…
“We can’t tell the guests, not yet,” the officer said, pulling Arandis
back from the edge of madness. “Our first responsibility is to them.”
“Yes, of course,” she agreed in a forced whisper. All that is ours is
yours, she intoned in her thoughts.
All that is ours is gone.
“But it won’t be long until they start to realize something is wrong,”
she added aloud.
The officer gave her what was supposed to be an encouraging smile.
“This is like all moments: only temporary. We shall endure it, and
then forget it in the better ones to follow.”
Arandis returned his smile and nodded as he spoke the old proverb.
But when he withdrew back into the cockpit and closed the hatch,
her smile quickly fell away. This is more than a single moment, she
said to herself as she started back down the short enclosed corridor
to the main passenger cabin. Risa is gone. My whole world…my
whole race…. How could something like this be simply forgotten?
She reached the hatch to the cabin, then stopped and doubled over as
she purged the contents of her stomach, for reasons that had nothing
to do with space-sickness.

1

The boy lay on the grassy hillside, the back of his head cradled in
the roots of the old poplar tree, staring up into the infinite nighttime
sky. Below him, the entire valley seemed asleep, with only a few
scattered lights coming from the windows of its farmhouses and
villages. The near perfect darkness made even the dimmest stars of
the Milky Way shine like lighthouse beacons, guiding ship captains
on their long journeys across the sea of space.
“Jean-Luc!”
The boy did not hear the voice coming from the direction of the
house at first—or rather, he chose not to hear it. He didn’t want to
have to give up this place, this memory frozen in time. He kept his
eyes and his imagination fixed on the stars above.
“Jean-Luc!” a second, younger voice called from much closer by,
accompanied by the rustling of grass and snap of twigs. The boy’s
thoughts now fell away from the sky and down to earth.
Specifically, he wished for the ground underneath to open up and
swallow him, hiding him from the pair looking for him.
But to no avail. “Here you are!” the boy crowed triumphantly,
leaping from out of nowhere and landing his heavy work boots on
either side of Jean-Luc’s waist. “Dreaming again, are you, mon petit
frère?” Robert grinned down at him, long dark hair flopping over his
eyes. He had always been the bigger of the two brothers, and in the
summer of his twelfth year, he had gained a full ten centimeters.
“Don’t you know what monsters lurk in the dark?”

Robert then let out a roar and fell atop his younger brother. The boy
put his arms up to ward off the attack, catching the other in the chest
and easily deflecting him. He then rolled in the same direction,
seating himself on the bigger boy’s stomach and pinning his
shoulders to the ground with both hands—though only momentarily,
before their positions reversed again. Arms and legs flailed as they
wrestled wildly, his brother laughing as he grabbed his wrists and
pinned them to the ground. The boy was surprised to find himself
laughing as well, finding the roughhouse play strangely liberating,
and he laughed even louder.
“Enough fighting,” came the first voice again from just overhead.
“There will be no more fighting.”
Robert jumped off his brother and went to stand beside his father.
“What are you doing out here in the dark, mon garçon?” Maurice
Picard asked in a deep, authoritative voice. Despite his bald pate and
deeply lined face, prematurely aged by a lifetime tending to the
vineyard, his sharp eyes and hawk-like nose marked him as a man
one did not lightly cross. “Dreaming again?”
“No, Papa,” the boy fibbed. “I was just…I couldn’t fall asleep, and
I…” He hesitated, knowing there was no point in trying to lie; his
father knew full well that his younger son did not share his feelings
of obligation to tradition, and had no desire to remain forever bound
to the place in which he had happened, by chance, to be born. And
he knew there was no avoiding his father’s disappointment in that
regard.
But strangely, his father’s scowl fell away, and a broad smile flashed
across his weathered face. He lowered himself onto one knee and
put a large, calloused hand on the young boy’s shoulder. “You need
to be true to yourself, Jean-Luc,” the older man told him. “What I’ve
given you—our name, our land, our traditions—was only a
foundation, not a limitation. And no matter where else you go and
what else you do, it will always be yours.”
The boy smiled, and then threw his arms around his father’s neck,

hugging him with an entire lifetime of unexpressed emotion. Papa
returned the embrace, and after an indeterminable time, they let go
and fell back, along with Robert, onto their backs in the grass. The
stars looked close enough now that Jean-Luc thought he could reach
out and touch them.
“All we’re seeing now is old light,” Maurice said. “The stars we see
are how they appeared years and years ago.”
“The past is the past,” Robert added. “To know what is now, you
have to go out and explore on your own, eh?”
That sounded like a grand idea, Jean-Luc thought as he closed his
eyes and continued to dream. A grand idea, indeed…

“Jean-Luc?”
Picard opened his eyes again, and was surprised to find that the
starlit vista above Château Picard had been replaced by a sky of
brilliant blue. He was further surprised to realize the figure before
him calling his name was not his father or brother, but his wife.
Beverly Crusher smiled down at him, standing so that her shadow
fell over him, shading his eyes from the brightness of midday. With
the sun at her back, she appeared as a classical angel, surrounded by
an ephemeral light, her long red tresses like flames as loose strands
flew in the breeze. She had no wings, of course, and her rounded,
pregnant stomach was also at odds with the traditional depiction of
asexual divine messengers, but as far as Jean-Luc Picard was
concerned, she was most definitely a heavenly being. “What are you
doing out here?” she asked him, amusement in her tone.
“Not napping, certainly,” Picard said, grinning up at her as he
pushed up into a sitting position. “Only old men doze off in the

middle of the day.”
“Old men, and exhausted ship’s captains,” Crusher retorted, smiling
back sweetly at him. “You’re supposed to be on rest leave, and you
need all you can get,” she told him.
Picard refrained from contradicting the doctor. They were at his
ancestral home in Labarre while the Enterprise was in drydock at
McKinley Station, undergoing repairs to the widespread damage it
had suffered during the most recent conflict with the Borg. He’d
slept little during the crisis, of course, and had operated almost
exclusively on adrenaline and sheer willpower when awake.
Despite all that, he did not feel exhausted. What he experienced at
the end of the war—witnessing the dismantling of the Borg
collective by the Caeliar, and sharing, in a limited way, the
absorption of billions of former drones into the Caeliar gestalt—
relieved him of his fatigue, instead filling him with pure joy as he
was finally emancipated from his lingering, fifteen-year link to the
Borg.
Beverly lowered herself onto the grass beside her husband. Spring
was officially still a few weeks away, but already the world around
them was coming back to life in a riot of green. “Though, if you are
going to nap,” she said as she settled in and leaned backwards
against his chest, “you might pick a more comfortable spot for it.”
Picard chuckled as he slipped his arms around her and laid his cheek
on the top of her head. “This actually has always been my favorite
spot on the entire estate,” he said. “I would sit or lie here for hours,
watching the Paris-bound shuttles by day and the stars by night. Of
course, part of that was the fact that, if I lay in just the right position,
I couldn’t be spotted from the house.” He looked back over his
shoulder at that house now—or rather, the house his sister-in-law,
Marie, had rebuilt on the original’s foundation following the tragic
fire that had claimed the lives of Robert and his son, René. It was a
near-perfect re-creation; if not for the loss of the roof-high shade
trees closest to the house, he would have no trouble imagining

himself over a half century back in time. “I had a most curious
dream,” he mentioned as the nostalgia washed over him again.
“Oh?”
Picard nodded. “I was a boy again, lying here, staring up at the stars.
My father and brother came looking for me, and when they found
me…” Picard paused significantly before continuing, “Father gave
me his blessing to leave home, to follow my dreams.” He smiled at
the marvel of it. “Robert and I were able to reconcile before he died.
But Father…” His voice broke momentarily. Beverly shifted her
position so that she could look at him directly once he was able to
continue. “I was away, on the Stargazer, when he died, and I’d
always assumed that, to the end, he stayed as stubborn as he ever
was in life.” So certain of this was he that, when Q had presented
him with a vision of his father during his own near-death experience,
Jean-Luc had no trouble accepting bitter, disappointed old man as an
accurate representation.
That negative image fell away now. “I feel now, though, that I’ve
finally been given his absolution,” Picard told Beverly, smiling
again. “That all those old wounds have at long last been healed.”
“That’s wonderful, Jean-Luc,” Beverly said, smiling back. “I know
your relationship was troubled for a long time, and I’m glad you’ve
finally found peace with your father’s memory.” She took one of
Picard’s hands and placed it on her swollen abdomen. “And I know
your experience is going to make you an even better father to our
son.”
He answered by leaning forward to kiss her mouth. Jean-Luc Picard
could not remember another time in his life when he had felt such
peace and contentment.
“You know,” Beverly said once their lips had parted again, “when
you told me just now that you had a curious dream, I thought for a
moment you were going to tell me…”
“What?” Picard prompted.
Hesitantly, as if afraid of bringing on a curse, she continued, “…that

you dreamed about the Borg again.”
Picard blinked in surprise. “Why…?” he began, then stopped. “No,
Beverly,” he assured her. “The Borg are gone, forever, from here
and everywhere.”
Crusher nodded, though she clearly did not feel Picard’s confidence.
“Yes. But…we’ve thought they were gone before.”
Picard sighed. He wished that he could share with her the absolute
certainty that had been conveyed to him by the Caeliar—or whatever
they and their newly liberated brethren had now become. All he
could do was to look deep into his loved one’s eyes and tell her,
with all the conviction he could muster, “Beverly, believe me when I
tell you: There are no more Borg. They are never coming back. We
are all free.”
Beverly stared back, and then allowed herself a small smile of relief.
“Of course I believe you, Jean-Luc. Always.”

Geordi La Forge turned his face up to the equatorial sun high
overhead, letting its warmth wash over him. There were still a few
weeks left until the rainy season came to this part of the African
Confederation, and it was significantly warmer than he was used to
on the Enterprise. But he couldn’t very well complain about that.
Because, after all…he was home.
From his vantage point atop the metal bleachers bordering the
Zefram Cochrane High School athletic field, he could see the
Mogadishu skyline to the southeast and—by virtue of his cybernetic
optical implants—the Indian Ocean beyond. Old-fashioned sailboats
drifted lazily on the blue waters that lapped against the pristine white
beaches along the Somalian coast. It was hard to believe the city had

been largely destroyed in the years between the second and third
world wars, and abandoned to rival militias. The ancient port city
experienced a renaissance in the late twenty-second century, and
was rebuilt in a manner that reflected its long history as a major
trade center, using the most modern architectural techniques. It may
not have been Paris or San Francisco, but it was as pristine and
perfect a city as any other on the paradisiacal world called Earth.
And on the field, he was watching the Cochrane Flyers face off
against their crosstown rivals, the Mogadishu Central High
Scorpions. The school band played as, all around him, the other
spectators shouted encouragement to the players or chatted among
themselves about nothing in particular. All of a sudden, the entire
crowd jumped to its feet and exploded in a mighty roaring cheer.
Geordi stood up a second later and saw the Flyers celebrating what
must have been an impressive goal.
“So help me, Geordi, if that was my kid scoring a goal you made me
miss…”
La Forge turned and saw his sister, Ariana, climbing the bleacher
steps toward him, carrying a disposable cup in each hand and
wearing a disappointed frown. His eyes flicked fleetingly to the
playing field, and he noticed that his niece, Nadifa, seemed to be at
the middle of the celebratory circle. She beamed and waved as she
spotted her mother and uncle in the stands.
Geordi waved back meekly as he relieved his sister of one of the
cups. Where the hell had his mind been during her score? “Sorry,
’Riana,” he said.
Ariana gave him a look that eerily mirrored the ones their mother
would use any time her young children tested her patience. With her
now-free hand, she swatted her brother on the back of the head—
playfully, but still with a touch more force than necessary. “Next
time, you get the drinks.”
“Hey, I offered,” he said as he sat and took a sip. “Ugh…I should
have insisted,” Geordi continued, his face twisted in reaction to the

tart concoction.
“What? I thought you loved isbarmuunto,” she said.
“Is that what it is? I thought it was straight lemon juice on ice.”
“Starfleet has spoiled you. Made you—”
Ariana stopped suddenly, and her teasing smile disappeared at just
the same moment Geordi snapped his head in her direction, jaw set
tight. They stared at each other like that for several seconds, while
play resumed on the field.
“I should rephrase that,” Ariana eventually noted.
Without acknowledging her words, Geordi said, “I’m going to go
stretch my legs a bit.”
“I’ll come with you.”
“No, stay.” Already on his feet, he made his way down the bleacher
steps. “There might be another goal, or something else just as
important.” He started walking aimlessly away from the field.
“Geordi!”
Ignoring his sister, La Forge continued idly in the direction of the
school building, sipping his drink. A group of teenagers congregated
on the library steps, talking and giggling and carrying on the same
way Geordi had done over half a lifetime ago.
“Geordi!”
He knew he was probably making more than he ought to of what
was just a thoughtless comment. On the other hand, Ariana had been
unapologetically disdainful of Starfleet since she’d been Nadifa’s
age. She hated that their parents spent so little time living together
while their kids were growing up, with one or the other usually off
on some mission at any given time during their childhoods. She
hated that, once she had turned eighteen and headed off to college,
Mom decided to switch back to the command track and pursue her
own starship command—a decision that eventually led to her
disappearance over ten years ago. She hated that their father was
three hundred light-years beyond Federation space aboard the U.S.S.
Amalthea, one of the new Luna-class explorers (although she

admitted to being grateful that his ship had been too far off to be
called back during the recent threat).
Geordi, for his part, hated how much she looked down on the life
he’d chosen, though he normally kept it to himself. Now just wasn’t
a very normal time.
“Geordi!” Ariana shouted again as she caught up with her big
brother, one hand holding her head-dress atop her head. “Hey, I’m
sorry, you know I didn’t mean it.”
Geordi stopped, but did not look at her. Instead, he slowly turned in
a half circle, taking in the whole of the school grounds. “It all looks
the same as always, doesn’t it?” he asked, gesturing to the field, the
students, the trees and the sky. “So normal, like nothing happened.
You would have no idea, seeing all this, how close we all came to
losing it all.”
“Well, that’s not fair,” Ariana countered. “You weren’t here when
things were looking their worst. There wasn’t much normality then.”
Geordi was sure that was true, but still…“But it didn’t take you long
to go right back to soccer games and picnic lunches, did it.”
“And what are we supposed to do?” Ariana asked. “Cover ourselves
in ashes and sackcloth and beg the universe for mercy? Life goes on,
Geordi.”
“For you,” Geordi snapped. “Never mind the billions of people who
weren’t so lucky!”
Then it was as if time just stopped. Ariana stared with her
expression frozen, stunned by his bitter words. And Geordi felt just
as stunned, mortified that such vitriol could have come from him.
“Oh, my God,” he said in a strangled whisper. “’Riana, I’m sorry. I
don’t know what…”
His sister shook her head. “Don’t be sorry, Geordi.”
“I didn’t mean it,” he insisted. “I just…I don’t know…”
“I know you didn’t. You gotta stop beating yourself up, Geordi.”
“But that was a horrible thing to say!” Geordi nearly shouted. “I
have no right blaming you for what happened!”

Ariana reached out and put a gentle hand on her brother’s arm. “And
you have no right to blame yourself, either.”
Geordi felt as if all his insides were contracting. “Wh-what?”
“You lived, Geordi.” His sister looked him directly in his cybernetic
eyes. “You can’t let yourself feel guilty for that.”
His mouth moved up and down a few seconds before he was able to
form sound again. “I…what? That’s…that’s ridiculous. I don’t feel
guilty…”
“I know you better than that, Geordi La Forge. You survived the
Borg when billions died. This after surviving them about a half
dozen times before, and surviving the Dominion, and the Tezwans,
and the Remans. You’ve outlived Mom. You’ve outlived Data…”
He almost felt like he was going to double over. “That’s stupid,” he
insisted, as tears welled up around his implants. Yes, it had been a
hard few years, and yes, all these deaths had hit him hard, especially
Data’s, who had been his best friend for years and who was
supposed to live for centuries, but…“I shouldn’t feel guilty for
living…”
“No,” Ariana told him. “You shouldn’t.”
La Forge clamped his eyes shut, but that couldn’t keep the tears
from starting to pour. He felt Ariana pull him into a hard embrace,
and he returned it, wrapping his arms tight around her and burying
his face in her shoulder. He felt like an idiot, letting his little sister
see him like this. “I’m very proud of you, big brother,” Ariana told
him softly, “for putting on that uniform and going out there so that
we can all live here safely and have picnics and play soccer and all
that. But I’m also very, very grateful that you get to come back
every once in a while and share it with us.”
Brother and sister stood like that for a long time, as the game and the
world went on around them.

The suborbital shuttle caught up with and passed the sun minutes
after leaving Paris, on its way to San Francisco. Picard watched the
clouds below as he replayed his earlier conversation with Beverly in
his mind. If this meeting turned out to be anything like the others
he’d taken part in over the past week—and he had no reason to think
it wouldn’t—he would need to cling to the assurance that there was
at least one person in the universe who had complete faith in him.
It had been eight days now since his return to Earth, and half of
those days had been spent in stuffy conference rooms, briefing
Starfleet Command, then President Bacco and the Federation
Security Council, then representatives of the governments of Earth,
Luna, Mars, and other Sol sys tem colonies, repeating over and over
his account of the end of the Borg collective. And in each of those
meetings, one question would inevitably be asked, repeatedly, in a
number of different ways, couched in hypotheticals and vague
expressions of distrust, but all boiling down to one simple concern:
How can you be so completely certain the Borg are really gone
forever?
To which, Picard could really only give one answer: “I just know.”
He had felt the cataclysmic metamorphosis as it happened. He’d
sensed the severing of every single drone from the collective, and
then felt the embrace of the Caeliar gestalt, taking in all those lost
souls and making them a part of themselves. It was the single most
remarkable experience of his life…and there was no one else in the
universe who could truly understand it.
The shuttle landed on the grounds of Starfleet Command, and Picard
was met on the tarmac by a young female human in security gold.
“Captain Picard?”
“Yes.”
“I’m here to escort you to your appointment,” she said, her spine
perfectly stiff, a sure sign that she had been wearing the pip on her
collar for only a very short time. Picard had heard that most of this

year’s Academy seniors were granted their commissions early, so
they would be ready to deploy on short notice, just in case. With the
estimates of Starfleet losses during the Borg assault at over forty
percent, there would still have to be a major recruitment effort to
bring forces anywhere close to what would be considered secure
levels.
They rode the lift in silence to the Headquarters building’s
uppermost floor—the sanctum sanctorum of the admiralty—and
then the ensign led him through the dimly lit corridor lined with
portraits of Starfleet’s past leaders, arranged in no discernible order;
a white-haired human in the dark jacket and necktie of the preFederation era hung beside an Andorian in the gold-green silken
dress tunic of the following century.
Presently, they reached a set of solid double doors, and the ensign
gestured to Picard to place his hand on the security panel beside it.
The captain did so, and the doors parted with a slight mechanical
moan to reveal what appeared to be an oversized holosuite.
Today’s briefing would be for the benefit of the members of
Starfleet’s admiralty stationed off-Earth, who would be attending via
holocom. A long table was positioned at one end of the room, facing
the open space that would soon be filled with holographic images of
those flag officers who would be participating from afar. A small
handful of HQ-based admirals were also here: Leonard James Akaar
and Marta Batanides stood talking at the near end of the table, while
Admirals Masc, Batiste, and Montgomery were huddled in the far
corner, engaged in what appeared to be a rather animated discussion.
Picard was approached by the sixth admiral present, Alynna
Nechayev. “Good morning, Captain Picard.”
“Good morning, Admiral,” he echoed automatically, even though
his body was telling him it was early evening. “I take it we’re just
waiting now for Admiral Jellico?”
Nechayev frowned slightly. “No, I’m afraid not,” she said. “The
admiral last night tendered his resignation to President Bacco.”

Picard’s head snapped back at that. “He what? Why?”
“Don’t be obtuse, Picard,” Nechayev said, scowling at him. “The
man was the commander of Starfleet during the greatest debacle in
all of recorded history. Whatever else you may think of Edward
Jellico, he is a man of honor who has always taken responsibility for
his actions and decisions. And that’s what he’s done now.”
“I have never questioned Admiral Jellico’s honor,” Picard quickly
asserted. He’d questioned many of the senior officer’s decisions
over the years, as well as his tendency to turn a deaf ear to contrary
viewpoints once he’d made up his mind on a given matter. “But still,
he shouldn’t have felt obligated to fall on his sword because of this,”
Picard continued. “What happened was beyond the power of any
mortal being to control.”
Nechayev sighed and nodded. “I essentially told him the same thing.
I suspect it was the lack of control that finally pushed him to his
decision.”
Picard didn’t know what more to say. He’d butted heads with Jellico
more than a few times, and he had not thought much of the decision,
following Admiral William Ross’s well-earned retirement last
autumn, to promote Jellico to fleet commander. All things being
equal, he couldn’t honestly say he was sorry to see Jellico step
down.
But “things” were not equal anymore. Starfleet had suffered
devastating losses, and the loss of the man at the top of the chain of
command could only serve as one more complicating factor in
getting the organization back on track.
His thoughts were interrupted by the sound of the doors opening
again. Picard turned, and for a split second failed to recognize the
tall blond woman who entered. Part of that was due to her face,
which now lacked the metallic Borg implants that had encircled her
left eye and pierced her neck just below her right ear. But the more
striking difference was the way in which she carried herself. Seven
of Nine, the former Borg drone who had been liberated by the crew

of the U.S.S. Voyager seven years earlier, had always struck Picard
as one of the most self-confident people he’d ever encountered—a
trait made all the more impressive by the fact that she had been
stripped of her individuality at the age of eight.
However, that quality was now gone. Though she put on a good
show of fearlessness, the woman who entered the conference room
clearly wished to be any place else.
“Captain?” Picard turned again, and then looked up to meet the gaze
of Admiral Akaar. “If you’ll take your seat; we’re just about ready to
begin,” the imposing Capellan said.
Picard moved behind the table and took the chair indicated, which
happened to be right beside the late arrival. She sat, hands folded in
her lap, clearly straining to keep the perfect posture that had always
seemed to come naturally to her. “Hello, Annika,” Picard said to her,
with a small, friendly grin.
The woman flinched in response and jerked her head to the left.
“Captain Picard,” she said, and quickly turned to face forward again.
Realizing he’d committed a faux pas, Picard added, “I’m sorry,
Professor…I assumed you no longer favor your Borg designation.”
In earlier encounters, the woman had objected to the use of her
human name, Annika Hansen, insisting for whatever personal
reasons on retaining her Borg designation. Given recent events, the
captain had thought she would understandably feel different about it
now.
“It is irrelevant,” she said, without looking back at him.
Picard stared quizzically at her profile for a moment longer, noting
the tightness of her jaw and neck. What he had felt during the
Caeliar’s merging with the Borg—what he had felt in concert with
the entire Collective—was so positive, so uplifting, it was difficult
for him to believe that this fellow former drone could have come
away from the experience in such a clearly haunted state.
But before he could question her any further, the holo-emitter grids
surrounding them shimmered out of existence, replaced by a brightly

lit conference room. The table at which he and Seven sat became
part of a long wooden oval, around which some fifty or sixty
admirals from across the Federation were seated. Picard immediately
noticed Admiral Elizabeth Shelby, commanding officer of Bravo
Station, who earlier in her career had established herself as one of
Starfleet’s first experts on the Borg. There were several other
familiar faces, some of whom he had not seen for years and was
surprised to learn had been promoted above him. As they realized
the hololink had been activated, they all looked expectantly to the
head of the table.
The physically present admirals took seats on either side of Picard
and Seven, except for Admiral Akaar, who remained on his feet.
“Good day, friends,” he greeted the assemblage. “Thank you for
your time today. As I’m sure I needn’t tell you, the past two months
have been the most catastrophic in the history of any of our worlds.
Beginning on stardate 58011, the Borg launched a new, intensive
offensive against the Federation. You all are aware of the horrific
results: over sixty-three billion deaths on over a hundred worlds,
ships, and starbases. Approximately forty percent of our fleet
destroyed, most of those at the Azure Nebula, when the Borg armada
invaded the Federation en masse. Vulcan, Tellar, and Andor were hit
by crippling attacks, along with our allies on Qo’noS, and several
other independent worlds.
“However, in all this tragedy, there is reason for optimism. Not only
because the Federation has survived this most recent onslaught, but
because the evidence leads us to believe that the Borg threat has
been eradicated forever.
“At this point, I yield the floor to Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the
U.S.S. Enterprise, who witnessed the ultimate fate of the Borg.”
Akaar took his seat. Picard remained seated as he repeated his piece
of the narrative: the tale of how a starship captain from the old Earth
Starfleet, thought dead for over two hundred years, had instead lived
in a loop of time for the last eight hundred and fifty years among a

race called the Caeliar. And of how that captain was able to bridge
what was apparently a very narrow gap between Caeliar and Borg,
enabling the Caeliar gestalt to dissolve the Borg collective, to silence
the queen, and to transform the Borg into something new.
“What do you mean, ‘something new’?” interrupted Admiral Nyllis,
the short, compactly built Pentamian commanding Starbase 120.
“What we witnessed was a physical metamorphosis,” Picard said, as
he pressed a control button on the flat panel before him. In the well
at the center of the circular table, the classified sensor log recording
from the Enterprise played back, showing Axion, the Caeliar’s
spaceborne city, surrounded by the thousands of Borg cubes it had
drawn back from their onslaught against the Alpha and Beta
quadrants. The Caeliar city began to glow, and in a flash, seemed to
become a mass of pure light. Its radiance expanded, washing over
the surrounding armada, overcoming the ability of their black hulls
to absorb visible light. And then, those nigh-impenetrable metallic
hulls cracked like eggshells, spilling out even greater brilliance as
they hatched what looked like giant spiked spheres of pure silver.
“According to Captain Hernandez,” Picard continued, “the Borg—
all the Borg, all across the galaxy—had become part of the Caeliar
gestalt, and were now dedicated to the cause of peace throughout the
universe.”
“Captain Picard…” Unsurprisingly, it was Shelby who now spoke.
“Please forgive my cynicism, but that sounds to me like a very tidy,
pat resolution: the Borg are taught the error of their ways, and decide
to dedicate themselves to good instead of evil from now on. It’s a bit
hard to swallow, isn’t it?”
Picard grinned. “When you characterize it that way, yes, of course it
is. But not when you understand that the entire nature of the Borg
has been altered—”
“The last time the nature of the Borg was allegedly altered, it was by
the android Lore,” said a Saurian admiral Picard did not recognize.
“And they weren’t altered for the better.”

Picard could have pointed out that Lore had not altered the Borg, but
had rather taken advantage of an alteration effected by himself.
Explaining this, however, would not have helped his argument in the
least. “But what Captain Hernandez and the Caeliar have done to the
Borg is fundamentally different—”
“Captain, I’m sorry,” interrupted Admiral Roll-man, C.O. of
Starbase 401, “but it seems to me that a lot of what you’re telling us
hinges on the acceptance of the claim that this Erika Hernandez was
in fact the same person who disappeared with the Columbia two
centuries ago.”
“Yes. Didn’t you once have an alien claiming to be Captain Bryce
Shumar try to take over the Enterprise?” Admiral Toddman added
skeptically.
“The Titan’s medical staff did perform a DNA test,” Picard replied,
“and confirmed Captain Hernandez indeed was who she said she
was.”
“And have we already forgotten how easily the Founders managed
to get around our blood screenings during the Dominion War?”
asked Admiral ch’Evram, who had been captain of the Bellingham
during that conflict. “I don’t think an alien power that could do what
we just watched in that playback would have much trouble creating
fake DNA.”
Picard sighed. He could spend another half hour vouching for
Hernandez, or countering every question about every niggling little
detail, but he couldn’t see the point, other than to drag this meeting
out as long as possible. So, he simply pulled himself upright in his
seat, tugged his uniform in place, and, making certain to meet the
eyes of everyone appearing to be in the room, said, “Sirs, I
understand your doubts and your concerns. The Borg have been like
a specter hanging over us for a decade and a half, and it’s difficult to
believe, after fearing them for so long and after witnessing the worst
that they could do, that the threat could be over so suddenly, and so
finally.

“Yet, it is.”
The room was suddenly silent. Picard let that simple declaration sink
in for a moment, and just as the buzz of contradictory disbelief
started to build again, he continued, in his authoritative tone, “I was
assimilated by the Borg. And in the years since then, the Borg
maintained a low-level psionic connection with me. I was not even
aware of it at first, thinking my nightmares following the Battle of
Wolf 359 were the product only of my own subconscious mind. But
four years later, just before the Battle of Sector 001, I realized that
the dreams were not created by my mind alone. I was forced to
recognize that a part of me was still Locutus, and that this shade of
the Borg would haunt the darkest part of my mind for the rest of my
life.
“That was, until Hernandez insinuated herself into the Collective,
and the Caeliar sundered the link. I felt that break. I felt…millions of
souls suddenly liberated, as well as my own liberation. And
then…Locutus was gone. Along with the Borg. Along with the
weight that had been on my soul for so long, I could hardly
remember when it hadn’t been there.
“I realize this is not the testimony you expected here today, sirs. But
I have never been so confident of anything in my entire life as I am
of the fact that the Borg are gone, forever.”
Again, a hush fell over the room, as the gathered admirals processed
Picard’s words. Being admirals, however, they could not go without
hearing the sounds of their own voices for too long. Several spoke at
once, but it was Admiral Batiste who made himself heard above the
rest. “And what about you, Professor Hansen?”
Picard noticed her flinch again at the use of her human name. “What
about me?” she snapped.
“What do you have to add to Captain Picard’s testimony?”
“I have nothing to add,” she said. “I have no insights into the
captain’s feelings or beliefs whatsoever.”
“But he talks about what he perceived through his residual link to

the Borg,” Batiste persisted. “You also have maintained some
connection to the Collective since your liberation seven years ago,
isn’t that correct?”
“It is,” she said. “Do note, however, that our experiences with the
Borg are quite disparate, as are the specifics of our links. For
instance, Captain Picard failed to note that Admiral Janeway and the
U.S.S. Einstein had been assimilated by a suppos edly dead Borg
cube, leading to the near destruction of Earth nine months ago.”
Picard turned toward the former drone, surprised by her words. He
knew that she and the admiral had forged a strong bond following
her liberation from the Borg and through her early reintroduction to
humanity. He had no doubt Janeway’s death had had a profound
effect on her. But he’d never thought that she might somehow resent
him for not anticipating or preventing the admiral’s death.
Picard’s old friend Marien Zimbata spoke up then. “It was right at
the time that the Enterprise was witnessing this metamorphosis of
the Borg that you had a breakdown at the Palais de la Concorde, and
that your remaining Borg implants mysteriously disintegrated.”
Seven shot a harsh look across the head table at Akaar and
Batanides. They both had also been in the presidential offices with
her at the height of the crisis, Picard knew, and the younger woman
seemed to feel one or both of them had betrayed some kind of
confidence. “Yes,” she answered.
“Can you tell us what you were experiencing at that time?”
“Clearly, I was experiencing the metamorphosis,” she shot back. “I
could not have told you that then, as I did not learn what the
Enterprise witnessed until a later time. And, I cannot tell you more
than that now.”
Admiral Batiste folded his hands and tapped his knuckles against his
bottom lip. “So you don’t share Captain Picard’s certainty that the
Borg are gone, and the Borg threat is over forever?”
Picard caught the former drone sneaking a furtive glance his way
from the corners of her eyes before stating, “Admiral, at this point in

time…I have no certainty about anything.”
Though he had no idea what this woman had gone through to make
her sound so lost and forlorn, Picard considered her with great
sympathy. At the same time, though, he was dismayed to look
around the virtual conference room and see that her uncertainty had
been transmitted, like a virus, throughout the Federation.

2

Worf fell back onto the hard deck of the shuttle, naked and breathing
hoarsely. His pulse roared in his ears, and he tasted blood on his
tongue—both his own and the thinner, saltier tang of his
companion’s.
He opened his eyes and turned his head to Jasminder Choudhury, the
Enterprise’s chief of security, lying beside him. Her eyes were
closed, and her chest rose and fell slowly with each of her long,
measured breaths. Her dark brown skin was covered with a sheen of
perspiration, and as Worf slowed his breathing, he took in the
distinctively human scent of her sweat, mixed with his own in the

confines of the small cabin.
Those scents, however, did not cover the acrid smell of smoke and
ash that had infused the clothing they’d shed earlier and left
scattered on the deck around them. They had just left Deneva,
Choudhury’s home planet—or rather, what was left of it—after
paying their respects to those who had been killed there in the recent
Borg attack. Deneva had often been cited as one of the most
beautiful planets in the Federation, but the Borg attack had
devastated it. What had once been the Choudhury family’s land, in
the township of Mallarashtra, had been turned into an empty, gray
alien landscape without a single familiar landmark or bit of scenery.
Even the Sibiran Mountains on the eastern horizon, denuded of their
snowcaps and evergreen-covered slopes, had been unrecognizable.
Jasminder opened her eyes and turned then to Worf, giving him a
small, joyless smile before turning away. Worf did not know what to
say to her. He knew what it was to lose loved ones: his parents had
been slain by the Romulans on Khitomer when he was a child, and
both K’Ehleyr and Jadzia had died at the hands of honorless foes.
But there were no words that could lessen the pain he knew she felt
over the loss of her family.
Jasminder sat up, grunting softly in pain as she reached behind her
neck and pulled her long loose black hair into a ponytail. As Worf’s
eyes wandered over her bare back, he wondered, not for the first
time, how they had come to such a point in their relationship.
Although he had felt an attraction to Jasminder from the start (there
was something about tall, dark-haired, sharp-witted women…), her
pacifistic beliefs and ideals seemed on the surface to be in direct
conflict with the Klingon ethos.
Where they had found a common bond, remark ably, was in their
respective spiritual natures. Following a firefight with a Borgassimilated Starfleet vessel, he found himself in a fascinating
discussion with Jasminder about the necessity of violence, drawing
parallels between the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita and the code

of honor Kahless implemented in order to rein in the worst of the
Klingon people’s savagery in war. This conversation had led to
many others over the past several months, ranging from
Choudhury’s lifelong fascination with the myriad of belief systems
that permeated the galaxy, to Worf’s varied experiences in Starfleet,
the Klingon Defense Force, the Federation Diplomatic Corps, and
the Boreth Monastery.
Still, their relationship had been completely professional and
platonic, until these last couple of weeks. After another mindlessly
destructive confrontation with three Borg cubes, it was becoming
clear that matters with the Borg were going to get worse—much,
much worse—before anyone could even hope things might get
better. While the crew was effecting repairs to the ship, he and
Jasminder had used the brief lull to visit the holodeck and continue
her beginning mok’bara lessons. Both had been tense and frustrated,
concerned about the pressure being put on Captain Picard and the
entire crew, and fully cognizant of what their failure to stop the Borg
could mean to the galaxy as they knew it.
This shared frustration came through in their vigorous workout.
Although his lessons were still at the very basic stage, Jasminder
was already familiar with tai chi, anbo-jyutsu, and Suus Mahna, and
had proven an extremely quick study. Worf had decided to test her
limits, and started throwing unexpected new moves at her. She
managed to block or evade almost all of them, intuitively
determining the most effective countermoves and then throwing the
same attacks right back at him. “Is that all you’ve got?” she’d
taunted.
“Hardly,” he’d assured her, launching into a combination of moves
that succeeded in knocking her feet out from under her. However,
Jasminder managed, as she fell, to twist and grab hold of his
wraparound exercise gi, taking him down with her. For a moment
they were frozen, one atop the other, their noses centimeters apart.
Then her fingers were in his hair, his mouth was on hers, and the

mok’bara lesson was ended.
This time had been no less impulsive, but now, as they both dressed
in silence, there was a palpable sense of awkwardness. Again, Worf
glanced at his companion’s turned back before moving forward
through the shuttle and taking the pilot’s seat. After a moment,
Choudhury joined him, taking the seat to his right. Neither spoke a
word for several minutes, as they both watched the stars warp past.
Finally, still without looking his way, Jasminder said, “We should
talk.”
Worf also kept his eyes straight ahead. “Yes. We should.” Following
their initial liaison, both had agreed (after hobbling into sickbay, one
a minute after the other in a futile attempt to hide the mutual cause
of their respective injuries) to put such a conversation on hold and
concentrate on the impending battle with the Borg. Neither had
found the courage to broach the subject again, until now.
“I…” Jasminder said, then stopped herself, pulling her swollen lip
between her teeth. She turned in her seat to face him and started
again: “I…what we did just now…it’s just…after seeing what
happened to my home…my family…I just needed to…do…feel
something…else. Something that wasn’t so…”
“I understand,” Worf told her in what he hoped would be a soothing
tone of voice.
“It’s not that I regret it…well, not much,” she said, trying again to
smile as she rubbed her sore left shoulder. “But…this isn’t the kind
of person I am, Worf. I don’t normally…”
“Jasminder,” Worf interrupted, “you do not need to explain. The
circumstances of the last several days have been…singular.” He
turned away and quietly sighed. “In fact, I should apologize to you.
As your superior officer, I should have been more prudent in my
behavior and exercised greater restraint.”
Jasminder gave him an unreadable stare at that. “Oh.”
Realizing he had committed a gaffe of some sort, he quickly
amended, “And of course, I speak not only as your superior, but also

as a friend.”
Jasminder’s expression shifted to a small, sad smile. “Thank you,
Worf. That means so much to me right now. It’s good to know that I
still have that, at least…” Her smile faded as her eyes grew distant
and began to fill again with tears.
Worf reached out and laid a hand on her shoulder. “Jasminder, do
not give up hope yet of finding your family,” he told her. “It will be
some time before there’s a complete accounting of all ships and
evacuees who managed to escape prior to the Borg’s arrival.”
“One chance in a million,” she whispered bitterly.
Worf knew that the odds were, indeed, somewhere in that range.
Deneva was a world of over two billion inhabitants, and had had
only a few hours’ warning before the Borg armada reached their
system. But what he said to Choudhury was, “Even so, you cannot
dismiss that one chance. Your mother and your father are a part of
you, always. No matter what has happened to them, you must not
stop trying to find them.” He reached across to put a hand on
Jasminder’s shoulder and looked her in the eye. “I will help you in
your search, if you like.”
Choudhury placed her hand on top of his. “Thank you, Worf,” she
said, and again tried to smile.
Her eyes, though, remained inconsolable.

For most of her life, Beverly Crusher had felt that she’d never had a
real home.
She’d lost both her parents as a small child, and one of her earliest
memories was being told to get all her toys and clothes together
because she was leaving her house and never coming back. She was

taken in by her grandmother on Arvada III, and though Beverly
loved the old woman dearly, she had always felt that Arvada was
someplace to get away from. (In fact, almost as soon as she entered
Starfleet Academy, her grandmother decided to pull up roots on
Arvada and move to Caldos, so she must have felt somewhat the
same way.) During the course of her own career, she had never
stayed in any one place long enough to form that kind of connection.
The Enterprise-D came close to feeling like a home, but she had no
difficulty leaving after her first year to head Starfleet Medical, and
the crash on Veridian III drove home the fact that starships were
impermanent, a poor substitute for a true hearth and home.
But from the moment she first set foot in the Picard ancestral home,
she had a feeling of finally arriving at the place where she belonged.
Marie, Jean-Luc’s sister-in-law, immediately opened her arms wide
and took Crusher into a tight, familiar hug. “Beverly! I can’t tell you
how happy I am to finally properly welcome you after all this time!”
“And it’s wonderful to meet you at last, Marie,” she replied,
squeezing back. Shortly after her and Jean-Luc’s hastily arranged
wedding last year, Marie’s was the first congratulatory message she
received. And just as she had done for Jean-Luc during his extended
time away from Labarre, Marie continued a steady stream of
correspondence, making sure that Crusher felt like a member of the
family. Meeting her was like being reunited with a long-lost sister.
Marie eventually released her grip and lowered her eyes to the other
woman’s stomach. “And how are you coming along?” she asked,
lightly placing a hand on the bulge there.
“Just fine,” Crusher said, beaming. “He’s doing just fine.”
Marie’s eyes started misting then. “A darling baby boy,” she
whispered, and Crusher could feel in her soft voice the soul-deep
sorrow she still felt over René’s loss, and her heart went out to her.
Jean-Luc’s nephew was only a few years younger than Wesley, and
even though she knew he was alive and well, Beverly still missed
him terribly, and could only imagine what it would be like to lose

him permanently.
After a moment, Marie blinked her tears away and smiled. “I can’t
tell you how happy I am…that Jean-Luc finally decided to stop
being alone, and that you and he—our whole family—has been
blessed like this.” Marie kissed her on both cheeks, and Beverly,
overtaken by the emotion of the moment, kissed both her new
sister’s cheeks in return.
Being accepted as a full-fledged member of the Picard clan did not
make her feel any less uncomfortable, though, as she sat and
watched Marie rush back and forth from kitchen to dining room,
carrying dishes and bowls and platters of food. “No, you sit!” she
told her and Jean-Luc both. “Let me enjoy cooking for others again.”
Marie had had a replicator installed in her kitchen when the house
was rebuilt—a change Jean-Luc had noticed immediately—and had
fallen out of the habit of cooking “real” food. Given her new
responsibilities in tending the vineyard, it made little sense to plan
and create elaborate meals when she had only herself to feed. But, if
this past week was any indication, she had not lost any of her
gastronomic talents.
As Marie circled the table and disappeared again into the kitchen,
Picard poured a small bit from the wine bottle he’d opened into his
glass. Silently, he went through the rituals that he’d been taught
from an early age as the son of a vintner—color, swirl, smell, taste,
and savor—before nodding his approval. As he filled his glass, then
Marie’s, Crusher said, “You haven’t said anything about your
debriefing today.”
Picard looked up at her, then shrugged. “There isn’t much to tell.
Other than the news of Admiral Jellico’s resignation, it was fairly
standard.”
“Jean-Luc,” Beverly said, tilting her head, “you think, after all these
years, I don’t know when you’re holding something back?”
“This is what I get for putting things off for so long,” he sighed.
“Not even a year since the wedding, and already you read me like

we’re an old married couple.”
“I know, it must be terrible, not being able to keep your secrets,”
Crusher teased, then asked seriously, “What is it that’s bothering
you?”
Picard sighed again. “Seven of Nine was at the debriefing as well.
She, apparently, has been affected differently by the eradication of
the Borg than I have.”
“Well, that’s to be expected, isn’t it?” Crusher asked. “After all,
from all I’ve heard about her, there are only superficial similarities
between your experiences after being liberated.”
“Yes, but…for me, there was an absolute finality in what the Caeliar
did.”
“But not for Seven? Then, you think the Borg are still—”
“No!” Picard said in a tone that made it clear he would brook no
argument. “The Borg are gone!” He paused to regain his composure,
then continued, “I have no way of knowing what’s happening inside
Seven’s mind—nor, understandably, did she seem willing to open
up her soul before a gathering of the admiralty.” A look of empathy
for the young woman washed over Picard’s face. Then he shook his
head as his frustration returned. “Starfleet cannot afford to dwell on
a threat that no longer exists. But, what little she did say was enough
to sow mountains of doubt.”
As Picard finished his thought, a knock came from the front door.
“Now, who can that be, at din nertime?” Marie wondered as she
emerged again from the kitchen, a bowl of steaming haricots verts in
her hands.
“I’ll get it,” Picard said, putting his wineglass down and moving to
the door. Beverly leaned back in her chair, where she had a straight
line of sight to the front of the house.
“Captain Picard!” the visitor said in a high, warbling voice as the
door opened. Picard was momentarily taken aback. Although the
seat of the Federation government was in France, one rarely saw
nonhumanoids outside of the metropolitan Paris area. So it was a bit

surprising to have found a two-meter-tall insectoid, dressed in
civilian human garb, standing on the front stoop. “Hello, how are
you?” the alien asked, its small mouth curled into a semblance of a
smile.
“I’m fine, thank you,” Picard answered in a tone of uncertainty.
Crusher could not immediately place the species of the visitor,
though she got the sense that she had encountered its kind before.
After a moment, during which her husband also apparently failed to
recognize the visitor, Picard said, “Forgive me, but, do I…”
“Oh, I beg your pardon, Captain,” the insectoid said. “Of course, I
shouldn’t have expected you to recognize me from such a long time
ago. I am Barash.”
The name didn’t seem to help the captain, but it immediately
registered in Beverly’s memory. “Barash!” she exclaimed, getting
up from her chair and going to greet their visitor. “Of course,
Barash!” She took the alien’s long-fingered hand and squeezed it
gently, careful not to fracture his delicate exoskeleton. She then
turned from his large, multifaceted eyes to Picard’s. “You remember
little Jean-Luc Riker, don’t you?” she said with a teasing grin.
“Ah,” Picard said, the light of recognition turning on behind his
eyes. Fourteen years earlier, the Enterprise crew had rescued the
young alien from a solitary exile on Alpha Onias III. He had been
hidden there by his mother after fleeing an enemy attack on their
homeworld, along with an advanced holographic generator
programmed to create whatever environment or companions he
wanted. He was found by Will Riker—or, more accurately, Riker
was found by Barash, after the commander beamed down to the
planet to investigate anomalous energy readings. The lonely young
alien then created a complex holographic scenario by which he
convinced Riker that they were father and son, the alien child
presenting himself as a human teenaged boy. Riker eventually saw
through the ruse, and when Barash finally revealed his true nature,
the commander offered to rescue him and bring him back to

civilization.
Although the captain was not particularly amused by Riker’s
continuing to call their new passenger Jean-Luc, he did become
rather fond of Barash during his brief stay aboard. The rest of the
senior staff felt much the same, as did Wesley, who spent much of
the trip to Starbase 718 teaching Barash to play parrises squares. At
the starbase, they all said their good-byes, and Barash was given
over to the care of a kindly Andorian zhen working in the Displaced
Persons Agency office.
“I spent a month on Seven-One-Eight,” Barash told them as he,
Picard, Crusher, and Marie all gathered in the parlor, “while Admiral
Sternberg and her crew tried to determine what had become of the
rest of my people.”
“And were they able to learn anything?” Crusher asked.
Barash shook his head as he masticated a small piece of cheese. He
had politely declined Marie’s invitation to stay for dinner, but
relented when she insisted on serving him some simple hors
d’oeuvres and wine. “No,” he said aloud after swallowing. “They
examined the technology my mother had left with me on Alpha
Onias III, but that only ended up raising more questions than
answers. And I was a mere larva when we first fled, so I couldn’t
offer much help. We think my people are possibly from a planet
somewhere in Romulan space. Maybe, if détente with the factions
there holds, there might be a chance to find out.”
Crusher half smiled as she nodded. While she of course hoped for
the best, relations between the Romulan Star Empire, the newly
formed Imperial Romulan State, and the Federation were extremely
tenuous, and bound to remain so for years to come.
“At any rate,” Barash continued, “I eventually ended up in a youth
community home on Earth, in Ho Chi Minh City. Myself and a
hundred other orphans and lost children.”
“So you grew up in an orphanage?” Marie asked, then clucked her
tongue. “Oh, you poor thing.”

“It wasn’t so terrible,” Barash assured her. “Oh, it wasn’t easy,
particularly for someone like me, the only one of his kind. But I
preferred by far being among other people, a part of a larger
community.” He took a sip of wine and continued, “As I grew older,
I began mentoring the younger children, and by the time I reached
full maturity, I was offered a formal position. This was right after
the establishment of the Cardassian DMZ, so there were plenty of
new arrivals.”
“I can imagine,” Picard said soberly. A number of planets in that
border region had been ceded to the Cardassians by the treaty with
the Federation, necessitating the abandonment of several Federation
colonies—some by violent means. “And then the Dominion War
after that.”
“With the war with the Klingons in between,” Barash added, dipping
his head. “They were busy years for the agency, but I fear all that’s
come before will pale in comparison to the situation we face now.”
The three humans all nodded somberly. The Borg had damaged
more worlds than all the Federation’s previous conflicts combined,
and far more thoroughly. Hundreds of millions of refugees had been
created by the war, none of whom would be able to return to their
homes anytime soon, if ever.
“That brings me to the reason for my visit,” Barash then said. “I
need your help, Doctor Crusher.”
Beverly was visibly surprised when he addressed her rather than
Jean-Luc. “What can I do?”
“I’ve received a series of dispatches from Pacifica. It was a primary
destination for many of the refugee ships fleeing the Borg invasion,
being one of the most distant Federation worlds from Earth. We’re
hearing reports now that the planet is being overwhelmed by the
numbers arriving there.”
“That wouldn’t take long, given their limited amount of available
land space,” Crusher said. Pacifica was an oceanic world, populated
primarily by an aquatic race, the Selkies. In all, Pacifica’s land area

amounted to about a third of Earth’s, the bulk of it divided among
several hundred islands, the biggest of them just a little larger than
Greenland. And while the Selkies had long welcomed off-worlders
who came to enjoy the planet’s vast oceans and the pristine beaches
of the smaller islands, most of the larger land masses were restricted,
being the habitat of younger Selkies still in the amphibious stage of
their life cycles.
“No, not long at all,” Barash agreed. “We need to send a team to
Pacifica to report on the current conditions there, and to render
whatever immediate aid is needed. Unfortunately, the current
situation is stretching the agency to its limits. We have a runabout
available, but we need Starfleet assistance, and—”
“—Starfleet is also stretched dangerously thin at the moment,”
Picard finished for him.
“Yes.” Barash dipped his head and for a moment said nothing. They
all observed the moment of silence for the dead before Barash
looked up again. “That’s why I knew it would be pointless to ask
that the Enterprise undertake the mission.” He turned to face
Crusher again. “But Doctor Crusher, as both a medical doctor and a
command-level officer, you could lead the small investigative team
I’ve assembled for this task.”
“Oh?” Beverly responded, surprised and, truthfully, proud to be
considered for such an undertaking.
“The Enterprise is scheduled to depart within the next thirty-six
hours,” Picard said, looking a bit uncomfortable in his seat.
“But your crew should be able to get along without her for a short
while, shouldn’t they?” Barash asked. He then looked from the
captain to the doctor. “I know this is a terrible imposition, but every
day we wait to send a team to Pacifica is another day they go
without the help they need.”
Hearing that, Crusher had no hesitation in saying, “Then by all
means, I’ll do it.”
“Well, now, hold on a moment,” Picard interjected. “Beverly, you

cannot—”
Crusher snapped her head in Picard’s direction, fixing him with a
sharp stare, one eyebrow arched toward her hairline. Picard paused,
reconsidered, then turned to Barash. “May we contact you later with
an answer?”
“Of course,” he said, setting his glass down and unfolding his giant
frame from his seat. “I still have to find an environmental sciences
specialist for the team. Please contact me via the DPA in Paris once
you’ve decided.”
Marie walked Barash to the door, and then somehow disappeared
into another part of the house, leaving the newlyweds alone.
“Beverly…”
“Jean-Luc, you heard what he said,” Crusher barreled right over
him. “There’s a humanitarian crisis in progress, and it’s escalating as
we speak.”
Picard shook his head, not yet willing to admit this concern trumped
all others. “There must be someone else Barash can find.
Someone—”
“Another physician with command experience? Who’s presently on
Earth and available?”
“The Enterprise needs—”
“The Enterprise does not need,” Crusher countered immediately.
“The Enterprise will be just fine for a few days with Doctor Tropp
in charge of sickbay. The people on Pacifica need me, and the others
Barash is sending.”
Picard opened his mouth, but there was nothing that could
reasonably be said to counter that bottom-line assessment. And so,
to his apparent chagrin, he voiced his concern: “Beverly, you’re
pregnant.”
Crusher just smiled sweetly at him, saying noth ing, letting him
reflect privately on what a stupid thing that was to say. “What I
mean is that, in your condition…”
“Pregnancy is not a debilitating disease, Jean-Luc,” Crusher told

him. “And may I remind you that, when you officially approved
Miranda Kadohata’s promotion to second officer, she was in her
eighth month?”
“I did, didn’t I?” Picard replied, smiling ruefully. “Would you
believe I had never noticed her condition until she raised the subject
of her maternity leave?”
Beverly almost laughed aloud. “Actually, yes, I would.” The captain
had rarely shared the bridge with the relief ops officer, and when he
did, she was sitting behind a large console, with her back to the
command chair. “I’d believe it because I know that you know it’s
not supposed to be relevant.”
“No, it’s not,” Picard said simply, leaving unsaid the plain reality
that Beverly’s pregnancy was relevant to him, whether it was
supposed to be or not.
Beverly understood, of course, that he was genuinely, if illogically,
expressing his love and concern for her, and for their son. “Would it
make you feel better if I were to have someone like Miranda with
me on the mission? Barash said he still needed a science officer.”
Kadohata had become, in the time since joining the senior staff, one
of the captain’s most trusted and respected officers. Even following
the incident last summer, when Miranda, under orders from Admiral
Nechayev, briefly took command of the ship from Jean-Luc, she had
been able to regain his regard. And, having just recently been
through her own second pregnancy, she would be more likely than
most other officers to be sensitive to Beverly’s condition, without
being overly protective.
Picard considered the idea, then nodded. “Yes. I believe it perhaps
would. If you can convince her, of course.”
Beverly smiled at her husband. “I’ll contact her right now.”
Kadohata was still on liberty with her family on Cestus III, but it
would take only a slight detour for the DPA’s runabout to pick her
up there en route to Pacifica. And by saving her the need to meet the
Enterprise at Earth, Miranda would have an extra twelve hours to

spend with her husband and children. “And then I’ll let Barash
know.”
Picard nodded again, and a corner of his mouth twitched slightly
upward. “Make it so.”
Beverly kissed him on the cheek, and then made her way to the
small guest bedroom she and Jean-Luc had been using during their
stay. As she keyed in her request for a subspace connection to
Cestus, Marie appeared in the doorway, drying her hands with a
dishcloth. “That was quite nicely done,” she said, with a glint in her
eye.
“Thank you,” Beverly said, returning the bemused expression. “Jack
was away on the Stargazer for almost the entire time I was carrying
Wesley. I’ve never had to deal directly with the stereotypical
overprotective father-to-be before.”
She and Marie shared a knowing chuckle. Then the humor faded
from Marie’s eyes, and she turned her gaze away, saying, “Just don’t
dismiss his worries completely, Beverly.” Her attention was
seemingly drawn to the door frame, and she ran one hand over the
slightly dulled, nine-year-old varnish covering the flawless, unburnt
wooden molding. “No matter how safe our loved ones are, you never
really know…”
Beverly nodded. “I promise to be careful, ma soeur.”
“See that you are,” Marie replied, flashing a grin and waving a
mock-warning finger at her. “And don’t spend long chitchatting,”
she added, heading back for the kitchen. “Dinner’s already starting
to get cold…”

3

Lieutenant T’Ryssa Chen stood in front of the full-length mirror in
her quarters, turning first one way and then the other. She grabbed at
the material of her white dress uniform jacket just below the armpits
and tugged. There was a brief moment of relief before the fabric
snapped back, pinching hard on a very sensitive part of her chest.
“Gahh!” she shouted in a most typical but un-Vulcan manner as she
fought against the accursed uniform in order to free her tender skin.
After several minutes of yanking and jerking and wriggling, she
finally found an arrangement that almost approached a degree of
comfort, but gave the uniform more wrinkles than a raisin. After
another tug at the two gold-trimmed points at her waist, she regarded
her reflection once more, tossing her hair back over her delicately
pointed ears, and decided she’d achieved an acceptable balance
between looks and comfort. Of course, looks started out with the
advantage, she thought, giving her reflection a wink.
Her door chime sounded, and after one last visual check, she crossed
the cabin to the doors. With a touch of a button, they slid open,
revealing Lieutenant Dina Elfiki waiting in the corridor. “Ready,
Trys?” she asked.
Chen’s face fell. Not because Elfiki, with her huge brown eyes and
dark Egyptian facial features, banished almost all confidence in her
own good looks, but because the woman stood there, waiting to
escort her to the shuttlebay to greet the captain back aboard, dressed
in her standard-duty black, gray, and blue uniform. “What the hell?”

Chen sputtered. “Dina, you told me this was full-dress!”
“Did I?” Elfiki said, her eyes growing even wider as she feigned
surprise. “Oops. Well, no time to change,” she added, grabbing
Chen’s elbow as she tried to turn back into her cabin. “The captain’s
shuttle is already on its way.”
“You are so going to pay for this, Elfiki,” Chen snarled as she half
stumbled into the corridor and grudgingly let herself be guided to
the turbolift.
“Oh, please,” the science officer replied. “After that prank with the
alternating gravity plates in stellar cartography? Or reprogramming
the food replicator in my quarters with the menu for Commander
Worf’s cat?”
“You still have no proof that was me,” Chen argued, though she
failed to keep the “Yes, I am guilty” grin from splitting her face.
“If I really wanted to pay you back,” Elfiki continued, “I would
have…oh, I don’t know…tapped into the clothing replication
systems and tweaked the body measurements on file for you.”
It took a moment for Chen to see through Elfiki’s perfectly deadpan
expression and register what she was telling her. “You mean,
you…?” she started to ask, then trailed off when the science officer
answered her with a tiny smirk. “I’m starting to think I liked you
better before I got to like you,” she said, pulling at her collar.
Elfiki giggled out loud then, and Chen let her annoyance wane
enough to laugh along with her. Before this past week, neither had
made much effort to get to know the other very well; Chen was more
interested, frankly, in getting to know the male members of the crew
(though she had maintained an exclusive relationship with security
officer Rennan Konya for a lot longer than she would have expected
when it had started), while Elfiki seemed just as happy to spend her
off-duty time alone in her quarters. But they had been the only
members of the senior bridge crew to volunteer to stay aboard the
Enterprise during her stay at McKinley, and with Rennan spending
his liberty at home on Betazed, Elfiki found herself the target of a

full-bore assault by a bored contact specialist. As it turned out, the
two found they had quite a bit in common, from strained family
relations (though Elfiki refused to elaborate on the specifics) to
troubles with men (about which she had absolutely no trouble
elaborating) to—most surprising to Chen—a wickedly sharp sense
of humor.
Chen was about to describe how she would take her revenge on
Elfiki for this most recent prank, stressing to her the amount of
intricate planning she would use and the exquisite attention to detail
that would keep Elfiki from recognizing the trap until it was too late.
However, before she had the opportunity, the turbolift arrived,
already carrying Lieutenant Taurik, the ship’s Vulcan assistant chief
engineer. He nodded to Elfiki as she entered the car and then raised
one eyebrow in a typically condescending Vulcan manner as he
considered Chen and her choice of apparel. “What, a girl can’t try to
look nice for her captain?” she demanded.
Taurik pointedly shifted his gaze to a spot just above the car doors.
“I made no comment about your appearance one way or another,
Lieutenant. Resume to main shuttlebay.”
The lift bleeped in acknowledgment and started to ascend.
“Seriously, Dina,” Chen said in mock-serious tones, ignoring the
car’s other occupant, “when you least expect it…expect it!”
“I do hope,” Taurik said, still without turning his gaze from the front
of the lift, “that with the rest of the crew and senior staff back
aboard, the recent rash of practical jokes plaguing the ship will now
come to an end.”
Chen smiled behind his back. She’d learned early on that she tended
to make full-blooded Vulcans uneasy with her humanlike behavior.
For all their talk of Infinite Diversity in Infinite Combinations, they
somehow never seemed to make peace with the idea of V’tosh
ka’tur—Vulcans without logic—or anyone who too closely
resembled them.
Which made it all the more fun to flaunt her un-Vulcan-ness around

other Vulcans at any given opportunity. “Aw, lighten up, Taurik,”
she said. “I was going to recalibrate graviton generators on Deck
Eight. Really.”
“Nevertheless,” the lieutenant said, turning around to face them
both, “you are officers aboard the U.S.S. Enterprise, one of the most
celebrated ships in Starfleet. It is not unreasonable to expect that, as
such, you display a certain degree of decorum.” He sounded so
much like Commander Semkal, the supercilious Vulcan first officer
on Chen’s previous ship, the Rhea, that she had to bite back another
chuckle.
“Aye, sir,” Elfiki said softly, as if she were in fact being dressed
down by a superior officer instead of one of equal rank.
Chen, of course, would have none of that. “Come on, we were just
blowing off steam. We’ve been through a rough couple of weeks,
you know. Well, maybe you don’t know,” she corrected herself, “but
for those of us who feel emotions like fear, anxiety, empathy…”
Chen stopped as Taurik’s subtle look of irritation suddenly took on a
harder edge. He glowered at her silently for several seconds before
saying, “Computer, halt,” still in his regular cool, flat tone.
The sound of the turbolift’s magnetic drive fell still, and Taurik took
a slow breath before telling Chen, “You are unaware, I take it, that I
had a mate and a daughter in ShiKahr.”
Chen found herself frozen in place. ShiKahr was the largest city on
the planet Vulcan, home to over five million living beings, including
tens of thousands of off-worlders. As such, it had been the Borg’s
primary target when their genocidal rampage had reached that
planet. The attacking cube was eventually destroyed by the Starfleet
ships defending the 40 Eridani system, but not before it had
succeeded in turning the ancient metropolis into just another piece of
flat wasteland extending out from Vulcan’s Forge.
“‘Had’?” Elfiki asked, in a dry whisper.
“Yes, Lieutenant,” Taurik said. “My use of the past tense was
intentional, and accurate.” His voice still betrayed nothing, though in

his dark eyes, riveted on her own, Chen thought she could see the
struggle between the older man’s Vulcan emotions and his ability to
control them.
Then, thankfully, he looked away. “Resume.” The turbolift started
rising again, then stopped seconds later outside the main shuttlebay.
Taurik marched straight out, while Chen was momentarily frozen in
place.
T’Ryssa Chen knew that Vulcan emotions were more volatile than
human emotions. At least, that was what she had always heard, and
that was her favorite excuse whenever she let her own feelings get
the better of her—“Sorry, that was my Vulcan half”—but in reality,
she had no idea how one actually measured emotional strength, or
whether she would fall closer to human or Vulcan on that theoretical
scale. But now, she did know that she never wanted to see the full
power of a full-blooded Vulcan’s unleashed emotions.
“Trys?” Elfiki tapped lightly on her shoulder. “Hey, Trys, you
okay?”
Chen jerked as if caught daydreaming. “Yeah. Fine,” she said,
giving her friend an exaggerated devil-may-care shrug. “Let’s hurry,
I don’t wanna get on Worf’s bad side before we even leave dock,”
she said, her face turned away, and then darted out of the turbolift
car so Elfiki only saw the back of her head.

Early on in his Starfleet career, Ensign Geordi La Forge of the
U.S.S. Victory had been assigned to pilot a shuttle for a senior officer
conducting an inspection tour of his ship. That officer—one Captain
Jean-Luc Picard—had commented about a minor variance in the
shuttle’s engines, and Geordi had spent the rest of the following shift

running diagnostics and chasing down faulty components, trying to
get the craft’s performance up to spec.
Nearly twenty years later, La Forge was again at the controls of a
shuttle, conducting Captain Picard on a slow survey around the
Enterprise-E in drydock, reviewing the repair job that had been
done, and all that had yet to be completed. “She looks better than she
did,” Picard said, in a far more diplomatic tone than he had used
during that long-ago inspection.
La Forge couldn’t argue with the captain’s assessment, but that was
only because the ship had been so badly damaged when they first
returned to Earth. The Enterprise had suffered more than a dozen
hull breaches, ranging from a three-meter fissure near main
engineering (to which he had lost five of his engineers in the blink
of an eye) to an unholy gash across the top of the saucer section,
where the ship had collided with a Hirogen attack craft at the far end
of a trans-galactic subspace tunnel discovered just prior to the Borg
invasion. The ugly blackened scar was gone now, as were all the
others, the ruptures mended by the molecular refusion of the ship’s
duranium composite skin. There was still, however, some slight
color variation that stood out to La Forge’s cybernetic eyes.
The chief engineer wasn’t going to get upset at the McKinley team
for not touching up minor cosmetic flaws, though. Given how thinly
their staff was stretched in the wake of the Azure Nebula incursion,
La Forge considered himself lucky that they had completed all the
most vital work, as well as all that required extravehicular activity.
Unfortunately, that meant a lot of crawling through Jefferies tubes
for him and his team, finishing the less critical tasks and running
diagnostics, once they were released from drydock and set off on
their next mission.
La Forge was reviewing the list of those remaining repairs on a padd
as he guided the shuttle in one more circuit around the ship. As they
passed the end of the starboard nacelle and looped around to run
parallel to the port, Picard cleared his throat and said, “Geordi…I

never did personally apologize to you for my…lapse in judgment at
the peak of the conflict.”
La Forge raised his eyes from his padd, looked at Picard, then turned
his eyes away. “It’s all right, sir,” he said, almost under his breath.
“You weren’t yourself.” Given the captain’s history with the Borg, it
wasn’t too surprising that the recent war had affected him so
drastically.
“No, Geordi, it is not ‘all right,’” Picard insisted, in that
characteristic, commanding tone of his. “I issued what amounted to
an illegal order. I put you in an untenable position, and I owe you a
debt of gratitude for standing up to me as you did and refusing to recreate Shinzon’s thalaron weapon.”
La Forge hesitated before saying anything in reply. Shinzon, a
Romulan-created, Reman-raised clone of the captain, had used the
thalaron radiation generating device just over a year ago to
assassinate the entire Romulan Senate, destroying every molecule of
organic matter in their bodies and turning them, literally, to dust.
Data had sacrificed his own life to stop him, destroying Shinzon’s
weapon, his ship, and the madman himself. Then just over a week
ago, as it was starting to look as if the Federation was in its death
throes, Picard had issued the order to reconstruct the immoral device
for use against the Borg. Geordi had refused, flatly, to Picard’s face.
“That was probably the hardest thing I’ve ever done in my career,”
La Forge finally replied. Privately, he wondered what would have
happened if the Caeliar had not ended the Borg threat when they did,
and if Earth would have been lost, too, because of his refusal. “I’ve
served under you for a lot of years, sir. And with the exception of
my father, I respect you more than any other man alive.”
“I appreciate that,” Picard said, smiling.
“But I have to tell you, though, sir…” La Forge continued, and then
faltered momentarily.
“Go on,” the captain prompted him.
La Forge looked the other man directly in the eyes and told him, “To

be blunt, sir…at that point, it was becoming very difficult to
continue respecting you.”
Picard’s smile fell. “No, I suppose, the way I had been behaving, it
must have been quite difficult, indeed,” he said, dipping his head. La
Forge watched as a shadow of self-disappointment washed across
the older man’s expression. “I also have a great deal of respect for
you, Mister La Forge, and I have always found you to be a most
keen judge of character.” He paused, then said, “I sincerely hope
that, in the future, I do not present such challenges to your regard for
me. But if I do, I hope you will show the same strength and ability to
call me out for it.”
La Forge gave the captain a small, sympathetic smile. “I’ll do my
best, Captain,” he promised, before turning back to the controls and
guiding the shuttle toward the starship’s massive shuttlebay.

“Commanding officer, Enterprise, arriving!”
The assembled officers snapped to attention as a bosun’s whistle
sounded, and Picard stepped through the shuttle’s open portal and
grinned like a schoolboy. The shuttlebay was not particularly
remarkable—a cavernous and largely featureless space, broken up
only by the narrow catwalk that ran along its perimeter and a few
no-nonsense warning signs. But as he stepped off the shuttle and his
boot hit the deck, he felt himself become a part of it again. As much
as he had enjoyed the week in Labarre, for most of that time he had
itched to get back, and the anticipation had served to make this
moment all the sweeter. This was his ship—his place in the
universe.
Then the captain’s focus moved from the shuttlebay to the people

gathered there. My crew, he thought with pride. He stepped a few
paces closer to the review lines, then addressed the assemblage.
“This sort of ceremony is usually reserved for welcoming a new
captain aboard when she or he takes command of a vessel for the
first time. Some of you here were present at just such a ceremony in
this same place nine years ago.” Scanning the lines, Picard was
slightly surprised to realize how few of those present actually fit that
bill. “And some of you, I believe, are yourselves brand-new to this
vessel,” he added, noting a young Payav ensign and a tall, orangehaired human woman in sciences blue he was sure he’d never seen
before.
“However, while my command of this ship is not new, it is a new
universe that we shall be dealing with together. We stood fast
against the most perilous threat to the Federation, and we have
prevailed. Our long galactic nightmare is over; today, we mark the
start of a new era. I look forward to exploring it with all of you.”
A brief round of applause punctuated the captain’s address. Worf
stepped forward from the line and extended his hand. “Welcome
back, sir.”
“Thank you, Number One,” Picard said, grasping his hand. “It’s
good to be back.”
Worf nodded and gave him one of his narrow Klingon smiles. It was
hard to see even a trace of the rash young lieutenant who had joined
his crew with the launch of the Enterprise-D in this matured,
seasoned man before him anymore. Worf released his hand, fell in
beside Picard, and marched beside him as Picard stepped forward to
review and greet the rest of the crew.
At the head of the line was his chief of security. “Lieutenant
Choudhury,” Picard said, extending his right hand. “How are you?
Have you heard anything yet about your family?” he asked in a
quiet, sympathetic tone.
The Denevan woman looked past the side of his head, avoiding
direct eye contact with both him and Worf. “No, sir,” she said

through her tightened jaw.
Picard put his left hand over the back of Choudhury’s right, and
gave it an extra squeeze. “If there is anything I can do, any way I can
help…”
The security chief managed a small smile. “Thank you, sir. But I’ll
be fine, and I’m eager to resume my duties.”
Picard simply nodded, not wanting to prod her any further. He
moved to her left then, to Counselor Hegol Den. The middle-aged
Bajoran man was the second person to fill the post long held by
Deanna Troi, and seeing him at this moment, Picard wondered if
he’d have to start looking for a third. Hegol had not taken leave at
Earth, but had remained on ship and on duty, offering what help he
could to an understandably shaken crew. From the look in his
sunken brown eyes and carelessly shaved face, they had kept his
schedule full, perhaps even around the clock. “Counselor. How are
you bearing up?”
“I’m fine, thank you, sir,” Hegol answered, letting whatever else he
might have added remain unsaid. Picard understood, and nodded,
letting him know that they would talk further later.
Next to Hegol stood the assistant chief medical officer, whose
position in line only served to remind Picard of the chief medical
officer’s absence. “Doctor Tropp,” he said, forcing Beverly out of
his thoughts for the moment.
The Denobulan physician did not help. “Captain. I’m pleased to
report that, despite Doctor Crusher’s absence, the medical staff is at
full preparedness, and ready—though not especially eager—to
handle whatever situation may arise.”
“I have every confidence,” Picard assured him, as well as the other
medical staffers standing in the rows behind him. The captain
continued down the front row, greeting and shaking hands with
Lieutenants Taurik and Dina Elfiki, finally reaching the end, where
Lieutenant T’Ryssa Chen stood, conspicuous in her dress whites.
“I take it you were the victim of someone’s prank, Lieutenant?” he

asked, favoring the young woman with a tiny smile.
Giving him a tiny chagrined smile of her own, Chen answered, “I
was going to tell you that this was a demonstration of how much
more I respect you than the rest of the crew.”
“Indeed?”
“Yes, sir,” she said, and then grabbed at the bottom of her jacket and
gave it a sharp downward tug.
Picard’s smile faded. He arched one eyebrow at her, and he could
have sworn he heard, from behind, a quiet chuckle from Worf.
“Hmph,” Picard said, before looking away to address the rest of the
assemblage. “Thank you all. Be prepared for an imminent departure.
Dismissed.”
As the assembly dispersed, Worf fell in step with the captain. “How
imminent do you anticipate our departure to be?” he asked as the
two made their way out of the shuttlebay.
“Just as soon as Command lets us know where it is they’d like us to
go,” Picard answered, at the same time tapping his combadge.
“Picard to bridge.”
“Bridge. Rosado here, sir,” replied the voice of the beta-shift
operations officer currently manning the conn.
“Have we received any communiqués from Starfleet Command,
Ensign?”
“We have not, sir.”
Picard frowned. “Very well. Please alert me as soon as we do. Picard
out.”
“Sir,” Worf said as soon as Picard had finished his conversation with
the bridge, “I regret to tell you that the Enterprise is not prepared to
leave orbit.”
Picard sighed. “Yes, Number One. I’ve discussed the state of repairs
with Mister La Forge on the way here. But there are too many other
ships that require McKinley Station’s particular services, so—”
“Sir,” Worf interrupted, “that was not what I was referring to.”
“Oh?” Picard said. “This isn’t about our armaments, is it?”

The Klingon looked mildly offended. “No, sir. While I still believe
we should continue to arm the ship with the best available weapons,
we are still more than able to defend ourselves against any current
enemies without transphasic torpedoes.”
Picard nodded. Transphasic torpedoes had, for a brief time, been
Starfleet’s most effective defense against the Borg. Picard was
gratified to know that Worf, unlike some others in the fleet, accepted
and acknowledged the Borg’s defeat.
Worf continued, “The problem, sir, is that we do not yet have a full
crew complement. Starfleet has yet to assign personnel to replace
our recent casualties.”
“What?” Picard asked, stunned. He’d been told, in his many
meetings with the admiralty, that thousands of ground-and stationbased officers on Earth and around the Sol system would be
reassigned to ships, and that the entire senior class at the Academy
had been granted early commissions in order to deal with the
staggering casualties Starfleet had suffered in the recent war.
“We’ve had no new transfers whatsoever?”
“Ten, sir.”
Picard stopped in mid-stride, just short of the turbolift doors, and put
a hand out to halt Worf as well. “Ten. Starfleet has sent us ten crew
members to replace our thirty-nine casualties?”
“It is my understanding that the Enterprise is not the only ship
facing this problem,” Worf reported. “Given the losses Starfleet has
suffered…”
“Yes,” Picard sighed. He supposed, all things considered, he should
have simply been grateful for the ten new personnel he was getting.
“Well, we can make do for the time being with twenty-nine open
billets,” he said. Presumably, as things became more settled around
the Federation, more reassignments would come.
“That’s not all, sir,” Worf continued.
Picard almost considered not asking the question. “What else?”
Worf hesitated, then told him, “Twenty-six crew members have

requested extensions to their leaves—”
“Denied,” Picard said quickly, and started for the turbolift again.
“—for reasons related to their mental fitness,” Worf finished,
following the captain into the open car. “These requests did come
with the proper supporting reports from examining counselors.”
Worf scowled as he added, “If these individuals are in fact
psychologically unfit for service…”
“Do they forget we have counselors aboard?” Picard snapped. He
instantly regretted his harsh-ness—not for any fear that Worf might
be offended, of course, but because he knew his crew would not be
asking for extended leaves lightly. Picard could still vividly recall
the pain he’d felt when he first learned of Robert’s and René’s
deaths, and he knew many of them had suffered losses that, in
comparison, dwarfed his.
On the other hand, he hadn’t had the luxury of turning the ship over
to Riker in order to mourn his brother and nephew. For all the
sympathy he felt for these people, they were Starfleet officers, and
they were sworn to perform their duties selflessly. “These are all
requests, correct, rather than notices that these men and women are
certified as unfit for duty?”
Worf nodded. “Yes, sir.”
“Then have them all called back,” Picard said, as the lift slowed to a
stop at the top of the ship. “And forward the psychiatric reports to
Doctor Hegol.” Picard recalled the deeply wearied expression he’d
just witnessed on Hegol Den’s face. He regretted the additional
burden he was putting on the man, but it was unavoidable.
“Captain on the bridge,” Ensign Rosado announced when the
turbolift doors swept open and Picard stepped out onto the bridge.
The rest of the bridge crew, who had arrived moments earlier via the
secondary turbolift from the welcoming ceremony, snapped to
attention. “Welcome back, sir,” Rosado said, giving him a broad
smile that crinkled the corners of her eyes.
“Thank you, Ensign,” he replied, though it felt odd addressing a

woman his own age as such. Jill Rosado had come to Starfleet as her
second career, and brought with her a wealth of life and practical
experience the typical Academy graduate simply did not possess.
“McKinley Station has cleared us to leave drydock,” she reported.
“Excellent,” Picard said. “I relieve you, Ensign.”
“I stand relieved, sir.”
Rosado returned to her ops seat, but Picard remained standing.
“Number One,” he said, turning to Worf, “would you do the honors
of taking us out?”
Worf nodded. “Aye, sir.”
Picard returned his nod. “Very good. I shall be…in my ready room.”
And with not a small amount of trepidation, the captain turned
toward the private entryway at the starboard side of the viewscreen.
During their investigation of the series of subspace tunnels
terminating in the Azure Nebula, the Enterprise had ended up in the
Delta quadrant, facing a pack of ten Hirogen hunter ships. A hit to
Deck 1 had sparked a series of overloads and fires, one of which
engulfed the captain’s ready room. He’d lost many of his most
valued possessions, including the Mintakan tapestry given to him
during an accidental first contact mission, a rare twentieth-century
printing of The Globe Illustrated Shakespeare, the small flute that
had once belonged to a man named Kamin on a long-extinct world,
and other mementos of his fifty-plus–year career.
The doors opened ahead of him, releasing a faintly antiseptic scent
of new carpeting and other materials that gave the duranium cubicle
the semblance of a livable space. Entering his restored sanctuary, he
discovered the space had not only been repaired and refurbished, but
redecorated. The centerpiece was a large, antique wooden desk
which, upon closer inspection, Picard was surprised to recognize as
his father’s. It had been built by his great-great-grandfather, its top
made from the face of an old wine cask. For as long as Jean-Luc
could remember, it had sat in the corner of the winery warehouse,
where Father kept his shipping records and weather logs. Picard ran

his fingertips along its smooth, newly refinished and revarnished
surface, and the intricately carved grape leaf and vine design that
adorned its edges. So few Picard family heirlooms had survived the
house fire, and Picard felt tremendous gratitude to Marie for parting
with this one.
The next new addition to catch his eye was a framed painting that
was hung above the new couch, depicting a flock of black birds in
flight. It took a moment for him to understand the significance of
this gift, until he noted the artist’s mark: Data.
Picard recalled then that this particular work had been done at his
own urging, shortly after Data had first discovered his “dream
program.” The birds, Data explained following his second vision,
symbolized his newly discovered ability to break through his
limitations and to explore the greater aspects of his being. Picard
nodded at Geordi’s choice from the myriad of Data’s collected
artworks; he couldn’t think of a better symbol for what he foresaw in
this new post-Borg era.
On a stand to the left of the sofa sat what was clearly an ancient
piece: a Klingon Second Dynasty bloodwine vessel, painted with a
depiction of Kortar and Lunob’s slaying of the gods. Very few
Second Dynasty pieces had survived the Dark Time, and Picard
marveled at the surprising artistry of the ancient warrior responsible
for this piece.
And at the right end of the couch, under a white card with the words
“To my husband, with love, Beverly,” sat a new Shakespeare
volume—or rather, an old one: a first edition of The New Britannia
Complete Shakespeare, published in 2054. Picard caressed the brittle
but intact binding gently, reflecting on the fact that, in the year
following the end of the Third World War, even at the height of the
Post-Atomic Horror and in the face of Colonel Green’s genocidal
purges, there were those who saw the preservation of this bit of
human culture as a priority. A red ribbon bookmark stuck out of the
bottom; Picard opened the book, and laughed as he read the title of

the play that began on the marked page: All’s Well That Ends Well.
Just as he was about to settle onto his new couch with the Bard, the
comm chimed and Worf’s voice announced, “Captain, there is an
incoming message for you, sir. From the presidential office at the
Palais de la Concorde.”
Picard’s eyebrows snapped upward. “Thank you, Number One,” he
said, wondering for what possible reason the president would be
contacting him. He set the open book carefully onto the stand that
had accompanied it, then crossed the room to his desk and activated
the anachronistic-looking computer monitor sitting on the far corner.
After a few moments, as the Palais communications system initiated
its extra security protocols, the image of Nanietta Bacco appeared,
seated at her own desk before the wide, panoramic window of her
office overlooking the Champs-Élysées. Standing just behind and to
the right of the president (and blocking the view of the Tour Eiffel)
was Admiral Leonard James Akaar. At nearly two and a half meters’
height, the new head of Starfleet Command was almost as
impressive as Gustave Eiffel’s famed monument, and towered over
the petite white-haired woman. “Madam President. Admiral,” Picard
said in greeting.
“Captain Picard,” the president said, giving him a small, personable
smile. She looked far more at ease than she had a week earlier, when
he had last met with her, but there was still clear evidence of the
weight of her office pressing down on her shoulders. “I understand
you and the Enterprise are ready to get under way again. I hope you
were able to enjoy some of the brief leave time you had while here
on Earth?”
“Yes, ma’am, thank you,” Picard answered, wondering.
“And you’re wondering now why I’m bothering to call you, while
you’re waiting to receive your next orders,” the president said,
interrupting his thoughts.
Picard allowed himself a small smile. “I admit, the question did
occur to me, Madam President.”

Bacco glanced briefly over her shoulder at Akaar, who remained
perfectly still and silent behind her. Then she turned back to the
captain. “I assume you’ve heard the address I gave following the
Borg’s…disappearance.”
Picard nodded. “Yes, ma’am.”
“And you’ll recall, in that speech, I made a special point of saying,
despite the blow we’ve been dealt, that Starfleet would continue its
commitment to peaceful exploration.”
“Indeed,” Picard answered. “It was quite inspiring, ma’am.”
The right corner of the president’s mouth twitched upward in a
sardonic-looking half-grin. “Perhaps too inspiring,” she said.
“Captain,” Akaar interjected, “this isn’t being shared with a lot of
people outside of Command, but the fleet is in far worse shape than
is being publicized. We have possibly billions of homeless refugees
to resettle; catastrophic damages suffered on Vulcan, Andor, and
Tellar; not to mention the help the Klingons are going to need from
us, with Qo’noS now barely habitable. Widespread exploration
solely for exploration’s sake? It’s simply not feasible.”
Intellectually speaking, none of this was particularly shocking to
Picard. But hearing it so bluntly put by the president and Starfleet’s
ranking admiral, he felt his heart fall in his chest.
“What of the Titan, though?” he asked after a silent moment. Will
Riker’s ship had been specifi cally named in Bacco’s speech as one
that would continue Starfleet’s exploratory mission.
“The Titan will be an exception,” Akaar said. “The rest of the Luna
-class ships are still out there, as it’s important to keep up the image
we’ve presented. The Titan will be at Utopia Planitia for another
month or so; we’re planning to formally relaunch her and get her
back under way on First Contact Day—make it a bit of a morale
booster for the Federation.”
“I see,” Picard answered flatly. He dared not tell either of his
superiors what he thought of using a Starfleet ship as part of some
sort of public relations stunt.

President Bacco leaned forward, elbows on her desk, and looked
directly at Picard. “The reason we’re telling you all this,
Captain…the reason I personally wanted to be part of telling
you…is because I believe you deserve to see the decision-making
process behind your new assignment. The debt the Federation owes
you can never be adequately repaid, Jean-Luc. And I wanted to be
certain that you understood this assignment is in no way meant to
diminish that.”
Picard nodded, and waited.
“Captain Picard, where the Enterprise is most needed,” the
president finally said, in an almost frighteningly disheartened tone of
voice, “is here, as close to home as possible.”
And Picard’s heart dropped even further.

4

Donald Wheeler woke up with a dead hairy rat in his mouth.
That’s what it tasted like, at any rate. He lifted his head off his
pillow and immediately regretted it, as bolts of pain ricocheted

around the inside of his head like spiked tennis balls. Then, against
his better judgment, he opened his eyes. Wheeler had no idea where
he was; only that it was too goddamned bright. He blinked and
squinted until either his eyes or the light adjusted, and he could see
he was in a narrow bed in a small, white compartment.
The infirmary? No, the infirmary was larger than this. He’d been to
the Gerrold University Medical Center more than a few times during
his matriculation—while feeling much the way he did now, come to
think of it. G.U. was surrounded by some of the best wineries and
distilleries on Sherman’s Planet, and Wheeler had taken full
advantage of their proximity to campus. But the G.U. Med Center
had a lot more beds, a lot more equipment, a lot more space…
It then occurred to him that no, he wasn’t at G.U. anymore. He’d
finally, after six years and a couple of false starts, finished his
studies and earned his degree in pre-Federation Tellarite literature.
Then, with diploma firmly in hand, he set off from G.U. and
Sherman’s Planet, and headed for Risa to celebrate his
accomplishment. He’d been celebrating nonstop for three months
now, because were he to stop, he’d be forced to figure out exactly
what he could do with a degree in pre-Federation Tellarite literature,
other than teaching The Shallash Epics to a new generation of
aimless students. And that was a fate just too horrible to
contemplate.
Except, this wasn’t Risa, either. He remembered…
Well, he couldn’t remember much of anything, not with this
hangover. This is a pretty lousy infirmary, Wheeler thought, if that’s
what it is, if they haven’t shot me up with an alcohol inhibitor. How
long have I been here unconscious, anyhow? Well, he would just
have to check out and cure himself—a little hair of the dog that bit
him should do wonders in that regard.
After a few deep breaths and an enormous effort, he pushed himself
up, swung his legs over the side of the bed, and somehow managed
to get himself upright. The room was small enough that he could put

his hands out to the walls on either side, and in that manner he
moved to the door.
Once his eyes had adjusted again to the full-intensity lights on the
other side, he remembered: he was on a Risian transport, ordered to
temporarily evacuate…
Another bolt struck him right between the eyes, and Wheeler opted
to put thinking on hold for a moment. He staggered past clusters of
his fellow passengers, all of whom seemed strangely subdued,
toward the nearest courtesy bar, and powered up the replicator.
“Wine. Red—a Pinot Noir. And not synthehol, either.”
The computer sounded an off-key tone, and answered, “Unable to
comply under current restrictions.”
It took several seconds for that to penetrate the haze that had
enveloped his brain. “Restrictions?” he said. “On a Risian
transport?”
“Per emergency protocols,” the machine explained, “this unit can
only fill requests for essential foodstuffs.”
Emergency? The word reverberated in his mind, along with the
thunderclaps of pain. “Listen, this is essential. My head’ll split open
if I don’t get a little something to take the edge off.” Normally,
Wheeler knew better than to try to plead with a computer, but that
didn’t quite matter to him at the moment.
Which was only fair, since his condition didn’t matter to the
replicator, either. It just gave him that same discordant chime and
stubbornly refused to give him his wine. Frustrated, Wheeler
punched the wall. “Come on, I’m sick! Give me something!”
Finally, the dispenser slot lit up. Surprised but pleased, Wheeler
watched as a small storm of energized particles glowed bright and
then dimmed. For some reason, instead of a glass, it had given him
his request in a wide-lipped ceramic cup. The scent hit him at about
the same moment his hand wrapped around the cup and registered
the fact that it was heated, and that the replicator, responding to his
claim of being ill, had given him chicken soup. Growling, he flipped

the cup over, spilling broth all over the inside of the replicator and
down its front surface. “Phinda!” he cursed loudly as the hot liquid
scalded him.
“Hey, hey!” Someone was suddenly behind him, one hand on his
shoulder, the other on his soup-splattered forearm. He turned—or
was turned—and was pleased to see it was the gorgeous chief
facilitator from the Temtibi Lagoon Resort. “What are you doing?”
she demanded, in a very stress-filled, un-Risian tone of voice.
“I was just trying to get a drink,” Wheeler answered. He noticed that
the smile that seemed permanently plastered onto the hostess’s
face—just as it was on every Risian’s—had disappeared; she spoke
to him now through tightly clenched teeth that seemed nowhere near
as bright as they used to be.
“The bar is closed,” she told him, making it sound very final. “Let’s
get you back to the dispensary.”
The Risian woman started to guide him back through the subdued
lounge to the small white room. If he were thinking clearly, he
would have let her do so, and then after allowing her to lay him on
the dispensary’s bed, he could have convinced her to lie beside him
and show him some of that famous Risian hospitality. Instead, he
shook her hands off him and said, “What the hell is going on? Why
can’t I get a simple stinking drink, for crying out loud?”
“Oh, shut up,” said one of his fellow passengers, a disheveled,
unshaven Ktarian, sitting with a hand draped over his eyes. “You’ll
get your precious wine when we get to Pacifica.”
“Pacifica? What happened to Risa?” No one answered him, and for
some reason, everyone turned away. But it hardly mattered; Pacifica,
he knew, was an ocean world, with lots of beautiful beaches…and
beautiful, four-breasted females. “When’ll we get there?” he asked,
suddenly impatient.
“Soon,” the Risian woman said. She still wasn’t smiling at him.
“Fine,” he said, thinking now that it would definitely be better to
find him some gorgeous, quadruply-endowed sea maiden, rather

than this cold fish. He stumbled back to the dispensary on his own
and fell into the bed, where he could dream of the warm beaches and
cool drinks waiting for him on Pacifica.
But somehow, those pleasant dreams did not come, and he instead
lay awake, recalling the strangely haunted looks on the faces of the
other passengers.

Yesterday, Miranda Kadohata considered herself the happiest
woman on the face of Cestus III.
She had been scheduled to leave Lakeside at midday, in order to
travel to Earth and report back aboard the Enterprise. However, now
that she was going to Pacifica with Doctor Crusher, her stay on
Cestus had been extended by an extra half a day. She and her
family—husband Vicenzo Farrenga, five-year-old daughter Aoki,
and twin one-year-olds Colin and Sylvana—took advantage of this
temporary reprieve by taking an all-day outing to April Beach. They
spent the entire, perfectly sunny day playing in the crystal blue
waters, building sand castles, and chasing an oversized beach ball up
and down the shore. Aoki ran along the water’s edge, turning
fearless cartwheels, while the twins primarily sat under the
umbrellas, fascinated by the way they could grab handfuls of sand,
and how it would then slip away between their fingers. The family
stayed until Cestus began its descent beyond the water’s western
shore, turning the surface shimmering shades of orange and red. At
home, as Miranda tucked Aoki into her bed, her daughter told her,
“Mummy, this was the best day ever!” Miranda told her she agreed
as she gave her a good-night kiss and turned out the light.
Today, all that changed.

Today, Miranda appeared at the family breakfast table in her gold
Starfleet uniform shirt and gray uniform slacks, with the matching
gray jacket, with its freshly shined Starfleet arrowhead emblem
pinned to the breast, draped over her forearm. Even the babies
seemed to realize the significance of her wardrobe choice this
morning: Mummy was going away today.
Miranda forced herself to smile through her feelings. “Good
morning, loves,” she said, circling the table to give Aoki a peck on
the cheek. The little girl pouted and tried to squirm away, but her
mother still managed to get her lips to their target. She then moved
over to where Colin and Sylvana, side-by-side in their tandem
highchair, looked back and forth between their mother and the
porridge bowl from which their father had been feeding them.
Miranda kissed each of their foreheads, at the same time grabbing a
nearby towel and wiping wayward lumps of cereal from their cheeks
and chins.
Then she turned to her husband. Vicenzo smiled back at her as they
shared a quick peck, though she could plainly see his smile was just
as forced as her own. “Good morning, sweetheart,” he said. “You
sleep okay?”
“Oh, just fine,” she said as she draped her jacket over the back of her
chair. Colin had been up once during the night, wanting a bottle and
a clean nappy. Even though Vicenzo had been taking care of the
midnight cries all by himself, Miranda had trained all her career to
wake quickly in case of an emergency, and had beaten him out of
bed and into the nursery. And at any rate, this was a far more
pleasant type of emergency than she’d had to deal with for the past
several months on Enterprise.
She took her seat and reached for the jam jar at the center of the
table. As she spooned a dab on her toast, Aoki asked in a small
voice, “How long till you gotta go, Mummy?”
“Just about an hour now, sweetie,” Miranda told her.
“Will you be home for my birfday?”

Miranda lightly bit her bottom lip. “I don’t know, love,” she
answered, in complete honesty. The Enterprise, as far as she knew,
still hadn’t gotten its new assignment, and with so much uncertain in
the wake of the Borg attack, heaven only knew where she might be
three weeks from now, when her firstborn turned six years old. “But
I promise to try.”
“Okay,” Aoki mumbled into her breakfast bowl. At five years and
eleven months, she was well aware that “I’ll try” was a far lesser
promise than “Yes, I will.” The rest of the morning meal passed in
relative silence, with Aoki poking at her cold and clumpy porridge
for several minutes before asking to be excused.
Aoki played quietly in her bedroom until the Runabout Genesee,
Miranda’s assignment for the next several days, hailed to let her
know they were coming out of warp and entering the Cestus system.
She had to call twice before her daughter emerged with a sullen
expression on her face. “Come here, my love,” Miranda said softly,
getting down to Aoki’s height on one knee. She wrapped her arms
tightly around her daughter and whispered in her ear, “I’m going to
miss you so much, my big girl.” Aoki did not hug back right away,
withholding her affection as a way of protesting her mother’s
departure, as Counselor Troi had explained to Miranda after the first
time it happened a couple years ago. But her resistance wore down,
and her tiny arms went around Miranda’s neck. “I’ll miss you too,
Mummy,” she said in a half sob.
After a long minute they disengaged, and Miranda turned to grace
Colin and Sylvana, standing up in their walkers, with their own
kisses and murmurs of endearment. She stood then to face her
husband, but before she could say anything, he turned and looked
past her. “Aoki, look after your brother and sister while I say goodbye to Mummy outside.”
The girl nodded, and Vicenzo opened the front door onto the porch.
Miranda grabbed her duffel bag and followed him out, wondering
what this was about; Vicenzo had never been shy about showing

affection in front of the children.
As the door closed behind them, Vicenzo turned back to his wife,
looking deep into her dark, almond-shaped eyes. He reached out to
run his fingertips across her finely sculpted cheek and brush her dark
hair back. “This is never going to get any easier,” he told her.
Miranda smiled sadly and put her arms around his waist. “No, I’m
afraid it isn’t,” she whispered into his chest as she laid her head on
his shoulder.
“So don’t go.”
Miranda shook her head back and forth in answer to his routine plea.
“You know I don’t want to. You—”
She cut herself off when Vicenzo broke their embrace and took a
step backwards. She looked up at him, surprised by the intensity
with which he stared back at her. “Then don’t,” he said, his tone
almost desperately urgent. “Stay here, with us.”
“Vicenzo? Why are you trying to make this harder than it already
is?”
“We spent six days on that transport, Miranda,” he said. “Six days
completely cut off from the entire galaxy, having absolutely no idea
what was going on. All I knew was, the Borg had already destroyed
a dozen other planets in sneak attacks, and that my wife, up on the
front lines of the war, had told me to grab the kids and run, get off
Cestus III as fast as we could.”
Miranda said nothing. She had contacted Vicenzo shortly before the
Enterprise made its first excursion through the subspace tunnel
network the Borg had been using to violate Federation space,
worried that she might not make it back. Regulations forbade her to
tell him how dire the Federation’s tactical situation had been at that
point, but she was able to get her point across, urging him to take the
children to visit the farming colony on Kennovere, and quickly,
before the growing season ended. A transparent cover, but it had
gotten the message through.
“I knew Cestus was lost,” he continued. “The world where I grew

up, home to everything I ever knew or loved—gone. But that didn’t
matter. Because all of this,” he said, swinging his arm around to take
in the entire planet around them, “paled in comparison to the thought
that I had lost you.” Tears started to stream down his craggily lined
cheeks. “It wasn’t until I saw you in the front door when we got
back that I could let go of that feeling. But now you’re leaving
again…and I just can’t bear the thought of ever going through
anything remotely like that again.”
Miranda was speechless. She and Vicenzo had been married for
close to ten years now, and she’d never seen him so distraught at the
end of a leave. Before she could form any kind of appropriate
response to him, her combadge chirped, then spoke in Beverly
Crusher’s voice: “ Runabout Genesee to Commander Kadohata.”
Miranda lifted a hand to tap the device on her chest, but Vicenzo
caught her wrist. “Don’t go,” he said plaintively. “Tell Doctor
Crusher…something.”
They looked deep into each other’s eyes for several long seconds,
then Miranda pulled her hand free. “Kadohata here.”
“We’re in orbit and ready to beam you up, Miranda.”
“Stand by, please, Doctor.” She cut the comm channel, and looked
back to her husband. “Tell her what?”
“I don’t care. Anything. I…I know I’m being selfish and
inconsiderate and not respecting your choice to live this life, but the
thought of you flying off into danger again—”
“We’re going to Pacifica, love…”
“And then from there?” her husband asked. “Will you only be
assigned safe missions from now on?”
“Vicenzo, I have a duty—”
“You have a family!”
Miranda was knocked back a mental step by the vehemence of that
last outburst, and all that was implied by it. “You’ve known I was a
Starfleet officer from the day you met me,” she almost shouted back.
“It’s hardly fair for you to stand here now and tell me you’re

unhappy with my career choice.”
“And what part of this is fair to the children?” Vicenzo demanded.
“Is it fair they hardly know their mother? Is it fair that every time
she leaves home, it might be for the last time?”
Miranda was spared the need to answer that question by an insistent
beep from her combadge. “Crusher to Kadohata. I’m sorry to
interrupt your good-byes, Miranda, but we really—”
“It’s okay, Doctor,” she interrupted. “One to beam up.”
“Miranda, no…” Vicenzo protested. He tried to reach out for her,
almost as if he thought he might physically restrain her, but the
transporter effect happened far too quickly.
And yet, even as the runabout’s transporter alcove took shape
around her, the image of Vicenzo’s face, and the look of hurt he
wore as he watched her beam away, stayed with her.

People never realized how good they had things until they were
deprived of the small comforts they took for granted.
For instance, after serving for so many years aboard Starfleet’s
biggest top-of-the-line vessels, sharing the limited living space of a
Danube-class runabout with four others felt incredibly confining and
claustrophobic. After trying to catch a few hours of sleep on the
narrow little shelf that passed for a bunk, constantly shifting position
in an effort to make herself comfortable (which would have been a
futile exercise, she suspected, even if she wasn’t pregnant), Crusher
gave up, sat up, and padded in her stockinged feet to the door of the
tiny cabin.
“Good morning, Doctor-Commander,” said Doctor Meron Byxthar,
the Betazoid sociologist Barash had recruited for this mission, as

Beverly emerged into the communal living area. Byxthar was an
unassuming-looking woman Beverly’s age, about half a head
shorter, with medium-length hair dyed a nondescript shade of
brown. She did not turn to face Beverly, but kept her attention on the
man across the table from her.
The man, Paul Dillingham, looked up briefly, greeted Beverly with a
half-muttered “Doctor Crusher,” and immediately turned his
attention back to the table. An array of tiles, not unlike dominos,
were arranged between the two, forming some sort of pattern that
only an aficionado of the Betazoid game Rivers could discern.
Dillingham, an individuals’ rights attorney—also in the employ of
the Federation government—was clearly less than an aficionado, and
chewed on his salt-and-pepper mustache as he pondered which of
his tiles to place where.
Crusher returned the greetings as she headed for the replicator.
“Croissant with icoberry jam and…cold milk,” she told the
computer, pausing to reflect on just how good a cup of coffee would
taste just now.
“Most physicians say caffeine, in moderate amounts, is acceptable
for pregnant humanoids,” Byxthar said while still watching
Dillingham. Then she turned and said, “Sorry, Doctor-Commander,”
in response to Beverly’s unspoken irritation at having her thoughts
read.
Crusher said nothing as she took a long, unsatisfying sip. As much
as Doctor Byxthar had tried to maintain an inconspicuous
appearance, in order to better blend in with refugee communities and
make her observations, she’d made little effort thus far to similarly
tone down her personality. As a noted and respected expert on the
issues concerning dislocated persons and cultures, she had balked
when Crusher first requested that she also be addressed as Doctor,
rather than Commander. “Or ‘Beverly’ works, too,” she had added
with a smile. Byxthar rejected that idea, and on her own came up
with the compromise title Doctor-Commander. Beverly finally just

shrugged and resolved to put up with it for the few days they had to
work together.
She took a seat at the table and tore into her flaky pastry while
watching the game unfold before her. Though Beverly only
understood the game in the most general sense (she had tried to learn
it once during a stay at a Lake Cataria resort on Betazed), she knew
enough to tell that Dillingham was playing out of his depth. Each of
the tiles represented either a piece of land or a body of water. The
goal of each player was to shape the contours of the land between
them, so as to direct the flow of water, to moderately irrigate their
own territory, or to cause either flooding or drought to their
opponent’s.
Dillingham maintained a cool, serious demeanor and gave no hint of
acknowledgment that his land was as dry as Tyree. After a long
moment of consideration, he selected one of the tiles from the hand
in front of him and placed it near the center of those already laid out.
Whatever he had done, it apparently was not good for Byxthar, who
had been poised to place a tile of her own down immediately
following Dillingham’s turn, and now paused to reconsider. Beverly
wondered, as she spooned a daub of pre serves on her croissant, how
the Betazoid could have been so surprised by the shift in the game.
“Because reading an opponent’s thoughts would be unsporting,”
Byxthar said as she studied the game tiles.
Crusher furrowed her brow. “But reading everyone else’s isn’t a
problem.”
“You wanted to know, Doctor-Commander,” Byxthar answered, still
not looking up.
Crusher stopped herself before making a retort, and shoved a large
chunk of croissant in her mouth to make the temptation to say
anything easier to resist. She reminded herself that once they got to
Pacifica, both would be doing their own work, without much need to
interact with one another.
The comm then came to life, and a voice from the runabout’s

cockpit said, “Gliv to Crusher. We’re approaching the Cestus
system and dropping out of warp.”
“Acknowledged,” she answered, brushing the crumbs from the front
of her uniform. After returning her empty plate and half-full glass to
the replicator, Crusher wended her way toward the front of the ship.
In the cockpit, Ensign Thur chim Gliv, a young Tellarite with a coat
of short rust-brown fur, turned in his seat as he sensed another
person enter. “Sir.”
“Ensign,” Crusher said. Through the forward portals, over the pilot’s
shoulder, she saw the bright green-blue globe growing closer. “Have
you hailed Commander Kadohata yet?”
“Not just yet, sir,” Gliv answered. “Cestus Orbital Control has us
holding just beyond standard orbital distance at the moment.”
Crusher was about to ask why that was, but then shifted her attention
to the short-range sensor readout, and saw the answer for herself: at
least six dozen other ships, ranging from shuttlecraft to class-V
transports, were in immediate range, all identified with civilian
registries. The largest share originated from Regulus, one of the first
planets obliterated following the Borg invasion. That planet had had
barely two hours’ warning before the devastating armada swept
across their system. At first, Crusher found herself happily surprised
by how many Regulans had managed to escape before it fully
dawned on her what a small percentage of that world’s total
population even this volume of ships represented.
“Cestus Control to Runabout Genesee,” the voice over the comm
interrupted her thoughts. “You are cleared to enter standard orbit.
Coordinates are being transmitted now. Please do not deviate from
these coordinates!”
Gliv bristled at the sharp tone of the controller. What Beverly
perceived as stress in the man’s voice—no doubt he had rarely, if
ever, had to deal with so many vessels at once—the Tellarite
apparently interpreted as a suggestion that the pilot would refuse to
follow instructions. But all he said in response to the perceived

insult was, “Acknowledged. And I hope you have a nice day, too.”
The comm channel bleeped and went quiet without any response
from the planet. Gliv ran his cloven hands over his control panel,
and Crusher watched as he maneuvered expertly around the satellites
and other vessels currently circling Cestus III. After a minute, he
powered down the main impulse engines and announced, “We are
now in standard orbit directly above the city of Lakeside, the most
unimaginatively named settlement in the sector,” he added while
flashing a row of small, stubby teeth.
Crusher suppressed a desire to wince. “Ensign, that line wasn’t all
that funny the first dozen times you used it.”
The Tellarite’s smile disappeared. “It wasn’t?”
“I’m afraid not,” she told him with a sympathetic smile. The young
ensign had been trying his best to ingratiate himself to her and the
rest of the team, but so far all his attempts at humor and camaraderie
had come across as clumsy and forced.
As Gliv reflected on Crusher’s critique of his comedic performance,
the doctor slipped into the chair beside him and tapped into the
comm system. “Runabout Genesee to Commander Kadohata.”
“Kadohata here,” came the response.
“We’re in orbit and ready to beam you up, Miranda.”
“Stand by, please, Doctor.”
“Of course,” Crusher said, just as she heard the audio channel being
closed on the other end, and smiled bittersweetly. She and Jack had
gone through such good-byes too many times (and, at the same time,
far too few times), and she was willing to give Kadohata the time
she needed with her husband and small children.
“I don’t believe I made my observation about Lakeside’s name as
many as a dozen times,” Gliv said, interrupting Crusher’s thoughts.
Crusher turned and gave the Tellarite a deadpan stare. “I was using
hyperbole, for comic effect.”
Gliv pondered that a moment, then his lips parted to display both
rows of teeth. “Aahh! Very good, sir!” Whether his amusement was

real or just an effort to humor a senior officer, Crusher could not say.
The engineer was the one team member who showed genuine
enthusiasm for this mission; he’d freely admitted that he hoped it
would serve as a step toward a more prestigious posting than the one
he’d held at Lunar Colony One for the last year. And he seemed to
have no issue with flattering the team leader during this brief
mission if that meant getting a good report in his file.
After what she thought was a generous extra amount of time,
Crusher keyed the comm panel again. “Crusher to Kadohata. I’m
sorry to interrupt your good-byes, Miranda, but we really—”
“It’s okay, Doctor,” Kadohata answered. “One to beam up.”
Crusher turned to Gliv, who had already turned to the console at his
left-hand side, awaiting the order. “Ensign, energize.”
In the narrow alcove at the rear of the cockpit, a column of swirling
matter and energy illuminated and faded, leaving a human woman
with dark hair and mixed European and Asian facial features. She
stepped forward, hitching the strap of her duffel bag up over her
shoulder, and stood at attention as she faced Crusher. “Permission to
come aboard?” she asked, with a British-sounding accent.
“Granted,” Crusher said, smiling. “How was your leave?”
“Good, quite good,” she answered as she turned to the Tellarite now
stepping toward her.
“Commander Miranda Kadohata,” Crusher said while gesturing,
“Ensign Thur chim Gliv, our engineering specialist.”
Kadohata put out her right hand. “How do you do?”
Gliv smiled as he wrapped his thick fingers around the human
woman’s. “That’s for me to know, and you to find out!” he said,
then waited for the gales of laughter he’d been sure would result.
Miranda stared at him, and then at Beverly, bewildered. “Never
mind,” the doctor said. “Ensign Gliv’s sense of humor is still a work
in progress.”
Gliv let out a bark of a laugh. “A work in progress! I like that!”
Crusher sighed. “Take us out of orbit, Ensign, and resume course to

Pacifica, maximum warp.”
As Gliv returned to the pilot’s seat, Crusher escorted Kadohata to
the aft of the runabout, where she introduced her to Byxthar and
Dillingham, and showed her where to stow her gear. The Rivers
game had apparently been fought to a kind of stalemate, though
neither competitor seemed anywhere near willing to concede.
The two Enterprise officers then moved forward into the cockpit.
“We’ve cleared the Cestus system,” Gliv reported. “ETA to Pacifica
is eight and a half hours.”
“Very good,” Crusher answered, then asked, “Are you ready to be
relieved, Ensign?” Gliv had been at the helm since coming aboard at
Luna.
He grinned. “Do Terran bears defecate in wooded—?” He quickly
stopped himself after reading the reactions of the two senior officers,
dropped his smile, and said, “I mean, yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”
“I bet he’s a blast at parties,” Kadohata said once Gliv had left the
cockpit and she had assumed the pilot’s seat.
“Only when he leaves,” Crusher replied, then added, “Damn, now
he’s got me doing it.” She sighed and fell back into the copilot’s
chair. “So…leave was good?” she asked, folding one leg underneath
herself.
“Yes,” Miranda said, shooting the doctor a quick sideways glance,
and then forcing a smile for her. “The twins have grown so much, I
couldn’t believe it. And Aoki…she’s fearless, that one. You should
have seen her the other day at the beach.”
Crusher nodded indulgently. “And Vicenzo?”
“Well…Vicenzo…he’s…” Kadohata trailed off, and then broke a
long pause with a shoulder-slumping sigh. “Well, we had a bit of a
row just now as I was leaving.”
“I see,” Crusher said neutrally, then waited to see if the other woman
would elaborate.
“He asked me to go AWOL!” She shook her head in disbelief, even
though she was the one telling the story. “To just leave you high and

dry on this mission.”
“Really?” Crusher said, raising an eyebrow.
“I know he frets when I’m away,” Kadohata said. “I fret, too,
wondering what might happen to him or the little ones. But he knew
from the first that I was in Starfleet. Good heavens, the only reason
we met in the first place is because a ship got blown up out from
under me!”
Crusher nodded, recalling the story of how Kadohata had returned to
Cestus after the destruction of the Enterprise-D at Veridian III, and
met her future husband while attending a baseball game. “This is my
life, my career,” Kadohata continued. “And I’ve finally reached this
position, after almost twenty years: second officer of the Enterprise!
Two steps away from having my own command! But all he cares
about is…”
“…is you.”
Kadohata turned toward Crusher at that, and suddenly, every bit of
anger drained from her face. “And then I just walked out on him—
well, beamed out—right in the middle of our tiff. The last words we
had…” She trailed off and put a hand over her face. “Bleeding hell.
I’m just a selfish git, aren’t I?”
“No more so than the millions of other Starfleet officers in your
situation,” Crusher said. “Not to mention every other sailor and
explorer since the dawn of time.”
Kadohata shook her head, unconvinced. “It just keeps getting harder.
When it was just the two of us, oh, we’d cry and kiss and have truly
epic good-bye sex.” She shared a sly smile with Beverly on that
point. “But there was never a question that I wouldn’t be shipping
out. After Aoki came along, though…”
Crusher nodded. “A baby changes the whole dynamic,” she said,
reflecting on Jean-Luc’s initial reaction to her heading up this
mission. Once upon a time, he had trusted her to take command of
an entire starship; but now that she was carrying his child…
“Same with you and the captain?” Kadohata asked, and for a

moment, Crusher thought she was dealing with her Betazoid team
member again.
“No,” she quickly lied. All other things being equal, she would have
had no problem commiserating with Kadohata about her husband.
But as her husband was also the other woman’s commanding
officer, a certain amount of discretion had to be maintained. “I was
actually thinking about me and Jack, right after Wesley was born,”
she covered.
“Oh?”
Crusher nodded, even as she wondered why those decades-old, longburied memories had suddenly jumped into her conscious mind. “It
wasn’t quite the same situation, of course, since we were both
Starfleet—I’d earned my commission after my four years pre-med. I
was in my second year of medical school, and Jack was on the
Stargazer. They took off on a year-long deep-space exploration
mission as soon as we got back from our honeymoon, which was
hard enough for us to deal with. Then I found out, four weeks later,
that I was pregnant.” The memories started to flood back, the fear
and the joy and the panic of being twenty-four years old and
expecting, with her new husband hundreds of light-years away.
“A whole year?” Kadohata asked, eyes widening.
“That was actually one of the Stargazer’s shorter missions,” Crusher
answered. It was a bit strange to realize how foreign the idea of such
lengthy missions had become in recent decades, at least until the
launch of the Luna-class. “And Jean-Luc, bless him, found a reason
to get back to a starbase halfway through, and let Jack take his
paternity leave.” Beverly had actually cursed Picard’s name at the
time, as Jack had not made it to Earth until five days after Wesley
was born. By the time he did make it, though, she had forgotten all
her anger—forgotten everything, in fact, except for how much she
loved this man, how happy she was to have him with her and their
child.
The weeks that followed were among the fond est of Beverly’s

memories. Jack and Wesley bonded instantly, to the new father’s
surprise. He would sit for hours by the baby’s crib, staring in
undisguised wonder. During his waking hours, Wesley would stare
right back, seeming to display a degree of cognition well beyond
that of an average newborn.
Theirs was the very picture of domestic bliss, until the day Starfleet
showed up at the door to the Crushers’ San Francisco apartment.
“Beverly Crusher?” said the tall, grim-faced man in an immaculately
pressed maroon uniform jacket.
“Yes?” she said, rocking from one foot to the other as the baby
started to drift off in her arms.
The officer glanced at the baby briefly, and then met Beverly’s eyes
again. “I’m looking for your husband.”
She felt her chest tighten as she stepped back away from the door,
allowing the security officer in. She led him into the apartment’s
small kitchen, where Jack was fixing sandwiches for their lunch.
“Hello?” he said as the stranger entered, looking a bit less surprised
than Beverly might have expected.
“Lieutenant Crusher. I’m glad to have found you here. Commander
David Gold.” He offered his right hand, which Jack reluctantly
shook. “Your C.O. is going to be relieved to learn you’re alive—
though you may not be after he gets his hands on you.”
“What?” Beverly moved around the kitchen table to Jack’s side.
“What do you mean, relieved he’s alive?”
Gold raised one thick dark eyebrow up his high forehead. “Well, he
doesn’t report back to his ship at the end of his leave time, there’s no
message, no excuses…”
Beverly’s mouth fell open. “End of his leave?” Her head snapped
right and she looked up at her husband. “Jack?”
Jack gave both her and Gold a sheepish grin. “Umm…what day is
today?”
The superior officer crossed his arms over his chest and said, “Five
days after your captain expected you back aboard the Stargazer.”

Jack winced, just as Beverly did. “Commander…sir, I know that I’m
technically absent without official leave, but…Please, this is my first
leave since my first son was born. I missed his birth already, so I
wanted to make the most of what time I did have, and…I guess I just
didn’t want to think about leaving him, and…well, I guess I lost
track of the days. I know that’s a piss-poor excuse, but if there’s any
way we could…”
“Overlook your oversight, and make this go away without formal
charges?” Gold asked, giving him a stern, unyielding glare. Then a
small grin cracked his façade. “I’m not Shore Patrol, Lieutenant. I’m
just an old friend of your captain’s, from way back. He knew I was
on Earth, and asked me to check up on you, your wife and son, make
sure nothing had happened.”
Beverly studied Gold’s face. “Then…Jack’s not…?”
The older man gave her a kindly smile. “I have six kids of my own.
Not so much kids anymore, though,” he added, and for a moment a
look of melancholy crossed his face. Then he turned to Jack. “My
ship, the Schiaparelli, is leaving orbit within an hour. You get your
tuchus on board, we can take you as far as the Denobulan sector.
And I’ll see what I can do to smooth things over with Jean-Luc for
you.”
“I’d appreciate that, Commander. Thank you, sir.”
Gold nodded to both Jack and Beverly, then reached out to gently
brush his fingertips across the downy-haired top of Wesley’s head
before turning and letting himself out.
“That was a close one, huh?” Jack said as he collapsed back into his
chair and picked up his sandwich.
“Jack! I can’t believe you just lied like that to a superior officer—
and a friend of Captain Picard’s!”
“Lied?” Jack asked, perfectly innocent.
“You forgot when your leave ended?” Beverly shook her head at the
ludicrousness of that claim. “You know the captain is never going to
believe that.”

“Don’t worry about it,” Jack told her in a reassuring tone. “Jean-Luc
will bark a little, put a mild reprimand in my file, and that’ll be that.
You know what they say: it’s easier to ask for forgiveness than for
permission.”
“‘Don’t worry about it,’” she repeated in disbelief. “You’ve
technically deserted, you’re taking terrible advantage of your
friendship with Captain Picard…and you’re not even going to make
your ride to Denobula if you keep sitting there!”
“Yeah,” Jack said, staring down at the half-eaten sandwich sitting in
front of him, drumming on the tabletop lightly with his fingertips.
Beverly sensed the sudden, uncharacteristic swing in Jack’s mood.
Shifting the drowsing baby in her arms, she pulled out another chair
and sat at the table beside him. “Jack?”
“How can I leave, Beverly?” he whispered, still not looking up. “I’m
a father now. How can I?”
“You have to. You have your duty, your career.”
He shook his head slowly. “My father was almost never around. He
didn’t want to be; he made it real clear to me, for as long as I’ve
been old enough to understand, that he thought getting married and
having a kid was a big mistake.” He turned and looked at his wife
and child then. “I don’t want Wesley to ever feel like that.”
“He won’t,” Beverly answered automatically.
“But if I leave…” He looked into the boy’s face, and the boy looked
back.
“He’ll know you left for a reason,” Beverly told him, putting one
hand out and resting it on the back of Jack’s. “Because you’re an
honorable man, a man who keeps his promises and lives up to his
responsibilities.”
“How can he know that?”
“Because he’s going to grow up the son of two Starfleet officers,”
she promised him. “And we’ll have our entire lives to let him know
how much we care for him.”

“Bev…if this all is supposed to make me feel better…”
Crusher blinked and stared at Kadohata. How long had she been
talking, lost in her own reminiscences? And what had been the point
she had been trying to make to the other woman when she started
out? “I’m sorry, I think I got a little off track there. But the thing is,
you have to be true to yourself. You’re a wife, a mother, and a
Starfleet officer. If you put limits on yourself—any one of those
facets—you’re not only denying yourself, but denying Vicenzo and
the children of the person you really are.”
“I suppose,” Kadohata said as she pondered that. “Thank you, Bev.”
“You’re welcome,” she said. They sat for a moment longer, in
companionable silence, as the stars streaked past through the
forward viewports.
“I should really call Vicenzo…” Miranda said.
“I’ll give you some privacy,” Beverly answered with a smile,
already halfway out the cockpit door.

5

“It should have been me.”
Doctor Hegol Den said nothing, but just continued to stare placidly
at the young Betazoid man sitting on the couch opposite him.
Lieutenant Rennan Konya in turn stared at his own lap, fidgeting
with his hands. After a moment, the counselor prompted him: “Why
do you say that?”
“I’m the assistant chief of security,” Konya snapped back. “I was the
one telling them what to do, and now they’re dead! These are guys
who were fighting Jem’Hadar when I was still going through basic
training; what the hell am I doing, giving them orders, getting them
killed?”
The Bajoran counselor continued to listen with one ear as he jotted
notes on his padd. He’d been hearing many cases of survivor guilt
since the end of the Borg’s assault; he was sure he’d be dealing with
plenty more such cases for months, if not years, to come. He
continued to listen to Konya pour out his guilt and grief and shame,
only occasionally prodding him. At the end of the session, Den
urged the lieutenant to try and take an objective look at himself and
reconsider the harsher judgments he had made.
Once Konya left, Hegol heaved a mighty sigh. It had been another
full day of appointments, and, as his rumbling stomach was
reminding him, he had worked straight through lunch. The muscles
of his back and legs protested as he pushed himself up out of his
chair for the first time in hours, and crossed the room to the
replicator.
Just as he was retrieving his veklava and jumja iced tea, his door
chime sounded. His shoulders sagged, and just for a moment, he
considered simply pretending he wasn’t there. His sense of

responsibility to those who needed him—plus the realization that the
ship’s computer would give away his location, anyhow—won out,
and he called, “Who is it?”
“It’s Commander Worf, Doctor,” replied the first officer through the
comm.
Of course. “Come in,” Hegol said, trying to keep the weariness from
his voice.
The Klingon officer entered and stopped just inside the door when
he saw Hegol getting ready to eat. “Doctor. I apologize for
disturbing you during your off-duty time.”
“It’s all right, Commander,” Hegol said, gesturing for him to come
inside. “The price I pay for having no interruptions while I’m on
duty. Have a seat. Can I get you anything?”
“No. Thank you.” Worf hesitated before taking the seat opposite the
counselor at his desk, giving Hegol the opportunity to take a large
bite, happily silencing his stomach. “I was hoping you had
completed your evaluation of those crew members who’d requested
psychiatric leave,” Worf then said.
Hegol nodded as he took a sip of tea. “I just saw the last of them.
Ensigns Bulthaus and H’Mupal, I would recommend be transferred
out of the security section, at least temporarily.”
Worf scowled as he considered that. “Commander La Forge has
been asking for additional assistance in engineering to deal with our
still-pending repairs.”
“Good,” Hegol said, swallowing another bite of veklava. “Let them
be part of fixing things for a while. That should be just the kind of
therapy they need, after being part of so much destruction.”
“And what of the others?”
“The others…” Hegol sighed, his fork hovering above his plate.
“They’re all suffering from post-traumatic stress to one degree or
another, but they at least recognize they need help working through
their issues. With continued regular counseling, I don’t see that any
of them would be unable to carry out their duties.”

Worf nodded, seemingly satisfied with this report. Hegol hesitated a
moment before broaching another subject, but then said, “Actually,
Commander, I’m far more concerned about the ones who refuse to
face their emotional issues and try to behave as if nothing is wrong.
Lieutenant Choudhury, for example.”
The commander stiffened in his seat. “Lieutenant Choudhury?”
“Yes. Our chief of security has seen her entire planet obliterated by
the Borg and most likely lost her entire family. Yet, to see her on the
ship here these past couple of days, you would never know anything
had happened.”
Worf narrowed his eyes at him. “Perhaps you just don’t know the
lieutenant well enough to see how she is coping with her losses.”
Hegol shrugged slightly. “I suppose that could be so. I haven’t
actually talked with her at any length since her return. Although,
that’s another cause for concern.”
“What is?”
“That she hasn’t come to me,” Hegol said. “Or to any counselor
since her loss. In point of fact, according to her records, Lieutenant
Choudhury has not voluntarily sought or received any counseling
since her first year at Starfleet Academy.”
“Is that so unusual?” the first officer challenged him. “Not every
Starfleet officer needs to undergo counseling.”
“Commander, I know that Klingon culture doesn’t put much
credence in what I do—”
Worf gave him a frown that verged on being a snarl. “You must also
know that I was close friends with one of your predecessors, Deanna
Troi, and that I often welcomed her counsel.”
Hegol held his tongue. He indeed did know about Worf’s past
relationship with Deanna Troi, but chose not to express any opinion
on that particular topic. “Commander, when I was in the Resistance,
I had a colleague named Tafka. He was a deeply religious man who
believed in peace, yet just as devoted a fighter as any of us, knowing
if we were ever going to get our planet back, we could give the

Cardies no quarter. But each night he prayed to the Prophets and
promised to walk Their path. Well, the Occupation ended, and Tafka
entered the monastery. Two months later, he had killed himself,
leaving a note saying the Prophets could never forgive him for all
he’d done.”
“And you believe Lieutenant Choudhury is capable of such a thing?”
Worf asked, almost sounding personally offended.
Hegol kept himself perfectly calm and still as he answered,
“Lieutenant Choudhury, too, is a devout adherent of a belief system
that puts great importance on pacifism and peaceful behavior. She is
also a security officer who, over the course of her career, has
participated in three major interstellar wars, plus dozens of isolated
armed conflicts, and has just recently suffered a loss most of us
would consider inconceivable. Yet through all of this, she has
maintained this image of…I think the humans’ word for it is
‘unflappability.’
“As I admitted, I do not know her as…intimately as you do.” Hegol
noted the way Worf flinched at his choice of terms, and quietly filed
it away in his mind. “But at the same time, I have to be somewhat
concerned that beneath her serene exterior, she’s bottling up all of
this emotion, letting it build up. And without adequate outlet, all that
pressure…” With his hands and fingers, he silently mimed a small
explosion.
Worf glowered and stood up from his chair, looking as if he was
making a significant effort not to fling it across the room.
“Doctor…do you wish me to order Lieutenant Choudhury to see
you?”
Hegol would have liked to have answered yes to that, but the fact
was, he didn’t have a solid basis to do so. Still, he couldn’t simply
ignore the concerns he felt. Finally, he looked up and answered
Worf by asking, “Do you believe you would need to order her?”
Worf stared at him for a moment, then said, “Thank you for your
report, Doctor. Enjoy your meal,” after which he turned and left.

Hegol continued to stare after him for a few seconds after he’d gone,
wondering what precisely was triggering the Klingon’s apparent
protectiveness.
As if you don’t already have enough on your platter, he chided
himself, then put all thoughts of work aside as he turned his
attention back to his dinner.

The moment Arandis felt the transporter effect fade away, there
were a pair of cold, webbed hands on her back and bare shoulder,
pushing her roughly. “Move! Out of the way; there are more still
coming!” the owner of those clammy hands barked. She and the
three others she beamed down with were “escorted” down off a
transporter platform that sat off to the side of a large, elegant hotel
lobby. They were steered away from the check-in desk, though, into
a line that led out the exit doors.
“Wait, where are we going?” Arandis asked the Selkie male doing
the steering. He wore a loose, dark-blue tunic and matching pants,
which looked casual enough, but when added to the phaser rifle he
wielded, was clearly a law enforcer’s uniform. “We’ve come here
seeking sanctuary for those under our care. Why—”
“This isn’t a sanctuary,” the guard said, and accentuated that point
by motioning with his weapon for her to keep moving. “The Eden
Beach Hotel is merely allowing use of its lobby and transporters as a
favor to the government—that’s all. Its rooms are already full to the
gill crests.”
“Then where…?” Arandis managed to ask before the guard turned
his attention to others further back in line, ordering them to keep
moving. They were funneled, single file, toward a dead-eyed

Zakdorn woman sitting at a small table at one end of the lobby.
“Handonthescanner,” she said in a lifeless mumble. Despite
everything she’d been through, Arandis still had enough of her
Risian empathy to wonder how many survivors of the Borg this
worn woman had had to deal with. As the device hummed under
Arandis’s palm, the Zakdorn asked for her full legal name, planet of
birth, and most recent residence. “Thankyounext,” the Zakdorn
woman concluded, and before Arandis could ask any questions of
her own, another armed Selkie reached for her arm and maneuvered
her back into the queue leading out the doors.
“I thought the war was over. What’s with all the soldiers?” Arandis
turned her glare away from the guard and found herself standing
directly behind Donald Wheeler in line. He was looking far more
sober than he had earlier aboard the transport, thanks to a second
round of anti-inebriants and a few more hours of rest. Given their
present circumstances, however, she didn’t think a little dulling of
the senses would be terribly unwelcome.
Arandis turned to survey the faces of the Selkies populating the
hotel lobby, as they in turn watched the new arrivals shuffling for
the doors. After more than fifty years as a hospitality hostess, she’d
learned to read others quite well and to determine at a glance what
their troubles were, in order to relieve them. “They’re frightened,”
she said.
“Frightened? Of what?” Wheeler blanched slightly then as a thought
occurred to him. “The war is over, right? The Borg are really gone?”
“Yes,” Arandis said. “It’s us they’re frightened of. To them, we’re
invaders.”
“Khrught,” he said, turning the Tellarite profanity into a derisive
laugh. “Yeah, after all the Borg have done, we’re scary.” He gave
her a sideways glance and another of his inexpert leering smiles. “I
mean, you…If you were to tell me resistance was futile, I’d have no
reason to want to resist.”
Arandis ignored the inept and inapt compliment as they reached the

Eden Beach Hotel’s front entrance and stepped out into the brilliant
tropical sunlight. For a moment, as the sun’s warmth fell on her face
(coming from only a single star, but just as strong as Risa’s binary
pair), she closed her eyes and let the sounds and smells of the nearby
ocean tickle her senses. For just a fleeting moment, she allowed
herself to believe she was back home.
Then, she lowered her face and opened her eyes.
The street—a broad thoroughfare that led up from the ocean
between rows of hotels, restaurants, and entertainment parlors—had
become an ocean itself, swollen and surging with humanoid life.
Most of the beings, it seemed, wore expressions similar to
Wheeler’s—confusion and disbelief, in some verging on severe
illness.
“Inland!” shouted another of the Selkie soldiers. “Head inland! We
have food, shelter, and medical facilities prepared for you.”
“No wine, though, huh?” Wheeler said under his breath as he jostled
his way into the moving mob.
“No, probably not,” Arandis said, in a sarcastic tone she never
before would have dreamed using with a guest. But he wasn’t a
guest anymore—not of hers, anyhow. Arandis had always heard that
the Pacificans’ hospitality ran a close second to that of Risa. She had
to say, from her time here so far, she couldn’t agree.
After a few minutes of silence, Wheeler muttered something else.
“What?” Arandis asked him.
“Sherman’s Planet had a lot of great wines,” Wheeler repeated
himself quietly. “Nothing like Earth wines; the hybrid grapes they
grow—grew there won’t grow anywhere else. I went to this one
winery in New Sonoma a couple years ago, where they had a tasting
of this very rare vintage, this ’45 cabernet sauvignon. This was an
incredible wine. Full-bodied, dark, complex…it exploded on the
palate…and the finish…” He sighed rapturously at the memory;
then his expression turned bittersweet. “But I guess all Sherman’s
wines are rare vintages now, huh?” Arandis, having no idea what to

say, simply shrugged and nodded at her fellow refugee.
More people joined the throng from the hotels and resorts that lined
the main boulevard of this seaside village. At the edge of town, the
boulevard narrowed and became a path winding through a forest.
The canopy of leaves overhead cast them into shadow, and Arandis,
in the light, silky sun-dress and diaphanous wrap she’d had on when
the call to evacuate Risa went out, began to shiver slightly. She was
more than a little surprised when she felt Wheeler drape his beach
towel over her shoulders. She looked at him, but he’d turned away,
feigning interest in the endless range of trees off to the other side of
their trail.
Arandis had lost all sense of how long they’d been walking. From
the occasional glimpses she caught of Pacifica’s one sun through the
trees, she thought they must have been walking for hours—but then,
she had no idea how long a day on Pacifica was. Truth be told, she
wasn’t even sure how long it had been since they left Risa—she
thought it had to have been at least a full week, but at the same time,
that just seemed incredible. She trudged on, her feet aching, and her
stomach starting to gurgle audibly.
Finally, the parade of refugees came to a stop, still in the middle of
the woods. “So, where is this food and shelter they were talking
about?” Wheeler asked, sparking similar rumblings from the others
around them.
As the question of what was holding them up traveled from person
to person moving forward, an answer was passed back from those at
the site of the logjam: “We’re at a river,” an exhausted-looking
Efrosian woman announced from several meters ahead, “and they
won’t let us cross.”
“They are letting us cross,” the equally tired-looking Efrosian man
standing beside her contradicted. “It’s just a very narrow bridge.”
“A rickety, makeshift piece of pyurb is what it is,” another voice in
the crowd said.
“Well, what do the Selkies know from building bridges?” asked one

of the refugees pressing up from behind Arandis. “They can just
swim across.”
“Hell, I can swim…” a Caitian man growled.
“Oh, but they don’t want us contaminating their precious waters,” a
disheveled Yridian man sneered.
“Well, in your case…” Wheeler said under his breath while rolling
his eyes. Arandis, though, took a critical look at herself and her
disheveled and bedraggled traveling companions, and wondered if,
in their current conditions, that wasn’t a legitimate concern.
“Off-worlders!” The sound of the electronically amplified voice
instantly silenced the entire crowd. “We are trying to make this
resettlement as orderly and nondisruptive as possible. We ask that
you please remain patient and calm. We are all doing our best to
deal with extraordinary circumstances.”
The address by the anonymous Selkie peace-keeper did its job. The
crowd continued to move, slowly, at times almost imperceptibly.
When Arandis reached the now fabled bridge, she saw it was indeed
only wide enough for a single file of people to cross at once, and she
also noted that the gently flowing river it traversed was only a few
meters wide at this spot.
Looking upstream, she saw a small group of Selkies barely hidden
by a dipping tree branch, submerged almost to their eyes, observing
her and the others. They must have noticed her direct stare, and
quickly dropped below the water’s surface, but not before Arandis
could see the apprehension in those eyes. On the opposite bank,
once she’d made it across, she paused to glance upriver again. The
eyes were gone, but before she turned away, she saw a tiny bluishgreen face emerge from the water’s surface. A pair of oversized eyes
blinked, and the mouth opened, emitting a high-pitched gurgle that,
despite the immeasurable differences between species, was
unmistakably that of a baby.
“Idiot Selkie,” more than a few refugees muttered as they set foot on
the soil on the other side of the bridge. Arandis moved away from

the water and rejoined the crowd continuing up a gentle slope, away
from the riverbank.

As a kid, Trys Chen used to love exploring the Jefferies tubes of the
ships her mother and she had been assigned to. Even on the smallest
vessels, there were literally kilometers of the service tunnels for an
angry young half-breed pissed off at the universe to crawl into and
get away from all the drama of shipboard life. She particularly liked
the ones that ran over the reduced-gravity areas of the ship, like the
shuttlebay, where she could stretch out and almost float, as if in a
tub of dry water. She would camp out for hours there, just letting her
eyes trace the lines of the conduits and opti-cable lines, listening to
the soothing murmur of the ship’s mechanical operational systems.
Of course, the Jefferies tubes quickly lost their appeal once she
joined Starfleet herself, and got the occasional assignment to repair
this system or conduct a physical inspection of that piece of
equipment. And, after crawling through the Enterprise’s access
tunnels for almost half her regular duty shift, she came to utterly
despise the cramped, uncomfortable, overheated spaces.
“It’s something to keep you off the streets, at least,” she muttered to
nobody as she crawled along, echoing her mother’s usual response
whenever she would complain about a boring chore or school
assignment. Given the Enterprise’s current mission, there was no
call for her services as contact specialist, so Commander Worf
“suggested” that she “volunteer” to help out Commander La Forge.
There were a lot of tasks left undone at McKinley, and the
engineering section was seriously understaffed. And thus, Chen
found herself on her hands and knees in the gap between Decks 5

and 6, tricorder at the ready, confirming the ship’s internal sensor
system was working properly by scanning each of the sensor array
clusters, set at ten-meter intervals in the walls off the passageways,
one by one. “I’ll just bet Dina is behind this,” she spoke aloud again
as she confirmed yet another of the devices to be functioning
perfectly.
After verifying the next eight sensor clusters were sensing
accurately, and muttering curses against Elfiki, Worf, the staff of
McKinley Station, and the late Admiral Jefferies, she finally
received an anomalous reading from her tricorder. “Uh-oh,” she
said, and tapped her combadge. “Chen to engineering.”
“La Forge here. What is it, Trys?”
“Sir, I think I just found a bad unit. Section 06-43-F-Eta,” she read
off the nearest crossbeam.
“Okay, sit tight there,” La Forge said, and cut the connection.
Chen sat on her haunches and felt her muscles tighten for several
minutes, until finally, a hatch opened around a bend somewhere
ahead of her. Seconds later, Commander La Forge appeared,
crawling her way with an equipment case strapped over his shoulder.
“All right…let’s have a look.” La Forge took the tricorder from
Chen and quickly reviewed the diagnostic of the suspect unit. “Oh,
yeah, this one is shot,” he said, and then cracked open his case,
taking out a small handheld tool. “Good job, Trys,” he said with an
easy smile.
“And I only had to check five thousand other good ones to find it,”
Chen said, making sure she blunted the comment with a smile of her
own.
La Forge gave her a sympathetic look as he worked the cluster
assembly loose from its socket. “I know, it’s a dull, monotonous,
tiring job. But it’s better that we find these now, rather than
discovering in the middle of a crisis that we have gaps in the grid.
And I really do appreciate your pitching in,” he added with a grin.
The commander’s positive mood was contagious, and despite the

pain in her knees and shoulders, Chen’s smile became a bit more
genuine. “Thanks,” she said. “You’re in a pretty chipper mood,
considering it’s your butt on the line if all this work doesn’t get
done.”
La Forge glanced up from his work, with an odd look in his
mechanical eyes. For a second, Chen thought he would snap at her
to never mind about where his butt was or might end up. Instead,
what he said was, “I had a really good leave. I went home, spent
time with my sister and her daughter, and…worked my way through
some things that I’ve been letting eat at me for a while. So…yeah,
I’ve got my life, I have people who love me, and a career that I love.
I’m a lot better off than a lot of people are right now.”
Chen nodded somberly. “Like Taurik.”
La Forge raised his head again. “Yeah…Why Taurik, specifically?”
he asked, concern for his assistant plain on his face.
“No reason,” Chen said. “It’s just…well, you know, he was on
board the whole time we were at McKinley, supervising the repairs.”
“Yeah. I couldn’t have taken my leave if he hadn’t volunteered.”
“Volunteered?” Chen’s jaw dropped. That meant he had never had
any intention of going back home following the attacks, which
meant…“Son of a targ!”
“What?” La Forge asked, looking ready to back away from her.
“He was pulling our legs! A joke—some kind of payback for all
those pranks.”
“Taurik, joking?” La Forge asked, and as soon as he did, Chen
realized how unlikely that really was. “Joking about what?”
“He said he had a wife and daughter who were killed in ShiKahr.”
Geordi La Forge’s face fell. “He did.” The way he was looking at
her made Chen feel a half meter tall. “What makes you think he
would lie about something like that?”
“Well…he didn’t go back to Vulcan for the big mass memorial they
had there.” Chen had no idea what such a service for mourners who
refused to mourn would be like, but the news reports had said close

to fifty million had gathered in the shadow of Mount Seleya, so
there must have been something to it.
La Forge shook his head as he scanned the replacement sensor unit
with his tricorder. “What he told me was, it was more logical to
allow those of us whose families survived to spend our limited time
with the living, rather than for him to deny someone else that chance
so he could honor those who would be dead for eternity.”
Chen frowned as she tried to reconcile all of this in her mind. “I
don’t think I’ll ever understand Vulcans,” she said.
La Forge gave her a shrug as he closed up his case and started back
the way he had come. “Well, why should you be different from any
of them?” he asked, before disappearing back around a corner of the
tube.

6

Picard leaned forward in his seat, gripping both armrests as he
watched the invading ship turn and prepare to jump to warp. “Fire
phasers!” he ordered.

Energy beams bolted out from the Enterprise’s ventral emitters, one
hurtling across the other vessel’s bow, and the other striking its warp
coil. Their shields took most of the blow, but not enough; flashes of
light and energy showing through the warp plasma vents indicated a
cascading series of overloads, temporarily crippling the smaller
craft’s warp drive.
“They’re hailing us now,” Choudhury reported from her station.
“Yes, now they want to negotiate,” Picard muttered bitterly under
his breath. He stood from his seat and said, “On-screen.”
The image of the Ferengi ship was replaced by that of its young
commander, a boy barely past the Age of Attainment. “My
Federation friends, please,” he said, holding out both hands, wrists
together, in the customary sign of submission. “I fear there has been
a terrible misunderstanding.”
“Indeed there has,” Picard said. “Apparently, DaiMon, you are under
the impression that there’s some profit to be made in desecrating the
wreckage of Starfleet vessels and facilities within Federation space.”
The Ferengi put on a wounded expression. “Captain! I’m saddened
that this negative perception of Ferengi still persists among you
hew-mons to this day! I am an honest businessman, hoping to
provide my services and help the people of the Federation in this,
their time of need.”
If the DaiMon was trying to pacify the captain with his sympathetic
tone, he was having the exact opposite effect. “We tracked you here
from the former site of Starbase Leonov,” he said as he stepped
closer to the viewer, his voice rising. “And our sensors are reading
significant amounts of Federation-manufactured duranium and
tritanium alloys in your cargo holds!”
“Which I will offer back to the Federation—for a very reasonable
reclamation fee—so it can be reused in your rebuilding efforts.” The
Ferengi smiled, as if this were the most generous offer ever
imagined—which, to him, it may have been. “So, you see, we are
both on the same side—”

“And who asked you to collect this material from our battle sites?”
Picard demanded, making no effort to rein in his outrage.
“Nobody asked me,” the DaiMon said, with evident pride in his
initiative. “But, as the Ninth Rule says, opportunity plus instinct
equals profit.”
“Yes, well, in this instance, your math is off,” Picard informed him.
“You will drop your shields and release your cargo to us. And then
you will leave Federation space.”
The Ferengi’s snaggletoothed jaw dropped. “What? Captain, that’s
outrageous! You can’t simply—”
But Picard had turned his back on the protesting alien. “Lieutenant,”
he said to his tactical officer as he moved back to his seat, “arm
quantum torpedoes.”
Choudhury was caught off-guard by that order, and it took her a
moment, even after Picard signaled her with a wink, to respond,
“Quantum torpedoes. Aye, sir.” Picard turned back to the screen just
in time to see the properly intimidated DaiMon reach forward to his
control globe. The transmission ended then, and on-screen, Picard
and the bridge crew watched as the Ferengi ship’s cargo doors slid
open.
“Their shields are down,” Worf reported, reading from his chairside
display. “Have all the surrendered material beamed into Cargo Bay
Four,” he ordered the officer at ops, then said to Picard, “Well
played, sir.”
Picard answered with a dismissive snort. “Any schoolyard bully can
issue threats,” he said, even though he had no regrets about using
such blunt tactics against the scavenger, who was now moving off at
impulse, its holds empty.
“Still,” Worf said in a low grumble, “we have at least now
accomplished something.”
Picard raised an eyebrow at Worf’s sarcastic response. The
Enterprise’s mission was officially termed a rescue and recovery
patrol, though the job they were actually charged with, as the

president had phrased it, was “roving troubleshooter.” The captain
had been given a significant degree of latitude and autonomy to
respond to whatever crises he discovered, in whatever way he, in his
best judgment, saw fit.
Initially, Picard had thought it an unqualified vote of confidence
from his superiors, one that would allow him to help in ways he
couldn’t if given a single specific assignment, such as ferrying
emergency supplies to Vulcan or Qo’noS. In reality, though, being
roving troubleshooters meant they were traveling rather aimlessly,
like Don Quixote wandering a landscape mostly devoid of
windmills. They had encountered two small evacuation ship
convoys, though neither had been in need of any assistance. And the
“accomplishment” of tracking and recovering a few tons of debris
paled when one considered how much more of what had been lost at
Starbase Leonov could never be recovered.
There was, however, one remarkable incident during their recent
travels. “Computer,” Picard said, “replay visual log of our fly-by of
the Axanar system yesterday, twenty-two forty-two hours, full
magnification.”
On the main viewer, the stars jumped, and a blue-white globe filled
the bottom-right quadrant of the screen. As the planet slowly grew
larger, a strange speck of light appeared above one of the small
islands in the world’s primary ocean. The light expanded, and then
divided, until it became visible as separate distinct streaks, now
clearly identifiable as torpedo trails. They flew upward through the
highest reaches of Axanar’s atmosphere, and then the torpedoes
detonated, one after another.
“A twenty-one-gun salute,” Picard said, as the sequence of brilliant
starbursts continued. He turned back to Worf, but addressed the
entire bridge. “What we are doing is of value…if to no one else, then
to these people, and others like them. The entire Federation has
suffered a traumatic blow, and they need reassurance that they are
now safe. We are that assurance. We are that security. It is the heart

of our pledge as Starfleet officers: to serve and to protect the people
of the Federation. It is a responsibility that we should take pride in
performing.”
Picard looked again to Worf. “Understood, sir,” the first officer said,
matching the captain’s tone and also looking about the bridge and
making sure the rest of the crew received the captain’s message.
Picard could tell that his Klingon heart was not in it. Silently he
sighed, grateful at least that Worf’s ambassadorial experience
enabled him to hide his feelings from the rest of the crew.
The captain took his seat again. “Helm, resume on heading—”
“Sir?”
Picard and Worf both turned as Lieutenant Choudhury stepped down
from her tactical station, padd in hand, moving between them.
“Excuse me, Captain, but I’d like to recommend a variation to our
current patrol route.”
“Oh?” Picard said.
Choudhury nodded and offered him the padd. “There were four
Andorian cargo vessels that were part of the evacuation of Andor,
though in the chaos of the last hours before the Borg attack, they
never formally received clearance to break orbit, and so, they were
officially assumed destroyed. But, we have evidence they may in
fact have left before the Borg arrived: radio communication between
an unidentified Andorian ship and Ivor Prime, right after the news
broke about the end of the war.”
“And their most likely return route would be right along here,”
Picard said, tracing a finger across the padd’s display of an empty
region of Sector 003. “Have we picked up a distress call from this
region?”
“No, sir. But neither have they returned to the Andorian system, and
they certainly should have by now,” Choudhury said, fixing him
with a direct look that spoke of her professional conviction.
Picard considered the padd, and Choudhury, thoughtfully. In the
prelude to the Azure Nebula invasion, Choudhury was able to make

the leaps of logic that allowed her to accurately predict Korvat had
been in imminent danger of attack.
He then stepped up directly behind the flight controller’s forward
station. “Ensign Faur, lay in a new course, bearing 0-6-7 mark 3-4-4,
and engage at warp five. Initiate and continue long-range sensor
scans for anything that could possibly be a ship in distress.” Picard
turned back and gave Choudhury a broad smile. “Excellent work,
Lieutenant.”
“Only if we’re able to find and save anyone,” Choudhury demurred.
“Even then, most of the credit has to go to Ensign Rosado.”
Picard turned to the bridge library station, where the older human
woman stood. “She’s the one who’s been able to pull together all the
Andorians’ fragmented data—what wasn’t lost once Andor itself
was attacked,” Choudhury continued, “and then sync it with
communication logs, Starfleet logs, and civilian space traffic
movement, triangulating all that across the subspace comm relay
grid.”
Picard was duly impressed. Rosado had been head librarian at the
University of Bologna on Earth for close to fifty years before
resigning, and had then decided to start her second career in
Starfleet. Clearly, her experience in information sciences was
proving an asset in her new career. “Well done, Ensign,” the captain
told her.
“Is there a reason this search protocol was limited to Andorian
vessels and records?” Worf asked.
“Just to limit the volume of raw data while we were testing the
program,” Rosado explained as she moved back to the operations
console. “And since Andor is the closest affected system…”
“Then this protocol could be used to likewise track unaccounted-for
ships from any system?” Worf asked. Picard noticed a look passing
between his first officer and Choudhury, and noted that the Denevan
woman looked away, an uncharacteristically haunted expression on
her face.

“Yes, sir,” Rosado answered. “Although Andor suffered…relatively
limited damage.” From her hesitation and expression, it pained
Rosado to describe the annihilation of at least five major population
centers and the deaths of close to one hundred million as “limited
damage.” “For those worlds that suffered more complete
destruction—” Rosado’s eyes, along with, it seemed, the entire
bridge’s, flicked to Choudhury. “—the available data may not be
sufficient for the computers to extrapolate from.”
“I see,” Picard said softly. “Still, if there’s even the slimmest chance
of finding and rescuing any lost evacuees…” Picard handed the padd
back to Choudhury. “I’d like you to share this search protocol with
your counterparts on all vessels currently assigned to patrol and
rescue-and-recovery duties.”
The tactical officer nodded. “Aye, sir.”
“And,” Picard continued, stopping her as she started to turn back to
her station, “we should endeavor to refine the protocol to enable us
to search for information from any and all impacted worlds.”
“Yes, sir,” Choudhury answered, and again, for just a fleeting
moment, he thought he saw that strange, haunted look pass behind
her dark eyes.
Then she dropped her gaze to her panel, rapidly keying in
instructions, and Picard dismissed it. He turned back to the forward
viewscreen, watching the stars warp by. Somewhere, up ahead, were
people in trouble, in need of help.
Picard allowed himself a small, private smile. And the Enterprise is
on its way.

At the end of her shift, Trys Chen climbed out of a hole in the wall.

She spent several minutes in the middle of the corridor, twisting this
way and that, ignoring the odd looks she got from the shift-change
foot traffic passing by. Then she made her way back to her quarters,
stripped off her dusty, grease-stained uniform, and took a long sonic
shower. It had been a long day of mind-numbing repetitiveness,
allowing her normally overactive mind to wander aimlessly in places
she thought better not to explore. What do I care about Taurik or
how he mourns his dead family? she asked herself as she finished
her shower, pulled a thin wrap around herself, and walked across her
living quarters to the replicator to order herself a beer.
As she savored the first cold sip and let herself relax even further,
she noticed that her computer station was signaling a saved message.
She slipped into her desk chair and keyed the playback function, but
the only message was that there had been an attempt to contact her
by someone at the Raal Provincial Hospital on Vulcan. Trys stopped
with the glass halfway to her lips as she stared at the screen. Why
would anyone on Vulcan—in a Vulcan hospital in a backwater
province—be calling her? The only possible person she could think
of would be—
Well, no, that couldn’t be possible…
Except, who else…?
No.
The beer mug sweated in her hand as she stared at the screen, frozen.
Trys was rarely indecisive, and she didn’t like the way it felt to be so
now. So, she hit the tab that initiated a return signal, and she
watched as the screen cycled through a number of frames, from the
Starfleet delta, to the UFP seal, then the stylized IDIC representing
the Vulcan government, and then the unfamiliar emblem of a Vulcan
medical facility.
Finally, that static image was replaced by the face of a Vulcan man.
He wore a large surgical healing patch that covered his right eye
socket and wrapped around to his ear. An ugly black-green blotch on
the top of his stubble-covered head sug gested his hair had recently

caught fire and burned to the scalp. He looked out from the screen
with his one good eye and said, “T’Ryssa Chen?”
“Yes?” she said, wishing to the gods of at least a hundred cultures
that she’d ignored that damned message.
The man lifted his left hand, fingers splayed in a V, and told her
what she already knew: “Live long and prosper, T’Ryssa. I am
Sylix.”
Trys felt an entire lifetime of emotion roiling in the pit of her
stomach. “Yeah, and?”
“You know who I am?”
“Sure. You’re the guy who went all Pon farr on my mom twentyseven years ago, and then ran away to let her raise the result all by
herself.”
The man on the screen hesitated before dipping his chin and saying,
“That is…sufficiently accurate.”
Trys felt ready to burst out of her skin. For years, she’d wondered
what she’d say to this man if she ever saw him again. Now here he
was, and the only sound coming out of her mouth was a slow, hoarse
breathing.
“T’Ryssa, I—”
“I prefer Trys,” she said curtly.
“Trys—”
“Actually, from you, I think I prefer ‘Lieutenant Chen,’ instead.”
No doubt pained by his spawn’s undisciplined show of indecision,
Sylix took a breath and said, “I contacted you, Lieutenant Chen,
because I have been unable to find the current whereabouts of your
mother, Antigone.”
“Probably because she doesn’t want you to find her.” Too bad I
wasn’t as successful at avoiding you.
“I had hoped you would help me in this regard.”
“Really. Why?”
“Because I’m a civilian, Starfleet Command would not—”
“No, not ‘Why would you ask for my help?’—although that is a

damned good question. I meant, why would you want to find
Antigone?”
Sylix hesitated almost imperceptibly. “I simply wish to ascertain
whether she survived the recent hostilities.”
“Yeah, bullshit,” Trys snapped. Her mother’s current assignment,
the U.S.S. Wounded Knee, came through the war without ever seeing
action, but she wasn’t about to volunteer that information to the son
of a bitch. “Did you try to contact her after the Odyssey went boom?
Did you try to find her any time during the entire Dominion War?
No, this is about you. You had a near-death experience when the
Borg hit Vulcan, and by some miracle, you lived. You managed to
get rescued, fixed up, and flown to a hospital on the other side of the
planet, where you got a lot of time to just lie there and think about
how close you came to being just more sand piled on the Forge.”
Sylix said nothing as he listened, but the small twitches of his
injury- weakened facial muscles told her she had his number to the
last decimal place. “Now you’ve got this big second chance, so now
you want to reach out to all those you’ve hurt and make amends for
all your wrongs.”
The Vulcan stared stock-still at her for a moment. Then, he lifted his
one exposed eyebrow and said, “You are very human, aren’t you?”
“Damn straight, Skippy.”
“I should think that you would want to help me, given—”
“Given what? That you’re my daddy?” Trys erupted. “What’s that,
an appeal to emotion? You want to make up for being a lousy person
all your life, fine; but don’t you dare ask me for my help!”
And with that, Trys cut the connection, hard enough to cut her
knuckles. Cursing as she put her fingers to her mouth, she went to
the ’fresher to run cold water over her hand. Once the flow of green
blood had stopped, she dried her hand with a towel and walked back
out into the cabin. Goddamned Vulcans, she thought as she took a
long swig of beer to wash the taste of copper from her mouth.

Beverly Crusher had been to Pacifica several times in the past, on
both official Starfleet business and for her own personal pleasure.
But on all those occasions, she had only ever seen the surface of this
pelagic world. This was her first time visiting hi’Leyi’a, Pacifica’s
underwater capital city, and it was with a sense of awe that she stood
in the center of hi’Leyi’a’s main plaza, on the ocean floor, staring up
at a kilometer of seawater above her.
“This is fantastic!” Miranda Kadohata said, her breath having been,
figuratively speaking, taken away. Their beam-down coordinates
had placed them in a small air pocket, with invisible force fields
holding in enough gaseous oxygen for the visiting air breathers to
continue doing so comfortably. Both Kadohata and Crusher gaped at
the alien cityscape that surrounded them. Multi-hued, coral-like
spires rose upward, illuminated by bioluminescent seaweeds
clinging like kudzu to every surface. Spiraling shells and fractalpatterned sponge-like structures decorated every surface, and the
tiny, gemlike sand grains that made up the flooring of the open
courtyard reflected and intensified the limited ambient light of the
depths.
Paul Dillingham grinned amiably at the two women. “Well, I feel a
lot better about gawking at all this like a hick tourist, seeing you
veteran Starfleeters acting just the same way.” A school of what
looked like small Earth jellyfish swam by, flashing like oversized
blue-green fireflies. And of course, hundreds of Selkies, Pacifica’s
water-breathing humanoid natives, swam to and fro, carrying out the
business of their daily lives.
“Well, this is what we live for, you know,” Kadohata said. “Strange
new worlds and all that.”
“Pacifica is hardly a new world,” Dillingham countered, but before

he could get any further in what was sure to be a pedantic
monologue on Pacifican history, the sound of the energy field
changed pitch, and the field rippled behind him. For a split second,
Crusher envisioned the invisible barrier popping like the bubble it
was, and the three of them being crushed by hundreds of
atmospheres of seawater.
It held steady, however, even as a mottled green humanoid limb,
ending in a web-fingered hand, passed through the energy
membrane, followed in short order by the rest of the body of a male
Selkie.
A naked male body, Crusher couldn’t help but notice. While the
Selkies who lived on the surface and interacted regularly with other,
more modest species normally wore some sort of attire in deference
to their guests, for those living underwater clothing was a hindrance.
Once inside the bubble, the Selkie drew a deep breath—a younger,
amphibious Selkie, then, Crusher realized—and said, “Welcome to
hi’Leyi’a. I’m Uthdel Evelth, Secretary Bemidji’s personal assistant.
Would you come this way, please?” As Evelth gestured toward the
nearest of the structures surrounding the plaza, the energy-enclosed
dome morphed, expanding toward their destination and, as they
drew closer, retracting behind them.
Off to the side of a wide, elaborately decorated portal, through
which several fully aquatic Selkies entered and exited, there was a
smaller set of doors, adorned only with a sign warning of the
nonaquatic environment beyond. The air bubble pressed over this
opening, and the doors opened for them with a soft hiss. Crusher,
Kadohata, and Dillingham entered a corridor that, in marked contrast
to the exterior, was constructed of the same plain, unadorned
polymetal that typified practically every Federation facility across
the quadrant.
The corridor led to an equally plain conference room, split in half by
a transparent plate. The other half of the room was flooded, floor to
ceiling, with clear Pacifican seawater, putting Crusher in mind of

visiting an old-style aquarium. On the other side of the transparency
was Pacifica’s Secretary of Interplanetary Affairs, Osseo Bemidji, a
venerable old member of the planet’s ruling party, with sagging
facial features and random spots of white all over his fully exposed
body. “Finally!” he said as he stood and leaned across the table on
his side of the room. Whether it was intentional or not, the water and
the transparency both acted to magnify Bemidji’s large, all-black
eyes to intimidating proportions. Crusher suddenly got the feeling
that it was she and her colleagues who were in fact in the proverbial
fishbowl. “We need to get all these so-called refugees off the
surface!”
The Federation team was momentarily stunned. “Mister Secretary,
excuse me,” Crusher eventually said, “but we’re only here to assess
the refugee situation here, not to remove them.”
Dillingham then piped in, “Which, under Article 51 of the Articles
of the Federation, cannot be done without proper cause, nor without
due process for those persons who—”
“Do not quote the Articles at me!” Bemidji cut him off, waving his
finned arms in a wide arc. “Pacifica has been a proud and stalwart
member of the Federation for generations. But the Articles are not a
suicide pact. Pacifica is facing a dire threat from this sudden,
massive influx of off-world air-breathers!”
“What kind of dire threat?” Kadohata asked.
Jets of small bubbles streamed from the secretary’s gill crests—the
equivalent of an air-breather’s sigh. “I know you are probably not
aware of this, but the beginning of the Selkies’ life cycle is not lived
in the oceans, but on the surface—”
“In an amphibious stage,” Crusher interrupted, “which lasts through
childhood and the childbearing and-raising years, approximately the
first thirty-five years of life, on average.”
Bemidji scowled at her, then nodded. “And it is our young, our
future generations, these refugees are putting at risk.”
“How is that, Mister Secretary?” Dillingham asked.

“Our children have very exacting environmental needs,” he
explained, making what looked like a determined effort to maintain
his patience. “For centuries, we’ve welcomed off-worlders who
wanted to visit our smaller islands and build there—their lack of
natural shelter, exposed shorelines, and sandy ground make them all
but worthless to us. But the refugees have already overwhelmed
those existing resorts, and they’re demanding to be placed inland on
the larger landmasses, where they will be a disruption to our young
and jeopardize the region’s ecological stability.”
“Mister Secretary,” Crusher started, hesitated, and then said, “while
I respect your concerns, these people you want us to remove from
your planet have suffered a far greater disruption to their lives than
your young are likely to.”
“Yes, well, that’s a fine thing for you to judge, Commander Crusher,
but these are our children you’re so cavalierly dismissing!”
Beverly’s right hand unconsciously went to her stomach in a
protective gesture. “First off, Mister Secretary, I would prefer to be
addressed as Doctor, given that I am a physician. And as a doctor,
and a Starfleet officer, I would never dismiss or intentionally
endanger any life. That said, I know as well as you do, sir, that your
young people do frequent off-worlders’ resorts.”
Bemidji stiffened visibly at that. “And they have no qualms about
interacting with air-breathers, either,” Kadohata interjected, in a way
that suggested, to Beverly at least, that the second officer was
speaking from direct knowledge. Kadohata caught her stare from the
corner of her eye, turned, and gave her a look that said, “What? You
know I had a life before meeting my husband.”
Meanwhile, after several seconds spent seething over the humans’
insinuations regarding his fellow Selkies, Bemidji said, “There is a
difference between mature adults choosing, of their own free will, to
travel to other parts of their own planet and initiate contact with
visitors, and being compelled to allow outsiders to invade the
sanctuaries of our newborns, as is happening on iy’Dewra’ni.”

Crusher recognized iy’Dewra’ni as the name of one of Pacifica’s
largest landmasses, and the site of the primary resettlement area that
Barash had concerns about. “Mister Secretary, I’m certain that,
despite all the challenges, we will be able to find a solution that will
address both the needs of your citizens and those of the refugees.”
“Yes, well, there had better be. Because when it comes to protecting
our own, we will do so, Federation or no Federation.” And with that,
Bemidji turned, put his arms out to his sides, and with one mighty
stroke swam up to the ceiling and through a door Beverly had not
noticed until now.
“Cheery fellow,” Kadohata noted after the secretary had exited and
the portal had closed behind him.
“Just how endangered do you think their nurseries really are,
Doctor?” Dillingham asked.
“I couldn’t even hazard a guess without taking a firsthand look,” she
told him. “But I find it hard to believe that, even with the limited
land area on this planet, the situation can be as dire as he suggests.”
“Well, it’s not just about available land; it’s about civic
organization,” Kadohata said. “Cestus III was able to take in all the
refugees from the Cardassian DMZ back when, because Governor
Bacco and her cabinet were dedicated to making it work.” Crusher
caught the pride in Kadohata’s words as she spoke about her fellow
countrywoman, who was now president of the Federation. “Here,
though…being a water breather, Bemidji is pretty far removed from
what’s happening on the surface. Can we really take what he says at
face value?”
“I should hope a government official at his level would make sure of
his facts before risking a rift with the Federation,” Dillingham said.
“Sure,” Kadohata allowed, “but he wouldn’t be the first politician to
try to put up an assertive front while talking out his…blowhole.”
Dillingham shook his head. “Selkies don’t have blowholes.”
“Whatever orifice he’s talking out,” Crusher interjected, “it hardly
matters. We came to get our own firsthand look at the refugee

encampment. So let’s see it. Crusher to Genesee,” she said, hitting
her combadge. “Three to beam up.”

7

The Enterprise discovered all four of the Andorian transports within
two light-years of the path where Rosado and Choudhury’s model
predicted they would be found.
Unfortunately, they did not find the ships intact.
“The Shratha’s Pride Three was the first of the four ships to be
destroyed,” La Forge briefed the assembled senior officers, “when it
suffered a warp core breach at zero-three thirty-two hours three days
ago.” He gestured to the screen at the far end of the conference room
table, where a computer-created animation showed, in slow motion,
the first of the Andorian-designed transports violently break apart.
“The exact cause has not yet been determined, but right now, it
looks like structural fatigue.”
“How old was the ship?” asked Lieutenant Elfiki.
“Well, the Atlirith-class transports were in general production from

the late twenty-three tens to the mid fifties,” La Forge answered.
“The physical analysis we did of the remains indicates all four ships
were on the older end of that scale, and hadn’t been significantly
refurbished in at least twenty years.” The chief engineer turned back
to the screen, and as the animation continued he explained, “The
resonance wave from that event was enough to send a disharmonic
vibration through surrounding subspace, knocking the Pride Two’s
dilithium chamber out of alignment.” On-screen, the second of four
ships exploded.
“Aren’t there supposed to be safeguards against that kind of thing?”
asked Ensign Rosado, shocked and angered by the scenario the chief
engineer had just described.
“Supposed to, yes,” La Forge said with a sigh. “The Shratha
Transportation Company, from what I’ve gathered, had a long
history of cutting corners and fudging their way through standard
safety inspections. But, when the call went out for all available ships
to assist in the evacuation of Andor…”
“It probably didn’t make much difference,” said Doctor Tropp,
sitting in on the briefing in Doctor Crusher’s absence. “They were
risking their lives either by boarding the ship or staying behind.”
La Forge nodded. “The debris and subspace shockwaves from the
first two explosions breached the other two ships’ shields, tearing
multiple hull breaches in both One and Four. It was all over in under
ten seconds,” he concluded as the last ships disappeared and the
screen went blank.
A silence fell over the conference room. This was far from the end
result anyone had hoped for. What had seemed an opportunity to
find some small victory in all the destruction the Borg had wrought
had only served to cast a darker shadow over the crew.
After a moment, Picard said, “Well, at the very least, the families
will not have to live with the uncertainty of not knowing what’s
happened to their loved ones.” It was small consolation, but it would
have to do. “Geordi, does your investigation require that we remain

here for very much longer?”
La Forge shook his head. “No, sir, I think we’ve gathered all the
evidence we can.”
“Very well, then. Lieutenant Choudhury,” he said, turning to the
security chief, who had sat strangely silent throughout the briefing,
“have you identified any other potential emergencies we should
investigate?”
“No, sir.”
The bluntness of that seemingly defeatist answer brought the room
to dead silence again. This one seemed to stretch out for far longer,
until Elfiki spoke up. “We are still running more data. It does take
time, with the volume we’re dealing with, but…” She looked to the
captain with a cautious and uncertain smile. “We should, hopefully,
have more soon.”
“Thank you, Lieutenant,” Picard said, genuinely grateful to be able
to end on a more upbeat note. “We shall resume our patrol course
and, needless to say, continue to keep on the lookout for those in
need of help. Dismissed.” As everyone rose from their chairs, he
added, “Lieutenant Choudhury, a moment, please?”
Obediently, she lowered herself back into her chair. Worf also
stopped, turning to direct a look of concern toward first the
lieutenant and then the captain. Picard waved his first officer off. He
knew these two had formed a seemingly unlikely friendship early
on, and he suspected that there was more than just professional
camaraderie behind Worf’s decision to accompany Choudhury to
Deneva during his leave. But Worf made no protest, and followed
the rest of the staff out.
Once the room was empty, Picard stood up from his seat at the head
of the conference table and moved to the one directly to
Choudhury’s left. “Lieutenant,” he asked gently, “are you all right?”
“I’m fine, sir,” she said, all too automatically, as she snapped
upright in her seat.
Picard fixed her with a piercing yet kindly look. “We were all

disappointed by the way this recovery ended. But we mustn’t let this
setback demoralize us. After losing so much, we can hardly allow
ourselves to give up hope as well.”
“Of course not, sir,” she quickly agreed. “You’re absolutely right,
and I should have been more mindful of how I was presenting
myself before the rest of the senior staff. It won’t happen again.”
Picard said nothing as he considered the woman beside him. In the
relatively short time she had been aboard the Enterprise, the captain
viewed Jasminder Choudhury as a steady, reassuring presence at the
heart of the crew. Even at the height of the recent invasion, when the
captain himself felt about to fall apart, Jasminder had remained as
calm and centered as the Buddha himself. And at a glance, she still
appeared just as poised and calm as ever. But, just as she had during
the ceremony in the shuttlebay, she refused to make direct eye
contact with him. “Lieutenant…” he started, then stopped.
“Jasminder.”
She briefly turned her head, and in her eyes Picard saw all the pain
she’d been trying to keep hidden. “All of us, the entire crew, share in
your loss,” he told her, lightly touching his fingertips to her forearm.
“What you are going through…”
“Sir, please,” Choudhury interrupted, her eyes shut and her lips
pressed to a thin, tight line. Suddenly, her serene exterior was
revealed as a very carefully maintained façade masking a rampant
storm of feelings. “I appreciate the sentiment, but I’m fine.” She
opened her eyes then, and offered him a tiny sliver of a smile.
It was actually a very good show of reassurance, and might well
have worked under different circumstances. But the events of the
past several weeks were still fresh in his mind, as were the pains he
had taken to deny the feelings of depthless despair and hopelessness
that had nearly overwhelmed him not long ago. “What you have
suffered—the loss of your entire world—is unfathomable to most of
us,” he began sympathetically.
“‘Whatever is subject to origination is all subject to cessation,’”

Choudhury intoned in response. “That’s one of the most basic truths
of this existence: all is impermanent.”
Picard hesitated, unsure how to reply to that. He recognized the
quote from the Tipitaka, as well as the truth behind this piece of
Buddhist teaching. But it struck him as being a disturbingly dark
sentiment, particularly in the current context.
Choudhury must have sensed his confusion, because she added,
“Grief is also impermanent. I wouldn’t expect you to understand, sir,
but…my spiritual beliefs have sustained me throughout my life,
through all the changes I’ve experienced. It’s not always easy,” she
admitted, allowing the captain another fleeting glimpse of her deeper
being, “but I am coping, sir.”
Picard considered Choudhury a moment longer, wondering just how
skeptical he should be about that claim. He had never been a
religious man, and while he knew something of Choudhury’s beliefs
and their historical roots, he couldn’t claim to genuinely understand
them. He did, however, understand the importance of faith—it was a
lesson that had been driven home for him in that desperate last hour
of the Borg assault, by holding on to hope when reason told him all
was hopeless.
Finally, he gave her a nod, and said, “If there’s anything…”
“Thank you, Captain,” she said quickly, “but there really isn’t.”
And he knew there wasn’t. “Very well, Lieutenant,” he said, his
voice thick with regret. “Dismissed.”

Jasminder Choudhury stepped out of the lounge, onto the bridge,
and turned to the turbolift doors after a silent exchange with her
relief, Ensign Abby Balidemaj. The ensign indicated that she would

be fine manning the tactical station for a while longer, and
Choudhury smiled back at her gratefully, since she was in no state to
be on the bridge at that moment.
It was ridiculous, she knew, and wholly unprofessional. But the
discovery of those Andorian ships, and then watching a depiction of
their destruction in cold clinical detail, had triggered a renewed
wave of grief, which seemed to rise up from the small hard knot in
her stomach, push the air from her lungs, and wrap its sharp claws
around her heart. She folded her arms across her midsection and
paced the small space inside the car, unable to keep her body still.
She wished she didn’t have to mislead Captain Picard. She was
trying to the best of her ability to cope with the death of her family.
But to say she was, indeed, managing to do so…
She put a hand over her mouth to stifle a sob and willed the turbolift
to move faster. When it finally came to a halt, she held back a
moment, making sure no one was in the corridor, before darting out
and quickly slipping into her quarters. Choudhury ordered the lights
up only a fraction of full illumination, just enough to make her way
through the living area to the small corner she had set aside for
meditation.
She lowered herself onto the large cushion on the floor, folded her
legs into the lotus position, and closed her eyes. Jasminder left the
incense sitting on the small table underneath her mandala unlit;
lately, the normally pleasant scent of smoldering wood only
triggered memories of Deneva’s scorched surface. She willed her
mind to go blank, drawing a slow, cleansing breath in through her
nostrils, following the air as it flowed into her lungs and then back
out through her mouth.
Her mind refused to cooperate, though. Rather than emptying in the
dimness and near silence, it pulled up old images from her memory:
Her father and her, planting the oak sapling in front of their new
house. Grandma Basma leading her into her mother’s bedroom to
meet her baby sister, Divya, for the first time. The whole family in

the stands at the Junior Parrises Squares finals, on their feet cheering
her after she had scored the winning point. Laughing and clapping as
Divya and Guarav danced at their wedding. All juxtaposed with the
deathscape where she and Worf had walked just days earlier.
All is impermanent. The words mocked her now. All of it was gone
now. These people and places existed now only in her mind and
memory. And her mind stubbornly refused to put them aside.
She felt tears leaking through her closed eyelids and angrily swiped
them away. Choudhury was no stranger to death. She’d lost her best
friend from the Academy their first year out, during a pointless
shooting match near the Cardassian border. She had risen to security
chief aboard the Timur only after Lieutenant Ang was killed at the
First Battle of Chin’toka. And following that, she had been
responsible for more deaths than she cared to think about. She’d
mourned them all, friend and foe alike, but she had always been able
to move past mourning with the help of her faith, and reclaim her
tranquility and balance.
But these weren’t Starfleet officers, she chided herself, or
Jem’Hadar soldiers bred to disdain the divine life force within them.
This was your family. These were the people who begged you not to
leave Deneva, who tried to convince you that you didn’t need to join
Starfleet to fulfill your calling as a protector. And now, those people
and that home you swore to help protect…
Choudhury sat there for nearly fifteen minutes, mourning her family
and her world, and all that she had held dear for so much of her life.
Until finally, she had no more tears to shed, and she got up and went
to the ’fresher to splash a little cold water on her face. She patted her
face dry with a towel and studied her reflection in the mirror,
checking for redness and puffiness around her eyes. Convinced that
she could at least project the image of a protector, she shoved her
feelings down, put her shoulders back, and headed for the bridge.

Over the course of her career, Meron Byxthar had visited dozens of
refugee and displaced persons settlements. She’d been to the nearpermanent Bajoran settlements in the Valo system, and traveled with
a nomadic clan of Xindi Arboreals across five star systems over the
course of two years. She’d visited the Thallonian camps on Nelkar,
the Skrreean communes on Draylon II, and even a small Kreel
asylum on Archanis IV, prior to its discovery and dismantlement by
the Klingon Defense Force.
Given all this, she should have been prepared for what greeted her
when the transporter rematerialized her on the perimeter of the
iy’Dewra’ni refugee camp, and much of it was indeed familiar.
Byxthar found herself, along with the rest of the team, before a small
prefab structure that was serving as the infirmary and administrative
office, just inside the camp entrance. Looking out across a broad,
rolling pasture, she saw row upon row of cloth tents stretched out for
hundreds of meters.
Filling the makeshift streets of trampled grass that ran through this
instant city were hundreds upon hundreds of humanoids. They
seemed to move in slow motion, and without any apparent
destination. Some were engaged in conversation with one another.
Others were engaged in conversation with themselves, or perhaps
the gods that had apparently abandoned them. And others simply sat
silent, staring vacantly into space. Byxthar opened her telepathic
senses to the faceless mass and felt their grief, helplessness,
hopelessness. All extremely common in her experience, except for
the fact that all these people were citizens of the United Federation
of Planets.
“Oh, my…” said Kadohata, giving voice to the horror and shock
Byxthar had also sensed from her colleagues. “This looks like

something out of the Dark Ages.” Byxthar didn’t know much Earth
history, but guessed, from the evidence before her, that “the Dark
Ages” referred to the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries,
a period of near-continuous small and large wars just prior to first
contact by the Vulcans.
And these are the lucky ones, Byxthar heard Doctor-Commander
Crusher note to herself as she shook her head in mute disbelief.
“What is with these cloth tents?” Dillingham demanded of no one in
particular.
“The cellulose fiber fabric would be far more efficient to replicate
than hundreds of plastiform panels for standard prefab shelters,”
Gliv said, brushing a tuft of windblown fur away from his eyes.
“Those can’t be sturdy enough to qualify as adequate shelter,”
Dillingham said, shaking his head. “They’re bound to be blown
away during the next significant storm.”
There’s not a cloud in the sky, and they’re worried about storms—
like we need to start inventing things to worry about. That last
comment was unspoken by someone approaching them from behind.
The Betazoid turned and saw a bulky Grazerite man in a filthy
Starfleet sciences-blue shirt rounding the corner of the building. “At
last, you’re here,” he said as he belatedly became aware he’d been
noticed. “Please tell me you’re ready to start beaming these people
up right now,” he said, even as he took mental note of the civilian
garb Byxthar and Dillingham wore.
Doctor-Commander Crusher fixed the Grazerite with a look that
mirrored her troubled thoughts. “And you are…?”
“Lieutenant Commander Amsta-Iber, chief meteorologist, Aronnax
Station.”
“Aronnax Station?” Crusher asked. “What are you doing here?”
Aronnax Station was a Federation scientific facility, dedicated to
exploring the remote regions of Pacifica’s global ocean, located on a
small island nearly halfway around the planet from their current
position.

“I’m here because the Selkies wanted a Starfleet officer here,
overseeing this…this.” He tossed a hand up in the air as he silently
dismissed a number of colorful ways to describe the scene laid out
before them. “The Starfleet presence at the Fed eration embassy was
reassigned after Barolia and Acamar, and so were the guards and
other support personnel at Aronnax. It was me or the ichthyologist.”
“So you’ve been running this all on your own?” Crusher asked.
“Trying to,” Amsta-Iber said wearily. “The locals have been a help,
but they’re not happy about it. Apparently we’re in close proximity
here to one of their major spawning areas, and they don’t want these
people lingering. So, the sooner you can start relocating them, the
better.”
“We’re not here to relocate these people,” Crusher told him. “And
even if we were, there’s little we could do with just one runabout.”
“One runabout? That’s all they sent to sort this mess out?” he cried,
as a number of colorful phrases flashed through his mind.
“Never underestimate what a determined group can accomplish,”
Crusher told him with a small half-grin. “What’s the medical
situation, Commander? Is there a doctor on site?”
“We have an EMH set up and running,” he answered.
Crusher sighed, and Byxthar heard the string of unflattering
comments she left unspoken. “Fine,” she said. “Do you have an upto-date map of the camp layout? How about a census? Do we have
an accurate accounting of the people we have here?”
Amsta-Iber blinked, caught off guard by the sudden barrage of
questions by a superior officer. “Um, yes, sir. I have the map in the
office, and the census is being taken at Eden Beach as the refugees
are beaming down.”
“How many are there?” Kadohata asked.
The Grazerite drew a long, noisy breath through his nostrils. “We’re
at over seventy thousand by now.”
My God, Crusher thought to herself, but didn’t let that reaction show
as she turned to the entire team. “Okay, we need to survey this entire

camp, and make sure everything is up to standards—food, water,
shelter, clothing, waste disposal, hygiene, medical care. Miranda, I
want you—”
A high-pitched unintelligible cry interrupted the doctorcommander’s instructions. Looking out toward the tent city from
where the scream had come, Byxthar saw a young human woman in
a filthy dress running in their direction, a bundle of some sort in her
arms. The Betazoid was able to sense what it was the woman was
carrying, and why she was crying. It’s her baby; he won’t wake up,
she thought as she started to turn to tell Crusher.
Whether the physician had heard her telepathically or was acting on
her own instincts, Crusher rushed forward to intercept the crying
mother, moving at a slightly irregular gait due to the child she
herself was carrying. Kadohata followed, and then so did Byxthar
and the others, including Amsta-Iber.
Crusher caught and stopped the woman, got her to sit down on the
ground, and had her tricorder out to examine the child by the time
the rest came up behind her. The mother, between sobs and gasps for
air, was saying, “Matthew, oh Matthew,” over and over. Byxthar
saw the baby, a boy not even a year old, lying limp in his mother’s
arms. She sensed that the little one was in excruciating pain, but was
too weak to do more than softly whimper as he struggled to breathe.
Crusher finished her scan, interpreted the tricorder readings, and
almost without a pause for thought slapped at the combadge on her
chest. “Crusher to Genesee,” she called, and the small ship’s
computer beeped an acknowledging tone. “Medical emergency.
Three to beam out, these coordinates.” She then looked up at the rest
of the mission team from her crouched position. “Miranda, you’re in
command. Get the survey under way,” she told Kadohata, and then
lifted her eyes skyward. “Energize!”
Once the doctor and her patients were transported away, Byxthar
shifted her attention to the growing crowd of curious refugees drawn
by the commotion. “Hey, what about the rest of us?” a Solari man

demanded after the three had gone. “When do we get off this rock?”
That question was echoed and repeated by more of the frustrated
refugees gathering around him. None of the team members had an
answer, and could only stare back as the crowd grew in both number
and in volume.

Doctor Crusher left the wailing woman sitting on the transporter pad
as she stepped off and reached for a small hatch an arm’s length
away. She grabbed the emergency medical kit there and went back
down on her knees as she threw the lid open and snatched a
hypospray. She took special care to check and recheck the
instrument’s settings—not only the dosage, but the force of the
injecting spray, both of which she adjusted down for her small
patient. She put her hands out to take the baby—
“NOOO!” the mother screamed, clutching the child tight to her
chest. “What are you going to do with him? You can’t take him
away from me!”
“I’m not going to take him away,” Crusher said, in her most
soothing tone. “My name is Beverly. What’s yours?”
The girl took a moment to recollect herself before answering,
“Peggy. And this is Matthew.”
“I’m not going to do anything to hurt Matthew,” Crusher assured
her. “I’m just going to give him some medicine,” she said, holding
up the hypo so she could plainly see. “It will make him better.”
Crusher spoke simply but authoritatively. Peggy didn’t need to know
Matthew had picked up a foreign microbe—undoubtedly one she
had picked up first herself and passed on through her milk—
resulting in a severe case of gastroenteritis and dehydration. What

she needed to know—and believe—was that the doctor was going to
help her baby.
The woman—really no more than a girl, maybe nineteen at the
oldest—considered the doctor’s words uncertainly for several long
moments. Her eyes then went down to the pronounced bulge of
Crusher’s midsection and lingered there a moment before she finally
loosened her hold on the child.
Crusher slowly reached forward, putting a hand on little Matthew’s
back, and pulled down his pants and his diaper. A nearly
overpowering stench filled the cabin as the diaper’s contents were
exposed to the open air. I’d almost forgotten this part, Crusher
thought to herself, quickly reining in her gag reflex before putting
the hypospray nozzle to the baby’s bottom. With gentle pressure,
Crusher intravenously pumped a mild antibiotic solution into his
system, along with several milliliters of saline solution.
Crusher threw the medkit strap over her shoulder, then lifted the
baby out of his mother’s arms, eliciting only a mild squeak of
protest. She stopped in the ’fresher, where she stripped Matthew’s
diaper completely off, dropped it into the waste extractor, and
dematerialized it. At the same time she grabbed a towel, went back
to the main cabin, swept the game tiles off to one side of the table,
spread the towel, and lay the baby down.
He was still unresponsive, but his breathing was a bit more regular
now. As Crusher ran her tricorder over him again, she saw that
Matthew was responding to the treatment, if a bit slowly. The doctor
gave him another few cc’s to combat his dehydration; beyond that,
she just had to wait and hope little Matthew could rally by himself.
“Is he going to be okay?” Peggy stood on the threshold of the living
area, leaning her full weight onto the doorframe, the picture of
exhaustion. She showed physical signs of dehydration, too; Crusher
would have to check the refugees’ water source for infestation, and
probably half the refugees as well.
Crusher avoided her eyes, looking instead into the medkit. “How

long has he been ill?” she asked as she pulled out a silvery package,
which she tore open, and extracted a sterile cleansing cloth. She
quickly but thoroughly cleaned the baby’s bottom, all the while
watching for the slightest sign that he was coming around.
The girl seemed confused by the question. “Well, he was being
cranky on the transport, but everyone was.” A new, haunted
expression crossed the girl’s face.
“What about the diarrhea?” Crusher asked. “When did that start?”
“Did they really destroy everything?”
Crusher felt her stomach clench. She hesitated, debating how to
answer that non sequitur, until Peggy clarified, “The Borg, I mean.
They said they were coming to Danula II. They made me leave, me
and Matthew. They said I had to make sure he was safe. They said I
had to leave them all.”
“And you are safe now,” Crusher told her in her most reassuring
tone, sidestepping the question altogether. Crusher hadn’t heard any
reports specifically mentioning Danula II, a small Federation colony
that was home to one of Starfleet Academy’s physical training and
athletics facilities. But she knew it was located about fifty or so
light-years from the Azure Nebula, right in the “dead zone” created
by the Borg invasion; there was little doubt as to the fate of Peggy
and Matthew’s homeworld.
The doctor told Peggy none of this, though. Instead, she pressed the
young mother again: “I need you to tell me how long Matthew has
been sick like this.”
“Uumm…a couple days?” Peggy was looking everywhere but in
Crusher’s eyes. “I think…after the fourth day after we got here?”
“Did you drink any water from the lakes or streams down there?
Without sterilizing it first?”
“It looked clean,” Peggy answered, as tears of realization and guilt
started to well in her eyes. “And the lines for the replicators were so
long…”
Suddenly, the doctor’s tricorder began to emit a number of shrill

warning tones. Crusher spun back toward her tiny patient and picked
up the scanning device again. “Damnit,” she whispered, as she
watched the child’s vital signs dropping. “No, no, no…”
“What?” Peggy cried, rushing around to the other side of the table,
knocking most of Byxthar’s ceramic game tiles to the deck, with a
sound like a building collapse. “What’s wrong?”
Crusher kept her eyes fixed on the tricorder, avoiding the young
mother’s eyes. The contagion was playing havoc with young
Matthew’s autoimmune system, and resisting the antibiotic
treatment. Crusher cursed silently to herself as she looked vainly at
the medkit lying open beside her. If she could isolate the specific
microbe the boy had picked up, she could synthesize a targeted
treatment, but not before the boy’s already strained internal organs
would start to shut down.
Matthew was dying, and Crusher was running out of options.
Literally tossing the tricorder aside, Crusher scooped up the baby in
her arms and ran out of the runabout living area. In the short, narrow
passageway that led to the cockpit, she used her elbow to knock
another door control panel, and stepped into the small science lab
that was part of the runabout’s replaceable standard mission module.
Though rudimentary and somewhat poorly equipped compared to a
starship laboratory, the standard module lab did include a small
stasis chamber, normally used for small biological specimens
gathered during science survey missions. Crusher hit the button to
open the roll-out drawer and lay the baby in the specimen tray. Even
though the chamber was far too small for an adult human patient, it
was large enough to make the baby look even tinier. It was with no
small degree of regret that Crusher hit the button again, and watched
the little boy be swallowed up into the bulkhead.
“What are you doing? What are you doing?!” Peggy screamed as
Crusher spun and caught her by the wrists, warding off her furious
balled-up fists. The fight left the young girl quickly, though, and
then Crusher was supporting her sagging, dejected weight. “I was

supposed to keep him safe,” she half-whispered, half-sobbed.
“He is safe,” Crusher told her. “He will be, I promise.”
“We were the only ones they put on the ship,” Peggy continued as if
she hadn’t heard the doctor at all. “Just us. They stayed—his father,
my mother and father. They said it was more important that the baby
and I were safe.” Tears started to course down her face. “And now,
we’re the only ones left.” She didn’t ask this time about Danula, or
her loved ones who stayed behind there; Crusher was rather sure she
already knew, and was repressing much of what had happened in the
last several days.
The doctor guided her by the elbow back to the living area, and sat
her down at the table. She then went to the replicator, and while
waiting for the two cups of tea she had requested to materialize, she
struck her combadge. “Crusher to Kadohata.”
“Yes, Doctor,” came the response. “Is the little boy all right?”
“I had to put him in stasis,” Crusher told her in lieu of an actual
answer. “Miranda, there’s a contaminated water source down there,
and odds are, these two aren’t the only ones to get sick from it. I
need you to find it so I can track down whatever it is that made him
sick.”
“I’m on it, Bev.”
Crusher thanked her and cut the connection, then brought the two
steaming mugs back to the table. She placed one in front of the
puffy-eyed Peggy, and took her own seat opposite. “I should have
been a better mother,” the girl muttered. “I should have known…I
should have realized…”
Crusher reached across the table and laid a hand on the young
woman’s forearm. “Don’t punish yourself like this, Peggy.”
“He’s all that I have!” Peggy burst into tears again. “He’s all I have
left!” Crusher moved around the table to her side, letting Peggy
throw her arms around her. “Everything is gone…Doctor, if I lose
him, too…” she sobbed into the doctor’s shoulder.
“Don’t think that way,” Crusher told her. “You’re not going to lose

him. And you’re going to be strong for him. You have untapped
strength inside you that will get you and him both through this.”
Peggy’s sobs stopped briefly for a deep, sniffling breath. “How do
you know that?” she asked.
Crusher, her own face buried in Peggy’s hair, simply answered, “I
know…”

Starbase 32 sat on the edge of Federation space, where it served as a
jumping-off point for Star fleet’s exploration of the unknown region
beyond. In addition to being the home port to a dozen starships
whose mission it was to seek out new life and civilizations in this
part of the galaxy, it was also home to many of the families who
crewed those ships. Beverly Crusher had requested a posting at
Starbase 32 following the end of her internship on Delos IV, so that
she and Wesley could be that much closer to Jack, out there aboard
the Stargazer. His ship’s mission was an open-ended one, so there
was no way of knowing when he might come back, but as far as
Beverly was concerned, that was beside the point; his family would
be there waiting for him when he did.
She had just come off shift at the base infirmary and had gone to
Christof Schuster’s quarters to pick up Wesley. Schuster was a
sciences-division lieutenant who, like Beverly, had a spouse serving
on a deep-space explorer, and a young child—a seven-year-old
daughter named Elle—whom he was raising by himself. He was an
ever cheerful man who had happily volunteered to let Wesley sleep
over when Beverly had to respond to a late-night medical emergency
during her third week as assistant CMO. The two had formed a close
friendship and mutual support network after that, and their children,

who shared a number of classes at the base school despite their age
difference, became all but inseparable.
Christof invited Beverly to sit down and have a cup of coffee, which
she gratefully accepted. A shipment of spoiled Owon eggs had come
to the station earlier in the week, and the infirmary had been run
ragged with a steady stream of food poisoning cases since. While
Wesley and Elle played Parcheesi in the living area, the grown-ups
sat and relaxed and chatted about nothing in particular—their jobs,
current events, recent news from their respective spouses.
The peace of the moment was then broken by the chiming of the
cabin door. Elle jumped up to answer, and everyone was surprised
when the base commander, Admiral Naomi Jerusalmi, appeared in
the open doorway.
Both officers leapt to their feet as Schuster invited her in.
“Lieutenants,” she said, giving them a smile that somehow looked
out of place on her soft, round face. Alarms started going off in
Beverly’s mind. Though the admiral was a perfectly nice and
personable woman, she was not in the habit of casually dropping by
to visit junior officers. Her visit to Schuster’s home, Beverly
thought, could not bode well.
The admiral gave a wary look at the children, both mirroring their
parents by standing at full attention, then looked back to the adults.
Schuster caught the hint, and said, “Elle, why don’t you and Wes go
play in your room for a few minutes.” Beverly studied the admiral’s
face as the kids made their exit, and then gave Christof a quick look
of sympathy out of the corner of her eye.
The admiral took a breath as she stepped further into the room,
closing the gap with her officers. “I’m sorry to do this this way,” she
said, looking back and forth between the two, “but you weren’t in
your quarters, and this isn’t something a commanding officer should
put off.”
Beverly was momentarily confused. Why would Jerusalmi have
gone to her quarters? And why was she not looking at Christof…?

“Doctor Crusher, I regret to inform you that your husband,
Lieutenant Commander Jack Crusher, has been killed in the line of
duty.”
Time stopped. Her mind felt as if someone had opened an airlock
door and blew every thought in her head out into the vacuum. At
some point, she remembered she needed to breathe, and she spoke
the only word she could find. “No.”
Beverly felt Christof’s hands around her shoulders, and then she felt
a chair underneath her. It took a few more seconds to realize that her
legs had given out on her.
“I’m sorry,” the admiral said, empathy in her gray eyes. “It was an
accident of some kind, during an EVA repair mission. Captain
Picard didn’t provide many details, but the Stargazer is on its way
back…”
And Beverly felt a jolt of elation shoot through her when she heard
that. He’s coming home! That brief spark of joy was quickly snuffed
out, though, as she realized that in the truest sense, he would never
come back to her again.
The next few days went by in a haze. Doctor Meather, the base
CMO, had relieved her of her duties in the infirmary, leaving
Beverly with nothing to do but sit and stare at the bulkheads. Wesley
became strangely withdrawn; to him, “Daddy” was a vaguely
remembered visitor from long ago, yet he knew from seeing Elle and
her father together that he had been denied something far greater.
Still, a part of Beverly’s mind clung to denial. She and Jack had
been apart for so much of their marriage, so really, nothing had
changed, had it? She hadn’t heard from him for almost two weeks,
but he was always terrible about letter writing, claiming the few
times he did respond to Beverly’s letters to be too busy to do so
more often. (Even after making a big deal about that one
holorecording he made for Wesley before heading back to the
Stargazer five years ago, he’d never found the time to make more.)
So, as long as the Stargazer was still out there, nothing was really

wrong.
That delusion was challenged by Jean-Luc Picard’s appearance at
her door four days later. His light brown hair had receded even
further since the last time Beverly had seen him, and he wore a
dermal regenerative patch on his right temple. And in his eyes,
Beverly could see how deeply he too was mourning for Jack. The
two had been friends longer than Beverly had known either, and
Picard had worked with him on a daily basis for years. Seeing his
pain, she wanted to wrap her arms around him so they could both
cry over their loss.
Of course, they both maintained perfect Starfleet decorum, even
though she was in civilian dress. Picard stood there for a moment
looking uncomfortably first at her, then at her son. Wesley held
himself like a tiny cadet during inspection, as Picard knelt down to
speak directly to him. “Wesley…Wes…you’re called Wes, right?”
The boy nodded, trying desperately to keep his brave, grown-up face
from slipping.
“I am very sorry about your father, Wes. I…erm…” Jean-Luc
clearly had no idea how to talk to children, much less on such a
topic, and after stammering a bit, he simply gave Wesley a pat on
the shoulder, and stood again. “Beverly, I cannot begin to tell
you…” he started to say to her, but he was still discomfited by the
small boy there, staring up at him with a mix of pain, awe, and hate.
Beverly cut Jean-Luc off by looking to Wesley and saying, “Honey,
Captain Picard and I have to go do something. Why don’t you read
your book for a little bit, and we’ll be right back.”
“Okay,” Wesley said in a whisper, and after giving Picard a last
sullen look, turned back into the cabin. Jean-Luc followed Beverly
out, and fell in step beside her as she moved away from her door.
“I am so sorry for your loss,” he said as they walked down the
empty, strangely peaceful corridors of the station’s residential
section. “But you should know Jack gave his life to save his ship and
the rest of the crew.” Beverly only barely listened as Jean-Luc went

on, explaining how one of the Stargazer’s warp nacelles was
overloading and threatening to explode. Jack and the other member
of the EVA team, Lieutenant Joseph, blacked out from radiation, and
Jean-Luc had gone out after them himself. But he could only reach
one of them in time…
Picard only stopped when he saw that Beverly had guided him down
a dead-end corridor to a turbolift and had pressed the call button.
“Where are we going?” he asked.
“The morgue,” Beverly said in an even tone. “I need to see…”
Picard’s face fell. “Beverly…there’s really no need. Jack…”
“I have to see him.”
“Beverly, he was injured rather severely. I don’t think…”
The turbolift car arrived, and Beverly stepped on without seeing or
caring if the captain would join her. “Morgue,” she ordered the
computer, and only when the doors had slid shut again did she
notice she was not alone.
As the car started to rise toward the station’s upper levels and the
main medical facilities, Jean-Luc again told her, “You don’t have to
do this.”
Beverly shook her head and refused to look at him. “Yes, I do. It’s
important to me. I have to face the fact that he’s gone.”
The captain thankfully dropped his protests, understanding this was
one area in which he could not pull rank. They rode in silence the
rest of the way, and then continued wordlessly through the white,
sterile corridors that led through the lower level of the medical
section. “It’s good of you to come with me,” she said, breaking the
uneasy silence that had fallen between them.
“It’s the least I could do.”
They continued in silence until they reached the morgue and entered
the autopsy room, a two-level room with a bioanalysis station, a
dedicated LCARS access station, and on the lower level, a twometer-long table, a white sheet draped over it, covering the
unmistakable shape of a humanoid body. Beverly forced herself to

keep walking, to move down the steps, to approach the table…
And she froze. This was it. When she lifted the sheet and finally saw
the face of the person underneath, there would be no more denial.
Jack’s death would be part of her reality. She stood there and stared
at the shrouded figure for what felt like an eternity.
And then Jean-Luc was at her side, studying her, reading her face.
And as he continued to watch her, ready to react to any change in
her demeanor, he reached across, took hold of the sheet, and lifted it.
It was Jack. The right side of his face was marred by a grotesque
network of lacerations running from his throat up around his jaw and
up over his brow. The skin and muscle had been crudely rejoined
and the blood cleaned away, but the doctor could see how horrible
the injuries from the explosive concussion had been—bone
shattered, flesh torn away and hanging loose, blood and viscera
floating free in zero g, splattering the inside of his helmet…
Jean-Luc lowered the sheet again. “You shouldn’t remember him
like this,” he said, his voice surprisingly gentle and compassionate.
Beverly nodded, and thanked him for helping her through this
moment.
But her last memory of Jack would now be forever burned in her
mind.

Jack’s final request was that his ashes be scattered over the Hermosa
coral reef, just south of San Francisco. Beverly didn’t know why
that place was so special to him, and she couldn’t ask him anymore.
But she and Wesley dutifully made the trip back to Earth and
solemnly carried out this final request. It actually turned out to be
therapeutic, letting mother and son get away and spend time alone

together, and the Hermosa Reef—a thing of incredible beauty
created as the result of a terrible disaster centuries earlier—was
indeed a most tranquil spot, ideal for creating the closure that both of
them needed.
When they returned to Starbase 32 nine days later, they discovered
the Schusters were gone. Elle had been sent to live with cousins in
Salzburg while Christof grabbed at a sudden career opportunity: a
posting as the new senior science officer aboard the U.S.S.
Stargazer. Beverly was stunned by this betrayal. That’s what it felt
like: a betrayal of their friendship, of his daughter and her friendship
with Wesley, and even of Jack, whom Schuster had never even met.
The following day, Jerusalmi stopped by the infirmary and asked to
speak with Beverly privately in Meather’s office. The admiral
welcomed her back, and reiterated the same standard sympathies
she’d offered two weeks earlier, so long ago. Then, apropos of
nothing, she mentioned that the position of chief medical officer
aboard the U.S.S. Hammarskjöld had recently opened. Beverly was
still waiting to find out why the admiral had wanted to talk to her
when, to her surprise, Jerusalmi offered to recommend her for the
position.
Beverly was dumbstruck. The admiral said something more about
understanding this was a difficult decision, and acknowledging that
it was “poor timing.” She also stressed that it was a great
opportunity that Beverly had more than earned, and that she should
give it serious thought.
Beverly did think about it as she continued her uneventful shift.
Chief medical officer on an Ambassador-class ship—all else aside, it
would indeed be an incredible opportunity, the kind she had dreamt
of at the Academy. Back then, everything was about building her
career and climbing the ranks. Instead of a ring, Jack had given her a
book, How to Advance Your Career Through Marriage, as his way
of proposing.
But now, of course, she couldn’t accept. The idea that she could

leave Wes now of all times, just ship him off to his greatgrandmother, was unthinkable. Not that she expected Starfleet to
concern itself with such things; they just moved their people about
wherever they needed to put them, treating them like generic, easily
replaceable cogs, never mind the effect on spouses, children,
friends…
She returned to her quarters after the end of her shift, and the
moment she walked in the door, she was welcomed with a full-speed
tackle that nearly knocked her to the deck. Looking down, she found
her five-year-old with his arms wrapped fiercely around her waist,
his face buried in her side.
“Wes?” She gently pried him away, and squatted down to look into
his red-rimmed eyes. “Wes, what is it, honey? What’s wrong?”
He took a couple hitching breaths before he was able to say, “I…I
was ’fraid I was…was left alone.”
Beverly’s breath caught and her heart tightened. Her schedule for
this week matched with the school’s; Wes couldn’t have been home
more than ten minutes ahead of her. Looking over his shoulder,
though, Beverly saw the chest of Jack’s personal effects, which had
been offloaded from the Stargazer during their trip to Earth, sitting
open at the far end of the room. One of the old-style maroon uniform
tunics had been pulled halfway out; that surely would have been
enough to trigger a young child’s feelings of loss and insecurity—it
certainly triggered a reaction in his mother.
“No, Wes,” she said softly, looking him straight in his huge hazel
eyes. “You’re not alone. You have me. You will always have me,
sweetheart. All right?”
Wes looked back at his mother, wanting to believe her, but…“But,
Elle…her dad…”
“I will never do anything like that to you, Wesley,” Beverly told him
with all the conviction she had in her soul.
“Promise?”
Beverly glanced again at Jack’s uniform, and down at the modern

blue one she wore. And then she looked to her son again. “I promise
you, Wes.”
The following morning, Beverly Crusher went to Admiral
Jerusalmi’s office to turn over her combadge and rank pips. Then
she and Wesley left Starbase 32, and Starfleet, intending never to
return.

8

Worf walked into the engineering section and found it very much as
it always was: abuzz with activity. Personnel were moving about
with purpose and confidence, ensuring that the heart of the mighty
starship, the warp core, and all its peripheral systems continued to
operate consistently at peak efficiency. Worf was impressed and
pleased. If not for the mix of red and blue uniforms in with the
normal gold, one would never know this department was without so
many of its regular crew.
“Can I help you, sir?”
Worf turned to face Lieutenant Taurik, who was working on the

central systems console. “Yes, Lieutenant. Can you tell me where
Commander La Forge is?”
The other man looked confused for a moment. Vulcan stamina being
what it was, Worf couldn’t help but note how very fatigued the
assistant chief engineer looked. “He had gone to check on the main
computer core,” Taurik answered after only an extra second’s
thought. “However,” he continued, “I believe I hear him
approaching at this moment.”
Worf followed his eyes as Taurik turned in the direction of the wallsized main systems display. A moment later, he also heard La
Forge’s voice moving closer, just before he rounded a corner and
entered main engineering. “…is not good enough, Sonol,” he was
telling the Payav ensign walking with him. “Gather up ten of the
temps, and have them double-check the trigger responses on the
emergency force-field emitters on decks two through six.”
Sonol acknowledged his orders and moved off in another direction,
calling for volunteers. La Forge, spotting Worf, continued walking
in his direction, but once he reached him, turned to his assistant
instead. “Taurik, I told you when I left I didn’t want to see you here
when I got back. Go to your quarters and get some rest.”
“That is not necessary, sir,” the junior officer said, trying—and
failing—to shrug off his exhaustion.
Worf turned and glowered at him. “Are you refusing to obey an
order from a superior officer, Lieutenant?”
Taurik looked up at Worf. “No, sir,” he said in a plain, neutral tone.
“If you’ll excuse me, sirs,” he added before turning and leaving
engineering.
La Forge shook his head as he watched the young man go, then
turned his attention to Worf. “So…what brings you down here?” he
asked as he started walking again, making a circuit of all the
section’s monitoring stations.
Worf paced along beside him. “How are your repairs proceeding?”
Geordi sighed. “As well as can be expected, I suppose. We’ve got

the internal sensor network finished, and with that, we’ve discovered
a whole slew of other things that need attention. But we’re making
good progress, all things considered.”
“Good,” Worf said, giving La Forge a grin. “You should take great
pride in how well your department has continued to perform in the
face of many formidable challenges.”
“Thanks,” La Forge replied, somewhat surprised. “High praise,
especially coming from you.”
“It is deserved—and long overdue, my friend,” the first officer
answered. He had been looking at his long-time colleague in a very
different light since the recent incident when La Forge had stood up
to the captain and refused to follow his illegal and dishonorable
order to build a thalaron weapon. In the years since the two of them
had both joined the old Enterprise’s crew as junior grade
lieutenants, Worf had held more than half a dozen different
positions, while Geordi had remained in one place, seemingly stuck
there like a gobfly caught in tree sap. Yet, he had shown great
strength of self and spirit at a time when it had seemed the entire
galaxy was on the brink of destruction. Worf regretted
underestimating him for so long, and resolved to reinforce and build
upon the bonds between them.
“Thanks, Worf,” La Forge said, and gave the Klingon one of his
wide, easy smiles. “Now’s when you hit me up for a favor, right?”
Worf stopped in place. “I am the first officer,” he said forcefully,
making La Forge spin back just as he was about to enter his office.
“If I have a task for you to complete, I will not resort to spewing
false compliments to compel you to do it.”
La Forge reeled back. “Hey, I was just teasing. I didn’t mean to
suggest…” he said in a rush.
But he trailed off when he saw the unexpected expression on Worf’s
face. “Yes, I am familiar with the concept of ‘teasing,’” he said with
a smirk.
La Forge stared a moment more, then laughed. “Okay, yeah, you got

me good, there,” he conceded. “So…was there something else you
wanted?”
“There is something I’d like for you to take a look at,” Worf said,
nodding. La Forge gestured for Worf to follow him into his office,
and both sat. “We’ve run and completed the records search protocol
for any unaccounted-for evacuation ships out of Deneva. In the
course of reviewing the data, a curious item was discovered. Shortly
after the global evacuation order was issued, the Denevan president
invoked something called Plan 2757. This is the only time it is
mentioned; there is no indication of whether this plan was carried
out, or what it in fact entailed.”
“That is curious,” Geordi agreed, leaning back in his chair. “And
you have no idea what 2-7-5-7 is supposed to stand for? A code of
some kind, maybe?”
“I have a theory,” Worf said. “I suspect it is a reference to the events
on and around stardate 2757, when Deneva was invaded by a swarm
of extraplanetary neuroparasitic life-forms. The entire planet’s
population was all but incapacitated by these alien creatures.”
“Right, I remember,” Geordi said, nodding. “It was Kirk’s
Enterprise that discovered what happened, and was able to
exterminate the infestation.”
Worf nodded. “Yes, though not until eight months after the initial
infestation.” That had been a most serendipitous event for the
Denevans; had the Enterprise not already been en route, the entire
colony surely would have perished. “Given this, and the timing of
the president’s order, it would seem that Plan 2757 was to be put
into motion in the event of another global emergency.”
“And you don’t think it was part of the overall evacuation?” La
Forge asked.
Worf shook his head. “We’ve been in contact with several other
Denevan evacuation ships; none of them were aware of any such
plan. I believe it was in addition to the official evacuation plans,
kept secret in case the next threat was from sentient invaders.”

La Forge nodded thoughtfully. “Okay. Well, if no one was talking
about this plan after the president authorized it, let’s see what they
were talking about.” He activated his desktop computer interface,
called up the results of the Elfiki-Rosado search protocol for
Deneva, and keyed in his own set of search instructions. He hit a
final control, and the word WORKING appeared on the screen. The
two watched in silence for a moment, then La Forge asked,
“So…with the Deneva search done, did we find anything about
Jasminder’s family?”
Worf scowled and shook his head. “No, there is still no information
either confirming or disproving that any members of the lieutenant’s
family were evacuated.” It was a terrible thing, to be left without
knowing if a loved one had met their end, or how. Geordi’s
expression mirrored his own, and Worf recalled that he still, to this
day, did not know the true fate of his mother.
“She was in pretty rough shape after we found the Shrathra ships,”
La Forge noted. “Has she been doing any better at all?”
Worf felt the muscles of his neck and jaw tighten. “Why would you
ask me?”
La Forge started to grin, but then let it fall as he got a good look at
the very Klingon expression on Worf’s face. “You’re not teasing this
time.”
Worf looked away from the engineer, and cursed himself for his
overreaction. “Hey, Worf?” said La Forge. “Hey…are you doing all
right?”
Worf looked up, and put on his best stone-faced expression. “I am
fine.”
La Forge narrowed his mechanical eyes at him skeptically. “Come
on, Worf, ‘my friend’…”
Hearing his own words thrown back at him in a derisive tone
shamed the Klingon. And he had no one else to discuss his situation
with—not Jasminder, of course, and he did not feel comfortable
talking with Hegol, given their earlier conversation. Worf took a

deep breath and said, “Jasminder and I have been physically
intimate.”
La Forge stared back wordlessly for a moment. “Okay, I wasn’t
expecting that,” he finally responded.
“The first time was while we were preparing to face the Borg in the
Azure Nebula, and it was not planned. Then, after our visit to her
family’s land on Deneva, she said she felt it had been a mistake.”
La Forge absorbed that information. “Well, she’s been through a lot,
Worf. She’s in mourning, and that can confuse a person as to what
they really want.”
“Yes, I understand that,” Worf said. “However…I am no longer
certain…Klingons traditionally frown upon casual sexuality without
a more permanent bond.” Worf didn’t mention that this tradition was
considered archaic by most of contemporary Klingon society. Nor
did he mention how he’d largely disregarded those strictures during
his courtship of the decidedly untraditional Jadzia Dax. What he did
say was, “Our initial intimate liaison was not long after Captain
Dax’s visit to the ship.”
“Ohhh,” Geordi said in understanding, though Worf knew he really
could not understand, not completely.
It had taken until now for Worf himself to understand. “I have never
truly let myself believe Jadzia had reached Sto-Vo-Kor,” Worf said,
“because a part of her existed here still, in Dax.” It had been over
five years since he and Ezri Dax had parted ways at the end of the
Dominion War. At the time, she was only just beginning to come to
terms with being a joined Trill, a counselor who didn’t even know
her own mind, still uncertain of how to assert her own identity over
the chorus of all the Dax symbiont’s past lives—including the life
that Jadzia Dax had pledged to share with him.
Ezri had changed dramatically in the time since then. Now she was a
starship captain, commanding one of the most advanced ships in the
fleet, unafraid to go toe-to-toe with a legendary captain like Picard.
“Seeing Ezri now…seeing the person she has become, and how

different that person is from Jadzia…” He paused and said, “I have
no more doubts. I understand now that Dax is no more who Jadzia
was than…”
“B-4 is who Data was.”
Worf noted the very matter-of-fact way Geordi said that. The human
had been deeply affected by his closest friend’s death for a long
time, and it was good to see signs that Geordi, like Worf, seemed
ready to move on. “Exactly,” Worf said.
La Forge nodded, then after considering the mat ter a moment
longer, gave his head a shake. “Okay, well, wait, I’m still confused.
It sounds to me like you had a positive psychological breakthrough.
So, why now is your…relationship with Jasminder a mistake?”
“Because she is a human. She is a very tranquil, peaceable, nurturing
human woman. Klingons are rarely any of these things—particularly
not in our most primal behaviors.”
“Ohhh,” La Forge again said, this time in a tone that indicated that
he didn’t want to understand any more than he already did.
“She is a fascinating woman,” he said, more to himself than to
Geordi. “Brilliant, insightful, selfless. I do not believe I have ever
enjoyed the simple companionship of another person so much.” He
paused and sighed. “It’s best that we keep this relationship simple.”
Geordi gave him a sideways look. “Yeah. Good luck with that…”

Picard sat at his ready room desk, scanning the reports coming in
from all over the Federation, and tried to keep his mood from
plunging any further than it had since leaving Earth.
It wasn’t easy, though. Chancellor Martok had ordered the
evacuation of Qo’noS, and the temporary relocation of the seat of

the Klingon government to Ty’Gokor. An attempt had been made on
the Cardassian castellan’s life by a would-be assassin upset by the
loss of their fleet at the Azure Nebula. Romulan Empire warbirds
had destroyed at least three ships full of refugees from the
breakaway Imperial Romulan State—reportedly by using the
Enterprise’s search protocol, which Starfleet had shared with all the
local powers.
And that protocol, though wildly successful in locating and saving
over three hundred evacuation ships and thousands of lives across
the Federation, had apparently reached the limit of its effectiveness.
The greater problem now was what to do with all those ships and
their passengers, and more and more worlds were expressing urgent
concerns about all the refugees they were being asked to take in.
Again, Picard’s thoughts went to Beverly, and he hoped she was
making better headway addressing the problems on Pacifica than he
was out here.
The chime to his ready room door sounded, and he welcomed the
excuse to put his padd aside. “Come,” he said, admitting Lieutenant
Choudhury.
“I’m not disturbing you, am I, sir?” she asked, pausing just inside
the threshold.
“No, please,” he said, gesturing for her to enter and take a seat as he
stood up to refresh his empty teacup. “Can I get you anything?”
“No, thank you, sir.”
Picard recycled his used cup and ordered another Earl Grey,
surreptitiously studying the security chief as he waited for the
materialization sequence to complete. She was tense and serious, but
did seem a bit more poised than she had been of late. “So, what can I
do for you, Lieutenant?” as he moved to the couch and sat facing
her.
“Sir…Rosado, Elfiki, and I were trying to expand the scope of our
search protocol. Until now, the parameters were set to gather data in
a time period starting with the Azure Nebula invasion. We’ve

adjusted that back, to cull information starting with the attacks on
Barolia and Acamar.”
Picard nodded his approval. Those were the first two worlds the
Borg attacked, beginning five weeks of scattered surprise attacks
leading up to the start of the Borg’s final offensive, and there were a
number of smaller-scale evacuations during that period. Although
they faced much longer odds of rescuing any ships that had been
missing that long, they owed it to those citizens to make every
effort.
“In the course of putting together a sequence of events,” Choudhury
continued, “we found the first really big Borg panic occurred on
Cestus III, starting in the city of Lakeside.” She paused, giving
Picard a significant look. “We also determined from comm traffic
records that, less than thirty minutes before the panic started, there
was a personal subspace communication on a Starfleet channel, from
Commander Kadohata to Cestus III. The connection is only
circumstantial, sir,” Choudhury hastened to add, as Picard dropped
his head and pressed his hand over his eyes. “But, I felt you had to
be told, sir, particularly given the…‘incident’ last year.”
Picard sighed. “The incident,” as he well knew, was the short-lived
mutiny Kadohata had taken part in after Picard had refused a direct
order from Admiral Nechayev during last year’s Borg episode (it
seemed an exaggeration now to call any of the Borg encounters
previous to the just-ended war crises). Given the circumstances,
along with Kadohata’s service record and her desire to rebuild his
trust, Picard had opted to officially forget her role in the “incident.”
So willing was he to put it behind them that, when her name came
up on the promotions list four months ago, he ignored the residual
misgivings he’d had and advanced her from lieutenant commander
to full commander. Good heavens, I even entrusted her with the
safety of my wife and unborn son, he thought to himself, and now
this betrayal.
It occurred to him then how insane that attitude really was. What she

had done—if she had in fact done it—was with the purpose of
ensuring her family’s safety. Wouldn’t that be reason to trust her
more?
“It’s probably just a coincidence,” Picard finally told Choudhury.
Choudhury nodded. “Yes, sir. As security officer, I felt I had to
bring it to your attention—”
“As you should have, yes. Now…have these new parameters yielded
any promising leads?”
Choudhury made a noncommittal face, and was about to expand on
that response verbally when the door chimed again. Picard gestured
for her to hold her thought, and said, “Come,” admitting
Commanders Worf and La Forge. The latter wore an optimistic
smile on his face, and the former, while far less obvious, also had a
glint of excitement in his eyes. “Gentlemen, do I take it you’ve come
with some encouraging news?”
“We think so, sir,” La Forge answered. “Jasminder, you’ll want to
hear this, too,” he added to Choudhury, who had stood as they
entered, and looked ready to be dismissed. Instead, she moved
behind La Forge and looked over his shoulder as he crossed to the
captain’s desk and activated his computer monitor. The captain
stepped forward, between Worf and La Forge, to see what had
gotten his officers so excited.
On the screen appeared an image from what looked like a sort of
advertising brochure: a picture of an old twenty-second-century
cargo hauler, in dock, surrounded by the legend THE DENEVAN
COLONIAL MUSEUM—SEE DENEVA’S HISTORY
FIRSTHAND! “This is the S.S. Libra,” La Forge explained, as
Picard’s face twisted in incomprehension. “It was one of the longestserving ships in the Resources Corporation of Deneva’s cargo fleet,
and after she was finally retired in the early part of the twenty-third
century, she was placed in permanent drydock and made into a
museum ship. It’s been in synchronous orbit for over a hundred
years.”

La Forge hit a key on the base of Picard’s computer, and the image
switched from the still illustration to a moving image of a star field,
with a blue-and-white planet quickly filling the lower left-hand
corner of the screen. An ID code and time stamp identified it as
having been recorded by the U.S.S. Musashi. Picard readily
recognized this as Alex Terapane’s command, one of the six ships
destroyed while defending Deneva. “Now here,” La Forge said,
tapping another sequence of keys, “is the museum spacedock.” A
yellow square appeared just above the curve of the planet, and then
the image zoomed until the area within that square filled the display
screen. Picard could then clearly make out the spacedock;
however…
“The Libra is gone,” Choudhury said softly. There was no debris
around the docking facility, nor any noticeable sign of damage. “It
was gone before the Borg…. But that ship’s been a museum piece
for centuries!”
La Forge’s smile grew wider. “Exactly. A museum display visited
by thousands of people a year, so they can walk through and see the
entire ship, including its huge cargo areas, with their full life
support!” Picard’s breath caught as he realized what La Forge was
driving at: the ship could potentially hold thousands of escapees.
“This was Plan 2757,” Worf told Picard and Choudhury.
“Plan 2757?” Picard asked.
“An ambiguous nonrecurring reference we discovered in the
Denevan government’s comm records,” Worf told him. “It seems to
have referred to stardate 2757…”
“…but stardates aren’t used by planet-based organizations,”
Choudhury said, obviously repeating a point she had already tried to
impress upon her listeners. Picard nodded at her objection; the
stardating system was developed to account for relativistic effects
and other time-space shifts encountered by warp vessels. While it
wasn’t impossible that “2757” was a reference to a stardate, it didn’t
seem likely.

“Yes and no,” La Forge said. “The number has a dual meaning.
Stardate 2757 is approximately when Deneva’s parasite crisis first
struck—‘approximately’ because, like you said, Jasminder, a planet
isn’t a spaceship, and the old conversion formulas didn’t quite apply.
But, if 2-7-5-7 is an Earth calendar date…”
La Forge reached for the desktop monitor again and brought up
another page from the Denevan Colonial Museum brochure, this one
an illustrated timeline of Denevan history. Picard spotted the
relevant twenty-second-century event immediately: 2/7/57: The
R.C.D. cuts ties with Earth Cargo Service, establishing Deneva’s
economic independence. E.C.S. Libra renamed S.S. Libra.
“They expected Starfleet to see a stardate,” Worf said, sounding
vindicated, “and used it to direct them to this information, alerting
us to the secret launch of this escape vessel.”
“That’s a bit of a leap, isn’t it?” Choudhury asked the first officer. It
was a legitimate comment, and Jasminder voiced it in a respectful
and tran quil tone, though Picard thought he detected a very subtle
barb in the woman’s words.
But the thought was fleeting, and quickly dismissed as Picard turned
to La Forge. “Have you narrowed down the possible launch
window?” he asked. “Could the ship have been retrofitted with a
modern warp core? And if so, what would its peak velocity be?”
All three officers seemed taken aback by the captain’s sudden
fervor. “Um…three hours at the most, and with upgraded engines
and structural integrity, it could hit warp 6, maybe 7.”
Picard smiled and nodded enthusiastically, then turned, heading for
the bridge. “Sir?” Choudhury called behind him.
He paused before issuing his new orders to the helm, and turned
back briefly. “You’re right, Lieutenant,” he told her. “It is a leap.
But when you reach the limit of where small steps can take you, that
is what must be done.”

9

Beverly Crusher was not easily shaken. She had been a doctor for
over thirty years, and in that time she’d had to deal with just about
every type of medical emergency imaginable, and more than a few
that at the time had been unimaginable. She’d lost more patients
than she would ever care to count: to violent attacks, to strange,
exotic alien diseases, and to pointless accidents.
But young Matthew’s near death had unsettled her deeply. Here she
was, on a Federation member world in the late twenty-fourth
century, and she had nearly lost an infant to dysentery and
dehydration—dehydration on a planet that was almost completely
covered in water! This kind of thing had been eradicated three
hundred years ago—easily eradicated, by simply ensuring that
people had access to clean drinking water. There was no reason in
the universe why this poor, harmless child should have come so
close…
Crusher stopped herself, closed her eyes, and took a pair of deep
breaths as she forced her mind to clear. Of course, it wasn’t just the
medical facts of the case that were affecting her. She opened her

eyes again and looked at Peggy, slumped in one of the tableside
chairs, a cold, untouched cup of tea in front of her. No parents, no
husband—and now Crusher had to tear her away from her son.
She shook her head ruefully and clapped her med supply case shut.
Miranda had gone down to the river that looped around the camp
and discovered several dozen exotic microbes in the water. Crusher
was able to isolate the contagion, produce a counteragent, and
inoculate both mother and child. Though Matthew had reacted
positively to the new drug, he had already suffered too much internal
organ damage for the doctor to risk keeping him out of stasis. She
told Peggy it was better to leave him up here on the runabout; that
way, they could get him to the nearest starbase and a proper neonatal
ICU just as soon as this fact-finding mission was wrapped up.
Reluctantly, Peggy joined her on the transporter and beamed back
down with her to the planet.
Moments later, they were standing just outside the hastily
constructed plastiform building that served as the camp infirmary. It
had been one of the first structures erected, before concerns about
overtaxing the industrial replicators had arisen, and was far more
solid looking than the rest of the camp. It was, frankly, little more
than a gray and rather sad-looking hut.
Inside, Crusher was dismayed to find things were just as gray.
Beyond the entryway was a small examination area surrounded by a
thin curtain, and beyond, a ward housing two dozen cots and an
array of outdated and nearly obsolete medical equipment, some of it
as much as forty years old. One of those obsolete tools noticed their
arrival from across the room and started walking their way.
Crusher’s eyes widened in shock at the sight of the sharp-nosed,
high-foreheaded figure. “I don’t believe it…” she muttered under
her breath.
“Someone you know?” Peggy asked.
Before Crusher could answer, the figure was right there in front of
her, smiling his artificial smile. “Good afternoon,” said the

Emergency Medical Hologram. “Would you please tell me the
nature of your medical emergency?”
“A Mark III EMH?” Beverly blurted.
The hologram continued smiling, an act that made his chin all but
disappear. “That’s correct. I am a third-generation version of Doctor
Lewis Zimmerman’s life-and labor-saving holographic program,” it
explained unnecessarily. “I am fully qualified—”
“Yes, I know, I know,” Crusher interrupted. She’d heard this spiel
more than enough times before. “Aronnax Station didn’t have a
more updated version?”
“They did.” The hologram maintained its cheer ful expression—one
of the many improvements over the previous models—though it
retained the undertone of Zimmerman’s arrogance as it spoke.
“Aronnax Station currently has an EMH Mark IX running in its
medical center. Prior to my current activation, my program had been
lying dormant in Aronnax’s surplus storage depot for four years, ten
months, thirteen days.”
Crusher grimaced. Although her attitude toward the medical
holograms had moderated considerably over the last decade, having
seen their value demonstrated in numerous practical situations, she
had the feeling she was about to be reminded of the reasons she had
been so slow to warm to the things. “I’m Doctor Beverly Crusher,”
she informed the hologram. “Report.”
The EMH continued to smile vapidly, but its eyes narrowed at her
slightly. “There is no Doctor Beverly Crusher assigned to Aronnax
Station, or anywhere else on Pacifica. I require a positive
identification before I can share patient information, so I must
respectfully refuse your order.”
“There’s a Starfleet runabout, the Genesee, in orbit,” she said, afraid
she already knew what the response would be. “Interface with its
computer; it’ll verify my identity and authorities as a Starfleet
medical officer.”
The EHM barely paused before announcing, “I’m afraid I am unable

to verify the identity of the vessel in orbit.” His eyes were now thin
slits with tiny black beads peering through.
She was afraid of this. The Mark III had been in service during the
height of the Dominion War, and featured extremely stringent
security protocols—a good thing if a Founder was trying to use it to
gain access to private medical data in order to better impersonate
someone; not so good if anyone with a legitimate and vital need to
that information came looking for it. It was for this reason that the
Mark IV had been rushed into use so soon after the end of the war.
Fortunately, it did retain one old feature from its preceding versions.
“Computer, deactivate EMH.”
“Now, wait a min—” the EMH started to object as the portable
hologenerators fell silent without protest. Once it was gone, Crusher
guided Peggy over to one of the few vacant cots. She lay down, all
her will and strength sapped, and was out almost as soon as her head
touched the pillow. Beverly studied the portable life-signs monitor
beside her bed (of the same type she had first used in medical
school), and was satisfied that, physically at least, the young woman
was well.
“Are you a doctor? A real doctor?”
Crusher turned to face a tall, pale-eyed, dusky-skinned woman. She
wore a small disk on her forehead that identified her as a Risian, and
would have been stunningly gorgeous if not so disheveled and
visibly exhausted. “That’s right.”
“Thank goodness. Please look at this man.”
Crusher nodded and let the woman lead her to a cot where she found
a male S’ti’ach lying unconscious. His only visible injuries were to
his arms, which were both wrapped in dingy bandages stained with
dried brown blood. Yet the vital signs monitor at his bedside showed
only nominal activity. “His name is Sasdren. The EMH couldn’t tell
what was wrong with him. He’d been giving him polyadrenaline…”
“Of course he did,” Crusher grunted as she ran her tricorder over the
head and torso of her diminutive, blue-furred patient. “But its effect

diminished with each administration, so he started upping the
dosage.”
The Risian nodded. “Yes.”
Crusher nodded as well. Federation interaction with the S’ti’ach was
minimal until just a few years ago; they wouldn’t even have been
included in the Mark III’s database. Crusher set her tricorder aside
and opened her medkit, withdrawing a delta-wave inducer. She
placed it carefully on Sasdren’s smaller-than-average forehead, and
moments after he drifted off into deep sleep, his life signs began to
climb.
“Oh, my,” the Risian woman commented as she watched the
patient’s seemingly miraculous rallying. “How did you do that?”
“The S’ti’ach have remarkable natural healing powers. When
injured, they can put themselves into a coma-like state, similar to a
Vulcan healing trance, and redirect all their metabolic energy toward
repairing the physical wounds.”
“But if it’s natural, why wasn’t he healing himself?”
“Because he didn’t want to.” Crusher lifted the bandages, revealing,
as she suspected, deep brown gouges in the S’ti’ach’s blue arm,
which without doubt had been made by his own claws, trying to
slice the brachial arteries. “The delta-wave inducer puts him in a
deeper state of sleep, so that his subconscious mind can’t interfere
with his autoimmune functions.” She wondered what had happened
to him during the Borg attack and the evacuations that could have
driven him to this. Then she decided she really didn’t want to know.
The doctor looked up from her patient to the Risian. “Forgive my
manners,” she said, extending her hand. “Doctor Beverly Crusher.”
“Arandis,” the woman said, taking Crusher’s hand and allowing
herself a small sliver of a smile that did nothing to dispel the sorrow
on the rest of her face.
“Have you been here helping in the infirmary for long?”
She thought about that. “A few days…a week, maybe? It makes me
feel useful. Like I’m helping.”

“There’s plenty of help needed here, it seems,” Crusher said as she
looked around the ward, frowning. “Have you seen many cases of
people getting sick after drinking from the river?”
“Why, yes,” Arandis said.
Crusher nodded, then loaded her hypospray with a fresh ampoule of
the new antibiotic. “All right,” she said, holding up the instrument
and motioning for Arandis to lead the way. “Let’s help these
people.”

Byxthar stood on the edge of the makeshift soccer field, watching
several dozen children chasing a ball up and down its length. They
weren’t playing by any standard set of rules, so far as she could tell.
She wasn’t entirely certain that there were even teams, or if each
individual was deciding on their own which goal to defend—some
seemed to change their minds from one minute to the next. But they
were all, without exception, enjoying themselves. The resiliency of
children never ceased to amaze her. No matter what happened
around them, no matter their cultures, species, or the circumstances
of their displacement, almost nothing seemed to dull a child’s desire
to get up and play with others.
“You’re one of the Starfleeters, aren’t you?”
Byxthar started, having tuned out the crowd around her and not
having noticed the approach of the young human man with the
striped beach towel over his shoulder now standing beside her.
“Hmm? What? No.” She gestured to her plain dark civilian suit. “Do
I look like I’m in Starfleet?” she asked with a smile.
The man narrowed his bleary eyes at her. “Yeah…you ain’t got filth
all over you. Plus, you came here with the new ’Fleeters, the redhead

and the Tellarite and the one with the mustache.”
Byxthar tried to control her reaction. She had wanted to observe the
interactions of the various refugee groups without drawing any
undue attention to herself. “I’m not in Starfleet. I’m just here
checking on conditions for the government.”
“What, undercover?” the man asked.
Byxthar grimaced. “In a way.”
“And?”
Byxthar stared at the man, not understanding his query. She found
she could not hear anything coherent in his thoughts, either; more a
jumble of half-formed thoughts and unvoiced emotion, somewhat
muted by a dull throbbing pain. The only impression to come
through clearly was his almost physical need for alcohol. Seeing her
incomprehension, the man turned and pointed behind them with his
chin. “How do the conditions check out?”
Byxthar turned away from the soccer game to look at the camp
proper. “And…” Despite her efforts, a low murmur of the shock and
depression and fear that emanated from the collective minds of the
refugees seeped through her psionic shielding. “And they’re not
ideal…but they could be far worse.”
The man said nothing, gave no response at all. After a moment,
Byxthar turned away from him and back to the children.
“I didn’t vote for Bacco.”
“Oh.” Byxthar couldn’t tell what had prompted that comment, and
she certainly didn’t want to get pulled into a political debate.
“Didn’t vote at all, if you want to know the truth.” He rubbed a hand
across his whisker-stubbled chin. “Never have; never gave a damn.
Just like them,” he said, indicating the children on the field with a
tilt of his head. “Not a care in the universe. What’s it matter if Bacco
or Zife or whoever ended up running the government? It’s still the
same Federation, right? We go on living the same lives we always
lived, never worrying about anything, never wanting for anything,
knowing nothing’s going to change.

“Then it does change,” he said, and a shiver ran through his body.
“And then where’s the Federation? Then what does the Federation
do?” He sneered at her. “It checks on conditions. It says, things
could be far worse. Thank you, Federation! Aren’t we lucky, then?”
“I…didn’t mean to minimize…”
But the young man had already turned and started walking away,
straight across the soccer field, interrupting the flow of the game, but
only briefly. Once the trespasser was out of the way, play continued
as if it had never stopped. Byxthar watched him as he disappeared
over a small rise beyond, then sighed and tried to focus her
perceptions again on the simple joy of kicking a ball back and forth
in the grass.

Gliv grunted triumphantly and extracted the aberrant isolinear chip
from its slot inside the replicator. He pulled his head and arm out,
and turned to show it to Amsta-Iber. “Look at that,” Gliv said. “The
optical substrate has been completely decrystallized.”
The Grazerite scientist, standing back and peering over his shoulder,
shook his head at him. “I don’t know what that means.”
“It means you’re overworking this poor machine,” Gliv answered as
he tossed the defective chip into his tool case and then plugged a
new one into his tricorder. The handheld device ran its
reconfiguration routine, turning the new chip into a clone of the
previously scanned original. “If you keep abusing it as you have,
you shouldn’t be surprised when it decides to stop working.”
“You make it sound as if it’s a living thing with its own will,”
Amsta-Iber snuffed.
“Well, that’s silly,” Gliv answered the Grazerite. “Isn’t it?” he then

asked the replicator. “Yes, of course it is.” That would have at least
gotten a giggle from one of his human colleagues back on Luna, but
from Amsta-Iber, nothing. Gliv didn’t understand why human-style
humor seemed to be such a difficult concept for most other races to
grasp. He’d come across it at an early age, in the form of a flatvid
recording of a human named Groucho Marx who issued subtle and
clever insults like the most sophisticated Tellarite. When he joined
Starfleet Academy, his human classmates introduced him to the full
spectrum of Earth humor, from wordplay to slapstick, and all of its
greatest practitioners.
What did get a reaction was when he replaced the chip and the
replicator came back on line. “There,” he said as he snapped the rear
panel back into place. He stepped back to make room for the
refugees already waiting in line for food. “It’ll work for now, but
really, we should reconfigure the camp layout if you want to
minimize future problems.”
“Reconfigure how?” Amsta-Iber asked, falling in step with the
engineer.
“Well, you have your food replicators here, and you have your
latrines all the way over there,” Gliv said, gesturing to the
emergency field ’freshers set up beyond the edge of the camp
shelters.
Amsta-Iber stared at him in complete incomprehension. “Yes…?”
Gliv couldn’t help but grin now. “Well, the emergency field
replicator can use a broad variety of organic base material, other
than standard organic particulate suspension, from which to replicate
menu items.”
Amsta-Iber nodded. “Yes. We ran out of raw food stock fairly
quickly, and have been resupplying the replicators’ reserves with
roots and grasses and such.”
“Which it can use on a short-term emergency basis,” Gliv said, “but
it requires greater power consumption to transmute those complex
molecules. However, you do have a source of organic matter that

can be far more efficiently converted by the replicators.” He again
pointed to the latrines.
The Grazerite curled his cleft lip at Gliv. “Your attempts at humor
are becoming annoying,” he said.
The Tellarite laughed in spite of himself. “You’re a Starfleet
scientist. You must know that waste recycling and food replication
systems are interconnected this way in all our ships and bases.”
The meteorologist had no immediate answer, but just continued to
give Gliv a look of extreme distaste. “Yes,” he finally responded,
“but one never has to think about it. And we certainly can’t put the
’freshers in such close proximity to our food source!”
Gliv shook his head again. “The Mark VII emergency portable
refreshers are airtight, watertight, automatically sterilize, and break
down every bit of solid, liquid, and gaseous waste matter into safe,
inert—”
“I know all this,” Amsta-Iber snapped, “but you can’t simply ignore
centuries-old taboos shared by practically every civilized race to
ever advance into space.”
Gliv threw his arms up. “Fine! I’m only trying to offer short-term
advice to help you avoid long-term disaster. Feel free to ignore it.”
The Grazerite glowered at him for a moment, but then his expression
turned to one of concern. “Do you really anticipate that all these
people are going to be here long-term?”
Gliv followed Amsta-Iber’s gaze, looking back at the long lines of
hungry, homeless people. “I certainly hope these people are only
here temporarily,” Gliv said. Though he himself had spent the last
eighteen months “temporarily” stationed on Luna, analyzing and
making repairs to the over-three-hundred-year-old atmospheric
domes that had housed humans’ first off-Earth settlements. It wasn’t
particularly challenging work, but he had been perfectly willing to
“pay his dues,” as his C.O. put it, before a better posting came along.
Trouble was, the dues he’d paid never seemed quite adequate. “But I
do not know how long they could be here.”

The two men stood and said nothing for a moment, until the silence
became unbearable to the Tellarite.
“Say, ever hear the one about the human, the Klingon, and the
Ferengi…?”

As she finished up her preliminary survey of the iy’Dewra’ni
encampment, Miranda Kadohata’s shock over what they had found
turned to anger.
Despite her initial reaction, she knew this was nowhere near as bad
as what she would have found in similar camps on Earth in the wake
of its many wars. These people had food replicators, sanitary waste
disposal, and access to medicines undreamt of centuries ago. The
cloth shelters, though spartan and not especially spacious, were far
sturdier than they looked. All the tents were equipped with a batterypowered lighting system and a modular heating and cooling unit for
those species who did not find Pacifica’s balmy climes so pleasant
as humans did. They weren’t the kind of accommodations most
visitors to Pacifica’s resorts expected, but they were not all that
uncomfortable.
But still, as she walked along the increasingly muddied footpaths of
the tent city, she couldn’t help but think that a place like this just
should not exist in the Federation. It was beneath what they, as a
society, were capable of. Even taking into account how little
warning they had had ahead of the Borg’s devastating assault (there
had been scattered attacks for weeks, yes, but nothing that predicted
the mass invasion at the Azure Nebula), how quickly the Selkies had
had to react to the sudden influx of people in need, or how
temporary the current situation was supposed to be—all she was

seeing here were stopgap measures.
And the people saw it, too. At the start of her inspection, she was
rushed by streams of excited and adulatory exiles, who noticed the
uniform and immediately assumed that their rescuers had come at
last. When Kadohata had to tell them that she was only part of a
small advance group, and that they would do whatever they could
for right now, she felt guilty for having built up and then dashed
their hopes. They were like lost souls in purgatory waiting to be
delivered to paradise—or, perhaps more fittingly, caught in a state of
limbo.
She headed back to the administrative building, but paused to join a
small crowd listening to a quartet of Damiani singing what sounded
like a Bajoran hymn, in lovely four-part harmony. She almost
allowed herself to smile and enjoy the performance, but her
combadge emitted a chirp. “Dillingham to Kadohata. Could you
come back down here to the river, Commander?”
She stifled a sigh and tapped the device on her chest. “On my way.”
As it turned out, a number of refugees, impatient with the lines at the
food replicators, had found the same path down to the riverbank,
where they had gotten their water and then, to varying degrees, had
gotten sick. As she had gathered the specimen scans for Doctor
Crusher, Dillingham had confronted one of the Selkie law enforcers.
She had left him there two hours earlier, quoting obscure Federation
regulations about Pacifica’s legal obligations to the refugees’ health
and safety.
Back at the river, Kadohata found Dillingham now being confronted
by a different official. By the cut of his uniform, she assumed that
this was a senior member of local law enforcement, and probably
not inclined to defer to the civilian lawyer. “Hullo,” she said as she
approached. “I’m Commander Miranda Kadohata. What’s all this,
then?”
The Selkie stepped forward, extending his hand and giving her a
tight smile. “Commander. Commandant Thwa Minha, Pacifica

Security, iy’Dewra’ni Division.” He stood a full head taller than
Kadohata, and when she accepted his hand, it wrapped tightly
around her fingers—enough to be uncomfortable, but not so hard
that she could say that it was intentional. “Commander, I’ve heard
about the rash of illness among the refugees. Am I right to
understand the cause has been found and taken care of?”
“Yes,” Kadohata said, “our doctor was able to find a treatment.
Thank you for your concern, Commandant.”
“Of course,” he said. “Visitors have been drawn to the waters of
Pacifica for ages; it’s terrible that these particular waters have
sickened anyone. And, naturally, we all want to prevent any further
illnesses caused by off-worlders being exposed to the water from
this river.”
Between Minha’s silky tone and the sudden tension in Dillingham’s
jaw, Kadohata deduced that they were finally about to get to the
problem at hand. “Yes?”
“And the simplest solution to that end is to erect a barrier fence
around the perimeter—”
“Which you cannot do!” Dillingham interrupted in a low, frustrated
tone. He looked to Kadohata and explained, “There can be no
fences, no energy barriers, nothing to suggest an enclosure. Article
109, section forty-se—”
Minha made a strange, subvocal sound that clearly indicated his own
irritation. “Do you have the legal citations regulating the use of
waste extraction memorized, too, Mister Dillingham?”
“This is supposed to be a sanctuary, not a prison!” Dillingham said
heatedly. He was a mild, professorial-looking man, but Kadohata
was getting the feeling that was a façade over a volcanic
temperament. “Putting up a fence creates the wrong image.”
“The fence would be to protect them,” Minha said, evidently
repeating a previously stated point. “From drinking unsafe water,
from slipping down the steeper parts of the riverbank upstream. We
do agree that protection—of lives, of health, of rights—is our shared

primary goal, don’t we?”
Dillingham shook his head. “Your concern is protecting the native
residents against the irrational fear that these refugees—”
“There is nothing irrational—”
“Commandant,” Kadohata interrupted, raising her voice only enough
to quiet both men. “How would you propose to have this…safety
barrier constructed and put up?”
Dillingham looked at her aghast, while Minha looked confused.
“The components would be manufactured by industrial replicators,
of course. Then we’d have contract laborers put them up.”
Kadohata nodded. “I ask because the replicators in the camp are
being overtaxed, and we could certainly use all the extra sets of
hands we can get.”
Minha gave her the first genuine smile she’d seen from him. “I’m
sure something can be arranged with the nearby manufacturing
concerns. As I said, we all are concerned about your people and—”
“Our people, Commandant,” Kadohata corrected him sharply.
“These are fellow Federation citizens, remember. And you’ll keep
that in mind, I’m sure, as you determine the exact form that this
barrier eventually takes.”
“Commander,” Dillingham said in an urgent low voice, “you cannot
permit this. It’s a violation of these people’s dignity. Any kind of
enclosure that suggests these people have been penned in would be
potentially psychologically damaging to the people here.”
Kadohata stared at him for a moment, then turned to the Selkie.
“Thank you, Commandant.” She then took the lawyer by the elbow
and started leading him away. “You’ve spent two hours here,
prattling on about regulations and statutes and the harm that might
be done to these people. You haven’t actually seen the camp yet,
have you?”
“I saw it,” he answered, bewildered. “When we beamed down.”
Kadohata sighed and pulled him along faster. “Come,” she said as
they approached the edge of the tent city. “Let’s introduce you to the

people you’re defending.”

10

A burst of static came over the bridge audio receivers, and then a
voice cut through the background noise: “This is the Libra,
Enterprise. We read you loud and clear!” Whoops and cheers were
heard in the background over the scratchy audio-only transmission
from the once lost Denevan freighter.
The Enterprise bridge was a bit more restrained, but a palpable
feeling of relief and triumph engulfed them at this confirmation that
this would be a rescue, and not a recovery of remains. Jasminder
Choudhury all but laughed aloud, and quickly swiped her hand over
her eyes, pushing away the tears of joy.
Captain Picard, standing at the center of the bridge before his chair,
turned to share a broad smile with her and with the rest of the bridge
crew, then raised his head slightly as he again addressed the comm.
“What is your status, Libra?”
“We had to eject our antimatter stores three days out of Deneva,”

reported the captain, a woman who identified herself as General
Katherine Seton. “We were en route to Ingraham B. We’ve just been
limping along on impulse and trying to keep everyone as calm and
comfortable as possible. Fortunately, Plan 2757 allowed for a long
wait.”
It was truly impressive how much thought and preparation the
Denevan government had put into their evacuation plan, particularly
to Choudhury. In her family, the only time politics ever came up was
when her father and Uncle Narayana railed against the incompetence
of the politicians in Lacon City.
“It won’t be much longer. Lieutenant Faur,” Picard said to the young
woman at the conn, “how long until we can rendezvous with the
Libra?”
Faur consulted her console and answered, “One hour, twenty-one
minutes, sir.”
“Just enough time to bake a cake,” Seton quipped.
“We’ll be able to replenish your antimatter and make whatever other
repairs might be necessary to get you back under your own power,”
Picard said. “Do you require any medical or other assistance?”
“We’ve had a handful of injuries since leaving, plus two births.
They’re being taken care of, but I’d rather they were in a real, fully
equipped sickbay.”
“Of course,” Picard said, then looked to Worf. He nodded in
response, then tapped his combadge and spoke quickly to Doctor
Tropp in sickbay.
“Otherwise, we’re managing,” Seton continued. “Though I know I
can’t be the only one looking forward to getting outside again.”
“And…how many others are there?” Picard asked.
“Two thousand, seven hundred and fourteen,” came the answer.
Choudhury gasped softly in surprise. Over twenty-seven hundred
saved. It was by far the best news she’d heard since the attack on her
home, yet, at the same time, she couldn’t help but reflect on how
very, very small that number was compared to the planet’s total

population.
“We’ll do all we can to ensure their ordeal is brought to a swift
conclusion,” the captain promised.
“May the Great Bird bless you, Captain Picard,” Seton replied.
“We look forward to seeing you. Libra out.”
The signal terminated, and Picard paused, savoring this brief, bright
moment in what had been a very dark few days. Then he said to
Worf, “Contact Commander La Forge. Have him assemble an
engineering team to board the Libra.” He then turned toward the
bridge’s rear stations. “Lieutenants Choudhury, Chen, with me,
please,” directed the captain before heading for his ready room.
Choudhury looked over at T’Ryssa Chen at the auxiliary science
station, an incongruous look of surprise on her Vulcan face. She
turned from Picard to the security chief with a look that seemed to
ask, What did I do wrong this time? Choudhury just gave her a shrug
before turning to follow after the captain.
Picard waited until Chen, marching double-time, caught up behind
the long-legged Choudhury and then gestured for both of them to
have a seat on the small couch by the door. The captain himself
remained standing, pacing a bit. After a moment he said, “It occurs
to me that the Libra poses a rather unique situation. This is the
largest group of evacuees we’ve encountered thus far—almost a
small colony unto themselves. Given this, it’s my opinion that once
we rendezvous with the Libra, the away team should be led by the
Enterprise’s diplomatic and contact specialist.”
Choudhury raised her eyebrows in surprise, though it was nowhere
near the surprise Chen herself showed, once it dawned on her that
the captain was talking about her. “What? Me?” she finally
stammered. “But…this isn’t a first contact. Denevans are
humans…aren’t you?” she asked, turning to Choudhury. “Well, I
mean, I know you are,” she added, backpedaling furiously, “though
that doesn’t mean all Denevans are. I mean, I’m the last one who
should be pigeonholing people by species, right?” she added,

flicking at the point of her tapered right ear.
“Lieutenant Chen—” Picard said, his eyes rolling back just slightly.
“Sorry, sir,” she said. “It’s just…leading an away team! I’m just so
honored. It’s like I’ve just been awarded—” Chen then noticed the
stern glare Picard was giving her and clamped her mouth shut,
bringing her rush of blather to an instant halt. After a moment, she
let out the breath she was holding and said, “Thank you, Captain, sir.
I won’t disappoint you.”
Choudhury looked from one to the other with a tiny bemused smile.
Chen was an “odd duck,” as her great-grandfather used to say. She
had gotten to work closely with the younger woman just once since
joining the Enterprise, teaching her meditation techniques during
their encounter with the “Noh Angel” stellar cluster entities. To her
regret, though, Chen balked at the suggestion that their lessons
continue beyond the end of that mission, insisting she was more
comfortable with the way she had always dealt with her turbulent
mix of human and Vulcan emotionalism—that is, just letting them
all out.
“See that you don’t,” Picard told her. “I’m giving you an
opportunity to prove what you are capable of, Lieutenant. Do not
treat this matter lightly simply because these are Federation citizens.
It would be truly unfortunate if you were to cause them to renounce
their citizenship,” he added, letting the slightest hint of a smile show
through his stern visage.
Chen, perhaps out of an abundance of caution, refrained from
smiling back. “Aye, sir.”
Picard nodded. “Dismissed, Lieutenant.” Chen sprang from her seat
and bounded out of the ready room like an eager puppy, and Picard
smiled after her. It was an interesting dynamic, Choudhury noted:
Picard brought out the more disciplined side of Chen, while the
lieutenant seemed to temper the stuffier aspects of the captain’s
personality.
Once the doors closed, Choudhury told the captain, “We Denevans

are a pretty tolerant lot, sir. I wouldn’t worry about her doing too
much damage.”
Picard chuckled once as he took a seat opposite her. “No, I’m not,”
he assured her. “We just may not be seeing many first contact
situations in the near future, and I want to ensure that the growth
she’s shown in the last several months isn’t allowed to stagnate. At
any rate, I know you’ll keep a careful eye on her.”
Choudhury felt her heart being seized inside her chest. “Sir?”
Picard looked at her with a confused expression. “The reason I had
called you both in here was because I intended to have both of you
as part of the away team. Naturally, I assumed you would want to be
there to greet them.”
Choudhury tried to quickly find her center and school her
expression. “Well, that would be Lieutenant Chen’s decision as team
leader, wouldn’t it?”
“Well, yes…” the captain said, still confused.
“Frankly, I tend to agree with you, sir,” she continued. “I would
think this an ideal assignment for one of my junior officers.”
Picard said nothing, but studied her with his hawk-eyed stare. “Are
you concerned that you will be seen as taking advantage of your
position in order to interject yourself into this mission?”
“No, sir,” Choudhury said without any further elaboration.
Picard continued to stare at her skeptically. “Very well, then,” he
finally said. “Make whatever arrangements for security assignments
you feel best with Chen.”
“Yes, sir,” she said, rising, and headed out of the ready room before
he could ask any more discomforting questions. It simply wouldn’t
do for her commanding officer to learn what mixed feelings she had
about what they would find once they rendezvoused with this ship—
or, more precisely, what she would not find aboard.

Lieutenant Trys Chen walked into the transporter room to find the
rest of the away team—my team, she repeated to herself just to feel
that shiver of pride run up her spine again—already gathered and
ready. Geordi La Forge had one of his junior engineers, Ensign
Maureen Granados, and the Andorian intern, Doctor th’Shelas, was
accompanied by Nurse Mimouni. The team was rounded out by a
single security officer, Rennan Konya. Chen was still curious as to
why Jazz had begged off this assignment, but since that meant she
was getting her boyfriend as the team’s security officer instead, she
couldn’t complain. She smiled broadly at them all and said, “All
right, people, are we ready to get this boarding party started?”
They responded with nods, plus one “Ready, Lieutenant” from
Rennan. Chen resisted the urge to give him an extra little wink, and
gestured for the team to step up to the elevated transporter pads.
As her team took their places, La Forge hung back from the rest and
sidled up beside her. “You know,” he whispered, “it’s usually bad
form for the team leader to be the last to show up for the start of a
mission.”
Chen turned and stared at the commander. He was still smiling, but
his circuit-lined eyes conveyed the authority he put behind his
words. “What, so you’re my chaperone?” she asked, somehow
keeping her voice at the same low volume he had used.
“More like your backup support.” Both his eyes and smile turned a
bit friendlier as he said that, which helped to stop the protest rising
in Chen’s throat. She couldn’t really blame Geordi or the captain for
leaving the training wheels on, and she was still nominally the team
leader.
“Thanks,” she said. “I’ll remember that if there’s a next time.”
La Forge just nodded, and allowed her to lead him up onto the
transporter. As the uncomfortable sensation of having her atoms
taken apart and put back together subsided, Chen found herself on
the bridge of the S.S. Libra. If she hadn’t known beforehand that the

freighter was a museum piece, she might have worried she’d been
transported through a temporal field at the same time. Every piece of
equipment screamed of twenty-second-century technology and
design.
The Libra bridge had a crew of four: three in military uniforms, plus
a craggy-faced, dark-skinned man in a civilian suit. Once the
Enterprise team had fully materialized, the tall, ash blond woman in
the center seat stood and stepped forward. “Welcome aboard,” she
said, smiling broadly. “General Katherine Seton, Deneva Defense.”
Chen gave La Forge a quick sideways glance, then stepped forward
herself. “Lieutenant T’Ryssa Chen, U.S.S. Enterprise,” she said,
raising her right arm.
The general apparently misinterpreted the move, as she quickly
lifted her own right hand above her shoulder and spread her fingers.
“Peace and long life, Lieutenant.”
“Uh…yeah, and you, too,” Chen replied, lifting and dropping her
hand in a single motion, hoping no one noticed that she wasn’t able
to actually form the V-shape. She tossed her head, trying to
inconspicuously get her hair to fall over her uncovered left ear.
The general turned and gestured to the civilian. “And this is Gar
Tiernan, Vice President of Deneva.”
Chen made sure her hand was properly positioned so that Tiernan
was forced to shake it. “Mister Vice President, sir.”
Tiernan took it and said, “Any word yet on the passengers beamed
to your sickbay?”
Chen turned and stepped to one side. “Doctor th’Shelas?”
“The newborns and their mothers are all in perfect health,” the
doctor reported. “The other injured passengers you beamed over
have been treated and should make quick and complete recoveries.”
The Denevans all smiled at hearing that. “Excellent,” the general
replied.
This really is going excellently, isn’t it? Chen nodded back, and
sneaked a quick, self-satisfied smile at Commander La Forge as she

turned to present the rest of the away team. “This is Nurse
Antoinette Mimouni. She and the doctor are here to check on the rest
of your not-quite-such-emergency medical cases. Chief engineer
Geordi La Forge and Ensign Maureen Granados—they’ll be helping
you get back under way to Ingraham B—”
“Ingraham B?” The entire group seemed to be caught by surprise at
that, but it was Vice President Tiernan who asked, “Why would we
continue on to Ingraham B instead of heading back to Deneva?”
“Well, because Deneva—” Chen started to answer, and then quickly
caught hold of her runaway tongue as realization dawned. “You
don’t know.”
Seton’s eyes widened in concern. “Know? Know what?”
Chen cursed her tongue for slipping loose again so quickly. The
Denevans all stared at her with expressions of worry and
expectation, repeating the general’s question. Chen turned to La
Forge, who obviously was no more eager to answer the Denevans’
question than she was. All the same, he stepped forward, putting
himself between Chen and Seton, and began to explain what had
happened when the Borg reached their home planet.
Chen couldn’t help but turn away from their reactions as she fell
back with the rest of her former team.

The dark gray orb at the center of the starscape was
unrecognizable—just another dead world, one of the almost infinite
number of planetary masses on which life had never found a
foothold.
Or so it had seemed, at least until the probe making the recording
reached orbit and pierced the dust-filled atmosphere. Enhanced

visual sensors cut through the layers of thick toxic smoke, bringing
forth every detail of the planet’s surface with horrific clarity. Then
there was no mistaking what world this was: there was the
distinctive western coastline of the Iapetus Ocean, and the Summer
Islands just across the Bealtaine Strait. And on the south shore of the
largest island, where the capital, Lacon City, had once stood, there
was nothing but an ugly black scab of molten glass and metal.
Vice President Garson Tiernan of the planet Deneva—now
presumably President Tiernan of the Denevan Diaspora—sat in the
darkened observation lounge, his chair turned to the wall-mounted
screen, while Jean-Luc Picard sat in silent reverence across the table
from him. Together, they watched for a seventh time as the rest of
the world’s familiar geography rolled past, all signs of human
habitation on every continent reduced to nothing but blemishes on
the scorched terrain. As the probe descended for a lower-altitude
scan on its second orbit, the image started to break up, the effect of
residual radiation in the aftermath of the attack. By the time it
crossed the terminator to Deneva’s nighttime side, the screen went
completely black as the probe transmitter was overwhelmed and
failed.
After a brief, still moment, Tiernan hit the control embedded in the
conference table’s surface and started the visual recording again.
“There’s nothing to be gained by torturing yourself like this, Mister
Tiernan,” Picard said sympathetically.
The vice president did not even acknowledge that he had heard him,
instead fixing all his concentration on the images flashing before
him. Tiernan had been unable to watch the full recording the first
four times without rejecting the truth of what he was seeing, or
turning his head away, or stopping to vomit. The fifth time through
he managed to watch the whole horrible record from start to finish,
and had demanded to see it a sixth time. “I owe it to them, Captain,”
he had said in a strained voice. “I owe it to those people down there
to bear witness to what happened here, to brand these images into

my memory.” The probe completed its circumnavigation again
minutes later, and before the screen had time to darken, Tiernan had
restarted it a ninth time.
At last, Picard had to lean forward and hit his own control panel,
blanking the screen and bringing the room lights back up. “Sir, with
all respect to the deceased, you are now the presumptive leader of
the survivors of Deneva. That these people have a leader was the
very reason, as I understand it, that you were included in the Plan
2757 evacuation. And while you have my deepest sympathies, there
are pressing matters at hand that need to be addressed.”
The Denevan pivoted his chair toward Picard. He seemed to have
physically deflated since first being escorted into the lounge, and his
face looked as if it was threatening to slide right off his skull.
“You’re right, Captain,” he said, grabbing onto the chair’s armrests
and pulling himself upright. “Do we know how many other
Denevans managed to escape safely?”
“The current estimates are just over one million,” Picard said.
“No…” Tiernan said with a shudder.
“That so many were saved is a testament to the Denevan
government’s organization and planning.”
“So many, you say—that’s less than one-tenth of one percent…”
Tiernan dropped his head for a moment, making an effort to
compose himself. “Focus on the living,” he mumbled to himself,
then raised his head again. “How are the repairs on the Libra
coming?”
“You should be back under way within the hour,” Picard assured
him, just as the comm signal chimed. “Excuse me,” he said before
tapping his combadge. “Picard.”
“Captain,” said Ensign Šmrhová, the officer currently at tactical,
“we’re receiving a message from the Federation Council offices on
Earth. Councillor Lynda Foley of Deneva.”
Hearing this, Tiernan felt some of the darkness surrounding him lift.
“Please pipe it in here, Ensign,” Picard said, and moments later, the

face of a dark-haired woman of indeterminate age appeared on the
screen.
“Lynda!” Tiernan said, getting up out of his chair and moving
toward the viewer as if about to embrace her. “It is so good to see
you!”
“Not half as good as it is to see you, Gar!” the councillor replied,
her cheeks dimpling deeply as she smiled. “And Captain Picard,
thank you so much for finding these lost sheep of ours.”
“No thanks are necessary, Councillor,” he told her, smiling.
The councillor’s expression turned more somber as she looked back
to Tiernan and asked, “President Cordaro?”
Tiernan’s expression mirrored Foley’s. “Stubborn to the end. Sent
her entire staff and security detail home to their families, but refused
to be budged from her desk.”
Picard stood at that point, saying, “I assume, Madam Councillor,
that you two have quite a bit to discuss. If you would excuse me,
then…”
With the leave of both Denevans, Picard walked out onto the bridge,
only to find Lieutenant Chen waiting patiently for him at the lounge
door. “Sir, I wanted to tell you again how sorry I am for the way
things went,” she said forlornly once the doors slid closed behind
him. “Seems like I’m capable of fouling up a contact mission with
humans, after all.”
“Nonsense,” Picard chided her. “I shouldn’t have put you in such an
untenable position to begin with.” Picard shook his head ruefully.
He should have relayed the information himself during their initial
contact with the Libra, but, caught up as he was in the moment of
triumph, the calamity that preceded it was banished from his
thoughts. “It’s never easy to relate such tragic news.”
“Almost makes you feel guilty.”
Picard’s right eyebrow arched upward. “Beg pardon?”
“No, not you, specifically, sir,” Chen said. “I meant…we came
through the war pretty okay. We didn’t lose homes or family

members. Hell, I even ended up gaining in that department.” Picard
did not know what that comment meant, or why there was such
apparent bitterness behind it. “But these people—where do they go
now? What do you do when you lose everything like that?”
“‘Let me embrace thee, sour adversity, for wise men say it is the
wisest course,’” Picard said. “Shakespeare,” he added for Chen’s
benefit.
She gave him a small smile. “Yes, sir. The ‘thee’ kinda gave that
away.”
Picard returned the tight smile, then said, “I have no doubt these
people, as determined to survive as they are, will find a way to
embrace this tragedy, and become all the stronger for it.”
“So the rest of them who were killed on Deneva weren’t determined
enough?”
Picard answered the young woman with an angry glare, then looked
across the bridge toward the tactical station. He was slightly relieved
to see Ensign Šmrhová currently manning Choudhury’s station,
though that did not alleviate his outrage at Chen’s thoughtless
comment.
To her credit, she immediately looked abashed. “No! I know that’s
not what you were saying, Captain,” she said quickly, keeping her
voice low enough for just Picard to hear. “I was just wondering
aloud, you know—where’s the sense in all this? Why these people,
not those people? Why us, not them? At the risk of sounding like a
cliché,” she said with a sardonic laugh, “it is not logical.”
Picard sighed. “Far greater philosophers than I have attempted to
answer that question over the ages,” he said, shaking his head. “Why
do bad things happen to good people? I don’t know. I doubt the
answer to that question can be knowable. We can only try and take
solace in the fact that the enemy who caused this calamity is gone
now, and do all that we can to help those who have suffered.”
Chen was about to say something in response, but before she could,
the conference room doors slid open. “Captain Picard…Lieutenant,”

Tiernan said, stopping short when he saw the two Enterprise officers
standing in his way. He looked fully revived, the void Picard had
seen earlier in his eyes now filled with renewed purpose. “Captain,
what is your itinerary once the Libra repairs are finished and she’s
back under way?”
Picard quickly shook off his surprise at the Denevan leader’s sudden
transformation and said, “We’re on a rescue and recovery mission.
We don’t have an itinerary as such, but—”
“Then I need to ask that you take me to Earth,” Tiernan interrupted.
“I need to meet with President Bacco, and as soon as possible.”
“Why?” Chen asked, also clearly taken aback by his unexpectedly
elevated mood.
“I was just shown her postwar address,” he explained. “‘We will
rebuild these worlds,’ she said. That’s my primary obligation now:
to make certain that the promise made to my people is kept.”
Picard pursed his lips as he recalled his recent conversation with
President Bacco, about her speech being “too inspiring.” He
vacillated a moment as he considered the remarkable revitalizing
effect the Federation president’s words had on Tiernan, then told
him, “Mister President, I’m sure you understand that it will be some
time before the Federation can take on a project of such magnitude
as re-terraforming Deneva. The immediate concern has to be for our
displaced citizens, like those on the Libra—”
“Well, yes, of course,” Tiernan said. “But Ingraham B was only ever
meant to serve as a temporary refuge. These people are going to
need a planet to go back home to, after all.”
Picard said nothing; it was not his place, after all, to tell planetary
leaders how to lead. “Very well. As soon as the Libra is back under
way, we will set course for Earth. Lieutenant Chen, would you be
kind enough to escort President Tiernan to VIP quarters?”
Tiernan grinned gratefully. “Thank you, Captain,” he said before
following Chen into the turbolift. Picard returned the man’s smile,

though he was fairly certain that he was doing him no favors by
accommodating his appeal.

Worf stood at the center of the bridge, hands folded behind his back,
watching as the exterior running lights on the Libra were
reilluminated, one by one. And as he watched the ship come back to
life, he allowed himself a rare smile.
Today is a good day to live.
There had been too little glory in the recent war against the Borg.
His fellow Starfleet officers and Klingon warriors—and, he had to
concede, even the Romulans—had done battle against the invaders
with great honor, and there were some victories, such as at Troyius
and Ardana. But many of the dead had been children, or elderly, or
infirm, slaughtered without a chance of defending themselves. A
Klingon did not shrink from death, but being witness to a
purposeless slaughter of this magnitude would have given even
Kahless himself pause.
The Libra recovery, though, was a great triumph in the face of all
else. The Denevans’ foresight and their willingness to sacrifice in
order that some few might survive brought their entire people honor.
Their feat, and that of the outmoded, centuries-old freighter, was one
worthy of song.
“Number One?” Worf turned and noticed that the captain had
finished his conversation with Lieutenant Chen and the Denevan
vice president, and was now moving around to the starboard side of
the bridge. “Would you join me, please?” he said.
Worf nodded, turned the conn over to Rosado, and fell in step
behind Picard as he entered the ready room. He was gratified to see

that the K’jtma goblet had been given a prominent placement in the
captain’s personal refuge. Picard went directly to the replicator, and
as he manually keyed in a request, he said over his shoulder, “I
haven’t yet commended you, Number One, for the remarkable
deduction you made, which led us to the Libra.”
“Thank you, sir. But I was not the only one—”
“No, but it was your instincts,” the captain said, turning back to him
with two identical metal cups in his hands. “You’re the one who
questioned that single reference, and that’s what brought us to the
brightest moment of our current mission.” Worf caught the
unmistakable whiff of bloodwine as Picard handed one of the cups
to him and raised the other. “Qapla, Worf.”
Worf smiled and returned the salute. “Qapla!” Replicated
bloodwine was never very good, but this drink he shared with his
captain was more than acceptable.
Picard gestured for him to take a seat on the sofa, and Picard sat in
one of the matching chairs set at an angle to him. Once they were
both settled, the captain crossed his legs and said, “I don’t suppose
you’ve had any other brilliant insights as to where we might find
more exiles in distress?”
“No, sir. Though Lieutenant Elfiki did raise the possibility that some
evacuation ships may have attempted to take refuge in the Paulson
Nebula, and may still be there.”
The captain nodded thoughtfully. The Paulson Nebula was rich in
sensor-resistant elements, and as it was normally uninhabited, the
Borg theoretically would have ignored it during their genocidal
rampage. “Do we have any solid indication that there are in fact any
ships hiding there?”
“No, sir. Although, given the close proximity of the Paulson Nebula
to the Azure Nebula, the data we have is understandably limited.”
“It’s certainly worth investigating,” Picard said, and then sighed.
“However, we have been asked by President Tiernan to transport
him back to Earth.”

“He doesn’t intend to continue on with his people to Ingraham B?”
“No. He apparently intends to petition President Bacco for an
expedited timetable for the restoration of Deneva.”
Worf’s eyes widened in surprise, as the memories of walking on that
devastated planet with Jasminder arose unbidden in his mind. He
had to take another swallow of bloodwine to push back the vividly
recalled taste and smell of ash in the Denevan air. “That would seem
a poor use of his energies,” Worf said levelly. “Under the best
circumstances, it takes decades to terraform a planet. The conditions
on Deneva…he must realize the challenge that restoring it to even a
fraction of its former state would present.”
Picard sighed. “No, Number One. I don’t believe he does. He’s not a
planetologist or a terraformer; he’s a politician.”
Worf responded to this with a single dry chuckle. As an ambassador,
he had dealt with more than his share of governmental officials who
demanded results without any understanding of—or interest in—
how those results could be reached. Worf sometimes thought they
believed there was a button on their desk, which needed only to be
pressed, causing all their problems to be automatically fixed.
“I’d appreciate any suggestions you might have, Number One, on
how we might best broach this matter with Mister Tiernan,” Picard
said, leaning forward in his chair. “Your experience in your previous
role, I suspect, may provide some fresh perspective.”
Worf’s eyes widened. “Sir…I’m honored that you feel I can offer
any unique contributions.”
“No need for false modesty, Worf,” Picard said, smiling.
“There is nothing false about it, sir,” Worf answered with utter
seriousness. “You are far more accomplished as a diplomat than I. I
do not believe, in my four years in the position, there was a single
situation I faced where I did not ask myself, ‘What would Captain
Picard do?’”
Picard grinned and shook his head. “I’ve always considered myself
an explorer first. And I’ve always had the option, when dealing with

politicians, of simply beaming back aboard ship and leaving them
behind as soon as my specific mission was complete. You didn’t
have that luxury during your time in the embassy.”
“No, I did not,” Worf said in a low rumble, remembering more than
a few of the governmental officials he’d dealt with whom he would
have liked to escape at warp speed.
Before he could say anything, though, he was interrupted by the
beep of the comm, and the voice of Ensign Šmrhová saying,
“Bridge to Captain Picard. You have a priority message coming in
from Starfleet Command.”
“In here, Lieutenant.” Picard moved around behind his desk and
activated his desktop monitor. Worf followed, positioning himself at
the edge of the captain’s desk, where he could see the image of
Admiral Akaar as it appeared on the comm screen. “Admiral,”
Picard said in greeting.
“Captain Picard, the Enterprise is needed at Alpha Centauri III
immediately,” the craggy-faced Capellan said without preamble.
“Alpha Centauri?” Picard asked. “Why? What’s happened?”
“There’s rioting in the streets of the capital,” the admiral said, his
paled face almost the same color as his long white hair. “There are
reports of violence, fires, even looting!”
On Alpha Centauri? Worf wanted to exclaim, though he had enough
self-control not to question the admiral aloud. Alpha Centauri was
one of the five founding worlds of the Federation; the idea of such
things happening there was only slightly less unthinkable than
having them happen on Earth. Worf exchanged a look with the
captain, and saw a look of disbelief he was certain matched his own.
“There are conflicting accounts—the protests were started either by
the refugee groups placed there, or by residents protesting the
refugees’ presence,” Akaar continued, also plainly staggered by the
news. “Local law enforcement is doing what they can—”
But the captain was looking away from the admiral’s image now,
raising his head slightly and calling, “Picard to bridge. Set course for

the Alpha Centauri system and engage at maximum warp!”
The admiral, rather than being annoyed at being interrupted, simply
gave the captain a curt nod. “Godspeed, Enterprise,” he said, and
ended the transmission.
“Alpha Centauri…” Picard put his hands forward on his desk, as if
supporting a huge weight across his shoulders. Worf waited
respectfully as Picard stood like that for a moment, and the first
officer wondered if the captain’s spirit, so recently renewed by the
Caeliar, had been broken.
Then Picard shook his head, straightened up, and turned to Worf
with a fire of determination in his eyes. “We’ve lost too many
worlds already, Number One,” he said, as he started to move toward
the bridge. “We will not allow another to fall.”

11

Two full moons had risen over Pacifica, casting an ethereal glow
over the iy’Dewra’ni camp. Beverly Crusher leaned wearily against
the doorjamb of the infirmary building’s entry, breathing in the cool

night air and marveling at how peaceful and serene the place seemed
at that moment.
It certainly hadn’t been peaceful or serene for most of her day. She
was able to release the majority of the infirmary’s patients after
administering her new inoculation. But once word had gotten out
that “a real flesh and blood doctor” was now at the infirmary, the
line of people with minor ailments and injuries wrapped around the
building. She understood the reservations people had about the
EMH, and she realized that most people outside of Starfleet had
never encountered one before. But she’d been surprised by how
many civilians flat-out refused to deal with the computerized
hologram, opting instead to suffer in silence.
Fortunately, she had Arandis, who continued to be a great help,
administering treatment to the simpler cases—including a lot more
who had picked up the waterborne microbe—and just generally
projecting her good nature unto the tired and irritable patients as
they filed in and out. The Risians were legendary for their generous,
giving natures, and Arandis was proof of that, working herself
beyond the point of exhaustion and finally falling asleep sitting
upright in a chair in the corner of the infirmary.
Crusher’s gaze rose from the camp up to the larger of the two
moons, and then beyond. I wonder where Jean-Luc is right now, she
thought, as she absently rubbed the curve of her belly.
“Bev? You’re still here?”
Crusher brought her head back down as Miranda Kadohata
approached, dragging a small antigrav sled behind her. Her dark hair
was a mess, flying in all directions. The knees of her uniform pants
were caked with mud, as were the cuffs of her shirt. Still, she
favored Crusher with a smile. “I’m still here,” the doctor confirmed.
“You look pretty pleased with yourself.”
Kadohata nodded as she walked past Crusher into the infirmary,
went to the small storage unit in the corner, and grabbed one of the
small squeezebulbs of water there. “Commandant Minha came

through with that extra industrial replicator,” she said. “We’ve got it
up and running, and made some safety fixes to the family section of
camp.” Her smile faded a fraction then. “So many of these children
were put on their ships without either parent…” She shook her head
and trailed off as she drank deeply.
Crusher could think of nothing to say to that. She knew Miranda had
talked at length with her husband earlier, and things seemed to have
been patched up somewhat. Still, she understood that being apart
from her loved ones was never going to be easy. Her thoughts
started to drift again…
“Bev!”
Crusher’s head jerked up and she refocused on the woman talking to
her. “Bev, you’re exhausted. Go back to the ship and get some rest.”
The doctor shook her head. “I have patients to look after,” she said
as she headed back into the ward.
“Not so many anymore,” Kadohata noted as she followed Crusher.
“What about that Risian woman who was…Oh,” she said when she
spotted the sleeping Arandis. “Still, you need your sleep too, love.
Especially in your state.”
Crusher tilted her head and raised one eyebrow. “I don’t remember
you slowing down when you were three months along, during the
Delta Sigma IV mission,” she said. “And that was when a doctor
was telling you to.”
“A wise and brilliant doctor, whose advice I wish I had taken,”
Kadohata answered.
“Miranda…” Crusher started, but as much as she hated to admit it to
herself, she wasn’t twenty-four anymore. She was discovering she
could not shake off the fatigue and other effects of this pregnancy
like she had her first time. Finally, she sagged and said, “You won’t
hesitate to call if there’s any trouble whatsoever,” making it more of
an order than a request.
“Medical trouble,” Kadohata countered.
“Fair enough,” Crusher said, suddenly unable to resist the call of a

nice soft bunk. She felt a quick flash of guilt, knowing everyone else
in the camp was sleeping on thinly padded cots and sleeping mats,
but it wasn’t enough to stay her hand as she tapped her combadge.
“Crusher to Genesee. One to beam up.”
She was greeted, when she rematerialized on the runabout’s
transporter pad, by the sounds of a shouting match in progress in the
living area. Crusher made her way astern and found Dillingham,
Byxthar, and Gliv sitting around the table, which was strewn with
the remains of a full dinner. “What’s going on here?” she demanded.
“Ah, Doctor-Commander,” Byxthar said as all three turned toward
the doorway. “You’ll be able to help settle this.”
“Settle what?” she asked warily.
“We were discussing the reports we each plan to make to Director
Barash,” Byxthar answered, facing Crusher but directing her eyes at
Dillingham. “The professional, comprehensive reports expected
from a team of experts…”
The human gave her an acid look back. “And while you’re working
on your next book—oh, excuse me, your ‘comprehensive report’—
these people are living in the equivalent of a prisoner-of-war camp!”
“Hyperbole doesn’t help your case, Counselor,” Byxthar said with a
belittling sneer.
“A POW camp would be better planned and built,” Gliv countered.
“We’d be violating the Seldonis IV Convention if we did have
prisoners of war here.”
Crusher pinched the bridge of her nose. “Excuse me,” she said, loud
enough to silence the others. “But just what, exactly, is it you’re
arguing?”
“We’ve reached the limit of what we can do here for these people,”
Dillingham answered, wearing a sour expression. “I know Director
Barash didn’t set any timetables for submitting our findings—”
“Because he didn’t want to put restrictions on how we did our jobs,”
the sociologist interrupted.
“—but I’m afraid the longer we draw out this fact-finding mission,”

Dillingham said, talking over his fellow team member, “the longer
we delay any real help coming.”
“I’m sorry?” Crusher said, her tiredness suddenly banished by a
surge of indignation. “Real help? What is it that we’re here to do?”
Dillingham turned instantly apologetic. “I certainly didn’t mean…I
know you were in the infirmary all day, and Gliv here was busy with
his repairs. But all I can do is make my suggestions and file briefs—
which I do plan to do regarding Kadohata and this fence issue—”
Crusher had no idea what the “fence issue” was, nor did she care.
“What do you mean, that’s all you can do? How can you look at
what’s going on down there—you compare it to a prison camp—and
then come back up here, have a nice big supper, and say, ‘There’s
nothing I can do’? I’m sure Gliv would have appreciated an extra
pair of hands.”
“To be serious, sir,” Gliv said, eliciting surprised looks from the
other two, “these people’s basic needs are just barely being met. We
would need a full team of engineers and a starship in support to fix
all that needs fixing. One pair of hands wouldn’t make much
difference.”
“Not much, but some, right?” Crusher challenged him. “You’re not
arguing that we should do nothing, are you, Ensign?”
The young Tellarite at least had the good sense to look shamed. But
then Byxthar rose to his defense. “Begging your pardon, DoctorCommander, but we weren’t sent here to fix the camp by ourselves.”
She stood up from the table, and circled around to face Crusher
directly. “I do admire you Starfleet officers, rolling up your sleeves
and jumping in the minute you see something that needs doing. But,
I’ve been dealing with refugee issues for a long time, and the one
thing I can tell you is, you need to keep your detachment.” Byxthar
fixed Crusher with something akin to empathy for her. “Our only job
is to gather information for Director Barash; he’ll take care of what
has to be done next. It’s not our responsibility.”
Crusher stared daggers at her, and tried to get control of her thoughts

before the Betazoid woman picked up something that went too far
over the line. But she was interrupted by a loud double tone from the
comm, and then the voice of Miranda Kadohata calling from the
surface.
The doctor hit her combadge. “Crusher here. What is it, Miranda?”
“Bev, sorry, but it’s the Risian woman. Arandis. She’s gone into
some kind of convulsions.”
Crusher cursed silently. “Is she still breathing?” she asked Kadohata,
and at the same time pointed to Gliv. With a gesture, she sent him
scurrying to the runabout’s cockpit and transporter controls.
“Yes. I got her flat on the floor…”
“Good. Just stand clear, we’re beaming her up,” she said to
Kadohata, then called forward, “Gliv, whenever you’re ready!”
“I’m bringing her right back there to you, Doctor,” the ensign said
through the intracraft comm. “Energizing.”
The three moved back against the bulkheads to make room for the
woman, who arrived shaking and writhing on the deck. Crusher
knelt over her with her tricorder, and then cursed aloud. Dillingham
and Byxthar stood by mutely as she muttered a few more profanities
in frustration and pressed a hypospray to Arandis’s neck. Her
convulsions instantly subsided, and her entire body went lax.
“What happened?” Dillingham was the first to ask.
“The microbe has mutated,” Crusher growled. Which, depending on
when it mutated and how it had spread, could mean that most of the
inoculations she’d administered to the rest of the camp would prove
completely ineffective. She rubbed her face, and then looked up to
the two other team members. “Put her in one of the open bunks,” she
said, pointing to the small private cabins that abutted the living area.
“In one of our bunks?”
Crusher spun on Byxthar. “Listen to me: I command this mission
team. Your job is what I tell you it is! If you want to file a grievance
when we get back,” she added as she included Dillingham, “feel
free, but for now, do as I say!” Crusher headed for the front of the

ship, leaving Dillingham and Byxthar to care for the unconscious
woman.
Gliv turned as she entered. “Is everything all right, Commander?”
Crusher didn’t answer, but simply stepped around the engineer and
slipped into the pilot’s seat. Without a word, she disengaged the
autopilot, and then keyed a deceleration command sequence into the
control panel.
“Doctor?” the ensign said, jumping up out of his chair, and stopping
short right behind the commander’s. “Sir, what are you doing?”
“The mission has changed, Ensign,” she said. For a moment, her
thoughts went to baby Matthew and the other patients in the
infirmary who needed more help than she could provide with her
current resources. But they weren’t in immediate danger; not as
much as the rest of the camp was without a serious show of support.
“Looks like we’re going to be here awhile,” she said, adjusting the
pitch of the ship as it dropped into Pacifica’s upper atmosphere. “We
might as well make ourselves at home.”

Worf approached Jasminder Choudhury’s quarters and rang the
signal chime, then after a brief wait, rang it a second time. After
ringing it a third, Choudhury answered the door with tears in her
puffed and reddened eyes. “Lieutenant,” he said, “may I speak with
you?”
“Worf,” she said. “Could this possibly wait? I’m—”
He didn’t wait for her to finish making her excuse, but simply
walked through the open doorway, forcing her to step back. The
lights were dimmed, and the portals looking out into space beyond
the ship were set to opaqueness. He paused to consider the small

holo on her workstation desk—an image of Choudhury standing
with her father beside a majestic old oak tree the two had planted
together decades earlier. It was the same image she had shown him
when they had first learned of the destruction of her family’s
homeworld, using it to illustrate the bond she shared with her family
and home. He heard the door slide closed behind him, and then
Jasminder came around in front of him, defiance on her face. “What
is it, Worf?”
“Lieutenant Konya is currently in the holodeck, running urban
pacification drills with your security team in preparation for our
arrival at Alpha Centauri. Why are you not doing so?” he asked.
“Rennan is perfectly capable,” she said in response.
Worf fixed her with one of his penetrating Klingon glares. “Of
course he is. But that does not answer my question. You are chief of
security.”
“And I delegated the responsibility to him, as is my prerogative.”
She stood her ground, showing no sign of feeling intimidated by the
larger man.
“You also delegated the responsibility for the Libra boarding party
team’s security,” Worf noted, causing the woman to noticeably
stiffen. “I’m curious as to why.”
“Do I need to explain all my decisions to you, Commander?” she
retorted, stressing his rank.
“Only the ones I ask an explanation for, Lieutenant,” he shot back,
instinctively responding to the challenge to his authority. Worf
knew, though, that this insolence was only a defensive front, hiding
a deeper issue. He blew out a short breath to purge his anger, and
continued in a more moderate tone, “Your decisions since the
discovery of the Libra and Plan 2757 especially beg elaboration.”
A look of naked anger blossomed across Jasminder’s normally
bright and peaceful face. “Why? Because you would have done
things differently when you were security chief?”
He refused to acknowledge her aggressive stance this time. Worf

searched her eyes, trying to find something beneath the surface of
her fury. “Your parents could have been on that ship.”
Jasminder reacted as if she had been slapped. “Or your sisters, or
their children, on any of those Denevan evacuation ships,” Worf
continued. “I know how you honor your family, yet you behave as if
you were afraid to find them.” He tried to keep his tone flat, but he
heard the note of accusation and disbelief coming through in his
voice.
“Afraid to find them?” Jasminder shouted back, her face flushing.
“You son of a bitch, you think I was afraid, that I would so dread
finding my family alive?” Tears started streaming freely down her
face again. “I would give anything if I thought I’d ever see them
again, damn you. But I won’t!”
“You cannot know—”
“I do know!” she cut him off. “I know my family, Worf. They would
never have taken a spot on any of the evacuation ships if it meant
that by doing so, another person was left behind.” Her anger then
seemed to burn itself out, like an ember thrown from a fire. She
turned away, and dropped onto the sofa in her cabin’s living area.
“Every one of those people we found represents someone my father
and mother sacrificed themselves for,” she said, her head dropping
in shame. “And why them? I know that makes me a horrible person
for thinking it, but why do they get to live? What makes them any
more worthy?”
Worf crossed the room and seated himself on the opposite side of
the sofa. “They honored themselves and you with their selfless act,”
he told her.
“Yes, they died with honor,” she said sourly. “And with good
karma, and in a state of grace, and whatever other ways you can
choose to soften it, and none of them change the fact that they’re
gone.”
“Of course it does not. There is nothing soft in death, which you
well know.” Worf’s mind flashed briefly back to the hazy jumble of

disconnected memories of the Khitomer outpost collapsing around
him, the smell of blood and the screams of pain. “To say one died
well, however it’s phrased, is to acknowledge the way they lived
their life, and to recognize that we have the duty to live life as well
as they did before death comes for us.”
He couldn’t be certain whether his words were having any impact.
She sat with her head down, and a thick lock of her black hair,
which had worked free of her ponytail, fell over the right side of her
face. Worf found himself fighting the urge to reach out and gently
brush it back. “Your parents gave their lives for others, just as you
joined Starfleet to protect others, even at the risk of your own life.
You owe it to them and to their memories to continue to do so.”
Jasminder kept her eyes downcast, though at least she was no longer
crying. Worf sat with her a moment longer until, deciding nothing
more would be said, rose and headed for the door.
“Worf?”
He stopped and turned back to see her lift her head and push the
loose tresses back behind her ear. “Worf…” she repeated, and then
seemed to be considering a list of things she wanted to say to him,
before settling on “Thank you, Worf,” with a wan smile.
He took that as a very good sign, and smiled back before exiting.

Trys Chen squatted on her haunches and looked at the newborn
child in the sickbay nursery through the side of his transparent crib.
“He’s kind of an ugly baby, isn’t he?”
Doctor Tropp crossed his arms over his chest and fixed her with an
exaggerated scowl. “You know what, Lieutenant? I suspect that the
majority of the seemingly thoughtless, socially inappropriate

comments you make are wholly intentional, simply to get a reaction
out of your audience.”
Chen looked up and briefly met the Denobulan’s eyes, then turned
back to the child. “Seriously, look how scrunched his face is. You
sure he’s all right?”
“He’s fine,” Tropp sighed, taking her by the elbow and helping her
to her feet. “All the Libra patients are fine. Your concern is laudable,
but unnecessary.”
Chen nodded, but continued to study both the little boy, and the
prettier baby girl in the crib next to his. “These guys are never going
to understand how much everyone else around them has lost. As far
as they’re concerned, the way things are now is the way they’ve
always been.”
Tropp considered that, and nodded. “One might almost envy them
that.”
Chen thought about that as she left sickbay and headed back to her
quarters. She had taken it upon herself to tell the Denevans who had
been transferred to sickbay that, thanks to their new president, they
wouldn’t be going straight to Ingraham B. They’d taken that news
pretty well, but only because most of them were still trying to get
over the earlier news about not returning to Deneva.
As she entered her cabin, she noticed an icon flashing on her
computer monitor. “Computer, play back messages,” she said, as she
kicked her boots carelessly across the room and against the outer
bulkhead.
The computer chirped like a robotic parakeet, and then informed her,
“Response protocol activated. Initiating transmission to Starfleet
Headquarters, Earth.”
“What the hell?” Chen asked the disembodied voice, and then went
over to study her monitor screen. She had no time to read the
informational text that appeared below the Starfleet emblem on the
screen before it disappeared, to be replaced by the image of a female
Gallamite with two solid pips on her collar. “Lieutenant T’Ryssa

Chen?”
“Yeah. Who wants to know?”
“My name is Lieutenant Joham,” she answered, then asked, “Is
your mother Lieutenant Commander Antigone Chen?”
“Uh…yes?” Red Alert klaxons went off in her head. She’d been in
and around Starfleet long enough to recognize this script, but she
knew it couldn’t be…
“I regret to inform you that Antigone Chen, serial number GB-018494, was killed in the line of duty on stardate 58119.”
“No. No, this is a mistake,” Chen said, even as she realized that
Joham must have heard the same denial from practically every
family member she contacted. In this case, though, it was true. “My
mother is a science officer on the U.S.S. Wounded Knee. They were
out toward Berengaria during the war; the Borg never came near
them.”
A mortified expression crossed the Gallamite’s face, and she
lowered her head, giving Chen a perfect view of the brain inside her
transparent skull. Chen inhaled, not realizing that she had stopped
breathing. Joham would check her records, find that someone had
transposed digits in the serial number or some equally stupid
mistake, and apologize for scaring the hell out of her. For all the
issues between her and her mother, despite all the times she’d denied
caring about the woman…
“Lieutenant Commander Antigone Chen transferred from the
Wounded Knee to the Grace Hopper on stardate 57809. That vessel
was destroyed, and all hands lost, while engaged in combat with the
Borg in the Zeta Fornacis system.” The lieuten ant was now looking
up, straight into Chen’s eyes, completely confident in what she was
saying. “The president and the commander in chief of Starfleet offer
their condolences.”
“No!” Chen shouted. “No, this is a sick, sick joke…”
“I assure you it’s not a joke, Lieutenant,” the Gallamite said.
“It has to be!” Chen insisted. “If my mother had been killed by the

Borg, I would have been notified weeks ago!”
“Your mother had listed her parents, Xun Chen and Ismene Zavos,
as her next of kin on her initial Starfleet application, and failed to
update that information following their deaths three years ago.”
I had grandparents, Chen thought. Which shouldn’t have been a
revelation, but Antigone had never talked about her own parents.
And now they were dead. A grandmother and a grandfather she
never knew.
And a mother she barely knew any better. Also dead.
Joham went on about how they’d searched for Antigone’s other
relations, but Chen wasn’t listening anymore. She continued not
listening until Lieutenant Joham signed off and the monitor went
black. She just sat stock-still as she stared into space, and had
anyone been watching, they would have easily mistaken this as a
display of perfect Vulcan emotional control.
Until, of course, she hurled the computer monitor against the nearest
bulkhead.

12

For nearly three decades, Meron Byxthar had been studying the
sociological aspects of the lives of refugees. But until now, she had
never truly understood what it was like to be caught in a place with
no reasonable hope of ever returning home.
The Betazoid stood at the edge of the camp as the sun peeked over
the horizon and glinted off the bright white hull of the Genesee
where it sat grounded at the entrance to the camp, right beside the
infirmary. The two food replicators had been ripped out of the cabin,
and now sat up against the starboard nacelle, where early-rising
refugees were lined up for their morning meals. On the other side,
along the port nacelle, Ensign Gliv had moved the portable ’freshers,
for some reason also connecting them directly to the ship’s auxiliary
ports. And from the ship’s stern, a thick cable ran into the
administration shack, the impulse engines now replacing the
emergency generators that had been powering the camp’s
equipment.
The ship was now irrevocably a part of the iy’Dewra’ni camp, never
to fly again.
Which meant she was just as stuck here as everyone else in this
forsaken place.
“Doctor Byxthar!”
She jumped, so caught up in her thoughts that she hadn’t even
sensed Amsta-Iber come up behind her. “Doctor, I just wanted to
express to you again what it means to me that you and your team
have made this firm commitment to dealing with the crisis here.”
“Don’t thank me,” Byxthar said witheringly.
The Grazerite reacted in surprise. She was more pleasant when the
refugees were hopeless and miserable, she heard him think, and it
was all she could do to keep from lashing out at him. How dare he
make her out to be such a heartless monster?
She turned away from him, looking again at the grounded ship and

at the scores of people surrounding it. She let her psionic senses
open just a bit wider, not believing the hopelessness and misery had
really abated as Amsta-Iber had implied, but checking anyway.
I am not a heartless monster, she told herself, as an upsurge of
renewed optimism washed through her senses.

Arandis’s eyelids fluttered and opened just enough to cause her to
wince against the light. “Good morning,” Doctor Crusher said,
smiling down at her as she snapped her tricorder shut. “How are you
feeling?”
The Risian woman rolled her head one way, then the other. “Where
am I?” she rasped weakly.
“You’re on our runabout.”
Her eyes met Crusher’s. “Going home?”
The doctor’s smile faltered slightly. “Not just yet.”
A shadow seemed to pass behind the woman’s eyes, but she blinked
and shook her head as if willing dark memories away again. “What
happened?” she asked.
“You passed out,” Crusher told her. “You were infected by a
mutated microbe, but it’s gone now.”
Arandis took that in. “Tired,” she said.
Crusher nodded and gave her a kind but stern glare. “Yes, well, you
were pushing yourself pretty hard all day. You should have said
something if you were feeling sick or feverish.”
The Risian sighed. “It’s our nature to give.”
“Well, you’re going to have to get used to doing a little taking for
now,” Crusher said, patting her hand before turning and leaving the
private cabin. As she passed through the living area, her eyes went

to the now-open alcove where the food replicator had been, and
mused about how much she would have loved a double-strength
French roast right then. Stifling a yawn, she stepped out of the
runabout, drawing the attention of the refugees lined up to access the
newly set-up replicators. At first, she thought she just imagined they
looked a little brighter this morning, a little less dejected than they
had the previous day.
“Thank you, Starfleet!” an unseen man shouted from the multitude.
This sparked a wave of cheers and exclamations of gratitude.
Crusher acknowledged them with a modest wave as she walked
from the runabout to the infirmary.
Miranda Kadohata, drawn by the shouting outside, met Crusher at
the infirmary’s entrance. “Beverly,” she said, frowning at her. Her
black bangs hung limply over her eyes, which were underscored
with dark crescents. “That was nowhere near eight hours.”
“Uh-huh,” the doctor answered as she squeezed past her.
“Bev, love, you were up how long last night chasing down these
mutations?” the second officer asked, arms crossed over her chest.
“Aren’t there other places in the camp you can make yourself
useful?” Crusher asked, only slightly joking. She was beginning to
seriously regret her suggestion to Jean-Luc of having Miranda along
as a chaperone. She knew Miranda’s intentions were nothing but
good, but there was only so much mothering she could take.
“I like it here just fine,” she said, her expression changing subtly. “In
the middle of things.”
Crusher studied her out of the corner of one eye. “Peggy stayed in
the family section during the night, I take it?” she asked. She had
checked on Matthew just before looking in on Arandis; his condition
had not changed while in the stasis chamber, which was all she
could hope for right now.
Kadohata nodded again, and Crusher saw the same tiny tightness
again at the corners of her eyes. As a mother herself, she could tell
Miranda was having mixed feelings, here caring for the children of

strangers, when her own were light-years away. It was what they did
as Starfleet officers, though that didn’t make it any easier.
Taking in the ward, she noticed one bed missing its occupant.
“Where’s Sasdren?” she asked, crossing to the vacant cot.
“He’s scarpered. Insisted on discharging himself,” Kadohata said
with a sigh; Crusher wasn’t sure if it was meant for the patient or for
her and her stubborn insistence on doing her job. “He said he was
fully recovered, and the tricorder said the same thing.” Kadohata
handed Crusher that tricorder then, and the doctor saw, indeed, that
the S’ti’ach’s physical injuries had completely healed. Crusher was
far less certain about any other wounds he’d suffered.
The doctor shook her head. “Well, it’s not as if we could have kept
him here against his will.” She only hoped he didn’t try to repeat
what had put him in the infirmary in the first place.
Kadohata put a comforting hand on her shoulder. “You can’t let
yourself worry about what might happen next,” she said, as if
reading her mind. “You did your best by him. You’ve done so much
good here…”
“Hardly feels like I’ve done anything,” Crusher said. She dropped
onto Sasdren’s empty bed, suddenly feeling as if the full weight of
this world was settling on her shoulders.
Kadohata gave her an incredulous smile. “Are you kidding? Did you
hear the people out there just now?”
Crusher chuckled and let her eyes slip closed, and the roar of the
approving crowd came back to her memory…

Then the curtain fell, muffling the sound of applause from the
audience. The lights came back up on the stage, and Beverly and her

fellow cast members all hugged and congratulated one another on a
successful opening night performance. Though she’d questioned
how well a four-hundred-year-old adaptation of an eight-hundredyear-old Shakespearean comedy would play in 2357, the St. Louis
Theater League’s production of Kiss Me, Kate seemed, from their
vantage point, to be a hit. It had been an amazing, terrifying,
exhilarating experience, her first time dancing in a public forum, as
well as her first time ever in a full-scale theatrical production. As
thrilling as it had been competing in the All-City Dance Competition
earlier in the year, this experience had been at a whole other level.
The adrenaline dissipated by the time she’d changed out of her
costume and stepped out the stage door into the warm, muggy
Missouri summer night. The other chorus dancers were off to the
nearby bar to continue their post-show celebration, but she had clinic
hours in the morning, not to mention a babysitter with a curfew. But
as she was bidding them good night, she was stopped cold by the
sight of an old, familiar face, waiting for her under a streetlight by
the curb. “Walker? Walker Keel?”
The tall, distinguished-looking older man crossed the sidewalk to
give her a big hug. “Beverly. It’s good to see you.”
“You, too! Walker, how long has it been?”
“Too long,” he answered, and his smile faded away. “I’m sorry I
couldn’t make it for Jack’s funeral,” he said in a subdued tone.
Beverly took a small sharp breath and forced a smile for her friend,
the Starfleet captain. “I know.” She’d been out of uniform for three
years, but she hadn’t forgotten how duty took precedence over all.
The Horatio had been assigned to the Tzenkethi border at the time,
and Walker had sent her a very touching condolence message. He
had known Jack longer than anyone she knew—he had been the one
who introduced the two of them—and Beverly believed that, if not
for the risk of a major interstellar incident, he would have been back
on Earth to pay his respects in person in a heartbeat. “What are you
doing here now?” she asked.

“Are you kidding? I love Cole Porter.” Beverly gave him a playful
swat on the arm, and Walker smiled again, bringing out a bunch of
new lines on his craggily handsome face. “No, seriously—the
Horatio is undergoing a major refit at Utopia Planitia, so I decided
to look up some old friends back here on Earth. Have you had dinner
yet?”
“I…well, no,” she answered. She’d had a light meal before the
show, and was planning to have a little something when she got
back home. But she couldn’t refuse her old friend, and so they made
their way to a small, warmly lit steakhouse a few blocks from the
theater.
“I gotta tell you, Bev,” Keel said, sipping at his drink, “you
impressed the hell out of me up there tonight. I never knew you
could dance like that.”
“Neither did I,” she said with a laugh. “I saw a notice at the local
community center for dance lessons, and decided on a whim to give
it a try. But I love it. It’s really amazing to discover that you have
this hidden talent, and to be able to bring it out, develop it…it’s very
rewarding.”
Walker nodded as he studied Crusher’s face intently. “More so than
medicine?”
“Well, I’m not about to give up my practice to dance full-time,”
Beverly said. Her partnership with Doctor Tina Halloway was a
good one. It allowed her to keep regular hours and gave her plenty
of personal time to spend with Wesley, as well as her own pursuits.
“I’ve known I was going to be a doctor since I was a girl; that hasn’t
changed. But I can do both.”
“The Dancing Doctor,” Walker said with a small laugh. “But having
a private practice on Earth—especially so far removed from San
Francisco or Paris—has got to be a huge change from running a
starbase infirmary.”
“Oh, yes, that’s for sure.” Beverly nodded. “It’s a rare week when I
see anything more serious than a case of indigestion. Speaking of

which,” she said as the waitress approached with their dishes. She
set a chicken Caesar salad in front of Beverly, and for Captain Keel,
a charbroiled sirloin with baked potato and broccoli. He attacked
with his knife and fork, carving out a bite-sized chunk of beef,
popped it in his mouth, and moaned in mild ecstasy as he slowly
chewed. “Oh, you can’t get that from a Starfleet replicator…”
Beverly chuckled at his exaggerated pleasure as she speared a
forkful of greens for herself. Her salad didn’t elicit the same reaction
as Walker’s steak, but it was still quite good.
“Do you ever miss it?”
Beverly swallowed. “Starfleet? No,” she answered quickly. “No, I
have no regrets about leaving. I have a good life here, and I’ve been
able to give Wesley a nice, stable environment to grow up in.”
Walker raised an eyebrow at her. “Come on now, Bev. Remember
who you’re talking to. Or have you forgotten about the Prague?”
Beverly didn’t answer, though of course she hadn’t forgotten her
time aboard that tiny ship during her fourth year in the Academy’s
pre-med program. Walker had been a lieutenant commander,
assigned as an officer-observer during the Prague’s month-long
cadet training cruise—Starbase 218, to Memory Alpha, and then
back to Earth. Under the watchful eyes of Keel and a dozen other
supervisory officers, the command, engineering, and security staffs
were being fully run by third-and fourth-year cadets. In sickbay,
though, the Prague had a full medical staff, who the pre-med
students were expected to simply observe over the course of the
mission. It was a bit frustrating for Beverly, who had essentially
been practicing medicine since she was fifteen, caring for the
survivors of the Kevrata ship crash on Arvada III.
The frustration got pushed aside immediately when the Prague
found itself in its own crisis situation. En route back to Earth on the
last leg of the mission, they hit an uncharted tetryon field, taking out
warp drive and knocking most of the crew against the decks and
bulkheads in the process. There had been no fatalities—thanks in no

small part to Crusher, who kept a level head and didn’t hesitate to
jump in and lend her assistance in the crisis.
“You enjoyed that,” Keel told her now, with a knowing grin. “Being
in the action. Being there to help when things go south, and being
able to make a positive difference.”
“That was years ago…before Jack.” She felt that small dark void
open up in her chest again at the thought of her late husband. The
pain wasn’t fully gone yet—she suspected it never would be,
entirely—but she had come to accept her loss, and had gotten on
with her life, a life she was happy with. “I’ve got a son to think
about now.”
“And where is he tonight?”
“At home, with a sitter.”
“Mmm-hmm,” Keel said.
Beverly scowled. “And it’s just one quick tram ride there, so I can
kiss him good night every night, and be there to see him off to
school every morning. Something I couldn’t have done in Starfleet.”
“You two could have stayed on Starbase 32,” Walker noted.
Beverly shook her head. “Not if I wanted to move up, I couldn’t.”
“And you wanted that, didn’t you? To move up, to better yourself.”
Beverly stared at her salad. “I wanted what was best for my son.”
“I know you did, but what about what was best for you?” Walker
asked, pointing with his fork. Somehow, she found she didn’t have
an immediate answer for him. “I was really amazed by what I saw
up on that stage tonight, Beverly,” he said then, poking at his potato.
“You know what I saw?”
“What?”
“Passion,” Walker said, fixing his eyes on hers. “The kind of passion
I remember seeing in you on the Prague, and then later, while you
were stationed on Tau Ceti III. You were always a person who
wanted to live life to the fullest, to make the most of every
experience, to push yourself to the limit and test your abilities at
every opportunity.

“I saw you channeling that passion through your dancing, and I
couldn’t help but think: she doesn’t really give a damn about
dancing. This is just a safety valve. You’re so frustrated with the
way you’ve stunted your medical career, you need this active,
physically and mentally challenging activity to channel and release
it.”
“That’s—” Beverly started to say, planning to deny all he said. But
the truth of the matter was, having been reminded of the Prague and
of Tau Ceti III, and even of Starbase 32, she wasn’t sure he was so
far off the mark. She had come to St. Louis, to the middle of the
continent, to get as far away as possible from the unpredictability of
that old life. But there was still a part of her that craved it. So instead
of a denial, what Beverly said was, “Why are you telling me all
this?”
“This refit the Horatio is undergoing?” Walker said. “It’s primarily
to the interior, the cabins. Creating family living space.”
“Family space?”
“With the Federation growing faster, and missions running longer
and traveling farther out, crews need the option to bring their
families along. The Galaxy- and the Nebula- classes, when they
launch in the next few years, will have fully integrated facilities for
family support, but our retrofit should make for fairly decent
accommodations.” Walker leaned forward over the table. “I’d like to
have you and your boy aboard, Beverly. Chief medical officer.”
Beverly shook her head. “Walker, you know I can’t. It’d be the same
as trying to raise him on a starbase, except worse. The risks—”
“No, it’s not as safe as life in St. Louis,” Walker allowed. “But it’s
also far more rewarding than treating stomachaches and sore throats.
With all respect to your partner, your patients, and your
choreographer, you’re squandering your talents and your passion
here. You need to be out there in the middle of things, pushing the
edge of the envelope, the one making waves instead of sitting here
watching the little ripples hit the shore.”

“So, I should be in the middle, and on the edge?” Beverly joked,
though not taking anything her old friend was saying lightly.
He chuckled. “Analogies were never my strong suit.” Then he said,
“You know what I’m saying is true.”
Beverly shook her head. “Walker, Wesley’s already lost his father. I
couldn’t do this to him.”
Keel said nothing at first, but fixed her in his powerful gaze.
“Beverly…what if I were to suggest that you were hiding behind
your son? Using him as an excuse to keep you from facing up to
what Jack did?”
Beverly felt her face go hot. “What is that supposed to—?”
“Yes, there’s risk in Starfleet,” Walker interrupted. “Jack took a risk
when he volunteered to go outside the ship and cut away that
nacelle. He could have played it safe and let someone else do the
job. He could have played it safe and transferred off the Stargazer
when you had Wesley. But that’s not the person he was,” he
reminded her. “That’s not the person you are. And I’m going to
wager the apple didn’t fall very far from either tree.”
Beverly let Walker Keel’s words echo in her head long after they
had finished their meal and parted ways, with the captain making her
promise to think about his offer and wait two weeks before giving a
definitive no. On the ride back home, as she watched the nondescript
landscape of her adopted hometown roll past her window, she forced
herself to reexamine the choices she’d made over the past three
years, and the one before her now. As nice a place as St. Louis was,
Walker was right: other than geographically, it was far from the
center of anything. And while she liked and respected Tina
Halloway, and knew she was doing good for her patients in private
practice, she knew she was limiting herself.
But to return to Starfleet—could she really do that? More important,
could she do that to Wes, not only risking their lives, but
surrounding him with reminders of his father’s death? Or maybe
Walker was right, that by putting limits on her potential, she was

doing the same to her son, in the name of protecting him.
Once she arrived home and sent the babysitter on her way, she
tiptoed into her son’s room. He was fast asleep, still grasping the
padd he had been reading. Beverly sat on the edge of his bed and put
a hand on his arm. “Wesley? It’s Mom. Wake up; I need to talk to
you about something.” The boy mumbled in his sleep, and Beverly
shook him a bit harder….

“I need to speak with her,” she—or someone—insisted again, and
she repeated the hard shaking…
And Crusher bolted awake, nearly vaulting up off the infirmary cot.
She blinked her bleary eyes and found herself looking straight into
Commandant Minha’s huge black eyes. “Doctor, I must speak with
you,” he demanded, while Miranda Kadohata, standing just behind
him, overlapped, saying, “Sorry, Bev, he wouldn’t take no—”
“Commandant,” Crusher said as the last vestiges of her dream fell
away. “What is it now?”
“My troops are falling ill. Because of your people.”
Crusher closed her eyes again and moaned silently. “Right back in
the middle of things,” she muttered as she forced herself up out of
bed.

The Enterprise dropped out of warp on the outskirts of Alpha

Centauri’s binary system, and pushed its way toward the worlds
circling the primary star. Soon, Alpha Centauri III came into view,
and Picard reflected on how utterly peaceful and quiet the whiteand-blue orb appeared from this distance.
“Sir,” Ensign Šmrhová reported from the tactical station, “I’m only
picking up minimal civil and emergency response communications.
No indications of any kind of widespread unrest or violence.”
Picard turned and gave her a quizzical look. “Nothing?” From
Akaar’s report, he had feared they would arrive to find the capital in
flames.
“Nothing, sir,” Šmrhová confirmed. “I’m seeing some evidence of
some recent large fires in New Samarkand, but none currently
burning.”
Picard turned his gaze to Worf. “An overreaction by the planetary
leaders, perhaps?” the first officer suggested. “Tensions are still
likely to be high.”
The captain sighed. While he certainly hoped whatever trouble may
have erupted here had been dealt with, he was not pleased by the
idea of being called away from his primary objective on a pointless
mission by a panicked government official. “Standard orbit,” he
ordered. “Hail the capital.”
Šmrhová keyed the command into her tactical console, and after a
moment reported, “We’re receiving a response from the office of the
planetary governor, George Barrile.”
“On-screen,” Picard said as he stood and straightened the front of his
uniform.
The view of the planet was replaced by the image of a middle-aged
human man with a head full of thick white hair. He sat at a desk
before a large window, through which Picard recognized the familiar
skyline of New Samarkand. “Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the U.S.S.
Enterprise,” he said, flashing a wide yet insincere smile. “I suppose
I should be honored.”
Picard wasn’t quite sure what to make of that comment, so he

decided to overlook it for the moment. “Thank you, Governor
Barrile. We stand ready to assist you in any way.”
“Yes, well,” the governor answered, “the immediate crisis has
already been brought under control. We had to arrest a number of
our ‘guests’ and enact some stringent measures on the group as a
whole to avoid repetition of such violence.”
Alarms started sounding at the back of Picard’s mind. “What sort of
stringent measures?”
“That’s hardly your concern, Captain.”
Picard stiffened at that, and the scowl on his face deepened. “In fact,
it is my concern,” he answered. “I was ordered here because of this
outbreak of violence, and it’s my duty—”
“Starfleet’s duty is supposed to be to the people of the Federation,”
Barrile interrupted. “Do you intend to take over this office and
declare martial law, Captain?”
Again, Picard was caught off balance by the governor’s astonishing
question. “What?! No, of course not!”
“Then, as the duly elected leader of this system, I would suggest you
show a bit more respect for me and the citizens I represent!”
“Governor,” Picard said, fighting down the ire this self-important
bureaucrat had provoked, “I certainly meant no disrespect either to
you or the people of Alpha Centauri, and I apologize for whatever
offense I may have given. However, I am confused by your apparent
hostility to our presence.”
“I apologize if I’m being less than cordial, Captain,” Barrile said,
sounding far from apologetic, “but being civil doesn’t seem to get
results anymore.” He took a deep breath, then said, “I believe it
would be better if we were to continue this conversation face-toface.”
Picard nodded. “I can beam down as—”
“With respect, Captain, I’d rather you didn’t.”
Picard clenched his jaw. “Then I invite you aboard the Enterprise.
Five minutes from now?”

Barrile nodded, and cut transmission without any further niceties.
“Charming,” Worf observed.
Picard almost chuckled, but he could not summon up sufficient
amusement. “Have the governor escorted to the observation lounge
when he arrives.” He spent the next five minutes replaying the
conversation in his mind, trying to pick out some indication of the
source of the man’s animos ity. He was still as bewildered as ever
when the conference room doors opened and Governor Barrile was
escorted in by Ensign Šmrhová. “Welcome aboard, Governor,”
Picard said, smiling pleasantly, determined to start this encounter
with a blank slate.
“Captain.” The governor squeezed his hand firmly. Picard dismissed
Šmrhová with a nod, and once the doors had closed behind her, the
governor said, “Before we begin, I want you to know that I am
aware of your role in ending the latest Borg incident, and for that
you have the thanks of all of Alpha Centauri.”
Picard nodded in appreciation of the conciliatory gesture. “Thank
you, Governor. My role was not quite as the news reports portray
it.”
Barrile shook his head, dismissing that as irrelevant. “However, as
you are currently the only high-ranking Starfleet officer in this
system, the remonstrations we have will just have to go through
you.”
“What remonstrations?” Picard asked, gesturing for the governor to
take a seat at the conference table.
Governor Barrile sat, folded his hands on the tabletop, and leaned
forward. “We, the people of the Alpha Centauri system, were
betrayed by the Federation and by Starfleet.”
Both of Picard’s eyebrows arched in disbelief. “What? What do you
mean, betrayed?”
“You may not even be aware of this, given your part in the war,”
Barrile allowed. “But, in the first hours of the invasion, Admiral
Jellico sent out an order to the fleet. He told them that if Earth fell,

then the war would be considered lost. Any remaining ships were
instructed to save themselves, and abandon the rest of the
Federation’s remaining worlds to our fates.”
Picard’s face fell. “How did you learn this?” he asked in a strangled
whisper.
“I have my sources, whom I trust implicitly,” the governor said.
Then, after a moment of studying Picard’s expression, he added,
“And you were aware of that order.”
Picard said nothing; he certainly couldn’t deny the charge. The order
had come at the war’s darkest hour. The armada blockading the
Azure Nebula had been obliterated, and the Borg were devastating
everything in their path. Despite a few scattered incidents of success,
resistance had finally been accepted as futile.
It was almost a full minute before Picard felt ready to speak aloud.
“Governor…I certainly understand your reaction. But…from a
command point of view, once the seat of the Federation was gone,
that would mean the end of the war.”
“Like hell it would!” Barrile snapped. “We all know they weren’t
going to just stop there and declare victory, Picard. The Borg were
intent on taking us all out. It’s just that those of us on this side of the
Sol system weren’t considered important enough to defend! I have a
list of at least thirty-five hundred Centaurian Starfleet officers and
crewmen killed in this war. Men and women who sacrificed
themselves in defense of a hundred other alien worlds and colonies.
How do I tell their next of kin that when it came to defending them,
Starfleet couldn’t be bothered?”
Picard opened his mouth to reply, but the governor barreled right
over him. “And now that the war is over? Not only are we being
burdened with all these refugees, with no Federation support, but at
the same time we’re having our mining and manufacturing
industries federalized. Paris is threatening to come in and take
control of our topaline processors and factories, and ship it all to
Vulcan, Andor, and Tellar! Where does it end?”

Picard waited to be sure Barrile had finished, and then pulled his
own thoughts together. “Governor, I do appreciate your anger over
Admiral Jellico’s orders—although I would expect that, had events
reached such a point, very few if any of my fellow captains would
have ever obeyed such a directive, allowing billions to die to save
themselves.
“Hypotheticals aside, the Alpha Centauri system did in fact emerge
from this war unscathed, while the other worlds you mention took
massive damage from the Borg—”
“Captain, the four ships we did have in system during the war were
all called away to other duties just as this deluge of refugees started
arriving—that’s not a hypothetical. It took a riot to get a starship
back here. How much are we supposed to give, when we can’t
expect anything in return?!”
“Sir, the Federation has just suffered the worst disaster in its entire
history.” Picard felt his temper starting to get the better of him, and
fought to keep his voice level. “With all due respect, this is not the
time to begrudge the needs of other worlds or dwell on other petty
slights—”
“Dismiss them as petty if you like, Captain,” Barrile said as he
leaned back in his chair. “I can promise you, the people of Alpha
Centauri won’t consider them that way.”
There was something in the governor’s words that struck a warning
tone. “I’m sorry?”
“As soon as the worst of this refugee situation is dealt with,” the
governor said, “I plan to announce a systemwide plebiscite to
consider the question of secession from the United Federation of
Planets.”
Picard’s jaw dropped. “You cannot be serious!” he said. “Alpha
Centauri is one of the founding members of the Federation!”
“Yes, I’m aware of that, thank you,” Barrile replied snidely. “But
this isn’t the twenty-second century anymore. The galaxy has
changed drastically over the last two centuries.”

The galaxy has changed drastically over the last two months, Picard
kept himself from snapping back. As he tried to form a more
appropriate response, he was interrupted by the voice of Worf over
the comm. “Bridge to Captain Picard.”
“Yes, Number One?”
“We are receiving a transmission from Doctor Crusher on
Pacifica.”
“Acknowledged,” Picard said, then turned to Barrile and said, “I’ll
have to ask you to excuse me, Governor.”
Barrile shrugged and said, “I don’t know that we necessarily have
anything more to discuss, Captain.”
Again, Picard bit back the sharp retort he was tempted to make, and
instead said, “I will try to be brief.”
Seconds later, he stepped through the doors onto the bridge. “Put the
message on the main viewer,” he said as he moved to the spot
directly in front of his chair.
A moment later, the gorgeous face of his wife appeared on the
screen, and in an instant his frustration with the Centaurian governor
was almost completely forgotten. “Doctor,” he said, carefully
maintaining their professional association while on the bridge,
though he was sure his smile was far wider than it would have been
for just any member of his crew.
“Captain,” Beverly answered, briefly flashing her own brilliant
smile, before dropping it and replacing it with a far grimmer look.
“The situation on Pacifica is becoming untenable. We’ve got a
growing health crisis, the local authorities are being less than
helpful, and Director Barash is telling me it could be another two
weeks before he’ll have another ship available for a relief mission.”
Picard matched her look of concern. “What do you need, Doctor?”
“We need to get as many people out of this camp as we can, and
relocate them to a more suitable location—more open space, more
available shelter. I also need my own sickbay.”
Picard hesitated. His immediate responsibilities undeniably were

here, dealing with Governor Barrile. Leaving now would mean
running the risk that he would carry through with his threat of
rebellion against the Federation, and in the brief time he’d spent
with the man, he believed that threat was quite real. What’s more,
were he to decide to order a course to Pacifica, it would be
believed—and not inaccurately so—that his decision was colored by
his concern for his wife and their unborn son.
His indecision lasted all of one second. “Ensign Weinrib, lay in a
course for Pacifica. Ensign Šmrhová, please escort Governor Barrile
to the transporter room. Tell him…” A number of possible messages
flitted through his mind before he continued, “…tell him duty calls.”
Crusher smiled at him again. “Now I remember why I fell in love
with you.”
“Nonsense,” Picard said, putting on his most stern and sober face.
“I’m merely living up to my obligations as a Starfleet officer.”
“Exactly,” Crusher answered with a teasing glint in her eye. “Thank
you, Captain. Crusher out.”
Crusher’s image disappeared, and at the same time, Picard heard the
conference room door slide open. He turned, and Governor Barrile
gave him a silent curt nod as he followed Šmrhová into the turbolift.
Worf moved up to Picard’s side and asked, “Has the crisis on Alpha
Centauri been fully resolved, sir?”
“No, Number One,” Picard sighed. “No, it hasn’t. Governor Barrile
is unhappy with the way his worlds have been treated of late, and he
is threatening to withdraw from the Federation.”
“What?!” The entire bridge had reacted to that news, turning toward
the captain with expressions ranging from shock to incredulity. But
it was, unsurprisingly, Lieutenant Chen who had given full-throated
articulation to her disbelief. “You can’t be serious!”
Picard gave her a sharp look.
“I mean, he can’t be serious,” she revised herself. “You, sir, I’m sure
are. Serious, that is.”
Picard shook his head at the young woman and said, “Unfortunately,

he is by all indications quite serious.”
“But at such a time,” Worf said in a low rumble that hinted at barely
restrained fury, “when so much has been lost. Such a thing borders
on treason.”
“I doubt he even comprehends just how much we have lost,” Picard
replied. “The war against the Borg was a brief, distant event that
never directly impacted them. He’s focused on his system and his
people; I think he simply doesn’t understand how dire the current
situation is for the entire Federation at large.”
“Maybe he needs to be shown, sir.” Picard turned back to look at
Chen. “Maybe he needs to see the horror and the death and the shit
up close…have his nose rubbed in it, so he does understand,” she
said heatedly. Picard was somewhat taken aback by her impassioned
statement; the novelty of seeing a cheerfully emotional expression
on Chen’s very Vulcan face had long worn off, but the animosity
she now displayed was something brand-new.
“Lieutenant,” Worf said to her in a warning tone.
“Sorry, sir,” she replied, not looking a bit so. Her eyes met Picard’s,
and refused to look away.
Picard considered her silently for a long moment, and then tapped
his combadge. “Picard to Transporter Room One.”
“Luptowski here, sir.”
“Has Governor Barrile beamed back down to the planet yet?”
“No, sir,” came the reply.
Picard nodded. “Thank you, Ensign,” he said, tapping his badge
again. A grin crept across his face as he then turned toward the conn.
“Lieutenant Weinrib, break orbit.”
“Aye, sir,” Weinrib said as the ship started to push away from the
planet.
“Enter course for Pacifica,” Picard said, settling back into his chair,
“and engage.”
Worf started to turn back to his seat as well, but paused just long
enough to lean on the arm of the captain’s chair and tell him, with a

small smile, “You were right, sir. This is much better than being an
ambassador.”

13

A crew of Selkie workmen leapt from the high riverbank into the
water below, splashing just upstream of a small raftlike watercraft
carrying a load of metal poles. It was still well before high sun, but
already hot, and the workers were obviously enjoying the brief relief
of being back in the water, diving and jumping, instead of laboring
on the land.
“Knock it off, you lollygaggers!” the crew supervisor, a female
Selkie named Yyeta’a, shouted from above. “We’re here until this
job is done, and I for one would like to get home before my kids
grow their spiny fins!” The men grumbled insults that they thought
could not be heard from their distance, and clambered aboard the
raft to gather more materials and start hauling them back up the
banks.
Yyeta’a frowned as she silently watched their slow progress. The

fact was, only half of her sixteen children were still that young, and
further- more, she was really in no great hurry to get back to them.
She had been called up as part of the security reserves when the offworld refugees first started to deluge the off-world enclaves, and
while there was nothing pleasant about being around all these poor
people robbed of their homes by the Borg, it was at least an
interesting change from the day-to-day tedium of motherhood.
“Excuse me?”
Yyeta’a turned quickly, leading with the point of her rifle, toward
the human male who’d approached. His hands immediately shot up,
empty palms exposed, and he took a step back. “Whoa, hey, didn’t
mean to scare you, there.”
“You didn’t,” Yyeta’a told the alien, though between his unkempt
sand-colored hair and rumpled clothing, he was a bit of a frightening
sight. “You shouldn’t be wandering away from camp.”
“Yeah, I shouldn’t be in a camp at all, but the Borg didn’t see things
that way,” he said grimly. “What’s going on here?”
“We’re marking the borders of the camp.”
“A cage, huh?” the human said, sounding oddly resigned.
“No,” she answered. “Not a cage. Just…” She trailed off as she
glanced back at the sections that had already been erected, and
realized how apt the description really was.
“And I’d always heard the Pacificans were a hospitable people,” the
man said. “Especially the women.”
Yyeta’a flinched. She knew full well what kind of Selkie women
this human was talking about—the kind who bristled under the
social restrictions put on women of childbearing age and who
rebelled against it, leaving their children to visit the alien enclaves
like Eden Beach, engaging in the kind of things no decent female in
her fertile period would spend her time doing. “If that’s the kind of
hospitality you’re looking for here, forget it,” she said, clenching the
rifle a little harder.
“It’s not,” the man said, so quickly that Yyeta’a wondered if she had

been insulted. “I’m just…this isn’t how I saw the rest of my life,” he
said, glancing off toward the completed barrier section. “Granted,
I’ve never really thought too much about my future at all…”
Something about the man—whether it was the sadness in his small
sunken eyes or the vulnerability that showed on his pale-fleshed
alien face—made Yyeta’a set her training aside and lower her rifle.
“This is just temporary, you know. Starfleet will send more ships
soon, and things will be back to normal.”
“How? Look at this place,” he said, flailing his arms out around
them both. “Look at us. If I had come to Pacifica three months ago
instead, we wouldn’t be meeting like this.” Yyeta’a didn’t mention
that they wouldn’t have met at all; this was the first time she’d ever
been face-to-face with an off-worlder. He dropped his arms and
hitched his shoulders. “This here, this is too far past normal. Normal
is done and over with, and this is what’s left in its place.”
Yyeta’a, almost forgetting the reason she was here, took a step
closer to the alien and placed her one free hand on his arm. “Things
will get better, and soon,” she said.
“Thanks,” he answered quietly, though he clearly didn’t believe it.
His skin was strangely warm, and covered with a light coat of fine
hairs. As an adolescent, Yyeta’a had heard other girls talk about
humans, saying that as land-dwellers, they had special pheromones
that were particularly strong in the open air.
She wasn’t thinking about that right now, or about the normal life
and family she had waiting after this deployment ended. “It will. I’m
sure of it.”
The man met her eyes and he finally smiled, sending an
indescribable jolt through her. But before either of them could say
anything more, she was startled by the crashing clatter of a dozen
metal poles being dropped behind her. “What the deep?” shouted
one of the two workers who had finally reached the top of the
riverbank with their load of fencing material.
Yyeta’a realized what this must have looked like, and immediately

swung her phaser rifle upward. “Step away!” she shouted, as the
muzzle connected with the underside of the human’s chin, caught for
a moment, and then tore a bright red gash in his pale flesh.
“Aauurrgghh!” he screamed incoherently, bringing a hand to his
bleeding face. “What the hell?!” He reached out, and between her
earlier mental fuzziness and shock at the sight of alien blood,
Yyeta’a was unable to keep him from grabbing the rifle out of her
hands. He flung it to the ground and took a menacing step toward
her. “Damn you, you—”
He never completed that thought, because one of the workers had
slipped around behind him at that point with a three-meter-long
metal fence pole in his hands. It whistled through the air before
connecting with the back of the human’s skull, knocking him off his
feet and sending him face-first into the turf.
By this point, the shouts of the workers and the human had attracted
the attention of other nearby Selkie guards, as well as other refugees.
Yyeta’a wasn’t sure what exactly happened next, only that she could
barely hear her own thoughts over the noise and bedlam that
followed. She knew she should have retrieved her rifle and pushed
the angered alien hordes back. But the man had fallen right on top of
it, and as she knelt beside him, she found herself just stroking the
strange, fine strands on his head. “I’m sorry,” she whispered, just
before a thrown rock—from which direction, she couldn’t say—
struck her on the side of the head. She staggered and fell beside the
unconscious human, and just as her vision went black, she
whispered another apology to her children.

Kadohata perked her head up at the alarmed shouts carrying up from

the edge of camp, and heard a wave of growing panic moving her
way, toward the main part of the camp. She and Peggy had gathered
a group of small children around them, reading from The Adventures
of Flotter, and the younger woman faltered as she noted Kadohata’s
look of alarm.
“Keep going; keep them all calm,” Kadohata told her in an even tone
that, despite its softness, carried authority. After getting a hesitant
nod from Peggy, she got to her feet and started moving toward the
disturbance. She moved at an even, unhurried pace, even though
every muscle and nerve in her body urged her to break into an allout run.
The commander wound her way through the tent city, and as she
reached its outer edges, she found herself weaving through a
growing crowd of curiosity seekers. She was about to urge them all
back to their temporary homes, but forgot her intention once she saw
the scene being played out before her: a mob of irate refugees
screaming and shaking their fists at a defensive line of Selkie guards
brandishing phaser rifles. She was relieved to see that they were not
pointing their rifles at the civilians, but it was very small comfort,
and subject to change too quickly for her taste. Just beyond the
Selkies’ line, and in front of a section of new fenc ing, she thought
she saw several natives squatting down in a rough circle, about the
size of a humanoid. It didn’t take much imagination to guess what
had sparked this current tense standoff.
Then the line of native guards parted, and Commandant Minha
stepped through. He hesitated just a moment, seemingly caught by
surprise by the number of non-Pacificans he found himself facing.
He recovered instantly, though, and called out, “You people, get
back to the camp. There’s nothing here that concerns you.”
A voice shouted, “They killed one of us! A human male!” An angry
buzzing spread through the crowd. Kadohata noticed a few of the
guards gripping their rifles a little tighter.
“Nobody is dead,” Minha said. “We have a minor injury that is

being taken care of—”
“One you caused!” the voice shouted over his.
By this point, Kadohata had worked her way through the mob and
crossed the short distance separating the refugees from the troops.
“What is going on here, Commandant?”
Minha glowered at her, then grabbed her elbow and leaned in close
as if to whisper in her ear. “One of your people attempted to assault
a member of my barrier-building team.”
“We’re back to ‘my people’ versus ‘your people,’ are we,
Commandant?” Kadohata asked.
“Spare me the patriotic pabulum, Commander,” Minha growled.
“The fact of the matter is, if Starfleet was doing the job they were
supposed to be doing here, matters never would have reached this
point.”
Kadohata shook her head. “I’m not interested in this juvenile fingerpointing,” she told him, letting her fatigue seep through.
“Whatever’s come before, the facts now are that you have a platoon
of armed guards here threatening to make an already tense situation
much, much worse.”
“Then pull these people back,” Minha insisted.
“And them?” Kadohata retorted, pointing to the guards.
“Commander,” Minha said, raising his voice to address the crowd at
the same time, “you forget that you are guests on this world. You—”
“This is how you treat guests?” shouted an angry female voice from
behind Kadohata. “You herd them into pens like animals, give them
only the minimum they need to live, if that?” She was joined by a
chorus of other unhappy voices, echoing and expanding upon her
sentiments. As their volume and the emotions rose, the Selkie guards
grew more uneasy.
Kadohata turned toward the increasingly restive crowd. “Please,
everyone, I know you’re all tired and frustrated, but this isn’t
helping.”
“And when are we going to see some real help, Commander?” the

same voice demanded. “How long are we supposed to tolerate this?”
she asked, over a rising swell of supportive cheers from behind her.
Minha clearly had had enough at this point. He turned to the guard
closest to him and, in a near whisper, told her, “Fire a warning shot
over their heads.”
“No!” Kadohata shouted with enough force to startle the young
woman Minha had given the order to, and make her hesitate long
enough for the commander to tell the commandant, “What is it
you’re warning them of? That you can shoot down a crowd of
traumatized and unarmed people if you want to? Is that the
message—”
But Minha wasn’t listening. “Private!” he snapped at the female
guard, and she quickly raised her weapon and pressed the firing stud.
A phaser beam shot into the sky, drowning out every other sound on
the field with its distinctive high-pitched whine. The mob screamed,
many of them either fleeing or throwing themselves shaking on the
ground.
Almost instinctively, Miranda reached out for the still extended
phaser rifle and, using a move she had learned in Commander
Worf’s mok’bara class, wrenched it out of the guard’s hands. She
now held the weapon…
…and she found herself facing over thirty Selkies drawing their own
weapons on her. Those refugees remaining and on their feet looked
desperate enough and ready to charge the natives, the odds be
damned. Please, don’t let me have started another bloody war, she
silently begged the universe….

“Hold your fire!”

Jasminder Choudhury, operating on almost pure instinct and
adrenaline, ran down from the top of the small rise where the
transporter had put her team down, moving directly between the line
of uniformed Selkies and the crowd of nonnatives. The Enterprise
had just established orbit and was in the process of beaming Doctor
Crusher’s most critical patients to sickbay, when its sensors had read
a single phaser discharge near the encampment border. Without even
thinking, Choudhury had rushed to the transporter room, calling to
the security officers on standby, and mounted the platform with
them.
It wasn’t until she was halfway down the slope that it occurred to
Choudhury that she had beamed down unarmed, in violation of
protocol. Fortunately, her uniform and her authoritative demeanor
were enough to keep either side from escalating the situation any
further. She approached Kadohata, standing midway between the
two groups with a harsh-looking Selkie man wearing high rank
insignia on his uniform breast. “Commander,” she acknowledged the
second officer, and then turned and offered a hand to the man.
“Commandant. Lieutenant Jasminder Choudhury, U.S.S.
Enterprise.”
“Finally,” he said, giving her hand only the most perfunctory of
squeezes. “You’ll be removing this rabble at last, then?”
Choudhury forced herself to keep her expres sion impassive and
nonthreatening. “We are here to alleviate the current situation and to
ensure the safety and protection of all Federation citizens.”
The Selkie commandant shrugged. “I just hope you’re up to the
task,” he said, pointedly looking from Choudhury to Kadohata. He
then turned to his troops. “Back to base.”
The Selkies withdrew, except for one medic who stayed by the side
of an injured human lying on the ground. Lieutenant Giudice went
over to assess the situation, then he and the downed man
disappeared in an emergency transport beam. Meanwhile,
Choudhury adjusted her combadge for voice amplification and

addressed the refugees: “Everyone, please return to the camp. We
have further relief supplies on the way.”
That proved incentive enough for those who were still gathered
there, and the crowd rapidly evaporated away back over the rise.
Choudhury reset her combadge and announced, “Choudhury to
Enterprise. The armed confrontation has been ended. One potential
casualty has beamed aboard.”
“Excellent work, Lieutenant Choudhury,” Commander Worf said.
She could hear the proud smile in his tone.
“That was brilliant timing, too, Jasminder,” said Kadohata once
she’d ended transmission. “I don’t know how I would have worked
free of that spot.”
“You shouldn’t have had to be put in it in the first place,”
Choudhury said, looking her up and down. Her almond-shaped eyes
were underscored with dark bags, her black hair hung limp around
her oval face, and dried mud caked nearly every inch of her barely
recognizable uniform. “How are you holding up?”
“Just tired, that’s all, but never mind me,” Kadohata said, fixing her
with a deeply sympathetic look. “How are you?” The two women
had not seen one another since their respective leaves following the
Enterprise’s return to Earth spacedock, and Choudhury couldn’t
even recall having spoken to Kadohata at all in the hours following
the loss of Deneva.
“I’m…I’m getting better. It’s hard,” Choudhury admitted for the
first time of her own volition, “but I’ll be all right.”
“I’m sure you will, Jasminder,” she said, reaching out and giving her
arm a quick squeeze. “Well, I’m glad you’re all right, and I’m glad
you and the ship are here. There’s a lot that needs to be done.”
“Well, by all means, Commander,” Choudhury said, gesturing for
her away team to follow them, “Let’s help these people out.”

Both Acting President Barrile and Governor Tiernan had protested
loudly all during the journey to Pacifica, up to and including their
security-escorted walk from their VIP cabins to the transporter
room. Captain Picard largely ignored their invective as he instructed
Ensign Luptowski to put the three of them—plus their security
escort—on top of the runabout, reasoning that would be a good
vantage point for them to take in the entirety of the iy’Dewra’ni
camp.
All the newcomers let the sights, sounds, and scents of thousands of
homeless Federation citizens living in conditions closer to those of
the fourteenth century than the twenty-fourth wash over them.
“Mercy…” was all Tiernan could say, his earlier complaints dying in
his throat as the enormity of the situation sank in. Barrile, for his
part, was at long last struck mute by the grim reality before him.
“I hope you gentlemen now understand why I felt it so vital that you
see this place with your own eyes,” Picard told them in a low, even
tone. “Because this is what’s become of the Federation. That we can
allow something like this camp to exist on one of our member
worlds should shame us all.”
“Hell,” Barrile muttered, shaking his head as if unable to accept
what his senses were telling him. “How could something like this be
allowed to happen? Where are the Selkies? Why aren’t—?”
“No!” Picard said sharply. “We cannot sit back and point the finger
of blame at others, while we decide to close ourselves off and focus
on our own problems to the exclusion of all else.” Picard looked
pointedly at both leaders. “These people are our fellow citizens. It is
the responsibility of us all to do what needs be done in this time of
crisis.”
The two politicians did not disagree; they were still trying to recover
from their shock and disbelief. Captain Picard, having seen many
horrors in his career, especially over the last several weeks, was able
to regain his bearing more quickly. In a way, he envied these men,

who had not yet formed those emotional calluses. Still, he showed
no pity for them.
“Come,” he said, gesturing for the rest of the group to join him as he
walked to the stern of the ship and lowered himself onto the column
of footholds that ran down the rear hull, “let’s get a closer look, shall
we?”

“Computer,” Ensign Gliv said as he stood up off his knees, “activate
Emergency Medical Hologram.”
The newly replaced holoprojectors around the infirmary powered up,
and the form of a petite human woman appeared in the center of the
ward. “Hello, how may I be of assistance?”
“She’s alive! Alive!” Gliv exclaimed.
Crusher ignored his obscure joke and told the Mark IX EMH,
“Hello, Nina. Please run a self-diagnostic.”
A thoughtful look crossed the face of the thoroughly modern
hologram, who then reported, “My available memory has been
significantly curtailed, but otherwise, I am functioning at acceptable
levels.”
Crusher nodded, pleased. “Nina, your program has been transferred
to the infirmary of the iy’Dewra’ni Refugee Camp on Pacifica.
Hopefully, your program won’t be needed here, but just in case.”
“What about the Enterprise, Doctor Crusher?” the hologram asked.
“We’ll make do without an EHM for the time being.” Crusher
looked around at her surroundings. The Enterprise had beamed
down or replicated the equipment for a state-of-the-art medical
facility, but even with new biobeds, scanner arrays, monitors, and a
surgical arch, there was no disguising the fact that they were in a

plain, makeshift plastiform shelter. “This place is the very definition
of emergency.”
“Yes, Doctor,” the EMH said, looking somewhat forlorn as Crusher
ordered her deactivated and she faded into nonexistence.
“She didn’t seem very happy about staying here,” the Tellarite
engineer noted.
Crusher nodded. “They’re becoming more and more lifelike with
each generation. Could we use one of the computer cores in the
runabout to give her more memory?”
“If we still had any computer cores in the runabout,” Gliv said.
“Commander Kadohata had me move the library station into the
administration building for the camp census data.”
Crusher scowled, although she certainly couldn’t fault Miranda for
first having the same idea she did. As she tried to formulate an
alternative option, Doctor th’Shelas approached. “Doctor Crusher?
Doctor Tropp just asked me to let you know that the infant,
Matthew, has come out of surgery. He was able to repair all organ
damage, and the patient is in stable condition.”
Crusher felt as if the planet’s gravity had suddenly been halved.
“Oh, thank goodness,” she said. She wasn’t sure if she could have
ever forgiven herself if, by grounding the runabout, she had put the
child in greater danger.
“We have matters under control here now,” the Andorian continued,
considering her with one antenna crooked. “You should feel free to
return to the ship any time you wish.”
Crusher considered that, and then she turned to regard the patients
still occupying the infirmary. They were not so ill as to need to be
transferred to sickbay, but they still needed care. “Thank you,
Shelas,” she said as she picked up a padd, leaving her colleague to
just stare at her back as she started doing rounds.

As powerful a blow as the initial sight of iy’Dewra’ni was, speaking
with the individuals caught there was like a photon grenade blast
between the eyes. Spouses separated from loved ones. Children
separated from parents. People who had never in their lifetimes
known want, afraid they might not get their next ration of food, or
who broke out sobbing in the middle of their daily routines for
reasons they couldn’t quite articulate. But the worst were the ones
who did not tell their stories, who only stared back mutely, their
eyes glazed over and their minds barricaded behind defensive walls
built up by their psyches.
The men eventually split up: Tiernan stopped to talk at length with a
cluster of his fellow countrymen and-women, and Barrile found
himself frozen when a two-year-old child rushed up, grasped his
shin, and shouted, “Pa-pa!” The boy realized his mistake when the
governor looked down and gave him a direct look, and he ran off,
frightened and miserable.
“Captain Picard!” He turned and saw Commander Kadohata
approaching from behind him, with Lieutenant Choudhury right
behind. “Oh, you’re a sight for sore eyes, sir, if you don’t mind my
saying so.”
“It’s good to see you as well, Commander,” Picard said warmly.
“I understand the Enterprise is the only ship we’re to expect here for
the foreseeable future,” she said, exchanging a rueful look with
Choudhury. “Is that right, sir?”
Picard sighed as he looked around and reflected on the scope of
what surrounded them. “For the moment, yes, it’s just us.” The
captain turned and started walking slowly back toward the runabout
and the camp entrance.
“I was rather afraid of that,” Kadohata said, falling in step beside
him. “On the other hand, I’m quite thrilled that any relief has come.”
She held up a padd for the captain to see. “I’ve been prioritizing the
needs of the camp and the people.”

“We’re already addressing many of the most basic concerns, such as
medical care and food supplies,” Choudhury interjected.
“Excellent,” the captain said. “If the two of you would then
coordinate with the appropriate department heads. We’re here to do
everything in our power for these people.”
“That’s good to hear you say, sir,” Kadohata said, “because what
these people really need is to be taken somewhere else.”
Picard felt his entire body sag. There were close to eighty thousand
people in this camp alone. There were more refugees, he knew, in
other regions of the planet, and on scores of other worlds as well.
The Enterprise could take a fraction of these people aboard and
relocate them to Omicron Ceti or Typerias, but would that solve
anything, or would it simply transfer the humanitarian crisis from
one site to another?
“…That way, we could get up to ten thousand of these people onto
the Enterprise. That would greatly alleviate the burdens…”
“Ten thousand?” Picard said, suddenly aware that his second officer
was still talking to him, and slightly embarrassed for tuning her out.
“The Sovereign-class rescue profile gives a maximum figure of
sixty-five hundred evacuees.”
“It would be a tad uncomfortable, sir,” Kadohata said, “but it could
be done…if we were determined to do so.”
Picard chose not to respond to the challenge in her tone just then.
“Let’s address the immediate concerns for the moment; we can
discuss further options at a later time.”
Kadohata nodded, showing slight disappointment. “Aye, sir,” she
said.
Picard nodded back, and they reached the prefab building adjacent to
the grounded runabout that housed the infirmary. As he moved
toward the entryway, Kadohata added, “There is also a more
personal matter I should like to discuss with you, sir, at a more
opportune moment.”
The captain turned back to regard his second officer, wondering at

the curious tone she had used. Her face betrayed nothing, though, so
he only nodded before walking into the camp infirmary. As
expected, he found Beverly still hard at work, checking on the
condition of each of her remaining patients, even as her Andorian
intern trailed behind her, quietly mentioning how unremarkable
these remaining cases were and that he felt fully capable of taking
charge of the ward. “Doctor Crusher,” the captain called out, finally
causing his wife to stop in her tracks and turn around.
“Captain Picard,” she said, allowing herself only a hint of a smile.
The infirmary was her domain, and she maintained complete
professionalism.
“I’ve been expecting a report from you, Doctor.”
“Of course, Captain. I…have a copy in the runabout. Doctor
Shelas?”
The other doctor did not try to hide his amusement as she excused
herself and led the captain to the ship. Kadohata and Choudhury
were directing a small team of engineers to remove more matériel
from the main part of the runabout, while Crusher and Picard wound
their way forward to the cockpit. Once the door slid shut, and they
were alone, Beverly’s arms were around his neck, and they were
locked together in a firm and ravenous kiss.
After lingering for several moments like that, reaccustoming
themselves to this togetherness, Jean-Luc pulled himself gently
away, looked deep into her eyes, and said, “You realize, I hope, that
you had no real authority to ground and disassemble this vessel. Any
recompense paid to the DPA will come out of your pocket.”
“Excuse me?” she answered, giving him a mock-stern glare. “Is this
the same man who kidnapped two Federation political leaders and
brought them here against their wills, lecturing me?”
“‘Kidnapping’ is such an inflammatory term…”
“But not exactly inapt,” Beverly concluded his thought. “Jean-Luc,
really, what were you thinking?”
“The same as I suspect you were,” Picard answered. “That ordinary

efforts would no longer suffice in the situation presented. That I
could not simply refuse to do anything while the Federation as
we’ve always known it crumbled around us.” He gave a single dry
chuckle and smiled humorlessly. “And to think, just days ago, I was
absolutely euphoric at the thought of a universe without the Borg,
and being free to become an explorer again.”
Crusher gave him a more genuine smile back. “After all you’ve been
through in your life, Jean-Luc, the fact that you’ve managed to hold
on to that passion of yours…” She paused, and seemed to debate
whether to mention whatever thought had just entered her mind.
“You know, I’ve been thinking a lot about Jack over the last few
days.”
“Oh?” Picard said. Even though it had been nearly thirty years since
his death, Picard still felt a sharp pang whenever his thoughts went
back to his good friend, and his wife’s first husband.
“Or, not Jack, specifically,” Crusher amended, “but about…losing
him, and how I lost myself afterwards. It’s important to remember
your passions, especially in times like this. We all have to hang on
to as much as we have left, and as tightly as we can.”
Before Picard could say anything to that, his combadge chirped, and
Worf’s voice said, “ Enterprise to Picard.”
“Yes, Number One?”
“Sir, you have an incoming priority message from Admiral Akaar.”
Picard’s shoulders sagged. He was actually a bit surprised that it had
been this long before the admiral had tried to contact him, but that
made him no more eager to hear from him. He looked to Beverly for
a bit of silent encouragement, and then tugged at his uniform and
said, “Relay the message through the Genesee’s comm system.”
Crusher stepped back out of range as Picard sat in the forward
pilot’s seat and turned to face the screen to his left. “Admiral.”
The centenarian Capellan stared daggers at him from across almost
half the width of the Federation. “Picard, explain to me what in the
hell you think you’re doing,” he demanded.

“Sir, the Enterprise is responding to reports of an emergency
situation on Pacifica—”
Akaar cut him off. “Do you suppose there is currently any situation
anywhere in the Federation that could not be classified as an
emergency?”
“I’d suspect very few, sir,” he acknowledged.
“How did you determine the emergency situation on Pacifica was so
dire that you had to abandon your assigned mission to Alpha
Centauri III?”
“Doctor Crusher alerted me to the deteriorating situation—”
“So, it was your wife,” the admiral practically sneered.
Picard bit his tongue. Akaar was a Starfleet traditionalist, who had
vocally opposed Will Riker’s decision to put his wife Deanna Troi
in a key position aboard the Titan and who had also been none too
happy when word of his and Beverly’s recent nuptials had reached
Starfleet Headquarters. “It was my chief medical officer,” Picard
told the admiral, “while on a mission for the head of the Displaced
Persons Agency.”
“And it wasn’t some ethereal voice or mysterious psionic link that
drove you to disregard orders?”
Picard bristled at the admiral’s mocking tone. “No, sir,” he said
through a clenched jaw.
Akaar rubbed a hand across his tired-looking eyes and down his
stubble-covered cheek. “Picard, I think you’d agree that you were
given extremely broad latitude in your current mission, yes?”
“Yes, sir,” Picard granted.
“And I should have hoped that, even given so much rope, you might
have avoided hanging yourself, but no. They’re screaming for your
head on Alpha Centauri, and the Denevan councillor is no happier
with you, either.”
“Sir, if I could just—”
“Save it, Picard,” the admiral snapped back. “Whatever your
excuses, this is no time for renegades. You are to leave Pacifica

immedi—”
And the screen went blank.
“Admiral?” Picard said, despite the clear evidence that the signal
had been interrupted. He tried a series of controls on his panel, but
the admiral was gone.
The cockpit door slid open behind him, and both he and Crusher
turned to see Kadohata and Choudhury take a single step in. “Excuse
us, sirs,” the second officer said. “I’m sorry. We were salvaging the
runabout communication relays for use in the camp. I didn’t realize
until too late that it was in use.”
“Really?” Picard asked, arching one eyebrow at her, and then at
Choudhury. “That was rather careless. You cut off Admiral Akaar
just as he was about to issue new orders for the Enterprise.”
“Oh,” Kadohata said, doing a serviceable job of looking surprised at
learning that.
“Sorry, sir,” Choudhury added. Far from looking contrite or
shocked, she seemed to have at last regained much of the calm selfconfidence Picard had come to expect from her.
“I suppose there’s no real harm,” Picard finally said. “He’ll simply
recontact us.”
“I just checked with Commander La Forge,” Choudhury then
informed him. “The long-range transceiver was one of the systems
we didn’t get fully repaired before leaving McKinley, and it’s posing
intermittent problems. He can’t guarantee we’ll be able to receive
any signals from Earth…for a while.”
“Indeed?” Picard fixed both women with as stern a glare as he could
muster. Then, he sighed. “Well. That being the case, I suppose the
only thing to do is to carry on with what we’re doing here, until
we’re able to reestablish contact with the admiral.”
“Aye, aye, sir,” agreed all three of his officers, including Crusher,
who was no longer even trying to keep a straight face. Kadohata and
Choudhury slipped out of the cockpit, and Picard turned to his wife.
“You know, Beverly,” he said, scowling as he rubbed the bridge of

his nose, “we have had so many difficulties rebuilding this crew
over the past year. Trying to replace Will and Data and Deanna and
Christine…learning the hard way that we’ll likely never recapture
the chemistry we all had for so long…. Now, I have my operations
officer and our chief of security colluding in a scheme to circumvent
the chain of command…”
He then dropped his hand, lifted his head, and smiled at his beloved.
“I think this new team is at last starting to come together.”

14

“This is unacceptable!”
Worf considered the man on the viewscreen with the bland,
impassive expression he had perfected over his four years as an
ambassador. “To what, precisely, are you referring, Secretary
Bemidji?”
The Selkie official expelled a hissing stream of air bubbles in
exasperation. “We called the Federation in to remove these…offworlders from iy’Dewra’ni. What you’re doing now is establishing a

permanent colony!”
Worf leaned back in the conference room chair and crossed his arms
over his chest. “We are replacing the cloth shelters originally
fabricated for the refugees with sturdier structures, but they are no
more permanent—”
“If they’re not permanent, then when are they coming down?”
Bemidji demanded. “When is Starfleet going to do what they were
sent here to do, and give us our own planet back?”
Just a few years earlier, Worf would have responded to this
belligerent posturing in kind, baring his teeth and defending the
honor of his fellow Starfleet officers in a throaty growl. What he
said now was, “I can assure you that Starfleet and the Federation
government are doing all they can to address your concerns.” It was
bland and, though perfectly true, largely meaningless. Yet, Worf
could not see how this noisy grishnar was worthy of anything more
from him.
“Do not insult me, Commander! It’s bad enough that Captain
Picard refuses to speak to me directly, making me deal through his
underlings.” Worf almost scoffed at the obvious attempt to rile him
with the double insult. Bemidji knew full well Picard was right now
in the middle of the iy’Dewra’ni camp looking for the very solutions
he was agitating for; apparently he thought provoking an impolitic
outburst from the Klingon officer would strengthen his negotiating
position. “I will take this directly to the Federation Council if I have
to!”
“That would be your right, sir,” Worf said. “I for one would be
fascinated to hear Pacifica stand up before the Council and announce
they were unwilling to help those Federation citizens whose worlds
have been destroyed. Given that so many of the planets razed were
former Earth colonies, and that the plurality of refugees on Pacifica
are humans, I am certain all of Paris will greet such an
announcement with great interest.”
The minister had no immediate rejoinder to that, and Worf took

advantage of this, saying, “If you’ll excuse me, Mister Secretary, I
have other matters to attend to,” and ending the transmission. This
turned out to be true, as Worf noticed a waiting message from the
bridge once the screen went blank. He stood up from his seat as he
keyed open a new comm channel. “This is Commander Worf,
Enterprise.”
On the wall screen appeared a human woman with a rounded face
and a head of dark curly hair, sitting behind the desk of a small
ready room. “Commander Worf. It’s been a while. I’m pleased to
see you back in uniform.”
“Thank you, Captain Cukovich,” Worf answered. Martina Cukovich
had been commander of the Litvyak ten years earlier, during the
Federation’s brief war with the Klingon Empire. As strategic
operations officer on DS9, Worf had had a number of interactions
with Cukovich during that conflict, as well as during the war with
the Dominion that followed. She was now the captain of the Nansen,
which had been one of the ships that fought the Borg at Beta Rigel
during the recent invasion. “What can I do for you, sir?”
“You can let me speak with Captain Picard,” she said, dropping her
earlier polite smile.
Worf had suspected as much. “I’m afraid he is not currently aboard,”
he said.
Cukovich blew out a gust of air in annoyance. “Commander, I have
been ordered by Admiral Akaar- to intercept the Enterprise, relieve
Captain Picard of command, and if necessary, place him under
arrest on charges of kidnapping. Now, between you, me, and the
bulkhead, I don’t relish the idea of taking one of the captains who
finally stopped the Borg and throwing him in chains. But I don’t
have a lot of options, not if you’re going to continue to have all
these ‘communications issues.’”
Worf clenched his teeth as he nodded. He had readily approved of
Captain Picard’s plan to bring Barrile to Pacifica, but the Klingon
was becoming concerned that they had misjudged what the eventual

result would be. The captain and his “guests” had been on the planet
surface for just under six hours, and other than orders to beam down
supplies and matériel from the captain, he’d heard nothing that
indicated any progress. Not for the first time, Worf wondered if Will
Riker had faced the same issues, or if the captain just enjoyed
watching his Klingon first officer squirm. “I will convey your
message to Captain Picard as soon as I am able,” he said to
Cukovich.
“Well, I hope that’s within the next two and a half hours, because
that’s when we’ll be making orbit,” Cukovich said. “ Nansen out.”
Worf considered the black screen for several seconds after Cukovich
signed off. Then he signaled the bridge. “Ensign Rosado, patch me
through to the captain.”

Picard leaned back in the runabout seat, frowning at the blank
screen. The audacity of what he had done had not fully dawned on
him until now; it was more in the character of the brash young
ensign who’d helped Cory Zweller cheat a group of Nausicaans at
dom-jot half a century ago than the man he’d since become. And
yet, he didn’t have any regret for what he had done. They’d
improved living conditions at iy’Dewra’ni tenfold, and had gotten
President Tiernan to offer an additional two hundred thousand nonDenevan refugees permanent settlement on Ingraham B. And if
George Barrile could remain unmoved by what he had seen here, at
least Picard could comfort himself knowing he’d done what he
could. Though he knew that would be very weak comfort in the brig.
A scraping sound pulled Picard’s attention to the runabout cockpit
door. It was pulled open manually—the automatic servos had been

salvaged for a piece of equipment in the infirmary—and
Commander Kadohata entered. “Sir,” she said, with a hopeful smile,
“have you finished with the communications relay?”
“Hmm? Oh, yes, certainly…” the captain said, starting to stand to
offer her his chair.
“No, sir, you’re fine there,” she said, reaching in front of him to
reconfigure the setup. “Rather, I think you’ll want to stay and
listen.” She tabbed a key and said, “Kadohata to Rosado. All set up
there, Jill?”
“Standing by, Commander,” the relief operations officer replied
from aboard ship.
Picard looked up curiously at the younger woman. “What is this?”
he asked.
Kadohata answered with another grin. “We’ve resolved our longrange communications problems, sir,” she told him, then tapped her
combadge. “Kadohata to Choudhury. Ready when you are.”
Picard was still watching Kadohata when he noted, from the corner
of his eye, the comm screen reactivating, and the image of George
Barrile, standing just outside the runabout, with the camp behind
him. He looked uncomfortable for someone who, as a longtime
politician, was surely used to public speaking over subspace. After a
brief moment to gather himself, he looked up directly through the
screen and began to speak:
“This is Governor George Barrile of Alpha Centauri, and I am
speaking to you today from the planet Pacifica. And this is the
iy’Dewra’ni Refugee Camp on Pacifica,” he said, as the image
moved away from him and across the settlement behind him,
“where about eighty thousand Federation citizens forced from their
homeworlds by the Borg have been relocated. Until a few hours ago,
these people were living in tents, with only limited access to
adequate medical care, facing shortages of…”
Barrile’s voice trailed off, and the video sensor moved back to catch
him looking at the scene himself, his fist over his mouth, shaking his

head. “These images can’t do justice.” He slowly pulled his eyes
away and turned to face his audience. “My words can’t do justice.
We’ve all been seeing images and hearing accounts like these on the
news services over the last couple weeks, but…they’re just not real
to us. There’s a camp not unlike this one just ten minutes’ walk from
my office in New Samarkand; I have not bothered visiting it. We
humans eliminated scenes like this, scenes of poverty and disease
and hunger, centuries ago. We’ve been so comfortable for so long in
the Federation that we can’t conceive of the idea that these evils can
rise up again and overwhelm us. Worse, we can’t even see it
happening right under our noses.”
He paused. “Citizens of Alpha Centauri…citizens of the
Federation…it is happening right now.
“Just days ago, I was sitting in my office resenting the way my
comfortable existence had been disrupted, and in my selfabsorption, I resolved to launch a campaign asking my fellow
Centaurians to vote on whether we should secede from the
Federation. Now, thanks to an utterly audacious act that has shaken
me out of my complacency, I’ve resolved to add a second question to
this plebiscite, asking whether we as Centaurians should reassert
our commitment to the ideals set forth in the Articles of Federation.
To renew the promises we made over two centuries ago to the
peoples of Earth, Vulcan, Tellar, and Andor, and to all the peoples
who have come after, to be a united society, dedicated to our mutual
welfare and survival. And I hope we will not be the only ones to
reaffirm our commitment to those ideals at this crossroads in our
history.
“I thank you for your time and your attention,” he concluded, and
then the screen went dark.
Picard looked up to Kadohata again, who was wearing a triumphant
smile. Picard gave her a small nod and said, “Well done,
Commander.”
“The credit belongs to you, Captain,” she said modestly. “You

brought the governor here; I only guided him the last few meters.”
Picard nodded again as she exited the cockpit, leaving the captain to
consider the governor’s address, and whether or not it might
accomplish anything. It also occurred to him that with their
communications “problems” now solved, he could expect to hear
directly from Akaar, probably before the Nansen arrived.
“Let’s hope his words do not fall on deaf ears,” he said softly to
himself.

Worf had gone to the transporter room to meet the captain. Picard’s
boots and pant cuffs were caked in mud, and a thin coat of sweat
covered his head and face. “Number One,” he greeted Worf as he
stepped down from the platform. “Is Captain Cukovich still standing
by?”
“Yes, sir,” Worf said.
“Well, then by all means, let’s not keep her waiting,” he said to the
ensign behind the control con sole. Picard stood beside Worf, his
soiled uniform in marked contrast to Worf’s immaculate clothing,
making the Klingon feel strangely inadequate in comparison.
“Energize.”
The human woman materialized moments later, and stepped down
as Picard said, “Captain Cukovich. Welcome aboard the Enterprise.”
“Captain Picard. Commander Worf,” she said, nodding to both. She
was half a head shorter than Picard, but carried herself in a way that
gave her the appearance of height. “I don’t suppose you’ve
reestablished communications with Admiral Akaar since Governor
Barrile’s address?”
“No, I’ve not heard from him,” Picard said. They had hoped that

what the Centaurian had said would have served to mitigate Akaar’s
ire and changed Cukovich’s orders.
Unfortunately, this seemed not to be the case. “Neither have I,
despite repeated attempts.”
“A taste of my own medicine,” Picard suggested.
The other captain shrugged. “Whatever the reason, my orders are
now as they were.” She surprisingly pulled herself up even
straighter. “Captain Jean-Luc Picard.” Picard likewise brought
himself to full attention. “By order of Admiral Leonard James
Akaar, Starfleet Command, I hereby relieve you of command of the
U.S.S. Enterprise, pending a formal review.”
Picard betrayed no emotion as he answered, “I stand relieved.”
Cukovich then turned to Worf. “Commander Worf. I am putting you
in temporary command of the Enterprise.”
“Sir,” he said, “with respect, I cannot take command.”
Cukovich narrowed her eyes at him. “And why not, Commander?”
Worf shifted his weight from one foot to the other. “Because I
supported Captain Picard’s decisions, and because I believe it is
essential that our current efforts here at Pacifica not be halted or
suspended.”
“Who asked you to halt or suspend anything?”
Worf and Picard both gave the Nansen captain looks of surprise,
which generated an amused chortle from her. “Of course, Captain
Picard is entitled to an expeditious hearing, but as long as he’s in no
hurry to get back to Earth…”
Picard looked at the woman askance, then said, “I’m willing to
waive that particular right.”
Cukovich said, turning back to Worf, “I would agree with your
assessment, Commander, that the situation here is of a greater
priority.”
The Klingon considered Cukovich a moment longer, then allowed
himself a small smile. “In that case, I accept command.”
Cukovich nodded, then said, “Well, Captain Worf, I think the

Nansen and the Enterprise should coordinate our efforts here. And if
Captain Picard, having witnessed the situation on the ground, has
suggestions…”
Worf shook his head. “Commander Kadohata and the other
members of the DPA team have already made very thorough reports.
I believe regulations state Captain Picard should at the least be
confined to quarters.”
Both captains stared at Worf agape. “Number One?” Picard said
warningly.
Worf then turned to the transporter operator. “Contact Doctor
Crusher and have her beam up immediately. I believe her
unauthorized grounding of the Genesee warrants similar measures.”
Cukovich hid a smile behind her hand as Picard’s expression quickly
shifted. “Ah. Yes, well…regulations are regulations,” he said. Worf
did not bother to hide his own smile.

It was impossible to look like a serious and respectable authority
figure while wearing a hydration suit. At best, one could only hope
to look not quite totally ridiculous.
Secretary Bemidji, fortunately, was too old, and too angry, to care
about such things. Grimacing, he tugged the suit’s hood over his gill
crests as the acroshuttle broke through the surface of the ocean into
Pacifica’s troposphere. He was at the age where he had now spent
more than two-thirds of his life underwater, and the memories of his
younger days living on the surface grew blurrier with each passing
year. As the transport passed the apogee of its ascent, and then made
its jarring landing at the edge of the iy’Dewra’ni encampment, he
had difficulty even remembering the last time he’d set foot on dry

land. He’d long ago reached the position where he could make airbreathing off-worlders come to him in hi’Leyi’a, and send younger
subordinates to deal with matters needing attention above.
Once the shuttle was drained and repressurized, the hatch opened
and Bemidji stepped out onto the surface of his planet. He used a
polished worm-shell cane with pearl inlays to help make up for the
lack of buoyancy he had in the air, again heedless of how it might be
perceived, as he made his way to where Commandant Minha stood
along with the human man, Dillingham. “Mister Secretary,” the
lawyer greeted him, while the commandant snapped to attention.
“Mister Dillingham. Commandant,” Bemidji replied, his voice
sounding alien as it passed through thin air to his eardrums. “What
word of the injured man?”
“Mister Wheeler suffered a subdural hematoma and a mild
concussion, along with lesser injuries. But he’s now fully
recuperated, thanks to the arrival of the Enterprise.”
“Good news,” Bemidji said, then turned to the commandant.
“Minha, would you care to explain to me how this man was injured
while within the area deemed a safe haven for the Borg refugees?”
“I failed in my responsibility, Mister Secretary.”
Bemidji nodded, and at the edge of his vision, he noted Dillingham
nodding also. He of course knew the full story, and understood the
impulses the men who attacked Mister Wheeler felt. But that
excused nothing, neither in his mind nor, he was sure, in the minds
of Dillingham and the Federation officials he was to report back to.
“Thwa Minha, I’ve been obligated to inform you that you are
relieved of your position in the iy’Dewra’ni Division.”
Minha dipped his head again in an apparent show of remorse. In
fact, Minha was nearing the end of his amphibious phase, and would
have had to forfeit his position in a matter of months anyhow, when
he was no long able to use his lung for breathing out of water. By
letting himself suffer this little humiliation in front of the Federation
observer, Minha lost little, while Pacifica, one hoped, regained some

degree of respect from Paris. And after those images got out to the
rest of the galaxy, Pacifica would need all the help it could get in
that regard.
Dillingham smiled a large, toothy smile, and stepped forward with
his right hand extended. “Secretary Bemidji, I appreciate your
personal intervention in this matter. Thank you.”
Bemidji let Dillingham pump his glove-encased hand. “You’re
welcome, Mister Dillingham. And,” he added, as he started back
toward his shuttle, “have a safe and speedy trip back to Earth.”

Arandis was in a plain, sterile sickbay, breathing in air that smelled
of absolutely nothing. She wore a loose-fitting medical gown that
covered almost her entire body, from her neck to her wrists and
ankles.
She had never felt so contented in her entire life.
The Risian listened to the steady rhythm of medical monitors
chiming and beeping throughout the open ward, evocative of
Algolian ceremonial music. She closed her eyes and let it soothe her,
until she heard a set of footsteps approach. Opening one eye, she
saw Doctor Tropp grinning down at her. “Hello, Arandis, and how
are you feeling?”
“Better and better,” she said with a grin of her own.
“Excellent,” the Denobulan said as he looked up at her monitor.
“We’ll be coming around with lunch soon. Do you feel ready for
solid foods?”
Arandis put a hand on her abdomen and realized that the discomfort
she’d felt in her stomach and bowels over the last day and a half was
now totally gone. She’d overheard Tropp telling another Starfleet

officer how the Enterprise computer had found the genetic
something-or-other easily, far faster than the runabout’s computer
could have, and led him to a more effective cure that would work on
all cross-species mutations of the contagion. “Yes, please,” she said,
then asked, “but…could I still have the soft-food dessert?
The…what is it called?”
“Cherry gelatin?” Arandis nodded, and the doctor gave her an
indulgent smile. “I think that could be arranged.” Arandis beamed
back at him as he patted her hand and moved to the next bed. After a
lifetime of tending to the wants and desires of others, it was nice to
have others taking care of her, instead.
As she was finishing her pasta lunch and digging her spoon into the
chilled, wriggling treat, another person approached. “Hey, darling,
how are you doing?”
Arandis looked up at Don Wheeler, and smiled out of habit. “I’m
fine. And how are you?”
“Good as new,” he said, rubbing the underside of his now cleanshaven chin. If he had suffered an injury there, there was no scarring
or any other sign of it. “They’re moving me out of sickbay, into
general quarters. I’ll be sharing a cabin meant for two with eight
others, but only until Starbase 18.”
“And where from there?” Arandis asked.
His smile fell away then. “I don’t really know yet. I’ve been
thinking about Tellar, maybe.”
“Good wines there?” she asked.
“No,” Wheeler answered, making a sour face. “The Tellarite palate
is like the human appendix.”
Arandis didn’t quite understand the analogy, but got the general
meaning. “Why there, then?”
“It’s doing something.” He shrugged, then asked, “What about
you?”
“I haven’t thought much about it,” she said. When she did, all she
could think about was what she couldn’t do: return to Risa. And

without that option, what difference did it really make where she
went? For now, she simply turned away, and spooned a cube of
gelatin into her mouth.
This is like all moments: only temporary, she thought, as she savored
the sweet dessert dissolving on her tongue. In the end, what
happened next was up to the Givers. She would take pleasure in it
for as long as it lasted, without concern for the moments to follow.

The children had been shooed off their soccer pitch, sent running
back to their parents and caretakers. Taking their place on the field
were one hundred eighty-four Kazarites, Cygneti, Dopterians,
Pentamians, and others who had homes on nearby worlds to return
to, but had been stranded on Pacifica during the crisis. They
disappeared, six at a time, as they were beamed aboard the Nansen.
Miranda Kadohata watched from the sidelines, standing alongside
that ship’s captain. “Like trying to drain a lake with a teaspoon,”
Cukovich said just under her breath.
Kadohata nodded in acknowledgment, though she was feeling far
more optimistic than the captain. At least now we have a teaspoon,
and there’s hope we’re not simply all going to drown. Not only was
the Nansen taking some five thousand refugees aboard, but there
also were now two additional ships in orbit: transports out of Bre’el
that had just returned home several hundred of their own evacuees,
and upon hearing Governor Barrile’s address, had headed for
Pacifica. They were able to take aboard several hundred Trill authors
and editors, who had been attending a literary convention at an Eden
Beach hotel and had been stranded there during the invasion.
Though they had been quite comfortable in comparison to those at

the iy’Dewra’ni camp, they were more than happy to leave—and
open up their rooms for several hundred iy’Dewra’ni transients who
had, as yet, nowhere else to go.
“Still not enough,” Cukovich grumbled as another half-dozen people
dissipated into columns of light and energy. “Admirals and their
half-assed—” she started, then stopped herself and turned to look at
the woman next to her.
“I’m sorry, sir, I didn’t hear you,” Kadohata said in deadpan
assurance.
Cukovich smirked, still slightly chagrined. “Thank you,
Commander.” She turned away again, back to the field.
A moment later, she said, supposedly still to herself, “I don’t
imagine Picard would be so shy about expressing his opinions of the
admiralty, no matter how insubordinate, hmm? Seeing this, and
knowing that all of them are just sitting there in San Francisco,
celebrating the end of the war. Same damned thing that happened
after the Dominion War. Betazed still hasn’t one hundred percent
recovered from their occupation during the war, did you know that?”
Kadohata decided that was a simple enough question that she could
safely offer an answer. “Yes, sir. I was there just over a year ago.”
At Will Riker’s and Deanna Troi’s Betazoid wedding ceremony,
Lwaxana Troi had complained to anyone who would listen about her
ongoing struggles to bring more resources to her homeworld.
“And they’re far from the worst off,” Cukovich continued. “But
instead of launching a concentrated rebuilding effort immediately
after the war, we just did a little bit here, a little bit there, sometimes
letting things go until they reached emergency status, like the
damaged space elevator that nearly collapsed on that Tellarite
colony. Criminal is what it was. And if they think we can dawdle
like that for another four, five years this time…” Cukovich looked
around at the camp, and blew out an exasperated breath. “I’m afraid
we’re going to find out we won the war against the Borg, only to
lose the peace to our own complacency. And if we let that

happen…”
Kadohata considered that possibility in silence. She couldn’t
imagine it coming to that; this war had been far more destructive and
disruptive than the one with the Dominion, and undeniably called
for a different response. At the same time, Kadohata had to admit
the response she’d witnessed so far was not encouraging. “We all
just have to do what we can,” she said under her own breath.
Her combadge chirped, and Ensign Gliv’s voice reported,
“Commander, we’ve established your link to Cestus III.”
“Thank you, Gliv,” she said, and then turned to Cukovich. “Excuse
me, Captain.”
The captain smiled at her. “Thanks for not listening.”
Kadohata returned the smile. She then crossed the camp at a
deliberate clip, and when she reached the Genesee, slipped into the
cockpit and into the seat at the active communications console. She
keyed the transmit key, and her smile widened as the image from
home appeared on the screen. “Hello, Vicenzo. Hello, Aoki.”
“Hi, Mummy!” her daughter, seated in her father’s lap, shouted.
“Honey, the babies are sleeping,” Vicenzo admonished her mildly.
“Hi, Mummy,” Aoki repeated in a whisper. “I miss you.”
“Oh, I miss you, too, darling, a whole lot. You too, love,” she added
to Vicenzo.
“Same, sweets,” Vicenzo replied, half smiling. “You’re still on
Pacifica, then?”
“Yes,” she said, nodding slowly. “It’s still a right mess here; it’ll be
more than a while cleaning up.”
“I saw the pictures,” Vicenzo said, nodding. “And the address
Governor Barrile gave. It really looks dreadful.”
“It is,” Miranda said simply.
Vicenzo continued to nod, then, after a mildly awkward silence, took
a hitching breath and said, “Miranda, I’m sorry.”
“Sorry, love?” Kadohata asked, confused.
“I know what you do is important. And I really am—we really are

proud of you,” he amended, squeezing Aoki tighter on his lap,
eliciting a squirmy giggle from her, “for doing what you do, even if
it means some sacrifices.”
Miranda fought to hold back tears as she smiled into the face of this
dear, sweet man who meant more to her than anything else in the
universe. “I have some news, dear. Like I mentioned, it’s going to be
a time setting things to rights here. So…I’ve decided, when the
Enterprise heads off…I’ll be staying.”
Vicenzo blinked. “What’s that, now?” he asked.
“I’ve asked Captain Picard to allow me to remain on detached duty
to the Displaced Persons Agency,” she explained, “to continue to
help with the refugee crisis here. It’s a huge challenge—like being
operations officer for a half-dozen starships—and it’s such
important work. Plus…” She smiled broadly then. “I’ll be right here,
set in one place.”
Aoki seemed to catch the implications of this faster than her father
did. “How far ’way is Specifica?” she asked excitedly.
“Pacifica, dear,” Miranda corrected her kindly. “And it’s only a few
days by runabout.”
“But, as busy as you’ll be…?” Vicenzo started to ask.
“I’m promised more help in the next week,” Kadohata said, “and
once things are in place, organized and up and running, I should
have more flexibility in my schedule.” She felt her entire face
expand with her smile as she added, “So, we need to make plans for
a big birthday party!”
Miranda Kadohata would forever treasure the looks of joy that
blossomed on her family’s faces.

15

Lieutenant Taurik had to admit to being impressed by the thought
and planning that had gone into the Enterprise’s role in the
evacuation of iy’Dewra’ni. Whereas the specifications for the
Sovereign-class ship stated that it could transport a maximum of
sixty-five hundred passengers in addition to a standard crew, every
spare bit of space aboard was being utilized in order to relocate nine
thousand eight hundred and seven from Pacifica to Ingraham B. In
addition to filling the cargo bays, shuttlebays, laboratories,
holodecks, the Happy Bottom Riding Club and other, smaller
lounges with refugees, the regular crew was doubling-and triplingup for the duration. The entire security team had given up their
quarters, opting instead to “hotbunk” on cots in the corners of the
armories and weapons control rooms. Captain Picard had said he
was hard pressed to think of a time he had ever been more proud of
his crew.
Unfortunately, the situation made the restricted areas of the ship
more appealing to anyone wanting a little bit of privacy. And the
Jefferies tube above the main shuttlebay observation deck had
apparently been irresistible to one such person. Taurik inadvertently
winced as he lowered himself to his hands and knees to open the
hatch. He had not slept well in days, and the current
accommodations were not helping in that regard. He also had not

had the opportunity to meditate since leaving Pacifica, and the
combination of these factors had inspired quite a few un–Vulcanlike thoughts about what he might do to whatever unauthorized
person or persons he might find in the ship’s restricted area.
He activated his tricorder and held it ahead of him with one hand as
he crawled through the access tunnels. As it turned out, he didn’t
need it—after crawling just a few meters, he could hear crying up
ahead. After a few more meters and a sharp left turn, he encountered
T’Ryssa Chen, sitting with her legs folded to her chest and her
forehead resting on her knees. Taurik froze, instinctively repelled by
the naked display of emotion from this woman who, from all
appearances, was no less Vulcan than himself. He watched her
silently for several seconds, almost as if entranced, before saying,
“Lieutenant Chen.”
Her head snapped up sharply and turned. “Oh, hell, it’s you,” she
said with a horrified look on her face. “Go away! Leave me alone!”
“You are not authorized to be in this area,” the engineer told her.
“Here’s your authorization,” she said, and gave him a hand gesture
that might have been a Vulcan salute minus three fingers. “I’m not
hurting anything. I just want to be alone—need to be alone for ten
damned minutes. Just let me be.”
Taurik imagined himself whipping his hand out, grabbing hold of
the histrionic woman’s neck, and then dragging her unconscious
form out of the Jefferies tubes, perhaps just dumping her in the
corridor. He blinked those thoughts quickly away, disturbed by how
he was letting Chen’s undisguised emotions affect him. In an effort
to counter these ideas, he lowered himself on his haunches and
asked, “What is wrong?”
“What, like you care?” she shot back.
“It is often helpful to articulate one’s thoughts coherently,” Taurik
said, paraphrasing one of Surak’s teachings on emotional control for
the half-human woman.
Chen glared at him, took a noisy breath through her nose, and said,

“You wanna know? Okay. My mother, who I thought was alive, is
dead. My father, who I used to consider dead, is alive. My
grandparents, who I never knew existed, don’t anymore. And the
person who finally started to help me get over my motherabandonment issues just left the ship herself without even saying
good-bye!”
“You’re referring to Commander Kadohata?” Taurik asked. Given
the chaos surrounding their departure from Pacifica, it was hardly
logical to fault the commander for not saying individual farewells.
Chen laughed unkindly. “None of the rest of that even registered
with you, did it? Mother. Father. Grandparents. They’re just
meaningless words to you, aren’t they, you cold-blooded bastard?”
“Not meaningless!” Taurik snapped back. “Do not think, because of
your mixed blood, that your losses are greater than mine!”
He instantly berated himself for his uncontrolled outburst. But now
Chen was staring at him in wide-eyed amazement. “My blood has
nothing to do with it,” she said defensively. “You’re the one acting
like your wife and daughter being killed doesn’t bother you.”
Taurik stared back at her, unable to mask his disbelief. “What
sentient being would not be bothered by such a thing? Surely, you
know the power of Vulcan emotions.”
“Well, it wasn’t my human half that made me break down like a
baby in the middle of breakfast,” she mumbled.
“Then you must understand how powerfully I feel—”
“I don’t understand jack about Vulcans. I mean, come on—you just
told me it’s better to articulate thoughts coherently. You didn’t even
go to the memorial; what is anyone else supposed to think?”
It was with no small shock that Taurik realized that Chen had made
a valid point. She might even have put her finger on the problem that
had been unsettling Taurik since the destruction of ShiKahr.
“I grieve,” he said aloud. “I grieve for my mate. I grieve for my
daughter. I grieve for all of ShiKahr, I grieve for all of Vulcan, I
grieve…” He fell silent then, using all his strength to keep his

expression of emotion limited to these simple words.
After a moment, Chen replied, “I grieve with you…uh, thee.”
The two sat there in the Jefferies tube for an extended period of time
together, silently.

While Ingraham B was an M-class planet, it was not a terribly
hospitable or pleasant world. The original Earth colony established
there in the early twenty-third century had a difficult time
maintaining a subsistence living even before they were wiped out by
the extraplanetary neural parasites that had later attacked Deneva.
There had been a minor effort to reestablish the colony shortly
thereafter, but most would-be pioneers at the time opted, at the
Federation’s urging, to settle the new worlds of the Taurus Reach
instead. There had been occasional subsequent attempts at resettling
the world, but they never attracted more than a handful of settlers,
all of whom eventually left for greener pastures within a matter of
years.
Now, the simple fact that this planet still had its atmosphere was
enough to make it a desirable home. And with its huge new
population and twenty-fourth-century technology to access the
planet’s largely untapped resources, it was hoped this time Ingraham
B would flourish.
“But it’s never going to be Deneva,” Gar Tiernan lamented as he
stared across the choppy gray waters of the planet’s largest ocean.
Jasminder Choudhury, standing beside him on the rocky shore, said
nothing.
She had finally found the nerve to approach him during their visit to
the Pacifican camp. She’d introduced herself as a fellow Denevan,

which triggered his ingrained politician’s response. “A pleasure,
Lieutenant,” he said, giving her a broad white smile and a firm,
trustworthy handshake. “On behalf of the Denevan people, let me
tell you how proud and grateful we are for your service, particularly
in this time—”
Choudhury indulged him briefly, but then cut him off to ask, “Sir,
what can you tell me about the evacuation of Mallarashtra?”
The man stopped in midsentence. “Is that where you were from?”
Choudhury nodded. “That was my home province. That’s where my
parents and family lived.”
Tiernan’s eyes softened in sympathy. “I should have guessed from
the accent.” He paused to formulate his answer, then said, “It was
one of the only regions where there were no reports of vio lence or
other problems during the evacuation. Unfortunately, that was
because they almost all refused to go. Young children and their
parents only. The rest of the community…” He shook his head in
wonderment. “They only filled about half the seats on the transport
that was sent for them. To see that kind of selflessness, in the face
of…It was really remarkable.”
“I see…” Choudhury said softly. Half a standard transport filled—
which meant only three to four hundred evacuees. And tens of
thousands of others, refusing to save themselves at the cost of
another life. Knowing that her family had made a choice, that it
wasn’t something she did, or failed to do…well, it didn’t take away
the grief. But, hearing how they embraced their fates with eyes open,
without fear, did ease her mind.
“I visited there once,” Tiernan interrupted her thoughts.
“Mallarashtra Province. With my ex. The Crescent Valley Retreat.
Beautiful old place; you know it?”
“I worked at the Crescent Valley when I was a teenager,”
Choudhury said, grinning in spite of herself.
“This probably would have been before your time,” he said, with a
wink. “We loved the fountains that they had there, in the main

courtyard. Every night after sunset, when they were lit up with all
those multicolored lights, we would go out and stroll around them
arm in arm…”
“That was where I had my first kiss,” Choud hury admitted, smiling
as she thought about Geeta Jalal for the first time in twenty-five
years.
They talked for hours, at iy’Dewra’ni and during the voyage to
Ingraham B. Tiernan told his story about watching Deneva’s comefrom-behind victory over Bolarus in the 2338 Federation Cup, and
Choudhury told hers about the freak blizzard that hit Mallarashtra
when she was five. Both exchanged memories of touring the Libra
as school-children, and of the Bicentennial World’s Fair in 2361,
and visits to the Summer Island Playhouse and the Winston
Memorial Art Gallery…
But since beaming down to Ingraham B, Tiernan had been strangely
withdrawn and quiet. Choudhury, acting as his personal guard and
escort, walked with him as he circled what would be the heart of the
new colony, considering it all distantly. Once he completed his
circuit, he muttered, just barely loud enough for Choudhury to hear,
“Little wonder this planet’s been abandoned for over a century.”
He turned toward the nearby coast, and once there, climbed up onto
a large, weather-polished boulder. He sat, knees up and together,
staring at the horizon. Choudhury scaled the big rock as well, and
stood back a few meters behind him.
“We’re never going to rebuild all that we had,” he said at length.
“Not here. Not on Deneva—even if we do rehabilitate the planet,
it’ll be a different planet. There’ll never be another Mallarashtra or
Lacon City. It won’t be the same Summer Islands, or the same
Crescent Valley…. Deneva is gone.”
“No.” Choudhury stepped up to stand right beside the president.
“The geography is gone, and the landmarks. But how can you say
Deneva is gone, given all the time we’ve spent together, proving that
it does still exist.” She tapped her forehead, and then the center of

her chest. “Here. And here.”
Tiernan gave her a cynical look from out of the corner of his tearfilled eye. “Right. Lieutenant, I appreciate what you’re trying to say,
but this”—he pointed to his own chest—“is not what I’m talking
about. I’m not interested in the metaphysical.”
Choudhury was about to make a retort, but she held her tongue. Her
beliefs were a personal thing, just as loss and grief were. Explaining
that all physical things are impermanent, and that attachments to
those things cause unhappiness, would not help him. Truth was, it
was barely much help to her.
Sensing that the president wanted to be alone, she moved farther up
from the shore, though still keeping him in sight. Behind her, she
heard a heavy pair of treads moving toward her over the scrub grass.
“Is anything wrong?” Worf asked.
Choudhury looked back at him over her shoulder and shrugged.
“It’ll just take time, that’s all. When you lose so much, you just have
to keep reminding yourself about how much you still have left,” she
said, at the same time reaching out and taking his hand in hers. Worf
looked down in mild surprise, then looked up at her again, smiling.

As luck would have it, Chen’s quarters were among the first to be
emptied of refugees at Ingraham B. She now sat alone in the privacy
of her cabin, as she had for nearly half an hour, staring at the blank
monitor on her desk.
What are you so scared of? she asked herself. There isn’t anything
he can do to you that he didn’t already do twenty-five years ago.
And yet, it took an additional half hour, plus two servings of liquid
courage, before she gathered enough nerve to hit the key on the base

of her monitor.
Moments later, he was on the screen. He’d recuperated significantly
since the last time she’d seen him. His hair had grown out some
more, and the bandage that had covered most of the right side of his
head was gone. Only a slight greenish discoloration indicated where
new skin had been grafted on; in another couple of days, it would
look completely natural. In contrast, his right eye had been replaced
by a mechanical optical implant, identical to one of Geordi La
Forge’s. Well, that’s just going to creep me the hell out the next time
I talk with him, she thought.
“Lieutenant Chen,” the Vulcan said, dipping his head.
Chen took a breath, hesitated, then in a rush of air said, “Antigone is
dead.”
The Vulcan man paused. “I see.”
Oh, you see, Trys somehow kept herself from saying out loud. Ah,
well, great, I’m so glad I made the effort to let you know,
considering what a pro found effect the news is having on you. Even
after her strange encounter with Taurik in the Jefferies tube, she still
couldn’t wrap her mind around this idea that what you saw of
Vulcan emotions was not necessarily what you got. Of course, the
fact that her mother was the supposed subject of his supposed
emotions made a bit of a difference…
“I am sorry.”
Trys thought her eyelids would tear at the corners, they had popped
open so wide. “What?” she asked. “Don’t you mean, ‘I grieve with
thee’?”
Sylix tilted his head. “I thought the human sentiment to be more
appropriate, considering.”
Trys shook her head. To think that she had almost believed he meant
he felt actual sorrow. “So they’re just empty ritual words to you,
aren’t they?”
“I am sorry,” he repeated, making the words sound anything but
empty. “I do regret your mother’s untimely death.” In fact, the

words were full to overflowing.
A million questions went through Trys’s head. Really? Why? What
do you feel for her now? Why didn’t you feel it for her when you
left? What do you feel for the daughter you made with her? What
now? But what she said, after a significant silence, was, “Well, you
wanted to know, and now you do.”
“Indeed.”
“So…” Again, an uneasy silence grew between them. Trys thought
she could see him contem plating a lot of the same questions she
was. What do you feel now for the father you never knew, T’Ryssa
Chen?
What now?
“I should be going,” Trys said.
“Certainly.” Sylix started to raise his split-fingered hand, but then
seemed to think better of it, and awkwardly curled his fingers into
his palm before dropping his hand in his lap. “Good-bye, T’Ryssa
Chen.”
And just like before, her hand hesitated just above the key she
wanted to hit. “One more thing.” The older man, who had already
started to look away, jerked his head back around toward her. “If
you ever get the urge to contact me again…” Trys said, looking him
straight in both eyes, “I may not be completely averse to the idea.”
The bastard still didn’t smile before she ended the call, but Trys did
get the impression that, deep down, he kind of wanted to. That was
something, anyway.

It was the most productive chaos Picard had ever seen.
Nearly two hundred transports and smaller ships were in orbit of

Ingraham B, most of them Denevan in origin, most on their fifth and
sixth trips here. They were running to worlds like Aldebaran and
Kreetassa, which like Pacifica were being overwhelmed by Borg
escapees, and bringing back those willing to make this rough world
their new home. In addition, two more Starfleet ships had come,
technically in violation of their own orders, in order to assist in the
refugee crisis.
“Commander Henderick’s team thinks they can revive the old
colony’s water works,” said Captain Zilssom of the T’Pora,
referring to the leader of that ship’s S.C.E. team. The Saber-class
ship had initially been sent to survey for topaline in an uninhabited
system nearby. “Most of it is terribly deteriorated, no surprise, but
they believe they may be able to—”
“Yes, by all means,” Picard said, nodding at him from across the
Enterprise conference room table. Worf had magnanimously
decided to allow him out of his quarters, although Beverly, after
sleeping through the entire journey from Pacifica, had decided to
continue taking advantage of her incarceration. Picard looked up
from his padd to see the Tiburonian staring at him, nonplussed by
his interruption. Picard gave him a half grin and said, “If a Corps
engineer says it can be done, the explanation behind that judgment is
usually superfluous.”
“Just ask them not to make this planet disappear,” joked Captain
Mary Beth Sterling of the Courage, which was currently
experiencing “a minor navigational malfunction” during their patrol
of Sector 009.
“If you’re going to rebuild the water system, you’ll want to
reintegrate all the old colony’s plans into your survey maps,” added
Doctor Byxthar, who had taken a keen interest in witnessing the
creation of this new Denevan homeworld, “and take it into account
before breaking ground on any permanent structure. Otherwise,
you’ll have the same problems the Bajoran colonists on Golana did
when they first discovered the old ruins—”

The doctor was cut off by a call from the bridge. “Captain, we have
another starship dropping out of warp and entering the system,”
said Ensign Balidemaj, who was manning tactical. “It’s the
Esquiline .”
“Uh-oh,” Zilssom said. At the looks of the others, he explained,
“Right now, every engineer on my ship is crowding at the windows,
tongues hanging out, trying to get their first direct look at a Vestaclass ship.”
Sterling snorted in amusement as Balidemaj added, “They’re hailing
you by name, Captain Picard.”
“In here, Ensign,” Picard said, moving to the wall-mounted screen at
the far end of the room. At the press of a button, the Esquiline bridge
appeared, and Picard recognized her captain, Parimon Dasht. But his
attention was drawn first to the towering man standing to the
captain’s right. “Captain Picard.”
“Admiral Akaar,” Picard replied, straightening to attention.
“Prepare to receive me aboard.”
“I stand ready.”
The admiral looked past Picard. “Sterling. Zils som. It would be best
if neither of you crossed my path.”
“Yes, sir,” both said as the screen went blank.
Picard made his farewells to the others in the room, and then stood
and waited alone in the silent lounge for his superior officer to
arrive. Even though he had been expecting the hammer to drop at
any time, he was still surprised by the admiral’s appearance. For the
head of Starfleet to have come all the way from Earth, this was not
likely to be a typical reprimand—perhaps he planned to personally
keelhaul him.
Yet, Picard found himself remarkably calm, and when Akaar was
escorted into the conference room, the captain stood, smiled warmly,
and shook his hand, as if they’d run into each other at a holiday
party. “Good day, Admiral,” the captain said. “You made
extraordinary time from Earth.”

“The Esquiline has just been fitted with its new slipstream drive,”
Akaar said. “This trip had the primary purpose of testing the new
engines.”
“And the secondary purpose?” the captain asked.
The admiral glared down at him from his impressive height. “We
have a problem, Picard,” he said, starting to pace the room. “Do you
understand the way the chain of command is supposed to work?”
“I believe so, sir,” he answered, as politely as he could.
“The way the chain of command is supposed to work,” the admiral
began, ignoring Picard’s response, “is that we have the most
experienced, most knowledgeable, and most intuitive people at the
top, deciding what needs to be done, and giving orders to those
under them to do it.” Akaar gestured to the padds still strewn across
the table in the center of the room. “Clearly, that is not what’s
happening here. Even relieved of command, you still manage to
accomplish all this…”
Picard remained at attention as the admiral continued to pace and
shake his head. “You were assigned to address a crisis on Alpha
Centauri, and what you did was to abduct the governor and take him
to the far edge of the Federation at the behest of your wife. No
matter how influential Barrile’s address was, or how loudly he’s
praising you now for helping him see past his own nose, kidnapping
a government official goes beyond the pale, Picard.”
“Aye, sir,” Picard said, putting on his best poker face. He had
resolved, when he first left Alpha Centauri, to face whatever
consequences were levied for his actions. But still, he did sincerely
hope that Barrile’s advocacy would be given some weight once
judgment was passed on him.
“And yet, there’s no denying how out of place you are in the chain
of command,” Akaar continued, “so, we’re going to have to promote
you.”
Had he been playing poker, Picard would have betrayed his hand at
that point. “What?”

“We’ve lost Janeway, Ross, Jellico, plus Owen Paris and dozens of
others during the war,” Akaar explained, his sorrow for his lost
colleagues evident in his eyes. “We’re facing an entirely reshaped
and tenuously held together Federation, and frankly, it would be a
lot easier to deal with a disagreeable equal than a disagreeable
subordinate. You would be the primary director of our postwar
rebuilding efforts, deciding how ships and personnel and matériel
get allocated and moved around. It’s going to be a vitally important
role, Jean-Luc, and one in which I believe you will excel.”
Picard recovered his composure and listened intently as the admiral
further described this surprise promotion. When Akaar had finished,
he responded, “I am deeply honored, Admiral. But, I must decline.”
“Now, don’t be rash, Jean-Luc.”
Picard lifted an eyebrow, slightly amused by the fact that he and the
admiral were apparently now on a first-name basis. “Forgive me, but
it sounded as if I was being offered the position because of my
tendency for rash decisions.”
“For your correct decisions,” Akaar countered. Picard was about to
point out that his rash decisions were not deemed correct except in
hindsight, but the admiral was continuing: “You’ve proven yourself.
You’ve earned this. It’s a chance for you to make a real difference.”
Picard chuckled to himself. “A wise man once told me, ‘Don’t let
them promote you, don’t let them transfer you, don’t let them do
anything that takes you off the bridge of that ship. Because while
you’re there, that’s where you can make a difference.’”
Akaar rolled his eyes. “And what fool told you that?”
“Admiral James T. Kirk.”
Leonard James Akaar was, for the first time in Picard’s experience,
left speechless. The Capellan’s life had been saved by the legendary
Starfleet captain prior to his birth over a century earlier. His mother
had given him his middle name, James, in honor of the man. And
when Picard invoked his name, and repeated the advice Kirk had
given his successor as the Enterprise captain in the last hours before

his death on Veridian III, Akaar dropped his sneeringly
contemptuous expression. “There’s little point in arguing with that,
then,” he muttered.
The admiral turned away and started to pace the room, moving as if
about to buckle under the weight he carried on his shoulders. The
meeting had obviously not gone as he had anticipated—no doubt,
very little over the past two months had gone as anticipated. Akaar’s
attention fell again on the collection of padds on the table, and he
picked up one that displayed the planned layout of the new Ingraham
B colony, supposed to support one and a half million displaced
transplants. “There are a lot of differences needing to be made,
Captain,” he said, “and a lot of differences to be made in the way we
approach them.”
He turned, and held up the padd. “In a way, we’ve been given a
knock backwards to Kirk’s era: our territory much smaller, millions
of people heading for new worlds that will need our support for
years before they become self-sufficient…. Maybe it is best to leave
you here, Picard,” he said, tossing the padd back onto the pile of
others. “Maybe what we need more than another admiral is another
James Kirk.”
Now it was Picard’s turn to be at a loss for words. The admiral gave
him a slight smile and a nod, then turned to go, leaving Picard to
consider his final comment.
And he could not shake the sense that the old Capellan admiral, in
drawing his parallels between the two eras and the two Enterprise
captains, had called down a curse upon his head.

EPILOGUE

Stardate 58357.1
Fromander IV wasn’t such a bad little planet, after all.
Jean-Luc Picard stood atop a small rise and gazed out across a
grassy plain that stretched all the way to the horizon. In the near
distance, a herd of large, green-haired animals, somewhat akin to
bison, grazed peacefully, ignoring the cadre of Starfleet science
officers moving around them with tricorders in outstretched arms.
The initial long-range surveys of the system done forty years earlier
had identified this planet as being class-P—glaciated and incapable
of sustaining humanoid life. More recent evidence, though,
suggested those early determinations might have been inaccurate, so
the Enterprise had been charged—following its latest supply run to
Cestus III—with taking a second look. What they found was a world
that, while apparently in the midst of an ice age and largely covered
with glaciers and permafrost, featured a belt of land at the equator,
about five thousand kilometers wide, rich with flora and fauna.

A stiff breeze sent the long grasses rippling like waves and cut
through Picard’s uniform jacket like a cold blade. He didn’t mind,
though; the thrill of discovering a new class-M world nobody
expected to find, and being among the first to walk its surface, was
enough to let him ignore the elements.
His thoughts as he admired the view were disturbed by the beep of
his combadge. He gave it a responding tap and said, “Go ahead,
Enterprise.”
“Captain, you have an incoming message from Admiral DeSoto.”
Picard smiled again. His old friend and the longtime captain of the
Hood had been offered the promotion Picard had turned down. He
had accepted and had been doing a superior job of directing
Starfleet’s recovery efforts. The captain made his way down the
small hill to where his shuttle had landed and activated the small
screen. “Hello, Admiral,” he said as the white-haired man appeared
on the screen.
DeSoto sighed and gave Picard a pained smile. He was still growing
used to the title, and had asked Picard repeatedly to continue calling
him Robert. This time, however, he skipped the collegial banter and
said, “Jean-Luc, we need you to pull your people off Fromander IV
and back into Federation space proper.”
Picard was taken aback both by DeSoto’s orders and by the dire tone
he had used to deliver them. “What? Why? It is looking extremely
promising as a new refugee colony—”
“Unfortunately, not from this perspective anymore,” DeSoto said.
“Not that close to the Gorn border.”
“The Gorn?” Picard echoed in disbelief. The Gorn had not been
seriously considered a threat since a faction called the Black Crest
briefly overthrew the old leadership seven years earlier, and attacked
several nearby Federation worlds. “Has there been another coup?”
DeSoto shook his head. “No, not a coup. I’m sending you a secure
data packet that’ll give you all the gory details. I’m sure we’ll be
talking extensively about this in the days to come,” he said, sighing.

“DeSoto out.”
Picard reviewed the report as the Enterprise headed to Starbase 120.
He had to go over it a couple of times to assure himself he wasn’t
misreading it somehow, and even then, it wasn’t until President
Bacco gave her press conference the following day, formally
breaking the news to the Federation, that he began to realize what it
meant.
The Gorn, the Romulan Star Empire, the Tzenkethi, the Breen, the
Tholians, and the Kinshaya had united in what they were calling the
Typhon Pact, posing an external threat that could distract the
Federation from its vital recovery work. The president stated that the
rebuilding effort would continue to take priority—and perhaps, as
far as the Palais was concerned, that was true. But Starfleet, as the
Federation’s first line of defense, could not define its priorities the
same way.
“Jean-Luc,” Beverly said softly as she tugged the padd free from his
hands, “there’s no point in brooding over it. Come to bed.”
Picard let her take the padd, but made no move to get up from his
seat on the sofa. Beverly instead lowered herself next to him. “Look
on the bright side: Zalda’s reaffirmed its commitment to the
Federation and to helping the refugees.”
Picard couldn’t deny that, although that good news was tempered by
the discovery that the Typhon Pact had manufactured the story about
Zalda refusing to take in refugees in the first place. Still, they were
now the fifteenth member that had chosen to follow Alpha
Centauri’s lead. The vote for Governor Barrile’s plebiscite had gone
pro-Federation by better than a four-to-one margin, and had proved a
great boon in convincing people all across the Federation to
rededicate themselves to its ideals.
“I received another report earlier today,” Picard told his wife
distractedly.
“Oh?”
Picard nodded. “The Titan has crossed into the Canis Major region.”

From Beverly’s reaction, she understood what that indicated—Will
Riker and his crew were again off into unknown territory, resuming
their mission of exploration. And she of course recognized the small
flicker of envy her husband felt toward his former first officer. “You
do know, of course, that Will told Admiral Masc that he wanted the
Titan to help in the recovery effort instead?”
“Yes, I know,” Picard said with a self-effacing grin. “It’s just…it
seems I’ve been deluding myself these last few months. The Caeliar
absorption of the Borg collective was such a…transformative
experience. What I felt…” He trailed off, still unable to put it into
words. And as the days passed, the intensity of the incident had
faded, bit by bit, from his memory.
“But, the end of the Borg really wasn’t the end of the struggle, at
least not for us,” he continued dejectedly. In fact, a nine-ship fleet
was right now readying to head off to the Delta quadrant in an effort
to look for the Caeliar, the admiralty having thoroughly rejected his
assertions about their ultimate disposition. “We will always have our
threats; there will always be other concerns and issues, even if we
have to invent them ourselves. It was foolish of me to have hoped
otherwise.”
Beverly shook her head and smiled at him. “You’re not a fool, JeanLuc; you’re a romantic. Big difference. You were ready to believe in
a transformed world, in a better world. I think that you still do, that
it is possible to help make a better world for the future.”
“Indeed I do,” he said, smiling back deep into her eyes and laying
his hand on her ever-expanding stomach.
A few minutes later they were in bed, and Beverly was soon fast
asleep. She was becoming more easily tired as her pregnancy
progressed, though she of course refused to admit it, and continued
to insist on working her regular schedule in addition to all the extra
recovery work. Picard stared up at the bulkhead that arced over their
bed as he listened to her soft snores, considering her thoughts about
the true meaning of the Caeliar’s effect on him, and about where, in

this post-Borg universe, his destiny lay.
After a moment, he reached to the bedside stand and tapped the
control pad on its surface. Above his head, the exterior viewport,
which had been set to opaqueness for the night, turned back to its
transparent setting. Picard dropped his head back onto his pillow and
stared up at the billions of unexplored stars overhead.
And he dreamt.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

My thanks first go to my editor, Margaret Clark, for giving me the
opportunity to write this story, and for pushing me to make it better.
Of course, I must acknowledge David Mack for his epic, galaxychanging, and kick-ass Star Trek: Destiny trilogy. (It doesn’t quite
feel right to “thank” him for destroying half the Federation.)
I will, however, thank the other members of the “Mack’s Mess”
clean-up crew—Christopher L. Bennett (Star Trek: Titan—Over a

Torrent Sea), Kirsten Beyer (Star Trek: Voyager—Full Circle), and
Keith R.A. DeCandido (Star Trek—A Singular Destiny)—for their
eagerness to make the post-Destiny books fit together as seemlessly
as possible. Special thanks to Christopher, for his collaboration on
the development of the Selkies, which he was concurrently building
upon in his Titan novel as I was working on this one.
I must also thank the other authors of the pre- Destiny, post-Nemesis
TNG books: Michael Jan Friedman (Death in Winter), J.M. Dillard
(Resistance), Keith DeCandido, again (Q & A), Peter David (Before
Dishonor), and Christopher Bennett, again (Greater Than the Sum).
And needless to say, we all owe much to all the creative people
behind the Star Trek: The Next Generation television series and its
film sequels.
In creating the iy’Dewra’ni camp, I referred repeatedly to the
“Anatomy of a Refugee Camp” feature created by the CBC, at
http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/refugeecamp/. I do wish to
stress, however, that my fictional twenty-fourth-century refugee
camp does not and could not present the terrible realities that
displaced persons live with in this century.
I also want to thank all the other wonderful and informative
websites, wikis, and weblogs around the Internet that helped along
the way, as well as the Hennepin County Library for their more
traditional method of keeping and distributing information and for
providing lovely quiet places to write.
Finally, thanks to everyone who said, “Congratulations!” or “That is
so cool!” when they learned I was writing a Star Trek novel. Never
underestimate the value of a good ego boost to the author who
barricades himself in a room alone with his laptop night after lonely
night.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
WILLIAM LEISNER is a three-time winner of the late, lamented
Star Trek: Strange New Worlds competition, and his first novel, A
Less Perfect Union, was published in the collection Star Trek:
Myriad Universes: Infinity’s Prism in 2008. In between, he has
written the Star Trek: Starfleet Corps of Engineers eBook Out of the
Cocoon (the title story in the print compilation due out in 2010); the
short story “Ambition” in Constellations, the Star Trek fortieth
anniversary anthology; and the novella The Insolence of Office, part
of the Slings and Arrows eBook miniseries celebrating The Next
Generation’s twentieth anniversary. A few more credits, and he
might convince himself that he actually is a real writer.
A native of Rochester, New York, he currently lives in Minneapolis.

