“Now!” Kirk ordered.

Before Kirk could hear if Kyle had Spock beamed aboard, the
Copernicus cracked open like a giant egg and pushed forth a
massive bubble of plasma and white-hot energy. Enterprise was
slammed back. She rolled away, creaking under the strain as support
struts buckled and circuits sparked. The bridge lights dimmed and
returned, but the ship continued to quake and rumble.
“Captain!” Chekov’s voice. “Shockwave now pushing Isitri fleet—
toward the colony!”
On the main viewscreen, the torrent of energy dissipated and the
Isitri fleet could be seen rolling awkwardly toward the gas giant and
its several moons, one of which held Berlis’s colony.
Kirk didn’t have time to consider the ramifications and instead was
pounding at the comm. “Transporter room!”
“Internal communications are down, sir,” Uhura said as she waved
the remnants of a smoke plume from her console. “Trying auxiliary
circuits.”
“Sulu,” Kirk barked around an intake of the acrid air, “take the
conn.” Two steps later, he was in the turbolift, zooming toward the
transporter room. Long moments after that, he was facing Spock on

the transporter platform. He motioned forward one of the security
officers standing guard.
“Place Mister Spock under arrest.”

Pocket Books
A Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and
incidents either are products of the author’s imagination or are used
fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events or locales or persons,
living or dead, is entirely coincidental.
™, ® and © 2009 by CBS Studios Inc. STAR TREK and related
marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. All Rights Reserved.
This book is published by Pocket Books, a division of Simon &
Schuster, Inc., under exclusive license from CBS Studios Inc.
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or
portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information address
Pocket Books Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the
Americas, New York, NY 10020.
POCKET and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon &
Schuster, Inc.
Cover art by Cliff Nielsen
ISBN-13: 978-1-4391-2345-4
ISBN-10: 1-4391-2345-4

http://www.SimonSays.com/startrek
[http://www.SimonSays.com/startrek]
http://www.StarTrek.com [http://www.StarTrek.com]

To Josh,
for the language he taught me

“Loneliness is the first thing which God’s eye named, not good.”
—John Milton

CONTENTS
ONE
TWO
THREE
FOUR
FIVE
SIX
SEVEN
EIGHT
NINE
TEN
ELEVEN
TWELVE
THIRTEEN

FOURTEEN
FIFTEEN
SIXTEEN
SEVENTEEN
EIGHTEEN
NINETEEN
TWENTY
TWENTY-ONE
TWENTY-TWO
TWENTY-THREE
TWENTY-FOUR
TWENTY-FIVE
EPILOGUE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ONE

T

ractor beam.” Captain James T. Kirk spun toward his chief
engineer.
Montgomery Scott turned from the engineering console and shook
his head forbiddingly. “At this distance? Through that atmosphere?
Impossible, sir.”
“Their shields are failing.” Spock was angled over his science
station console viewer, its informative blue glow playing over his
sharp features. “At the current rate of descent, their hull will be
crushed in four minutes, sixteen-point-nine seconds.”
“Mister Scott, set shields for atmospheric running.” Kirk turned
back toward the helm. “Sulu, close the distance. I want that ship
pulled out of there.”

“Aye, sir.” Sulu’s lithe fingers danced impressively across his
console. At navigation, Ensign Chekov answered Sulu’s movements.
Moments later, the navigator said, “In range, Captain.”
Kirk kept his eyes on the main viewscreen. Tension made his
shoulders knot up. First contact with a new warp-capable race was
exhilarating, but the distress call dampened any enthusiasm and
caused concern. “Spock?”
“Radiation from the gas giant prevents a detailed scan, but sensors
indicate storm currents are pulling them deeper.”
Sulu must have felt his captain’s eyes on him because he began
reporting the closing distance. “Forty thousand kilometers…thirty
thousand…”
Scotty positioned his hands over the proper controls. “Almost.”
“In range…” Sulu gazed deeply into his scanner. “Now!”
“Scotty—”
“Tractor beam engaged, sir.”
Enterprise’s tractors emitted blue energy beams that encased the
alien vessel and pulled it slightly closer.
“Reverse course,” Kirk ordered.
The engines struggled as Enterprise pulled the other ship through
the tempestuous primordial gases. Kirk gripped the arms of his chair
and seemed to transfer his will to the tractor beam to help tug the
mass behind them.
On the main viewscreen, gas clouds eventually gave way to the dark
vacuum of space. Kirk watched the starscape intently until the red
lights on the helm began to flash. Chekov instantly checked his
console, as the captain watched over his shoulder.
“Two vessels, incoming.” Chekov looked back at Kirk expectantly
but the captain flew out of his seat and toward the rail near the first
officer’s station.
“Spock?”
“Unknown design. Scanning energy signatures…” The Vulcan
glanced up, making eye contact with Kirk. “They’re charging

weapons.”
“Uhura, hailing frequency.”
Slender brown fingers made well-practiced motions across the
communication console. Uhura nodded quickly. “Open, sir.”
“This is Captain James T. Kirk of the Federation Starship
Enterprise. We are responding to a general distress call and engaged
in rescue operations—”
Uhura removed her earpiece and instead read her console screen.
“They’re responding, sir—mathematically.”
“Universal replies, Uhura.” Kirk stepped up between his officers,
but kept his eyes on the main viewscreen. “Spock?”
“Class eleven shields and weak disruptor cannons. And yet…” The
first officer turned away from his scanner to impress upon Kirk the
irony of the situation. “They appear to be warning us to leave.”
“Don’t they have sensors?” If they did, Kirk thought, they were
fools. “We outgun them a hundred to one.”
“Confirmed, Captain,” Uhura said. “The message is a warning.”
“Explain we’re on a rescue mission.”
Uhura checked the readouts on her board and shook her head. “I
think they understand that, sir. Their message reads: ‘Leave them to
die.’”
“They’re firing on the damaged ship,” Spock reported.
Kirk ordered Scotty, “Extend our shields.”
The chief engineer shook his head. “We’ll lose the tractor beam, and
they’ll slip back into the atmosphere, sir.”
“Another salvo, and the alien ship will lose cohesion,” Spock said.
Kirk returned to his command chair and pounded the comm button.
“Bridge to transporter room. Lock on alien vessel in tractor and
beam all life-forms aboard.”
As he watched the small vessel fade into the gas that surrounded the
planet, Kirk wished he was at the transporter controls. He looked
from the main screen to the speaker on the arm of the center seat and
back again—until he saw a bright flare against the sweeping

maelstrom of colors. The ship was gone. Kirk’s jaw tightened until
he heard Kyle’s report from the transporter room: “We have them,
sir! Three individuals.”
A sigh rose in Kirk’s throat but he wouldn’t let it escape. Instead, he
asked Spock, “The hostiles?”
“Breaking off, Captain. Retreating toward the inner star system.”
Sulu’s hands hovered on his console, ready to engage a course that
Chekov had no doubt already plotted. “Pursuit, sir?”
“Negative. Continue scans and maintain red alert. Uhura, security to
transporter room. Have medical standing by.” Kirk hurried to the
turbolift. “Spock, with me. Scotty, you have the conn.”

“Jim, I don’t think we’ll need them.” Doctor Leonard McCoy’s tone
was laced both with annoyance at the security team near the
doorway and pity for the three unconscious souls in sickbay.
Familiar with McCoy’s attitude and recognizing that the three aliens
didn’t pose much of a threat, Kirk sent the guards away. As they
retreated out of sickbay, the captain got a closer look at the most
colorfully dressed alien who appeared to be the leader.
Dressed in a medium-blue tunic and loose gray trousers, the being to
whom McCoy attended was humanoid, slight of build with a bonewhite complexion under a pinkish fuzz. He had no hair exactly, but
the fuzz on his head was thicker and crest-shaped. He had large eyes
that bulged even when closed, and flat nostrils without a pronounced
nose—an interesting evolution.
A nurse removed a device from the being’s wrist, and Kirk noticed
that the even distribution of fuzz made it seem as if a pale child had
been crossbred with a peach.

“How are they?” Kirk asked as McCoy scanned and reviewed the
bio-bed monitor.
“Coming around, I think,” the doctor grunted.
Before them, the peach man stirred, his bulbous eyes fluttering open.
He was so delicate that Kirk wondered about his planet’s gravity and
makeup. Did his people, like the Vulcans, hide incredible strength in
their slender forms?
The alien flailed his arms then pointed and gestured while looking
pleadingly at McCoy and the nurse.
“Is he trying to speak? Is he injured?” Kirk came closer.
“He’s not trying to speak,” McCoy said, glancing at his Feinberg
scanner. “No vocal cords.”
“Captain, I believe he wishes to use the device taken from his wrist.”
Spock gestured toward the apparatus on the table to the left of the
alien.
Kirk nodded and said, “Analysis.”
The Vulcan scanned the device with his tricorder, then picked it up
and inspected it closer. “A computerized communications device.
No inherent threat.”
Kirk made a gesture, ordering that the unit be returned to its owner.
The alien sat up in bed, and relief flushed his pale countenance as
Spock returned it to him. The alien placed the device on his wrist
and began gesturing again. This time, however, a flood of tones
emanated from the device.
The other two aliens began to stir. They looked panicked and unsure
at first, but then, suddenly and perfectly synchronized, they grew
calm and centered. Kirk found it curious, and filed away the thought
for later consideration.
The universal translator began interpreting, replacing bleeps with
words once the Enterprise’s computer learned the alien language.
“Can you understand us?” Kirk asked the alien who had come to
first.
The peach man took in a breath, not quite a gasp. Kirk wondered if

the reaction was the equivalent of a nod, but then the alien gestured
at him. The translator took over: “Understand I. You make sound.
Hear I and communicate.”
Kirk nodded slowly and the alien mimicked the gesture as if
attempting to duplicate a greeting.
“You who?” the alien asked, looking around the room and
addressing the question to them all.
Kirk took a step forward and said, “James T. Kirk, captain of the
Starship Enterprise, my first officer, Mister Spock, and Doctor
Leonard McCoy. We responded to your distress call.”
The alien looked from Kirk to the others—including his own
people—then back to the Enterprise captain. His slight features,
which seemed even smaller in rela tion to his bulbous eyes, were
excited and relieved. “I possess no knowledge of you, but you
interesting very very. I called Berlis Aknista from Isitra Colony
First. Excuse language barrier. We communicate thoughts. When
travel space, device necessary for deliver information give you.”
“Telepaths, Captain.”
“Yes, thank you, Mister Spock.”
“Do you have a written language?” Spock asked Berlis.
“Writing recent. No need past.”
Spock nodded as if confirming a theory to himself.
“But you developed a manual language?” McCoy asked.
“Yes. Not all people think together. Some alone, single—disabled.
They signs created—ideas communicate difficult but possible.”
The syntax wasn’t alarming to Kirk, though it was already
improving thanks to the universal translator. There must have been
something in the way Berlis was gesturing or the manner in which
the device interpreted these gestures into tones that the translator
still didn’t understand. With time it would improve.
Kirk wasn’t certain if he should avoid moving his hands when he
spoke. He was concerned about gesturing in a manner Berlis and his
people might find insulting, or that would accidentally convey the

wrong thing, so he kept his arms at his sides and spoke as evenly as
possible.
“Someone wanted you dead. Why?”
Berlis’s face wrinkled with confusion as he said, “Why?”
“That’s what we’d like to know. Why?”
Berlis and the other two aliens simultaneously looked at Kirk
anxiously, as if the captain would be the one to soon supply them
with an answer.
Could such naïveté be genuine? Kirk and Spock exchanged a glance,
but the Vulcan offered only a curious expression.
Pushing out a breath, Kirk steeled his gaze. “Who attacked you?”
“Our people from Isitra Zero: homeworld.”
Spock’s eyebrow lifted in surprise at the information, and McCoy,
even as he continued to scan one of Berlis’s comrades, looked
genuinely insulted on the aliens’ behalf.
“And…” Kirk struggled to get the next question out, unsure of just
how far he could go before seeming rude. “You don’t know why
they’d want you dead?”
“I know not,” Berlis told him. “I Colony First leader I now return
home from meeting with Zero council.”
“Was there a disagreement at your meeting?” Spock asked. “Perhaps
a heated one?”
Berlis made a quick synchronized movement with both hands. “No.”
Kirk waited a long moment for Berlis to elaborate, but the alien said
nothing more. Finally McCoy broke the silence.
“Jim, we should let them rest.” The doctor gently pushed Berlis
down against the bio-bed’s pillow. “Their oxygen levels are still
pretty low.”
“Well, you’re safe for now,” Kirk assured the three aliens, and found
himself nodding to Berlis. Then the captain smiled slightly,
unexpectedly, and shared another brief glance with Spock.
Spock merely looked at the captain with interest. Kirk couldn’t
quash the feeling that there was something strange about Berlis. He

did not think it was because of the nonverbal communication; it
wasn’t the first alien—or human—he’d met who used manual
language.
After a second’s hesitation, the captain nodded once more, and
turned and left. Spock followed behind.
Once they were in McCoy’s office, Kirk turned to his first officer.
“Opinion, Mister Spock.”
“While it seems unlikely that Mister Berlis would be unaware of the
reasons his own people might wish him dead, he seems forthright.”
His lips pursed into a thin line, Kirk grudgingly grunted in
agreement but added, “There’s something…odd about Berlis and his
people. I can’t put my finger on it.”
“Perhaps your human intuition is at work,” Spock gibed, as McCoy
joined them.
“How lucky for you to not be burdened,” the doctor said.
Kirk allowed himself a slight smirk that pulled up one corner of his
mouth.
“Indeed,” Spock replied.
“How long before we can talk to them again, Bones?”
The doctor’s shoulders rolled in a lazy shrug, as he shook his head.
“I’ll let you know.”
“As soon as Bones gives the word, move Berlis and his associates to
quarters,” Kirk told Spock. “I want you to talk with him again. Find
out all you can—about their colony, the area, anything else that
might help us figure out what’s happening.”
Spock, clasping his hands behind his back, nodded, saying,
“Understood.”
“Do we return Berlis to his colony,” Kirk asked, “or hand him over
to his homeworld’s authorities? We choose the wrong answer, and
our actions might cause a civil war.”
“Agreed, Captain.”

TWO

T

wo security guards flanked the entrance to the guest quarters that
Berlis and his associates had been taken to. The close-knit group had
requested a joint berth. Spock nodded at Lieutenant Sentell, who
pushed the button that opened the cabin door.
The Vulcan stood outside until Berlis peered back and made a
motion that obviously meant come, as the universal translator
interpreted it. With his hands clasped behind his back, Spock entered
just enough for the door to close behind him. “Am I disturbing
you?”
Berlis huffed out two short breaths through slightly parted lips,

which the universal translator interpreted as “No, no.” The alien
smoothed his hands over his fuzzy cheeks, apparently to make
himself more pre sentable. His preening, Spock thought, has an
avian quality to it.
“May I meet your associates?” Spock asked, stepping farther into the
room.
Making a clipped gasp, Berlis indicated the sleeping area where both
aliens were motionless, each in his own bunk. “They sleep,” he told
Spock by moving his head toward his own shoulder and closing his
eyes a short moment. He sat in the chair in front of a small desk, and
motioned for Spock to take a seat.
The Vulcan nodded once and moved smoothly to the available chair
and sat down. “Captain Kirk wishes me to—”
“Questions, you have, questions?” Berlis asked. “We feel good. We
try answer.”
“We?” Spock glanced past Berlis at the two sleeping Isitri.
“They sleep. Exhausted—injury not habit. But good to answer
questions.” Berlis blinked at Spock expectantly.
Spock looked at Berlis’s comrades and back at Berlis. “You’re in
contact with their minds right now?”
“Always,” Berlis said.
“Are they aware of it?”
The short intake of breath was interpreted as “Yes.” Berlis moved
his head to one side, once again indicating the others. “We are
always aware of one another.”
“Interesting. Do you read their dreams?”
Berlis’s eyes narrowed and his expression looked as humans might
when they taste something sour. “Context strange,” he said finally,
after a long pause. “They tell me their desires. They do not write
desires.”
Of course, Spock thought, a telepathic culture without books. They
wouldn’t understand the term read except in the context of reading
something written. “A dream,” Spock explained, “is a series of

thoughts or images that occur during a certain level of sleep in many
sentient beings. Do Isitri experience dreams?”
Giving the question some thought, and seeming to test the notion,
Berlis glanced back at his people and then at Spock again. “Not
same you describe.” He tilted his head to one side, indicating one of
his associates. “Golo tells me he likes visit with wife when sleeps.
Sometimes their children.” He then tilted the other way. “Epiltan…”
Berlis’s face wrinkled into a strangely sweet smile. “Epiltan also
likes visit Golo’s wife.” He chirped out a high-pitched laugh, then
seemed to flush, as if embarrassed for the other man. “Epiltan,” he
said, by way of explanation, almost expecting that Spock would
understand that it was simply Epiltan’s way of being.
“Does Golo know Epiltan does this?”
“Of course,” Berlis replied quickly, perhaps finding the question
silly, but quickly recovering—realizing Spock couldn’t know
differently. “Golo and Epiltan…brothers. Their link strong very
very.”
Spock nodded slightly at the distinction. “So those related to each
other have stronger telepathic connections.”
Huff. Berlis’s short outward breath told Spock he wasn’t accurate.
“They no relatives. Brothers.” The illogical statement made Spock’s
eyebrow raise, and Berlis continued: “All normal link same. People
choose communicate more deep with some, no others.”
“Of course,” Spock said. Berlis had used the term brother, or the
translator had interpreted it, in the figurative sense, to describe not
so much a familial bond as rather an emotional kinship.
“You different.” Berlis stretched out his hand, pointing at Spock
with the first and last fingers on his hand.
“Different from you?”
“No,” came the short huff. “Different from others here. You think
strong.”
Spock lowered his head in acceptance. “Vulcans are telepaths.
Usually there must be physical contact to…Are you attempting to

probe my thoughts now?”
Berlis blushed again, his pale skin turning the same pinkish color as
the fuzz that covered him. “Sorry I annoy—no intention—not realize
action.”
The probe of his mind had been so light, so peripheral, Spock
believed Berlis was honest in his regret. It was likely that the Isitri
merely had a passive telepathy that sought out nearby minds for
communication and companionship. There was a similar connection
among Vulcans, often unfelt and unnoticed. Spock had sensed the
connection not long ago—when the Vulcan crew of the U.S.S.
Intrepid had died in space. In fact, it wasn’t the connection he’d felt
even then, but the sudden severing of that link. Perhaps because he
was away from most of his kind, Berlis was going through a similar
withdrawal.
“I understand,” Spock said. “No apology is necessary.” Indeed, a
connection to such a telepathy as Berlis’s might be an interesting
experience.
“I apologize continued,” Berlis said. “Please, forgive, and let me
answer your questions.”

The briefing room tri-viewer showed a map of the current star
system. When Spock flicked a button on his panel, the view
highlighted a gray moon that orbited the same gas giant from which
they’d pulled Berlis’s ship.
“Isitra Colony First,” Spock said. “The designation Berlis gives his
home.” He switched to an image of a green and blue Class-M planet
closer to the Isitri star. “And Isitra Home Zero, where Berlis and his
friends had been traveling, and the origin of the assault on their

vessel.”
Kirk glanced at McCoy, at his right, at Uhura, who was next to the
doctor, and across the table at Scotty. When Spock spoke again, the
captain gave his science officer his full attention.
“The purpose of Berlis’s trip to Isitra, his first such voyage as
colony leader, was to update his homeworld’s council on the
progress of Colony First, as well as to discuss ongoing negotiations
with the inhabitants of the neighboring system.” The viewer now
showed a long-range scan of the next system. “On our charts,
System Zeta Tau Nu. To the Isitri, the system of the Odib.”
Spock described the Odib as a standard spacefaring civilization, one
with a spoken language and a conventional culture. This, apparently,
had been a source of tension between the two races, and the Odib
reportedly feared the Isitri.
“Why?” Kirk asked.
Spock shook his head. “Unknown.”
“Speculate.”
Spock drew in a slow breath and steepled his fingers, leaning back
in contemplation. “Difficult to say without more information.
Perhaps the Odib are particularly warlike. Certainly Berlis and his
people are relatively peaceful.”
“You mean the same people who tried to kill him?” McCoy asked
pointedly.
Spock pursed his lips. “We don’t have all the information regarding
that event.”
“And Berlis isn’t forthcoming,” Kirk said.
“He’s been quite open, in fact.” Spock’s voice took on an almost
excited tone, which was evident only in a slight increase in the speed
of his speech. “He’s given us a wealth of information about his
culture. For example, the sign language they use has only recently
been adapted with translation units for the purposes of space travel
and negotiations with non-telepathic people. They have no books, no
schools, no teachers, no mass communication, and while they have

gestural languages, they have been developed for the few Isitri who
lack telepathic ability because of illness or birth defects.”
“But they never developed a spoken language?” Uhura asked.
“They lack a complex vocal apparatus,” Spock replied. “A great
number of Isitri are deaf. Spoken language would be of little use to
them.”
Kirk nodded, accepting the information, though it didn’t help to
explain why the Odib feared the Isitri. What would it be like to have
negotiations with a race that communicated instantly with one
another, discussing things covertly while in the presence of nontelepaths? It would seem secretive and the Odib would probably feel
at a great disadvantage. Paranoia didn’t often lead to peace.
“Their communication is fully telepathic?” Uhura asked. “Across the
entire planet?”
“It is.” Spock nodded once.
“Across space?” Scotty leaned in a little, his right hand motioning
toward the now dark viewer. “Berlis’s colony is on the tenth planet,
and his homeworld is the fourth.”
“Negative, the colony is not in telepathic contact with Isitra Zero.
That is the reason for the colony—so that a group of Isitri can have
different ideas, perhaps more inventive than the whole of Isitra
Zero.”
“Or perhaps more radical,” Kirk said. “If the Isitri didn’t care about
the progress of their colony, or how Berlis was running it—”
“Berlis insists he does not run it,” Spock said. “As I understand it,
the Isitri share thoughts and ideas so freely that it’s not possible for
any one person to be in charge of any particular enterprise.”
Kirk asked, “Then what’s the purpose of a colony leader?”
Spock tilted his head and pursed his lips, indicating his answer was
between educated guess and idle speculation. “Presumably to bring
order to the chaos of a million individual minds all clamoring to be
recognized.”
Although he nodded as if his questions had been answered, Kirk still

felt unsettled. What confused him most was a feeling he couldn’t
quite put his finger on. The captain turned to McCoy.
“Bones, what’re the chances that Berlis and his people can make
telepathic contact with us?”
“You mean send us their thoughts, or read our minds?” McCoy’s
brow crinkled in thought.
“Both. Either.”
The doctor shrugged. “It wouldn’t be unheard-of, but since we need
the universal translator to communicate, I doubt it. Physiologically, I
haven’t had time to study—”
Kirk turned to Spock again. “Have you sensed any attempt to
contact you telepathically?”
“No deliberate attempt of which I’m aware.”
McCoy could obviously read his captain’s face well, and the doctor
narrowed his eyes at Kirk. “Have you?”
Kirk smiled and shook his head. “No, no. At least I don’t think so.
Would I know?”
McCoy didn’t quite grin and said, “If you heard voices in your head,
you’d know.”
His own slight smile fading, Kirk sat quietly a moment, looking
down at the data card he was turning over and over in his right hand.
He finally set down the card and looked squarely at the doctor.
“There were certain questions I wanted to ask Berlis that
kept…slipping away, while I was talking to him.”
“In favor of what?” McCoy asked.
“Nothing. That’s the point.” Kirk shrugged. “I like him. I don’t want
to think negatively about him.”
“What’s wrong with that?” McCoy asked.
Kirk’s eyes flicked up and saw from McCoy’s reaction that he’d
glared more intensely than intended. “I don’t know him. How do
you like someone you don’t know?”
“Instinctive reaction?” Uhura offered. “We’ve all met someone
we’ve taken an instant liking to.”

The captain nodded and decided to change the subject. “Have we
had any contact with the Isitri, Lieutenant?”
Uhura shook her head. “No, sir. And scans of communication traffic
are extremely light, for reasons Mister Spock has now explained.”
Kirk swiveled to face Spock. “We rescued someone the Isitri
obviously didn’t want rescued. What if we turn Berlis and his
comrades over to them now?”
“Berlis doesn’t know for certain, but suggests that doing so would
be a death sentence.” Spock’s tone was overly forbidding, Kirk
thought. Was there some emotion in it? Was Spock somehow
outraged at the thought of it? Kirk was outraged, McCoy likely was,
but Spock also seemed to be. It wouldn’t be the first time Spock had
allowed some emotion to lace his tone, but…maybe Kirk was
projecting and saw something that was not necessarily there.
“Jim, we can’t let this happen.” McCoy pressed himself anxiously
against the briefing room table.
“I’m forced to agree with the doctor,” Spock said.
Kirk met both Scotty’s and Uhura’s respective gazes, each imploring
him not to turn over Berlis and his comrades to the Isitri.
“I’d like to know the reason they’ve sentenced them to death,” Kirk
said.
“Indeed.” Spock’s coal-black eyes seemed to bore through Kirk.
“No matter their reasons, whether perceived or real, would we hand
them over for the Isitri to murder?”
Murder was an interesting word choice for Spock to make. Slowly,
Kirk shook his head. “No.”
“Captain, I strongly suggest we return Berlis, Epiltan, and Golo to
their colony,” Spock said. “It’s the only moral choice we can make.”
“The only one?” Kirk asked.
“Affirmative,” Spock said tightly.
McCoy countered, “We could try to contact the Isitri and find out—
”
“Inadvisable.” Spock cut off the doctor. “First contact situations

such as these are especially sensitive. Questioning their motives
could be seen as overtly hostile.”
Kirk couldn’t really counter what Spock had said, but didn’t
recognize in it Spock’s usual rational argument. It seemed almost as
if Spock were reaching. Kirk wondered if the Vulcan was acting on
gut instinct. Spock had spent the most time with Berlis and had a
better understanding, if an incomplete one, of how the Isitri might
react. But was there more behind his insistence?
The captain tested his theory: “We’ll return Berlis to the Isitri.”
Uhura and Scotty exchanged a concerned glance and McCoy nearly
spoke but Spock reacted instantly— and irrationally.
“I cannot allow that,” the Vulcan said tersely.
Kirk stared his first officer down. “You…cannot allow?”
“I…excuse me, Captain.” And with that Spock rose and quickly left
the briefing room.
“Security,” Kirk said to Uhura and he and McCoy were instantly up
and through the door. Across the corridor from the briefing room
door, Spock was slumped against the wall, hands clasped tightly
against his chest. He was breathing in and out so deeply that each
breath lasted several seconds.
“Spock?” Kirk approached gingerly, then nodded for McCoy to
examine the Vulcan. “Bones.”
McCoy had no medical instruments with him and as the security
men arrived, the doctor motioned them toward Spock. “Sickbay.”
One arm held up to block the interference of the security guards,
Spock seemed to instantly recover himself.
Nodding security off, Kirk stepped forward. “What happened?”
“My apologies, Captain,” Spock said, his voice having regained its
normal unaffected timbre, but his shoulders still tense with the
effort.
“What happened?”
“Jim, let’s get him to sickbay first.”
Kirk nodded; if Spock was going to hesitate or ob ject, he didn’t

show it. They went to sickbay.
After what seemed an interminable amount of time, McCoy finished
scanning and nearly finished grumbling. “He’s fine, as far as I can
tell.” He nodded to Nurse Chapel and she pressed a button on the
exam table that tilted it forward, allowing Spock to step down.
The Vulcan went immediately to Kirk, who’d been waiting
impatiently by McCoy’s desk.
“I must sincerely apologize, Captain.”
“What happened?” Kirk prodded. “Bones?”
“Physically? Nothing. Other than signs of mental stress.”
Spock looked no worse for wear, Kirk thought, other than a slight
slump of his shoulders. “From?”
McCoy handed Chapel a scanner and joined Spock and the captain.
“I’m guessing there’s something about Isitri telepathy that makes
those perfect Vulcan brain waves a little less perfect.”
“Inarticulately phrased, Doctor,” Spock said, already sounding like
his usual self, “but essentially correct.”
Brow furrowing, Kirk felt his stomach tighten. Had Spock been
victim of some telepathic attack? “They were trying to read your
thoughts? Or communicate with you?”
“Both,” Spock said. “And neither. I experienced a similar feeling
when I first spoke to Berlis and—”
McCoy cut him off. “I thought you said he hadn’t attempted to
contact you telepathically?”
“I said no deliberate attempt was made,” Spock corrected. “There is
a passive telepathy I felt…”
“Maybe you and I did as well, Jim,” McCoy offered, gesturing to
include them both. “You said you felt something.”
“Like an aura of good feeling.” Kirk nodded. “It may be nothing.”
“It may be something. And Spock, because of his Vulcan abilities, is
more in tune with it.”
“Apparently,” Kirk said dryly.
“I have it under control now, Captain,” Spock said.

Kirk looked to McCoy, who merely shrugged.
“Just the same,” the captain said, “I think you should keep your
distance from Berlis until he’s gone.”
“Jim, you’re not really returning him to—”
Kirk cut him off. “The Isitri freighter headed for his colony.”
Spock’s left brow jutted toward his dark bangs.
A slight smile tugged at the captain’s lips. “I won’t lead him to his
own execution. We’ll return Berlis to his colony, and let the chips
fall where they may.”
McCoy nodded once, and Spock did as well, slowly, almost to
himself.

THREE

T

he man had been on his ship a total of six hours, with half that
time spent talking to Spock. And yet, even after his first officer’s
detailed report, and especially after learning that Spock was affected
by the alien telepathy, Kirk was no closer to understanding the
enigma that was Berlis of Isitra Colony First. As he and his
comrades mounted the transporter platform, however, all his
concerns seemed to melt away. Berlis’s obvious innocence as he
looked around the chamber in confusion was childlike, almost
sweet. Kirk couldn’t help but smile.
Berlis spun his arms, apparently asking Spock to explain what was
happening. To Kirk’s astonishment, Spock replied not verbally, but
with fluid gestures. When he was finished, Berlis, Epiltan, and Golo
all looked satisfied and McCoy leaned toward Spock, his voice low.
“You learned that in a few hours, Spock?”
“I did,” Spock replied. “I’ve always had an affinity for languages.”
“I thought that was music.”
“They’re much the same, Doctor. Even the manual language the
Isitri use holds melody in its motions.”
Kirk wondered if Spock had some telepathic help while learning the
language, but then again, it was Spock. His mastery of alien cultures
was what made him the best first officer in the fleet.
“Thank you, Captain Kirk,” Berlis said, as Mister Kyle took him by
the elbow and centered him properly on the transporter pad.
“Because save lives, us, and return home, us.”
Kirk couldn’t help but return Berlis’s infectious smile as Kyle
returned to the transporter console and began pushing buttons. The
captain glanced at Spock a moment, and wondered if he was
blocking the same contagious smile from spreading across his face.
“Locked on to Isitri freighter, Captain.”
“Energize.”

Just as Kyle’s hands moved toward the dematerialization sliders, the
red alert lights began to flash. “Shields are up, sir,” Kyle said.
The captain’s fist snapping across the console like a coiled snake
attacking, Kirk punched the intercom. “Kirk to bridge.”
Uhura had been left the conn and the speaker crackled with her
reply, “Three incoming ships, Captain. We believe Isitri. They’re
keeping their distance, but arming weapons.”
“On my way.”

“Come about, Mister Sulu,” Uhura ordered.
“Coming about, aye.” Sulu tapped expertly at his console, and the
stars swam across the viewscreen until the three Isitri ships came
into view.
“They’re backing off,” Palmer said from navigation.
Chekov was hunched over Spock’s scanner console. “They—two of
the ships are powering down weapons and engaging a course that
will take them alongside the freighter.” Twisting slightly, the ensign
looked to Uhura with some confusion. “The third ship continues to
back off, and is maintaining weapons lock.”
Uhura and Sulu exchanged a glance. “What’re they doing?” the
helmsman asked, more to himself than to anyone else.
When Kirk and Spock exited the turbolift, Uhura relinquished the
center seat to the captain and gave him the latest status; Chekov
returned to navigation as Spock took back his console, and Palmer
retreated to the engineering station on the upper bridge. Ensign
Miller nodded to Uhura and took an auxiliary bridge station in case
he was needed again.
Kirk lowered himself into the command chair. “Any hostility from

the two Isitri ships that stood down, Mister Spock?”
“None.” Spock looked over at the captain from his scanner. “And
the third vessel is now turning back toward Isitra Zero.”
It was anticlimactic, yet the bridge was still a block of tension. Kirk
felt unnerved by a problem that seemed to require no further
resolution. Why would three Isitri ships charge weapons only to
have two of their number fall in sync with Berlis’s freighter? Why
would the other ship retreat, tail between its legs?
Turning toward Uhura, the captain ordered, “Try to hail the two that
joined the freighter, Lieutenant.”
“I have been, sir. No response.”
Kirk got up and went toward the turbolift. “Maintain yellow alert.
Uhura, you have the conn. Spock, let’s talk to Berlis.”

Berlis, Epiltan, and Golo were chatting with McCoy. When Kirk
entered the transporter room again, he found all four laughing and
Lieutenant Kyle smiling warmly. Isitri’s laughter, perhaps because
of the lack of vocal cords, had a decidedly chirpy quality to it, which
added to the aliens’ avian-like demeanor.
“Mister Berlis,” Kirk said, “it would seem you’re already aware that
the crisis is averted.”
“Yes,” Berlis replied, his hand pointing to the red-alert light near the
doorway. “Lights stop on, off. Only off now.”
Kirk glanced up at the light and nodded. Of course, the lack of
flashing lights made Berlis calm. The alien seemed to trust that he
was safe on Enterprise. Somehow the notion also calmed Kirk—to
know that his ship was safeguarding someone who needed
protection.

The bosun’s whistle sounded and the captain gestured for Kyle to
activate the comm. “Kirk here.”
“The Isitri colony freighter signals they’re ready for transport.”
“Thank you, Ensign. Kirk out.”
Kyle held the transporter controls ready as Berlis and his crew
mounted the platform again. This time, nothing stopped them from
activating transport: the good-byes Berlis issued were final and the
sparkle and hum of dematerialization whisked the Isitri away.
It wasn’t until they were on the turbolift heading back to the bridge
that Kirk first sensed a change in his own mood, and a side-glance to
McCoy suggested the doctor was feeling the same. The feeling only
came to fruition when silence fell between them once Kirk was
sitting in the command chair. McCoy at the captain’s left, they both
watched the viewscreen as Berlis’s Isitri ships disappeared into the
distance.
Turning toward Spock’s station, Kirk began to ask a question at least
twice before finally calling the science officer over to the command
chair.
“Captain?”
“Berlis’s telepathy…I feel its absence. The warm feeling I had
dissipated once he left. I felt…a loss. As if someone I cared about
were going away and I would miss them.”
McCoy looked away slightly. Spock merely offered silence.
His lips pressing into a thin line, Kirk could feel his annoyance
ebbing. “Did you feel anything? At all? Either of you?”
When McCoy’s eyebrow twitched and the doctor’s lips pulled down
into a slight frown, Kirk knew he was onto something. “You did.”
“Well, maybe a little disappointment. I wouldn’t call it a feeling
really, just…uh…”
Kirk nodded and turned to Spock. “I don’t suppose—”
“I’m quite sure I’d recognize a feeling if one had presented itself,”
Spock said dryly.
“I’m not,” McCoy quipped.

“I assure you, Captain, my telepathic defenses are quite strong.”
Spock’s voice lowered in tone, for the sake of his own privacy.
“There have not been, nor will there be, any such incidents as
before.”
The captain believed him, but worried about his Vulcan friend. “The
question is how long must you keep your mental shields up? What’s
the range of their telepathy?”
Spock considered his answer for a brief moment. “Unknown.
According to Berlis, the entire planet and colony respectively
communicate, instantaneously, so at least planet-wide, but not far
enough to traverse the star system.”
“Somewhere in between,” McCoy said.
“Obviously.”
Kirk swiveled around toward port. “Palmer, how long before we
have warp speed?”
The engineer turned from her station, crisply reporting, “Another
twenty minutes or so, sir.”
“Uhura, was there any contact with the Isitri ship that didn’t join
Berlis’s freighter?”
Slightly turned away from her console, but always able to do several
things at once, Uhura was coding some command into her board
with one hand, and balancing her earpiece with the other. “No, sir.
They refused to answer hails.”
“It’s possible that their communications officer was on one of the
other two ships,” Spock offered. “Berlis indicated that one
communicator per expedition is not uncommon.”
As Kirk watched the small dot on the main viewer shrink farther into
the starscape, he searched for the feeling he’d had before—the sense
of loss when Berlis left. It was gone, and now that it was, he
wondered if it was ever really there.
“Mister Spock,” he said finally, “I think it’s time we made official
first contact with Isitri Zero.”

“Approaching the fourth planet, sir.” Sulu looked back toward the
command chair for a moment, then eyed Chekov’s station to make
sure he was in synch with the navigator.
Kirk watched the lush green planet as it grew closer on the
viewscreen. “Uhura?”
“They’re receiving us, Captain. Replying with an approach vector
for orbit.”
The captain nodded. “Transfer coordinates to the helm.” He rose and
moved toward the science station. “Spock?”
Gazing from his sensor cowl to a screen above him, Spock read the
close-range scan results. “No natural satellites, but three orbiting
platforms with life-forms aboard. Various other small orbital
devices, seemingly monitoring the planet or scanning space.”
Kirk looked back to the viewscreen regarding the planet. “Any
hostility over our arrival?”
To be thorough, Spock doubled-checked. “None detected. There are
several large cities across the two southern continents, any of which
might hold defense systems or ships, but no evidence of active
aggressive posture.”
“Standard orbit, Mister Sulu.” The captain returned to the command
chair. “Uhura, transmit our intentions to make an official visit and—
”
“Captain.” Uhura turned fully toward Kirk, pulling out her earpiece
but leaving it hovering near her earlobe. “They’re asking to speak to
me.”
Kirk leveled his gaze at Spock, who offered his opinion. “They
might assume that the captain of the ship is also the communications
officer.”
“There is a certain logic to it,” Uhura said with a playful smile.

His eye returning the twinkle he saw in hers, Kirk nodded at her.
“Will you explain to them that I’ll be substituting for you, if they’ll
permit me to visit?”
“Of course, sir.”
Kirk pushed himself from the center seat and toward the lift. “Mister
Spock, you have the conn.”

The beam-down coordinates the Isitri had offered would leave Kirk
and McCoy in the Main Council building at the center of Isitra
Zero’s capital. A bright room, vividly decorated in dazzling colors,
materialized around them. With no one to greet them, they had time
to take in the setting: artwork, clusters of seating thickly upholstered
in shimmering fabrics, and at the center of each seating area, a small
pool of water, neither deep enough nor big enough to accommodate
anything but drinking or the washing of hands. Kirk wondered
whether, given the Isitri’s birdlike qualities, they were birdbaths.
An automatic door parted and a slight Isitri walked into the room,
greeting both Kirk and McCoy with a smile and a strange hiss of
breath. He—or she, since Kirk wasn’t really sure how gender was
differentiated among the Isitri—merely motioned for them to follow.
The doors opened to a corridor that they didn’t walk down; instead,
they turned directly into another room just meters from the doorway.
Another larger set of doors opened to reveal a rather spare room
with a round table made of what looked like stone but that also had
the graininess of wood. As the Isitri who brought them in joined the
others at the table—there were a total of seventeen—Kirk realized
which seemed male and which female: like Berlis and his comrades,
the males had pinkish fuzz covering them. The females had a

slightly darker, almost lavender hue and somewhat thicker frame.
Two seats down from the man who’d led them in was a lavender
Isitri. She stood and Kirk assumed she was the council leader.
Her arms moving swiftly, a translation unit began chirping on her
wrist, and the universal translator quickly interpreted her meaning.
“Hello. We are Isitri Council Zero. You are commander of the ship
above? Why have you hindered our justice?” Either because this
communicator was used to talking to off-worlders, or because his
universal translator now had a better understanding of the language,
her speech seemed tighter syntactically.
“I’m Captain James T. Kirk, representing the United Federation of
Planets. I’m sorry that we interfered in an internal Isitri matter. That
wasn’t our intention, but we replied to a distress call and felt
ethically bound to respond. Without knowing the crimes Mister
Berlis may have been charged with, we—”
Suddenly a man across the room stood up and looked at Kirk but it
was the woman who spoke and the timbre of the universal translator
changed. Apparently the entire council would speak through her, and
her tone would change depending for whom she was speaking.
“Captain, Berlis is charged with no crime.”
“But isn’t he sentenced to death?” McCoy asked, unable to, much to
Kirk’s annoyance, keep his attitude out of the question.
“Yes,” the Isitri man said through the woman. “For it is either he
who shall die…or all of Home Zero.”

FOUR

Since there was no real voice to echo off the Isitri Council
chamber’s walls, the universal translator’s sterile intonation failed to
capture the regret expressed on each of the seventeen Isitri faces
before Kirk. Body language was more powerful than words, and a
thick silence followed the Isitri man’s declaration of why Berlis
must die.
Yet there was still no concrete explanation—and Kirk needed more
information. McCoy obviously did as well, and Kirk saw he was
ready to say as much, so he jumped in before McCoy could.
“Honored Isitri Council, our policy is not to knowingly involve
ourselves in situations internal to your planet and politics, but
having met Berlis, you’ll excuse me if I wonder exactly what threat
he poses.”
“We need not tell them.”
“They won’t understand.”
“I believe they will.”

“I believe you have the brain of a small domesticated animal.”
Though all the statements came from the designated speaker, each
one was delivered from several different sources. McCoy smiled at
the last comment, and apparently embarrassed, the council discussed
things more discreetly from that point on.
“I suppose we’ll just think good thoughts to ourselves,” Kirk
muttered to McCoy; the woman interpreted Kirk with gestures,
perhaps for the members of the council who couldn’t hear. A
collective chuckle rose from the members, and Kirk was positive he
heard it cascade out of the room and down the hall. He wondered if
it made its way across the city, and then the planet. Probably so. In a
network of connected minds, new stories and humorous jokes were
doubtless a commodity, and Kirk’s irony was perhaps not lost on the
entire race of Isitri.
“My niece likes you,” one of the Isitri said.
Another added, “So does my brother.”
“And my wife.”
“And my domesticated animal.”
Again, the group laughed, their nostrils opening and closing,
emitting their characteristic high-pitched chirp.
The man who seemed to be the most talkative among them stood
and walked toward Kirk. “Captain, I must apologize for our less
serious council member. He’s often a problem.” He glared at one of
the members. “Understand that while we cannot read your thoughts,
we consider ourselves good judges of character. I’d like to trust
you.”
This Isitri, Kirk noticed, was chunkier than Berlis and his two
comrades. Kirk was unsure how much it had to do with the female
interpreter, but this man spoke more elegantly. This council
probably dealt with the Odib Spock had mentioned, and perhaps
other races with whom the Isitri had come in contact. Although, a
race of telepaths could conceivably appoint any individual or group
as representative. The female interpreter explained that while Kirk

stood here speaking to this group of seventeen, another group in
another city listened and debated. For Kirk, it was a disconcerting
notion: to be at odds with such a council, for example. How did one
then convince an entire planet of one’s position?
“Esteemed council member,” Kirk began.
“My name is Chista,” the man said via the interpreter, and then
introduced the others. The fifteen names became a blur for Kirk.
Interestingly, he did not introduce the interpreter.
“Chista, can you explain the specific reasons why Berlis must be
killed?”
“It is not a decision we come to lightly, Captain, but one we must act
on swiftly, especially now.” Chista stopped pacing and, facing Kirk,
drew in a short breath. “I am being told that I’ve begun this
discussion too dramatically, and have not gotten to the point.
Perhaps a more personal setting and more intimate conversation.”
He indicated a side door—which opened, perhaps on mental cue—
and gestured for Kirk and McCoy to walk through. The female
interpreter followed as well.
The room was certainly friendlier: soft seating and various shelves
holding elaborate sculptures. While it suggested the warmth of a
library, there were no books. As Spock had discovered, a culture that
relied on telepathy in so absolute a manner had no need for them.
Chista sat and invited Kirk and McCoy to sit as well. The interpreter
stood to the side of them, so she could do her job. Kirk had to
remind himself to look at Chista, and not at the interpreter, since the
one communicating was not the woman, but rather the Isitri man
before them. He’d had enough experience to know that not facing
the person whose words were being spoken was considered rude in
many cultures.
“You have obviously talked with Berlis and enjoyed his company,”
Chista said. “There is much to admire in that young one. But
unfortunately, there is also much to fear.”
“He didn’t seem dangerous,” McCoy said. It was only the second

thing he’d said since they’d beamed down, which was unusual for
the doctor.
“My chief medical officer, Leonard McCoy.”
“Medical Officer,” Chista said, as if it were part of McCoy’s name.
“He is not physically a danger, but as all things Isitri, the problem is
more mental.”
Kirk and McCoy exchanged a glance, both recalling Spock’s
episode. What had happened wasn’t dangerous, but it was unusual.
Was Chista referring to similar incidents? They waited for him to
explain but there was a long silence. The council man certainly
seemed to have a sense of the dramatic, dropping hints frequently
but never giving the full picture. Then again, he was likely having a
planetwide conversation about what he should say. It was a wonder
that anything ever got done on Isitra Zero. How would a Federation
politician do anything with all his constituents in constant contact?
Actually, Kirk thought, such accountability might not be a bad thing.
Eventually, Chista spoke again. There was probably some delay in
this communications roundabout, as the Isitri conveyed his thoughts
to the interpreter, who signed for her wrist device, which chirped to
Kirk’s universal translator. It was successful, if complicated. “We
are a very open people, Captain, but many off-worlders don’t
understand that we are a large group of individuals. We are not a
hive mind. There are those who believe I should not be confiding in
you. Like the Odib, you could fear us, and wish to destroy us.”
“That won’t happen,” Kirk told him.
The quick gasp that followed was Chista’s acceptance of Kirk’s
claim. “Most of us believe that. Simply not all. But I have decided
that your act to save Berlis shows us your character, and that of your
people.” His jaw quivered a little, and the interpreter remained
silent. Kirk wondered if Chista was indulging in an Isitri sigh.
“We’d like to help if we can, Chista,” Kirk said. “The Federation
could mediate a dispute between you and Berlis, or—”
Chista made a short huff. “You misunderstand. We have no dispute.

I must explain fully.” The man’s round belly sat on his lap like a
package before him and he fidgeted uncomfortably beneath. “We
begin communication with our young very early in their gestation.
Soon after higher brain functions begin, so does our telepathy. Very
simple at first, of course, as the brain is still growing and mapping
pathways. We feel our children’s emotions, and allow them to feel
ours. This is something non-intimate adults do not do, except with
close family members, as our emotions are one of the things that
keeps us being individuals. As you can imagine, we bond to our
young quite tightly and quite early, and when their telepathy grows,
they reach out and touch the community as a whole.”
“They speak,” McCoy said, “before they’re born.”
In reply, Chista gave his Isitri nod: a slight inward breath.
“Sometimes much to the chagrin of their parents,” he said with a
chirpy chuckle. Kirk saw his flat nostrils flare a little and realized
the sound came from there.
Kirk and McCoy smiled. Aliens could be so different from humans,
yet so similar in as many ways, including when it came to the
frustrations of being a parent.
“Occasionally, a child has a telepathic ability that exceeds the
strength of most Isitri. These children are undisciplined and have a
tendency to push their thoughts and emotions on those around them.
Usually, with training, this can be controlled. Every few generations
there is a genetic mutation that produces what we call a
‘troublesome mind.’ Such a mind is not only uncontrollable, but also
its telepathic aptitude is such that it can direct the minds of others.”
“Berlis,” Kirk said, a sour realization sinking in.
But Chista puffed out an opposing breath. “Berlis is the most
troublesome mind of all, Captain, as his telepathy is the strength
seen, thankfully, with great infrequency.” The Isitri clasped his
arms, seemingly chilled by the very thought of Berlis’s power. “You
must understand, we use our telepathy as a chain of vast
communication that washes across the planet in waves and cross-

waves. Berlis has the ability to not just influence the chain—he can
control it.”
Did that mean he was controlling Kirk on Enterprise, and Spock was
trying to break the connection, or was Spock being controlled? Kirk
wasn’t sure. But he knew he needed to find out.
“He never received training to manage his ability?” McCoy asked.
“No,” Chista said. “Had we known of a power as strong as his, his
life would have been terminated in utero, as soon as the ability
manifested.” In reaction to McCoy’s expression, Chista added: “In
ancient times, the mother was killed as well. More recently, since
the invention of space flight, in cases where the abnormality is not
quite as strong, the person in question is exiled from her own kind.”
“Berlis slipped through the cracks,” Kirk said. The idiom was lost
on the interpreter, and she asked him if he could rephrase the
statement. “How did Berlis survive this long?”
“We don’t know.” Chista paused a moment, perhaps receiving
information from the other Isitri. “We believe his ability must not
have manifested until adulthood,” Chista continued. “Since he was
on Colony First, his growing control of others was not realized until
he was elected to visit Isitra Zero. During his time with the council,
he controlled us covertly—perhaps unknowingly—and we did not
even realize it had happened until Berlis left the planet.”
“Sir,” McCoy began, and seemed unsure how to ask his question.
Kirk was glad the doctor was being careful with his words. “Why
wouldn’t it be possible to train Berlis now as others have been?”
“His mind is too strong. And such training takes place on the
preborn, not an adult mind that has been linked with so many others
for so long.” Chista must have seen that Kirk and McCoy didn’t
fully understand. “A troublesome mind must be isolated from most
people. For any Isitri this is a difficult task, as we are so very
intertwined with one another but for those as strong as Berlis…”
“You said he may not even be aware he is doing this. How can you
sentence him to death if he doesn’t know what he’s done and isn’t

given a chance to stop?” Kirk asked.
“He cannot stop. No more than you could be asked to stop breathing.
His nature is to destroy.” Chista—or one of the other several billion
Isitri—must have sensed Kirk was dissatisfied with that explanation.
“Captain, this decision isn’t made out of mere tradition. The risk is
too great. Isitri history is riddled with such troublesome minds
subjugating all for the span of a lifetime.” Chista’s jaw quivered and
he sat back. He seemed to get lost in thought for a moment, then
looked back to Kirk. “Ones weaker than Berlis have, in our past,
usurped people’s individuality for generations. Only upon their
deaths would the entire planet come out of its mental slavery.” He
leaned closer now, his bulbous, yellow eyes sharp and focused.
“Imagine it, Captain: As a young man you’re suddenly under the
total control of another mind. When that mind dies you have your
life back. Except you’re now an old man, and there is no life to
live.” The Isitri Council man let that thought sit a moment, then
drew himself even closer. “Now multiply that tragedy…by a planet.”
Kirk and McCoy exchanged a morose glance. The ultimate
dictatorship, Kirk thought.
“Wouldn’t it be possible to isolate Berlis, so he isn’t a threat?”
McCoy asked.
“We have tried such things, Medical Officer.” Chista’s expression
was one of deep regret, or so it seemed to Kirk. With any alien race,
however, Kirk realized he could be projecting; emotional facial
expressions differed by culture. “Last time a troublesome mind
ruled,” Chista said, “his reign was twelve years. A war began with
the Odib, because the mind in control believed them to be a threat to
us. Millions died on both worlds, before the Odib finally managed to
destroy the city where the mind lived.” His jaw was quivering again,
and Kirk was now certain the quiver was the equivalent of sighing.
“The Isitri people woke from their sleep,” he continued, “to find
their children dead, their cities in ruins, and the Odib vowing that the
next time we lost control to such a ruler…would be the last.”

“I understand.” Kirk felt his throat tighten around the words. He did
understand, and the notion was horrifying.
“Our people, and peace with Odib, depends on Berlis’s death,
Captain,” Chista lamented. “Do you not owe us your assistance? But
for your interference, he would already be dead, and the threat of
war averted.”
The only thoughts Kirk could muster would speak to duty and good
intentions…but it all seemed hollow since his actions had put
billions in harm’s way. “What kind of assistance?” Kirk finally
asked, and avoided looking at McCoy.
Chista was eager to make his case. “Should we send a covert
assassin, they would fail, because an Isitri mind would be instantly
recognized and compromised. One of your people, however…that
mind would not be recognized.”
“No,” Kirk said, shaking his head. “We can’t carry out an execution
for you.”
Chista pushed out a series of quick, powerful breaths. “If Berlis had
been left to die, we wouldn’t be on the verge of war. The blood of
millions will be on your hands, Captain.”
“What war?” McCoy demanded, obviously as distraught as Kirk was
over the situation.
“If Berlis returns to Isitra and reads the plan in our minds to end
him, we will all be under his control for certain. And the Odib will
destroy us.”
“But why?” McCoy demanded.
Kirk answered for Chista: “There’s a peace treaty they must have
signed. If one of these troublesome minds develops, and the Isitri
don’t take care of the situation, the Odib will.” The Isitri gasped,
acknowledging that Kirk was correct.
“Odib Ambassador Sa-Gahnesaam is, at this moment, in the
southern capital,” Chista admitted. “He demands the council provide
proof that the troublesome mind we’re bound by law to reveal to the
Odib…has been destroyed.” Lowering his head to one side in what

appeared to be an expression of sadness and exhaustion, Chista sank
back into his seat. “If you do not end Berlis for us…millions,
perhaps billions, will die.”

FIVE

T

he Isitri Council needed to deliberate with the sister council that
had been conversing with the Odib ambassador. Kirk and McCoy
were offered a brief tour of the area, and the interpreter served as
their guide. They visited a market where people were buying various
pieces of technology, and then saw an art exhibit. The interpreter

pointed out a specific painting she seemed to like—a somewhat
Impressionist rendering of a nature scene.
Kirk wondered about the planet’s development. If they were all
bound to one another’s minds, how did art surprise or touch an
individual who could have seen the conception of the work directly
from the mind of the artist? After seeing another three paintings, all
completely different, he decided to ask.
“Do you have a favorite artist, Captain?” she asked in reply.
He nodded. “A few.”
“And do you enjoy their work only the first time you see it, or each
time?”
Kirk smiled. “I see your point.”
She continued walking and as they followed, she asked: “Are you an
artist yourself?”
“Not by any stretch of the imagination,” Kirk said with a smile.
If she didn’t understand the idiom, she certainly got the gist of it and
asked McCoy the same question. “Medical Officer, are you?”
The doctor shrugged. “I painted a little when I was younger.”
She gasped in. “And did your paintings as conceived in thought
translate to reality exactly as you intended?”
Kirk found himself picking up a few of the Isitri signs. The gestures
for yes and no seemed to both precede and follow a question,
making it clear an answer was being requested.
The doctor smiled. “Indeed they did not. If only they had.”
The interpreter beamed the most charming smile. “As it is for you, it
is for us. We are not very different.” The sign for different was one
hand balled into a fist, and the other opened and palm up. Kirk liked
it—how purely conceptual it was—and was beginning to see what
Spock had admired about the manual language.
Next she took them to a recreational area, where mothers, fathers,
and children were very obviously having a great deal of family fun.
Watching them play was fascinating for Kirk—it was almost
soundless play, but for the occasional chitter of laughter.

“They are learning,” the interpreter said of the group.
“The children?” McCoy asked. “It’s a school?”
“All of them are learning. About one another; skills from their
parents; stories from one another. It’s possible to focus on just the
thoughts around you. We don’t all communicate with everyone else,
any more than you would speak to everyone you see
simultaneously.”
“But you can,” Kirk said. “When one of these troublesome minds
appears, the entire planet communicates.”
“That is more limited communication,” she replied, and her frown
was deep. Isitri faces were amazingly expressive, and it was very
clear to Kirk that neither sign language nor telepathy alone could
fully convey their full range of emotion. The language was
obviously a mixture of conceptual gestures, postures, expressions,
and even some mime. “Since will and thought is one-way when a
troublesome mind is in control…the communication is not the
cacophony it would otherwise be to link all minds at once.”
“So, when I speak to you, I’m not speaking to all Isitri?” Kirk asked
after they walked a bit farther, and had begun a loop back toward the
room where the council deliberated.
“You are not,” she said. “Since I am currently telling only my
husband of my experiences today. My memories, should I choose to
allow them, will be read by others. But that is my choice.” She
emphasized my and the sign was a fist, centered on her chest and
drawn down her trunk, stopping at her abdomen.
“Does anyone ever take your thoughts without asking?” As soon as
the words were spoken, Kirk regretted the harsh tone of his pointed
question. His habit was to be blunt, but the Isitri woman didn’t seem
fazed by it.
“The only time that is possible is should a troublesome mind touch
my thoughts. Such was when Berlis visited with the council. As we
explained, we can’t be sure what memories he did or did not violate,
because only once he was far enough away were we able to stir back

into our own consciousness and wills.” Her jaw quivered. “Exactly
what happened while he was in control…parts are rather vague to
us.”
McCoy’s face was quite expressive now, and mirrored Kirk’s
feelings. It was unimaginable: to essentially go into a mindless
coma, become a zombie of sorts, while your thoughts—the essence
of who you are—were violated by a telepathic dictator. Was that
really what Berlis was? He’d seemed so innocent and childlike.
As they neared the council chamber again, McCoy asked a question
that had been nagging at Kirk as well: “Pardon me, but Chista said
Berlis might be unaware of the control he’s exerting. How is that
possible?”
The woman thought about it a long moment, then her jaw quivered,
which Kirk now considered might be more of a shrug than a sigh.
“My mind,” she said finally, “is not troublesome, so I do not know
for certain. But if he were intentionally controlling us, why would he
have left, knowing his control would have ended once he was far
enough away from Isitra Zero? He’d not been with us long enough
for the link to last past his visit.”
“So how did his control manifest itself?” Kirk asked.
“It is difficult to explain,” she answered. “We knew he was directing
our thoughts and our actions on some level, but could not really
divide where our wishes ended and his began. His wishes simply
became ours—our wills totally subverted.”
Kirk knew he’d brought McCoy along for good reason: he asked
another excellent question. “If you’re not sure which thoughts were
yours, how do you know any were his?”
She smiled tellingly, as if sharing an intimate secret. “To this point,
Medical Officer, the purpose of my existence was not to please
Berlis.”
McCoy chuckled.
“When he spoke to the council,” she continued, “we all felt our
purpose was to assist him and ensure his satisfaction. When he left,

we went back to our respective wishes, and felt the hole in our lives
that follows the release from a troublesome mind.” Now her smile
turned mostly sad. “I like Berlis,” she told McCoy and then looked
at Kirk. “But I don’t know if I truly like him, or if he has
subconsciously suggested that I should like him. This is the danger
we cannot survive.”
She nodded—she pushed away her head. It obviously meant she was
excusing herself because she turned and walked back into the
council chamber.

As soon as Kirk and McCoy returned to Enterprise, Spock reported
that a large Isitri fleet was gathering. The captain took the command
chair and McCoy slipped to his spot at Kirk’s side. Spock remained
at the captain’s right, ready to consult.
“Number of craft?” Kirk asked. “Class of weaponry?”
“So far twenty-three vessels of varying ability; low-level phasers
and class-four shields.”
One-on-one, hardly formidable. Amassed? Enterprise could be
badly damaged—perhaps even disabled in a full fight.
Kirk gave Spock the details of his discussion with the Isitri Council,
including their determination to kill Berlis at whatever cost.
Listening without interrupting, Spock merely nodded at various
points. “We should be able to disable them before they reach Isitra
Colony First,” he finally said matter-of-factly.
Kirk looked sharply at his Vulcan first officer, who was looking
intently at the small gathering fleet launching into orbit. “Are you
suggesting we interfere, Mister Spock?”
“We already have,” Spock said. “Had we not rescued Berlis from his

impending death, this fleet would not be gathering now. Berlis and
his colony will surely mount a defense. Hundreds, perhaps
thousands, will die. If we disable the Isitri fleet now, those lives will
not be forfeit.”
There is a certain logic to the argument, Kirk thought, but not to the
premise. It was totally unlike Spock to suggest this course.
“Spock, you can’t be serious,” McCoy said, his eyebrows arched in
shock.
“Quite serious, Doctor,” the Vulcan said impartially, clasping his
hands behind him. “Since the Isitri fleet cannot attack Berlis
directly, for fear they will come under his influence, they must
attack from afar. Millions of Colony First citizens will be
unnecessarily put in jeopardy.”
Tension spread from Kirk’s back to his shoulders and neck. He
examined Spock’s features: calm, unemotional, and detached as
usual. Yet the captain couldn’t help but wonder if the Vulcan’s link
with Berlis hadn’t caused some lasting bias or remained loosely
connected.
“No, Mister Spock,” Kirk said. “We’ve meddled enough.”
“And should Berlis and his colony request Federation assistance?”
Spock offered. “Are we not obligated—”
“To what?” McCoy snapped. “Commit murder for anyone who asks
our help?”
“Killing in self-defense is not murder,” Spock said. “I have formed a
hypothesis about Berlis and his power and do not believe he is aware
that he exerts force on people’s minds.” Spock’s black eyes
burrowed into Kirk’s and then McCoy’s. “You both felt the
benevolence that Berlis radiates. It isn’t deceptive.”
“Spock,” Kirk began, but his first officer interrupted.
“Sir, it is my opinion that while the Isitri may be unable to train
Berlis’s mind, I could—perhaps—teach him certain Vulcan
telepathic disciplines that would negate his inherent control of
others.” Coal-black eyes pleaded for Kirk to listen to reason. “Do we

not owe him the chance to negate his inherent threat to his people?”
It was a compelling argument. But was it Spock’s, or was Berlis still
in there somehow? Kirk became acutely aware that the crew was
beginning to follow the discussion with interest, and perhaps they
wondered the same: Chekov’s eyes were on his board, but he was
surely listening. Sulu had turned slightly back, and at the
engineering console, DeSalle was fully turned toward the command
chair until Kirk’s eyes flicked in his direction and the man twisted
swiftly around.
“You want to risk a mind-meld with someone who takes over other
people’s minds?” McCoy challenged.
“Admittedly risky, but perhaps the only way to avert the death of the
colony,” Spock said.
“There’s no official agreement to assist either side in this very
internal Isitri conflict,” Kirk said sharply. “I won’t help the Isitri
Council against Berlis, I won’t help Berlis against the Isitri Council,
and I won’t risk losing any member of this crew to either.”
Peripherally, Kirk noted McCoy’s nod of approval, but the captain
was studying his first officer’s expression. The Vulcan looked from
McCoy to Kirk.
“Is that a problem, Mister Spock?”
Without hesitation, Spock said, “Of course not, Captain.”
Kirk took in a breath and nodded as Spock returned to his station. It
was Kirk’s intention to seek one more audience with the Isitri
Council, perhaps even with the Odib ambassador; Uhura hailed the
planet again.
At some point after McCoy headed to sickbay and as the Isitri fleet
continued to make its way for Berlis’s colony, Spock left the bridge.
As soon as Chekov’s console alerted him about a shuttle launch,
Kirk glanced back to see the Vulcan was missing.
“Close the bay doors,” Kirk ordered. “Dammit, Spock,” he said
under his breath.
Sulu and Chekov struggled with their respective consoles—each

having controls that could have overridden any command.
“We’re locked out, Captain,” Chekov said.
“Aft view.”
On the main viewer, Shuttlecraft Copernicus sped away at full
impulse. “He’s heading for the Isitri fleet,” Sulu said.
Kirk felt his jaw tighten and his teeth clench. “Tractor beam!”
Scotty shook his head and pointed to DeSalle, instructing him to
press a sequence of buttons. Scotty then checked a readout and
shook his head a second time. “Impossible, sir. Disabled at the main
conduit,” he grumbled.
“We can’t bypass,” DeSalle said, frustrated.
“Sulu, maneuver us in front of him.” Kirk gripped the arms of the
command chair tightly. What was Spock thinking? He must still be
in Berlis’s thrall, Kirk thought. But was Berlis that powerful and
inscrutable to so covertly control someone? Or did Spock merely
have some residual subconscious imperative left in him that he was
now responding to?
Jabbing at the navigation console repeatedly, Sulu eventually
twisted back to Kirk, a cross of annoyance and frustration in his eyes
and voice. “I can’t get power, sir.”
Unbelievable, Kirk thought, and was out of his seat and checking
Sulu’s console in one swift move. He pivoted toward engineering.
“Scotty?”
The engineer smacked at the controls. “Aye, I see what he’s done. I
can’t fix it from here.”
Kirk hooked a thumb tightly over his shoulder. “Go.” He looked
over Sulu’s and Chekov’s respective shoulders. Weapons were
available—both phasers and photon torpedoes. The Spock he knew
wouldn’t have been careless enough to forget to disable them, unless
he was sure Kirk wouldn’t open fire on the shuttle. Not much of a
gamble for Spock to make, but at the same time, should Kirk make
one? A phaser beam, well placed, could disable the Copernicus, but
if off even a fraction, the small ship would be destroyed, and Spock

with it.
“Anything?” Kirk asked Uhura. She shook her head but continued to
hail the shuttle.
The decision to fire on Spock weighed on the captain, and he
processed all of it quickly as he lowered himself back into the
command chair. Spock read him well enough—Kirk wasn’t going to
risk killing his first officer. At least not until he’s back on board and
I can wring his neck.
“Come on, Scotty,” Kirk said quietly through his teeth.
Sulu kept keying in the same command to his console, anticipating
again and again the moment navigation would be restored.
“Mister Scott, sir,” Uhura said finally, her voice trailing off as Kirk
pounded at the comm button with his fist.
“Kirk, here.”
“I can get you half impulse for now, sir.”
“Not fast enough, Mister Scott.”
“And the tractor beam. Best I can do.”
“Work on the rest. Kirk, out.” He thumbed off the comm and
pointed to the blank starscape on the main viewer. “Do the best we
can with the tools at hand, gentlemen.”
Enterprise pushed ahead—slowly—but Copernicus was faster. All
Kirk needed was to get into tractor range. He leaned forward, willing
the impulse engines forward.
“Range?”
“Another four hundred thousand kilometers, sir,” Sulu said.
“Get a lock as soon as you can, DeSalle.”
“On it, sir. We’re edging closer.”
“Captain!” Chekov’s thick Russian accent—and the shock behind
it—cut across the bridge. “There’s an overload building in the
shuttle’s engine!”
A thick, heavy realization hit Kirk in the gut as he motioned Chekov
toward Spock’s sensors. “Confirm.”
DeSalle took Chekov’s navigation console as the ensign leapt over

to the science station. Kirk twisted toward him as the blue light
reflected off the young man’s face.
“Confirmed, sir,” he said, still reviewing the sensor data.
“Copernicus’s engine is on manual overload and will explode
in…two point two minutes.”
Kirk’s face flushed and his throat tightened; he looked at Sulu.
“Range?”
Sulu just shook his head.

SIX

He’s flying it into the mass of the Isitri fleet.” Kirk wasn’t asking
a question, and was more talking to himself than he was to Chekov,
but the ensign answered anyway.
“Yes, sir.”
On the viewscreen, Spock’s shuttle sped forward, maintaining a
faster sublight speed than Enterprise could muster in her hampered
state. Spock used that damage he had inflicted to his advantage.
Damn.
Kirk ordered Uhura to inform the Isitri of the situation—so they
could at least attempt to move their fleet out of the way. He thought
grimly that this was what his Starfleet instructors meant when they
said the darkest command decisions were those for which one could
never be trained. What was he to do now, knowing that the Isitri
wouldn’t be able to move the bulk of their fleet in time? Destroy
Spock’s shuttle before he destroyed it himself and took the Isitri
fleet with him? The blast wouldn’t decimate the Isitri ships, but
they’d be highly damaged and open to attacks by the Odib, or
perhaps Berlis’s forces, if he had any.
“The Isitri say they’re pinned in, Captain.” Uhura held her earpiece
in place as she received the message. “If they move closer to Colony
First, they’ll be within range of Berlis’s control, and if they move
away, they’ll be closer to the Copernicus when…” Her sentence
trailed off because it was both difficult to imagine, and impossible to
ignore: The Isitri fleet were between a rock and a hard place—
slavery or death.
Why was Spock doing this? That’s what Kirk wanted to know. An
answer would have to wait, and if Kirk couldn’t pull off the plan that
was starting to form in his mind, it would be moot.
“Mister Sulu, lock phasers on Copernicus.”
Sulu turned slowly back to Kirk, even as his fingers were tapping in
the commands to his controls. “Power level, sir?”
It wasn’t a question asked often. Full power was assumed unless

otherwise specified.
As Kirk spoke, his throat tightened around the words. “Full. I want a
narrow beam, right into the shield generator.”
It was tacitly understood that such a hit would knock out life support
and likely decompress the shuttle, killing anyone aboard almost
instantly.
Sulu and DeSalle exchanged a soul-searching glance, and Kirk was
sure he heard the slightest gasp from Uhura.
The captain pounded the comm button on the arm of his chair.
“Bridge to transporter room.”
“Transporter room, Kyle here.”
“Mister Kyle, lock on the Copernicus. You’ll have a moment once
her shields drop before Mister Spock is killed by the explosive
decompression. I need you to grab him in that moment.”
There was a long silence at the other end. Then, Kyle’s answer
came, “Aye, sir.” Not “I’ll try, sir,” or “That’s impossible, sir,” but a
simple acknowledgment that the task would be done.
“Stand by, Sulu,” Kirk said, then turned to DeSalle. “Be ready on
the tractor beam, too.”
“Sir?”
The captain nodded to the growing dot on the main viewscreen that
was Copernicus. “Destroying the shields will accelerate the overload
of her engines. The ship will flare and momentum will carry the
explosion into the Isitri fleet.” Kirk shook DeSalle with a forbidding
command: “Pull the shuttle away from the Isitri fleet before it
explodes.”
“That will mean pulling it toward us,” DeSalle said cheerlessly.
Kirk nodded. “You’ll have the same window Kyle does.”
“Aye, sir.” DeSalle turned back to the console and pounced on the
controls, readying his calculations.
Chekov began a metered countdown to the shuttle’s engine overload
versus the range for both transporter and tractor beams. Thanks to
both previous damage and Spock’s sabotage, the trouble would be

that while pulling Spock out and Copernicus away from the Isitri
fleet, its shields would be incapable of protecting Enterprise from
the explosion.
Droplets of sweat collected in the small of Kirk’s back and he pulled
himself slightly away from the back of the command chair. Times
like these, he hated being the captain of the ship, not because he had
to make difficult decisions, though those weighed on him, but
because he couldn’t be at the helm or in the transporter room, taking
the actual steps to implement his own orders. Kirk knew his people
were good at their jobs—among the best—and he didn’t doubt their
ability. But for him to sit and wait, not being the person carrying out
the commands…usually that feeling was a mere tweak. Today it was
a punch to the gut.
“Five seconds to range,” Chekov called.
“Transporter room, stand by,” Kirk said into the comm.
“Four…”
“Sulu, target sharp.”
“Three…”
Kirk and DeSalle exchanged a tense look of mutual affirmation.
“Two…”
Apprehension clenched the bridge and Kirk’s every muscle was
ready to snap.
“Range!” Chekov said.
“Now!” Kirk ordered simultaneously.
As one beam of energy shot out from the Enterprise’s phaser banks,
a tractor beam grasped at Copernicus and pulled it toward them.
Kirk knew at the same moment Kyle was working to find Spock and
whisk him away before he was ripped asunder. Three technological
marvels, considered almost commonplace, on which so many lives
now hinged.
Before Kirk could hear if Kyle had gotten Spock, Copernicus
cracked open like a giant egg and pushed forth a massive bubble of
plasma and white-hot energy. Enterprise was slammed back. She

rolled away, creaking under the strain as support struts buckled and
circuits sparked. The bridge lights dimmed and returned, but the ship
continued to quake and rumble.
“Stabilize,” Kirk ordered above the din.
“Trying, sir,” Sulu called out as he struggled with the controls.
“Thrusters!”
“Captain!” Chekov’s voice. “Shockwave now pushing Isitri fleet—
toward the colony!”
On the main viewscreen, the torrent of energy dissipated and the
Isitri fleet could be seen rolling awkwardly toward the gas giant and
its several moons, one of which held Berlis’s colony.
The Isitri had stayed out of whatever they knew Berlis’s range to be,
and now—thanks to the explosion that blew them off course—they
might be within the radius of his control.
Kirk didn’t have time to consider the ramifications and instead was
pounding at the comm. “Transporter room!”
“Internal communications are down, sir,” Uhura said as she waved
the remnants of a smoke plume from her console. “Trying auxiliary
circuits.”
“Sulu,” Kirk barked around an intake of the acrid air, “take the
conn.” Two steps later, he was in the turbolift, zooming toward the
transporter room, where he faced Spock, who was still on the
transporter platform.
“Spock…” Kirk rasped, but said nothing else. He wanted to say,
“How could you?” and “What were you thinking?” but he didn’t.
Instead, he addressed one of the security officers standing by.
“Place Mister Spock under arrest,” Kirk said flatly, watching
Spock’s unmoving expression.
Behind the captain, Lieutenant Prescott exchanged a look with
Ensign Michaluk. The last thing either man expected when they
woke up this morning was to put the ship’s first officer under arrest.
Prescott stepped forward but Michaluk hesitated. “Ensign,” Prescott
whispered harshly. When the man didn’t move, Prescott raised his

voice just a touch. “Kevin!”
Michaluk finally snapped out of his trance and closed the distance
between himself and Spock. “Do you want him in the brig, sir?”
Kirk considered it for a moment and pressed his lips together, nearly
sighing. “No. Confined to quarters,” he said finally.
Prescott and Michaluk both nodded. With one hand on his phaser,
Prescott motioned to the door. Spock acquiesced without complaint
and the three left Kirk silently studying the empty transporter
platform.
Kyle observed the captain a moment and took in a breath to speak,
but the bosun’s whistle beat him to it.
“Transporter room,” Kyle said after thumbing the comm button.
“Captain Kirk, report to the bridge, please,” Sulu said.
The captain took two steps until he was near the console comm
speaker. “Report, Sulu.”
“The Isitri fleet has fallen into orbit of Colony First, sir,” Sulu
reported. “The Isitri Council reports they’ve lost contact with their
vessels and believe Berlis now controls them all.”
Kirk exchanged a grim look with Kyle. “I’ll be right there,” he said,
thumbing the comm button twice. “Kirk to sickbay.”
“Sickbay, McCoy here.”
“Bones, Spock is confined to his cabin. I want him examined.”
“I’m on my way.”
Kirk nodded curtly, pounded the comm off, twisted on a heel, and
stalked out.

Once the captain had returned to the bridge, Sulu explained more
fully that the Isitri fleet had recovered from the shockwave and had

not only failed to attack Colony First, but also took defensive
positions around it. The captain’s brows knit in contemplation. What
would this mean? If the fleet now served Berlis, would they attack
Isitra Zero? If they tried, should Kirk stop them? No matter what he
may have unintentionally done by saving Berlis from his death
sentence, surely Spock’s actions had sealed Kirk’s fate; he would
have a hand in the affairs between Zero and First. And perhaps that
was what Spock truly wanted, for Kirk still couldn’t fathom that the
Vulcan had acted in what amounted to an attempt at cold-blooded
murder.
Kirk watched the Isitri fleet in their defensive orbits for a solid
minute, and then turned to Uhura. “Lieuten ant, get me the Isitri
Council.”
“Aye, sir.”
There was a long delay, likely because the Isitri were still unfamiliar
with Starfleet’s more advanced communication protocols. When the
picture finally wavered into view, Kirk saw only the female
interpreter who’d worked with the council, but not Chista or any of
the others.
“I’d like to speak with the council,” Kirk informed her.
A slight smile tugged at her lips. “You are, I assure you, Captain,”
the interpreter said.
Of course, the council did not need to be physically present, Kirk
realized, which made his task more difficult. He was used to dealing
with personalities, reading them and sizing them up, so he could
project a version of himself that best suited the person with whom he
talked. This was different. He couldn’t see Chista’s body language
or facial expressions and couldn’t gauge his honesty or feelings.
Straightening up in the command chair, Kirk wanted to be as
delicate as possible. “Your fleet…” Kirk started to say, but wasn’t
sure where to take it from there.
“Yes, Captain. It is lost. It was half our operative ships. We have
reserves, of course, but the odds would now be equal to what have

become Berlis’s forces.” Her sign language seemed more
abbreviated than before. More curt. Perhaps more fatalistic.
Kirk had the urge to ask what he could do, even though he knew he
could do nothing. And yet he felt responsible—especially for
Spock’s actions. “I’m sorry,” was all he could muster.
“We appreciate that, Captain Kirk,” the interpreter said and her
expression was a mystery to him—neither sincere nor insincere, yet
Kirk detected a slightly snide tone in the universal translator. It was
probably his imagination, or a manifestation of his guilt. “We must
now deliberate as to how we will answer the Odib’s demands under
our obligations to the treaty.”
“We would be happy to mediate as a neutral third party, once formal
first contact is made with the Odib,” Kirk offered.
Her expression was dismissive. “Thank you, Captain. We shall be in
contact with you should we decide in favor of such a course.”
The communication ended, and the interpreter’s visage was replaced
with the starscape. In the distance loomed the gas giant, and Isitri
Colony First’s moon. Kirk watched the gas giant’s satellite for a
moment, as if he could see Berlis on Colony First, as if he could
discern his true intent from afar. He wondered again if Spock was
under alien control, or whether there was some logical reason for the
Vulcan’s actions that he just could not see.
It was time to find out.
When he arrived at Spock’s quarters, McCoy was leaving. Prescott
and Michaluk were each standing at either side of the door. Each had
a sidearm, and Kirk wondered how long they’d hesitate before
stunning Spock, if need be. How long would Kirk hesitate, for that
matter? And worse, how had they gotten into a situation where Kirk
needed to think about such things?
McCoy shook his head.
“Bones?”
“It’s not him, Jim.”
Kirk looked sharply at the closed door and back at McCoy. “Berlis.”

“It’s got to be.”
“It’s not Spock at all?” Kirk frowned.
“Well, it is, but a Berlis version of him. An influenced Spock, I
suppose.”
Considering the doctor’s assessment, Kirk looked at the door again.
“Can you explain that?”
McCoy sighed heavily. “Near as I can tell, Spock is in there—
fighting for control if his neurotransmitter levels are any indication.”
His tone was dark, discouraged. “But the man I talked to isn’t our
Spock. He’s totally concerned with the Isitri colony…to the
exclusion of all else.”
Attempting to destroy himself—and others—for the sake of
someone as dangerous as Berlis…It was the antithesis of Spock.
“You have to help him,” Kirk said finally, still look ing past the
guards at the door to Spock’s cabin.
McCoy chewed his lip. When he didn’t answer, Kirk looked at him.
“I don’t know what I can do, Jim. Spock has blocked out Klingon
mind-rippers. If he can’t block Berlis’s telepathy, I’m not sure how I
can, short of killing him.”
Kirk’s jaw tightened and his hands balled into fists at his sides. “We
can’t lose Spock because I chose to answer a distress call.”
“I’m sorry,” McCoy began somberly, “but right now Spock is as lost
to us as the Isitri fleet is to Chista.”

SEVEN

On the contrary, Captain, I’m quite certain of my own sanity.”
Kirk needed to see Spock for himself, and found it chilling that his
first officer sounded so convincing. If he had not been told about
Berlis’s powerful telepathy, Kirk would have believed the Vulcan’s
sincerity. The full plight of the Isitri should they fully fall under
Berlis’s spell began to weigh on the captain’s shoulders.
“Sabotage? Attempted murder? These are the logical actions of a
commander in Starfleet?” Kirk couldn’t help but press, to see if the
rationality Spock usually wielded was in there, as McCoy had
suggested.
“I attempted no murder,” he said flatly, as if debating some small
point in an insignificant matter. He sat at his desk, hands clasped on
his lap, a picture of unruffled serenity. “I assumed your actions
would result in the loss of the shuttle in a manner that would hamper
the Isitri fleet.”
“You could have died, and killed hundreds of others because of your

actions.”
Spock tilted his head down in acknowledgment. “I took a calculated
risk with my own life, in the hopes of saving hundreds of others.
That was my goal and the ultimate consequence.”
“But why?” The why came out as a half growl.
“Berlis is an innocent,” Spock said. “I have an obligation to protect
innocent life. An entire fleet had set out to destroy one man who has
committed no crime, other than posing a possible threat. Possible
threats should never be treated as actual threats.”
It was quintessential Spock in tone, and yet the logic had
hemorrhaged. Kirk’s lips curled around a question but he decided it
was fruitless to ask to speak to the real Spock. There was no appeal
to be made here, for such a request would have to be made to the
man in control of Spock.
Pivoting quickly toward the door, Kirk left his first officer sitting,
watching after him, the guards stepping back into view just as the
doors closed behind him.
Spock was left to his thoughts. He was concerned for Kirk, but more
so for Berlis. What would the captain do? Could he help the Isitri
now? It would be a violation of the Prime Directive to do so, but
Kirk had been known to make calculated risks regarding the edict.
The odds that Kirk would interfere on the side of the Isitri, against
Berlis, were close to twenty point seven to one, but those were
hardly impossible odds.
The notion that bothered Spock for a brief moment was how
disquieted both the doctor and the captain seemed by his completely
justified behavior. While McCoy and Kirk were both prone to flights
of fancy, generally at least one of them was more grounded in reality
and morality. It was mystifying. He thought he might examine the
reasons more fully, but decided that doing so would be futile and
would take time away from formulating a just end to the Isitri
question. Something must be done to save Colony First. Spock knew
the Odib would not allow the treaty to go unenforced, and that being

the case, Chista would not listen to reason.
Yes, something had to be done.

Once in the turbolift, the bosun’s whistle prompted Kirk to hit the
wall comm. “Kirk, here.”
“I have Chista for you, sir,” Uhura said.
“Patch it down here, Lieutenant.”
“Aye, sir. Switching.”
Kirk twisted the lift control handle and stopped its movement.
“Captain Kirk?” It was the universal translator’s voice, but Kirk
imagined it was the Isitri Council’s interpreter doing the speaking
for Chista.
“This is Kirk.”
“I am Chista,” the voice said. “We spoke previously.”
“I remember you.” Kirk’s lips curled into a small, tight smile. The
greeting was quaint, as if Kirk could ever forget Chista under these
circumstances. He wondered if it was something the Isitri felt was
necessary for non-telepaths. Spock spoke of different minds feeling
differently, and just as Kirk would recognize a voice, Chista
probably identified people by their telepathic signature; without it,
he had to announce himself.
“We have discussed the situation with the Odib ambassador and
quelled their fears for the time being,” Chista said.
“You have?”
“We are not comfortable with the fact, but we’ve misdirected the
Odib, suggesting that Berlis has been neutralized.”
“I see.” Kirk found it interesting that in this culture, too, politicians
wouldn’t admit to telling a lie, even when it was obvious they were.

“Suggesting” and “misdirected,” indeed.
“Had we not, they would be warranted to war against us, Captain.
At least against the colony.”
“The one you wanted to destroy?”
“Not destroy,” Chista said. “We wished to make a surgical strike
against Berlis.”
“With your entire fleet?” Kirk didn’t buy it.
“The fleet was gathered as a last resort. If we must lose our
colony…well, we would prefer it to losing our entire planet.”
Kirk nodded and sighed. Sadly, he understood Chista’s difficult
position and even felt somewhat responsible for his lie. But what
would happen if the Odib found out they’d been misdirected? Would
they destroy the colony and Isitra Zero as well? Kirk had pushed the
Isitri down this path, and his first officer had helped to herd them
along the way….
It had never been more apparent how much Kirk needed his friend.
More important, though, he didn’t want to give Berlis the advantage
of having Spock at his disposal and putting Kirk at a disadvantage.
The captain realized he was thinking of Berlis not merely as a
problem for the Isitri but also as a personal adversary. He felt a pang
of guilt, and wondered if such a feeling was the result of his part in
all that had happened, or whether it was the residual effect of
Berlis’s telepathy—that feeling he’d had when Berlis was aboard.
Was Berlis’s aura the one he had broadcast to Kirk, or was it simply
the real him? If he was as innocent as he seemed, perhaps he could
be reasoned with.
“I’m going to talk to Berlis,” Kirk said, partly to himself and partly
to Chista.
There was a pause before the interpreter replied, as if great
discussion had quickly ensued. “We do not understand what this
will accomplish, Captain.”
“Neither do I,” Kirk admitted, rubbing his palms together somewhat
anxiously. He hoped to convince Berlis to release Spock, though that

wouldn’t solve the Isitri’s problem with their colony—or the Odib.
But it would be a step in the right direction. “I’ll let you know the
outcome. Kirk, out.” He thumbed off the comm and restored
movement to the turbolift with a new command. “Transporter
room.”
After informing Scotty and giving him the conn, Kirk had Uhura
request an audience with Berlis.
“He has transmitted coordinates for the Colony First council
chamber, sir,” she reported. A council was an interesting concept
where Berlis was concerned. Did he alone sit at a large table? Then
again, Chista could do that and still be in contact with his peers—or
the entire planet.
When Kirk materialized on the colony, he was struck by the harsh
contrast with Isitra Zero’s council chamber. This building was less
grand, and while not makeshift per se, one got the sense that it had
been constructed more for purpose than style. The walls looked to be
a quickly fabricated type of concrete and the floor was much the
same, just painted a different color. The temperature was warm, but
the hall was emotionally cold.
There was some artwork, but almost all of it looked photographic—
cold and uninspired. Drapes covered the few windows, and the Isitri
sun shone in, casting a glare off the hard floor. Some small animal
the size of a cat but shaped more like a giraffe—spindly with long
legs and an extended neck—was lying in one of the light bars that
streamed into the room. As Kirk approached it stood, startled, and
ran off. As it skittered away he wondered if the Isitri could talk to
animals telepathically, and if so, did the animals listen?
Then again, for hundreds of years on Earth there had been several
higher primates that had been taught a sign language similar to that
which the Isitri used. It wasn’t inconceivable that Kirk had just seen
a mini, telepathic giraffe.
When Kirk was summoned into the council’s chamber, he was
surprised to find the hall full of people. An official interpreter

introduced himself first—unlike the Isitra Zero interpreter who
never revealed her name. This man called himself Totrostav, and he
explained the names and positions of each of the eleven people
around the wooden table. There was someone in charge of water
reclamation and someone who directed new housing fabrication, and
so on. Several people had more than one responsibility.
Interestingly, Berlis, who sat to one side rather than at the head of
the table, went without introduction.
“Captain, it is good to see you once more,” Berlis said through the
interpreter. The cadence through the universal translator was
certainly better articulated now than his own speech had been on the
Enterprise. The universal translator had enough exposure to fluidly
translate the language.
Berlis’s smile was infectious, if not to Kirk, then surely to his own
people—they all looked pleasantly toward him.
Kirk nodded at them, and then turned to Berlis. “I don’t mince
words,” the captain said brusquely.
Brows knitted with confusion, Berlis looked from Kirk to the
interpreter and back. “You will not…cut words into small bits?”
Totrostav asked.
“I say what I mean,” Kirk explained. “And I expect the same from
my friends.”
Berlis understood and seemed quite pleased with himself. He
nodded cheerfully. “Oh, I agree, I agree. Speak clearly, and I will
also.”
“You’ve assaulted my first officer. You continue to do so. It has to
stop,” Kirk said, less harshly than he actually intended. He’d wanted
it to sound like the accusation it was, but it came out more like an
appeal.
“I do not understand,” Berlis said.
One of the other colony council members lifted a hand to get Kirk’s
attention. “Berlis would not assault someone, Captain. You must be
mistaken.”

If Chista was correct, that was Berlis making an objection, and not
the individual through whom he spoke. Had Spock’s actions not
been so uncharacter istic, however, Kirk would be wondering if
Chista was telling the truth. Without being a telepath himself, how
could Kirk know for certain what Berlis was or wasn’t doing or of
what he was capable?
“You’re in control of Spock. He disobeyed orders to help you.”
“He is a telepath,” Berlis said. “We speak, but I do not control him.”
Kirk squared his shoulders, hoping his body language would show
his unwillingness to back down. “Your conversation is against his
will.”
“Of course not. I would never—” Berlis looked confused and hurt.
“Captain, your friend only told me what the council on Isitra Zero
decreed, and lamented with me about my plight. But I asked nothing
of him.”
Pulling in a tight breath, Kirk felt a rush of anger, and then quickly
calmed down. He said evenly, “You’re telling me he decided to
ignore his oath so he could willingly support your insurrection—”
Jaw quivering, Berlis said, “There is no insurrection. We want
nothing but to be left alone.”
“Spock told you what we learned on Isitra Zero of his own accord?”
Kirk asked.
Berlis gasped and the interpreter said, “Yes.”
“Then you also know your people are in breach of their agreement
with the Odib.”
Bulbous eyes cast down, Berlis looked sadly at the table. “I had
hoped to negotiate with the Odib myself. To convince them I am no
threat to them or to my people.”
“Chista disagrees,” Kirk said.
“I love Chista as I do the others from my homeworld, Captain, but
he is wrong about me.” The sign from the interpreter for but was the
same one that Chista’s interpreter used for different. That made
sense and he realized the gestural language was perhaps easily

learned because it followed a conceptual logic.
Even without Spock, Kirk thought logic was key. Could he convince
Berlis he was a threat—to Spock and to his own people? “Do you
deny being a troublesome mind?” he asked.
Berlis was forthright. “I do. I was never seen as such. Ever.” He
looked around the council table, indicating all seated. “People may
like me, and may be inclined to help me when troubled, but I
promise you I do not manipulate them.”
“Why would Chista say otherwise?” Kirk pressed. “Why sentence
you to death, and start a chain of events that would lead the Odib to
annihilate your entire colony?”
Frowning, baring sharp little teeth that didn’t appear when the Isitri
smiled, Berlis looked an odd cross between menacing and sad. “I do
not know. I met Chista when I visited Zero council. You would have
to ask him. I would like to ask him.”
“You’ve linked minds with him,” Kirk asked, “but don’t know
him?”
“Someone reveals of themselves only as much as they wish. If
Chista wanted to murder me, we could link minds and he could keep
that from me as surely as you could keep from me your ill will by
not speaking it.” A series of gasps from the other council members
indicated their agreement. “I am not your enemy, Captain,” Berlis
continued. “I am not Chista’s or the Odib’s. I only want to be
allowed to live. Is that wrong?”
Kirk shook his head. “But if you’re as dangerous as they say—”
“I wouldn’t ask you to know Isitri law, but have I broken any moral
absolutes that you hold?”
When Berlis spoke without the help of an interpreter, he had seemed
innocent. Kirk thought that a more articulate Berlis would appear
less so, but now he was more philosophical and…more logical. If
Berlis was influencing Spock, was it possible that Spock was
influencing Berlis—enough so that he really was less of a threat to
the Odib and Isitra Zero? Or were Kirk’s second thoughts influenced

by this aura of trustworthiness Berlis radiated?
“You’ve broken no law or moral code, as far as I know.”
“He hasn’t, Captain,” one of the others said. “And he has only ever
been wise and helpful as our council leader.”
Berlis stood. “What would you like me to do, Captain?” he asked. “I
don’t believe I’ve manipulated Spock. I’m merely charmed by such
a creature as he. His telepathy stretches far, and his mind is
refreshingly complex. He fascinates me. His culture fascinates me,
and someday I’d enjoy meeting other Vulcans.”
“What would I have you do?” Kirk leaned down, flattening his
hands on the table. “Release your hold on him.”
Berlis’s breathy huff indicated, “No.” He continued, “Were there a
hold to release, I would.” He sat back down and turned his gaze
away, looking lonely, as if he were losing a friend.
Kirk was almost sure he felt that raw emotion radiating from him.
“I must ask you to go,” the interpreter said for Berlis. “You are not
the man I believed you to be.”
Kirk’s tight jaw opened to speak, but he was not sure what to say so
he closed it again. Whatever power Berlis had was manifesting itself
before him. He felt sorry for the alien, despite the anger he knew
was welling within himself.
Kirk stoked that anger and let it grow until the sadness Berlis pushed
on him was but a shadow. He curtly nodded and flipped open his
communicator. “Kirk to Enterprise. One to beam up.”

EIGHT

S

pock lay tilted on sickbay’s exam table. Desperate to free his first
officer’s mind from Berlis, Kirk had insisted McCoy use a chemical
concoction normally employed by undercover security agents to
protect their minds from telepathic invasion. It worked for many
races, including Rigelians…but had never been tested on a Vulcan.
McCoy waved his scanner, looked at his tricorder and at the
readouts. He did this at least three times before Kirk had to stifle the
urge to bark at him. When the doctor grunted and shook his head at
one of his scans, Kirk gave in.
“Bones?”
Spock opened his mouth to answer but McCoy stepped on whatever
he might have said. “Damn it, Jim, I don’t know! His
neurotransmitter levels haven’t changed, so I just can’t tell! Let me
work, and you’ll know that much sooner!”
Lips pursing tightly, Kirk growled, “Hurry.” He was unwilling to
allow McCoy the last word.

Still, McCoy grumbled, “What I wouldn’t do for a waiting room.”
Kirk paced toward the desk, glanced into the open cabinet behind it
and its mundane contents, and twisted back to Spock and McCoy.
“Okay,” McCoy said, releasing the bed back into a vertical position.
“I don’t think it worked. If there were another Vulcan on board,
maybe.”
“Why another Vulcan?” Kirk asked.
“Because a chemical cure alone won’t do it, but if Spock could
muster his own defenses…” McCoy put the tricorder and scanner on
his desk then turned back to Kirk. “If another Vulcan melds with
him it might help.”
With a slightly articulated brow, Spock disagreed and stepped to the
deck. “No such defense is necessary, gentlemen—”
“The hell it isn’t,” McCoy said.
Suddenly Kirk rushed forward and harshly grasped Spock by the
shoulders.
Surprise tainted Spock’s normally cool visage as he stared into
Kirk’s angry eyes.
“Spock, you’re in there and I’m ordering you to fight Berlis’s
control!” He shook the taller man, who despite his great strength did
not pull away. “Do you hear me? Do you hear me?”
“Jim, you can’t expect—”
Kirk silenced McCoy with a harsh glare and a shake of his head. He
kept his grasp tight on Spock. The doctor’s notion about Vulcan
mind-melds reminded Kirk that Berlis and Spock were different
races, and their telepathy, though similar, wasn’t the same. If Kirk
could use that difference—and force Spock to use it…“You’re
Spock, first officer of the U.S.S. Enterprise! You have a duty to
assert yourself—to protect your ship against alien attack!”
Rather than answer the accusation, as anyone else might have,
Spock was silent. His coal-black eyes peered into Kirk’s severe
glare. The captain shook him ever so slightly and ground each word
through gritted teeth, “Fight, Spock. Fight for your own life!”

Neither man blinked. Arms pinned to his sides by the fervor of his
captain’s grip, Spock shuddered. It wasn’t much, and might not have
been recognized by McCoy, but Kirk saw it and felt the real Spock
stirring from his slumber. “Yes!” Kirk spun Spock around so
McCoy could see the Vulcan’s face and stand witness. “Come on,
Spock! Wrestle him! If nothing else—make him work for it! Make
him struggle to hold on to you!”
Behind him, Kirk heard McCoy’s scanner hum, but the doctor made
no indication of a finding.
“Let go of him, Berlis!” Kirk demanded, his plan now twofold:
strengthen Spock while weakening Berlis. There was a kindness to
the Isitri man that couldn’t be faked. Kirk would appeal to him—
maybe even intimidate him into letting Spock go, or at least crack
him enough to let Spock get through. “Let him choose, Berlis! Let
him decide to be part of your hive-mind! You owe me that! You
owe him!”
A flicker of recognition played in Spock’s eyes—realization that
something was wrong—that Berlis was exerting influence. That was
when the battle began in earnest. Suddenly, in one fluid motion,
Spock pulled out of Kirk’s grip and locked the captain in a similar
hold. “I!”
The pain inflicted by Spock’s strong hands sizzled up Kirk’s arms
like lightning. He groaned but quickly recovered himself. “Yes,
Spock! That’s it. Take over. Shut him out!”
“I…I am—”
“Spock!” Kirk’s voice was loud but sounded throaty and fatigued.
Bruises were surely spreading from where Vulcan strength fixed his
forearms to his sides. Pain radiated up his shoulders and into his
neck. “You’re first officer of the U.S.S. Enterprise!” Kirk charged.
“You have a duty—”
“I—am—Spock!” the Vulcan yelled, and collapsed backward.

Darkness. Neither cold nor warm, a black womb enveloped him. His
wish to stay within the protective cocoon was overridden by
curiosity; whose voices did he hear?
“Bones?” It was the captain’s name for Doctor McCoy, but the
voice was distorted. Was someone else saying this? Spock analyzed
the inflection, since the speaker’s identity eluded him. However
muffled and deformed the sound, he believed it was Captain Kirk.
“Chapel, get in here.” McCoy? Logically it had to be him, but again
the voice was oddly unfamiliar. The rest came and went in pitch,
tone, and speed. It was an unnerving blur that with effort he could
perhaps decipher, but the energy to do so eluded him.
“Respiration—…—olerance, Doctor.”
“I can see th—…—cc’s of nentizene!”
“What’s happen—?”
“—rainwave patterns have alm—…—pletely shut down.”
“—barely regis—…—nough to control—…—itals.”
The words became less real, twisting into sounds that lacked
cohesion and coherence. At one point, perception told him Vulcan
was being spoken, but reason required he disregard that possibility.
Clearly his mind had slipped into self-seclusion, and had seemingly
taken his body with it.
With time—he couldn’t be certain how much—Spock realized he
had forced his consciousness to retreat away from Berlis beneath
several layers of telepathic protection. Such a technique was
prehistoric on Vulcan, used when ancient warriors pushed their
minds into those of their enemies. He’d used a less severe adaptation
of the procedure against Kor’s mind-ripper on Organia, but here
he’d needed the entire method to regain himself.
Now, with full realization of what had transpired, Spock was ready

to pull back the unneeded layers. Not all the mental shields he’d
raised were required, and determining which were necessary would
take considerable review and testing. As he slowly lowered his
defenses, more awareness seeped in from the outside world. He felt
nerve endings come alive again and realized he was on his back, no
doubt on Doctor McCoy’s examination table. The temperature was
an uncomfortably cool twenty-three degrees. There were three others
in the room, seven in the corridor passing by, a turbolift opening
seventeen meters away with two people (one male, one female
human, judging from their respective heartbeats), and the captain
was necessarily one of the people standing close by: Spock could
hear the clicking of his tense jaw.
He waited approximately seven extra seconds before opening his
eyes.
“—enough to control his vitals, sir…” Chapel’s face looked to
McCoy in shock. “Doctor!”
Spock sat upright, all eyes on him. As McCoy checked scanner
readouts, the Vulcan met Kirk’s quizzical brow with an arched one
of his own.
“Spock?”
“Yes, sir,” Spock replied.
“How—how are you?” Kirk asked.
“Quite well, now.”
“But are you you?” McCoy demanded. “You fainted just a moment
ago and—”
“Vulcans don’t faint, Doctor,” Spock said as he planted his feet
firmly on the deck. “I was discerning the proper mental defenses
needed to block Berlis from my mind, then erecting those barriers.”
“It took thirty seconds?” Kirk asked, astonished.
Spock allowed mild surprise to taint his expression. “It did seem
much longer, but I admit to needing to break off all base perceptions
in order to…weed out that which did not belong.”
A slight smirk playing at his lips, Kirk exchanged a knowing glance

with Chapel. “That’s Mister Spock,” she said, and Kirk nodded
once. It was.
“Now wait a minute,” McCoy interjected. “Unless we verify it’s
actually you, you saying you’re fine now isn’t worth a hill of beans.”
“Indeed.” Spock assented to McCoy’s logic so quickly that the
doctor showed signs of shock. He waited for the jab of punchline but
none was forthcoming.
“So verify it.” Kirk gestured McCoy toward Spock.
Lightly biting his lip and then playing with the ring on his little
finger for a moment, McCoy finally grunted his inability to do just
that. “Dismissed, Nurse,” he told Chapel finally.
Bemused, she smiled knowingly, nodded, and left.
“I must apologize, Captain.” Spock looked at Kirk, and yet slightly
behind him.
He was embarrassed, Kirk realized, and to put his friend at ease, the
captain also looked away. “Spock…It’s not your fault,” McCoy said,
grudgingly. “He—”
Spock pursed his lips and shook his head grimly. “I allowed the
initial contact; therefore, the fault is mine, Doctor.”
“You allowed?” Kirk asked.
Lowering his head in assent, Spock pulled in a deep breath. “I did. I
believed he had inadvertently contacted me telepathically. He was as
curious about my alien mind as was I about his.”
Kirk nodded. Sometimes his science officer gave in to his admirable
curiosity in painfully ill-timed ways. “And then he refused to
relinquish the link.”
Thinking about that a short moment, Spock met Kirk’s eyes.
“Captain, I’m not sure he can.”
“Explain.”
“Even now it is taking great effort to maintain the mental protections
that keep Berlis out,” Spock said gravely. “And from my contact
with him I believe he is not so much exerting force as he is giving in
to his nature. To ask him not to contact minds in the way he does

would be akin to asking you to hold your breath indefinitely. He
might be able to do so for a short time, but eventually nature will
out.” The Vulcan looked from McCoy’s sympathetic gaze to Kirk’s
stern one. “Should he attempt to press back into my mind, I may or
may not be able to keep him out,” Spock said. “I cannot be trusted.”
“Spock,” Kirk began.
“Captain, I won’t be able to tell you should the barrier fall.”
“I’ll know,” Kirk said.
“Jim,” McCoy protested, “if he won’t know, how could you? You’re
going to risk this ship on a hunch?”
It wouldn’t be the first time, Kirk thought. “I’ll know,” he said
adamantly. “We didn’t know what to look for before. Now we do.”
Smirking, McCoy nodded toward Kirk. “Again, he trusts his human
intuition, Mister Spock. Considering how fragile the Vulcan mind is
to Isitri telepathy, per haps you should engage your human half. It
seems the Vulcan half isn’t as reliable.”
“I assure you, Doctor, I will give your prescription all the weight
and contemplation it is due.”
Normally the interplay in such a situation would mildly annoy Kirk,
but today it felt reassuring.
Less comforting was the thought that Spock could be lost again.
“How far away do we have to take you,” Kirk asked him, “for Berlis
to be unable to reach you?”
“Unknown,” Spock said after a moment’s consideration. “Vulcan
telepathy is generally contact driven, but as you know, there is a
component that can traverse long distances.”
Remembering Spock’s reaction to the hundreds of Vulcans who died
on the Intrepid, Kirk nodded.
“Well, I hope it takes proximity to make initial contact at least,”
McCoy said. “Otherwise there’s an entire planet that Berlis could
control from light-years away.”
The thought loomed over them. Berlis had a fleet, and he had access
to all Spock knew or, at least, was familiar with it. “If he traveled to

Vulcan…” Kirk said.
“He would have a very formidable army,” Spock replied. “We
cannot allow that to happen.”
Suddenly what had been a very local problem became galactic.
“Would he?” Kirk asked.
“He might,” Spock said. “Not out of malevolence, but selfpreservation. That is the malignant element.”
“What is?” McCoy asked.
“Through Berlis I was able to touch the minds of every Isitri on
Colony First. They’re conflicted. They love Berlis. He is a part of
them. And yet, they no longer know where Berlis ends and they
begin.” His eyes looking away, farther than the opposite side of the
room on which they focused, Spock’s tone was low and almost
somber. “I understand the horrific feeling. One doesn’t so much stop
being oneself as one is forced to ignore who one is and act on
impulses not one’s own. One’s thoughts seem to be one’s own…but
they are not, and that only becomes clear when the troublesome
mind is gone.”
Kirk looked at his first officer. What was he to say? Spock had been
imprisoned, in a way, against his will—on a very personal level.
The awkward silence lasted a little longer before Spock continued.
“When I was linked to Berlis I believed I was acting on my own
accord. I had no idea that my perceptions were so far removed from
reality.”
“What allowed you to realize differently?” McCoy asked.
“I didn’t,” Spock admitted. “I trusted the captain.”
McCoy and Kirk shared a glance. That level of trust was what being
in command was truly about—being able to lead someone not only
down an unknown path, but also a seemingly wrong path, if the need
called for doing so.
“My point, gentlemen,” Spock continued, “is that Berlis is not so
much coercing the Isitri colonists into being subservient as he is
replacing their wills with an extension of his own. Only when he is

gone will they realize they were not in control of themselves.”
“It explains Chista’s fear,” Kirk said, rubbing his chin with the back
of a thumb. “And it makes Berlis more dangerous. His people want
him dead and he’s reacting to it.” He paced away, then back,
considering the possibilities. “A cornered animal responds with
panic. Berlis has become an actual threat because they tried to kill
him when he was just a potential one.”
“Berlis may be acting to save himself and his colonists,” Spock said,
“but they don’t even know they have lost their free will. And should
Berlis return to Isitra Zero, such will be the fate of billions.”
“All because we intervened.” McCoy shook his head dourly.
Kirk said as he marched toward the door, “And now we’ve got to
stop him.”

NINE

S

a-Gahnesaam, the Odib ambassador to Isitra Zero, had been kept
waiting too long. In fact, being made to wait any longer from the
instant he arrived was too long, and so the Isitri who asked him to
wait was foolishly annoying him. What the Isitri didn’t understand
was how Sa was the calm, deliberative one among those in his
government—at least as far as the Isitri were concerned. His
superiors had decided to strike at the Isitri as soon as they were
informed of the troublesome mind’s existence. Sa-Gahnesaam
convinced them to wait, since the problem was contained on the
Isitri colony and their main planet was protected. While this
contingency was not accounted for in the treaty, it made sense to not
waste the resources, or the lives, by obliterating the Isitri.
Some in the forum believed Sa was naïve. He’d not lived through
any of the Isitri wars, and did not know firsthand the fear that his
forebears felt. But he had learned long ago—it was taught in
school—of the horror of an enemy under the direction of a single
mind. The Isitri, under a troublesome mind, were relentless, making
their most active and intense technological bursts in such times—
either because of war itself, or sheer will.
Conversely, the last Odib dark age was when they had to defend
themselves at the expense of the planet’s entire economy and a third
of its population. The Odib had only now, after centuries,
completely recovered. What a price they had paid for having brought
the Isitri space flight. No, they would not allow themselves to be
attacked again.
When the Isitri Council finally deigned to see him, Sa-Gahnesaam
had worked himself up into quite a froth—he was annoyed for being
kept waiting, and angry at the situation itself. He was also angry at

his own hesitation. Sitting there, contemplating the choices he’d
made, he decided he should not have lobbied to delay the launch of
his people’s fleet. Das-Dosiame had warned him against lobbying
for postponement, and was, as usual, correct.
Sa marched into the council room and the interpreter greeted him on
behalf of the group. He sneered at the slight little man and looked
directly at the one whom he knew to be the leader. “Madam, give me
news.”
The interpreter began to gesture and his wrist device ground out
choppy Odibian. “Chista informs that the troublesome mind threat
has been neutralized.”
“And what of his alien allies?”
“There are no allies. The Federation people have also communicated
with Chista and our sister council. Their interference was a mistake
they regret. They wish to open trade negotiations with us, and with
you as well.”
“I see.” Sa-Gahnesaam narrowed his gaze, leveling it at the council
chairwoman. “Are you certain?”
“Of course.”
Having visited Isitra Zero for many years, and being intimately
familiar with the people—especially this particular council—Sa was
almost sure he was being lied to. He stroked his beard and studied
her body language. She was nervous. In fact, the entire group of
them looked like a nest of Istacha hatchlings, newborn and shaking.
Even the interpreter was uneasy.
“Very well,” the ambassador said cautiously. He could get nothing
more out of them. But the Isitri, by nature of their telepathy, were
very bad at keeping se crets. As he turned to leave, he knew he’d
discover the truth soon enough.
A few hours passed before he could meet his contact. The notion of
having spies on Isitra Zero was a dangerous one. As difficult as it
was to keep state secrets, it was equally as thorny for a spy to stay
concealed. But some Isitri—perhaps many—were as concerned as

the Odib were about a troublesome mind coercing the populace.
Many sympathetic minds probably looked the other way if they had
an inkling of espionage, especially when the spy was as old as
Sketel.
Sketel had lived through a war with the Odib, and so personally
knew the horrors of Isitri slavery. In his case, he went to bed a little
boy and when the troublesome mind was finally dead, he awoke to
find his parents long passed, years of his life missing, and married to
a woman he didn’t really know or love. She was pregnant with their
second child. He knew them intimately—and yet did not.
Because of this, he was invested in helping the Odib, not just for
moral reasons, but for a very emotional one.
When Sa-Gahnesaam met him at his home, the look on Sketel’s face
told him there was indeed more than what the council would admit.
The Odib ambassador had years ago learned the Isitri sign language
and he greeted Sketel traditionally: open palms clasped to heart,
proving he held no weapon and had only his hands to protect his
vital organ.
“Good see you,” Sketel said.
“Same,” Sa replied as his friend guided him out of the chill night air
and into his flat.
Sketel doubled his frail form onto a padded bench and gestured to
the seat opposite him. “Sit please, rest.”
“Thank you.” The ambassador pulled off his long coat and folded it
neatly across the back of his chair before reclining.
Sketel kept his heat up quite high, and already Sa could feel himself
beginning to perspire. With the sleeve of one hand he dabbed at the
clammy skin on his head and with the other he unfastened the collar
of his tunic and pulled his long beard away from his neck, exposing
his chest to the air.
Sa took in his surroundings and told Sketel he had a lovely home.
Like most of his people, the man seemed to like bright, primary
colors. The floors were painted yellow, the walls orange-red, and

much of the furniture was upholstered in a quilted fabric the color of
the sea grass Sa’s mother fed him as a boy. In these difficult times, it
made him homesick.
Otherwise, Sketel’s home was much like an Odib home—except for
the one thing that always made an Isitri residence look a little odd.
Sa’s own house was filled with books—some old and printed, others
newer and digital, but books were an important part of Odib life.
Although he’d long understood the ways of the Isitri, the lack of
books in their homes and offices always seemed strange.
Sketel offered him a drink, but Sa huffed his refusal. “You give help
me again please,” he said. He was blunt with his friend, as was the
shared Odib and Isitri custom. That was one of the things he’d
learned to admire about the fragile race: their need to cut to the heart
of most matters.
Eyes bulging more than usual, Sketel’s worried expression spoke to
the difficult times before them, and the hard choices to be made. He
gasped. “Know know.”
“Tell me,” Sa suggested, already certain Sketel would do so.
As if releasing a high-pressure valve, the old Isitri man began
gesturing furiously fast. He had always been a signer, as he had a
cousin who lacked telepathic ability and as children—that is, when
he remembered being a child—they had played together. In fact, he
was one of the Isitri who’d helped the Odib ambassador learn the
manual language.
But the torrent of concepts flooding toward Sa-Gahnesaam became a
mishmash. Once he’d lost the context the movements lost all
meaning because there were too many signs that meant more than
one thing depending on circumstance. The movement one made for
correct was the same for proper and the same for right and the same
for moral and the list could go on to cover several related ideas that
were just slightly different. Within a sentence about which he knew
the topic, Sa understood plainly which meaning was correct. In a
contextual vacuum he couldn’t know exactly what Sketel was

saying. And when he struggled with one sign, the next three went
unnoticed until random words just blended into panicked arm
movements.
“Slow,” he told the old Isitri man. “Please slow.”
Starting again, Sketel moved at a speed that seemed more in tune
with his age. He told him what he knew: that Berlis was still alive,
that the aliens from outside the Home System had twice stopped the
troublesome mind from being terminated, and that Berlis now had
control of several Isitri fleet vessels.
Sa-Gahnesaam looked down for a long moment, and then finally
met his friend’s gaze. “You know what I must do.”
Sketel gasped that he did. The man was neither naïve nor stupid and
he long ago told Sa he’d come to terms with what would probably
be seen as treason by many people.
“I would like you to come with us when the embassy staff leaves the
planet,” Sa told him. “I cannot guarantee your safety otherwise.”
Eyes cast downward, Sketel laid his head sideways on his own
shoulder and the slightest whine came from his nostrils.
“I know, my friend,” Sa said. “I know.”
But Sketel was looking away and the ambassador had to tap the Isitri
man’s leg to call his attention back.
“Is there no other way?” he asked.
Sa wished there was. “I will delay things as long as I can. You, and
the others in the underground, must join us until…” He frowned.
“Until the situation is concluded.”
Signing slowly, making small, tired gestures, Sketel said, “Yes, of
course. We will gather and meet you at the appointed hour.”
There was an indescribable sadness in the old man’s expressions, or
maybe Sa-Gahnesaam was projecting his own mixed feelings onto
his friend. It was so easy to be frustrated with bureaucracy and
councils and politicians on both worlds—and so difficult to
reconcile the problems they created with the people who just wanted
to live their lives. It was difficult to not feel regret when dealing

with people who’d become friends.
Sa thanked his friend for the information—and for his many years of
counsel—and told him he hoped they would be able to save as many
lives as possible. They both stood up, and the Odib ambassador put
his chin on the old Isitri’s head. It was a gesture of endearment
among Sketel’s kind, a sign of affection a father might show to his
son, and despite the age difference it seemed very right to Sa.
Back on the street again, his coat around his shoulders, Sa pulled a
communications device from his pocket. He looked at the small
screen. SECURE FREQUENCY it blinked.
Did he want to place this order? With his own people he’d lobbied
against such drastic matters, even as he used them to threaten the
Isitri.
What other choice was there? The treaty had been broken and the
peace was in jeopardy.
He opened the channel. “Prepare to evacuate the embassy,” he said
with more sadness than he intended for his aide to hear. “We must
pull our people, and our friends, home…and let our fleet do as they
must.”

Has the Enterprise left the area? Berlis asked the community at
large, unsure of who might be monitoring the skies.
A captain in one of the freighters replied: They are in visual range.
Heartrendingly painful, but not unexpected. As soon as Spock was
no longer in his sphere, he felt it was less likely that he was gone
from the star system than that Captain Kirk had convinced Spock to
lock himself away. Berlis had felt his Vulcan friend’s internal
doubt—and then nothing. If only Berlis had been able to reassure

Spock…
He didn’t blame Kirk, really. Berlis understood the fear of the
unknown. It was the same fear he had felt from the colonists
regarding the difficult times ahead.
The problem that Spock’s absence presented was one of
information. He’d been a conduit to knowing what was occurring
outside of Colony First. Without that channel, Berlis needed to
improve the scope of his people’s communications ability. He’d
asked them to focus on improving their capability, and to his delight,
their devotion produced a flurry of activity. It was one of the
strengths of the Isitri, when they collectively had the will to work on
a common goal: the ability to share knowledge and ideas almost
instantly.
Pride washed over him, softening the dejection over losing Spock,
but not eliminating it. He truly missed the Vulcan’s calm, ordered
mind. He’d taught Berlis much—not just about the Federation and
the Enterprise, but also a more reasoned, logical philosophy. He
didn’t wholly embrace Vulcan philosophy, but admired Spock’s
devotion to it, and saw in it useful concepts he could draw on for his
own life. Yes, his link with Spock had surely been an advantage,
only somewhat diminished by its absence.
When Bithnush, the chief communications specialist this season,
told Berlis that the upgrades were complete, both were overwhelmed
with contentment—for a brief moment. As system improvements
came online, that warm feeling crumbled away. A message from the
Odib ambassador to his homeworld spoke of war. Berlis asked that
the message be confirmed—spoken language could often be
misinterpreted since no Isitri spoke out loud and many could not
hear.
After checking three times, there was no doubt as to the
communication’s meaning or significance. A debate began instantly
as to Colony First’s next action. It would take a few days for an
Odib fleet to arrive—if they were not already gathered and ready to

deploy. Logic suggested they would be; therefore, time was of the
essence. With half the Isitri fleet unwilling to protect the colony,
how could Berlis hope to protect his people? And what of Isitra
Zero? Would the Odib be satisfied with conquering the colony or
would they move to the homeworld and attempt to end all threats
they mistakenly perceived? Berlis understood that great wrongs had
been done to the Odib in the past, and he was sympathetic to their
trepidation. But he could not let them destroy his colony nor could
he allow them to have a base from which to launch attacks on Isitra
Zero.
His only option was to appeal to Chista’s reason. They must join
together against this common threat. Surely Chista and the council
would agree.
It was decided: Berlis would go to the homeworld, and convince the
council that he was no threat—that the Odib were the current
danger, and Colony First and Home Zero must work together.
Berlis was sure his people would listen to reason. When he appealed
to them personally in the past, they’d always been amenable.

TEN

Movement, Captain.” Spock hovered over his scanners, where he
should be, where it felt right to have him, Kirk thought. “Berlis is
moving several ships toward Isitra Zero.”
“On screen.”
The forward viewer came to life, wavering as it magnified in on the
gas giant moon that held Colony First. Several Isitri fighters rolled
out of orbit and sped away.
Spock didn’t believe Berlis’s people had the ability to overhear the
Odib communication Enterprise had intercepted. At least it wasn’t
his impression when he was linked with Berlis. But, there was a
possibility that their capability would quickly progress, in a leap of
technological improvements.
As Kirk watched the Isitri vessels shrink on the screen, he knew
Berlis was aboard one of them—he could feel it. And if Berlis was
taking a large fleet with him…when he got to Isitra Zero he’d have a
whole fleet, and in fact an entire planet, at his command.
Kirk couldn’t allow him to succeed. He’d helped put these events
into play and he couldn’t let his missteps lead to the destruction of
two cultures. “Sulu, pursue the Isitri colonial fleet.”
“Aye, sir.”
Enterprise pushed herself quickly toward the fleeing vessels and on
the main viewer they grew larger as the distance closed.
Spock kept himself locked on his sensors. “Several of the ships have
turned to intercept us.”
“Full shields.” Perhaps because of his familiarity with Kirk through

Spock, Berlis had obviously anticipated his pursuit. “Contact
Chista,” Kirk ordered Uhura. “Let him know Berlis is on his way.”
From the periphery, the captain saw Spock had turned toward him
and so he swiveled in the direction of his first officer. “You disagree
Berlis is aboard one of them?”
Spock shook his head. “Eminently logical. The fleet must stay with
him, and he with it, if he is to keep control of them.”
That begged a question Kirk hadn’t considered before. “Then why
didn’t the colonists realize they had been under Berlis’s control
when he was away on Isitra Zero?”
“The longer a troublesome mind has influence, the more extended an
amount of time an individual must be out of his sphere before his
own will returns,” Spock stated matter-of-factly.
Kirk rose and brought himself to the rail between them. “So it would
have been more difficult for you to block him, the longer he’d been
controlling you? Does he know that? Does he act on that fact, to
increase his ability to direct people?”
Spock closed the distance between them. Kirk was suddenly
reminded that his Vulcan friend did have emotions, though he rarely
allowed them to surface. There was still some embarrassment
around the topic of Berlis’s control, of course. “It may be something
he’s subconsciously aware of,” Spock said quietly.
As much advantage as Berlis might have knowing Spock, and Kirk
through him, Kirk could now use Spock’s knowledge of Berlis to his
benefit as well. “You’re saying he’s a dictator who doesn’t know
he’s dictating?”
“Essentially. I don’t believe he acts deliberately to keep people in
his sway, but intuitively he knows which actions will work in his
favor.” Spock nodded at the main viewer to indicate Berlis beyond
it. “He knows that personal interaction works to his advantage, the
same way a child discerns his parent will frequently acquiesce to
tears. Does a toddler seek to manipulate or merely instinctively
know how?”

“This isn’t a child, Mister Spock.”
Skeptical, Spock tilted his head. “You felt the innocence he radiates.
I touched it with my mind; it is not a deception. In a very literal
sense he is emotionally a child. How would you have matured if
from a young age your mere presence influenced your elders and
your peers into accepting your suggestions and eventually your
whims?”
“He’s a spoiled child,” Kirk scoffed.
Spock shook his head and casually clasped his hands behind his
back. “A benevolent despot, who only knows his own benevolence,
and none of his despotism.”
“Almost within weapons range, Captain.” Chekov’s voice wasn’t
tense, but heavy with anticipation.
Kirk turned fully toward the main screen and Spock returned to his
station.
“I want them disab—”
“Their engines—” Spock called urgently.
Before them, the screen flared white. The three Isitri fighters didn’t
fire on Enterprise, but rather erupted in massive explosions. Force
and momentum crashed debris and hot plasma energy into them,
twisting the ship back and to its side. She fell off course.
Sparks sizzled around Kirk as the lights dimmed and relit. His lungs
filled with the acrid smoke that billowed from a substation to the
left. Sounds filled his ears beyond the straining of the engines
against the shockwave. Bulkheads creaked and voices called out:
“—decks five, six, and eight! Damage teams respond!”
“—negative gravity, section thirty-seven beta!”
“Starboard support strut, four-three-two gamma!”
“—porter room, please respond!”
“Casualty report! Sickbay, come in!”
“All three vessels self-destructed in our path, Captain,” Spock said.
This was an escalation Kirk hadn’t predicted—but should have. If
Spock, while under Berlis’s thrall, was willing to sacrifice himself,

why wouldn’t the captains of those ships? And their crews? How
many died? Hundreds. And they didn’t even know it wasn’t their
choice. Was that a blessing, or a curse?
“Status of his fleet?”
“Sensors obscured by radiation,” Spock reported.
“Uhura—” Kirk barked through the sounds of the extraction fans as
the smoke cleared.
“Clearing channels for Mister Scott, sir.”
Static crackled from the speaker on Kirk’s chair arm. “Shields
compromised,” came the harried Scottish accent. “Auxiliary power
is holding, sir, but we’ve got seven plasma coolant leaks and until
we seal ’em there’ll be no main engine output.”
“Understood.” Kirk thumbed the comm off. There was no use
pressing Scotty for schedule adjustments. Games with time
management weren’t useful in such dire situations. The captain spun
toward communications where Uhura was under the lip of her
console, bypassing circuits manually. “Lieutenant?”
“Working on it, sir.” She knew they had to contact Chista before it
was too late.
Kirk twisted toward Spock and launched himself against the rail.
“Sensors?”
The Vulcan moved switches and hit buttons on his console, but
above him the screen remained cut with blank static. “Negative.
Radiation from the explosions.”
“Distance to Isitra Zero?”
“At last measurement, approximately five point one six A.U.”
The bridge was hot and Kirk was sweating. He wiped beads of
perspiration from his brow and looked at the blank main viewer,
mentally eyeing ships he couldn’t see. “Under eight minutes at half
impulse.”
With calculation unnecessary, Spock said, “Or three minutes at warp
factor one.”
The captain nodded and pivoted toward the turbolift. “I’m taking a

shuttle.”
Uhura uncurled herself from under her console to watch the captain;
the entire bridge crew turned toward him as well.
“Alone?” Spock stepped toward the turbolift.
“No, but I need you here,” Kirk told him, and kept his own counsel
about his feeling that the farther Spock was from Berlis, the better.
“Sulu, you’re with me. Spock, you have the conn.”

Quietly, Sa-Gahnesaam had gathered his staff on the embassy roof.
Sketel and a handful of other Isitri had joined them. Some from the
underground refused to leave Isitra Zero. Many of them would not
prepare for the war in any way—they went about their daily lives the
same as usual. That was probably for the best, if Sa was to keep his
leaving a secret.
Others were less discreet and took their families to rural areas to
wait out the storm that was to come. While he’d have preferred they
simply join his people on Odib, he understood their reasons against
it. Living on an alien planet—as Sa had chosen to do—was a very
unique circumstance and required a specific personality, especially if
the communication barrier was such that one could interact only
with relatively few people.
Still, he would have rather they come with him than overtly be seen
moving away from large cities, especially the capital. While Sa
trusted them all not to reveal that the Odib fleet was on its way, he
knew loyalty to their bond might not matter on a planet where
information traveled telepathically.
“I’m sorry, my friend,” Sa signed to Sketel as he ushered him and
the other Isitri toward the small Odib craft.

Sketel shuffled close to Sa and faced him, the oddest expression on
his features. The ambassador wasn’t sure how to describe it.
Melancholy? Detachment?
“Are you all right?” Sa asked.
“No,” Sketel said. “And I am sorry.”
Sa-Gahnesaam saw the Isitri’s eyes narrow and his flat little nostrils
flare with a grunt. Then he noticed the warm wetness spread across
his own belly. Confused, he looked down to find Sketel’s arm
extended, holding the hilt of a knife that was buried between his
ribs.
Eyes wide, Sa’s jaw dropped. Peripherally he saw others attacked in
kind—for each and every Odib there was one Isitri with a blade.
“No,” Sa said as his life began to drain. Hot slices carved into him,
he huffed out “No” in Isitri before falling to the floor like the rest of
the slaughtered Odib embassy staff.
It didn’t really hurt, Sa realized. He just felt the heat and moisture of
his own blood and the shock of the moment. As his vision dimmed,
Sketel’s sad expression was the last face he saw. He expected to feel
anger or hatred, but instead he simply grieved for his loved ones—
including Sketel.
“I sorry,” he saw the old Isitri man sign. “Rest well.”
Darkness followed. And then oblivion.

The shuttle launched through the debris field left by the Isitri ships.
Bits of wreckage snapped against the shields or sizzled in the
deflector beams as they drove toward Isitra Zero.
“Sensors clear,” Sulu said as they warped away from the radiation
radius that cloaked the Enterprise. “Isitri fleet is…” Surprised, the

lieutenant looked up from his console. “Not within range.”
Kirk grabbed the sensor dome and looked for himself. “Where could
they be?” He was asking himself, not Sulu or either of the two
security guards behind them.
Shrugging his shoulders, Sulu offered his best guess: “On the
planet?”
It was possible. In fact, if the Isitri fighters had been damaged by
Copernicus’s explosion, and again by the shockwave of their own
sacrificed ships, they’d need repair. Obscured by atmosphere and
powered down, Newton wouldn’t be able to find them with her
sensors.
What awaited Kirk on Isitra Zero would remain a mystery until he
arrived.
Sulu piloted ably, but Kirk fidgeted in the copilot’s seat since one
wasn’t necessary on such a short trip.
The radio silence didn’t help matters. Kirk couldn’t raise the
Enterprise, as her comm systems were still out, and Chista was not
returning hails.
But there were standard navigational beacons that acted normally as
they approached the planet, which reassured them somewhat. It
struck Kirk that Berlis might have intercepted Kirk’s initial warning
to Chista, and that in an attempt to avoid conflict with his own
people, Berlis might also have directed his half of the Isitri fleet
toward the Odib system. Tactically it wasn’t an unsound idea. Berlis
would have the advantage of surprise.
As they skimmed over the Isitri capital, Kirk couldn’t help but
notice how much like other cities—Earth cities—it looked: some tall
buildings, some short; parks and streets; houses and apartment
buildings.
They landed near the council building. Kirk, Sulu, and one of the
security guards were greeted by the same interpreter who’d met him
and McCoy previously. She wasn’t surprised to see them.
“The council will see you immediately,” she said, and led them to

the chamber without another word or gesture.
Kirk and Sulu exchanged an uncomfortable glance as the door was
opened for them and the interpreter led them in.
Chista welcomed them eagerly, apologetically. “Captain, I’m so
sorry we didn’t respond to your communication. You can imagine
our surprise when Berlis returned, and he and the council were
having words, as you can imagine.”
Stepping to the side, Chista revealed Berlis’s slight form seated at
the council table. “I heartily regret any loss of life from our
encounter, Captain, but we did need to delay you so that Chista and I
could meet and resolve our differences.”
“And you’ve done that?” Kirk asked cautiously.
“We have,” Chista assured him.
Kirk steeled his gaze, trying to pin Berlis with a glare. “And the
three vessels you ordered to sacrifice themselves to delay me?”
“I made no such order, Captain,” Berlis said sadly. “I asked the
captains of those ships to impede you, but didn’t think they would
go to such lengths. I only wish they had not.”
Kirk’s shoulders were tight with tension; he didn’t believe it. It was
the first time Berlis had clearly lied, and judging by the slight flush
of his pale Isitri skin, even he didn’t believe what he was claiming.
Chista, however, trusted Berlis fully. “I understand why they did,
Captain,” he said. “They understood what I hadn’t until Berlis
explained. The Odib are the real threat.”
On his first visit to the Isitri Council Kirk had noticed how the
interpreter’s tone had changed according to each person for whom
she was signing. It may have been his imagination, but Kirk thought
these differences between speakers were now gone.
The only indication that Chista was the one speaking was his
animated body language and facial expressions. “While I had not
upon first meeting, I cannot express how thankful I am that you
intervened and kept Berlis from our foolish death sentence.”
Chista smiled, Berlis smiled, the interpreter smiled, and the gathered

council smiled. Likely, the entire planet smiled.
Except for James Kirk. His voice low, he only said, “You’re
welcome,” and turned and left.

ELEVEN

In the time it took for Shuttlecraft Newton to return to the
Enterprise, the radiation had cleared and enough repairs were
completed to give Kirk’s ship back her sight.
After checking on casualties in sickbay, he and McCoy made their
way to the bridge.

Normally a discussion of options would happen in the briefing
room, but for Kirk it would feel more like they were sitting around
doing nothing, and he wanted to be doing something. On the bridge,
where he could watch the tactical displays, he felt ready to pounce
into action.
As they debated, however, all the captain really did was helplessly
watch as the remainder of the Isitri fleet slowly achieved orbit. On
another screen, telemetry probe data indicated the Odib fleet
gathering itself as well. Soon they would make way…and then there
would be war.
“What if we just beam him up?” Chekov asked. “Go to warp before
they can react and he’ll be too far to influence them.”
It wasn’t a bad idea—it just wasn’t a workable one. Kirk had
thought of it on the return shuttle trip. He’d ordered Spock to put
priority on any transporter-related system knocked out by Berlis’s
suicide ships.
But after investigation Spock determined it wasn’t feasible. Kirk
looked to him to explain that to the ensign.
“Scans indicate that because of the war readiness demanded by
Berlis, the Isitri government has been moved underground. The
complex is beyond transporter range.”
“And the longer he’s in control,” Kirk added, “the longer it will take
for the Isitri to reassert their own wills.” The captain shook his head
soberly. “We beam him away and go to warp—and an entire fleet
will pursue us.”
Sulu was turned from the helm and seemed to meet both Spock’s
and the captain’s eyes as he asked, “Could we stop the Odib fleet,
somehow? Remove the reason Berlis is going to deploy his ships?”
“Now wait a minute,” McCoy interrupted. “What are we talking
about here?” He stepped closer to Kirk. Arms crossed, the doctor
took on an indignant pose. “Maybe we stop both sides from killing
each other, but then what? Become Organian-like referees, imposing
our own treaty?”

Pulling in a long breath, Kirk rose, looked at McCoy a moment, then
stepped around the helm and glared at the main viewscreen. Engines
were minutes away from coming back online. Enterprise could go
anywhere then, and if she left, there wasn’t a regulation that could
be tossed in Kirk’s face for leaving the situation as it was.
Except his conscience.
“We started this landslide,” Kirk said, still watching the planet and
the assembling Isitri fleet. “Now it’s about to become an avalanche.”
“Jim, you can’t fight their war,” McCoy protested.
“I wasn’t planning to.” Kirk pivoted toward his first officer.
“Spock.”
The Vulcan rose from his seat as Kirk approached. “Captain?”
“Your mind-link with Berlis. Was it two way?” Kirk leaned against
the lip of Spock’s station. “He learned about the Enterprise, the
Federation. Did you learn about him? About Isitri history?”
“I did,” Spock said. “Much of the information would have been
subconsciously transferred, but I believe I can access it. Have you
something specific in mind?”
The captain shook his head tiredly. “I do. Other troublesome minds.
How were they handled? Surely all their reigns didn’t end when they
died of old age.”
Spock considered the question for a moment, as if searching some
mental database. “Some did have accidents, or were murdered in
power struggles,” he offered. “And two were killed by the Odib.”
There wasn’t much Kirk could do with that information. He paced
back toward his command chair, all eyes on him. “He must have a
weakness.”
“Certainly,” Chekov said. “Is he not basically humanoid? He could
be poisoned, phasered, stabbed—”
Kirk sneered. “Without killing him, Ensign.”
With a shrug, Chekov turned quietly back to his console, pulling his
hands from his lap and placing them on the controls.
“Mister Chekov is not incorrect,” Spock said. “In the past, some did

die of poisoning.”
An idea stuck Kirk and he spun toward Spock. “Wait a minute.”
“Jim, you can’t be thinking—”
“Hold on, Bones.” Kirk was on to an idea and needed to follow it
through, uninterrupted. “Spock, how could anyone attack someone
like Berlis? Why wouldn’t he know as soon as someone planned
such an execution?”
Silently, Spock considered the question.
“Well, Spock?” McCoy prodded after several long moments.
“Forgive me, Doctor, this is not exactly as easy as accessing the
information on the library computer.” Spock closed his eyes, then
opened them again. “Captain, there is a danger to searching for such
specific information.”
Kirk and McCoy exchanged a brief glance. “What kind of danger?”
“To access these…memories, I will have to break down certain
barriers…”
“You’ll have to link with Berlis again?” McCoy asked.
“No. But there is a chance, if he is attempting to link with me, that
he might succeed. The effort it takes to keep him out will be
otherwise diverted.”
McCoy stepped toward the captain and demanded his full attention.
“Jim, if we lose him to Berlis how will we know? He could give us
wrong information. Or tell us only what Berlis wants us to know.”
The logic gnawed at Kirk. What strange set of circumstances had led
them to this point: where McCoy was the voice of reason. Despite
the fact he was right, Kirk hammered the doctor with a sharp glare.
“Right,” McCoy said sarcastically. “You’ll just know.”
“I agree with Doctor McCoy,” Spock said. “Should we attempt this,
we should retire to sickbay.”
Surprised, Kirk looked up at him.
“Should Berlis link with me, influence me,” Spock continued,
“McCoy will have to sedate me.”
Nodding them toward the turbolift, Kirk agreed. “Let’s go.”

Spock sat still on the edge of a bed. McCoy monitored his vital
signs, occasionally frowning at Kirk, who watched until the silence
was finally too unbearable.
“Spock?”
“Yes, Captain?”
“Is it working?”
“No.”
McCoy scowled. “What’s wrong?”
Eyes opening, Spock nearly frowned himself. “To access those
memories, I must strip away more protections than I’d realized.”
The captain paced away, frustrated. “Then we can’t…”
“There is one possibility,” Spock offered, stepping to the desk.
“And?” McCoy pushed.
“A stabilizing agent could be added to the process,” Spock said, and
looked at Kirk.
“A drug?” McCoy asked.
“No, Doctor.” Spock didn’t move his gaze from Kirk. “A mind.”
“You want to mind-meld with me.” Kirk turned toward his first
officer. There was nothing in the Vulcan’s serene expression that
seemed deceptive; he trusted Spock, despite all that had happened.
Yet Kirk couldn’t deny that if Berlis were still linked with Spock,
this would be the perfect way to neutralize possible interference by
the Enterprise.
“Why him?” McCoy demanded.
Spock explained to Kirk. “Your resolve helped pull me away from
Berlis’s link in the first place. The strength of your will, combined
with mine, should be enough to allow sufficient mental shields to be
dropped.” He stood, almost reticent to admit he needed assistance,
and yet logic obviously demanded he did. “As you once needed me

to help you disbelieve the illusions of the Melcotians,” Spock said,
“I need you to keep Berlis from reconnecting with my mind.”
“Do it.” Kirk marched close enough for Spock to reach out and
touch his face.
“Jim—what if Berlis…what if this is a trap?” McCoy pushed
himself between the two of them. “Maybe Spock is still under his
influence. What happens if you two meld and Berlis is still there?”
McCoy was merely echoing the concerns Kirk had already
considered and dismissed. But Kirk was curious. “What would
happen, Spock?”
The Vulcan shook his head. “Unknown.”
“Can you assure me he’s not in that Vulcan noggin of yours, just
waiting for our guard to drop?” McCoy pressed.
“I cannot.” Spock turned fully to Kirk and his voice softened. It was
the tone he took when discussing pri vate matters. “It is a risk, Jim.
If I am still under Berlis’s control, I wouldn’t know enough to tell
you otherwise. I wouldn’t conceive otherwise. That is the insidious
nature of his power.”
With a wave of his hand, Kirk gestured for McCoy to back off and
for Spock to proceed. “Let’s go.”
Moving in closer, Spock placed first one set of fingers on the
captain’s face, then a second set. “My mind to your mind,” Spock
said, shutting all other stimuli out. “My thoughts to your thoughts.
Our minds are one.” Spock moved his fingers from one location to
another, pressing on Kirk’s face as the captain’s eyes glazed. “Two
become one…”
“Two…become one…” Kirk repeated, and slowly closed his eyes.
“Another mind…”
“Yes,” Spock said. “It wishes to join.” He whispered. “It is a
troublesome mind…”
“No,” Kirk snarled. “It is not allowed.”
“It wishes…” Spock nearly pleaded.
“No, we can’t.”

“It wishes…” he repeated, his voice uncharacteristically passionate.
“It is familiar.”
“Request…” Kirk said through gritted teeth, “denied!”
“It is lonely, it is searching—” Spock breathed. “He inspires. He
encourages. He beseeches us.”
“Troubled!” Kirk barked. “Deny him!”
“Yes. Yes, troubled. Oppressive.”
“The troublesome mind.” Kirk relaxed his tension. “How do we stop
it? What is his weakness?”
“Troublesome. Troubled. Initiator,” Spock murmured.
“History!” Kirk ordered Spock, or himself, or both. “Search!”
“Many troubled minds. Many destroyed. Many controlled.
One…gone.”
“Exiled.” Kirk sighed.
“Exiled. And alone.”
“Exiled.”
Slowly, Spock pulled his fingers away. Kirk opened his eyes, and
the link was broken.
“Thank you, Captain,” Spock said.
“A woman.” Kirk smiled, but only lightly. He was near exhaustion.
“Another troublesome mind.” He sighed heavily, pulling in and then
letting out a cleansing breath. “Could she still be alive?” He drew a
sleeve across his forehead, mopping his brow.
“Well, I wasn’t in your heads,” McCoy groused. “What the devil are
you talking about?”
Kirk staggered to McCoy’s desk and threw himself into a chair as
the doctor began scanning him. “There was another troublesome
mind,” Kirk said. “Decades ago. Like Berlis, she wasn’t discovered
until later in life.”
“Compared with in utero,” Spock interjected. “She was an
adolescent.”
McCoy nodded as he listened. “Damned Vulcan voodoo,” he
grumbled as he took a hypo and injected Kirk’s arm.

Shocked, Kirk looked up sharply.
“It’ll give you energy.”
The captain nodded and continued sorting through the results of the
meld. “She was weaker than Berlis. She controlled large clusters of
people, but eventually her control fell off—dissipated.”
“She was separated from her community,” Spock said, steepling his
fingers in contemplation. “Left isolated for several months, which,
itself, proved problematic. It was early in their space exploration
phase and her family appealed to have her sent into space.”
“Where?” McCoy asked as he began to scan Spock.
“Away,” Kirk told him. “There was no heading other than out of the
solar system.”
“A young girl? Sent alone into space?” McCoy was outraged for her.
“Even if she found a habitable world, how would she know how
to—well, do anything?”
“She would know anything her people knew, Doctor,” Spock said.
“Remember, they have no books, no teachers. Their knowledge is
entirely shared on a racial level.”
McCoy considered that a moment. “Okay, say she’s out there.
Another of these troublesome minds gets us what, exactly?”
“She was controlled somehow, for a certain amount of time.”
Refreshed from the doctor’s potion, Kirk stood up. “If we can find
out how…or—Spock, there was something about two troublesome
minds coexisting, do you remember that?”
He nodded. “I do. Ancient. They could not influence one another
and wrestled for control of the people for years until one took over.”
“When the other died?” McCoy asked. Having finished scanning
Spock he prepared another hypo.
“Negative. One was older, and as he aged and weakened, the
younger mind was able to assert itself with more vigor.” Spock
didn’t react to the shot.
“We have to find this woman—this other mind,” Kirk said.
McCoy placed his kit on the desk, casting it aside as if discounting

the whole affair. “It makes no sense, Jim. If she’s older, how do we
know she’d be strong enough to subvert Berlis?” He turned to the
cabinet behind his desk and pulled out a bottle of bourbon and two
glasses. “And how do we know she’d not be a worse threat than
Berlis? Find her and bring her here, and you could be replacing a
benevolent despot with a malevolent one.”
Kirk took a glass from McCoy and waited for him to fill it. “We
won’t know until we find her.”
“There were rumors about the direction in which her ship was sent,”
Spock said.
“Yes.” Kirk looked at the filled glass, took only a small sip, then set
it on McCoy’s desk. “We’ll cross-reference those with our star
charts. If we can find her, and if she’s alive and willing to help us
and her people…”
“Hell of a lot of ifs in there, if you ask me.” McCoy took a larger
swig from his own glass.
“I didn’t,” Kirk said, half seriously. At McCoy’s sour expression,
the captain softened. “Bones, it’s all we’ve got.”
“That,” McCoy said, mocking the idea with a raised glass, “is the
most depressing news of the day.”

TWELVE

I’m sorry, Admiral Das, but there is no word from Sa-Gahnesaam.”
Commander Sheh-Keshemger was not old enough to have been in
the last Isitri war, but had heard tales that chilled her, sickened
her…and now such times were upon her and yet she felt numb.
She’d joined the fleet specifically because of those stories, and
because her mother, grandmother, and two uncles had also served,
defending her planet. Those were only the family members who’d
fought in the Isitri wars and had survived.
The admiral fussed with several papers on his desk, searching
aimlessly for nothing in particular. She knew him well enough to
know he was moving simply to move—to have something to do as
he contemplated his loss. “Yes,” he said. “I understand.”
Gently, Sheh pressed on, making sure he truly comprehended. “If
they were detaining him, there would be word through diplomatic
channels.” She reached out a little, then quickly pulled her hand
back, unwilling to break protocol. She nervously stroked her beard,
as if that were where her hand had been going all along. “We must
assume he is lost.”
“He trusted them,” Das whispered harshly, bitterly. “And I suspect
doing so has hastened his ending.”
“He was kin to you.” She didn’t know for certain, but his posture

expressed a sense of deep loss. His shoulders were weighed down
with sadness.
“He may as well have been.” Das stood up and turned toward the
port. He looked out at the starscape, perhaps wishing he could see
Isitra, and in doing so understand her. “I’ve known—” He corrected
himself. “I knew him many years. Since he went into the diplomatic
service and I into the military, I thought certainly he would outlive
me.” He sighed heavily. “I was mistaken.”
Sheh lowered her head respectfully. “I grieve with you.”
Pivoting back toward the desk, Das sat intently and called up
something on his computer screen. “I do not merely grieve,
Commander. I intend to get revenge.” Without looking up he asked,
“What is our fleet status?”
He was all business again, and somehow that stirred confidence in
her. She hoped it wasn’t short-lived. “Seventy-three percent,
building to seventy-five,” she said. “The High Congress suggested
keeping one quarter in reserve to protect the homeworld.”
Das shook his head. “I will overrule them in this case.”
Nervously, Sheh bit the inside of her lip. “You have the authority, of
course, Admiral, but—”
“The Isitri fleet is bound to be under the troublesome mind,” Das
said, still looking at things on his screen rather than at her. “For
them to attack our planet he would have to leave the system with his
ships. He will not, for that would leave their world open to attack.”
The logic was sound. Such a young troublesome mind would not
risk sending his fleet out of his sphere of influence so early.
Nevertheless, Das’s voice seemed desperate. Sheh wondered if the
admiral wasn’t anxious to take charge of the situation since he’d
failed to control the one thing he truly wanted to control: Sa’s safety.
“How long before the full fleet is ready?” he asked.
“An additional…” she checked. “Seventeen hours, sir.”
“Intelligence estimation of the Isitri fleet’s readiness?”
“We cannot be sure, without information from Ambassador Sa-

Gahnesaam’s party—” Sheh caught herself. It was stupid and
callous and she’d gotten so into the rhythm of work that she hadn’t
considered how that might sound. “I’m sorry, Admiral.”
He shook his head and motioned for her to continue.
She pulled in a deep steadying breath, then continued. “We estimate
less than eleven hours.”
Das nodded and gestured for her to leave. “See to the readiness of
the remainder of the fleet.”
She rose, made it most of the way to the door, and then decided to
turn back. She’d always known Das to be decisive, stern even, but
rarely impulsive. His judgment felt rash. “If I may, sir, I think you
gamble with our lives.”
A nod told her nothing. Das could have been dismissing her, or
considering what she said. She wasn’t sure.
“Perhaps,” he said finally, his tone riddled with regret. “But it’s a
bet I believe we shall win.”

“I calculate the odds at eleven hundred to one.” Though Spock was
flipping switches on his library computer console, his computation
had been internal.
Kirk stroked the edge of his chin thoughtfully with his thumb.
“Pretty low odds, Mister Spock.”
“Higher than the other options given to us by warp- probe telemetry,
which are all far more distant.” At the punch of a button, one of the
screens above him, which displayed a star chart, wavered into a
closer view of a solar system. “Sao five-three-three. Within range of
the early Isitri warp craft, with two habitable moons and one inner
planet.”

“The gas giant has two M-class moons?” Chekov asked.
With another push of a button the screen changed to show a distant
scan of the gas giant and several natural satellites. “One is quite
lush, the other somewhat less so,” Spock said, “but sensors indicate
both support a varied flora-fauna environment.”
With her earpiece in place, Uhura gestured to the viewscreen above
Spock’s console. “And the inner planet?”
“Somewhat less hospitable, but according to probe data, signs of
basic civilization. Approximately Class-D.”
“You’re an Isitri girl,” Kirk said, pacing the upper bridge and
thinking out loud. “You’re thrust into exile by your own people.
Where do you go?” He looked around. “Opinions.”
“The inner planet,” Uhura said confidently.
Chekov scoffed. “This far out? She’d think about survival and go to
the moon with the most lush habitat.”
But Sulu agreed with Uhura. “I say the inner planet.”
When Chekov looked at both Sulu and Uhura as if they’d lost touch
with reality, Uhura explained: “She’s alone. If she saw there were
signs of civilization, not only would she need people to help her
survive physically, but also emotionally.”
Kirk agreed. “She was used to touching millions of minds, suddenly
stranded alone in space. She’d seek out others.” He turned to his first
officer. “Spock?”
The Vulcan nodded. “An Isitri mind, begging to contact another
soul, would want even a primitive, non-telepathic mind close by.”
“Bones?”
The doctor’s brows shot up. “If y’all right?” Kirk leveled a serious
stare in his direction and McCoy grudgingly offered, “Inner planet.”
“I agree.” Kirk nodded and turned toward Scotty. “Mister Scott, how
are we faring?”
“Warp power’s available, sir.” Leaning over the engineering
console, Scotty checked one last readout. “I can give you warp
four.”

The captain lowered himself into the command chair and checked
the chronometer. At warp four, they’d be cutting it close. But what
choice did he have? “Chekov, lay in a course. Sulu, warp factor
four.”

The Enterprise is no longer within sensor range of our ships.
Berlis’s jaw quivered. That is sad. Spock is missed.
Can you sense him? Chista asked.
Berlis huffed out a frustrated breath. I cannot. I wish to extend my
range.
Is that possible? another of the council members wondered.
Berlis thought it might be. If Juah takes his vessel a distance away,
and Onro doubles that distance from Zero, and Eklan then triples
his—
There was a clamor of mutual agreement: Yes, a chain.
A thought chain from here to First.
We can connect with the colony, and add their sensors to our own.
An early warning system should the Odib attack the colony first.
Berlis chuckled at his little pun, and the planet chuckled with him.
Be careful not to travel too far, my friends, he told them. I cannot
bear to be disconnected from any of you.
Nor we you, came the response, in planetary unison. Nor we you.

Enterprise glided majestically toward a brownish-gray planet that
revolved around a white-yellow star. “Sao five-three-three gamma,”
Sulu announced.
“Standard orbit.” Usually, finding a new inhabited world was
exhilarating. Today Kirk was anxious. McCoy was right—a lot of ifs
had to fall into the right place for their outlandish plan to work.
“Aye, sir. Standard orbit.” Sulu tapped at his console and it beeped
responsively. At his command, Enterprise slid into orbit.
“Spock?” Kirk restlessly turned to the rail beneath the science
station.
“Scanning…” Spock peered into his sensor viewer, his hands blindly
tapping at buttons and flipping switches. “Mostly arid climate,” he
reported. “Definite humanoid inhabitants. Global population
approximately one hundred seventy million, clustered around small
inland lakes, one large inland ocean, and several small rivers. As
long-range sensors suggested, no indication of advanced
technology.”
Kirk couldn’t see the Vulcan’s face but knew his eyebrow had
popped up when he slowly rolled out a contemplative
“Interesting…”
“What is it, Spock?”
“Refined metal.” He turned and looked at Kirk. “Not far from a
village.”
“A ship?” the captain asked, twisting toward the main viewer and
studying the planet below.
“Possibly enough mass, but no power generation.”
“A place to start looking.” Kirk turned and launched himself toward
the turbolift. “We’re beaming down,” he told McCoy.
The doctor grabbed Kirk’s arm and stopped him just before he
reached the turbolift doors. “Jim, she could have come here, crashed,
and died. Or passed away from illness and otherwise be long dead.”
The captain looked at McCoy a long moment, then called to Spock

to join them. “Sulu,” he said as the turbolift doors opened for them,
“take the conn.”

THIRTEEN

T

he hot air assaulted his lungs as soon as they’d materialized.
There was only a slight breeze but it was scorching enough to make
Kirk instantly feel as if he were in a sauna. McCoy was already
dabbing sweat from his brow and Spock…well, he looked cool and
collected. Even the gentle wind didn’t disturb his dark hair.
Consulting his tricorder, Spock pointed at the distance. They’d

beamed down behind a bluff that was far enough to hide them from
the indigenous populace, but close enough to the source of refined
metal they’d scanned.
As they walked, crusted sand crunched under their boots and Spock
continued his scans. “Bearing five degrees, two hundred meters
distant.”
Quickly they were upon it: an oblong craft, pitted and dented,
overgrown with small, dry weeds and crusted with dried sand that
had been washed into it by fast-moving floods. It was half buried,
and desert life had bloomed in the shade it provided. Some form of
cacti or desert flower surrounded it, making it look almost natural.
“Various small life-forms inside,” Spock said, examining his
tricorder. “None humanoid.”
“This didn’t crash,” Kirk said on inspection.
“It’s just a shell.” McCoy peered inside. “No equipment.”
Kirk picked off a leaf that was clinging to the hatchway.
“Cannibalized. Stripped.” He looked up at Spock. “She survived.”
The Vulcan nodded once and turned toward where they knew the
humanoid encampment to be. “Individual life signs are
indeterminate. We’ll have to be closer to the village to differentiate
between native and Isitri vitals.”
“Let’s go.” Kirk tossed the leaf to the ground and began marching in
the direction Spock indicated. McCoy followed them.
As they trudged along, Kirk couldn’t help but wonder if they were
tracing the steps of a frightened girl, however many years ago. How
long had the trip taken her, and what were her supplies? Was there a
sand storm? Were there natives who instantly killed her on sight?
Was this just a wild-goose chase? The answers to those questions
weren’t in the dust that spread out up the hill. Small brown brush
held the dirt against the rise but their journey upward shifted sand
beneath them nevertheless. They disturbed the home of small
insects, which scurried away from their boots.
Once at the summit, they could look down toward the first

indications of a village: rough-hewn huts and signs of life—but no
people.
“Where is everyone?” Kirk wondered aloud.
“Jim!” McCoy pointed behind the captain.
Kirk turned to find several diminutive but powerful-looking
tribesmen, all in desert protective garb, pointing very sharply carved
instruments at their throats.
“I think we found them,” McCoy said.
Slowly showing their open hands in a nonaggressive manner, the
three Starfleet officers exchanged cautious glances.
Kirk wryly said under his breath, “Take us to your Isitri?”
The indigenous people gestured for them to move, and uttered a few
words in their language—but not enough for the universal translator
to interpret. Scrambling to their feet, Kirk and his crew shuffled
down the front side of the bluff and toward the huts in the distance.
“Captain.” Spock’s whisper was barely audible. Kirk glanced toward
the direction of Spock’s nod and saw two of the natives motioning to
each other. It was quick, and for all Kirk knew it could have been
the sign language that hunters often used with one another, but he
had one of those hunches he sometimes got, and a certain
anticipation welled in his chest. Spock must have believed the same,
as he was the one to point out the gestures that seemed distinctly
Isitri.
As they walked, the smell of water wafted lightly through the warm
air. They drew closer to the gathering of huts, and the odor grew
stronger. But so did the stench of primitive village life. Kirk
wondered how the young Isitri girl would have reacted to the
environment her first time. To go from a culture of space flight and
advanced technology to one from sub–bronze-age times…jarring
didn’t cover it.
Pushed into a small lean-to, Kirk, Spock, and McCoy were left
alone, but six guards stood outside the door in a semicircle, all
looking in. It was amazingly cool inside the shelter, which may have

looked like a simple construction but was certainly not. A reed-like
material was interwoven with stronger branches that fortified the
walls and roof, and withstood the elements.
When a native’s feet shuffled on the dirt outside, Kirk tensed up and
looked. Instinctively he readied himself.
The tribesmen parted and allowed a tall, gangly Isitri female
entrance to the hut.
Nostrils flaring, Kirk had played the odds—and won. “Spock, can
you?”
“Greetings,” Spock said, and signed. “We are friends.”
“I’m Captain James T. Kirk and we’re—”
Eyes bulging in shock, the woman’s jaw quivered so hard Kirk
thought it might fall off. “You speak my gestural language,” she
signed back to Spock.
Both voicing and signing, Spock replied. “We have had contact with
your people, both on Isitra Zero and Colony First.” Kirk noticed that
when Spock had signed without speaking he was faster than when
he had to gesture and talk at the same time. He wondered if two
different parts of the brain were in use: one for spoken language, and
one for gestural. Or perhaps it was just difficult using two
languages—with two different syntactical structures—at the same
time.
“You—” She hesitated, confused. “There is a colony? Where?”
Stunned and in shock, she sat awkwardly on the ground, almost
stumbling down. Kirk reached out and guided her by the elbow.
Once she had her bearings, she gestured for them to join her on the
floor. “You are not Odib,” she said. “My name is Meshu. But who
are you?”
Kirk answered, but she looked at Spock’s interpreting. “We’re from
the United Federation of Planets, and we—”
Tilting her head to one side, she was far more interested in Spock
himself than whatever he was signing. “You are a telepath, but your
mind is closed.”

“Yes,” Spock replied.
“Your minds are open,” Meshu said of McCoy and Kirk. “But they
are simple, quiet.”
McCoy scoffed with irony. “I’ve been thinking the same all day.”
“Bones!” Kirk chided, but quickly turned back to Meshu. “We need
your help.”
“You need my help? You came here looking for me?” She huffed
out a breath. “I am exiled.”
“Your planet is in danger,” Kirk told her, but she huffed again.
“This is my planet,” Meshu protested.
Kirk shook his head, then realized that wouldn’t be understood and
so puffed out his own negative breath. “I mean Isitra Zero.”
She looked confused, and also weary. “I don’t understand. I can only
help destroy my people.” She was older than most of the Isitri Kirk
had met, or perhaps it was merely the effect of her more difficult
life.
“There is a troublesome mind in control of Home Zero,” Spock
explained. “And the Odib are going to destroy the planet, if they can.
If they cannot, your people will annihilate them.”
Taking a moment to digest the information, slowly, Meshu began to
cry. It was a high-pitched whine and, as a human does, she shed
tears.
“I’m sorry,” Kirk whispered, and watched Spock sign his apology.
Meshu seemed to gather herself. She wiped away her tears, but
licked at her fingers with her pale, narrow tongue, taking back in the
moisture and sodium. Probably in keeping with the desert-dweller
she’d become. “I was a child when I came here.” As she signed,
Spock interpreted. “Fourteen revolutions old. These people found
me in my ship, close to death. They thought I was a god who had
lost her way and hoped to tender favor with me by mending my
wounds and nursing me back to health.”
McCoy nodded to indicate the tribesmen at the door. “Do they still
think you’re a god?”

“Some may, who remember my falling from the sky.” She smiled
sweetly. “But I have explained to them who I am and where I am
from. They’ve learned my sign language and you would be surprised
the things we are able to communicate. They’re very intelligent.
They only lack technological know-how.”
“Do you understand their language?” Kirk asked.
“They have no written language, and I cannot hear their sounds,” she
said.
“You’re deaf.” McCoy touched his ear.
“I hear very high pitches, but not the vocal range of these beings.”
She smiled again. “Or you.”
Spock signed, “Are you these people’s leader?”
“Not intentionally, but I believe they look up to me,” she admitted.
“They protect me, certainly. Perhaps they love me as I love them.”
“You radiate an aura of goodwill,” Kirk said, not really forming a
question. “Like Berlis.”
She met Kirk’s eyes first questioningly, then with understanding. “I
assume Berlis is the troublesome mind.”
Kirk told her, “Yes.”
Her jaw quivered—probably more a sigh than a shrug. “I cannot
change my nature, Captain, so I changed my location.”
“Against your will,” McCoy said.
Awkwardly, Meshu attempted to nod as she’d seen them do, but it
looked more like she was rolling her head on her long neck. “At
first. But who was I to argue the right to my will when my presence
displaced…usurped the will of those around me?”
Kirk smiled. “You’ve gained wisdom.”
“Hard won,” she said, a light smile thinning her dry lips. “Hard
learned.”
“Do you miss home?” Spock asked.
This time she both gasped in a breath and attempted the nod. “I miss
touching other minds.” She was calmer now, and her signing
became more natural, less like she was searching for gestures she’d

not used in some time. “Toward the end of my journey,” Meshu
continued, “my craft ran out of enough oxygen for life support. I had
to put on a lifesuit. You are spacefarers. Have you ever worn such a
device?
“In such a suit you cannot feel the surfaces outside of you, or smell
the air, or touch the universe. You are enclosed, cut off. You might
move through a room, but it does not possess you fully because you
are shut away from it.” She looked at Kirk and saw he understood.
“You have felt that before.” She turned to Spock and met his eyes,
but unsure of herself returned to Kirk. “That is how I feel, revolution
after revolution. I am among beings, as intelligent and wonderful as
my own people. But I can never touch them in a natural way.”
“But you sense them on some level,” Kirk said. “You sensed us, and
sent them to meet us.”
“You are wise yourself, Captain.” She smiled. “I did.”
Spock signed, “What did you hope they would find?”
“No one who would hurt them.” She turned back to Kirk again. She
was looking at Spock only when reading his gestures, or when
talking directly to him. Something about him unsettled her, Kirk
thought. Was it that his telepathy was tempting to her?
“I enjoy my life, Captain,” she said, “within the context of the reality
it has become. I enjoy these people and I…” She paused, and a
realization came over her, hardening her expression. “You think I
can stop this Berlis, and wish to take me back to Isitra.”
Kirk exchanged glances with both Spock and McCoy, and wondered
if perhaps he was the only one who really thought it possible.
Whatever the case, he decided a united front seemed more confident.
“We do.”
“I will not.” She stood abruptly. “I will not replace one tyrant with
another, especially myself.”
Standing up, Kirk put himself between her and the doorway. “You
don’t think you’re in control of these people?” he asked. “What do
you call your life here?”

“All I have,” she said sadly. “And if I thought I was controlling
them, I would end myself.”
Kirk felt sorry for her, or did because of her influence. He couldn’t
really tell which, and on some level it didn’t matter, because the
emotion was the same.
“If Berlis thought he was controlling his people, he would do the
same,” Spock countered, signing as he spoke but his voice a thick
whisper. “Do you truly know when you’re replacing someone’s will
with your own? I assure you, Berlis does not.” Spock stepped closer,
boring down on her with his black eyes. “He will bring your people
to their doom. But you can save them.”
Meshu stared at him a long while, then slowly began pushing out
breaths, almost a slow-motion hyperventilation. Kirk realized she
was essentially shaking her head over and over at the thought of it—
at the internal conflict. She collapsed and began to moan, a highpitched twitter that made Kirk’s ears hurt and must have sliced
through Spock’s skull: He crumpled to the ground.
Meshu’s subjects rushed in, frantic, hovering around her at first,
then quickly turning their spears toward Kirk’s throat.
STOP!
There was no word, for Meshu could not speak, and there was no
sound other than the nervous whine through her flat nostrils. But
Kirk was certain the command to cease—from her and to all of
them—had screamed in his mind.
Everything stopped and all were silent except for Meshu’s soft sobs.
Isitri sobbing—less through their noses than from inside their
chests—had an ebb of complete sadness to it that crashed into Kirk,
and likely all of them. McCoy looked startled, the planet natives
looked as if they’d received an electrical shock, and Spock…Spock
was on his knees, curled over, holding his head in his hands.
Kirk rushed to him as McCoy scanned Meshu, and slowly lifted her
to her feet.
Lightly putting his hand on Spock’s shoulder, Kirk whispered,

“Spock?”
The Vulcan looked up. A tear traced down Spock’s cheek and there
was a fleeting moment of misery in his usually unruffled expression
before he instantaneously regained a serene composure.
“What happened?” Kirk asked the Vulcan. He twisted to Meshu.
“Are you in his mind?” he yelled.
“Jim, she can’t hear you.”
“She is not in my mind,” Spock said, then signed to Meshu as he
spoke. “Your sadness is overwhelming. Why?”
Gasping in and quivering her jaw at the same time, she answered
slowly. “Besides the preservation of my life, I’d hoped to gain two
things from my exile: the safety of my people, and the assurance that
I was usurping no one else’s will with my own.” She turned to Kirk
bitterly, heartbroken. “You’ve assured me all I have is my own life.
An existence that now means nothing.”
Kirk grasped her shoulders, holding her frail frame close. Their eyes
met. “No,” he ground out.
Confused, she looked beyond him to Spock.
The position in which Kirk held her made signing impossible, but he
wanted her to listen, not speak. “If you don’t want Berlis left in
control and you want to save your people, help us. Help them. We
won’t leave you there. We’ll bring you back here.”
She pulled out of his grip and began signing vigorously. Kirk looked
to Spock to translate but he shook his head. “Too fast.” He signed to
her, “Slow down, please. I don’t understand.”
“Icha bilk, Meshda. Icha colimar sithdou zibechna.” It was one of
the natives, a small, dense young man, whispering in a tone that
suggested he was appealing to Meshu in some way. He dropped his
spear and was signing to her—and speaking.
“He’s telling her not to be distressed,” Spock said.
Within moments the universal translator had enough to begin
deciphering his language.
“Icha be sad, Meshda,” he repeated. “Do not believe we love you for

any reason but our own love for you.”
She lowered her head, her slight shoulders softly heaving with quiet
sobs.
“You would not say that,” Meshu said, “were I not here.”
“We always knew your nature,” the tribesman assured her. “You
explained it to us.” The look in his eyes was that of a son to his
mother, and it looked very genuine. “When you were ill with the
zezu bite, and asleep with the sickness for many long days and
nights, I tended you.” He huffed. “Not because you told me to, but
because of who you are.”
“You don’t understand,” she said. “Even asleep, my subconscious—
”
“I do not care. I am happy with you,” he insisted, “and you are
happy with me. That is all that matters.”
“No,” she said, her hands crossed in a blocking motion. “No, you
must know your love comes from within and not from without.” She
turned to Kirk. “I must know it.”
“Then go,” the native said. “Go with them and help your people.”
He turned to the captain. “Before you bring her back to us, guarantee
without her presence that we still love her. I do not doubt that we
will…but she must not doubt that our love is genuine.”
Kirk nodded, then also gasped to affirm.
Meshu reached out and touched Kirk’s arm, pulling him toward her.
“What must I do?” she asked. “I will help.”

FOURTEEN

How is she, Bones?” Kirk had paced anxiously outside the guest
quarters waiting for McCoy. McCoy and Spock had both attended
Meshu, so the captain didn’t want to get in the way even if it meant
waiting outside.
“More relaxed now, but still a bit frantic,” the doctor said as the door
slid closed behind him. “Spock’s still in there. I’m not sure how he
is.”
The captain considered replying but decided against it. The truth was
that he wasn’t sure about Spock himself. He’d insisted to McCoy
that he’d know if Berlis had control of the Vulcan again, but would
he? Kirk thought he would—especially after the mind-meld—but
what about Meshu? She had been so agitated, so despondent, that
she’d managed to push her emotion through not only to a group of
non-telepaths, but also to Spock despite his extensive mental
defenses. If she was still in his head—perhaps even unaware that
she was, and if Spock was oblivious…how could Kirk begin to

know?
After too long a look at the cabin door, wondering how both Spock
and the Isitri woman were doing, Kirk finally turned to face McCoy.
“Do you have a medical opinion to convey, Doctor?”
“I do.” He straightened with formality, yet managed to keep his
skeptical expression. “I’ll admit I’m surprised we even found
Meshu, but I don’t think she’s up to pulling Berlis off the top of the
totem pole.”
Kirk allowed himself a sigh. “She’s the only option we have. With
Spock’s help—”
“And who’s going to help him?”
The captain leveled his best hard stare at McCoy, but as usual that
garnered no result other than somewhat softening the doctor’s tone.
“Jim, what’s the one thing we’ve always been able to count on with
Spock? His stability. His skill at slicing through the emotion of a
matter to give us the raw logic.” Was that admiration in McCoy’s
voice? “I’m not sure that’s possible right now. I’ve never seen him
this unsteady.” McCoy’s worry was evident. “He’s struggling to
maintain his inner balance.”
Few people knew Spock as well as Kirk and McCoy, yet so much
about him was still mysterious even to them. They’d each seen the
emotions the science officer kept veiled from others—perhaps even
from himself. Spock was well trained at keeping those feelings in
check, but being half human meant he was used to having to do so
more than a full Vulcan. What remained unclear was how he could
control emotions that were not his own.
“How do we help him, Bones?”
McCoy opened his mouth to speak but Kirk cut him off.
“I don’t want to hear ‘I don’t know,’ Doctor.”
Annoyed but tight-lipped, McCoy looked away as Kirk turned
toward the cabin and pushed the chime. The door slid open, he
entered, and as it closed again behind him he heard McCoy’s faint
grumble, “Well, I don’t.”

Sitting at opposite sides of the small desk, Spock and Meshu were
having a discussion in the Isitri sign language. He noticed that both
of them didn’t really watch each other’s gestures, but instead seemed
to look into each other’s eyes. They obviously caught the signs in
the periphery, but facial expression—almost like a mime—had much
to do with the method of communication.
Kirk marveled at how fluidly Spock signed, despite having known
the language only two days. Kirk also noticed that more gestures had
become clearer to him. Whether that was because of his mind-meld
with Spock, or simply his exposure to the language, he couldn’t be
sure.
The two stopped their discussion when Meshu perceived Kirk in the
doorway. “Captain,” she greeted. She was far more self-composed
than she was on the planet and looked up to him in wonder, her
round eyes gleaming. “Your ship is beautiful. Spock has been
explaining your mission. How wonderful it must be to travel the
stars and explore new life.”
He couldn’t help but smile at her enthusiasm, which jarred him—he
couldn’t help himself when Berlis was aboard, either. The smile
faded from his lips.
“Has Mister Spock had time to brief you on our plan?”
She gasped a “Yes” and looked down at the table, as if embarrassed
to criticize. “I don’t believe it can work.”
The captain looked at Spock.
“Meshu lacks the confidence,” the Vulcan said matter-of-factly.
“I’ve explained the extent of Berlis’s control.”
Beginning to shake nervously, Meshu wrapped her arms around
herself. “He’s far stronger than I ever was, Captain. I unwittingly
manipulated thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands of people,
but billions? It’s beyond me. And if his ability is that strong—”
“You touched my mind,” Kirk pointed out. “That’s something even
Berlis couldn’t do.” He closed the distance between them, trying to
bolster her confidence with his. “I know you have this in you.” He

didn’t—not really. But he wanted her to believe it. Could he hide his
own uncertainty from a telepath? For that matter, could he do so
with someone who used a manual language? His words might say
one thing, but could she read some inconsistency in his body
language?
“I’ll lose myself to him. I can’t do this!” Meshu’s expression was
racked with guilt and fear. One hand clapping into another over and
over again, Spock interpreted, “Can’t. Can’t. Can’t.”
“Meshu,” Spock told her, “we will not force you to do anything you
don’t wish to do.”
“Can’t,” she said. “Can’t.” But then she was silent, and as if
exhausted, laid her head flat on the desk and closed her eyes.
The bird-like quality of her appearance—of all Isitri—struck Kirk
once more. The females were indeed larger than the males but still
rather slight. It made Kirk think of them as fragile, breakable.
“There is, of course, the other time concern, Captain,” Spock said.
“Meshu has confirmed why the Odib fear Isitri’s troublesome minds.
So long as Berlis lives and remains an influence to his people, the
longer the period they can be outside his control before they realize
his goals are not theirs.”
The implications were just as they had expected. “How long,
Spock?” Kirk asked. “How long before he can send out his fleet?”
“I have no data on which to base a hypothesis,” Spock said, and the
captain almost wished McCoy was there to ask why the Vulcan
couldn’t just say “I don’t know.”
“Does this throw a wrench into our plans?” Kirk tried to massage the
knot building in his neck.
Spock shook his head. “We would be ripping Berlis away quickly.
The Isitri would return to normal with alacrity.” He indicated Meshu
with a nod in her direction. “But without her confidence, our plans
cannot come to fruition.”
Stepping closer, Kirk reached out his hand, wanting to pat Meshu’s
shoulder to give her reassurance, but the bosun’s whistle sounded

and he was drawn instead to the small desk viewer.
“Kirk here.”
Sulu, sitting in the command chair, appeared on screen.
“Approaching the Isitri system, Captain. Scans indicate a change in
the distribution of their fleet.”
“On screen.” Kirk looked away a quick moment, exchanging a
glance with Spock as the screen showed a tactical view.
The muscles in his shoulders instantly tensed. The knot in his neck
became Gordian. “Thank you, Mister Sulu. Maintain course. Slow to
impulse upon entering the Isitri system.”
“Aye, sir.”
Kirk thumbed the comm off. “He’s put ships around Isitra Zero.
Equidistant from one another.”
“Interesting,” Spock said thoughtfully.
“Would that expand his influence?”
Pausing for consideration, Spock hesitated. “In a sense. Each Isitri
mind would provide a link to the next.”
“He’s building a long chain,” Kirk said as he began to pace the small
cabin. “Creating a perimeter in which his fleet will have
maneuvering room to battle.”
“And keep an enemy fleet as far away from the planet as possible,”
Spock offered.
Suddenly looking up, Meshu reacted to Kirk’s pacing, perhaps
feeling the vibration of his steps through the deck plates.
With her awake, Kirk decided to rehash one of his fears for her
benefit.
“What if Berlis made way for Vulcan, Mister Spock?” Spock was
again interpreting their conversation into sign.
“What if he got hold of a race that could telepathically communicate
over long distances?” Kirk asked.
Spock didn’t hesitate. “He would have an army in his grasp, no
matter his distance from them, and no matter the amount of time
they were away from him.”

“In the case of Vulcan, it would be an army that could cripple the
Federation with their inside knowl edge,” Kirk said. “Our closest
allies could helplessly become our most dangerous enemies.” Spock
paused mid-sign and exchanged a look with his captain. Kirk wasn’t
talking just about the planet Vulcan, but about his friend. “Could
Berlis consider doing something like that?”
“If it meant his own self-preservation,” Spock said, pausing only to
interpret Kirk’s question, “and what he perceives to be the
preservation of his planet. If he fears Federation interference, he
could already be making such plans.”
“He said he found Vulcans fascinating,” Kirk recalled, “and hoped
to visit your homeworld someday.”
Spock rose, and without signing had Meshu wondering what was
being said. “Captain, with Meshu having demonstrated the ability to
broadcast to human minds as well, Berlis—whose ability is far
stronger in general—can surely not be allowed to travel to Vulcan or
Earth.”
The captain motioned to the Isitri woman who sat at the desk and
bewilderedly looked up at them. “I’m not the one you have to
convince.”

“I remain unconvinced,” Sheh-Keshemger told her admiral.
Das dismissed her concern with a shrug and waved her closer to the
command chair. “Commander, I am aware of your views,” he said in
a harsh whisper. “But I command this fleet and I have been charged
with protecting our planet from our enemy.”
Sheh felt an eyelid twitch. It often did when she was under stress,
and she wondered if Das noticed it. Certainly it felt like her entire

face was fluttering. His stern expression didn’t suggest he had seen
it.
With a frown, she accepted that she wasn’t in control of the
situation, but her duty to question Das was of no less importance.
“Long-range scans now indicate the Isitri fleet has deployed in a
heretofore unseen formation. Without knowing more about the
reason for this—”
Das cut Sheh off. “The last time we delayed matters, giving them the
benefit of the doubt, they launched long-range weapons that disabled
our outposts and defense systems.” He twirled his hand around, to
indicate the universe in general. “Where are those outposts now? We
still have not managed to rebuild them, have we? Shall we allow the
Isitri to bounce us farther back this time? Perhaps to our stone age?”
Frustrated, Sheh furrowed her brow. They shouldn’t waste time
discussing the ends on which they already agreed. What she wanted
to debate was the tactics, not the goals. “Of course not.”
“The longer one of these troublesome minds is in control, the farther
their people can leave their influential sphere before beginning to
question their purpose.” Eyes flashing disgust, and maybe a little
fear, Das charred her with a glare. “What is the strength of this
particular mind?”
“We are not certain,” she admitted.
He nodded as if he’d proven his point. “You see why we must not
wait to find out?” He wasn’t really asking a question.
“The last ruler spent months in control before venturing out and—”
Sheh protested.
“And the one before that mere days.” He shook his head and turned
toward the viewscreen. “No, this shall not be left to chance.”
That was it. The end of the discussion. “Yes, Admiral.” Once Das
had turned away he’d tuned out any reasoning but his own, and it
was time to defer to him. But she couldn’t quite leave it anyway.
“One question, if I may?”
He nodded very tightly, a quick up-and-down motion—once.

“What if this troublesome mind defeats our fleet and then comes to
conquer our world as the rubble of our ships orbits their sun?”
Das still refused to meet her eyes. “We will not allow that to
happen,” he said.
Relinquishing her position at his side, she bowed her head and
retreated for the rear of the command center. “I hope you are right.”
“I hope the same, Sheh.” His voice, she sensed, did have in it a little
doubt.

Chista told Berlis that the fleet was in a defensive position around
the inner star system and was almost in place in the outer system.
Epiltan explained that long-range scans were imperfect, but
suggested the Odib were gathering a fleet. It was not unexpected
news, but it did sadden him nevertheless.
Berlis wished that the sensor technology of the Isitri was as strong as
or stronger than the Odib’s. Much to his pleasure, word came
instantly from the Akawri province that the minds most adept at
engineering were working on such an improved sensor array and it
would be built in Akawri’s capital city within the hour. Berlis was
touched by their support and hard work, and humbled by their
dedication. They were equally touched and humbled by his good
wishes.
When one of the key ships slipped into place near Colony First, all
Istria glowed with pleasure—they were again connected to one
another. Colony First rejoiced, mentally embracing Berlis and their
extended family. Istria was one, and this pleased Berlis and all the
rest.
Soon after, when the new sensor array was brought online, an

incredible melancholy washed across the planet: the Odib fleet was
on its way to the Isitri system. This wasn’t what Berlis wanted. It
wasn’t what anyone wanted. Welling up with emotion, Berlis
suggested Colony First might come under attack before Zero Home.
Golo, happy to be connected to Berlis again but distressed at
learning the Odib were ready to attack, assured his people that the
civilian craft of the colony could quickly be converted to military
fighters. Berlis feared for them nevertheless, but was inspired by
their commitment, and all of Isitra felt the same.

FIFTEEN

C

an’t, can’t, can’t.” It was Spock’s voice, but Meshu’s words.
Was it personal fears? She’d lived a difficult life, and hadn’t struck
Kirk as weak, but she was adamant that even with Spock’s help the
plan would not work.
“What scares you?” Kirk asked, glad they’d decided to stay in the
cabin’s intimate setting rather than going to sickbay as McCoy had
suggested. “The doctor will monitor the meld. You’ll both be fine.”
“Berlis is too strong,” she said, while Spock interpreted.
“I can teach you disciplines,” the Vulcan told her. “You will be
safe.” There was a certain amount of emoting necessary for gestural
language, and Kirk noticed Spock’s voice was also more expressive
when he spoke as he signed.
“I can’t,” Meshu replied. “I won’t.”
“Why?” Kirk balled his fists and put them on the desk as he leaned
down. “Meshu—why?”
McCoy took a half step toward her, but was still behind the captain.
“Is it because you believe you can steal control from Berlis?”
Spock’s brow rose in surprise. McCoy had it. When Spock
interpreted for her, Meshu gasped in an affirmative breath.
She looked into Kirk’s eyes and signed slowly but passionately to
him. “I have not touched a mind for many years, until distress
compelled me to touch yours,” she told them, then put her head to
one side, resting it on her own shoulder.
She was embarrassed, Kirk decided, and her body language was the
equivalent of a human looking down dejectedly. “It was a difficult
moment,” Kirk said. “We understand.”
“You cannot appreciate the feeling,” Meshu huffed at him, then
looked up at Spock. “You may. I am not sure.”
“You’re barking up the wrong Vulcan if you think he understands a
feeling,” McCoy sniggered.
Spock signed the insult, and Meshu looked harshly at McCoy. He
shrugged apologetically.

“Explain it to us,” Kirk said after he cast his own sideways glance at
McCoy.
Meshu gasped that she would, but hugged herself, placing her arms
around her sides for an extended time. Her eyes closed; it almost
looked as if she were sleeping. Suddenly, her eyes opened and she
began gesturing. “There was a young boy in my adopted village who
would visit the cliffs where he knew he should not play. Children do
childish things, and Cheshu’s parents became worried when he did
not return home one evening.” Her gaze became suddenly distant as
she pulled up an old, perhaps painful memory. “We searched and
searched and could not find him until the next night. He’d fallen,
and a large boulder had slid from the mountain above and pinned his
left arm and left leg. He was ill, in shock, and when we freed him
the nurses could not save his arm or leg—the bones were crushed.”
McCoy shifted his weight from one leg to the other. Kirk knew he
wanted to somehow propel himself back in time and to that planet to
help the boy. Such was the size of the doctor’s heart.
“We removed what was left of them, cauterized the wounds, and
though it took weeks, he survived the fever,” Meshu continued. “His
foot would always itch, he said, even though it was no longer there,
and his hand would reach for things, for people, and of course, touch
nothing.”
Leaning down, McCoy gently patted Meshu on the shoulder.
“Phantom pain isn’t uncommon.”
She glanced at him, accepted his wisdom with an inclined head, then
continued: “Then I’m sure the dreams are also common. Every
night, eyes closed, he possessed two arms and two legs. He would
run, he would play…” She smiled sweetly, sadly. “He would even
dream of walking the cliffs again.” Her jaw quivered. “Every
morning came the shock that things were not as he had hoped. He
spiraled into depression. With time he came to accept his life.
Children grow up and the people of my village are nothing if not
adaptable.” Her eyes met Kirk’s. “But I understood his loss.”

“The link with your people,” Kirk said.
“The link with any people,” she signed with a gasp. “I tasted that
feeling again, with you, for the first time in years, and only for a
brief moment.” She quivered her jaw again, longer this time: a heavy
sigh. “I used to dream of it every night. I used to crave it every
waking moment. As I grew older I dreamed of it less…but I would
wake up in the night and my first thought would be to remind myself
of the depth of my loss.” She looked at Spock now, sensing in him a
kindred spirit. “There are nights, after many years, that I don’t think
about it at all. But there are also nights I do.”
“Are you afraid I won’t be able to control your access to my mind
after the meld?” Spock asked. “That I will be unable to break the
bond with you?”
“I haven’t thought about that,” she admitted. “I fear that once I have
relinked with my people, I shall never wish to let them go. And
knowing how the Isitri minds work, they will assure me I should
stay.”
“We’ll protect you,” Kirk offered.
“Why wouldn’t I stop you from trying, as Berlis surely will?” She
huffed twice—the second one was long and from deep within,
almost an actual sigh.
“I have confidence in you,” Kirk told her with a shake of his head.
“If you can ask this question now, I don’t believe you’d lack such
conscience and keep an entire planet enslaved.”
“Captain, were I to take your arm and leg, or your eyes, or
your…whatever it is you hold most dear—”
My ship, Kirk thought, but simply clamped his jaw tightly.
“I won’t ask what you might do to regain whatever you could not
bear to lose. But I’ll ask you what you would do to keep it, once
finding it again.” Her expression—or perhaps her mind—broadcast
such sorrow that Kirk almost flinched. “You could teach me how to
control Berlis and therefore all Isitri. You could teach me to release
them and I could return to exile.” Her bulbous eyes glistened with

tears. “What if I don’t wish to?”
“Is that what you want?” McCoy asked.
“No. But it may be too within my nature to avoid it.” Meshu rolled
her head around, wiping each eye on a respective shoulder.
Spock turned to Kirk and didn’t interpret for Meshu. “If I may,
Captain, perhaps I can reassure her.”
With a nod, Kirk turned for the door and motioned McCoy to go
with him. “Do what you can, Spock.”
He and McCoy silently made their way to the turbolift and didn’t
speak until the doors slid closed.
“What now?” the doctor asked.
Kirk grabbed the control handle but didn’t activate the turbolift. He
stifled a sigh but allowed himself a little shrug. “I need to buy the
Isitri some time.”
“How?”
“I’m thinking.” He twisted the handle. “Bridge,” he ordered.
“Say you buy some time. Then what?” The doctor crossed his arms
and motioned his head downward to indicate Meshu. “She doesn’t
want to do this.”
“Spock will convince her,” Kirk assured McCoy, and tried to assure
himself as well.
“She fears Berlis—fears becoming him,” McCoy said. “Maybe
there’s some wisdom in that.”
“You don’t feel sorry for her?” Kirk asked.
“I do. But you and I both felt Chista’s fear. Meshu was exiled for
what she is, and now Chista has fallen into the exact situation he had
hoped to avoid.”
“And it is my fault.” Kirk pulled in a deep, decisive breath. “I’ve got
to do something to stop the Odib.”
“You can’t hold off an entire fleet.”
The turbolift doors opened onto the bridge and Kirk stepped out as if
ejected. “Maybe I can—with an appeal.”
McCoy followed Kirk to the command chair as Sulu slipped back to

the helm.
“Uhura.” The captain lowered himself into his seat. “Try to raise the
Odib homeworld.”
She nodded and dabbed at her board. “Aye, sir.”
“And if they don’t take kindly to you asking nicely?” McCoy
frowned.
“I don’t know, Bones,” Kirk said quietly. “I’m out of rabbits to pull
out of my hat.”
“Huh,” the doctor scoffed. “May you be blessed with another hat.”

“Who?” Das-Dosiame’s eyes narrowed and he looked from Sheh to
the tactical screen. “From what ship?”
“Jamesty-kirk, captain of the U.S.S. Enterprise. United Federation of
Planets?”
“Generic enough name.” Das shrugged as he rose and moved to the
scanning station. “Can you get a location fix?”
The sensor operator shook his head. “The signal originates from the
Isitri system, or near it, Admiral.”
“Command is recommending we speak with them, Admiral,” Sheh
said.
“United Federation of Planets,” Das grumbled as he returned to his
command chair. “Might as well call themselves the League of
Beings.” He motioned to the communications officer. “I will talk to
them myself.”

“I have an Admiral Das, sir.” Uhura’s right hand hovered over the
button that would place the transmission on the main viewer.
Kirk nodded. “On screen.”
The starscape washed away and a large man with a bald head and
long reddish-black beard filled the screen. “Who are you?” Das
rumbled.
“Captain James T. Kirk, representing—”
“I know that much. Tell me why you’re in this area.”
Direct and to the point. Kirk liked that, and explained from the
beginning: about the distress call, about Berlis and his effect on
Spock, about the shuttle incident and his talk with Chista, all of it.
Admiral Das listened quietly and intently, occasionally looking at
the woman—also bald and bearded—who stood to his left.
“They know you’re coming,” Kirk said. “They’re preparing for your
fleet right now.”
“We understand that,” Das said. “We are also prepared.” He
leaned down on an elbow and stroked his beard, and appeared to
contemplate Kirk. “What is the purpose of this discussion, Captain?
Are you asking to join us, or warning us off?”
“Neither.” Or both, Kirk thought. “Admiral, I under stand the
concerns of your people—”
“No, I don’t think you do, Captain.” Das stood dramatically and
while it was difficult to know for certain because there was nothing
with which Kirk could compare the man’s height, he looked to stand
close to two and a quarter meters tall. His tunic was long in the back
like a cloak, and short in front, like a shirt, and as he marched
forward it flourished behind.
“You’re right,” Kirk admitted. “I can’t claim to know all the details
of your history with the Isitri. But grant me that I’ve had a crash
course since meeting Berlis.”
Das nodded unenthusiastically. “Are you attempting to make an
appeal for the Isitri? Asking us not to attack? Because we see your

signal originates within their system. What would guarantee me that
I’m not speaking to the troublesome mind right now?”
Pursing his lips, Kirk realized he’d not thought of that when he
considered contacting the Odib. Could he suggest Das trust him on
his word? If the situation were reversed, Kirk certainly wouldn’t
trust Das.
Mustering a little of his own drama, Kirk stood and took a step
toward the main viewer. “I don’t know how to convince you. All I
can tell you is that we’re trying to save two planets here, and two
peoples—”
“That is where we differ, Captain,” Das said harshly. “I am working
to save but one.”
“I…” Kirk chewed on his inner lip a moment and debated being this
honest with an alien admiral about to go to war. “I feel responsible
for this situation,” Kirk admitted.
“That makes you perceptive,” Das replied dryly. “But it doesn’t
convince me there’s an alternate course of action.”
“Give me twelve hours,” Kirk pleaded for the Isitri, but Das was
already shaking his head. “Twelve hours, and if I can’t remove
Berlis from the equation—”
“This does nothing, Captain Jamesty, but allow them to shore up
defenses—and offenses.”
“Or it defuses the problem entirely.” Kirk took another step toward
the viewer and hoped he was looking more imposing to the Odib
admiral. “I’ll make you a deal, Das. Whether I’m successful—or
not—you get a constant telemetry from our sensors: an inside look
into this system.” He was considering it, Kirk could tell, so he
sweetened the pot to put the deal to bed. “I can rid you of Berlis
without a life being lost.”
“Lives have been lost,” Das barked.
Kirk nodded and tilted his head down. “We can avoid losing more,”
he said, neck still tilted down, but eyes burning into Das’s.

Das looked to someone off-screen, and the main viewer abruptly
went black.

“I don’t trust him,” Sheh said.
The admiral sighed and returned to the command chair. “Nor do I.”
Gesturing to the viewscreen as if Kirk still filled it, Sheh asked, “If
we can’t trust him, how could we trust his sensor data?”
Quietly, Das considered her question. He sat as if mentally
reckoning a long, complicated mathematical formula. “Do we need
to? We could use the signal as a carrier for our own sensor
telemetry.”
With a smile, Sheh showed her admiration for the idea. “Yes, we
could. It wouldn’t be indicative of much—the detail would be
minimal.”
Das nodded. “But it would confirm Kirk was sending us the actual
data.”
“It would,” Commander Sheh agreed. “And twelve hours would
allow us to bring another three light cruisers online. I’d feel better if
we left some protection here.”
“Twelve hours.” Das nodded and had made his decision. “But I want
something else riding Kirk’s telemetry.” He turned to the crewman
at the sensor station. “Get as much information on his vessel as
possible. If his ship falls under the troublesome mind’s control, it
may be necessary to destroy it.”

Once he and Kirk were back in the turbolift, the doctor spoke
candidly with admiration. “I didn’t expect him to accept your
terms.” McCoy shook his head, releasing a half chuckle. “But twelve
hours isn’t a long time, Jim. And if Meshu won’t help…”
“Spock will convince her,” Kirk insisted.
The doctor grunted skeptically. “And what if Spock is still
connected to Berlis?” The captain opened his mouth to speak but
McCoy pressed on. “I know you don’t think so, but for the sake of
argument what if he is, Jim? Berlis would know all about the whole
idea. He could be preparing for it right now.”
Kirk hadn’t considered that, and McCoy wasn’t seeing the full
ramifications if it were true. “If so, it’s worse than that.” He twisted
the turbolift handle again, speeding them up. “If Berlis is still linked
to Spock, what happens when he and Meshu mind-meld?”
By the time they got to the guest quarters and the door opened, Kirk
and McCoy found both of Spock’s hands pressing into Meshu’s face
and forehead. “Our minds are one.”

SIXTEEN

Spock, what have you done?” McCoy rushed to Meshu’s side.
The Vulcan sat back as if at afternoon tea and steepled his fingers
across his chest. “Meshu lacked the confidence to withstand not only
Berlis, but also her own inner desires. Only through a mind-meld
could I lend her my strength.”
“You were supposed to wait, so I could monitor…How do you know
she won’t give you her weakness?” McCoy countered pointedly.
“She could have,” Spock said, “but she did not.”
Meshu gasped her affirmation. “Now I can do this, Captain. We can
do this.” She did seem bolstered—calmer.
“Spock?” Kirk studied his first officer’s expression. If Meshu had
merely transferred her vulnerabilities to Spock, it didn’t show. But
would it be so obvious?
“She has the capability,” the Vulcan said matter-of-factly.
With a nod, Kirk accepted that.
“You’re going through with this?” McCoy stepped closer to Kirk,
getting in his personal space. “Jim, this isn’t a decision you can
make with your gut! Billions of lives are at stake.” The doctor
waved at Spock. “Tell him. Tell him that, for all you know, Berlis
might still be connected to you.”
“The doctor is correct,” Spock said. “I wouldn’t know if Berlis has
broken through my protections.”
“But I would, Captain.” Meshu placed both palms on her own head
and then turned them into fists. Kirk recognized the sign as “holding
knowledge” and understood, in context, she was saying “I know.”

Of course, if Berlis were now directing both Spock and Meshu, all
this could be a deception.
“For years I’ve felt the depths of loneliness unlike any you can
imagine,” Meshu continued while Spock interpreted. “My one mind,
unaccompanied by the billions of voices it should naturally hear…I
cannot relate the profundity in any language. I will admit that it is
good to link with another mind—especially with someone like
Mister Spock, who has a most interesting and unusual intellect. But I
would know if a mind not his was also in the link. There is not.”
If memory served, Meshu described Spock’s mind in much the same
way Berlis did. Was that a clue? Kirk didn’t think so. He believed
Meshu was sincere.
“I believe her,” Kirk said finally, examining Meshu’s face while
Spock interpreted. The Isitri woman gasped a confident breath and
the captain turned to McCoy. “Good enough for you?”
“Does it matter if it’s not?” the doctor asked.
“Not really.”
“You’re taking her word for it, but if Berlis is in Spock’s head, and
now also in Meshu’s, you just asked Berlis to assure you everything
was okay.” McCoy made the same point Kirk had considered and
discounted.
“If he were linked with Spock, his goals would be achieved, and so
he would have no reason to lie,” Meshu said.
Kirk smirked. “Logical, Bones.”
With a sigh, McCoy crossed his arms and grumbled, “Like one of
him isn’t more than enough.”
The smile faded from his lips and Kirk turned to Spock. “Now we
just have to get to Berlis.”
“That will not be easy,” Spock said.
“We have less than twelve hours.” Kirk looked at Meshu. “Any
advice?”
“I do not know Berlis, other than through Spock,” she said, and
noticed McCoy’s eyes widened.

“Through what I’ve told her, Doctor,” Spock assured McCoy.
“Right.” McCoy didn’t seem certain and Kirk hoped it was true.
“Gentlemen, and lady…” Kirk gestured toward the door. “It’s time
to make our move.”
Once on the bridge, Meshu marveled at the array of technology
before her. Kirk took some pride that it astounded her so, as if he’d
built Enterprise with his own bare hands. “A little more advanced
than the craft you’ve used.”
Almost breathless, Meshu gasped, taking in a large gulp of air.
They all followed Spock to his station where he quickly flipped
switches and coordinated data. When he turned back toward the
captain, McCoy, and Meshu, Kirk nodded toward the sensor scan
results showing on the viewscreen above the science station.
“Tactical assessment.”
“It would appear Colony First is working in synchronization with
Isitra Zero.” Spock pointed to a line of ships on the system map.
“Here, and along this route. Berlis has deployed vessels that have
allowed him to create a chain all the way to the colony.”
“To what end?” McCoy asked.
Alert lights began to flash on the helm and a Klaxon sounded. Kirk
pivoted toward the lower bridge. “Contact?”
Chekov poked at his console and shrugged. Brow crinkled, he
looked back at the captain. “I—I think we’re being scanned.”
“Fascinating.” Spock bent over his scanner and in a short moment
straightened up, one brow jutting up. “Both the colony and Isitra
Zero are scanning us.”
“That’s triggering deflector screens?” Kirk peered over Spock
toward the report coming up on the second screen above the Vulcan.
“The intensity of their scan is disruptive.” Spock nodded and
motioned to the power output.
“Since when are their sensors that strong?” McCoy asked.
“They were not,” Spock said, just a touch of concern layering his
voice, “twelve hours ago.”

“How is that possible?” Uhura asked.
A ball of tension knotted in Kirk’s back, and another was forming in
his stomach. “Berlis can direct an entire population to a single goal.”
“He’ll see the Odib coming,” McCoy said.
Kirk nodded and paced the bridge. “Why would he need such strong
sensors?”
“A long-range targeting device?” Sulu offered.
“Possibly,” Spock said.
“He needed the colony.” Kirk turned back to Spock. “Why?”
“Scanning.” Bowed again over his sensor cowl, the Vulcan remained
there a long time before standing straight and twisting to the captain.
“Reading an unusual power signature.” He’d neglected to sign the
last sentence, and Meshu looked at each of them, confused.
“Full power to shields,” Kirk ordered.
Scotty punched at the engineering controls. “Full shields, aye.”
As if smacked by a giant electrical fist, Enterprise ignited in sparks.
Consoles blasted smoke and circuits sizzled above them.
The lights flickered, and dimmed.

Sheh’s sensor officer shook his head and repeatedly tapped at his
board. “Confirmed. Disruption in the data stream.”
“Have we lost telemetry?” Sheh asked.
“Only a momentary fluctuation, but the data is garbled.”
“A trick?” She twisted toward communications. “How is our carrier?
Are we pulling any of our own data?”
“We are,” came the reply.
She stepped to Das’s side. “I feared our subterfuge was discovered.
It’s intact,” she said, “but should we risk irritating this Federation?”

Das shrugged and seemed more concerned with why the stream was
suddenly garbled. He rose and marched toward the sensor station.
“Divert power to computers, Lieutenant. Enhance the data.”
The lieutenant poked and prodded his console, moving data to the
touch screen with his fingertips. “The Isitri colony is firing on
Enterprise.”
Das looked at the information and watched the simulation based on
the data. The moon that housed the Isitri colony fired on the
Federation ship a second time.
“Again!” the sensor lieutenant called out.
Sweeping back toward the command chair, Das growled at the helm.
“Make way for the Isitri system.”
“We gave our word to them—” Sheh protested.
“Dead men hold no grievance.” Admiral Das folded himself into the
command chair. Disillusioned, he shook his head. “If they’re still
alive when we arrive, we will defend them. If dead, we will avenge
them.”

Golo reached out to Berlis and informed him Enterprise had been hit
by the new weapon. There was disappointment in that fact. They’d
hoped Captain Kirk would not interfere further; while Berlis owed
Kirk his life, Enterprise couldn’t be allowed to side with the Odib.
When the targeting scanners suggested there was a transmission
broadcast from Enterprise to the Odib system, Berlis regretted his
next suggestion: Disable the Federation vessel; if necessary, destroy
it.
An intense debate followed instantly: Which was the best course of
action? Berlis appreciated Spock and had learned much from him,

but was he worth saving if it meant keeping the Enterprise a threat?
Perhaps.
All involved asked Berlis for his opinion, since he knew Spock best
and also knew Kirk. Should Enterprise be destroyed?
The grief was overwhelming for him—for all Isitra—because the
conclusion was yes. Enterprise, by helping the Odib, had chosen to
betray their friendship. Sadly, it would be their undoing.

“Evasive!” Kirk ordered, and the ship turned so that neither the
planet nor moon was on the main viewer. The vessel wobbled under
another blast that appeared electrical in nature, zapping circuits from
every system. So much damage, so many small pops and
explosions—were the deflectors down? “Shields?”
“Shields unaffected, Captain,” Chekov reported.
“Wide scatter beam—” Spock’s voice was calm and unruffled.
“They’re tracking us closely.”
“Doctor, casualties in sickbay,” Uhura told McCoy.
“On my way,” he said, and headed for the turbolift.
The bosun’s whistle sounded and Kirk jammed down on the comm
button.
“Scott to bridge!”
“Yes, Mister Scott.”
“We’ve got an overload in the mains, sir! Engines are off line!”
“Auxiliary power to thrusters,” Kirk ordered, and thumbed the
button off. But the command was a futile one—thrusters wouldn’t
provide an escape. “Spock!”
“Damage to most major circuits—inertial dampeners, coolant
systems…” The Vulcan turned to meet Kirk’s eyes. “It’s a sensor

weapon. Shields cannot block the signal.”
They’d encountered sensors before that had been disruptive when
scanning, but this was ingenious. It was becoming clearer why the
Odib so feared the Isitri. To design—and implement—an entirely
new weapon in a matter of hours was chilling.
“We need to get out of here,” Kirk said and got back on the comm.
“Bridge to engineering. We need warp—”
Booooom! An explosion rumbled somewhere from below.
Scotty’s voice crackled from the speaker, peppered with static and
sparks. “I can only keep rerouting circuits so long, sir. As long as
they’re still training that beam on us—”
“Torpedoes?” Kirk looked to DeSalle at the engineering station.
He shook his head. “Circuits are cooked, Captain.”
Thinking only a short moment, Kirk motioned forward. “Come
about. Sulu, take us into the planet.”
“Coming about, aye.” Sulu twisted with the ship as he steered it
toward the gas giant.
“Batten for atmosphere,” Kirk ordered and a flurry of crosstalk
began across the bridge.
“Rerouting dampeners.”
“Confirmed.”
“Interconnects braced!”
“Verify.”
“All decks, aye.”
Another flood of sensor energy cascaded across the ship, making her
quake again.
“Thruster circuits damaged,” DeSalle called.
Sulu struck at his console. “Bypassing!”
“Spiral us in,” Kirk ordered, and Sulu turned back in shock.
“Sir?”
The captain pointed at the helm and Sulu instantly followed the
order as Kirk explained. “I want us to look as if we are out of
control.”

“Aye, sir.” Sulu nodded tightly and played with the controls, making
his powered descent look rough and random.
Enterprise dove down awkwardly on a haphazard course. The
atmosphere first blew out of their way, but the deeper they trod, the
more it crushed in on them, making the hull creak under the
pressure.
“The atmosphere is dissipating the beam,” Spock reported. “It’s
working.”
Kirk nodded. “Reduce forward shields. I want a little flare.”
Providing an elegant show, Enterprise was burning up in the gas
giant’s stratosphere.
“Put as much distance between us and the colony as possible,” Kirk
ordered, his neck beginning to unknot.
“Out of range in ten seconds,” Spock called.
The attacks stopped.
Jumping to the upper deck, Kirk nodded approvingly at his own
plan. “They’ll think we spun in and were crushed by the
atmosphere.” He tried to smile encouragingly at Meshu, whom he’d
forgotten was on the bridge. The slight woman was sitting in the
alternate science station chair, long fingers curled around the
underside of the seat—holding on for dear life. “Damage report,
Mister Spock.”
“Several circuits are on bypass.” The Vulcan flipped a switch and
brought the screen above them to life. An internal dorsal view of
Enterprise appeared. Red dots indicated a bypassed or downed
circuit.
“The ship has measles,” Kirk said wryly.
Spock nodded as if Kirk had made a helpful comment. “Some
backup circuits are down as well. Sensors are hampered. Warp and
impulse are offline, and external communications are down.”
“Communications and sensors,” Kirk groaned. “The Odib will
believe we’ve backed out of our deal.”
“Or that we’ve been destroyed.”

The captain looked at Uhura. “Tell Mister Scott I want priority on
warp, weapons, and inertial dampener circuits.”
“Aye, sir.”
Kirk shook his head and slid a thumb along his jaw. He looked at
Spock. “Getting you and Meshu to Isitra Zero just got that much
harder.”

Sheh-Keshemger hung her head when the last bits of information
rolled across her screen. She loaded the report on a tablet and took it
to the admiral.
He glanced at the screen and handed it back to her without a word.
“The last bits of telemetry indicated Enterprise was on a desperate,
out-of-control course into the gas giant.”
“I read it, Sheh.”
“Then you read my report on the Enterprise itself. Five times larger
than our biggest cruiser; their deflectors so sophisticated we can’t
even rate them; their engines are estimated at three warp factors
faster than ours.”
Das stroked his beard absentmindedly, as if thinking about more
important things. “We obviously won’t be doing battle with the
Enterprise, Commander.”
“No,” she said. “Just with those who scuttled her in a matter of
minutes.”
He met her bitter gaze with one of his own. “What would you have
us do? You know the history as well as anyone. What’s the one trait
all their troublesome minds have had in common?”
Sheh needn’t think about her answer. “Paranoia.”
“Extreme paranoia.” Das crossed his legs and looked at the starscape

that flew past on the main screen. “And tremendous strides made in
technology.”
“Thanks to our espionage unit, our own technology has been greatly
served as well,” Sheh pointed out.
Das grimaced. “At the cost of how many lives?”
A heavy sigh escaped Sheh’s chest. Das had put the entire Odib fleet
on a course that could easily lead to total disaster. “I’m not
advocating that we refuse to defend ourselves, Admiral. But neither
should we hasten our destruction by pitting our forces against an
unstoppable foe.”
“The more time passes,” Das told her, “the more unstoppable they
become.” He shook his head adamantly. “We are on an inexorable
path, Commander. Captain Kirk wished to delay it twelve hours—
and he is dead. Do you honestly suggest we wait and tempt the same
fate?”

SEVENTEEN

James Kirk, as the captain of a starship, felt it was his duty to
know every station aboard the Enterprise. It was his calling to know,
and he took it seriously. While that didn’t mean he knew the finer
details of everyone’s job better than they did, if needed he could
work the ship as any other crewman would. Today, he needed to.
That wasn’t quite correct. He wanted to. He knew what must be
done, and now just needed to repair the tools that would make it
possible. If he had not taken a hand in doing the maintenance
himself, he’d be sitting—waiting—and that would have been
unbearable.
Instead he was helping Scotty plan circuit reroutes and fail overs that
would hopefully be better shielded from the new sensor weapon the
Isitri had developed.
“Here?” Kirk asked his chief engineer, pointing to the diagram on
the clipboard. “No, here,” he corrected himself.
Scotty nodded with admiration. “Aye, it should work.”
Grabbing a Jefferies tube handrail, Kirk pushed himself up toward
the access panel they needed to bypass. “Mister Scott, you almost
sound surprised that I know what I’m doing.”
The Scotsman scoffed. “You’re the only captain in the fleet I’d let
touch his own ship, sir.” He handed Kirk up the laser probe he
needed. “Gettin’ your hands dirty now and again clears the brain,
doesn’t it?”
There was something about being in the guts of his ship that
contented James Kirk. Like he was a part of her, and she him. He

didn’t let his mind linger on such a thought, merely accepted the
feeling of security as if it were part of the vibration of the bulkheads
and deck plates.
Meshu made him wonder what he might do to get back his ship if
he’d ever lost it. It was a question he couldn’t answer…because he
honestly wasn’t sure.
Would he let hundreds die to save his ship? Thousands? Millions?
It wasn’t a proper mathematical equation because the unknown
quantity was always, “What hangs in the balance?”
Kirk had asked his first officer to continue working with Meshu, to
teach her the finer points of the Vulcan mental disciplines she would
need, partly because the captain didn’t want to think about some of
the trickier aspects of his own plan. Most of all, Kirk didn’t want
Spock trying to teach the same mental restraints to Berlis.
He assured the Vulcan that Meshu could better teach Berlis because
they were both Isitri, but in truth he was more anxious about Spock
losing himself to Berlis yet again.
As Kirk reached down the Jefferies tube and exchanged the laser
probe for a conduit sealer, he wondered how much Berlis knew
about his ship from his short time with Spock. Was it enough that all
this cross-circuiting and shielding was worthless? Would Berlis be
anticipating this move and directing an entire planet to find a way to
overcome it?
How could Kirk defeat billions of people all acting in unison against
him?
Weaving one circuit into another, Kirk looked down to see Scotty’s
form had been replaced by McCoy’s.
“They said I’d find you here.”
“And you did,” Kirk said as he continued working.
The doctor nodded up the corridor, probably to the next access panel
where Kirk knew his engineer had needed to complete his part of the
bypass. “Not enough to do your own job, you have to do Scotty’s?”
Kirk shrugged, but he was probably at too odd an angle for McCoy

to notice. “We need all hands to complete this work before the Odib
get here.”
“They said they’d wait twelve hours.”
“They agreed to terms that then became moot when we were
attacked and lost the ability to hold up our end of the bargain,” Kirk
explained.
“Why not trust them to wait anyway?”
“Because I wouldn’t wait. Waiting isn’t smart.” Stretching a long
cable between two relays that weren’t really designed to be
connected, Kirk marveled at how technology could be manipulated
beyond its intended purpose. “How many hours did it take the Isitri
to come up with an entirely new weapon—not just on a drawing
board but also building an actual successfully operational model?”
he asked McCoy as he worked.
“Not long,” the doctor grumbled.
Scotty popped his head in front of McCoy and called up the tube.
“Another ten minutes for main engine power, sir. I don’t like the
way some of those coolant systems look.”
Pushing himself down and onto the deck, Kirk nodded. “Very good,
Mister Scott.”
“Full sensors can be brought back online,” Scotty said as he
marched purposefully up the corridor, toward main engineering.
“We’ll be able to see again,” Kirk said.
McCoy gestured to the Jefferies tube. “That means you’re done
here?”
No, it meant he had something more to do than wait. “I’m just
getting started.”

“Communications status?” The doctor in tow, Kirk strode from the
turbolift to Uhura’s station.
“Subspace transceiver circuits are fully bypassed, sir.” She looked
up at him. “Continuing subspace silence, per your order.”
“Maintain,” Kirk said. “And call Mister Spock to the bridge,
please.”
“Aye, sir.”
“Subspace silence?” McCoy asked as Kirk retired to the command
chair.
“We made it look like we lost control and were crushed in the
atmosphere,” Kirk explained. “They’d never find wreckage even if
they took the time to look. If they assume we’re dead, that gives us
an advantage.”
The doctor stepped down to the lower bridge and took his normal
position at the left side of the command chair. “Why would they
assume that?”
“Because Berlis is naïve.” Kirk reached back and tried to massage a
tight muscle out of the back of his neck. “Chista pointed out how
young he was. Being in command of anything—a colony, ship, fleet,
or planet—it requires a certain amount of experience.”
“But Chista wasn’t inexperienced,” McCoy pointed out. “There’ll be
plenty of advisers helping him.”
“You know what a B-29 is, Bones?”
“Riboflavin and folic acid?”
Kirk’s eyes squinted quizzically, his brows knitting.
“Now you know how I feel,” McCoy said wryly.
“It’s an airplane.” Kirk smirked. “A bomber used by the United
States in the Second World War. Stalin…” He paused, seeing if the
doctor remembered his history. “Stalin?”
McCoy smiled mockingly. “Stalin I’m familiar with, thank you.”
The captain swallowed a small chuckle. “Even though Soviet Russia
fought on the side of the Allies, political tensions were high. The

Americans refused to give plans for the bomber to Stalin’s air force,
and American pilots were warned not to land in Soviet territory—”
“Even in case of an emergency?” McCoy asked.
“Three B-29s had to land under mechanical duress and while Stalin
shipped the crews back home—”
The doctor nodded his understanding. “He kept the ships.”
“Planes,” Kirk corrected. “Yes.” He glanced around and noticed
Sulu and DeSalle were both listening. Uhura surely was as well.
“You got a point somewhere in here about the Isitri or Berlis?”
McCoy asked.
Ignoring the attitude, Kirk pressed on. “Stalin ordered his people to
reverse engineer the stolen bombers. Part by part, they copied the
planes, until they could build a prototype. Stalin issued orders that
the B-29 was to be copied precisely—in all ways—right down to the
colors she was painted inside the bomb bay.” The captain waved a
finger as if Stalin had merely chided his underlings. “No deviation
would be tolerated, and the head of the program was also in charge
of the secret police.” Kirk swiped his thumb across his own throat.
“How convenient.”
“He ruled through terror and oppression,” Kirk said.
“Which…worked. They got an exact duplicate of a B-29. But—”
“Here it comes,” McCoy said with a good-natured smile.
“Including all her flaws.” Kirk’s eyebrows shot up at the punchline.
“No design is perfect and the American bomber had its share. In
reverse engineering it, the Soviet scientists saw these flaws, but were
afraid to deviate from their orders to create an exact duplicate.”
It dawned on McCoy how this related to their present situation.
“Berlis doesn’t have advisers,” he said. “He has followers.”
Kirk nodded. “He might not enslave through terror, and his people
don’t even feel enslaved. But they are. Stalin’s people were afraid of
defying his will. Berlis’s people don’t have a will other than his.”
A chilling fact, and the dread was evident on the good doctor’s face
and on Kirk’s as well. As the captain turned toward Uhura, he found

the same dismay on her face.
“Mister Spock is on his way, sir,” she said, her voice unsettled.
Kirk nodded and gave her an encouraging nod and a touch of a smile
before heading toward Chekov who was under Spock’s station. The
young ensign was helping a red-jumpsuited technician with console
reroutes. The Isitri weapon could be countered at the circuit level,
but if the controls overloaded, the sensors themselves would be of
little value.
Chekov pulled himself up just as Kirk stepped up to the upper bridge
level. “Captain, we’re just about to test.”
The technician closed the access bay and the console came alive.
Lights and screens brightened and the hum of the controls added
their rhythm to the din of the bridge. It completed a song of sorts,
and suddenly the bridge sounded right.
One hand touching a set of controls, and the other flipping three
switches, Chekov brought the sensors online.
As if summoned at that very moment by his station, the turbolift
doors parted and Spock glided toward them. McCoy took a step
toward the Vulcan, but didn’t scan or otherwise examine him. A
certain ten sion bathed the bridge. Was Spock himself? Certainly
not—he was maintaining a meld with Meshu who was five decks
below. But would that link change him in the same way his link with
Berlis had? Kirk didn’t think so—but he wasn’t sure, and perhaps
some doubt showed on his face. A crew always followed their
captain’s lead, and he didn’t have the luxury of uncertainty.
To augment his confidence in Spock, Kirk gestured to the science
station. “Excellent timing as usual, Mister Spock. We need you at
sensors.”
“Technically, Captain, I should point out that both Meshu and I will
be at this station.”
“Of course,” Kirk said, and hoped his voice remained free of
trepidation.
“You are relieved, Ensign.”

Chekov nodded and returned to navigation. Kirk looked at Spock for
a long moment as the Vulcan turned to the sensors. When the
captain returned to the command chair he found McCoy was
watching Spock as intently.
“Engaging scanners,” Spock said as Kirk lowered himself into the
center seat.
Before Kirk could order a tactical screen onto the main viewer, the
turbolift doors opened again. Scotty went straight to the engineering
station and hovered near DeSalle.
“Main power’s restored, sir.”
“Scotty, you’re taking your timing cues from Spock now,” Kirk told
him, but the cheer in his tone felt false and he wondered if it
sounded as empty.
“All decks report ready, Captain,” Uhura announced.
“Red alert.” Kirk thumbed a button on the arm of his chair. “Let’s be
ready for anything.” He nodded at Spock. “Tactical.”
The forward screen flashed to life and filled with data. A graphical
representation of the Enterprise was at the center, then shrank to a
dot as the image shifted to include the local part of the Isitri system.
“Damn,” McCoy breathed when he saw it, and Kirk felt his jaw
drop. Spock clung to his sensor cowl and everyone else stood ready.
“Battle stations!” Kirk called.
They’d taken too long. The Odib were already here, and Berlis’s
Isitri forces were ready to engage them.

EIGHTEEN

Battle stations, battle stations. All hands: battle stations. This is
not a drill. Repeat: This is not a drill.”
Too long. He’d waited too long. Kirk took the heavy blame and
pressed it into his chest. He should have put Spock and Meshu on a
shuttle and sent them to Isitra Zero. He should have risked it—a
calculated risk. But he hesitated, hoping to see them along himself,
to keep an eye on Spock as if he could use his will to snap the
Vulcan back into the fold if Berlis grabbed hold. It was a foolish
delay.
The Odib filled the outer system, massing most of their numbers in
the penumbra of the gas giant, protecting themselves from Colony
First and its new weapon.
Just as Enterprise poked out of the clouds, the lead Odib ships fired
guided charges that swam toward the colony. Only when the sensor
weapon was destroyed would they be able to make a clean break for
Isitra Zero.

Berlis’s fighters couldn’t venture forth fast enough to stop the Odib
missiles, and didn’t even try. As the missiles got closer, the new
offensive sensor weapon snapped into the arsenal, quickly disabling
them so they fell toward the planet. Hot with friction as they crashed
into the atmosphere, they rained down, burning quickly to vapor.
Revealing herself to both sides, Enterprise sped forward, placing her
massive form between the opposing fleets. No one fired. No ship
moved. The imposing Federation starship was three times larger and
generally more powerful than any of the vessels gathered around
her. Collectively, either fleet could defeat the Enterprise, but neither
side wanted to begin a battle that would leave itself open to attack.
Kirk sat anxiously forward, and imagined the admirals of each fleet
were doing the same on their ships. Or was Berlis directing his fleet
from the safe confines of an Isitra Zero bunker? There was no way
to be sure.
“Steady as she goes, Sulu,” the captain said.
The Enterprise couldn’t block the Odib and the Isitri from fighting if
they wanted to, but her appearance obviously shocked them. Both
probably thought her destroyed. They wondered now what she
would do next.
So did Kirk. Did he fire on the invading vessels in an attempt to
warn them off from their own destruction? Did he engage the Isitri
and hope they backed off? The thought of militarily engaging what
essentially were innocent people acting against their wills was not
what he had bargained for when hoping to make first contact with
the Isitri.
He kept his eyes on the main viewscreen, which was now split into
two tactical displays showing each fleet. Kirk then turned slightly
back toward Uhura. “Raise the Odib. I want to talk to Admiral Das.”
“Aye, sir.”

“Kirk on communications channel zeta,” Sheh said after looking
over the comm officer’s shoulder. “Flagged urgent.”
Das frowned, his brow weaving tightly inward. Three minutes into
when the battle was to begin, they were at a standstill. The first
salvo was destroyed, but it was to be a distraction for a second
volley, in the hopes that the Isitri weapon could not cope with
another attack so quickly. Kirk’s surprising imposition ruined that
tactic.
“Down here,” the admiral grunted, gesturing to the screen off the
side of his chair. He didn’t want his strategic charts removed from
the large center screen.
Some sort of Federation flag or standard appeared first. Then Kirk
came into view. The bridge of his ship was impressive: large and
colorful with a flurry of activity. Kirk sat confidently in a center seat
similar to Das’s but with less equipment attached to it. Perhaps Kirk
wasn’t a hands-on commander. Das was.
Federationites were an interesting breed, varied in their form.
Different colors, at least one had ears shaped different from the rest,
and all seemed to have hair on their heads but not their chins, the
opposite of the Odib. Das stroked his beard and tried to picture
himself with hair on his head, but only fleetingly as he knew he’d
look ridiculous.
When he was done sizing Kirk up, he was ready to talk. “This is
Das. Speak.”
He’d been harsh to see how Kirk would react, and the Federationite
didn’t blanch or falter. “This is Kirk. Listen.”
A smile could have appeared on Das’s face if he’d let it. He liked
people who were direct and unflinching. “I’m listening.”
“I’m not confident of the security of this channel so I’ll be brief.”
Kirk stood and looked intently at Das. “I need you to stand down
your fleet. The weapon that destroyed your torpedoes will do the
same to your ships. Your shields will be useless.”

Das glanced at Sheh-Keshemger for confirmation. Her shoulders
rolled in an uncertain shrug.
“There’s no way to know,” she said. “Scans of the weapon are
difficult to decipher.”
“We have a large fleet, Captain,” Das told Kirk. “They can’t destroy
all of us before we raze them.”
Obviously frustrated, Kirk’s face tightened. “Admiral—”
With a raised hand, Das cut him off. “You don’t know this situation,
Jamesty-Kirk. Your people have no personal stake in our fate, nor do
you have the history of death visited on you by the Isitri. If you
attempt to stop us, you become our enemy, and will be vanquished
along with the troublesome mind’s forces.”
A nod to Sheh indicated Das wanted the transmission ended. She
motioned for the communications officer to do so, but did not leave
the admiral’s side.
“I know you have doubts,” he said before she could speak. He met
her eyes and in a low whisper said, “I understand.” It was his way of
saying he also had reservations, but it would have been inappropriate
for him to say so on his own bridge.
Sheh nodded grimly. There was a congress of world leaders who had
entrusted him with protecting the homeworld, and that weighed on
him. How could he trust Kirk—this man he didn’t know, who had
some unknown agenda, and was obviously aligned with the Isitri?
He couldn’t. His instinct told him Kirk was trustworthy, but for all
he knew the Enterprise captain was a speaking telepath who was
held by the troublesome mind and broadcasting a trusting aura.
No, Kirk could not be trusted. Das would certainly lose a great
number of his forces, but the Isitri would be sent back to
preindustrial times—and they would never be allowed into space
again. Those were the consequences of breaking the treaty, and that
is what would be done.
He would attempt to avoid dealing with the Federationites, but
should they get in his way, it would be their mistake.

The screen returned to the starscape view and Kirk sighed. He was
sympathetic to Das’s predicament and respected his determination,
but that left the captain with his own dilemma.
“Mister Spock.” Kirk nodded and went over to the rail beneath the
Vulcan’s station.
Spock swiveled his chair toward the captain and calmly waited.
“What are the chances Meshu—with your help—could pull control
of the Isitri colonists from Berlis?” Kirk asked.
Spock considered the question quietly. “Unlikely,” he said finally.
“Is that your judgment or Meshu’s?” McCoy asked.
“Both. The longer Berlis is in control of his people, the more
difficult it is to wrench them away from that control. Ending his life
would be shocking enough to sever the connection abruptly and they
would notice the immediate absence but the colonists have been
linked to him for years. It’s why he was able to take short visits to
Isitra Zero without them noticing his power over them had lapsed.
When the loss of the connection is gradual, an individual’s will is
slow to reassert itself.”
“But if Meshu can abruptly lock Berlis out…” Kirk said.
“That is not a struggle to be fought in the minds of the inhabitants of
Isitra Zero, let alone those of the colonists.” Spock spoke so matterof-factly, as if there were zero doubt about this most uncertain
enterprise. “That battle is one we must wage in Berlis’s mind with a
direct link.”
“We?” That hadn’t been the plan, Kirk thought, but he also hadn’t
thought through the exact details. The original idea was that with
Spock’s mental disciplines taught to her, Meshu would be able to
wrench control away from Berlis while also keeping him out of her
head. Now, it sounded as if Spock was talking about being the link

between Berlis and Meshu himself. “You? Personally?”
“I have been attempting to teach Meshu the protections I employ
that block Berlis from my mind,” Spock said. “We’ve found the
Isitri brain is incapable of several of the necessary Vulcan mental
restraints. If we are to succeed, it will be necessary to initiate a meld
between myself and Berlis. While Meshu rips control away from
him among the people, I will secure his mind so he cannot wrest
them back from her.”
Kirk felt a cold sweat break across his neck. “You’ll be the conduit?”
“I must be.”
Was McCoy right all along? He certainly thought so: “You’ll open
your mind to Berlis,” the doctor exclaimed, incredulously. “And just
let him in.”
“If Meshu is to succeed in pulling the Isitri people to her will, and
away from Berlis’s, we must work together.”
It seemed logical, within the context of what Kirk had been told
about the situation, but the source of that information was Spock.
“Pretty damn dangerous, if you ask me, Jim,” McCoy said.
Spock tilted his head, a Vulcan type of shrug. “The odds this will
succeed make it a reasonable calculated risk.”
“Do I want to know the odds?” Kirk asked.
A lifted brow was the captain’s only answer. Truth be told, he didn’t
want to know the odds, not specifically. Because as foolish as it all
now sounded…it was the only plan available to them. Knowing just
how stacked against them things were would only cause worry he
didn’t have time to deal with.
“We have to get you to Isitra,” Kirk said, turning toward the main
viewer. “And simultaneously stop the Odib from destroying the
colonists—and their homeworld.”
“There is no other way,” Spock assured him.
So it seemed, but was it true? McCoy had pointed out—correctly—
that if all this time Berlis had been connected to Spock, this would
be exactly what he’d want the Vulcan to do: bring Meshu and

himself to Isitra Zero where they could be joined permanently to the
Isitri mind-link.
How sure was Kirk that Spock was himself? He was supposed to
know if he wasn’t, but that was before Spock melded with Meshu.
Now Spock was necessarily different. He wasn’t just himself, but a
Spock-Meshu hybrid.
As the captain studied his first officer’s sharp Vulcan features, he
tried to decode the minute expressions Spock allowed to flash
occasionally in his eyes and across his visage.
“Captain!” Chekov’s call spun Kirk around.
On the main viewscreen, the Odib fleet was moving forward and the
Isitri ships were holding back. The colony would respond first with
their sensor weapon.
He twisted back to Spock who was already analyzing his console’s
data. “Sensors can be jammed,” Kirk said of the colony’s offensive
artillery. “What about it?”
Spock was skeptical. “The power needed to attempt such an
obstruction would be prohibitive.”
Kirk wondered aloud: “We’ve rerouted circuits to protect
them…how long can we last against that weapon?”
“Three attacks.” Spock checked a calculation. “Perhaps four.”
“We’re going to be the bait, Mister Spock.” Kirk pivoted from his
first officer to the main screen and the ensuing battle. The captain
knew he was more comfortable dealing with the dilemma of Berlis
and Meshu. “We’ll distract the Isitri and the Odib,” he told Spock,
“while you and Meshu take a shuttle for Isitra Zero. Can you get
through the remainder of the Isitri defenses?”
Spock rose and relinquished his station to Ensign Cordell. “I believe
we can,” he said to Kirk.
“Good. Get Meshu, and hurry.”
As the Vulcan strode to the turbolift, Kirk swiveled around to meet
his gaze. “And Mister Spock…” He wanted to tell him to be careful
or keep his head about him, but instead let a playful grin tug at the

corners of his lips. “Try not to destroy this shuttle.”
Spock nodded accommodatingly. “I shall endeavor not to, Captain.”

NINETEEN

S

pock’s and Meshu’s small shuttlecraft arced speedily toward
Isitra Zero, cutting a line between the gas giant and the colony’s
moon.
“The shuttle is away, sir,” Sulu reported.
“The Odib fleet is closing in on Colony First,” Chekov said from the
science station. “Isitri fighters from the colony are moving to

intercept.”
“Put us between them, Sulu,” Kirk ordered and glanced only briefly
at the navigational coordinates. “Course one-one-three, mark seven.”
As Enterprise curved up between the two forces, McCoy leaned in
and whispered, “You sure about this, Jim? Maybe I should have
gone with them.”
Maybe. But sparing the doctor at a time like this merely to babysit
his first officer made little operational sense. “I need you here,” Kirk
told him as he watched the tactical display. “Things are going to get
rough.”
“Not too rough—sickbay still has beds filled from the last attack.”
McCoy headed toward the turbolift. “I’ll release those I can back to
their cabins. We’ll make do.”
“I hope you don’t have to,” the captain said back to him.
As McCoy stepped in, he said not quite under his breath, “From
your lips to Spock’s pointy ears.”
Kirk managed to toss an admonishing look at him just as the doors
slid closed.
“The Odib are launching another salvo, sir,” Cordell reported. “The
colony is firing.”
Strings of energy, made visible only with the computer enhancement
of the main viewer, flowed forward from the Isitri colony and
collided with Odib missiles. Bright sparks flashed and dimmed and
the artillery broke apart into large chunks of debris. Only one missile
detonated, sending the rest into oblivion, long before reaching their
intended target.
Another salvo from the colony reached the Odib fleet itself.
“Block it, Sulu!” Kirk ordered, grasping tightly to the arms of the
center seat. “Put us in the way.”
The sound of something that was a cross between bacon sizzling on
a grill and the crackle of a security cell’s force field echoed across
the bridge. Tendrils of electricity spat through the shields, across the
saucer section, and over the ship’s console.

“Circuits holding, sir,” DeSalle told them all.
Kirk thumped his knee. “Bless you, Scotty.”
As Enterprise was struck the Odib fired again. This time the missiles
met their targets, smacking into Colony First and erupting into a
massive explosion that cleaved the moon’s atmosphere with dust
and molten debris.
Aghast, Kirk’s stomach churned. How many people just died
because he’d put his ship between the Isitri weapon and Odib
forces?
Hawk-like and vengeful, Isitri fighters spread across the Odib line,
firing fine, thin tendrils of energy.
“They’ve retrofitted their ships with the weapon,” Chekov said from
Spock’s sensors. “Weaker but still disruptive.”
This was why the Odib so feared the Isitri. In a matter of hours, with
the entire mental resources of both planet and colony forced to focus
on a single goal, Isitri technology had taken a giant leap forward.
Just two days prior they’d had weapons that couldn’t seriously
challenge the Enterprise one on one. Not anymore.

You are concerned, Meshu said.
It was useless to deny the truth, as the conversation Meshu had with
Spock was on a telepathic level. My ship is in danger, he told her.
You hide your emotions.
Spock made a minor course adjustment and found Meshu’s hand
was already on the console, making the necessary changes. To not
reveal one’s emotions is not the same as hiding them. I merely do
not succumb to emotional displays.
She looked at him and sensed it was more than that, but accepted his

word for now. Why? she asked.
It is the way of my people.
Why? she asked, and quickly huffed a puff of air as she perceived
his irritation. I am not a child. I am merely curious. Would you
rather I investigate your mind for these answers while we are
melded?
Maintain your discipline, Spock told her.
Then answer me. It wasn’t a threat on her part, simply an expression
of the fact that if he were interested in responding to her questions
and unwilling to further open his experiences to her, he would have
to convey the information himself.
My forefathers have a history of great violence due to uncontrolled
emotions, he explained. To counter it, we use reason.
Do you speak of your Vulcan forebears, or of humans? Certain
knowledge was inherent in the meld, so Meshu was aware of
Spock’s dual heritage.
Yes, he answered simply.
Have you no use for any emotions? She looked at him as he flew the
shuttle on a far course around the Isitri star, hoping to use the solar
radiation to mask their approach. With planetary sensors focused on
the outer system, it was a sound tactic.
Emotions are not tools of cognition, Spock told her. They tell you
nothing about the nature of reality.
Her chin quivered. Perhaps, but cannot emotions tell you something
of yourself?
He didn’t look at her, and instead shut down certain power outputs
that could be easily scanned by Berlis’s people. I am already
familiar with myself, he said finally.
Meshu made a chirping laugh. I know you don’t believe you’re
fooling me, Spock. And I doubt you can fool yourself.
Emotions exist, Spock said. To not accept that I have them would be
illogical.
Meshu pressed on. And to embrace them? Would that be so

illogical?
No, he replied. But not preferable. Where might it end?
Happiness? She laughed again. I am reminding you of your mother.
Yes, he admitted. You are.
Meshu frowned. I have unsettled you. I am sorry.
I am not unsettled, Spock told her, and didn’t doubt it until she
doubted it. He did feel more emotional now that he was connected to
her—as he had when he was linked to Berlis. The struggle to keep
both Berlis blocked and Meshu disciplined left little energy for the
ordering of Spock’s own feelings.
She huffed a negating breath. You work so hard to shield your
emotions from others—and yourself. But I am here, with you. Our
minds touch. And you have not easily shielded your feelings from
me.
Those had been the sentiments he’d just had, but conceptualized in a
slightly different way. One of the disadvantages of a telepathic
discussion was the speed of it—there was no time to guard one’s
thoughts and feelings. Then I owe you an apology, he said.
You mustn’t. Meshu smiled at him. I understood why Berlis enjoyed
communicating with you. Your mind is refreshing.
As was his. That wasn’t something Spock would have normally
shared, but it was true, and Meshu was right—he couldn’t easily
fool her.
You miss him, she said.
Spock’s reply was instant, unshielded. Yes.
This will be difficult for both of us.
He need not look in her eyes to know what she felt. Her emotions—
her longing—washed over him and called to his own. Through
Berlis, Spock had experienced the unbridled emotions of billions of
people. He always had the same feelings as anyone, but generally
wouldn’t allow himself to practice them. Connected to Berlis he
could leave his own emotions unexpressed but yet know the
sensations of all those whose minds he touched. He didn’t wish to

admit to himself how much he enjoyed it…but Meshu’s presence in
his mind made such deception—and self-delusion—difficult.
She, too, had a longing that was satisfied via telepathy, and Spock
forthrightly asked her how difficult it might be to wrench herself
away from Isitra once she reconnected with her people.
I sincerely hope, she said, that it will not be impossible.
They shared a silent moment, where neither thought anything. But
they both felt an incomparable sorrow. The paths of their respective
lives had led them to be so close to happiness, and yet demanded
they reject bliss in favor of morality.
A choice, Spock told himself and Meshu, is the root of all morality.
Without choice, one can have no moral code. It was a tenet of
Vulcan philosophy, and he recited it to reassure himself—and
Meshu—that they had chosen the proper course. In a vacuum bereft
of alternatives, there can be no values. And without values, there
can be no reason for a code of ethics.
She understood, and also didn’t fully comprehend why he was
explaining such a simplistic thought.
Because, he told her, what gives our lives meaning is which
alternatives we choose. If we have no options, if we can take but one
path, we are by definition slaves.
Their eyes met, and it seemed to make their connec tion stronger.
We each choose our paths based on the values we assign to
ourselves, and others. I value the liberty of the Isitri people above
my own pleasure.
Meshu made an affirmative gasp. She understood.
You must do more than understand, Spock told her. You must agree
that it is also your goal.
Their connection being what it was, she would not be able to
convince him she was as resolute as he. I can only promise to try,
Spock.
He silently accepted her frank admission that she was not fully
committed to their objective.

And I hope, she added, that I do not weaken your resolve with my
own.
Spock had considered that possibility before McCoy had even
mentioned it. Indeed.

Energy plumes from the Isitri fighters raked across Enterprise,
covering her in electrical flame. Enterprise threw javelins of blue
energy at its attackers, creating plasma eruptions and jettisoning
coolant into space.
“Kirk protects us,” Sheh said urgently. “He obstructs the Isitri
forces.”
A cascade of explosions rumbled beneath her, shaking her stride as
she wobbled to Das’s command chair.
“Some are getting through,” he said.
“They have conventional weapons,” Sheh told him and held up a
tactical tablet for him to view. “Less than half their fleet have this
new sensor weapon.”
“Good.” Das poked at the screen of her tablet, indicating the ships
he wanted targeted first. “We’ll repay the favor to Jamesty-Kirk by
finishing those he cannot.”

“Phasers to disable only, Sulu.” Kirk knew that was a good thought,
but unlikely to be easily followed. Guesses could be made as to the

strength needed to put a ship’s engines offline, but who could say
what else was damaged in the process? A degree this way or that and
a critical system could be vaporized.
Sulu accepted the task nevertheless. “Aye, sir.”
“The Odib are engaging the Isitri we can’t occupy,” came the tense
report from the starboard aft. Cordell was young, an ensign like
Chekov but with less experience. Kirk would almost prefer the
Russian split in two—half of him at Spock’s sensors, the other at
navigation. In battle, he opted for the man’s prowess at tactics and
torpedoes.
“Sulu, disable Odib ships as well, if in range.” Kirk let out an
exasperated breath. “We’re not taking sides.”
Soon the Odib were firing on Enterprise as well. Conventional
disruptors, weaker than those of the Klingons or Romulans—but
when coming from the dozens of ships that swam around them like
so many lightning bugs on a warm summer’s night…
Despite now engaging the Odib as well, Kirk felt like he was taking
a side. This was all to save the Isitri. If he really wanted to stop the
Odib from destroying Isitra Zero and the colony, all Kirk needed to
do was destroy the capital of Home Zero and the bunker below.
Enterprise could do so in a matter of minutes. Morally that option
was close to him and yet he was causing casualties on both Odib and
Isitri fleet ships, calculating—hoping—that in the long run fewer
lives would be lost.
Berlis’s fighters dove toward Enterprise, skimming away from her
phasers and layering the ship with tendrils of disruptive energy.
Working in unison, Sulu and Chekov brought their vessel’s sharp
fangs to bear and raw bars of energy connected with first one Isitri
ship, then another, sending both off course in opposite directions.
Another three fighters swooped in, firing the Isitri offensive sensor
spread.
“Circuits holding,” DeSalle reported. “No significant damage.”
Yet, Kirk thought. Yet.

As each ship hobbled away the captain made a mental calculation of
how many injured there might be…and how many dead. The Odib
could be said to have chosen their fate, but these Isitri did not.
Berlis’s destiny was thrust upon them, and they simply believed it to
be their own.
“Another Isitri fighter, sir.”
Another. How many would he have to fire on?
He wanted to have Uhura contact Spock. He needed to know how
close they were to landing on Isitra Zero. But they couldn’t chance a
transmission that might give away the shuttle’s position. Kirk would
have to trust that it was going well—and trust that Spock and Meshu
could complete their mission before both the Isitri and Odib fleets
were devastated. And before Enterprise was as well.

We’ve been discovered. Unable to sign, his hands busy on the
controls, Spock had to let Meshu know telepathically. A highpitched squeak expressed her shock as the Isitri fighters fired on the
shuttle.
They’ve equipped their vessels with similar sensor weapons to what
the colony developed. Spock engaged in evasive maneuvers that
would bring him closer to Isitra Zero’s atmosphere, but zigging
toward it meant having to zag away, and for every two steps forward
he had to jump one back.
Shields are useless to us, he told Meshu as he routed power away
from those circuits in the hopes they would be reserved for now and
could be bypassed later.
Meshu’s thin fingers gripped the sides of her chair tightly. We shall
die! One could not scream telepathically, but the urgency of her

thought was evident.
Calm, Spock suggested, and she used his stillness of psyche to
compose herself. Help me, he asked of her. She began hitting
buttons, unsure of what they did, but through Spock knowing
exactly their purpose.
A series of shots sizzled across the shuttle’s dorsal plates as it veered
into the atmosphere. Circuits crackled and failed and when Spock
attempted to switch to the unused shield relays, they overloaded,
failing instantly. Without shields, the outer skin quickly heated, and
a burning trail of smoke streamed behind them as they fell through
the stratosphere.
A powered landing was impossible without circuits through which
they could route power. And an unpowered landing meant death on
impact.
Meshu was oddly calm. She said good-bye to Spock and was
thankful she would at least meet her end on her home planet. Let the
soil of Home Zero accept me back.

TWENTY

The plan, such as it was, had been to distract the Isitri and Odib—
keep them from fighting each other by forcing them to engage the
Enterprise. But there were too many ships in each fleet to sustain
that tactic, and Kirk had to dart from skirmish to skirmish, blocking
some ships from taking blasts, and surgically removing other ships
from battle by disabling their engines. But casualties were going to
occur, and the running tally the captain kept in his head weighed on
him oppressively. Every slice of phasers added to it.
“Fire.”
An Isitri fighter dorsal strut was sheared off, sending the ship off
course at an odd angle, plasma flame sputtering behind it.
“Fire.”
An Odib engine vent erupted into space, throwing the vessel into a
tight spin, away from the Isitri line.
“Fire”
Shields were hit on two more ships, one from each fleet. They each
spun around and unleashed their own weapons—not on each other,
but on the Enterprise. She took the salvos, shuddered through them,
and returned the volley.
Pulling punches was not easy for a starship battling two fleets that
were trying to destroy each other. One ship had been launching
torpedoes into another—destroying both. The shockwave disabled
other vessels nearby, and they were going to lose life support.
Enterprise couldn’t beam the people aboard. Lifeboats exploded
away from the area, spiraling toward Colony First. With luck they’d

survive a crash landing. Those pulled into the gas giant’s
atmosphere would be crushed.
Kirk’s private, morbid tally grew.
The battle waged on. But as Kirk anxiously ordered Enterprise to
take the brunt of yet another firefight between the two enemies, he
knew of no other solution. This was the most moral choice he could
make. It was hopefully buying Spock the time he needed.

There was no time to view the ground below in any detail. There
were no sensors left to scan for the safest landing pad. Spock and
Meshu relied on her memories of the capital city—memories of an
adolescent girl, who had been taken from her home many years ago.
The shuttle dropped quickly. Meshu wanted to reach out to the
nearest Isitri. Through that, she’d be able to understand the changes
to the city and could direct Spock where to glide in.
You mustn’t, he warned her. Connecting to any Isitri mind was the
same as tapping Berlis on the shoulder and alerting him to their plan.
The last of the unburned circuits to which Spock could switch
finally sizzled offline. As the wind howled through cracks burned
into the bulkheads, he escaped the pilot’s chair and pried open an
access panel in the deck.
The shuttle vibrated around them as Spock’s fingers reached for the
manual charge release for the emergency landing bags.
Meshu felt the explosion all around her and a high-pitched bleat
screeched through her nostrils.
The shuttle hit the ground and bounced three times. Spock grabbed
for Meshu, and hugged her around her seat back, pinning them both
to the stationary chair. Had he not, they’d have bounced around the

cabin like rag dolls.
Outside, high-impact balloons were softening the landing as best
they could. What would have been crushing death was high-g
oppression, but they lived.
The rocking back and forth stopped as abruptly as it had begun but
Meshu’s bleating continued until Spock pressed into her
telepathically.
Calm. We are safe. Calm.
Spock pulled her toward the hatch. He grabbed his tricorder, a
phaser, and made sure his communicator was still intact.
Still in shock and shaking with fear, Meshu looked out on her home
planet for the first time since she was a child. She stumbled out the
hatch. She looked around, wobbled weakly forward, and touched a
tree…then collapsed into it, holding it close to her, and sobbing
gently.
Zero, she said over and over to herself. Zero. Zero. Zero.
Allowing her a private moment to console herself and regain control,
Spock surveyed the area. It was an open glade covered in fern-like
plants and short grass with scattered bushes and trees. He assessed
the shuttle: crumpled, pitted, scorched, but intact enough. Spock
thought of the human saying: Any landing after which one was
ambulatory was acceptable.
Tricorder readings told Spock the capital was less than two
kilometers away. Under the city was the bunker complex where
Berlis and the local council were probably sequestered. Isitri
security forces, Spock knew from his previous link with Berlis,
would be organized against an Odib infantry landing—not against
two stealth infiltrators.
We must go, Spock told Meshu, placing his hand under her elbow—
trying to bolster her both physically and mentally.
The city is close, she said.
Spock showed her the tricorder scan of the area. Access to the

underground is closer still. There is an entrance tunnel nearby.
We must go, she echoed.

They must go, the military advisers pled to Berlis. Our forces cannot
be deployed in such a widespread configuration. We need them at
Colony First! He saw the tactical maps in their minds. He touched
the concern in their hearts. He knew they were right, but instinct told
him not to push those ships too far into the system, even if Colony
First needed reinforcements.
We will lose our link should we move those vessels, Berlis worried to
them. Can we not send support from Zero Home?
His commanders complained it would take too long. The Enterprise
has disabled more than half our fleet, Berlis.
But Kirk battles the Odib as well, diminishing their numbers,
another of the fleet captains offered.
If Berlis allowed the link to be broken, he would not be connected to
his Colony First home, and they were most comfortable to him.
Could he leave them in a time of need? A time of fear? Many had
already died in the initial Odib strike on their homes. For Berlis to
abandon those families now, deserting them…I cannot sanction it.
Please, I implore you, Berlis told the commanders, do not pull those
ships from their locations.
We shall not, they all agreed. It would be wrong to abandon the
colonists.
Berlis gasped an affirmative breath. Chista, who sat to his side, did
as well. They smiled at each other, nervously reassuring one another
and the other members of the capital council as well.
On Colony First, those who had known Berlis the longest

bittersweetly rejoiced that he would remain in contact with them,
even as they jointly mourned with him over their dead.
When death occurred, every disconnection was a painful slap to their
collective psyche. They all wished that the Odib and Enterprise
would soon see reason and stop their unwarranted attacks on the
Isitri.

“This Kirk is the devil!” Das spat that at the screen of tabulated
losses that appeared before him. “With one hand he mends our
wounds, with the other he reopens them!”
Exposed cables crackled above the Odib admiral, sputtering
electricity and filling the bridge with smoke.
Isitri fighters converged on their vessel, slamming conventional
disruptors and torpedoes with their new sensor weapon. Sheh
stumbled down to the Das’s chair, nearly taking his head off with
her arm as she reached out to stabilize herself. He ducked and
grabbed for her, pulling her toward him.
“Admiral,” she said shakily, “secondary systems are failing. Three
decks have lost life support. Explosive decompression has forced
emergency bulkheads to engage, trapping thirty crew in those areas.”
Frustrated, infuriated, exasperated, Das-Dosiame wished his will had
destructive force: Were it so, Kirk’s ship, the Isitri fleet, the entire
star would wink out of existence.
“We cannot help them,” Das growled. “We may not be able to help
ourselves.”
Another salvo from the Isitri made the deck underneath them, the
bulkheads around them, and the bones within them tremble. Debris
crashed down from above. Thick slabs of bracing sliced down,

cutting into Das’s head and pushing themselves through Sheh’s
stomach. She collapsed across his chair with a weak groan.
The lights flickered, the engines wavered, and hope drained away
with the blood that trickled from their wounds.

TWENTY-ONE

T

here were guards, as Spock assumed there would be. A Vulcan
walking in front of them would be a shock that could be used to his
advantage—but only once. After that, all other guards would know
Spock was on Home Zero. And so would Berlis. For Spock to stay

out of sight, Meshu would have to be the one to subdue the sentries.
He handed her his phaser, and concentrated on the way it worked.
She gasped her understanding.
It’s so small, she said, and Spock explained how much pent-up
energy was in the small container. It could, if overloaded, destroy
the entire bunker complex.
She protested its use—perhaps she would operate it incorrectly.
You will not. Spock studied her knowledge of Isitri anatomy,
however, and gave her a second option.
Leaving Spock in a corridor alcove, Meshu approached the first set
of guards. Both women paid her no mind at first, until they realized
Meshu was all but invisible: a person was walking up to them, but
was only present physically and not mentally. Before they had a
chance to react, Meshu stretched out both hands. She pressed in on
each guard’s neck, executing an Isitri version of the Vulcan neck
pinch.
They crumpled into two respective masses of gangly limbs. Meshu
was so shocked about her success that she nearly fell over with
them.
Spock rushed forward and placed a hand on each guard’s temple.
Even unconscious, they could relate their last waking thoughts
telepathically, and it was better for Spock to pull them into his link
with Meshu than it was to leave them free to convey to Berlis that
someone was in the bunker.
Taking them carefully from the corridor, Spock placed them both
out of the way, in the alcove that had just hidden him.
They will know where Berlis is, Meshu suggested.
Yes.
Before leaving the guards to their sleep, Spock searched their minds.
Where is Berlis?
The women were confused, disoriented, but they felt a familiarity
with Spock, despite never having melded with him before. Berlis
knows you, they both told him.

Where is Berlis? Spock asked again.
Without deceit, they thought of his location. Meshu saw it too, and
flooded Spock with dread and disappointment. Protected. We cannot
reach him. Too many sentries.
He eschewed the emotional torrent and tried to calm her. Spock’s
serene attitude centered her and Meshu attained a more logical
mind-set. But they both knew that Meshu’s passions were taxing
Spock’s ability to keep Berlis out and Meshu calm. And now with
two more Isitri in the mix, his burden was growing exponentially.
There are at least twenty-seven guards between us and the council
room, Meshu said. Spock knew this already and gasped.
He leaned down again, fingertips touching pressure points on the
skull of one of the guards.
There is a room, Spock said, next to the chamber. Unattended.
Empty. He removed his hand and stood up straight again.
You need to touch Berlis to connect to his mind, Meshu said.
“No,” Spock huffed. There is an increased danger. Other minds will
be present and I may touch their thoughts before finding Berlis. If I
do, they will alert him.
Meshu was nervous and it pricked Spock, peppering him with yet
another unwanted feeling. Compose yourself, he urged her. We must
go now. The way is clear.
Meshu frowned anxiously. But to an empty room.

“Secondary deflector dish circuits compromised,” Scotty called out.
“Bypassing to tertiary.”
They needed the deflector more than they needed weapons. At the
speeds necessary for battle, any fragments of wreckage the mêlée

had created—a hull plate or stray shard of rubble—would crash right
through the Enterprise’s skin if not for the deflector array.
And there was much debris. What vessel remains weren’t locked
into orbit of Colony First or the nearby gas giant either floated out
into space or fell quickly into atmosphere. Three entire ships had
begun such a descent toward their doom. Enterprise had tractored
two of them to safety, even as it battled their comrades. The third
had no life signs.
In some ways the battle was easier than Kirk had considered. The
Odib had taken out the most powerful Isitri weapon—and while the
Isitri fighters had a smaller scale version of the offensive sensor
artillery, Scotty’s protected circuits and double backup nodes had
allowed Enterprise to hold its own against over whelming forces.
The problem was that the ships opposing them were looking to
destroy Kirk’s vessel, whereas he only hoped to disable theirs. As
the battle waged on, the first ships they’d put out of action had made
repairs and returned to combat.
“What we need,” Kirk said as he directed Sulu to fire on a specific
vessel on the tactical display, “is a way to take them all out at the
same time.”
“Aye,” Scott said, “but how?”
Kirk ruminated as the bridge shook around them. They were taking
fire from all sides. Two Isitri ships concentrated their sensor fire on
one of the engineering decks and suddenly Enterprise had a massive
power fluctuation.
Scotty grumbled out orders to his people as DeSalle and another
crewman worked switches, bypassing more lines.
The lights returned and Enterprise fired. Both Isitri ships reeled
away as chemical flame spasmed from their engines. How many
were just injured on those two ships? How many died? Who had
gone to sleep when Berlis first touched their minds and would now
wake up without an arm, or a leg, or a family?
Kirk had answered a distress call, saved three people from certain

death…and this is what he’d wrought.
“Mister Scott,” the captain called over to his en gineer. “If we can’t
jam their sensor weapon, can we duplicate it?”
Scotty’s eyebrows migrated to the middle of his forehead.
“Duplicate it? I’ve not even studied how they did it.”
Stepping toward the rail near Scott’s station, Kirk intensely focused
on his idea, and the sounds of battle—even the quaking of the ship
around him—filtered away. “But you understand the principle.”
“Aye, we had to in order to protect ourselves.”
Kirk pressed his palms tightly against the red rail. “And we’re more
protected against this particular weapon—more than the Odib or
even the Isitri would be.”
“Why would we aim it at ourselves?” DeSalle asked.
“I don’t want to aim it at all,” Kirk said. Every muscle tightened. “I
want to broadcast it.”

Saving Isitri was not as Meshu had imagined it. She stood nervously
in an anteroom used for storing foodstuffs, as her alien comrade—
the first mind she’d touched in decades—pawed at the wall of the
council chambers. Beyond it was the central Isitri Council, and
Berlis, the troublesome mind who controlled them.
Fingers spread and angled in different configurations as he moved,
Spock probed for the proper mental signature. He had to take great
care. His link to Meshu was a weakness right now. He was
maintaining a barricade for himself, for her, and for the two guards
they had encountered. While the sentries did not take much effort to
block, as they were still unconscious, Meshu’s emotional fits still
caused Spock to exert himself unnecessarily, distracting from his

ability to juggle all the variables. Now, in an attempt to find Berlis’s
specific mental signature, if Spock faltered and accidentally allowed
Berlis in before Meshu was prepared, they would not only fail to
save the Isitri, but also would be enslaved to the troublesome mind’s
will.
Meshu, for her part, was beginning to panic.
What if someone is hungry and comes to this pantry? she asked him.
What if I do not have the strength to quell the war? At most I
influenced a few hundred thousand people—but never billions.
I am here to assist you, Spock reassured her. You must control your
emotions, Meshu.
She gasped. She knew he was right and appreciated what he was
doing for her planet. The Enterprise could have simply solved their
problem—and the Odib’s—by destroying the capital city and Berlis
with it. But at every turn Spock and his people had attempted to save
as many lives as possible. She should not doubt him. Or herself.
Cold stone beneath his fingertips, Spock pressed down, feeling his
thoughts brush against Berlis’s for just a split second. I have found
him, Spock told Meshu. Ready yourself. I will establish the meld.
You must wrench the people from him, and I will seal him off from
them.
I am ready, Meshu said. And both she and Spock knew it wasn’t
quite true. Soon, so would Berlis.

TWENTY-TWO

T

here was much happening. Berlis now realized how different
helping to lead a planet was from merely assisting a colony. Today
he had to direct both. So many had been lost from the link. Anger
trickled up from the families of the dead, but Berlis asked people to
understand the fear of the Odib and the Federation. While it was
necessary to defend themselves, the Isitri people needed to
remember how different they were and how those differences
worried other races. Compassion would lead to understanding.
Eventually. The Isitri would defend themselves until it did.
Understanding, Berlis explained to them all, comes at the most
unexpected moments. His life had been testament to that.
It is true, Chista expressed. I did not understand Berlis until I
learned more about him, and discovered there was nothing to fear.
Several others on the council chimed in that their experience had
been similar: Bannatyan and Sektu, Kenachin and Gralow. Everyone
felt the same. Everyone thought the same.

Information from the captains in the fleet told them that Enterprise
was beginning to take damage and the tide of battle was perhaps
ready to turn in the Isitri favor. There was no joy in learning that the
Federation people would have to be ended—especially Spock, with
whom Berlis felt he’d begun a robust friendship.
Spock. Just the thought of him made Berlis feel the link might be
open and—Spock? Was he there? Were his thoughts available?
Berlis had felt a flutter of familiarity and thought perhaps the Vulcan
had reconnected, if only for a moment.
If Enterprise were dying, if Spock were unfortunately injured,
perhaps his mind was seeking refuge and he’d seen the error of his
ways. Berlis reached out for an instant update on the Federation
ship’s condition.
Oddly, eerily, only silence replied.
Berlis reached out again. He asked Chista and the others to do the
same.
Perhaps one of the connecting ships has traveled out of range,
Bannatyan suggested.
Huffing his skepticism, Berlis reached out again—and this time felt
a new Isitri he’d never known.
Are you newly conceived, little one? he asked.
No, came the reply. I am Meshu. I have returned home.
Returned? Berlis’s feelings gushed across the planet: first confusion,
then cautious joy, and then fear…
Who are you? Berlis asked. Who is she, Chista?
Chista hesitated and a coldness suddenly flowed from him. He was
unsure of himself, of Berlis, and yet…not of Meshu.

I…I believe it is working, Spock. Meshu kept her eyes tightly closed.
She pushed her mind out—farther than ever before.
Berlis has sensed me, Spock told her. You must work quickly. He
must not be in control when I reveal myself.
I…try. Meshu was under enormous strain. Spock was as well. He
was drained, sapped, but they continued coordinating: where Meshu
pushed herself to take charge of minds from Berlis, Spock raised
barriers to Berlis’s touching those minds again.
Fingers pressing deeper into the stone wall, Spock exhausted himself
to raise the protection Meshu needed to do her work.
Can you reach the fleet commanders? he asked her.
I feel them, Meshu said. I cannot control them. I am suggesting—but
they are not yet listening to my will. All the time she’d been on Zero
Home she’d tried to limit her influence over the minds around her.
Her life in exile was testament to her inability to do so. Now she was
asked to reverse her learned morality and instead not only give in to
her nature, but also surpass it.
Difficult at first, it was becoming somewhat easier for her. And with
each mind she touched—more pleasurable.
Spock considered warning her against giving into the gratification,
but right now he needed her to use it. And…he felt the gratification
as well and part of him wanted to also give in. So many minds
connected to his, so much intellect—it was quite enthralling. Yes, an
emotion. He allowed himself to feel, justifying it by reminding
himself he needed to use his energy to help Meshu and so must let
his emotional guards down.
She needed as much bolstering as he could manage and if he should
be unable to pull himself away from Berlis, he would need her to
save him from his own trap.

Static crackled across the main viewscreen as Odib attackers
punched raw energy across the saucer. “Divert phaser power to
shields,” Kirk ordered. He hung near the comm on the command
chair, waiting for word from Scotty.
The turbolift doors opened and Kirk twisted toward them, but it
wasn’t Scott who burst onto the bridge; it was McCoy.
“Bones?”
“Don’t you Bones me, Captain.”
If McCoy called him captain in that tone, it meant the doctor had
something far up his craw.
The quake of weapons fire staggered McCoy’s gait as he stomped
toward the command chair.
“I’m busy, Doctor,” Kirk snapped, lacking both the time and
patience.
“Scotty tells me he’s rigging a charge that will likely fry most of the
good circuits we have left.”
Another tremor forced McCoy to grip onto the arm of Kirk’s chair.
Kirk didn’t meet the doctor’s eyes. He kept his attention on tactical.
“Come about, Sulu. Chekov, target to starboard.”
“Circuits like life support,” McCoy continued as if Kirk had merely
paused to pour the doctor a cup of coffee.
“Life support is the most protected,” Kirk countered. “As are
sickbay systems.”
“Are you trying to commit suicide? For all of us?” McCoy sputtered.
Kirk turned to him fully. “Calm down, Doctor. I’m not just ordering
my engineer to blow out random systems! We’re overloading key
nodes that will send out a wave of energy on the same frequency as
the Isitri sensor weapon. Yes—it’ll fuse a lot of our systems! But
we’ll knock out all of theirs. Every vessel trying to destroy their
neighbor—and us—will be disabled in one fell swoop and without
more loss of life.”
“Except maybe ours?”

“Yes,” Kirk conceded more calmly, even a little tiredly, “it’s risky.
But we have to buy Spock enough time. And we can’t do it firing on
every ship in two warring fleets—and getting fired on by them.” The
captain met McCoy’s cool blue eyes. “I can’t let two planets destroy
each other because of my mistake.”
McCoy softened his tone. “You saved a man’s life, Jim. You’re not
to blame for what came from that.”
“The road to hell, Doctor.” Kirk rolled his jaw and turned away,
casting his eyes back on the main viewer. “I paved the road.”
“Mister Scott, sir,” Uhura said, her voice layered with support and
anxiety.
Kirk took another lingering look at McCoy, then thumbed the
comm. “Scotty.”
“We’re ready, Captain. Whenever you give the word.”
McCoy stood his ground at the command chair. He nodded
encouragingly when the captain glanced at him. He’d come to
chastise Kirk and now he stayed to support him.
On the main viewscreen, two Odib ships clashed with three smaller
Isitri vessels. Another two rolled toward Enterprise, spewing
disruptor fire.
Hands pressed tightly on the arms of his seat, Kirk steeled himself
and watched the main viewer. “Now, Mister Scott.”
Dozens of sensors usually used for passively scanning the universe
around them, or actively touching a particular object, flashed alive.
A bubble of hard energy spread out from Enterprise. The wave
pushed into the vessels around them, crackling through the shields
and into their control circuits.
A reflection of the force rebounded toward Enterprise, the energy
bouncing off the multiple contacts. Kirk’s ship was buffeted.
Circuits exploded, smoke filled the bridge and fans clicked on.
Above him, a panel burst open and spewed char and insulation
across his neck. McCoy ducked and fell back as the deck shook.

Burning embers rained onto them as the vessel quaked and then
went dark.

Sheh blinked in the relative darkness. Only sparks from exposed
circuits provided dim crackles of light. She focused on her sense of
hearing: coughing, sizzling, creaking, wheezing. She groped toward
the command center and called out to Das-Dosiame. “Admiral?”
Tripping over a chunk of debris that had fallen to the deck she
collapsed across the command chair with a dull thud and felt Das
under her. Her vision adjusted to the dim light and she saw him,
eyes open and glazed over, blood draining down his face and into
his beard from a slice of metal pressed into his forehead. “Das!” She
staggered up and shook him at the same time, trying to rouse him.
He slumped. Dead.
Sheh rubbed from her eyes both smoke and tears. She embraced
him, something she had dared not attempt when he lived, and
choked on her grief. She hoped no one heard her soft sobs over the
din of their own misery.
With a gulp, she held down her anguish and bolstered her
determination. Das’s will would be carried out. He was the admiral,
and Sheh would take the ship and follow his last orders.
“Admiral Das is dead,” she told the bridge. “I am assuming
command.” Not wishing to remove her commander from his chair,
Sheh-Keshemger stepped to the side, but called out her orders. “I
need a full status report,” she told whomever could manage. “See to
the wounded, see to the vessel, and try to raise the fleet.” If the ship
was a total loss, she’d transfer the command standard to another

vessel and continue the battle from there.
Both Das and Sa would be avenged.

“Emergency lights.” Kirk reached down and pulled McCoy to his
feet as the lights flickered on. Smoke was already clearing. Certain
circuits protected themselves by shutting down when in danger of
overloading—bridge lights and fans included. Sometimes circuits
were saved in that manner, and sometimes not. This time they
survived.
McCoy nodded his appreciation as he regained his footing. Behind
him, Kirk zeroed in on DeSalle who manned the engineering station
in Scotty’s absence. “Damage report.”
Coughing out an answer, DeSalle choked on the smoke that settled
from above. “Status coming in now, Captain.” He waved away the
fumes and punched at his console. “Life support coming back
online,” he said. “Deflectors down, sensors down, thrusters barely at
station-keeping.” He turned to Kirk and nodded, encouraged. “All
decks report power being restored.”
“Mister Sulu.”
“Helm is responsive, but without sensors…”
“Understood.” Kirk punched his arm chair comm. “Kirk to
engineering.”
“Scott here.”
“I need sensors, Scotty.”
“Aye. We’re workin’ on it, sir.” The engineer’s Scottish burr
couldn’t conceal an unspoken frustration. “We’re rerouting backup
circuits to those that’re not, but we can’t withstand more attacks
from the Isitri weapon.”

“How long before we’re maneuverable?”
The engineer made a soft sigh. “Six minutes, sir.”
“Good work, Scotty. Kirk out.” Thumbing the comm back off, the
captain exchanged a grim glance with McCoy. They both knew that
only one of Berlis’s ships needed to have survived the sensor blast to
disable Enterprise for good. That vessel could be moving toward
them now, ready to pounce, and there was nothing they could do
about it. They wouldn’t even know until it was too late.
“What now?” McCoy asked.
“We wait,” Kirk said, pressing his lips into a thin line. “And hope
Meshu and Spock can succeed.”
McCoy didn’t ask what would happen if that didn’t occur. He just
crossed his arms and groaned.

TWENTY-THREE

T

here was a balance to what Spock was attempting. He walked a
mental precipice tenuously. As Meshu reached out for more Isitri
minds, Spock blocked those thoughts from Berlis. The troublesome
mind didn’t notice, just as one might not notice a room gradually
cooling off or growing dimmer. But there would be a point when
Berlis would suddenly become aware that his sphere of contact was
smaller than it should be, and not just because of the deaths. Meshu
had distracted Berlis by introducing herself, but she’d learned the
disciplines Spock had taught her, and Berlis neither controlled her,
nor saw the deception.
Having known Berlis as well as he did, Spock knew trickery would
not have been easily discerned. His naïveté was genuine. He’d lived
in a society where falsehoods were uncommon and once he imposed
his will on those around him, what lies were there to tell?
With his own emotional defenses down, Spock was sad. Hurting
Berlis, as he knew would happen, was anathema to the Vulcan.
Meshu’s anxiety didn’t help matters. It is time, she told Spock. We
have enough.
No, we must continue. The fewer minds touching Berlis’s, the easier
it would be for Spock to do what he must, he told her. And while
that was true, he wondered if he had an ulterior motive. He
understood Meshu’s pull toward the link of Home Zero. He craved
it. And, like her, he would miss it when it was gone.
Part of him wondered what he might do if Meshu was unable to
fulfill her part of the plan, and how he might handle being trapped
with Berlis. Was he considering that contingency because he
secretly wished it? McCoy would suggest so. The doctor was often
entirely off about his supposed insights into Spock’s psyche…and

yet other times he was spot on. Most recently he was between those
two extremes: It wasn’t Berlis who controlled Meshu or Spock—it
was their own passions. Meshu didn’t want to give up the link, and
neither did Spock.
Overwhelmed with fear that when the time came she would be
unable to muster the will to leave it behind, Meshu wanted to get the
event over with. Conversely, Spock wanted to delay until he was
certain he had control of his desires, and not the reverse.
Meshu insisted now was the time. Spock’s feeling was that he
wasn’t quite ready, even if she was.
Feeling. His feeling. That was his mistake, he chided himself.
Feelings did not explain reality. They were not, as he told Meshu,
tools of cognition. One’s emotions could not be factored in.
Couldn’t be. Shouldn’t be.
Wouldn’t be.
Yes, Spock told her. Now is the time. Prepare yourself.

Berlis was fascinated by Meshu. Where did you come from? Why
have I never known you before? Tell me about yourself. His
questions were innocent, so he didn’t understand why Meshu was
being coy and would not open her mind with the answers.
I was born in Dalinga Bektab, Meshu told him. It wasn’t an answer
to any of his questions and Chista bristled on Berlis’s behalf.
I know no one named Meshu from Bektab province, the council man
said. Why are you bashful with us? We represent the capital council.
You do not know me? Meshu asked. I know you.
I promise I do not know you, or do not remember you, Berlis said.
Chista, search your mind.

For an inexorably long time, Chista did not answer. Berlis looked at
him across the council room and rapped on the table twice to get his
attention. Chista frowned at Berlis.
Chista, what is wrong? Berlis asked.
Chista only frowned.
Chista? What troubles you?
Berlis blinked several times in succession. Something was terribly
wrong. Chista sat living, breathing in and out, but was dead in his
mind, as if he’d had a sudden, massive stroke or—
No, something else had happened.
Bannatyan? Berlis searched for another mind he knew well. There
was no reply. Bithnush? Golo? They were all from his clan—their
minds more in tune with his than anyone else’s. Where were they?
Even a sudden plague would not rip people from the link like this.
Panic coursing through his veins, Berlis rose and shook the person
next to him. He blinked into their eyes, and their only response was
to frown at him.
Person after person, male or female, it did not matter. No one spoke
to Berlis. All minds were closed to him.
Was he sick? He was sick! He must be!
He ran into the hall and grabbed the nearest sentinel. Speak to me, he
demanded. SPEAK TO ME!
A high-pitched whine escaped his flaring nostrils and he collapsed
between the two guards who looked down at him with confusion.
Anyone, Berlis called out, pleading. Am I dead? Is this death?
Pulling in his legs and placing his head under his left arm, Berlis
curled himself into a ball and sobbed.
You are not dead, Spock told him.
SPOCK! You have returned! Berlis’s excitement—his total relief—
flowed over the Vulcan and he quivered under the emotional torrent.
Yes, I am here, Berlis.
With the flood of emotions—confusion, enthusiasm, fear—came a
deluge of desperate questions: What is happening? Can you help

me? Are you well? Am I ill? Help me reason this out!
An undercurrent of worry peppered Berlis’s thoughts: Without his
leadership, would the Odib now defeat the Isitri and lay waste to
Home Zero?
Epic sadness pressed into Spock’s heart, and the disciplines he used
to sustain the barriers between Berlis and the planet so that Meshu
could take control were going to waver if something was not done to
calm the troublesome mind.
Spock decided to explain matters to Berlis, quelling his fear for the
planet, first. Home Zero will be safe because of this.
Confusion became the strongest emotion—not relief. What is
“this”? Berlis asked. What is happening to me?
Spock felt himself physically tremble, his stomach twisted in knots.
He took his hands off the wall and walked shakily out into the
hallway. Around the corner, Berlis was still on the floor, still coiled
in on himself. Kneeling down, Spock placed one hand across
Berlis’s head and the Isitri man’s eyes shot open.
In that moment, Spock broke his links to the two guards he’d
touched, as well as the minds of the council members he’d blocked
from Berlis and handed to Meshu. Spock touched Meshu’s mind,
peripherally, as he would need help extracting himself, but now his
total focus was on wrapping his mental shields around Berlis’s
damaged psyche.
This is purposeful, Berlis said, aghast. You are jailing me!
Yes, Spock said with false dispassion.
The horror violently crashed into Spock, the sentiment palpable.
What have I done to deserve this? Spock, are you not my friend? He
was crying now, rocking back and forth under the pressure of
Spock’s fingers.
My people need me, Berlis screeched in Spock’s mind. I need them!
The realization of shocking loneliness was washing over Berlis now,
and over Spock as well. The Isitri man’s mind reached out in every
direction, groping for another presence besides Spock. Berlis

pressed against the barriers the Vulcan had built around him. Like a
coffin, they confined him, buried him, hid him from the universe,
and kept the universe from him.
No, he huffed as well as cried to Spock through the meld. No. NO!
NOOOOOO! A child locked out of his home, Berlis was
overwhelmed with fear and panic and a heavy bottomless dread.
Spock collapsed next to him and drew him close. He felt a tear drop
to his cheek and flow downward. But still he did not allow Berlis to
touch the world he was used to. He denied him access to his home.
I cannot be alone, Berlis wailed. Please, please, please, I cannot be
alone!
Unable to tear himself away—unwilling to destroy Berlis further—
Spock held the frail troublesome mind tightly. I will stay with you,
Spock sobbed as he replied and severed his last link with Meshu,
rejecting the outside world for both of them. I will not leave you
completely alone.

The turbolift doors opened and Scotty strode to his station. “Sensors
restored, Captain,” he said and nodded to DeSalle to check the
systems monitor. “I’ve got full impulse available, or warp, but not
both. They’re sharin’ the same control circuits.”
Kirk smiled briefly and gave the engineer an appreciative nod.
“Thank you, Mister Scott.” He crooked a thumb toward Spock’s
science station. “Chekov, short- range scan, please.”
Sliding out from behind navigation, Chekov peered into the scanner;
the ensign flipped two switches and put the starscape on the main
viewer.
A graveyard of debris—and intact ships—drifted around them.

Whatever course a vessel was on when it lost power to its engines
was the path it continued on. Kirk hoped none had fallen into the
lunar colony’s atmosphere or that of the gas giant.
“Life signs?” he asked, his eyes shifting from one intact ship to
another on the viewscreen.
“Yes, sir,” Chekov said, still examining the blue sensor glow. “All
intact vessels have life support.” The ensign chuckled in disbelief.
“Thirteen Isitri fighters are maneuvering, Captain.” He looked up, a
proud smile thinning his lips. “They’re returning to Isitra Zero.”
Leaving the battle theater. Spock and Meshu had gotten through.
Kirk breathed a quiet sigh of relief and swiveled around to Uhura,
but Chekov grabbed his attention with an urgent call.
“Sir!”
Turning first toward the science station and then looking at the main
screen, Kirk saw: a single Odib vessel fired on the retreating Isitri
ships. One blossomed into plasma flame and fell quickly toward the
gas giant.
“Uhura, raise the Odib. I need to talk with Admiral Das.”

“Admiral Das is dead,” Sheh-Keshemger spat bitterly. “No thanks to
you, Jamesty-Kirk.”
“Stop firing on the Isitri vessels,” Kirk demanded. “They’re
unarmed and retreating.”
“Did they refrain from firing on our disabled ships?” Burning with
anger, Sheh stood tensely, pointing at the command chair and Das’s
slain body, which she still refused to move. “His blood is caked in
my beard because you’ve defended these attackers—”
“You’re in their system,” Kirk snapped. “They retreat while you

look to raise the death toll out of anger and revenge?”
“Yes,” she snarled. “I am following my admiral’s orders to resolve
the Isitri threat.” A sneer contorted her face. “Once, and forever.”

If nothing else, Kirk had at least distracted the Odib with debate.
Keep her talking, he thought, and let the Isitri ships get closer to
home.
“Captain,” Kirk began.
“Commander,” she corrected. “Sheh-Keshemger.”
“Commander Keshemger.” Kirk rose and bowed his head
respectfully. “I understand your anger,” he said smoothly. “The Isitri
began wars that killed millions of innocents.”
“Yes.”
“And no matter the reason,” Kirk continued, “your people have
died.”
“Yes,” she fumed.
He stoked her anger rather than satiated it. “How many blameless
Odib died at Isitri hands, just because a troublesome mind like Berlis
coerced them to fight you?”
“Millions!”
“Right!” Kirk pointed at her. “So why shouldn’t you kill those
enslaved Isitri, even if they’ve now regained their own wills and are
returning to their peaceful lives?”
Sheh-Keshemger faltered, began to sputter. “I—” Her eyes flicked
to the others on her bridge, and stopped on Das. “He wanted this,”
she said, still angry but her voice softer than before. “His orders…”
“Were to protect the lives of the innocent,” Kirk said. “As any good
admiral would ask.” The captain shook his head sadly.

“Commander, don’t act against his morals by following an order
given before circumstances changed.”
“But next time,” she began, the sentence trailing off and her gaze
lost in a memory.
Kirk opened his arms as if to reach out to her. “Next time, the
Federation will mediate. We’ll help to avoid the death of even one
Odib or Isitri.” He stepped closer to the viewer, closing the virtual
distance between them. “The war is over. Let’s bury our dead…not
add more.”
Sheh turned away. “Yes,” she said barely above a whisper and
motioned to someone offscreen. Two men stepped in and, with care
and respect, gingerly removed Admiral Das from his command
chair.

Meshu found Spock and Berlis where the sentinels said they’d be,
where they were left at her request.
Her Vulcan mentor sat against the gray wall, eyes unfocused,
shoulders slumped, hugging her predecessor. Berlis was curled into
a fetal position, sobbing softly and rocking slowly.
There was no remnant of Spock in Meshu’s mind so she waved a
hand before his face, but his eyes did not move.
She searched Spock and found his communicator, and though she
could not speak into it, she opened the device and pressed buttons.
Lights flashed, though she wasn’t sure what they meant and couldn’t
know if someone said anything on the other end.
Unsure of what to do, she simply told all Isitri to help their
neighbors, heal the wounded, and mourn the departed. She knew
Kirk would eventually come. He must. The fleeing fighters see his

ship intact, she thought. If not, she would be stranded, forced to
become the one thing she’d always promised herself—and her
mother—she wouldn’t.
She lowered herself to the floor and sat next to Spock and Berlis.
They were the two people on the planet with whom she couldn’t
connect mentally, so she hugged them both and sadly savored her
last hours of bliss before she returned to her solitary life.

TWENTY-FOUR

As Enterprise sped from the Isitri system, Meshu felt the link with

her people wane. When it finally seemed as if the connection had
been severed, she wished them good-bye. Unexpectedly she heard
the echoes of billions crying out for her as she slipped away. If
someone had shaved off her skin slowly it would have felt less
painful. She knew she could have remained with them. How could
Kirk have stopped her if she really insisted on it? Spock was the
only one who could keep her from staying with her people and he
was in no state to do so. The thought had crossed her mind a dozen
times. She daydreamed about it, planned it, and twice began to tell
Kirk that it was her wish. She debated it with herself endlessly until
the moment the transporter beam whisked her away.
When Kirk returned to Home Zero, Meshu used the council’s
interpreter to explain what had happened to Spock and Berlis. Here
on Enterprise she was without the ability to communicate; the wrist
device Spock told her Berlis used was new technology limited to the
Isitri ships, and none could be found for her trip home. She thought
the captain understood some of her gestures, but he’d been totally
inadequate at using them himself. McCoy tried very hard to
understand and apparently knew Earth sign language, but it was too
different, and was gibberish to her.
Body language, however, was far clearer. Kirk’s and McCoy’s
concern as Spock lay catatonic in their sickbay was obvious. Next to
him, Berlis flinched under the restraints that seemed more to keep
him from rolling off the bed than anything else.
Meshu knew Berlis’s pain and understood that Spock, locked in a
meld with him, must understand it as well. Just why he sealed
himself in with Berlis was a mystery, but Meshu could guess. As
damaged a soul as Berlis was now, Spock had always been. She’d
known it when they melded, but assumed the mind in pain they
shared was mostly hers. While she had her own burdens, Spock’s
were heavier. She was exiled from one world. He was self-exiled
from two.
If she could talk to him now, perhaps she might be able to help him.

Then again, perhaps no one could. He needed to travel alone on his
journey, yet he obviously could not bring himself to do so. Nor
could he travel it with help. Instead, he did what Berlis did:
collapsed in on himself.
Though Meshu felt more alone than Spock probably ever had, she
was still more cheerless for him—and for Berlis—than for herself.
She would return to her exile and embrace her adopted family again,
but even together, the two men were alone.
Kirk may or may not have asked her village if they still truly loved
Meshu and indeed wanted her back; she didn’t know. If she had the
ability to ask him, she would not want Kirk to tell her. While she
had imagined this last visit to Home Zero would cause a hole in her
heart, instead she discovered that her new home was, in most
respects, filling enough.
True, she would still long for her world, when she slept or when the
silence of voices in her mind became too much to endure. But what
a small price to pay to know that her first home was safe. That
calmed her greatly, and surprisingly she was also comforted by the
knowledge that she’d found a new, unexpected yearning for her
small village and the faces of her adopted planet.
Many revolutions ago her mother told her that there were some
dreams one could attain, and others one could not. Her mother’s
advice had been for her daughter to attain her dreams by altering
them to meet the possible. Meshu had learned to draft her dreams to
those things within her reach, and merely think fondly of those she
could not. The unattainable goals? She would not waste her energy
on them. It would be illogical to do so, she’d discovered—and she
could thank Spock for the added insight.
Wishing again that she could reach the Vulcan one last time, Meshu
closed her eyes and stretched out her mind to him. To her sorrow,
her senses told her there were no telepaths near. Locked in their own
exiles, Spock and Berlis were as good as dead to her.
And yet, she sat in sickbay, watching them and still trying to touch

their thoughts. Uncertain of how long she had been trying, she was
startled when Kirk touched her shoulder and indicated she should
follow him.
He spoke as they rode on the turbolift, though the movement of his
lips meant little to her and the few signs he attempted were relatively
useless—unless he indeed hated her ugly, fat cow.
She couldn’t help but smile a little, and what he actually tried to say
must not have been funny because he looked at her quizzically a
moment, before smiling himself and bowing his head in what may
have been an apology.
She remembered the early difficulty of communicating with the
villagers who found her. They, too, seemed to assume that if they
simply moved their lips carefully or slowly she would somehow
divine their meaning. After many years she could perhaps
understand a word or two by lip reading, but to attempt to follow a
conversation with that method would surely drive her mad.
As Kirk continued to blather at her, she gasped a lot, affirming
whatever he talked about as if she understood, and he took her to
their teleportation room and guided her to the brightly lit platform.
He stood fully facing her and the sad and yet somehow charming
expression on his face gave her a very warm feeling. What a
superior group of people these were, and what an extraordinary
leader they had in Kirk. She should like to see them all again
someday, under hopefully different circumstances. That was, of
course, only if Spock survived. She’d touched him the most, and
would not want to entertain the thought that his unique mind was not
in existence.
With another bow, which might have been a good-bye, an apology,
or both, Kirk signed “thank you” correctly, and curled his short neck
to the man in red behind the console.
Light tickled her from within and without, and sparkles enveloped
her even though she shut her eyes tightly. When this all faded, she
was home.

“Well, Bones?” Kirk had hoped his few minutes away from sickbay
would mean he’d be happily surprised upon his return to find that
the doctor had come up with a way to sever Spock from Berlis.
McCoy hovered over Spock, watching his vitals, injecting him with
different potions. “I still think she was our best bet,” he said, waving
the hypospray to indicate Meshu.
“I asked her if she could, and she said no.”
“What, up here?” McCoy scoffed.
“On Isitra Zero, with the interpreter.” Kirk sighed and paced the
small sickbay ward. “You’d beamed up with them already. She
said…” He hesitated. He didn’t want to believe it. He couldn’t
believe it. “She said Spock locked himself in the meld, deliberately.”
McCoy turned slowly toward Kirk, grabbing the hand scanner in a
tight grasp as if it were ready to fall. “Berlis didn’t force him—”
The captain shook his head and whispered, “No.”
“Then why?”
Kirk shrugged and he pushed out a long breath. He shuffled over to
Spock’s bed and thought any moment the Vulcan might snap out of
it, stand up, and explain how some inexplicable Vulcan ruse was to
blame.
That didn’t happen.
“I need him, Bones,” Kirk said, and his eyes shifted to Berlis. With
the Isitri man’s mind completely locked away, he was finally able to
have an uninfluenced feeling about Berlis. Right now, that feeling
was anger. An unspeakable notion struck Kirk: What if Berlis died?
Would Spock be free, or would the shock kill his friend?
Was this why Berlis’s nature was to influence those around him?
Was it a defense mechanism? Eons ago, did the bird-like creatures
that perhaps gave rise to the Isitri defend themselves from predators

by broadcasting a nonthreatening aura? If Berlis had no telepathy,
would Kirk have turned him over to his own people soon after
saving him?
No, he decided. He wouldn’t have. His feelings were one thing—his
morals another.
“Feelings,” Kirk murmured and turned back to Spock. “Bones,
Meshu said Spock was crying when she found him. He was crying.”
“Well, that’s not unexpected,” McCoy said. “He was going through
an incredible strain.”
Finger jabbing at Berlis, the words snapped off Kirk’s tongue. “He’s
not himself. Even now, even if we’re not at all influenced by Berlis,
Spock is.”
“That may be, but where does it get us?” Frustration arched
McCoy’s brow and heightened his voice. “Everything I’ve tried—
every stimulant, every brain blocker—nothing works! Right now the
only sure bet I know is stopping all his brain function. That’s called
death and I won’t cure my patient posthumously.” He looked down
at Spock a long time, then back up at Kirk, a warmer glint in his eye.
“Though lord knows those Vulcan brainwaves can probably survive
even death.”
“Spock isn’t the key.” The captain turned to Berlis. As if reacting to
a fever, the frail Isitri man continued to moan and flinch against the
restraints. “He is.”
“I’m not going to kill him, either,” McCoy said tiredly as he
prepared a nutritional hypo.
“I’m not asking you to,” Kirk snapped. The doctor’s accusation hit a
little too close to home. Would the captain be willing to sacrifice
Berlis’s life for Spock’s? It wasn’t even a question. He paced back
to the counter opposite their beds and leaned down, laying his palms
flat. “There has to be some way to…” He searched for the right term
for a very wrong notion. “To stop his brain from functioning.”
“Yeah,” the doctor bristled, “it’s called death.”
Kirk pounded the counter with a tight fist and bolted upright,

burning McCoy with a glare. “Damn it, Bones, we’re talking about
Spock!”
Facing off against his captain, the doctor straightened as well,
tossing the hypospray on the table next to Spock’s bed. “I don’t care
if we’re talking about murdering Colonel Green to save Zefram
Cochrane! I’m a doctor, not an executioner!” He pointed at his
patients almost accusingly. “It’s a mind-meld—you kill Berlis and
who knows what kind of trauma Spock will suffer.”
“I’m asking your medical opinion, Doctor!” Kirk barked. “Is there a
way to reduce Berlis’s brain function to a bare minimum? Just
enough to keep him alive?”
The doctor chewed angrily on the question, then said, “I’ve not
studied this man’s physiology enough to know.”
“Then study it!” Kirk demanded.
“Fine. See you in ten years.” McCoy turned toward the door when
he saw Chapel ready to enter. He shooed her off and she retreated.
Arms crossed, Kirk leaned heavily against the bulkhead, cupping his
chin with one hand. “We have life-support machines that will keep
someone alive when they’re in a coma, until—”
“He’s not in a coma…” McCoy’s brow wrinkled, an idea changing
his expression. “Maybe that’s it,” he said. “A medically induced
coma.” He sped into the outer examining room and leaned down to
access his desk computer and Kirk followed. “They used to do this
sort of thing centuries ago, with sedation,” McCoy said, sorting
through computer tapes before finding the one he wanted and sliding
it into the loader. “About sixty or seventy years ago there was a
similar procedure done with localized stasis fields, far more
aggressive. It’s been rarely used since the invention of cortical
suppressors and stimulators…but it might limit enough of Berlis’s
brain function for the mind-meld to be useless.” The doctor looked
up at Kirk, an embryo of a smile turning his lips. “You can’t link an
active mind with an inactive one.”
“How soon can you be ready?”

“Jim, there are risks.” McCoy relaxed his posture and his tone
softened. “Berlis might not recover, or Spock could stay linked
anyway and—”
So it would be risky, Kirk thought, and maybe just a false hope, but
what other choice is left? “Do it. Unless you have another way to
even attempt to break the meld, short of killing Berlis…” He shook
his head grimly and sighed. “Just do it. Any assumed risk is my
responsibility.”
McCoy studied the captain’s face a few moments, trying to
understand whatever it was his psychologist-side wanted to know.
Apparently dissatisfied, he frowned, nodded, and got to work.
Gathering the equipment took some time and involved Scotty, two
engineering techs, and three medical techs. Kirk watched, and the
flurry of activity around Spock and Berlis only reinforced their
relative stillness.
Spock had been on the precipice of death more than once. It was the
inherent risk of being in space and exploring the unknown. But
Meshu said he’d chosen this—that he’d said good-bye to her and
told her he was making the right decision for Berlis and himself.
That meant his actions weren’t necessary to resolve the situation, but
were his—and/or Berlis’s—desire. As much as the idea of losing his
friend worried him, the thought that Spock desired to be cut off from
the universe frightened Kirk more.

“Go ahead, Nurse,” McCoy ordered, and Chapel hit the switch on
the computer console that had been set up next to Berlis’s bio-bed.
A hazy light fluttered around the troublesome mind’s head from two
probes that had been extended above each temple. The glow gave

his milky skin and peach fuzz an even paler quality. In the most
disconcerting way possible, he looked instantly dead.
The doctor ran his scanner and monitored the screen above the bed.
Slowly, the indicator for brain activity slid lower and lower down
the scale. Other vital signs decreased as well, and concern pinched
McCoy’s brows together. He administered the prepared hypo that
Chapel put in his palm as soon as he held out his hand, and the
levels increased—including the one for mental activity. A battle
began to find the level where brain output would be low enough and
yet heart and respiration would be high enough. And it took close to
an hour before the doctor turned to Kirk and mopped his brow with
his shirtsleeve.
Kirk suddenly realized he, too, had been perspiring, and he wiped
his hand across his forehead and absently brushed the dew on his
pant leg.
“His mind is incredibly strong,” McCoy said wearily. “We’d
dampen the neural activity, and it’s like his brain would catch a
second wind, then a third, and a fourth.”
As the nurse tended Berlis’s now inert form, McCoy and the captain
gathered around Spock’s bed.
Indicators for the Vulcan’s brain activity had also wavered—Kirk
and McCoy had both kept an eagle’s eye on them. Once Berlis was
completely under—as low as he could be placed—Spock’s
brainwave pattern stabilized.
Pulling another already prepared hypospray from the bedside table,
McCoy shared a last, worried glance with Kirk before injecting the
Vulcan’s arm.
Moments after the hypo hissed its potion into his green veins,
Spock’s eyes fluttered open. With incredible speed his hand reached
out and grabbed McCoy’s wrist, wrenching it upward.
He pulled McCoy close until their faces nearly touched and yelled,
“Murderer!”

TWENTY-FIVE

W

hy did you do it?” Spock demanded, rage and agony arching
his swept brows.
“He’s not dead,” Kirk shouted, and with some difficulty yanked the
Vulcan’s hand away from McCoy’s wrist.
The doctor shrank away and Spock’s furious eyes leveled
themselves at Kirk. The Vulcan tried to pull back his hand and had
he not been weakened he might not only have done so, but also
heaved Kirk with it.
“He’s not dead,” Kirk repeated through gritted teeth.

Spock gulped, and as instantly as he’d awakened, his grip relaxed
and his hand fell away. Just as quickly, his visage returned to its
normal, impassive expression.
“Of course not, Captain,” he said as he leaned back in the oddest
mixture of a relaxed and yet stiff posture.
The captain’s shared look with McCoy didn’t answer the question
both were likely asking: Was this Spock? The real Spock?
“My apologies, Doctor,” the Vulcan said in a cool, normal tone.
“Did I injure you?”
“I’ll be fine, Spock,” McCoy said, studying the man’s face intently.
With an accepting nod, Spock then looked to the captain. “My
apologies to you as well. I should like to file a full report, explaining
my actions—”
“Later, Mister Spock,” McCoy interrupted, and when Kirk opened
his mouth to speak, the doctor cut him off as well. “I said later. He’s
not eaten in three days and there’s only so much intravenous
nutrition can do.”
Kirk had too many questions and McCoy’s lack of curiosity, and
insistence that they go unanswered, irritated him to no end. But he
nodded anyway.
“Doctor, I assure you—”
“Don’t bother, Mister Spock. Bed rest is the prescription, and I
intend to see it is filled.”
Spock leveled a raised brow, and Kirk might have chuckled his
delight at seeing it, if he truly felt the entire episode was over.
Something in his gut told him it wasn’t.
What of Berlis? He glanced sideways at the troublesome mind just
two meters from Spock. Could they keep him in stasis forever? Was
it right to do so? And should he someday awaken, what would that
do to Spock?
“I’d like him to rest in his quarters,” Kirk told McCoy.
“Jim, I don’t—”
“This isn’t negotiable, Doctor,” Kirk hammered. He wanted Spock

as far away from Berlis as possible. “I don’t want them in the same
room. If I could put one in a shuttle, tethered behind the ship, I
would.”
“I think Mister Spock has gone through his shuttle allotment this
month,” McCoy jibed lightly. Kirk didn’t react to the levity, and
neither did Spock. The doctor pressed on. “Fine. So long as he rests,
I don’t care where.” He looked at Spock. “But I intend to check on
you hourly.”
Lowering his head in assent, Spock agreed.
Once in his cabin, he did not need sleep, yet hourly the doctor
insisted he should. The logic of frequent visits and yet expecting
one’s patient to sleep eluded him.
For Spock, meditation was more required than was slumber, and had
McCoy been better versed in Vulcan physiology, he might have
understood. There was, of course, a time when Spock had explained
it to the doctor, but the rote response was an admonishment to
remember his human half.
As if he could forget.
Fingers woven together and steepled at his chin, Spock cleared his
mind and concentrated on each singular event since his last
meditation, in order, from then until now. Each moment had its own
analysis, first in a contextual vacuum, then within the context of the
time it occurred, and finally within the greater milieu of every other
moment of his life. This was the Vulcan way, the way of his
forebears, the learned discipline that had helped an entire race
transcend chaos: “Using reason as their guide.”
And yet this time nothing felt—not felt—was resolved. Hour after
hour, between the doctor’s quaint interruptions, Spock resolved to
begin again and sort happenstance from emotion. Hour after hour, he
seemed unequal to the task.
Frustration tensed his muscles and his clasped hands trembled under
the strain. The door chimed again, another hour had obviously
passed. He closed his eyes, willed his hands to calm themselves, and

lowered them to his lap where they were hidden by the desk.
“Enter.”
The door opened and McCoy stepped in. “Jim wanted to stop by but
I thought you’d rather not be disturbed just yet.”
“How singularly astute of you, Doctor.”
From McCoy’s expression, the intention of Spock’s comment was
not lost on him.
“Right,” he said. “I’ll let the computers warn me if your vitals
change drastically and check in on you in the morning.”
Spock nodded once, noncommittally.
“And get some sleep,” McCoy said as the door closed behind him.
“Doctor’s orders.”
“Indeed,” Spock murmured to himself, and returned to his
meditation.

Oblivion was damp without the moisture, and freezing yet not cold.
The darkness was not a lack of light but a texture unto itself and it
extended forever—a vast expanse and yet confining like a hard
cocoon. The more he reached out into the void, the tighter it
coalesced around him. Worst of all, it was built of the loneliness that
even gods refused to touch.
This was Berlis’s universe, and the unending pain pressed down on
his every atom. Drifting, he called out for the one savior he knew
might answer him.

Spock!
The wail blazed on every nerve ending. Spock gasped in
psychological pain and physically stumbled. He struggled to keep
himself off the deck as Berlis’s plaintive cry raked across him.
Unprotected and unready for the emotional inundation, what scant
order had come from the last twenty hours of work disintegrated in a
fraction of a second.
From his bottomless pit of solitude, Berlis clutched onto the one
mind close enough to touch. Spock expected the pleading for
companionship Berlis begged for on Home Zero, but in his seclusion
the troublesome mind could not truly communicate anymore. All he
could do was reach out in misery, which he broadcast in wave after
crashing wave.
Spock understood his pain, though he could not have comprehended
its extent until Berlis insisted he do so.
In that eternal moment, the Vulcan pretense of sequestering emotion
seemed both ceaselessly naïve, and heartrendingly unattainable.
He could bear the tsunami of emotion no longer. It must end.
It must.
Spock prepared himself as quickly as possible, struggling against
Berlis’s assault. The pain wrenched him. He wrestled against it to
gather enough composure to leave his cabin. He traversed relatively
unnoticed down the corridors, but once he was alone in the turbolift
he couldn’t help but allow a terrible sob. He slumped against the
wall and with his free hand pounded on his own leg as hard as he
could manage without knocking himself down. “Control,” he
growled through his tightened jaw. “Control!”
The unending tide of despair both pushed the Vulcan away, and
pulled him deeper in toward the center of the storm. There must be
relief. There must be.
Once in sickbay, a nurse called out to him. When Spock didn’t
reply, he was certain she went to a comm to contact the doctor.

No matter. He must be free of the unending, heavy, horrific
passions.
Berlis lay unnecessarily restrained, his delicate limbs pinned with
strips of cloth to the bio-bed. The white aura of energy that
enveloped his skull could not end either man’s agony.
“Spock!” McCoy’s voice.
He did not turn to meet the doctor’s face, but heard a click and
McCoy spoke again. “Jim, get down here. Now!”
Hesitation would mean suffering without end. Vacillation would
hasten the wrong kind of oblivion. The unwanted meld, the unaskedfor agony, the unrequited escape…logic demanded a distinct path.
Morality insisted as well. Judgment wavered when it should not
have: that was the weakness of the emotional, the illogic that so
desperately needed to be purged from the mind.
Boots skidding on the deck must surely have been Kirk’s.
Time was short.
Shakily, his arm extended and his hand squeezed closed.
The whine filled their ears as loudly as the wails filled their minds.
And then both went silent.

EPILOGUE

How is he?” Kirk rolled the phaser over and over in his hand,
studying it because he didn’t want to look at Spock.
The doctor handed his scanner to the nurse and left Spock on the
bio-bed, quietly resting. He motioned Kirk out into his office.
“What’s wrong?” Kirk asked, a rock of tension weighing down his
stomach.
“What’s right?” McCoy said somberly. “Unofficially he’s fine.”
“Unofficially?” Kirk huffed out in frustration. “Bones—”
“Unofficial because if I put in the record that he’s mentally and
physically unfit, his career will be ruined.” He crooked a thumb over
his shoulder. “You were here. You saw what happened. He
murdered Berlis in cold blood.”
Kirk gripped the phaser hard. “I saw it. The question is why.
Spock’s not a murderer.” He pointed at McCoy with his free hand.
“You know that.”
“And I know what I saw. Sure, he’s been under great strain—”
“Then write that in your report.”
“I will, Jim. But right now—as of this moment—he checks out.”
McCoy cast his gaze down and shook his head. “I examined him just
after, and…”
“We have to dig deeper and find out why.”

Pivoting on a heel, Kirk marched into sickbay. McCoy followed.
“That’ll be all,” Kirk told the nurse, and she looked to the doctor for
confirmation.
With a slight nod, McCoy hastened her out.
Once the door had closed behind her, Kirk approached one side of
Spock’s bed and McCoy the other.
Eyes closed, the Vulcan was serene, eyes moving beneath their lids.
Was he dreaming? What did he dream about? What did anyone
dream about when life was a nightmare?
“Spock.”
If he was in a deep sleep, it took little to wake him, for Kirk’s call
was not loud.
“Captain.” He sat up in bed, first on his elbow, then pulling himself
into a reclined sitting position. “Doctor,” he greeted, but Kirk
noticed he would not meet their eyes for more than a split second.
And the tone of his voice was not robust. Fatigue didn’t seem like
the reason. Depression? Confusion?
“Can you talk about what happened?” McCoy asked. He and Spock
had numerous disagreements over the years, sharing many harsh
words—especially on the doctor’s part. But now the warmth he
expressed to Spock was almost jarring, as if Spock had been
diagnosed with a terminal illness and McCoy felt the need to repent
for all his snide remarks at the Vulcan’s expense.
“I don’t know,” Spock said, and Kirk felt his lips part in shock. The
man he knew as a pillar of strength and certitude might say
something was unknown, or he might admit he lacked enough data
for a conclusion, but rarely did he utter “I don’t know.” Especially
when answering a yes-or-no question.
“Spock—” Kirk couldn’t demand an answer, though he wanted to.
More than wanting to insist on one, he wanted one to simply exist. If
Spock truly didn’t know…“Tell us what you do know,” Kirk said.
After a long pause, Spock finally made eye contact that lasted more
than a second. “I killed Berlis.” It wasn’t spoken in his usual

impassionate Vulcan timbre, but instead came weakly from barely
parted lips.
Kirk and McCoy waited what seemed an eternity for Spock to speak
again and offer some explanation.
Finally, the captain prodded him. “Why?”
Preparing with a long sigh, Spock began slowly. “Believing Berlis to
be unable to reestablish the mind-meld while in the cortical status
field, I lowered the mental disciplines that would block his
advances.” His voice was less shaky, but still not quite sturdy. “He
apparently managed to overcome the confines of the mental
suppression—”
“I’m sorry, Spock,” McCoy said softly. “I had no idea he’d be able
to do that. We should have monitored him more closely.”
Spock couldn’t bring himself to look at the doctor, but inclined his
head in gracious acknowledgment. “No apology is necessary. The
Isitri mind is far more complex than most encountered by Federation
science.”
McCoy said nothing, but exchanged an apologetic glance with Kirk
anyway.
Meeting the captain’s eyes again, Spock drew in a long, steadying
breath and continued. “The nature of a Vulcan mind-meld is
dissimilar to the kind of telepathy the Isitri use to communicate.
They share thoughts, feelings, dreams…and in the case of Berlis—
and Meshu—they distribute their will, and their whims.” Suddenly
he looked just past Kirk, his focus drifting, his lips parting silently
for an awkward moment. “Vulcan telepathy is less reflexive and
more dynamic. Two minds once melded act as one. One can be more
dominant, but it is against the character of the Vulcan mind.” He
looked up at Kirk again. “One of the many ways in which Isitri and
Vulcan telepathy are disparate.”
None of this yet spoke to what happened, other than that Berlis had
entered Spock’s mind against his will. Or was Spock saying that
once he did, Berlis wasn’t himself, and neither was Spock, but they

were a Spock-Berlis hybrid?
Kirk let out a discouraged breath. “What’re you saying, Spock? That
had you stayed melded with Berlis you could have kept him from
overwhelming his own people? Or eventually yours?”
Shaking his head, Spock closed his eyes a moment, seeming to
search for the best way to explain his meaning. Kirk couldn’t
remember having ever seen him do that before.
“No,” the Vulcan said finally, and perhaps he was deciding if what
Kirk suggested was possible. “By his nature Berlis was what he was.
His fate was cast by his immutable nature—”
“Are you saying you killed him because it was his fate to die?”
McCoy’s tone was partly outraged and Kirk cast him an irritated
look. Now wasn’t the time.
“Hear him out, Doctor,” he ordered. “I want to hear his
explanation.”
Spock swallowed and shook his head rather sadly. “I have no logical
explanation.”
By now nothing shocked Kirk any longer, but this statement was
more chilling than watching Spock kill an unarmed man.
Except…he wasn’t unarmed, Kirk remembered.
“He attacked you,” Kirk said, writing the report in his head. “And
you acted in self-defense.”
“He melded with me,” Spock said, “and I was not prepared. In his
action, he changed me into a part of himself, and I a part of him.”
“Spock, did Berlis ask you to…did he want to die?” Kirk asked, and
realized the phaser was crunched in his palm.
“I can’t say for certain.” The Vulcan met Kirk’s gaze with such raw
emotion behind his eyes that the hair on the back of the captain’s
neck stood on end. “Either he wanted to die to end his suffering…or
I wanted him to die to end mine.” Spock shakily sighed and
continued, unsteady. “For Berlis, the lack of mental connection was
untenable loneliness. As if you or I were to be blinded, deafened,
made quadriplegic, and numb to tactile stimulus.” He looked from

one man to the other. “How long would any of us survive that?
Berlis could not endure it. And in reaching out to me, neither could
I.” He looked past McCoy to Berlis’s now empty bed. “I truly don’t
know if he suggested his ending to me, or I to him.” McCoy’s brow
furrowed and Spock drew the doctor in with the same emotional
glance that he’d leveled at Kirk. “Two minds became one, such is
the nature of Vulcan telepathy.” He looked at the captain again.
“And one man’s will had become another’s, such is the nature of
Berlis’s troublesome mind. He turns all minds he touches
troublesome.”
“You’re not responsible, Spock,” Kirk decided. “Berlis attacked
you, made you the instrument of his death.” That was the way he
wanted it to be.
“Or,” Spock said, “we decided that to end our suffering, he needed
to die.”
“You can’t know that.” Kirk’s jaw was tight. Anger welled within
him: at Berlis for his very nature, and at himself for moving Spock
down this impossible path. “He made the decision: and forced it on
you.”
“Or,” Spock said, heartrending grief streaking his voice, “I made the
decision, Jim…and forced it on him.”
“You’ll never know,” McCoy murmured, his voice thick.
“No,” Spock said. “I never shall.”

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

It will come as no surprise to many after reading this book that I
have some familiarity with American Sign Language. In fact, as an
employee of Gallaudet University (the first higher educational
institution for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing in the world), I work
with more Deaf people than I do with those who can hear. Generally
speaking, I probably sign more than I speak on any given day.
One of my goals with this story was to convey the intricacy of a
gestural language, and I hope I accomplished it. Many people have
certain misconceptions about sign language, among them the idea
that sign is just a series of made-up hand movements meant to
represent a spoken tongue. It is not—sign is its own robust language.
Any of them that exist—French SL, British SL, Japanese SL, Irish
SL, Spanish SL, and so on—has its own syntax, its own etymology,
and, for me, its own beauty.
I was careful not to base any Isitri signs on any of the ASL that I
know, but certainly the expressiveness and fondness for my second
language was my inspiration for making the Isitri signers, and some

of them deaf.
That leads me to the first and most important acknowledgment: my
brother Josh (who is a teacher by profession) taught me to sign and
so, for giving me a reason to learn and making it easy for me to do
so, I am forever in his debt. Because of my learning ASL, I am
immersed daily in a culture I enjoy and work with people I like and
respect. Hell of a gift, that. Thanks, bro.
Thanks also to Marco Palmieri, who is probably the most flexible
and tolerant editor on the planet. It’s either my good fortune that it is
his nature, or I have pleased the great editing gods. Either way, I
wouldn’t trade him for the world.
As usual, I have to thank my friends and family for cutting me slack
while I moved across the country and worked to finish this book as I
began a new job and a new life. It’s been a busy summer.
I also want to thank James Cawley and the cast and crew of Star
Trek New Voyages: Phase II. Not only have they brought me into
their fold as one of their extended family, but their graciousness and
love of Trek has also been a blast. There’s nothing quite like being
welcomed aboard the Enterprise as it looked for William Shatner
and Leonard Nimoy forty years ago. Just walking across James’s
bridge and sitting in that chair was inspiration for a hundred Trek
novels. Basking in the glow of these folks’ Trek enthusiasm is
inspiration for a hundred more. I’ve made many new and wonderful
friends from James’s introductions (not least of all him), and while I
can’t mention them all here, I hope they know this acknowledgment
is for each of them, individually and collectively.

