by
Michael A. Stackpole

.lit compiled 10/04 by DrB

DEATH AMONG THE STARS
The Y-wing let a proton torpedo go at point-blankrange, but it shot past the eyeball and would have hit
theX-wing had Corran not rolled fast. "Break outside,Champions!"
The Y-wing pilots complied with Corran's order, but did so slowly. The TIE spun in on Champion Five,
pour-ing verdant laser bolts into its shields. The Y-wing pilotcontinued his roll and dive, and the TIE
corrected to fol-low him, allowing himself to fly a level arc as he pursuedhis quarry.
You're mine, now.Corran eased back on his stick,millimeter by millimeter centering the Imperial fighter
onhis targeting crosshairs.
Whistler shrilled a warning.

Behind me? Who?He glanced at his sensors and sawthe other TIE closing in on him and he wanted to
breakaway.Can't, Five is history if I do.
Corran hit his trigger and prepared for nothingness.

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank the following people fortheir various contributions to this book:
Janna Silverstein, Tom Dupree, and Ricia Mainhardtfor getting me into this mess;
Sue Rostoni and Lucy Autrey Wilson for letting meget away with all they have in this universe;
Kevin J. Anderson, Timothy Zahn, Kathy Tyers, BillSmith, Bill Slavicsek, Peter Schweighofer, Michael
Kogge,and Dave Wolverton for the material they created and theadvice they offered;
Lawrence Holland 8c Edward Kilham for the X-Wingand TIE Fighter computer games;
Chris Taylor for pointing out to me which ship Tychowas flying inStar Wars VI: Return of the Jedi and
GailMihara for pointing out controversies I might want toavoid;
My parents, my sister Kerin, my brother Patrick andhis wife Joy for their encouragement (and endless
effortsto face my other books out on bookstore shelves);
Dennis L. McKiernan, Jennifer Roberson, and espe-cially Elizabeth T. Danforth for listening to bits of
thisstory as it was being written and enduring such abuse with smiles and a supportive manner.

Dramatis Personae

RogueSquadron
Commander Wedge Antilles(human male from Corel-lia)
Captain Tycho Celchu(human male from Alderaan)
Captain Aril Nunb(Sullustan female from Sullust)
Lieutenant Corran Horn(human male from Corellia)
Lieutenant Pash Cracken(human male from Con-truum)
Ooryl Qrygg(Gand male from Gand)

Nawara Ven(Twi'lek male from Ryloth)
Rhysati Ynr(human female from Bespin)
Erisi Dlarit(human female from Thyferra)
Gavin Darklighter(human male from Tatooine)
RivShiel(Shistavanen male from Uvena III)
Zraii(Verpine male from Roche G42)
M-3PO(Emtrey; protocol and regulations droid)
Whistler(Corran's R2 astromech)
Mynock(Wedge's R5 astromech)
Alliance Military
Admiral Ackbar(Mon Calamari male from Mon Cala-mari)
Alliance Intelligence
General Airen Cracken(human male from Contruum)
Iella Wessiri(human female from Corellia)
Winter(human female from Alderaan)

Citizens on Coruscant
Asyr Sei'lar(Bothan female from Bothawui)
Inyri Forge(human female from Kessel)
Fliry Vorru(human male from Corellia)
Zekka Thyne(human/alien male from Corellia)
Crew of thePulsar Skate
Mirax Terrik(human female from Corellia)
Liat Tsayv(Sullustan male from Sullust)

Imperial Forces
Ysanne Isard, director of imperial intelligence(human female from Coruscant)Kirtan Loor, Intelligence
Agent(human male fromChurba)
General Evir Derricote(human male from Kalla)

1

Even before his X-wing's sensors had time to scan andidentify the new ship, Corran Horn knew it was
trouble.That knowledge was not based on the ship's unsched-uled, unannounced reversion to realspace
in the Pyriasystem. In the month since the Rebel Alliance took theplanet Borleias from the Empire, more
ships than Corrancared to remember had popped in for a quick survey ofthe place. Some were on
diplomatic missions from worldsthat had already joined the New Republic coming to in-spect the latest
conquest of their forces. Other ships hadbeen sent by the rulers of planets who wanted to separatefact
from propaganda before they decided if they wantedto shift allegiances in the galactic civil war.
Still others had been Imperial vessels on reconnais-sance missions, and a goodly proportion of the rest
wereAlliance ships with legitimate business in the system. Allof them had to be checked out, and the
hostiles discour-aged, but the patrols had produced no serious incidentsor fatalities. This spawned a
complacency among the pi-lots that was not conducive to long life, but even Corranhad found it hard to
keep his edge when no seriousthreats presented themselves.
The new ship's arrival slashed away his peace of mindlike a vibroblade. The sensors reported a modified
freight cruiser that had started life as a Rendili Star Drive ship—not in theNeutron Star-class of bulk
cruiser, but some-thing roughly a quarter that size. That in no way made itremarkable or unusual—dozens
of ships built on the samedesign had been through the system since its conquest.The name,Vengeance
Derra IV, followed the naming con-vention common among New Republic ships of recalling some event
in the course of the civil war. It had even en-tered the system on the course and at the speed the Rebels
had dictated for freighter traffic.
Still, something is not right here.During his brief ca-reer with the Corellian Security Force, hunting down
smugglers and other criminals, he'd learned to trust hisgut feelings about things. His father, Hal, and even
his grandfather—both CorSec officers themselves—had en-couraged him to follow his instincts in
dangerous situa-tions. The sensation frustrated him with its elusiveness, asif it were no more tangible than
the faint scent of a flowerteasing his nose and defying identification.
It's enough that I know something is odd. Exactlywhatisn't important at this point. Corran keyed his
comm unit. "Rogue Nine to Champion Five, you handlethe challenge. Wait here with Six. I'm going to go
out anddo a flyby."
"I copy, Nine, but we are supposed to expedite allshipping in this area. They aren't in the challenge zone
yet."

"Humor me, Five."
"As ordered, Nine."
The system patrols had been broken up to cover fourzones around the planet of Borleias. The plane of
theecliptic split the system up and down, with sun side and out splitting it core and rim. Corran and two
Y-wing pi-lots from General Salm's Defender Wing had up-and-out,which was by far the busiest sector
because the planet's moon had moved out of it and sunward two days previ-ously.
"Whistler, see what you can do about boosting oursensors to pick up any anomalous readings from that
freighter."
The green and white R2 astromech blatted harshly athim.
"Yes, fine, there's likely to be lots of things wrong with that freighter." Corran frowned as he nudged his
throttle forward and the X-wing started off toward thefreighter. "I was thinking about inappropriate
weapons orother odd things."
As Corran's fighter came in closer he began to geta visual feed on the ship. All of 150 meters long, it had
the gentle curves of smaller ships, or the larger MonCalamari warships. The bridge was a bulge on the
top of the bow that tapered back and down into a slender mid-ship. Two thirds of the way back toward
the stern theship's body flared out again to accommodate the star drives. A communications array sat
right behind the bridge, and quad laser turrets bristled off the bow and ina ring around the middle of the
ship.
Whistler splashed a report on the ship onto Corran'sprimary monitor. It was a Rendili Star Drive's
design,from theDwarf Star-class of freighter. It shipped roughlyfifteen hundred metric tons of equipment,
ran with a crew of four hundred, and had nine quad lasers as well as onetractor beam that could be used
to pull salvage into the belly storage area. The guns and carrying capacity made it a favorite for short-haul
traders who were willing towork in areas of the galaxy where authority had brokendown, or Imperial
entanglements could be a problem.
"Champion Five here, Rogue Nine."
"Go ahead, Five."
"I challenged theVengeance and it answered with acode that is good."
That surprised Corran because he couldn't shake thefeeling that something was wrong with the ship.
"Didthey get it on the first try?"
Five's comm unit didn't filter the surprise out of hisvoice. "No, second pass. Why?"
"I'll tell you later. Stay where you are, but get some-one to lift from Borleias in an assault shuttle. You
and Sixbe ready for trouble."
"As ordered, Nine."
Whistler chirped an inquiry at Corran.

"Yes, I think it's exactly like the doubletaker case."Back on Corellia he and his partner, Iella Wessiri,
had in-vestigated a series of burglaries where things had beenstolen from houses, but there were no signs
of forcedentry. All of the security systems were manufactured bydifferent companies, and installed and
monitored by dif-ferent agencies. The key to cracking the case was that theROMs used in the security
systems all came from thesamemanufacturer. An employee had sliced the code thatgot burned into the
chips so when a particular passwordwas used on the locks, the system would spit out the cor-rect
password. On the second try the thief would enter the correct code, get in, and rob the place.
The Y-wing fighters the Alliance used were old, butstill vital, and most of them were a patchwork of new
and old systems. Spare parts were not easy to come by, and whatever were available were used quickly
to keepthe fighters in service. It was conceivable that a sensor/comm unit integrator had been fitted with
odd chips thatgave away codes when checking them. Arranging for suchthings would not be beyond the
Empire's Director of In-telligence, Ysanne Isard, especially if it would help pre-vent the Rebel Alliance
from taking Coruscant away fromher.
Corran punched his comm unit over to the frequencythe freighter was using. "Vengeance Derra IV, this
is Lieu-tenant Corran Horn of Rogue Squadron. Stop now. Standby for boarding."
The freighter did not even slow, much less stop. "Isthere a problem, Lieutenant?"
Corran shifted the targeting crosshairs of his heads-up display over to lead the freighter, then sent a quad
burst ofred laser fire across the ship's bow."Vengeance, stand by
for boarding. There will only be a problem if you make
one.
"Standing by."
The freighter began to roll to port, exposing its top toward Corran's ship.Not good. "Five and Six,
prepareproton torpedoes. Link fire and lock on the freighter."
"Nine, they've done nothing."
"Yet, Five, yet."
Swinging up and around from the belly ofVengeance,four TIE starfighters raced in toward Corran's
X-wing.Without waiting for them to start shooting, he slappedthe stick to the right and brought the fighter
up onto its starboard S-foil. The TIEs started their own turns to portand began to dive, anticipating his
escape maneuver.Corran punched his left foot on the etheric rudder pedal,skidding the stern of his ship to
starboard, then shot offstraight in the opposite direction from his pursuit.
"Nine, we have two TIE bombers deployed."
"Five, fire on theVengeance, then take the dupes. I'vegot the eyeballs. Let Borleias base know we have
trou-ble." He knew the Y-wings would have little trouble out-flying the dupes—pilot slang for the
double-hulledbombers. If he could keep the TIEs occupied, theywouldn't be in any position to harass the
Y-wings. If the missiles the Y-wings launched atVengeance were enoughto take down the forward
shields, the freighter's captain would have to think about running, which would distractthe TIE pilots,
since without him, they were stuck in thePyria system.

Lots ofifsthere. Time to make some of them certain-ties.He used a snap-roll to bring the fighter up on
the starboard stabilizer again, then dove into a long loop that took him down to whereVengeance's bulk
hid him fromthe TIEs. Rolling his ship and applying some rudder, hearrowed straight in at the freighter.
This put him in posi-tion to watch as the quartet of proton torpedoes launched by the Y-wings nailed the
ship's bow. Each missile ex-ploded against the shields like a star going nova.
The astromech droid whistled up a requiem forVen-geance's bow shield.
Corran tightened on the trigger and sent a quad burstof fire toward the ship's bridge. Without waiting to
see ifit hit or did damage, he barrel-rolled to port, moving to-ward the middle of the freighter, and pulled
back on thestick to bring the fighter's nose up. His targetingcrosshairs hung just above the horizon of the
freighter'shull.
A TIE starfighter, shying from the series of explosionsagainst the forward shield, streaked over the
freighter'sedge and right into his sights. Corran triggered a quadshot that caught the eyeball on the port
side quadaniumsteel armored solar panel, slicing the hexagon into adozen or more pieces. A secondary
explosion suggested afailure in one of the ion engines that the fighter's subse- quent careening off through
space confirmed.
Corran rolled up on the left stabilizer foil and driftedto port for a heartbeat before snapping over onto the
star-board S-foil and hauling back on the stick. The maneuverallowed him to evade the fire coming in
fromVengeance'slasers. It also put him on the vector the TIE had usedcoming in over the freighter's hull.
Adding a bit more tothe starboard roll and pulling back on stick again tookhim out past the ship's
damaged bow and let him swoopin on the tail of another TIE.
The eyeball broke back left, but Corran rolled his ship through a corkscrew that kept him on target. He
fired twice. The first quad shot missed, but the secondtagged the ball cockpit full on. The lasers blew
through the engine, then an explosion ripped the fighter apart.Corran dove into and flew through the
expanding ball of incandescent gas, then rolled and dove again.
"Five, report."
"One dupe dead, one sleeping."
Corran laughed aloud. "Nice shooting, Five. Good thinking." The Y-wing pilots had shown the presence
ofmind to engage one of the bombers while using their ioncannons. The weapons were inferior in power
to lasers,
but they had the advantage of knocking out a ship's elec-tronics by overloading the electrical system.
The ion can-nons could render a ship inoperable, allowing the pilot tobe picked up later.
Chances are, though, this Imp pilot will kill himselfto avoid capture. Still, the ship might teach us
something.
"Nine, the freighter is turning to run. Do you want help with the eyeballs?"
"Negative, Five."
Whistler scolded him with a harsh blatty sound.
"It's not that I think I'm that good, Whistler, it's thatI know they aren't." Refusing assistance to deal with

en-emies that outnumber you was usually ascribed to unend-ing egotism or terminal stupidity, but Corran
had a thirdreason in mind. The Y-wing pilots, while enthusiastic and decently trained, were insufficiently
experienced in dog-fighting to be much help to him. If they entered the fight,he'd have to worry about
hitting them. Without their in-tervention, his only possible targets were Imperial ships,and that fact gave
him some freedom.
"Nine, we'll takeVengeance."
"Negative, Five, definitely negative."If they go in onthe freighter it will pick them apart."Hang off there
andtry for torp locks on the TIEs."
Glancing at his sensor displays, he marked the posi-tions of the Y-wings, then rolled his ship and dove.
Angry green laser bolts slashed through the blackness in front ofhim, but neither of the TIEs' shots hit.
The sensors re-ported the last two eyeballs had just pulled through acrisscross maneuver and were
looping up and around to make another pass on him. That told him the last two pi-lots were good enough
to have survived more than onefight in their ships.
They rolled through their double-helix maneuver andCorran shot through the center of their spiral.
Rolling outto the right he cut in front of one, inviting a hastilysnapped shot. The TIE pilot took it, splashing
lasersagainst the X-wing's aft shield. Ignoring Whistler's shrill
shriek, Corran reinforced the rear shield, then rolled andbegan a dive.
The eyeball rolled and started after him. Corranchopped his throttle back, then rolled and dove sharply.
He remained in the dive for a couple of seconds, thenrolled again and climbed. Rolling back out onto his
orig-inal course, he popped in behind the TIE that had previ-ously been on his tail and took a shot of his
own.
The eyeball juked at the last second, so the four laserbolts only clipped the top of one of the solar
panels. TheTIE starfighter began to whirl away, but it never ex-ploded. Damaged as the ship was, it
would be an easy tar-get to follow and finish, but the last TIE sprayed laser fire against the X-wing's
shields, giving Corran a more imme-diate threat to deal with.
Because it was coming in from the left, Corran rolledright, then cruised down through a diving turn that
aimedhim back along its inbound course. The TIE looped up,then rolled and came down through an
inverse loop tocut across Corran's tail. Corran let the X-wing sideslipright, but not before the eyeball had
taken a shot at him.Whistler screamed, then a bank of lights started flashing on the fighter's command
console.
Sithspawn! My shields are down.Corran stomped on the right rudder pedal, swinging the X-wing's nose
in that direction, then rolled up on the port stabilizer and pulled back on the stick. As the ship started to
climb, anothersnap-roll to the left broke it off at right angles to theclimb and away from pursuit. "Whistler,
get the shieldsback up, fast."
A counter appeared on his main screen and begancounting down from one and a half minutes.
"Not good, not good at all."
The major advantage an X-wing had over a TIEstarfighter was shields. The two fighters matched each
other in speed and the TIE actually had the edge in ma-neuverability. Shields allowed the X-wings to
survivemore hits during a fight, and in dogfighting, the goal wassurviving to the end and beyond. Corran

felt he could
outfly the TIE pilot, but engaging in combat while nakedwas not something that made him feel at all
confident.
He punched the throttle to full and pushed the fighterthrough a series of twists and loops that carried it
awayfrom the TIE, but no closer to the Y-wings. Time seemed to be passing very slowly to Corran, with
each second onthe counter seeming to take a minute to click off. The TIEpilot seemed content to circle
around, trying to close withCorran, then he broke off and streaked in toward the Y-wings, coming up
from beneath them.
"Heads up, Five. Invert, you have incoming."
The Y-wings executed the flip in good order asCorran allocated power that would have normally goneto
shields over to propulsion. That provided him a bitmore speed, which let him close the gap with the
eyeball.
"Nine, I have missile lock."
"Shoot, Six, shoot."
The Y-wing let a proton torpedo go at point-blankrange, but it shot past the eyeball and would have hit
theX-wing had Corran not rolled fast. "Break outside,Champions!"
The Y-wing pilots complied with Corran's order, butdid so slowly. The TIE spun in on Champion Five,
pour-ing verdant laser bolts into its shields. The Y-wing pilotcontinued his roll and dive, and the TIE
corrected to fol-low him, allowing himself to fly a level arc as he pursuedhis quarry.
You're mine, now.Corran eased back on his stick,millimeter by millimeter centering the Imperial fighter
onhis targeting crosshairs.
Whistler shrilled a warning.
Behind me? Who?He glanced at his sensors and sawthe other TIE closing in on him and he wanted to
breakaway.Can't, Five is history if I do.
Corran hit his trigger, tracking ruby energy dartsalong the TIE's flight path. Even as he saw the lasers hit
the eyeball's wings and cockpit, he braced for the otherTIE's lasers burning through his ship. He saw his
target
explode and knew, as green laser bolts scythed down to-ward his ship, he was a dead man.
He prepared himself for nothingness.
He was not wholly disappointed.
Nothing happened.
Corran rolled left and climbed. "Find him, Whistler."
The droid gave back a negative report.

"What aboutVengeance?"
Whistler reported it had gone to lightspeed.
At least we're clear there.Corran felt a shiver rundown his spine. His left hand rose up and, through the
fabric of his flight suit, touched a gold medallion he wore.It appears all my luck has not run out.
"Five, Six, what happened to the other eyeball?"
"I got him, Nine."
"With what, Six?"
"The missile I launched."
It took Corran a second to make sense of the reply,then he remembered the missile that had almost hit
himas he had come in on the TIE starfighter. "Six, you were aiming at thesecond TIE?"
"Yes, sir, Lieutenant. Did I do something wrong?"
Corran wanted to yell at him about choosing targetsthat have a higher threat factor—by virtue of being
closerand, therefore, more likely to hit their target—but hestopped before he gave in to temptation. "Not
wrong,Six, but it could have been more right."
"Yes, sir," came a sheepish reply that remained full ofnervous energy. "Next time, sir."
"Yeah, at least we can all be thankful there will be anext time."
Whistler tootled triumphantly as the X-wing's shieldscame back up.
Corran smiled. "Yes, I do appreciate your shavingseven seconds off the estimate, Whistler." He keyed
hiscomm unit. "Five, Six, mark the coordinates of yoursleeping dupe, then we head in. We'll have reports
to fill out but the fact that wecan fill them out means this has been a very good day."

2

Wedge Antilles shook hands with both of the pilots stand-ing in his office. "Sorry to keep you waiting
but we ap-parently have had another probe of the system byImperial forces. The Imps didn't make much
of a fight ofit, but we almost scrambled the rest of the squadron." Hewalked around to his side of the
transparisteel-toppeddesk, then waved the two of them to chairs. "Welcome toRogue Squadron."
Both pilots smiled and thanked him.
Wedge looked first at the Sullustan female. "CaptainNunb, I hope you do not think the fact that you

were notselected to join Rogue Squadron six months ago reflectsin any way a lack of respect for your
skills as a pilot."
Aril Nunb shook her head, the slender plait of brownhair lashing one shoulder and another. "I harbored
nosuch thought, Commander."
"But you were aware that I chose Captain TychoCelchu to be my Executive Officer, not you?"
A red-purple light flashed in her big garnet eyes. "Ru-mors to that effect were easily heard, but more
easily ig-nored, sir."
Wedge smiled.Frank andpractical, this I like. "Thoserumors were true, Captain. My reasons were..."
"Excuse me, sir, but you have no need to explain yourself to me."
"I think you will find, both of you, that RogueSquadron is full of very good pilots. Our discipline is abit
more lax than in other units, and I tend to explain or-ders when I can because we rely on each other very
heav-ily. No one shirks duty here, no matter how dangerous. Ithink it is important that every member of
the squadronknows where he or she stands."
The mouse-eared Sullustan nodded her head. "Yes,sir."
"I'd heard stories about you and your brother, espe-cially concerning your exploits on behalf of the
Alliancein stealing supplies from SoroSuub Corporation and turn-ing them over to us. I saw firsthand
how well yourbrother flies when he piloted theMillennium Falcon intothe second Death Star and
enabled Lando and me to blowthe reactor and control structures. I saw then, and later inreviewing your
performance tests, that the both of youhave a native ability in a fighter that wasn't learned andcan't be
taught. Since the rebuilding of Rogue Squadroninvolved training pilots to higher and higher levels of efficiency, I didn't think you were well suited to a role withus in such a training period."
"I understand, sir."
What she left unsaid told Wedge that she understooda lot more about the situation in the galaxy than she
cared to mention. Rogue Squadron had lost four pilots, afull third of its strength, in the last six months.
Undernormal circumstances new pilots would be brought inand trained up to the squadron's level of
efficiency, butsuch training required time. Events in the galaxy did not give the New Republic's forces
much in the way of time,so the replacement pilots were being drawn from the bestavailable candidates
who expressed an interest in joining the unit.
Wedge turned to the redheaded man seated next to
the Sullustan. "I was surprised, Captain Cracken, to seeyour name appear on a list of candidates willing
to re-place pilots in Rogue Squadron. You've got your ownflight group out on the Rim and you're used to
flying an A-wing, not an X-wing. Won't you find us a bit slow foryour tastes?"
"I hope not, sir." Pash Cracken frowned slightly.
Wedge thought for a moment that the question hadirritated the young pilot, but the reply had come in a
voice that maintained its emotional neutrality. Crackenwas the son of General Airen Cracken, one of the
Alli-ance's legendary leaders and the New Republic's answerto Ysanne Isard. Airen Cracken had
fabricated an identityfor his son that allowed Pash to enter the Imperial NavalAcademy. On his first

assignment after graduation, Pashled his entire TIE wing in defecting to the Alliance. Theybecame known
as "Cracken's Flight Group" and theirkilling of a Victory-class Star Destroyer had made them and their
leader legendary as well.
"If you don't mind my asking, why do you want toleave your people behind and join us?"
Cracken's frown deepened and he shifted uneasily inhis chair. "It's a kind of hard to explain, sir."
"But your reasons must be strong because you'll haveto take a reduction in rank to Lieutenant to join us."
"I know that, sir."
Wedge opened his hands. "You may share as little asyou want with the others in the squadron, Mr.
Cracken,but I really do need to know why you want to be aRogue."
Aril Nunb leaned forward in her chair. "Perhaps if Iwere to leave, sir?"
Pash shook his head. "No, that's not necessary."Breath hissed in through clenched teeth. "This is going to
sound odd."
"Perhaps, but we won't know until you get it out."
"Yes, sir." Pash sighed. "Pretty early on, because of time I spent fooling around with old Z-95
Headhuntersimulators, my father realized I had a bit of a talent for
flying. He encouraged my interest in flying and made allsorts of opportunities available for me to use
simulatorsand then real starfighters. I soloed before I hit pubertyand simulator battles had me beating
some fairly good pi-lots. I knew I was good, but I didn't knowhow good be-cause I thought people
praised my skill to get in goodwith my father.
"When I went to the Academy I got a handle on howgood I was. I was better than most of my
instructorswhen I started, and by the time I graduated none of themcould touch me. We were flying TIE
starfighters and mysquadrons weren't losing a single pilot. I graduated rightup at near the top of the class,
and the guys who finished ahead of me were the guys in my squadron that I'd forcedto leave the
simulators and work on their academicstudies."
Cracken's hands curled into fists as strain entered hisvoice. "When we defected, when we killed the
Exsangui-nator, all my people followed my lead and most of us sur-vived. Attrition has worn the unit
down, that's why we'renow part of Commander Varth's wing, but the peoplethat have been with me all
the way along think I leadsome sort of a charmed life. They think I won't fail them,that I can't be beaten.
Those who have died along theway are accused of having done the wrong thing at thewrong time, and in
some cases they're right, but Ihavesent people to their deaths.
"The new kids coming into the squadron are incul-cated into this myth of my invincibility. My pilots are
get-ting careless, and that's going to get people killed. I knowthat happens, but because of the legend
they've built meup into, I can't get my people to listen to me or do thethings I need them to do. If I stay
there and some Imp outguesses me, everyone will follow me down in flames."
Wedge sat back and nodded slowly. Rogue Squad-ron's unit roster had a lot of names on it, and save
for aJedi Knight, a couple of pilots assigned to training squad- rons, and a few pilots who had left for
other pursuits,anyone who wasn't active duty was dead. Biggs Dark-

lighter, Jek Porkins, Dak Ralter, and Bror Jace were allamong the most talented and famous pilots the
Empirehad killed, but Wedge could attach faces to all the nameson the roster, and knew the details of
how each of themhad died. That they had perished under his command did overwhelm him at times, so
he found it very easy to un-derstand Pash Cracken's dilemma.
"I would say, Lieutenant, that a change is due foryou. Your unit will have to reassess how it operates in
your absence, and that will certainly be a good turn ofevents." Wedge tried to read Cracken's
expression, but hecould not. "It strikes me, however, that there are plenty ofother fighter units in the
Alliance that would welcome apilot of your skill—and most of them are A-wing units."
"Yes, sir, true, but they're not Rogue Squadron."
"Why is it that important that you join Rogue Squad-ron?"
Cracken's shoulders slackened slightly—not so much that Wedge would have said he slumped in his
chair, butCracken had clearly decided he would withhold nothingfrom his answer. "Any other unit would
put me in com-mand and that would solve nothing. You see, because of my previous situation, I no
longer have a perspective onhow well I fly. I'm beginning to question myself and myperformance, and
that means I'm a hairsbreadth from doubting myself. If I've lost something, I need to knowI'm not flying
as well as I can, but if I lose my confidence,I lose everything.
"Here, in Rogue Squadron, I'll be measuring myselfagainst the best our side has to offer."
Wedge pressed his hands together, fingertip to finger-tip. "What does your father think of this change?"
Cracken's face slackened for a moment, then fire flared in his green eyes. "My father had nothing to do
with this decision."
"But you have spoken to him about it?"
"Yes."
"And he approved?"
Cracken's head came up. "He has nothing but the ut-most of respect for you, Commander Antilles."
"That's good to know." Wedge frowned, drawingbrown brows together to hood brown eyes. The
conquestof the Pyria system had required two operations becauseAlliance Intelligence had failed to
uncover some informa-tion about the Imperial installations on Borleias. The idea of Imperial operatives or
traitors having set the Rebels up for their first defeat could not be ignored and any inves-tigation of such
allegations would fall to General Crackenand his people.
While Wedge had absolutely no reservations aboutany of his people, his trust was not shared by others
inthe Alliance. General Salm, the leader of Defender Wing,had long been suspicious of Captain Tycho
Celchu. WhileSalm had admitted to Wedge that he knew Tycho had notleaked information concerning
the first Pyria assault tothe Empire, he believed Tycho was an Imperial agent whowould betray the
Alliance at the worst possible moment.
The conquest of the Pyria system had opened the wayfor the Rebel Alliance to strike at Coruscant, the
Imperialhomeworld. Taking Coruscant would confer upon theNew Republic a legitimacy it had not yet

earned in theeyes of much of the Empire's citizenry. Those who wereaware of the state of the Empire
could find little to differ-entiate the Rebels from the Imperial warlords who were carving their own little
realm out of the Empire. Thoughthey might not believe assurances from Coruscant thatthe threat
presented by the Alliance or people like War-lord Zsinj was minor, they did not yet see the Empire as a
cadaver waiting for scavengers to carve it up.
Coruscant was the key to establishing the New Re-public as the new ruling force in the galaxy. Taking it
was a bold step—a serious gamble that required thousands offactors to fall into place to win. Since
Admiral Ackbarhad ordered Wedge to attend the Provisional Council'sdeliberations on the project, he
knew Rogue Squadronwould be heavily involved in the campaign. AirenCracken had to be aware of that
eventuality, too.
In his place I'd consider planting an agent in RogueSquadron to watch for any suspicious activity. But
wouldI use my own son?Wedge looked at the younger Crackenfor a moment and read disappointment
on his face, notoutrage or wounded pride.I'd be angry and indignant,fighting the implication of being a
spy with an appeal to honor. Fash is not. Is he innocent, or just very much hisfather's son?
The Corellian leader of Rogue Squadron sat forwardand rested his forearms on the desktop. "Trust is
the key to this unit, but that doesn't mean you have to tell yourfellow pilots your deepest, darkest secrets.
The peoplehere are the best and I'm sure you'll both fit in. Again,welcome to the unit."
"Thank you, sir."
Wedge handed each of them a small strip of plastic. "The facilities here are a bit more comfortable than
we've been used to—Evir Derricote ran this operation until wetook it away from the Empire. He was
devoted to a cer-tain level of creature comfort. Captain Nunb, you'll haveyour own quarters. Lieutenant
Cracken, you will share aroom with Nawara Ven, a Twi'lek pilot. I think you'll likehim."
Pash took the strips and handed one to Aril.
Wedge glanced at his datapad, then frowned sharply."I've only got an hour until I have to fly out to
rendez-vous withHome One. I will be taking ourLambda-classshuttle since I'll be bringing General Salm
with me. Lieu-tenant Cracken, you may use my X-wing for the timebeing—we should have one of the
others up and repairedinside a week for you. Captain Nunb, I'll introduce youto Captain Celchu.
Because of his status, you'll actuallybe in command of the unit in my absence. Tycho will helpyou with
anything you need."
He stood up. "Is there anything else we need to dis-cuss?"
The Sullustan shook her head. "No, sir."
Wedge looked at Pash. "Anything?"
"No, sir."
"And if I see your father at the meetings?"Pash smiled. "Just tell him he was right about thegrilling he said
you'd give me, and let him know Ipassed."
"It will be my pleasure, Lieutenant." Wedge kept asmile on his face as he led them to the door. "I think
youboth will find the trials of being a Rogue a bit more dif-ficult than any interrogation I'll give you, but I
have no doubt, being as how youare Rogues, you'll survive andthen some."

3

Corran welcomed his visitors to the small suite of rooms that he and his wingmate, the Gand named
Ooryl Qrygg,had been given on Borleias. Since the Rebel assault had severely damaged most of the
surface buildings in the Im-perial installation, the New Republic occupation forcehoused itself in the
underground warrens that formed thefoundation for the base. Aside from the occasional blaster scars and
a couple of blown-out walls, the facility was infairly good repair.
Corran's suite had two bedrooms that had been builton to either narrow end of a rectangular room. The
walls had been painted an Imperial grey. That color, combinedwith the deep blue of the carpet, made the
room fairlydark. Corran had countered the color scheme by bringingin as many lights as he could find and
rigging a smallholoprojector to flash up images of other worlds andcover a huge chunk of the longest
wall.
He'd begged, borrowed, and bartered for the furnish-ings installed in the room. Most of the functional
surfaceswere the tops of spare parts crates. He'd managed to keepone of the couches that had originally
been in the roomand swapped the one with the blaster-burn hole for two
Y-wing ejector seats. A small refrigeration unit doubled asthe holoprojector stand and, though filling the
room withan occasional rattle or wheeze, managed to keep bever-ages cold and food from spoiling.
A slender, brown-haired man entered the suite firstand smiled as an image of Alderaan appeared on the
wall. "It has been a long while since I saw Wuitho Trifalls." Hepointed at the promontory from which a
river fell in threespectacular waterfalls. "I visited there with my familythe week before I went off to the
Imperial Academy.NovaCom maintained a repulsorlift cabin in the area, so that's where we stayed. It
was as beautiful as that picture,but without the roar of the water, it seems..."
Dead.Corran didn't need to see the sorrow and painon Tycho Celchu's face to know what word had
gone un-spoken. Save for the coldest-hearted Imperialist amongthe survivors of Alderaan, the
Alderaanians had suffereda deep, emotional wound when their homeworld had been destroyed. It
crushed some but others, like Tychoand Princess Leia Organa, seemed to be driven by thatloss to
forever put to rest the Empire and its evil.
"I apologize for that, sir. The projector chooses im-ages at random."
Tycho's face brightened. "Don't apologize. I may missmy home, but that does not mean I like seeing
hologramsof it any less. The planet may be dead, but its beauty liveson in images like that."
The second visitor shuffled through the doorway,then took a hop forward as it shut behind him. The
blackdroid had the body of a 3PO unit, but the crested clam-shell head of a spaceport control droid.
"Good evening,Lieutenant Horn. May I say I was pleased to receive yourinvitation to visit this evening
because I am finding Cap-tain Nunb a bit brusque for my tastes..."

Corran flicked a green-eyed glance at Tycho. "Do youwant to do it or should I?"
"Do what? May I help?"
Tycho smiled. "We couldn't do it without you,Emtrey. Shut up."
"Sir, I must protest..."
"Shut up."
"But I..."
"Shut up."
With Tycho's third repetition of the command, thedroid's arms snapped to its sides and its head canted
for-ward sharply until its chin almost touched its chestplate.At the base of its skull, back at the top of its
neck post,a glowing red button became visible. Emtrey shook onceas if hit by a blaster bolt, then stood
still and, most re-markably, silent.
"Every time I see that little routine I'm amazed."Corran shook his head and waved Tycho to the couch.
"Ithink I've gotten to the bottom of what's going on with him, though."
"Great." Tycho sat down and turned to face awayfrom the picture wall. "Tell me what you've got—or at
least as much as you can."
"Sure." A shiver worked its way down Corran'sspine. A month previously Tycho had reported that
Emtrey, Rogue Squadron's M-3PO unit, had exhibitedodd behavior when told to shut up repeatedly.
The droidhad been acting strangely for a time before that, but noone had complained because he was
talking less and hadmanaged to cobble together some excellent exchanges on the black market and
within the Alliance's quartermaster corps to get the Squadron needed supplies. That behaviorCorran had
been able to trace to his suggestion that thedroid "scrounge" some parts to fix his X-wing.
"I managed to track records back to right before theevacuation of Hoth. Emtrey was there working for a
Lieutenant in the Quartermaster Corps. Her name wasLosca or something like that. Anyway, she was
having towork hard to try to build up stores after the losses atDerra IV and she wasn't having much luck.
At that pointin time the defeat made things look bad for the Rebellion,so resources began to dry up."
Tycho nodded. "I remember. We had a difficult time
getting our equipment to function in the cold because wedidn't have the proper conversion kits."
"It appears this Lieutenant Losca was getting killedon negotiations and wasn't getting the job done to her
orAlliance Command's satisfaction. She wanted to create adatabase that would allow her to function like
a com-modities trader, but computer resources were limited and tied up coordinating things like
defenses. Apparently theAlliance leadership wasn't too high on the idea of becom-ing a commodities
exchange, so they forbade her fromdoing anything that ambitious and urged her to keepdoing what she
was doing."
"The Hoth base was supposed to be top secret."Tycho frowned. "Setting it up as some sort of marketplace would have led to its discovery even earlier thanVader's tactic of using probe droids surveying

worlds."
"That may be true, but this Lieutenant Losca ap-peared to think that without some sort of trade, the Rebellion would run out of supplies. The base would remainhidden, but be out of everything that made it
possible torebel. In desperation she had some techs cobble Emtrey together out of spare parts. She
sliced some commodities-brokering code together and burned it into some chipswhich were implanted
into Emtrey. The brokering chipsgive him a second personality that operates without thenormal 3PO
personality being aware it exists. Thescrounger can be brought to the fore by asking it toscrounge
something, or telling it to shut up, as you dis-covered. When you use that latter technique, the droid
becomes a simple terminal that gives you access to all itsdata."
The man from Alderaan leaned forward and restedhis elbows on his knees. "What were the security
precau-tions Losca took with the droid?"
"I don't know, and I can't ask because she died on Hoth during the assault. Emtrey got off the planet and
has been kicking around from unit to unit until we gothim. No one else learned about his secret until we
ranacross it. I had Whistler do a basic diagnostic scan of
Emtrey and the scrounging circuitry is the only unusualstuff in there. I don't think he's a security risk."
"That's good." Tycho smiled. "And it was good workgetting the data from Hoth. Most of those files are
stillclassified, aren't they?"
"All of them are, but Whistler's got slicing code thatcan get him through low-level security stuff." Corran
shrugged. "Those files are easy to break—unlike the rou-tines used to seal portions of your record."
Tycho barely missed a beat. "Good. I doubt there ismuch damage that could be done by people learning
de-tails about Hoth. My adventures, on the other hand,could cause problems."
Corran made no effort to hide the surprise at Tycho'swords. "Aren't you angry with me for trying to
crackyour file?"
Tycho smoothed his light brown hair at the back ofhis neck. "Anger isn't going to do me any good, is it?
Imight be a little disappointed, but not angry."
"Why disappointed?"
"If there was something you wanted to know, you could have asked."
"Would I get a straight answer?"
Tycho blinked. "Why would you think I'd lie toyou?"
Corran jerked a thumb toward the closed door."There are two Alliance Security officers at my door,
cor-rect? They're waiting to escort you back to your quarters,right?"
"Yes. So . . . ?"
"So General Salm thinks you're some sort of threat tothe Alliance. Shouldn't that make me wonder about
you?"

"It could." Tycho shrugged his shoulders. "Thenagain, you could think about what you know about me
and decide for yourself if I can be trusted or not."
Corran sat back and folded his arms across his chest.In his career with the Corellian Security Force,
Corranhad questioned all manner of people—humans, aliens,
and even the occasional droid. He'd always had a senseabout who was telling the truth and who was
lying tohim. He'd gotten used to following that feeling, playinghis hunches to find the chinks in the stories
suspects used to build.
From Tycho he was getting no sign of deception,but what hedidn't know about the man seemed to outweigh what hedid know. There was no question thatTycho Celchu had been a valued and valiant
member ofRogue Squadron from before Hoth until after Endor, Bakura, and dozens of other little battles.
He flew anA-wing in the assault on the second Death Star and man-aged to draw pursuit away from
Wedge and theMillen-nium Falcon. Well after that he had volunteered for aclassified mission and all
trace of his records up to sixmonths before he rejoined Rogue Squadron had been en-crypted. The gap
only amounted to three quarters of ayear, but it marked the end of trust in him by a host ofAlliance
figures.It seems Wedge Antilles was the onlyperson who still had faith in him.
Corran had only known Tycho for six months, but in that time Tycho had repeatedly flown an unarmed
shuttle into dangerous situations to recover pilots who had been shot out of their ships. On one of those
occasions he hadsaved Corran's life by providing him a datafeed that lethim target incoming TIE
Interceptors. It had been a bravething to do, and one that could have gotten Tycho killed,but he took the
chance to keep Corran alive.
Despite owing Tycho his life not once but twice,Corran still had reservations about him. Tycho had been
secretive about the gap in his record. Corran could haveeasily ignored that, but the ease with which
Tycho hadoverpowered his security detail and slipped away fromsupervision on the second occasion
when he savedCorran's life made Corran wary. He knew his suspicionwas the residue of having been a
CorSec officer whose fa-ther and grandfather had also served CorSec, and he'dhoped learning the truth
about Tycho would ease hismind.
The problem was that the only place he could learnthe story would be from Tycho who, for better or
worse, had to be considered somewhat unreliable as a narrator.Still, it's better than unfocused
suspicion.
"Sir, I have trusted you in the past, and I'll go ontrusting you in the future because I've not seen you do
anything wrong. And I apologize for trying to slice out your file. I guess having worked with CorSec has
justhoned my sense of paranoia. Not knowing why Salm hasyou under guard has that sense working
overtime."
"But you'd still like to know what happened to me two years ago?"
"Yes, sir."
"Fine." Tycho shrugged with resignation, but hisvoice carried with it some relief. "It'll be good to share
this with someone else, but it goes no further, right?"
Corran held his hand up. "On my honor."
Tycho fixed him with a crystal-blue stare for a sec-ond, then nodded. "I volunteered to fly a TIE

starfighterinto Coruscant. The Alliance impounded it at Bakura andmodified it heavily to fill it with sensor
packages. In com-ing in I made several orbits of the planet and picked upall sorts of interesting data on
the Golan space fortresses,the defense shields, the orbital solar collection mirrors,the skyhooks, the dry
docks and ship factories, and every-thing else orbiting the planet. I then took the ship in, landed on
Coruscant, and the data was downloaded. It was shipped out by various routes and within two weeksI
was asked to fly the eyeball back out, taking readings as I went, then hook up with a freighter and return
to theAlliance. I knew getting out would be tough, but we hadall the proper codes to get out, so I
chanced it."
"And the Imps got you."
"They did. Two ion-cannon blasts shorted every sys-tem I had in the ship, including the self-destruct. A
StarDestroyer pulled me on board and I was captured. Theyhit me with a Stokhli stun spray and I was
out. When Ifinally awakened again I was on a transport coming out
of hyperspace. We grounded and I found out I'd been taken to Lusankya."
"Lusankya?!"
"You know it?"
"Only by the most vague and nasty of rumors. It'ssupposed to be Iceheart's own private prison. Weird
things happen to people there."
Tycho nodded. "The guards, when they deign tospeak to a prisoner, take great delight in noting that no
one leaves unless Ysanne Isard is through with them."
Corran shook his head. It was easier for him to be-lieve that theKatana-fleet existed than it was to
acceptthe existence of Lusankya. Corran had first heard theword mentioned after a rival of Corellia's
Diktat hadbeen murdered by a trusted aide. The aide had been taken away by Imperial authorities about
a year before the mur-der, but had been returned three months later. After hekilled his boss he was
reported to have repeated the word"Lusankya" over and over again. After that incident Corran had
heard of a dozen other, similar situationswhere a seemingly normal person had turned on friends and
family, betraying them or performing some hideousact of terrorism against them. Each of these incidents
hada link to Lusankya in some way or other, but that linkonly became apparent after the crime had been
commit-ted.
Corran frowned at Tycho. "People who come out of there are human remote bombs. They do horrible
thingswhen the Empire activates them."
Tycho's hands convulsed into fists. "I know, I know.What's worse, no one has ever mentioned
Lusankyabe-forethey have acted. The clues are always found later.But with me, after three months of
interrogation and de-tention, I guess they decided I was useless. I was in badshape—catatonic for most
of my time at Lusankya so Iremember almost nothing, then I was let go. Theyshipped me to Akrit'tar.
After three months I managed toescape from the penal colony there and made my way
back to the Alliance. I was debriefed for two months butthey couldn't find anything wrong with me."
"And they hadn't found anything wrong with theother people who had been to Lusankya either, right?"
"No. The only difference between me and them wasthat I remembered having been there. It is the

opinion ofGeneral Salm and some others that I was allowed to re-tain my memory, and that my escape
was engineered, justso I could return to the Alliance and betray it."
Without any evidence to prove he was a sleeper agent,the Alliance couldn't imprison Tycho without
seeming as much of a heartless entity as the Empire itself. Even so,Corran reminded himself, lack of
evidence was not evi-dence of lack. Salm's suspicions about Tycho could be onehundred percent
correct, and the utter lack of evidencepointed to the skill of Ysanne Isard and her people.
Corran's eyes narrowed. "So, you don't even know,really, if you are an Imperial agent waiting to happen
ornot?"
"Iknow I'm not." The Alderaanian's shouldersslumped. "Being able to prove it is something else again."
"But being constantly under suspicion, that's got towear on you. Why put up with it? Howcan you put up
with it?"
Tycho's expression drained of emotion. "I put up withit because I must. Enduring it is the only way I can
be al-lowed to fight back against the Empire. If I were to walkaway from the Rebellion, if I were to sit
the war out, Iwould have surrendered to the fear of what Ysanne Isardmight,might, have done to me.
Without firing a shot she would have made me as dead as Alderaan, and I won't al-low that. There's
nothing in what I have to live with on a daily basis that isn't a thousand times easier than what I survived
at the hands of the Empire. Until the Empire isdead, I can never truly be free because I'll always be under
suspicion. Living with minor restrictions now meanssomeday no one has to fear me."
Tycho slowly opened his hands and scrubbed them
over his face. "I don't know if any of that sets your mindat ease, but that's all there is."
Corran shook his head. "It helps, a great deal.Whether you are or are not an Imperial agent in a Rebel
uniform, the fact is that you've saved my life twice. Thatdefinitely counts for something—a great big
something, infact."
"Good." Tycho pointed at the droid. "What do wedo about him?"
"I don't think he's much of a security risk, providedhe doesn't trade in futures for commodities that are
pres-ent on whatever targets we're heading out to hit. Whis-tler's already modified his purchase
parameter program-ming to cover that situation." Corran smiled. "I don'tthink General Salm will think
Emtrey any less of a threatthan he considers you,if we report on his scrounging per-sonality. As long as
we don't activate it, except in veryspecific cases, we should be safe."
"So you think we can reactivate him?"
"Yeah, I suppose so." Corran stood and walked overto the droid. "Brace yourself."
He hit the button on the back of the droid's neck.
Emtrey's head snapped back and locked in its properposition. The droid looked around for a moment
or twoduring which his elbows crept out away from his body. "Idon't know what got into me. Please,
forgive my rude-ness." The droid's head tilted to the right and his eyesbrightened. "Did I miss anything?"
Corran slapped him on the shoulder. "Nothing you'dfind useful, Emtrey. We were just swapping gossip

and re-peating rumors that had no substance to them at all."

4

At first the giddiness bubbling up inside him surprisedWedge, then gratified him as he slipped into his
chair be-hind Admiral Ackbar.They're actually here, the Provi-sional Council. I never thought I'd see
the day.He felt thesame excitement inside him that he'd known as a childwhen some alien or famous
Corellian had come to his parents' refueling station. Had he been asked he wouldhave assumed that being
in the same room with the lead-ers of the New Republic would not seem that special, butitwas and made
him think that the war hadn't burned allof his innocence out of him yet.
Mon Mothma, still looking strong and serene despite the traces of grey creeping into her hair, stood at
her placeat the circular table. "I call this meeting of the ProvisionalCouncil to order. Councilor B'thog of
Elom sends regretsat being unable to attend, but we have a quorum, so wewill be able to proceed.
Councilor Organa, if you wouldbe so kind as to update us on your attempts to open a di-alog with
Warlord Zsinj."
The woman at Mon Mothma's right hand stood.Though she wore a pale green gown gathered loosely at
the waist with a silver belt, Wedge couldn't help but see
Princess Leia ready for battle, the way he had seen her somany times before. It struck him as odd that a
martial im-age could so easily replace the elegant vision before him,but he was reading the fight in her
eyes and the fire in her spirit. Those qualities had made her one of the Rebellion's most respected leaders,
and clearly sustained her in hergovernmental activities.
"I have attempted through numerous channels tomake contact with Warlord Zsinj, but have been
rebuffedevery time. It appears he believes his possession of theSuper Star DestroyerIron Fist has made
him into a forceto be reckoned with in the galaxy. What little of his Im-perial career we know about
indicates he is a man whoembraces the idea that the endsdo justify the means. Heis a survivor, and shows
cunning at playing his enemiesoff against each other. The leadership vacuum in the Im-perial Navy
post-Endor allowed him to rise further thanwas previously reasonable, then declare himself a Warlordand
begin his drive to take control of the Empire."
Borsk Fey'lya's cream-colored fur rippled as he stood."Councilor Organa, it would seem that this Zsinj,
if he isas cunning as you suggest, would be open to negotiations.How have you approached him?"
A trace of weariness tightened the flesh at Leia's eyes."We have tried contacts at various levels within his
orga-nization. Messages sent via the Imperial HoloNet havegone unanswered, thoughyour people have
assured methey have been collected by Zsinj. More light escapesfrom a black hole than information that
comes back outfrom him and his fleet. I suspect he wants to see howtruly strong we are before he begins
any negotiations withus."
The Bothan's violet eyes narrowed. "If there is no in-formation coming out of his organization, how do

youknow he is seeking data on us?"
Admiral Ackbar nodded to Leia. "If I might answerthat, Councilor."
The hint of a smile on her lips banished the fatiguefrom her face. "Please, Admiral."
Ackbar remained seated and waited until the Bothansat back down before he spoke. Borsk's fur rippled
again,this time quickly, which Wedge took as a mark of irrita-tion. "A little less than a standard week ago
a freighterappeared in the Pyria system. It was challenged and re-sponded with the proper passage
codes, but a member of Rogue Squadron chose to do a closer check. The freighterlaunched six TIEs,
four starfighters, and two bombers.The freighter fled and all but one of the smaller ships wasdestroyed.
The one that survived was a bomber that hadbeen disabled by two Y-wings. Examination of it and interrogation of the pilot indicates the ship was sent byWarlord Zsinj to confirm our conquest of Pyria and,
if the opportunity presented itself, to strike at the base."
Borsk's face hardened. "And your people let thefreighter escape?"
Ackbar's lids drifted down for a moment. "Councilor Fey'lya, the freighter was fully armed and deployed
sixfighter craft. On post we had two Y-wings and oneX-wing. Despite being outnumbered, our forces
elimi-nated the six fighters and damaged the freighter, driving itoff. The freighter fled before the fighter
screen was elim-inated, but even if it had not, engaging it would havebeen suicidal."
"I thought such missions were Rogue Squadron's spe-cialty."
Wedge felt color rising to his face.The last time that was suggested, it was another Bothan who did
the sug-gesting.
Admiral Ackbar opened his hands. "I would pointout that to so easily dismiss Rogue Squadron's
sacrificesis to denigrate the sacrifices made by all peoples whohave died in service to the Rebellion."
The Bothan councilor sat back and Wedge's admira-tion for Ackbar grew. The Admiral's veiled
reference tosacrificesechoed the oft-heard Bothan lament about thenumber of Bothan agents who had
died to secure the in-formation about the second Death Star. Because theBothans did not possess a
strong military—as opposed to
the Mon Calamari fleet forming the backbone of the NewRepublic's Armed Forces—they used the
sacrifices of theirpeople as their justification for sharing power in the New Republic. If Fey'lya devalued
Rogue Squadron's contribu-tion to the Rebellion, he likewise eroded his own basis ofpower.
Doman Beruss, a flaxen-haired woman who repre-sented the Corellian exiles on the Council, stood. "I
be-lieve we are heading toward the focus for this meeting,but I would prefer to cut directly to it instead of
watchingmy colleagues scratch and claw their way there. Zsinjknows, as do we, that whichever force is
able to wrestCoruscant from the grip of the Imperial government willbe seen as the legitimate, or at least
strongest, claimant togovernance. The Pyria system was taken to be a steppingstone to Coruscant, and
Zsinj now knows we do have it."
The Wookiee and Sullustan representatives nodded inagreement with Doman. Mon Mothma looked up.
"Ad-miral Ackbar, if you are prepared to give your presenta-tion."
"I am." Ackbar stood and General Salm, a small,balding, thickly built man, slipped into the chair the
MonCalamari had vacated. Salm linked his datapad into ajack on the edge of the table. Above the

mirrored platecentered on the table the holographic image of a world appeared.
"This is Coruscant. It was the administrative centerof the Old Republic and retained that function when
the Emperor seized power. Palpatine made an attempt to re-name it Imperial Center, but it is known as
such only inImperial decrees. Coruscant is still seen as the heart of thegalaxy and many look to it as the
center of order and au-thority, no matter who controls it.
"After the Emperor's death, a government wasformed under the leadership of Sate Pestage. His suzerainty lasted six months until a coup by a coterie of otherImperial advisers forced him into exile. It appears
that hisouster was organized by Ysanne Isard—she was definitelybehind Pestage's hounding and death.
She deftly undercut
the bureaucrats she had used to vanquish Pestage andtook control of the Empire for herself. While she
main-tains her title of Director of Intelligence, and has sug-gested she is holding the planet in stewardship,
there is nodoubt that she is in full control."
As Ackbar spoke, the planet dissolved into an imageof Isard. A tall, slender human woman, she still
seemedpossessed of the vitality that the Rebellion had begun tosap from Mon Mothma. Isard wore her
hair long. Exceptfor white sidelocks, her hair was as black as night andserved to accentuate her severe
beauty.
Her most striking features became apparent as theimage shifted to a close-up of her face. Her eyes were
mis-matched. The right one was an icy blue that had contrib-uted as much as her demeanor to her
nickname of"Iceheart." By contrast the left eye was a molten red.Wedge felt a shiver run down his spine
just looking at herhologram—and he had no desire to make a closer ac-quaintance with her.
Ackbar continued. "Despite her not being from amilitary background, she has, in no way, allowed the
de-fenses of the Imperial homeworld to slacken. Outermostwe have Golan Space Defense stations. They
are compa-rablein power to a Star Destroyer. They are not mo-bile, so eliminating them from a section
of the sky overCoruscant will give us an area in which to operate, buteventually all of them will have to be
neutralized.
"In addition to these defense stations, there are ap-proximately seven Victory-class Star Destroyers on
stationat Coruscant. There are ground-based fighter groups aswell as the fighter wings stationed in and
around theships, shipyards, and orbital factories. The orbital mirrorstations and low-orbit skyhooks may
also have beenarmed."
Ackbar clasped his hands behind his back. "As formi-dable as all that is, the primary problem in taking
Corus-cant is the overlapping defense shields."
The image of the world had long since returned. Asthe Mon Calamari had described aspects of the
defense,
representations of them appeared in orbit around the planet. With his mention of the defense shields, two
spheres constructed of hexagons appeared to encase theworld. One moved in the direction of its orbit,
the othermoved in the opposite direction. The neon-blue lattice-work shrouded Coruscant and occluded
any good viewof it.
"To take Coruscant we must eliminate the shields.There are a number of ways to do this, but none of
themis simple. A direct assault would cost us more dearly thanboth Death Star battles combined. I think
the only rea-sonable approach to taking Coruscant is to blockade the world. It is hardly

self-sufficient—even the defense sta- tions only carry three standard months' worth of pro-visions. Faced
with dwindling supplies, a negotiatedsurrender would be possible."
Mon Mothma frowned. "The problem with a block-ade is twofold. The first is that it would keep our
fleet at one place for an extended period of time. This would al-low Isard to recall the Imperial fleet to
drive us off."
Ackbar nodded. "Or it could encourage naval officers in far-flung regions to sever their ties with the
Empire,breaking it up further."
"Giving us many warlords like Zsinj to worryabout." Borsk's words came so softly they seemed almost
purred. "Pinning our fleet in one place would also allowZsinj to prey upon New Republic worlds."
Ackbar opened his hands. "Yes, what you suggest might happen."
Mon Mothma raised a hand and cut him off. "Thesecond problem with a blockade is that the people of
Co-ruscant will suffer. My friend, you visited Coruscantwhen you were with Grand Moff Tarkin. You
know thereare vast populations of outcasts who dwell deep in the shadowed canyons of that
metroworld. They barely sur-vive as it is. If supplies are cut off to Coruscant, they willsuffer the most and
we cannot afford to be responsiblefor their suffering."
"This I know very well, Chief Councilor Mothma,
but you face me with an impossible task." Ackbarpointed a hand at the floating hologram of Coruscant.
"You want the world taken, but the means that will de-liver it to us with the minimum of bloodshed is one
that is unacceptable. It is possible to batter our way in there.I cannot say there will not be a significant
amount of col-lateral damage—damage that may harm people as muchas any blockade. Yet, even if that
sort of damage is moreacceptable from a diplomatic and political point of view, it leaves us with a reality
that is militarily unacceptable:the world we take will be a world we cannot hold."
Wedge nodded. To bring the shields down on aplanet, standard doctrine dictated that the shields were
tobe probed for weaknesses, such as places where an atmo-spheric anomaly was causing a disruption.
That weak-ened sector would be targeted and a hole would be punched through it. The gap would then
be used as ahole through which shield projectors would be destroyedby bombardment or laser fire.
While that would bring theshields down and allow for a planetary assault, it wouldleave the planet
defenseless until the shield generators could be repaired or, most likely, replaced.
"What you ask of me and my troops is not possible."Ackbar shook his head. "Coruscant, if taken in
haste, willfall to another just as quickly, and all we have fought forin this Rebellion will be for naught."
5
Wedge opened his arms wide and stretched. Standing onthe patio of the Noquivzor facility's only
abovegroundbuilding, he looked out over rolling hills carpeted withgolden grasses. The breezes that
stirred eddies and cur-rents into them warmed him and began to take the chillout of his clothes. He pulled
off his jacket and slung itover his shoulder. Ineed an hour or two of sun andwarmth before I head back
in there.
After the morning Council session had adjourned,Wedge and Salm had returned to Admiral Ackbar's
quar-ters and discussed the problems with conquering Corus-cant. Because of Noquivzo's arid climate,
Ackbar'squarters had been fitted with a humidification system thatmade the environment more

comfortable for the MonCalamari. For Wedge and General Salm, the humiditythickened the air to the
point where it seemed to drag onthem and tire them out.
Wedge smiled as he watched a herd of wilder-nerfsspread out and over a far hill like an inky black stain
onthe golden carpet. He recalled a promise he had previ-ously made to himself to return to Noquivzor
and takesome time to relax. He had wanted to remember what he
was fighting for, and this world had seemed the sort ofplace where he could find some peace.Now I'm
back, butthere's no peace to be had.
"Would that some of this tranquillity would sneak into our deliberations."
Wedge spun around. "Highness."
Leia smiled at him. "Wedge, please, not so formal. We've known each other for too long to stand on
cere-mony."
He nodded sheepishly. "I know that, but things havechanged. Look at you. I can still see the Leia
Organa whowaited anxiously for Luke's return from the Death Star atYavin, but the others, they all see
you as Alderaan's rep-resentative to the Provisional Council. I have no intentionof seeming familiar or
disrespectful."
"Things may have changed, Wedge, but not us."
"I don't think I can agree with that idea entirely."Wedge hung his jacket over the back of a metal chair
andleaned heavily upon it. "Yavin was over seven years ago.I've gone from being a pilot who thought he
was verygood to someone who leads a squadron of hotshots andaids an Admiral in planning assaults on
the Imperial cap-ital."
Leia nodded and drew a chair up beside the one upon which Wedge leaned. "Back at Yavin we didn't
have anyAdmirals."
"We barely had any ships at Yavin. We had GeneralDodonna, but he's gone." Wedge seated himself
besideher. "You've gone from being the youngest person ever tobe elected to the Imperial Senate to the
fusion reactor forthe whole Rebellion. Mon Mothma may lead us, and Ad- miral Ackbar may fight for us,
but you're the one whokeeps all the disparate parts of the New Republic work-ing together. How you do
that, I can't even begin toguess."
She laughed lightly and Wedge smiled in response tothe sound. "Keeping Han and Luke out of trouble
has of-ten been far more easy, to be certain. There are times it
feels as if this Rebellion could be measured in decades, not years."
"I was thinking centuries, but your point is well taken." Wedge shook his head. "Are all the Council
meetings this difficult?"
"Some are. This one in particular is prickly. BorskFey'lya has some issues he wants dealt with and he
hastaken steps to see to it that he gets his way."
"I think Admiral Ackbar is holding his own."

"That's because Fey'lya is playing for a longer game.He has things well thought out, and he is a stickler
fordetails."
"What do you mean?"
Leia looked at him with a mixture of surprise andpity in her eyes. "Oh, Wedge, you wouldn't believe
howwell Fey'lya has orchestrated things to work against Ad-miral Ackbar."
"Try me."
"You're on." Leia swept a hand out to take in thenearly treeless landscape. "Fey'lya arranged for this
meeting to be held here, on Noquivzor. He is right athome here—these savannahs closely resemble his
homerange on Bothawui. Mon Mothma, you, me, and theother humans find the climate and setting
pleasantenough that we are at ease. Kerrithrarr, the WookieeCouncilor, does not like a world with wide
blue skies anda lack of trees. Asking him to live underground is to comewithin millimeters of violating his
personal honor, andyou know how touchy Wookiees are about that."
"Yeah, now that you mention it, Noquivzor andKashyyyk have very little in common. Admiral Ackbar
and the other Mon Calamari don't like the dry air here."
"Sian Tevv and his Sullustans find it a bit hot here." Leia shrugged. "As a result, most of those who
opposeBorsk Fey'lya are ill at ease here. It will be easy for tem-pers to flare and people to decide
someone..."
"Admiral Ackbar..."
"Right, someone is being stubborn. This could influ-ence votes and could go against Ackbar and his
plans."
The Princess sat back and smoothed her gown against herthighs. "Of course, Ackbar knows all this,
which is whyhe advanced the blockade plan. He knew it would notwork, so now if he retreats from that
position, he showshimself to be reasonable and willing to compromise. Thismeans the other side must
compromise, too."
Wedge frowned because until after the meeting, whenAdmiral Ackbar had explained these things to him,
he'dcompletely missed the significance of what Leia had justindicated was blatantly obvious. "I think
finding enemyships and shooting them up is easier than this politicsstuff."
"Possibly, but it's a matter of scale. You lead yourpeople against several dozen Imperials at a time. Each
ofus represents millions and billions of individuals and ourgoal is the overthrow of billions. We cannot
afford to beso direct or free."
"Once upon a time we could."
"True, but then we were all self-elected members ofan outlaw movement. Now we speak and act for
wholeworlds." Leia reached over, took Wedge's hand, and gaveit a squeeze. "Back in those days I
scarcely dared dreamwe'd have these problems to deal with in the future."
Wedge patted the top of her hand. "Yeah, in thosedays it seemed as if our children and grandchildren
wouldstill be fighting the Empire."

"Indeed." She laughed again. "So, Wedge Antilles,any prospects on the horizon for you contributing to
theRebellion's next generation?"
"Me? I have all the children I need in my squadron."He saw sadness wash across her face. "It's not that
bad.I have friends, I just don't have the time to go courting. You found someone, and you weren't even
looking. Itseems to happen that way, so I'm not terribly worried.Now what about you and Han?"
"We're happy, when we get to see each other. It's kindof rough on a woman to finally admit you love
someoneand then have him frozen in carbonite for the better part
of a year. Then again, during that time he didn't find littleways to irritate me."
"That's his nature, though—he's chaos incarnate."Wedge smiled. "Han Solo, you have to love him..."
"...or freeze him in carbonite, I know." Leia staredwistfully off into the distance. "He's a good man. Even
with his quirks and rough edges, I don't think I can findbetter in this galaxy. And I'm not really interested
in look-ing, either, but there are times when I wonder 'Whyhim?' "
"If you ever have doubts, serious doubts, come seeme. I can give you a dozen reasons to answer that
ques-tion."Not the least of which is that it takes a guy as fastand sharp as Han Solo to keep up with
you, Leia.Wedgelet go of her hand and stretched again. "What aboutLuke? How is he doing?"
"He's doing well. He's continuing his Jedi training. He's also been traveling around the galaxy trying to recover any artifacts or documents that will fill in the back-ground of the Jedi Knights. The Emperor's
attempt toexterminate the order was very effective. Only the histo-ries written at his order remain and
they're long on fab-rication. Luke says they have nothing serious to offer byway of instruction for a Jedi,
though a couple of the textssuggest exercises that are designed to lure a potential Jediover to the dark
side."
"That's nasty, and rather typical of the Emperor."
"He was evil and, just as bad, quite thorough in hismethodology." Leia sighed. "Luke has designed a
regimenof exercises and has convinced me to start training. I dothem when I can, but a Jedi is supposed
to be tranquiland at peace when she acts, and the frustration inherentin my position often keeps me away
from the properframe of mind."
"I can imagine. The next time you see him, or speakwith him, tell him he's welcome to fly with Rogue
Squad-ron whenever he wants. I've got a good bunch ofpeople—a solid core group to which I'll be
adding newpeople as they become available." Wedge sat forward.
"We've rebuilt the squadron by filling it with good pilotswho also have other skills. Ackbar wanted and
we'venow got an elite group that can handle everything from pitched battles to covert entry and scouting
operations.Adding a Jedi Knight into the mix wouldn't hurt a bit."
"I suspect Luke would like flying with you again, butthe responsibility of being the last or, rather, the first
newJedi Knight weighs very heavily on him right now. He'sbusy discovering as much as he can about the
tradition towhich he has become heir. I will give him your message,though."
"Thanks."
A comlink bleeped and Leia produced it from withinthe sleeve of her gown. "Councilor Organa here."

"Leia, it's Mon Mothma. If you have a moment, Ihave some things to discuss with you."
"On my way." Leia snapped the comlink off, then leaned over and gave Wedge a kiss on the cheek.
"Youmay be right—we have changed, but I'm thankful that it'snot so much that I can't sit with an old
friend and relaxfor a minute or two. I'll see you later, Wedge."
"Good-bye, Leia." Wedge stood as she departed.Change we have, Leia, but change for the better, I
think.Seven years is a long time, but I think we can handleseven more.He smiled.And maybe another
seven afterthat.
A man came out onto the patio and turned inWedge's direction. Though white hair dominated the redon
his head, his green eyes and sharp cheekbones madethe resemblance to his son unmistakable. Wedge
snappedto attention and saluted.
The man stopped and returned the salute, then of-fered Wedge his hand. "Pleased to make your
acquain-tance, Commander Antilles."
"Likewise, General Cracken. Is there something I cando for you?"
The General pointed Wedge back to his chair. "If youhave a moment."
Wedge resumed his place. "Go ahead."
"I wanted to thank you for taking my son in as a member of your Rogue Squadron."
"Thank me?" Wedge chuckled. "There are very fewparents that would consider their children joining
RogueSquadron a good thing."
"I think you will find I am rather unlike most par-ents, Commander." The elder Cracken had the same
gen-eral build as his son, though he had thickened a bit in themiddle and jowls were just beginning to
form on him."Many other commanders would have rejected him justbecause of his connection to me.
They would assume Iwas using him as an agent to audit their activity."
"Are you?"
"Should I be?"
Wedge shrugged. "I don't think so, but General Salmhas concerns over the security of my unit."
"I'm aware of the Celchu situation but I am notoverly concerned by it. I trust you will report any problem in that regard."
"Of course."
"I expected nothing less." Cracken rubbed his hands together. "Pash is a very talented man—I say this
as hisfather and as a New Republic officer. His early successput him in a position where it was difficult
for him to do anything else of apparent consequence, which meant hewould have to push himself above
and beyond his abili-ties to succeed. While I have no doubt he has not yet found the upper range of his
talents, clearly his peoplecould not keep up with him. His desire to do more wastempered by his
knowledge that he could easily get themkilled. It was a situation that would end up with him hat-ing

himself—either for having done nothing, or havinggotten his people killed.
"By joining you he will be challenged. You're a goodman, Antilles. You don't take chances when you
don't needto, but you don't shrink from doing the jobs that need tobe done. You've found the balance my
son needs to findfor himself. I don't expect you'll get him killed, but if hedoes die as a Rogue, I know he'll
have been doing the best
he could to do the best for the Rebellion. I'd hate to losehim, but if he has to go, doing so in that way
isn't bad."
"I hope Rogue Squadron will live up to your expec-tations."
"I'm sure it will."
The confidence in Airen Cracken's voice madeWedge's stomach tighten. "Should it concern me, sir, that
the head of Alliance Intelligence has just told me that hisson will find his time in my unitchallenging}"
" 'Concern' you, Commander?"
"Yes, sir."
"Oh, I should think so, Commander Antilles."Cracken nodded solemnly. "Very much so, indeed."
6
Whistler's warble made Corran look up at the timer onhis green and white X-wing's main display. "Five
minutesuntil we come out of hyperspace, thanks." The count-down marked the end of a two-leg run from
Borleias toMrisst that took a total of five hours to complete. Takingthe precaution of hitting a transit
system before arrivingat Mrisst struck Corran as unnecessary, if the intelligencethey were reacting to was
correct.Our target already knows where we live.
Mirax Terrik had arrived at Borleias aboard her ship,thePulsar Skate, after a trade run that had
included avisit to Mrisst. Being a smuggler of no small amount ofskill, she had pulled a copy of the local
system traffic re-ports from Mrisst control to see who was operating in herarea and might prove to be
competition. One of the shipson the list was a freighter by the name ofVengeanceDerra IV.When she
arrived on Borleias she asked Emtreyfor any information he had on the ship, and that resulted in their
recon flight.
Corran fought to clear his mind and focus on the mis-sion. That was not an easy task because of two
bits of in-formation the squadron had received a couple of hours
prior to the mission being planned and launched. The first was confirmation by Thyferran officials of Bror
Jace's death. He had been the hottest Rogue pilot in thesquadron's first five missions, amassing
twenty-two killsto eclipse Corran's mark by one. Upon his return fromhis last mission, he was called
back to Thyferra because of a relative's impending death, but he had never arrivedat his destination.
Everyone had feared the worst, butuntil Thyferran officials backtracking his intended routehad found
debris from a destroyed X-wing, everyone hadhoped for the best.
Though Corran and Bror had been rivals, they hadalso understood each other. Without that
understanding,Corran probably would have accepted news of his deathas easily as the others did. The
Thyferrans reported thatan Imperial Interdictor cruiser had been working in that general area, so the

scenario appeared to be that Jace hadbeen pulled out of hyperspace a bit prematurely andjumped by
TIEs and destroyed. It seemed plausible toCorran except that no one reported finding any TIEfighter
debris.
If I got jumped, I would have taken some of them with me.Corran did admit to himself that Bror could
have been surprised and killed with a lucky shot or two,but that struck him as unlikely. If his ship had
malfunc-tioned or something else had gone wrong, then Brorwould have been helpless. The problem with
that theorywas that the unit's chief tech, a Verpine named Zraii, keptthe X-wings in prime condition.
Unless someone had tam-pered with the ship, the chances of a malfunction were slim and none.
The Interdictor cruiser had been reported to be theBlack Asp.It might have been coincidence, but the
Rogues had fought against that ship in their first engage-ment. Corran had come as close to dying in that
fight—one where they had been dragged out of hyperspace byaccident—as he ever wanted to get again.
If not for TychoCelchu's intervention he would have been dead or, worseyet, a guest at some Imperial
penal colony.
He would have been inclined to let theBlack Asp'sappearance pass for coincidence except for the
second bitof information that came through to him. Emtrey hadbeen trying to locate information on Gil
Bastra, the manwho had been Corran's superior at CorSec. Gil had beenthe one to fabricate the
identities under which Corran, his human partner, and her husband had fled from Corellia.Corran had
asked the droid to look for information be-cause of a spurious report indicating that Gil had beencaught
and killed by Imperial authorities.
Emtrey had found a report that confirmed the origi-nal death notice, but this one elaborated on the cause
of death. Gil had been killed during a botched interrogationby Intelligence Agent Kirtan Loor. Loor had
been the Im-perial Liaison to Corran's CorSec division and no lovehad been lost between them. Inever
liked him even be-fore he let my father's murderer walk free.
A lump rose in Corran's throat. He rubbed at it withhis right hand, the heel of which pressed his
medallionagainst his breastbone. His father had kept the medal asa lucky charm. It was the only memento
of his father hehad left since he fled from Corellia and Mirax had iden- tified it as a commemorative
medal struck to mark a Corellian Jedi Knight's elevation to the rank of Master.The feel of the gold
medallion helped him remember the good times with his father, and that eased the tension inhis throat.
Corran knew it was a fallacy to think that two factslinked by time had a causal relationship, but he could
notshake the gut feeling that Kirtan Loor had been involvedsomehow with Bror Jace's ambush and death.
The report about Gil's death had indicated Loor had been summonedto Coruscant and assigned "new
duties." Corran had nodoubt that no matter what Loor was supposed to bedoing, he would continue to
look for a way to get backat Corran for eluding capture at Corellia.If Loor foundout that I was with
Rogue Squadron, he'd do anything hecould to strike at me, even if he could only kill myfriends.
Corran bounced his helmet back against the ejectionseat's headrest. "Think about Loor later, now you
have amission to run." He glanced at the cockpit chronometer."Ten seconds to reversion to realspace.
Hang on, Whis-tler, we're going in hot."
The wall of light outside the cockpit exploded into amillion pinpoints of light as Rogue Squadron burst
intothe Ga Tir system. Their jump had been plotted with spec-tacular precision—exceeding even that for
whichSullustans were renowned—so they appeared below theplanetary plane, heading in toward Mrisst
via the southpole. Pash Cracken had suggested that approach since theaustral-polar continent was
known to be too geologically unstable for the Mrisst Trade and Science Academy tohave set up any
astronomical observation posts.

Rogue Squadron had not expected to arrive unno-ticed, but they wanted as little data about them
collectedfor as long as possible. IfVengeance was monitoring thesame sort of traffic control reports that
Mirax had pulled, the arrival of eight X-wings would attract attention. The arrival of eight mongrel
snubfighters—for that was what Rogue Squadron's navigational beacons proclaimed themto be—would
barely be noticed.
Data collection from stations on the planet wouldeventually be collated with the traffic data and point out
that the "Uglies"—to use the Corellian nickname for suchrebuilt craft—were performing like X-wings in
good re-pair. With sufficient luck this anomaly wouldn't be no-ticed until after the mission was over.
Corran was willingto settle for it being overlooked until they'd foundVen-geance.
The X-wings swept up and around the fringes ofMrisst's atmosphere and caught their first glimpse of
Ven-geance glinting in sunlight. "Whistler, what's the ship nexttoVengeance?"
The droid chittered for a moment, then displayed theanswer on Corran's secondary monitor. The ship
was amedium-sized transport calling itselfContruum's Pride.Whistler appended to his identification a
criminal behavior code that Corran recognized as meaning the shipswere moving in tandem, remaining steady to
facilitate the transfer of cargo.This is just like spotting smugglers backwith CorSec.
Before Corran could key his comm unit and let theothers knowPride was in league withVengeance,
PashCracken's voice filled the comm channel. "Twelve,Prideis bad."
"How do you know that, Four?" Captain Nunbasked.
"Contruum's my homeworld. Naming conventionsfor ships restrict virtues to capital ships. Transports are
named for beasts of burden and rivers."
Corran keyed his comm unit. "Four is correct,Twelve.Pride is transferring cargo to or taking it from
Vengeance."
"We have two for the taking, then. S-foils in attackposition."
Corran reached up and hit the appropriate switch.The fighter's stabilizers split and locked into the
positionthat gave the X-wing its name. Off to the starboard side of his ship he saw the four fighters in
Two Flight moveout under Cracken's command. Corran served as CaptainNunb's wingman, with Rhysati
Ynr and Erisi Dlarit in Rogues Seven and Eight completing One Flight.
Captain Nunb's voice filled the comm channel. "Star-shipsVengeance Derra IV andContruum's Pride,
this isCaptain Aril Nunb of Rogue Squadron. You have vio-lated New Republic space. Stand down.
Drop yourshields. Prepare to surrender your vessels."
Corran's green eyes narrowed as the ships began tomove apart. "Be alert, Rogues. They're moving and
theone thing we knowVengeance needs more of is TIEs."
As if summoned by his words, a dozen TIE star-fighters and interceptors boiled out of the gap between
the two ships.
"They needed pilots, too, Nine."

"Which they apparently got, Four."
"Cut the chatter. Two Flight, takeVengeance. One Flight, we have cover."
"As ordered, Twelve." Corran flexed his right hand,then took firm hold on the flightstick. He thumbed his
la-sers over to dual-offset mode that fired them in pairs.Doing that meant each shot packed less power,
but he gota faster rate of fire. In the sort of wheeling, twistingdogfight the eyeballs and squints promised,
rapid fire wasdevoutly to be desired. "I have your wing, Twelve."
No sooner had he said that than Nunb's ship side-slipped to port, then dove toward the planet. Corran
hadno idea why she'd done that, but he followed her as besthe could, remaining off her starboard
stabilizer and backa bit. As he started to follow her as she pulled up and outof the dive, he saw her lasers
flash and the lead eyeballexploded.
"Nice shooting, Twelve."
Her only reply came in a snap-roll up onto her portstabilizer that she quickly reversed. The stern of her
ship slid to starboard as she applied rudder, swinging the noseof her craft to port. It tracked along the
course of the TIEthat had taken her snap-roll feint. Nunb's quad shotclipped the port wing on the eyeball
and sent it spinning off into space.
"You have lead, Nine."
"As ordered, Twelve." Corran glanced at his scannerand found a pair of Interceptors angling in from
above.He pulled back on his stick, rolled, and acquired his first target. He set up for a head-to-head
pass, then cut histhrottle back. Bringing the port stabilizer up, he let the fighter sideslip to the right, then he
applied port rudderand repeated Nunb's tracking shot on the lead squint.
It took him four shots to do what she had done inone, but the effect was no less spectacular. The scarlet
la-ser bolts burned a line of holes in the Interceptor's cantedport wing. It began to tear away from the
front andsmashed into the ball cockpit. When the top half of the stabilizer finally ripped free, the port
wing twisted. TheInterceptor began to gyrate and spin, then shook itself
apart. Finally the twin ion engines exploded, one after theother, sowing ship shards on the Mrisst
atmosphere.
The second squint kept coming and Corran's maneu-ver had left him presenting his profile to it. Whistler
whooped a warning, but Corran felt no panic at all. Herolled the ship over onto its top, then hit more left
rudder.This reversed the effects of his previous move and left himgoing nose-to-nose with the squint.
Corran centered the Imp in his targeting cross and when it went green, he tightened up on the trigger.
The laser bolts perforated the cockpit and filled itwith fire. A secondary explosion shredded the squint.
Thewings sailed away from the fiery red and blue ball, thenthe ion engines blew, engulfing the remains of
the ship ina silvery cloud. It imploded and tiny bits of debris strucksparks from Corran's shields, but did
no damage.
On ahead Corran spottedVengeance because of thesheer volume of laser fire coming from its bow and
waistlasers. The green darts formed striated cones of fire that spiraled around as the gunners attempted
to hit their tar-gets. While the freighter's guns had not been intended asantifighter weapons, the tight
spirals meant the gunnerswere having a very difficult time tracking their targets.

Apparently Lieutenant Cracken can fly very well.
Corran saw four pairs of proton torpedoes head in atthe waspy freighter from widely disparate angles.
Even if the gunners had been good enough to actually shoot thetorpedoes out of the void, covering all the
shots wouldhave been difficult. Some shots were going to get through, the only question remaining was
how many.
All the torpedoes hit, bringing downVengeance's for-ward and aft shields amid a storm of brilliant
explosions.Vengeancebegan to rotate in space, exposing a gaping hole in the port side. Escape pods shot
out in all direc-tions. The freighter continued to move away from Mrisst,but it was clearly drifting and
would eventually succumbto the planet's gravitational pull.
"Nine, break starboard."
Corran rolled his ship to the right hard, but still
caught a couple of green laser bolts on his aft shield. He shunted power from his lasers to the shields,
then evenedtheir strength out. Back where he had been, a TIE star-fighter swooped through a dive, and
one of the squad-ron's X-wing's flashed past, hot on its tail.
"I can't shake this squint on me."
"Twelve is on the way, Eight."
Erisi has one on her and Captain Nunb is on her way to help.Corran saw two TIE starfighters streak
down andpast him, coming in on an oddly angled vector. He won-dered what they were doing until
Whistler put a track upon his screen that showed them to be on an intercept forRogue Seven, the ship
that had called for him to break.Her target is pulling through a tight loop and she's fol-lowing, while the
twogarralstry to cut across the circleand nail Rhysati. Not if I can help it.
"Seven, watch your aft. I'm coming, but be preparedto break up and right if I call."
"I copy, Nine. Almost have him."
Corran rolled the ship to port, then hit enough rud-der to stand the X-wing on its nose. He punched the
throttle full forward and angled in at the two fighters fol-lowing Rhysati's ship. He switched his targeting
system over to proton torpedoes, but didn't target the TIEs im-mediately.Some models have a target
lock warning sys-tem. If I give them a chance to dodge, they will.He tooka quick breath, blew it out,
then let his range on the leadTIE drop to one kilometer. Nudging his stick forward, he impaled the
eyeball on his targeting crosshairs. The HUD went red, Whistler sounded a solid tone, and Corran hithis
trigger.
The proton torpedo lanced out and hit the lead eye-ball dead on. It pierced the starfighter's port wing,
then exploded right in front of the cockpit. The central ballcrumpled as the wing disintegrated. The bulk
of the craftwent tumbling off down Mrisst's gravity well.
Corran switched back to lasers and sideslipped right. He snapped a quick shot off that dinged the other
TIE'sstarboard wing, but failed to get enough of it to do significant damage. The TIE broke hard to port, so Corranrolled the X-wing to the port, applied some

rudder, andcut his speed back to remain on the TIE's tail.
The eyeball rolled right, then climbed sharply. Corranstarted to climb, then the TIE came over to
complete aloop. Corran snapped the X-wing over on its right S-foil,presented his port side to the TIE.
The starfighter's firstshots passed wide on either side of the snubfighter, butthe eyeball started to roll to
correct his aim.
Corran hit hard left rudder, then rolled ninety degreesto starboard to face the eyeball head on and give
him theworst targeting profile possible. With a flick of his thumbhe brought the torpedo targeting program
up and imme-diately got a tone from Whistler. Ignoring the hail ofgreen laser bolts hammering his forward
shield, Corran squeezed the trigger.
The proton torpedo tore the TIE's starboard wing off,sending the starfighter into a flat spin. Whistler
reportedthe ship's thrust had cut in half. Corran would have putthat down to damage done to the
starboard engine,but the spin began to slow. The pilot had clearly shutdown the port engine so he could
counter the spin. Re-starting the port engine would give the pilot maneuveringpower, but an explosion on
the port side of the fighter showed the restart had not worked as intended. Bluelightning played over the
fighter, then it burst into a fire-ball that streaked in toward the system's sun.
"Whistler, targets."
The droid displayed an image ofContruum's Pride onthe scope, but it wasn't going anywhere. Corran
hit a fewbuttons on his console, shifting around to see if therewere any more fighters available, but he
found none.Whistler's negative bleat chastened him for doubting thedroid.
"Just checking."
Whistle rebleated his comment.
"Yes, perhaps Ishould know better." Corran keyed his comm unit. "Nine is clear, Twelve."
"I copy, Nine. Come to a heading of 173 and orbit
Vengeanceat three klicks. Four has convincedPride thatit wants to help stabilizeVengeance so it doesn't
do an at-mosphere dive. Mrisst Disaster Control is scrambling forrecovery operations."
"As ordered, Twelve." Corran smiled. "And, Cap-tain?"
"Yes, Nine?"
"Impressive flying out there. Welcome to RogueSquadron. You're definitely one of us."
"Thanks, Nine. It's nice to be home."
7
At the sound of her voice a jolt ran through Kirtan Loor.He whirled away from his workstation and
dropped toone knee before the towering holographic projection ofYsanne Isard. "Madam Director, I am
at your service."
"That was my impression."

The chilly tone in her voice warned him that hermood was not one in which she would tolerate mistakes.
He couldn't think of any he had made, but he killed thestirrings of anger that being unjustly accused
started in him.You have been accused of nothing. Her mood maynot have anything to do with you or
your service."Whatwould you have of me, Madam Director?"
Some of the venom in her varicolored stare survivedtransmission from her office kilometers up and away
from his work space in the bowels of the Imperial Palace."I would have of you the best effort you can
produce."
"Always, my lady."
"Your report on the incompetence of theBlack Asp'sflight coordinator in the Bror Jace matter was quite
thor-ough. I wanted Jace alive so I could utilize him atLusankya. Your report makes it quite clear that
MajorWortin knew this, but took no steps to guard against a
kill. And you were correct in pointing out that his insis-tence that the ship blew up by accident was
nothing morethan a sham."
"Thank you."
"I did not need your editorializing in the conclusionyou drew. It is true that in the past Major Wortin
wouldhave been executed, but we cannot afford to squanderour personnel with such abandon anymore. I
have ap-proved your suggestion that he be transferred to theInex-orable.Under Thrawn he will learn
lessons he shouldalready know, or he will die."
"Yes, Madam Director."
"I have received another request from GeneralDerricote for subjects. This time he wants Quarren?"
Loor brushed a hand back over his black widow'speak, then looked up at her. He had often been told
helooked like a young Grand Moff Tarkin, but he was fairly certain Tarkin would never have let Isard
intimidate him.Tarkin had real power, almost as much as Iceheart wields here on Imperial Center. I have
only the little bits I haveassembled. I must wait and accumulate more.
"Yes, Madam Director, that is his request. GeneralDerricote's cadre of scientists have made the initial
break-through in their research on Gamorreans. The virus hasan incubation period of a month and is fatal
in seventy-five percent of the cases."
"The incubation period is too long. It must be faster."
"Yes, they know that."
"How long are the subjects contagious?"
Loor reached back and pulled his datapad from thedesk. "Four days, during the final throes of the
disease.Transmission occurs through bodily fluid and can survivein contaminated water supplies for
almost a day. It can befrozen and survive indefinitely."
Isard's expression hardened. "It cannot be made air-borne?"

"The current theory is that the same genetics thatwould make it transmissible by air would greatly
facilitatea spontaneous mutation allowing it to affect humans."
"Unacceptable."
"As I have told them, Madam Director." Loorglanced at his datapad again. "Derricote believes part of
the incubation period problem is tied to the sluggishnessof the Gamorrean metabolism. Quarren are not
as gooda platform to guarantee cross-species susceptibility, buttheir metabolic rate is higher than that of
Gamorreans."
"Very well, give him what he wants. Organize sweepsin the undercity for Quarren. There should be
enough ofthem in the warrens to suit his needs." Isard rubbed ather eyes with slender fingers. "Collect
extras—Derricote'sestimates of what he will need are always conservative."
"Yes, Madam Director."
"And tell Derricote I want the incubation period cutto a week, and I expect that breakthrough in a
month, no more."
"I saw the reports of Zsinj's forces showing up nearthe core. Do you think he is coming here?"
Ysanne Isard laughed aloud and Loor decided he'dheard more pleasant sounds during difficult interrogations. "Zsinj? Never while I am here. He knows I wouldpluck out his heart and fling it into the streets
from thehighest tower in the Palace. The only way he will comehere is after someone has taken the world
away from me, and he can slink in like the coward he is and take it awayfrom them. No, his probes are
to evaluate my defensesand the Rebellion's strength. He will compare them, thenput himself into a
position to become the victor after the Rebels and I exhaust ourselves in the fight for ImperialCenter."
Despite having only read it once, Kirtan Loor recalledvery clearly the details contained in Zsinj's Imperial
datafile. Everything there correlated well with the con-clusion that the man was an opportunist, though
Loorhesitated at deciding such a label defined the man com-pletely. Iwould have done that before my
associationwith Iceheart, but I have been made painfully aware thatrelying on conclusions I had drawn
was the source of thedifficulties in my life.
"If it would please you, Madam Director, I can ar-range for efforts to discourage Warlord Zsinj's
scoutingmissions."
"No, absolutely not. The man may not be terriblybrave, but he compensates for this by being venial and
vengeful. Strike at him and he will feel compelled to strikeback." Isard's expression grew distant as her
voice trailedoff. "No, we must concentrate on the Rebellion. All mustbe ready for them when they decide
to strike at ImperialCenter."
"As you wish, Madam Director."
"You had better hope so, Agent Loor. If Derricotedoes not have his distraction for them available then, I
shall have to take drastic steps to assure that anyone con- nected with his project does not fall into Rebel
hands."She smiled coldly. "And if I were you, the implicationsthereof would frighten me to death."
8
Wedge dried the palms of his hands on his thighs as hewatched Admiral Ackbar rise in response to Mon

Mothma's invitation. "Thank you, Chief Councilor. Mystaff and I have spent a considerable amount of
time sinceyesterday's session reviewing and analyzing all pertinentfiles concerning Coruscant. While we
are still of the opin-ion that a blockade of the world is the preferable course of action from the military
point of view, we are willingto concede that other factors may make this option un- available to us."
Mon Mothma smiled with genuine pleasure. "I ap-preciate your efforts in this regard, my friend. Have
youdiscovered another way to approach this problem?"
"We have identified a number of them, Chief Coun-cilor."
Borsk Fey'lya tapped a button on the datapad infront of him. "A more logical course would have been to
identify the greatest problem preventing our conquest,would it not?"
The Mon Calamari nodded solemnly in the Bothan'sdirection. "We have done this as well. Clearly the
overlapping planetary shields are the primary impediment toachieving our goal."
The large black Wookiee seated to Princess Leia'sright growled a question that Leia's gold 3PO unit
trans-lated. "Oh, my, Councilor Kerrithrarr wishes to know ifyou have found a way to bring the shields
down?"
The Wookiee snarled and the gold droid's armsflapped for a second. "I conveyed the meaning of your
message, Councilor, without using the colorful analogy you suggested. For clarity, sir."
"I understand the question." Ackbar held a hand upto forestall further elaboration from the Wookiee. "In
re-ply, perhaps an analogy is appropriate in that Coruscantcan be likened to the first Death Star."
Borsk Fey'lya barked a quick laugh. "You suggest we let Skywalker and Rogue Squadron fly in and
destroy theplanet with a well-placed proton torpedo?"
"I am terribly sorry to disappoint my esteemed col-league from Bothawui, but I was thinking to the prior
visit to the Death Star, when Obi-wan Kenobi succeeded in sabotaging the facility to allow the
Millennium Falconto escape." Ackbar pressed both of his hands against thetabletop. "The overriding
problem we have in decidinghow to approach Coruscant is determining exactly whatis where. Huge
construction droids are constantly grind-ing up old buildings and creating new ones. While we dohave
agents on the ground who are trying to supply uswith as much data as possible, most of it comes from assets placed within the Imperial administration. While thishas allowed us to react to things the Empire is
doing off-planet, these resources are poorly positioned and trainedto provide us with the sort of military
data needed to en- able us to effectively plan for conquest."
Doman Beruss looked over at Ackbar. "You want to send a team of military specialists to Coruscant as
a pre-lude to moving on the world?"
"It is a stormy sea, but this venture is the first strokein calming it."
Doman looked over toward Mon Mothma and beyond to one of the Chief Councilor's advisers. "GeneralCracken, this sort of intelligence operation falls
into yourarea of expertise. Are you prepared to handle it?"

"Councilor Beruss, I have reviewed the general guide-lines for the operation and I approve of them. I am
pre-pared to use the assets I have developed on Coruscant toaid Admiral Ackbar's effort. However, the
general divi-sion of labor within the Alliance—a division caused byour limited resources—means most of
my people lack aprime requisite for being able to carry out this opera- tion."
The Bothan craned his neck around to look atCracken. "That requisite being?"
"None of my available people are fighter pilots."Cracken gestured in Wedge's direction. "Admiral
Ackbar has suggested, and I agree, that Rogue Squadron is a nat-ural choice for the operation."
"Rogue Squadron?" Borsk Fey'lya made no attemptto cover his surprise, and Wedge thought he might
havebeen exaggerating it a bit for dramatic effect. "Here youranalogy to the Death Star comes back to
haunt you,Ackbar. Rogue Squadron may have worked miracles be-fore, but they could not possibly
succeed in rendering Co-ruscant defenseless."
"Rendering the planet defenseless is not the purposeof the mission, Councilor Fey'lya." Ackbar turned
andpointed at Wedge. "In rebuilding the squadron care wastaken to choose the best individuals
possible—both in thearea of their flying skills and for a host of other skills.Rogue Squadron is uniquely
qualified for this mission."
"Do you think this as well, General Cracken?"
"I do, Councilor Fey'lya."
"You would risk your son's life in this?"
"That is a question that has been answered manytimes over."
The Bothan's creamy fur rippled along his shoulders.He fixed Wedge with a violet stare. "You accept
this mis-sion, Commander Antilles?"
Wedge waited to answer until after he got a nod from
Admiral Ackbar. "In principle, yes. The details are stillbeing worked out."
"Do you think you could be effective on the groundthere?"
Wedge thought for a moment before answering."Given the parameters of the operation, yes."
Leia casually raised a hand. "Perhaps you could ex-plain what you mean by that, Commander Antilles?"
"Of course, Councilor Organa." Wedge gave her asmile in thanks for breaking up Fey'lya's interrogation.
"Because of the virtually total urbanization of the planet,Coruscant presents some unique problems for an
incom-ing force. As we saw at Hoth, the Imperials correctly tookour shield generators down first, then
worked on other targets of military importance. On Coruscant we need to be able to pinpoint power
plants, communications cen-ters, and other sites that we can hit to disrupt Imperialcommand and control
functions. We need to pull theshields down, then make them deaf and blind. If we givethem no power to
operate their defensive weapons, wefurther guarantee our success."
Leia nodded thoughtfully. "You said you needed topinpoint targets. In what way does your piloting skill
en-hance your ability to do this?"

Easy questions with important answers—hitting Co-ruscant should be this simple."Councilor, it is one
thingto identify the locations we need to hit, but hitting themis another thing entirely. As a pilot I can
identify andevaluate the possible approaches to a target. I can alsohelp determine how much in the way
of firepower will benecessary to eliminate it.
"I should also point out that we really do need to berunning a precision operation because we have to
takeinto account the possibility of Warlord Zsinj or someother Imperial leader trying to take Coruscant
from uswhile we are trying to bring its defenses back up. For ex-ample, hitting a power conduit is
preferable to hitting the reactor creating the power it carries because the conduit is much easier to
replace."
The Bothan smoothed the fur on his chin with his lefthand. "Bribing a custodian to shut the power down
would be much easier, wouldn't it?"
"Yes, sir, but handling that sort of thing is outside myarea of expertise."
"I see." Borsk Fey'lya sat forward and clasped hishands together. "Despite my reservations about this
mis- sion, I do agree with my Mon Calamari compatriot thatthe gathering of information is necessary if
the conquestof Coruscant is to happen. I would also vouchsafe thatany interim disruption of normal
Imperial functions onCoruscant by Rogue Squadron, or General Cracken's peo-ple, would not be seen
as a negative."
Ackbar blinked once, slowly, then clasped his handsbehind his back. "Disruption is not necessary, but it
couldbe effective and even helpful."
"I would think it could be very helpful, especially ifit served as a distraction for Imperial authorities who
might be working against Rogue Squadron." Fey'lyaopened his hand. "That seems reasonable, does it
not?"
Ackbar nodded. "Perhaps."
Wedge sensed in the slow delivery of Ackbar's replyan extreme reluctance to grant the Bothan his point.
Leiasuggested Admiral Ackbar would have to compromise,and he has retreated from the blockade. It
would seemBorsk Fey'lya wants him to concede more.
"Good, for I have a little operation that I think willfunction very well as an adjunct to what you want to
do."
"And that is?"
Fey'lya hit a button on his datapad and the holoplatein the middle of the table displayed a small, dirty red
ovoid planet whose atmosphere escaped into space likesmoke drifting from dying embers. A single large
moonorbited it, plunging in and out of the wispy tendrils of at-mosphere trailing from the planet. Wedge
didn't recognizethe world until the Bothan sigils running down the edgeof the image area resolved
themselves into Basic letters
and strung themselves together at the planet's southernpole.
Kessel!Wedge shook his head. He knew that the Em-pire had maintained a penal colony there and used
the prisoners as slave labor to harvest spice. One of RogueSquadron's recruits—the first of the new

members to beslain—had come from Kessel and still had family therewho worked as educators. After
the Emperor's death, the inmates had overthrown their masters and had taken con-trol of the planet.
They administered the mines and thevast atmosphere factories that freed enough oxygen andother gases
from the rocks to let people exist on the sur-face using nothing more elaborate than a rebreather. Itwas a
brutal existence with very little in resources being available to the residents—that the world was
consideredviable was more a testament to the tenacity of the resi- dents than any measure of scientific
analysis.
Borsk Fey'lya stood. "Kessel was one of the detentioncenters the Empire used to house dissidents as
well ashardened felons. When the inmates took control of the center they chose a Rybet by the name of
Moruth Dooleto administrate. He was a minor official at the prison andappears to have been connected
to the spice trade, hencehis easy alliance with the prisoners. The Imperials and the political prisoners
were sent to work in the spice mines. A few of each have been released, but only after off-worldfriends
and family have paid a substantial ransom."
Threepio again translated for the Wookiee Councilor."Kerrihrarr wishes to know what criminals and
Kesselhave to do with Coruscant?"
"Coming to that point directly." The Bothan smiled,but Wedge read a hint of threat in the toothy grin.
"OnCoruscant there are substantial remnants of the Black Sunorganization. As did many of you, I thought
PrinceXizor's grab for power was doomed from the start, but itwas the Black Sun organization that
allowed him to con-template opposing the Dark Lord of the Sith. I proposeselecting and freeing certain
Black Sun officers fromKessel and bringing them into Coruscant. There they
would bring the disparate parts of Black Sun together andwork to sabotage the Empire."
Ackbar sat down slowly and gave Fey'lya a wall-eyedstare. "You want to revive the scourge of the
Black Sun?"
"Not revive, just focus. The enemy of our enemy isour friend. Isn't that the principle behind Councilor
Or-gana'sapproaches to the Hapans? That certainly was theprinciple that guided our alliance with
Imperial forces atBakura to fight the Ssi-ruuk." Fey'lya stared incredulouslyat Ackbar. "By granting
selected felons their leave ofKessel—in effect taking Doole's obvious rivals for poweroff his hands—we
can also ransom some of our peoplewho are trapped there. And to guarantee Black Sun'scompliance
with our wishes, we can trade them more oftheir people when they perform as we want them to."
"I don't like this." Ackbar shook his head adamantly."You are talking about unleashing thieves and
murdererson Coruscant."
"To let them steal Imperial goods and kill Imperialofficials, or do you want to reserve the killing foryour
people, and thedying, too? Shall that be a privilege re-served for the military, or will you take help where
youcan find it?" Fey'lya crossed his arms. "You have alreadyadmitted that added distractions could be a
help to RogueSquadron's mission. Certainly having an army of irregulartroops at your disposal to disrupt
Imperial operations when the invasion begins would reduce bloodshed."
Doman nodded. "It seems Councilor Fey'lya ismerely suggesting you fight fire with fire."
The Mon Calamari half closed his eyes. "I do not like fire analogies. As we say on Mon Calamari,
'Frolic in thesurf and get drowned by the undertow.' "
Leia stood. "I would agree, as one Corellian has putit, if you anger a Wookiee, you shouldn't be

surprised athaving an arm torn off, and it may well be that in the fu-ture we regret any sort of alliance with
the remnants ofBlack Sun. On the other hand, I think none of us cantruly comprehend the difficulty of
neutralizing the Impe-rial forces on Coruscant. Indeed, as you have said, Admiral Ackbar, until you have Rogue Squadron on theground to assess the situation, we cannot be a
hundredpercent certain what taking Coruscant will entail. Thefact is, however, that winning the goodwill
of at least partof Coruscant's underworld cannot hurt us."
Mon Mothma nodded. "I would also point out thatsome of our greatest leaders were thought to be
nothingbut ruffians, confidence men, and spice smugglers. In be- ing given the opportunity to join us, they
have managedto redeem themselves."
"But if they are the exceptions that prove the rule?"Ackbar slapped his hands impatiently against the
table'ssurface. "I do not like this operation at all, but I believe many of you see merit in it where I do not.
If this Kessel run is to be authorized, I want to go over every detail to make certain what we want to
happen is what actually happens. No one, not even an idiot like Zsinj, has beenfoolish enough to free the
dregs of the galaxy fromKessel. I do not want a situation to arise where my peopleare taken hostage and
our equipment is converted to theuse of the criminals. This will be a strictly military oper-ation and I will
not have it turn into the sort of disasterwe faced on Borleias."
Councilor Fey'lya's fur rose on his neck and formed acrest between his ears before he smoothed it back
down.The first assault on Borleias had been planned and led byGeneral Laryn Kre'fey, a Bothan who,
according to scut-tlebutt, was distantly related to Borsk Fey'lya. The mis-sion had gone from bad to
worse, costing General Kre'fey his life and putting almost half of Rogue Squadron out ofcommission. Had
General Salm not violated a direct or-der, all of Rogue Squadron would have been destroyedand the
Rebel Alliance would be in no position to even consider a mission to Coruscant.
Fey'lya's voice began soft and low, causing Wedge tostrain to hear him. "Far be it from me to wish a
repeti-tion of Borleias on anyone. You are the military leaderhere, Ackbar—I have no wish to supplant
you. Youshould handle the military details, but I have prepared a
list of people I think should be our targets. I have ap-pended full files to my list so you may determine
whatefforts and precautions need to be taken."
"Your understanding in this matter is most appreci-ated, Councilor Fey'lya."
"Good. We really are on the same side here, Admiral.I want the conquest of Coruscant to proceed as
swiftlyand efficiently as you do." Fey'lya smiled, but Wedgefound no warmth in the expression. "Iwould
hope you will use your best people to see that this mission comesoff perfectly. Perhaps if you were to
employ RogueSquadron as part of the operation, their efforts will estab-lish a rapport with those they
free and that will work intheir favor."
"I will take that suggestion under advisement, Coun-cilor."
Wedge leaned forward in his chair and dropped hisvoice to a whisper. "Sir, freeing criminals from
Kessel isnot a mission Rogue Squadron wants to perform."
The Mon Calamari turned his head enough to watchWedge with one eye. "And Ysanne Isard does not
want tosurrender Coruscant to us. We all have to do things wedon't want to do, Commander. Let us
hope we can justmake the best of them."

9
Wedge hit a button on the datapad, causing the holo-projectorin the center of the pilot's briefing room to
re-create the long-distance view of Kessel he'd first seen at the Provisional Council meeting. "All right,
people, let'sget this briefing under way."
The various members of Rogue Squadron took theirplaces. Wedge noticed that Corran Horn and
NawaraVen, a Twi'lek who had been a lawyer before he joinedthe Rebellion, were sitting together in the
back. When go-ing over the initial planning stages of the operation withCaptains Nunb and Celchu, he'd
anticipated the greatestresistance to the operation coming from those two.Onesent people to Kessel; the
other tried to keep them frombeing sent there. They've both got connections to the population there, and
that could mean some complica-tions for me.
Wedge shifted his shoulders around to loosen them,then began. "This operation is going to be
accomplishedin three distinct parts. Each one has to go according toplan or we abort the whole thing.
Admiral Ackbar is leav-ing the decision to proceed or stop to me. I may not likewhat we're being asked
to do—and I don't—but the Provisional Council wants this done, so we're doing it. Butwe're doing itour way."
He pointed to the moon orbiting Kessel. "The Impsused to keep a base on that moon. It is supposed to
beabandoned, but we don't know what the Imps may haveleft behind in the way of automated defenses
or boobytraps. Our first step is to run a flyby on the base, neutral-ize automated defenses, and knock
down anythinglaunched at us from there. Lieutenant Page and his com-mandos will then come in and
secure the base. AllianceSecurity will follow up and relieve his troops. That's phase one. Everyone got
it?"
The pilots before him all nodded with degrees of en-thusiasm going from great to none.
"Phase two is a repeat of phase one, but it takes place on Kessel. We do a flyover and clear a landing
zone forPage's people. The commandos will secure the LZ. Whenthey do, Horn, Ven, and I will land.
Captain Nunb willbe in charge of the rest of you and you'll fly cover for theLZ and for Tycho. He'll be
using the shuttleForbidden toferry our people from Kessel to the moon. On the moonthe people will be
processed, then shipped out on anumber of different ships for insertion into Coruscant, orfor repatriation
to their own worlds or exile communities.
"The processing and out-shipping is phase three. Itwill run concurrently with phase two. Trouble with
out-bound people will cause the termination of the opera-tion." Wedge crossed his arms. "Two key
points here.The first is that this is an extremely sensitive and danger-ous mission. The people we are
dealing with will be verydangerous. Our rules of engagement will be simple: Weoffer a general warning
when we come in, then we use whatever force we need to preempt problems.
"The second point is this: We're getting some of thegood along with the bad. We have our want list of
scum,but they won't know who it is that we want. Our job isto ransom as many people from political lists
as we canfor those on the criminal list we'll be taking away. Dooleis the key to this strategy working.
We'll be taking his enemies away and lowering the general population. Thiswill ease his resource strain and increase his
control overthe spice operation. He'll see this plan as better for himthan it is for us."
In the back Corran raised a hand. "Commander,what will we do in the very real situation of some of

thesepeople threatening to kill innocents if we don't takethem? Lujayne Forge had . . . has family on
Kessel. The people sentenced to Kessel are likely to do anything to getoff that rock. For all we know,
Doole wants to leave,too."
"That's all possible, but there are contingency plansto prevent that from happening. You'll note in the
supple-mental material in your briefing bytes I have a list of stra-tegic sites on Kessel. They include the
atmosphere plantsand, most importantly, a list of spice storage facilities.Moruth Doole has supplies
hidden away so he can meetdemand well into the future. I will make it very apparentto him that if he
cannot exert control over his people, I will be forced to destroy his storehouses. Since greed seems to
drive the local economy there, I think he'll seehis way clear to working with us."
Corran nodded. "When persuasion fails, coercionworks."
"I hope so, Lieutenant Horn."
Nawara Ven sat forward, letting his brain tails dangleover his shoulders. "Commander, I've reviewed the
list of ransom candidates. Am I mistaken, or do I notice a signif-icant portion of them are Bothans?"
"Is there a problem with that, Lieutenant Ven?"
"On the surface of it, no, sir. On the other hand I no-ticed that a number of people—many of whom
were myclients, in fact—people who trulyare political prisoners, have been left off the list. I don't mean
that there was anycampaign to keep my clients from being pulled off theplanet, just that the list of 'good'
people has some peopleon it who could easily be on the other list, and some verydeserving, innocent
people have been left off the list."
Wedge smiled, a response that seemed to surprise his
pilots. "I'm glad you pointed that out. In presenting thisplan to the Provisional Council Admiral Ackbar
madevery clear that we'd have to be dealing from a position ofstrength. Councilor Fey'lya provided some
deal packagesindicating who should be asked for in exchange for thisor that person on the 'bad' list. With
your help and expe- rience in negotiations, Lieutenant Ven, I intend to winmore people for each of our
prisoners than the Council suggested we might. I do have clearance to supplementmy lists to account for
marriages and children. I intend usto exploit that latitude as much as possible."
He looked around. "Any other questions before Ideal with Lieutenant Horn's next objection to the plan?"
No one said anything, so Wedge nodded to Corran. "Bemy guest, Lieutenant Horn."
"Not really an objection, sir, but a question—can weexclude any of the people on our 'bad' list?" Corran
winced. "There are a few on here who really shouldn't beallowed off Kessel, unless we're going to dump
them inthe Maw on our way out of there."
The image of spacing any number of the criminalsinto the black hole near Kessel brought a smile to
Wedge'sface, but he killed it quickly enough. "These are the peo-ple that have been determined to be
useful to us. Who didyou have in mind?"
"Zekka Thyne—he's also known as 'Patches,' but notto his face. He's on Kessel because my father and
I gothim on a smuggling pinch, but he's been tied to the mur-ders of nearly a dozen people—all of them
rivals of Black Sun. Patches was being groomed as Prince Xizor's man onCorellia. Xizor tried to slice
some files to get Thyne shif-ted back off Kessel but he couldn't because Corsec's Im-perial Liaison,
Kirtan Loor, had accidentally altered thestructure of the files with Thyne's information. But forthat bit of

incompetence, Thyne would have been longgone from Kessel—it was the only good thing Loor everdid."
"If we're lucky, Lieutenant Horn, Thyne will bedead."
Corran smiled. "We could see to it that he is."
"Murder, Lieutenant Horn?" Wedge frowned. "Evenif he is as bad as you say..."
"Wait, wait, wait." Corran held his hands up as ev-eryone turned to stare at him. "I'd be the first person
whowould be glad to dance on his grave, and if he steps outof line at all, I'd be happy to vape him, but
I'm not sug-gesting murder. It does strike me, though, that we could slice some files and report some
deaths that prevent us from taking certain people."
Corran's suggestion sorely tempted Wedge. The list ofcriminals Borsk Fey'lya had supplied did scan like
a di-rectory of organized crime. Wedge had no love for theEmpire, but it had been fairly ruthless at
dismantlingthe upper levels of Black Sun. Black Sun was a cancer.The Empire hadn't been able to cut it
all out, but theyhadforced it into a pretty serious remission. Reviving itto distract the Empire had some
merit, and Corran's sug-gestion offered a possible way to excise some of the more malignant elements
from the group.
The spark of hope burning in Wedge's mind died veryquickly as reality set in. "The purpose of our
mission is totake from Kessel and insert into Coruscant the peoplewho will complicate the lives of
Ysanne Isard and herpeople. The guys who are the most vile are also the oneswho can cause the most
trouble. We're going to be mak-ing the most out of the confusion they create."
Pash glanced back at Corran. "If we make Black Suntoo weak, the Empire squashes it."
"Sure, but if we make it too strong, we lose the trustof the folks Black Sun hurtsand we might find
ourselveshaving to compete with them for the ownership of Corus-cant." Corran shook his head. "Xizor
would have de-posed the Emperor if he could have, and Zekka Thynewill make a run at Isard if he has
the chance."
Wedge shrugged. "Sounds like he is just the manCouncilor Fey'lya wants to have on Coruscant."
"And the last person most of us should want there."
Corran's eyes narrowed. "Can we put him on the list ofstrategic targets to take out?"
"I'll trust your judgment in that matter, Lieutenant Horn. That's why you'll be with me down on the planet.
If Zekka Thyne is a problem there, we'll deal with himthere." Wedge looked around. "Anything else? No
overallobjections? Lieutenant Horn?"
Corran shrugged, but not fluidly enough to convinceWedge he was without objections. "It's a mission,
sir."
"But I would have thought freeing criminals wouldhave caused you to have reservations."
Corran smiled. "I'm not saying Ilike it, sir, but inCorSec we made deals with criminals on a daily basis.
The goal then, just as it is now, is to trade a lesser evil for a greater one. I'd just as soon use Zekka
Thyne and some of this other scum as rancor bait, but if they'll help bringIceheart down, I guess my
reservations don't really mean that much. I'm good to go with this, Wedge. I think I'll befine."

Wedge nodded slowly.He has a point, though I don'tthink he likes this any more than I do. But it's a
missionand we're Rogue Squadron, so we'll get it done."Last-minute questions, anyone?"
No one had anything to ask, so Wedge killed the pro-jection of Kessel. "We're mission go in twelve
standardhours. You'll want to get some sleep, but before you do,give Emtrey a list of your belongings.
While we're on theKessel run, our headquarters will be relocating back toNoquivzor. We'll be operating
from there for the immedi-ate future."
Pash looked surprised. "Afraid of reprisals by War-lord Zsinj?"
Wedge just smiled. "Those are the orders, straightfrom the Provisional Council, the wisdom of which, I
amcertain, will make itself clear once we finish the missionto Kessel."
10
Kessel's weak atmosphere slowly smothered the firesburning amid the ruins of the two concussion
missile launchers on the ridge overlooking the landing zone. Alittle smoke and even more dust rolled in a
lazy mistdown the escarpment, pouring like a vapor stream acrossthe unpaved roadway carved from its
face. The mist dis-solved before it hit the flat of the plain, leaving a clearfield of fire for Page and his
people as they set up a pe-rimeter around the hillock at the center of the plain.
Whistler hooted in a low tone.
"Looks pretty clear to me, too." Corran began a long turn to starboard that took him out over the main
minecomplex. The only surface features visible were the ad-ministration buildings and some storage sheds
for surfacevehicles. One track led off to the north on a nearly directline for the nearest atmosphere plant.
The other majortrack led south to the hills and the plain where he wouldbe landing.
"Nine is clear, Rogue Leader."
"I copy, Nine. Come in and land. Don't forget yourbreathing mask."
"Thanks, Lead." Corran brought the X-wing about
and flew back to the plain. He eased his throttle back andcut in the repulsorlift generators. The X-wing
glideddown gently and hovered five meters above the ground.Using the rudder pedals, Corran swung the
nose aroundand positioned his fighter so it formed the third point ofa triangle with Wedge's and Nawara's
fighters. His cov-ered the southern defensive arc of the Rogues' positionand left enough space for Tycho
to easily bring theLambda-class shuttle down in their midst.
Corran extended the landing gear and brought theship to rest, then killed the repulsorlift generators and
en-gine. "Whistler, remember, shoot first if you have to,thengo for an engine start to give you more laser
energy. Ifyou have to, hover out of reach until the rest of thesquadron comes and covers you."
The droid keened mournfully.
"No, nothing will happen, I promise, but I want youto be careful." He missed a chunk of Whistler's reply,
buttook it that the annoying tone carried the meaning of themissing content. He doffed his helmet, drew
the blasterfrom his shoulder holster, checked it, took it off safe, and reholstered it. Finally he pulled on a
breathing mask anda pair of goggles, then popped the release on his cockpitcanopy. It slid up and he

crawled out.
Corran jumped down and found Kessel to be just abit lighter in gravity than Borleias or Noquivzor. He
ranover to where Wedge and Nawara stood beside an or-ange, mushroomlike tent that the commandos
had assem-bled. "How did your conversation with Moruth Doolego?"
Wedge frowned slightly. "I think I got my pointsacross, but he's right on the edge of paranoia, and it
doesn't take much to push him over."
"Doole's probably a glit-biter."
The Twi'lek twitched a head tail in Corran's direc-tion. "I don't believe I've heard that term before."
"CorSec slang, sorry. Glitterstim is the most potentform of spice—the stuff most people get is cut and
dilutedso heavily that the most they get from using is a little euphoria. Glit-biters are taking the real thing and it seems,in some folks, to punch up their latent mental
abilities. They can read minds, or so they think, and they assumeany mind they can't read is closed
because the person isplotting against them. Doole probably forgot he was see-ing a hologram of you,
Commander. You were hostile, hecouldn't read you, hence he figured you really had it in for him."
Lieutenant Page, a dark-haired man of mediumheight and build, came over and pointed toward the horizon. "Landspeeder coming down the road."
Wedge hit his comlink. "Lead to Twelve. How does itlook?"
"One vehicle, Lead."
"Thanks, Twelve." Wedge turned to Page. "It's com-ing alone. If you clear it, let it come in."
"As ordered, sir." Page went running off in the direc-tion of the big, boxy landspeeder and a squad of
folks fellin behind him. The landspeeder slowed, then stopped,and a door opened. Page spoke through
the open doorwith someone while his people checked in and around thevehicle. Apparently satisfied with
the inspection, Pageclosed the door and jumped back off the vehicle's runningboards. He waved it
forward and it headed in.
Other commandos stopped the landspeeder about ahundred meters beyond the perimeter at a point
where itremained under the guns of Wedge's X-wing. Two peoplegot out and a trooper escorted them
forward towardWedge. The man stood very tall and seemed to Corran to be painfully thin. What little
hair he had left on his headwas white and wispy enough that Kessel's weak atmo-sphere could make it
float. The woman came up to theman's shoulder and had deep brown hair. Corran guessedfrom the way
she moved she was younger than the man,but her face was deeply enough scored with wrinkles thathe
would have matched them in age were he looking atstill holograms.
The commando moved the two visitors into andthrough the tent's simple airlock, then Corran and
Nawara followed Wedge through. Once inside they wereable to remove their breathing masks, though
the acridstink of hot plastic almost made Corran put his back on.Resolving to breathe as little as possible,
Corran joinedNawara in front of some folding camp chairs.
Squeezing past the table with the holoprojector on it,Wedge extended his hand to the man. "I'm

CommanderWedge Antilles, New Republic Armed Forces. I lead Rogue Squadron. I knew your
daughter."
The man shook Wedge's hand firmly and kept abrave expression on his face, but the slight tremor in his
lower lip betrayed his true emotions. "I am Kassar Forge.This is my wife, Myda. I want to thank you for
thehologram you sent after Lujayne..."He fell silent for amoment and his wife rubbed his back with her
hand."She always said she wanted to be a hero and showsomething good could come from Kessel."
"She succeeded." Wedge turned back toward his ownpeople. "This is Nawara Ven and Lieutenant
CorranHorn."
Kassar shook their hands as well.
Corran didn't release the man's hand, forcing himselfto smile as he looked up into Kassar's dark eyes.
"Yourdaughter reallywas a hero. She kept the unit together. Shetold me about what you do here, about
teaching peopleso they don't have to return to crime. She spent a lot oftime teaching all of us, too."
"Thank you."
"No, thank you." Corran patted the back of theman's hand. "I owed her a big favor I never got a chance
to repay. If there's anything I can do for you, please, don'thesitate to ask."
Kassar nodded, then freed his hand from Corran'sgrip and turned back to Wedge. "I guess I have to
askwhat it is I can do for you, Commander? I'm sure all thiswasn't just so you could say hello. Your
strike on themoon base caused a lot of excitement, and Doole is nothappy about losing his missile
launchers."
"If Doole wants to be happy, today will not be his
day." Wedge ran a hand along his jaw. "We're here totake some people away from Kessel—some very
bad peo-ple. We are also going to take as many of the good peoplefrom here as we can. On the top of
my list is you andyour family,if you want to go. And go or stay, I want youhere to point out people who
should be on the list butaren't."
The tall man clasped his hands together against hisstomach and stared at the orange fabric floor for a
mo-ment. "I came here by choice a long time ago—well be-fore any of you were born. Back before the
Clone Wars even. I don't know if I have done much good here, but Ithink I've done very little evil. I'll
stay. Myda?"
Her hand grasped the back of his neck and shookhim gently. "I didn't come here willingly, but I did stay
because I wanted to be with you.We will stay, and ourfamily will, too." Myda's voice took on an edge at
thelast of her statement and Corran saw her exchange asharp glance with her husband.
Kassar nodded slowly. "I am willing to help you,Commander, but I don't want to make decisions about
who goes and who stays. I'll offer what I know."
"If you are afraid of reprisals..."
"No, no, I've long since been judged harmless by ev-eryone here. You're taking them, the decision is
yours tomake."

"I understand. Lieutenant Ven has my list of the goodfolks that we want to get out. I'd like you to review
itwith him." Wedge twisted around and touched the holo-projector. "I've left Moruth Doole with the
impressionthat this is very much a rogue operation. He thinks I'msetting myself up as the middleman in
this hostage oper-ation. I've told him I am willing to transport prisoners offKessel—prisoners he'll be well
rid of—in return for get-ting my people off. That's an accurate description of whatwill happen, but not my
focus in this project. Still, Doolehas to think I'm willing and able to kill his prisoners,blow up his stores of
spice, and toss him into the Maw."
Myda looked over at Wedge and Corran with a pierc-ing stare. "Are you capable of doing that?"
"Capable, yes," Wedge nodded, "and not particularlyreluctant to do so."
She smiled. "Good. Fear is as much a part of life onKessel as spice or air. Control it and you'll do fine."
Wedge hit the power switch for the holoprojector. Animage of Moruth Doole the size of a pilot's helmet
glowed to life. The batrachian Rybet hopped impatientlyfrom one foot to the other, then stopped and
clapped hiswebbed hands together. He twisted his whole bodyaround to peer closely with his good
mechanical eye atthe holocam in his dark office. The green of his fleshmelded with the similar hue of his
jacket, while the tan tracery on his flesh looked as if he'd been drizzled with paint. Because of the way he
leaned forward to get near to the holocam, his head swelled out of proportion withhis body and nearly
made Corran laugh.
"Is that you, Antilllles?" The Rybets voice jumpedsharply between octaves and added more l's into the
cen-ter of Wedge's name than necessary.
"It's me, Doole. I've got my first exchange to offeryou." Wedge looked over at Nawara Ven and the
Twi'leknodded. Wedge smiled tightly at the holoprojector. "Ihave a group of ten Sullustans. For them I'll
take ArbSkynxnex."
"No!"
"No?"
"I am selling them to you, I decide what I am paid.Skynxnex is mine—he does not leave." Doole hopped
upand down angrily, then searched around until the metaland glass mechanical eye again spotted the
holocam. "For these Sullustans I will give you Zekka Thyne."
The name didn't surprise Corran, but Kassar's reac-tion to it did. The old man shuddered and Myda
clung tohis arm.They look as afraid of Thyne as Doole sounds. Corran raised a hand and Wedge hit a
mute button on theholoprojector. "Commander, he's too anxious. He wantsto be rid of Thyne. We can
get more for him."
Wedge nodded, then unmuted the communicationsdevice. "Thyne isn't of interest to me. I'd have to be
madto let someone like that leave this rock."
"Youwill take him, or you get nothing else."
Wedge pulled a comlink from a pocket in his flightsuit and held it up where Doole could see it. "Rogue
Leader to Twelve, you're free to fire on warehouse number one."
Doole's image capered away from the holocam, then hunched itself over, as if the Rybet was looking at

a mon-itor built into an unseen desk. Doole reeled back, thenran to the holocam. "You wouldn't dare."
"No?"
"Twelve here, Lead. I have acquired the target. Com-mencing run now."
"Antilles!"
"You have something you want to say to me,Doole?"
"The Sullustans and more..."
"Twelve, abort the run, but don't clear your targetingdata."
"As ordered, Lead."
Doole's thick purple tongue played out over the thinline of his mouth. "The Sullustans you can have.
Whatelse?"
Wedge turned away from the projector as if givingthe problem due thought. Nawara held up fingers to
indi-cate which of the target groups he thought should beadded to Thyne's ransom. Wedge nodded, then
turnedback. "We're sending you the data on a group of fiveBothans, including Esrca Plo'kre."
"Plo'kre." Doole's mouth snapped shut, then hebowed his head. "Done. And Thyne brings with him
an-other."
"Who?"
"His cutter."
Wedge looked back at the Forges, but they gave nosign of even having heard Doole, much less
understandinghim. "Corran?"
Iknow I've heard the term before. He thought back,then nodded. "It's a spicer term, used a lot of
years agowhen Thyne was still on Corellia. A cutter is someonewho prepares spice for use or sale. It
came to mean some-one close enough to a person that they could be trustedwith cutting their spice. He
probably means aide." Kassar's head came up. "He means lover."Corran shrugged. "That, too." Wedge
nodded. "Do you know who it is?" Kassar hung his head and Myda answered. "We do.Her name is
Inyri."
Corran checked his datapad. "I've got nothing onanyone by that name."
"You wouldn't. She's done nothing wrong."Something is not right here.Corran frowned. "Youdon't get
sent to Kessel for nothing. How well do youknow this Inyri?"
"I thought I knew her very well." Myda swiped at a tear rolling down her cheek. "She's our daughter."
11
"Is it a deal, Antilles?"

"Send them out." Wedge hit another button thatfroze the transmission. On the other end Doole would
only see a holographic representation of Rogue Squad-ron's crest. He turned toward the Forges. "Say
the wordand we'll make sure they are separated. We'll find her aplace to stay, away from Thyne."
"Do it!" Myda reached out and clutched one ofWedge's hands in her own. "Please, don't leave her with
him."
Kassar's hands settled on his wife's shoulders anddrew her back. "Myda, we can't do that. She has
madeher decision."
"But it is a bad one."
Inyri's father slowly shook his head. "And so thismeans we can deny her freedom? Making bad
decisions isnot a crime, not even under the Empire."
"But I've seen plenty of people end up headed forKessel because of making bad decisions." Corran saw
thepain in Myda's eyes, and saw no small amount of it re-flected in her husband's expression. "I know
Thyne—he is
as bad as they come. Your daughter's choice will land herin trouble."
Kassar straightened up. "Only if she acts on it."
"But she's leaving with him."
Kassar shrugged helplessly. "She has found somethingto value in him. Perhaps she can save him from
himself."
Corran winced. "Thyne's pretty much a black hole asfar as saving is concerned."
"My whole life has been spent here training peoplehow to live away from Kessel. That is all I can do,
though. I cannot make their choices for them. I cannotlive their lives for them." Kassar looked down and
wipedtears from Myda's face. "We gave our daughter—all ofour children—all the love and support we
could. We trustthem. Just as we trusted Lujayne to go off and join the Rebellion, we must trust Inyri."
Corran shook his head. "I'm not liking this at all,Commander."
"It doesn't thrill me, either, Corran, but it's not ourfight and not one we can win, not right now anyway."
Wedge looked down at his fists, then opened them slowly."Perhaps she will serve as a brake on him."
"And when the brake burns out?"
"I expect you to have something arranged to coverthat contingency."
"As ordered, sir." Corran started going through thelist of criminals on his datapad. The original list had
beendrawn from Imperial files and annotated with rankingsthat determined the value of each individual to
the Rebel- lion. Out of thousands of convicts, only seventeen hadbeen identified as useful by New
Republic officials. Those seventeen—now reduced to sixteen since Doole had elim- inated Arb
Skynxnex from consideration—clearly hadbeen rising stars in the Black Sun organization. Whilenone of
them had achieved upper-level status, they hadshown the sort of initiative and drive that made it clear,had
their careers not been interrupted by arrest and con-viction, the best of them would have been on a rough

parwith Jabba the Hutt in terms of power and influence.
Corran remembered his father having complainedabout the changing nature of organized crime. Once
upon a time Black Sun had been an honorable organization—with its own morality, of course, but with a
code that itsmembers lived by. Black Sun had always been ruthless—dump a load of spice and
blaster-packers would worryabout collecting the cost, or its equivalent, from thesmuggler in question.
Members who informed on otherswould be killed in a most grisly manner, and law enforce-ment officers
were legitimate targets for reprisals, but these things were all done on an individual basis.
The new breed was willing to use a bomb in acrowded cantina just to get one individual. The idea of
killing an informerand his family became standard. The spice that started to be sold was stronger than
ever before and the assassination of political figures who opposed the crime cartel became the rule, not
the exception. Hal Hornhad assumed the Rebellion's success in defying the Empirehad contributed to a
general easing of moral standardsthat carried into Black Sun and allowed savages likeZekka Thyne to
thrive.
Three silhouettes appeared on the other side of the airlock's translucent inner seal. The soldier inside the
tent opened the airlock and tugged Thyne through first. The hobbles on the man's feet made him stumble,
but Thyne managed to recover his balance despite having his armsbound behind him. He shook off his
breathing mask, thenheld his head up defiantly. "I am Zekka Thyne."
Five years on Kessel hadn't done anything to Thynebut make him a bit leaner and, as the hateful glow in
hiseyes suggested, a whole lot more malevolent.It's as if theyears here have distilled him down to his
core essence.Only a couple of centimeters taller than Corran, Thynehad a wiry build that made him seem
somehow eventaller. Clean-shaven and bald—he appeared to be congen-itallyhairless—his head and
exposed flesh gleamed likepolished leather.
More remarkable than in its glow, Thyne's flesh camein two shades of color. Most noticeable was the
light blue
because it seemed to have been layered on over thewhitish-pink color, as if he had been splashed with
midnight-blue dye that never quite washed out. The big-gest splotch cut right down along the bridge of
his nose,then back under his cheekbone to his left ear and on up to the midline of his skull again. It gave
the impressionthat he had one massive black eye that was slowly fading.
Aside from the color, his sharply pointed ears, andblack, equally sharp serrated teeth, his eyes separated
himfrom the realm of the wholly human. The orbs were redthroughout, the color of arterial blood, except
for wherea slender diamond pupil bisected them. Flecks of goldoutlined the black diamond and, in the
dark, would re-flect a little light. Those diamonds had betrayed him onCorellia, letting Corran and his
father send him on hisKessel vacation.
Wedge raised an eyebrow. "It is truly him?"
Corran nodded. "It's Patches all right."
"Horn, here?" Thyne hissed. "Perhaps you never gotthe message I sent you?"
"What message was that?"
"Your father's dead, isn't he?"

The venom in the man's voice combined with the sur-prise of the question to make it feel as if Corran's
hearthad been slammed back against his spine. He wanted toshout something back at Thyne, but first his
breath, thenwords failed him. Thyne had always been full of threatsand intimidation, but Corran and his
father had refusedto acknowledge them. Thyne had not been the first crim-inal to threaten him, nor the
last.
And not the first to be blamed for my father's death.With a moment of thought Corran realized that
Thynehad probably heard of his father's death and decided toclaim responsibility just to get at him.
Corran thoughtThyne more than capable of ordering a murder, and BlackSun more than capable of
carrying that order out, butHal Horn had been killed over a year and a half afterThyne had arrived on
Kessel.Black Sun preferred thingsa bit more immediate than that, as I recall.
Corran's eyes became green slits. "I suppose youcouldhave been the one who had my father
killed—afterall, you threatened us both and left the whole job undone,which means it's in keeping with
your usual sloppiness."
The riposte had no visible effect on Thyne. He lookedaway from Corran, then watched Wedge for a
moment."Are you the Jedi?"
"No, I'm just the man who decides if you leave hereor not." Wedge jerked a thumb toward Corran.
"Thatwasn't a good start."
"Oh, forgive me, I've forgotten the Rebels are allsweetness and light. That's what they tell us, you know,
all the pols who were sent here." Thyne smiled carefully."Then again, you're here taking someone like me
awayfrom this place. Expediency wins over purity, it would ap-pear."
The commando at the airlock brought Inyri Forgethrough and Corran saw the resemblance between her
and Lujayne the second she removed her breathing mask.They both had the same brown eyes and trim
bodies.Inyri wore her brown hair longer than her sister had and had dyed a forelock the same shade of
blue as Thyne'spatches. She appeared shocked to see her parents, but her face closed up quickly as she
turned away from them andrested her hands on Thyne's left shoulder.
Wedge studied the woman for a moment, then lookedup at Thyne. "The New Republic has authorized
me togive you transport from Kessel to a destination you willlearn later. You will be given tasks to
perform. If you suc-ceed in performing them to our satisfaction, the New Re-public will grant you a
conditional pardon for your crimes. Do you understand?"
"What if I decide to accept your offer, then I just goaway."
Wedge smiled openly. "We'll hunt you down andbring you back here."
"The galaxy is a big place."
"You might thinkthat, but it's getting much smaller
all the time." Wedge shrugged nonchalantly. "The Em-peror couldn't hide from us, don't assume you
could."
Corran nodded. "You weren't that hard to find be-fore, Patches, you won't be again."
"You don't scare me, Horn."

"I'm not interested in scaring, just catching, Thyne." Corran bent down, retrieved Thyne's breathing
mask, andshoved it onto the man's face. "No matter where you go,I'll find those double diamonds of
yours, just like lasttime. Count on it."
Wedge nodded to the guards. "Take him outside andprep him for shuttle transport." Inyri started to
follow,but a guard stopped her in response to Wedge's hand sig-nal. "Ms. Forge, I'd like to speak to you
alone."
Inyri turned slowly and stiffly. "We're hardly alone."
"You're not required to go with Thyne."
She glared at her parents, then looked at Wedge. "I'vemade my choice to be with him. Leave it alone. It
is noone's business but my own."
"Look," Corran began, holding a hand out toward her, "we can protect you from him."
"Oh, like you protected my sister?"
Corran's hand dropped back to his side. The samehorrible sensation he'd felt when Lujayne had died
rip-pled through him. He knew the pain in Inyri's voice had triggered the memory, but he felt he was also
sensing thepart of her that had died when she found out aboutLujayne's death. Asked to choose between
the memory orInyri's pain, he couldn't have decided which hurt him more, but the inability to redress
either frustrated himlike nothing else.
"I did, we did, everything we could to protectLujayne." Corran tapped a hand against his chest. "We
didn't know her as long as you did, nor as well, but youknow what your sister was like. You know how
good she was at making people feel welcomed and at ease and val-uable. She did that with us, too."
He pointed at the airlock. "It may not be my businesswhat you do with Zekka Thyne, but I'm certain
your sister wouldn't have wanted you to go with him. Lujayne'sgone, but that's no reason for the people who
loved herand respected her to let you get into trouble. Thyne is ev-erything your sister was not."
"You don't know him."
"And maybe you don't either." Corran held his handout to her again. "You don't have to do this."
"I do." She folded her arms resolutely. "I am."
Wedge shook his head. "You will have time toreconsider—up to and including your final drop-off."
"Is that all?"
Wedge frowned. "You might want to say good-bye toyour parents?"
"Why? That didn't keep Lujayne safe."
"It didn't get her killed, either."

Wedge's reply seemed to soften Inyri for a moment.Her gaze flicked toward her parents, and for a
heart-beat, Corran thought she was going to come to hersenses. Then her eyes hardened and she fitted
the breath-ing mask back over her face. Without a word she turnedon her heel and stepped into the
airlock.
Wedge turned and looked wordlessly at her par-ents.
Kassar hugged his wife. "You tried, Commander.That is all we could ask."
The rest of the exchanges went fairly smoothly. Wedge re-sorted to threats a couple of times when
Doole balked atgiving him the people he wanted, but by the end of thingsthey had managed to pull 150
political prisoners fromKessel in exchange for picking up sixteen of the mosthardened and despicable
criminals the galaxy had ever known.
And by the end of the process Corran had foundsomeone they could use to keep Thyne in check.
Wedgesuggested a deal to Doole but the pretentious Rybet dis-missed it as one where he got nothing.
Wedge had sug-gested he consider it goodwill and after a flyover by the
airborne portion of Rogue Squadron, Moruth Doole de-cided it was in his best interest to play along.
"And this is the last time I deal with your Rebellion.Kessel stands alone from now on!"
Wedge smiled at Doole's image. "Then we won'tcome back, unless we're returning some of your friends
toyou." He disconnected the transmission before Doole'showl rose to painful levels.
Ten minutes later two commandos escorted the lastprisoner into the tent. The human was old, though not
frail. The holograms Corran had seen of him had not hadflesh quite so loose or sallow, but the dark eyes
stillsparked with life. While smaller even than Corran, theman exuded a certain power. A full shock of
white haircrowned him and granted him some of the dignity hisdirty jumpsuit stole.
Even Wedge seemed impressed. "Moff Fliry Vorru, Iam Commander Wedge Antilles."
Vorru smiled graciously. "Charmed. Do I detect atrace of Corellia in your Basic?"
"You do."
"A loyal son come to free me from this prison?"
"Perhaps."
Corran had never met Moff Vorru before, but hisgrandfather had told stories of the man. As the
adminis-trator in charge of the Corellian Sector under the OldRepublic, Vorru had turned a blind eye to
smuggling ac-tivities, which made Corellia a center for smuggling and gave it a reputation that had not
changed over the years.When Senator Palpatine declared himself the Emperor, hefound Vorru to be a
rival of sorts. Prince Xizor betrayedVorru to the Emperor, but the Emperor did not slay him.It was
thought that Vorru had ransomed his life by caus-ing his datafiles about others in the Imperial Senate and
throughout the Empire to be doled out to the Emperor bit by bit.
Though it had been decades since Corellia operatedas an open sector under Vorru, many criminals
thought ofVorru's Corellia as a shining Utopia of unparalleled pros-

perity. Vorru had become a legend in the Imperial under-world and at CorSec there always were new
rumorsabout an attempt by someone to raid Kessel and freeVorru.
The ex-Imperial Moff shrugged as much as his bondswould allow. "What do you want me to do for
you?"
"Do you know Zekka Thyne?"
Vorru sighed. "I do. Aggressive and intelligent,though aggression is his default setting. Surprise him and
he strikes out. Unpredictable beyond that."
"We're going to use him against the Empire, but wedo not want him to become excessive and hurt
others."
The old man smiled slowly. "Using strategic weaponsto gain a tactical advantage is a sign of
desperation."
"These are desperate times." Wedge nodded towardCorran. "Lieutenant Horn thinks you can control
Thyne."
"Control him, no." Vorru closed his eyes for a mo-ment. "Control those he needs to be able to go too
far,yes, I can do that for you."
"Will you?"
"Gladly." Vorru's confident smile carried on up intohis reopened eyes. "It will be dangerous, but seeing
Impe-rial Center again will be worth the risk."
Corran blinked and looked at a stunned Wedge.Howdid he know he was going to Coruscant?
The old man read the surprise on their faces, thenlaughed. "Don't be astonished I was able to figure out
where I would be used,rejoice in that fact. Were that sim-ple a deduction beyond me, I would have no
chance offulfilling the mission you have given me."
12
Walking through one of the long dark corridors built be-neath the Imperial Palace would normally have
depressed Kirtan Loor, especially as he was on his way to a meetingwith General Evir Derricote. When
Derricote had sum-moned him the General had seemed quite manic—a stateLoor had seen crumble into
a tantrum filled with de-mands on previous occasions, yet even that prospectcould not dampen his mood.
Corran Horn was on Kessel freeing prisoners.Loorallowed himself a laugh that echoed sinisterly through
the passage. Over the past two weeks the freed criminals hadbeen filtered back into Imperial Center.
The Rebels hadbeen careful in their insertion efforts—security was main-tained at normal levels, which
meant a substantial bribecould make almost any datafile look like it had neverbeen sliced. Had he not
been tipped to their arrival, Loor would have missed their reentry into Coruscant's under-world.
Loor even allowed himself to admire the Alliance forits plan. Criminals had a penchant for making
themselveshighly visible targets. The Empire did need to maintain order on the capital world, but their
resources would only

extend so far. By bringing to Imperial Center the peoplethey did, the Alliance managed to breathe life
back intothe corpse that was Black Sun, causing some fairly alarm-ist reports to start filtering up from the
constabulary.
Somehow, though, even their dire predictionsamounted to nothing against Loor's mind's-eye image of
Corran Horn helping to escort criminals from Kessel.Three of those on the list had actually been arrested
onCorellia during Horn's time with CorSec.It must havekilled him to let someone like Zekka Thyne
escape jus-tice. What I wouldn't have given to be there and see it.
Kirtan Loor forced himself to laugh again and willedhimself to remain feeling triumphant, but could not.
His basic fear of Corran Horn undercut his sense of superior-ity. Corran Horn, Gil Bastra, and Iella
Wessiri had man-aged to deceive him long enough on Corellia that they were able to escape before he
could have them arrestedand jailed. He had found Gil Bastra after over a yearand a half of searching, but
Bastra maintained that's be-cause he had given clues to draw Loor after him. Prior tothat he had thought
he was close to Corran once, but thathad been a mistake, and Loor had no idea where Wessirior her
husband was.
The fact that they had been able to fool him oncemeant he had to assume it was possible for them to fool
him again. In the old days, before Ysanne Isard hadsummoned him to Imperial Center and pointed out
his penchant for making unwarranted assumptions, he wouldhaveassumed he could not be fooled again.
That wouldhave guaranteed his being deceived.And that would havedoomed me.
Because he worked to no longer allow himself to as-sume too much, he had reassessed Corran Horn.
Fromthis reassessment his fear had grown. Loor had always known Horn was capable of being a killer,
and he hadlabored under the assumption that Horn had actuallymurdered a bunch of smugglers in cold
blood. When itbecame apparent that those murders were a sham—Loor'sface still burned as he realized
he had based his assumptions about those murders only on reports created by GilBastra—he saw Corran Horn as someone
capable of us-ing violence, but also as someone who could control histemper. Horn emerged as more
cunning and that trait be-came more dangerous when coupled with his relentless-ness.
To "motivate" Loor in his supervision of GeneralDerricote's project, Ysanne Isard had released the fact
that Loor had killed Bastra into channels that wouldcarry that data to the Rebel Alliance. She also let it
beknown that Loor was on Imperial Center. She had said at the time that she hoped such information
would serve todistract Horn from looking into other matters veryclosely, but Loor knew it would just
draw Corran to Im-perial Center like vice draws Hutts.
I will have to be very careful when he gets here. If hegets to me it will be because I want him to, but on
my terms and to my benefit.
As Loor neared his destination, the door to Der-ricote's lab opened to an inrush of air and the General
himself stood there beaming. Though cadaverously slen-der, there was no way Loor could squeeze past
the Gen- eral's rotund form and enter the lab with the man just standing there. "I thought you wanted me
to see some-thing in the lab, General."
Derricote brushed a hand back over his thinningblack hair, then clapped his hands. "I do. The Quarren
were very helpful, very helpful."
"Put it in a report, General."

"No, you must come see for yourself."
Loor hesitated. The holograms appended to the firstof Derricote's reports had been enough to make him
queasy. The idea of looking at experimental subjects in person did not appeal to him in the least.Well,
perhapsjust a bit, but only out of morbid curiosity.
"Lead the way."
Derricote stepped out of the doorway and Loor en-tered the lab. Unlike the majority of suites in the
ImperialPalace, the laboratory had stark, functional appointments. Bright lights reflected from white and silver sur-faces and the only things even approximating
decorationwere red and yellow signs warning of biohazards, livewires, and operating lasers. Glass walls
allowed them topeer into a labyrinth of rooms where white-smocked indi-viduals appeared to be taking
creatures apart or putting them back together with the help of surgical droids ofvarious configurations.
The door closed behind them, with the air whistlingin as the opening narrowed. Derricote glanced back.
"Itsounds like that because we are under negative air pres-sure in here. That way if something breaks out
it will notbe carried by a draft out of the lab."
"I thought humans would be immune to this plague."
"No, that's not exactly correct." The General smiledand Loor knew the man just loved exposing any
weak-ness in Kirtan's knowledge of the project. "We are start-ing from a number of viruses for which
aliens show ahigh susceptibility. It is possible that spontaneous muta-tions could change it enough that
humans could be af-fected by it. The chances of that are very limited,primarily because the genetic
sequences we're usingwould have to be massively altered for humans to fallsick. It is possible, of course,
that this might happen, butat the average mutation rate, it would take a thousandyears before that would
happen."
"But you could make a vaccine, couldn't you?"
"Building up immunity to a virus is not all that sim-ple. It could take years to perfect a vaccine for this
dis-ease." Derricote smiled casually, as if talking about aninconsequential amount of time. "It could be
done, but itwould take a concentration of resources that would ex-ceed these by ten or twenty times."
At least, then, the Rebels won't have a chance atdoing it since they don't even have this facility.Loor
low-ered his voice. "You can cure it, yes?"
Derricote nodded. "Bacta."
"Is that all?" Bacta was the treatment for everythingfrom a simple cut to severe combat trauma, from a
sniffle
to the virulent Bandonian Ague. "If Bacta will cure yourdisease, the disease is useless."
"Hardly. The more severe the case of the disease, thegreater the amount of bacta needed to cure it."
Der-ricote'sdark eyes glittered in a way Loor found rather un-nerving. "In the very late stages of the
disease bacta can hold the disease at bay, but some organs and extremitiesmay be so damaged that they
will require cybernetic re-placement. Come and see."

Derricote led him deeper into the laboratory complexand through a doorway into a stainless-steel
corridor.Transparisteel windows lined the walls and gave them views of detention cells with one or two
individuals inthem. On the left were piggish Gamorreans—naked, aswere the squid-headed Quarren on
the right side—looking miserable in their clinically spare environs. Thosenearest the doorway through
which they entered ap-peared relatively normal—though they were such a sightthat Loor couldn't bring
himself to study them in anygreat detail.
"You will notice the transparisteel windows aretriple-paned. That central sheet is reflective on their side,
so they cannot see us. The walls between the cells aresoundproofed. We found that necessary to
maintain or-der."
"I see," Loor said, but he really saw no need for se-curity precautions. The first few Gamorreans were
placid, though they did seem to know people might be observingthem through the windows, so they sat in
such a way thatthey preserved their modesty. Farther along they appearedto be in some sort of a stupor.
Their black eyes had be-come quite glassy and fixed on one point. They just laythere, barely moving, in
whatever position they seemed tofind themselves, no matter how uncomfortable.
Loor did notice a splotchiness on the Gamorreans'flesh. Angry black boils seemed to radiate out a
spider'sweb of lines that connected them one to another. Onecreature had a boil on his tongue and
several others showed them on the bottoms of their feet. Loor assumed
the boils were painful since what little movement he did see seemed to be an attempt to relieve pressure
on them.
He also noticed these Gamorreans seemed very dry. Mucus and saliva did not decorate their faces the
way itnormally did. Clearly the creatures were sick, but Loorsomehow took that to be the most telling
sign of their dis-ease.
Then he saw the final-stage patients.
The boils had broken open and the Gamorrean's fleshhad cracked along the spiderweb lines. Black
blood oozedfrom the wounds and the Gamorrean left bloody foot-prints everywhere it wandered. And
wander it did, dart-ing left and right, backward and forward, dancing as ifthe floor were made of molten
lava. The creatureslammed into walls, leaving runny silhouettes of itself onthe transparisteel, then it would
rebound and fall to theground. There it thrashed around, vomiting up liters ofthick black fluid, then
somehow clambered back to its feet and hurled itself around the room again.
Loor reeled away as the Gamorrean he was watchingsplattered himself against the window. The
Intelligenceagent fell to his hands and knees, fighting valiantly tokeep from vomiting. He forced himself to
breathe in andout through his nose and the nausea passed. "That's hor-rible."
"I know." Derricote slapped him on the back. "The Quarren go black all over, then their autoimmune
systemgoes insane and liquefies their bones. They become a sackof fluid just teeming with Krytos."
"Krytos?"
"My name for the virus—it is a combination of theworld names for the viruses I've combined here." He
sighed and Loor could tell he was savoring the vision ofthe dying Gamorrean. "A milliliter of an end
patient'sblood is sufficient to infect an adult. The incubation pe-riod is falling slowly, but the period from
first symptomsto final stage is remaining fairly constant. I doubt we willimprove on that."

"Why not?"
"What you saw, the boils and the bleeding out, partof the whole process. The virus is replicating itself in
thehost body. Once it has filled a cell with virus, that cell ex-plodes and those next to it are infected. The
circulatorysystem carries the virus throughout the body. Cell by cellthe creature dies, and the process
escalates until you getthe end stage. By then the pain is incredible—did I men-tion the virus doesn't seem
interested in destroying painreceptors? Most remarkable, really."
Loor reared back onto his haunches, then stood. Hefocused his gaze on Derricote and consciously
ignored themovement he caught out of the corner of his eyes. "Howlong from onset to final stage?"
"There are seven stages. One for each day of the dis-ease." Derricote pointed to the right side of the
corridorbut Loor refused to look in that direction. "The Quarrendie more gracefully, if liquefaction can be
seen as grace-ful."
"How much tinkering did you do to make the disease jump species?"
"Not much. With the Quarren version we should beable to attack the Mon Calamari population. I will
needother subjects, of course, to test other crosses. I wasthinking a raid of Kashyyyk might..."
"Kashyyyk?" Loor looked at Derricote to see if theman had finally lost the last of his sanity. "I will check
with Madam Director Isard, but I think eliminating a spe-cies that proved useful as slave labor before
would be un-wise. I suggest you and your scientists should comparethe known susceptibility of alien
species and try to groupthem so you can tailor a virus that will do the most harmto the largest number."
"Wecould do it that way, though it would be moreelegant to engineer a specific ..."
"There is nothing about your Krytos that is elegant."
Derricote took a step back and blinked. "What? Notelegant?"
"Don't take that the way it sounded, General, take itthe way I meant it." Loor forced himself to smile.
"Your
work is most impressive, utterly unforgettable." The im-age of billions of aliens falling down and
dissolving intofetid puddles in the canyons of Imperial Center almostmade Loor sick. "The Rebels are
coming here to take thecenter of the Empire. What they will get is a world ofdeath and they will be
powerless to save it."
13
Corran Horn waited behind the transparisteel blast shield until thePulsar Skate's repulsorlift drives had
shut downand the gangway started to descend. The modifiedBaudo-chssyacht looked a lot like its
namesake, primar-ily because of the long, gentle curving lines of the wings. He realized he thought of the
ship as quite beautiful, andthat surprised him because both he and his father hadworked hard to put the
Pulsar Skate and its skipper outof commission.
Itsoldskipper, he reminded himself. Booster Terrikand his father had been each other's bane. Booster
had a facility for hauling all sorts of contraband, not just spice, and enough of his cargo was made up of
things that pow-erful people wanted that he made a number of influentialfriends. Booster easily could

have become a broker ofgoods, but he loved flying too much. Eventually HalHorn caught him and
Booster did five years on Kessel.
Booster's daughter, Mirax, was unbraiding her long black hair as she came down the gangway. She
stoppedwhen she saw Corran and smiled. The fierce rivalry their fathers had known gave them a link—a
link strengthenedby the fact that they also were both raised on Corellia—
and that link had allowed them to avoid inheriting theirfather's enmity.
Corran returned her smile. "How was your run?"
"No Imperial complications." She rolled her brown eyes. "On the other hand, having two dozen utterly
jubi-lant Sullustans aboard theSkate for a week is sufficient toremind me why I prefer moving inert
cargo."
"Eat their weight in rations?"
"Yes, but that wasn't the problem. They're ratherperkywhen they're happy, and perky can wear on you
pretty fast." She jerked a thumb back toward the bridgeof her ship. "Liat wasn't any help. He fell instantly
andmadly in love with one of the refugees. She seemedthrilled, as did the others. I think there may even
havebeen a wedding in the hold, but I'm not sure."
Corran shrugged. "I don't know anything aboutSullustan customs. We could ask Captain Nunb."
"That's a possibility." Mirax's smile slackened just abit as she reached out and laid a hand on his
shoulder."Any bad effects from the trip to Kessel?"
"What do you mean?"
She shrugged. "A lot of good people made it offKessel, but I know some real rancor bait had to have
beenlet free to win their release. After all, I don't think the guyrunning Kessel is going to take New
Republic promissorychits in exchange for prisoners. Doole doesn't do any-thing for nothing."
"Unlike some smugglers?"
Her smile brightened again for a moment. "I'mcounting on you and Wedge to finish this Empire off so I
can begin collecting what I'm owed."
"And if we don't?"
"Then just like that Jedcred you wear, the chits willbecome collectible and I'll make the money back
later."Her hand shifted from his shoulder, allowing her to givehim a light punch in the arm. "Nice change
of subject,though."
"Sorry." Corran hadn't answered her question be-cause he hadn't allowed himself to think about it very
much. It was all well and good to tell Wedge before thetrip that he didn't have any problem letting
criminals loose. It was true that CorSec, like any other securityforce, made deals with a lesser evil to get
rid of somegreater evil. That clearly was what the whole Kessel oper-ation was about—they'd be pitting
a resurgent Black Sunagainst the Empire. With Fliry Vorru included in the mixof people freed, the
chances were Black Sun wouldn't runhopelessly wild.

On the other hand, Corran would have felt a lot bet-ter if the list of criminals they freed had been a list of
folks lost on a ship that flew into the Maw and nevercame out again. The criminals were capable of doing
thejob the New Republic wanted them to do, but it was pre-cisely because they were as ruthless and
cruel as anyGrand Moff that had ever served the Emperor. And while it was true that their activities
would help break the Em-pire down, Corran knew plenty of innocent people couldget hurt by any violent
spillovers—and the people theyhad released could easily be described as sloppy when itcame to
violence.
"I guess I'm having some second thoughts. I knowthe Empire wouldn't hesitate to use any weapon
againstus, so they're definitely the target to shoot at." Hefrowned heavily. "Once we take Coruscant, I'd
be happyto help hunt down and ship back to Kessel any of theslime we released."
"If you need someone to do the hauling, I'm in, freeof charge."
Corran smiled. "But we won't tell your father you'reworking with a Horn on such a thing."
"No, I like him alive too much to shock him withthat news." Mirax laughed a bit. "Has the food here on
Noquivzor gotten any better than the last time I washere?"
"It actually has. Lots of good things were shipped infor a meeting here last month and Admiral Ackbar
leftthe surplus here. I think Emtrey has traded some of it
away, but there are still some surprises. Want to get some-thing to eat?"
"Please."
They headed off toward the central corridor thateventually sent a branch running down to the mess hall.
As they walked along Mirax related some of the odderantics of her Sullustan pilot and his bride to be.
The sto-ries were funny, and Corran laughed in all the appropri-ate places, but he was laughing because
of more than thehumor in the stories. He realized that with Mirax he felt very much at ease, providing one
more reason why he found her attractive.
He knew he wasn't in love with her, but he knewhimself well enough that he'd be poised at the top of
thatvery slippery slope if he just let himself go. Falling in love,for him, had never been one of those
one-look-and-passion-ignites things. When that happened to him heknew it was lust, pure and simple.
While Mirax waspretty enough to inspire lust, Corran knew things thatburned hot burned out fast, and
he'd been raised to think relationships should be stable, not supernova events thatcollapse into an
emotional black hole.
The fact was that his father's murder had cut himadrift emotionally. While he was still with CorSec he
hadGil and Iella keeping him pointed in the right direction,but he had only made one new friend during
that time,and she left after six months. Then, on the run, hecouldn't get close to people for fear of being
unmasked and turned over to Imperial authorities. Even when hejoined the Rebellion and applied for
admittance to RogueSquadron, the fierce competition with other pilots to getaccepted created a wall.
Lujayne Forge had made the first big breech in it, then others exploited that breech andhelped him get
used to being with people and trustingthem again.
"Corran."
Both he and Mirax stopped at the high-pitched squealof his name. They turned back as a tall, blocky

Gand came down the corridor from behind them. The Gand's
exoskeleton appeared uniform in color except whereshadows edged the plates and on his right forearm
andhand. There the exoskeleton was much more pale andeven chalky. The latter half of the limb matched
the leftone in length, but was not quite as big around.
Corran pointed at his right arm. "They removed thebacta capsule."
"Yes. Ooryl is most pleased." The Gand forced in-flections into his Basic, mostly at the right places, and
added volume to emphasize his pleasure. Two months be-fore, at the first battle for Borleias, Ooryl
Qrygg had been shot out of his X-wing and had lost his right forearm inthe process. By circulating bacta
through a capsule, Rebel medics had been able to speed up the Gand's rather re-markable regenerative
abilities—abilities no one in theAlliance had known Gands possessed.
Ooryl flexed his three-fingered hand. "Once the cara-pace hardens, Ooryl will be fit enough to be your
wing-Gand again."
"I can't wait. Trying to keep up with Captain Nunbis tough. She's good enough she could fly through a
novaand her ship would stay dark."
Mirax smiled. "We're going to get food. Do you wantto join us?"
"Ooryl would be pleased, but Ooryl was sent byCommander Antilles." Armored lids flicked down over
the Gand's multifaceted ebon eyes and back up again."He wants to see you, Corran."
"Why would he want to see me?" Corran couldn't re-member having done anything unusual.I hope
Emtreydoesn't have Whistler slicing some files for him.
Mirax tugged on Corran's hand. "Let's go and getthis over with. I can say hi to Wedge, then we can get
some food."
Ooryl laid his left hand gently on Mirax's forearm. "Qrygg regrets to tell you that Commander Antilles
saidthis is official business. The Commander knew you wouldbe together—Ooryl was sent first to your
ship—and he
wants Corran to go alone. Commander Antilles said hewould see you later and explain everything."
"If it's official, it's official." She shrugged and letCorran's hand go. "I'm still going to get some food. I'lleat
slowly, so if you get done fast, find me."
"I will."
Mirax looked at Ooryl. "You are still more than wel-come to join me."
"Ooryl is honored."
"Good, I like having company, and since you share aroom with Corran, you can tell me all sorts of
embarrass-ing things about him." She slipped her right arm throughthe crook of his left and winked at
Corran. "Take your time with Wedge. I'll be well taken care of."
Corran laughed, more at Ooryl's discomfiture thanher remark. "Have fun—the fun I can bet I won't be

hav-ing."
Corran walked past Emtrey and into the office spaceWedge had been given on the unit's return to
Noquivzor.The room, which was not really that big, seemed far toolarge to suit Wedge. Other officers
would have had thewalls lined with holograms and the shelves packed with trophies from their various
adventures. Aside from a fewholograms of his dead parents and of him posing withsquadron mates,
Wedge didn't have much reflective of histime with the Rebellion.
Wedge pointed Corran to one of the two chairs infront of his desk. "Be seated. This won't take long, but
itmeans some changes that are going to require some ac-tion on your part—both of your parts."
By way of his statement Wedge included the womanseated in the other chair. Erisi Dlarit had been
another ofthe recruits that had joined Rogue Squadron at the timeCorran did. She wore her black hair
cut short and tightagainst the back of her neck. She had blue eyes that spar-kled like sapphires and an
elegant beauty that definitelymade her prettier than Mirax. Erisi, having been raised
among the privileged humans on Thyferra, had benefitedgreatly from the riches her kith and kin made
from the bacta cartel. Mirax had referred to Erisi more than onceas "the bacta queen" and Corran
thought the remark wasuttered with an equal mix of envy and disgust in Mirax'svoice.
Though Mirax would deny any of the envy.Corranslipped into the seat and smiled at Erisi. "This should
beinteresting."
"Indeed. We finally get to fly together."
Wedge cleared his throat. "Emtrey will be giving youaccess codes for some datafiles. They include a
self-extracting virus that will destroy the data once it has beenviewed. Read carefully and memorize the
points about initial contact."
Corran's mind flashed back to the sort of briefingsGil Bastra used to give him and Iella before they
startedon an undercover assignment. "You're not preparing usfor some escort run, are you?"
"No." Wedge looked down at his desk, then back upagain. "For a variety of reasons the Provisional
Councilhas decided the New Republic needs to take Coruscant.To be able to do that we need reliable
data on the de-fenses and the locations of tactical targets. Someone hasto get that information and you're
it."
"Us?"
Erisi looked as surprised as Corran. "Commander, there is no way the two of us can do that job alone,
evenif wehave help from forces already there." Her blue eyesshrank to slits. "We'reall going in, aren't
we?"
"That's an assumption that I'm not at liberty to con-firm or deny, Lieutenant Dlarit." The Commander
shook his head. "You both know how a cell system works—noone is allowed to know about more than
their portion ofthe network. What you don't know will keep otherssafe."
"Who do we report to?"
"All that will be in your briefing file—even I do notknow what your cover will be or what your travel ar-

rangements will be and I doubt sincerely I'll have a wayto contact you."
"You'll be going, though, won't you?" Erisi frowned."It only makes sense they would send all of us, not
justtwo."
Wedge shook his head. "What makes sense to Gen-eral Cracken is its own subset of reality. He says
the pre-cautions are necessary. It's all to keep you safe."
Corran scowled. "Since when was 'isolated' made asynonym for 'safe'?"
Erisi patted his left hand. "Don't worry, you'll bewith me."
"That's something." Corran flashed her a smile."How long before we head out, Commander?"
"You're off as soon as you leave this office. TheFor-biddenis waiting for you."
"Is Tycho flying us to wherever?"
"No. General Cracken has one of his people in com-mand."
Corran nodded slowly.The operation is sensitiveenough that they don't want to trust him with a part of
it."If you can, say good-bye to him for me. And good-bye to Mirax, too."
"Will do." Wedge folded his arms. "One last thing—and this is awkward—we need your permission to
haveEmtrey transfer money out of your personal accounts,slice it through some cutouts, and funnel it into
the ac-counts you'll be using on Coruscant."
Corran laughed. "Get receipt bytes and we'll be reim-bursed?"
Wedge chuckled right along with the two of them. "It's not enough they want our bodies, but they want
usto finance the war. I understand there is a budget for thisoperation, but I know it's not going to be
enough. Ifthings go wrong, having the extra credits available . . ."
"I've had practical experience in this area, and I'd notcare to relive it. I've got ten you can have."
Erisi looked at Corran, then up at Wedge. "Is tenenough?"
Corran smiled at her. "Ten thousand is what Imeant."
"Oh, I meant ten million." She batted her eyes. "Isthat enough?"
Wedge coughed into his fist. "I think it will do."
"Yeah, being able to buy a whole wing of snub-fighters could be handy in a pinch." Corran shook his
head. "Do we have to come back after this operation?"
"Have to? I don't know, but I certainly hope you areable to." Wedge came around from behind the desk
andoffered Corran his hand. "May the Force be with you."
"And with you, sir." Corran shook Wedge's hand. "As much as we need, and then some."

14

Iguess now is the time we will see if this disguise really works or not. Wedge sat back in the
starliner's plush seat,barely glancing at the screen built into the rear of the seatin front of him. On it played
little holographic reportsabout the nature of the Rebellion and the war beingfought against it by the
Empire. The gist of the reportswas to suggest that the battle with Palpatine's murdererswas going well
and justice was being restored to the gal-axy as victory after victory over the treasonous Rebelswas
gained.
Wedge, disguised as he was, presented an argumentthat belied the Empire's propaganda efforts. A metal
mask covered his forehead, right eye, and cheek on down to the edge of his jaw. Part of the mask
continued on pasthis right ear, flattening it utterly, and on back to the rearof his skull. Another piece
curled down along his jaw andwrapped around his throat. A round lens set in place overhis right eye
enlarged it and made it very easy to see howblue the contact lens he had on was.
Surface pressure kept the mask in place, making it de-cidedly uncomfortable to wear. It also made the
roundededge on his face dig sufficiently into his skin to appear asif the metal had replaced flesh on that
side of his face.The mask also unbalanced his head enough that his neckhurt too much to hold his head
straight all the time. Asa result he let his head loll to the right for the most part,and that added to his
disguise.
The Customs official who had come aboard right af-ter the Dairkan StarlinerJewel of Churba entered
the Co-ruscant system stopped in the aisle opposite him. "I needto see your identification."
Wedge slid an identification card from inside thebreast of his black Imperial uniform. He used his right
hand that had been encased in black leather. The glovedid little to hide the blocky, angular nature of the
hand, though even if it had been smooth, the fact that it con-sisted of two thick fingers and a thumb would
have giventhe Customs man the idea something was wrong. Gentlewhirring sounds emanated from the
glove as Wedge's fin-gers tightened on the card and his wrist rotated to hand the card over to the official.
"Here you are, sir." Wedge's words came in a buzzingcroak, half because of the pressure on his larynx
and halfbecause of the voice modulator built into the mask.
The Customs official gave the ID card only a cursory glance before he swiped it through a slot on his
datapad."Colonel Antar Roat..."
"Ro-at."
"What?"
"My name is pronounced Ro-at." The buzz made thewords all but unintelligible, though the emphasis he
placed on them appeared to get through to the Customsofficial.

"Pardon, sir. Colonel Ro-at. You are bound for Impe-rial Center for reconstr . . . yes, of course." The
man'svoice trailed off. "Everything seems in order here, Colo-nel."
Wedge raised his hand to take the card back, but didnot let his claw close on it yet. "Are you certain?
My bag-gage is in my sleeping berth."
"Yes, I am certain." The man impatiently tapped thecard against Wedge's thumb.
"I understand the need for security, sir."
"I'm certain, sir."
"If you have trouble, I will help." Wedge let his voicefall to a whisper, as if suddenly overcome with
fatigue.His head dipped slightly at the same time, then hebrought it back up. "I will help."
The Customs man nodded. "I will remember that, Colonel."
Wedge took the card and fumbled a couple of timesbefore he slid it home again. "I live to serve."
The Customs man moved on, mumbling under hisbreath. "You're dead and still serving. The
Emdee-foursshould have let you die."
Wedge would have missed the remark, but the hear-ing enhancement built into the mask and fed into his
right ear allowed him to catch it. He killed the smile the com-ment threatened to produce because he
knew ColonelAntar Roat would find little in life that was funny.Andgetting caught by Customs as I try to
land on Coruscantwould not be funny at all.
It had not occurred to Wedge to wonder how hewould be inserted into Coruscant until he was on his
wayfor his briefing about his cover. He'd known, of course,that he couldn't fly an X-wing in there, and he
sincerely doubted much in the way of contraband or illegal immi-grants made it onto Coruscant without
someone knowingand approving of it. He'd assumed he would be disguisedsomehow, but it never
crossed his mind that he wouldhead into Coruscant in an Imperial Naval Officer's uni-form.
The briefing about his new identity had been fasci-nating. General Cracken's people had fashioned
severalidentities for him. One, Colonel Roat, was designed forinsertion and possible reuse later to get
back out again.He had another one for the time he would be scoutingaround on Coruscant and a third as
his exit identity. He had been informed about the latter two identities, but all
datacards and other things for them would be supplied onCoruscant after he had been met and had a
chance to set-tle in.
The Intelligence division had chosen Colonel AntarRoat as his insertion cover for a couple of reasons.
Thefirst was that the prosthetics hid Wedge's identity almostcompletely. Moreover, they were a
forbidden attractant—they made him unusual enough that people would pay at-tention to him, but they
would see the parts, not the manwearing them. And people caught staring at him would look away in
shame. They would remember a man withwar injuries, but any details would concern his mechani-cal
parts. Since the parts could be removed and discarded,authorities would be looking for a man who no
longer existed once Wedge had shed that disguise.
The second reason Roat had been created for Wedgewas because Wedge was a pilot. He could
accurately and intelligently converse about starfighter combat if pressed.His cover story indicated he had

been shot down in thedefense of Vladet, in the Rachuk system, and Wedgecould talk about that battle
since he'd been there.
7was on the Rebel side, but I wasthere.
A slight tremor rippled through the ship. Wedge hita button beside the screen in front of him and the
viewshifted to an external one being flashed from a holocammounted in the aft of theJewel of Churba. A
shuttle liftedoff from a spinal docking port on the top of the ship. Theultra-class passengers had traveled
in what was supposedto be unparalleled luxury on the starliner's upper decksand those who could afford
it clearly took their ownshuttles down to the planet to avoid waiting to disembarkwith the other travelers.
It amazed Wedge that people would or could exist insuch luxury in such a time of turmoil. He found their
de-sire for pleasure and ease less disturbing than their appar-ent lack of foresight. From the Rebellion's
point of viewthe end was nigh for the Empire—though whether the Re-bellion or someone like Warlord
Zsinj was going toemerge as the new force in the galaxy was open to conjecture. The fact was, though, that no matter who won,avoiding unnecessary expenditures of money in such
diretimes seemed just to be common sense to him.
He did realize that some people would spend moneyto spin around themselves a cocoon within which
the Re-bellion did not exist. Maintaining the illusion that theEmpire was hale and hearty was not difficult if
price wasno object. Wedge had no doubt that in some far-flung en-claves of the Empire not only were
there people who did not believe the Emperor had died, but there were people who would keep on
believing he was alive and well for years if not decades and possibly even centuries.
Ignorance I can understand, but not willful igno-rance.
He killed another smile before it could blossom,though this one was more difficult to kill than the first.The
very same people he considered willfully ignorantwould find him deluded and misguided. Half of them
would deny there were any problems inherent in the Im-perial system—as if slavery, anti-alien
sentiments, and weapons that destroyed planets could be so easily forgot-ten. The other half might admit
there were problems, butthey would shy from accepting open insurgency againstthe legitimate
government as a solution to them. Forthose people, working within the system was the way toachieve
change, but they failed to realize that when a sys-tem had become as corrupt as the Empire, significant
change was impossible without a shattering of the power structure.
The trick of it all—and what tempted him to smile—was that all sides could make reasonable and logical
argu-ments for their points of view. Therein was the problem with politics. Since it was the art of
compromise, roundupon round of discussion could end in no solution beingreached. The only time
serious change was made waswhen an individual was willing to die for what he be-lieved. Absent that
basic commitment—a commitmentmost Imperial citizens were not prepared to make—the
Empire would continue to exist in one form or another, in-stitutionalizing evil.
A man appeared at the end of his row of seats. "Col-onel Roat?"
Wedge looked over slowly, then nodded. "PrefectDodt. It has been, well, years."
As Parin Dodt—an Imperial Prefect with greyingbrown hair and brown eyes—Pash Cracken nodded.
"Itwas last at the ceremony ending the year of mourning, as I recall, just before you were transferred
away. I wouldnot have known it was you, but the Customs man toldme who you were. The galaxy gets

smaller as time goesby."
Wedge stiffly patted the seat beside his. "Join me, ifyou do not mind. My body has been broken, but my
brain was unaffected. You are coming to Imperial Centeron business?"
"You know better than to ask such questions, Colo-nel, just as I know not to ask where you were
injured."Pash settled himself into the seat and loosely fastened therestraining belts on. "This has been a
very smooth flight."
"It has indeed." Wedge nodded. Pash's comment had confirmed what Wedge had decided about the
journey toCoruscant: security was not so tight as to uncover them,nor as lax as might have been expected
were the Empire'score institutions breaking down. It also told him thatPash had encountered no trouble
fitting in with the otherpassengers. While the two of them had known they weretraveling on the same
flight, they had not made contactpreviously. Had there been any difficulties they would nothave made
contact prior to landing, and only did so nowto facilitate pickup in the spaceport.
A smiling flight facilitator's face appeared on the flatscreen. "We are beginning landing operations. Please
bring your seats into a full and..."
Wedge killed the sound on the display. "I hope ourlanding is as smooth as the flight."
"As do I." Pash sighed convincingly. "I hate spaceport tie-ups. If things are going to go wrong, it's generallythere."
The spaceport at whichJewel of Churba set down was amultistory facility built atop a triad of towers
approxi-mately fifty kilometers from the Imperial Palace. Thedocking bay had multiple levels that allowed
passengersfrom the various classes to disembark without having tomix with the others. The rich who had
not left in theirown shuttles were received in an opulent, spacious area that Wedge saw through the
porthole asJewel settled infor a landing. The keelrunners—aliens and low-classhumans—were
off-loaded in a secure cargo area.
The first- through third-class passengers exited thestarliner through multiple ports and into a clean but
crowded waiting area. Customs officials ran spot checkson some of the passengers, but Wedge saw no
one hustled away. Beyond the Immigration area was luggage retrieval,but before he or Pash could worm
their way into thecrowd to get their things, a brown-haired woman in aprim grey medtech uniform
approached them.
"Colonel Roat?"
Wedge nodded. "I am Roat. This is my friend, PrefectParin Dodt. You are?"
"Irin Fossyr. I am from the Rohair BiomechanicalClinic. I was sent to meet you."
"You were."
"I had been told you were notified. I left word withyour aide, Captain Seeno."
"That explains it. Seeno was killed just before I beganmy journey."
"You have my sympathies, sir."

"Accepted." Wedge nodded solemnly. The womanhad used the correct phrases to introduce herself,
provingshe was one of Cracken's agents. Wedge waited while sheand Pash picked up the luggage, then
she led them out to a waiting lift-car. It had labels on the side proclaiming itto be from the Rohari
Biomechanical Clinic but otherwise
looked utterly ordinary. Their luggage was loaded intothe external rack, then the three of them climbed in
andthe driver in the forward compartment headed them away from the spaceport.
The woman sat back on the bench seat that faced therear of the craft. "It will take us fifteen minutes or
so toget where we're going. We could get there faster, but..."
Wedge smiled as much as the mask would allowhim to. "Precautions, we understand. I was wondering,
though, if I can't take this mask off."
"By all means."
Wedge subvocalized the command that let the air outof the built-in bladders, loosening the mask. He
worked itoff, then coughed and finally shucked his hand out of theclaw glove. "Luke doesn't seem to
mind his replacementhand—it must be that Jedi training."
Pash chuckled politely, but the woman just sat thereand stared for a moment. Then she blushed and
looked away. "Forgive me. I had been told you were important,but I didn't realize. I remember your face
from some earlyImperial warrants. You're Wedge Antilles, right?"
Wedge nodded. "You saw Imperial warrants with mypicture on them?"
"They had limited circulation—the Diktat might have been with the Empire, but not so all Corellians."
She ex-tended her hand to Wedge. "I'm Iella Wessiri. It's a plea-sure to meet you."
Iella Wessiri? Why is that name familiar?Wedgeshook her hand and let her introduce herself to Pash
Cracken—eliciting another blush—while he thought about her name. Then it came to him.That's what
Corran's human partner was called.
"You saw the Imperial warrants when you were withCorSec."
Iella blinked, then nodded slowly. "They must havegiven you a thorough briefing."
"Not really, but I have heard of you." He shrugged."I can't say from where, of course."
She shook her head. "No, of course not.""What I can say is this"—Wedge smiled—"what Ihave heard
makes me think this mission's smooth startshould extend yet further and give us a chance to accom-plish
everything we set out to do."
15
Corran Horn felt miserable. The cover story prepared forhis entry into Coruscant called for him to be
swathed inmultiple layers of cloth—most of it oppressively heavyand hot—forming the purple and red
robes he wore. Thecollar on the shirt he wore closest to his skin had beenstarched and pressed until its
edge felt like a razor, espe-cially where it pressed up against his larynx. A big, old, rounded cylinder hat
crowned him while the skirts of theoutermost robe dragged on the deck of theJewel ofChurba'sexclusive

ultra-deck.
He kept his hands hidden in the sleeves of the robe,as he had been instructed a good Kuatitelbun would
do.The goal of the clothing was to render him all but gender-less, and were he traveling on Kuat with
Erisi, he wouldbe considered all but invisible by the upper crust of soci-ety. OnJewel he had been a
curiosity and the combinedobject of envy and pity.
Erisi's appearance had been the source of envy for ev-ery male in ultra-class. She wore tight blue
leggings be-neath a loose blue blouse flecked with scintillating pointsof light that flashed gold and silver. A
belt gathered theblouse at her waist, which was just as well because it had
no fasteners and lay open from throat to tails. Thus,though she was fully clothed, anyone with enough
intelli-gence to outwit a Kowakian monkey-lizard could imaginewhat Erisi looked like naked, and the
idea of having toshare a cabin with her doubtless seemed wonderful toplenty of men.
Pity came when people saw how she treated him.Erisi berated him mercilessly—on those occasions she
chose to acknowledge his presence consciously. Most ofthe time he trailed respectfully after her, paying
for thingsshe bought, carrying things she wanted carried, pickingup after her, and apologizing graciously in
her wake. While her conduct was far from graceless, she appearedto draw strength from the cruelties she
inflicted uponhim. Theirs appeared to be a symbiotic relationship where Corran endured abuse in return
for sexual favors.
In the final analysis, despite Erisi's beauty, no onethought it was an even bargain.
Erisi tapped her foot impatiently as a stocky female Customs official wandered along from the previous
dock-ing foyer to where they waited. Erisi folded her arms andgave the woman a withering stare. At first
the official hes-itated, then she smiled slowly. The expression on her faceall but broadcast her thoughts to
Corran.She's remem-bered shehas the power here, at this moment, and willmake Erisi pay for her
disrespect.
The official glanced at her datapad. "Ris Darsk?"
Erisi nodded coldly.
"I have a travel file with the appropriate visas foryou, but not for him."
"He is Darsk Ristel." Erisi waved her left handdismissively. "He is there."
"I only show one passenger."
Erisi reached out with one finger and punched a but-ton on the woman's datapad. "There. Baggage."
A scowl settled over the official's face. "State the pur-pose of your visit to Imperial Center."
"It is a private matter."
An oily smile spilled over the scowl. "That is insuffi-cient for our records."
Erisi glanced at Corran, then she produced a razor-edged smile that slashed into the official's confidence.
"Mine is a pleasure journey here, though I anticipate verylittle of it."

The official turned toward him. "The purpose ofyour visit, sir?"
Erisi answered for him. "His is a business trip."
"Business and pleasure? Should it not be one or theother?"
Erisi shook her head slowly. "Not when my pleasureis his business. He istelbun."
The official's head drew back, trapping an extra chinagainst her throat."Telbun?"
"Exactly. Mytelbun bore me here on Imperial Centerso, in keeping with my family's tradition, I have
come here with thistelbun to conceive."
"To conceive? A child?"
"You understand."
"Telbun.I see." The official looked at Corran and heaverted his eyes."Telbun."
Telbunwere drawn from the middle classes on Kuat. They were raised and trained by their families to
excel inacademics, social manners, and athletics. When theyreached the appropriate age, they underwent
a battery of tests that produced a ranking by combining scores for in-telligence, grace, health, and genetic
makeup. The upperclasses of the great Kuat merchant houses then purchasedtelbunfrom their families for
the purpose of parenting achild with a member of the merchant family, then raisingthat child. The child
would be an heir of the merchant house, thereby getting all the benefits of its birth, whilethetelbun's family
would be greatly enriched by the fees paid for thetelbun's service.
The process, which divorced reproduction from emo-tional commitments, struck many, including
Corran, asinhuman, but the Kuati aristocracy found it practical in anumber of ways. It left their people
free to enter into alliances and mergers without placing a child in jeopardy ofbeing drawn into an enemy camp when
whatever enter-prise that brought two people together collapsed. It alsoprevented inbreeding between
noble families and pro-vided the children with a guardian/tutor with a very seri-ous and tight bond to his
charges. The children knewtheirtelbuns provided one half of their biologicalmakeup, but they only
acknowledged their aristocraticparent as having a blood relationship with them.
The process was not easy on atelbun, but what didtheir feelings matter? They were property, nothing
more.
The official hit a few buttons on her datapad. "You and thetelbun are cleared. Beyond the airlock is
yourshuttle. Enjoy your stay...or whatever."
The woman moved off down along the ship's spinetoward the next docking foyer. Erisi and Corran
retreatedto circle in the center of the docking foyer. The circle slowly rose toward the outer hull and the
circular plat-form on which they rose locked into the floor of theairlock with a click. Corran felt bits and
pieces of thingsshift below his feet, then the cylindrical airlock slowly ro-tated ninety degrees until the side
opened onto a shuttle'shatch. Beyond the opening stood a female pilot whowaved them aboard the
modifiedLambda-dass ship.
The hatch closed behind them. "If you will beseated," said the pilot, "and strap yourselves in, I cantake

you to the Hotel Imperial."
Erisi nodded. "We are cleared for an entry vector?"
"Yes, Mistress Darsk."
Corran walked into the passenger compartment andtook a seat in the last of four rows. Erisi cast a
glancedown a small corridor toward the cockpit, then cameback and joined him. She said nothing as she
strappedherself in, but she did rest her arm on his. The lights glis-tening on her blouse shifted color
sequentially, as if a golden beach was being eroded by a silver wave.
The ship shuddered and popped as it disengaged itselffromJewel's airlock, then it lifted off and its wings
snapped down into place. As they did so, holographic displays lining the walls of the passenger compartment pro-vided images that made it appear as if the whole
ship hadbeen made of transparisteel. The shuttle pulled up and away fromJewel, heading outbound from
Coruscant fora moment. The screens filled with pinpoint images of dis-tant stars.
Erisi kept her voice low. "Please forgive me for howrudely I have treated you."
"Whatever you desire, mistress."
She looked at him with a horrified expression at thedullness of his response, then that deepened as she
real-ized that being alone in the ship's cabin did not mean theycould not be overheard. Erisi leaned
toward him, fillinghis nostrils with the sweet scent ofnlorna flower perfume. She kissed him on the lips,
lingering close enough to whis-per, "You aretelbun. You understand."
Corran nodded. "I amtelbun. I understand." Hercomment and his reply, fairly innocent and common
giventhe relationship of their two cover identities, had been im-bued with a different meaning for the two
of them. It wasa touchstone, a link back into their real identities. When-ever they needed to assure
themselves that the other per-son was just playacting they were able to use the phrasesand responses to
do so. In this way Corran knew her cru- elties were forced upon him by their situation, and sheknew his
indifferent responses did not reflect his true feel-ings for her.
Of course, I don't know what those feelings are, re-ally.He liked Erisi enough as a friend and yet still
foundher very attractive. The degree of proximity forced bytheir roles had stopped short of physical
intimacy, buthad included living together throughoutJewel's journey and the training before that. Erisi had
made no secret, inthe past, of her attraction to him. No one would havefaulted them for sleeping together,
given their circum-stances, but Corran had held himself back from succumb-ing to her charms and the
security of shared intimacy.
At first he told himself it was because he didn't wantto let his guard down. If they were to make love
their
guard would be down. One slip, one fatal admission, aninappropriate name whispered in an unguarded
momentof passion, could have spelled their undoing. Only bybeing apart could they guarantee mission
security.
Those concerns eroded as they spent more time to-gether. For a very short time he allowed himself to
imag-ine that he would be betraying Mirax in some way if heslept with Erisi. Hedid have feelings for
Mirax, but therewere no commitments or obligations between them. Forall he knew she had a lover

stashed away in everystarport across the galaxy—he doubted it, and was sur-prised at the spark of
jealousy ignited at the thought—and if she did, it was no business of his. They were both adults and if
theydid eventually enter into a relationship,what had gone before would have to be dealt with as
something that happenedbefore.
His ultimate resistance stemmed from two things thatfed back and forth into each other. The first
surprised himwhen he discovered it, but he couldn't deny it—hethought of Erisi as being well and truly
outside his social class—inescapably so. She came from a world where shewas nobility. Money,
opportunity, material advantages,and the best of everything were what she had been bornto. While her
joining the Rebellion spoke to true nobility in her heart, the fact was that she really enjoyed luxuryand
treated it as her due. He had seen that throughout thetrip—she took to it like a Sarlacc to sand.
Despite being atelbun, the same luxury was availableto Corran. He was surprised by his inability to get
usedto it. Whereas Erisi might think nothing of peeling a fruitand leaving the rind on the arm of a nerf-hide
divan,Corran found himself worrying about spilling somethingor sweating on the divan, thereby ruining it.
Erisi didn't care if it was ruined, whereas he did because he did nothave access to the sort of money that
would allow him tolaugh off a demand to replace the couch.
Erisi's blithe disregard for money had all but given Corran fits. Erisi had ordered him to tip servants
extrav-agantly, but he had a hard time rewarding indifferent or
poor service as well as he did good service. And the ser-vants on the ultra-deck were obsequious and
sycophanticin the extreme. There were times he wanted to just lashout and bash them, but he knew
they'd accept a beating,then thank him for administering it in such a skillfulmanner—doing whatever they
thought would inflate thegratuities.
He knew he could never fit into her world, and hesuspected she knew it, too. While the abuse she
heapedupon him was exaggerated enough that he knew shedidn't mean it, there were times the tone of
her voice orthe venom in her eyes seemed a bit too convincing. Asmall part of her realized his
unsuitability as a mate, and that bit went to war with the part of her that liked him,producing enough
anxiety that she dealt with him moresharply than she might otherwise have done.
Her resentment about his lack of ability to cope withthe common elements of her existence made him
want toshow her he could adapt. Deep in his heart he knew he would fail ultimately because just as he
and Erisi neededa touchstone phrase to remind them who they truly were,Corran himself needed a
connection back to what he sawas real life. His family circumstances had never been af-fluent, but neither
had they been impoverished. Like hisfather and grandfather, he had worked for the CorellianSecurity
Force and he was proud of his background. If heand Erisi couldn't be together, then it was her loss, not
his.
Erisi's hand tightened on Corran's arm. "Oh, my,look."
The shuttle had come about and gave them an unob-structed view of the planet. They sailed in beyond
thesphere of Golan Space Defense platforms and the orbitalsolar reflection stations. The latter reflected
sunlightdown to the planet to warm zones near the glacial caps ateither pole. While quite habitable,
Coruscant's orbit tookit far enough from the sun that capturing and redirectingsolar energy was needed to
keep the world temperate yearround.
The shuttle was heading down and in toward thedaylight side of the planet, but a crescent of night
gobbledup a big portion of it. The lighted side had a spiky, angu-lar quality to it, with towers rising up and
grand canyonssinking down through a khaki and grey landscape. Sky-hooks, massive stone islands

flecked with green and pur-ple gardens, floated lazily over the ferrocrete terrain.Corran could see nothing
natural on that side of theworld, just the rough scars of humanity's manufactureand constant
reconstruction of the planet.
The nightside, by way of contrast, sparkled and shim-mered with a full spectrum of colors that flowed
throughinvisible channels. Millions of lights marked towers hecould not see, and each light on them
corresponded toone or two or four or a dozen people living in its prox-imity. Deep down at the base of
the towers, winking inand out of life as buildings eclipsed his view, muted lightsplayed out like those in
ocean depths, hinting at life un-seen and likely unknowable.
Approaching the line that marked the end of day andthe beginning of the night, Corran saw a building
thatcould only be the Imperial Palace. An arrogant edifice, itrivaled and mocked the Manarai Mountains
to the south.Towers rose from it like coral spires from a reef and theirsharp, angular construction made
them seem as danger-ous to Corran as the coral they reminded him of. Thosetowers, that artificial
mountain, housed the bureaucracy and officials that could destroy planets with a roundingerror in the
budget.It is a hive of evil. He shivered.No one will ever be safe until it has been purged.
"Impressive, isn't it?"
Corran looked up and found the shuttle's pilot stand-ing in the hatchway. "Shouldn't you be flying this
thing?"
"We're on instrument approach to the Hotel Impe-rial. My droid copilot can handle it." She gestured at
thevision of the planet. "You're lucky. It's a clear night. If there were storms, I'd be at the helm dodging
lightningand skyhooks and you'd not see much."
Erisi lifted her chin. "Mytelbun and I..."
"You want the Emperor's suite. Someone else has aprevious reservation."
Corran spoke slowly and carefully. "We thought itwas arranged."
"It can be."
Erisi's eyes narrowed. "Will a thousand credits suf-fice?"
"As a down payment, yes."
Corran smiled. "You're our contact?"
The pilot nodded and Corran took a good look at herfor the first time. He found her pretty, and her
dark eyeswere full of fire, but there was another quality about herthat he couldn't place at first. He
thought it had to dowith her mood, and how quickly she had shifted from be-ing just an anonymous pilot
to their contact, but he rec-ognized that mutability of personality as a mark of anexcellent undercover
operative.Iella could change likethat—affect a mood and suddenly she was someone else.
As the woman drew closer he nailed it. Though herhair was white and gathered at the back of her head,
herealized she reminded him very strongly of Princess LeiaOrgana. He'd not made the connection when
she was thepilot—he knew he'd not really paid that much attentionto her. It was obvious to him that she
wasnot Leia Or-gana, but because of the resemblance he would have beenwilling to bet she came from
Alderaan.

The pilot sat down in the chair in front of Corranand swiveled it around to face them both. "We've not
much time here, but the cabin is clean, so we can talkbriefly. I already know who you are. Here I'm
known bythe code name Targeter though as the pilot I go by Rima Borealis. That will do as a call name
for now. We'll getyou into the hotel and book you into a suite, but you'lllive out of other rooms we have
secured for you. Newidentities and identification cards will be supplied there."
Erisi nodded slowly. "We're not it, are we?" Shepointed toward the Palace as their ship descended.
"Just the two of us gathering the information needed to bringthat down—that's a lot of pressure."
Rima shrugged. "I don't know, and I couldn't tell youif I did. Sorry." She patted Erisi on the knee. "I
wouldn'tworry, though. From what I understand, you Rogues are a thorn in the Empire's flesh. Now's the
chance we haveto shove it deeper and twist it a bit."
"Nice analogy." Corran smiled. "I like it.""I thought you would." Rima returned his smile."Nothing on this
mission two Rogues can't handle, evenif," she added with a shrug, "getting in to Coruscant islikely the
easiest part of the whole thing."
16
Gavin Darklighter said nothing as thePulsar Skate re-verted to normal space. His silence did not result
frompreviously warbled warnings by Liat Tsayv, nor was itborn of the need for operational security that
GeneralCracken's people had drilled into him. And it was not theresult of his having his eyes closed so he
couldn't see any-thing.
He could see.
What he saw was Coruscant, and that vision took his breath away.
Mirax turned in her seat. "Impressive, eh, kid?"
Gavin knew he'd not seen as much of the galaxy assome folks—all of Rogue Squadron included, and
thecrew of theSkateas well —but he didn't think of himselfas a total nullwit or nerf-herder. He wasn't
one of theSand People, for example, and he knew plenty about so-phisticated things, like flying an
X-wing or slicing code in a computer. He might have grown up on a farm outsideAnchorhead, but he'd
been to town at least once amonth, and his family was always invited over to the bighouse by his uncle
for family celebrations.
He'd even been to Mos Eisley.Once.
But he'd never seen anything like Coruscant.
"It's just a city, the whole thing, one big, huge, reallybig city." Gavin spread his arms wide for emphasis,
but hit hull before he thought he'd gotten the gesture right. "It's all city."
"Pole to pole, horizon to horizon, more or less." Mirax smiled. "There are spots on the glacier where
things haven't been built over, but the only reason that'strue is because the poles are frozen reservoirs. If
youdrink water down there, it was pole-frozen or shipped infrom outside."
A light came to life on the console. The Sullustan pi-lot chittered at Mirax, causing her to turn around
and hitthree buttons."Merisee Hope here."

"Coruscant Space Traffic Coordination on link here.Our files show you're transporting exotics? Our
scanshows you have eight individuals on board."
"Affirmative. Three humans, five exotics."
"I copy. You are cleared on vector 34293AFX."
Liat gave Mirax a nod, so she spoke into the communit again. "We copy. Thank you, Coordinator."
Gavin saw her shut the comm unit off, then raised aneyebrow. "That seemed too easy."
"Suspicion is a good thing, just so long as you don'tgo overboard with it."
"Sounds like something Corran might say."
Mirax glanced back at Gavin, but he couldn't readthe expression on her face. "He might say such a thing,
indeed. And he'd be thinking our entry was too easy, too.The trick of it is that certain members of
Coruscant'sSpace Traffic Coordination office have been bought and paid for. When the entry-monitor
satellites beamed an in-quiry to theSkate they got a transponder message thattold them we were the
Merisee Hope. That ship is aknown slave-runner for one of the brothels on the edge ofInvisec."
"Invisec?"
Mirax frowned. "I thought they briefed you beforethis run."
"Well, yes, they did, but I don't remember Invisec be-ing mentioned before." Gavin shrugged helplessly.
"Whatis it?"
"A chunk of the Imperial City that is popularlyknown as the Invisible Sector, primarily because most
people don't want to admit it exists. It's large enough toswallow up three or four of the largest
metropolitan areasfrom elsewhere in the galaxy, but here it's just one pre-cinct out of many. Invisec is a
contraction of the nameand is used by folks who frequent it to refer to the area."
"You mean the Alien Protection Zone."
"Right, sure, if you want the Impspeak designation,but only the military uses that. Citizens don't talk
aboutit, or call it'there,' or refer to it as invisible or unseen, orthe witty ones confess slumming down there
by sayingtheydisappeared for a while. Invisecis largely made upof the APZ, but it extends around it and
has little satellite sectors elsewhere in the city. Think of it like Mos Eisley, but uglier, nastier, and less
hospitable."
Worse than Mos Eisley?Gavin blinked. "Is that pos-sible?"
"That's the thing about evil, Gavin, it doesn't dimin-ish when you spread it over a larger area. It's
rumoredVader built a palace near Invisec because, for him, it wasas attractive as a seashore sunset is to
most folks. Theblack market thrives down there. Aliens who have work permits can leave Invisec and
work in other locations.Those who don't are forced into working at the factoriesthat have been built on
the edges of Invisec."
Looking past Mirax and out through the cockpitviewscreen Gavin saw the dark city below rise up

towardthe ship. It seemed as if towers lunged to impale theSkatebut the Sullustan pilot deftly steered the
ship aroundthem. Down and down the ship glided, flitting betweentowers and around through canyons,
pushing lower andlower through layers of light and shadow until theyreached a point where Liat had to
turn on the ship's run-ning lights or be left without a means for orienting theship.
The Sullustan slowed the ship and brought it downbelow the overhanging edge of a building. Dark fungi
andwhite lime stained the walls. Gavin couldn't identify thestone used to construct the building, but it
seemed to beancient and covered with odd, twisty runes like nothinghe'd ever seen before. "What does
the writing say?"
Mirax laughed. "That's not writing, Gavin, those arethe trails of granite slugs. Hawk-bats tend not to get
down this deep."
"Granite slugs and hawk-bats?"
"Hawk-bats look good riding the thermals—just aslong as you don't suck one into an engine. They prey
on granite slugs and get the occasional borrat. Borrats get asbig as two meters long."
"Sounds like womp rats from back home."
"Sure, except these things have tusks, spines, armoredflesh, and claws that can dig through ferrocrete.
The onlygood thing about them is that they tend to be solitary."Mirax flipped some switches overhead.
"And there are allsorts of extraterrestrial beasties that someone brought toCoruscant and let loose. Most
are benign, but..."
Gavin shivered.And why was it 1 agreed to this duty?
TheSkate slowly began an ascent, which Gavinthought would bump them against the bottom floor ofthe
building above, but he discovered they were risingthrough an open hatchway in the overhang. "This is
con-venient."
"A lot of transport of goods goes on at the lowerlevels in the city—it keeps traffic lighter up above. This
building used to be outside Invisec, but as the construc-tion droids slice a piece off one side of Invisec,
the un-homed push out and take over new areas of the city. It'sa slow migration and Invisec generally
gains two kilome-ters for every one it loses."
ThePulsar Skate drifted forward and put down itslanding gear. It came to rest in the large, dark
basement of the building, squeezed in between trash middens,hydro-reclamation processors, and the
heart of the build-ing's heating and cooling facilities. Liat killed the
repulsorlift drives but left the external lights on, provid-ing the only strong illumination in the facility.
Mirax unstrapped herself from the command chairand punched a button. Gavin heard a whooshing hiss
fol-lowed by the sound of servomotors lowering the accesshatch. It touched down with a metallic thump.
"C'mon,kid, let's see what they have set up for you."
Gavin unfastened his restraining belts and followed her down the ramp and out into the building. The
musty air filled his nose and dried it out. It reminded Gavin ofhow the air smelled just before a Tatooine
dust storm hitwith its full fury. He found the scent familiar enough tobe reassuring.
Mirax preceded him down the ramp and crossed overto one of the trash middens. Dropping to one

knee, shewaved him over. "Grab this end of the crate and pull."
Gavin grabbed one of the handles on the duraplastbox and slid it from beneath the trash. Mirax got the
handle on the other end of the two-meter-long case and between them they lugged the heavy rectangular
box over to a spot beneath one of theSkate's lights. The rest of theRogues descended the ramp and
joined them.
Nawara Ven's black cape pooled around him as heknelt at the lockpad on the box. He studied it for a
mo-ment, then looked up at Mirax. "This looks to be whatwe were told to find here. It should have gear
and iden- tification cards in it. Should you be here when we openit?"
She shrugged. "You're probably right, I shouldn't be,but I've got two standard hours before the
clearances formy exit identity become live."
Gavin frowned at Nawara. "We can trust her, youknow."
The Twi'lek held a hand up. "I do not doubt her hon-esty, Gavin—but the less she knows, the better for
her. In the same way, our not knowing the particulars of her es-cape vector and identity means we
cannot reveal it if werun into complications."
Mirax patted Gavin on the shoulder. "Not to worry,
Gavin. I've got navigational calculations to do. May theForce be with you all." She retreated up the
ramp, then itascended after her.
Nawara punched a combination into the lockpad.The lock clicked and the Twi'lek slid the cover off.
Thegear inside had been packed into numbered boxes thatNawara pulled from the case and handed to
the appropri-ate individuals. Gavin accepted box one and wanderedaway from the others to open it.
Inside he found a folded change of clothes, a smallsatchel in which they could be carried, a hundred
credits in various forms, a small hold-out blaster, and a packetfilled with identification cards. He tore the
packet openand poured its contents into his hand. He had a drawcardin his alias so he could pull money
from a transaction ac-count as needed, a basic medical record card containing a medical history that
would allow doctors to treat himwithout knowing who he really was, and his new identi-fication card.
His cover identity was that of Vin Leiger, a youngman from a Rimworld who had gotten into trouble.
He'dhooked up with a Shistavanen—conveniently played byRiv Shiel—and had left home. The two of
them hadscraped by on a number of worlds by using Vin's appar-ent innocence to trick locals into trying
to take him for allhe was worth. Shiel—who would go by the name ShaalirResh—would rob the con
men targeting Vin, then theywould move on.
A chill ran down Gavin's spine as he ran through allthe details of his new identity. Vin Leiger, he realized,
hada more complete history than he did himself. It struckGavin that it was utterly absurd for him to be
trying topass as an outlaw from another world. It was even more absurd for him to be a member of an
elite Rebel squad-ron on a spy mission to the Imperial homeworld.Howcan I be here?
He remembered standing on the edge of the pit where his family lived, looking out at the wastes of
Tatooine,wondering if Luke Skywalker had ever stood where he
stood and had seen what he'd seen. It was quite a con-trast to the scene below where his mother and
siblingscleared away the debris from his sixteenth birthday cele-bration. Security, warmth, love, all

existed down in thehole, while everything outside it was hostile, inhospitable,and unforgiving.
His father had come up and had stood there withhim. "You've got the Darklighter look on your face, and
at your age, too." His father sighed. "I knew this day would come, just not this soon."
Gavin had looked down at his father. "What do youmean?"
"Us Darklighters have a point in our lives when we look outside ourselves. We look outside our lives.
Someof us, like my father, never do it until the end, and thenthey regret all the things they didn't do. Your
uncle Hufflooked outside once upon a time and chose to ignorewhat he saw. That's why he's become a
food magnatehere. By building up his little empire here he's too busy tosee what's out there."
Gavin could once again feel his father's rough handon the back of his neck. "Your cousin, Biggs, had the
look at your age. He was determined to go to the Acad-emy and become a hero with his name written
big in thestars. He succeeded, better than he ever imagined, I sus-pect, though I'd have settled for a bit
less success and a bit more life for him. And now you, Gavin, my eldest,you have the look."
"There's something out there for me, Father." Gavinhad shrugged. "Maybe I'm dreaming, but it feels like
mydestiny is out there."
"There's only one way for you to find out."
His father's reply had surprised him. "Do you meanyou would let me go off and join the Rebellion?"
The elder Darklighter sighed heavily. "I couldn't stopyou any more than Huff could stop Biggs, but Huff
tried. When he saw he couldn't win, he secured Biggs an ap-pointment to the Academy—that way he
was in controlof his son's fate. Biggs went, of course, because that's
what he had to do, but he resented his father's meddling.There was a rift there, and that eats at Huff
every day ofhis life.
"Well, I'm not going to stand in your way. You'rewelcome back here whenever you want to come, and
nomatter what you do, or don't do, or run from, you'll al-ways be welcome here. You're a Darklighter.
Going outthere is what you must do, so go with my fondest wishesthat the Force will keep you safe and
whole."
Gavin had smiled and continued to stare out into the distance. "I feel as if the whole universe is opening
up tome, and that all I have to do is step forward and I canmake a difference. The feeling is powerful and
exhilarat-ing. Is that how you felt when youlooked, Father?"
"I never looked until now, Gavin. I was always too afraid, and what I see now is a lot of pain and hurt."
Hesmiled up at his son. "And regret I won't be out therewith you. Whatever you do, remember who you
are,what you are. A Darklighter's destiny is waiting for youout there. This Rebellion, it's been without a
Darklighterfor too long. It's time that problem was solved."
So now I'm with the Rebellion, on a dangerous mis-sion to find the weaknesses of a fortress planet.
Whose vi-sion was more accurate, Father, mine of destiny, or yoursof pain and regret?He shook his
head.At least back therewith you I have a safe haven. This mission is part of see-ing to it thateveryone
has a safe haven and the freedom to discover their own destiny. I think you'd probably tellme that
with a Darklighter involved, we'll succeed. I hopeyou're right.

Shiel's hand landed heavily on Gavin's shoulder."Time to move, Gavin."
"I don't know any Gavin, Shaalir." Gavin stuffed hisclothes into his satchel, tucked the blaster into his
belt,and pocketed the identification cards and money. "The name's Vin Leiger and I'm here to find out
what makesthis world spin, and then find a way to make it stop."
17
Wedge Antilles realized that the mission he and PashCracken had been given was the most difficult of all
tocomplete. He suspected the other members of RogueSquadron had been assigned tasks like mapping
outpower grids or locating shield generation stations. Pin-pointing those locations would be vital if any
invasionwas to succeed, but that data would be useless unless heand Pash succeeded and came away
with a positive re-port.
They had been charged with the duty of assessing theloyalty of the populace on the planet. Iella Wessiri
hadbeen able to provide them with her impressions of thegeneral mood of the world's population, but she
freely ac-knowledged she was more pessimistic than another mightbe. "Paranoia has a way of coloring
your thoughts aboutthe world."
Wedge smiled as they moved out of the Galactic Mu-seum's Sith artifact room. "Paranoia may be an
effect ofthe things in that room. Ghastly stuff..."
"But seductively powerful." Iella glanced down wist-fully. "Not as crude as a cubic meter of credits, but
thosethings appeal to something even more base than greed."
"My thoughts exactly." Because of his mission pa-rameters Wedge had decided touring the various
Imperial facilities open to the public should form the basis of theirsurvey, and in the week since his arrival
they had covereda lot of ground. He had expected the Empire to put itsbest face forward and display
things that would denigrateand demean the Rebellion, and he'd not been disap-pointed. By learning what
it was the Empire wanted itscitizens to believe about the Rebellion, he could then as-sess whether or not
the Imperial propaganda efforts weresuccessful.
The museum had proved very instructive in this re-gard. The bottom two floors provided extensive
displaysof the flora, fauna, and mineral treasures from through-out the Empire. Several displays did
provide notationsthat this plant or that animal had been made extinct ontheir native worlds by "outlaws
and malcontents," andincluded among such beasts were Ewoks—and Imperialtaxidermists had taken
great pains to make them seemhelpless and even more cute than they were in real life. However, despite
such propagandistic comments, the dis- plays were impressive and reminded Wedge there wasmuch
more to the Empire than he'd consciously acknowl-edged before.
The first two floors were clearly designed to impressand overwhelm visitors with their magnificence, so
thenext four floors had been put together to capitalize on the favorable impressions made below. Those
floors covered the cultural and social developments of the Empire. Onewhole floor had been given over
to the Emperor and hislife. Holograms of people who had known him served as tour guides at each
display while droids admonished the people to keep moving on. All the displays, from items shown to the
descriptions that accompanied them, wereslanted toward making the viewers believe everything the
Emperor had done had been for their specific good.
The final tableau presented on that floor made thispoint abundantly clear. It showed the Emperor lying in
state upon a bier in a dark room. He looked far younger

and more handsome than Luke had described him, as ifthe moral rot and evil in him had never been able
to oozeout and reveal itself. The Emperor appeared just to besleeping, ready to rise up if the Empire
needed him again.
A holographic image of Darth Vader sizzled to life when Wedge had approached. "Behold my Master
andweep. He has been stolen from us by those who embracehatred. The Emperor learned that the
Rebels had stolenplans for an Imperial Planetary Ore Extractor and in-tended to use the one they were
fabricating at Endor oninhabited planets. He assembled his fleet, and heedless ofpersonal danger, he had
me take him to Endor. He infil-trated the half-completed extractor, offering these Rebelshis forgiveness
and a hand in friendship. They rejectedhim and attacked his fleet. My Master had no alternativebut to
destroy this Death Star himself, perishing in theprocess so his citizens could live on. I was slain with him,
but my death did not distress me, for it came in service tomy Master."
As Vader spoke, a fanciful holographic simulation ofthe battle at Endor played itself out against the
backdropof the chamber. An outnumbered and outgunned Imperialfleet drove a dagger into the heart of
the Rebel formation.The pinpoint accuracy of Imperial gunners laid waste tothe Rebels. As that war
raged outside, the Emperor ap-peared looking beatific as he pleaded with an unseenRebel host. His
expression melted into sorrow and pain, then his eyes blazed and his fists knotted. Suddenly hisimage
exploded, taking the Death Star with it. The explo-sion tore into the Rebel fleet, leaving only small, weak
ships to flee.
The whole presentation had sent a shiver throughWedge. He had been at Endor—he had fired the shot
that helped destroy the Death Star—yet this telling of the storyfelt as compelling to him as the true history
of what had happened. It suggested a benign purpose for the DeathStars and made the Rebels out to be
monsters for think-ing to use one on an inhabited planet. By doing so, andby suggesting the Emperor had
gone there to prevent that
sort of perversion, the fear that lingered in everyone'sheart concerning the destruction of Alderaan was
shifted into fear directed at the Rebellion. The Emperor had sac-rificed himself to save everyone else, so
only the mostboorish of louts would not show gratitude of some sorttoward him.
As he moved on to the Hall of Justice with Iella hefound himself amazed at how easily the Empire had
beenable to warp the truth into a story that sustained therealm. "The people who create these exhibits are
verygood at what they do."
"That was never more evident as it is with this areaconcerning the Jedi." Iella linked her arm through
Wedge's as they strolled on. "Were it not for the Emperor,we would be slaves to a tyrannical Jedi state."
The history of the Jedi Knights was presented in a lin-ear fashion, moving from right to left around the
room.The thousand-generation saga had been condensed suchthat it gave emphasis to the legendary Jedi
Masters of old,then suggested a gradual deviation from that noble tradi-tion as the Knighthood grew. The
corruption hadbegun—Wedge gathered by implication—when humanJedi Masters had taken on
nonhuman disciples. The JediKnights went from being the guardians of the Old Repub-lic to the secret
masters of its future. They used theirpowers to manipulate and direct the Republic's leaders.
After the resolution of the Clone Wars, the Jedi beganto move toward an open grab for power. Senator
Palpatine circumvented them and deposed their puppet.In overthrowing the corrupt Old Republic, the
Emperorstripped from the Jedi their political power and laid theirevil bare for all to see. The Jedi denied
the truth he re-vealed, all except one of their number. His fellows tried tomurder him, but he survived
their treachery and rose to assist the Emperor in rooting out the evil that had ruinedthe Knighthood. He
was Darth Vader and, said the dis-play, never had there been a greater champion for thehigh ideals of

the Empire than he.
Wedge smiled. "At least that last bit is true—Vaderwas Imperial through and through."
"Notice how they have the true line of Jedi Knightsdying with Vader at Endor? No mention of Luke
Skywalker, but the implication is that he is heir to the cor-rupt tradition." She shook her head. "I wonder
if that is too subtle?"
"Appeals that play to fear can be subtle and still veryeffective." Wedge turned and looked back toward
the farcorner of the room. "It looks to me as if this chamberonce opened onto another one, but the
entrance has beensealed up."
"I've seen an old version of a holographic museumtour—we have people who archive those sorts of
things just to see what's been changed. Once upon a time, backin the days of the Old Republic, there
were three morechambers that extended back there with mementos of fa-mous Jedi Knights and their
exploits." Iella shrugged."It's been sealed up for over thirty standard years. Rumorhas it that most of the
things in there now are mementomori, and the descriptions of some are enough to make the Sith artifacts
look absolutely benign."
Pash Cracken met them outside the Jedi exhibit carry-ing a small sack. "Are you two interested in getting
out ofhere?"
Wedge didn't answer immediately because his atten-tion was drawn to something beyond Pash. The
museumhad been constructed in such a way that the circular foyerrose all the way up to the roof, giving
each floor acrescent-shaped opening onto it. The northern wall,through which the public entered the
building, had been constructed of transparisteel, providing a commandingview of the Imperial Palace and
the walkway that linkedthe Museum with the Imperial Justice Court.
A vicious dark, roiling cloud was coalescing in thekilometer or so between the museum and the Palace.
Golden lightning shot through it, then arced up into theair. A brilliant energy thread linked the cloud with
the lowest of the planetary shields, then seconds later an explosive rumble of thunder sent a tremor through thebuilding. More lightning flashed at the heart of the
cloud's dark depths and the cloud began to drift towardthem.
Wedge looked over at Iella. "That's a nasty-lookingstorm. Are we safe here?"
"Sure," she said, taking her hands off the steel rail-ing. "A compressor probably blew in one of the
buildingsdown there. Water vapor escapes into the air, condenses,and starts spitting energy. There's
lightning rods all overthe place on these towers and skyhooks, so we should besafe. You'll know it's a
really bad storm when the sky-hooks detach their tethers and move off."
Down below Wedge saw all sorts of people streaminginto the foyer as the storm approached. Beneath
the darkcloud he saw a shimmering sheet of rain scourging the buildings. "Such quickly developing storms
must makeweather prediction here very tough."
"I've heard it said that any meteorologist who is rightthirty percent of the time here on Coruscant is
barredfrom shipping on the submarine gambling vesselCoralVandaor from any other casino because
she's just toolucky. In reality, though, no one has any reason to actu-ally go outside, so the weather
matters little."

A bolt of lightning struck very near the museum andthe lights dimmed for a moment. Pash smiled."That
could be an inconvenience."
"True."
Wedge pointed at the sack Pash had in his left hand. "I take it you found something interesting in the
muse-um's souvenir mart?"
"I have here the most popular items, as indicated bya very friendly salesclerk." Pash peered down into
thebag. "I have a statue of the Emperor made from cold-castCorusca Stone resin—if you project a laser
through thebase it will give you a series of pictures of the Emperordisplayed on your wall. I promised my
father I'd bringhim something, and that's it."
Wedge nodded solemnly. "He'll love that."
"I hope so. I also got two holopad display disks thatwill project the two most popular segments of the
Emper-or's life story: the Clone Wars and the one titled 'Sacrifice at Endor.' I was assured they were the
hottest sellers andespecially popular with tourists who would be headingback into the outlier worlds."
"Interesting." In their early discussions of how bestto accomplish their mission, Pash had suggested to
Wedgethat one way to determine the beliefs held by others wasto watch what they spent money on. The
popularity ofthe statue suggested that a good number of people did re-vere the Emperor, though the
image of Pash's father dis-playing it like a trophy in his office suggested that eventhe Emperor's detractors
would find a use for such athing. The holopad disks, on the other hand, suggested aninterest in the events
that happened before and aroundthe founding of the Empire and the events that marked itsdecline. The
'Sacrifice at Endor' piece was significant inthat it confirmed the Emperor's death and could be brought to
distant worlds to lay any doubts to rest. Thefact that it showed the Rebel fleet as having been broken,and
suggested evil motives on the part of the Rebelsthemselves, was not that great a concern to Wedge.
While Imperialists could use the program to show how the Em-peror cared for his people, the chances of
it convincinganyone that the Rebellion had died at Endor with it wereslim indeed.
Well, this is a start. It would seem that people are be-ginning to come to grips with the fact that the
Emperoris dead. How ever he died—by his own hand or through Luke's intervention—the fact is
that the Rebellion wassufficiently strong to put him in mortal danger. To agreater or lesser extent
everyone on this planet must won-der how much of the Rebellion has survived and how itwill come to
affect their lives.
Wedge smiled. "I think those will do just fine. Every-one will be happy with them."
"I hope so." Pash jerked his head back toward the
building's central core and the lift tubes. "The storm willbe past shortly. Shall we head down and out?"
Wedge nodded and started toward the lifts when a woman grabbed his elbow. He turned with a polite
smileon his face and she launched herself into his arms. "Dar-ling," she shouted, then kissed him full on the
lips. "I'mso glad I caught up with you!"
Wedge got his hands on her shoulders and pried him-self loose of her embrace. He started to sputter,
then hesaw who she was and a chunk of Hoth settled itself in hisguts.Mirax! "Yes, love, we were just
getting ready tolook for you. Where have you been?"

"I missed some connections and couldn't get outwhen I wanted to." Mirax forced a light laugh and smiled
at Pash and Iella. "You know me, I always push my luckwith my travel plans. Things just fell apart this
time, andI don't have a clue as to what I shall do now. Perhaps, mydear, you do."
18
Though the week he'd already spent wandering throughthe upper precincts of Coruscant had allowed
him to be-come accustomed to constant observation, Corran couldnot shake the background sense of
being watched. Ofcourse there were reasons for people to watch him. He sat at a tapcaf table on the
edge of a promenade in the Impe-rial Palace's Grand Corridor accompanied by two strik-ingly beautiful
women. Erisi with her short black hair and Rima with her longer white hair proved enough of a con-trast
to each other that eyes were naturally drawn tothem. That he, a lone man, should be blessed with their
company made him the object of a certain amount ofenvy, as did the apparent leisure with which all three
ofthem sat at the table and chatted away idly.
Corran and Erisi had been given two areas to study in their survey of Coruscant. They were to cover
basic secu-rity and peacekeeping as well as medical services and fa-cilities. Having been a security
officer, Corran knew whatto look for by way of force allocation, morale, discipline,response times, and
tactics. Much of the week had al-ready been spent in passive observation of the Coruscant
constabulary and the stormtrooper contingents thatworked with them.
Coming to the Palace's Grand Corridor had been thefinal and crowning expedition in their survey of the
up-per, most public levels of Coruscant. At first Corran hadabsolutely balked at taking such a risk
because he felt se-curity there, in the heart of the building from which the government was run, had to be
maintained at the highest level. The chance of detection there was greatest, yet the need for study there
was equally great. He knew that anyattempt to take Coruscant might well end up with a run-ning lightfight
through the halls and corridors of the Pal-ace, so any information about its security would clearlysave
lives.
And in this place Rogue Squadron could have dog-fights with a whole wing of TIEs.
The Grand Corridor had immediately impressed him with its scope and size. The corridor itself ran on
for kilo-meters and the open areas at the floor level could easilyhave accommodated a Star Destroyer.
Banners of all col-ors and designs hung from balustrades and arches. Eachone represented a world in the
Empire and there weremore of them than Corran figured he could count in alifetime.
Purple and greench'hala trees lined the main floorand each of the upper levels. Their bark reacted to
vibra-tions and sounds, sparking displays of color that splashed an ever-changing, opalescent mosaic on
the grey granitewalls and pillars. Corran had overheard from the numer-ous tour guide droids thatch'hala
trees had been a favor-ite of the Emperor's and placed here at his specific request. Though he hated
everything the Emperor hadstood for, Corran had to admit that thech'hala trees werewhat truly made
this place grand.
The necessities of modern life did not intrude andspoil the majesty of the hall. Reader strips, like those
scrolling out the latest news stories everywhere else onCoruscant, had been shielded so that anyone
wanting to read their messages had to stand at a specific point on the
floor to actually see the scarlet letters rolling by. Informa-tion kiosks were warded bych'hala trees.
Small alcovesscooped from the walls at regular intervals provided peo-ple a modicum of privacy for
using the holo-link stationsbuilt therein.

Security appeared to be lax, but Corran picked up on things that Erisi clearly missed. Stormtrooper
squads didpatrol the main floor and passed certain checkpoints atfairly precise intervals. They appeared
to be most con-cerned with breaking up or moving along knots of non-humans. Those with legitimate
reasons to be in thebuilding were urged to be on their way, while thosegawking at the magnificence of the
Palace were directedto join escorted tours or to leave.
The upper galleries of the Grand Corridor appearedto be alien free, yet the mechanism for maintaining
themthat way was remarkably unobtrusive. Side passages lead-ing to stairs or lifts narrowed
considerably, forcing indi-viduals to move through them no more than two or three abreast. Guards
wearing a more stylized and estheticallypleasing form of stormtrooper armor maintained posts atthese
passages and gently redirected anyone who ap-peared to be lost. They did respond to questions, but
only with the directions to the nearest visitor and informationkiosks where the questions could be asked
again.
The stairs themselves doubled back twice. This meantanyone who got past the guards on the lower level
couldbe isolated on the middle staircase and dealt with. Thelandings on either side of the staircase
appeared normal,but Corran knew of a dozen ways anyone traversing themcould be trapped or, with a
laser cannon emerging from behind a hidden panel, cut down with little or no risk to Imperial personnel.
While quite fantastic in its design and execution, the Grand Corridor had not been created with-out an
eye toward security.
Corran made some quick assumptions about otherprecautions that had to have been set up. He
suspectedthat in the narrow corridors below there were weaponsdetectors. The technology for locating
an inorganic object
next to the flesh of or within the body of a living creature was old and unobtrusive. By detecting the
disturbance aweapon made in the creature's bioelectric field or theplanet's own magnetic field a computer
could comlink to the guards the identity of the person carrying the weapon,its location on his body, and
even the type of weapon he was carrying.
Other passive monitoring devices could be used to lo-cate things like gas canisters or bombs by picking
up onmolecular traces coming off them. For all Corran knewthech'hala trees could have been genetically
altered tomake them into botanical sniffers. The patterns of lightflashing across their bark could have
some sort of signifi-cance, alerting Imperial officials to danger without any-one in the Grand Corridor
being the wiser.
You're definitely thinking too hard about this,Corran.He smiled and looked over at Rima. He caughther
staring at him for a moment, but her eyes had enoughof a soft focus that he knew she'd not been seeing
orthinking about him. "Imperial Center to Rima. Hello?"
She blinked, then grinned sheepishly. "Sorry. I wasthinking."
"That was apparent. What about?"
Rima hesitated and that caught Corran's full atten-tion. Throughout the time he had spent with her he'd
come to realize two things: She was incredibly observantand she seemed to forget little or nothing of what
wenton around her. Actually Corran couldn't remember hav-ing caught her out at having missed a detail
about some-thing, and he'd frequently been corrected by her. The onlytimes she had previously hitched
before answering a ques-tion were times when the answer had the potential of vi-olating the security
envelope surrounding the mission.

Rima's expression softened somewhat and Corransensed she was about to open up a bit about herself.
"Iwas thinking that we might actually have a friend in com-mon. He was from back home, though I did
not know him there. I was wondering how he was."
Corran smiled and picked up his cold cup of espcaf.
He'd assumed all along she was from Alderaan. She'dnever confirmed this, nor had she denied it. He
couldn'tremember having said anything to her that told her his as-sumption, but from the look in her eyes,
he had no doubt that hehad said something, allowing her to phrase herquestion in such an oblique
manner.
He lowered his cup and kept his voice neutral. "Doyou mean Sel?" He abbreviated Tycho's last name,
assum- ing that even if the conversation were being overheard,the intelligence value of one syllable was
tiny.
"Yes, I was thinking of him."
Erisi smiled. "He is doing well. He recently got meout of a very tight spot. Quite a treasure."
"Really? That's good."
Corran caught a flicker of surprise and hurt in Rima'seyes. She covered it quickly, but he thought he
recognizedjealousy in her reaction to Erisi's flirtatious response tothe question.She and Tycho must have
some history. "I guess you know him better than either one of us. We'rereally just casual acquaintances
of his."
Rima's eyes sharpened slightly. "Only casual ac-quaintances? I would have thought you two would have
been fast friends."
"We could have been, but the man has secrets."Corran shifted his shoulders uneasily. Despite his original
resolve to trust Tycho, reality had slowly impinged onhim. The preparation for the mission to Coruscant
hadstressed trust and sharpened his sense of paranoia. At thecore of the Tycho problem was the fact that
no one saveYsanne Isard knew if Tycho was her puppet or not.Corran had emotionally begun to insulate
himself from Tycho, but until now had not realized how far along thatunconscious process had gotten.
"Secrets establish a dis-tance and undercut trust."
Hurt returned to Rima's eyes. "He's had a hard life."
"So haven't we all."
Rima's head came up. "You don't understand. Hisfamily died..."
"Ido understand." Corran kept the volume of his
voice down, but let the emotions bubbling up in him pourstraight through into his words. "I have no
family eitherand do you know what? I saw my father get shot up. Murdered. And I couldn't do anything
about it. I was a hundred meters away, watching him by remote, backinghim up, when a bounty hunter
walked into the cantinaand lit up the booth where he was sitting with two otherpeople. Killed them all and
I couldn't do anything about it. I got there and held my father in my arms, but it wastoo late. You want a
hard life, there's a hard life for you."

Corran's hands contracted into fists and Erisi leanedover to hug him. He stared openly at Rima, daring
her todeny his pain. He wanted her to break, to lose that look of superiority she wore. He wanted her to
admit thatnothing Tycho had been through, even the destruction ofhis homeworld or his Imperial
captivity, could have mea-sured up to what Corran had endured.
Even as Erisi whispered, "I'm so sorry," in his ear,Corran knew he had overreacted and overreacted
badly.What's gotten into me?He searched his mind for an an-swer, tracing back fleeting thoughts, and
slowly came toa realization that surprised with its simplicity and amazed him with its power.
Tycho, in saving his life and in shepherding himthrough his introduction to Rogue Squadron, had moved
into an august company in Corran's mind. Corran's fa-ther, his CorSec supervisor, Gil Bastra, and
Wedge Antilleswere the only other people that Corran saw in the guard-ian and mentor roles in his life.
With his father and Gilboth dead, Corran realized he had begun to rely onWedge and Tycho to serve as
touchstones and moral com-passes for him.
The fact that Tycho could not be fully trusted had gone to war with the esteem in which Corran had held
him. As he had mentally distanced himself from Tycho, hebegan to feel that Tycho had somehow
betrayed him. Theanger he felt toward Tycho, the anger that had triggeredhis outburst, had come from
this sense of betrayal and
Corran's guilt at having elevated someone so untrustwor-thy to a rank equal to that of his father.
This is crazy. I have to sort all of this out. Tycho hasnot betrayed me or anyone else. I need to apologize
tohim and to Rima.
Before he could say anything, Rima began speakingin low, even tones. "I do not doubt the sincerity of
the an- guish you feel, and I am most sorry for you. As tragic asis your story, though, I think Sel's story
can be considered of equal weight."
Corran wanted to tell her she need say nothing more,she need not explain, but the solemnity of her tone
frozehis words in his throat.
"He had graduated from the Academy and was as-signed to a Star Destroyer—theAccuser. On the
occasionof his birthday—something most TIE pilots celebrate be-cause of their rarity—he was engaged
in a realtimeHoloNet connection to our home. His family was there:father, mother, brother, sisters,
grandparents, and hisfiancee. He was speaking to them when the transmissionwas cut off. That sort of
thing was not unusual and heplanned to chide his father about it since his father ranNovacom, the largest
HoloNet provider on the world.The fact was that Sel never got a chance to do that be-cause, as he
discovered shortly thereafter, his family haddied in a monumental catastrophe."
Corran's stomach collapsed in on itself like a neutronstar.Tycho was speaking to his family when
Alderaanwas destroyed. I saw my father die, but he saw everyonedie. I was able to hold my father and
give him a funeral.I was able to comfort his friends and be comforted bythem. My father may have died
alone, but I didn't haveto endure his death alone. My life's as soft as a Hutt's un-derbelly by comparison.
He heard Erisi stifle a sob and felt a tear moisten theside of his neck. He turned to face her, then saw a
visionfrom the past that sent a chill straight through him. Hishands came up to cup Erisi's face, tipping her
chin up-ward, then he pulled her to him and kissed her fiercely.
He felt her start to pull away, but he restrained her gentlyand she flowed into his arms to return the kiss

with apassion that all but melted what he felt inside.
Part of him wanted the kiss to end and wanted himto escape her arms. Corran resisted the idea of
escape be-cause he couldn't be certain of how he would spend his freedom. What he really wanted to do
was insane on anImperial scale. It would compromise the mission. It hadthe potential to delay or prevent
the New Republic fromtaking Coruscant and finishing the Empire. It ran the riskof destroying everything
the Rebellion had worked for.
But it would feel very, very good.
Over Erisi's shoulder Corran had seen Kirtan Loor.The tall slender body, the crisp gait, and the head
held imperiously high were unmistakable. He'd memorized allthose things about Kirtan Loor months
before his father'sdeath. Subsequent to it he had reveled in the fury andcontempt they had spawned when
he saw the man.
What Corran wanted to do at that moment, morethan anything else in the galaxy, was to walk over, grab
Loor, and pitch him from the promenade. He would havepreferred being on a higher level to do so—a
much higherlevel—but that problem could not be helped. He hopedthe fall would kill the man, though
from a mere ten me-ters up the chances were it would only break a few limbsand possibly rupture some
internal organs.
Corran felt someone tap him on the shoulder and forthe barest of moments thought Loor had spotted
him.About the time he realized that hadn't happened—the factthat no stormtroopers were closing in and
no alarms weregoing off cinching it for him—Rima said, "The danger ispast. He's gone up another level."
Corran pulled back and gave Erisi a quick kiss on thenose, then looked over at Rima. "How'd you
know?"
"Kirtan Loor's presence on Coruscant has not gone unreported. Correlating things I know about him
and youwere not difficult."
Erisi blinked her big blue eyes a couple of times, then
looked from Corran to Rima and back. "What was all that about?"
"You saved my life." He smiled at her. "Forgive theliberty I took, but..."
She caught her breath, then returned the smile. "I un-derstand. If you ever need your life saved again, I'll
behonored to be of service to you."
He patted her on the knee. "Thanks. I'll rememberthat." He turned back toward Rima. "I'm not afraid of
him."
"I didn't think you were."
"I want to kill him." Corran reached out and tappedher lightly on the temple. "Do you know why?"
"I know many things, but not all things."
"I caught the Trandoshan who killed my father, butLoor let him go." Corran took in a deep breath and
let itout. "He'll pay for that one day. Sooner than later, Ihope, but don't worry, I have my priorities

straight. Hisdate with justice can wait, wait until we bring down thegovernment that gives people like him
the power to per-petrate evil on more worlds than we can count."
19
It occurred to Gavin that if his father had any idea he'dend up sitting in the Azure Dianoga cantina, he'd
neverhave let him leave the farm. If Mos Eisley was consideredthe armpit of the galaxy, this part of
Coruscant could be considered anatomically lower and decidedly less hy-gienic. In the dim distance, in
an alcove between the barand the doors, Gavin could see a Kubaz quartet playingtrunkflutes and
percussion, but the din caused by hun-dreds of aliens speaking all at once walled away thesound of their
music.
Acrid green smoke drifted through the cantina's at-mosphere, stinging Gavin's eyes and painting another
layer of grime across his face. Down in the lower reachesof Invisec he'd taken to wearing all of his
clothes in lay-ers, rotating the inners to outers, and had been at it forthe week since they'd landed. He felt
he smelled like adewback with bloat, but the worse his scent became,fewer were the complaints from the
various aliens withwhom they dealt.
The mission given to their team had been quitebroad. The top two items on the agenda were to determine the level of control the Empire exerted over the
lower reaches of the city—and the general mood of thealien population on the world—and to find out if
thelower levels of the infrastructure would provide avenuesof attack against the government. That seemed
logical toGavin because if Coruscant were built on a foundationthe government didn't control, bringing it
down would bejust a little bit easier.
Since their cover story had Gavin and Shiel workingas partners, they had traveled independently from
theothers and had spent a great deal of time exploring thetunnels and ruins at the bottom of the world.
The Shista-vanenwolf man had suggested they begin their explora-tion near the Invisec border because if
there was no way to leave Invisec and penetrate the newer sections of the city, any invasion force that
made planetfall in Invisecwould be bottled up.
The border proved fascinating because of the melangeof building materials and architectural styles all
jammedinto a very small area. Where the huge constructiondroids had carved a swath that nibbled away
at Invisec,the walls were formed of sheer ferrocrete with nopreconstructed access ports to the other side.
No matter how new these walls looked, all of them had been cov-ered with colorful writing—most of it
being anti-Imperialinvective—or had been gouged by sharp claws or nibbledby sharper teeth.
Borrats appeared to be the pioneers that opened holesin these solid walls. The holes appeared to be
about twicethe size of a pilot's helmet, with claw marks that striateda cone shape going in and coming out
on the other side.Clearly sapient beings had expanded on some of theseholes, enlarging them to permit
easy passage for mostcreatures. Some of the holes had been reseated, but theferrocrete patches could
be removed if they were chippedaway at the edges, and in at least one case, a plug had been hinged so it
looked normal from the far side and could provide easy access to areas outside Invisec.
The perimeter of Invisec where the residents weremoving out and taking over buildings previously
outside
their sector was known in local parlance as the OuterRim. There the holes through the ferrocrete walls
werenumerous and large enough to permit all sorts of com-merce. Where the Imperials made an effort to
stop the mi-gration of aliens, all windows and doors had been sealedwith ferrocrete plugs. Messages

splashed on walls indica-ted points where people suspected the Imps had set upbooby traps. Arcane
sigils and graffiti in more languages than Gavin knew existed marked the sites of fights whereImps had
killed people to prevent the sullying of new ter-ritory.
The Outer Rim clearly provided more opportunitiesfor an invading force to push into the city proper
primar-ily because the walls there were not as strong as the bar-riers on the other side of Invisec. That
fact, however,would be the only bright spot in an otherwise verygloomy report. After days of wandering
through the darkand twisted alleys and byways of Invisec, the vast scale of the invasion needed to wrest
the planet from the Empire began to press in on Gavin. The planet had billions uponbillions of people.
The force needed to pacify the popu-lace and maintain order while fighting against Imperial
stormtroopers would have to be incredibly huge.
It would take more troops than the Rebellion hasunder arms. The shields make this place a tough nut to
crack, but chewing up the meat isn't going to be anyeasier.Gavin hunched forward on the table in the
corner booth and gripped his mug of lomin-ale with both hands."Prospects don't look so good, do they?"
Shiel lowered a mug from his muzzle and wiped ex-cess ale off on his sleeve. "If there's no prey, there's
noreason to hunt."
Nawara Ven and Rhysati Ynr cut through the smoke and slid into the booth, forcing Gavin to slide
around to-ward the center of the semicircle. The Twi'lek's clotheswere worn in only one layer, were
more conservatively cut and decidedly cleaner than the ragged things Gavinand Shiel wore. Rhysati wore
a skintight, dark blue bodystocking supplemented with knee-high boots, belts,
chains, and other straplike accessories that accented heralready considerable charms. Gavin forced
himself tomeet her stare, then blushed when she winked at him.
Nawara raised a hand and waved a serving droidover. "Churban brandy for me, or the closest synthesis
you can manage. She will have a Durindfire, light on thephosphorescent agent." He settled a brain tail
overRhysati's shoulders as the droid scuttled off, then noddedto Ooryl and Aril Nunb as they joined the
group. "Allalive and well, I see."
Ooryl tapped himself on the chest. "Gand has trav-eled extensively and has found much exotica. Items
areavailable from throughout the galaxy, at prices that re-flect the distance they have been shipped, not
any restric-tion on supply."
Nawara rhythmically tapped his fingernails againstthe scarred and stained tabletop. "Estimates on how
long those goods would last?"
Aril cocked her head. "A month, perhaps more, pro-vided Imperial interests did not stage raids. The
Impsappear to monitor trading. Everyone seems to pay protec-tion to the Imps, to Black Sun, and to
local Invisecfactions. If things were to get tight, some of the things here would be pulled outside."
Gavin exchanged a glance with Shiel. The wolf manhad said that he would have opted to starve the Imps
outby blockading the planet. He estimated it could survivefor two or three months. Aril's estimation of the
suppliesin Invisec meant that the alien population of Coruscantwould be hurt worse by a blockade than
the Imps would.Given the anti-alien bias the Empire had, that sort of re-sult wasn't surprising.If Ysanne
Isard was smart she'dransom the Invisec population for supplies, or she'd justhave them killed and
take their supplies for the humans.
The general din of the cantina faded and died as Im-perial stormtroopers came through the doors. They

wore the standard white armor seen across the galaxy, thoughthey did have small pinpoint spotlights
clipped to theirright shoulders. Two soldiers remained at the doorway—
they were armed with heavy blaster rifles—while the restof the squad broke down into a pair of
three-man groups that began to work their way around the dark oval room.Back through the doorway
Gavin thought he saw more troopers and a large vehicle, but the swirling smoke andgeneral gloom made
a positive identification impossible.
Aril kept her voice low. "Another sweep?"
Nawara nodded but remained silent.
The various alien denizens of the bar shifted around anxiously. The Gotal seated back to back with
Nawara inthe next booth over ducked his head, giving Gavin a clearview of the stormtroopers centered
between the Gotal's horns. Gavin killed a smile as he recalled stories about Gotals being able to read
minds.It would be very inter-esting to be able to know what's going on inside thosehelmets, if
anything at all is. I wonder what they're after?
The knot of stormtroopers nearest the Rogues stopped at a table where two squid-headed Quarren sat
conversingwith a tall Duros. The leader of the stormtroopers de-manded identification cards. He ran
them one at a time through a slot on the datapad attached to the armor on hisright thigh, then returned
one card to the Duros.
"You two will have to come with us." The storm-troopers behind him brought their blaster carbines up to
cover the Quarren.
"What have we done?"
"Routine inquiries. You have nothing to fear if youhave done nothing wrong."
The Quarren, pulling their robes tightly around them,rose from their stools and scurried out. No one
stared atthem, but everyone seemed to be watching them go.Gavin could feel resentment rising in the
room as it rosein him.
The second trio of stormtroopers found no one inter-esting to harass, so they backed to the door while
the firstset of troopers approached the Rogues' table. The leaderdemanded Gavin's identification with an
outstretchedhand. "Far from home, aren't you? ID, now."
Gavin fumbled for it, then turned it over.
The stormtrooper ran it through his datapad's slot,but didn't return it immediately. "I asked you a
question,son. What are you doing here?"
"Ah, I, ah, I'm just here." Gavin fought to stop panicfrom choking him.
The stormtrooper snapped the ID card on the table."I have reports that say you left home under strange
cir-cumstances. Maybe you want to come with us and returnto your own kind. We won't letthem hurt
you."
"No, I'm fine here, really."

The trooper shifted his attention to Rhysati. "Identi-fication."
She snuggled tighter beneath Nawara's brain tail andflicked her pink tongue salaciously over the grey
flesh of the Twi'lek's throat. Nawara reached inside his tunic andheld up an ID card between the second
and third fingersof his right hand. As he lifted it toward the stormtrooper, Gavin saw the outline of a black
triangular coin worth ahundred credits. "You don't really need to see her identi-fication."
The stormtrooper took the ID card and neatlypalmed the coin. He held the card up to compare the
hologram with Rhysati, then tossed it down in angerwhen she turned her face toward him and winked.
"Yourkind makes me sick."
"As does your kind, which is why I'm with him."
That rocked the stormtrooper back on his heels for a moment and he seemed about ready to go for his
blasterwhen a buzzing came from his helmet. He touched theside of it with his left hand, then turned to his
two com-panions and jerked his head toward the door. Lookingback at Nawara he said, "You're lucky
this time, spoiler,but I'd be thinking about finding a new friend. Itwouldn't do to have this one crying over
your ashes,would it?"
"Perhaps not."
"Definitely not. Remember that."
The stormtroopers withdrew and darkness again de-scended on the Azure Dianoga. The conversational
tone
remained low, which allowed some of the band's music tomake it over to the table. Over near the
doorway Gavin saw some figures get up and begin to sway or writhe intime to the music, though the
twitching of one person ledhim to believe that some of the notes were being playedwell outside the range
of his hearing.
Aril appropriated Gavin's ale and downed a healthyswallow of it. "That was close."
"Gand has previously avoided such contact. Gandhas seen Imperials rounding up others, both Quarren
and Gamorreans."
Shiel nodded. "The kid and I saw a family of Gamor-reans herded off."
"The stories we've heard indicate occasional sweepstaking in Gamorreans and Quarren on a weekly
basis.They take a dozen or two." Nawara Ven scraped talonsalong his jawline. "Perhaps there has been
an anti-Imperial uprising on Gamorr."
"That would explain the taking of Gamorreans."Aril's garnet eyes sparkled in the backlight of the glowing
drink the service droid placed in front of Rhysati. "Whythe Quarren?"
Nawara dropped a ten-credit piece in the slot on topof the droid's head and drew his brandy from the
tray."Quarren share the same world with the Mon Calamari, but the two populations are not wholly
united. Perhapsthey want to exploit the enmity between them."
A petite, black-furred female Bothan came walkingover to their table and smiled invitingly in Gavin's
direc-tion. A diamond of silken white fur covered her fromthroat to navel—it being visible beneath her

sleevelessjacket's loose lacing closures. White also sheathed herhands and carried on up to mid forearm.
A blaze of white fur blossomed in the middle of her brow and splashedacross her left eye and cheek to
where it narrowed againat the corner of her jaw. Her light violet eyes shonebrightly in contrast to the fur
surrounding them, givingher a penetrating stare that sent a quick jolt throughGavin.
Nawara looked up at her. "Is there something I cando for you?"
"I think not, sir." She picked up Gavin's identificationcard, read it, and gently set it down again. "I
noticed howyou dared defy that stormtrooper, Vin Leiger, and Ithought perhaps I would like to learn
more of a man who can be so casual in a place where so few of his kind arefound. I thought we might
discuss this . . . privately."
It took Gavin a half second to rememberhe was VinLeiger, but that was because he'd not recognized
himselfin her description of the encounter with the stormtrooper.She must have somehow confused me
with Nawara, butshe's looking right at me."Um, I, ah, I'm here with my friends."
She nodded politely. "Of course, you would not wantto abandon them. I understand." The Bothan
glancedback over her shoulder toward where people were danc-ing. "Surely they would not begrudge
my stealing youaway for one dance?"
"Ah, we're discussing something right now. Perhapsanother time, Miss..."
"I am Asyr Sei'lar." Her smile slackened slightly."Another time, then?"
"Yes, certainly."
A Gotal seated in the next booth over turned around."He's lying, Asyr. Your approach made him
nervous andyour retreat filled him with relief." As the horned human-oid came around to face Gavin he
produced a blaster andpointed it at the Rogues. Out of the corner of his eyeGavon saw Asyr move and a
small blaster appeared inher right hand. While he saw no more guns, he heard acrescendo of safety
switches being snapped off, so he in-stantly rejected the idea of digging for his puny hold-outblaster.
Nawara's voice took on an edge, the sort of edgeGavin imagined it had when the Twi'lek had fought for
his clients in court. "Would someone care to explain what my friend has done wrong here? Is it a crime to
refuse todance in the Azure Dianoga?"
"Not at all, but his relief shows him to be as much abigot as the stormtroopers who just left here." Asyr
tapped Gavin's ID card with the muzzle of her blaster. "Ifhe'd not lied, if he'd accepted my invitation,
we'd haveknown he's like your woman—someone to whom speciesmakes no difference. Since he's a
bigot, we have otheruses for him."
"And those would be?"
The Bothan smiled coolly. "The Imps have been kid-napping people from Invisec and they've not
returnedthem. Something has to be done, so we have formed theAlien Combine. We need someone to
take a message tothe Imps to let them know we'll tolerate their predationno longer. Your friend has
elected himself to fill that postand this will be one time when a dead manwill tell atale."
20
Kirtan Loor's ears popped as the lift ascended to the rar-efied precincts where Ysanne Isard lived.She

does notlive, shelairs. As much as he hated her intrusive holo-visitations to his tiny office, being
summoned to see herpersonally was even less of a cause for celebration. Andeven though all of the news
he had relayed to her hadbeen very positive, he did not see her as someone who would invite a
subordinate to her office to congratulatehim on his successes.
To eat him alive, perhaps, but not to congratulatehim.
The lift slowed, then stopped, and the doors slidopen. He stepped out and paused, raising his arms
awayfrom his body. Though the scarlet-armored ImperialGuards on either side of the lift and at either end
of theshort corridor did not move or even seem to pay attentionto him, he knew rash or casual
movements could prove lethal in their territory. He waited, then lowered his armsand walked down the
corridor to his right. After a couplemore turns, passing several more guard stations, he ar-rived at the
door to Isard's office and it slid open sound-lessly.
Though he stood half a head taller than she did, Looralways felt dwarfed by her. That impression had
nothingto do with her physical presence, though she was a strik-ingly handsome woman, and her
mismatched eyes didlend her an exotic air. Instead it was the way she stood,how she moved, and how
well she wore the scarlet uni-form that confirmed her right to rule. Though she madeno claim to the title of
Empress, she was very much Im-perial in her manner. In a time when the Empire wascrumbling, that was
enough to leave her in charge.
Isard waved Loor into her office. As he had on eachprevious visit to it, he marveled at the sheer
emptiness ofthe cavernous room. Whereas other Imperial officers and bureaucrats managed to cram their
cramped offices withtreasures from countless worlds, Isard reveled in thegreatest luxury of all on
crowded Imperial Center— uncluttered space. The external transparisteel wall gaveher a view of the
world she ruled as the sun set on it andthe red strip edging the room's blue carpet appeared to bejust an
extension of the red sunset.
"You wished to see me, Madam Director?"
Isard hit a button on a remote and shields slowly de-scended to eclipse the sun. She let the office fall
com-pletely dark before slowly bringing the lights up. "I didindeed wish to see you. General Derricote
now wantsSullustans for his experiments?"
"He does. They were his second choice. He wouldhave preferred Wookiees, but I explained to him the
fool- ishness of killing off a valuable labor source."
"Did you think to explain to him the foolishness ofchoosing Sullustans?"
Loor nodded. "I did, but he countered that sinceSoroSuub had chosen to back the Rebellion, punishing
them is hardly out of the question. I suggested he shoulduse Ewoks as a substitute, but he actually has
some sound scientific reasons for wanting to work with Sullustans.The Quarren are an outlink to some of
the more aquatic species, Gamorreans to another set of creatures, and the
Sullustans, he says, will be a bridge race to Shistavanen,Bothan, and similar species."
Isard frowned. "I would prefer avoiding the slaughterof Sullustans—like Wookiees they are useful.
However, iftheir sacrifice will give me dead Bothans, the advantageoutweighs the immediate
disadvantage. Perhaps weshould quarantine a breeding stock of Sullustans so theycan repopulate their
world."

Her reasoning seemed logical to him, which surprisedKirtan Loor. On one hand she was plotting a way
toslaughter millions of creatures in a most horrible way, yeton the other she was concerned with having
enough ofone species left alive to repopulate devastated worlds.While he had no love for Sullustans, and
did see them as being inferior to humanity, he did think of them as some-thing more than grain that could
be poisoned and fed to rats, with some pristine kernels held back as seed stock.
Was there a time I would have seen this as insanity?That question lurked in his brain and he was
surprisedthat he did not have a clear answer to it.Does it trulymatter? These are extraordinary times, and
they call forextraordinary action.
"Your precaution, Madam Director, is wise, but Iwonder if it will be needed."
"You are approaching a subject obliquely, AgentLoor. Please be more direct." She clasped her hands at
thesmall of her back. "You see a problem with Derricote'sKrytos virus?"
"I do. It can be cured by bacta."
"I know."
"You do?"
"Yes, of course." Isard smiled slightly. "That a curecan be affected by the use of bacta was one of my
originaldesign parameters for the virus."
Loor's jaw dropped. "But I thought your goal was to kill the aliens here on Imperial Center so that when
theRebels came here they would be horrified."
"Oh, I expect that, but in a way you never imagined.The problem with your scenario is that it will not
cripple
the Rebellion." Her eyes sharpened. "Warlord Zsinj,Darth Vader, and even the Emperor failed to see
that asingle strike at the Rebellion will not destroy it. The Re-bellion is a fire. You have to extinguish each
and everyhot spot, or you have to deny it fuel, so it cannot burnany longer. They settled on the former
method, whereas I will use the latter."
"I am not certain I follow you." "This is not a surprise." She held a hand up. "Whatdo the Rebels do
when one of their comrades is killed?" "Bury him, burn him, whatever.""And if one of their comrades is
wounded}""Get him help." The simplicity of the question andthe speed with which the answer came to
him undercut itsimportance. He thought for a moment, then added, "Res-cuing the man, getting him
medical help, rehabilitatinghim, and getting him back into combat all require more resources than a
memorial service."
"Thereis hope for you, Agent Loor." Isard's smilegrew, as did the lump of ice in Loor's stomach. "The
Re-bellion has done a great deal with severely restricted re-sources, both in terms of materiel and
personnel. If atrained warrior cannot be saved by medical intervention,the Rebellion has lost himand all
the hours spent training him. While there are always more bodies willing to besacrificed to tear down the
Empire, training them is astrain.
"Another question for you: What will the Rebels dowhen they find people beginning to be sick with the
Krytos virus."

Loor frowned. "They will heal them, if they can.""Which means they will require unbelievably vast
amounts of bacta. Just stabilizing a Krytos victim in thedisease's incubation period—before the virus has
begun toreproduce out of control—will result in the loss of a fullliter of bacta. That doesn't seem like
much, of course,since a bacta tank holds considerably more than that, butthe losses will become
significant as the disease spreads.Total production on Thyferra last year was seventeen billion liters. The amount needed to treat all the victims hereon Imperial Center will require three quarters of
lastyear's production. At the current prices for bacta, savingeveryone they can will bankrupt the
Rebellion."
"With no fuel they cannot burn." Loor stared downat the floor, then shook himself. "When Derricote gets
thevirus perfected, you'll turn the planet over to the Rebels."
"Exactly. And because the virus will not infect hu-mans, I force the human Rebels to act to save as many
aliens as they can. If they do not, because they are unaf-fected it will appear to their alien allies that they
are justas unconcerned about aliens as they accuse us Imperialsof being. Moreover, because elements of
Rogue Squadronare here on Imperial Center now, we can begin to weavetogether lies that will implicate
them in spreading the vi-rus."
"No one would believe that of them."
"No one would believe they would free vicious crim-inals from Kessel and send them to Imperial
Center, butthey did." Isard slowly rubbed her hands together. "Whilethat morsel will be a lie, it is a lie that
the Bothans will use as a pry bar to work more power into their hands.Those aliens we do not kill or
drive away into a self-imposed quarantine will see the wisdom of repudiatingtheir alliance with
treacherous humans. The Rebellionwill tear itself apart from within."
Loor gave himself a few moments and let all she hadsaid sort itself out in his brain. "Am I to assume,
then,that you do not want the members of Rogue Squadronwe have identified swept up?"
"No, I want them to scout out the world and decideon one or another plan of attack to take this world
awayfrom us. As long as they are seeing what we want themto see, and our agent keeps us apprised of
their timetable, they are useful to us. We cannot allow them to act before we have sufficiently infected the
alien population of theworld. If they strike prematurely, they will never take theworld and our efforts to
gather them here and present tothem the Krytos crisis will fail."
Isard closed her eyes for a moment, then nodded."You will send out the appropriate code phrases to
alertour agent that you desire a meeting, face-to-face."
"Isn't that risky?"
"I think it is vital. Arrange for it this evening—youwill go yourself."
"But . . ."
Ysanne Isard's light laughter came laden with sharpbarbs. "You are afraid of Corran Horn finding you,
yes?"
Loor knew denying the truth in her question was foolish. "He would kill me if he had the opportunity to
do so."

"But the chances of your running into him here, onImperial Center, are what, one in trillions?"
"Corran Horn has an annoying facility for beatingthose kinds of odds and showing up where he is least
wanted." Loor's frown deepened into a scowl, but not be- cause he resented the fear he had of Corran
Horn. That fear was well founded and useful, just as the fear of arancor might keep someone away from
its lair. If Corranhad the opportunity to kill him, he would take it andlikely succeed.
What bothered Loor more than that eventuality wasYsanne Isard's willingness to put him in jeopardy by
sending him out to meet the traitor in Rogue Squadron. So far information generated by the spy had only
beenused actively once. That use had resulted in the death of Bror Jace, but things had been arranged so
that every-thing appeared coincidental. Thatcould have beenenough to leave Corran without suspicion,
but if it wasnot, then Loor's sojourn could lead to a confrontationand his death.
To her I am expendable—an opinion I do not share.While she can take chances with me, I cannot
afford totake chances myself. Fortunately I am not entirely with-out resources of my own here on
Imperial Center. I willhave to take precautions myself. I must prevent Corran from having a confrontation
he devoutly desires and oneI heartily wish to avoid.

Isard studied him with no mercy in her eyes. "Hornis not what should concern you—assuring our spy of
oursupport is. Without timely and reliable reports, thingscould collapse and that would not please me."
"Yes, Madam Director."
"Oh, and order the collection of some Sullustans.Keep General Derricote happy." She hesitated for a
mo-ment, then smiled. "Or, at least, keep him productive.The Empire is a house afire and he is the means
to smoth-ering the blaze. When his work is done, the Rebellion willhave ceased to be a problem. Then
and only then will webe able to begin to restore the galaxy to the way it shouldbe."

21

Though Mirax's appearance surprised Wedge and hadhim a bit off balance, Iella took it immediately in
stride. She looped an arm through Mirax's and smiled sweetly."We have some catching up to do, so you
boys just fol-low along and don't you dare try to overhear us."Though her smile remained in place, and
she kept a lighttone in her voice, Wedge read tension and wariness in hereyes.
"As you wish, ladies." He sketched a short bow, thenfollowed them to the lifts. They descended in one
cage,then headed out onto the rain-slicked promenade. Iellaand Mirax chatted and laughed as their path
meandered around, entering buildings, stopping at vistas, and goingfrom point to point of interest while
always descending.Wedge could tell, from the way they traveled, that Iellamade some choices at
random, but others with a purpose. With the frequent stops and passes through clothing bou-tiques that
madehim feel uncomfortable, Iella made itvery difficult for anyone following them to go unnoticed.
Wedge realized that being forced to wait amid racksof women's clothing samples made him uneasy

because ofmore than his gender making him feel utterly out of placethere. For the past seven plus years
he had been at war.While there had been relaxing times and he'd been givenleaves, he'd never slipped
out of his identity of being a pi-lot. Without family to visit—his parents were dead, andbecause of his
connection to the Rebellion, visiting anyother relatives would put them in jeopardy—he'd taken timeoff
but not timeaway. Wandering through the by-ways of Coruscant was as close as he had come to what
others might see as normal life since his parents werekilled.
He smiled. Even the time he had put in as a touringhero for the Rebellion had been far from normal. He
found himself whisked around from planet to planet,banquet to banquet, wearing a dress uniform he
didn'teven know the Rebellionhad. At receptions and partiesand dinners he found himself congratulated
for his part inthe Rebellion by creatures he never knew existed before.Gifts had been bestowed upon
him, honors given him, and opportunities provided him to do things he'd neverhad the courage to even
dream about as a child.
He watched as Iella and Mirax played with agarment-fabricator holo-unit, lengthening and shortening,
trimming and coloring dresses they'd never order. Theylaughed and were having fun.Just the way
normal folksdo when enjoying a normal life.
The word "normal" stuck in his brain for a momentand he realized that "normal" was a goal for most
folksthat had no definition. When Rogue Squadron's chieftech, Zraii, ran diagnostics on Wedge's X-wing,
normalwas defined by a series of benchmark readings establishedin Alliance specifications and Incom
performance manu-als. There was a way to determine if the fighter was per-forming normally or not. And
if it was deficient in someway or other, that defect could be corrected.
Normal in terms oflife, on the other hand, was notso easy to determine. For Mirax, hauling contraband
be-tween worlds was normal, yet to someone like Iella or Corran, that was grossly abnormal behavior.
For his par-ents normal life had been owning a fueling depot and
raising a family.That version of normal, or some minorvariation of it, seemed to fit most folks' view of
what lifeshouldbe.
But does that mean that anything else is not normal?For him, living the life of a pilot fighting against the
Em-pire seemed normal. Moreover, it seemed to be a life thatwas based on reality. The Empire,
weakened though itwas, cast a pall over the entire galaxy and until it waseliminated, the home, job, and
family sort of normalwould always be in jeopardy. A hint of wrongdoing couldshatter the cocoon of
normalcy most people tried to spinaround themselves and disrupt their lives forever.
Wedge and Pash trailed silently in the women's wakeas they moved on. Iella seemed to move a little
more de-liberately, and as they emerged from a stairwell onto apromenade that hung out over an urban
canyon witha river of shadow filling it, a repulsorlift cab came to astop. The doors opened and Iella
motioned them all intoit. Wedge didn't recognize the driver, but that somehowmade him feel better about
the situation than not.
Without instructions from Iella, the driver took the vehicle away from the building and down. The route
heflew seemed as twisted and circuitous as the one Iella hademployed, but the journey ended quickly.
The driverdropped them on another walkway, but this one was sev-eral kilometers down and away from
where they'd beenpicked up, leaving them submerged in the thick shadowsof the undercity.
Iella led them along to an alley, then down it and intoa building. Three floors up she opened a door and
ledthem into a sparingly furnished room. Its most impressivefeatures were the two large picture windows
that domi-nated the far walls. They provided a rather panoramicview of the intersection that the

apartment overlooked, orunderlooked, depending upon one's perspective.
Iella closed the door, then nodded toward the twocouches that faced each other in the center of the
room."Please be seated."
Mirax sat with her back to one of the windows and
let a slight smile play across her lips. "Which do youwant first? The story of why I'm here on Coruscant,
orhow I managed to find you?"
Iella shrugged easily. "Which one will convince meyou're not an Imp?"
Wedge frowned. "Mirax is clean. I've known her allmy life. She's no Imp."
"Convince me."
Wedge started to say something, but Mirax clearedher voice. "I can handle this, Wedge, honest." She
smiled."I appreciate the caution, especially here. I'll start with the museum and work back only as far as
needed, thatway you won't know more than you need to."
Iella nodded. "Coruscant is a world that has billions of people on it. The chances of your being in the
rightplace to spot someone you know are astronomical. Evenluck or believing in the Force doesn't begin
to cover thoseodds."
"Quite true, but I had a house edge on the wager."Mirax jerked a thumb toward Wedge and Pash.
"They'resnubfighter jockeys. Sooner or later they'd have to go to the Galactic Museum and check the
display that talkedabout Endor. It's ego and these pilots can breathe vacuumeasier than they let slip a
chance to see what lies the en-emy is telling about them. Corellian pilots are notoriousegotists, so staking
out the museum seemed natural."
Wedge arched an eyebrow at Mirax. "You think I'megotistical?"
"Wedge, I love you like a brother, so it hurts me tosay this, but you're so egotistical you think you can
keepyour ego under control. Most of the time you do, whichis your only saving grace. And the times you
don't, well,I've not been on the receiving end of a display, but I imag- ine there are some Imps who
would regret that experi-ence,if they were alive to think about it."
Despite the slight sting of her words, Wedge knewthere was more truth in them than he really wanted to
ac-knowledge. In the second run at Borleias he'd let himselfbe outraged at the tactics the Imps thought
would stop
him from completing his mission.That wasquite the dis-play of ego and they paid a dear price for letting
me in-dulge myself.
He turned toward Iella. "Well, at least you can tellshe knows me."
"From that explanation I can tell she knowsCorellian pilots. I had a partner who was a hot hand withan
X-wing. If he ever joins the Rebellion, he'll give you arun for your credits." Iella looped a lock of brown
hairback behind her right ear. "Since you didn't run Com-mander Antilles in to Coruscant, you didn't
know he washere. That means you brought more pilots in and werefiguring they'd visit the museum.
Probably more fromRogue Squadron."

Mirax inclined her head to the left. "You certainly could conclude that scenario is accurate."
"Oh, I'm sure it is." Iella sat down on the arm of thecouch opposite Mirax. "Your presence means your
exitidentity was blown, which means the rest of the pilotscould have been compromised somehow."
Mirax looked up at Wedge. "Are you and I the only folks from Corellia who don't sound like we were
trainedin deductive reasoning by CorSec?"
Iella patted Mirax on the knee. "Iwas trained in de-ductive reasoning by CorSec."
"So you were part of CorSec?"
"Yes, why?"
Mirax sighed and held her hand out. "I'm MiraxTerrik."
Iella's hand stopped short of sliding into Mirax's grip."You're Booster Terrik's daughter?"
Mirax's hand dropped back to her lap. "I bet youliked it better when you thought I was an Imp agent."
"You'd lose the bet." Iella kept her hand held out."I'd just joined the force when Hal Horn put your
father away. Booster was smart enough that I can believe hisdaughter was sharp enough to stake out the
museum.And he was lucky enough that I can believe you suc-ceeded in your long shot. I'm Iella Wessiri."
Wedge waited for recognition to flash in Mirax'seyes, but she shook Iella's hand without any sign she
rec-ognized the name or knew of the woman.Perhaps Corrannever spoke to her about his partner or
never named herto Mirax.
Iella freed her hand from Mirax's and sat back on thecouch. "This all complicates things incredibly, but
we'reon top of them right now, so it's not a crippling emer-gency. This place is a safehouse. I've called in
someonewho I expected to use to help debrief you and interrogateyou, if necessary. We'll still need the
debriefing, of course,but we need it to determine where to start assessing thedamage to our operation
here. Your problems could havea perfectly innocent explanation, but because they involvethe Empire, I
doubt that entirely."
"I don't know what happened really." Mirax shrugged. "I made the arrangements as per usual with a
broker. Thatgives me an identity code and a window for an exit vector.I enter three flight plans or so, get
clearance on them, thenhead out. This time, when I tried to use the ID to enter theflight plans from a
public datapad, things locked up. Icleared out and Imp Security landed on the place. It wasdown in
Invisec so it created quite the stir. I turned aroundand burned some favors my father had earned with
BlackSun to get my ship and crew taken care of. Since then I'vebeen looking for a friendly face."
Iella's brown eyes focused on the window behindMirax for a second. "Sounds like the Imps got the controller who was entering the ID codes. Your broker insu-lated you from direct discovery, but when you
used thecode they found you. We can get some slicers back-tracking things and see how bad the
situation has be-come. That means bringing in folks who have skills Idon't, and for that, we have to wait."
Pash sat down beside Mirax. "While we wait I thinkwe've a more serious problem to figure out how to
han-dle."

Mirax frowned. "What can be more serious than the
Imps knowing members of Rogue Squadron are on Co-ruscant?"
Wedge smiled. "If the Imps find outwhy we're here,they can take steps to make the conquest of
Coruscantimpossible. That, my dear Mirax, is about as serious as itgets."
22
As unsettled as things were, Corran felt glad when theyheaded back to the Hotel Imperial. Erisi, Rima,
and hemade fairly good time through the city. A freak stormover near the museum slowed them down by
cuttingpower to a moving sidewalk. Like most of the other pe-destrians they stood around waiting for it
to be repaired,contenting themselves with watching the storm or readingthe news as it scrolled past on
the readers. Corran noted that while public transport could be disrupted by storms, the news and
propaganda machine flowed onward with-out a hitch.
No one spoke very much as they traveled back to thehotel, but Corran caught Erisi watching him and
givinghim brave smiles to shore up his feelings. He appreciatedthe effort, but it only served to remind him
what sort offool he'd made of himself. He almost asked her to stop,but somewhere deep down inside he
knew the humilia-tion was good for him, trimming back ego and forcinghim to be more thoughtful.
As they walked along, he reached out and rested ahand on Rima's shoulder. "I do want to apologize for
what went on back there."
A curtain of white hair slid in back of her shoulder, brushing across the top of his hand, as she looked in
hisdirection. "Perhaps I owe you an apology also."
"Not at all."
"I do." Pink, blue, and silver highlights flashedthrough her hair as a moving sidewalk conveyed them
through a tunnel lit with a random pattern of neon lights. "Everyone from my world carries around some
survivorguilt. We do not want to be pitied, but at the same timethe sacrifice our people paid seems to
demand respect.Among us there are those who have lost a great dealmore than others . . ."
"But you have all lost everything."
"True, but someone who was with his family in ser-vice on another planet has lost less than those who
hadkin die. Sel, in seeing everyone go, his story is tragic."Rima glanced down at her open hands. "All of
us recallwhere we were when we heard the news and the tragedy'simpact hit us full at that moment. Sel
had thought noth-ing was amiss, then he learned the significance of what hehad experienced. The hours in
which he considered itnothing mock him and haunt him."
In the same way does my failure to avenge my fatherhaunt me."You were right, his life was hard."
Erisi rubbed her left hand along his spine. "I thinkwhat she means to say is that her people are pitied for
something over which they had no control. The gulf be-tween pity and respect is vast. When their tragedy
is den-igrated, and that seemed to be what you were doing, youstrip away respect and reduce them to a
pathetic state.And while they do not want to be pitied, their actionscannot be judged without bearing in
mind the tragedy that underscores their lives."
Corran slowly nodded.Working in the Rebellion pro-vides two things for Alderaanians: vengeanceanda

means to earn the respect they desire from others. Theyseek the vindication I felt when I brought Bossk
in for myfather's murder, and they're fighting to avoid what I feltwhen Loor let him go.
He smiled. "We were both wrong."
Rima shook her head. "We were both underinformedand that condition has been corrected."
"Agreed."
They got off the moving sidewalk at one of the HotelImperial's middle entrances. Erisi pointed toward
thedoorway as Rima slowed her pace. "You will join us fordinner, yes?"
"Can't." She gestured vaguely back along their line oftravel. "There's something I have to check on. I'll
be incontact tomorrow morning."
Corran and Erisi bid Rima farewell and took a liftdown to their room. They said nothing to each other,
but Erisi stood a bit closer to Corran than she normally did.He didn't mind that terribly much because her
obviousconcern told him he wasn't alone and had, in her, a friend upon whom he could rely. He also read
other confusingthings in her eyes and posture, but his emotional statewas chaotic enough that making
sense of much of any-thing was impossible.
He opened the door to the room and preceded her in. Hitting a light switch he saw no one and
confirmed thatthings had been left the way he positioned them in themorning before they headed out. The
triangular nub of ablack sock was still caught in the edge of a drawer andthe closet's slide door had been
left open to a point thatwas even with a pair of Erisi's ecru slacks.
The door clicked shut behind him, then the lightswent out. He turned and felt Erisi's hands slide along either side of his chest, then close gently around his back.Corran felt her body press against his and the
feather-light brush of her lips on his forehead, nose, and lips. Shepulled him close and again dropped her
mouth to his,kissing him with the fierce passion they'd shared in the Grand Hall.
Making no conscious decisions to do so, he let hisarms enfold her. His left hand slipped beneath the hem
ofher jacket and gently stroked her back. His right handcame up and held the back of her head. He
breathed in
deeply, filling his nose with the spicy scent of her per-fume. As she broke off their kiss, arching her head
back,he traced his tongue from the hollow of her throat to herearlobe.
Erisi lazily pulled him along with her as she slowly drifted toward the room's bed. Corran understood her
in-tention and realized he should have resisted the tempta-tion she offered. Rational arguments tried to
trip a circuit breaker in his brain, but they all failed. Operational secu-rity wasn't important because if the
Imperials decided totake them there was no way for them to elude capture.Sleeping together or
separately would not save them if theEmpire knew enough about them to know where to findthem.
Both of them being members of Rogue Squadron was no bar to involvement. Nawara Ven and Rhysati
Ynr hadfallen in love and that had not proved an impediment totheir skills and performance. Corran and
Erisi were of le-gal age, sound mind, and both consented to what theywere about to do. Even the fact
that the two of themwere from different worlds and different cultures had no bearing on what they were
going to do.That we are here,now,is all that matters.
The word "now" began to ricochet around in hisskull, releasing all sorts of memories. When he'd been in

CorSec he'd heard his father or Gil Bastra or himself tellrookies that most criminals were stupid because
theylived fornow. Living fornow meant they didn't lookahead to the consequences of their actions. They
didn'ttake precautions, didn't plan, and as a result, what theydid fell apart on them.
Things went deeper than just that as well. He remem-bered his father weeping on the anniversary of the
deathof Corran's mother. "One of the reasons she was a goodwoman, wife, and mother was because she
didn't thinkabout herself first. Not a selfish bone in your mother'sbody. Everyone else came first and what
she wanted wassaved for later because we needed hernow. And now she
has no more later, and there seems little reason in havinga later without her."
Erisi stopped moving backward and Corran felt thefoot of the bed against his shins. She slowly sank
back on the bed and drew him down with her. He resisted slightly,lowering her softly onto the quilted
coverlet. He saw herin soft shades of grey from the dim light splashing inthrough the window. She was a
seductive vision, a dreammade real and warm and he fought to use that image toquiet the thoughts raging
through his mind.
Powerful though that image was, a feeling of disasterdissolved it. Corran remembered his own relief at
not sleeping with Iella back when he was with CorSec be-cause, aside from destroying her marriage, the
affairwould have changed forever their relationship. Thefriendship and trust they had developed working
togethercould have never been reclaimed. It was true that theymight have stuck together and been
stronger for gettingtogether, but their attraction had been as much circum-stantial as it had been real,
which made for a poor foun-dation for any permanent relationship.
And this is circumstantial, too.Corran heard Miraxon Noquivzor telling him that Erisi would not be good
for him and he'd seen how truly different they were asthey came into Coruscant. He'd developed doubts
aboutany relationship with her then, and this situationnow didnot invalidate those doubts.She's attractive
and I'm at-tracted, but something is not right here.
Something inside him felt verywrong. His father hadtold him countless times to trust his feelings and to
playhis hunches. Corran had taken his father's advice and hadlearned to live by what he felt, or to later
regret goingagainst those feelings. He had gone against his gut feel-ings before, and with much less in the
way of inducementto do so, but those situations had never turned out right in the end.
Corran let himself fall forward, but he kept his el-bows locked and held his chest and head above Erisi.
"Ican't."
Erisi flashed him a shadowed smile. "I think you're doing fine."
"Seriously, I can't." He bent his right arm andflopped down on his flank beside her. "It isn't going to
work."
Rolling up on her side, she reached over and strokedhis cheek. "What's wrong? What did I do wrong?"
"It's not you." He took her hand and kissed herpalm. "It's not that I'd like nothing better than to be here
with you, but..."
"This is just now, Corran. I need this, you need this.It won't change who we are. No obligations. No
recrim-inations. No regrets."
Her words poured soothingly into his ears. He hadno doubt she meant them and that they would be true

forher. "I hear you, Erisi, and I believe you, but I don't knowthat I'd be able to leave it in the past. It
might not changewho we are or what we mean to each other, but I'd betagainst it given my past history.
As I said, it's not you, it'sme."
He rolled onto his back, then sat up. "You have tofigure I'm an idiot. We've gotten very close a number
oftimes and I keep pulling back."
He felt her hand on his back as she sat up beside him."Actually, while it is frustrating, I do find this
hesitationone of your more endearing qualities."
"Decisiveness in men is so off-putting, after all."
Erisi laughed easily. "Your sense of humor is attrac-tive as well, except when you use it as a shield."
"Sorry."
She kissed his shoulder. "You see, Corran, few are themen who allow their emotions to have a part in
theirdecision-making process. Most are expediently logical—emotions motivate them, but do not guide
them. Withmost men there would be no hesitation—if emotions weregoing to come into play, it would be
afterward. Your abil-ity to factor emotions into your choices ahead of timemakes you rather unique and
worth pursuing."
"Or a big waste of time."
"Not so far."
"I'm just warming up. You'll see. Give me time."
Erisi sighed beside him. "Perhaps that is the best idea,right now, no matter what we think we want. What
weneed is time alone."
He smiled in the direction of her silhouette. "Howcan you be so logical? Aren't you supposed to be
feelingscorned right now?"
"Perhaps I should, but then I don't always allow my-self to be ruled by emotions." She shrugged. "We've
justcome to a decision to postpone making a decision aboutus and the nature of our relationship.
Depending uponthe decision made, I might be scorned, but I don't thinkthat emotion is worthy of either
one of us."
Corran nodded. "Yeah, you're right there, on both counts."
"Well, I'll leave you here, then..."
"No." Corran reached over and squeezed her leg justabove the knee. "I'm fairly used to taking walks to
sortthings out. I've got a key, so I can let myself back in. Idon't know when I'll get back."
"I'll head out and get some food. I should be herewhen you get back unless some Hapan princeling
comesalong and sweeps me away to make me the queen ofsome distant planet. Then won'tyou be
sorry?"
"Actually I think I would be." Corran stood, thenleaned down and kissed her on the forehead. "Thanks

forunderstanding."
"Thank you for letting me understand."
Guided more by emotion than any sort of rationalthought, Corran left Erisi behind in the room, entered a
lift, and hit the lowest numbered button he could find. It took him well below the level where they had last
seenRima. The walkway onto which it dumped him didn't look that bad, though it was deeper than any
place he'd been since his arrival on Coruscant.
Shoulders hunched and hands jammed deep into the
pockets of a brown bantha-suede jacket, he started wan-dering. It didn't matter to him where he was
going, but just that he was going. Walking demanded little in theway of mental activity, so it gave him time
to think andhe'd done scant little of that which was unconnected to the mission for well over a month.
He tried to trace the source of his discomfort, but noeasy answer presented itself. Certainly the pressure
of be-ing on Coruscant had a lot to do with it. Though precau-tions had been taken against discovery,
something assimple as his nearly being sighted by Kirtan Loor showedthat no matter how much care one
took, there were timeswhen luck just ran out.
Corran smiled. Back in CorSec they'd adulterated an old Jedi aphorism about luck to answer criminals
whoclaimed they'd been caught because of bad luck. The JediKnights maintained there was no such thing
as luck, justthe Force. In CorSec they'd told criminals there was no such thing as bad luck, just the
Corellian Security Force.
Now there's not even that.In news he had seen scroll-ing across readouts throughout Coruscant he
learned thatthe Diktat had dissolved CorSec and had allocated mostof its resources and some of its
personnel to the new Pub-lic Safety Service. It didn't take much to see the changewas a purge of people
with questionable loyalties to theDiktat, but whatever its purpose, it erased yet one morelink he had to his
past.
His hand rose to his breastbone, but the gold medal-lion he normally wore was not there. General
Cracken'speople had said that by keeping it he could seriously com-promise security, so he'd put it away
in Whistler's smallstorage compartment. He knew the droid would keep itsafe and, for him, knowing
where it was had almost thesame effect as actually wearing the good luck charm.Andthe Jedi whose face
appears on that coin would say there'sno such thing as luck, so clearly it can't be a good luckcharm.
It occurred to him that he was losing his focus on life. Back when he had been with CorSec things had
been simpie. He knew who he was and so did everyone elsearound him. Though things were not all black and
white,the number of grey tones were limited. There wasn't toomuch for him to handle, which made it that
much easierto focus on what he was supposed to be doing.
In cataloging the chaos that had dominated his lifeover the past five years or so, it was easy to tote things
upin the negative column. His father had died. He'd leftCorSec and his friends had vanished. He'd slipped
in andout of various identities while on the run. After months oftraining and fighting for the
Rebellion—escaping death bythe narrowest of margins over and over again—he got stuffed onto
Coruscant and nearly got spotted by one ofthe few people on the planet who could recognize him.He
wasn't flying. He didn't have his good luck charm andhe found himself missing Whistler, Mirax, Ooryl,
and theothers.

He shivered.If I only look at things on the negativeside of the balance sheet, I'll keep imposing
reasons on myself to remain unfocused.The key to getting his focusback was to isolate those things he
could control andwork with them. Anything else didn't matter because hecouldn't influence it. Only by
doing as much as he couldto manipulate the variables under his control could hekeep himself in position
to make decisions instead of find-ing himself without options.
What that means now is concentrating on my mis-sion. I'm here to learn about security and that's what I
should be doing.He nodded, then slowly began to realizethat his wanderings had taken him farther and
lower thanhe would have consciously chosen to go. Coronet City onCorellia had some seedy spots, but
they appeared posi-tively immaculate and safe compared to where Corranfound himself. While his
location did provide him with adatapoint for his mission—namely that there was no ac-tive Imperial
security to be seen this deep down—it wasa small speck of silver lining in a large cloud.
He decided to get his bearings and moved in off thestreet. This required him to thread his way through
various makes and models of speeder bikes hovering in a wallin front of a cantina. If there was any lettering
painted onthe wall or door to indicate what the place was, it hadlong since faded too much for Corran to
read it. A series of holograms flickered in sequence showing a storm-trooper's helmet breaking into four
uneven and rathermessy sections. What it meant mystified him until hewalked inside and down the steps
and saw a sizzling or-ange sign that proclaimed the place to be "The Headquar-ters," or, at least, did so
when all the letters chose to buzzto life.
Corran had chased fleeing Selonians through sewers with better atmosphere and more consistent lighting
thanthe Headquarters. The narrow stairway broadened outinto a foyer that ended where one side of the
triangularbar blocked it off. To get farther into the cantina one hadto pass through the choke points at
either end of the bar. While a fair amount of dense smoke filled the air, Corrancould see tables clogging
the floor and booths backagainst the walls. Two curtained doorways were built intothe back corners,
leading to waste relief stations and,given the sort of clientele drawn to this type of establish- ment,
providing access to dozens of bolt-holes.
Speaking of bolt-holes . . .Blaster bolts had dottedthe walls near the entrance with a dense pattern of
holes.Corran noticed they tended to be grouped about a meterup from the floor and tapered off past
head height for theaverage stormtrooper. He found this marginally reassur-ing, though his gut did not
agree with that sentiment atall.The faster I can get out of here, the better I'll like it.
He kept his gait casual and a bit loose. His hands emerged from his pockets slowly as he approached
thebar, slipping into a spot near the end over to the left. Afairly powerfully built Quarren female in a
sleeveless tu-nic planted her hands on the bar right in front of him. "Ithink you're lost."
In an instant Corran was back in CorSec makingsweeps of various Coronet City cantinas. "If I wanted
thinking, I'd not be in here.Lomin-ale." He put enough
of an edge in his voice to make her question the judgmentshe'd made of him. As she moved away to
comply, withher facial tentacles twitching out a silent curse at him, he realized his clothes were too new
for him to fit in easily.Most of the patrons wore cloaks, less out of a concessionto fashion than because it
concealed their identities, andnot many people coming into a place like the Headquar-ters really wanted
to be spotted.
She returned with a small glass of ale, half of whichwas foam. He tossed a couple of credit coins on the

barand they disappeared instantly in her grey fist. He sippedthe ale and found it wasn't as bad as he
expected, though it could have benefited from being colder. His was theonly small glass being used in the
place, which he took as a not-so-subtle measure of his popularity with the staff.He knew he'd not get
served again, and he wasn't inclinedto linger over his drink.
By the same token, if he just turned around andwalked out, half the regulars would be all over him like
chitin on a Verpine. Running away would have the sameeffect as flagrantly flashing credits around, or
opening hisjacket and letting everyone see he didn't have a blasterwith him. He considered, for a
moment, trying to buy ablaster from someone, but that would put him in directcontact with gun-carrying
criminals who might decide killing and robbing him was easier than selling him aweapon.
Corran leaned on the bar and drank more of the ale.Realizing he was not in a good position, he started
tolook around and assess the threats suggested by the can-tina's patrons. Dozens and dozens of criminal
profiles flit-ted through his brain. He classified people based on theirspecies, the amount of interest they
showed in him, andthe kind of hunches he got when he looked at them. Thepeople inside seven meters
provided him with two definiteclass-one threats, a half-dozen class-two threats, and oneGamorrean who
appeared scared enough that Corrantried to attach the face to any warrants that had been outstanding when he'd been in CorSec. He came up blank,then started on the booths along the wall to the
left.
What?Corran blinked his eyes and shook hishead, then took another look. Through the swirlingsmoke,
seated facing a tall, slender figure in a cloak andhood, Corran saw Tycho Celchu.Impossible.
He looked away, then back for a third time. The in-dividual to whom Tycho was speaking stood,
eclipsingCorran's view of the unit's Executive Officer. In doing sothe figure also managed to destroy
Corran's interest inTycho because despite the dim light and the thick smoke,he knew the hooded and
cloaked figure could only be oneperson.
Kirtan Loor.
Corran set his ale down and began to move aroundthe bar.Loor and Tycho! He isan Imperial agent! I
haveto get to . . .
He slammed into a large Trandoshan and reboundedfrom the reptilian's chest. Someone clapped a hand
onCorran's right shoulder and he felt the muzzle of a blaster jam into his ribs. The Trandoshan closed in
on the left, pinning him against the man with the blaster. "You're go-ing nowhere, pal."
Corran looked to his right and couldn't recognize theman holding the gun on him. What he did notice
aboutthe gunman was that he had a comlink clipped to the la-pel of his jacket and a small lead to an
earphone in hisleft ear. As Corran looked back to the left to see if theTrandoshan was similarly equipped
he saw the cloakedfigure disappear out one of the back entrances. Tychowas gone as well.
Depression blossomed full in the pit of Corran'sstomach, yet he knew things could easily continue to get
worse.
They did. Very easily.
Through the doorway that swallowed the cloakedman swaggered a person swathed in garish and gaudy
clothes. The smoke would have been enough to concealhis identity until he drew closer, but the cantina's
dim

light allowed the diamond pupils in his eyes to shinebrightly.
Corran shook his head. "What you see when youdon't have a blaster."
Zekka Thyne didn't bother to smile. "Your thoughtsparallel mine." He reached back and drew Inyri
Forge from his shadow. As she came around him she handedhim a blaster pistol. "Of course, now Ihave
a blaster andam just full of ideas about what I can do with it."

23

Though he marched at the head of the parade, Gavin Darklighter felt anything but happy. He'd been
searched and deprived of his hold-out blaster. The Gotal walkedbehind him, occasionally poking him
with a blaster, andAsyr Sei'lar walked on his right. She seldom looked overat him, but when she did he
saw only venom in her violeteyes.
The other Rogues had been dragged along in hiswake, with a thick knot of denizens from the cantina
traveling behind them. The Rogues had been allowed tokeep their weapons, but their power packs had
beentaken away, reducing the blasters to oddly shaped clubs.Shiel seemed the most angry, but Aril and
Ooryl insulated him from the individuals on either side so no violencebroke out.
Asyr led the way through a set of corridors and stair-ways that provided easy and instant access to the
city'slower reaches. Unlike the pathways Gavin and Shiel hadlocated, this one appeared to have been
built in place, nothacked out of what construction droids had created. Itdidn't seem that new—and
certainly not as new as Asyrhad made the Alien Combine sound—so Gavin guessed ithad been built after
a Hutt or some other criminal bribed the city planners to program it into a construction droid. The journey
ended in a large rectangular warehouse area that they entered through double doors in one of thenarrow
walls. Scattered throughout the space were all sorts of makeshift hovels. They had been cobbled together from ferrocrete blocks, duraplast packaging, bro-ken sheets of transparisteel, and ragged bits of
cloth. Dwellings for larger creatures formed the foundation ofthe makeshift apartment blocks. Smaller
creatures likeSullustans, Ugnaughts, and Jawas occupied the upper lev-els. Gavin felt pretty certain things
actually roosted up in the shadows ten meters overhead, but the light was toodim for him to see more
than silhouettes moving about.
The Bothan led them to a central clearing. Wideroll-up doors had been slid down in place where they
bi-sected the longer walls. The one off to Gavin's left had a hole cut in it large enough to permit transit by
most hu-manoidcreatures. A couple of Twi'leks and a Rodianbearing guns stood watch nearby. Since
both of theroll-up doors were large enough to admit repulsorlifttrucks, Gavin assumed they led out onto
whatever passedfor streets at this level of the city.
Asyr stopped Gavin at the center of the clearing. Therest of the aliens fanned out in a semicircle behind
themto ring half the clearing. This left the rest of the Rogueshalfway between Gavin and the circle. The
Gotal camearound from behind him and stalked forward to where asteel post had been set into the
duracrete floor. He pickedup the hammer that hung from a string and pounded itagainst the post's
flattened top.

A heavy mournful tone rang from the post and filledthe room. Gavin could feel vibrations play through
thefloor. All around curious faces peered out through holes,windows, and doorways in the hovels. The
Gotal hit thepost again, summoning more people to come out of theirhomes. He hit it a third and final
time, then let the ham-mer drop.
Gavin heard the whir of an engine and looked up as
a box drifted forward and slowly down. Cables loweredit from the mobile winch moving along tracks
out away from the far wall. Lights came on inside the box, reveal-ing windows and a doorway. As the
floating buildingcame to rest against the floor, the doorway opened and amale Devaronian stepped forth.
The black cloak he wore nearly shrouded all of him—what little of his rotund belly and chest it didn't
cover made a bright scarlet stripe downhis middle that matched the tone of his flesh.
Asyr bowed her head in his direction. "Dmaynel, wehave brought you one of the bigoted men who has
trav-eled into Invisec to mock us. He is the one we should useas the message we wish to send to the
Empire."
Light reflected white from the Devaronian's sablehorns. He stepped forward and took Gavin's chin in his
hand. His fingernails pressed hard into Gavin's flesh, but Gavin did not flinch nor try to pull away. He
stared downinto Dmaynel's dark eyes and did his best to hide his fear.
The Devaronian smiled, then released him andstepped back. "You have chosen wisely, Asyr. He is
youthful and even handsome by their standards. His bodywill say all we want to say, and more."
"Indeed," said Nawara Ven, "it will let them knowthey are superior to all of us in every way they think
nowand new ones as well."
"Who are you?"
The Bothan scowled. "These five were with thisMan."
Dmaynel looked past Gavin. "And you five are hisfriends?"
"We are, and proud to be so." Nawara Ven appearedat Gavin's left hand. "I have known him for well
over sixstandard months and consider him one of the best friendsI have ever had."
The Devaronian folded his arms across his chest. "Itis rare among us to find one who so openly
professes his friendship with a bigot."
Nawara smiled. "And what proof do you have thathe is a bigot?"
Asyr snarled. "He refused to dance with me."
The Twi'lek opened his arms. "Of course, how couldI have forgotten? Refusing to dance is a sign of
being abigot. What if I had refused your request? Would I have been a bigot?"
"You were withher."
"The human female, yes." Nawara nodded slowly."So you would say I would have had a reason to
refuseyou."

Asyr nervously smoothed the fur on her face. "Yes,you would have."
"Is it not possible, then, that this Man had a reasonto refuse you?"
"He did. He is a bigot."
"You draw a conclusion that is not supported by ev-idence, my dear." Nawara opened his hands and
liftedthem up to take in all the aliens watching. "Is there noreason other than bigotry that might explain his
action? Perhaps he is not a good dancer. Perhaps he has someonehe loves far away from here. Perhaps
he is allergic toBothan fur."
Asyr thrust a finger toward the Gotal. "But MnorNha said he felt relief when I went away. He was
relievedhe would not have to touch me and associate with me."
"She is telling the truth, Dmaynel. That is what Isensed."
Nawara drew himself up to his full height and turned to face the Gotal. "Tell me, Mnor Nha, did you
sense re-lief from this Man when the stormtrooper departed fromour table?"
The Gotal hesitated, then nodded. "Yes."
"So when one threat removed itself, this Man felt re-lief." Nawara turned back and smiled at Asyr.
"Could itbe, fair Asyr Sei'lar, that this man felt you as threateningin some ways as a stormtrooper?"
The Bothan's head came up. "I am no stormtrooper."
"Perhaps not in form, but in impact, I think you are."The Twi'lek patted Gavin on the shoulder. "My
friend here is young and
you are very beautiful. You approached him. You flattered him. You expressed interestin him and you
were persistent. You
stalked him, all ofwhich must have quickened his pulse. You clearly sawsomething in him that he was not
certain truly
existed,which certainly would make him anxious. Your departuremeant he never had to discover how
disappointed you
would be when you discovered he did not live up to theimage you carried in your mind. Relief at your
departurewould only
be natural."
Gavin nodded in agreement with Nawara's assess-ment and saw heads among the spectators also bob
away.Nawara's hitting close to one part of the truth so he canleave the rest of it alone.Rather obviously
Gavin's reliefcould be explained in terms of his being on a covert mis-sion from the Rebellion, but
revealing that fact wouldblow the operation. As much as the Alien Combine hadbeen organized to
protest Imperial misconduct, he knew there had to be at least one Imperial informant among thecreatures
assembled in the warehouse.

"He was threatened byme?" Asyr's violet eyes nar-rowed. "That's nonsense. How could anyone think
of me as threatening?"
"How indeed?" Nawara exaggerated a frown."Could it be that he has heard it was the Bothan people
who bravely sacrificed themselves to carry news of thesecond Death Star to the Rebellion? How could
he find a member of the species that caused the Emperor's deaththreatening? No, of course, you're right,
that is not pos-sible.
"The larger question to ask, of course, is why wouldhe find you or me or any of us threatening right
now?Could it be that his random selection, his being sentenced to death for an offense that is poorly
defined; could thatpossibly remind him of the Empire you hate so much?Could it be the idea of being
used to convey a message topeople he does not know sounds very Imperial to him? Could it be that your
action in this regard makes it diffi-cult for him to differentiate between you and the Em-pire?"
"Absurd!"
"It is, Asyr?" Nawara looked up and out at the aliensstaring down at the center of the room. "If you act
like the Empire, you will be seen as the Empire."
The Devaronian waved that idea away. "He is one ofthem.Kill him and leave the body for them."
"No! He is one of us." The Twi'lek shook his headvehemently. "You are protesting death and
mistreatmentby the Empire, but Humans have suffered as much at the hands of the Empire as any of us.
Yes, Mon Calamari,Gamorreans, and Wookiees have all been enslaved, butnone of them had their
homeworlds destroyed asAlderaan was destroyed. And who is it who has struckthe most mortal blows
against the Empire? The Rebel-lion, yes, but the Men among them. How many of uswere part of the
Rebellion and shed our blood at Yavin?How many of us froze on Hoth or died at Derra IV?"
Someone in an upper gallery shouted down, "Wewere there at Endor. A Mon Cal led the fleet at Endor.
Wehave contributed to the war against the Empire."
"He's right," Asyr crowed. "We were there at En-dor—without Bothans, Endor would not have
happened.A Sullustan piloted theMillennium Falcon and it killedthe second Death Star. Your points are
for naught."
Nawara smiled slowly. "Yes, we were there at Endor,but Men fired the shots that destroyed that Death
Star.Men killed the Emperor. Even so, the point you bring upto protest mine makes my case for me. We
wouldnothave been at Endor except that the Men who began theRebellion, the Men who bled and died
for its first victo-ries, the Men who allowed us in, brought us in, welcomedus with open arms. You
accuse this Man of bigotry be-cause he felt relief when you left him alone, yet you arewilling to treat him
as a loyal son of the Empire whenyou already know that to do so is to discard any possibil-ity that he
hates the Empire just as much as you do."
Dmaynel shrugged casually. "If he hated the Empirethat much, he would be out fighting it, not here hiding
atits heart."
Nawara hesitated for a second and Gavin shook hishead.Don't blow mission security. It's better they
kill meand our mission remain secret than to let the Empireknow we're here. Too many people would
hear the expla-nation for us to be safe.
The Twi'lek stroked his chin. "And what if his loyaltyto the Rebellion can be demonstrated?"

Dmaynel shrugged. "The Rebellion is far away. It willbe years before I have to deal with them, and by
then,this one will be forgotten. Right now he can serve noticeon the Empire that we will no longer tolerate
their preda-tionupon us. Kill him."
The Gotal took careful aim with his blaster, but be-fore he could pull the trigger, earsplitting explosions
andbright flashes buckled the metal door to Gavin's left. Themetal ribbon flopped down over the Twi'leks
and Rodian standing guard. A cylindrical Ubrikkian HAVr A9 Float-ing Fortress cruised forward. The
repulsorlift field pressedthe door flat against the floor causing dark fluids to gushout from beneath it. The
blaster cannon turret atop thevehicle spun to the right and the two spotlights on eitherside pinpointed the
Devaronian. In the vehicle's wake twodozen armored stormtroopers poured into the warehouse.
Light from the machine's cockpit control panel re-vealed an image of the Fortress's Commander holding
acomlink up to his mouth. "This is an unlawful assembly.You will lay down your weapons and disperse
peacefullywhen given leave to do so. If you do not, my orders areclear. So are my fields of fire."
24
Wedge smiled as the white-haired woman walked throughthe door Iella had opened. "The Provisional
Council mustbe serious about taking Coruscant. They have you here."He offered her his hand. "It's been
a while, Winter—andyou'd know exactly how long it's been, right?"
"I would, Commander Antilles, which is why, likeyou, I'm here." Winter shook his hand, then greeted
Iella.Turning to face Pash, she nodded. "You would be Gen- eral Cracken's son."
"The legendary Winter. I'm honored." Pash bowed inher direction.
Mirax stood and shook Winter's hand. "I'm MiraxTerrik."
Winter nodded. "And the reason I was summonedhere." She looked over at Iella. "Nothing in our files
in-dicates Imperial involvement with her."
Pash frowned. "Being my father's son, I have a ques-tion that you may not want to answer, but I have to
ask. Commander Antilles and I were with Iella and Mirax the whole time we were coming here and we
didn't see Iellamake contact. How did you know to come here?"
Winter's expression became more serious, heightening
her resemblance to Princess Leia. "The account number Iella used to gain access to the datapad in the
dress shopwas special. Various things about the dress design se-lected, such as the colors, were sliced
into municipal com-puters. At certain points around the city—in this case ona moving sidewalk—a
pattern of lights communicated tome enough information that I knew to come here. Thereare backup
systems to handle things if there is no re-sponse, but everything worked well, so it was no prob-lem."
Wedge nodded appreciatively. "It's nice that you canslice into Coruscant's central computer."
Winter shook her head. "We can't. The safeguardsthere are too heavy for us to get in cleanly and out
again. The central computer is attached to roughly a dozen aux- iliary computer centers that are intended
as backup, butare used primarily for low-level administrative and com- mercial applications. We can get
into them and do so ona regular basis, but none of the patches we've tried to in-sert into the central
computer have made it."

Iella sat back down. "If we could bring the central computer down we'd be set because it controls all the
im-portant things, like the shields and ground-based fighterdefenses."
"The shields are the key." Wedge perched himself onthe arm of the couch next to Mirax. "If they go
down Itend to think most of the citizenry would support achange in government."
Winter sat beside Iella. "Overall security here is notas tight as I might have expected it to be under
Ysanne Is-ard'scontrol. That goes for the Imperial Palace, too. Iwas seated on the promenade nearly
four hours drinkingespcaf and saw nothing special. We almost had a problemwhen an Imp Intel officer
just happened by. I was afraid one of my companions was going to attack Loor, but hekept his temper
under control, just barely, but under con-trol."
Iella's eyes narrowed. "Kirtan Loor is here, on Corus-cant?"
Winter nodded.
Mirax raised an eyebrow. "Sounds like the kind of re-action Corran would have had to Loor."
Iella's jaw dropped. "You know Corran?" Miraxlooked up and stared blankly at Iella for a moment,
then blinked with astonishment. Both women then turned toWedge."
"Corran's here?" Mirax asked.
"And he's in Rogue Squadron?" Iella added. "IsWhistler still with him?"
Wedge held his hands up. "I don't know exactlywhere he is, but he is on Coruscant. Iella, I know you
were his partner in CorSec. I didn't mention his being inRogue Squadron because you didn't seem to
have that in-formation yourself, which means New Republic Intelli-gence didn't let you have it.
Operational security and allthat."
Winter nodded. "Corran Horn is here, but he has nodroid with him."
Mirax frowned. "How did you know Whistler was a droid?"
"Two years ago Corran Horn ran from CorSec takingan X-wing and an R2 unit with him. He was
spotted asa prospect then, but we lost track of him. A year and ahalf later he joins Rogue Squadron,
implying he has greatskill as a pilot. This implies practice flying while he wason the run. This means he
kept his R2 unit, so I decidedIella's question was about a droid, since X-wings have no-toriously little
capacity for dragging pets or other peoplearound in them."
Mirax sat back. "You're good."
"Thank you."
Wedge winced. "Corran's here with Erisi."
Mirax growled. "The bacta queen."
Iella glanced at her. "The way you said that . . . butyou're Booster Terrik's daughter. You and Corran
couldn't be..."

"We're just good friends."
Iella laughed. "Not the first time I've heard that saidin exactly that way. The stories I could tell you."
"Without Corran here to defend himself, I don'tthink that's a good idea." Wedge looked over at Winter.
"Mirax's exit identity was blown by the Imps, leaving herstuck here after she dropped off what was
probably therest of my squadron."
"All of them, even Ooryl. They're in Invisec, or atleast that's where I left them."
"Thanks. What we're trying to determine is if the Imps picked Mirax up at random, or if the security on
this operation has been blown. Any problems withCorran and Erisi?"
"None." Winter thought for a second. "I had a team watching them for the first couple of nights to see if
any Imps showed an interest in them, but that turned out neg-ative. Those teams were shifted to monitor
Imp sweeps inInvisec. They seem to be picking up Gamorreans andQuarren, but no one is certain why."
As Winter spoke staccato flickers of color outsideprompted Wedge to look toward one of the
windows.Bright flashes of red and green blaster bolts lit the thor-oughfare outside. He studied the tableau
for a moment,trying to make sense of it, then his jaw dropped as hisbrain sorted out what he was actually
seeing. "Everyone down!"
Having no time to explain his warning shout, hegrabbed on to the arm of the couch and wrenched it over
backward. Mirax's hands shot out to both sides as shefought to balance herself, with her left hand locking
in a death grip on Pash's shirtfront. She pulled her legs up and in to protect them, inadvertently making it
just that much easier for Wedge to tip the couch over.
Over he went with it. He slipped to the side, duckingin toward Mirax, barely managing to pull his left leg
in tosafety. His hands came up to cover his head and he ex-pected a nasty bash when he hit the floor, but
that wasthe least of his worries. Ihope the couch will be armorenough!
Outside, the speeder bike he had seen flying towardthe window finally hit. It broadsided the wall of
trans-paristeelwith a solid thump, bursting through to spininto the room. The rider went one way and the
speederbike the other, between them sowing a glittering rain of lethal crystalline shrapnel throughout what
was supposed to be, ironically enough, a safehouse.

25

Corran let himself sag toward the man on his right. Theman jabbed him again with the gun to shove him
away.Corran moved to the left but when he could no longerfeel the gun in his ribs he took a step
backward. The manon his right pulled the blaster's trigger, sending a scarletbolt of energy into the
Trandoshan's belly. It opened asmoking hole there, hurling the reptile back onto a tablethat collapsed
under his weight.

Corran's left hand dropped over the top of the blasterand pulled. At the same time his right elbow came
up and out, catching the shooter between mouth and nose. Twist-ing slightly, Corran pulled the man
around between himand Zekka Thyne. He tore the blaster from the man'sgrip, then gave him a sidekick
that propelled him towardThyne.
Without waiting to see what happened, Corran spunand ran a zigzag course toward the doorway. The
whineof blaster fire filled the room. Bolts burned past his legs and over his head, lighting little guttering
fires on eitherside of the doorway. Remembering what he'd observed onhis way in, Corran dove forward
into a somersault, thencame up to his feet at the base of the shadowed stairs.
Shifting the gun to his right hand, he brought his arm upand fired back over his shoulder to discourage
pursuit.
Bursting out through the doorway, he kicked aRodian off a speeder bike, settled himself in the saddle,
and dropped it into first gear. Cranking the throttle, heshot off and headed for the nearest canyonlike
intersec-tion that would allow him to lose himself in the city. Heinstantly regretted not having shot up the
other speederbikes in front of the Headquarters, but a glance back athis pursuit suggested returning to do
that now would besuicide.
If I'm going to die, I'd prefer it on my terms, in mytime.Doing what he'd done back in the cantina had
beenstupid, but that was the only option he had when beingfaced with death. There had been no doubt in
hismind—or the minds of anyone else in that cantina—thatThyne was going to kill him. That knowledge
was thereason Corran knew the man on his right would hesitatebefore shooting—robbing Thyne of his
kill would be asfatal as being Corran Horn in that situation.
Corran clutched and shifted with his feet, then gavethe bike more throttle with his right hand. Using his
thumb he hit the suicide-cruise button, keeping the throt-tle constant, then shoved the blaster down onto
a pair ofsnap-clips that held it perfectly at the muzzle and triggerguard. With his left hand he rotated the
vector-shift back,canting the forward directional vanes up, and hung on asthe speeder bike climbed
toward a hovering skyhook.
Idon't remember the Incom Zoom II being this re-sponsive, but it looks like the Rodian had this one
alltricked out. Good thing for me, I guess.He hunkered down and rotated the speeder bike to put its bulk
be-tween him and the blaster bolts being shot by his pursuit.The Incom speeder bike didn't have any
weaponry built onto it. The small data display between the throttle and vector handles constantly had stuff
scrolling across it, butit was all in Rodian, which meant Corran had no ideawhat was going on.As long as
I go fast, does it reallymatter?
Rolling the bike and playing with the vector-shift, hestraightened it out and sent it screaming along
throughone of the upper canyons. He aimed the speeder bike wellaway from the mountainous Imperial
Palace and cutaround a skyhook tether. Shifting his weight and givingthe vector-shift nudges now and
again, he kept thespeeder bike juking and bouncing as the wind tugged at his hair and blaster bolts
streaked scarlet past him. Someof them were heavier than those a handheld blaster couldproduce, letting
him know that some of the machineswere military surplus and in good working order.
He glanced back, but in the darkness all he could seewas blaster bolts coming at him. The riders coming
upbehind were getting better with their shots and Corran re-alized that flying up high and in the open was
playing to their strength. Ineed a tight course with few shots avail-able. That means down!
Hanging on tightly he inverted and cranked the vector-shift back. The speeder bike dove through the
night, flashing past level after level of apartments, malls,offices, and grand promenades. Chopping the

throttleback, Corran threw his weight to the left and hooked thebike around and back up through a
narrow space be-tween two towers. Leaning back to the right, he came around the cylindrical tower and
shot off down an alley.
A scattering of blaster bolts scored the walls aroundhim. Corran broke left, then cut the throttle back
andshifted into neutral. A tug on the vector-shift brought hisbike around in a flat spin that he killed by
goosing thethrust to kill his momentum. Hanging there in the air, hefilled his hand with the blaster and
braced his hand onthe speeder bike's chassis.
Two speeder bikes cut into the alley, racing full boreafter him. Corran's first two shots hit the rightmost
bikeon the nose. The bike's control panel exploded in a silvershower of sparks. The blast lifted the driver
and pitched him head over heels off the speeder bike's rear end. Thebike itself immediately began a
smoking dive toward the
planet below and the driver slowly tumbled down in itswake.
He shifted his aim to the second bike, but the driverhad already begun to pull up. Corran's two shots hit
histarget, one on the driver's leg and the other on the con-nector post fixing the sidepod to the speeder
bike. The ve-hicle did not split apart and the driver veered away as ifhe'd had enough, so Corran
rehomed the blaster and setoff again.
Something on the data monitor squawked at him. He knew it was Rodian but he could no more
understand thespoken tongue than he could read the written language.The guys on the bike and sidepod
are comlinking with theothers. They'll coordinate and they know this city betterthan I do.His hand snaked
up to where he usually worehis good luck charm but he felt nothing.On my own.
He refused to despair and instead set the speeder bikeat a moderate pace and took it down farther and
fartherinto the lower reaches of Coruscant. He had no ideawhere he was, but that did not matter to him
as much asbeing aware of where his pursuit was. Fortunately for him they tended to announce themselves
with blastershots that sizzled past close, but never seemed to tag him.
With three on his tail, he dove into a black hole at thebottom of a canyon, then came around and shot
backagainst his previous line of travel. Trimming his speed heducked and dodged his way through a
tangle of supportgirders, then dove back out of them and came up andaround through a hole in the roof
of a passage. Cuttingback on his throttle, he locked the speeder bike in a gentlecircling pattern that flew
around the hole. He drew theblaster and waited.One has to be coming soon.
One of the threedid jet up through the hole, but hecame out riding a rocket. Corran snapped a quick
shot off at him but missed.The way he came out means hewas warned.
A speeder bike swooped at him from above. Some-thing bright flashed at the front of the sidecar, then
he felta thump on the aft end of his bike. The whole speeder
bike jolted, then started flying backward. Because of theway he'd locked his controls, the bike began
spinningthrough an awkward spiral that almost pitched him tothe ground.
Dropping back into the saddle—literally willing him-self back into it—Corran shifted to neutral and
adjustedthe vector control to kill the roll.They've got a line onme.He twisted himself around and tried to
see the line sohe could shoot it, but it was too slender for him to spotin the darkness. Given no choice, he
shifted his aim to-ward the main body of the Ikas-Ando Starhawk and trig-gered three shots at the lump
a meter or so below a fistthat had been thrust victoriously into the air.

The Starhawk's pilot slumped forward over the frontof the speeder bike and Corran immediately felt his
bikebegin to slow. Dropping back down into the saddle, he shifted the Zoom II into gear and punched
the throttleforward. Coming around to his right, he sailed on past and below the hovering Starhawk.
Twenty meters outfrom it he felt a tug and his bike slowed.
Damn, the sidecar guy didn't release me.All speederbikes came with a deadman switch that returned the
throttle to zero thrust if it was released. That preventedthe speeder bike from racing along if the person at
thecontrols died, fell off, or somehow could no longer pilotthe bike. It was a safety precaution built into
the ma-chines, but as with the one Corran had stolen, it was pos-sible to put in a suicide-cruise switch
that would keep thethrottle set despite having no hands on it.
Corran cranked his throttle up full, but the drag fromthe Starhawk was making him far too slow. The trio
ofbikes that had chased him down were pacing him, buttheir drivers had clearly decided to call in other
help tobox him in. Ihave to get rid of this thing. I have to cutthat line.
Corran sent the Zoom II into a dive, hauling the Starhawk after it. He sped on through level after level,
then came out into a huge intersection of canyonlike airroads.Damn, back out in the open. His pursuit
began
to close, shooting again. Corran tried to make the bikedance as before, but with an air-anchor attached
to it, hewas having no luck at all.
Snarling with frustration, he pointed the speeder bikestraight at the building on one corner of the
intersection.He aimed at a lit rectangle on one of the lower levels, in-tending to whip the trailing Starhawk
into the illuminatedsign there.It would be poetic justice if it were an ad forStarhawks.He expected the
impact would batter the biketo bits. If it didn't,well, there are plenty more walls.
It wasn't until he got close enough to see people sit-ting in the room move that he realized it wasn't an
adver-tising billboard but a window. He wanted to veer off, butblaster bolts on both sides bracketed him.
He thought fora second about going straight through and out throughthe other side, but he knew the
transparisteel would riphim apart.Get out of the way!
At the last moment Corran hauled the speeder bikearound in a sharp left turn. The Starhawk trailing
aroundafter him hit the window. He felt a hard jolt, then hisspeeder bike shot off across the intersection
and parallelto another building's front. He glanced back and thoughtfor a moment that he was free of the
Starhawk, then aslight tremble in the bike's frame matched sparks on thebuilding wall.
Of all the luck!Instead of the transparisteel severingthe cord that bound him to the Starhawk, the
sharpness of the turn had snapped the weakened connectors be-tween the sidepod and the Starhawk
itself. The pod's oc-cupant had vanished, but Corran couldn't see where he'dgone. The pod itself trailed
after him like a balloon aftera child in a stiff wind, but the advent of a half-dozenmore speeder bikes into
the intersection gave him nochance to try to shuck it off.
The trailing pod gave him all sorts of trouble becauseof the potential it had for anchoring him to pillar or
post.He tried to keep his turns crisp, but he had to avoid nar-row alleys and keep his speed under
control. If he wenttoo fast the pod would whip around, bashing into walls
and throwing the aft end of his speeder bike around. If heslowed, the pod still shot forward. The
elasticity of theline connecting it with his bike meant it shot it toward him unless he broke from his line of
flight.

The trailing speeder bikes and swoops kept himhemmed in. He knew he was being herded toward a
spe-cific point, and he desperately wanted to avoid goingthere, but he didn't have many choices. He did
dive and sideslip to smash the pod against walls and break it loose,but it stayed with him.If I survive this
perhaps I'll send the Ikas-Ando people a testimonial on the durability oftheir sidepods . . .
Cruising around a corner, Corran saw bikes closingfrom above and behind, trapping him in a wide alley
thatended in a solid wall a hundred and fifty meters on. Ithad no other outlets save up and what appeared
to be aclosed loading gate at the base of the wall toward whichhe sped.This is it, my run ends now. The
only choices open to him seemed to be slamming into the wall and dying, or fighting and dying.
He thought about slowing to fight, but the whistlingpod behind him reminded him of the folly of that idea.
It'll go through me faster than . . . hey, that's an idea!Corran pointed the speeder bike directly at the
loadinggate and kicked the throttle up to full. Twenty meters out,he cranked the vector-shift back, nosing
the speeder bike toward the sky, and reversed thrust. The combinationpitched him forward, then brought
the front of the bike up to bash him back into his seat. As the bike invertedand the pod sailed through
beneath it, Corran grabbedthe blaster pistol and dropped a dozen feet to the ground.
The pod hit the loading gate's roll-up door withenough force to cave in the metal barrier toward the middle and rip it from the tracks on which it hung. Thespeeder bike, with the suicide-cruise switch engaged,
slammed into the falling ribbon of metal, then flew onover the crest of it and on into the building's interior.
Ittugged on the pod, but the pod had become trapped by
the door, so the cord parted, freeing the speeder bike to careen farther on.
With blaster bolts raining down around him, Corrandove for cover inside the building. Speeder bikes
swoopedpast him as he twisted around and got just inside the doorway. Bringing his blaster pistol up, he
tried to pickout targets, but found far too many to choose from. Thisconfused him for a moment because
while he distinctlyremembered being chased by Zekka Thyne's Black Sun villains, he could see no way
stormtroopers could haveanticipated his journey and set up the ambush into whichhe had ridden.

26

The peal of metal striking metal and the scream of thedoor being torn from its rails snapped Gavin's head
around to his right. Beyond Asyr he saw the door oppo-site the Imperial Fortress come crashing down,
then a rid-erless speeder bike flew into the warehouse. Blaster boltsstippled the door and scarlet energy
darts shot from in-coming speeder bikes toward the stormtroopers.
As shock faded and the stormtroopers began to re-turn fire, Gavin dove to the right and tackled Asyr
Sei'lar.She snarled and clawed at his back as they went down,but he held on and rolled her toward the
edge of the cir-cle and behind debris. A dying Duros—his chest featuringa blackened hole at the center
with flames burningaround it—collapsed on top of them. Gavin shrugged himoff and filled his hands with
the blaster pistol the Duros had dropped.
Gavin came up on one knee and triggered two shotsat a stormtrooper. One glanced off the man's thigh

armor, scoring it with a black stripe, and the other passed be-tween the man's knees. The stormtrooper
came around,leveling his blaster carbine at Gavin.Oh, no, just like onTalasea.
A hand grabbed him by the shoulder and pulled himdown. The stormtrooper's fire scythed up through
whereGavin had been and one bolt passed through the hem ofGavin's coat, but didn't draw blood.
Having released her grip on his shoulder, Asyr leanedout around the ferrocrete blocks shielding them
andsnapped off two shots at the stormtrooper. Both hit himin the torso, turning him around and dropping
him to thefloor. There he twitched and slapped his hands at theholes in his armor, but he did not rise up
again.
Red and green energy bolts crisscrossed in the air, fill-ing the warehouse with the stink of ozone, melted
armor, and burned flesh. The Fortress's heavy blaster cannonspumped out bolts that methodically blasted
into thelower levels of the makeshift dwellings. Shadowed interi-ors flared scarlet for a moment, then
exploded in smokeand dust. The upper floors would collapse on the lower, burying people alive.
Gavin came up to fire again, but Asyr yanked himback down as a speeder bike just missed clipping him.
"Keep your head down unless you want to lose it."
"A minute ago you were planning to have me killed."
She flashed him a smile. "A bigot wouldn't havesaved me."
Gavin shoved her aside with his left hand and trig-gered a line of shots at a stormtrooper peeking out
frombehind cover. "We can't stay here."
"C'mon, run to the open door." Nimbly she rolled uponto her feet and started off. She scattered shots in
the di-rection of the Fortress. He couldn't see what she wasshooting at because of the dust and the
smoke, but he ranright along behind her and shot in the same direction shedid. Blaster bolts sizzled back
through the pall at him, butnothing came within a meter of hitting him.
As nearly as Gavin could tell, the volume of blasterfire heading in at the stormtroopers grossly exceeded
the amount coming back from them. What the Imperial firelacked in volume it made up for with accuracy
andpower. Through the smoke Gavin could see bolts from
pistols and carbines glancing off the Fortress's armorwhereas its return fire stained the smoke with the
color ofblood and exploded whatever it touched. People ranscreaming, others staggered and fell. He
looked for any-one he could recognize, but saw none of the other Roguesamong the refugees.
He reached the street outside and found himselfabruptly dragged out of the river of fleeing people and to
the left. He pulled his right arm free from the other man'sgrasp, then smiled. "Corran?"
"Good to see you, too, Gavin."
Asyr, who was standing next to Nawara and Rhysati,frowned. "Gavin?"
"Long story." Gavin looked at the others gatheredbeside the door. Between them, Shiel and Ooryl
supported the Devaronian, Dmaynel Kiph. His black blood oozedlike oil from a wound in his right thigh.
Everyone elselooked fine. "Where's Aril?"

Nawara shook his head. "Don't know."
Corran glanced at the people running from the ware-house. "She's small. We could have missed her."
Rhysati nodded. "There have been a lot of Sullustansrunning away."
Gavin brandished his gun. "We can't leave her."
Another explosion rumbled from within the ware-house. Corran shied away from the opening. "The Fortress is moving up. We can't go back in."
Bits of masonry debris pitter-patted over Gavin's coatand stung his face. He wanted to go diving back
into thefight, but his belly began to throb where he had previ-ously been gut-shot by a stormtrooper and
that made himhesitate. Guilt immediately assailed him because he hadbeen the cause for the Rogues to be
in the warehouse.Part of him knew the Imperial operation had to have beenone that was planned long
before he was dragged downfor a trial, but logic couldn't defeat the fear he felt forAril and the others
inside.
Two speeder bikes shot back out of the warehouse,followed by a third and then a fourth. After them
came
two Imperial stormtroopers on speeder bikes of theirown. The lead Imp bike fired a shot from its laser
cannonand melted half the control surfaces on a Starhawk.The speeder bike went down hard, spilling the
rider to theground. The second bike swooped low toward thedowned driver.
More smoothly than Gavin would have thought pos-sible, Corran's blaster pistol came up and around.
Hesnapped off three quick shots. One missed the second Imp speeder, but the other two hit and boosted
the driver upout of the saddle. The armored figure fell ten meters to the ferrocrete street, rolling up in a
lifeless heap next to his prey. The speeder bike glided to a hover in midairabove him, out of reach and
benign.
Nawara pointed up as a half-dozen stormtroopers onspeeder bikes dove down through the alley.
"Reinforce-ments, let's move."
Asyr pointed to a doorway set flush with a wall off tothe right. "This way."
Corran waved them on, then darted out and ran to-ward the downed bike driver. Gavin followed him,
direct-ing a scattered pattern of covering fire back into thewarehouse. He reached the rider a moment
after Corrandid and realized the rider was a woman. She tugged herhelmet off, spilling brown hair over
her shoulders. A blueforelock had been pasted to her forehead by sweat.
"Leave me alone!" she snarled at Corran.
"No way, Inyri." Corran grabbed her by the shoulder of her jacket to pull her along, but just ended up
keepingher off the ground when her step faltered.
"My knee," she gasped, "I can't."
Gavin handed Corran his blaster, then swept her upin his arms. "Let's go."
Inyri struggled against Gavin for a moment, thenhung on as stormtroopers started shooting at them from

all directions. The Rogues who had gone over to thedoorway Asyr had pointed out returned fire on the
stormtroopers emerging from the warehouse, momentar-ily driving them back. Corran, with a blaster in
each
hand, triggered a flurry of shots at the first speeder bikeas it came around to make a pass at them. He
didn't hitthe pilot, but he made the man shy off and slam hisspeeder into the alley wall.
The speeder exploded, spilling fire down the wall andinto the alley. It sparked a momentary lull in the
shootingthat Gavin used to complete his run to the doorway. Hegot inside quickly and stumbled forward,
but kept hisfeet. The backlight of blaster fire from the other Roguesprovided him with enough light to find
his way a bitdeeper into what appeared to be a cluttered stockroom ofsome sort. Despite the smoke in
the air, Gavin detected a heavy chemical scent.
Up ahead Asyr cracked a door open, letting a sliverof dim yellow light slice through the gloom. Janitorial
supplies filled the shelves in the room, though dust cov-ered all of them. As he moved out into the
corridor withInyri, he saw enough grime to confirm that the supplieswere seldom used in the building.
Asyr cut across the corridor to a stairwell and ledthem down. Ooryl and Shiel followed with Dmaynel,
leaving Nawara, Rhysati, and Corran to form the rearguard. Though no one seemed to be pursuing the
group, Corran and the other two gave the wounded folks a goodhead start before they followed.
Gavin didn't recognize any of the tunnels or passagesthey took, nor the buildings they cut through, though
they all looked pretty much like those he and Shiel had seen in their survey of Invisec. Finally they moved
up afew levels and were admitted to an apartment where anIthorian led them through a fairly conventional
room toa thickly overgrown, junglelike area of heavy humid air,dripping water, rainbow-colored plants,
and artificiallighting.
Asyr pointed Ooryl and Shiel toward a bluish-greenmossy patch and they deposited Dmaynel there.
"Houlilan, take care of Dmaynel. This other one is hurt,too, but not badly."
Inyri shifted a bit in Gavin's arms. "You can let me down. I can stand. I just banged my knee up when I
fell."
Gavin eased her onto her feet and supported her asshe balanced on her left foot. "Are you going to be
okay?"
She nodded, wincing only slightly as she tried to putweight on her right leg. "I guess you think I should be
grateful."
Asyr looked surprised. "They saved you from deathor worse at Imp hands. Thanks are warranted."
Inyri shrugged. "Thank them? Never. They're the rea-son I'm here. If they'd not interfered with my life, I
wouldn't have been in trouble."
Corran frowned from the doorway. "You had achoice. You didn't have to leave Kessel."
Asyr pocketed her small blaster and folded her arms."There's definitely something going on here that I
don'tknow about. Do I want to?"
Gavin shook his head. "Probably not."

"For your own sake," Nawara added.
Inyri smiled cruelly. "These are the people whobrought Black Sun back to Coruscant."
The Bothan covered her surprise well, then staredright at Gavin. "True?"
He shrugged. "I'm afraid so."
Asyr frowned. "Freeing folks from Kessel explainswhy you've got no love for the Imps, but I don't think
theRebels will think much of your doing that either. Makesthe galaxy kind of small for you. That's a big
problem."
"Not really, not at all." Corran handed Gavin backhis blaster. "As things go, that's really a minor
problem."
"Aminor problem?" Asyr's frown deepened. "Do Ieven want to know you people?"
"Probably not." Gavin smiled at her. "We'reRebels—pilots in Rogue Squadron."
"And you're here on Coruscant?" Asyr's amethysteyes widened. "I begin to see your perspective on
things."
Corran nodded. "Let me help you get the fullhologram. We're here to figure out how to liberate Coruscant. In comparison withour mission,any other problemis a minor problem."
Aril Nunb had decided to feign unconsciousness whenthey dragged her from the rubble, but the cracked
ribs on the right side of her chest were painful enough to makeher squeal when a stormtrooper pulled on
her right arm.He hauled her to her feet, then shoved her toward thegroup of cut and bleeding refugees
standing behind the Floating Fortress.
Aril didn't think she'd blacked out when thingsstarted happening, but she couldn't be certain. She remembered the stormtroopers arriving, then the far doorgoing down. She'd broken for the exit along with
theother Rogues, but a blast from the Fortress had explodedpart of a hovel to her right. She thought only
the shockwave had knocked her down, but the ache in her ribs sug-gested she'd been hit solidly by flying
debris. Then she'dseen a Sullustan toddler begin to scream and thrash in a midden. She'd bent to help
him out when the rest of thebuilding came down.
She glanced back at the pile from where they hadpulled her, but she saw no child. Aril turned to look
for-ward again, but she saw no child among the hollow-eyedsurvivors. Those that could cry did, others
licked theirwounds; many stared off into space.
A Too-Onebee glanced in her direction, then pointedoff to the left. Aril mutely followed the directions
andfound a group of Sullustans huddled together, segregatedfrom the other refugees. A number of
children clung to adults, hiding behind legs or burying their faces in a par-ent's neck. Aril couldn't see the
child she had gone after.She had a hard time actually recalling the child's face, which told her she'd
probably been concussed.
Instead of letting herself think she'd failed, she arbi-trarily picked out one child and decided he had been
theone she had tried to help. She nodded in his direction, buthe just hid further behind his father's leg.

Someone grabbed her left arm. Aril looked up intothe jowly face of a man who stood a good forty
centime-ters taller than she did. He was quite heavyset, yet hisbrown eyes shone with a cunning that
removed him fromthe class of man she would have called bovine. He worehis thinning black hair in a
short military style cut, which was in keeping with his General's uniform.
"You seem healthy. A good specimen."
Aril lightly tapped the right side of her chest andwinced.
The man dropped his thick-fingered hand to her flankand probed her ribs. She squeaked out a protest.
Histouch, while clinical, was also forceful and hurt."Cracked ribs maybe, probably just bruised." He
lookeddown into her eyes and turned her head to the left andright. "You look fine. Don't worry, I'll take
care of you."
He straightened up. "Diric!"
An older, dull-eyed man in a bloodstained orderly'suniform spun on his heel. "Yes, General Derricote?"
Derricote patted Aril on the shoulder. "This is onewe're taking with us. Put her with the others."
"She makes a dozen and a half, sir."
"Good." Derricote pointed to the orderly. "Go withhim. You will have the best of care. In fact, I daresay,
youwill have the best medical care available for the rest ofyour life."
27
Admiral Ackbar closed his eyes for a second, then noddedto his aide. "I suppose the tide is high, so I
cannot escapeit. Please show Councilor Fey'lya in."
The human aide departed, giving Ackbar a momentof silence in which he could prepare for the coming
con-frontation.No, Ackbar, if you assume bitter water, you'llnot taste the sweet.The Admiral refused
to consider theBothan a rival for power, primarily because Ackbar him-self had no desire for power in
any political sense of the word. He had risen to his position at the head of the Al-liance military because
of his intimate knowledge of Im-perial doctrines—learned while he was Grand MoffTarkin's slave—and
because the Mon Calamari had con-tributed their considerable fleet to bolster the Rebel Navyfor the
battle at Endor. Once the Empire was defeatedand his services were no longer needed, he would happily
retire to Mon Calamari and spend the rest of his days liv-ing through tide cycles.
He realized his refusal to see Borsk Fey'lya as a rivalprobably was shortsighted, but he could not afford
thedistraction. With the death of General Laryn Kre'fey atBorleias, the Bothans had lost their most
celebrated military leader. The Bothans had no other candidate to offeras viable for running grand operations like the
taking ofCoruscant.
Which meant any Bothan agenda had to go throughAckbar.
Which is why Fey'lya has come to me now.
The hatch to Ackbar's cabin onHome One openedand Borsk Fey'lya entered the dimly lit office.

Ackbarstarted to adjust the lighting upward, but the Bothanshook his head. "Be comfortable, Admiral, I
can see wellenough in this light."
The subdued tones of Fey'lya's voice, and the concil-iatory nature of his words, immediately put Ackbar
on his guard. "You honor me with your visit, Councilor."
Fey'lya held a gold-furred hand up. "Please, the for-mality of titles is unnecessary between us. We have
not al-ways been on the same side, nor do you probablyconsider me a friend, but you do acknowledge
the bondwe share within the Rebellion."
"Of course." Ackbar nodded slowly. "You came tospeak to me about Noquivzor."
"Indeed. The reports I have gotten were sketchy."
Ackbar sat back in his eggshell repulsorlift chair."You have the basics: one standard day ago Warlord
Zsinj showed up in the system with theIron Fist,launched a wing of TIEs, and proceeded with a
planetarybombardment. Our base there was hit hard, though sincemost of it was underground, the
damage was not asextensive as Zsinj undoubtedly would like to think."
Fey'lya's purple eyes glowed luminescently in the half-light. "We met on Noquivzor approximately seven
stan-dard weeks ago. Do you think this was a misguidedassassination attempt?"
Ackbar thought for a moment, then shook his head."Unlikely. If he killed the Rebellion leadership he
wouldmake himself a target. I suspect he thought he was at-tacking Rogue Squadron, to pay them back
for hitting hisships. His facility for carrying a grudge is all but legend-ary. We made no secret of where
Rogue Squadron was
staying primarily to keep the Empire looking atNoquivzor instead of closer to home."
"How badly was Noquivzor hit?"
Ackbar's eyes half closed. "We had major damage to the barracks complex. Multiple floors collapsed
one atopanother. We will be a long time digging bodies out. RogueSquadron lost a significant portion of
their support staff.The hangar complex, on the other horizon, escaped dam-age. When we get them back
from Coruscant they willhave ships to fly."
"Even the worst plague will spare some of the virtu-ous." The Bothan slowly shook his head. "Warlord
Zsinj is becoming more of a problem. If we do not strike backat him and hit him hard, he will be
emboldened and hitus again."
"Agreed, but where do we hit him? He's as elusive astheKatana fleet. The galaxy is a big place and even
withback-plotting and reports coming in, pinpointing his loca-tion is all but impossible. To find him would
demand afull fleet operation, and that would mean we delay theCoruscant operation indefinitely."
"But if we were to do that and try to hunt Zsinjdown, we would suddenly open ourselves to more reprisals by him and might give Ysanne Isard the opening sheneeds to strike at us." Fey'lya smoothed the fur
aroundthe mouth with his left hand. "Fighting on two fronts isfolly."
"Truly spoken." Ackbar cocked his head slightly."You would not be here if you did not have an idea to
of-fer, for this discussion merely verbalizes facts plainly inevidence to anyone who has read the reports."

A hurt expression stole upon Fey'lya's face, but theintelligence in his eyes robbed it of its intended effect.
"Toescape a rancor, one is wise to ignore the bite of a flea."
"Meaning?"
"We cannot shift our focus from the Empire. What Ipropose is a bold strike at Coruscant."
"We're not ready."
"We must be." Fey'lya opened his hands. "We are already staging for it and nothing in reports from Corus-cantgive any indication that Isard is increasing her
de-fenses. She must know we are not ready so she thinks she has time to prepare. If we go now, soon,
she will be takenunawares."
"You grossly underestimate Iceheart if you think sheis ever unprepared."
Fey'lya's head came up and his jaw opened in a pred-atory grin. "You are not protesting the plan as
utter mad-ness. Your thoughts parallel mine, don't they?"
Ackbar sat forward again, his barbels quivering. "Weare at a critical junction. Iceheart's preparations for
theinvasion she has to know is coming have been insuffi-cient. Reports from Coruscant are favorable.
Because ofrecent developments it appears it is possible to unite dis-parate parts of the Coruscant
population to give us a par-tisan force on the planet. They are poorly equipped, butcan be disruptive and
distracting."
"Can they disrupt and distract enough to bring theshields down?"
"I do not know." Ackbar shook his head. "I havesent a message to Commander Antilles directing him to
formulate and prepare to implement a plan to do justthat, with the resources he has on hand. Once I
receive areply that indicates he has such a plan prepared, I willgive him a target time for when it has to go
into effect.When the shields go down, we will arrive at Coruscant."
The Bothan's eyes narrowed. "You allow for no slip-page in his plan. What if he cannot bring it off in
time?"
Ackbar's jaw opened in a smile. "I have had a reportwhich makes this plan viable in the event that Commander Antilles and his people fail to bring the shieldsdown. You may recall that in recent months the
Interdic-torcruiserBlack Asp ran afoul of Rogue Squadron? Their Captain, a woman named Uwlla Iillor,
filed a protest over the transfer of her flight operations officer from her com-mand. The protest was
ignored and, apparently, was enough to prompt her and her staff to decide to defect.
This gives us an Interdictor cruiser, something we havenot had before.
"Depending upon the course we choose, the journeyfrom Borleias to Coruscant will take approximately
twenty standard hours. My intention is to send theBlackAspin early and have it jump to the outer edges
of theCoruscant system. If the shields are not down, the Inter-dictor will power up the gravity well
projectors and dragour invasion fleet from hyperspace prematurely. If the shields are down, Iillor will do
nothing and allow us torevert from hyperspace right on top of Coruscant."
Fey'lya slowly nodded. "Elegantly simple but decid-edly effective. You clearly trust this Captain Iillor.

You donot think her coming over is one of Ysanne Isard's decep-tions?"
"No. Captain Iillor cites interference by Imperial In-telligence with her command as the primary reason
forher defection. General Cracken has cleared her and hashis people working on her staff. Within a week
theBlackAspwill be operational with an Alliance crew."
The Bothan nodded. "The ship will be renamed?"
"The crew has chosen a hopeful name:Corusca Rain-bow."
"An omen, to be sure."
"That is my hope." Ackbar gave Fey'lya a wall-eyedlook. "You will propose this plan to Mon Mothma?"
"In both our names, yes." Fey'lya smiled. "With hersupport and the two of us backing it, the Provisional
Council cannot fail to make it operational."
"Good." The Mon Calamari nodded. "Then I just have to see that the operation does not fail."
28
Kirtan Loor dropped to one knee before the holographic image of Ysanne Isard but did not bow his
head. "Thankyou for replying to my request so quickly, Madam Direc-tor."
She arched an eyebrow at him. "Displays of ego andspirit always attract my attention, Agent Loor."
"Good, then I can take it that you will be reprimand-ing General Derricote?"
"Why?"
Loor blinked, then narrowed his eyes. "Why?Madam Director, he took it upon himself to go intoInvisec
and select subjects for his experimentation whowere transported directly to his lab. He violated every
known security procedure we have in doing that. TheSullustans he took were not properly screened so
we donot know who they were. The other captives spoke of anAlien Combine and the Sullustans might
have been able to supply more useful information on that organization."
Isard dismissed his protest with a sneer. "I have toldhim you are to be allowed to interview his subjects."
"Oh, yes, but he immediately injected them with thenewest strain of his Krytos virus. The interviews
would
have to take place with my people in isolation suits,which means the subjects would know they were
nevergetting out. Their motivation to cooperate would be gone.And if he's right, if this strain has an
incubation period oftwo weeks, the subjects would be well into dementia anddeath before analysis would
let us conduct other interro-gations."
"That is not your concern at this moment, AgentLoor. General Derricote's Krytos project is of
paramountimportance. This new strain could be the breakthroughwe need to prepare Imperial Center for
the Rebels." Fireflared in her molten left eye. "That idiot Zsinj attackedthe Rebels to salve his own
wounded pride. He doesn't re-alize that if they were to mobilize their entire fleet and de-vote it to hunting
him down they'd have him inside ayear. The fool thinks he is powerful, but he doesn't realizeall he has

done is to force the Rebels to move moreswiftly to take Imperial Center—too swiftly."
Loor sat back on his heel. "There is no indication ofimpending operations according to our spy in Rogue
Squadron."
"I know that, but I also know their leadership. Theymean to wipe us from the galaxy and they cannot do
thatif they end up chasing after every Moff who decides heshould be the next Emperor. Imperial Center
is the key topower in the galaxy. They know that and they know thesooner they sit Mon Mothma on the
Imperial throne, theeasier their crusade will be."
The audacity of launching a strike at Imperial Center surprised Loor, but he knew the leaders of the
Rebellionoften saw the impossible as necessary and their successesagainst the Death Stars had made
them think they couldsucceed at anything. Isard had purposely left ImperialCenter vulnerable, but only so
the Krytos virus couldcause the Rebel Alliance to collapse. If it were not ready,her plan would fail and
the Alliance would be strongerthan ever.
"I will monitor the situation, Madam Director."
"Oh, yes, you will." She stabbed a holographic finger
at him. "The Rogues can plan all they want, but nothingcan actually bedone for two weeks. I am going to
deploythis version of the Krytos virus so it can be introduced tothe planetary water supply starting now.
We will see ifDerricote's predictions on its speed and lethality are cor-rect, and assuming they are, we
will save ourselves twoweeks of waiting. If the Rogues strike too soon, all willbe lost. Two weeks
minimum—a month would be better.Develop the resources you need, do whatever you must, but see to
it that the Rogues do nothing substantive be-fore I want them to."
"It will be done, Madam Director." Loor bowed hishead, but when he looked up again her image had
van-ished. He stood, slowly, and a smile spread across his fea-tures. "Develop resources and do what I
must. By yourorder."
He walked from his dark, cramped office down ashort corridor to another room. The door whisked up
into the ceiling, revealing a dark room with a figurebound to a chair and flanked by two stormtroopers.
Loorwalked in and took the man sitting there by the chin, elic-iting a snarl from him.
Loor laughed, releasing the chin, then backhandedthe man across the face. "Displays of spirit can be
pain-ful."
"Nothing you can do will hurt me, Loor."
"Ah, you do remember me. I should be flattered,Patches." Loor looked down at Zekka Thyne and hit
himagain. The man's head rocked back, but the red eyesstared up at him, full of defiance. Striking Thyne
had a cathartic effect on him, but Loor refused to indulge him-self. "Fortunately for you, I remember you
as well."
"You'll get nothing from me, Loor."
"But you have nothing I want, Patches." Loor tappedfingers against his own breastbone. "I have
something tooffer you, however. Rogue Squadron brought you andother Black Sun scum to Imperial
Center, then they fol-lowed you. There is only one implication for this, which

is to suppose you and they are preparing for an assault onImperial Center."
"I know nothing about that."
Loor grabbed an ear and twisted it cruelly. "You'relistening now, not speaking."
Thyne stared vibroblades at him but remained silent.
"Good." Loor released him. "You will be my eyesand ears within the Alliance community here. I want to
know their plans. I want timetables, suppliers, personnelrosters, anything and everything. If you give me
what Iwant, I let you live."
"If I walk out of here, you will never be able to getme again so your threat means nothing."
"Oh, I won't be the one to kill you. Not firsthand,anyway. What Iwill do is allow Black Sun slicers to
ob-tain files that even go back to my CorSec days notinghow you were working for me. They will
implicate you inthe downfall of Black Sun here on Imperial Center. Yourfate will be decided by your
brethren, not me."
That threat damped some of the defiance in Thyne'seyes. "Do not be disheartened, though, Patches, I
would not surrender you unless forced to. These stormtrooperswill conduct you to a place to which you
will say you es-caped after your speeder bike was brought down. We've been combing the area
constantly for the last three days.You will tell your compatriots that you were in hidingand finally managed
to escape. They will believe you."
"No one will believe I hid."
Loor looked over at one of the stormtroopers. "He'sright. Before you leave him inflict a nonfatal
abdominalwound—one he could survive and one that won't hamperhim too much."
"You don't need to do that."
Loor smiled. "Oh, but I think we do. Verisimilitude.If you can't believe you would have been hiding, no
one else will. People are suspicious, especially people likeCorran Horn."
"Then this will be another thing I owe him for. If itweren't for him, I'd not be in your custody."
"Indeed," Loor nodded confidently. "And just toshow you that I'm not a monster, I'll give you a gift. If
you find a convenient time to kill Corran Horn, do so. I consider him a threat to you and your operation.
Hiselimination, therefore, will please me no end."
29
Corran hated waiting. It seemed that since he'd left therest of the Rogues with the Ithorian he'd done little
but wait. After departing from the Ithorian's jungle—whichwas just one apartment within a whole
complex filledwith such apartments so the Ithorians could live together,as was their wont—he had used a
public comm stationand had called a number Rima had given him. The re-cording at the other end asked
him to punch in a personalcode, which he did, then he was given instructions onwhere to go.
Being careful to see he was not followed, he went tothe location indicated. He found himself at a biopod
hotelrun by a Selonian. The tall, slender creature showedCorran to a small pod midway up on a wall of

pods. As Corran climbed in he estimated the cockpit of his X-wingwas larger. He dialed the external
opaquing for his doorup to full, then lay down in a pod that measured two me-ters in length, a meter in
height, and a meter in width.
He immediately adjusted the temperature up—it wasset low enough that he figured a Sullustan had been
thelast occupant—and opened a channel on the comlink tolet music fill the pod. The datapad display unit
above his
face flashed through a series of instructions concerningfire exits, the location of refresher facilities, and
the loca-tions of nearby culinary establishments. He watched thatuntil one advertisement showed a
Gamorrean digging apaw into a bowl of something pink that pulsed, at whichpoint the need for locating
food became moot.
He remained at that location for two days beforeRima came for him and took him to another place that
was better suited to his needs, though it was in need of agreat deal of repair. Plasteel sheets covered one
of theapartment's walls. The furnishings, while hardly worn atall, were tattered and torn. The carpet had
some blood init and transparisteel occasionally crunched underfoot. The interior wall opposite the plasteel
wall had been heavilydented by an oblong, vaguely cylindrical object.
Corran looked at her. "Is this the place where aspeeder bike came crashing through the wall?"
Rima stared at him, somewhat stunned. "How do you know about that?"
"I was driving the bike that sent it into the window."Corran ran his hand over the impression in the wall.
"The others wouldn't have told you about that. The Rogues didn't know and the Black Sun people aren't
much for talking about their defeats. I'd imagine theyhave turned the story into something about rescuing
thealiens from the Imps, right?"
"I do not know." Rima shrugged easily. "My primary concern has been seeing to it that you and Erisi are
takencare of. I apologize for quarantining you two, but I don'tknow how much has been relayed to
Imperial Intelli-gence."
"I don't know either, but I made some basic arrange-ments before I headed out and called the
emergencynumber you gave me. Inyri Forge was going back to theHeadquarters. That is one place Fliry
Vorru can be found.It was my bad luck that Zekka Thyne was there the night I visited. That's what
initiated the chase that ended withmy running into the Imperial raid on the Alien Combine.
"The other Rogues have the Headquarters as a touchstone. I gave them no way to reach me and I have no wayto reach them save through using Inyri as a
cutout. Iimagine the Alien Combine also has a way to reach theother Rogues. Has there been any word
on Aril?"
Rima shook her head.
Corran frowned. "Does that mean there's no infor-mation or there is, but I don't need to know it?"
"There is no news." Rima's shoulders sagged just abit. "There was a lot of confusion in the aftermath of
the raid. Some reports have suggested a group of Sullustanswere led off early on, but we've no
confirmation of that,nor any indication they are in any of the prisons here. They vanished and so has Aril."

"People tend to do that." Corran's hands knottedinto fists. "One thing that's important, I need to talk to
Commander Antilles."
"Who?"
Corran smiled wearily at Rima. "I'm here, the otherRogues are here."Including Tycho. "Commander
Antilles has to be here and I need to speak with him. I saw some-thing the other night that he needs to
know about."
"If it is that important, perhaps I need to know aboutit?"
Not with you being as close to Tycho as you seem tobe.Corran shook his head. "You don't need to
know,Rima, sorry. Squadron business."
"Very well." The white-haired woman shrugged. "Stay here until I return for you."
"As ordered." Corran drew the blaster from themakeshift holster he'd fashioned in the lining of hisjacket.
"Can you get me some spare power packs for thisthing?"
"I'll see."
"That doesn't sound very hopeful. What if storm-troopers raid this place?"
"Ask if you can borrow some from them." Rima gavehim a grim smile. "All they can say is no."
He waited two more days, spending his time workingup a line that would convince stormtroopers to
surrender
their weapons to him. He found it a singularly frustrating occupation because, since they tended to be
much larger than he was, he knew he could not intimidate them. Ap-pealing to their humanity seemed a
dubious prospect, asdid appealing to their sense of fair play.
He spent the vast majority of time in the apartment going over the earlier events and trying to draw
conclu-sions from all of it. First and foremost he was certain he'dseen Tycho Celchu talking with Kirtan
Loor. That meantthe operation on Coruscant was busted wide open. WithTycho on Coruscant the Imps
clearly had full descriptionsand datafiles on everyone in the squadron. He had to as-sume they were
under surveillance or would soon bewatched.
The fact that he'd stumbled across Tycho and Loormeeting in publicdid bother him a bit. If Tycho was
anImperial agent—as had been everyone else who'd everbeen at Lusankya—why wouldn't the meeting
have beenheld in an Imperial facility? The obvious answer to that question was that Tycho hadn't
appreciated his Lusankyaexperience and was being wary of trapping himself in anImperial stronghold. He
was smart enough to know theImps couldn't be trusted, so he was probably gouging them for sufficient
credits to buy some far-away worldand live like a Moff for the rest of his life.
The fact that their mission had so clearly been blownreally left the Rogues only one choice: leave
immediately.He felt he had collected enough information about thegeneral level of security on the planet
to be useful, but healso expected all that to change in the near future, if ithad not changed already. He had
to assume that whateverany of the Rogues had learned was of dubious value, andtherefore, their mission
was a bust.

The only way to salvage any of this is to go homeand start fighting against the Empire again.
Before he could come up with another plan thatwould be effective, but also before he'd admitted defeat
to himself, Rima came for him. She resisted answering his
questions about their destination and seemed abnormallytaciturn and withdrawn, but she did give him
powerpacks for his blaster, so he chose not to press her for in-formation. He did wonder what had
gotten into her, buthe chose not to ask questions on the street. When they slipped into the Headquarters
he found other things to occupy his attention, especially his being ushered downthe back corridor to a
side room where Wedge sat waitingfor him.
Corran snapped to attention and saluted as Rima leftthe room. "Horn reporting, sir."
Wedge returned the salute, then smiled and gaveCorran a back-slapping hug. "It's good to see you're
alive and well, even though the last time I saw you, you were doing your best to kill me and a number of
other people."
What?"Excuse me, sir?"
"I was in the apartment where you sent a speederbike through the window." Wedge held a hand up and
Corran saw some half-healed cuts on it. "Nothing major,but there's not much bacta down here, so I have
to healthe traditional way. Did find some ryll tincture that killedinfection, though."
"If I had known, I'd..."
"No one save the driver was badly hurt, so don'tworry." Wedge inclined his head toward the door.
"Win-ter tells me you wanted to talk with me? Something youcould only tell me?"
"Winter?" Corran frowned for a second. "Ah, youmean Rima..."
"Right. We'd met before. She and Tycho are friends."
"So I've gathered, which is why I wanted to talk toyou." Corran clasped his hands at the small of his
back."Five days ago, right here in the Headquarters, I sawTycho Celchu talking with Kirtan Loor, an
Imperial Intel-ligence agent."
Wedge looked surprised, then frowned and slowlyshook his head. "Five days ago?"
"Yes, sir."
"That's impossible."
"I know what I saw, sir." Corran jerked a thumbback toward the bar. "I saw him as sure as the Emperor
is dead." He tried to make his statement sound certain,but he was getting feelings of confusion and
sorrow fromWedge's expression. "Really, I did see him."
"That's impossible, Corran. Five days ago WarlordZsinj attacked our base at Noquivzor. The barracks
com-plex got hit hard. They're digging through the rubble nowbut they don't expect to find survivors."
Wedge hesitatedfor a moment, then swallowed. "Our support staff wasdevastated. Zraii survived, but
that was the only confir-mation they'd give me."

"What about Whistler?" Corran blurted out thequestion before he realized how callous it made him
sound. "He's only a droid, but . . ."
Wedge patted him on the shoulder. "I understand. Idon't have word of him directly, but Zraii was
workingon our fighters in the hangar, so I have to suppose mostof our astromechs were there with him.
The hangar es-caped serious damage. If any news comes through, I will let you know."
"Thanks." Corran took a deep breath and tried tosort everything out in his mind. "So what you're telling
me is that if I saw Tycho, I saw a ghost?"
"That's about the size of it."
"And you told Rima, er, Winter? That's why she wasso quiet."
"I just got word myself and broke it to her as gentlyas I could. We're still hoping—bacta can do miracles
ifthere's even the remotest spark of life—but things do notlook good." Wedge sighed. "Of course, that's
the least ofour worries right now."
"Oh?"
Wedge nodded. "Zsinj's attack is driving the invasion schedule forward. We have a new mission and
you're hereto help plan it out."
"I'll do my best, sir."
"Let's hope we canall do our best, and then some."Wedge slowly exhaled. "We've got to come up with
aplan that will let us, with a minimal amount of lead time,take over or destroy whatever we need to bring
downCoruscant's shields and leave the world open to invasion.
30
Corran followed Wedge from the small room into thehallway and farther along to an even larger room.
Thefirst people he saw there were the Bothan Asyr andthe Devaronian he'd helped to escape from the
ware-house. They were already seated at the large round tablein the middle of the room. As he came
around Wedge hesaw Fliry Vorru looking very Imperial and Zekka Thynelooked pale and in a bit of
discomfort.
Looks like not everyone escaped unharmed.
"Corran!"
"Iella!" Arching his back, he picked her up in a hugand hung on tight. "I can't believe you're here."
"Gil did this to me. The identities he set up were onCoruscant." Iella pulled back away from him, but
kepthis hands in hers. "I can't believe it's you."
If seeing Thyne hurt had made Corran feel good, see-ing Iella made him feel . . .almost whole. I've
spent toolong with nothing and no one from my past aside fromWhistler. It was as if that world didn't
exist.He smiled."Where's Diric?"
Iella's smile froze for a second, then she glanceddown. "I don't know."

"I'm sorry. What happened?"
"A year ago or so he was picked up in an Imp sweepand never came home. I bolted, made some
Alliance con-tacts, and joined the Rebellion. There's been no word andafter this amount of time..."
Corran nodded and hugged her again. Diric Wessirihad been an interesting man. Old family wealth
allowedhim to lead a life of leisure. He viewed life as a collection of phenomena to be studied and
experienced, but he was not one to let those experiences change him. He was eas-ily twenty years Iella's
senior, but they fit together like ox-ygen and hydrogen. Diric didn't always agree with thingsCorSec did,
but he made an attempt to understand whathad been done, and that quest for enlightenment had impressed Corran.
This is not the time to tell Iella that Gil is dead andthat Loor killed him. There will be opportunities later,
I'msure."Diric was special, but so are you. It's great tosee you again despite everything else."
"I agree." Iella squeezed his hands gently. "AndMirax asked to be remembered to you."
A smile blossomed on Corran's face. "She's here?How?"
"TheSkate brought the rest of the squadron here and couldn't get away." Iella frowned. "I would have
thoughtthe others had told you how they got here."
"We were a bit busy when we ran into each other."
"No kidding. Mirax has threatened to give youspeeder bike lessons. First rule, she says, is stay away
from buildings."
Corran laughed aloud. "Yeah. We'll have to discussthat more."
Thyne snarled. "How long is this chummy crap goingto go on?"
"Patches, someday when you have a friend you'll learn this is what you do when you haven't seen each
other for a while." Corran released Iella and she movedoff to take a seat next to Winter.
"Well said, Lieutenant Horn." Vorru folded his hands
together on the table. "However, time is of the essence, Igather. Shall we get things under way?
Commander?"
Corran took a seat beside Wedge, placing Winter onhis right hand. Iella sat next to her, then the two
aliensand finally Vorru and Thyne. Corran noticed that Thyneheld his right hand and forearm protectively
over hisstomach.Gut-shot. Painful. Good.
Wedge stood. "I want to keep this as simple as pos-sible. Since the warehouse incident we have all
come toagree that working together to oppose the Empire is pref-erential to each going our own ways.
Each of our groupshas strengths and weaknesses, most of which overlap tominimize our exposure to the
enemy. We can all agreethat we will fare better on Coruscant once the Empire isoverthrown and
accomplishing that end is a goal of theRebellion.
"Originally Rogue Squadron was sent here to reconCoruscant and gauge the vulnerable points for later

ex-ploitation. The problem is that Warlord Zsinj is testingboth the Empire and the Rebellion. The
Imperials knowthat to attack him is to weaken themselves to the pointwhere they cannot prevail. The
Alliance knows that to pursue Zsinj would dilute our strength so that a strike atCoruscant won't be
possible for years, perhaps evendecades. This means the Alliance will have to strike in thevery near
future and they want us to open the gates toCoruscant."
Fliry Vorru tapped a fingertip against the tabletop. "Bringing down a planet's shields is not an easy
proposi-tion."
"Agreed." Wedge leaned forward on his hands. "Thecentral computer complex here is the key. Is it fair
to as-sume Black Sun's slicers have not been able to insert codeinto the master programs that control the
planet?"
The white-haired man sat back in his chair. "I believethe discussion of that point is premature."
"Oh?"
"Quite so, Commander." Vorru nodded toward the representatives of the Alien Combine. "Their stake in
this
is quite clear. The Imperial regime is decidedly cruel andinhumane in dealing with them. The liberation of
thisplanet would benefit them enormously. And you Rebels,well, you would be achieving a goal you've
been focused upon for at least seven years. I mean, Winter dear, it is ev-ery Alderaanian's dream to
replace your lost world withCoruscant, is it not?"
Winter's eyes glittered coldly. "The Alliance's goal isto see the death of the evil that destroyed our world.
Alderaan cannot be replaced and certainly not with thistransparisteel and duracrete mausoleum for an
Empire."
Wedge folded his arms. "Your point, Vorru?"
"My point, Commander, is that the Alliance is notlikely to be any more favorable to Black Sun than the
Em- pire was. Less, in fact, I suspect. I want to know what isin this plan to reward me and my people for
their coop-eration."
Corran snarled. "Why don't you start with your lib-eration from Kessel?"
Vorru smiled delicately. "You would gladly see meback there, would you not, Lieutenant? If your plan
suc-ceeds you might find yourself appointed Minister of Secu-rity. If the cursing about you and your
family done byThyne here is any measure of Horn efficacy, I think Iprefer having Ysanne Isard opposing
me. What I wouldlike, Commander Antilles, is some guarantee of clemencyfor those of my people who
work to help you overthrowIsard."
"And if that is not possible?"
"Relocation to a world of my choosing, a world thatwill be made part of your Alliance with me at its
head."
"A world you will turn into a haven for crime?" Iella looked disgusted.
Corran shook his head. "He's smarter than that. He'llsolicit bribes from worlds so he doesn't end up

there.He'll be rich enough to buy a star system or two."
Vorru opened his hands. "I seek a world where I canlive out my days in peace and you think poorly of
me. I
find it hard to believe you hold the rehabilitative qualitiesof Kessel in such contempt."
"Enough." Wedge held a hand out to forestallCorran's reply to Vorru's unctuous comment. "I'll giveyou
my personal guarantee you and your people will notbe held responsible for crimes committed while you
areacting in concert with us. That doesn't mean a sociopathlike Thyne here is free to slaughter innocents.
We're onlygoing to hit legitimate military targets. The streets startrunning with blood and I'll burn your
people down my-self. I think this is the best offer you're going to get."
"It's acceptable. For now." Vorru nodded. "And, no,our slicers have not been able to get into the main
com-puter."
Thyne shifted uncomfortably in his chair. "We shouldjust blow it up. Everything will stop and the shields
willcome down."
"No they won't." Winter frowned. "Damage to themain computer system will transfer control to satellite
fa-cilities. While they are not as well guarded as the main fa-cility, they will not be easy to take over.
There is also apossibility that crucial systems, such as shield control, could get shunted to another satellite
center if there istrouble with one. In other words, to get the shields downthat way we'd have to guarantee
a strike atall of the sat-ellites as well as the main center, and we don't know forcertain whereall of those
subsidiary centers are."
Vorru smiled. "I can furnish you with those locations,but your reservations about so explosive a plan are
justi-fied. It strikes me that something more subtle would bepreferential."
Asyr laid a hand gently over one of Vorru's. "I don'tunderstand why it is so difficult to slice code into the
main computer. There are billions of transactions andmessages that go through the system on an hourly
basis.Something ought to be able to get through, shouldn't it?"
Wedge shrugged. "Seems like it, but I guess not. Win-ter?"
She tucked a strand of white hair back behind her
ear. "The Imperial computers operate through a very re-strictive language that has a hierarchical
command andaccess structure. Programs that go in to be effective acrossthe system have to be
authorized at the highest securitylevels. These levels are ultra-secure. Programs are scannedfor content
and that content is compared to their accesslevels. If a system program comes in without an accesscode
that is cleared for entering system programs, it'sdumped."
Corran frowned. "If you were able to wrap a pro-gram up in the right disguise, it would get through,
right?"
"Presumably, but we don't have the right codes.Those codes are changed by the hour and old memory
cores are swapped out daily and destroyed within aweek—though after a day's worth of use they're
prettywell ready to be junked anyway. Each night clean newmemory cores are placed in the computers
and trillions ofexabytes of transactions are transferred to the new cores. This happens throughout the
system."

Asyr nodded. "The production facility for the Palarmemory cores is on the Invisec border. Nasty work
mak-ing the things. All sorts of noxious chemicals go on thedata retention surfaces, then a lot of energy
gets used informatting the cores. We lose people every day in thatplant."
Wedge folded his arms. "If they're getting new coresdaily, how does the transfer of data occur? I mean,
if anold core is replaced with a new core, how does the data from the old core get onto the new core?"
"They have two banks of cores and the data is trans-ferred from one to the other. The process doesn't
takethat long." Winter smiled. "The Imperial Senate's com-puter system used the same security system,
but on amuch smaller scale. Half a standard hour is all it shouldtake to complete the operation."
Corran sat back. "What happens to the transactionsthat occur while the transfers are taking place?"
"They get caught on a subsidiary memory bank and
queued up to be sent into the main banks when the ap-propriate cores are free. Then those cores send
the dataover into the new banks."
"Okay, Winter, now what sort of program governsthe transfer of data between the banks?"
She looked at Corran oddly. "Pretty basic stuff, uni-versal to every system really. It goes into cores
whenthey're formatted. What are you getting at?"
"Data goes from the first bank to the second, right?"
"Yes."
"And it goes fast because, presumably, it was checkedas it came in and anything bad was discarded,
right?"
"Yes."
"So if something on one of the subsidiary cores wasshot over into the security core during the transfer, it
wouldn't be checked by the second bank, right?"
Winter began to smile. "And altering the transfercode on one of the subsidiary disks so it would send a
Rebel program over when the secure transfer was takingplace, instead of blocking that transfer the way
it's sup-posed to, wouldn't be that hard..."
"Because," said Asyr, "we have access to the plantwhere the cores are manufactured and we can alter
thecode used to format the memory cores."
"Right." Corran beamed. "We send over a programthat causes us to be given clearance codes and
addressesfor the shield maintenance programs and we can bring the shields down at will."
Vorru bowed his head in Corran's direction."CorSec's gain was Black Sun's loss. You have a devious
mind—it is a pity you decided to use it to hunt us."
Corran winked at him. "That's the trick of it—I can't stand the thought of a criminal who's dumber than I
amprofiting by his crimes. Neither could my father, whichexplains why we shortened Patches's career."

"If your father wasthat smart, he'd still be alive."
Corran refused to be goaded. "This operation is a lit-tle bit more important than punching holes in your
fan-tasy life, but the time will come."
Thyne started to get up, but Wedge pushed him backinto his chair. "Stay down."
"Make me."
Vorru's right hand struck fast and slapped Thyne onthe belly. The younger man howled, then, as he
doubled over, Vorru grabbed him by his neck and slammed hisforehead into the table. Thyne,
glassy-eyed, reboundedand Vorru flung him from his chair. "For some peoplediscipline is alesson. For
others it is a lifetime."
A shiver ran down Corran's spine.He goes from gra-cious to vicious in less time than it takes for
darkness tocome in when a light goes out. And Thyne is out like alight.He exchanged a knowing glance
with Iella and sawher shake her head.
Wedge looked at the man on the floor, then shrugged."We have enough, I think, to begin some planning.
Win-ter, if you can have your slicers begin the programs we'llneed, that will be a big help. Asyr, we'll
need the basic se-curity setup at the Palar plant, plus the routines and anycomputer security information
you can get us." Helooked at Vorru. "And you..."
"I will find out if any of the computer core techni-cians have any interesting vices we can exploit or an
inter-est in exploiting the vices we have to offer."
"I think that will be fine." Wedge smiled. "In twodays we will meet again and see how close we are to
mak-ing the plan work."
31
Kirtan Loor's hands convulsed into fists.Who is morestupid, a fool or someone who relies upon a fool?
ZekkaThyne's initial report about a planning meeting for whatthe Rogues would be doing to bring
Imperial Centerdown had seemed promising. Thyne had told him whohad attended and it had pleased
Loor to learn IellaWessiri and Corran Horn had been reunited. The fact thathe'd not known Iella was
living right under his nose did not thrill him, but her location had been outside his areaof immediate interest
until she became part of RogueSquadron's operation.
The datafiles that the Imperial Intelligence organizedcrime division had sent over to him had provided
interest-ing information on Fliry Vorru as well as the Devaronian,Dmaynel Kiph, but of Asyr Sei'lar they
had no record.Though he had been chastened before by Ysanne Isard about drawing unwarranted
conclusions, Loor decidedSei'lar was probably a member of some Bothan spy net-work. The possible
existence of an independent BothanIntelligence operation on Imperial Center suggested theAlliance was
not a wholly unified front, which meant
Iceheart's strategy for dividing and destroying them piece-meal had even greater merit.
What angered Loor was Thyne's deception—a decep-tion that became quite apparent from subsequent
reports.Thyne had said the first meeting had merely been organi-zational and had not produced any sort
of a workingplan. In the five days since that meeting, though, Thynehad been given certain tasks to

perform that ran outsidethe usual duties he had within Black Sun. Initially he had overseen the collection
of all sorts of data from the BlackSun's gambling and spice operations on Imperial Center, but he only
collected the datacards. He had no idea whatinformation they contained.
After two days of that he had been shifted over toequipment procurement. While his activities provided
Loor with an interesting window on the black marketavailability of almost anything, it did not give him the
sort of information that would be useful for counteringthe Rogues' operation. Thyne was overbuying
weaponsand having them delivered to any number of sites. In this Loor recognized an effort to provide
far too many sitesfor Imperial Intelligence to adequately cover.
It seemed clear to Loor that Thyne had been isolated by the command group and given jobs that, while
valu-able, were not crippling if bungled. Thyne was not theonly person buying weapons on the black
market so Loor had to conclude that perhapsnone of the arms Thyne hadcollected would be used. Loor
would have decidedThyne's cover had been blown, but Vorru's file left littledoubt about how the man
would have been dealt with ifBlack Sun knew Patches was working with the Empire.
Several things seemed obvious to Loor. The first wasthat Thyne had managed to show himself to be
unreli-able. He assumed this was because Thyne clearly wouldhave loved to supplant Vorru as the head
of Black Sunand Vorru, just as clearly, would want to prevent thatfrom happening. Thyne's animosity for
Corran and Iella could have also made him a liability in any planning councils. Loor had decided that
Thyne had been ejected
from the initial meeting before plans had been discussedand only later learned that Thyne had been
concussedand amnesia blanked the substantive part of the meeting. The spy within Rogue Squadron had
not been present at the meeting. The spy's subsequent reports had been sin-gularly useless. The planning
council had compartmental-ized the jobs needed to complete the operation, so thespy's activities proved
less enlightening than Thyne's.Having Rogue Squadron personnel maintain a low profile did make sense,
since they were not as familiar with Im-perial Center as other members of the conspiracy, but itmade
their activities useless as indicators of what was go-ing to happen.
The only saving grace in all of it was that things ap-peared to be building slowly. Isard had told Loor that
nothing could happen before two weeks—the incubationperiod of the new strain of the Krytos virus. The
Sullustans taken in the warehouse had been injected withthe virus ten days earlier so he was very close to
his dead-line already. Isard said she'd already introduced the virus into the water supply, so countless
creatures were already ingesting it. Loor himself had taken to boiling water andonly drinking wines
imported from other worlds—eventhough the virus was not supposed to infect humans, hewanted to take
no chances.
Loor sat back in the shadowed depths of his officeand rubbed a hand against his forehead. The key to
tak-ing any planet was to lower its shields and drop troops.While a planetary bombardment might cause
a lot ofdamage, only troops on the ground could take and holdreal estate. Without the shields going
down, that couldn'thappen, so the shields had to be the logical target for theRogues.
The obvious target for taking the shields down was toattack the shield generators themselves. Loading a
landspeeder full of Nergon 14 and having a suicidebomber run it into a generation station seemed the
most expedient way of dealing with the shields. Two facts ar-gued against that as a strategy—the sheer
number of stations would require a metric ton or two for the Rebels toobliterate them all and the Rebels had not, to his
knowl-edge, purchased any Nergon 14 so far. More importantly, destroying the shield generators would
work against theirfuture efforts to hold the planet.

A strike against the power generation stations hadsimilar problems. There were even more of them than
there were shield generation stations. The planet's electri-cal grid was coordinated such that an area that
lost its lo-cal power plant would immediately have energy suppliedby others in nearby sectors. Flickering
lights would be theonly sign of disruption. In his months on Imperial CenterLoor had only seen lights
flicker when one of the power-ful local thunderstorms broke over a building where hewas.
The obvious target was the computer that controlledeverything on Imperial Center, but Loor had seen
prisonsthat had less security than the central computer. The cen-ter had its own platoon of stormtroopers
and the bar-racks within a fifty-kilometer radius had orders torespond to alarms there with all speed and
firepower attheir command. The facility itself had been built withmore demanding specifications than
those of any otherbuilding on the planet, including the Imperial Palace. Ru-mor had it that if the Death
Star had been used againstImperial Center, the computer center would have been arecognizable and
salvageable piece of debris.
An armed strike on the computer center would seemdoomed to failure, but the presence of Rogue
Squadrondid make it a bit more viable. If they had fighters—andfighters of various types were available
on the blackmarket—they might be able to intercept and down someof the incoming troops. That would
give the attackersmore time, though the outcome would still be dismal forthe Rebels. The ground-based
TIE fighter squadrons inthe area would be able to counter the fighter threat, so placing them on alert was
a precaution he would suggestto Isard.
Perhaps the most difficult part of guarding against
the Rebel action was balancing on the razored edge ofIsard's plan. She wanted to give Imperial Center
to theRebels, saddling them with responsibility for a populationthat would drain them of bacta and fluid
capital, effec-tively hobbling them and pinning them in one place. If hisprecautions against Rebel action
were too obvious, theRebels might do something unusual, giving them theplanet before she wanted them
to have it or, worse yet,convincing them to scrub their invasion. The idea of fac-ing her anger if things
went wrong filled Loor with dread.Still, there are only four more days until her mini-mum deadline, two
and a half weeks until the maximum.I'm close to success.Loor nodded slowly in the darkness."If
Derricote delivers what he promises with thisSullustan group, the Rebels will take a dying world andtheir
movement will die right along with it."

32

Corran wetted a small cloth swab with ethyl alcohol andrubbed it over the focal end of the BlasTech
DL-44 Heavyblaster pistol. He peered at it closely, then gave it onemore light pass with the cloth. As the
alcohol evaporated,he saw Gavin reflected in miniature. "Ah, Gavin, this isthe third time you've asked me
if you could ask me aquestion."
The kid blushed as he snapped the trigger assemblyfor his SoroSuub S1BR into the receiver housing. "I
know, sorry." Gavin kept his voice low enough that noone in the warehouse space aside from Corran

could hearhim. "I wanted to ask you about, um, you know."
Corran winced. Hedidn't know, but that sort ofthing was only said as preface to a question about killing
or sex. Since Gavin had long ago become an ace and hadacquitted himself well in the firefight in the
warehouseacross Invisec, Corran assumed the question had to beabout sex.His parents should have
told him about thisbefore they let him go off to war, shouldn't they?Corranlooked around to see if
Wedge was nearby, figuring hewould do a much better job helping Gavin.
He couldn't see Wedge anywhere. Corran shruggedhis shoulders and eased the concentration element
intothe barrel of the blaster pistol. "What's your question?" Gavin set his face in what he clearly thought
was aserious expression, but the general youthfulness of hisfeatures undermined the effort. "On Tatooine,
well, inAnchorhead, well, in the area around the farm, it wassmall and so...We didn't have a school the
way you didon Corellia, see, we all took classes via a local HoloNetand sent lessons in on datacards,
you know ..."
Corran fit the barrel assembly together and snappedit into the gun's frame. "Gavin, are you trying to tell
meyou don't know how to kiss a girl?"
The young man pulled his head up and blinked, thenfrowned. "Anchorhead may have been small but not
that small."
"Kin don't count."
Gavin blushed. "I wasn't related to everyone aroundthere, you know."
Corran raised his hands and smiled. "I know, I know,I was just giving you a hard time. What is it that
youwant to know?"
"Well, you've been around a lot. And you come fromCorellia." Gavin's voice dropped precipitously.
"You'veseen, you know, two people get together, but they're dif-ferent, right?"
"Do you mean like Erisi and me? We come from dif-ferent worlds, but we're both human—though we
haven'tgotten together."
"No, I mean like Nawara and Rhysati.""Oh." Corran nodded slowly. Throughout the galaxythe
permutations of relationships between two or moreindividuals were legion, as were the rules, formal and
oth-erwise, that governed their conduct. Prohibitions on rela-tionships between races and classes and
castes variedfrom planet to planet, but the rules governing interspeciesrelationships tended to be largely
similar. The majority ofthem were set by official Imperial policy—a policy CorSecofficials had called
"look but don't touch."
"Exotic and different can be very attractive, Gavin.
There are some folks who absolutely draw the line on dating outside their species while there are others
whoseem to be interested in experiencing anything and every- thing they can." Corran shrugged. "I guess
I don't thinkit'swrong, but it just may not be right."
"I don't think I follow you."
"I wasn't very clear. Look, would you like to have children someday, have a family?"

"Yes, I think so."
"Okay, what if the person you fall for isn't capable ofhaving children with a human?"
"I would, well, um, I don't know."
"There are other problems, too, and we're not talking the possible difficulties and dangers of making
love, ei-ther."
"Dangers?"
"Sure. Suppose the person you're with is used togiving and getting gentle little love nips—with tencentimeter-long teeth?" Corran hooked two fingers overlike fangs. "Your hide isn't as thick as a
Gamorrean's, soyou'd be leaking."
"I hadn't thought about that." Gavin frowned andhis shoulders slumped. "I mean, I don't think that will be
a problem."
"Some species don't live as long as we do—thoughamid present company, life expectancy isn't that big
an is-sue." Corran picked up a new heavy blaster and began todisassemble it for cleaning. "There are a
lot of things youcan take into consideration, Gavin, but it pretty muchboils down to the same thing
relationships between hu-mans do: if you and the other person get along, problemscan be worked out."
Gavin nodded. "So have you ever, you know . .. ?" The young man's voice trailed off as color rose in his
cheeks.
Corran felt two hands on his shoulders and lookedback to see Iella's smiling face above his. "Has
Corraneverwhat}"
Corran shrugged his shoulders. "Nothing."
Mirax appeared on his left and leaned on the tablebetween Corran and Gavin. Her dark hair had been
pulled back into a thick braid. "The look on Gavin's facedoesn't suggest it was nothing, CorSec."
Iella's hands tightened playfully on the back of hisneck. "Come on, Corran, there's not much you haven't
done."
A smile blossomed on Gavin's face and Corran sud-denly felt outnumbered. And reluctant to answer
Gavin's question. He knew it wasn't because of Iella's presence— she already knew the answer and
could even tell the story better than he could. And he figured Gavin would find itamusing and make him
less nervous. Clearly Gavinwanted to hear that Corran had dated an alien becausethe boy obviously had
an interest in someone, and fromthe glances Corran had seen and the stories he'd heard,Gavin was
thinking a lot about the Bothan, Asyr Sei'lar.While Corran thought she was a bit worldlier than Gavin
could handle, he was willing to bet the farm boy fromTatooine could learn fast.
He found his reluctance to say anything came from Mirax's presence and his feelings toward her. Erisi
andRhysati had been paired together for their part of plan-ning the operation, giving Corran time apart
from her. Itallowed him to put Erisi into perspective. Even thoughthey were of the same species and even
were attracted toeach other, something deep down inside told Corran that their getting together would be
wrong. Not wrong, a di-saster!

Everything that made Erisi wrong seemed to makeMirax right. She understood him because of their
com-mon background. Granted their fathers had beenenemies—Corran characterized them aschronic
enemiesinstead ofmortal enemies—but that gave them a bond hewould never have with Erisi. Ultimately
with Erisi heknew he'd have felt like a pet, whereas with Mirax he feltlike a friend and equal.
During the planning operations Corran, Mirax,Gavin, and Iella had gone out and secured a lot of supplies for the operation. Things were scarce and, if availa-ble at all, were high priced. More than once
Corranwished Emtrey had been on Coruscant to help with pro-curement, but Mirax proved every bit his
equal in obtain-ing things. Whereas the droid might have used an instantanalysis of a trader's wares to
figure out his markup andsqueeze him until his prices became reasonable, Mirax charmed, cajoled,
wheedled, and even threatened. She'dlearned every trick in the book from her father andCorran thought
old Booster would be proud when he learned about her exploits.
But there is so much about her I don't know, like her reaction to learning I dated outside my species.
Fear thatshe might see such an action as making him unclean orunworthy killed any quip he might have
tossed at Iella.He looked up at Mirax but saw no suspicion or disap- pointment in her face.
Gavin fit two pieces of the blaster rifle together andtightened down a restraining bolt. "I wanted to know
ifhe'd ever dated someone who wasn't human."
Iella laughed. "Well, there were plenty of women hedated who weren't human, in spirit, that is."
Mirax sniffed lightly. "But why bring the bacta queeninto this."
"I never dated Erisi."
"No, you just pretended to be her Kuati impregnator,then kissed her in full view of the Grand Hall of the
Gal-axy in the Imperial Palace." Mirax shook her head."Clearly no relationship there at all."
Corran laughed. "The way you tell it, I might haveactually had fun."
Iella lightly cuffed the back of his head. "You alwaysdid complain about the easiest duty, Horn."
"Believe me, I'd take Chertyl Ruluwoor over Erisigladly."
"Oh." Iella raised an eyebrow. "That's interesting."
Gavin frowned. "What's Chertyl Ruluwoor?"
Mirax straightened up and tapped a finger againsther chin. "Sounds Selonian."
"It is." Iella smiled broadly. "Tell them, Corran."
"No, you tell them. You tell it better."
"You don't mind?"
"If I have to be mortified, I'd prefer not to do it to

myself."
Mirax swung around and seated herself on the edge of the table. "This sounds wonderful." She winked
at Corran, then looked up at Iella. "Go ahead, he'll survive
it."
"True, it's not like it's the first time he's heard this."Iella smiled and Corran knew she'd put a good face
onthe incident. "Chertyl Ruluwoor was a female Selonianwho had been sent to our unit to get some
training. Itwas a cultural exchange program. She was tall—at leasttwo meters—and slender. Selonians
are all very lithe and she was covered with relatively short black fur that glis-tened a silver-blue when the
light hit it right. Definitelygorgeous, definitely humanoid, but definitely not human."The Annual CorSec
Awards Ball was coming up andshe didn't know anyone. Selonians tend to be a very pri-vate sort of
people and the only ones you see in public are sterile females. They run things in their society and maintain a family unit with fertile males and females, but shewas all alone. The unattached male officers in our
branchput together a pool to see who would take Chertyl to thecelebration. Each man was required to
buy a ticket forfive credits and the winner—whom everyone considered aloser—would get the pot to
compensate for the evening." Mirax frowned. "It strikes me that the whole processwas the wrong way
around."
Corran smiled. "The Awards Ball pool is a traditiondating from a time when the Director had a daughter
who, as decorum dictated, could not go to the Ballunescorted. The Director refused to order someone to
askher to go, though he did order participation in the pool.Most years the prize is someone in the squad
who has volunteered to be 'won,' with the money going to the Sur-vivors and Orphans fund."
"This year, though, the prize was Chertyl and sheknew nothing about it. Most everyone who knew what
was going on
thought it was barbaric, but they hid be-hind tradition."
Gavin smiled. "And Corran won, right?""You could say that." Iella gave him a gentle punchon the
shoulder. "What he did was talk to the women who really wanted to go to the Ball with the other
offi-cers and gave them the impression that the whole thinghad been rigged—whatever ticket their guy
had would beselected as the winning ticket. The only way their mancould get out of winning would be to
get out of the pool.When pressed Corran allowed that he could be bribedinto taking on just one more
ticket—but it would have tobe a secret. The women pressured their men to get Corran to take their
tickets. By the time the pool winner was cho-sen, Corran hadall the tickets."
Mirax beamed at him. "Quite enterprising, sir.""Well, I knew I'd be miserable because of how my lifewas
going at the time, so I saw no reason for anyone elseto be away from the person they wanted to be with."
"But you did something noble. That's good.""It gets better, Mirax. Corran gave the pool and thebribes to
the fund, then went all out and showed Chertylthe time of her life. He hired a repulsorlimo, found outwhat
kind of flowers were considered appropriate bySelonians, and flew out in his X-wing to the only import
florist on Corellia who had them in bloom to get them.He even got a new formal dress uniform tailored up
forthe occasion. And he proved he cleans up very well.
"For her part, Chertyl was nothing short of stunning.She had that long, sleek physique that enabled her to
wear a slinky gown over which light slithered. She worea necklace of silver and aquamarine and a
bracelet tomatch that looked like light playing across her fur. Everywoman who saw her was instantly
jealous and Corranwas the envy of all the men. And, to make it worse, theyactually enjoyed each other's
company. That was aboutsix months after his father's death and things had beenrough for Corran, so the

whole situation seemed perfect."
Being unable to stop a smile from tugging at the cor-ner of his mouth, Corran nodded, and discovered
he wasdisinclined to kill the smile.That evening was a lot of fun.I put enough energy into it that I got to
leave my life be-hind for a while."Itwas great."
Gavin leaned forward. "So what happened?"
Corran looked up at Iella. "Spare the salacious de-tails, please."
Mirax smiled. "You can elaborate another time,
Iella."
Iella shrugged. "Though Chertyl was infertile it didn't mean she was incapable. Apparently she had
enjoyed the evening as much as Corran had and they continued to cel-ebrate after they left the Ball. Is
that circumspect enoughfor you?"
"It will do."
"Was it . . . ?" Gavin began to blush.Corran gave him a wink. "Better."Mirax raised an eyebrow. "Than
what?""Imagine finding a pile of rocks, deciding to throwthem out, dropping one, and having it split open
to reveala Corusca gem embedded in the middle.""Oh, my."
"And with each stone after that, the Corusca gem ismore lustrous and beautiful than the one before it.""I
see, very special indeed."
"And each of those stones, when fitted together, cre-ates a brilliant, exquisitely carved sculpture."
"I've got the hologram digitized and analyzed here,Corran. Thanks."
Gavin blinked. "Wow."
Mirax's brown eyes narrowed. "So if it was as greatas all that, how come you're here and not in some
den onSelonia?"
Corran winced. "Well, there was one little, micro-scopic problem."
Iella nodded. "The chemistry wasn't right.""Sounds like it was perfect to me." Gavin grinnedbroadly.
"Personal chemistry, yes, Gavin, was perfect. Personalbiochemistry was not, however." Iella rested a
hand onCorran's shoulder. "The reason the lucky charm Corranwears is on a gold chain is because his
sweat is acidicenough to tarnish something like silver. It's within normalrange for a human, mind you, but
just on the acidic end.And that was sufficient to get through the waxy surfaceon Chertyl's fur and irritate
her skin. And as it turnedout, Corran was mildly allergic to her fur."
"It was much like being sunburned all over for theboth of us."
Mirax giggled for a second, then made herself appearsober and saddened. "That's horrible."
Corran shrugged. "Unfortunately, it's life." Helooked over at Gavin. "There you have it, kid. My advice,

see what happens. It can't hurt, except in rare cases."
Gavin set the blaster rifle down and stood. "Thanks.I'll take your advice, if you'll excuse me."
"Good luck, Gavin." Corran waved him on his way,then smiled up at Iella. "Nicely told."
Mirax's brows furrowed. "How much of that wastrue?"
"All of it, every bit."
She frowned. "That's so sad, though."
Corran shook his head. "Not really. We both knewwe were living out a fantasy, but it wouldn't have
workedin the long run. I had no desire to move to Selonia andbecome part of a broodhome. Chertyl
knew she couldn'tbear the children I'd want. We remained friends and bothhave wonderful memories. In
fact, that was the best end-ing I had for any of my relationships."
"True, Corran, but that's because you never listenedto my advice about the women you were interested
in."Iella shook her head. "Disasters, every one of them."
Mirax smiled. "And what is your impression of thebacta queen?"
"Her? All wrong for Corran. Attractive, sure, but justnot his kind of woman."
"My thoughts exactly. I've told him so, but he doesn'tlisten."
"Never has."
Corran held his hands up in surrender. "Stop, please.You may not think Erisi is right for me, and I don't
reallythink so either—a conclusion I came up with on my own, too, I might add. Regardless, though, she
doesn't deservethis. Ysanne Isard wouldn't deserve this."
Iella glanced down at him. "Actually, Ysanne Isarddoes deserve this."
Corran thought for a moment. "Yeah, you're right,she does, carry on. By the time you're done, I'll have
fin-ished cleaning all these blaster pistols. Then we'll beready to do the job that really needs to be done."

33

Though General Derricote's office was no larger than hisown, its stark white color made Kirtan Loor feel
morevulnerable. He would have preferred waiting to deliverhis message to the Director from his own
office, but the delay the trip back would necessitate would not be ac-ceptable. Ysanne Isard would be
furious with what hehad to say, so he saw no reason to compound her anger.
On one knee, he refused to look up when her image burned to life in the General's office. "What is so
urgent, Agent Loor?"

"General Derricote's estimates of the incubation pe-riod for the Krytos virus in Sullustans was generous."
"What?" Loor could not see Isard's expression, buther voice sounded as it might if he had told her that
theRebels had just showed up with a Death Star. "Generousin what way?"
"Generous in his favor. He promised you ten days un-til the Sullustans began to sicken, but a dozen
appearsmore correct. And..."
"There is more?"
"Yes, Madam Director. The virus has resisted airborne transmission. Contact with virus-laden fluids and
tissues will still infect another individual, but fluid con-tact is still required."
"This is impossible, Loor, and I holdyou responsiblefor all this. Look at me!"
Loor lifted his face and saw molten fury roiling in herleft eye. "General Derricote gave me false
information.""He did that at Borleias, but you found him out.""But I didn't have to be tracking Rogue
Squadron'sactivities on Imperial Center at the time. I was worriedabout your deadline, which came and
went today." Loorhesitated and found himself cringing in anticipation ofher reply.
"The deadline was based on a ten-day incubation pe-riod followed by a week-long terminal cycle. This
throwseverything off." Isard's image towered over him. "Whatare the transmissibility figures? Is the virus
jumping fromspecies to species?"
"Flesh contact with ten ccs of viral fluid results in atwenty percent infection rate and the virus is viable for
thirty-six hours outside a host, longer if the conditionsare warm and moist. The virus can be frozen and
thawedwithout lost of viability or lethality. If the virus is actuallyinjected or injested, as little as one cubic
centimeter isenough to infect a subject.""And species migration?""General Derricote projects...""Projects!
I want results, not projections." Isard'shologram slammed a fist into an open palm but the soundrelayed
by holo-link sounded muted and weak. "OrderDerricote to begin replication of the current virus strains
and release all of them into the water supply."
Loor again bowed his head. "I anticipated your re-quest. Derricote says that in four days he should have
suf-ficient supplies to take care of the planet."
"Tell him he doesn't have four days. Full replicationand production begins immediately and batches go
intothe water supply when they are complete. I want it done
now. I will tolerate no more mistakes, his or yours, doyou understand?"
"Yes, Madam Director."
"And one more thing, Agent Loor."
"Yes, Madam Director?"
"Your last report on the Rogues indicated this eve-ning appears to be when they are taking their first
step atliberating Imperial Center. It is too soon. I won't have it.Scatter them, kill them, deal with them.
This time tomor-row I do not want to have to worry about them."
"As you wish, Madam Director!"

Isard's image vanished revealing Derricote standing inthe doorway to his office. He applauded politely.
"Thatwas a wonderful performance."
Loor snarled inarticulately and came up quickly. Heburied his left fist deep in Derricote's stomach, then
clouted him on the side of the head with a roundhouseright. The heavyset man stumbled sideways and
slammedinto the wall. He tipped shelves, overturning countlessboxes of datacard journals, then abruptly
sat down onthe floor and wallowed in them.
Part of Loor basked in the disbelief on Derricote'sflorid face, but even that feeling of elation did not dull
therage in his mind. He grabbed a handful of Derricote's tu-nic and hauled the corpulent man to his feet.
"You haveplaced me in mortal jeopardy because of your incompe-tence."
"Incompetence!? We are traveling paths that werepreviously shunned here. I have done the best I could.
The fact that my efforts do not live up to specificationsdesignated by those who have no idea about the
true na-ture of..."
Loor slapped the man hard with his open hand, thentugged him out of the office. "First, your technicians
areto start manufacturing the Krytos viruses in their myriadforms and start injecting them into the water
supply.Now! You have lied about how long it will take to killaliens and I'm not sure I trust your
transmission figures
so I want as much virus as available being used now aspossible. Including the experimental versions."
"But .. ."
"No buts, General, justnow." Loor's nostrils flared."What else have you lied to me about? Is it as deadly
asyou say?"
"You have seen the results, Agent Loor."
"Yes, Ihave seen the results, but not all of them."Loor dragged Derricote stumbling after him through the
laboratory to the hallway where the victims were kept.Loor tossed him on ahead and Derricote spilled to
the ground in the sanitized corridor. "I will not pay for an-other of your mistakes, General."
Glancing to the right, Loor could see Quarren begin-ning to melt, so he turned away and studied a
huddledgroup of Sullustans. They clustered around two smallchildren who were vomiting violently. Half
the adults tore at their own hair, pulling it out in great clumps. Somereeled away, others just fell and
trembled as if being shaken by a Cyborrean battle dog.
Loor looked back down at Derricote. "Madam Direc-tor wants bacta to cure the Krytos virus."
"It will."
"Have you tested the Sullustan version for a cure?"
"No, there is no need to waste bacta..."
Loor kicked the man in the thigh. "Wrong answer,General. Get up here."
The General stood and Loor shoved him toward thetransparisteel wall. "We will test the efficacy of

bacta onthe virus, General." Loor looked at the Sullustans andsaw one adult desperately mopping
vomitus from a child'sface. "Those two, the child and the adult. Test it on them.I want them to survive,
General, do you understand me?"
"Mother and child? How touching."
"Don't mock me, General. The child is younger andthe disease has clearly ravaged it far more than the
adult.And that adult, she is caring for the child. She can tellothers how to care for victims of this virus,
acceleratingthe desired effect on the Rebellion." Loor shoved a
comlink into Derricote's fat hand. "Get your people inthere now and save them. Do it."
"Or I give you a taste, here and now, of what theRogues will face tonight." Loor smiled coldly "I guaran
tee, General, you'll like it no better than they will"
34
Everything was going perfectly, then the Trandoshandropped the memory core. Wedge's heart caught in
histhroat—it clearly intended to escape him altogether, but the forced smile and gritted teeth prevented it
from get-ting away. The box landed on a corner that immediatelycrumpled, and there was no mistaking
the moan of metalbending out of shape.
The Imperial technician's face drained of blood. "Oh,now there is trouble."
Wedge raised a hand. "Perhaps not, friend.""I have no time and this incident will have to be re-ported
and checked out."
"I think, perhaps, I have a solution to your problem."
"I hope so, for your sake." The small techniciansniffed and looked around nervously. "If there is trouble,I
will not be found at blame—you and youralien helpwill be held responsible."
The loading process had gone almost without a hitch.Each core had been packaged in individual boxes
and adiagnostic datacard had been placed in a clear plasticcontainer fastened to the box. The technician
had selectedforty Palar memory cores from the fifty-five available at
the plant. Each datacard was checked and then a quarterof the boxes were opened and probes were
run on these randomly selected cores. If the data on them matched thedata on the card, the lot was
assumed to be good.
The auxiliary cores were slightly different and onlyten of them had been produced. Three of them had
beenformatted with the special codes and had serial numberswhere the last two digits added to ten. The
Trandoshan doing the loading had been told to drop a core if none ofthe specially prepared ones had
been selected, but onehad.
The one he dropped.
The Trandoshan trundled back to the remaining five boxes and picked one of the other two that had the
Rebelcoding on it. He started to lift it up, but the technicianput his hand firmly on the box and pressed it
back downto the ground. "No, you clumsy vermin, you will not se-lect the core. My choice."

Wedge slapped the Trandoshan hard across the arm,stinging his hand on the creature's leathery hide.
"Backaway, Portha. Your clumsiness will be reported."
The big, lizardly Trandoshan hissed and shuffledback away from the boxes to stand over by Pash. The
technician nodded slowly. "Thank you. They so seldomunderstand our problems."
"Indeed." Wedge scratched at the beard he hadgrown to help disguise himself. "You are quite right to
make the choice yourself, but there is insufficient time torun the diagnostics yourself. Their cards have
alreadyshown you that they are clean, but you want it clear that you were scrupulous in making your
random choice. Ifnot, well, I doubt your superiors would be impressed."
"That would be very bad indeed."
"And we can't have that, so choose you shall. Severaltimes, so there can be no doubt of the randomness
of thechoice. You'll see." Wedge smiled and spread his handsout. "There are five here. Pick three."
The man frowned for a second, then pointed to thefirst one and the last two.
Wedge motioned Gavin over. "Take the other twoaway."
Gavin slid the two designated units away into thedepths of the factory's warehouse floor. Wedge hastily
re-arranged the remaining trio into a single line.One ofthese is the unit I want him to take, two are not.
"Picktwo more."
The man designated the two on the end. "I choosethem."
"Good." He pointed to Pash. "Take that one away.Now pick one." Wedge wanted him to pick the first
box,but the technician tapped the second one.
Wedge nodded, smiled, then turned and scowled atGavin. "What are you waiting for? Get it into the
truckwith the others." As he gave Gavin the command, Wedgerested his foot on top of the chosen
memory core. "Hurryup, the man's on a schedule, a tight schedule."
"Don't drop it," the technician snapped.
Wedge sighed. "The exotics here work hard, but youcan't trust them—then I get a man like him who
isn'tmuch better."
The technician nodded as he watched Gavin carry thebox to the repulsorlift truck and slide it into the
back. "It's the fault of the Rebellion, you know."
"Do you think?"
"Of course. When the Emperor was still ruling therewas no doubt about how things were to be done.
Now..."The man shrugged his shoulders eloquentlyand Wedge nodded emphatically. "The people
nowadays have stopped thinking because sloppiness no longer earnsthe sorts of rewards it did before."
"I think you are quite correct." Wedge smiled andrubbed his hands together.Had you been thinking at
all,my friend, you'd have seen that I forced your choice ofbox. You made the choice, but I decided what
the choicemeant. Had you chosen the two sliced cores at first, I would have discarded the other three.
The illusion ofchoice has you satisfied.He made a mental note to thankBooster Terrik for having so long

ago taught him the
value of letting people deceive themselves by showing himhow to force a choice.
The technician made an entry on his datapad. "Eventhe stormtroopers are slipping. They tried to prevent
me from coming into this sector this evening, but I would notbe dissuaded by them, no, sir. I bulled on
through andthey let me go!"
"Stormtroopers?" Wedge shook his head, then pointed at Gavin. "Do you hear that, son? Even
stormtroopers are becoming so undisciplined that youcould join them. Perhaps those outside could tell
youwhere their recruiting office is."
The technician looked surprised. "Son? Is he yourboy?"
"Takes after his mother." Wedge guided the man to-ward his repulsorlift truck. "Don't want to keep
you."
Suddenly sparks shot from the loading dock side door and rained down from the warehouse ceiling. A
halo ofbrilliant white fire surrounded the door, then implodedleaving a smoking hole through which
stormtroopers be-gan to run. Duracrete and steel rained down from aboveas teams blasted their way in
through the roof and de-scended on slender lines. Out past the nose of the com- puter center truck
Wedge saw a Mekuun Hoverscout'sblunt prow batter the far gate. It bounced back, fired one burst with
its laser cannon, then came on again over the molten remains of the gate.
Wedge gave the technician a shove forward, thenspun on his heel and started running back into the
ware-house's shadows. He hurdled a line of memory cores,then cut left and back right as blaster bolts
exploded allaround him. Leaping over another line of crates, Wedge crouched down behind cover. From
his right Iella slid hima blaster carbine, then activated her comlink. "Shiel,Ooryl, Wedge is clear. Open
up."
From deeper in the warehouse both the Gand and theShistavanen started firing with a pair of Merr-Sonn
E-Web Heavy blaster cannons. The weapons weremounted on tripods and had very specific fields of
fire.
Ooryl raked a stream of fire over the loading dock andout at the Hoverscout. The scarlet blaster bolts
burnedtheir way up over the vehicle's nose and punched throughthe cockpit windscreen. The cockpit
exploded in fire andsmoke.
Shiel concentrated his fire on the stormtroopers de-scending on the lines from the roof. The high rate of
fireallowed him to track his shots and pick stormtroopers offthe lines. Wedge and Iella added their fire,
but concen-trated it near the holes to shoot people just beginningtheir descent.
The exit over at the far corner of the factory ex-ploded. Wedge hit his comlink. "Corran, report." He got
nothing in reply and could see nothing but fire andtwisted metal where a stairway had once been. The
orig-inal evacuation plan had designated that stairway and thearea beyond it, which Corran, Mirax, and
some of theBlack Sunners were holding, as their primary exit.Notanymore.
He looked at Iella. "Plan two. Fall back."She passed the signal along via her comlink. Portha,Pash, and
Gavin pulled back from their positions firstwhile Iella and Wedge provided covering fire. Once theywere
set, Iella and Wedge pulled back, but they didn't getfar. Even with covering fire from the heavy blasters
andthe others, the stormtroopers managed to concentrate enough fire to make it impossible for him to

move.
Lying prone on the ferrocrete, with his left cheekpressed against the cool floor and sparks from burning
crates stinging his right cheek, everything seemed to col-lapse in on him at once. Wedge knew that being
in the warehouse in Invisec on Coruscant was utterly and com-pletely insane—more so even than
sending snubfightersout to destroy a Death Star. He should have been in anX-wing if he was going to be
fighting Imperials. Havinga firefight with stormtroopers was still one of the best ways he knew of
committing suicide, and he was afraidhe was going to prove it in the next three or four minutes.In setting
up their operation they had taken into account what would happen if a stormtrooper patrol hap-pened to make a sweep of the Palar
factory—and the twoheavy blasters should have been more than enough totake care of the threat. The
presence of so manystormtroopers meant they'd been sold out at least twice—once so the Imperial
operation could be planned andagain so the scouts they'd had outside the plant wouldn'twarn them of the
impending raid.Corran said havingThyne organize the lookouts was a big mistake.
More blaster bolts scorched the air above him.If Idon't do something fast, we're done.Wedge pushed
up on the bottom of his comlink and gave it a twist, setting thedevice on a new frequency. "This is Rogue
Leader. Thingsare breaking up here. Track and recover on this signal.Come ready to shuck stormies."
"I copy."
Iella crawled over to him and glanced at the comlink."Do I want to know?"
"I don't like working without backup." He smiled,then ducked his head as a blaster bolt scorched the air.
"Ifwe hang on we may get out of this fine."
"You're the Rebellion's hero, so I'll trust you." Shegave him a confident smile. "Thyne sold us out, I'd
bet."
"No takers." Another trio of bolts burned throughthe air above them. "Can't wait here. Let's move."
"How?"
Wedge grinned. "Call Shiel. Get him to use that can-non to burn us a path through this maze."
"Consider it done." Iella gave Shiel the command andthe line of thick red bolts cut over and down.
Memorycores exploded casting fiery debris everywhere. The mem-ory platters whirled through the air,
hit, and rolledthroughout the warehouse. Smoke already coated the ceil-ing with a grey cotton cloud, but
more rose to take itfrom benign to a darkly menacing thunderhead.
As nearly as Wedge could determine later, Shiel's fir-ing on crates to clear a path for Iella and him was
inter-preted by the computer technician as an attempt todestroy the memory cores in the back of the
repulsorlift
truck. Whoever was driving it started the engine and ran power into the repulsorlift coils. The truck rose
from thewarehouse floor and started forward gingerly. The aft endbegan to drift left, but that was clearly
preparatory toswinging around the burning Hoverscout.
Suddenly the truck lurched forward. Its right frontfender slammed into the edge of the loading dock
accessport. The truck spun around to the left and backed intothe burning Hoverscout. It rode halfway up

onto the mil-itary vehicle before the repulsorlift coils shorted, droppingthe truck down to crush the
Hoverscout.
A titanic explosion shredded both vehicles andsprayed shrapnel throughout the loading dock area. The
blast's shock wave sent crates flying and tossed Wedgearound like a Chadra-Fan wrestling with a
rancor. Helanded hard on a crate, shattering it and the memory core it had contained. At the same time
he felt something popon his left side and got a sharp pain with each breath.Ribs, but at least I can still
move.
He grabbed Gavin's proffered hand and got to hisfeet. The two of them sprayed blaster fire into the
black cloud choking the far end of the warehouse, but very little in return fire headed in their direction.
The stormtroopersclearly had gotten the worst of the blast, being closest toit when the Hoverscout's
magazine of concussion missileshad blown.
Iella, Pash, and Portha had taken up stations aroundthe doorway heading deeper into the factory
complex. Be-yond it Nawara Ven and Shiel were wrestling with their heavy blaster cannon. Rhysati and
Erisi were out in frontwith Ooryl close behind. He sported a blaster carbine.
Wedge winced as he waved everyone on. "Go, go! This place is crawling with Imps. We were sold out
sonow we have to get clear."
Gavin's eyes grew wide. "But you're hurt, sir." "I can still move, Gavin, and that's what we have todo."
Wedge shoved him on ahead. "If we don't we're allgoing to be hurt a lot more."
35
Waiting in the plant supervisor's office Corran had a bad feeling about how things were unfolding out in
the ware-house. The supervisor's holopad had been wired into thewarehouse surveillance holocams.
Wedge, the technician,Pash, Gavin, and Portha all marched around on thedesktop like pieces in a
hologame. Though everythingseemed to be going well for his team, he couldn't shakethe feeling that they
were somehow losing.
Mirax sat behind the heavy steel desk and watchedWedge force the technician's choice of a new core
with abig smile on her face. "Oh, the smuggler you could havebeen, Wedge Antilles! He's got this guy
thinking he'smade a totally random choice when Wedge had a corepicked out from the beginning for him
to take."
"I'll take your word for it." Corran paced back andforth behind her. The supervisor's office had two
doors. The one at the front of the office led to a waiting roomwith a window that overlooked the
warehouse. The otherdoor, built into the office's back wall, led to a private stairwell and the private
parking area below the ware-house floor. To avoid being spotted through the window,Mirax and Corran
had taken up a position in the office.
Down below, in the parking area, Inyri and several otherBlack Suns waited with airspeeders to whisk
the Roguesaway.
"Take it easy. We're almost home free."
"I'll believe it when we're away from here and Win-ter's people can test the code." He again dropped a
handto the heavy blaster he wore on his hip, just to check howit was seated in the holster, then looked at
the blaster car- bine he held and made sure the safety switch was off."Wait, what's that?"

"I don't know." Mirax leaned forward and poked ata sparking light at the edge of the hologram.
"Someone'sburning through the door!"
Corran smelled smoke and knew he was too far fromthe loading dock to be getting it from there.
Somethingelse is burning. Too close.He reached out with his righthand and roughly shoved Mirax from
her chair. "Getdown."
The wall between the waiting room and the office ex-ploded inward. He saw it fragment and fire poured
through the cracks. The pieces of wall disintegrated,breaking into smaller and smaller bits until they were
nothing but pebbles and dust. The fire blacked the alumi-num studs, ripping them free from the floor and
ceiling,then propelled them into the office, gnarling and twistingthem as they flew.
The force of the explosion lifted Corran off his feetand blasted him into the office's rear wall. Wallstone
sagged and buckled, studs bent, but the wall did not col-lapse. The door leading into the stairwell
crumpled andtore free of the hinges, allowing a great deal of the explo-sive force to blow out through it.
The desk slammed backagainst the wall and Corran's legs fell across the top of it.His head and shoulders
tipped down, his feet came up, and he crashed to the debris-strewn floor with bloodstreaming from his
nose and an incessant ringing in hisears.
Through the dust and smoke he saw what appearedto be a quartet of stormtroopers dropping through a
hole
in the floor and standing on the ceiling. Dazed as he wasit took him a moment to realize his perspective
camefrom his still being upside down. Slightly more surprisingthan that discovery was the far more
welcome realizationthat he still held the blaster carbine in his left hand.
He let his body sag to the right, then he rolled for-ward onto his stomach. The world swam into focus a
mo-ment later. He slid his right hand forward and got itwrapped around the weapon's pistol grip. His left
handmoved up to grasp the barrel and he tightened down onthe trigger.
His first shots hit a stormtrooper in the knees anddropped him back into his fellows. Only one of them
turned toward him, the other two looked out at the ware-house floor that was lit by back and forth fire
from doz-ens of blasters. The stormtrooper who had made thecorrect guess brought his carbine up and
over, but onlymanaged to trace a line of fire across the wall aboveCorran's head.
Corran walked his fire up the stormtrooper's midline,burning three holes navel, heart, and throat before a
fourth knocked the man's helmet flying and dumped hisbody to the floor. The helmet bounced off the
back of oneof the other stormtroopers and clipped the helmet of the last one. Both men spun, their
weapons coming aroundwith deliberate and lethal intent.
Corran managed to rip off a burst that hit one ofthem in the thigh, then his blaster carbine stopped firing.
The man he'd hit spun around and went down to oneknee, but still appeared to be full of fight. Corran hit
thepower pack release button and reached down into hispants pocket for a replacement, but all he felt
was tat-tered fabric and his own flesh.
Next to him the desk rose two centimeters off the floor, then tipped forward. It rolled awkwardly, half
eclipsing him, and caught the full force of the last stand-ing stormtrooper's fire. Corran rolled to his right,
tryingto take advantage of the cover. As he did so, Mirax roseup on one knee and scythed blaster fire
back and forth

across the last two stormtroopers. Her shots took thestanding man in the middle, doubling him over, and
blew apart the helmet of the one Corran had only wounded.Corran saw her look down at him and saw
her lipsmove, but he couldn't hear her past the ringing in his ears. He took a guess at what she was saying
and forceda smile through the blood he could taste on his lips. "I'lllive. They used concussion munitions
but the wallstopped us from being knocked out." He scrambled upon his hands and knees. "Let's get out
of here."
Mirax crawled over to the open doorway and sliddown the door to the first landing. Corran followed,
thenthe two of them ran down the remaining flights. Corrankicked the door to the basement garage open.
Mirax wentthrough low and he followed. What they found made hercurse and the only good thing about
it was the fact thathe heard her oath.
Off to the right, heading out through the shadows, hesaw four airspeeders going away. From the left,
racingdown a ramp and into the garage's dark interior, came six Imperial stormtroopers on Aratech 74-Y
military speederbikes. Five peeled off their formation to go after theairspeeders and one swung around
toward them.
"Mirax, go!" Corran cast aside the useless carbineand drew his blaster pistol. She darted off toward the
leftand got behind one of the garage's massive pillars. Shewaved him toward her and made to come
around andcover him, but a laser bolt from the speeder bike gougeda chunk of duracrete from near her
head.
He shook his head and ran toward the approaching speeder bike. He cut to the right, snapped off two
shots,then ducked his left shoulder and rolled to the side as thespeeder bike's laser bolts sizzled over his
head. He cameup into a crouch with only twenty meters separating himfrom the speeder bike. As his
blaster came up he saw thestormtrooper's right hand curl back, cranking the throttle.The bike roared
forward and Corran knew the man in-tended to impale him on the spikes that jutted forward ofthe
speeder bike's vector-control surfaces.
Corran twisted to the right, willing his body to flowout around the sharp spearhead mounted on the front
ofthe craft. The vector-control surface shredded the left sideof his jacket, passing just beneath Corran's
left arm. Hetried to bring his blaster around to get a shot off at the stormtrooper, but all he managed to
do before the storm-trooper's knee caught him in the hip and spun him to the ground was slam the
weapon down hard on the driver'sleft hand.
The blow to the man's hand jerked the vector-control back making the speeder bike's nose veer sharply
upward.It struck sparks from the ceiling and a moment later thebike's tail joined in producing fireworks
as it scrapedalong on the ground. The forward control surfaces buck-led and curled in as the bike
jammed them hard against the ceiling. The bike began to invert, spilling the rider,then bounced against the
floor and ceiling before itstopped and hovered.
The stormtrooper skidded along on his armoredback, spinning around like a top. His legs finally
smackedup against a pillar stopping his spin. He shook his headand tried to climb to his feet, but Mirax
stepped out frombehind the pillar and dropped him with a kick to thehead.
"Now what, Corran?"
A muffled explosion from above shook the garage.Dust and peeling paint fell from the ceiling. Smoke
anddust billowed out of the doorway from above. "I knowwe're not going back up there."
She frowned. "Okay, one choice down. Care to pick another?"

He shrugged, then saw blaster bolts darting throughthe garage. One of the airspeeders had turned off at
thelast moment and was racing back toward them, with a speeder bike in pursuit. The airspeeder's driver
neatlywound the vehicle around and through a complex course,never giving the stormtrooper a clean
shot. Even so, be-cause of the speeder bike's shorter turning radius, it ateup the distance between them,
making it only a matter of
time before he drew close enough to cripple and kill theairspeeder.
Corran pointed toward the pursuit. "Fire at thespeeder bike. Let the airspeeder know there's cover over
here."
"What are you going to do?"
"Get luckier than I've been already, I hope." Corran ran over to the hovering speeder bike, grabbed the
con-trol handles, and started pushing it toward one of theopen rows between columns. He swung into the
seat andchecked the weapon's control monitor.It's good to go.Now I just need a target.He hit the thumb
switch on thevector-controller and sent a ruby laser bolt screaming outinto the distance.
Mirax laid down a solid pattern of fire that hemmedthe speeder bike in and the airspeeder driver took
full ad-vantage of it. She whipped the wheel to the right and shotstraight down a row toward the end
where Mirax and Corran stood.
The airspeeder passed in front of the hoveringspeeder bike and the second it was clear, Corran hit the
firing switch. The speeder bike's laser cannon spat out a steady stream of scarlet energy darts. He
expected thepursuing stormtrooper to fly his speeder bike rightthrough the hail of bolts, but the pilot cut
sharply to theleft and swung wide of Corran's trap.
Fortunately that left him in the open for Mirax. Herburst of fire caught the man in the left flank and
knockedhim from the saddle. He hit hard, with his helmet split-ting like the rind of an overripe meiloorun.
His bodyrolled along, almost coming upright again, when it col-lided with a pillar and fell back to the
ground slowly.
The airspeeder came to a stop between Corran andMirax. "C'mon, get in."
Corran looked somewhat agog at the pilot. "Inyri, you came back for us?"
"Stay if you like, Horn, or come with me."
Mirax grabbed Corran by the shoulder and dumped
him into the rear seat, then hopped in beside Inyri. "Ithink he got hit in the head. Go."
Lying in the back of the airspeeder, Corran swiped ahand across his mouth and it came away bloody.
He torea chunk of the lining out of his jacket and started mop-ping up the blood. "What happened back
there?"
"I don't know." Inyri brought the airspeeder out ofthe garage and immediately started it climbing. "We
werebelow waiting the way we were supposed to, then weheard a couple of small explosions and one
big one from the office at the head of the stairs. There wasn't any per-centage in staying around, so we
took off."

Her voice took on an edge. "I wasn't really comingback for you. The speeder bikes had an angle on exit
andI figured that being last in line I'd be the first to die. I broke off and thought to run back to the way
they camein, then I noticed you were shooting at the bike on mytail. When you got him, the least I could
do was pick youup."
Mirax patted Inyri on the shoulder. "Intentions don'tcount, what youdo does."
Corran sat up in the back seat. The only way Impe-rials could have gotten to the memory core factory
andraided it when they did was if they had inside informationabout what was happening there and when it
was goingto take place. Without thinking too hard on the matter he could identify twenty people who
knew about the opera-tion and that number could have expanded exponentiallyif someone stupid started
bragging.
From those who might have sold the operation out he immediately discarded any of the Rogues, Mirax,
Winter,and Iella. All of them, save Winter, had actually been inthe factory. Wedge said Winter was
incorruptible. While itwas not in Corran's nature to believe that about anyone,the fact that Pash Cracken
and Iella also vouched for herlet him clear her.
Mirax looked out through the windscreen. "Whereare we going?"
"Zekka picked out a location for us to meet if thingsdidn't go as planned. We'll link up there and then see
whoelse has survived this debacle."
As Inyri whisked them along a twisty, mind-bogglingcourse through the city, ascending and descending
through levels and around buildings, Corran continuedconsidering suspects. In the back of his mind he
knew theexercise was futile because there was no way he couldprove his suspicions. He also knew that
the first personon his suspect list, Zekka Thyne, would also be the last person on it. Corran knew Thyne
had betrayed them, he knew it in his heart, and he didn't really need proof forthat conviction.
His being placed in the position of lookout was per-fect from the Imp point of view. He protested that
hewanted something more important but Vorru forced himto keep that job. Even though I thought letting
him orga-nize lookouts was a bad idea, I was relieved since Iwouldn't have him with a gun in a place
where my backmight be turned. Heck, I was even glad be was disap-pointed with his assignment.
Unfortunately, withoutproof I'll have a hard time convincing others he's theSithspawn who gave us up to
the Imps.
Inyri swooped the airspeeder down and brought it inthrough a small round portal on the shadowed
midlevelof a building. A round plug of a door rolled in place afterthey entered. Lights came on in a
hangar, revealing it tobe empty except for a racked speeder bike off to the right.Inyri brought the
airspeeder to a stop, letting it settle on the hangar floor.
"I guess we got here before the others." With herhands on the top of the windscreen, Inyri pulled herself
up out of the airspeeder. "I hope they make it."
"I can vote for that." Corran clambered out of the back of the airspeeder and walked over to the
speederbike. He pressed a hand against the cold metal of its en-gine housing, then turned as the doorway
into the interiorof the building opened.
"You'll want to get away from the speeder bike."Zekka Thyne emerged from the building with a blaster

carbine leveled in Corran's direction. "Get your hands up.Hmmm. I can see why you security types like
saying that, such a feeling of power. You, too, Terrik. Inyri, take their blasters."
Mirax frowned. "What's going on here?"
Corran raised his hands to shoulder height as Inyricollected his gun. "Patches sold us out."
Inyri shook her head. "Impossible. He hates the Impsas much as you do—as much as any of us do."
Corran jerked a thumb toward the speeder bike."The engine's cold. We got no warning because he
wasn'tthere. Didn't want to take a chance the Imps would shoothim up."
"I knew you'd figure it out, just the same way I knewthey wouldn't get you." Thyne sneered at him. "You
andyour father always were lucky. That's the only way yougot me, your old man was luckier than I was."
"It wasn't luck. My father wassmarter than youwere. He still is."
"He's dead."
"My point stands." Corran shrugged. "What didyou figure you'd tell Vorru after everyone else got wiped
out in the raid? Or did you figure it wouldn't matter?"
Mirax slowly nodded. "He's got a plan to get away, Corran. He's going to sell you to his Imperial
contact forsafe passage and a new identity on a new world."
Thyne's smile broadened to hideous proportions."Close, very close, except in one detail." The carbine
roseto shoulder height. "Kirtan Loor just wants a corpse."
The whine of a single blaster shot filled the hangar and the bolt tinted everything with the color of blood.
Thyne staggered, then slumped back against the wall. His legs collapsed and his carbine clattered to the
ground. With both hands he tried to stem the steaming blooddribbling from his belly.
Corran looked over at Inyri, his gaze drawn to her because of the blaster pistol falling from her hands,
thenran over to Thyne. Squatting down he could tell from theway blood soaked the man's clothes that
there wasn't
anything he could do for him. "Unless you have a bactatank in there, you're dead."
"Then I'm dead. Just like your father." A wet cough wracked Thyne. "You want to know if I had him
killed,yes?"
Corran shook his head. "No. I wouldn't believewhatever you told me and it wouldn't bring him back."
And since you really want to torture me with it, I won'tgive you the satisfaction of thinking I do want
to know.
Thyne grimaced against the pain that contracted hismuscles. "Let me tell you this. Loor knows about
you. He knew about you before he forced me to betray you. I soldyou out this time, but someone else
sold you out beforeme."
Corran's jaw dropped open.Tycho! But Wedge saidhe'd died on Noquivzor so I couldn't have seen him
here.Someone else? Who?

Thyne forced a laugh. "There, I will haunt you."
"No, you'll just be dead and you'll die knowingyou've warned me about an enemy I didn't know I had."
Corran patted the man on the shoulder, pulling his handback before Thyne could bite weakly at it.
"You've justsaved my life, Zekka Thyne, and that's something we'llboth remember until death takes us."
Thyne's head lolled to the left and his body slack-ened. Corran stood and saw Mirax comforting Inyri.
He started to open his mouth to say something, but Mirax caught his eye and shook her head to forestall
his com-ment. He closed his mouth again realizing that the ques-tion he would have asked, though simple,
probablywould not have a simple answer.Nor an answer I reallyhave a chance of understanding.
He didn't even know if he should thank Inyri for sav-ing his life by shooting her lover. Corran admitted to
him-self that he'd not have thought she'd do that for all thestars in the galaxy. Her reaction toward him
had beenhostile from the moment they'd met on Kessel. Corranclearly remembered Inyri dispassionately
handing Thyne ablaster so Thyne could kill him at the Headquarters.
Later she had seemed to resent his helping her escapefrom the Imperials after her speeder bike had been
shotdown.
Every clue she'd given him suggested that if Thynehad been slow in shooting him, she'd have gladly done
the job rather speedily.
Inyri eased herself free of Mirax's embrace and satback against the airspeeder's hull. The front end of
the ve-hicle hid Thyne's body from her view though a thin rivu-let of blood was meandering toward a
drain in the centerof the hangar floor. She hid her face in her hands, sobbedsilently a bit, then wiped away
her tears.
When she looked over at him, despite the red rim-ming her eyes, she looked eerily like her sister,
Lujayne."You want to know why."
Corran nodded. He'd heard enough preambles toconfessions to know that she needed to talk more than
he wanted to have her actions explained. "If you want to tellme."
"Coming from Kessel, it marks you. No one respectsyou because they assume you're a criminal. When
you tellthem you aren't they just assume you're a liar. Even theprisoners don't respect you—they all come
from worldsthat have more going for them than spice mines and aprison. If you're born there you can
never escape Kessel."
Corran felt a tight knot forming in his stomach.When he'd first met Lujayne Forge he'd prejudged her
be-cause of where she had come from. Everything Inyri saidwas true, but her sister hadn't let that stop
her. Lujaynehad confronted Corran with his bias and made him seewhat he was doing. That experience
with Lujayne hadchanged him. It had made him ready to look beyondwhere Inyri came from, but she'd
prejudged and rejectedhim.
"Thyne helped me escape Kessel. He respected me.He made others respect me. He mademe respect
me. Yet in all the time I was with him I knew that he was not thesort of person I had been raised to
respect. He was the
antithesis of everything my parents had taught me wasgood and right in the galaxy."

Mirax nodded. "But he respected you and valued youin a way you never thought you'd find."
"Exactly." Inyri looked up at Corran. "Every time you would show up I'd be reminded of what I'd been
raised to believe. I tried to keep you away, but in the mid-dle of a lightfight you and Gavin run out and
pull me outof the street. Thyne didn't do that. He didn't turn aroundand come back for me, but I missed
the signs even then.
"Today he didn't warn me about what would happen at the factory. If you two hadn't been there in the
garage, I would have died. And when we got here, his centralconcern was killing you, not the fact that I'd
survived. Irealized that Thyne did respect me, but only for my use-fulness to him. He thought he could
trust me implicitly,which is rare among the members of the Black Sun."
She shrugged. "So, he saved me from Kessel, but yousaved me from the Imps and, through that, saved
me from thinking I was worthless. That was worth morethan Thyne's respect...or his life. I guess that
favor yousaid you owed my sister has been redeemed."
"That favor I owe your sister, that's one that will takea lifetime to pay off. What you did here, as far as
I'mconcerned, nulls the datacard between us. We're even."Corran smiled, then shook his head. "Of
course, we're still on Coruscant, we're being hunted by Imperialstormtroopers, and Thyne told me we
have yet anothertraitor in our midst. Seems to me this is the perfect timeto be settling up accounts and
making sure all our affairsare truly in order."
Mirax nodded. "Never put off to tomorrow whatyou can do today."
Inyri raised an eyebrow. "Except, perhaps, dying."
"Good point." Corran headed toward the door intothe building. "Let's get cleaned up and then we can
go seeif anyone else procrastinated their way past death."
36
If the Force is with us,Gavin thought as he duckedaround a corner,it's definitely the dark side. Blaster
boltsgnawed away at the wall, leaving the corner serrated andflaming. Looking to his right, he saw Ooryl
and Nawarapositioned inside a doorway, so he dove between themand rolled on past as they opened
fire on the stormtroopers chasing them down the corridor.
Pursuit began almost immediately after they left thefactory. They entered and moved through a number
ofbuildings and thought they were in the clear when Porthashot a stormtrooper who challenged them. The
storm-trooper went down but apparently lived long enough toreport their location to his headquarters.
Stormtroopersbegan to converge on the area, giving the Rogues few choices of where to run and even
less time to considerthem.
Wedge had insisted on going up, but the buildingthey'd picked to give them access to the bridges on
higherlevels was probably the worst choice they could have made. A transparisteel and ferrocrete
monolith, at the lower levels it stood absolutely alone, with no attach-ments, walkways, or links to other
buildings. Up on the

fiftieth level it branched out and gave them the access toother avenues of escape they desired, but getting
to thefiftieth level proved to be the problem.

Coming up into a crouch, Gavin looked around andhis heart sank. As with several previous floors, this
onewas an open square space centered on a lift and stairwellcore. The floor-to-ceiling windows provided
a lovely view of the shadowed levels of Coruscant—a view he founddecidedly claustrophobic.
Especially with an Imperial Troop Transport grav-truckfloating up to their level. An armored side panel
snapped down on the truck's boxy cargo pod. Astormtrooper framed himself in the opening and tossed
something at the window. It stuck for a second, appearing to be a black amoebic blob, then it exploded,
sprayingtransparisteel fragments into the room.
Gavin had already dived to the floor, but he still feltthe sting of the shards on his left flank and face.We've
had it.
"Stay down," Wedge shouted above the din, "every-one stay down!"
Though he had no intention of making himself a tar-get when trapped between two stormtrooper squads,
hewondered if the Commander had snapped. Staying downwas tantamount to surrendering, which would
makesense except that the stormtroopers had never given anysign of being interested in taking prisoners.
Looking tohis left at the stormtroopers picking their way along thepanel and entering through the broken
window, Gavindidn't get the impression they were more inclined toshows of compassion than the other
stormtroopers they'dfought so far.
Then something odd happened. The gravtruck tippedup at the front, spilling two stormtroopers from the
walkway and tossing those in the back from their feet. Ahalf second later the thing that had made the
driver shyhit the front end of the gravtruck and exploded. The con-cussion of the blast shattered more
windows and obliter-ated the gravtruck's cab. Beyond the floppy-limbed
tumbling of broken stormtroopers, Gavin saw the gravtruck begin to break apart and slip from sight.
A sleek snubfighter shot up past their level, then cameback around and flew directly toward the building.
Though not as elegant as the next generation ofstarfighters, the black with gold trim Z-95 Headhunter
came as a welcome sight to Gavin. Its blasters startedblazing from each wingtip and sliced fire through
thebuilding's central core. Sparks shot from ruptured electri-cal conduits and water gushed from
shattered mains.Walls evaporated beneath the assault, and of the storm-troopers who had been following
them, Gavin could seeno trace.
The Headhunter pulled back as a long black repulsor-liftvehicle rose into place. Wedge got up and ran
towardthe window even before the gull-wing door to the vehi-cle's passenger compartment had fully
opened. He wavedthe others forward and Gavin followed, but kept an eyeon the downed stormtroopers
and the central core to pro- tect against further trouble.
"Gavin, go."
"After you, sir."
Wedge laughed, then winced. "Go, it's an order."
Gavin tossed his blaster carbine to Pash, then leapt into the vehicle and jammed himself between Erisi
andthe Trandoshan. Wedge followed and the vehicle droppedaway from the building. Wind whistled in
through theclosing doors, and it wasn't until silence again reignedthat Gavin heard the driver's voice. Once

he did, Gavinrecognized it and found the shocked look on the otherRogues' faces mirrored his own
surprise.
Wedge nodded toward the driver's compartment."Yes, Emtrey, I am hurt, but it's not serious."
Gavin shook his head and poked a finger in his rightear to try to clear it. "How can Emtrey be here?"
Rhysati nodded. "And who's flying the Headhunter,Commander?"
"Tycho."
Gavin's face froze as his emotions went from elation

to suspicion and the despair of betrayal. "How? He waskilled at Noquivzor."
Wedge shook his head slowly. "No, he wasn't. Theraid was real, but neither he nor Emtrey was there.
Whistler was logging reports for both of them to make itappear like they were there. Both of them were
actually
here."
Iella raised an eyebrow. "You brought them here,
why?"
"There are two things I've learned in the Rebellion.The first is that what any of us thinks is secret is really
in-formation that can be used to purchase other, more valu-able information. If it were deemed expedient
and usefulfor our presence on Coruscant to become commonknowledge, say, to show a potential ally
that we are tak-ing steps to take the world, that ally would learn we werehere. It would only be a matter
of time before that infor-mation got into Imperial hands and we got into trouble." Nawara nodded. "The
fact that we were sold out to-day lends credence to this idea."
"And that brings me to my second point—the oppo-sition can only plan to handle those things they
knowabout. Tycho has been here as long as the rest of us haveand has been working for me. I wanted
one sabacc cardthat wouldn't change value on me and he was it. He'dbeen to Coruscant inside two years
ago, knew how to getaround, and, as we saw just now, has turned out to bevery useful."
Emtrey's clamshell head swiveled around to the back."Captain Celchu indicates we have no pursuit and
are clear to our hideaway. He also has a message for you."
"Link him through."
"Wedge, I'd save this, but it's time-critical."
"Go ahead, we're all friends here."
"An urgent message came through for you while Iwas waiting." Tycho's voice grew somber. "We've got
forty-eight hours to bring Coruscant's shields down."

37
Kirtan Loor bowed before Ysanne Isard. "Rogue Squad-ron is a threat no more."
Isard nodded as if she had only half heard him."They are not dead, however."
"Not for lack of trying." Loor smothered the frown that struggled to make itself manifest. Her order to
himhad been to prevent Rogue Squadron from doing what-ever it was they had planned to do. Killing
them was anoption, and he certainly could have had a squadron of TIE bombers fly in and level the Palar
factory. Had he done so he had no doubt he would have been criticizedfor the overkill. "Their escape is
regrettable, but ourforces have seized their weapon and equipment caches.They are helpless."
Isard raised an eyebrow over her blue eye. "I hardlythink the evidence justifies that statement."
Her stare sent a shiver down his spine, but Loorraised his head defiantly. "I agree, Madam Director, that
the appearance of a Headhunter and a transport vehicleare disturbing, but extrapolating too much from
thatmakes no sense. I think we will find the people whohelped them escape were mercenaries or bounty
hunters.
If Rogue Squadron had on hand the resources necessaryto effect that rescue they would not have
engineered aplan as weak as the one we disrupted."
"Weak?" Isard began to pace through the open ex-panse of her office. "I saw it as quite subtle."
"True. Analysis of some memory cores does indicatethey contained programs that might have been able
to in-sert security codes into the central computer that wouldhave given the Rebels system-wide
programming access.Thatmight have enabled them to bring our shields down,but for how long?
Overrides and failsafes in the systemcould have had the shields back up within an hour."
"Provided, Agent Loor, that they only went for theshields. You seem to think their effort would be either
one employing brute strength, or one that is subtle and el-egant." Isard shook her head. "Perhaps their
first stagewas meant to be subtle, but the second would be singu-larly crippling and enable them to
destroy the centralcomputer itself."
"I do not discount that, Madam Director, but I donot think you believe what you are saying." He held up
a hand to postpone the angry reply her molten stare promised. "Bringing the central computer down
wouldendall service on Imperial Center. All emergency services,all power, all water, all transportation.
While that would be advantageous for them, the untold hardship it wouldvisit upon the citizenry would
work against them. Yourplan to drain the Rebellion of bacta and money is predi-cated on their altruistic
nature, which means you cannot believe they would be so crude."
The heat in Isard's stare slackened, then she nodded,once, and began to smile. "You surprise me, Agent
Loor, with your insight. I had missed it before because of yourinability to think through other things."
Loor cringed inwardly. "I beg your pardon, Madam
Director?"
"Did you think you could run Zekka Thyne as yourown operative without my becoming aware of it?"
"That was not my intention, Madam Director. He

was but a minor player and I thought not to bother youwith insignificant details."
"You lie. He was useful in supplying you informa-tion, but you primarily wanted him to kill Corran Horn."
The tall woman tapped a finger against her sharp chin."It is just as well Thyne failed for I think I would
like tomeet this Corran Horn. It would be interesting to see whyyou fear him so."
"I fear him because he can be relentless. He hates mebecause I freed the bounty hunter who murdered
his fa-ther. Though not a crime, it is something for which hewill not forgive me. Were he disposed toward
murder, I would already be dead. Now that he has joined the Re-bellion, killing me would not be
murder." Loor narrowed his eyes. "Playing with Corran Horn is playing with fire."
"I am Iceheart, I do not burn."
"Yes, Madam Director."
Isard watched him for a moment, then noddedslowly. "I find myself in a curious position regarding you,
Agent Loor. A project under your direction, the Krytosproject, has not succeeded according to my
specifications.You have also, it appears, grown something of a spineand I am inclined to crush you down
for having done so."
Fear clawed his heart but—and this surprised him—itfound no real purchase there. It struck him that
fear hadbeen the motivating force for his life and the tool he usedmost often in dealing with others. He
had first enteredImperial service out of fear of disappointing his parents.Fear of failure kept him pressing
forward. Fear of embar-rassment made him try to destroy Corran Horn and fearfor his own life had
marked his actions since Horn leftCorSec.
He realized he'd lived in fear so long that he had be-come accustomed to it. As if it were an addictive
drug, herequired more and greater amounts to affect him. For thepast two years he had operated at a
high level of fear, atfirst because of Horn and then later because of Isard. Ev-ery threat Isard had thrown
at him involved his termina-tion for failure, and impending failure had seemed a
constant companion for him. The pressure had notcrushed him, and having lived through it, he was
strongerfor it.
Isard nodded slowly. "Very soon this world will be-come a festering pit of sick and dying aliens. I
expect aninordinate number of Rebels will be here soon as well—them or Warlord Zsinj's people. For
these and other rea-sons I will remove myself to my Lusankya facility. I havethere the seeds of the
Rebellion's complete destruction and they require cultivation.
"Imperial Center, on the other hand, needs slashingand burning. While I am content to let someone else
takethis world, I do not want their time on it to be easy. I donot want them to become complacent. I
have determined,then, to leave behind a veritable web of Special Intelli-gence Operative commando and
terrorist cells. I had notyet decided upon who I would sit as a spider in the centerof that web, but it
occurs to me that you would servevery well in that capacity. This spirit, this spine, it speakswell about
your ability to act independently in my be-half."
Part of him, the cold, calculating, andfearful part of him, screamed for the offer to be rejected. If Isard
wascorrect and the Rebellion would soon possess the planet,there was no reason he should stay behind.
It would bebetter to go with Isard to Lusankya and face death at herhands every day than it was to
remain on Coruscant to live a life in the shadows.

Another part of him correctly assessed the position.He would almost constantly be in danger. There
would beno sanctuary, no safe haven. Even so, he would be themaster of his fate—his decisions would
determine 'whether he lived or died. That very prospect terrified himand yet, at the same time, it
exhilarated him. Horn hadleft the sheltered life CorSec offered and he had thrived.This was Loor's
chance to see if he, too, could stand onhis own.
He pulled himself up to his full height. "You willmake me, in effect, the Grand Moff of Imperial Center?"
"You will be the leader of the Palpatine Counterinsur-gencyFront. You will annoy the Rebels on Imperial
Cen-ter as they have annoyed us throughout the galaxy. If youare successful, we will let the word of your
movementspread throughout the galaxy. We want them focused onyou so they will not be able to look
too far ahead. Hob-bling them by giving them this planet, then blinding themby making them focus on you
means they will not see thesnares I lay for them."
She smiled coldly. "They stand united now, but that isbecause they have a common enemy. The Krytos
virus,the scramble for power here, and your PCF will help frac-ture this Rebel Alliance into its constituent
parts. Oncethat happens, once they allow themselves to be divided, sweeping them away will be
nothing."
Loor rubbed a hand over his chin. "If I succeed, whatwill my reward be?"
"If yousucceed, you will do so because you will have mastered skills few people today possess." Isard's
smilebroadened, and even though he found the prospect of herbeing happy frightening, her amusement
gratified himsomehow. "In that case, Kirtan Loor, you will be in a po-sition totell me what your reward
shall be, and to wrestit from me if I am foolish enough to deny it to you."
Which means you will have to destroy me somewherealong the line, but that is not unexpected.Loor
nodded."I understand your offer and all it entails."
"And?"
"And I accept it."
"Excellent. I have already sent two Star Destroyersand several of the ground-based TIE wings off to
preparethe way for what will be a mass exodus when the oppo- sition arrives. I will disappear then."
Isard pressed herhands together. "To you I give the responsibility for Impe- rial Center, the Heart of the
Empire. Ward your chargewell and the glory that was Palpatine's empire will once again shine forth to
illuminate the galaxy."
38
The location Tycho had found to serve as a hideaway sur-prised Wedge because it seemed quite
unusual for Corus-cant. Though he did not believe the room actually wasbeneath the surface of
Coruscant itself, it had the sort offeel that made Wedge think of it as subterranean. Theceiling climbed up
into a vault that had been finished tolook as if it was part of a cavern, complete with stalac-tites hanging
down. However, rust stains and lime scaleadded details that reminded him where he really was.
So did the moist trash midden in the heart of theroom. It consisted largely of things slowly disintegrating
to mush, but a few brightly colored plastic things spottedthe corroded orange pile like mold. Nothing
looked very useful and it all smelled rather bad, a fact that had Shiel feeling rather out of sorts. The

moisture in the middencontributed to the room's microclimate, evaporating andthen condensing on the
ceiling to drip back down again.
Gavin seemed to be the only person who didn't mindbeing dripped upon. "On Tatooine I never even
saw rain,much less got rained on." For the others the dripping wa-ter seemed to make their moods more
foul and none be-came quite as foul as Corran's did when he saw Tycho.
Wedge had spotted Corran's anger rising up throughhis surprise. He pulled the younger man aside and
awayfrom the others. "Do you want me to apologize for de-ceiving you, Corran?"
Corran's green eyes flared. "You're my commandingofficer. You don't need to explain yourself to me,
sir."The hurt in his voice was unmistakable, but so was the implacability in his eyes. "I'm glad to see
Captain Celchuwas not killed at Noquivzor."
"Corran, I chose to keep Tycho's presence here a se-cret to safeguard him and to give us a weapon the
otherside knew nothing about."
"Wedge, I saw him talking with Kirtan Loor at theHeadquarters."
"Tycho said he was there meeting with a Duros gun-runner named Lai Nootka. He didn't see you, but he
wasn't meeting any Imp agent, that's for certain. Had heseen you and the trouble you were in, he would
havehelped."
"I bet."
Wedge grabbed Corran by the shoulders. "Look, hehad instructions to contact you if something
happened tome. You were going to be told, but only when it was nec-essary. It wasn't necessary until
now."
Corran's head came up. "When Zekka Thyne wasdying he said Kirtan Loor knew we were on
Coruscantbeforehe pressed Thyne into his service. There's a lyingsnake among us."
"And you believe what he said?"
"Shouldn't I?"
"Should you?" Wedge's brown eyes narrowed. "Whydo you think Thyne said that to you?"
Corran hesitated. "He wanted to hurt me, sure, but that doesn't mean he was lying."
"No, but it also doesn't mean he was telling thetruth, either. He reported what Loor told him." Wedge
frowned. "We've not seen Aril Nunb since the warehouse.It is entirely possible she was interrogated
before Loor
confronted Thyne. Loor bluffed and Thyne believedhim."
Corran slowly shook his head. "I worked with Loorfor years and the one thing I never saw him do was
bluff.The man's got a memory retention rate that rivals Win-ter's. Instead of letting a suspect guess at
what he did ordidn't know, Loor just started reeling facts off. He'd over-whelm a suspect with detail,
proving how smart he was,so it would seem obvious to the suspect that soonerrather than later the truth
would be found out. No, ifLoor told Thyne he knew we were here, he did. And, re-member, at the point

she was taken, Aril didn't knowanyone outside her group was here."
He has a point there, but he's still inferring a greatdeal from a dying man's last statement."You think
Tychois the Imperial agent?"
"You know his history. What do you think?"
"Ido know his history, but the whole of it." Wedgepointed over to where Tycho and Winter sat in close
con-versation. "I've watched him go through countless mis-sions against the enemy. He has a facility for
being in theright place at the right time."
"A bonus for a spy."
"Or for a hero. He's saved my life and he savedyours, as I recall, on numerous occasions for the both of
us. I trust him absolutely.If there is a spy—and I don'tfind a spiteful tale told by Zekka Thyne very
reliable—I'dsooner believe it was any one of us than I would believeit is Tycho. More importantly,
though, I need Tycho and everyone else if we're going to bring the shields down to- morrow night."
Corran folded his arms across his chest. "So you'retelling me to leave it alone even though his presence
might jeopardize whatever we do?"
Wedge opened his hands. "Look, Corran, I respectyour instincts, I really do, but I've been down here
for fif-teen hours more than you have. Our other caches have been hit by Imps. This is the only safe place
for us. IfTycho had betrayed us, this place would have been hit,
too. And, yes, the Imps could be holding off for someother reason, but I can't think of one aside from
their notknowing where we are. That may not seem like much to you, but it's enough for me to hope we
have a shot at ac-complishing our mission here."
The younger man frowned heavily. "Itisn't much, butright now it's more solid than anything I have. I'll try
tokeep an open mind here, but if the least little thing gets screwed up, I'm going to find out who did what
and therewill be hell to pay."
"I'll back you all the way."
"I guess that's as good as it gets, given the circum-stances."
Wedge brushed a droplet of water off his shoulder."That's not saying much here." He led Corran over to
anarea with a table and chairs set up under an overhang. "If I could have everyone over here, we need to
figure outwhat we're going to be doing. Any and all suggestions arewelcome."
The others gathered around the table. Aside from the members of Rogue Squadron the group included
Iella, Winter, Mirax, Inyri, Portha, and Asyr. The Trandoshanand Shiel both remained on cots and did
not join themeeting. Wedge could see both were sleeping, albeit fit-fully in Shiel's case, so he decided not
to waken them.Better they rest now and are able to fight later.
Wedge leaned forward on the table. "Our basic prob-lem is the same as it's always been: The shields on
thisrock have to come down. We took one shot at getting acomputer override established, but that didn't
work.What do we do now?"
Winter raised a hand. "Things are not exactly thesame as they have always been. The loss of the memory

cores means the central computer has begun to delegatejobs to the subsidiary systems to conserve
memory media.The disks they're using now are in sad shape—a lot more errors are creeping into things.
They've got a constructiondroid building a new manufacturing plant as an adjunctto the computer center
to bring the memory-core manufacture under Imperial control, but it won't be able toturn out product for another two days."
Wedge shivered. He'd seen construction droids work before and found their efficiency as impressive as
he didtheir potential for destruction. Vast, huge machines, theycombined the whole of the manufacturing
cycle in onehighly mobile package. The front end used lasers andother tools to dissect a structure. Little
ancillary droids—some as big as a gravtruck—sorted through the debrisand fed the appropriate bits of
material into the construc-tor's gullet. There metal was resmelted, stone grounddown to dust and
reconstituted, then extruded in girders,blocks, sheets, and trim. The aft end of the constructiondroid then
took the building blocks and, in accord with preprogrammed plans, created a new structure where theold
one had been. Specialized subsidiary constructiondroids equipped with repulsorlift coils built the
walkwaysthat linked structures and worked on the delicate upperreaches of the highest towers on
Coruscant.
"It's hard to believe that a factory can be built andrunning in three days, but that's progress."
Asyr growled. "I hope they evicted the tenants of thebuilding they destroyed to make the factory. They
keepforgetting to do that when they have one of those mon-sters take a slice out of Invisec."
Corran frowned. "If I remember correctly, the subsid-iary computer facilities are not as well guarded as
thecentral computer. This makes them vulnerable to an at- tack, right?"
"True, but using one of the computers to bring downthe shields means we're only going to get a small
portionof the shields down." Wedge shook his head. "This forcesus to concentrate our assault teams in
one place and al-lows the Empire to do the same with their defenses. Thisworld is too well defended for
the Alliance to take it by
storm."
Gavin shot from his chair and clapped his hands to-gether. "That's it! We take the world by storm."
Only the dripping sound of water violated the silence
that greeted Gavin's remark. Everyone stared at him and Gavin blushed.
Wedge nodded slowly. "What are you talking about,Gavin?"
"I'm talking about the storms we've seen here before.A cloud comes up and a lightning storm hits."
Corran shook his head. "Conjuring a storm up isn'tthat easy, Gavin."
"No, Corran, it is." Gavin raked his fingers backthrough wet hair. "My uncle on Tatooine is a food magnate who has a virtual monopoly on water rights andmoisture farms. He wants all the water he can get.
Hun-dreds of people have come to him with schemes to bringrain to Tatooine, and probably ten times
that numberhave come up with schemes they intend to use to breakUncle Huff's control of the water
market. Most he ig-nores, but occasionally he pays someone off. One of theguys he paid off was
someone who had a plan to seed theatmosphere with chemical crystals around which water would

condense. The water would form clouds and theclouds would produce rain."
Wedge straightened up. "Doesn't that presupposethere is sufficient water vapor already in the air? Aside
from this place, Coruscant seems rather lacking in humid-ity."
"And when there is some, a storm forms almost in-stantly." Pash nodded at Iella. "We saw one of those
fast-forming storms when we were at the museum."
Corran smiled. "Perhaps we could get everyone in theBlack Sun and Alien Combine to put a pot on to
boil atthe same time."
Everyone laughed except for Winter. "Boiling is agood idea, but we need a lot of water set to boil all at
onetime. That requires lots of water and lots of heat."
Corran opened his hands. "So, where do we get that much water?"
Winter chewed on her lower lip for a second. "Watergets melted at the polar glaciers, then pumped
through long aqueducts to pumping stations and deep reservoirs
throughout the equatorial areas of the city. There's plentyof water in any one of the reservoirs."
"But how do we vaporize it?" Wedge scratched at theback of his head. "Thermal detonators are too
inefficient,and repeated strafing runs to use lasers on it would take too long. We need a lot of heat, but
we need it deliveredall at once."
"I've got it." Asyr smiled proudly. "We use one of theorbital mirrors. They're designed to concentrate
sunlightand deliver it to the planet to warm up the colder regions.We redirect one of them to focus on a
reservoir and it'llvaporize the duracrete, transparisteel, and water in shortorder."
"The problem there, Asyr, is getting up to the mir-ror." Corran shook his head. "We'd have to get
throughthe shields we want to bring down first, and that's not go-ing to be easy, then we have to take the
mirror. By thetime we finished assaulting it, the Golan Space Defensestations would shoot it down or a
TIE starfighter wingwould come up and destroy it."
Iella looked over at Winter. "Are the mirrors crew-controlled or ground-controlled?"
"Ground-controlled. Mirror duty is considered pun-ishment. The crews that maintain the facilities go out
torepair damage from strikes by debris, but that's about it."
Wedge's eyes narrowed. "Presumably you're suggest-ing we take control of a ground station and
redirect oneof the orbital mirrors to vaporize a reservoir. That water vapor will condense into a monster
storm that will strikewith lightning all over the place, taking down the powergrid. As the computers try to
match power to demand, weshould get a complete power grid collapse."
Iella smiled. "You got a better idea?"
"Unfortunately, no." Wedge frowned. "The weaklink here, as I see it, is taking the control station."
"The orbital mirrors are controlled by the subsidiarycomputer centers." Winter glanced at her datapad.
"The nearest should be SCC Number Four, just south of the Imperial Palace."

"Do we have enough people to assault it and get us in fast enough that we can do what needs to be done
without interference?" Wedge looked around the tableand saw frowns or blank expressions except on
one face."Lieutenant Horn, you have an idea?"
"Yeah, we evict folks from that center."
"What?"
Corran leaned forward, resting his elbows on the ta-ble. "There's a construction droid building a factory
within a laser shot from that center, right? We get a crew in to take control of the factory and have it go
rogue. It heads straight for the computer center. I don't think any-one is going to remain on station while
a Death Star's lit-tle brother comes toward him gobbling up cityscape. It stops short of destroying the
center, but our crew shouldbe able to get in and get working on the orbital mirror.Moreover, we can
have the construction droid spittingout a new central computer facility with some of our own code sliced
into it. If we take the planet, we'll be up andrunning even if the Imps blow the old center."
"And if the Imps manage to stop the constructiondroid before it hits the abandoned computer center,
they'll think they've muted our attack and thwarted us."Wedge nodded. "I see it. Emtrey, do you know
how to run a construction droid?"
The droid's head came up. "I have had some experi-ence with smaller manufacturing systems, sir, so I
believeI can determine what we need to do."
Mirax raised a hand. "I've used one of the small onesto fabricate some storage areas for my father.
Count mein on that crew."
"Right." Wedge felt a twinge of pain in his ribs."With broken ribs I'm not flight ready, so I'll go on that
one, too. Iella?"
"I'm with you."
"Good." Wedge rubbed his hands together. "Winter,you're the best slicer we've got here, so you've got
to begoing into the center. Tycho, Gavin, and Ooryl, you'll round out that crew."

Corran looked up at Wedge. "What about the rest ofus?"
"You're flying cover."
"Commander, I don't think you're going to fit the restof us in the cockpit of a Headhunter."
"True, which is why Tycho has procured six ofthem." Wedge smiled broadly. "Corran, you'll fly withErisi
on your wing, Rhysati and Pash will fly togetherand . . ." He looked over at Shiel. "Hmmm, Nawara, you
might have to fly alone."
Asyr raised her hand. "Commander Antilles, I'm combat-qualified in a Headhunter."
"Excuse me?"
The Bothan looked down sheepishly. "You know meas Asyr Sei'lar, but what you don't know is that I'm

agraduate of the Bothan Martial Academy. I graduated ayear behind Peshk Vri'syk. He was good
enough to joinRogue Squadron last year, and I was his equal when wewere trained. It's been a while
since I've flown, but I canhandle the fighter."
Wedge raised an eyebrow. "What would a member ofthe Bothan military be doing here on Coruscant?"
"I'd rather not say, sir."
"I can understand that." Wedge nodded slowly."Well, then, you've got number six with Nawara in five."
The Twi'lek shook his head and Wedge noticed hisnormally ash-colored flesh had taken on a creamy
tonethat, in some places, seemed translucent. "I think I'mcoming down sick, sir. I'm not certain I'm flight
capable.The ryll I've taken is helping a bit, but I'm still not feelingwell enough to fly."
"I'm not formally qualified to fly, but I've done a lotof simming." Inyri bit her lower lip. "Lujayne used to
train against me. She was better than I was and beat meregularly, but not all the time."
Corran smiled. "I've seen her pilot a speeder bike andan airspeeder. She does well in the tight confines
of theseurban canyons."
Wedge was tempted to take her up on her offer, but
he held back. "I believe what you've told me, Inyri, but I can't take responsibility for your first starfighter
combattaking place on Coruscant. What I'd rather have you dois deliver Winter and the others to the
computer center.That will take some fancy airspeeder flying because we'llbe grinding a lot of stuff up in
the area."
"Commander," Erisi began, "if we have Asyr or Inyribring in some more people for the ground teams,
wecould free up Gavin, Captain Celchu, or Ooryl and giveus six pilots."
"No, we're not bringing anyone else in." Wedgeleaned forward again on the table. "Corran has broughtto
my attention the potential for betrayal. Zekka Thyneinformed the Imperials of our plans for the factory.
We'regoing to need all the time we have remaining to double-and triple-check our plans and equipment,
then we're go-ing. No one here is going to communicate with anyoneoutside just to make sure the Imps
have no inkling ofwhat we're going to do. This effortmust succeed."
Gavin slowly shook his head. "Fourteen against aworld. Those are long odds."
"Lieutenant Darklighter, I'm a Corellian. I have nouse for odds." Wedge smiled broadly, putting as much
confidence as he could into it. "No doubt the Imps havea sizable house edge here, but now the war has
come toCoruscant, which means they're playingour game, and that makes everything even all over
again."
39
Corran Horn tightened the straps on his life-support con-troller, adjusting the boxy device as he went to
get it cen-tered on his chest. He much preferred having thecontroller built into his command chair as it
was on hisCorSec X-wing, but the Z-95 was more primitive than that, so he had to wear it. He punched
a button, puttingthe device through a self-check, then got a tone indicating everything was in good
working order.

Mirax smiled broadly as she came walking over andsucceeded in forestalling the dread her black
Imperial uni-form sparked in him. "We're getting ready to head out.Are you okay?"
Corran nodded. "Yeah. We've gone over all theHeadhunters from nose to stern and they check out."
"So I gather. I recall seeing you and Erisi in close con-versation."
Corran felt hot color rise in his cheeks. "That was aprelude to a group discussion. We ended up
adjusting the sensor packages and zeroing the blasters at 150 meters. Wefigured that dogfights would be
close and shots of over150 meters in the canyons here are going to be rare."
"Take care of yourself out there."
"Hey, my job is making sure to keep TIEs and othersoff you." Corran reached out and tapped the tip of
hernose with his finger. "Look, it will be crazy out there. Inall likelihood Rogue Squadron will get a few
more heroesinducted into its Hall of the Dead..."
Mirax gave him a smirk. "Corran, if this is one ofthose 'tomorrow we might die so we should be together
tonight' speeches, your timing is lousy since tomorrow isnow and last night ended when this morning
started."
"I know." Corran laughed at the nervousness he felt."I guess what I'm trying to say is this: Before
CoruscantI found you interesting and attractive. Since we've beenhere I've gotten to know more about
you, to see how youreact under pressure and how effortlessly you seem to getalong with others. I admire
the qualities that I've seen inyou and, well, if we both come out of this, I'd like the op-portunity to get to
know you even better."
"Corran Horn, are you asking me out?" Mirax's darkeyes sparkled. "Or was there some pool that you
lost?" "If there'd been a pool, I'd have bought up all thetickets." He sighed. "Mirax, we've got enough
things go-ing against us, like our respective backgrounds, that thechances of things working out are bad."
"But we're Corellians, so what use have we forodds?" She pressed a finger to his lips, then leaned forward and kissed him. "And just to let you know, you'renot the only one who's been impressed here, so
you're on.You're taking me to the biggest and best victory celebra-tion the New Republic throws on this
rock." Mirax tapped a finger against the box on his chest. "Life- support gear optional."
"I'll be there." He kissed her in return, then lookedup and saw Wedge heading over to the black
airspeederEmtrey was to use to get them to the construction droid."You better get going."
"The Force be with you."
"And with you." Corran smiled as she ran off. He felt particularly lucky and hoped that sensation would
continue throughout the mission, then he turned andfound himself face-to-face with Tycho Celchu.
"Captain.""I'm glad you'll be flying the black and gold Head-hunter. I think it's the best of the lot, which is
why I usedit the other day. I just checked it out, everything looks fine,and I know I can trust you to bring
it back in one piece.""I'll do my best, sir." Corran refused to look him inthe eye. "If you will excuse me,
sir."
"No, wait a minute." Tycho shifted to the right toblock his path. "I want you to know you're wrong about
me. I didn't meet Kirtan Loor the night you saw me. I'mnot working for the Imps."

Corran exhaled slowly. "Captain, Wedge has askedme to let it go, and so I will, for now, but there are
toomany odd things here to make me leave it alone forever.""Such as?"
"Such as your being here when Alliance Intelligencethinks you're buried in rubble on Noquivzor. Such as
myseeing you here with an agent of Imperial Intelligence.Such as your vacation at Lusankya." Muscles
bunched at the corners of Corran's jaw. "Such as Bror Jace beingambushed and killed by Imperials after
you obtained per-mission for him to travel and plotted his course for him."Tycho's face slackened slightly.
"But that's all circum-stantial. Nothing is proven."
"Nothing's provenyet." Corran looked him square inthe face. "The fact that there's no solid evidence
againstyou just means you're real good."
The other man's blue eyes sharpened. "Or, LieutenantHorn, it means I've left no evidence because I'm
com-pletely innocent."
"I guess we'll see about that, Captain Celchu." Cor-ran rested his fists on his hips. "When I return, I'm
goingto make ferreting out the spy in our midst a hobby. I'mgood at that sort of thing, very good."
Tycho opened his hands. "And you're honest, so Iknow I have nothing to fear."
His calm reply surprised Corran. There was an utterdefenselessness about it he'd never encountered
before.
He wasn't certain how to take that remark, so he shunted it aside. "Well, Captain, if youdo have anything
to fear,I'll find it."
"Fly well, Corran." Tycho gave Corran a nod, then walked off. Beyond him Corran saw Pash Cracken
look-ing in his direction, but he turned away quickly andrubbed at an invisible spot on his red and green
Head-hunter's cockpit canopy.
Corran walked past him toward his own fighter. Erisiglanced up from where her blue Headhunter with
redtrim sat, then walked over on an intercept course. Corran forced a smile on his face. "Set to go,
Erisi?""Yes. I still wish we were flying together.""I'd be happy to have you on my wing." With Asyr's
joining the flight, Wedge had adjusted assignments soPash flew with the Bothan and Erisi joined Rhysati.
Thatleft Corran alone, but he'd been alone before in combatzones and both he and Wedge knew anyone
other than Pash Cracken would have a hard time keeping up withhim anyway. "With me flying solo we
can lull the Impsinto a false sense of security."
"The last thing they'll feel is regret." Erisi smiled eas-ily at him. "Are you feeling well? You're not coming
down sick like Nawara and Shiel, are you?"
Corran shook his head. "No. I'll be fine. I, ah, I justhad a confrontation with Tycho. The Empire owns
him,I can feel it. I told him that when I got back I'd dig up allthe clues concerning the spy in our midst and
provehewas involved in getting Bror Jace ambushed and jeopard-izing our mission here."
"I can see how that might have you out of sorts." Shereached out and stroked his arm. "If there's
anything I can do to help you, let me know."
"Thanks, Erisi, I appreciate it." He winked at her,then stepped back and let a loud whistle echo through
thecavern. "Let's go, Rogues. It's time to get moving. Ourpeople will be in position inside fifteen minutes,

whichmeans our prey will show up shortly thereafter. Shootstraight and fly fast."
40
The datapad's stuttered trilling attracted Kirtan Loor's at-tention. He walked over from where he had
been invento-rying weapons to be distributed to his command andtapped a button on the datapad. The
nature of the soundhad told him the message was urgent and of a high prior-ity as well. The message the
datapad displayed lived up toits billing.
Soan Interdictor cruiser has been spotted at thefringe of our system. Those ships are too big and too
val-uable to use as scouts. Either it is meant to decoy some of our forces out away from this planet or it is
the vanguardof an invasion fleet.He knew, without a doubt, the latter case was the truth, but that prospect
did not fill him with the dread it might have six months earlier. His reason forexisting now required a
Rebel invasion and conquest ofCoruscant.Our shields aren't down, so they must meanto make a fight
of it or ...
Loor hit some more buttons and checked to see if anywarnings had come in from the Rogue Squadron
spy. Hesaw nothing, but curiosity and caution caused him todelve a bit deeper. Using a security override
program hediscovered all messages from the agent inside Rogue
Squadron had been reclassified to "Isard Eyes Only." She had engineered it so all those messages were
routed to herfirst so she could decide their disposition. Loor knew if hechallenged her on it, she would
say it was done so he would not be distracted during his preparations.
At another stage in his life he would have wasted valuable time and energy trying to work a way around
Isard's action, but no more. What the spy had to say wasno longer important to the conduct of his
mission. Isardwanted Coruscant to fall into the hands of the Rebellion,so it would. Since he already knew
who the spy was, re-establishing contact at a later date would not be particu-larly difficult, should the
need arise.
Best if I assume that the Roguesareup to something. Fine. I wish them all the Force-inspired success
they de-sire. Once they win, once they drop their guard, then we will hit them and hit them hard.He
laughed aloud andreturned to his work. "Not much longer from now the Rebels will have what they most
desire. And shortlythereafter they will learn they don't really want it at all."
The black airspeeder raced through the night-dim streetson a course that brought it parallel to the
construction droid's path, then Emtrey cut the wheel left and pulledback. The airspeeder climbed rapidly,
then the nose easeddown and Emtrey steered in toward the flat landing sur-face built behind the droid's
control center. "I will have usdown in fifteen seconds, sir."
Wedge fitted the mask over the right side of his head.He spoke the command that inflated the air
bladders thatclamped the helmet in place. "How do I look?" hecroaked.
"Very Imperial, Colonel Roat." Iella gave him a nod.
Mirax looked less comfortable with his disguise."You look very cyborg."
"Good. That lessens my chance of being recognized." Wedge rode out the slight bump as Emtrey put the
vehicledown on the construction droid. A faint hum filled the
air, but it grew to a hideous din when the airspeeder'sgull-wing doors opened. Wedge got out of the

speederfirst, then helped both Mirax and Iella disembark.
A man wearing a red helmet and an orange jumpsuit waved both hands at them as he came running over.
"Youcan't be here. Get going or I call for stormtroopers."
Wedge leaned forward and frowned, tapping themetal over his right ear. "I cannot hear you."
"I SAID . . ."
"Too much noise."
The workman frowned, then bid all of them to fol-low him with a curt wave. He led them into a small
foyer just outside the command center. The door closed behindthem, cutting the noise almost to nothing.
"You can't be
here."
"I am Colonel Antar Roat and these are my aides. Ihave come for a safety inspection."
"I don't know anything about that."
Mirax gave the man a withering stare. "Of coursenot, idiot. If you did, this inspection wouldn't be a surprise, would it?"
Iella held a hand out. "Your identification and workpermits please."
"Wait." The man went for the identification cardsand held them out. "I should check with .. ."
Iella snatched the datacards from him. "Compound-ing the possible charges against you? Is there a
conspiracybetween you and your cohorts? How much do they payyou for your part in the smuggling
operation?" Iellapaced around him like a Thevaxan Marauder stalking
prey.
"What smuggling?" The man's hands came up as heturned to face her. "I don't know no..."
Wedge's boxy right hand crashed onto the back of theman's head, dropping him to the ground. Iella
immedi-ately turned to the interior door while Mirax let Emtreyinto the foyer. The droid held blaster
carbines for each ofthe others and passed them out carefully. Iella checked
hers, then passed the downed man's identification cardthrough the coded slot.
The door buzzed. Iella jerked it open and Wedge andMirax hurried through it, brandishing their
weapons at the trio of men lounging at a hologame table. Beyondthem, filling the walls of the rectangular
command center, monitors, gauges, dials, and fights displayed an unending amount of information about
every phase of the construc-tion droid's operation. The multicolored lights tendedmostly to be green,
which underscored the sick pallor of the men's flesh tones.
"Lie down on the floor and no one gets hurt." Miraxpointed her carbine at the men and smiled. "I ask
once—after that I have the droid pitch your bodies off the frontand you'll end up as compost in some
Ithorian's indoorgarden, understand? That's it, hug that deck and youwon't have to be enlightened."

Iella held the door open as Wedge went back throughand dragged the unconscious man into the
cockpit. Theother three looked shocked to see him down, but his snores reassured them somewhat as to
their own fate.Iella used some synthetic binders to fasten their hands be-hind their backs and link their
legs together. "They can betightened, gentlemen, so rest easy and there will be no need to make you
more uncomfortable."
While Iella took over covering the men, Wedge re-moved his mask and joined Mirax at the command
con-sole. "Can you drive this thing?"
Mirax tipped her head to one side, then the other,hesitated, then nodded. "It's a bit more complex than
theone I've used before, but I think Emtrey can help methrough this. Emtrey, bring this monster around
on a new heading for our target."
"Yes, Mistress Terrik. There, new course is set."
The main viewscreen showed a nighttime landscapeof lights and shadows begin to scroll across as the
con-struction droid executed a ninety-degree turn toward thesouth. In the distance, between two stocky
office towers,
Wedge made out the squat form of Subsidiary ComputerCenter Number Four. "Right on target."
"Good." Mirax looked up and hit a glowing red but-ton. The light started flashing red.
"What's that?"
"All government buildings are required to have evac-uationalarms in the case of a catastrophe."
Wedge smiled. "Like a construction droid bearingdown on it?"
"It's easy to see how you got that squadron com-mand, Wedge." Mirax poked him playfully in the stomach with an elbow. "The alarms are going off in everybuilding for ten kilometers along our line of advance.
Thesame evacuation alarms are required in residential areas with a relatively high assessed value. Not so
in places like
Invisec."
Emtrey turned from his position. "Sir, I have insertedthe auxiliary code into the blueprints here. Our
computercenter is begun."
The buildings in their path immediately came alivewith lights moving at a variety of speeds. Wedge
scanned the console and punched a button, shifting the image overfrom visible light to infrared. He saw
traces from all man-nerof speeders heading out and away. A solid mass ofgold tinged with red at the top
and bottom surged acrossthe bridges connecting the doomed towers with saferbuildings.
The console's comm unit came alive. "This is the Ministry of Planning and Zoning. Construction droid
Foursixnine, do you have a problem? We're showing a de-viationof your course."
Wedge hit the reply button. "No problem here, wejust have new plans. With Coruscant being under new
management, we wanted to get things started early toease the transition."

"What are you talking about? Who is this?"
"Rogue Squadron Contracting. X-wings are faster,but they don't build things as nicely as this does.
Antilles
out." He hit the comm, terminating the conversation."There, think that will make us a target?"
Iella laughed. "If it doesn't, that's just one more ex-ample of why the Empire is too stupid to survive."
Captain Uwlla Iillor of the New Republic InterdictorcruiserCorusca Rainbow glanced at the
chronographicdisplay built into the arm of her command chair, then upat the holographic representation of
Coruscant hoveringin the middle of the bridge. The display indicated therewere only twenty standard
minutes left before the Rebelfleet would be within range for her to pull them from hy-perspace. If she did
not, they would continue on into thesystem and arrive around Coruscant to do battle for the Jewel of the
Empire.
The hologram of Coruscant—which was based onImperial Traffic Control data broadcast to the
system—showed the world as a translucent sphere studded with arainbow of lights. Superimposed over
that were twospheres made up of hexagonal tiles. As long as those spheres were there, indicating the
presence of shieldsaround Coruscant, Captain Iillor was under orders topower up her ship's gravity well
projectors and pull thefleet from hyperspace prematurely. The situation was des-perate enough that
Admiral Ackbar had even said a par-tial shield failure would be sufficient to let the fleetcontinue on in,
provided Captain Iillor felt the shield out-age was significant.
The decision she had to make was even more difficult than the choice to defect with her ship and crew
to theRebellion. While Ackbar had been clear in his instruc-tions to her, she knew the conquest of
Coruscant wouldsignificantly cripple the Empire and correspondingly en-rich the New Republic. That she
had been placed in sucha position of trust and power showed her how differentthe Republic was from the
Empire and because of that difference she didn't want to make the wrong decision.
Lieutenant Jhemiti, her Mon Calamari First Officer,
held a datapad out for her inspection. "Projector crewshave run full system diagnostics on their
equipment andwe are ready to power up when you give the word."
She glanced at the times appended to each diagnosticsrun. "The crew is slow. We can't have that."
The Mon Calamari opened his mouth in a smile."Few believe we'll be activating the gravity well projectors, Captain."
Iillor raised an eyebrow. "And why is that, Lieuten-ant?"
Jhemiti hesitated for a moment. "Rumor has it thatthe people we have on the ground are Rogue
Squadron.They've killed Death Stars. They'll accomplish their mis-sion."
"Ah, yes, Rogue Squadron." The Captain smiledslightly. "Let me tell you, Lieutenant, I've fought Rogue
Squadron. They drove this ship off. They cost me almostall of my TIE fighters, too, in doing so. Were
anyone elsedown there, I would take their failure for granted. Withthem, I am willing to allow the
possibility they will suc-ceed."
Jhemiti blinked and the gold flecks in his red scalessparkled. "But Rogue Squadronis known for

accomplish-ing the impossible."
"If reputations alone won wars, Lieutenant, DarthVader would still live and you'd still be a slave."
CaptainIillor nodded grimly and looked at the chronometeragain. "There are eighteen minutes on the
clock—eighteen minutes for a squadron to strip a planet of itsdefenses. We'll let them have every second
we can, but wewill be ready to do our duty if they cannot do theirs."
41
Gavin jammed his hands against the dashboard of the airspeeder as Inyri flew through the cloud of dust
being raised by the construction droid. Even in the enclosed cabof the speeder he could hear the warning
klaxons blaringat Subsidiary Computer Center Number Four. As theybroke free of the grey cloud he got
a good look at all thevehicles jetting away from the computer center and allthe people fleeing across
bridges to other towers.
Inyri sideslipped the speeder to center it on the bal-cony situated fifth-floor front. From information
supplied originally by Black Sun, Winter had determined the con-trol center they needed was located on
the fifth floor.While they expected the whole facility to be abandoned,they assumed a general security
lockdown would makeentering at the first floor and working their way up diffi-cult.
"Brace for impact." Inyri cut power to the engine and .began to slow the speeder, then let it sail straight
over the balcony and into the office beyond it. The transparisteelwall disintegrated into one crystalline
wave that washedup and over the speeder's windscreen. A desk exploded atthe front bumper's casual
caress and the room's far walls
buckled, letting the speeder skid to a stop in the waiting room attached to what had once been the
CEO's office.Gavin slapped the quick release for his restrainingbelts and kicked his door open. He slid
from the speederand brought a blaster carbine up. The klaxons obliterated any sounds the opposition
might have made and the dust curtain between him and the rest of the building hid pos-sible foes.
Hunkered down in the shadow of his openeddoor he could see nothing, but with each passing secondhe
came to believe everyone had evacuated the building.Tycho cut to the right, Gavin went left and
advanced.Things appeared clear from his new vantage point, so hewaved the others forward. Ooryl
came up with Winterfollowing close behind him. Inyri brought up the rear, constantly checking back
toward the outside to make sureno one followed them in.
Winter was the key to their success because thedatapad she held contained the code that would move
anorbital mirror to target the nearest water distributionplant and reservoir. Once beyond the area of
devastationcreated by Inyri's entry, they were able to move alongquickly. All the doors along the corridor
to the control center were closed. Gavin tried to open all those on hisside of the corridor but they were
all locked tight. Tychoindicated the situation on the right was the same, but thatis what they had been led
to expect after the plant wasabandoned.
They reached the door to the computer center with-out opposition. Gavin took a moment to glance
throughthe transparisteel viewport in the heavy door. The room looked empty of life to him, though the
computers them-selves had lights flickering across their dark surfaces. Hol-ographic streams of data
scrolled up from desktop tooblivion above a dozen workstations. Aided by a thinmist hanging in the air,
the light from them cast green andred shadows over the rest of the room, making the dimly lit room seem
sinister.
Winter dropped to her knees and attached a cablefrom her datapad to a computer port on the
doorjamb.

"The sequencer programs I have will open the door in notime. First, though, I need to run a diagnostic
and see what sort of combination I want."
"Good luck." Gavin dropped to a crouch and watchedthe corridor that led farther into the complex. He
posi-tioned himself so his body shielded Winter. He felt a twingein his belly from an old blaster wound
and hoped it wasnot some sort of ill omen for the future.
The datapad beeped and Winter swore. "Sithspawn."Tycho crouched at her shoulder. "What?""They've
flooded the control room with gas. Lookslike Fex-M3d." Winter raised a fist but refrained frompunching
the door. "It's in a diluted form so it won't killyou if you get a lungful, but it'll put you out."
Gavin jerked a thumb at the door. "To the left, on thewall, there's a clear case that has breather masks in
it. Ifwe could get in, we could get them."
"That's the bigif. The case is coded, just like the door here. By the time a sequencer got it open, you'd
have tobreathe and you'd be down." Winter shook her head."Looks as if this system was installed within
the last twoweeks, after we were given the data we used to make ourattack. There's nothing we can do.
We can't get in. It'sover."
His hand on the stick, the Z-95 Headhunter cruisingthrough the duracrete canyons of Coruscant, Corran
Horn felt more alive and free than all the soaring hawk-bats on the planet. He would have much preferred
to beflying his X-wing, and he felt awkward flying into com-bat without Whistler backing him up, but
flying againmade him happy enough that he could forgive Whistlerhis absence. Noplace for him in this
Headhunter anyway.The Headhunter suffered in comparison with theX-wing. It lacked the
maneuverability and speed of theX-wing, though the shields and hull had the same integ-rity. The
Headhunter did not have hyperdrives and, con-sequently, did not need an R2 unit. The Headhunter's
triple blasters and concussion missiles were not the equal of the X-wing's four laser cannons and proton
torpedolaunchers but they didn't exactly leave him defenseless, ei-ther.
Against the Imperial starfighters he'd be facing theHeadhunter had the potential to be troublesome—both
for him and them. In atmosphere the TIEs lost some oftheir maneuverability. Their lack of shields made
themvulnerable to his attacks, but the fact that they'd beswarming meant being able to stay with one long
enoughto kill it would be difficult. Locking in on one target would make him a target.
He glanced down at his sensor display. "Hunt Leaderhere. I have twelve, that is one-two, starfighters
coming in on the droid. Time to engagement is thirty seconds. Shootstraight and call for help."
Corran got a series of acknowledgments over thecomm. Pulling back on his stick he started the Z-95
climbing. Pushing the throttle full forward he rocketed up like a ship intent on escaping the planet. A
quartet of TIEstarfighters came up after him but before they could closeto range and start shooting, he
rolled the Headhunter tostarboard. The fighter came up and over, then dove backin the direction from
which the TIEs had come.
Halfway through the dive, he pulled the fighterthrough a 180-degree snap-roll left, then swooped out ina
long glide that brought him in over the construction droid and into the rest of the TIEs. He spitted the
leaderon his targeting crosshairs and gave it two bursts ofblaster fire. The dozen energy darts stippled the
eyeballwith hits. It began a lazy roll that ended abruptly as itslammed into a tower and exploded.
The pilot of the next TIE followed his leader throughthe roll, clearly not realizing one of Corran's shots

hadpierced the cockpit and killed the pilot. He tried to pullup and away at the last second. His hexagonal
port wingclipped the corner of the tower and sent the TIE into acorkscrew spin that spiraled down into a
fiery explosiondeep in a dark canyon.
Standing the Headhunter on its port S-foils, Corranadded enough left rudder to snap the ship into a dive
pastthe construction droid. He pointed the fighter's nose straight at the bottom of the urban trench and
starteddown. He chopped his throttle back to zero and used thestick to roll his ship until the canyon
stretched to infinityoff each wing, but crowded him above and below.
Two TIEs dove after him and closed fast. Corranmade minor adjustments on his position, forcing them
tostick with him to target him. Their first shots missed,sending green energy lances down to flare brightly
in thedarkness, but they began to get better. Then they got closeenough that they hit his aft shield,
prompting him to takeaction.
He rolled the Headhunter ninety degrees to port,hemming himself in on either wing, then he pulled back
on the stick. At the same time he punched all the powerbeing generated by his engines into the repulsorlift
drive.The Headhunter's nose popped up, leveling him out ahundred meters above the canyon's bottom.
Momentum from the dive kept him going forward and away from theTIEs.
One eyeball pilot made a serious mistake by notrolling before he tried to follow the Headhunter. His
ma-neuver was intended to bring the TIE around in a sharp, right-angle turn—a maneuver that would
have worked inthe vacuum of space and placed him right on Corran's tailwith a killing shot. In
atmosphere, however, the maneuverbrought his starboard wing around in direct opposition tohis previous
line of flight. The hexagonal panel snapped,with the top half sheering through the ship's ball cockpit.Still
going full out, the TIE fighter hammered the ground and exploded.
The second TIE pilot rolled first, then swooped in af-ter Corran's Headhunter. The speed of the dive
forced thepilot into a wider turn than he clearly wanted. The loweredges of his wings struck sparks from
the duracrete street.Fighting inertial forces, the pilot did everything he could
to make his fighter climb. Finally the ship began to win inits battle with gravity and began to come up.
Up into one of the numerous walkways connectingone building with another. The TIE plowed into a
centralportion of the span, splintering the permacrete section ithit. The fighter exploded, shattering
windows and sowingshrapnel throughout the area.
Reversing thrust and applying some rudder, Corranbrought the fighter around in an end for end swap
thatleft him looking at the fires burning in his wake.Not abad start, four down, but it's only a start.He
eased the throttle forward and started a gentle climb to the unob- structed reaches of Coruscant's
atmosphere. He glancedat the shipboard chronometer and fuel gauge.
"Fifteen minutes to get the shields down and a halfhour of flying time. That's forever if we succeed and
littlemore than a heartbeat if we do not."
Wedge's comlink buzzed at him. "Antilles here, goahead."
"Tycho here. We have a problem—gas in the com-puter center. We need Emtrey. Now."
"I copy." He looked up at Mirax. "Will this thingkeep going by itself?"
She nodded. "The droid will stop at the outer edge ofthe computer center if"—she pointed at external

viewmonitors showing TIEs on strafing runs—"they don'tstop it first."
"If we can leave this thing alone, they need us in thecomputer center."
Mirax held her hands up. "Let's go."
Iella led the way back into the entryway. She startedto push the door open, then quickly ducked back.
A sprayof blaster bolts dotted the interior of the door with burnmarks.
Wedge ran over to where she sat on the floor. "Areyou hurt?""I'm fine."
"What was that?"
She shook her head. "I couldn't see clearly but given the size of those burn marks I'd say some
stormtroopershave an E-web heavy blaster set up on one of the nearbytowers. They've got the door
covered and covered well."Iella shrugged. "Unless we get some help, we're going tobe stuck here for the
rest of our lives."
42
Gavin's stomach began to fold in on itself as he heardWedge's voice come out of the comlink. "Sorry,
Tycho,we're pinned down here. Unless we get some help, we'regoing nowhere."
"I copy, Wedge." Tycho looked over at Gavin. "Youand I will go see if we can help them out."
Ooryl raised a three-fingered hand. "Ooryl..."Tycho shook his head. "I want you here to help Inyriguard
Winter. The kid and I will go."
The Gand nodded, then his mouth parts snappedopen. "Ooryl does not question your orders, Captain.
Ooryl merely wants to know how this Fex-M3d works."Winter slowly straightened up. "You breathe it
in, itgets into your bloodstream and binds to neuroreceptors,preventing nerves from passing information.
If you get astrong enough dose your autonomic nervous system shutsdown and you stop breathing. You
suffocate."
The Gand's mouth parts closed again. "Ooryl under-stands. If you will all back down this hallway, Ooryl
willopen the door, open the interior case, and bring you backrespirators."
Gavin's jaw shot open. "But you'll die."
The Gand shook his head. "Ooryl does not respire."
Inyri blinked. "What?"
Ooryl tapped his chest. "Gands do not respire."
"But you talk."
"Yes, Inyri Forge, but respiration is not required forspeech. Ooryl's body has a muscular gas bladder
that al-lows Ooryl to, among other things, draw in gases and ex-pel them at a controlled rate through
pieces of Gand exoskeleton that vibrate and approximate speech. Oorylgets the metabolic ingredients
Ooryl needs through inges-tion, not respiration. Fex-M3d will not affect Ooryl."

Tycho thought for a moment, then nodded. "Here'swhat we'll do. Ooryl will wait here until we retreat.
Inyri, you'll turn the airspeeder around and bring the engine up. Point the exhaust jets down this hallway
and we can usethem to push the freed Fex-M3d deeper into the build-ing."
"It will also point the airspeeder in the right directionfor our escape."
"Good point, Inyri." Tycho looked over at Gavin."Depending upon how many masks there are in the
room, you and Inyri may have to wait outside. If there are enough, we all go down and hold the center."
"Got it."
Tycho slapped the Gand on the arm. "Wait until weget clear, then go."
"Ooryl understands."
Gavin retreated with the others. They sealed them-selves inside the airspeeder. Inyri brought it up and
around, giving Gavin a good view of the firefights goingon outside. TIE fighters swooped and dove.
Green laserbolts flashed through the sky thick and furious. Countlessburn marks scored the flanks and
front of the construc-tion droid, yet it loomed ever larger as it came on towardthem.
Winter twisted around in the seat. "He's in."Gavin turned to look. The room's door appearedopen. A
greenish-yellow mist rolled out and carpeted thehallway in haze. The airspeeder's exhaust pushed it farther down the hallway, but there always seemed to bemore of it pouring from the computer center.
The sharp report of an explosion brought all eyes for-ward again. A pair of blurred Headhunters raced
past,flying through a collapsing ball of fire and debris. Morelaser bolts poured in at the construction
droid, but there was no sign they had any effect on the titanic machine.And as bad as things looked in the
air outside it, the coldefficiency of the way the droid dismembered the building in front of it was even
worse. Their vantage point let the Rogues peer into the construction droid's maw and Gavinimagined
what he saw to be the vision seen by billions of Alderaanians before their world exploded.
A thump on the hood of the airspeeder made Gavinjump and bang his head on the roof. He hunched
downand rubbed his head. "Emperor's bones!"
Outside the Gand looked surprised, then held up fourmasks. "Ooryl has been successful."
Tycho reached forward from the back seat and pattedGavin on the shoulder. "Ready to go?"
"Sure. Maybe I can get a light dose of the gas and it'llslow my heart." Gavin got out of the airspeeder
andpulled his mask on. It immediately felt hot on his face, but he tugged on the straps, fitting it tightly to
his face.He took his comlink from his jacket lapel and snapped it into the receptacle near his right ear.
"I'm set, Tycho."
The Alderaanian Captain gave him a nod. "Come on,then. Let's go see if we can make it rain."
As Corran's Headhunter came up through the towers hecaught Wedge's message to Tycho. "Hunter
Lead here,Commander. Got a problem?"
"Seems so, Corran. Tower east of us has an E-webtrained on us."

"Collateral targets?"
"Don't know, but the building should be evacuatedexcept for troops. Get them gone."
"As ordered. Stand by." Corran throttled the blackand gold fighter up and aimed for the stars. Before he
gotthere, but after he had left the towers of Coruscant be-hind, he came up on his starboard wing and
started to cir-cle. From up there it was relatively easy to spot thestream of fire coming from a nearby
cylindrical tower andlancing out at the construction droid.
Corran extended his loop and let it take him over andaround the computer center. He dove and leveled
out,coming in on the tower while running parallel to the con-struction droid's course. He shot past the
droid and cameup slightly. Heavy blaster fire lanced out at the construc-tion droid from the tower.
Corran let loose with a quickburst of fire, raking it across the side of the building.
His flight took him past his target, so he started toturn around again when fire came at him from the
build-ing. The blaster bolts splashed harmlessly against his rearshield, but Corran immediately rolled the
Headhunterand turned back away from the side of the building he'dattacked. He leveled out, then dove
and came around ona new attack vector. He switched his weapons' controlover to concussion missiles,
linked two, then climbed up over the construction droid's blocky outline.
His crosshairs settled on the genesis of the red streamdirected against Wedge's droid. He got no target
lock—anE-web and stormtrooper crew didn't conform to any tar-get profile in the Headhunter's combat
computer. Regard-less, when he hit the trigger, two blue missiles streakedout and hit dead on target.
An argent explosion blew through that floor of thecylinder. The silvery disk spread out through the entire
level and beyond, incinerating most of what was in thereand scattering the rest of it out over the city. Yet,
even forall that violence, the concussion missiles failed to damagethe structural supports, leaving the
tower intact aboveand below the level where little fires burned brightly inthe night.
Corran keyed his comm unit. "Will that do it for you,Commander?"
"Thanks, Corran. We're leaving to see some friends.""I copy. Want an escort?""If you've got nothing
better to do." Corran smiled. "At your leisure, sir, I live toserve."
Gavin had positioned himself so he could watch the doorand still see what Winter was doing from the
corner ofhis eye. Once they'd gotten into the room she'd plugged her datapad into the computer console
and very quicklyhad a representation of Coruscant floating above herworkstation. Her fingers flew over
the keys and sud-denly small cubes appeared to float around the worldarranged in three rings. One
circled the equator whilethe other two split the distance between the equator and the poles.
Seeming as insectoid as a Verpine because of themask she wore, Winter nodded to Tycho. "These are
theOrbital Solar Energy Transfer Satellites." She pointed to aglowing red dot riding just above the
equator. "This isour target. It's night here now, but several orbital mirrorsare high enough to give us what
we need."
More typing and a small label appeared attached toeach of the floating cubes. Gavin couldn't read them
atthat distance but he assumed they were unit designators that would allow Winter to send orders from
the com-puter to the station.
"We'll use OSETS 2711. First step is to have themirror opaque itself. Then we focus it here and start it

re-flecting again."
Tycho nodded. "Can you also bring up on this dis-play the Golan stations and ships in orbit?"
She shrugged. "I don't know, probably, but if I do itmight attract some attention. First things first."
"Go to it." Tycho stood behind her and rested hishands on her shoulders. "This world needs a bath, so
start boiling the water."
Life could have been worse,Lieutenant Virar Needathought to himself. The Captain Needa who had
oncecommanded the Imperial Star DestroyerAvenger had onlybeen his cousin, and one generation
removed at that.Darth Vader had executed Lorth Needa for incompetenceafter Hoth, while Virar was
still at the Imperial Military Academy. His cousins had all vanished, along with hisaunt and his
grandparents on the Needa side of the fam-ily, but at least he'd remained alive and been allowed to
continue in service to the Empire.It could have beenworse, I could be dead.
Of course, service on an Orbital Solar Energy Trans-fer Satellite was about as close to death as
someone couldget in the Imperial Navy without having shots fired athim. Others, including the rest of the
six-man crew, sawOSETS service as punishment, but Virar Needa saw it asnoble duty. After all, he was
entrusted with the care of afacility that made life on Imperial Center possible. With-out OSETS 2711,
Imperial Center would be just thatmuch more uncomfortable, and if the people who ran the Empire were
uncomfortable, well, then things would justbegin to fall apart entirely.
A mild tremor shook the station. The others lookedup from their sabacc game in the lounge. He saw fear
in their eyes because they had no idea what was happening.He did because of his four years of
experience withOSETS 2711. That's why he was a Lieutenant and incommand.
He raised a hand. "Don't worry, that's just the mirrorpanels rotating to opaque the surface."
One of the cadets looked up. "Why would they be doing that, sir?"
Needa smiled at him. "Well, Pedetsen, I would guessit is because another station is off-line for repairs
andwe're going to take over its duty. We'll have our directionadjusted..."He held a hand up, then cocked
his wristand pointed his index finger just as the altitude adjust-ment jets started a burn. "There you go."
"Thank you, sir."
Needa nodded and went back to looking out theviewport. Below him he saw the dark face of a sleeping
Imperial Center. It scintillated with a variety of lights that ran like phosphorescent blood through shadowy
flesh. Hesmiled and tried to burn the vision of the planet into his brain.It always looks so pretty from up
here —a potentialit fails to live up to when I am down on the ground.
The jet burn went on a bit longer than usual and thisdisturbed him. Not because he realized anything was
wrong, after all, the care of OSETS 2711 was what kept him alive, so nothing could go wrong. He
couldn't andwouldn't conceive of that possibility. No, the longer than normal burn, he decided, meant
they had built a new re-ception facility for the energy OSETS 2711 was sendingdown. That he'd not
heard of the plans to do this meant they were top secret. The use of OSETS 2711 to powerthis top
secret, vital, new site meant someone down there had finally decided to reward his unswerving and
unfail-ing loyalty.
The tremor again coursed through the station andNeeda smiled. "That's the mirror reflecting again, boys.

We're giving them everything they want. Our contribu-tion to this day will never be forgotten."
43
Corran Horn snapped the Headhunter up on its star-board S-foil and pulled back on the stick. He
featheredthe throttle back, slowing his fighter, and pulled itthrough a tight turn. Leveling off he triggered
two blasterbursts that blazed through the air in front of a TIE starfighter. The eyeball broke off its run on
Wedge'sairspeeder. The black vehicle slid into the gaping cavern marking what had once been a
fifth-floor office.
Corran rolled the ship left, dropped into a dive, thencame back up and over the computer center.
"HunterLead here, anyone need help?"
Asyr's voice came back through the comm. "I showsix more interceptors vectored in on us. Estimated
time ofarrival, five minutes."
"I copy, Five." Corran glanced at his scanner and sawthe group she was indicating. "See if you can pull
thefight more in this direction."
"As ordered, Lead."
Leveling out, Corran began a slow loop to the east.All of a sudden a golden dagger of sunlight stabbed
downthrough the night. The wedge of light focused on an os- tentatious building fitted with columns and a
cascade of
ever broadening steps. The building grew in brilliance un-til it shone like a beacon. For the barest of
moments iteven rivaled the exalted edifice of the Imperial Palace.
Then the building began to melt.
Window casings began to smoke and glow, then the pressure from the superheated air inside the
building blewthem out. Pennants flying from the top of the buildingburst into flame. Huge iron doors went
from black to or-ange, red, and finally white before they began to waverand collapse. Columns began to
wither and the building'ssharp edges softened.
The building began to sag in on itself, then it swelledat the center. The roof rose up volcanically, then an
explo-sion shook the building. Half-molten granite blocks splitapart and sloughed to the side like rotting
vegetable mat-ter as a gout of steam shot skyward. It billowed out and thickened as it hit the layer of
cooler air above it. The ex-panding vapor darkened precipitously, then Corran sawgolden highlights
illuminate it from within.
The first silvery lightning bolt slashed down at theImperial Palace. Corran laughed aloud. "Even the elements want the Empire dead!"
He keyed his comm unit. "I hope you can hear me,Wedge. You've got one fantastic storm brewing out
here.Keep it going."
The image of Coruscant floating in front of CaptainUwlla Iillor on the bridge of theCorusca Rainbow
began to change. Beneath the twin shields the datastream began to sketch in an angry red storm centering
itself over thePalace district. Gold pinpoints marked lightning strikesand quickly became so numerous that
flecks of redfloated like islands in a golden sea.

Jhemiti inclined his head toward the image. "The storm appears to be fierce."
"The worst Coruscant has seen in generations, Iwould imagine." She leaned forward and studied the image through half-closed eyes. "Rogue Squadron must
have caused this storm somehow. It becomes a weapon offantastic power, but it is very difficult to
direct."
The Mon Calamari nodded. "Perhaps the JediKnight..."
"Can control it? I doubt the Emperor could have con-trolled a storm of this magnitude. This I take as a
goodthing because it means the Empire cannot stop it."
The inner shield sphere flickered and went dark.Jhemiti pointed at the holographic projection. "There,
theshields are coming down."
"Perhaps." Iillor looked at the chronometer. "Wehave five minutes until the fleet comes through. Begin
ini-tial power up of the gravity well projectors."
Jhemiti's eyes half shut. "But the shields."
"The shields still exist." Captain Iillor gave her FirstOfficer a cold stare. "We'll give Rogue Squadron time
tofinish their mission, but if they cannot, we will finishours."
Wedge came around the corner and into the computercenter after getting an all-clear from Gavin.
Because theconstruction droid had the same anti-intruder system in-stalled on it, Mirax, Iella, and he had
been able to appro-priate breathing gear from it before they made the run to the center. He immediately
crossed to the workstationwhere Winter sat while Iella and Mirax took up defensive positions near the
door.
"How are things going?"
Tycho looked over at him while Winter typed furi-ously on her datapad. "Good and bad. The storm is
fierceenough that skyhooks are detaching and moving off. Bet-ter yet, the inner shields have come down.
Unfortunately,it appears their collapse has resulted in a shift of resourceallocation programs within the
computers. The storm istaking some power plants off-line, but others have beendirected to shunt their
output through previously unusedconduits."
Wedge frowned. "You're telling me that the destruction of one layer of shields has diverted power
throughbackup systems to reinforce the remaining shields?"
Winter nodded. "No one knew the backup system ofconduits existed—no power ran through them so
folks scouting for places to tap the grid never found them. Inessence, this is a whole new power grid. It
allocatespower to essential services, of which this center is part,but it means that main shield isn't coming
down."
This is not good.Wedge leaned with one hand on theworkstation. "Can you pull a map of this grid up?"
"Not available."
Emtrey tottled over. "If I might suggest, sir . . . ?""Please do, Emtrey."

"Lightning will travel along the easiest course fromthe ground to the clouds and vice versa. The new grid,
and especially its substation transfer points, will leak acertain amount of power. Lightning strikes will
cluster atthese points, so a plot of strikes should show you wherethe grid is."
Winter's fingers played quickly over the datapad's in-put surface. The globe flattened out and golden
pinpoints started to dot the resulting grid map. The image becamelocalized to the Palace district and
enlarged, but thestrikes still bled together into a golden network. Wedgesaw dark spaces fill in on the
map with each staccatothunderclap from outside.
Tycho pointed to a solid cluster that appeared to bethe hub from which many gold spokes spread.
"That'slikely a substation. The whole purpose of this storm wasto hit and knock out power stations. This
one looks in-vulnerable to lightning. So much for our plan."
Wedge shook his head. "The grounding that willprotect it from lightning won't help it against missiles.
Winter, can you pinpoint that substation?""Done."
Tycho looked over at Wedge. "You're going to sendsomeone in at that target with the storm raging
above it?""The airspeeder I came in doesn't have missiles or I'dgo."
"Yes, but you're a Corellian. You have no respect forhow truly hopeless some tasks really are."
"Right."
"So you're sending Corran."
"Right again." Wedge slapped Tycho on the back. "There's no pilot I know of for certain who can outfly
lightning, but I'd sooner beton Corran than against him."
Corran brought his fighter around on the heading Wintergave him. "You want me to fly intothat?" Six
kilometersdistant, the lightning strikes came in sheets, not individualbolts. "It's very ugly over there."
"I copy, Corran, but it's got to be done. Take heart,the target is twice the size of the conduit on
Borleias."
"Oh, you should have said that from the start."Corran nudged the throttle forward. "On an inbound
vector."
"You have four minutes."
"I'll keep that in mind." Corran took the fighter intoa dive and tried to sink as low as he could in the
duracrete chasms. The storms had already begun to kickup high winds, but the buildings tended to break
themup. He did hit some nasty sheers when he flew throughintersections, but the worse of them occurred
at the larg-est intersections, giving him plenty of time to recover.
He started to come up and out of the urban mazetwo kilometers away from his target. Rain immediately
lashed his fighter. It beat so heavily on the cockpit canopyand shook the ship enough that it wasn't until
he saw hisshield indicator go from green to yellow that he realizedsomeone was shooting at him. A glance
at his aft monitorshowed two Interceptors coming up on his tail.
Corran rolled and started a dive that he aborted al-most immediately. Rolling again violently, he righted

hiscraft and kicked in power to the repulsorlift drives. The drives cut in on cue and bounced his fighter up
over acrumbling skywalk between buildings.With power goingdown, they don't have their little lights on.
Behind him something exploded and his aft sensor in-dicated he only had one squint on his tail. A pair of
near misses, with green bolts shooting past his starboard S-foil,told him that the Imp pilot behind him was
good. Com-ing up on his left wing, he pulled a hard turn around thecorner of a building, then rolled 180
degrees and cut back around another. The figure-eight maneuver got rid of hispursuit for the moment, so
he came back around and setup to make his run on the target.
The Headhunter sliced through the air amid a cacoph-ony of thunder and a forest of lightning bolts.
Corranknew there was no way to dodge a bolt—one second itwould not be there and the next it would.
The lightningstrikes silhouetted darkened towers, helping him steeraround trouble. In that way they
proved more helpful than harmful, but he knew one solid strike and his controlswould fry.They will fry,
fighter won't fly, and I will die.
Turbulence in the air began to bounce him around.The stick tried to pull itself out of his grasp, but he
hungon firmly. Flying through rough air he had to strike a bal-ance between becoming rigid, which would
lock things upand crash him, and being too flexible, which meant he'dlose control of the stick and the
fighter would crash. Hetrimmed his speed and did his best to keep the fighter on
target.
More green laser blasts shot past.At least the turbu-lence is making me tough to hit. He shoved the
stick hardto the left, then rolled right and pulled back. After twoseconds he rolled left again and hauled
back on the stick.Leveling out right, he hit rudder and brought his nose inline with the aft of the
Interceptor. His quick turnsamounted to taking a long time to cover the distance thesquint covered swiftly
in its swoop. He ended up behindit and fired.
The blaster bolts clipped the starboard wing on theImperial fighter. It rolled right and got out of his line
offire. Corran could have followed it and killed it, but he'd closed on his target, so he switched over to
concussionmissiles. He set them on single fire, rolled, and dove in onthe target. He dropped the targeting
box on what ap-peared to be the base of a massive obelisk honoring trieEmperor and let fly.
The concussion missile streaked out and hit the baseof the statue. It exploded, casting rock in all
directions.The obelisk cast a massive shadow up over the face of theImperial Palace, then it tottered and
fell. Hitting theground, it shattered into a thousand pieces, but Corransaw no secondary explosions.
Ruined a monument, butnothing else. One more run better do the trick.
Wedge stared at the map. He'd seen Corran's attack runand had a track of the missile going into the
target, butthe lights didn't go out and the image didn't die. "Whathappened? He hit it, didn't he?"
Winter nodded. "Right on target, but not enoughpower. He's cracked the outer case. Another shot or
twoshould do it."
Tycho shook his head. "It better just be one moreshot because that's all he's got."
Wedge pointed to a green Interceptor icon coming inand around toward Corran's red Headhunter icon.
"Pro-vided he gets one more shot. Can't you do something about that squint, Winter?"
She looked up at him. "That squint was the source of the data on the missile hit. You really want us to be
blindout there?"

"No, of course not." Wedge looked down for a mo-ment, then clapped his hands. "You're getting
datafeedsfrom him? You have his identification number and inter-nal identification, right?"
"Can't get this data any other way. We're inside theImperial system, so getting that data is easy."
"Good. I've got an idea. Tap into Coruscant Traffic Control and get the Taxi, Hangar, and Maintenance
pro-grams set up with his numbers." Wedge keyed his comlink."Corran, listen to me. Your first hit was
good, but youneed to pack more into the next one. Here's the plan..."
Corran closed his mouth. "I copy, Wedge." He punched acouple of buttons on his console. "Telemetry
coming yourway. You know, you're always stealing my data for runs.Can I start getting Pathfinder pay?"
"Sure, I'll add it to your back-pay file. Squint's com-ing up on your tail. Get ready."
"As ordered, sir." Corran let a smile spread across his face.According to the boss I want you with me
as tight as possible, but still loose enough that you aren't going to burnme down.Corran
unconsciously pressed his hand to histhroat, but the medallion he normally wore wasn't there.It'swith
Whistler. That'll have to count for luck for now.
Coming around on another attack vector against thetarget, Corran let the squint drift onto his tail.
Looseninghis grip on the stick ever so slightly, he let the air bounce him around a bit. Green laser bolts
played out all aroundhim. With a flick of his thumb he shunted all forwardshield energy to the rear shields,
then he tightened his grip and rolled ninety degrees to the left. He remained diving inat the target, but was
ready to pull out at the last minute.
He spitted the hole the earlier missile had made withhis targeting reticle. "Control, three, two, one!" He
hitthe trigger, then pulled back on the stick for all he wasworth. "Missile away."
Winter punched a button on her datapad. "Link estab-lished and flowing."
Captain Iillor looked at Jhemiti. "Thirty seconds andcounting. Bring the gravity well projectors to full
poweron my mark."
Corran's concussion missile sailed in at the target.Throughout the short flight the targeting computer built
into the missile took sensor readings, compared the coordinates they supplied with those of the target, determinedif it should explode or not yet, and reported the
wholeprocess back to Corran's Headhunter. A million times a second it went through that same process,
constantly up-dating its position relative to the target and relaying thedata to the Headhunter.
Corran's Headhunter, in turn, sent that informationon to Winter's datapad. There it remained for a
nanosec-ond, then flowed into the Imperial computer network. Itrouted itself through several key systems
and finallypoured into Coruscant Traffic Control. The data then fedinto the Taxi, Hangar, and
Maintenance programmingthat, because of the override and emergency data flagsWinter had provided,
sent it back out to the Imperial In-terceptor closing on the Headhunter.
The chief benefit of computers is that they can auto-mate boring and routine jobs that need not concern
ahuman. If an X-wing fighter needed to be moved from alanding pad to a hangar position, or on into
maintenance,the R2 unit assigned to that X-wing could perform thatsimple task without the need to
trouble the pilot. SinceTIE fighters do not use R2 units, other programs hadbeen created to supply travel

routes, coordinates, andspeeds to a TIE fighter so it could be moved about with-out a pilot.
In this case, the course supplied to the Interceptor onCorran's tail was the course the missile was
traveling. Thedestination was the missile's target coordinates and thespeed was as close as the fighter
could manage to approx-imating the missile's speed. The implementation of suchprogramming required an
override code, which had beensupplied. Because of the potential problems caused if suchcodes were to
fall into enemy hands, the pilots could override the automatic programming, provided they hitthe correct
console buttons in the appropriate order.
Doing that required approximately 2.5 seconds of thepilot's undivided attention.
The Interceptor pilot's attention was anything but un-divided.
The concussion missile caromed off the edge of thebreach its predecessor had opened and exploded. It
blasted a hole in the shielding of the energy conduit. Shards fromthe conduit and its shielding sprayed the
interior of theconduit, severing some cables, merely nicking others.Sparks flew and several circuits
shorted out. Power died inseveral buildings for a second, but other lines accepted more power and the
shields remained intact.
Then the Interceptor hit. While it was not traveling asfast as the concussion missile, it did mass
significantlymore than the projectile. It was able to build up a consid-erable amount of kinetic energy that
it transferred to thetarget upon impact. In addition, the crash compacted theInterceptor's fuel cells,
compressing the fuel that subse-quently detonated. The Interceptor's crushed hull sheered through the
power conduit, severing the thick bundle ofcables running through it, and the explosion that fol-lowed
tangled and fused lines that had never been meantto touch.
Outside Corran's cockpit, Coruscant went black.
"Ten, nine, eight," Captain Iillor counted down.
"Look!"
Her eye came up off the chronometer. The last shield sphere flickered.
"Seven, six, five..."
The shield sphere died.
"Kill the projectors, Lieutenant Jhemiti." CaptainIillor looked out toward the planet sparkling like a star
inthe distance. "Now the battle for Coruscant begins."
44
Still basking in the glory of his redemption, LieutenantVirar Needa stared out the viewport at Imperial
Center.He saw lights on the world flicker and die, but even thatunusual a thing happening did not
penetrate the aura ofwell-being in which he cocooned himself. Clearly, itseemed to him, those responsible
for the power problemson Imperial Center would be banished to oblivion and he would be free to
ascend into the positions they vacated.
As he stared out into space he saw the stars ripplealong a wide front. Ships began to revert from
hyperspaceand his heart rate picked up as this happened. He alwaysenjoyed ships entering and leaving

Imperial Center space. He took great delight in cataloging them by type and later correlating a sighting
with news from the war against theRebels.
A smile spread across his face as two large ships ma-terialized. He recognized them instantly as Imperial
Star Destroyers. As they reverted they executed a turn to star-board, putting them into a geostationary
orbit.That'sstandard procedure, as the Captains of theAccuserandAdjucatorknow quite well.
His ability to recognize the two ships pleased him,
which is why he wondered about the underlying sense ofunease slowly seeping into his heart. About the
time oneof the long, gently curved Mon Calamari battle cruisers reverted and swung into the line, he
recalled theAccuserandAdjucator had both been captured at Endor by the Rebels. The fact that a
number of Mon Cal ships werepulling into line with them meant. . . Needa paled.At themoment of my
greatest glory, the Rebels have come toruin me!
More and more Rebel ships poured from hyperspace.Big ships, small ships, snubfighters, freighters,
frigates,and corvettes, each of them pulled into line with the heav-ier ships. The battle cruisers and
destroyers formed a cen-tral layer, with ships diminishing in size and strength as they stretched out from
equator to pole in the northernhemisphere.
Instantly the black void of space came alive withturbolaser and ion-cannon fire. Toward the bottom of
theviewport Needa saw a Golan Space Defense station. The lozenge-shaped platform launched spread
after spread ofproton torpedoes while its turbolaser batteries sprayedgreen energy projectiles at the
invaders. The return fire ittook splashed harmlessly against its shields, or so itseemed at first, though
Needa noticed the shield sphere slowly shrinking.
This cannot be!He turned from the viewport, rakingfingers back through brown hair. "To your battle
stations,men! The enemy is upon us!"
Pedetsen looked up from the sabacc game. "Beggingyour pardon, sir, but a mirror doesn't have battle
sta-tions."
Needa's jaw worked up and down a couple of timesas he mulled over the cadet's comment.True, but
we must do something. "Arm yourselves. We won't go down with-out a fight."
The darkness in the computer center only lasted for acouple of seconds, but it seemed like eons to
Wedge. It
was time enough for remnants of childhood fears of dark-ness to meld with adult fears of failure. The
darkness lefthim blind and opened the doorway to any number of pos-sible and horrible futures. For all
he knew the power tothe subsidiary computer center had been severed by Impe-rial stormtroopers who
were even now preparing to enterthe room and resume control of the facility.
The lights came back up again. The holographic mapwavered and popped, then stabilized. Elation filled
himfor a moment, then he realized that having power availa-ble meant failure.Or does it? "Why do we
have power?"
Winter hit two keys on the datapad. "Reserve gener-ators came on-line here after the external power
wascut."
"And power is down? And the shields?"

She hit more keys and the map expanded up from thetactical one showing the Palace district to the
orbital oneshowing the planet as a whole. There was no indicationof shields anywhere. "They're down."
Wedge keyed his comlink. "Corran, you did it."
"I just aimed, Wedge, you sliced the victory to-gether."
"We can argue who gets stuck with credit later. Becareful, you still have TIEs flying around you."
"They're all vectoring up, Wedge."
"What?"
"We have company."
Wedge pointed to Winter. "Slice me into Traffic Con-trol. I want to see what's orbiting out there."
"Will do." Winter's fingers flew over the keys and thesphere that was Coruscant suddenly became
surroundedby a shell of orbiting stations, satellites, and ships. The Rebel fleet formed a concave cap over
part of the north-ern hemisphere. Within its range floated a number ofGolan stations as well as several
Star Destroyers racing tooppose the Rebels.
"Can you get me better visuals? Is there a feed fromthat mirror you can pull?"
She shook her head. "No visual feed from it and all
of the military ships have gone independent of theground, so I can't get their visuals either. We know
wherethey are, but we don't know what they're doing."
A few holes opened in the Rebel formation. Wedgeknew that the ships lost were small—most likely
con-verted freighters with weapons grafted on—but theirlosses disturbed him. Just looking at the
situation, the sizeof the Rebel fleet and the paucity of defenders, there wasno way Imperial forces could
defeat the Rebels.Slow usdown and hurt us, yes, but keep us off Coruscant? No.That's clear, which
means everyone who dies up there to-day doesn't need to.
Tycho pointed to one of the space platforms. "I'd betthat's a Golan III. Our heavy ships can't
concentrate on it until they eliminate the destroyers. It's not quite as heav-ily armed as the Victory-class
destroyers, but it's got to bethe source of most of the damage to the fringes of thefleet."
"You can't slice into any ground-based missile batter-ies to use against that thing?"
Winter shook her head. "Aside from Corran and theother Headhunters, we have no weapons here. It
wouldbe nice if the Golan station would shoot streamers downinto the atmosphere and into our
thunderstorm, but Iwouldn't count on that happening anytime soon."
Tycho shrugged. "Look on the bright side,Wedge..."
"Is there a bright side?"
"Sure, if it had targeted us, we'd be slag."

"That's not what I'd call particularly bright, Tycho."Wedge brought his head up. "But it could be. It could
bevery bright indeed."
"Go down without a fight, Lieutenant Needa?" Pedetsenfrowned in Needa's direction. "One proton
torpedo andwe go down without even a whimper. I'll take two."
Needa blinked in confusion. "You want us hit withtwo?"
"No, I want two more cards." The cadet glanced athis cards, then up at Needa. "Of proton torpedoes I
wantzero."
"The Rebels have come!" Needa pointed at theviewport. "We must do something!"
Pedetsen shook his head and laid his sabacc cards onthe table. "Sir, if we do anything, we'll die. Now
eitherside might have a use for dead heroes, but I don't thinkthe heroes will get much out of it. On the
other hand,whoever takes Imperial Center—or maybe we should call it Coruscant—will have use for an
undamaged mirror and a live crew."
Needa glanced back at the fleet. "But those are theRebels."
"You think they can find us worst duty than this?"Pedetsen smiled. "They'll probably hail you as a hero."
"What?"
"Hey, it was your cousin who was martyred by Darth Vader after he let Han Solo escape Hoth. After
all, yourcousin had Rebel sympathies that he only confided inyou, which is why he let Solo escape. Your
having beenpunished with this duty proves the Empire suspected him,but could prove nothing."
Thatisone way to interpret the facts of the case, Isuppose.Needa frowned. "Do you think the Rebels
would believe that?"
"I don't know, but I think if we're dead, you won't beable to convince them that you and your loyal crew
have been waiting for them for ages." Pedetsen raked a pile ofchips toward himself and started to shuffle
the sabacc deck. "Your choice, sir. Do what you think is right."
Needa thought for a second, frowned, then nodded."I think I choose not to choose. If we do something,
werisk death. We can't do anything anyway, so there is noreason to choose."
A tremor shook OSETS 2711. Needa braced himselfagainst the bulkhead as the mirror started to shift.
"We'removing."
"I know, Lieutenant." Pedetsen smiled. "Looks likesomeone just made your mind up for you."
OnHome One's bridge chaos reigned. Hundreds ofvoices competed with one another, each filled with
ur-gency. Admiral Ackbar sat at the center of it, listening in-tently to comm feeds from his group
commanders. Thetwo Imperial Star Destroyers entering the battle were theTriumph and theMonarch.
AlreadyEmancipator andLiberatorhad begun pounding the ships.Triumph'sshields had collapsed on one
side, prompting the Captainto execute a roll that brought undamaged shields up be-tween the destroyer
and the Rebels.

Though theTriumph's difficulties heartened Ackbar,the Golan Space Defense platform off the port stern
sick-ened him. It had engaged many of the smaller ships in thefleet and was hammering them mercilessly.
The Com-mander on the platform had targeted ships with multipleproton torpedoes while saving his
turbolasers forsnubfighter defense. TIE fighters coming up from Corus-cantseemed content to fight
beneath the umbrella of his fire. The fact that the station could not move made itmarginally less lethal than
the Star Destroyers, but in thetime it took for them to be taken out of action, a lot of smaller Rebel ships
would die.
He looked up at the Quarren who had just appearedbeside his command chair. "What is it, Commander
Sirlul? Something about the station?"
"Perhaps..."A tremolo distorted her words as shepointed out the port side viewport. "The mirror is moving."
"Why would it . . . ?"
Before Sirlul could offer a possible answer toAckbar's question, the mirror's panels swung and locked
into reflective position. The whole structure contractedslightly, sharpening the solar beam. Though the reflected light remained all but invisible in space—onlyshowing up where it shone upon and incinerated
debris—
its brilliant focal point could easily be seen. It appeared asa bright dot on the edge of the Golan III
station.
Silvery lines, like cracks forming in ice or rootletsspreading through the earth, began to appear at the
edgesof the circle. Delicate and almost brittle, they snakedaway from the station and drifted into space.
The brightspotlight shifted right ever so slightly, leaving in its wakea black crescent. The argent rootlets
clung to the cres-cent's outer edge while opposite them some of the rootletsspun off into space.
The Quarren clasped her hands at the small of herback. "At its focal point the solar beam is approximately 12.5 meters in diameter. Roughly the length of anX-wing."
The hole on the end of the station grew as the beamshifted slightly. Already half the turbolaser batteries
had stopped firing. Ackbar could easily visualize the destruc-tion as the beam pierced bulkhead after
bulkhead, burn-ing from one end of the station to another. A sheet ofmetal would glow red, then white,
then evaporate. Thesolar beam would stab deeper, igniting whatever ittouched, then begin on another
bulkhead.
Ackbar looked up. "When the platform stops shoot-ing send theDevonian andRyloth over there. I want
ourpeople on that station to assess it and help those whohave survived."
"Sir, theRyloth andDevonian have less than onehundred troopers on board. The station has over a
thou-sand."
"Not anymore, Commander." Ackbar half closed hiseyes as something near the center of the station
exploded."Those who are left aren't going to be hostile. They'llwant to get off that thing and we will oblige
them. Send them to the other Golan stations, let them tell the story of what happened to their station. It'll
give their Command-ers a lot to think about and maybe, just maybe, save a lotof lives on both sides."
45

Corran glanced at the fuel indicator on his command con-sole. It showed he had another ten minutes of
fuel. A re-turn to Tycho's base would only take two or three min-utes and refueling would take a half
hour or so. Hewasn't certain if with the fleet orbiting above the Palacedistrict, Wedge and the others in
the computer centerwould face danger from Imperial forces, but in manyways that question was moot
given his fuel supply. Hesuspected the others were not in much better shape.
"Hunter Lead here, report with fuel status."
Everyone else in the flight reported being in the samesituation he was. "What we will do is this: Everyone
take a long-range scan of the area. If we have no immediatethings to worry about, we head in, refuel, and
come backout."
"I copy, Hunter Lead," came the replies.
"Corran, I caught that, too." Wedge's voice pausedfor a moment. "Winter shows no activity in your
vicinityand we look pretty secure here, too. Head in and hurryback."
"Will do, Wedge. Horn out." Corran brought his Headhunter around in a vast circle, letting the others fly
in on a more direct route toward their hangar.First up,last in.He smiled. He knew the others didn't need
him toprovide a good example. The fact was that the five ofthem had accounted for over a dozen
Imperial starfighters and Interceptors, proving the Rogues had not lost their edge and that Asyr Sei'lar
was a good pilot in her ownright.
He punched his sensors over to long range and imme-diately picked up a number of signals on his
scanner.Corran keyed the comm unit. "Pash, I'm picking up nineor ten hits."
"I copy, Corran. Looks like small civilian vessels. Theexodus is beginning."
Corran ruddered his ship to port and dove down todo a flyby on one of his sensor contacts. It did in fact
ap-pear to be a luxury yacht, with gentle flowing lines and a gaudily painted hull. Like the other ships it
was headingnortheast to slip beneath the edge of the Rebel umbrella.The ships would sail around to the
daytime side of theplanet and head out into hyperspace from there, using Coruscant's mass as a shield to
prevent the Rebels fromattacking them.
Corran was certain the vast majority of the peopleheading out firmly believed the Rebels would steal
theirwealth, dispossess them of their treasures, defile theirsons and daughters, torture, maim, and kill
resisters, andcommit any number of other crimes against them. Hedidn't think plunder and raping were
foremost in theminds of most Rebels, but here at the core of the Empirethe belief in lies used by the
Emperor to justify his dicta-torship ran deep among some folks. And even those whoknew better than to
believe such lies did truly feel theyhad something to fear since the idea of bringing Imperialsto justice had
always been one of the Rebellion's more ap-pealing tenants.
He found himself of two minds about the fleeing peo-ple. Part of him wanted to bring them to justice. He
could easily have sideslipped his Headhunter and blasted thehyperdrive engines from the hull of the yacht.
That would
trap its occupants on Coruscant and force them to faceretribution for their crimes against their fellow
citizens. The other part of him sympathized with them. TheEmpire had forced him to flee from Corellia,
carrying with him little more than a change of clothes. He evenhad to surrender his identity, as would
these refugees, for to remain who he was would have left him vulnerable tothe Empire's hunters. He had

been forced to change whohe had been and had been forced into an entirely differentlifestyle just to
preserve his life. Because of the constantfear of discovery, of being made to run again, that lifeseemed
more punishing than any prison term or even ex-ecution.Better no life at all than one lived in constant
fear.
He didn't know if he'd heard those words before orcomposed the line himself, but it struck him that
thosewords embodied the nugget of Rebel opposition to theEmpire. Mon Mothma and the other leaders
had enoughforesight to look ahead and plan out the course of thecampaign against the Empire, but for
people in his posi-tion, the fight was one to defeat the forces who madethem fear. The fact that after each
battle, each victory,there was just that much less to be afraid of became al-most tangible and served as a
very sweet reward indeed.
Corran nudged his stick back and climbed up awayfrom the fleeing yacht.Run, but always know you
cannotrun far enough.
He started to bring the Headhunter around on acourse to the hangar, but he saw an anomalous blip onhis
sensor screen. He initiated an identification program,but the contact faded and returned, depriving the
com-puter of enough solid data to make a match. It seemed to settle on an unknown fighter and a Super
Star Destroyer."Pash, what have you got for a contact at 352.4 de-grees?"
"Nothing. Do you have something?"
"Yeah, but it's weird. Probably a storm ghost. I'm go-ing to check it out."
"Want a wing? I can abort my approach."
"Negative, I'm just doing a flyby. If I need help, I'llneed you all ready to go." Corran glanced at his fuel
gauge. "One pass, then I'm in."
With the Golan Space Defense platform gone, AdmiralAckbar sent a signal to the fleet that started an
evolutionof the battle. Originally the Rebels had expected two orthree times more by way of Star
Destroyers than had ap-peared to defend Coruscant. That only theTriumph andMonarchremained to
oppose them surprised him becauseneither ship had a particularly illustrious reputation orcrew. At last
reportsEmperor's Will andImperator hadalso been part of the Coruscant defense force as well, andtheir
participation in the battle would have made thingsmuch more difficult.
Liberator, Emancipator,andHome One formed aline moving pastTriumph andMonarch. The two lines
exchanged fire and missiles, savaging each other. Shieldsheld at first, then, inevitably, crumbled. Beneath
them the ships' heavy armor had to absorb the force of the missile blasts and laser bolts. Some shots,
guided by the Force orthe product of pure chance, hit turbolaser batteries or tor-pedo launch tubes,
vaporizing them, crushing them, and destroying them. Others just nibbled away at a ship's hullor
superstructure. Molecule by molecule they weakenedthe barrier between the ship's interior and the void.
As always with war the best strategy was to hit with-out being hit back. With ships the size of Star
Destroyersand heavy cruisers, avoiding being hit was, at best, diffi-cult. The closest that could be
managed in that regardwas to minimize the number of weapons bearing on the ship. With the two lines
passing broadside to each other,the ships were exposed to the maximum possible damageinflicted by the
other side.
At Ackbar's signal another Mon Calamari heavycruiser,Mon Remonda, turned from its position in line
behindHome One, and pointed its bow toward Corus-cant. It surged forward, cutting across the

Imperial Star
Destroyers' line of flight. In doing so it was able to bringall of its starboard firing-arc weapons to bear on
Triumphwhile the Star Destroyer could hit it with its forward arcweapons.
Mon Remonda'sgunners began to pour fire in onTri-umph.The Imperial Star Destroyer had already lost
itsshields, so the turbolaser strikes played easily up over thespine of the ship. Even more devastating
were the hits by the Mon Calamari cruiser's ion cannons. Their blue light-ning chased all over the
destroyer's hull. Explosionstrailed in the lightning's wake.
The same time thatMon Remonda moved to strike atTriumph, the umbrella force began to separate.
Assaultfrigates—a fanciful name for refitted freighters—began toclose a net around the two Imperial
warships and theirsmaller support ships. While they could not sustain thesort of damage the heavier ships
were taking and survive,the Star Destroyers' ability to strike at them had been di-minished by combat.
The smaller ships closed in, firing away at the destroyers. There were so many of them that the gunners
who could target them could not targetall ofthem.
Other heavier ships—Corellian corvettes, gunships,and a variety of bulk cruisers and Mon Calamari
cruisers—pushed up and out away from Coruscant. Theyused distance to let them see over Coruscant's
horizonand spot other Imperial forces that could have been hid-den on the world's far side. They
remained out of rangeof the Golan Space Defense platforms, yet close enoughto respond quickly to any
situation that demanded over-whelming firepower.
Starfighters and troop carriers began their runs to theplanet. The outcome of the battle in space was
important,but without troops on the ground to take, hold, and se-cure facilities and impose order,
Coruscant would remain unconquered. Ackbar suffered under no illusions about Coruscant and its
defenselessness. That the shields weredown he felt was nothing short of a miracle, but hecouldn't count
on how long they would stay down. He
had, as nearly as he knew, a narrow window in which toinsert his troops, so he pushed them forward as
quickly as seemed prudent.
Commander Sirlul reached over and tapped a com-mand into the keypad on the arm of Ackbar's
command chair. A holographic schematic ofTriumph appeared be-fore him. Multiple systems were
outlined in red, includingthe bridge."Triumph has lost power and is beginning toslide back into the
atmosphere."
Ackbar hit his comlink. "Ackbar to Onoma."
"Onoma here, Admiral."
"Cease firing onTriumph. Use your tractor beams to pullTriumph along and accelerate its orbit so it
won't de-cay. We want to save the ship if we can." Ackbar lookedatMonarch and could see it taking as
much damage asTriumphhad.Between it and Triumph,we might be ableto salvage most of a Star
Destroyer.
"Order acknowledged, sir. Onoma out."
Sirlul glanced over at Ackbar. "Captain Averen ofMonarchhas sent a truce-byte out to everyone."
"He will surrender unconditionally?"

"If there are conditions, they will be insignificant."
Ackbar nodded. "Conduct the negotiations."
"Yes, sir."
"And when you're done with that, Commander, Ihave another job for you."
"Yes, sir?"
Ackbar pointed at Coruscant. "Find me someone down there who can surrender that world to me."
Wedge had Winter bring back up the Palace district tacti-cal map. "Corran, we're getting nothing on this
contactyou report."
"Contact is weak, Wedge. It oscillates back and forth,as if running between buildings. The computer
can't makeany sense of...wait a minute!"
"What's going on, Corran."
"I've lost throttle control. I'm speeding up!" The
green arrow representing Corran's Headhunter began aslow dip toward the planet. "Initiating emergency
shut-down of fuel injectors one and two."
That will cut fuel back to half, slowing him.Wedgelooked down at Winter. "Can you help him?"
"I can try."
"Negative, Winter, cut the override code you're using.I need to shut those two injectors down."
"I haven't used an override code, Corran."
"Yes, you have. I'm locked up. No control."
Wedge dropped down to stare at the data scrollingacross the screen on Winter's datapad. "What's
happen-ing?"
Near panic flooded through the comlink from Cor-ran. "Manual override is not working."
"Punch out, Corran! Eject!"
"Can't. Inverting! Nothing I can..."
Static filled the comlink channel as the green arrow dropped from sight. Wedge heard an explosion and
lis-tened to its echoes rumble as the holographic image of the building Corran's Headhunter had hit slowly
col-lapsed. He saw the building implode, but he felt it in his stomach. A void formed deep in his guts,
swallowing theelation he had felt moments before and having morethan enough room to devour the pain
and guilt tricklingthrough him.

Wedge bounced a fist off the holopad workstation,then tore off his gas mask and hurled it across the
room.He didn't know if the gas in the room had fully dissipatedyet, and part of him hoped it had not.
He'd been fightingfor more than seven years to oppose the Empire. Friendshad come and gone—mostly
gone —in that time. He'dgrown cynical enough to keep his distance from new re-cruits because he knew
they died earliest and if he didn'tbefriend them it wouldn't hurt him as much when theydied.
The truth was, though, that the distance didn't reallyinsulate him, it just allowed him to think their deaths
didn't hurt as much. But Corran, as much as the rest of
the Rogues and a little bit more, had managed to closethat gap. No, they didn't always get along, but
disagree-ments didn't dull respect and admiration. Corran was agood pilot and a smart man who treated
loyalty as the sa-cred foundation of friendship. Corran was like Tycho andLuke—all of them knew the
horrors and pressures andanxiety of war, and all of them knew the sense of satisfac-tion at having
completed a mission.
Even though they fought against Imperial storm-troopers and pilots, it sounded somehow evil to take
pride in killing other living creatures. And it wasn't reallythe killing of which they were proud, but of
surviving.They took pride in the fact that they had stopped some-one from killing their friends and, in
doing so, loosenedthe grip of an evil Empire on a fearful populace. Onlythose individuals who had gone
through what they had could truly understand it all and only those who under-stood it could really, truly,
understand why war and kill-ing should never be anything but the last resort.
A hand landed on Wedge's shoulder and he spun,knocking Tycho's arm aside. "I lost another one."
"Maybe." The outline of his gas mask had left redlines on Tycho's face. "But maybe, just maybe, Corran
managed to punch out before the ship went down. Maybehe's lying on top of that pile of rubble just
waiting forsomeone to help him."
And maybe he's buried so deep we'll never find him.Wedge drew in a deep breath, then nodded.
"You're right,that's probably what happened. He's probably waiting forus right now."
"He's a Rogue, after all."
"Right, come on." Wedge headed for the door. "He'sa Rogue and we take care of our own. No matter
the cir-cumstances, no matter the situation, we take care of ourown."
46
Wedge Antilles found the duracrete and transparisteelbarrow improbably neat. The off and on rain for
the lastfour days had washed the dust away and granted the frac-tured pieces of pseudogranite sharp
edges that looked al-most decorative. Nothing moved in the mound, nothingshowed colors outside
reflective silver, black, and grey.The hill of debris rose less than seven meters above thelevel upon which
he stood because the falling stories hadtelescoped into the floors below.
And somewhere in there are the mortal remains ofCorran Horn.Wedge shook his head. The building
Corran had hit had been on the line of the constructiondroid's advance, so when Mirax used the warning
beacon to get the computer center evacuated, this building hadlikewise emptied of people. Most of the
newly unhomedalready picked up on Rebellion phrases and said that theForce had truly been with them
when they got out. Andyet others had determined that Corran, knowing hisHeadhunter was going down,
had deliberately driven itinto a tower he knew had been evacuated. They said thatmade him a hero.

As if that's what it took for him to be a hero. As if
nothing else he had done would have made him one.Wedge realized his hands had knotted into fists
again. Heforced them open, as he had found himself doing numer-ous times since Coruscant had fallen.
When it came downto it, because of the efforts of his people, Coruscant hadnot been drenched in blood.
In fact, aside from the casu-alties in the space battle and limited actions on the planet, virtually no one had
been injured. "Yet another miracle,another sign the Force was with us."
Wedge hated the mocking tone that came with hiswords. People all around had gone berserk with joy
whenCoruscant fell. Even he had celebrated, albeit a bit sub-dued, because Aril Nunb had been found
alive and nearlywell in Invisec. Her return did not cancel the pain ofCorran's loss, especially with Mirax
Terrik wanderingaround as if her heart had been torn out and Iella Wessirinot being much better off. The
big hologram, the libera-tion of Coruscant, became hard to focus upon with suchan immediate loss.
While he pointed to Corran's death as the wellspringof his anxiety and frustration, he knew he did so
becausehe did not want to consider the question that all membersof the Rebel staff had been asking
themselves: Why hadn'tit been harder? To even consider that question somehow seemed to cheapen their
victory that was, by all accounts,hard fought and won through superior planning and exe-cution. Even so,
an average deck of sabacc cards had morecomputing power than the whole of the Imperial Navalstaff
left to conduct the defense of the planet.
The inescapable conclusion that could be drawn fromthe utterly inept defense of Coruscant was that
YsanneIsardwanted the New Republic to take the world. TheProvisional Council had seen Coruscant as
a symbol.Once they took it they would have won the right to rulethe galaxy. There was no doubt that
many worlds thathad proclaimed themselves neutral would indeed throw their allegiance to the Republic.
In that way the conquestof Coruscant did hasten the fall of the Empire.
Coruscant also became a black hole from which the
New Republic could not escape. Just as taking it had beena goal for them, so taking it would be a goal
for any otherpretender to Palpatine's throne. The Rebellion that had survived detection by the enemy
through moving theirheadquarters dozens of times now had bottled itself up. Ittraded flexibility and
mobility for legitimacy and Wedgewasn't certain that was a trade made in their favor.
He also knew the conquest of Coruscant would notbe without a price. Ysanne Isard had clearly traded
theworld for her escape from it—no one had found any traceof her and the reason for her evacuation
seemed quitesound. Already rumors of a plague spreading throughInvisec were flying thick and fast.
Nawara Ven and RivShiel had undergone bacta therapy and were recovering.What little General
Cracken had told him about ArilNunb's debriefing suggested the virus might have beencreated by the
Empire specifically to leave Coruscant a charnel house, but the conquest had aborted that plan.Virus had
been found in the water supply, though Rogue Squadron's boil-off of a lot of water may have killed avast
quantity of the virus.
Wedge heard footsteps behind him and, expecting tosee Tycho and Winter, was surprised when instead
he sawGeneral Cracken and Pash. Wedge began to smile, butPash appeared hesitant and Airen intent,
which led him tobelieve something serious was going on. "Good afternoon,General, Lieutenant. Is there
something I can do for you?"
The elder Cracken nodded. "There's been some head-way in the investigation of what happened to
Lieutenant Horn. My people went over all the sensor traces we couldfind concerning the crash, as well as
comm transcriptsand the statements made by everyone who heard his lasttransmissions."

Wedge smiled genuinely. "This is good news. If youdon't mind waiting a minute or two, I know Tycho
will want to hear this, and it will save you telling it again."Wedge glanced at his chronometer. "He should
be heremomentarily."
Airen Cracken shook his head. "I'm afraid he won't
be joining you. He's been arrested for treason and themurder of Corran Horn."
"What? That's impossible." Wedge stared at the headof Alliance Intelligence. "Tycho would never do
that.Never."
General Cracken held a hand up. "There are somethings you don't know, Commander, and I shouldn't
haveto remind you that an arrest is not a conviction. It is justthat we have sufficient evidence to arrest him
and it wasdeemed appropriate to do so."
Wedge folded his arms across his chest. "What evi-dence?"
"He was absent without leave from his post atNoquivzor. He traveled from there to Coruscant, bringing
with him an M-3PO droid full of highly sensitive data."
"He did those things on my order, General. Those or-ders were issued and sealed by me at Noquivzor."
The older man nodded. "So I have been told and soit says in your statement. If we ever get down to
whereyour office was, I believe I will find those orders. How-ever, until I do, his vanishing act looks
highly suspicious,especially when coupled with other things."
"Such as?"
"Captain Celchu knew the command codes for theHeadhunter Horn was flying."
"He knew them for all those Headhunters."
"Yes, but no other pilot threatened him with expo-sure for treasonous activities." General Cracken
looked athis son. "Pash overheard a heated conversation between Horn and Celchu right before the
mission began. Celchutold Horn he'd checked his machine out special."
Wedge's head came up and Pash winced at the harsh-ness of his stare. "Is this true?"
"I wasn't spying, Commander."
"My son was not placed in your unit to spy. He justhappened to be there." Airen frowned. "He didn't
wantto tell me about the conversation and has proved a mostreluctant witness."
"I see." Rogue Squadron's leader nodded toward
Pash. "Corran was probably hot about all this. What was Tycho's reaction?"
Pash's tense expression eased. "He said he welcomedany investigation Corran wanted to make. He said
he hadnothing to fear."

Wedge raised an eyebrow. "That hardly sounds like aman with any fear of discovery."
"He wouldn't fear it if he'd disabled the manual over-ride and had given his masters the command code
for theHeadhunter. What you did with that Interceptor, they didwith Horn's Headhunter."
"You still haven't established a link between Tychoand the Empire."
"But we will, Commander." Cracken shrugged hisshoulders. "We have means, motive, and opportunity.
That's all we need for an arrest and trial."
Wedge just shook his head. "This is wrong, and youknow it. After all we've fought for, to get to this
pointand arrest someone who's risked his life time and againfor the Rebellion on evidence that's
circumstantial at bestis a crime itself. A crime worthy of the Empire."
"No, Commander Antilles, you're wrong." Angersparked in the elder Cracken's eyes and jetted into his
voice."The Empire would have snatched Celchu, broken himdown until he confessed, then they would
have killed him. He would have disappeared and no one would have dared ask about him. That's how
the Empire would have handledit. The waywe will handle it is to have a trial and assess innocence or guilt
publicly, openly, aboveboard, so there isno question about justice being done or not."
Cracken raised his head up and met Wedge's stareopenly. "That, sir, is exactly what we fought for. You
know it, and you know there's no other way to handle this situation."
Wedge hesitated, then closed his eyes and nodded."You're correct, of course, General. We did fight for
jus-tice." He turned to stare at Corran's grave and thought ofTycho. "The pity is, even in victory, justice
still eludesthose who deserve it the most."
Epilogue
If there was a part of him that didn't hurt, Corran Horncouldn't name it. His chief complaint came from
hisshoulders. He could feel the binders holding his arms atthe small of his back constantly exerting
pressure to pullhis elbows closer together. They sheathed his arms inmetal from fingertips to elbows and
were the kind of re-straints that had been outlawed for CorSec's use.
He found himself tying on his stomach in the dark ona thin cot of some sort. He was naked, save for the
bind-ers, and the room was slightly chilled. A weak, barely no-ticeable vibration ran through the cot,
producing a lowhum that depending on how he turned his head, he could occasionally hear. He strained
his eyes to determine ifthere was anything to see, but the utter absence of lightfoiled him.
Corran found his thoughts wandering, which madehim think that he'd been drugged. That sensation,
alongwith the binders, his nakedness, and the darkness, led himto the inescapable conclusion that he'd
been captured bythe Empire. The darkness and drugs kept him disoriented.His nakedness made him
defensive—or was supposed to.He recalled a CorSec training seminar about methods
used by kidnappers to keep their victims off balance andwas able to pinpoint himself as the subject of
such treat-ment.
The chill in the air and the vibration suggested he wason a starship heading out through hyperspace to
somedestination or other. He knew the Imps would be fleeingCoruscant, but for a moment he had no
idea why. Thenhe remembered the Alliance fleet having arrived at Corus-cant.If they are running, we
won. He frowned.But if wewon, why am Itheircaptive?

He tried to remember what he could of his last mo-ments on Coruscant. He'd lost control of his
Headhunterand the manual override didn't work. Then a light hadflashed on the console indicating the
acceleration com-pensation unit had gone out. The ship flipped itself intoa high g-force turn and he
remembered nothing more.Without acceleration compensation, I felt the full effect ofthe turn. Blood
drained from my brain and I went out.
Corran rolled onto his left side, then drew his kneesup to his chest. He rocked himself a little bit and
man-aged to get up onto his knees. The world immediatelyspun, which was a sensation that was made
worse be-cause the utter darkness gave him nothing to look at, nothing to occupy his attention. He
brought his headdown and rested it on the cot, but refused to let himselfflop down again. It didn't matter
that he felt terrible, he'dgotten to his knees and refused to retreat to his bellyagain.
Lights flashed on brilliantly in an instant, stabbingforked pain into his brain. He heard a door whoosh
openand the careful, deliberate clank-clack of shoes on metallattice steps, but he made no attempt to
look in the direc-tion of the sound. He refused to look, part of him know-ing the individual had desired to
make an entrance, andhe congratulated himself for his restraint.
He waited until the sound of the footsteps stoppedbefore he slowly brought his head up. He kept his
eyes allbut shut, letting eyelashes and welled-up tears protect his eyes against the light. Out of the corner
of his right eye he
saw a blot of red, so he slowly turned his head toward itand looked up. Even before he got to the
mismatchedeyes, he knew who she was and he hoped against hopeshe was a figment of whatever drugs
they'd pumped intohim.
Her first words came cold and even, tinted with justa hint of curiosity. "I would have expected you to be
more formidable somehow."
"Clothes make the man," he said. At least he thoughthe said it. He did hear sound coming out of his
mouth, akind of harsh croaking that seemed closer to Huttese thanBasic. Had he any spit to let gurgle in
his throat as he spoke he'd definitely have been taken for a Hutt.
"Ah, the infamous Horn wit."
Corran opened his eyes wider and shuffled on hisknees around to face her. "I left most of it back on
FreeCoruscant."
She brought her hands up and clapped gently. "I'm amazed a man in your condition can make jokes."
She squatted down and caught him across the face with anopenhanded slap he never saw coming. "I'm
amazed aman in your situationwould make jokes."
Corran played his tongue over his split lip. "Lieuten-ant Corran Horn, Alliance fleet, Rogue Squadron."
Ysanne Isard stood again but he didn't bother follow-ing her with his eyes. "Very good, defiance. I like
defiance."
"If that were true, you'd find all you want on Corus-cant."
"Indeed, perhaps I would. That is no concern ofyours, however." Her low chuckle filled the room and
made it seem even colder. "I'll have you know that yourRebel forces are indeed now in control of

Imperial Center. What they have discovered, though they know not thedepth of the problem, is that
Imperial Center is a poi-soned world, a sick world. It is a black hole from whichthey cannot escape.
They have truly bitten off morethan they can possibly chew and they will be choked to death because of
it."
"I'm not inclined to take your word for all this."

Corran put as much disdain in the sentence as he couldmuster, but what she said disturbed him. Shiel
andNawara Ven and Portha had all become ill enough thatthey could not participate in the squadron's
final action.He didn't think anyone could have gone forward with re-leasing some sort of plague on a
world deliberately, but then he'd not thought anyone would use a weapon thatdestroyed whole planets on
an inhabited world. The Em-pire had done the latter, so using a biological agent to de-stroy people and
leave the world infrastructure intact justseemed like an economical refinement of Imperial doc-trine.
"I neither desire nor care about your belief in what Isay. Ultimately what you think is immaterial to me. I
haveyou, you are mine, and I will do with you what I see fit."
Corran brought his head up despite the pain. "Whatyou did to Tycho Celchu to get him to betray me?
Hegave you the codes for my ship. That's how you got me."
She looked down at him and her eyes narrowed."Oh, well done, Horn, well done. I would deny this, of
course, but the latest word from Imperial Center is that Tycho Celchu has been arrested by Alliance
Intelligenceon charges of treason and murder. Specifically,your mur-der."
"Hardly an injustice, given the circumstances."
"Perhaps not, but I will find a way to use it. I will re-turn you to them after they have convicted and
executedhim. His wrongful death will gnaw away at consciencesand undercut the Rebellion's illusion of
moral superior-ity."
"I'll tell them the truth."
"The only truth you'll know is the truth I give you."Isard's smile slithered cruelly onto her face. "We are
bound to Lusankya, my private workshop for people likeyou. By the time I am finished with you, your
mind willbe mine and your heart's desire will be what I wish."
Corran shook his head violently, hoping the painwould be enough to make him black out. It was not. "I
will never betray my friends."
She laughed again. "I have heard this chorus manytimes before and it always sounds so sweet. You will
be-tray them, Corran Horn, just as Tycho Celchu betrayedyou. You will be the instrument of Rogue
Squadron'sdeath and will strike a mighty blow against the Alliance's precarious unity. When I am through
with you, little man,you will become the instrument of the Emperor's ven-geance and nothing and no one
will be able to stop you."
About the Author
Michael A. Stackpole is an award-winning game andcomputer game designer who was born in 1957
and grewup in Burlington, Vermont. In 1979 he graduated fromthe University of Vermont with a BA in

history. In his ca-reer as a game designer he has done work for Flying Buf-falo, Inc., Interplay
Productions, TSR Inc., West EndGames, Hero Games, Wizards of the Coast, FASA Corp., Game
Designers Workshop, and Steve Jackson Games. Inrecognition of his work in and for the game industry,
hewas inducted into the Academy of Gaming Arts and De-sign Hall of Fame in 1994.
Wedge's Gambleis his seventeenth published noveland the second of four Star Wars X-wing novels. In
addi-tion to working on the novels he has worked on theX-wing comic series from Dark Horse Comics,
building acontinuity between the two sets of stories.
He lives in Arizona with Liz Danforth and two WelshCardigan Corgis, Ruthless and Ember. In his spare
timehe plays indoor soccer, enjoys gaming, serves as the Exec-utive Director of the Phoenix Skeptics,
and does his bestto remain caught up with the on-line traffic on GEnie.

The World ofSTAR WARS Novels
In May 1991,Star Wars caused a sensation in the publishing in-dustry with the Bantam Spectra release
of Timothy Zahn's novelHeir to the Empire.For the first time, Lucasfilm Ltd. had author-ized new novels
thatcontinued the famous story told in GeorgeLucas's three blockbuster motion pictures:Star Wars, The
Em-pire Strikes Back,andReturn of the Jedi. Reader reaction wasimmediate and tumultuous:Heir
reached #1 on theNew YorkTimesbestseller list and demonstrated thatStar Wars lovers wereeager for
exciting new stories set in this universe, written byleading science fiction authors who shared their
passion. Sincethen, each BantamStar Wars novel has been an instant nationalbestseller.
Lucasfilm and Bantam decided that future novels in the se-ries would be interconnected: that is, events in
one novel wouldhave consequences in the others. You might say that each Ban-tamStar Wars novel,
enjoyable on its own, is also part of a muchlarger tale.
Here is a special look at Bantam'sStar Wars books, alongwith excerpts from the more recent novels.
Each one is availablenow wherever Bantam Books are sold.
SHADOWS OF THE EMPIRE by Steve Perry
Setting: betweenThe Empire Strikes Back
andReturn of the Jedi
Here is a very special STAR WARS story dealing with Black Sun,a galaxy-spanning criminal
organization that is masterminded by one of the most interesting villains in the STAR WARS universe:
Xizor, dark prince of the Falleen. Xizor's chief rival for the favorof Emperor Palpatine is none other than
Darth Vader himself-—alive and well, and a major character in this story, since it is setduring the
events of the STAR WARS film trilogy.
In the opening prologue, we revisit a familiar scene fromThe Empire Strikes Back,and are introduced
to our marvelous new bad guy:

He looks like a walking corpse,Xizor thought.Like a mum-mified body dead a thousand years. Amazing
he is still alive,much less the most powerful man in the galaxy. He isn't eventhat old; it is more as if
something is slowly eating him.
Xizor stood four meters away from the Emperor, watchingas the man who had long ago been Senator
Palpatine moved to stand in the holocam field. He imagined he could smell the de-cay in the Emperor's
worn body. Likely that was just some trick of the recycled air, run through dozens of filters to ensure that
there was no chance of any poison gas being introduced into it.Filtered the life out of it, perhaps, giving it
that dead smell.
The viewer on the other end of the holo-link would see aclose-up of the Emperor's head and shoulders,
of an age-ravagedface shrouded in the cowl of his dark zeyd-cloth robe. The manon the other end of the
transmission, light-years away, would not see Xizor, though Xizor would be able to see him. It was a
mea-sure of the Emperor's trust that Xizor was allowed to be herewhile the conversation took place.
The man on the other end of the transmission—if he couldstill be called that—
The air swirled inside the Imperial chamber in front of theEmperor, coalesced, and blossomed into the
image of a figuredown on one knee. A caped humanoid biped dressed in jet black,face hidden under a
full helmet and breathing mask:
Darth Vader.
Vader spoke: "What is thy bidding, my master?"
If Xizor could have hurled a power bolt through time andspace to strike Vader dead, he would have
done it withoutblinking. Wishful thinking: Vader was too powerful to attack di-rectly.
"There is a great disturbance in the Force," the Emperorsaid.
"I have felt it," Vader said.
"We have a new enemy. Luke Skywalker."
Skywalker? That had been Vader's name, a long time ago.Who was this person with the same name,
someone so powerfulas to be worth a conversation between the Emperor and his mostloathsome
creation? More importantly, why had Xizor's agentsnot uncovered this before now? Xizor's ire was
instant—butcold. No sign of his surprise or anger would show on his imper-turbable features. The
Falleen did not allow their emotions toburst forth as did many of the inferior species; no, the Falleen
ancestry was not fur but scales, not mammalian but reptilian. Notwild but coolly calculating. Such was
much better. Much safer.
"Yes, my master," Vader continued.
"He could destroy us," the Emperor said.
Xizor's attention was riveted upon the Emperor and theholographic image of Vader kneeling on the deck

of a ship faraway. Here was interesting news indeed. Something the Emperor perceived as a danger to
himself? Something the Emperor feared?
"He's just a boy," Vader said. "Obi-Wan can no longer helphim."
Obi-Wan. That name Xizor knew. He was among the last ofthe Jedi Knights, a general. But he'd been
dead for decades,hadn't he?
Apparently Xizor's information was wrong if Obi-Wan hadbeen helping someone who was still a boy.
His agents were go-ing to be sorry.
Even as Xizor took in the distant image of Vader and thenearness of the Emperor, even as he was aware
of the luxury of the Emperor's private and protected chamber at the core of thegiant pyramidal palace, he
was also able to make a mental noteto himself: Somebody's head would roll for the failure to makehim
aware of all this. Knowledge was power; lack of knowledgewas weakness. This was something he could
not permit.
The Emperor continued. "The Force is strong with him. Theson of Skywalker must not become a Jedi."
Sonof Skywalker?
Vader'sson! Amazing!
"If he could be turned he would become a powerful ally,"Vader said.
There was something in Vader's voice when he said this,something Xizor could not quite put his finger
on. Longing?Worry?
Hope?
"Yes ... yes. He would be a great asset," the Emperor said."Can it be done?"
There was the briefest of pauses. "He will join us or die,master."
Xizor felt the smile, though he did not allow it to show anymore than he had allowed his anger play. Ah.
Vader wantedSkywalker alive,that was what had been in his tone. Yes, he had said that the boy would
join them or die, but this latter part wasobviously meant only to placate the Emperor. Vader had no intention of killing Skywalker, his own son; that was obvious toone as skilled in reading voices as was
Xizor. He had not gottento be the Dark Prince, Underlord of Black Sun, the largest crimi-nal
organization in the galaxy, merely on his formidable goodlooks. Xizor didn't truly understand the Force
that sustained theEmperor and made him and Vader so powerful, save to knowthat it certainly worked
somehow. But he did know that it wassomething the extinct Jedi had supposedly mastered. And now,
apparently, this new player had tapped into it. Vader wanted Skywalker alive, had practically promised
the Emperor that hewould deliver him alive—and converted.
This was most interesting.
Most interesting indeed.
The Emperor finished his communication and turned back toface him. "Now, where were we, Prince

Xizor?"
The Dark Prince smiled. He would attend to the business athand, but he would not forget the name of
Luke Skywalker.

THE TRUCE AT BAKURA
by Kathy Tyers
Setting: Immediately afterReturn of the Jedi
The day after his climactic battle with Emperor Palpatine andthe sacrifice of his father, Darth Vader, who
died saving his life,Luke Skywalker helps recover an Imperial drone ship bearing astartling message
intended for the Emperor. It is a distress signalfrom the far-off Imperial outpost of Bakura, which is under
at-tack by an alien invasion force, the Ssi-ruuk. Leia sees a rescuemission as an opportunity to achieve a
diplomatic victory for theRebel Alliance, even if it means fighting alongside former Impe-rials. But Luke
receives a vision from Obi-Wan Kenobi revealingthat the stakes are even higher: the invasion at Bakura
threatenseverything the Rebels have won at such great cost.
STAR WARS: X-WING by Michael A. Stackpole
ROGUE SQUADRON
WEDGE'S GAMBLE
Setting: two and a half years
afterReturn of the Jedi
Inspired byX-wing,the bestselling computer game fromLucasArts Entertainment Co., this exciting
series chronicles thefurther adventures of the most feared and fearless fighting forcein the galaxy. A new
generation of X-wing pilots, led by Com-mander Wedge Antilles, is combating the remnants of the
Empirestill left after the events of the STAR WARS movies. Here arenovels full of explosive space
action, nonstop adventure, and thespecial brand of wonder known as STAR WARS.
In this very early scene, young Corellian pilot Corran Hornfaces a tough challenge fast enough to get his
heart pounding—and this is only a simulation! [P.S.: "Whistler" is Corran's R2 astromech droid]:
The Corellian brought his proton torpedo targeting programup and locked on to the TIE. It tried to
break the lock, butturbolaser fire from theKorolev boxed it in. Corran's heads-up display went red and
he triggered the torpedo. "Scratch one eye-ball."
The missile shot straight in at the fighter, but the pilot brokehard to port and away, causing the missile to
overshoot the tar-get.Nice flying! Corran brought his X-wing over and starteddown to loop in behind
the TIE, but as he did so, the TIE van-ished from his forward screen and reappeared in his aft arc.
Yanking the stick hard to the right and pulling it back, Corranwrestled the X-wing up and to starboard,
then inverted and rolledout to the left.
A laser shot jolted a tremor through the simulator's couch.Lucky thing I had all shields aft!Corran

reinforced them with energy from his lasers, then evened them out fore and aft. Jink-ing the fighter right
and left, he avoided laser shots coming infrom behind, but they all came in far closer than he liked.
He knew Jace had been in the bomber, and Jace was theonly pilot in the unit who could have stayed
with him.Except forour leader.Corran smiled broadly.Coming to see how good Ireally am, Commander
Antilles? Let me give you a clinic."Makesure you're in there solid, Whistler, because we're going for alittle
ride."
Corran refused to let the R2's moan slow him down. Asnap-roll brought the X-wing up on its port wing.
Pulling backon the stick yanked the fighter's nose up away from the original line of flight. The TIE stayed
with him, then tightened up on thearc to close distance. Corran then rolled another ninety degreesand
continued the turn into a dive. Throttling back, Corran hung in the dive for three seconds, then hauled
back hard on the stickand cruised up into the TIE fighter's aft.
The X-wing's laser fire missed wide to the right as the TIEcut to the left. Corran kicked his speed up to
full and broke withthe TIE. He let the X-wing rise above the plane of the break,then put the fighter
through a twisting roll that ate up enoughtime to bring him again into the TIE's rear. The TIE snapped to
the right and Corran looped out left.
He watched the tracking display as the distance betweenthem grew to be a kilometer and a half, then
slowed.Fine, youwant to go nose to nose? I've got shields and you don't.If Com-mander Antilles wanted
to commit virtual suicide, Corran washappy to oblige him. He tugged the stick back to his sternum and
rolled out in an inversion loop.Coming at you!
The two starfighters closed swiftly. Corran centered his foe
in the crosshairs and waited for a dead shot. Without shields the TIE fighter would die with one burst,
and Corran wanted the killto be clean. His HUD flicked green as the TIE juked in and outof the center,
then locked green as they closed.
The TIE started firing at maximum range and scored hits. At that distance the lasers did no real damage
against the shields,prompting Corran to wonder why Wedge was wasting the en-ergy. Then, as the
HUD's green color started to flicker, realiza-tion dawned.The bright bursts on the shields are a
distraction tomy targeting! I better kill himnow!
Corran tightened down on the trigger button, sending red la-ser needles stabbing out at the closing TIE
fighter. He couldn't tell if he had hit anything. Lights flashed in the cockpit andWhistler started screeching
furiously. Corran's main monitor went black, his shields were down, and his weapons controlswere dead.
The pilot looked left and right. "Where is he, Whistler?"
The monitor in front of him flickered to life and a diagnos-tic report began to scroll by. Bloodred
bordered the damage re-ports. "Scanners, out; lasers, out; shields, out; engine, out! I'm awallowing Hutt
just hanging here in space."
THE COURTSHIP OF PRINCESS LEIA
by Dave Wolverton
Setting: Four years afterReturn of the Jedi

One of the most interesting developments in Bantam'sStar Warsnovels is that in their storyline, Han Solo
and Princess Leia starta family. This tale reveals how the couple originally got together. Wishing to
strengthen the fledgling New Republic by bringing inpowerful allies, Leia opens talks with the Hapes
consortium ofmore than sixty worlds. But the consortium is ruled by the QueenMother, who, to Han's
dismay, wants Leia to marry her son.Prince holder. Before this action-packed story is over, Luke willjoin
forces with holder against a group of Force-trained"witches " and face a deadly foe.
Luke stood in a mountain fortress of stone, looking over aplain with a sea of dark forested hills beyond,
and a stormrose—a magnificent wind that brought with it towering walls ofblack clouds and dust, trees
hurtling toward him and twistingthrough the sky. The clouds thundered overhead, filled with purple
('flames, obliterating all sunlight, and Luke could feel a
malevolence hidden in those clouds and knew that they had beenraised through the power of the dark
side of the Force.
Dust and stones whistled through the air like autumn leaves.Luke tried to hold on to the stone parapet
overlooking the plainto keep from being swept from the fortress walls. Windspounded in his ears like the
roar of an ocean, howling.
It was as if a storm of pure dark Force raged over thecountryside, and suddenly, amid the towering
clouds of darkness that thundered toward him, Luke could hear laughing, the sweet sound of women
laughing. He looked above into the dark clouds,and saw the women borne through the air along with the
rocksand debris, like motes of dust, laughing. A voice seemed towhisper, "the witches of Dathomir."
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE
DARK FORCE RISING
THE LAST COMMAND

by Timothy Zahn

Setting: Five years afterReturn of the Jedi
This #] bestselling trilogy introduces two legendary forces of evil into theStar Warsliterary pantheon.
Grand Admiral Thrawn has taken control of the Imperial fleet in the years since the destruc-tion of
the Death Star, and the mysterious Joruus C'baoth is afearsome Jedi Master who has been seduced by
the dark side.Han and Leia have now been married for about a year, and asthe story begins, she is
pregnant with twins. Thrawn's plan is to crush the Rebellion and resurrect the Empire's New Order with
C'baoth's help—and in return, the Dark Master will get Han and Leia's Jedi children to mold as he
wishes. For as readers of this magnificent trilogy will see, Luke Skywalker is not the last of theold
Jedi. He is the first of the new.
The Jedi Academy Trilogy:
JEDI SEARCH

DARK APPRENTICE
CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE
by Kevin J. Anderson
Setting: Seven years afterReturn of the Jedi
In order to assure the continuation of the Jedi Knights, LukeSkywalker has decided to start a training
facility: a Jedi Academy. tie will gather Force-sensitive students who show potentialas prospective Jedi and serve as their
mentor, as Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda did for him. Han and Leia's twins are now toddlers,
and there is a third Jedi child: the infant Anakin,named after Luke and Leia's father. In this trilogy, we
discoverthe existence of a powerful Imperial doomsday weapon, the hor-rifying Sun Crusher—which
will soon become the centerpiece ofa titanic struggle between Luke Skywalker and his most brilliant
Jedi Academy student, who is delving dangerously into the darkside.
In this scene from the first novel,Jedi Search,Luke vocalizeshis concept of a new Jedi order to a
distinguished assembly of New Republic leaders:
As he descended the long ramp, Luke felt all eyes turntoward him. A hush fell over the assembly. Luke
Skywalker, thelone remaining Jedi Master, almost never took part in govern-mental proceedings.
"I have an important matter to address," he said.
Mon Mothma gave him a soft, mysterious smile and ges-tured for him to take a central position. "The
words of a JediKnight are always welcome to the New Republic," she said.
Luke tried not to look pleased. She had provided the perfectopening for him. "In the Old Republic," he
said, "Jedi Knightswere the protectors and guardians of all. For a thousand genera-tions the Jedi used the
powers of the Force to guide, defend, andprovide support for the rightful government of worlds—before
the dark days of the Empire came, and the Jedi Knights werekilled."
He let his words hang, then took another breath. "Now wehave a New Republic. The Empire appears
to be defeated. Wehave founded a new government based upon the old, but let ushope we learn from
our mistakes. Before, an entire order of Jedi watched over the Republic, offering strength. Now I am the
onlyJedi Master who remains.
"Without that order of protectors to provide a backbone ofstrength for the New Republic, can we
survive? Will we be ableto weather the storms and the difficulties of forging a new union?Until now we
have suffered severe struggles—but in the futurethey will be seen as nothing more than birth pangs."
Before the other senators could disagree with that, Lukecontinued. "Our people had a common foe in
the Empire, and wemust not let our defenses lapse just because we have internalproblems. More to the
point, what will happen when we begin
squabbling among ourselves over petty matters? The old Jedihelped to mediate many types of disputes.
What if there are noJedi Knights to protect us in the difficult times ahead?
"My sister is undergoing Jedi training. She has a great dealof skill in the Force. Her three children are

also likely candidatesto be trained as young Jedi. In recent years I have come to knowa woman named
Mara Jade, who is now unifying thesmugglers—the former smugglers," he amended, "into an organization that can support the needs of the New Republic. Shealso has a talent for the Force. I have
encountered others in mytravels."
Another pause. The audience was listening so far. "But arethese the only ones? We already know that
the ability to use theForce is passed from generation to generation. Most of the Jediwere killed in the
Emperor's purge—but could he possibly have eradicated all of the descendants of those Knights? I
myself wasunaware of the potential power within me until Obi-Wan Kenobitaught me how to use it. My
sister Leia was similarly unaware.
"How many people are abroad in this galaxy who have acomparable strength in the Force, who are
potential members of a new order of Jedi Knights, but are unaware of who they are?"
Luke looked at them again. "In my brief search I have al-ready discovered that there are indeed some
descendants offormer Jedi. I have come here to ask"—he turned to gesturetoward Mon Mothma, swept
his hands across the people gatheredthere in the chamber—"for two things.
"First, that the New Republic officially sanction my searchfor those with a hidden talent for the Force, to
seek them out andtry to bring them to our service. For this I will need some help."
"And what will you yourself be doing?" Mon Mothmaasked, shifting in her robes.
CHILDREN OF THE JEDI
by Barbara Hambly
Setting: Eight years afterReturn of the Jedi
TheStar Warscharacters face a menace from the glory days ofthe Empire when a thirty-year-old
automated Imperial Dread-naught comes to life and begins its grim mission: to gatherforces and annihilate
a long-forgotten stronghold of Jedi chil-dren. When Luke is whisked onboard, he begins to communicate
with the brave Jedi Knight who paralyzed the ship decades ago, and gave her life in the process. Now
she is part of the vessel,existing in its artificial intelligence core, and guiding Luke through one of the most
unusual adventures he has ever had.
In this scene, Luke discovers that an evil presence is gath-ering, one that will force him to join the battle:
Like See-Threepio, Nichos Marr sat in the outer room of the suite to which Cray had been assigned, in
the power-down modethat was the droid equivalent of rest. Like Threepio, at the soundof Luke's almost
noiseless tread he turned his head, aware of hispresence.
"Luke?" Cray had equipped him with the most sensitive vo-cal modulators, and the word was calibrated
to a whisper nolouder than the rustle of the blueleaves massed outside the win-dows. He rose, and
crossed to where Luke stood, the dull silverof his arms and shoulders a phantom gleam in the stray
flickersof light. "What is it?"
"I don't know." They retreated to the small dining areawhere Luke had earlier probed his mind, and
Luke stretched upto pin back a corner of the lamp-sheath, letting a slim triangle ofbutter-colored light fall
on the purple of the vulwood tabletop."A dream. A premonition, maybe." It was on his lips to ask,Doyou
dream?but he remembered the ghastly, imageless darknessin Nichos's mind, and didn't. He wasn't sure if

his pupil wasaware of the difference from his human perception and knowl-edge, aware of just exactly
what he'd lost when his conscious-ness, his self, had been transferred.
In the morning Luke excused himself from the expeditionTomla El had organized with Nichos and Cray
to the Falls ofDessiar, one of the places on Ithor most renowned for its beautyand peace. When they left
he sought out Umwaw Moolis, andthe tall herd leader listened gravely to his less than logical re-quest and
promised to put matters in train to fulfill it. Then Lukedescended to the House of the Healers, where
Drub McKumblay, sedated far beyond pain but with all the perceptions of agonyand nightmare still
howling in his mind.
"Kill you!" He heaved himself at the restraints, blue eyesglaring furiously as he groped and scrabbled at
Luke with hisclawed hands. "It's all poison! I see you! I see the dark light allaround you! You're him!
You're him!" His back bent like a bow;the sound of his shrieking was like something being ground outof
him by an infernal mangle.
Luke had been through the darkest places of the universeand of his own mind, had done and
experienced greater evil thanperhaps any man had known on the road the Force had draggedhim ... Still,
it was hard not to turn away.
"We even tried yarrock on him last night," explained the
Healer in charge, a slightly built Ithorian beautifully tabby-striped green and yellow under her simple
tabard of purple linen. "But apparently the earlier doses that brought him enough lucidi-ty to reach here
from his point of origin oversensitized his sys-tem. We'll try again in four or five days."
Luke gazed down into the contorted, grimacing face.
"As you can see," the Healer said, "the internal perceptionof pain and fear is slowly lessening. It's down
to ninety-threepercent of what it was when he was first brought in. Not much,I know, but something."
"Him!Him! HIM!" Foam spattered the old man's stainedgray beard.
Who?
"I wouldn't advise attempting any kind of mindlink until it'sat least down to fifty percent, Master
Skywalker."
"No," said Luke softly.
Kill you all.And,They are gathering . . .
"Do you have recordings of everything he's said?"
"Oh, yes." The big coppery eyes blinked assent. "The tran-script is available through the monitor cubicle
down the hall. Wecould make nothing of them. Perhaps they will mean somethingto you."
They didn't. Luke listened to them all, the incoherent groans and screams, the chewed fragments of
words that could be only guessed at, and now and again the clear disjointed cries: "Solo!Solo! Can you
hear me? Children ... Evil... Gathering here ...Kill you all!"
DARKSABER

by Kevin J. Anderson
Setting: Immediately thereafter
Not long afterChildren of the Jedi,Luke and Han learn that evilHutts are building a reconstruction of
the original Death Star—and that the Empire is still alive, in the form of Daala, who hasjoined
forces with Pellaeon, former second in command to thefeared Grand Admiral Thrown. In this early
scene, Luke has re-turned to the home of Obi-Wan Kenobi on Tatooine to try andconsult a long-gone
mentor:
He stood anxious and alone, feeling like a prodigal son out-side the ramshackle, collapsed hut that had
once been the homeof Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Luke swallowed and stepped forward, his footsteps crunch-ing in the silence. He had not been here in
many years. The door
had fallen off its hinges; part of the clay front wall had fallen in.Boulders and crumbled adobe jammed
the entrance. A pair ofsmall, screeching desert rodents snapped at him and fled forcover; Luke ignored
them.
Gingerly, he ducked low and stepped into the home of hisfirst mentor.
Luke stood in the middle of the room breathing deeply, turn-ing around, trying to sense the presence he
desperately needed to see. This was the place where Obi-Wan Kenobi had told Luke ofthe Force.
Here, the old man had first given Luke his lightsaberand hinted at the truth about his father, "from a
certain point ofview," dispelling the diversionary story that Uncle Owen hadtold, at the same time planting
seeds of his own deceptions.
"Ben," he said and closed his eyes, calling out with hismind as well as his voice. He tried to penetrate the
invisiblewalls of the Force and reach to the luminous being of Obi-WanKenobi who had visited him
numerous times, before saying hecould never speak with Luke again.
"Ben, I need you," Luke said. Circumstances had changed.He could think of no other way past the
obstacles he faced. Obi-Wan had to answer. It wouldn't take long, but it could give himthe key he
needed with all his heart.
Luke paused and listened and sensed—
But felt nothing. If he could not summon Obi-Wan's spirithere in the empty dwelling where the old man
had lived in exile for so many years, Luke didn't believe he could find his formerteacher ever again.
He echoed the words Leia had used more than a decadeearlier, beseeching him, "Help me, Obi-Wan
Kenobi," Lukewhispered, "you're my only hope."
THE CRYSTAL STAR
by Vonda N. Mclntyre
Setting: Ten years afterReturn of the Jedi

Leia's three children have been kidnapped. That horrible fact ismade worse by Leia's realization that she
can no longer senseher children through the Force! While she, Artoo-Detoo, andChewbacca trail the
kidnappers, Luke and Han discover a planetthat is suffering strange quantum effects from a nearby star.
Slowly freezing into a perfect crystal and disrupting the Force,the star is blunting Luke's power and
crippling theMillenniumFalcon.These strands converge in an apocalyptic threat not onlyto the fate of
the New Republic, but to the universe itself.

The Black Fleet Crisis
BEFORE THE STORM
by Michael P. Kube-McDowell
Setting: Twelve years afterReturn of the Jedi
Long after setting up the hard-won New Republic, yesterday'sRebels have become today's
administrators and diplomats. Butthe peace is not to last for long. A restless Luke must journey tohis
mother's homeworld in a desperate quest to find her people;Lando seizes a mysterious spacecraft with
unimaginable weap-ons of destruction; and waiting in the wings is an horrific battlefleet under the control
of a ruthless leader bent on a genocidalwar.
Here is an opening scene fromBefore the Storm:
In the pristine silence of space, the Fifth Battle Group of the New Republic Defense Fleet blossomed
over the planet Bessimirlike a beautiful, deadly flower.
The formation of capital ships sprang into view with star-tling suddenness, trailing fire-white wakes of
twisted space andbristling with weapons. Angular Star Destroyers guarded fat-hulled fleet carriers, while
the assault cruisers, their mirror fin-ishes gleaming, took the point.
A halo of smaller ships appeared at the same time. Thefighters among them quickly deployed in a
spherical defensivescreen. As the Star Destroyers firmed up their formation, theirflight decks quickly
spawned scores of additional fighters.
At the same time, the carriers and cruisers began to disgorgethe bombers, transports, and gunboats they
had ferried to thebattle. There was no reason to risk the loss of one fullyloaded—a lesson the Republic
had learned in pain. At Orinda,the commander of the fleet carrierEndurance had kept his pilots waiting
in the launch bays, to protect the smaller craft from Im-perial fire as long as possible. They were still there
whenEndur-ancetook the brunt of a Super Star Destroyer attack andvanished in a ball of metal fire.
Before long more than two hundred warships, large andsmall, were bearing down on Bessimir and its
twin moons. Butthe terrible, restless power of the armada could be heard and felt only by the ships'
crews. The silence of the approach was brokenonly on the fleet comm channels, which had crackled to
life inthe first moments with encoded bursts of noise and cryptic ship-to-ship chatter.
At the center of the formation of great vessels was the flag-

ship of the Fifth Battle Group, the fleet carrierIntrepid. She wasso new from the yards at Hakassi that
her corridors still reekedof sealing compound and cleaning solvent. Her huge realspacethruster engines
still sang with the high-pitched squeal that theengine crews called "the baby's cry."
It would take more than a year for the mingled scents of thecrew to displace the chemical smells from
the first impressionsof visitors. But after a hundred more hours under way, her en-gines' vibrations would
drop two octaves, to the reassuringthrum of a seasoned thruster bank.
OnIntredpid's bridge, a tall Dornean in general's uniform paced along an arc of command stations
equipped with largemonitors. His eye-folds were swollen and fanned by an uncon-scious Dornean
defensive reflex, and his leathery face wasflushed purple by concern. Before the deployment was even a
minute old, Etahn A'baht's first command had been bloodied.
The fleet tenderAhazi had overshot its jump, coming outof hyperspace too close to Bessimir and too late
for its crew torecover from the error. Etahn A'baht watched the bright flareof light in the upper
atmosphere fromIntrepid's forward view-station, knowing that it meant six young men were dead.
The Corellian Trilogy:
AMBUSH AT CORELLIA
ASSAULT AT SELONIA
SHOWDOWN AT CENTERPOINT
by Roger MacBride Allen
Setting: Fourteen years afterReturn of the Jedi
This trilogy takes us to Corellia, Han Solo's homeworld, whichHan has not visited in quite some time. A
trade summit bringsHan, Leia, and the children—now developing their own clearpersonalities and
instinctively learning more about their innateskills in the Force—into the middle of a situation that most
closely resembles a burning fuse. The Corellian system is on thebrink of civil war, there are New
Republic intelligence agents ona mysterious mission which even Han does not understand, andworst of
all, a fanatical rebel leader has his hands on asuperweapon of unimaginable power—and just wait until
youfind out who that leader is!
Here is an early scene fromAmbushthat gives you a won-derful look at the growing Solo children
(the twins are Jacen andJaina, and their little brother is Anakin):
Anakin plugged the board into the innards of the droid andpressed a button. The droid's black, boxy
body shuddered awake,it drew in its wheels to stand up a bit taller, its status lights lit,and it made a sort
of triple beep. "That's good," he said, andpushed the button again. The droid's status lights went out, and
its body slumped down again. Anakin picked up the next piece,a motivation actuator. He frowned at it as
he turned it over in hishands. He shook his head. "That'snot good," he announced.
"What's not good?" Jaina asked.
"This thing," Anakin said, handing her the actuator. "Can'tyoutell? The insides part is all melty."
Jaina and Jacen exchanged a look. "The outside looksokay," Jaina said, giving the part to her brother.

"How can he tellwhat theinside of it looks like? It's sealed shut when they makeit."
Anakin, still sitting on the floor, took the device from hisbrother and frowned at it again. He turned it
over and over in hishands, and then held it over his head and looked at it as if hewere holding it up to the
light. "There," he said, pointing achubby finger at one point on the unmarked surface. "In there isthe bad
part." He rearranged himself to sit cross-legged, put theactuator in his lap, and put his right index finger
over the "bad"part. "Fix," he said. "Fix." The dark brown outer case of the ac-tuator seemed to glow for
a second with an odd blue-red light,but then the glow sputtered out and Anakin pulled his fingeraway
quickly and stuck it in his mouth, as if he had burned it onsomething.
"Better now?" Jaina asked.
"Somebetter," Anakin said, pulling his finger out of his mouth. "Notall better." He took the actuator in his
hand andstood up. He opened the access panel on the broken droid andplugged in the actuator. He
closed the door and looked expect-antly at his older brother and sister.
"Done?" Jaina asked.
"Done," Anakin agreed. "ButI'm not going to push the but-ton." He backed well away from the droid,
sat down on the floor,and folded his arms.
Jacen looked at his sister.
"Not me," she said. 'This was your idea."
Jacen stepped forward to the droid, reached out to push thepower button from as far away as he could,
and then steppedhurriedly back.
Once again, the droid shuddered awake, rattling a bit thistime as it did so. It pulled its wheels in, lit its
panel lights, andmade the same triple beep. But then its holocam eye viewlens
wobbled back and forth, and its panel lights dimmed and flared.It rolled backward just a bit, and then
recovered itself.
"Good morning, young mistress and masters," it said. "Howmay I surge you?"
Well, one word wrong, but so what? Jacen grinned andclapped his hands and rubbed them together
eagerly. "Good day,droid," he said. They had done it! But what to ask for first?"First tidy up this room,"
he said. A simple task, and one thatought to serve as a good test of what this droid could do.
Suddenly the droid's overhead access door blew off andthere was a flash of light from its interior. A thin
plume ofsmoke drifted out of the droid. Its panel lights flared again, and then the work arm sagged
downward. The droid's body, softenedby heat, sagged in on itself and drooped to the floor. The floorand
walls and ceilings of the playroom were supposed to be fire-proof, but nonetheless the floor under the
droid darkened a bit, and the ceiling turned black. The ventilators kicked on highautomatically, and drew
the smoke out of the room. After a mo-ment they shut themselves off, and the room was silent.
The three children stood, every bit as frozen to the spot asthe droid was, absolutely stunned. It was
Anakin who recoveredfirst. He walked cautiously toward the droid and looked at itcarefully, being sure
not to get too close or touch it."Reallymelty now," he announced, and then wandered off to the otherside
of the room to play with his blocks.

The twins looked at the droid, arid then at each other.
"We're dead," Jacen announced, surveying the wreckage.

