mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

L ost Tribe of the Sith#2

SKYBORN

6/4/09

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

6/4/09

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

L ost Tribe of the Sith#2

SKYBORN
JOHN JACKSON MILLER

D
L
BALLANTINE BOOKS • NEW YORK

6/4/09

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

6/4/09

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith #2: Skyborn is a work of fiction.
Names, places, and incidents either are products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.

2009 Del Rey eBook edition
Copyright © 2009 by Lucasfilm Ltd. & ® or ™ where indicated. All
Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization.
Excerpt from Star Wars®: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss copyright © 2009
by Lucasfilm Ltd. & ® or ™ where indicated. All Rights Reserved.
Used Under Authorization.
Published in the United States by Del Rey, an imprint of The Random
House Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New
York.
DEL REY is a registered trademark and the Del Rey colophon is a
trademark of Random House, Inc.
This book contains an excerpt from the forthcoming book Star
Wars®: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss by Troy Denning. This excerpt has
been set for this edition only and may not reflect the final content of
the forthcoming edition.
ISBN 978-0-345-51939-9
Printed in the United States of America
www.starwars.com
www.delreybooks.com

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

6/4/09

Chapter One

5,000 years BBY
“Heretic!”
“Good to see you too, Mother,” Adari said. “Did the
children behave?”
The door hadn’t fully closed when the smaller child
was in Adari’s arms, shoved there by Eulyn. Adari’s
older boy bounded into the room, hobbling her. Under
attack from four purple arms, Adari staggered toward
the wall, looking for a spot to drop her nonliving
cargo. The canvas bag thudded against the wooden
floor.
“Heretic! That’s what your uncle says they’re calling
you,” Eulyn said. “He was here—and neighbor
Wertram, the tailor. And his wife, too—she never leaves
the hut for anything! Eight people have been by
today!”
“Well, don’t look outside,” Adari said. “More followed me home.” She shooed the gangly older child
away and tried to rescue her silvery hair from her toddler’s mouth. Short hair wasn’t the fashion for Keshiri
women, but for Adari, it was self-defense. Where her
youngest was concerned, it’d never be short enough.
“Is the stew on?”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

2

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

“Stew?” Eulyn yanked her little grandson back, only
to see Adari dart into the kitchen. Flushed with aggravation, Eulyn’s skin took on a violet hue that almost
matched her daughter’s. “You’re worried about dinner!
You don’t have any idea what’s been going on around
here, do you?”
“It’s a dinner break. I was working.”
“Working, nothing. I know where you were!”
Adari stared into the clay crock full of boiling meat
and vegetables and sighed. Of course her mother knew
where she’d been. Everyone did. Adari Vaal, collector
of rocks and stones; young widow of the valiant uvakrider on whom so many hopes had rested. Adari Vaal,
enemy of right and order; absent mother and misleader
of other people’s children. Today had been her third
day of testimony before the Neshtovar. It had gone as
well as the other two.
“What is that sound?”
“They’re hitting the house with rocks,” Adari said,
returning with a steaming bowl that she set on the
table. Standing back, she swung the front door wide
and watched as several gifts from the community
bounced over the threshold. She slammed the door
quickly. A peppery stone under the empty crèche drew
her eye. She reached for it with a sinewy, scratched arm.
“That’s a nice one,” she said. “Not from around here.”
She was apparently drawing people from all over. She’d
have to look around, later. Who needed expeditions
when you had an angry mob to collect samples?
Adari knelt and put the discovery in her pouch,
already overflowing with stones of every shape and
color. Above, the clatter grew louder. The younger child
wailed. Eulyn’s huge dark eyes widened further with
horror. “Adari, listen!” she said. “They’re hitting the
roof now!”
“That’s actually thunder.”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

3

“It’s proof, that’s what it is! The Skyborn have forsaken you.”
“No, Mother, it’s proof that they’re protecting me,”
Adari said, eating standing up. “If it rains, the mob
can’t set our house on fire.”
That wasn’t likely to happen—the widow of a
Neshtovari was a protected person, unlikely to be
killed in a riot. However, there was nothing wrong with
making her life miserable, and since her sin was against
the Neshtovar themselves, no authority would stop
them. In fact, little displays like this were good for public order.
Adari poked her head into the backyard. No rocks
there. Just the uvak, doing what he had done all year:
taking up most of the place and being unfragrant.
Emerald reptilian eyes opened long enough to shoot
her a bad look. His leathery wings shifted, raking
against the sides of the pen. The beast didn’t mind the
cooling rain, but the noise from the street had disturbed his royal slumber.
Riderless uvak were all sloth and bad attitude, but
Nink hadn’t liked his rider when he had one. He was
Adari’s least favorite thing, but he came with the house.
In a sense, the house was his.
In olden times, when a Neshtovari—an uvak-rider—
died, the community had slain the deceased’s family, as
well. That practice had ended, perhaps the only time the
Neshtovar had allowed practicality to overrule tradition. Uvak were precious, temperamental, and attached
to their riders; stabling them with the dead rider’s survivors often kept the beasts sane enough to be useful for
the breeding market. Not to mention, Adari mused,
what it must have done for Neshtovar breeding. The
riders hadn’t had great social lives when death was in the
picture. But since the change, uvak-riders had become
highly sought after as mates in Keshiri society.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

4

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

Adari hadn’t sought Zhari Vaal at all. She was interested in rocks; Zhari was their equal for conversational
ability. In nine years he had given her two dim-witted children, a description that seemed less harsh to her than
maternally charitable. She loved them well enough, but
they were showing no signs of being any kinder or
brighter than their father had been. Foolishness bred true.
She, the fool for not running away; he, well, he was Zhari
Vaal. The “valiant young rider of the Neshtovar on
whom so many hopes rested”—that was the line from the
wake—had mistreated Nink one too many times. One
beautiful morning, the beast had flown Zhari far out over
the sea and unceremoniously dropped him. Adari was
sure she had seen a hint of satisfaction in the creature’s
bright green eyes when he returned home. She’d never
gotten along with Nink before, but at least now she paid
him some respect. When it came to Zhari, the uvak had
had more sense than she did.
It wasn’t all her fault, she knew. The match had
resulted from years of lobbying by Eulyn, seeking to
lock in her family’s future position. Only males became
riders, but Keshiri property descended matrilineally;
now Adari and her mother had the uvak and the wooden
house, while their neighbors still lived in huts of lashedtogether hejarbo shoots. Eulyn was thrilled—and Adari
was content to let the children be Eulyn’s domain, too.
Adari had done her duty; the Keshiri had been
advanced by another generation. Now she could concentrate on something important.
If they’d let her.
“I have to go back,” she said, lifting her younger son
from his work destroying the dinner table. The afternoon hearing had gone long, and an unprecedented
evening session loomed.
“I knew you’d do something like this,” Eulyn said,
her gaze piercing her daughter’s back. “I’ve always said

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

5

all that digging around in the filth would do you no
good. And arguing with the Neshtovar! Why do you
always have to be right?”
“I don’t know, Mother. But it’s something I’m going
to have to live with,” Adari said, handing off the dripping toddler. A smeary imprint remained on her tunic—
no time for a change. “Try to get Tona and Finn to
actually sleep tonight. I’ll be back.”
She opened the door carefully to find that the rain
had driven off the crowd. Comfort trumped belief on
Kesh. But the rocks remained, dozens of ironic little
statements scattered all across the stoop. If the hearings
lasted any longer, she wouldn’t have to do any more
field research for the season—everything she needed
would be on her doorstep.
Perhaps she should offend the Skyborn every year.
“We were talking about the flamestones,” Adari
reminded the chief of the Neshtovar.
“You were talking,” Izri Dazh said. “I accept no such
term.” The aged rider and high councilor hobbled
around the edge of the Circle Eternal, a plaza where a
tall column served as a massive sundial. Adari looked
around. Another gorgeous evening, for a place that had
no other kind. It was the same every day, inland: a
brief, determined afternoon rain followed by a cool
breeze that blew straight through the night. But now
half the village had forgone real entertainments to
watch a bald, bloodless man harangue a young woman.
“There are no flamestones,” he said, gesturing to a pair
of crimson rocks on a pedestal beside the central column. “I see here only normal stones of Kesh, as you
might find on any hillside.”
Adari coughed.
“You have something to say?”
“I’d better not.” Adari looked up from her seat in the

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

6

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

sandy clearing—and then around at the glaring listeners. What was the point? No one would listen. Why
keep making it worse . . .
She took another look at Izri. This lavender wraith
was the man who had eulogized Zhari. What did he
know about anything? What business did the
Neshtovar have telling anyone what to think, just for
convincing a few lazy animals to take them for rides
now and again?
Fine, she thought, rising. These’ll be two fewer rocks
they can throw. She took a stone from the pedestal. “I
have—the scholars of Kesh have collected stones from
every part of this continent. We record what we find.
We compare. This rock came from the foot of the Sessal
Spire, on the southern coast.”
The crowd murmured. Everyone knew the smoking
Spire, rumbling and bubbling at the edge of civilization.
Someone must have been crazy to go out there collecting rocks!
“The Spire created this stone, from the flames it holds
inside. And this,” Adari said, picking up the other rock,
“was found right here outside the village, buried in the
riverbed.” The stones were identical. “Now, the mountains ringing our plateau aren’t smokers—what we call
volcanoes—at least, not now. But this rock being here
suggests they might once have been. This whole continent, in fact, might have been created by them.”
“Heretic!”
“Is my mother here?” Adari craned her neck, scanning the crowd. Someone tittered.
Izri took the stones from her and rustled along the
perimeter of the audience. “You say these stones
came . . . from below,” he said, the horrible word dripping from his tongue. “And created all that is Kesh.”
“Then, and now. The smokers are building more land
all the time.”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

7

“But you know that all that is Kesh came from the
Skyborn,” Izri said, jabbing his cane in her direction.
“Nothing can be born of Kesh anew!”
She knew; every child knew. The Skyborn were the
great beings above, the closest thing the Kesh had to
deities. Well, there was something closer: The
Neshtovar, as the self-proclaimed Sons of the Skyborn,
might as well have been the Skyborn as far as life on
Kesh was concerned. Keshiri faith was vertical; high
was mighty. The elevated were venerated. It was Izri’s
uvak-riding group that, ages before, had brought down
from the lofty oceanside peaks the wisdom of the great
battle of creation. Riding colossal uvak of crystal, the
Skyborn had fought the Otherside in the stars. The battle raged for eons, with the Otherside injuring the
Skyborn before being defeated. Drops of Skyborn
blood fell upon the roiling black seas, forming the land
that birthed the Keshiri people.
Adari wondered about the biology of a gigantic, sandyblooded race—but the Neshtovar notion had something
going for it: The Keshiri’s few maps of the land looked as
if one of her kids had spilled something on them. Long
ridged peninsulas spattered in all directions from a cluster
of plateaus, forming enormous, often unwalkable coastlines and fjords enough for the Keshiri to harvest marine
life forever. Farther up the many rivers to the plateaus,
farmers drew even more from the rich soil. The Keshiri
numbers were both vast and well fed.
About the Otherside, Adari found the Neshtovar
were incurious to a fault. “That which opposed the
Skyborn” meant death, sickness, fire, rebellion—in no
particular order—when it wasn’t taking mortal form in
accordance with the storyteller’s needs. The Otherside
came “from below,” another element in the message of
vertical faith. And that was all there was to say. Given
the elders’ devotion to the Skyborn, Adari was sur-

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

8

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

prised they hadn’t hammered down who or what the
Otherside was. But then, if they had, they’d have come
up with a better name.
Which wasn’t stopping Izri from invoking it repeatedly as he railed at her. “Your words glorify the
Otherside, Adari Vaal. It’s why you are here. You are
here for preaching—”
“Teaching!”
“—telling these lies about the Great Battle to your
acolytes!”
“Acolytes? They’re students!” She searched the
crowd for familiar faces. Her students had ducked out
the day before when things had gotten rough, but some
of their parents were here. “You, Ori Garran! You sent
your son to the scholars because he wasn’t any good at
the mill. And Wertram, your daughter. Everyone here in
Tahv—do you think the village is going to fall into a
hole because I talked to your children about some
rocks?”
“It very well could!” Izri grabbed his cane from its
spot by the pedestal and shook it. “This land was a part
of the living Skyborn. Do you think they do not hear
you? When the ground quakes, when the smokers
burn—it’s their remnant acting in sympathy with their
wishes. Their wishes that we honor them, and hate the
Otherside!”
This again. “I know that’s what you think,” Adari
said, searching for slow, even tones. “I don’t pretend to
know what forces work the world—”
“That’s clear!”
“—but if disagreeable words caused the world to
shake, Kesh would rock every time husbands and wives
quarreled!” She inhaled deeply. “Surely, the Skyborn
have more important affairs than to police our own little disagreements. I know they do.”
Silence. Adari looked around. Dark Keshiri eyes,

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

9

once aimed at her, pointed down and away. She’d won
a few, that time. Maybe not enough to let her keep her
job, but enough that she could keep collecting—
Krakka-boooom!
Purple faces turned west, toward the Cetajan
Mountains. Jutting out into the ocean beyond, the
range provided the village of Tahv some of its finest
sunsets—but now the flames were coming from the
mountain peak itself. A pillar of fiery ash billowed from
the summit.
It made no sense. Adari helped Izri to his feet.
“That—that’s a granite peak,” she said over the subsiding echo. “It’s not volcanic!”
“It is now!”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

6/4/09

Chapter Two

A rock was a simple thing, but as her grandfather
had told her, “By simple things, we know the world.”
Adari had never felt shame for all those hours she’d
spent searching the creek beds, or for finding more of
interest in the shards of a shattered stone than in her
children’s first words. She was teaching them—but the
rock was teaching her.
Now, thanks to a simple rock, she was seeing more
of the world than ever before—from high above, clinging to the broad back of Nink. It was an unlikely position for either of them, but she’d been in it for most of
the night and part of a day. Her first uvak-flight. It
wasn’t by choice.
The hours after the explosion on the mountain hadn’t
gone that badly, she thought. Audience members at the
hearing had fled to their homes. She’d done the same
after Dazh and his cohorts left together, quibbling over
signs and portents.
By the next morning, however, the mood of the town
had changed. The faraway Cetajan peak was still
smoking, but it had become clear that it posed no danger to Tahv or the villages farther down the watershed.
It was safe for everyone to go outside—out to Adari’s
front yard, to express their feelings about her faithless

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

11

words and the smoldering addition to the skyline they
had caused. The Skyborn did listen. What other proof
was needed? If the Keshiri couldn’t silence Adari Vaal,
they’d at least make sure their voices were louder than
hers.
They’d been doing a good job of it when Adari sent
Eulyn and the kids out to take refuge at her uncle’s
place. The growing crowd, still pelting the house with
rocks, had parted to let the innocents leave. But the
mob had stayed straight through the afternoon rain—
and by sunset, the Neshtovar themselves were outside,
their uvak tethered safely away from the throng. By the
time Izri Dazh had hobbled up the steps to pound on
her door, Adari had seen the first torches lit outside.
That had been enough for her. The torches could’ve
been for light—but they might have been for something
worse. She’d clearly exceeded whatever protection a
widow of an uvak-rider was afforded. The Keshiri
weren’t big on violence, but they didn’t have a lot of
variety in their social sanctions, either. Judging that it
didn’t look like a banishing kind of crowd, Adari had
turned in desperation to her own backyard, and that
least liked portion of her legacy: Nink.
Her departure over the rooftop had surprised the
people out front almost as much as the maneuver’s success had surprised her. The uvak was most surprised of
all. With his rider gone, Nink could have expected
never to be ridden again. Uvak took to new riders so
seldom that they were promptly put out to stud.
Awakening to Adari trying to clamber aboard his fleshy
back, Nink could have done anything, gone anywhere.
He went up.
She had spent the rest of that night alternately
screaming and dodging pursuit by Neshtovar fliers. The
latter feat was made easier by Nink’s insistence on soaring far out over the ocean. Those had been the worst

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

12

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

moments for Adari, who knew the animal’s past. But
something on the uvak’s part, perhaps curiosity, kept
him from sending her to Zhari’s grave. Just before
dawn, Nink had finally found a seaside mountain
roost, where Adari immediately collapsed with exhaustion. Amazingly, when she awoke, the uvak was still
there, stuffing his beak with what little foliage there
was. Home clearly wasn’t looking that attractive to
Nink anymore, either.
Now, on the second morning since the explosion,
Adari saw that her directionless night flight had taken
her near the source of anxiety. The Cetajan Range was
a chain of craggy goliaths slivered from the mainland—
a prominent part of the horizon when seen from the
interior, but as inaccessible as places on the western
shoreline got. An expedition of rock hunters had
brought back what little Adari knew of the place—and
that had required a sympathetic volunteer Neshtovari
willing to fly a sample return mission. Seeing the mountain ahead of her, Adari was overtaken by the urge to
see the truth up close. If the explosion wasn’t volcanic,
it could set things right with her and the community.
And if the mountain was suddenly volcanic, she was
curious about that, too. What was the process
involved?
Or were the scholars wrong about the makeup of the
range? Had the uvak-rider flubbed the sample?
That was probably it. Adari’s anger rose as Nink did,
the uvak comfortably clearing the chain in preparation
for an oceanside approach. It would be poetic, Adari
thought, if the one project the scholars had entrusted to
a Neshtovar had resulted in wrong information.
Cetajan Range samples, nothing, she thought. The idiot
probably brought us rocks from his front path! She
shuddered, and not just from the chilly air. Why should
she be made to suffer for their colossal—

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

13

Suddenly the source of the smoke column came into
view. Adari nearly fell off Nink right then. She’d half
expected to see an open caldera, steaming like the
smokers—smoke really was a misnomer—she’d seen in
the south. Instead, a massive shining shell sat in an
indentation on the seaward side of the mountain. That
was the word that entered her mind, even if the scale
was completely wrong: its sharp, corrugated ridges
resembled the ancient conchs she’d seen returned from
the seabed. But this shell was the size of the Circle
Eternal!
And this shell had smoke—not steam—billowing
from several ruptures. Tremendous grooves gouged
behind the body showed it had struck downward at an
angle. The fires inside were now nearly spent, but she
could tell from the melted mangle that they must have
been far larger once. The explosion producing the
plume visible from the inland side must have happened
right when it landed, she thought.
Landed?
Before Adari could contemplate this, movement
caught her eye. One of the apertures in the shell disgorged something, something that struck the gravel
below and disappeared in a slide of dust. She nudged
the uvak nearer. A flash of crimson light appeared in
the small cloud—and at its end . . .
. . . a man.
The man looked up at her. He was pale of face,
lighter than the sickest Keshiri she had ever seen. And
in his left hand was a shaft of brilliant red light the size
of Izri’s cane.
Was it in his hand—or was it part of his hand? Adari
panicked, and Nink agreed, swooping out of the way.
A violent but welcome updraft yanked them both back
out over the sea.
Adari shook her head violently and closed her eyes as

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

14

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

Nink found smoother air. What had she seen? It had
the shape of a man, yes. Hair, darker than any
Keshiri—but then that red light. What was that light?
And there was something else moving on the mountain,
too, something she’d seen out of the corner of her eye.
Was the shell a nest of some kind?
She swallowed hard, her throat raw from the wind
and elevation. It was all too macabre. Sample return
missions, Neshtovar inquests—none of her past concerns stood for anything against what she’d seen.
Opening her eyes, she brought Nink around on a looping approach parallel to the jagged beach. The giant
shell perched near the end of a sheer drop-off, far
above. She’d approach from below, this time, rising
carefully until she could get a closer look.
Adari soon realized that her plan, while reasonable,
was wholly unsuited for a novice rider. Nink strained
against her, taking her on a spiraling route to the top
that wrenched her stomach. Dizzy, she fought to keep
her eye on the cliff top. The figure from before was
there, without the bright red light. But holding something else—
Something whizzed past, hurtling downward at such
speed that Nink withdrew his wings in fear. Adari
slipped for real this time, tumbling backward. Flailing,
she caught the uvak’s clawed foot with one arm on the
way down—and desperately wrapped her other arm
around it. “Nink!”
She strained to look up, but Nink was on the move,
sailing away from the crest and its strange goings-on as
fast as his reptile wings could carry them. Dangling, she
saw that Nink was making for the safety of their earlier roost, farther up the chain. He’d obviously had
enough surprises for one day.
So had she. But at least she was getting used to them.
Or so she thought.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

15

* * *
Shortly before the sun slipped behind the western
ocean, she watched the last wisps of smoke disappear
from the mountaintop. Adari didn’t think Nink could
be coaxed up there again before her water-pouch ran
out. The dried brekka beets were already gone. She’d
left so quickly she hadn’t restocked her expedition
pack.
Now, sitting on a ledge and watching the sunset, she
drew an invisible continent on her knee, wondering
how far she would have to fly to reach any settlement
that had not heard of her plight. There probably wasn’t
such a place. The Neshtovar weren’t just the peacekeepers and lawgivers, they were the communications
system that made far-flung Kesh one world. Circuit riders would have already spread the word from Tahv to
the elder riders in each village. She had escaped, but
freedom was no deliverance for her.
Deliverance.
The word reached her on the wind. It wasn’t even a
word, really—not one she had heard before. A strange,
melodic combination of syllables that meant nothing to
her ear. Yet her mind recognized it as a familiar concept: deliverance.
Instinctively, she looked back toward the mysterious
peak, drowning in shadow. Lights winked in the darkness
near its massive base. Fires—but not the uncontrolled
fires that must have been present at the mountaintop.
These fires had been set.
Adari sprang to her feet, losing her water-pouch over
the edge. The Neshtovar! They’d hunted her here, and
they’d camped, and in the morning, they’d find her!
They wouldn’t wait to find out what she’d seen atop
the mountain, not when she’d compounded her crime
by daring to fly Nink.
A breeze was blowing to the sea from the direction of

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

16

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

the mountain. Cool, calming. Deliverance, came the
word again. Another feeling followed, complex and
emphatic: We are yours—and you are ours.
Adari blinked back bewildered tears and stepped
toward the sleeping uvak. The wind rose again.
Come to us.
She’d been wrong to come here. The sky had told her
to, but it didn’t seem like any kind of deliverance Adari
knew.
Her nose crinkled at the stench. The gully was dark,
but it was clear something awful had been burned
there. Even the sulfurous pits of the south weren’t this
bad. She looked back at Nink, yawning in the woods
and unwilling to follow her farther. Wise animal.
The active fires were ahead, through trees over the
hill. Air caressed her as she crept up. Whatever they
were burning, it wasn’t what was in the gully.
In the clearing below, Adari saw them: people. As
many people as had been at her final hearing, only
gathered around multiple campfires. She again thought
of the Neshtovar lying in wait for her. If so, then her
arriving on foot was probably for the best. She strained
to make out their voices as she approached. She recognized one, but not his words. She crept closer—
—and left her feet entirely, hurtling toward a tree.
Flailing, Adari slammed hard against it, collapsing
breathlessly at its base. Figures rushed at her from the
shadows. Scrambling, she saw them—their bodies illuminated not by the fires, but from stalks of magenta
energy emanating from their hands, just like she had
seen before. She tripped over a root. “No!”
She never hit the ground. An unseen force yanked her
through the maze of figures, depositing her abruptly
before the largest bonfire. Rising, her back to the
flames, she looked at the advancing wraiths. They were

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

17

people, but not like her. Not purple, but beige, brown,
red, and more—every color but what they were supposed to be. And some faces weren’t like hers at all.
Tiny tentacles wiggled on red jowls. A fat, leprous figure, twice as bulky as the rest and with a hide like
Nink’s, stood behind them all, grunting gutturally.
Adari screamed—but they weren’t listening. They
were all around her now, man, woman, and monster,
shouting gibberish. She mashed her hands to her ears.
It did no good. The words were digging past her ears.
Digging at her mind.
Mental pinpricks became knives. Adari reeled. The
strangers surged forward physically and ethereally—
pushing, scraping, searching. Waves of images flashed
before her, of her sons, her house, her people—everything that was Adari, everything that was Kesh. She still
saw mouths moving, but the cacophony now boomed
inside her head. Words, meaningless words . . .
. . . that somehow began connecting with familiar
impressions. As with the breeze before, the voices were
alien, but she could feel the sounds coalescing around
rational thoughts.
“You are here.”
“There are others. There are others.”
“Bring them here.”
“Take us there!”
“Bring them here!”
Adari spun, or all of Kesh did. Above her, the group
parted for a new arrival. It was a woman. Darkerskinned than the others, she held a baby tightly swaddled in a red cloth. Mother, Adari thought against the
clamorous assault. A sign of hope. Mercy.
“BRING THEM HERE BRING THEM HERE
BRING THEM HERE!”
Adari screamed, writhing against the unseen claws
raking at her. The others were holding back. The

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

18

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

woman above was not. Adari reeled. She thought she
saw the veined wings of Nink, flying overhead and
away.
A hand appeared on the mother’s shoulder from
behind, drawing her back. The din faded from Adari’s
mind. She looked up to see—Zhari Vaal?
No, she realized, as her teary eyes focused. Another
of the strangely clad figures, but short and stocky like
her husband. She had once imagined Zhari at the bottom of the sea, his rich mauve color drained. This man
was paler still, but his dark shock of hair and reddish
brown eyes gave him a confident, compelling look. She
had seen him before, on the mountain. She had heard
him before, on the wind.
“Korsin,” he said, simultaneously in her mind and
with a voice as soothing as her grandfather’s. He gestured to himself. “I am called Korsin.”
Blackness closed around her.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

6/4/09

Chapter Three

On her third day among the newcomers, Adari
learned to talk.
She’d spent the first full day after the terrifying
encounter asleep, if that was the right term for a feverish, nightmare slumber interrupted by brief patches of
delirium. Several times, she’d opened her eyes only to
shut them quickly on seeing the strangers hovering
around her.
But they were tending to her, not harassing her—as
she’d found the second morning, awakening between
an impossibly soft blanket and the rough ground. The
newcomers had found a secluded dry spot for her, with
several figures sitting vigil. Adari had drunk the water
they offered, but it didn’t restore her voice. Her head
still rang, her mind bruised by the earlier assault. None
of her vocabulary came when called. She had forgotten
how to speak.
Korsin was sitting with her when she finally remembered. He’d called over Hestus, a rust-colored figure with
a shining mask covering part of his acid-scarred face. It
almost looked like it was part of his face—various bits
hiding under his skin. Adari had flinched in fear, but
Hestus had simply sat calmly, listening as Korsin tried to
talk with her.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

20

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

And they talked. Awkwardly, at first, with Hestus
piping in occasionally to repeat a new Keshiri word she
had said, followed by his own language’s equivalent.
Adari had marveled. The Keshiri words Hestus spoke
sounded exactly like what she’d said—in her own
voice, even. Korsin had explained that Hestus’s “special
ear” gave him that talent, helping to speed along the
exchange of information.
Adari was interested in that exchange, but most of
the information had gone the other way. She gathered
that the people Korsin led had indeed come from the
silver shell, and that it had somehow fallen from the
sky. It was also clear that, powerful as they were, they
had no means of leaving the mountain now, isolated as
it was by water and forbidding terrain. Korsin had listened with interest as she spoke about Kesh and the
Keshiri, of uvak and villages on the mainland. She’d
mentioned the Skyborn only once, before stopping in
near embarrassment. She didn’t know who the newcomers were, but she felt abashed bringing it up.
Now, on the third afternoon since her arrival, Adari
was speaking comfortably with the newcomers—and
had even picked up some words in their language herself. They were something called “Sith,” and Korsin
was “human.” She repeated the words. “You’re a good
listener,” Korsin said, encouraged. He said others had
worked with her as she slept—he did not say how—to
try to improve communications. Now they were progressing quickly, and it was not all their doing. Even
overwrought, Adari remained sharp.
“Our immediate concern, Adari Vaal,” Korsin said,
emptying a glistening pouch of powder into a cup for
her, “must be to reach the mainland.” There wasn’t
food or shelter enough for his people here, and the
mountain had sheer drop-offs to the sea below. Her
uvak might have provided an exit for someone, but

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

21

Nink, as fearful of the newcomers as he was of the
mountain’s native wildlife, had spent the last few days
far out of reach, above.
Drinking the broth—it was filling, not unlike her mother’s stew, she thought—Adari wrestled with the problem.
Nink might come when she called, but only if she was
standing in the open, alone. She could fly to land and
return with help. “I couldn’t take any riders, though.”
Nink might not appear if she was accompanied, and a
novice rider could never carry a passenger in any event.
“I’d have to go alone. But I’d return as soon as I could.”
“She will not!”
Adari knew the voice before she even looked up. The
screamer. The mother of the small child charged toward
the smoldering campfire. “She will abandon us!”
Korsin rose and took the woman aside. Adari heard
heated words exchanged, unfamiliar ones. But in bidding the woman away, he spoke words Adari did recognize: “We are her deliverance, and she is ours.”
Adari watched the woman, still glaring at her from
afar. “She doesn’t like me.”
“Seelah?” Korsin shrugged. “She’s concerned over
her mate—lost from the crash site. And with a child,
she’s anxious to leave this mountain.” He smiled, offering to help Adari stand. “As a mother, I’m sure you
understand.”
Adari gulped. She hadn’t mentioned her children.
She’d barely even thought about them since she arrived
among the newcomers, she realized. Shaking her head
in guilt, she revealed something else: that the Keshiri
might not listen to her.
Korsin seemed unsurprised—and unruffled. “You’re
smart, Adari. You’ll make them listen.” He gently
wrapped her shoulders with the azure blanket she’d
slept beneath. “Keep this,” he said. “The sun’s setting
soon. It could be a cold ride.”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

22

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

Adari looked around. Seelah stood in silent fury,
unmoved from before. The others Korsin had introduced eyed their leader nervously; red tentacle-jowled
Ravilan exchanged a worried look with Hestus. Even
the hulking Gloyd, who, despite his brutish appearance, was clearly Korsin’s greatest ally here, shifted
uncomfortably. But no one barred her from leaving
their campsite.
When a strong hand did stop her at the edge of the
clearing, she was surprised to see whose it was:
Korsin’s. “About the Keshiri,” Korsin said. “You told
us about Tahv, your town—it sounds a good size. But
how many are the Keshiri? How many Keshiri are there
in all, I mean?”
Adari answered immediately. “We’re numberless.”
“Ah,” Korsin said, his posture softening. “You mean
they have never been counted.”
“No,” Adari said. “I mean, we don’t have a number
that large.”
Korsin froze, his grip on her arm tightening. His dark
eyes, slightly smaller than a Keshiri’s, focused on the
wilderness beyond. She’d never seen him unnerved. If
this was it, it lasted less than a second before he stepped
back.
“Before you leave,” he said, finding a tree to lean
against, “tell me what you know about the Skyborn.”
Korsin had called the vessel he arrived in Omen. The
word not only existed in the Keshiri tongue, but was a
long-held favorite of the Neshtovar. Watching what
was happening now on the plaza known as the Circle
Eternal, Adari guessed even the uvak-riding chiefs were
realizing the irony.
She had returned to Korsin after a single day, one full
week after Omen had collided with the mountain—and
with her life. It had been a simple matter for her to

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

23

attract the uvak-riders there; as soon as the patrols
spotted her and Nink, they followed the whole way to
the Cetajan Range. The place had been the scene for
several surprises in recent times, but none trumped the
moment when the Neshtovar came upon Adari standing defiantly amid 240 supportive visitors from above,
almost every one signaling his or her presence with a
glowing ruby lightsaber. She didn’t have one of the
strange devices, but she glowed just the same from
within. Adari Vaal, collector of rocks and enemy of
order was now Adari Vaal, discoverer and rescuer;
answerer of the mountain’s call.
Add “prophet” to that, she thought as she watched
the dozen score visitors—some hobbling from their
ordeal—enter the Circle Eternal. They passed between
gawking, silent crowds of Keshiri, many of the same
people from her door the week before. Ahead in the
Circle, all the Neshtovar in the region were present,
more than she’d ever seen. Three days of aerial rescue
operations had brought the newcomers off the mountain, days in which the word had gone out far into the
hinterlands.
The Skyborn had arrived on Kesh.
No lesser reason could explain why the riders compliantly took their positions not in the Circle Eternal
itself, but along the raised perimeter. The villagers had
watched Adari’s hearing from here; now the Neshtovar
were watching her in the Circle, marching along behind
Korsin. Behind them, the visitors filed in, forming their
own inner perimeter over which the Neshtovar strained
to see.
Izri Dazh looked small, standing beneath the column three times his height that served as the sundial’s
gnomon. Normally, it made him seem larger. Not
today. He limped forward and greeted Korsin and
company with mawkish words of praise before turn-

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

24

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

ing to the audience. Straining to see over the line of
visitors, Izri made the declaration official. These were
the Skyborn, he said, come down from the very
mountain from which their servants had brought
back the law centuries earlier. It wasn’t the same
mountain, Adari knew; perhaps the texts would be
changed later. But Izri ignored that detail for now.
The visitors had established their identities to the satisfaction of all of the Neshtovar, he said.
“You didn’t believe them when they levitated your
cane,” Adari whispered, unable to resist.
“That ended when they levitated me,” Izri rasped,
under his breath. He turned back to see the villagers
cheering—not for his proclamation, but for Yaru
Korsin, Grand Lord of the Skyborn, who had just
physically leapt the distance to the top of the column.
When the cheering finally died down, Korsin spoke in
the Keshiri words that his interlocutor, the honored
Adari Vaal, Daughter of the Skyborn, had taught him
that morning. “We have come from above, as you say,”
he said, deep voice carrying to all. “We have come to
visit the land that was a piece of us, and the people of
that land. And Kesh has welcomed us.”
More cheering. “We will found . . . a temple atop the
mountain of discovery,” he continued. “We will be
many months in labors there, tending to the vessel that
brought us and communing with the heavens. And in
that time, we will make our home here in Tahv, with
our children—aided by the Neshtovar, who were such
good stewards here in our absence. They will leave here
today, taking wing to all corners of Kesh, to spread the
word of our arrival, and find the artisans we require.”
He spoke over the applause. “We are the Skyborn—and
we will return to the stars!”
Happy chaos. Adari’s younger son, Tona, squirmed

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

25

against her. She spied her mother and Finn at an honored place just outside the Circle, beaming happily.
Adari looked up at Korsin—and swallowed hard.
It was all so perfect.
And all so wrong.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

6/4/09

Chapter Four

The rapturous mood of the Kesh lasted straight
through Moving Day. The Skyborn had been quartered
in the fine homes of the Neshtovar while the riders
spread the word. As the Neshtovar returned one by
one, their guests uniformly declared their preference to
remain in the relatively sumptuous accommodations.
After the sixth rider appealed to Izri, the elder declared
that all riders should move their families to humbler
homes, that the Skyborn might know their devotion.
Korsin and Seelah had been living in Izri’s own house
since the first day.
Everyone moved but Adari. For her service to the
Skyborn, she’d been allowed to remain in Zhari’s
house. It also kept her near Korsin, whom she saw
daily in her informal role as ambassador and aide. She
saw all the prominent Skyborn daily: gruff but amiable
Gloyd, who was something called a Houk; Hestus,
busily indexing the Keshiri vocabulary; and rust-colored
Ravilan, who often seemed lost, a minority within a
minority. She also saw Seelah, who had installed herself
in Korsin’s lavish lodgings. Seelah’s child was Korsin’s
nephew, Adari learned.
Seelah always glowered at Adari when she was
around Korsin. Including today, as Adari stood with

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

27

him at a dig on the edge of the Cetajan Range, in sight
of the ocean she fled to a month before. The Skyborn
needed structures to stabilize and protect Omen, but
first they needed a clear land passage onto the peninsula.
A route was taking shape with the Skyborn, whose
number included many miners, hewing huge chunks of
strata with their lightsabers.
“Sabers’ll do better when we recover some of the
Lignan crystals to power them,” Gloyd said. Korsin
presented a rock sample to Adari. Granite. The efforts
were not for her, of course, but she’d always wondered
what was below. Now she knew.
“You were right after all,” Korsin said, watching her
study the stone. She hadn’t mentioned her conflict with
the Neshtovar, but she’d been anxious to confirm her
theories with someone who knew. Volcanos did form
new land. And the mountains of the Cetajan Range
weren’t volcanoes—while granite did come from
magma, they told her, it was formed far underground
over the course of eons. That was why its rocks looked
different from the flamestones. “I don’t understand half
what my miners tell me,” Korsin said, “but they say you
could easily help them—if you weren’t helping me.”
Korsin began speaking with Gloyd about their next
project, a dig to find metals necessary to repair Omen.
Adari started to interject when she saw Seelah orbiting.
Adari shuddered as the woman passed from sight.
What had Adari done to earn such hatred?
She’s not staring at me, Adari realized. She’s staring
at Korsin.
“I saw you,” Adari blurted to Korsin.
“What?”
“I saw you a second time on the mountain, that day.
You threw something over the side.”
Korsin turned from his work. He gestured—and
Gloyd stepped away.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

28

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

“I saw you throw something,” Adari said, swallowing. She looked down at the ocean, crashing against the
cliffs. “I didn’t know what—until you sent me to return
to the village.” Korsin stepped warily toward her. Adari
couldn’t stop talking. “I flew down there, Korsin. I saw
him below, on the rocks. He was a man,” she said, “like
you.”
“Like me?” Korsin snorted. “Is . . . he still there?”
She shook her head. “I turned him over to look at
him,” she said. “The tide swept him away.”
Korsin was her height, but as she shrank, he loomed.
“You saw this—and yet you still brought the Neshtovar
to find us.”
Adari froze, unable to answer. She looked at the
rocks, far below, so like the ones farther up the range.
Korsin reached for her as he had before . . .
. . . and drew back. His voice softened. “Your people
turned on you to protect their society. You were a danger?”
How did he know? Adari looked up at Korsin. He
looked less like Zhari all the time. “I believed something they didn’t.”
Korsin smiled and took her hand gently. “That’s a
fight my people are familiar with. That man you saw—
he was a danger to our society.”
“But he was your brother.”
Korsin’s grip tightened for a moment before he let go
altogether. “You are a good listener,” he said, straightening. The fact wouldn’t have been hard to learn. “Yes,
he was my brother. But he was a danger—and we had
dangers enough when you found us,” he said. He
looked deeply into her eyes. “And I think this is something you know something about, Adari. That same sea
took someone from you, too. Didn’t it?”
Adari’s mouth opened. How? Zhari had died there,
but the Neshtovar would never have told Korsin.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

29

Speaking of a rider’s fall broke their greatest taboo:
falling was being claimed by the Otherside. No one had
seen it happen, save for Nink—and the all-seeing
Skyborn.
Korsin was either a mind reader, or he was who he
said he was. Her words barely came out. “It—it’s not
the same. You pushed that man. I didn’t have anything
to do with what happened to my—”
“Of course you didn’t. Accidents happen. But you
didn’t mind that he died,” he said. “I can see it in you,
Adari. He was a danger to you—to the person you’re
becoming.” Korsin’s bushy eyebrows turned up.
“You’re glad he’s gone.”
Adari closed her eyes. Putting his arm around her
shoulder, Korsin turned her toward the sun. “It’s all
right, Adari. Among the Sith, there is no shame in it.
You would never be what you are today with him keeping you down. Just as you’d never be what you’re going
to become with Izri Dazh keeping you down.”
At the name, Adari’s eyes opened. The sunlight dazzled
her, but Korsin wouldn’t let her turn away. “You were
afraid of us,” he said, “and afraid when you saw the
body. You knew we’d die on the mountain if you didn’t
bring help. Yet you brought the Neshtovar anyway—
because you thought we could help you against them.”
He released her. Adari looked blankly at the sun for
another moment before looking away. Behind her,
Korsin spoke in the soothing tones he’d used when his
voice had first reached her on the wind.
“Helping us interact with the Keshiri is not just about
helping us, Adari. You will learn things about your
world that you never imagined.” He turned over the
rock in her hand. “I don’t know how long we’re going
to be here, but I promise you will learn more in the next
few months than you have in your entire lifetime. Than
any Keshiri has.”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

30

6/4/09

John Jackson Miller

Adari shook. “What—what do you—”
“A simple thing. Forget what you saw that day.”
Korsin made good on his word. In her first months
with the Skyborn, Adari had learned much about her
home. But she had also learned some things about
where they had come from, and who they were. She
was a good listener. By simple things, we know the
world.
Korsin’s Sith were the beings from above that she
denied—but they weren’t the gods of Keshiri legend.
Not exactly. They had amazing powers, and perhaps
they lived in the stars. But they didn’t bleed sand, and
they weren’t perfect. They argued. They envied. They
killed.
The Sith did read minds, to a degree. Korsin had used
that to call out to her for help after seeing her in the air.
But they weren’t omniscient. She’d found that out with
a simple, surreptitious experiment involving Ravilan.
She’d suggested he visit a restaurant deep in Tahv’s
busiest quarter. Off he went, getting lost in the same
neighborhood she always got lost in. The Sith’s perceptive powers were amazing, but they still required accurate knowledge from others.
She sought to provide that, accompanying Korsin to
many work sites, mostly employing jovial Keshiri
laborers. The Skyborn were perfect enough for the
Keshiri—and perfect enough for her. Yaru Korsin was
as far beyond Zhari Vaal in intellect as she was above
the rocks, and as long as she learned to avoid the eye of
Seelah, another widow of a fallen man, she could
expect to learn a great deal more.
At the same time her knowledge advanced, Izri’s faith
was further glorified. She took little joy in that, apart
from the occasional chuckle she got from having a
more storied role in it than he had. She was the

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Lost Tribe of the Sith: Skyborn

6/4/09

31

Discoverer, always to be remembered by Keshiri society. No one would remember Izri.
Watching another quarry being constructed, she
wondered what that society would look like. She
knew something the Sith didn’t: They’d be here for a
long time. She’d mentioned it once to a miner, who
promptly discounted it as advice from the local knownothings.
But she knew. The metals the Sith sought weren’t in
the soil of Kesh. Scholars had scoured every part of the
continent. They had recorded what they’d found. If the
substances Korsin’s people required hid farther beneath
the surface, it would take time to find them—a lot more
time.
Time, the Sith had.
What, she wondered, would the Keshiri have?

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

6/4/09

Read on for an excerpt from

Star Wars: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss
by Troy Denning
Published by Del Rey Books

In the Jade Shadow’s forward canopy hung twin
black holes, their perfect darkness surrounded by fiery
whorls of accretion gas. Because the Shadow was
approaching at an angle, the two holes had the oblong
appearance of a pair of fire-rimmed eyes—and Ben
Skywalker was half tempted to believe that’s what they
were. He had begun to feel like he was being watched
the instant he and his father had entered the Maw
cluster, and the deeper they advanced, the stronger the
sensation grew. Now, at the very heart of the concentration of black holes, the feeling was a constant chill
at the base of his skull.
“I sense it, too,” his father said. He was sitting
behind Ben in the copilot’s seat, up on the primary
flight deck. “We’re not alone in here.”
No longer surprised that the Grand Master of the
Jedi Order always seemed to know his thoughts, Ben
glanced at an activation reticle in the front of the cockpit. A small section of canopy opaqued into a mirror,
and he saw his father’s reflection staring out the side of
the canopy. Luke Skywalker looked more alone and
pensive than Ben ever remembered seeing him—
thoughtful, but not sad or frightened, as though he
were merely trying to understand what had brought

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss

6/4/09

33

him to such a dark and isolated place, banished from
an Order he had founded, and exiled from a society he
had spent his life fighting to defend.
Trying not to dwell on the injustice of the situation,
Ben said, “So maybe we’re closing in. Not that I’m all
that eager to meet a bunch of beings called the Mind
Drinkers.”
His father thought for a moment, then said, “Well,
I am.”
He didn’t elaborate, and he didn’t need to. Ben and
his father were on a mission to retrace Jacen Solo’s fiveyear odyssey of Force exploration. At their last stop,
they had learned from an Aing-Tii monk that Jacen had
been bound for the Maw when he departed the Kathol
Rift. Since one purpose of their journey was to determine whether Jacen had been nudged toward the dark
side by something on his voyage, it only made sense
that Luke would want to investigate a mysterious
Maw-dwelling group known as the Mind Drinkers.
What impressed Ben, however, was how calm his
father seemed about it all. Ben was privately terrified of
falling victim to the same darkness that had claimed his
cousin. Yet his father seemed eager to step into its depth
and strike a flame. And why shouldn’t he be? After
everything that Luke Skywalker had suffered and
achieved in his lifetime, there was no power in the
galaxy that could draw him into darkness. It was a
strength that both awed Ben and inspired him, one that
he wondered if he would ever find himself.
Luke’s eyes shifted toward the mirrored canopy section,
and he caught Ben’s gaze. “Is this what bothered you
when you were at Shelter?” He was referring to a time
that was ancient history to Ben—the last part of the war
with the Yuuzhan Vong, when the Jedi had been forced to
hide their young at a secret base deep inside the Maw.
“Did you feel like someone was watching you?”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

34

6/4/09

Troy Denning

“How should I know?” Ben asked, suddenly
uneasy—and unsure why. By all accounts, he had been
an unruly, withdrawn toddler while he was at Shelter,
and he recalled being afraid of the Force for years afterward. But he had no clear memories of Shelter itself, or
what it had felt like to be there. “I was two.”
“You did have feelings when you were two,” his
father said mildly. “You did have a mind.”
Ben sighed, knowing what his father wanted, then
said, “You’d better take the ship.”
“I have the ship,” Luke confirmed, reaching for the
copilot’s yoke. “Just close your eyes. Let the Force carry
your thoughts back to Shelter.”
“I know how to meditate.” Almost instantly, Ben felt
bad for grumbling and added, “But thanks for the
advice.”
“Don’t mention it,” Luke said in a good-natured
way. “That’s what fathers do—offer unwanted advice.”
Ben closed his eyes and began to breathe slowly and
deliberately. Each time he inhaled, he drew the Force
into himself, and each time he exhaled, he sent it flowing throughout his body. He had no conscious memories
of Shelter that were his own, so he envisioned a holograph of the facility that he had seen in the Jedi Archives.
The image showed a handful of habitation modules
clinging to the surface of an asteroid fragment, their
domes clustered around the looming cylinder of a power
core. In his mind’s eye, Ben descended into the gaudy
yellow docking bay at the edge of the facility . . . and
then he was two years old again, a frightened little boy
holding a stranger’s hand as his parents departed in the
Jade Shadow.
An unwarranted sense of relief welled up inside Ben
as he grew lost in a time when life had seemed so much
easier. The last fourteen years began to feel like a long,
terrible nightmare. Jacen’s fall to the dark side had

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss

6/4/09

35

never happened, Ben had not been molded into an adolescent assassin, and his mother had not died fighting
Jacen. All those sad memories were still just bad
dreams, the unhappy imaginings of a frightened young
mind.
Then the Shadow slipped through the containment
field and ignited her engines. In the blink of an eye she
dwindled from a trio of blue ion circles into a pinpoint
of light to nothing at all, and suddenly Ben was alone
in the darkest place in the galaxy, one child among
dozens entrusted to a small group of worried adults
who—despite their cheerful voices and reassuring presences—had very clammy palms and scary, anxious eyes.
Two-year-old Ben reached toward the Shadow with
his free hand and his heart, and he sensed his mother
and father reaching back. Though he was too young to
know he was being touched through the Force, he
stopped being afraid . . . until a dark tentacle of need
began to slither up into the aching tear of his abandonment. He thought for an instant that he was just sad
about being left behind, but the tentacle grew as real as
his breath, and he began to sense in it an alien loneliness as desperate and profound as his own. It wanted
to draw him close and keep him safe, to take the place
of his parents and never let him be alone again.
Terrified and confused, young Ben pulled away,
simultaneously drawing in on himself and yanking his
hand from the grasp of the silver-haired lady who was
holding it.
Then suddenly he was back in the cockpit of the Jade
Shadow, staring into the fire-rimmed voids ahead.
Scattered around their perimeter were the smaller
whorls of half a dozen more distant rings, their fiery
light burning bright and steady against the starless
murk of the deep Maw.
“Well?” his father asked. “Anything feel familiar?”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

36

6/4/09

Troy Denning

Ben swallowed. He wasn’t sure why, but he found
himself wanting to withdraw from the Force all over
again. “Are we sure we need to find these guys?”
Luke raised a brow. “So it is familiar.”
“Maybe.” Ben couldn’t say whether the two feelings
were related, and at the moment he didn’t care. There
was something hungry in the Maw, something that
would still be there waiting for him. “I mean, the AingTii call them Mind Drinkers. That can’t be good.”
“Ben, you’re changing the subject.” Luke’s tone was
more interested than disapproving, as though Ben’s
behavior were only one part of a much larger puzzle.
“Is there something you don’t want to talk about?”
“I wish.” Ben told his father about the dark tentacle
that had reached out to him after the Shadow departed
Shelter so many years ago. “I guess what we’re feeling
now might be related. There was definitely
some . . . thing keeping tabs on me at Shelter.”
Luke considered this for a moment, then shook his
head. “You were pretty attached to your mother.
Maybe you were just feeling abandoned and made up a
‘friend’ to take her place.”
“A tentacle friend?”
“You said it was a dark tentacle,” Luke continued
thoughtfully, “and guilt is a dark emotion. Maybe you
were feeling guilty about replacing us with an imaginary friend.”
“And maybe you don’t want to believe the tentacle
was real because it would mean you left your two-yearold son someplace really dangerous,” Ben countered.
He caught his father’s eye in the mirrored section again.
“I hope you’re not going to try to psychoanalyze this
away, because there’s a big hole in your theory.”
Luke frowned. “And that would be?”
“I was two,” Ben reminded him. “And by all accounts,
I didn’t feel guilty about anything at that age.”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss

6/4/09

37

Luke grinned. “Good point, but I still don’t think we
should worry too much about this tentacle monster of
yours.”
“It’s not my tentacle monster,” Ben retorted, miffed
at having his concerns mocked. “You’re the one who
made me dredge it up.”
Luke’s expression hardened into admonishment.
“But you’re the one who’s still afraid of it.”
The observation struck home. Whether or not the
dark presence he remembered was real, he had emerged
from Shelter wary of abandonment and frightened of
the Force. And it had been those fears that had allowed
Jacen to lead him into darkness.
Ben sighed. “Right. Whatever this thing is, I’ve got to
face it.” After a moment, he asked, “So how do we find
these Mind Drinkers?”
“ ‘The Path of True Enlightenment runs through the
Chasm of Perfect Darkness.’ ” Luke was quoting
Tadar’Ro, the Aing-Tii monk who had told them that
Jacen had left the Kathol Rift to search out the Mind
Drinkers. “ ‘The way is narrow and treacherous, but if
you can follow it, you will find what you seek.’ ”
Ben swung his gaze toward the black holes ahead. The
brilliant whorls of their accretion disks were burning
hottest and brightest along their inner rims, where a mixture of in-falling gas and dust was being compressed to
unimaginable densities as it vanished into the sharpedged darkness of twin event horizons.
“Wait. Tadar’Ro said perfect darkness, right?” Ben
started to have a bad feeling about the monk’s instructions. “Like, beyond an event horizon?”
“Actually, it’s probably very bright on the way down
a black hole,” Luke pointed out. “Just because gravity
is too strong for light to escape doesn’t mean it can’t
exist, and there’s all that gas compressing and glowing
as it’s sucked deeper and deeper.”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

38

6/4/09

Troy Denning

“Yeah, but you’re dead,” Ben said, “and everything
is dark when you’re dead. Still, I see what you mean. I
doubt Tadar’Ro expects us to fly down a black hole.”
“No, not down one.”
There was just enough anxiety in Luke’s voice to
make Ben glance into the mirrored section again. His
father was frowning out at the two black holes, staring
into the fiery cloud between them and looking just
worried enough to twist Ben’s stomach into a cold
knot.
“Between them?” Ben could see what his father was
thinking, and it didn’t make him happy. In any system
of two large bodies, there were five areas where the
centrifugal and gravitational forces would neutralize
each other and hold a smaller body—such as a satellite
or asteroid—in perpetual equilibrium. Of those five
locations, only one was directly between the two bodies. “You mean Stable Zone One?”
Luke nodded. “The Chasm of Perfect Darkness is an
ancient Ashla parable referring to the twin perils of ego
and ignorance,” he explained. “The Tythonians spoke
of it as a deep dark canyon flanked by high, evercrumbling cliffs.”
“So life is the chasm, darkness is falling all around,”
Ben said, taking an educated guess as to the parable’s
meaning, “and the only way to stay in the light is to go
down the middle.”
Luke smiled. “You’ve got a real feeling for mystic
guidance.” He lifted his hands away from the yoke.
“You have the ship, son.”
“Me? Now?” Ben considered pointing out that his
father was by far the better pilot—but that wasn’t the
issue, of course. If Ben was going to face his fears, he
needed to handle the flying himself. He swallowed
hard, squared his shoulders, then confirmed, “I have
the ship.”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss

6/4/09

39

Ben deactivated the mirror panel and accelerated
toward the black holes. As the Shadow drew closer,
their dark orbs rapidly began to swell and drift toward
opposite sides of the cockpit, until all that could be seen
of them were tall slivers of darkness hanging along the
rear edges of the canopy. Ahead lay a fiery confluence
of superheated gas, swirling in from two different directions and so bright it hurt Ben’s eyes even through the
Shadow’s blast-tinting.
He checked the primary display and found only
bright static; the navigation sensors were awash in electromagnetic blast from compressing gas. The Shadow’s
internal sensors were working just fine, however, and
they showed the ship’s hull temperature rising rapidly
as they penetrated the cloud. It wouldn’t take long for
that to become dangerous, Ben knew. Soon the fierce
heat inside the accretion disk would start fouling guidance systems and control relays. Eventually, it would
compromise hull integrity.
“Dad, how about doing something with those sensor
filters?” Ben asked. “My navigational readings are
snow.”
“Adjusting the filters won’t change anything,” Luke
said calmly. “We’re flying between a pair of black holes,
remember?”
Ben exhaled in exasperation, then cursed under his
breath and continued to stare out into the fiery ribbons
ahead. At best, he could make out a confluence zone
where the two accretion disks were brushing against
each other, and the painful brilliance made it difficult to
tell even that much.
“How am I supposed to navigate?” Ben complained.
“I can’t see anything.”
Luke remained silent.
Ben felt the hint of disapproval in his father’s Force
aura and experienced a flash of rebellion. He let out a

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

40

6/4/09

Troy Denning

cleansing breath, allowing the feeling to run its course
and depart on a cushion of stale air, then saw how he
had been blinded by his anxiety over the navigation
difficulties.
“Oh . . . right,” Ben said, feeling more than a little
foolish. “Trust the Force.”
“No worries,” Luke said, sounding amused. “The
first time I tried something this crazy, I had to be
reminded, too.”
“Well, at least I have an excuse.” Ben took the navigation sensors offline so the static wouldn’t interfere
with his concentration. “It’s hard to focus with your
dad looking over your shoulder.”
Luke’s crash webbing clicked open. “In that case,
maybe I should get some—”
“Who are you kidding?” Ben shoved the yoke over,
flipping the Shadow into a tight barrel roll. “You just
want to bite your nails in private.”
“The thought hadn’t crossed my mind,” Luke said,
dropping back into his seat. “Until now, ungrateful offspring.”
Ben laughed, then leveled out and checked the hull
temperature. It was climbing even faster than he had
feared. He closed his eyes and—hoping the gas was not
so thick that friction would aggravate the problem—
shoved the throttles forward.
It did not take long before Ben began to sense a calm
place a little to port. He adjusted course and extended
his Force awareness in that direction, then started to
feel a strange, nebulous presence that reminded him of
something he could not quite place—of something dark
and diffuse, spread across a great distance.
Ben opened his eyes again. “Dad, do you feel—”
“Yes, like the Killiks,” Luke said. “We might be dealing with a hive-mind.”
A cold shudder was already racing down Ben’s spine.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss

6/4/09

41

His father had barely uttered the word Killiks before
the memory of his stint as an unwilling Gorog Joiner
came flooding back, and for the second time in less
than an hour he found himself desperately wanting to
withdraw from the Force. Gorog had been a dark side
nest, secretly controlling the entire Killik civilization
while it fed on captured Chiss, and Ben had fallen
under its sway for a short time when he was only five.
It had been the most terrifying and confusing time of
his childhood, and had Jacen not recognized what was
happening and helped Ben find his way back to the
Force and his true family, he doubted very much that he
would have been able to break free at all.
Thankfully, the presence ahead was not all that similar to Gorog’s. There was certainly a darkness to it, and
it was clearly composed of many different beings joined
together across a vast distance—most of space ahead,
really. But the distribution seemed more mottled than a
Killik hive-mind, as though dozens of distinct individuals were joined together in something vaguely similar to
a battle-meld.
Ben was about to clarify his impressions for his
father when a familiar presence began to slither up
inside him. It was cold and condemning, like a friend
betrayed, and he could feel how angry it was about
the intrusion into its lair. The Force grew stormy and
foreboding, and an electric prickle of danger sense
raced down Ben’s spine. He could feel the darkness
gathering against him, trying to push him away, and
that only hardened his resolve to finally face the
specter. He opened himself up, grabbed hold in the
Force, and began to pull.
The presence jerked back, then tried to shrink away.
It was too late. Ben already had a firm grasp, and he
was determined to follow it back to its physical location. He checked the hull temperature and saw that it

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

42

6/4/09

Troy Denning

was hovering in the yellow danger zone. Then he
focused his attention forward and saw—actually
saw—a thumbnail-sized darkness tunneling through
the swirling fires ahead. He pointed their nose toward
the black oval, then shoved the throttles to the overload stops and watched the fiery ribbons of gas
stream past the cockpit.
The ribbons grew brighter and more deeply colored
as the ship penetrated the accretion disk, and soon the
gas grew so dense that the Shadow began to buck and
shudder in its turbulence. Ben held on tight to the
yoke . . . and to the dark presence he was clasping in
the Force.
His father’s voice sounded behind him. “Uh, Ben?”
“It’s okay, Dad,” Ben said. “I’ve got an approach
lane.”
“A what?” Luke sounded genuinely surprised. “I
hope you realize the hull temperature is almost into the
red.”
“Dad!” Ben snapped. “Will you please let me concentrate?”
Luke fell silent for a moment, then exhaled loudly.
“Ben, the gas here is too dense for these velocities.
We’re practically flying through an atmo—”
“Your idea,” Ben interrupted. The black oval swelled
to the size of a fist. “Trust me!”
“Ben, trust me doesn’t work for Jedi the way it does
for your uncle Han. We don’t have his luck.”
“Maybe that would change if we trusted it more
often,” Ben retorted.
The black oval continued to expand until it was the
size of a hatch. Ben fought the turbulence and somehow kept the Shadow’s nose pointed toward it, then
the ship was inside the darkness, flying smooth and
surrounded by a dim cone of orange radiance. Startled
by the abrupt transition and struggling to adjust to the

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss

6/4/09

43

sudden change of light, Ben feared for an instant that
the dark presence had led him off-course—perhaps
even out of the accretion disks altogether.
Then the cone of orange began to simultaneously
compress and fade, becoming a dark tunnel, and a far
worse possibility occurred to him.
“Say, Dad, would we know if we were flying down a
black hole?”
“Probably not,” Luke said. “The time–space distortion would make the journey last forever, at least relative to Coruscant-standard time. Why do you ask?”
“Oh, no reason,” Ben said, deciding not to alarm his
father any more than necessary. If he had flown them
past an event horizon, it was too late to do anything
about it now. “Just curious.”
Luke laughed, then said, “Relax, Ben. We’re not flying
down a black hole—but will you please slow down? If
you keep this up, you really are going to melt the hull.”
Ben glanced at his display and frowned. The hull
temperature had climbed into the critical zone, which
made no sense at all. The surrounding darkness and the
lack of turbulence meant they were no longer being
blasted by heat from the accretion disk. The hull ought
to be cooling rapidly, and if it wasn’t . . .
Ben jerked the throttles back and was pitched
against his crash webbing as friction instantly began to
slow the Shadow. The area surrounding them wasn’t
dark because it was empty—it was dark because it
was filled with cold matter. They had entered Stable
Zone One, where gas, dust, and who-knew-what-else
was floating in limbo between the two black holes.
Worried that they weren’t decelerating fast enough, he
used the maneuvering thrusters to slow the ship down
even further . . . then realized that during the excitement, he had lost contact with the dark presence he
had been using as a reluctant guide.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

44

6/4/09

Troy Denning

“Blast,” Ben said. He expanded his Force awareness
again, but felt only the same meldlike presence he had
sensed earlier—and it was too diffuse to be much of a
navigation beacon. “We’re back to flying blind. I can’t
feel anything useful now.”
“That’s not really a problem,” Luke pointed out.
“There’s only one place in here where anything can
have a permanent habitat.”
Ben nodded. “Right.”
Stable Zone One wasn’t actually very stable. Even the
slightest perturbation would start a mass on a long,
slow fall into one of the adjacent gravity wells.
Therefore, anything permanently located inside the
zone could only be at the precise center, because that
was the only place where the forces were in absolute
equilibrium.
Ben brought the navigation sensors back up. This time,
the screen showed nothing but a small fan of light at the
bottom, rapidly fading to darkness as the signals were
obscured by cold gas and dust. He activated the Shadow’s
forward flood lamps and continued onward. The beams
tunneled ahead for perhaps a kilometer before vanishing
into the black fog of dust and gas. Ben decelerated even
further, then adjusted headings until all external forces
affecting the Shadow’s travel vector were exactly zero,
and set a waypoint. Theoretically, at least, they were now
on course for the heart of the stable zone.
When Ben shifted his attention forward again, he saw
a blue fleck of debris floating in the light beam ahead.
He instantly fired the maneuvering thrusters to decelerate again, but in space, even a relative creep was a
velocity of hundreds of kilometers an hour, and they
covered half the distance to the object before the
Shadow responded.
Instead of the stony boulder or ice ball that Ben had
expected, the object turned out to be a young Duros.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss

6/4/09

45

Ben could tell that he was a Duros because he wasn’t
wearing a pressure helmet, and his blue, noseless face
and big red eyes were clearly visible above the collar of
a standard Jedi-issue flight suit. Hanging on his shoulder was what, at that distance, appeared to be a
portable missile launcher.
“Dad?” Ben asked. “Are you seeing this?”
“Duros, no helmet?”
“Right.”
Luke nodded. “Then yes, I—”
The Duros was silhouetted by a white flash, and the
silver halo of an oncoming missile began to swell in
front of the Shadow’s cockpit. Ben shoved the yoke forward and hit the thrusters, but even a Jedi’s reflexes
weren’t that quick. A metallic bang echoed through the
hull, and damage alarms began to shriek and blink. In
almost the same instant, the Duros and the missile
launcher floated past mere meters above the cockpit,
and the muffled thud of an impact sounded from far
back in the stern.
“Definitely no hallucination,” Luke commented.
“Dad, that looked like—”
“Qwallo Mode, I know,” Luke replied. Mode was a
young Jedi Knight who had disappeared on a standard
courier run about a year earlier. When an exhaustive
search had failed to find any trace of him, the Masters
had finally concluded that he had perished. “He’s a
long way from the Tapani sector.”
“Assuming that was Qwallo.” Ben extended his
Force awareness behind them, but did not sense any
hint of the Jedi’s presence. “Should I make another
sweep to see if we can recover him?”
Luke thought for a moment, then shook his head.
“Even if he’s still alive, let’s not give him another shot
at the Shadow. Before we start taking those kinds of
chances, we need to figure out what’s going on here.”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

46

6/4/09

Troy Denning

“Yeah,” Ben agreed. “Like how come he didn’t need
a helmet.”
“And how he got here in the first place—and why
he’s shooting at us.” Luke clicked out of his crash webbing, then added, “I’ll handle the damage. If you see
anyone else floating around with a missile launcher and
no pressure suit, don’t ask questions, just—”
“Open fire.” Ben deployed the blaster cannons, then
checked the damage display and saw that they were
bleeding both air and hyperdrive coolant. To make
matters worse, the yoke was sticking, and that could
mean a lot of things—none of them good. “Got it.
We’ve taken enough damage.”
Ben switched his threat array to the primary display.
At the top of the screen, the gray form of a mass shadow was clarifying out of the darkness. A yellow
number-bar was adding tons to the mass estimate faster
than the eye could follow, but he was alarmed to see
that it was already into the high five digits and climbing toward six. There was no indication yet of the
object’s overall shape or energy output, but the tonnage
alone suggested something at least as large as an assault
carrier.
Unsure whether it was better to slow down to prevent
a collision or accelerate to avoid being an easy target,
Ben started to weave and bob. There was just a vague
hint of danger tickling the base of his skull, but that
only meant nothing had set its sights on the Shadow
yet.
On the third bob downward, the yoke jammed forward and wouldn’t come back. Ben cursed and tried to
muscle it, but he was fighting the hydraulic system, and
if he fought it too hard, he would break a control cable.
He hit the emergency pressure release, dumping the
control system’s entire reservoir into space, and then
checked his threat array again.

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss

6/4/09

47

The mass ahead was no longer a shadow. A silvery,
elongated oval had taken shape in the middle of the display, the number-bar in its core now climbing past
seven million tons. The oval was slowly drifting toward
the bottom of the screen and shedding alphanumeric
designators, indicating the presence of a debris field and
the danger of an impending collision with the object
itself. Ben hit the maneuvering thrusters hard, and the
Shadow decelerated.
He heard a toolbox clang into the main cabin’s rear
bulkhead, and his father’s alarmed voice came over the
intercom speaker. “What did you hit?”
“Nothing yet.” Ben pulled back on the yoke, using
his own strength to force the vector plates down. “The
control yoke’s power assist is gone, and we’ve reached
a debris field.”
“What sort of debris?” his father demanded. “Ice?
Rock? Iron-nickel?”
Ben thumbed the SELECT bubble active and slid it over
to one of the designators: OBJECT B8. An instant later a
density analysis offered a 71 percent probability that
OBJECT B8 was a medium transport of unknown make
and model.
But Ben did not immediately relay the information to
his father. As the Shadow’s nose returned to its original
plane, an enormous, gray-white dome was slowly coming into view. Dropping down from above and upside
down relative to the ship, the dome hung at the base of
a large, spinning cylinder ringed by a dozen small,
attached tubes. Floating between the cylinder and the
Shadow were nearly twenty dark flecks with the
smooth lines and sharp corners suggestive of spacecraft, all drifting aimlessly and as cold as asteroids.
“Ben, you’re worrying me,” his father admonished.
“How bad is it?”
“Uh, I don’t really know yet.” As Ben spoke, the

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

48

6/4/09

Troy Denning

Shadow’s lamp beams continued to slide up the spinning cylinder, to where it joined a gray metal sphere
that looked to be about the size of one of Bespin’s
smaller floating cities. “But maybe you should come
back to the flight deck as soon as things are secure back
there.”
“Yeah,” Luke said. “I was just thinking the same
thing.”
As the lamp beams continued to reveal more of the
station—at least that’s what Ben assumed he was
looking at—he began to grow even more confused
and worried. With a second, dome-capped cylinder rising out of the sphere directly opposite the first, the
thing reminded him of a station he had helped infiltrate during the recent civil war. It didn’t seem possible
that two such structures could exist in the galaxy by
mere coincidence, or that he would have happened on
this one by mere chance even if the two were related.
He had the uneasy feeling that the Force was at play
here—or, to be more precise, that the Force was
putting him in play.
Now that they were actually in visual range of their
target, Ben brought the full suite of sensors back online
and began to investigate. To both his relief and puzzlement, all of the contacts appeared to be derelict vessels.
They ranged widely in size, from small space yachts like
the Shadow to an antiquated Tibanna tanker with a
capacity in excess of a hundred million liters. Ben did a
quick mental calculation of the total tonnage of the
abandoned ships and shuddered. If these were captured
spoils, there were some very impressive pirates hiding
around here somewhere.
Starting to envision sensor masks and ambushes, Ben
slid the Shadow into the cover of an old TGM
Marauder. The ship looked as deserted as its sensor
profile suggested, tumbling slowly with cold engines,

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

Star Wars: Fate of the Jedi: Abyss

6/4/09

49

open air locks, and no energy emanations whatsoever.
But there was no apparent combat damage, or anything
else, to suggest it had been taken by pirates.
Ben turned the sensors on the station itself and found
it marginally less derelict. Its power core was active,
but barely. A few warm areas suggested that at least
some of its atmospheric seals remained intact.
Approaching closer, he could see that three of the dark
tubes attached to the upper cylinder had come loose at
one end and were in danger of being launched away by
centrifugal force. Whoever lived here—if anyone did—
they were not much on maintenance.
The clack-clack of boots-in-a-hurry echoed through
the open hatchway at the rear of the flight deck, then
suddenly stopped. Ben activated the canopy’s mirror
panel and found his father standing behind the copilot’s
chair, jaw hanging slack as he stared at the slowly spinning station ahead.
“Remind you of anything?” Ben asked.
Luke’s gaze remained fixed on the space station.
“What do you think?” he asked. “It could be a miniature Centerpoint Station.”
Centerpoint had been an ancient space station located
in the stable zone between the Corellian worlds of
Talus and Tralus. Its origins remained cloaked in mystery, but the station had once been the most powerful
weapon in the galaxy, capable of destroying entire star
systems from hundreds of light-years away. One of the
few positive things to come of the recent civil war, in
Ben’s opinion, had been the facility’s destruction. He
was far from happy to discover another version hidden
here, deep inside the Maw.
“I was afraid you’d say that,” Ben said with a sigh.
“What do we do now? Lob a baradium missile at it?”
Luke’s voice grew disapproving. “Do we have a baradium missile?”

10:1

mill_9780345519399_2p_all_r1.qxp:8p insert template

50

6/4/09

Troy Denning

Ben dropped his gaze. “Sorry. Uncle Han said it was
always smart to keep one—”
“Your uncle isn’t a Jedi,” Luke interrupted. “I wish
you’d remember that.”
“Sure,” Ben said. “But maybe this one time we
should think about the way he would handle this. If
this place was built by the same beings that designed
Centerpoint Station, the smartest thing we can do is get
rid of it.”
“And maybe we will—after we unjam our vector
plates and replenish our hydraulics.” Luke slipped into
the copilot’s seat behind Ben. “In the meantime, try to
avoid hitting anything. I’ll see if I can find a safe place
to dock this bird.”

10:1

Pre-order a physical copy of
STAR WARS:
FATE OF THE JEDI: ABYSS
by Troy Denning
On sale August 18, 2009
Amazon.com
Barnes&Noble.com
IndieBound
Borders
Books-a-Million
Powell’s
RandomHouse.com

