TRANSIT
Stephen Dedman
“Transit” appeared in the March 1998 issue of Asimov’s, with an
illustration by Laurie Harden. New Australian writer Stephen Dedman
has made several other sales to Asimov’s, as well as sales to
maga-zines such as The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction,
Science Fiction Age, Aurealis, and Eidolon, and anthologies such as Little
Deaths, Alien Shores, and Glass Reptile Breakout. His first novel, The Art
of Arrow Cutting, was published in 1997, and was shortlisted for the Bram
Stoker Award for Best First Novel. Upcoming is a new novel, Foreign
Bodies. He lives in Perth.
In the compelling story that follows, he takes us to an idealistic
Utopian colony on another planet, and paints a bittersweet portrait of two
young lovers di-vided by every possible barrier: religion, politics,
philosophy, and even physiology—caught, quite lit-erally, between two
worlds.
****
I had just turned nine when Aisha walked into my class-room, stopping the
conversation and stealing my heart in the same instant.
I think we all stared, and then, as Aisha looked back defiantly, we
dropped our gazes back to our books as though we were suddenly
interested in Stigrosc prime number theories. Pat, our teacher for the day,
smiled a little thinly. “Class, this is Aisha, from al-Gohara.”
A few of us looked up and muttered greetings, as Pat guided our new
classmate to a seat near the doorway. A message from Morgan flowed
across my book. Pregnant, e opined.
I glanced at Aisha’s golden-pale profile out of the cor-ner of my eye.
Don’t think so, I replied.
Must be. Look at the size of those boobs.
It was hard not to, despite Aisha’s loose and very opaque sky-grey
robe, but that would have been even more impolite than passing notes in
class—and class was meant to teach us social skills: We would have

learned math much faster at home. Can’t be, I protested. Aisha was taller
even than Pat, at least two meters, but all the al-Goharans I’d seen were
taller still, and Aisha probably wasn’t much older than we were.
Morgan stared at er book for a moment, obviously gos-siping to
someone else. I stole a quick glance at Aisha’s face, which was beautiful.
Especially those eyes, rounder and darker and larger than any I’d seen
outside of books. I love you, I thought, and was startled to see I’d written it
on my book. I erased it hurriedly, relieved that I wasn’t still passing my
notes to Morgan, and went back to my math. A few of the kids were starting
to talk again, but none of them spoke to—or about—Aisha.
Maybe they don’t have contraplants on al-Gohara, Morgan
suggested, a moment later.
They must have, I replied.
Muslims aren’t like us, Morgan countered, and then, I bet they cut
Aisha’s thing off.
What?
They do that. They used to, anyway. Ask my dad.
Why?
E couldn’t answer that, and there was almost nothing about al-Gohara
in my book or my ramplant, and I couldn’t access the library during class
without Pat notic-ing. All I could remember was that al-Goharans, being
Muslims, liked to travel to Earth once in their lives, and their world was only
one solstice jump from da Vinci, with the worlds being in conjunction every
six point something years (math isn’t my forte, and I don’t think anyone
human really understands Stigrosc cosmography). From here, they went to
Marlowe or Corby or Ammon, but that usually meant staying on da Vinci for
up to a year wait-ing for the next solstice. I was only three or four years old
last time they’d visited, and the al-Goharans usually stayed near Startown,
where they’d built a mosque, and didn’t so-cialize much, but I’d never heard
of them bringing their children here before. I wondered whether Aisha even
spoke Amerish, and tried to imagine a voice that would match those eyes,
that golden face, those breasts ...
Aisha suddenly looked up, jacked out of er book, and then walked
over to Pat’s desk and whispered something. Pat looked startled for a

moment, and then nodded. “Of course; I’m sorry, I didn’t think of it. Will you
be coming back today?”
Aisha smiled, whispered something else, and then walked out of the
room. I remembered reading that Mus-lims had to pray so many times a
day—though whether that was an Earth day, an al-Goharan day, or a da
Vincian day, I had no idea. Maybe I could ask Aisha.
****
Aisha was standing in the shade under the trees at the edge of the
basketball court, leaning against one of the old cedars with a book in er lap,
but it was obvious from the way er eyes tracked that e was watching the
game, or the players, or maybe their clothes: Smoke and mirrors were back
in fashion again, and modesty wasn’t. I found myself watching Morgan’s
legs, as usual—e liked to wear the briefest, tightest shorts possible, to
show them off—but I kept wondering what Aisha’s must look like.
I’d accessed the library as soon as class was over, and discovered
that the gravity on al-Gohara was .82, the cli-mate generally warmer but less
humid, and the day nearly thirty standard hours; the ship, the Arakne
(Stigrosc don’t give names to their ships, but they allow the human
pas-sengers to christen them if they wish to), had only arrived three days
before, so e was probably still adjusting. I sum-moned forth all the courage
I thought I might have and had never needed before, and walked over. “Hi,”
I said. “I’m Alex. I’m in your class.” Aisha nodded, and we watched the
game for a moment. “Do they play basketball on al-Gohara?” Another nod. I
wondered what I was do-ing wrong, and realized that I was asking yes-no
ques-tions. “How do you like it here?”
The only reply to that one was a quick glance, and an expression I
couldn’t read through er shades. The solstice isn’t for nearly a year, I
thought; you’re going to have to talk to someone sometime ...
I saw Teri weave past Shane and slam-dunk the ball amid scattered
applause, and Aisha muttered something; the words were unrecognizable,
probably Arabic, but the tone said, clearly, “Not bad.”
“Do you want to practice your Amerish?” I suggested.
Another glance, and then, quietly, “Don’t you have any friends?”
“Sure,” I replied, slightly nettled. “I’m just lousy at basketball, is all. If I
were as big—I mean, tall as you, I’d probably be great. You’ll probably be

great, when you get used to the gravity; everyone will want you.” At least I
managed not to bite my tongue.
“The gravity isn’t a problem,” e replied, and muttered something that
sounded like “initially.” “It’s less than Earth’s, and we’ve been training for
that. It’s—”
“What?”
“Nothing. You just do things so differently here. I wanted to come to
your school—it’s been so boring on the ship, with no one else my own
age—and I had to pester my father to let me, but it’s ...”
I waited.
“Don’t girls go to school on da Vinci?”
“What?”
“I suppose I should have learnt more about the place before I came
here. I’m sorry I didn’t, but there wasn’t very much about it in our library: we
don’t travel much, except the men, and that’s usually only on Hajj.... Do your
girls decide not to come after they turn twenty-five, or is there some sort of
law against it?”
I stared, calling up words from my ram and trying to understand what
Aisha was saying, and hoping that I didn’t look as stupid as I felt, if that
were possible. “Or have they just sent me to a boy’s school by mistake? I
haven’t even found a girls’, uh, bathroom—”
A painful silence followed. “We don’t have segregated schools,” I
began, “or segregated toilets, or segregated anything. We can’t: we’re all...
we don’t...” Oh, gods, I thought; this must be what Morgan meant when e
said that Aisha’s thing had been cut off. “I’m not a ... I mean, I am a ...” I
took a deep breath. “Can I ask you a ques-tion?”
“I don’t know. Can you?”
I tried to smile. “Do you know what ‘monosex’ means?”
It must have been Aisha’s turn to stare at me. “What? No. What?”
“Or ‘maf—’hermaphrodite’?”

“You mean, like the Chuh’hom?”
“Yes. Monosex is the opposite; it means to be male or female, but not
both ...”
“But...” Aisha edged away from me slightly. “You mean you‘re a
hermaphrodite?”
I nodded. “We all are.”
“You mean, everyone in the school?”
“Everyone on the planet...” I replied, and then a though hit me. “Well,
except...”
Aisha slid slowly down the tree to sit with er arms wrapped around er
legs, murmuring something in Arabic. I waited. “I’ve never met a
hermaphrodite before,” e said, weakly.
“I’ve never met a—girl,” I replied, after a moment’s thought.
A suspicious stare. “How come you know what the word means?”
I shrugged. “Old films and novels. Besides, we call our sports teams
girls and boys—no one wants to wear uni-forms, so the ones with the shirts
are girls. I don’t know why; it’s probably something that used to mean
something once, like giving out gold and silver medals, or talking about
‘going the whole nine yards—’ “ I glanced at the outline of Aisha’s breasts,
and suddenly guessed the ori-gin of the custom. The feeling of knowing,
discovering, that was more of a buzz, a jolt, than anything I could remember
ever learning in class.
The game ended, and kids started drifting back into the classroom. I
stood there silently, not wanting to leave Ai-sha.
When everyone else had disappeared, Aisha looked up, er golden
face even more pale than usual. “This is too—” e looked around. “Do you
think the toilets would be empty now?”
“Huh? I mean, yeah, sure.”
“Great.” I offered my hand, to help er up, but e ignored it and
struggled to er feet without my help. We walked to the doorway, and Aisha
stopped, until I offered to go inside and make sure there was no one else

there.
“Can you tell the teacher that I’ll be back tomorrow, initially?” Aisha
said, when e emerged.
“Sure,” I said. “Will you be?”
Aisha hesitated, and then shrugged. “I don’t know. I’ll have to ask my
father.”
I nodded. It had never occurred to me before that mono-sexes had
fathers, though it probably would have if I’d thought about it for a few
seconds. “See you,” I said, won-dering if I’d ever see Aisha again, and
knowing I had to.
****
I spent most of the afternoon accessing the library, to find out what I could
about monosexes. There was a lot of stuff I’d never imagined, like needing
separate pronouns for each gender—”he” and “him” and “his” for males,
“she” and “her” and “hers” for females. They seemed sort of redundant, but
Amerish thrives on redundancy, and the female pronouns sounded exotic
enough that I practiced using them whenever I thought of Aisha.
Monos were extremely rare away from Earth, except in some religious
enclaves where no one had maf chromo-somes: otherwise, it required
major surgery, which almost no one bothered with. The first human mafs
were born a few years post-contact, but the chromosomes were
dis-covered by humans, not Stigrosc: Stigs don’t believe in genetic
engineering. Mafs remained a minority on Earth for more than a century, but
many of them—us—traveled to habitable solstice worlds, where there was
unrestricted birthright. Others became crew on the Stigrosc ships, or
emigrated to the neutral worlds; Stigs can’t tell one human from another,
and the Nerifar say we all taste the same, but Chuh’hom and Tatsu find it
much easier and safer to communicate with mafs. Meanwhile, on Earth, as
gene surgery became easier and cheaper and more countries adopted
“one couple—one child” laws, mafs were seen by many governments as a
way of avoiding serious gender imbalances in the population, and various
incentives were offered to prospective parents—cheap health insurance,
exemptions from combat service, places in the schools or the civil service
or diplomatic corps reserved for mafs, that sort of thing. According to the
library (which was at least seven years out of date), mafs made up 68
percent of the population of Earth—and more than 99 percent of the
permanent populations of Marlowe and Avalon, where the al-Goharans

would also have to stop en route.
There was nothing in the library—at least, nothing I could
access—about how monosexes made love. I was wondering about that
when school closed, and I guess I still looked preoccupied when I went
home: my mother, who is normally very careful not to invade our privacy,
asked me what was on my mind.
“There was a new kid in class, today,” I replied. “Of the Arable. Her
name’s Aisha.”
“Is that the one who’s pregnant?” asked Rene, without jacking out of
er eternal Vaster than Empires game. Sometimes I think that unrestricted
birthrights are over-rated; I get on okay with Kris, but I think Mum and Dad
should have stopped when they’d had one kid each. “She’s not pregnant,” I
snapped. “She’s ...”
“She?” asked Kris.
Okay, sometimes we get on okay. “It’s old English,” Mum explained.
“I didn’t think the al-Goharans brought their kids with them....”
“They never have before,” Dad agreed, without looking away from the
holo. “How long is the trip? Two or three years each way? Hell of a time for
a kid that age to be traveling—how old is e?”
That was Dad all over, making a judgment before e had any of the
facts. “I don’t know; she’s tall, and her Amerish isn’t too good, and she
dresses like... I think she’s about twenty-five or twenty-six,” Kris stared, and
almost dropped er book. “In al-Goharan years, which is—” My ram
converted that into thirteen to thirteen point five stan-dard. “Nine, roughly, so
she’ll be about twelve when she gets to Mecca.”
“Great,” said Dad. “Three years of er life wasted going to see a
crater.”
“Mecca’s not a crater anymore,” I informed er. “Well, it is, sort of, but
the radiation’s down to a safe level, and they’ve built a new mosque and
stuff. There was a load of new data for the library on the Arakne—stuff
about Earth and a lot of other worlds, and only a few years old.”
“Anything about how to get rid of razorvine?” e asked, sourly.

“Not that I noticed.” As far as the library was con-cerned, razorvine
was unique to da Vinci (lucky us). It was probably a mutant strain of our
terraforming fauna; it grew at about the same rate (much faster than the
cyberfarms could process it into anything useful), and in everything from
deserts to rivers, but was much harder to kill. Anything buried beneath it
might be lost forever: it blocked infrared and radar, and thrived on spotlights
and X rays. And it wasn’t even attractive—the same monot-onous tarnish
color as the solamat we use for major roads, with inedible seeds that you
couldn’t pick without the risk of losing a few fingers. Dad’s a builder, so e
regards it as a personal enemy, but most kids play hide-and-seek among
the thickets at least once—or as often as we can without our parents
catching us—and there are the usual stories about secret tobacco farms
hidden within razorvine jungles. “There are some new games and shows,
from Musashi,” I added, and Rene and Kris grinned, “and I don’t know what
else.”
Dad grunted, and watched the holo for a few more minutes, then
stretched. “Want to shoot a few hoops be-fore dinner?”
“Sure, Mum,” said Kris, heading outside. Mum glanced at me, then
folded er book. I was the last one outside. As usual.
****
“A Muslim monosex,” Dad muttered, as e collapsed onto the bed. My
parents’s room was well soundproofed, of course, but easy to bug on the
rare occasions that I wanted to listen in. “Okay, e’s nearly an adult, e’s got
er implants, you’d expect er to have crushes and fool around a little, but
there are dozens of kids er own age here, why—”
“E’ll only be here a year,” replied Mum. “Besides, it may be good for
Alex to get to know some off-worlders. You know e’s good at xenology; e
might even be a dip-lomat.”
“Not if it needs math,” said Dad.
Mum sighed. “E’s better at languages than we ever were, and e
enjoys them. I wouldn’t be surprised if e learnt Arabic before this friend of
ers flies away.”
“What good will that be?”
“How many mathematicians do we need on a world this size?
Biologists, builders, designers, artists, yes, but math-ematicians? And what

if e wants to go off-world?”
“Why would e?” retorted Dad. “What the hell can e get off-world that e
can’t have here?”
****
Aisha arrived in class a few minutes later than the rest of us, clad in the
same loose gray hooded robe or another exactly like it. Her dark eyes were
slightly clouded, and I guessed she was having trouble adjusting to the
shorter days. I thought of pointing out that she’d get more praying done this
way, but I wasn’t sure how she’d take it, and I couldn’t think of anything else
to say.
Our teacher for the day was Jai, an old fossil with a murmuring voice
and an inexplicable enthusiasm for eco-nomics, both of which e used to try
to explain the half-million years of human history pre-Contact. Most of us
were already confused long before e came to the impact of third wave tech,
and when e admitted that the whole thing had collapsed soon after the
Stigrosc arrived any-way, most of us became irritated as well.
“This is irrelevant, isn’t it?” asked Teri, while a few of us chuckled.
Jai bit er lip. “I rather hope so. You see, history is a wonderful
labor-saving device; it saves us reinventing and rediscovering so much.
True, all these economic theories were based on the idea that resources
were scarce and humans needed to work to survive. By the first century
pre-Contact, of course, the scarcities were usually manu-factured for
commercial or political reasons—so that the rich could stay rich, or nations
could control their populace by denying them food—and the work ethic had
be-come a cancer. Many people worked at jobs they hated because they’d
been convinced that there was no other way to survive; by the time the
Stigrosc came to Earth, it would have been cheaper to simply feed, house,
educate, and entertain most of these people—but that would have violated
the work ethic and destroyed the illusion of scarce resources. In this
regard, capitalism and commu-nism were almost indistinguishable—and
when the Sti-grosc arrived, and gave us cyberfacs and habitable planets,
asking only for those ideas and data that were free to every human, both
systems became, as you say, irrelevant. Our new economic system is, to a
large degree, another gift from the Stigrosc—but, unlike all previous human
economic systems, it is founded on the idea that human demand will never
outstrip resource availability. If this happy state of affairs should change,
then we will need a new system—and those of you who’ve been paying
attention will have some idea which ones not to try.” E drew a deep breath,

and then—apparently for the first time— noticed Aisha. E glanced at the
book open on er desk, and asked, “I gather things are the same on
al-Gohara?” She was silent. “The cyberfacs and robots provide what is
needed, and no one is compelled to do work that they hate?”
Aisha shook her head violently. “No, of course not,” she lied.
“Of course, there are some people who cling to the old ways,” Jai
continued, “simply because they are human ways—or, more importantly to
many of them, not Stigrosc ways. Most of these people are still on Earth,
because they regard Earth as a human world, or because they own parts of
Earth in a way they can never own part of any other world. What good this
ownership does them now, I leave to you to imagine; if any of you succeed,
please explain it to me. Aisha, it’s nearly noon; do you want to go and pray?
Now, are there any other questions?”
****
“Tell me about your world.”
We were sitting under the old cedars by the basketball court again.
Aisha glanced at me, and shrugged. “Why?” she asked. “You don’t want to
go there, do you?”
If all the girls there are like you, I thought, I might, but I didn’t say that.
“I won’t know until you tell me,” I replied.
She smiled slightly, beautifully. “It’s warm, and much drier than it is
here, and the sun’s not quite as bright—”
“I know all that. Tell me about the people.”
“People are people.” She looked warily at me, daring me to challenge
her.
“How much difference does having two sexes make?” I asked.
She looked even more wary. “I’m not going to discuss sex with—well,
you’re a boy.”
“I’m also just as much a girl as you are,” I replied, mildly.
She looked thunderstruck at that, then shook her head violently.

“There’s more to it than having a—besides, you don’t have ...” She looked
puzzled for a moment.
“If you want to know what I do have—” I began.
“I don’t—”
“You can access the library.”
Aisha blinked, and then laughed. I waited until she’d finished, and
added, “That’s how I know what you’ve got. Sort of. I mean, I... unless you
...” I sat there, trying to find the words.
“Have I been circumcised?” she asked, at last. “No. That was a
primitive custom, much older than Islam and explicitly condemned in the
Qur’an—you have heard of the Qur’an?—and while some Muslims on Earth
did it, so did some Christians. By the time the Stigrosc arrived, it had been
stamped out nearly everywhere, like foot-binding or breast implants. But
there’s more to being a woman than just the body.”
“We can all get pregnant, if that’s what you mean.”
“No!” she said, shaking her head again. “More than that!”
“What, then?” I asked, but she stood and walked away. I tried
following her, but she kept walking faster, and her legs were much longer
than mine. I walked faster, and she began running. Finally, she ran out of
the school and down the razorvine-edged road to Startown, and I didn’t
follow her.
****
The next day was Saturday, and I’d resigned myself to not seeing Aisha.
Kris had slipped out early to play bas-ketball and get out of gardening,
which we both hated.
Mum always maintained that if we did it often enough, we’d come to
enjoy it as e and Dad did, but e let me go after an hour of cauterizing the
razorvine that was begin-ning to encroach on the watermelons. I spent the
rest of the morning with a portrait program, trying to see if I could produce a
fair likeness of Aisha, and maybe slot both of us into an old movie, a
pre-Contact one with monosex characters: The Princess Bride, maybe, or
War for the Oaks. That way, I could just superimpose her face on a female

body, rather than have to try to imagine hers. Unfortunately, nearly all of the
female bodies in the art history catalogue were of women from Earth
gravity, while the few from the Martian Republic were too tall and slender.
I’d always known that ideals of beauty varied between eras and ethnic
groups, but seeing the demon-stration flash before my eyes was startling.
I’d never imagined that there were so many ways to mutilate living bodies.
I managed to devote three or four hours to Aisha’s face, and another
two to her figure, before succumbing to the temptation to access some
pictures of female genitals. They looked incomplete, even deformed, with
just this little bump where the penis should be, but apart from that, they
looked just like mine or Morgan’s. Males, I discov-ered, had external testes
where the vulva should be, in what looked like an uncomfortable, if not
hideously haz-ardous, position.
After forming a recognizable template of Aisha, I scanned us into
Forbidden Planet; the eyelines gave me a little trouble, but once I’d fixed
that, it looked wonder-ful, and it even made sense.
On Sunday, I made the mistake of reading a love poem by Andrew
Marvell, “To His Coy Mistress”—Had we but world enough, and time—and
became determined to see Aisha again, or at least to try. The library told
me that Sunday wasn’t a religious holiday for Muslims—their Sabbath
started Friday and finished Saturday—and there was nothing to stop me
walking up Tranquility Road to Startown; Aisha, a lightworlder, did it every
day. Mum let me go with nothing more than the usual caution to be home
before nightfall (razorvine is attracted by light, and can supposedly move
fast enough to engulf anyone walk-ing with a lantern), and I slipped out
before Dad could object.
The streets of Startown were all but empty, but there was a soccer
game in progress (if you can use soccer and progress in the same
sentence) on Eagle Street two blocks from the mosque, and it had drawn
quite a crowd—some of them in long-sleeved robes, some in jeans and
shirts. I watched for a few minutes, scanning for Aisha, but though I noticed
a few pale and beardless faces, I couldn’t see any women present at all, or
anyone under fifteen. I attracted some stares, not all of them friendly, but
no one questioned my right to be there.
A few minutes after the whistle blew for halftime, I heard the sound of
a single, powerful voice booming from the direction of the mosque, and
everyone turned and walked toward it. I followed until the last of them had
disappeared inside the doors, and then headed back to-ward my home.

I’d reached the edge of Startown when, suddenly, it began raining. I
heard doors open behind me, and laugh-ter, and turned to see al-Goharans
rushing out into the street, most of them staring at the sky and catching
raindrops in their mouths as they laughed; a few even re-moved their
skull-caps and let them fill with water before upending them over their
heads. I turned about, but though I searched down every street, I couldn’t
see Aisha anywhere. Eventually, after the rain stopped, I returned home,
hearing the waterfed razorvine growing around me as I walked.
That evening, I began learning Arabic: The library had teaching
programs for most languages, even ones that had been dead since before
contact. It was a little easier than Chuh’hom Oratory, and it might even be
useful.
****
“Why?” Aisha demanded.
“Why what?”
“Why are you learning Arabic? And why do you want me to help you?”
“Well, al-Goharans are going to be staying here after every solstice,” I
replied, reasonably enough. “We should have someone here who can
speak to them without an interpreter.”
“We all speak Amerish.”
“Then why do you learn Arabic?”
“The Quran must be read in the original; all transla-tions are invalid.”
“What do you speak at home?”
“My mother used to call it Amerabic,” she replied, and a beautiful
smile suddenly appeared on her face. “Some-times we’ll start a sentence in
one language and want to say something that’s easier in the other
language, so we switch. It’s whatever language we think in—here,
every-one speaks Amerish, so I think in Amerish.”
I nodded. “I went to Startown yesterday, and everyone there was
speaking Arabic.”

“That’s—you did what!”
“I went to Startown. I watched the soccer game for a while; then it
started raining, and everyone seemed to get a big kick out of it.”
“It doesn’t rain very often on al-Gohara,” she replied, looking at the
cloudy sky with distinct approval. “I don’t think I’ve ever seen it rain like that
before.”
“Then why weren’t you out dancing in it like everyone else?”
“I—” She turned to stare at me; her beautiful face turned pale, and
then pink. “That’s none of your business. Anyway, I’m sure it’ll rain again
before I leave, initially.”
I realized, suddenly, that all the times I thought she’d said “initially,”
whether or not it made sense, she was really saying “inshallah”—”if Allah
wills it.” “Oh, sure,” I replied. “Or maybe you can stop at New Seattle on
your way back. Do you mind if I ask you a question?” She continued to
stare, so I didn’t wait for her to answer. “Are there any other girls—or
women—in Startown?”
“No.”
“Why not?”
“That’s two questions.. ..” She turned away from me, and watched the
basketball game for a while. I was be-ginning to suspect that the reason
she almost always headed for this clump of trees at lunchtime was that she
liked talking to me, but wanted to make sure there were always plenty of
witnesses, as though she was willing to regard me as a girl from the neck
up. “Do you remember what Jai was saying last week about scarce
resources and the Stigs?”
“The parts I stayed awake for.”
“What she, he—what should I call him?”
“E,” I replied, without hesitation. “We’re all ‘e,’ except you.”
“Okay. What e said doesn’t really apply on al-Gohara. There’s one
resource that’s still scarce, and the Stigs con-trol it: that’s passage to Earth.
The hajj, the pilgrimage to Mecca, is one of the five pillars of Islam, but
there isn’t enough room on the Stig ships for all adults to make the journey

even once, so places are awarded randomly by a computer. At least, they
are on al-Gohara; I don’t know how it’s done on other Muslim worlds.”
I thought about this for a moment, and asked, “And women aren’t
allowed to go?”
“It’s a little more complicated than that... women are allowed to go,
but not without their husbands, so unless the husband has also won a place
on the ship, the woman gives it to her husband. Or sometimes to her father,
or an adult son, or she can trade it, inshallah. And there are some who think
the computer may not be perfectly ran-dom—”
“Trade it? For what?”
Aisha shrugged. “Favors. Prestige. Luxuries that the facs don’t make.
A. better marriage for her children, maybe, inshallah.”
“Arranged marriages?”
She nodded. I refrained from whistling or swearing, but it was a near
thing. “Some women complain about not going, but the men just blame the
Stigs for not having bigger ships: some even say they’re doing it to weaken
our faith, because the Stigs won’t even let us fill the ship, just in case
someone wants to leave the worlds we visit en route, which no one ever
does. The imams and califas have tried petitioning the Stigs, but they don’t
seem to understand about religion, and almost no one from,” she hesitated
for a moment, “other worlds, the non-Islamic worlds, ever wants to visit
Earth. Anyway, if the Stigrosc cared enough to want to break our faith, they
could leave all of us stranded on al-Gohara forever.”
“Sounds like you’re lucky to be here.”
“Lucky?” She considered this, moving the tip of her tongue
tantalizingly across her upper lip, as though tasting the air. “I’m lucky to be
going on hajj, and glad I’ll be an adult by the time I’m there, but I miss
having other girls around. Men are boring.”
I had to know. “How did you get a place when other women don’t?”
“My father wouldn’t leave me on al-Gohara alone.”
“What about your mother?”
“She’s dead,” Aisha snapped. “Okay? Can you leave me alone,

now?”
I walked to the other side of the playing field, so I could see her and
pretend I was still watching the basketball game. The game ended a few
minutes later, and I saw Morgan, wearing little more than a translucent helix
of swirling silver light, glance at me meaningfully before walking off
hand-in-hand with Ten.
****
Despite that setback, I finally did persuade Aisha to coach me in Arabic,
after only four weeks of mispronouncing words and hideously mangling the
grammar. In a moment of random curiosity, I learnt that she was named
after Muhammad’s third wife, and that her name was also Jap-anese for
“manipulating an overly sympathetic or soft-hearted person,” a discovery
that we both found hilarious.
Weeks passed, and though I became fairly good at read-ing and
speaking Arabic, I couldn’t write it or think in it. Aisha couldn’t invite me to
her home, nor come to mine, but occasionally she’d let me walk with her
almost as far as Startown, on the condition that I stayed on the other side of
the road. The only people who ever saw us were the razorvine clearing
patrols, and they must have men-tioned it to Dad, because one evening e
said, with all the casualness of a sun going supernova, “Some al-Goharans
volunteered for the clearing crews today, want Macleod and me to teach
them how to handle the lasers.”
No one spoke. I just stared at my dinner and kept chew-ing. MacLeod
was Morgan’s mother, and I wondered if e’d put them up to this.
“I don’t know whether they were getting bored, or whether they just
liked the idea of killing something,” Dad continued, “but there were at least
a dozen of them. There’s nothing else happening at the moment, so we
said yes.”
“Maybe they want to thank us for our hospitality,” re-plied Mum, mildly.
“Or maybe they don’t want us coming any closer than we have to,”
said Dad. E seemed remarkably calm about the idea of armed
al-Goharans: Of course, the lasers have genescanners and safety switches
built in, so you can’t actually aim them at a human, and bouncing them off a
mirror is much trickier than the thrillers make out. Dad wasn’t setting me up
to be murdered, but I wondered what e thought would happen to Aisha. Kris
looked from one to the other. “Why would they thank us for that? It’s free. I

mean, if we said no, the Stigs would stop coming here, right?”
Dad shrugged, and turned er attention back to er soup. Rene’s eyes
bugged. “No more Stigs? You mean no new games?”
“Relax,” I told er. “It’ll never happen. It’s in the treaty the Stigs signed
before they gave us Avalon and Terra-nova—that a ship would visit every
human world every solstice, so we could always go back to Earth, or out to
any new worlds....”
“Okay,” said Dad. “What do you think would happen if, say, the
al-Goharans landed and discovered that there was no mosque at Startown,
or no food or water, or no cyberfac? Would the Stigs still keep coming?”
“The Stigs would,” I replied, “but the al-Goharans might not....” My
voice faded out, and we stared at each other in silence until Mum said,
softly but pointedly, “None of us understand the Stigrosc well enough to
know what they’d do. Or the al-Goharans, for that matter.”
****
Aisha heard about the al-Goharan crews that same night, and the next day
she asked me not to accompany her home again, in case her father heard
about it and ordered her to stay away from the school altogether. On da
Vinci, that would be considered probable cause for a charge of child
abuse, but I decided not to tell Aisha that: I was still wondering what I
should say when she leapt up, and vol-unteered for the basketball game,
on the sole condition that whatever team she was on would be the girls. I
stayed on the sidelines and watched. Despite the gravity, she moved
beautifully, like a gazelle with breasts.
To my irritation, this became a set routine for a few weeks: we’d be
talking about something, when suddenly she’d stand up and join in one of
the games. She wasn’t quite as fast as Teri, and she had trouble allowing
for the gravity when she had to throw the ball any distance, but she knew
how to use her height and her reach, so she was always selected, while I
usually had to sit back and watch. On days when it was too wet for
basketball, she would sit in the classroom and watch the rain through the
roof. “This is wonderful,” she murmured. “Our buildings are made the same
way as yours are—though the ceilings are higher—but they’re designed to
keep the sunlight out; I don’t think this would ever have occurred to us.
Even when it’s not raining, I love watching your clouds, all the shapes, the
way they move....”

I’ve never been that enthusiastic about rain myself, but I nodded.
“You should see it in winter, when it thunders— but I guess you’ll be gone
before then...”
“Yes,” she said, still beaming, and then, unexpectedly, “It’s my
birthday tomorrow.”
“Happy birthday. How old will you be?”
“Twenty-seven: that’s about, oh, nine and a half of your years.”
I hesitated, then plunged in. “Of course, you could stay here.”
She stared at me, and then shook her head sadly. “My father would
never let me, Alex.”
“So don’t ask er.” There was a shocked silence as I did the math. “In
half a year, you’ll legally be an adult—”
“Not on al-Gohara—”
“Right; you’re not on al-Gohara. You’re on da Vinci, and subject to da
Vincian law—so you might as well en-joy its benefits. When’re you
considered an adult on al-Gohara, anyway?”
She looked away, as though she was fascinated by the way the rain
trickled down the windows. “On my wedding night,” she said, finally, very
softly.
“What?”
“Of course, most women don’t really treat you as an adult until you
have a child of your own. Boys are legally considered men after
puberty—do you know about pu-berty?”
I grimaced, and nodded, remembering my first and (so far) only
period, before I had my contraplants inserted. “Sure,” I croaked. “Is this
part of your religion, or—”
“Some of it,” she replied. “Some of it is tradition, I guess. Our
ancestors weren’t just Arabs; they came from every continent on Earth, and
they brought a lot of dif-ferent traditions with them.” She shrugged. “My
mother used to say it was intended to keep the birthrate up—we can’t breed
as fast as you can—but she may have been joking, I don’t really know.”

We sat there in silence for nearly a minute, before I asked, “Is this
what you meant when you said that there was more to being a woman than
... well, having female parts, being able to get pregnant....”
She nodded. “Well, it’s also important not to have— male parts, or
you’ll never be trusted around the women. If you were to come to
al-Gohara, the men wouldn’t want to know you, and you’d be barred from
places that were only for men and only for women, and you certainly
wouldn’t be able to marry. Men are permitted to marry non-Muslims, but
women can’t, so even if one wanted to ... it’d be the worst of all possible
worlds.” She turned to look at me, and I noticed that she was on the verge
of tears. “For you, that is. For us, it’s—”
“Home?”
“More than that. It’s ... a world we created for our-selves.” She looked
down, and then scrambled to her feet and rushed out into the rain, looking
at the sky, letting the rain run down her face. I just sat there and watched
her, trying to think of the right thing to say, and finally I walked out behind
her, stood within arms reach but too scared to touch, saying nothing,
nothing, nothing.
****
Weeks passed, and we spent them saying nothing, until Cori was giving us
a lesson in xenology. Aisha was as fascinated as I was, possibly more so;
unlike the rest of us, she’d actually met Stigrosc and Chuh’hom and Nerifar.
Cori was becoming slightly bogged down in the details of Nerifar triads,
thanks largely to Teri’s love for asking unanswerable questions, when
Morgan interrupted to ask, “Nerifar don’t have any religions, do they?”
“No,” replied Cori, er relief apparent. “They have a complicated
ethical code, which is almost entirely con-cerned with sex and food, but
because they don’t believe in owning any more than they can actually
carry—which isn’t much—it’s short enough for most of them to mem-orize.”
“Like a hafiz,” I interjected. Cori looked blank. “Some-one who’s
memorized the complete Qur’an,” I explained.
Morgan glanced at me, er expression unreadable, and then smiled
back at Cori. “But they don’t claim that this ethical code was handed down
to them by any sort of deity?”

“No. It was originally composed as a series of songs— peace
treaties from various wars, marriage vows, divorce decrees, medical
treatises, lessons for children, proverbs and parables, that sort of thing. But
because it’s never been written down, there’s no standard version; it’s sung
differently in different clans, new verses are always being added, and a few
were changed or edited out when they were discovered not to be true, like
the one about kid-neys ...”
“In fact,” said Morgan, er smile becoming wider and er voice
impossibly sweet, “none of the other species we’ve encountered—or that
the Stigrosc have encountered and told us about—have anything we would
call a reli-gion, or a deity.”
Cori considered this. “The Nerifar... don’t, the Chuh’hom ... don’t, the
Tatsu don’t... We don’t really understand enough about Stigrosc or Garuda
culture to be sure; they often seem to regard the universe as a sentient
being on a time scale beyond our comprehension, which I suppose you
could consider a deity....”
“But they don’t believe that it handed down a set of laws they had to
obey?”
“Only mathematical laws—which for a Stig or a Ga-ruda, is pretty
important. But not their ethical codes.”
“And none of them believe in a single ancestor for their entire
species?”
“No.”
“What about the Garuda egg?” asked Jo.
Cori nodded. “Well, the first Garuda presumably did hatch from the
first Garuda egg, but the ‘Garuda egg’ in their histories contained
everything, so it’s probably a metaphor—or a poor translation—for the Big
Bang. The Nerifar don’t have any similar stories—the only mentions of eggs
in their coda are instructions on how to care for them and when not to eat
them—but the Nerifar didn’t know the rest of the universe existed until the
Stigrosc landed on their homeworld.”
Morgan nodded. “Do any of them worship their ances-tors?”
Cori considered this. “No. Chuh’hom worship the com-munity; they
believe in a form of reincarnation, but they’re still arguing about whether

souls can travel be-tween planets, and if so, how fast.” Chuh’hom love to
argue, and their committee meetings should be avoided at all costs. “The
Nerifar eat their ancestors, and never speak the names of the dead. Male
Tatsu worship their mothers, and no one knows what the females think.
Stigrosc revere their descendants, and if Garuda worship anything, it’s the
sky.”
Morgan grinned, and sprang er trap. “Would you agree that only
humans had religion because it was invented by human monosex males
and enforced with violence, to compensate for the fact that they couldn’t
bear children, that their role in creating children was ridiculously small and
for all they knew, might have been nonexistent, per-formed by someone
else—the same inadequacy that pro-duced lunatic ideas like penis envy,
sentient sperm, and women as mere incubators? That its mainspring was
the idea that the father was the creator, not the mother; the father was
omnipotent and omniscient, the father knew best—but not better than er
father, or er father before er, and so on until the golden age before women
fucked everything up?”
There was a brief silence while Morgan paused for breath. I glanced
at Aisha; her face, normally pale, was the color of dried bone. Cori began
saying, “Well, I think that’s a ...” but Morgan was unstoppable. “And that
be-coming complete, becoming mafs, so that everyone could create
children, could know that feeling, did even more to kill off the old religions
than the bombing of Mecca and Rome?”
Cori—who was only eighteen or twenty, and had never been a
mother—gulped, and began again. “I think that’s an oversimplification; I
don’t think there’s ever a single cause for anything as complicated as—” but
I didn’t hear the rest, because Aisha had run from the room, and I followed
her.
****
She was running down Tranquillity Road, and I could feel her screaming,
though she was saving her breath for the race. Her legs were much longer
than mine, and she was nearly acclimatized to the gravity, and I didn’t have
a chance of catching her before she reached Startown unless she let me.
She was at least halfway there before she began to collapse; fortunately,
she slowed down enough that I could catch her before she hit the solamat.
Holding on to her wasn’t easy—standing up, my eyes were on the same
level as her breasts—but I supported her as best I could while she cried
onto the top of my head.

“It’s okay,” I murmured into her blouse. “E just doesn’t understand,
that’s all.”
She sniffed. “Do you understand?”
“No, but... I’m trying to understand. Besides, I...” I took a deep breath
and said it very quickly, “I’ve been in love with you ever since I saw you and
... well, Morgan and I used to ...” I tried to remember an Arabic term for “go
steady,” and couldn’t think of one.
“What?”
“Well, I guess you could say we were ... girlfriends, or something.
Nothing serious, just kid stuff—kissing games, that sort of thing.” She
pulled away slightly and stared at me through her shades. “You don’t play
games like that on al-Gohara?” She shook her head violently. “Well, I guess
it’s different for you. We all have the same sort of, uh, equipment, and we
get to see each other naked in the change rooms, at the beach, places like
that, or look in a mirror... but I think Morgan’s a bit jealous.” I shrugged. “I
guess that’s one thing we haven’t gotten rid of.”
Aisha raised an eyebrow at that, and then began crying again.
“Thanks for coming after me ... I’m glad we can say good-bye.”
“It’s—what?”
“I can’t go back to school. Not after that.”
I stared at her, suddenly weighed down by a horrible feeling of
heaviness, of sinking. “Good-bye, Alex.” She grabbed my head, kissed me
quickly and violently, and then let go and turned away. I tried to yell
something, but my mouth seemed to be stunned. I watched her walking,
and then ran after her.
“And do what?” I panted. “Stay at home all day every day until Olivia
arrives?” She kept walking. “Okay, you don’t want to go back to school, you
don’t have to, neither do I, we can still see each other.”
“No we can’t.”
“There’s an empty house, way out of town, all on its own; it’s a great
place, completely private, and I have a key.” She stopped, and looked

curiously at me. “It be-longed to Mad Cousin Yuri. It’s a long story. Anyway,
it’s at the end of Barrows Road, you know, the turn-off we just passed...”
Aisha shook her head, and started walking faster.
“Send me a note if you change your mind,” I called. No answer. “Or
send me a note anyway, any time you want to talk. Please?”
She stopped, and turned. “Inshallah,” she murmured.
****
“Is this why you call him Mad Cousin Yuri?” Aisha asked, staring at the
half-finished artworks that lined the walls.
I nodded, wondering how Aisha had convinced her fa-ther to let her
out unchaperoned. “E was my father’s cousin, not mine: e wanted to be an
artist, and e was pretty good at it, but e hated working.” Aisha laughed. “E
con-vinced erself that the only way e was going to finish any-thing was by
removing erself from society altogether, so e petitioned for a house out
here, no one around but the friendly neighborhood razorvines. A lot of
people tried talking er out of it, but e had the right to a house of er own, and
the builders couldn’t claim to be too busy or anything, so it got done; they
cleared the land, built a road and the house, and moved er stuff out here. E
stayed out here for three weeks.” Aisha laughed. “E came back
oc-casionally, staying for a week or two at a time—and usu-ally with a model
or two, rarely on er own. Dad never really let er live it down—it was the first
house e’d ever built, which is how I got a key—but Yuri was too easy-going
to get upset. E managed to finish a few small things—some portraits, a lot
of sketches, a statue or two— but e was just too fond of the cafes and the
bathhouses.”
“Isn’t there a bath here?” asked Aisha, a little ner-vously.
“Sure—down the hall, second right. You want to take a bath?”
“I’ll need to wash before I pray ...”
Stupid of me. “Yes, there’s a bathroom—down the hall, there.”
“Then why did e have to go to bathhouses?”
“Ah,” I said, sitting down on a chair that was twice my age. “Well. We
go to the bathhouses for sex—I mean, I don’t, you have to be at least

eleven, that’s about thirty-one of your years—but that’s what they’re for. I
think that’s where my parents met, or at least—” I noticed that Aisha was
looking disturbed, even slightly revolted, and shut up. I’d had to wait five
weeks before she contacted me, and another four before she’d agreed to
meet me here, which left only eleven weeks and three days before Olivia
arrived—Time’s winged chariot hurrying near, as Andrew Marvell would
have said.
“We may be more different than I thought,” she said, softly, staring at
the picture that Yuri had been working on on er final visit here. It was a
sketch of er favorite model, Kai, the one e used to joke about being buried
with. E was very pregnant, and topless—or bottomless, rather; Yuri hadn’t
drawn er below the waist, just a halo of curly hair, a beautiful round face,
and beautiful round breasts with large nipples the color of Aisha’s eyes. “I
mean, I shouldn’t be lying to my father, I shouldn’t even be here with you,
especially not alone...” I waited for her to say more, but she didn’t. “Why
not?” I asked. “I mean, we’re not even doing anything—”
“But we might be!”
“—and what if we were? Whose business is that but ours?”
“You don’t understand!”
“No! I don’t.”
We glared at each other for a while, and then she shook her head.
“What do you want?” she asked, softly.
“Where do I begin? I want to—I want us to be able to see each other
whenever we want.”
“I’m leaving in eighty days.”
“You could stay here; you could be happy here—” She raised her
eyebrows at that, and then blinked as though the idea had never occurred
to her before. “Anyway, we were talking about what I want. Next thing on my
list is, I wish I knew what you wanted.”
She continued to stare, and then shook her head. “So do I,” she
whispered. “Alex, you’ve been wonderful, you’ve been kinder to me than
anyone since my mother...” She turned away, and I could tell she was about
to cry; I reached up and out to touch her shoulders, comfort her, but

stopped when my hands were only a few millimeters away. “My mother,”
she repeated, rather stiffly. “Was executed. For adultery. Now do you
under-stand?”
I had the feeling that I was understanding less and less the longer I
knew Aisha; I shook my head,
“My father brought me with him on this trip because he didn’t trust my
mother’s family to watch me, he thought I might disgrace him—”
“That’s—”
She turned and faced me, tears in her eyes and a crooked smile on
her lips. “And how do you get on with your father?”
“That’s not the point.” I took a deep breath. “Okay, so maybe it is the
point. But I know my father is wrong about you—and about a lot of other
things. Is yours?”
“I’m here with you, aren’t I?” She glared at me, then glanced briefly
around at the windows, and then removed her scarf. As I stared, she shook
her long hair free, pulled her jacket open, stepped out of her skirt, and then
stood there wearing only a pair of pants and a strange harness-like garment
covering her breasts. A moment later, that popped open, and then she
removed her pants and sat down on a chair opposite me, legs slightly apart
and one foot propped up on the seat. She was even more beautiful than I’d
imagined.
“Now do you understand? On al-Gohara, I’ll be my mother’s daughter
until I’m my husband’s wife. Here, I’d be considered a freak, mutilated,
incomplete—and that in-cludes emotionally as well as physically, sexually.
We couldn’t even have children naturally!”
I admit, I hadn’t thought that far ahead—I couldn’t le-gally switch off
my contraplants until I was fourteen— and I was surprised that Aisha had.
Of course, if “naturally” meant “without gene surgery,” then she was right,
but so what? Or was that against al-Goharan law, too? Suddenly,
uncontrollably, I began laughing.
“What’s up?”
I took a deep breath and leaned back in my chair. “I’m just glad I
didn’t fall in love with a Stigrosc; that would have made my life really

complicated.”
Aisha stared, her eyes bugging slightly—and then she, too, burst out
laughing, which set me off again. I slid out of the chair and kneeled in front
of her, close enough to almost taste her, close enough to hear her
heartbeat. I reached out and stroked her hair, running my hand along the
side of her face down to her lovely neck—and felt/heard the cry of the
muezzin, transmitted through the bone from a complant, calling her to zuhr,
noon prayer. She looked into my eyes sadly, then grabbed her clothes and
ran to the bathroom, while I collapsed face-first onto her chair.
I heard the bathroom door slide shut, and then open, and she
disappeared into Yuri’s bedroom to pray (it’s con-sidered inappropriate to
perform salat in a bathroom). When she reappeared, fully clothed, I was
sitting back in my own chair.
“When Olivia arrives...” I began, as she walked to-ward the front
door. She stopped. “Just in case I don’t see you before then,” I said.
“Olivia won’t be able to wait for you; it’ll only have an hour or two to
rendezvous with the shuttles before going to the jump point. If you’re not on
the shuttle in time, your father will have to choose be-tween you and waiting
another six years for er hajj—six years here. Which do you think e’ll pick?
“We can hide here,” I continued, quickly. “Or, better still, we can hide
in the razorvine; even if they can find us, they’ll never be able to cut us out in
time—”
“I can’t stay here, either,” she said, “not in this house, not on this
world...” and then she walked out. I stared at her back, waiting for her to turn
around; then, when she disappeared behind the next hill, I grabbed one of
the razorvines that was snaking around the house, feeling the thorns bite
into my palm and my fingers, standing there silently, knowing that Aisha
wasn’t coming back, and un-derstanding nothing.
****
The clouds were the same gray as Aisha’s robes, and the razorvine rustled
and groaned alarmingly as I biked down the road toward the starport. I’d
crept out of the house as soon as the sun had risen, after the longest night
I’d ever stayed awake through. I hadn’t heard from Aisha since Ramadan
began, five weeks before, and that had been just another good-bye. She
hadn’t even answered my mail; maybe her father had taken her book away.
If e had, e’d know I was here, waiting; if not, she would.

I watched the first bus arrive as the shuttle hangar un-folded like a
flower, then heard another bike behind me. I turned, and saw Morgan,
dressed in jeans and a fine mesh jacket against the morning cold, dismount
and walk toward me. “Saying good-bye?” e asked.
I didn’t answer; I just turned my attention back to the shuttle. I couldn’t
see Aisha, but maybe she’d boarded while I’d looked away.
“I’ve been reading about monosexes,” e said, sitting next to me.
“Boys, girls... they were almost never friends. They didn’t understand each
other well enough, they were taught to want different things ... It was really a
scary idea, not being friends with your lover. I was really glad we’d gotten
past that.” I said nothing. “E’s not going to stay, you know.”
I saw a figure in gray, slightly shorter than the others, walking toward
the ramp, and reached for my nocs. It was Aisha, and she looked around
before sliding up the ramp and into the ship. “I thought we were friends,”
said Morgan. “We were friends for a long time, since we were kids. I
thought we might even be lovers, one day. You know, you hurt me pretty
badly, dumping me like that.”
“I’m sorry,” I said, quietly.
“Especially dumping me for er,” e said, with some real bitterness in er
voice. “A monosex. Someone who’s not even complete. How do you think
that made me feel, knowing I couldn’t compete with half a person?”
“She’s not half a person,” I replied, dully.
Morgan shrugged, as the first bus pulled away and an-other crowd of
al-Goharans filed into the shuttle. “Well, e’ll be happier with er own people.”
I opened my book: no new messages. Morgan opened er jacket as
the sun broke through the clouds. “So, what happens now?”
I looked at er for the first time that day. “We’re friends,” I said, gently.
“You’re one of the best friends I ever had, and I’m sorry I hurt you.”
E smiled, and shrugged. I leaned over and kissed er. “And I’m going
to miss you,” I said, and ran toward the shuttle, yelling “Wait!” at the top of
my lungs.
****

The pilot was Jessi Vokes, Teri’s mother, and e knew that I was still nearly
twenty weeks short of turning ten—but e also knew that there wouldn’t be
another ship leaving for nearly four years. Faced with this dilemma and a
strict schedule, e called my mother, who—to my astonish-ment—told er that
I had er permission to leave, and woke Kris and Rene so we could say
good-bye. Perhaps fortu-nately, fathers don’t get a vote in these matters.
We lifted off only a few seconds behind schedule, and docked with Olivia
with time to spare.
The human crew here are doing their best to keep the mafs and the
Muslims apart, so I haven’t seen Aisha in a week—and, fortunately, her
father hasn’t seen me. But I have seen Nerifar, and Chuh’hom, and I hope
to see some Stigrosc when they’ve finished shedding their skins. The
ship’s library is even better than the one on da Vinci, and full of recent data
about the planets we’ll visit.
The atmosphere on Marlowe is rich in neon and the aurora look like
waterfalls of blood, especially during the season they call Not-and-Live.
Aisha and I will legally become adults there, long before Isis arrives. I think
I could be happy staying on Marlowe, despite the weather, but if Aisha
decides to continue on her hajj, I’ll follow. They say Avalon is as beautiful as
Earth was between the Ice Ages, but if Aisha doesn’t want to stay there,
either . .. well, I’ve always wanted to see Earth. And after Earth, we have
time. And worlds enough.
****

