The Blood of Winterhold
Stephen Almekinder
Hard Shell Word Factory

For Mom and Dad, very special parents.

Copyright 2000, Stephen Almekinder
ISBN: 1-58200-547-8
Published June 2000 by
Hard Shell Word Factory
PO Box 161
Amherst Jct. WI 54407
books@hardshell.com
http://www.hardshell.com
Cover art copyright 2000, Dirk A. Wolf
All electronic rights reserved.
All characters in this book have no existence outside the imagination of the author,
and have no relation whatever to anyone bearing the same name or names. These
characters are not even distantly inspired by any individual known or unknown to the
author, and all incidents are pure invention.
Go to Chapter:
1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10 | 11 | 12 | 13 | 14 | 15 | 16 | 17 | 18 | 19 | 20 | 21 | 22 | 23 |
24 | 25
Chapter 1
HE SPIRALED OUT OF the trance and his fingers spiraled up the familiar curve of the
prayer horn. He passed through one layer. His thumb and forefinger caressed the S shaped
curve which represented eternity. He emerged from another layer. The tight button of truth
slid beneath his ring finger and little finger. He broke through the last layer and his palm
brushed the symbols of beauty and despair and love in rapid succession.
The prayer horn slipped from his hands and settled between his crossed legs. He opened
his eyes, but just barely. The sun off the endless snow slashed through the slits, fuzzed by his
eyelashes. As a matter of discipline, he did not close his eyes but held them half open. The
cold burning light filled his eyes and seemed to penetrate deeper and deeper into his skull. He
let it dig in.
Even as the hard edge of the light off the Waste drove a wedge up into his sight, he
became acutely aware of the uneven surface of the frozen snow beneath him. It tilted him to
one side and he discovered the muscles on the left side of his body were pulled taut to keep
him from tipping over. He shifted his buttocks, which only served to reveal a new set of
ridges in the snow beneath him. He forced himself to sit still in the new position.
The conspiracy of sensations was completed by the dead weight of his breather mask
tugging at his neck. He had pulled it down and off his face just before he entered the trance.
He needed to breathe unimpeded and, since he was in a shallow cave out of the wind, he did
not need to circulate the frigid air through the baffles of the breather mask to keep his lungs
from icing over.
Trys myr Lyn pyr Drun sat in a cave in the Northern Range and faced south. Using the
techniques learned from his training to be an Interpreter of the Caynruhl clan, he had entered
his trance in an attempt to lay to rest some of the doubts which had plagued him of late. The
breaking of the trance by what he considered to be minor irritations only intensified the
doubts. All of his life he had wanted to be an Interpreter; one who read, comprehended, and
interpreted the words of the Chronicles of Blood through the Rituals, and by means of
ceremonies helped to fulfill the spiritual aspirations of his clan. But was he meant to be an
Interpreter? His fingers were numb from rubbing his prayer horn over and over in an attempt

