THE DAY BEFORE THE DAY BEFORE
by Steve Rasnic Tem
Steve Rasnic Tem’s audio CD collection Invisible is a summer release from
Speaking Volumes LLC. In November, Centipede Press is bringing out In Concert , the
collected short collaborations between Steve and his wife Melanie Tem. The title story
appeared here in Asimov’s last December. The author’s new tale for us takes a sharp and
unsettling look at what could have happen...
When I was a child, a few dozen decades from now,our mother would have us say a
prayer every morning before breakfast just to, as she put it, “get your heads in the right place
before the day’s clock starts ticking.” She called it a prayer, even though we were agnostic
or atheist or whatever. My mother saw herself as scientific and full of a great number of
theories that sounded like so much fantasy to me.
In any case, she’d have the four of us—John with that breathing problem that so
annoyed me (and that would kill him before his ninth birthday), beautiful red-haired Liz (gone
missing after that terrorist attack on Denver that changed so many lives), Robbie (who left
after high school and hasn’t been seen since), and I, Kent (like Superman’s more interesting
alter ego)—bow our little heads and say in unison, “I may have made some terrible mistake
the day before yesterday, and the day before that, but today I promise to do better, and fix
what I can.”
It was a lot for four small children to say without error, much less understand, and I
always messed up, mumbling some inanity to cover my mistake, such as “the day before,
yada yada yada.” Liz always got it perfect, of course—I don’t know if she understood it or
not. Me, I was fixated on how our mother introduced our little morning mantra: “before the
day’s clock starts ticking.” Did that mean that whatever happened before breakfast didn’t
count? Could I make every mistake possible, without consequence, if I just got up early
enough? The very idea left me dizzy with freedom.
“Mister, your thingy is hanging out.”
I look around in alarm, see the little boy pointing, and discover that I must have
snagged my pocket watch chain on something and now it’s hanging out, dangling with its
two-faced fob. I put it away quickly, as if it were an unmistakable indicator of my occupation,
not some silliness the team had contrived in service of a forced sense of solidarity. I try not
to look too closely at the boy’s face—I always have trouble with the children’s faces. But I
make myself smile at him, and give him a little wave, and he turns away abruptly as if
suddenly alarmed at his own boldness.
The watches had been Carter’s idea. The team doesn’t wear uniforms, of course,
and isn’t really a team per se, since we all do our work solo. The door to our headquarters
simply states “Office 87” in unusually thin, Arial Narrow typeface—if you were to look at an
angle you probably wouldn’t see any words at all. The office is in an old industrial park
outside Washington, D.C., sharing a building with an import/export operation and a small
electronics firm. Williams claims these businesses are also fronts for secret government
agencies, but then Williams has been disturbedat least as long as I’ve worked there. He’s
ten years older than the rest of us, numbering six as of the last time I was in the office, which
was actually a long time ago. Sometimes I wonder if they’ve replaced me. Sometimes I
don’t care.
The boy has pointed me out to his parents, who are now staring at me strangely. Of

course, I don’t know what the boy told them; perhaps he was just fascinated by my eccentric
timepiece, but parents are naturally suspicious of a child’s random encounters with
strangers. Not that I blame them. “Random,” I think, is the most frightening word in the
language.
With our solo assignments carried out in secrecy and with minimal interaction, there
is very little feeling of camaraderie in Office 87. So Carter said we should all wear these
old-fashioned pocket watches, to symbolize that we’re part of a team—the “Time Team,” he
called it, laughing. Actually, we all laughed over that one. Then he made some reference to
television shows in the old days, and how pocket watches had a relationship to fictional
accounts of time travel historically, and though we smiled and laughed at his bit of erudition,
it was strained, because we didn’t really care. Most of the team, I think, care very little about
the past, except in a resentful, uncomfortable way. We have this lonely job, you see, which
we but vaguely understand. Except for Williams, we’re all young guys in our mid-twenties.
Even Williams went along with the watch idea, maybe just so that he, too, would feel
part of a team. The only point of disagreement among us was Carter’s insistence that all the
watches be broken—faces cracked into as many tiny pieces as possible, then glued back in
place—preferably with some of those pieces affixed, deliberately, into the wrong
places—so that they were like non-functioning timepieces converted into small works of art.
It was Williams who backed up Carter’s idea with his own words. “The broken watches have
double significance. The timepieces have no meaning for us, because we are working
through time and are unrestrained by it. But at the same time, we are there in the first place
to make some change, to fix something which, at least from our supervising agencies’
perspectives, is broken.”
You could tell from the way Williams said “perspectives” just how much he trusted the
bosses’ judgment.
The boy’s father looks over at me unpleasantly, but I smile and nod, and the idiot
routine appears to assuage him at least temporarily. “He was just admiring my watch!” I call
out foolishly, lifting it out of my pocket to display it again. All around me I’m aware of people
staring, but I soldier on. “You don’t see many like this anymore!” The two-faced silver fob
spins, four small emeralds for eyes.
Each of us chose our own fob. Carter’s was an antique ornament, a bit of
memorabilia from one of those ancient shows: a telephone booth. Williams attached a
warped and fire-scarred bolt onto his chain. We were all curious, but no one asked. Mine
was the two faces—Comedy on one side, Tragedy on the other—the only thing I had left
from my mother. I remember she liked the way the eyes appeared to glow in the faintest
light. I was fascinated by the way it spun between the two faces, always reminding me how
joy and sorrow arrive randomly into a person’s life, with equal possibility.
I really didn’t expect the powers that be would allow us to carry these watches on our
assignments, but after an initial investigation they didn’t seem to care. My guess is some
official personage somewhere up the line decided it would be good for morale.
The grocery store in Fraser, Colorado, is unusually crowded today, but I’ve learned
that a few seriously deep breaths and a practiced soft-focusing of one’s vision prevent the
worst of the anxiety attacks. Medicine to control such incidents was always standard issue,
but I ran out of the pills a long time ago. I’m not supposed to be here, after all, but thinking
that way gets me nowhere.

Most of the people in here today are tourists, including the young boy’s family, on
their way to some hiking or ski vacation. Most of the other children I see with guarded
glances are likewise strangers, so I’m not likely to have to deal with them to any serious
degree. Out of a population hovering around a thousand there are less than a hundred local
children, and they’re fairly spread out—on most of my trips in for supplies I’m normally
unlikely to encounter more than a dozen of them. On my drive I avoid the local school.
I found this all out before I came here. It’s why I came here—that, and the fact that this
town is very much the same as it was, will be, in my time. This was home. This will be home,
before I came to work for the agency. Oh, my mother’s house hasn’t been built yet, and the
names on the buildings, the brand names in the stores, are all different, but the feel of the
place is almost identical. I’m more aware of land and sky, mountain and stream, than I am of
people here. My initial jump was into Denver —that’s where the mission was—in my day that
city is twice the size, having consumed the western foothills almost entirely. It was like
traveling alone through a gigantic metropolis of the dead. I had to get out of there as quickly
as possible.
I turn around and discover a little girl standing in front of me. Our eyes lock, or rather,
hers lock on mine. She’s a local; I’ve seen her before. A little blonde, curly-headed slip of a
thing. I think dolls and hair-ribbons, afternoon daydreams and playing school. I have
convinced myself that children this age possess some sort of radar that informs them I do
not belong inside their particular circumstance, although none of the children I have ever
encountered on assignment have said anything that would verify this perception. Maybe they
simply don’t know how to put it into words. Her face goes soft, a runny pink. I can’t quite take
my eyes away when the effect begins. It is then I am painfully aware that I cannot feel her true
age. I watch as the life appears to burn out of her, leaving her a cinder, a stone without even
a memory of flesh. In my time she is long dead—in this time her life has hardly begun. As I
gaze at her she seems the oldest creature on the planet, her ageless face shimmering like a
ghost of everything we hold dear.
She smiles at me— love me! her new face appears to say. I give up a sliver of an
involuntary smile, then I turn and practically run to the checkout lane. I can feel people, all
these dead people, turning to stare, noticing me, examining me, but it cannot be helped.
Everything feels out of its proper order and, of course, it is. I am deranged and rearranged.
Everything I left behind exists in a kind of frozen death, and yet what moves around me
where I have come to is a walking death, a talking death of all that is gone. I pay the young
woman at the checkout with the practiced, fleshless smile, place these stinking, moist bills
into her bony hand, and flee.
****
My ancient pickup whines as it struggles to take me farther up the mountain to my
cabin, rented with the rotting (but historically accurate) cash every team member carries for
emergencies. The bills aren’t really rotting, of course, but I will never get used to paper
money, the soft, greasy feel of it. It just feels worthless to me. The amount of money they
supply you for these “rare” emergencies, in fact, is phenomenal. So I have been forced to
conclude that such emergencies have not been so rare after all. Periodically team members
have gone missing. More than a few times we have been told a member required “medical
leave.”
We have been instructed that the adjustments we are to make on these assignments
are intended to be simply and briefly executed—we were never meant to be gone more than
a half hour or so. The reasoning is apparent—the briefer our voyage the less the chance we

will disrupt continuity for everyone else. The adjustments we’re sent to make are supposedly
well-considered, planned out in the finest detail, the possibility of some disaster because of
our meddling either eliminated completely or minimized to within acceptable parameters.
Our mandate is that only seemingly innocuous but absolutely essential adjustments
are ever approved, tiny actions that will save the lives of important personages, for example,
issues of national security and public safety. In other words, we don’t go in with guns blazing
to save some important diplomat or president’s daughter.
Small changes, the kind you’d supposedlyhardly notice. One of my assignments was
to break into a parked car, hot-wire it, and move it forward three and one-half feet. On
another assignment I went back forty years and stole a letter from a man’s desk. Another
time I picked up a candy wrapper and threw it away. Seriously—an entire, very expensive
mission just to dispose of a bit of trash.
The cabin is as simple a living space as I can imagine. Two rooms plus rudimentary
toilet and shower. Both the main room and the sleeping quarters have large enough
windows you can almost feel as if you are living out of doors. In one corner of the main room
are a sink, stove, and refrigerator. I have seen such things in movies, but I’m embarrassed
to say that even after six months here I am not comfortable using these appliances.
I have tried as much as possible to furnish these quarters with simple, ageless
furniture of no particular era or style. Something to sit on. Something to lie down on. A table.
Planks and stiles and some upholstery. I want to find a kind of stillness here. I do not want
the sensation of floating through time.
In the opposite corner is a stone fireplace—the true wonder of my living arrangement.
Unaccustomed as I am to an open flame, I could sit here for hours gazing into the various
patterns made, the subtle variations in color, and feel the oh-so-present, palpable heat. But I
don’t. Knowing the tree shortages to come, how could I? Still, I have to confess I’ve burnt
more wood during my time here than I needed for warmth. At least, I believe, right or wrong, I
have a relatively clear view of the choices I am making.
In Office 87 we never had any idea what our actions were supposed to be preventing,
whom we were saving, whose day we were making the slightest bit better. That has been an
essential part of the protocol under which we operate. Someone else—in fact a room of
someone elses, one would hope—decides everything, including, most importantly, whether
the mission meets that criterion of essentiality via minimal change. We’ve been told it’s all
done by committee, that there are checks and balances, and that everything we’re going to
do on the assignment has been researched thoroughly to minimize the consequences.
None of us completely buys that, of course—we’re not fools. In every government
there are pressures, there are favors owed, advantages to be gained. Not all my
assignments, I am convinced, were in aid of the common good.
But we always hoped for the best. They chose people with minimal ties who wanted
to make the world better through small actions. These were people who had little to hold
them to today. These were people in need of a mission.
These were foolish people who had no idea what they were getting themselves into.
Before our brief jaunts into dead people’s lives they would scan us thoroughly,
looking for foreign substances, chemicals in the blood, anomalies and, I suspect,

contraband. They removed splinters, grit trapped under nails, even microscopic organisms
in some cases. We were to fast for twelve hours before missions. I tried to stretch that to
sixteen whenever possible. We were always told that these were purely precautionary
measures, that there had never been a “negative incident.”
They continually emphasize that their understanding of what we do is incomplete.
Carter says he heard that before any of us were recruited the technicians missed a tiny
wood splinter in a fellow, and when they sent him back it virtually exploded into a tree, with
obvious consequences for the traveler. Williams says that story has been making the rounds
for years and it’s complete crap. Still, I thoroughly check myself over before they do their
scan, just to reassure myself. People make mistakes.
For the trip itself they strap you into a device resembling a boat mounted vertically
onto a metal scaffold. You are not merely strapped to this device, but transfixed by means of
cords, ties, and cuffs which bite into the skin and restrict breathing and movement. A device
resembling some sort of sports helmet, complete with face and mouth guards is squeezed
over your skull, which still isn’t sufficient to shield you from the extraordinarily bright lights
shining onto your face from eight different directions. In the background a technician reads
off blood pressure, respiratory, and electromagnetic readings, which only serves to increase
your panic until, on the verge of nervous collapse, you are launched into sometime else. Or
at least that is how it always was for me. I don’t know how it was for the others—it was
something we all seemed hesitant to discuss.
At the end of your quick assignment you are returned to that same launch chamber,
dragged, or so it seems, from the end of your spine. The force is so great you imagine that if
that segmented column weren’t fully attached to muscle and rib it would slip right out of you
like a snake. The one major difference in your return is that the launch room is dark, quiet,
seemingly abandoned. I’m sure they have their reasons for it—maybe it’s to conserve
power, maybe it’s to minimize agitation during re-entry—but every mission for me it was as
if I’d gone to the end of the world, beyond the years of humankind, with no way to get back to
my own time.
Anomalies have occurred, despite their lame assurances. On one trip Williams came
back with the front half of a small lizard growing out of his left arm, near the elbow. If he bent
his arm too far it squealed in pain. I came back once with a small shiny protuberance on the
inner side of my left foot. They decided it was an additional toe and severed it a few weeks
before my next job.
Carter returned in a state of shock his last mission before I came here, his face
covered in ridges and folds of skin a half-inch deep. Initial speculation was that this might be
some sort of aging after-effect. Carter was terrified. “But I feel fine!” he kept saying. As it
turned out it was just an accumulation of loose, dead skin. The body manufactures a great
deal of it during the course of an average year. Somehow Carter had collected a deposit of
numerous decades’ worth, and all on his face. They just shaved it off, basically. The bottom
layer of skin, the one Carter had departed with, was a bit raw, but none the worse for wear.
Simply one of the many random vagaries of time travel, they explained. I don’t think any of us
found comfort in this statement.
One of the things I do here is walk the woods surrounding the cabin, picking up any
trash I can find, down to the tiniest bits, and examining every plant, every tree, committing
these things, and the land and rock that support them, and the line of sky that backgrounds
them, to memory.

I have never been particularly ecologically minded. Certainly we are trained to cause
minimal damage to the environments we travel into, but that is more a technical issue, I
think, with little philosophical impact on most of us. When you experience such massive
transformations, witness widespread ecological and social changes on every other trip or
so, you tend to accept these waves as natural, inevitable, unchangeable.
But being here for a period of time, knowing how long such things last, I feel
compelled to make these small corrections, these minute removals of what, aesthetically at
least, does not appear to belong. Every trip I take into town I bring my trash and anything
else I no longer need for the landfill. They say they are building another ridge. Maybe they
are.
I am fixing mistakes. And recording, recording all the time. Because having lost my
own time, this—this land, these woods, these stones—this is my last view of the planet.
The Denver assignment had been set for twenty minutes, with an additional three
minutes available for error correction. I arrived in that city’s main park, inside a small area of
trees. I don’t like landing near trees—the possibility of waking up inside one seems all too
real. I am told it has never happened.
A few feet away were some small children playing. I recognized the pale, red-haired
girl from the briefings. Her name was Alice, and she was five years old. She was shy and
somewhat sickly, but she gamely tried to join the other children in their play. They purposely
ignored her. Even good kids can be quite cruel at times.
Her mother was approximately ten yards away, sitting on a bench with other mothers.
She was deep in conversation with one of them. Even diligent parents are sometimes
distracted. Even good parents forget how random the world is, how quickly the unexpected
can occur.
I quickly walked over to the little girl. A small needle protruding from the coin in my
hand delivered the sedative into her arm. I pulled her limp body onto my shoulder and ran to
one side of the park where it bordered the busy street. The little girl, Alice, started to wake
up.
I stopped and looked back at the mothers on the bench. No one had noticed. But my
instructions were that the mother had to notice, had to see, so I waited. I didn’t shout, I didn’t
wave my arms, I just waited.
The little girl on my shoulder started to cry. I felt a pang, but I reassured myself that
this was okay. They hadn’t suggested I hurt her—of course I would have said no if they had. I
didn’t believe they actually would. Surely they wouldn’t. We’re not out there to hurt people.
Now the mother, and the other mothers, were screaming. The little girl Alice was
screaming. All according to plan. I ran across the street.
The back door of the building was unlocked. I ran in, started up the stairs. The little
girl was crying. “Alice,” I said. “Alice, I’m sorry. Everything’s going to be all right. I promise.”
Idiotic, of course. I really had no idea.
The room was empty except for an old stained mattress on the floor. I gently set her
down on that. She wasn’t crying so much now—it was more like a whimper, like a small hurt
animal. It made me feel worse than before. I couldn’t think of anything else to say—I’ve never

been good with children. So I said, “Alice.” I repeated it, “Alice, Alice, Alice.” Then I said, “I’m
sorry” again.
She looked up at me. She was getting that pink blur. I was seeing her skull. I kept
telling myself I wasn’t hurting her—this wasn’t that big a deal. I would make my return. Her
mother would find her here. She’d be fine. I kept waiting for the air to shimmer, for the world
to crack open, and then they’d drag me back where I belonged.
But she was only five years old. How could I leave her there? What if her mother
didn’t find her right away? What if that’s the way they intended it—maybe she was supposed
to be by herself in this room for hours? Five years old and by herself. Terrified.
In aid of what? Maybe she’d become a politician, this experience having shaped her.
Maybe even a world leader. Maybe this event would inspire ambition, or develop certain
strengths. The world would be a better place.
Or maybe this was all meant to just line someone’s pockets. Maybe someone was
about to get rich off her pain. Or maybe because this had happened to her, some way,
somehow, the terrorist attack on Denver would not take place, and my sister Liz would be
alive.
I waited and waited, well past the time, and listened to this child cry. Until I could not
take it anymore.
I picked her up. “We’ll find Mommy,” I said. And started for the door. Behind me I
heard the shimmering—I turned and saw Williams’ face. Something had gone wrong. Now I
was part of the past needing to be fixed. But this child. I ran for the door, ignoring his shout.
I raced out of the building with Alice in my arms. Everything so bright; around me the
air was opening in several places. There was Carter. There were people I did not recognize.
Dashing across the street we were almost run down by one of those old yellow taxi
cabs. He stopped just in time. I held Alice tightly. And then when we reached the park and I
saw her mother talking to the police officer I set her down and let her go.
I turned and ran back to where the air had opened. I went into the building and up
those stairs. I waited for the tug on my spine. And felt nothing.
****
There was, I think, only a random chance I could have escaped the local authorities.
And yet here I am. And I’ve never felt the tug again, and there have been no signs of a
rescue attempt, and after this long I do not expect there will be. It is onlytime that separates
us, after all. They could have come at any moment if they’d really wanted to retrieve me.
Perhaps it’s my fault. I should have followed the instructions precisely. It wasn’t my
decision to make. What’s one little girl’s tears to the destiny of millions?
Still, she was so frightened. I was frightened. There are important people in this
world, and there are unimportant people. Big people and small people. It has always been
this way. It doesn’t matter how much I rail against it. The decisions of a few will change the
lives of the rest of us. There is nothing to be done. And if you are a small person, they don’t
always come back for you.

I cannot say how I feel about this—my feelings are lost somewhere in time. I have felt
them leave my body, on their way to where I cannot follow.
At night without the light pollution of a large city I have a clear view of the stars, in a
sky so expansive I can hardly take it all in. I do not enjoy feeling small. I cannot appreciate or
accept the basic facts of individual demise. Perhaps I am just a child. Clearly, I am out of
order. Out of place.
I have a theory. I think it would have pleased my mother to know that I, too, have
theories. Just like a scientist who knows what he or she is about. Liz would have said,
“Mom! Kent has a theory!” And the whole family would have gathered around to listen to it.
I believe that without a strong sense of causality, you cannot feel real emotion: love,
hate, passion. How can you grieve someone not yet born? How can you love someone who
lived before your lifetime?
The rest of the team would have laughed to hear me say such things. I’d always been
so practical—I did my job, and didn’t understand all that much about it. No sense of the big
picture.
Now I am living hundreds of years away from anything I thought I knew. If “living” is the
right word, surrounded as I am by the dead, who had been dead ages before I was even
born.
Now, memory is my time machine. It is a highly unreliable time machine, subject to
frequent breakdown and delays due to constant, meaningless distraction. But it is all I have.
“Let’s get going before the day’s clock starts ticking,” my mother sings, going around
to each of our bowls to ladle in the hot cereal she has made. Fraser is an ice cold town, “the
ice box of the nation” they sometimes call it, but our mother’s hot cereal has the power to
protect us from the ultimate cold.
We bow our little heads. John breathes noisily, scarily, and I’m annoyed because he
kept me up all night with it, but I stretch my hand under the table and put it on his just the
same, because we are brothers and buddies and I want him to know I am still here, sitting
beside him in the warmest kitchen in the world.
On the other side of me, out of the corner of my eye, I can see my sister Liz with her
beautiful red hair. She doesn’t know it, but sometimes I will gaze at her head for what seems
likehours, trying to find all the patterns her hair makes, which are like flames of shifting color,
and though I know they aren’t real flames, I want to ask her why I can still feel their heat.
Then there is Robbie, always so quiet, but always the first to begin, “I may have made
some terrible mistake the day before yesterday, and the day before that, but today I
promise...” already I’ve lost the words, I just never can remember. I can never get it right. So I
just give it all I have, say the only words I own, the words sitting there at the tip of my tongue,
“the day before, the day before, yadda yadda yadda, Amen.”

