The

Ancient
Future
the Dark Age

Traci Harding

TO SUE
FOR SHARING THE DREAM
ALL THESE YEARS

Contents
Dedication
Characters of the Dark Age
Prydyn, 519 AD
Britain, 519 AD
Degannwy
Aberffraw

PART 1 TIME
1 The Stones
2 Time Shifts
3 The Pact
4 An Arranged Marriage
5 The North Tower
6 The Second Prince
7 The Magician
8 The Storms of Gwynedd
9 Death of a King

PART 11 SPACE
10 Inauguration
11 The Quest
12 Union
13 Winds of Change
14 A Winter Solace
15 Full Moon
16 Samhain

17 The Five Dark Days
18 Anger to Avenge
19 Burgeoning
20 Beltaine

PART 111 REALITY
21 Secrets from the Stones
22 Dissolution
23 Where is Home?
24 The Visit
25 Awakenings
26 Tylwyth Teg
27 The Returning

Bibliography
References
Acknowledgments
About the Author
Credits
Copyright Page
Cover
About PerfectBound

Characters of the Dark Age
Heroine
Prince of Gwynedd
High Merlin
King of Gwynedd
Queen of Gwynedd
Brother of King
Sister of King
Brother of Maelgwn
King of Powys
Princess of Powys
King of Dumnonia
Ruler of Dyfed
King of Gwent
Ruler of Dalriada
Ruler of Merica

Tory Alexander
Maelgwn – ‘The Dragon’
Taliesin Pen Beirdd
Caswallon
Sorcha
Cadfer
Lady Gladys
Prince Caradoc
Chiglas
Vanora
Catulus
Vortipor
Aurelius Caninus
Fergus MacErc
Ossa

Maidens and Ladies
Tory’s maid
Mute from Aberffraw
Vanora’s maid
Maiden at Aberffraw
Maiden at Aberffraw
Head maid, Aberffraw
Head maid, Degannwy
Rhys’ wife
Cedric’s wife
Proprietor of whorehouse
Chiglas’ crone

Katren
Ione
Malvina
Cara
Alma
Drusilla
Fenalla
Jenovefa
Mabel
Old Hetty
Mahaud

Knights and Advisers
Maelgwn’s Champion
King’s Champion
Maelgwn’s messenger
Maelgwn’s keeper of records
Maelgwn’s watchman
Maelgwn’s cook
Red-headed knight
King’s accountant
Trainer of armies, Aberffraw
Maelgwn’s adviser
Maelgwn’s knight
Maelgwn’s squire and musician
Maelgwn’s second squire
Vortipor’s Champion
Brockwell’s son
Maelgwn’s son
Rhys’ son

Calin Brockwell
Tiernan
Cadogan
Madoc
Vaugnan
Jeven
Cedric
Percival
Gilmore
Rhys
Angus
Selwyn
Tadgh
Queron
Bryce
Rhun
Gawain

PART 1

TIME

1

The Stones

A

s evening cast its shadow across the horizon,
Tory secured the last bolt and replaced the
hubcap. She tilted back on her heels to admire
her work when, out of the corner of her eye, she noticed
that the back tyre was also losing air. ‘Goddamn hire
cars,’ she cried, kicking the dying tyre with her steelcapped boot. ‘I don’t believe it!’
It was difficult to see how bad the puncture was as
the old country road was poorly lit. Tory drew back her
long hair and sighed, kissing goodbye to any chance of
making it to her aunt’s in Oxfordshire by dinner.
Disheartened, she turned and lent on the car to mull
over her problem.
The difference between a good situation and a bad one
lay only in one’s perception. The voice of her Sensei came
into her thoughts.

It wasn’t as if she was afraid to be in the countryside
at night, for she was more than capable of protecting
herself. Only a few months back she’d achieved her
second Dan grade (black belt) in Tae-kwon-do. She’d
also trained in kickboxing, a sport her brother, Brian,
had encouraged her to pursue.
Brian had been Tory’s driving force, her fiercest
competitor and closest friend. Her recollection of the
events that led to his death continued to plague her,
though two years had passed since the tragedy.
On the final day of their first Dan grade competition,
Brian and Tory had competed against strong opposition
to secure the title in their respective weight classes.
Brian had sustained a couple of bad strikes to the head,
but the doctor who examined him afterwards gave him
the all clear to go home. The next morning Tory found
her brother dead. An autopsy determined the cause of
death to be a subdural haematoma, which is swollen,
bruised tissue that leads to a build up of pressure on the
brain. The doctors compounded her family’s distress by
explaining that if this had been detected at the time of
the injury, Brian might have been saved. Tory never
competed again, and from then on she regarded the
medical profession with considerable scepticism. Brian
was gone and her family had to live with the knowledge
that it didn’t have to happen.
Tory’s father Renford, a Welshman born and
educated, was a professor of British history and language.
He travelled the world lecturing at universities and was
often called upon to investigate archeological finds.

Tory’s mother, Helen, was a classical harpist of some
merit, and was forever flying off to perform with one
orchestra or another. These professional obligations sent
her parents abroad soon after Brian’s death. Tory had
insisted on staying at home in Sydney as she wanted to
finish her year at university. She spent most of her time
on her own anyway, studying history, mythology, music,
philosophy, metaphysics, and the like. Her father’s
knowledge of ancient languages had also ensured that
Tory had a firm grasp of Brythanic (ancient Welsh) and
Latin, in addition to the other languages she’d studied at
university. Her parents had never pushed her into the
workforce for they were well off and ardent students
themselves.
Renford and Helen hated having to leave Tory on
her own most of the year. So, out of fear that she would
wind up a hermit, they suggested that a change of
scenery might do her good. As her father’s passion for
his heritage had rubbed off on her over the years, Tory
thought it high time she investigated Britain’s historical
sites for herself.
Tory glanced up at the encroaching night sky. She
remembered seeing an inn on the corner as she’d turned
off the highway, however that was quite a way back. She
looked down the road in the other direction, but as
there weren’t any houses nearby, she considered the
fence beside her.
The property was bordered by large trees, and as
Tory approached them her heart began to pound in her
chest. ‘I don’t believe it,’ she uttered, as she saw a large

circle of stones in the field beyond. She was tempted to
investigate so she retrieved her backpack, shoulder bag
and saxophone case, and locked up the car for the
night.
The circle appeared to be at least a hundred feet in
diameter, and Tory guessed there were about seventy
stones. Some were much larger than others; the
elements and humankind had taken their toll over the
centuries of the circle’s existence.
As she reached the perimeter of the circle a strong
presence came over her and she stopped in her tracks.
How strange that I should find myself here tonight. She was
a little scared by this thought, for tonight was the
summer solstice. When Tory recalled tales of Wiccan
and Druidic practices traditionally held on this night a
shiver ran over her.
She knelt down to retrieve her black leather jacket,
the only possession of her brother’s she had wanted to
keep. Well known as Brian’s lucky jacket, it was
reinforced at the elbows and bore a large-winged Harley
Davidson emblem on the back. It was also two sizes too
large for her and very comfortable. As Tory felt the
familiar safety of the jacket, she assured herself that it
hadn’t been fear that made her shiver, just the cool
evening air.
She reached out to one of the taller stones and ran
her fingers over its rough surface. She recalled stories of
how these stones would go down to a brook to bathe at
midnight on New Year’s Eve . . . Or was it All Hallow’s
Eve? It didn’t matter, as for the Celts of old both days
fell on the same date, October thirty-first, and were

celebrated with a festival known as Samhain. Another
story of how a witch had turned a king and his men to
stone brought the name of the circle to mind, ‘The
King’s Men, of course!’ Tory turned to look out across
the field behind her. Beyond she knew that there should
be another small gathering of stones called ‘The
Whispering Knights’, but they could not be seen from
this distance. Across the road from the car, no doubt
hidden by bushes, she would find the ‘King Stone’, set
on a ridge looking to Long Crompton. This represented
the king’s wager with a witch that he could see the
village from the ridge. It must have been bad weather
because he obviously lost. The witch then turned all the
knights to stone before turning herself into a tree. Well,
at least I know where I am now, Tory thought.
Turning on her torch, Tory set about sorting
through the clothes, books, sheet music and toiletries in
her backpack in search of something to eat, rummaging
amongst her CD Walkman and its speakers, her
headphones, camera, spare film and batteries. It was a
good thing Tory wasn’t big on fashion as there was
scarce room for any clothes. What she really felt like
was a hamburger with fries and a Coke, yet all she
managed to dig up was a half-eaten health slice, a bottle
of water and a packet of unsalted cashews. It wasn’t
much but it was better than starving.
Tipping the last cashew out of the packet into her
mouth, Tory stuffed her things back in her pack. She
leant against a large rock and lit a joint that she’d rolled
for the trip. ‘Here I am getting high, at what some
would consider a sacred site, on the night of the summer

solstice, at . . .’ She strained her eyes to check her
watch, ‘. . . quarter to midnight.’ Tory smiled, this was
definitely not what she’d imagined she’d be doing this
evening.
As she stood to face the circle again, she thought of
all the celebrations that would be taking place tonight
at the more public sacred sites like Glastonbury and
Stonehenge. People would be performing old rites,
dancing, singing and paying homage to the Goddess,
that is, Mother Earth. Oddly enough, the atmosphere
surrounding the stones no longer perturbed her. On the
contrary, it seemed to welcome, even beckon her
towards the centre. So she ventured into the middle,
dragging her belongings along with her. ‘Close enough.’
Tory dropped her things where she stood and took off
her boots. The potent energy of the place intrigued her,
so she sat on the ground in the lotus position. The back
of her hands rested gently on her knees and her thumb
and middle finger met to form a circle, aiding the
circulation of energy around her body. She closed her
eyes and took three deep breaths, to achieve a relaxed,
peaceful state.
Her attention was drawn to the sounds of little
night creatures. She inhaled progressively deeper,
focusing her thoughts on the hooting of an owl close by.
Tory had become so engrossed with this sound that she
did not notice the light around her growing steadily
more intense. This often happened when she meditated;
colours would emerge in her mind, intense colour at
times, but never before had the light been so white for
so long. She continued to breathe deeply, imagining

that she was inhaling the brilliant white light
throughout her body, and it filled her with a sense of
strength and well-being.
The owl stopped hooting and Tory became aware of
a faint humming, like the buzzing in your ears after a
rock concert, only this was more melodic. It gradually
increased in volume to the point where it bothered her
and she was compelled to open her eyes.
The white light she thought she had imagined, truly
surrounded her and appeared to be exuding from the
ground within the circle. The mist rose towards the sky
to form a large billowing cloud. From within the largest
stone, a ball of blue light, no bigger than a coin, made
its way towards her.
What is it? A fairy perhaps? She’d never actually
seen one, so she couldn’t dispel the possibility.
In her study of these stones, Tory recalled that
scientists had documented sightings of this light
phenomena. Some said it was caused by geological and
electromagnetic factors, but the energy involved was so
exotic that it was not yet understood. Others suggested
that it could relate to consciousness itself, considering
consciousness as a field effect; like actually seeing the
equivalent of what the Chinese refer to as Chi energy.
The sound of laughter then began to filter through
Tory’s head and it sounded suspiciously male. This irked
her and she looked around for its source. ‘Is this some
kind of elaborate hoax?’ she asked.
The laughter rose again, only clearer now.
Tory drew herself up straight. ‘Show yourself. I am
not afraid.’

The light was still for a moment. Then in the blink
of an eye it darted towards her, almost touching her
forehead. Tory’s limbs froze, and she began to feel faint
as the light penetrated her skin.

2

Time Shifts

T

ory woke the next morning, bathed by the
warmth of the sunshine. She squinted at the
blue sky above, shielding her eyes from the glare,
then stretched to relax the kinks in her body after
sleeping on the hard earth.
The ball of light! She sat up so abruptly her head
spun.
All her bags were accounted for, and as far as she
could tell she hadn’t been harmed in any way. ‘Was that
for real?’ She rested her head in her hand, recalling the
previous night.
Tory felt a gritty paint smeared on her brow and
looked at her fingers that were smudged with blue.
‘What the hell is this?’ She pulled a small mirror from
her backpack. Stamped on her brow was the image of a
dragon. In Celtic mythology this symbol represented

the guardian spirit of Ancient Britain. Why had she
been marked with it? Tory decided that although it was
rather cute, the dragon had to go. She began
rummaging through her bag for a tissue when she
remembered that they were in the glove compartment
of the car. ‘It’s time I got moving anyway.’
It wasn’t until Tory stood up that she realised there
were a few things amiss. ‘What’s happened to the car?’
She ran towards the road that was now nothing more
than a dirt track. ‘Where’s the fence, and the road for
that matter? What the hell’s going on here?’ She looked
about her noticing that although the landscape was
more or less the same, the landmarks had all changed.
The trees not only differed in height and location but
also in species, and there were many more of them.
‘Stay calm,’ she told herself. ‘I’m sure there’s a
perfectly reasonable explanation.’ But when Tory turned
back towards her bags she was dumb struck.
The stones, which had been crumbled and broken
the day before, now stood over seven feet tall and were
fewer in number. The peace of the field enveloped her,
there was no distant rumbling of traffic, no power-lines,
planes, anything! Tory’s mind went blank; she couldn’t
even begin to fathom the possibilities of what might
have befallen her.
She became aware of a growing rumble. The ground
beneath her began to vibrate before any sound reached
her ears. In the distance she spied eight men on
horseback, racing down across the open field towards
her. She snapped out of her daze and pulled a cap from
her bag to cover the mark on her forehead.

The men drew their horses to a halt outside the
circle and were all, rather curiously, dressed in authentic
suits of armour. I knew the Poms were old fashioned,
but this is ridiculous, she thought. ‘Hey there, what’s
happening?’ She waved in greeting as she walked
casually towards the perimeter of the circle. Her
greeting was not met with any reaction from the group,
it was as if they hadn’t understood a word she’d said.
‘By the Goddess,’ one of the knights exclaimed with
playful delight. ‘It be a woman.’
He wasn’t speaking modern English, but what
sounded like an obscure form of Welsh. Tory was able to
discern this as Welsh and its ascendant Brythanic were
like second languages to her. Her father’s passion for the
old tongues of his people was such that he persisted in
using them most of the time.
Tory stopped several feet away from the men as they
appeared a rather ominous bunch: unshaven and
unwashed, their armour tainted with blood.
‘What say thee, Majesty?’ One of the younger men
commented to the dark-haired man beside him. ‘She be
a feisty challenge, and I could use the exercise.’ His
request was met with much encouragement from his
companions.
Tory didn’t like his tone of voice, yet the word
‘majesty’ played on her mind. She turned to the one the
young man had addressed thus; he did seem to possess a
certain regal disposition that set him apart from the
others. He sat quietly, observing Tory’s attire with a
very curious expression, before placing a hand on the
young man’s shoulder to advise him. ‘This woman doth

employ a tongue and dress the like of none we have
seen before. Caution Brockwell, a witch be said to
haunt this place.’
‘What!’ Tory exclaimed.
‘I am not afraid,’ Brockwell said. ‘If she be a witch,
thou shalt have her head.’
The dark-haired man looked at Tory and, with some
encouragement from the rest of the men, smiled to give
Brockwell his consent.
The hair on the back of Tory’s neck stood on end.
She stepped away as Brockwell dismounted. These guys
are serious . . . ‘Now hold on,’ Tory cried out. ‘Could I
speak to the man in charge for a moment, please?’ She
made her way towards them hoping to appease the
situation.
‘I would start running if I were thee.’ Brockwell
moved to intercept her.
‘Brockwell, one moment,’ the dark-haired man said,
gravely. This woman bore a vague resemblance to his
deceased mother, so he allowed her to voice her protest.
Tory nodded politely, grateful for the chance to
reason with him. ‘Why, may I ask, dost thou think me a
witch?’
Brockwell began to answer but his superior held up
a hand and replied, ‘If thou art not a witch, then why
dost thou appear so uncouth?’
‘Uncouth!’ she repeated. ‘Ye all appear very strange
to my eyes, I assure thee. Doth this mean that I should
conclude that thou art involved in demonic practices
and deserve to die? With no proof, no means to defend
thyself.’ Tory realised she was being a little over-

dramatic, but she had him thinking. ‘Be this thy
concept of justice?’
Brockwell went for his sword. ‘Who art thou to
question a Prince of Gwynedd! I shall sever thy head
from thy shoulders for such insolence.’
The Prince waved him to silence, but with a smile
this time. ‘Brockwell, I do believe I see her point.’ He
paused to consider her words. ‘What dost thou suggest I
do, give thee a weapon to slay one of my own men? This
would seem rather absurd, would it not?’ With this his
men broke into laughter.
Tory held her tongue until they had finished. They’ll
all be laughing on the other side of their faces by the time I’m
finished with them. ‘May I suggest a solution that I
consider to be fair?’
‘Please,’ the Prince implored her, rather intrigued by
her manner.
‘If thy friend here removes his sword and protective
armour, I would like to fight him for safe passage.’ Tory
chose her words carefully. ‘If thou art agreeable, I would
consider that a good show.’
Again the Prince and his knights, including young
Brockwell, fell about laughing. The Prince had to
question this further. ‘Am I to understand, that thee
wishes to fight Brockwell with thy bare hands?’
Tory was not fazed and pretended to ignore their
mocking good cheer. ‘Why?’ she asked, giving Brockwell
the once over, ‘dost thou not think him up to it?’
With this the Prince and his knights were beside
themselves, however Brockwell’s humour was dwindling. The Prince wiped a tear from his cheek as he

caught his breath. ‘I think it be only fair to warn thee,
Brockwell be my champion, he hast never been
defeated in game or battle.’
This announcement made Brockwell even more
smug, and he stripped off his armour to reveal a sweaty,
muscular body. His long dark hair, a mass of knotted
curls, clung to his bare skin. He reminded Tory of her
brother, as their eyes were the same piercing blue. He
was no taller than her but looked to be twice her body
weight in muscle alone. All the better, she concluded. It
will slow him down.
‘I am not worried,’ Tory assured them.
‘I can see that.’ The Prince looked down at her,
shaking his head. ‘Still, I fear Brockwell will snap thy
tiny frame like a twig.’
Tory found this comment rather charming and
smiled as she reminded him, ‘Only a moment ago thee
gave Brockwell leave to violate me in whatever way he
saw fit. Be there a difference?’
The Prince acknowledged this to be true, realising
that he may have been a bit rash.
‘She shall bewitch thee, Majesty. Speak to her no
longer.’ Brockwell stepped forward to draw the Prince’s
attention away from Tory. ‘I am more than happy to rip
her limb from limb with my bare hands.’
The Prince was now rather reluctant to give him
leave, but his men would indeed think him bewitched if
he did not. ‘So be it.’
‘Safe passage, remember.’ Tory received a nod of
confirmation from the Prince before she backed up to
prepare herself. She took off her jacket and wrapped her

hair quickly into a bun to prevent it from being pulled.
Where on earth am I? Tory found some tape in her bag
and bound her hands as she did for competition,
managing the task within minutes. She decided she
must find out who this prince claimed to be; if there was
one thing she knew thoroughly it was British history.
She walked to about five feet away from Brockwell
and, after rolling up her sleeves, turned her cap around
backwards so that she could see clearly. ‘So, might I ask
thy name before I meet my fate?’ Tory said to the
Prince.
‘No Majesty. Do not answer.’ Brockwell intervened,
his fiery eyes fixed on Tory.
‘I must also insist,’ the eldest knight added.
The Prince was obliged to heed the advice of his
men. ‘Afterwards perhaps.’
‘There will be no afterwards,’ Brockwell assured
him.
Tory pretended to be indifferent. ‘Alright then, if that
be the way of it.’ She resumed her dry, confident tone of
voice. ‘I will just have to beat it out of thy boy here.’
Tory purposely turned her back on her opponent,
walking slowly and confidently into the circle of stones
to take her place. She could feel Brockwell’s rage build
to breaking point when she called him a boy, as this was
obviously something he worked hard to disprove.
Seconds later, and with a total disregard for chivalry,
Brockwell came charging at her from behind. She
stopped to time the impending impact and turned her
body slightly to take the great weight of his body over
her right shoulder.

He was mumbling something to the effect of, ‘I will
teach thee some respect . . .’ before he’d even realised
he was airborne.
Tory brought him crashing to the ground on his
back. She went down on one knee and buried an elbow
deep into his solar plexus before darting backwards to a
safe distance.
It was clear that Brockwell had no idea what had
happened. The other knights, who were laughing at
Brockwell’s misfortune, began teasing him from their
mounts. ‘Good show!’ the Prince commented to Tory
in encouragement, surprised that she was not dead
already.
It didn’t take Brockwell long to recover. He got
back to his feet, and was seething with humiliation. ‘I
shall rip thy heart out and rape thee while thy body be
still warm,’ he taunted, stalking her.
Tory kept her humour. Brockwell was seeming more
and more like her brother who had made worse threats
over the years to frighten her into retreat. ‘My, my, that
be a vivid picture, still I do not think so somehow,’ Tory
replied. Brockwell lunged forward to grab her neck but
she pulled his arms to either side of her, kneeing his
stomach. This sent him stumbling backwards, and
before he’d had a chance to recover, Tory spun a full
360 degrees to finish him off with a kick to the side of
his head. Her adrenalin was pumping now and it felt
good. She looked back to the Prince, who appeared
rather wonder struck. ‘Champion indeed,’ she said.
‘What dost thou think, three points and I win?’
The Prince merely motioned behind her.

Tory turned to find Brockwell on his feet, blood
oozing from the side of his face where her steel-capped
boot had hit. With no time for her to fend off the blow,
he punched her in exactly the same place, putting the
full force of his body behind it. As she hit the ground it
felt as if he had shattered her cheekbone. There is no
pain, she told herself as she saw Brockwell approaching
to finish her off.
‘My dreams are filled with better than the likes of
thee,’ Brockwell spat in disgust, bending down to pull
her to her feet.
Tory instinctively went into a tuck position. She
grabbed hold of Brockwell’s arms as he leant down, and
used her feet to propel him over her and onto his back.
She flipped herself onto her stomach, taking hold of
Brockwell round the front of the neck to temporarily
paralyse him by applying pressure to the vital points
located there. She maintained a firm hold, pointing to
the Prince with her free hand. ‘Very soon he will be
dead. Dost thou yield to spare this boy’s life?’
Brockwell tried to shake loose of her grasp, his face
red from the strain.
‘I yield and pronounce thee victorious this day,’ the
Prince told her.
‘And thy name?’ Tory asked, as Brockwell began to
squirm harder.
The eldest of the advisers whispered quietly to the
Prince, ‘Majesty, I beseech thee . . .’
‘I swear I will kill him,’ Tory yelled impatiently.
Little did she know that the life she held in her
hand belonged not only to the Prince’s Champion and

best friend, but to his cousin who was a duke no less.
The Prince was not about to let him die.
‘I am Maelgwn, son of King Caswallon of
Gwynedd,’ he shouted. ‘And if thee would kindly
release my knight, I will be greatly indebted to thee.’
Tory let Brockwell go; it would take him at least a
few minutes to recover. She got to her feet, her mind in
motion. Maelgwn, a Welsh king, she recalled. Tory
guessed him to be around the same age as herself. Now
then, when was he supposed to have been born? Around the
late fifth century if memory serves. ‘So what year be this?’
she asked. ‘Around five twenty?’
The Prince, though surprised by the question,
answered. ‘Five nineteen, to be exact.’
Tory held her face where Brockwell had hit her.
Maelgwn, Maelgwn? Damn, what did they call him? A cold
chill ran down her spine as it dawned on her. ‘Prince
Maelgwn, Dragon of the Isle. I believe our meeting may
have been intended.’ Tory removed her cap to reveal
the Dragon on her forehead. ‘Recognise this?’
Upon seeing the mark there was a rumbling of discontent among the knights. The Prince, appearing a mite
stunned himself, raised the shield from the side of his
horse and turned it to face Tory; it bore the same Dragon.
Tory squealed with amazement. ‘Dost thou know
who put it there?’ she asked.
‘Nay, who?’ the Prince mistook her meaning.
‘Well, I am afraid I don’t know,’ she explained,
mildly disappointed. Tory stopped mid-thought, feeling
the cold steel of a sword at her throat; she could only
assume Brockwell had recovered.

‘No common woman possesses such skills, thou art
in cahoots with demons.’
‘I agree.’ A heavy set, red-headed knight spoke up.
‘Do it, Brockwell.’
‘This doth not say much for thy word,’ Tory
squeezed out, looking to Maelgwn. She dared not move,
to save cutting her own throat.
‘Brockwell, withdraw thy sword,’ Maelgwn ordered.
‘But Majesty, hast she caused thee to take leave of
thy senses. Did thee not see?’
‘Calin!’ Maelgwn’s voice thundered, shocking
Brockwell to silence. ‘I ordered thee to yield!’
Tory was beginning to see why they called Maelgwn
the Dragon. Brockwell reluctantly slid the sword away,
making sure he nicked her neck in the process. She
touched her throat to discover he’d drawn blood. ‘Thee
did that on purpose,’ she accused him, angered by the
scar it would leave.
‘Aye.’ He glared at her a moment, his wild blue eyes
ablaze with hate and fear. He replaced his sword in its
scabbard and moved to retrieve his armour.
‘Majesty,’ the eldest knight pointed behind them,
where a single rider made haste towards the group.
‘Now what?’ Tory grumbled, nursing her wound.
‘Cadogan,’ the red-headed knight announced with
good cheer, riding off to meet him halfway.
As the party seemed more interested in their
comrade, Tory backed up quietly to collect her gear.
Fairly confident that she knew where she was, she’d
definitely decided that she wanted to be elsewhere. Why
me? Tory slipped on her jacket and zipped it all the way

up. Because you always wanted to come here. She hoisted
on her backpack, looking over at the knights to see that
the horseman had reached them.
A few torrid words passed between Cadogan and the
others, before the Prince ordered them all to move out
at once.
Something has got them worried. What would these men
fear? Tory watched as the knights rode off ahead of the
Prince who turned and rode towards her direction, his
expression grave.
Brockwell, who had taken off after the others,
pulled up when he noticed. ‘Nay Majesty, please. She
will only slow thee down.’
‘I promised safe passage. I cannot leave her to Saxon
mercy. Go with the others, I will catch thee up by
nightfall.’ Maelgwn was angry at his knight’s incessant
disrespect. He had his reasons for wanting to spare this
girl and his decision would be questioned by none bar
his father. ‘Go!’ He stressed the urgency.
The thundering sound of horses’ hooves and
wagons, perhaps hundreds of them, rose to a deafening
roar as they approached from the hill behind them.
Brockwell had to move now, or he would never make it
round the ridge unseen.
‘Saxons,’ Tory whispered, knowing them to be one
of the more barbaric tribes of the time.
‘Climb on,’ the Prince said. ‘I shall take us around
the other way, through the forest.’
Tory backed away; he was an important historical
figure and she would not be responsible for getting him
killed. ‘Nay, thee will never outrun them with me . . .’

‘Do not argue with me woman, get on,’ the Prince
snapped, short on patience and time.
The Saxon tribe emerged over the crest of the hill
and a few of the riders bolted on ahead in pursuit of the
Prince’s party.
‘They must have spotted Brockwell.’ Tory took hold
of the Prince’s arm, and with one almighty heave
Maelgwn lifted her, bags and all, onto the saddle behind
him.
‘Hold on,’ he cautioned as he turned the horse
around and headed off down the ridge towards the
forest.

3

The Pact

T

he Prince rode hard for well over an hour, but
the forest had become so dense that he was
forced to slow his steed down to a walking pace.
Tory wasn’t too fond of horses and had found the
ride a rather harrowing experience. Still, she was calm
now, as she sat in silence, resting her head against her
escort’s back.
Her rest was interrupted as the horse came to an
abrupt standstill. Tory opened her eyes and withdrew
her arms from around the Prince. They had reached a
stream, which was a welcome sight indeed for it had
been a long time between drinks. The Prince threw a
leg over the horse and slid off, turning to help Tory.
She could feel herself blushing; she’d never received
this kind of treatment back home. Most of the guys Tory
had hung out with were her brother’s friends who’d
never wasted any airs and graces on her. If they had, she

probably would have found it patronising and decked
them.
‘I believe we have reached a safe distance,’ he
assured her, leading his horse to the stream.
When the Prince crouched down to take a drink,
splashing his face and neck, Tory took off her
cumbersome backpack and followed suit. The water
relieved her aching cheek. Over the past few hours it
had constantly reminded her of how cocky she’d been,
and how stupid – turning her back on an opponent
during a fight. The slice Brockwell had made on her
neck stung like a paper cut, and became even more
irritated when she washed it. Tory then let her hair
loose and brushed out the knots, before tossing the
brush back in her pack.
Only then did she notice that the Prince had taken
a seat and was watching her with some amusement.
‘Thou art so extraordinary,’ Maelgwn said. ‘By what
name art thou known?’
‘Tory Alexander,’ she answered, feeling slightly
embarrassed. ‘Tory, to my friends.’
‘And, where art thou from?’
This was a tricky question and she didn’t want to
pause too long to consider it, in case he thought she was
concocting a lie. ‘My home be far away, in a country
known as Australia.’
The Prince seemed perplexed by her answer. ‘Then
how can it be that I, who consider myself to be fairly
well learned, have no knowledge of this place? And
how be it that thee speaks my tongue if thou art not
from these parts?’

‘Ah well, my country will not be discovered for
another twelve hundred years. As for speaking thy
tongue, my father teaches British history and language.
He was born a Briton himself, or Welsh as they be
known in my time.’
The Prince was taken aback a moment. ‘Thou art
from the future?’
‘Indeed.’ Tory looked him straight in the eye,
hoping he wouldn’t think her mad.
‘What year doth thou claim to be from?’ Maelgwn
asked. ‘The truth now,’ he added firmly.
‘I was born in the year nineteen sixty-six,’ she
began. ‘Yesterday, for me, was the year nineteen ninetythree.’
The Prince rose in fury, his eyes wide with disbelief.
It was only now that Tory realised how tall he was.
He stood at a little over six foot and towered over her.
This was unusual for one of his race in this period in
history, as most of the Britons were more akin to her
height, as Brockwell was.
Tory held out her hand to calm him. ‘I think I can
prove it, if thee will just hear me out.’
Maelgwn was beginning to think his men were right
about this girl; he didn’t believe one word of her tale.
Still, he was interested to see how far she’d go before he
got the truth out of her. So he took a seat and beckoned
to Tory to go ahead with her defence.
She smiled meekly and dived into her bag. Thank
you Mum, for giving me an instamatic. Tory brought out
the camera for his inspection, and the Prince reached
for it.

‘Careful,’ Tory said, and he quickly withdrew his
hands. This made her smile. ‘It be harmless, I promise.
Thee must just be careful not to drop it, as it be very
fragile.’ Tory offered it to him again.
Maelgwn looked over the camera, not game to
touch it. ‘Thee also appears fragile, yet thou hast quite a
sting. Thou hast my leave to explain.’
‘Okay.’ Tory walked a few paces away and squatted
down, looking at the Prince through the lens. ‘This be a
camera, it takes pictures.’
‘It draws?’
‘Sort of.’ Tory glanced around to get a light reading.
She didn’t want to use the flash unless she had to, as no
doubt it would startle him. ‘It will be ready in just one
moment.’
The Prince smiled, delighted at the thought. Just as
Tory took the picture, however, he realised how
preposterous it sounded and his stern expression
returned.
‘The smile looked better,’ Tory informed him as the
camera ejected the photograph. She gave it a couple of
gentle blows then held it under her jacket to develop.
‘Shan’t be long, it has to sit in the dark for a moment.’
The very dubious Prince sat waiting with his arms
folded. As she pulled the photo out to view, Tory broke
into a huge smile. My father would kill for this.
‘May I see?’ Maelgwn’s curiosity got the better of
him.
‘Only, if thee promises I can keep it.’
A gentle smile graced his lips as he viewed the
picture. ‘Be this how I appear to thee? Thee must think

me barbaric, like the Saxons.’ He stroked his beard as if
he’d only just noticed it was there.
‘Not at all,’ Tory smiled. ‘I assure thee, I do not look
my best either.’ The Prince laughed and Tory felt the air
of mistrust begin to lift.
‘What else dost thou have in there? Show me more.’
Tory assembled her saxophone, an alto, and played a
short, sultry piece that met with great approval from the
Prince. Maelgwn loved the music of his court bards, and
he found this high-pitched horn every bit as beautiful as
the harp or pan flute.
Then, while Tory set up her CD Walkman and
speakers, Maelgwn picked up one of the discs. He
moved it to and fro, catching beams of sunlight which
reflected a rainbow around the forest.
‘Amazing, what does it do?’
‘It plays music too.’ Tory explained simply. ‘Here.’
She gestured to the disc in his hand.
Upon seeing the Prince’s selection, a heavy metal
album, she said, ‘I don’t think thou art quite ready for
this just yet.’ She flicked through her collection. ‘I
believe this may be more to thy taste.’
A soft piano piece began to fill the air, and the
Prince stood astounded. ‘By the Goddess! I have never
heard the like.’
‘It be piano,’ Tory whispered, not wanting to break
the mood she’d created.
The Prince closed his eyes and took a deep breath.
‘It be the most beautiful music I have ever heard.’
The way he said this made Tory feel that this brief
moment of pleasure was well needed. He wandered

slowly around the small clearing, lost for a time in
another world.
Could he possibly have something to do with my interest
in this period of history? What if I never make it home? Will
I again be born in the twentieth century to aimlessly search
for information on the Dark Age, without a clue as to why?
Suddenly the Prince appeared disturbed, so Tory
switched off the music. Now only the sounds of the
forest could be heard. Maelgwn had drawn his sword
and was watching the forest with caution. Tory
remained low, even though she’d heard no sound out of
the ordinary.
All was still a moment, then two bowmen emerged
from the cover of the trees. There was little Maelgwn
could do, his sword against two bows.
The pair yelled instructions in a Germanic tongue,
and at a glance Tory guessed them to be outlaws. They
were very fair haired and more primitive in appearance
than any of the Britons she’d encountered thus far.
These men were tall, but not as heavy set as Maelgwn’s
men.
The Prince dropped his sword as the bowmen
ventured into the clearing. They circled him, gloating
over their prize; they could see that he was a rich man.
One stood back to cover their captive, while the more
adventurous of the two approached Maelgwn to relieve
him of his riches.
Tory took this as her cue and stood, letting loose a
whistle to draw their attention.
It would seem the pair had been so focused on the
Prince that they hadn’t spotted Tory. The knave closest

to the Prince was delighted at the discovery and stepped
towards her.
Maelgwn had to smile at the two unsuspecting
thieves. Tory noticed this and winked to assure him she
had a plan.
The knave dropped his bow to take her in hand. He
eyed her over, expressing his pleasure to his accomplice
who sniggered in response.
Maelgwn took a step forward but the bowman
interrupted any thoughts he may have had for her
rescue.
As the man pulled Tory close to him, she could
barely breathe for the stench of his body. I’ll die of
suffocation. He grasped her back with both hands and
ground her against his groin; his legs were spread wide
apart, as he was much taller than she. ‘Perfect!’ she
whispered to her assailant and, gathering all the power
she could muster, promptly kneed him in the groin.
When the man keeled over she belted his face with her
knee, so hard she broke his nose.
This distraction was all Maelgwn needed, and he reclaimed his sword to run the outlaw through. He turned
to find the other knave out to settle the score with Tory.
The Prince approached from behind and severed the
man’s head with one clean stroke of his blade.
Tory freaked as she watched the head roll across the
ground; the man’s body lay twitching where it fell. ‘Art
thou crazy!’ she yelled, hysterical. ‘I could have knocked
him out or something, thee did not have to kill him.’
She began to tremble from the shock and her stomach
turned at the sight of so much blood.

Maelgwn didn’t understand this at all. ‘But he
would have killed thee.’
She was going to be sick. ‘I can take care of myself.
What be wrong with you people?’ She darted off into
the bushes, leaving the Prince rather bemused.
By the time she’d returned the bodies had been
dragged into the undergrowth. Maelgwn stood with the
reins in his hand, ready to leave. Tory approached him,
ashamed of her behaviour. ‘I want to apologise, I did not
mean . . .’
Maelgwn waved her to silence, tossing her an apple.
‘If thou host recovered, we should make haste to reach
the others by nightfall.’ He mounted his horse and
smiled. ‘Or Brockwell shall have the men believing
thou hast turned me to stone.’
After clearing the forest, the terrain was more obliging
and they travelled at a steady pace for the rest of the
day.
The Prince slowed his horse to a stop on the crest of
a hill. He spotted smoke from a camp fire and smiled,
pleased that dinner would be well under way. ‘Art thou
hungry?’ he asked Tory, who was dozing against his
back.
She groaned in pleasure at the thought of food. ‘I
could eat a horse. No offence.’ She patted the animal
without moving her exhausted body.
‘Well hopefully that shan’t be necessary,’ the Prince
answered as they galloped down the hill.
The camp site was a hive of activity. A wild pig,
slain by the warriors, was roasting over the fire. The

Prince’s tent had been raised, and torches were lit
around the encampment to discourage thieves. Most of
the men had now settled by the fire, telling stories of
their battles this day over much mead.
As the Prince rode into the camp, his men rushed to
meet him. All except Brockwell, who appeared rather
perturbed.
Madoc, the eldest amongst them, was the first to
reach the Prince. ‘Majesty, I shall never leave thy side
again. I have been out of my mind with worry. What
would I have told the King?’
Maelgwn dismounted in good cheer, the smell of
pork filling his nostrils. He slapped his old companion
on the back, assuring him. ‘’Twas no need to worry, Sir
Madoc, I had Tory here to aid me.’ Maelgwn turned to
help her down, and no sooner had her feet hit the
ground than Brockwell was in her face.
‘Thou dost not belong here.’
Tory took a step back, holding her hand to her
head. ‘So the Saxons failed to catch thee, what a
shame.’
Maelgwn intervened before the situation got out of
hand. ‘Brockwell, I swear this very day, I would have
been murdered by thieves if not for the services of this
gracious lady.’ As Brockwell was about to protest, the
Prince added staunchly, ‘And I will not hear another
word said against her.’
Brockwell glared at Tory a moment before
withdrawing to the fire.
‘So thou hast seen a bit of action, Sire?’ a knight,
roughly Maelgwn’s age, inquired.

Tory noticed the man’s steely blue eyes fixed on her.
He was only of average build, but seemed a rather
menacing character nevertheless.
The Prince took Tory by the arm and led her
towards his tent. ‘Cadogan, I have seen things this day I
never before imagined.’
‘Do tell, Majesty.’ Cadogan smiled with open envy
as he watched Tory disappear into the tent.
‘Later,’ the Prince said, closing the tent flap behind
him.
Tory off-loaded her bags and Maelgwn motioned her
to a large fur on the ground.
‘Rest, thou art safe here. I shall wake thee presently
with food and drink.’
‘Sounds marvellous,’ Tory replied, crawling onto the
thick fur rug.
Maelgwn freed himself from the confines of his
armour, watching Tory while she rested. The candle
beside her cast a light across the mark of the Dragon on
her forehead and he studied it a moment. The Prince
believed the story of Tory’s origins, or at least he
believed that she believed it. But if she was telling the
truth, who had brought her back to this time and
branded her with his mark? Was it sorcery or
coincidence that she appeared so much like the late
Queen of Gwynedd? There was only one man Maelgwn
knew who had the knowledge and skill to carry out such
a feat, but he had not seen the old wizard for over a
decade.
Nevertheless, she was beautiful, the Prince concluded, when she was not conducting herself like a man.

He made a mental note to inquire about her methods of
fighting as he left to join his men outside.
Maelgwn gave Tory a nudge and she woke with a fright.
‘Easy,’ he said. ‘Here, drink.’ The Prince held out a horn
full of liquid.
‘I’m still here,’ Tory grumbled as she sat up, rubbing
her bruised cheek. ‘No offence, but I had hoped it was
just a bad dream.’ She sighed and accepted his offering
with thanks.
‘I understand,’ Maelgwn sympathised, watching her
gulp down the mead.
Tory began to splutter and cough. ‘Good grief!’ She
held her chest, trying to catch her breath. What is it . . .
95 per cent proof?
‘Mead,’ he said grinning, knowing full well it had
quite a kick.
She stared at the warm brew. It reminded her of
saki, only it was much sweeter, and on second taste she
decided it was rather pleasant. The Prince handed her a
large chunk of bread, crammed full of pork, which Tory
accepted as if it were a jewel. ‘Maelgwn, thou art a true
legend, thank –’ She clasped a hand to her mouth,
realising she’d addressed the Prince by his first name.
Maelgwn just broke into laughter. ‘Thou art most
welcome.’
My, we are in good spirits, Tory observed. Maelgwn
sat smiling, watching her eat. Tory found this rather offputting; it was as if he had something to say but couldn’t
come out with it. After a few minutes, she could stand it
no more. ‘So hast thou been speaking of me?’

‘Aye.’ He sounded perplexed. ‘I told my men all I
know and saw.’
‘So?’ Tory asked. ‘What hast thou decided?’
‘Well.’ The Prince sat up straight. ‘I would like thee
to show my knights what thou hast shown me, so that
they may decide for themselves.’
Tory considered his request and gave him a thumbsup with her free hand.
Maelgwn presumed this meant yes, and so mimicked
the gesture as he got to his feet. ‘I will let them know,
they will be most pleased.’
Left alone with her thoughts, Tory’s heart sank as
she cast her eyes around the tent. She had never before
felt homesick, as she was well used to being separated
from her parents. She had always taken it for granted
that she would see them again. But now, who could
say?
When Tory emerged from the tent with her bag of
tricks, the Prince escorted her to the fire where the rest
of the men had congregated.
Cadogan came forward to help Tory with her things.
‘It would seem I have missed all the action this day,’ he
said, as he relieved her of the weighty backpack and
looked to Maelgwn to be introduced.
‘Tory, this be Sir Cadogan, my scout and messenger.’
Cadogan took up her free hand. ‘At thy service.’ He
bowed forward to lightly kiss it.
Tory slid her hand away, wise to his type. ‘Thanks,
but no thanks,’ she replied in the nicest possible way,
reclaiming her backpack from him.

This brought a round of drunken laughter from the
men. ‘She be on to thy game, Cadogan,’ called the redheaded knight with amusement.
Maelgwn was glad Tory wasn’t so gullible as to fall
for Cadogan’s charms, and moved on with the rest of
the introductions. ‘This be Sir Madoc, who takes care of
my ledgers. He be an old, dear friend of my father, the
King.’
Madoc stood and bowed to her.
The Prince walked around the fire motioning to his
men, who all nodded when introduced. ‘Sir Angus, Sir
Rhys, Sir Vaugnan, my watchman.’
‘Never sleep,’ Vaugnan said, flashing a grin.
‘Sir Brockwell, thou hast already met.’
Brockwell fixed Tory with his usual glare, and she
forced a sweet smile in return.
The Prince thought it best to move on quickly,
motioning to the next in line. ‘This be Jeven, my cook
in wartime.’
Tory stepped forward and shook his hand. ‘I am very
pleased to meet thee, sir. Supper was delicious, I was
absolutely famished,’ she said to the young man who
looked to be the youngest after Brockwell. He was of
fair colouring and much smaller build than the other
warriors.
Jeven blushed slightly at the attention she paid him.
‘I am glad it was to thy liking, lady.’
Finally, the Prince introduced the large red-headed
knight. Cedric stood up, quite serious for a change. ‘I
wish to thank thee for my Prince’s safe return. I would
have had thy throat cut this day –’

Tory shook her head, cutting him short. ‘There be
no need to apologise, sir. It was the least I could do after
thy Prince spared me from the Saxons.’
He bowed, pleased that he’d said his piece. ‘Thou
art most gracious.’
The men were engrossed for hours, truly amazed by
the evidence of Tory’s claim that she had come from a
future time zone. Maelgwn smiled as he watched her
joke and drink with his knights as if she were one of
them. She was expected to answer a thousand questions
at once, and both she and the men were becoming more
talkative as the mead took hold.
When the haunting tune from her CD faded, a
quiet pause descended on the gathering. The Prince
considered this an opportune time to bring up what had
been on his mind most of the day. ‘Tory?’
‘Yes, sir,’ she answered, still not sure how she should
address him.
‘Tell me of the way thee fights.’
This question seemed to strike a nerve in Brockwell,
and his dark mood returned.
Tory tried not to notice and obliged the Prince with
a full explanation. ‘It be an old art of fighting known as
Tae-kwon-do. The principle is that one’s strength
cannot be based on one’s size. Each person has a great
source of power within, which can be channelled
through a perfect balance of mind, body and nature.’
She placed her hands on her solar plexus.
‘Ridiculous!’ Brockwell interjected.
He was hushed to silence by the others, who were
listening intently.

‘But how did thee maim Brockwell with one hand?’
the Prince asked.
‘I wish I had seen this,’ Cadogan mumbled, and was
immediately reprimanded for interrupting.
Tory paused a moment to consider how she might
best explain it. ‘The brain sends messages around the
body through a central nervous system, telling the body
what thee wants it to do.’ Tory looked to the knights
who stared at her blankly. Maelgwn seemed to be
following though, and nodded for her to continue.
‘Within this system there art certain pressure points
that when blocked, prevent any communication
between the body and the brain. Thy opponent’s limbs,
therefore, tend to fail him, either temporarily or
permanently, depending upon thy intent.’
‘Amazing,’ Maelgwn concluded. ‘Could I be taught
this?’
‘No Majesty, she lies.’ Brockwell took a stand. ‘She
be trying to trick her way into thy favour. It be sorcery, I
say.’
Tory rose to face the young knight. ‘Thou art really
starting to bug me. What dost thou want from me?’ She
threw her arms in the air. ‘Dost thou want me to prove I
could have killed thee today? Alright, I will.’ She
stormed off.
Brockwell was stunned by her outburst. ‘She be not
normal.’
‘Indeed.’ Maelgwn laughed at this, shaking his head.
‘What on earth?’ He watched Tory drag over a few large
logs that had been cut for the fire, and beckoned for Sir
Cedric to help her.

Tory had calmed down considerably and was
courteous in her instruction to Cedric to place two logs
parallel to each other, a third crossing them both. With
this accomplished she smiled with satisfaction, and
asked Brockwell to approach. When he didn’t, Tory
placed her hands on her hips and smugly said, ‘Art thou
afraid?’
‘I do not fear the likes of thee,’ Brockwell replied, as
he stepped forward.
Maelgwn supressed a smile as he awaited her next
move with growing interest.
‘Question.’ Tory put it to Brockwell. ‘Could thee split
this piece of wood in two, using only thy bare hand?’
Brockwell briefly examined the heavy log, seeing no
purpose in the question. ‘Nay. It would be impossible,
even for the strongest man.’
‘Be that so?’ Tory asked. ‘Watch and learn.’ She
knelt on one knee before the logs.
A hush came over the camp as Tory closed her eyes,
breathing deeply to concentrate and centre herself. She
joined her hands in prayer position, then tested her aim,
bringing the side of her hand to rest on the middle of
the target. Focus, her mind instructed as she raised her
hand. With her eyes fixed on her point of contact, Tory
let loose a mighty cry and brought her hand down
towards the great hunk of timber. The inconceivable
force behind the blow split the wood down the centre.
The knights were aghast for a second before they
broke into a round of applause.
‘Bravo,’ cried Cadogan, giving her a standing
ovation.

‘Most impressive,’ agreed Madoc.
Tory was oblivious to their adulation as she raised
herself to face Brockwell, pointing to the splintered
wood. ‘That could have been thy skull.’
Brockwell stared at it blankly, knowing he would
have trouble accomplishing the same feat with an axe.
He approached Tory, taking hold of her hand to inspect
it. ‘Not even a scratch,’ he informed the others.
At this moment, Tory felt his resolve changing. He
seemed to take a softer stance, appearing weary and
confused. On this note Tory thought it best to take her
leave. ‘Gentlemen,’ she nodded.
‘Tory,’ Maelgwn called for her to wait for him.
‘Where art thou going?’ he asked as he reached her.
His gentle tone made her realise she had no idea.
‘To sleep, I suppose. Where doth thou want me?’
The question brought a shy smile from them both,
and Maelgwn waved towards to his tent.
‘Where art thou going to sleep?’ Tory pointed to the
Prince, their grins even broader.
‘In my tent,’ he replied, walking off in that direction.
‘I see.’ She considered the option of sleeping outside
with the rest of the drunken party but decided the odds
for survival were far better inside. She turned to find
Maelgwn already waiting with the flap held open for
her.
‘The men have not seen a good-looking woman
since last winter,’ he informed her, just in case she was
still debating the option.
‘That’s a lot of hormones,’ she commented as she
reached him.

Whistles sounded from around the fire as Tory
disappeared into the tent. Maelgwn motioned for them
to quieten down but like any other young, single male,
he was enjoying every minute of it.
The Prince followed her in and invited her to sit on
the fur rug.
Surely I have been enough entertainment for one night.
Tory was a little worried as this was obviously where he
slept, but with a degree of hesitancy she sat down.
‘Thee never answered my question.’ Maelgwn
removed his cape, spreading it on the ground to sit
upon. ‘Could thee teach me thy way of battle?’
‘I doubt thee would have the time or patience. It be
more than a way of battle, it be a way of life, a state of
mind.’ She prodded her backpack to find a soft spot to
use as a pillow and leant back on it, too tired to discuss
the matter further.
‘Please Tory, I would like to try. I have good need of
thee.’
His tone was so heartfelt that Tory sat up again.
‘If thou hast nowhere else to go, come back with us
to Mon. It would not seem so at a glance, but I am a
wealthy man, thee would be well taken care of,’ he told
her quite definitely, considering that perhaps he could
have put it another way.
‘Art thou offering me a job?’ Tory could hardly
believe it, her first night in a new time zone and she’d
already found employment.
‘Aye, that be it!’ He jumped to his feet, relieved that
she’d found a way to describe exactly what he wanted
from her. ‘Thee could be my . . .’ he clicked his fingers

in search of a suitable title, ‘. . . adviser! Thee must
know about a great many things I do not.’
‘And personal trainer,’ Tory added, holding up her
hand for a high-five.
Maelgwn looked puzzled but crouched down,
holding his hand up in the same fashion.
‘Slap it,’ she bade him, and Maelgwn obliged with
good force. ‘There you go.’ Tory punched his shoulder in
assurance as she lay down. ‘Goodnight.’
Maelgwn sat pondering on his state of affairs, still
fairly drunk and stimulated by the day’s events. The
Dragon returns. The thought came to him from
nowhere, accompanied by a feeling of certainty that he
hadn’t felt since he was a boy of fifteen and had
reclaimed his father’s kingdom from his treacherous
uncle. Whatever had guided him through that dire time
was with him now. He wondered why the King had
summoned him home, and what so many Saxons were
doing this far west? There was indeed something afoot,
but what?
Maelgwn lay down on his side to look at Tory, who
was already asleep. ‘I believe I was intended to meet
thee, also.’

4

An Arranged
Marriage

C

ome sunup, the camp was alive with activity as
gear was packed on the horses. The knights had
been campaigning for many months and were
eager to begin the final leg of their journey home.
Cadogan entered the tent and went down on one
knee to wake his lord. Yet he was distracted by Tory’s
shapely form lying to one side of the Prince, and lent
over to view her more closely.
‘What doth thou want, Cadogan?’
The knight was startled by Maelgwn’s voice. ‘We
should go, Sire.’
The Prince sat up, a little woozy at first. ‘We shan’t
be long,’ he instructed, motioning his messenger to the
door.

Cadogan dipped his head in response and quickly
withdrew.
Maelgwn paused before waking Tory, observing how
peaceful she looked – not harrowed or threatened as she
had been most of the previous day. ‘Tory.’ He shook her
gently. ‘It be time to leave.’ As Tory began to awake,
Maelgwn started to strap on his armour.
‘Oh God,’ Tory moaned, trying to lift her head. ‘I
would never have imagined it possible for my body to
ache this much.’ She gasped and fell back onto the fur.
Maelgwn took hold of her around the waist and
hoisted her up. ‘Apologies for my means, but we seek to
reach Castell Degannwy by evening, home to many of
these men.’ He helped Tory on with her backpack, placed
her sax case in her hand, and turned her around. ‘Thee
understands, they art in a hurry.’ He guided her outside.
Tory, still half asleep, saw Jeven rushing up to her,
with an apple and a large piece of bread in his hands.
‘For the ride,’ he explained, handing them to her coyly.
Tory was touched by the gesture. ‘Jeven, thou art an
angel, I swear.’
Jeven blushed as he passed her a water bottle made
of animal skin. He then bowed and quickly took his
leave before any of the others noticed them together.
‘So thou art coming with us?’ Brockwell’s voice
boomed behind her.
Tory took her time turning around to face him. ‘Thy
Prince hast offered me a job,’ she answered, not fazed by
his tone.
Cadogan, who overheard her reply, laughed. ‘I bet
he did.’

Neither Tory nor Brockwell appreciated the remark,
folding their arms as they glared at him. Maelgwn also
caught the comment and approached Cadogan, gripping
hold of his knight round the back of the neck. ‘Doth
thou have a problem, Sir Cadogan?’
Cadogan froze, realising his impiety. ‘Nay, Majesty.’
He closed his eyes, annoyed at himself, as the Prince
released him.
‘Pleased to hear it.’ Maelgwn turned his attention
from the troublemaker to address all his men. ‘Let us
make haste if we wish to reach Degannwy by nightfall.’
At his word, all made for their mounts. Tory took up
her things, chasing after Brockwell. ‘Wait.’
He turned around, annoyed.
‘May I ask thee something?’
Brockwell’s expression lightened a little, though he
only nodded in response.
‘Why doth my presence offend thee so?’
Brockwell, eager to get home, was growing
impatient. ‘In my experience, I have found it best to be
wary of that which I deem unnatural. My only concern
be for the welfare of my cousin.’ He stared at her a
second then took off towards his horse.
Tory was struck as she watched him, and once again
she thought. My god, he’s like Brian. The way he
moved, his stance, even his manner was the same.
Maelgwn pulled his horse up alongside her. ‘Ready?’
He reached down to help her mount.
For most of the day they’d kept good time, as the terrain
they covered was generally rolling green fields and light

forest. But after six hours in the saddle the landscape
was becoming more mountainous, and the knights
decided to rest before commencing the final homeward
stretch.
As Tory dismounted she could smell the sea, and
she and the Prince climbed to the top of a hill where
she looked out across the ocean. The wild, moist breeze
swept through her hair, and she drew a deep breath,
enjoying the magnificent view
‘If we follow the coast we shall reach the citadel by
nightfall. The worst of the mountains lie further inland,
we have come round them,’ Maelgwn explained to her.
‘I’m pleased to hear it,’ Tory assured him wholeheartedly, rubbing her behind.
Maelgwn laughed at this. ‘It will be over soon, I
promise.’
As they turned to walk back, Tory had to ask. ‘This
citadel wouldn’t happen to have a hot bath, perchance?’
‘Of course,’ Maelgwn declared. ‘I shall have one
drawn for thee as soon as we arrive.’ Maelgwn took off
his long cape and threw it around her shoulders.
‘I am not cold.’ Tory went to take it off.
‘Please, I do not know what my people will make of
thee dressed as thou art.’
So Tory agreed; it made good sense to keep the
cloak on, and with the promise of a hot bath at Castell
Degannwy, she was as eager as the men to get under
way.
Four hours later the knights stopped on the crest of a
great hill. From here one could see the citadel of

Degannwy, which was the official entrance to the
kingdom of Gwynedd. This grand fort stood upon the
largest of two craggy hillocks, and supported a
flourishing little community that spread out around its
high stone walls.
‘Behold,’ cried Madoc, pulling his horse alongside
Tory and the Prince. ‘The twin hills of the Gwynedd
stronghold.’ The old knight took a deep breath,
obviously proud and happy to see his home.
‘Well, what are we waiting for?’ the Prince declared.
Tory clung on for dear life as the powerful black
stallion took off down the hill as fast as it was able, with
the knights following close behind.
To save being detained, the Prince’s party raced
through the outlying village. Cadogan had been sent on
ahead to inform the King of his son’s return, thus the
knights found the portcullis already raised. A road led
between the hillocks, through another large gateway,
and into the courtyard within the walls of the citadel.
The Prince kept his promise to Tory, and as soon as
they arrived had her whisked away to his chambers.
Fenalla, the frumpy head maid at King Caswallon’s
court, was under instruction to arrange a hot bath, a
meal and mead. While this pleased Tory no end, it also
suited the Prince; he needed his mysterious guest to be
out of sight, at least until he’d decided exactly how
much the court should know about her.
Without stopping to speak with the well-wishing
servants, Maelgwn made haste to his father’s quarters
where the King would be residing this late in the day.
The Prince pushed open the huge oak doors of the

King’s library, which remained from the time of the
Roman withdrawal. Cunedda, his great great
grandfather, along with his eight sons, had come down
from the Manau Guotodin (Firth of Forth) under
instruction from Rome to restore order to the kingdom
of Gwynedd and beyond. Cunedda had made this grand
fortification his base and it had belonged to their family
ever since.
‘Percival.’ Maelgwn sought the attention of a frail
old man working alone in the room. He was sitting by
the fire with a quill in hand, recording figures on
parchment. The old soul had been so caught up in his
work that he hadn’t heard the doors open. He looked
up, not recognising Maelgwn at first.
‘Prince Maelgwn? Be that the young heir of
Gwynedd under all that hair?’ Percival stood up, his old
bones creaking. ‘I mistook thee for a Saxon.’ He
laughed as Maelgwn approached and embraced him.
‘It be good to see thee.’ The Prince held him at
arm’s length for a moment then strolled around the
room to take in the familiar surroundings. ‘Where be
my father?’
‘Why he left for the court of Chiglas only yesterday,’
Percival informed him, as if it were common knowledge.
‘Chiglas! Why?’
‘Why? The wedding, Sire.’
Maelgwn was set at ease, reaching for a jug of mead
on the table by the fire. He filled a goblet for himself
and Percival, taking a long swig. ‘Ah, my father’s mead,
there be nothing like it. So tell me, who shall be wed?’

Percival suddenly went white. ‘But, I thought thee
knew, Sire?’ He seemed to want to avoid the issue,
making Maelgwn all the more curious.
‘Knew what, Percival?’ The Prince smiled, amused
by his game. ‘Who shall be wed?’
‘It be thy own wedding, Sire. Hast the King not told
thee?’
Maelgwn stood, enraged. ‘What! Why?’
Percival humbled himself, afraid he was in trouble.
‘It be not my place to say, Sire. The King said he would
meet thee on Mon, presently.’
Maelgwn was so incensed that he began to pace to
and fro like a caged beast. ‘I will not marry the daughter
of Chiglas.’ He found this easy to say to Percival, but to
his father – that was a different story. Still, it didn’t
seem fair to take out his frustrations on poor Percival,
so Maelgwn left the room. ‘Thee can tell my father, I
am most displeased.’ He slammed the doors behind
him.
Maelgwn was storming through the hall in a fit of
rage when he met Brockwell who was on his way to a
feast to be held in their honour.
‘Art thou coming to drink with us, cousin?’
Brockwell took hold of him by the shoulder as they
walked together.
‘Maybe later, I have a lot on my mind at present.’
‘Already?’ Brockwell was amazed. ‘But thee only just
arrived.’
Fenalla carried out her duties in a huff, giving an
occasional grunt in objection to Tory’s appearance.

When Tory finally found herself alone, she dug out
her CD player to listen to some music and relax. After
undressing and wrapping herself in a towel she made for
the bath, taking a goblet of mead with her.
The Prince’s chambers were spectacular. She would
never have imagined that a building as grand as this
would exist in Britain during this time. Large stone
stairs led up to the steaming pool of water that was over
twice the size of a normal bath. It was distinctly Roman
in design, and had a large open fire at the end to boil
the huge pots of water it took to fill it.
‘Well I must say, I am impressed.’ Tory immersed
herself in the luxurious bath and from there studied the
rest of the room in the glow of candle and torch light.
She admired the solid, raw furnishings, the thick
curtains of Prussian blue, and the ornate tapestries that
depicted the battles and daily life of Gwynedd. ‘Yep, I
could live here.’ She smiled, indulging in the splendour
of her surroundings.
As she rolled over to float on the water, she was
startled by the sound of the door closing and quickly
submerged herself once more.
An equally stunned page was turning circles upon
discovering her, not knowing what to do. ‘Forgive me,
lady,’ he stuttered out. ‘I am Selwyn, the Prince’s squire.
I be just on my way to attend to my duties when I heard
thy beautiful music.’ His eyes looked everywhere but at
her to seek its source.
‘I am pleased to meet thee.’ Tory reached for her
towel but the door opened again before she could grab
it.

Maelgwn and Brockwell entered, neither of them
noticing Tory or Selwyn at first.
‘But the men will be disappointed if thou dost not
attend,’ Brockwell argued.
Maelgwn spied his squire making himself scarce and
removed his gunna, handing it to Selwyn. ‘Please Calin,
I just need some time to think.’ The Prince seated
himself, holding up his feet so that Selwyn could
remove his boots. ‘I will come down later, I promise.’
‘Excuse me, but this was a private moment,’ Tory
interjected, a mite discomforted by her predicament.
All three men burst into laughter; Maelgwn had
completely forgotten about his guest. ‘Well, I have no
objection.’ His good mood returned as he noticed the
soft music and reclined to enjoy it.
Brockwell, now clean and shaven, folded his arms
and took a few steps towards Tory, smiling broadly.
‘Well, well, well, what have we here?’
‘I am warning thee, Brockwell . . .’ Tory choked on
her words, shocked to find her brother’s face staring
back at her; he even had the same dimple on his chin.
She froze, wide eyed at the discovery.
‘What be wrong?’ The Prince stood.
Tory held up a hand motioning them to stay back. ‘I
am fine, please. I would just like to be able to dress
without thy entire guard in here.’
‘Of course. Brockwell, Selwyn, if thee would both
excuse us.’ As Maelgwn showed them to the door, he
wondered what had frightened her.
Us! Tory grabbed her towel, managing to wrap herself
up and take a seat on the bath before the Prince returned.

Maelgwn was rather surprised to find that this
woman from the future was just as modest as any lady in
his court. So he avoided looking directly at her, walking
over to stoke up the fire. ‘What scared thee just now?’
‘Oh nothing.’ She jumped up to pull on a sweatshirt and pants as soon as his back was turned.
‘Brockwell just appeared so different all cleaned up.
More sort of . . . handsome.’
‘I see,’ the Prince said flatly, as if he either didn’t
like or believe her statement.
Tory made herself comfortable on some large
cushions opposite Maelgwn and began to comb the
knots out of her hair. The Prince didn’t stir from his
reflections for some time, his eyes lost in the open
flame. Tory wondered what was on his mind as she
watched him in silence.
‘Tell me of thy home, Tory.’ He sounded far away.
‘Do people get what they want there?’
An odd question. She paused to think about it.
‘Those who believe they can, do. Much the same as
here, I expect.’
Maelgwn looked at her, his interest aroused.
‘For although the civilised world be much larger in
the future, it continues to be plagued by crime and war.
And thanks to modern weaponry, some nations can
destroy entire cities and their occupants without ever
leaving home.’
‘But thy people must have laws?’
Tory gave half a laugh. ‘Indeed. But often it be the
people who make the laws, who art the ones who break
them – organised crime we call it. What the Saxons

make a livelihood from here, slaughtering and looting,
some do for fun where I come from. That be why I
learnt self-defence,’ she concluded with a sigh.
Maelgwn looked back to the fire. ‘That be why I
must learn it too.’
Tory woke the next day in a state of bliss. She was
nestled in a pile of pillows in the middle of the Prince’s
huge four-poster bed, and she was covered by a light
blanket of soft fur.
As she dozed, it dawned on her that she couldn’t
remember going to bed. Did I really drink that much that I
have forgotten, or did I fall asleep in front of the fire? ‘I’ve
got to lay off that stuff.’
There was a knock on the door. ‘Has to be his
lordship,’ Tory mused, sitting up.
Maelgwn entered, followed closely by Fenalla who
was struggling with a large tray covered with the
season’s fruits, cheese, bread and a large pitcher of
water.
‘Dost thou ever sleep?’ Tory asked, rubbing her eyes.
‘Nay, miss too much.’ The Prince waited for Fenalla
to relieve herself of her load then closed the door
behind her.
Tory stared at Maelgwn in amazement. His hair had
been trimmed but still fell past his shoulders, and shone
like moonlight on water, it was so dark and straight. His
clear, ivory skin and his high cheekbones could be
appreciated now that his face had been liberated from
its hairy disguise. He wore thickly woven trousers and
shirt and a gunna of dark brown that belted at the waist

with black leather. His boots, made of the same black
leather, were bound with laces round his leg up to the
knee. A long, black woollen cape hung about his
shoulders, partially covering a medallion of the Dragon
that was made of black onyx and set in silver.
‘So at last we meet, face to face,’ said Tory.
Maelgwn flashed a cheeky grin. ‘More becoming, I
hope.’ He strode over to pour two glasses of water.
Tory held her head. Is he kidding me? ‘I have no
objection,’ she announced sarcastically, mimicking the
same regal tone he’d used the night before.
This made the Prince laugh. ‘Thy wit be clever.
Thee must have slept well.’ He handed her a goblet and
took a seat on the bed.
‘Very well, indeed.’ Then her tone changed to a soft
plea. ‘Please, tell me we art staying here.’
‘We shall leave as soon as thou art ready,’ Maelgwn
answered with regret. Seeing her disappointment he
added, ‘Though Degannwy be grand, I assure thee it be
no comparison in beauty to my home at Aberffraw.’
‘I shall look forward to it then.’ She smiled and
climbed out of bed, still dressed in her tracksuit. ‘What
should I wear?’
The Prince was stumped by the question. ‘Doth
thou own a dress at all?’
‘I do have one dress with me, it might suit.’ She
sounded doubtful.
‘Fine,’ the Prince resolved, getting to his feet. ‘I
have one more thing to take care of, but I shall be back
for thee presently. Please eat,’ he added, disappearing
out the door.

Tory’s aches were considerably better this morning,
and a glimpse in her hand mirror showed that her bruise
was fading. She decided to leave her hair out as, judging
from the little she’d observed of the maidens here, this
seemed quite acceptable. Still, she wasn’t sure about her
dress. Made of black stretch cotton, it had long sleeves,
a v-neck and flared to a full skirt that fell in waves to
her ankles. If not for the snug fit of the bodice it might
have been appropriate. She would have to wear her
leather jacket over the top for, although her frame was
tiny, Tory was fairly well endowed in the chest department and she was sure this would not go unnoticed.
The dress looked a tad ridiculous with her long white
socks pushed down around her ankles and her steelcapped boots. They were riding again today, however,
and these were the most sensible footwear she had.
The Prince knocked and strode into the room
without waiting for a response, slamming the door
behind him. He came to an abrupt halt when he saw
her. ‘Heaven forbid,’ he announced with a grin and a
laugh.
‘Thee could have waited.’ Tory crossed her arms in
front of her chest. She couldn’t believe she was actually
embarrassed, and blamed this on the fact that she had
to wear a dress. She simply hated looking feminine, it
always made her feel vulnerable. ‘I am going to wear the
jacket over the top,’ she explained, reaching for it.
‘No hurry,’ Maelgwn assured her, doing his best to
wipe the smile from his face.
Tory paid him no mind as she put on the jacket and
zipped it all the way up.

‘Art thou ready to leave?’ she asked him.
‘Aye,’ Maelgwn said as he picked an apple from the
platter. ‘I have spoken to my men and we have decided
it best to keep thee a secret for the time being.’
‘How dost thou plan to do that?’ Tory motioned to
her outfit.
Maelgwn smiled, having thought this through. ‘I
shall tell whoever might dare inquire that we found
thee wandering in the south. Thou art from a faraway
land – Australia.’ He recalled the pronunciation. ‘In a
shipwreck perhaps, thee lost thy memory and can only
recall certain things.’ He seemed quite pleased with
himself when he’d finished explaining.
Brockwell knocked and entered, striding over to
join them. ‘We art ready to leave, Sire.’ He looked at
Tory with a smirk on his face. ‘Art thou a woman
today?’ He referred to her dress.
Uncanny, he’s every bit as annoying as my brother. ‘I
was a woman a day ago when I flattened thee,’ Tory
retorted, making for the door with her bags.
Brockwell chuckled, amused that he had struck a
chord.
‘Let us be off then,’ Maelgwn resolved. He was
pleased that Brockwell no longer appeared strongly
opposed to Tory’s presence. Now his mind was at ease,
for Brockwell was his constant companion and
Maelgwn had feared there would be a problem.
Only a small party would accompany the Prince to
Aberffraw: Brockwell, Cadogan, Madoc, their squires,
and Selwyn.

Tory was given her own horse to ride. ‘I preferred
being chauffeur driven,’ she commented to Maelgwn as
she made herself comfortable in the saddle.
Maelgwn caught her meaning. ‘It will be an easy
ride, I promise.’
It was a fine day, and only little puffs of cloud
scattered the azure sky. As they moved out of the citadel
into the village, they were escorted by a guard of a
dozen soldiers that would accompany them as far as the
Isle of Mon. They were to crew the boat that would tow
a barge carrying the Prince’s immediate escort across the
Menai Strait from Bangor.
As the party made its way through the village, the
Prince pointed out his father’s refortification plans to
Tory. For such a confused and barbaric period in history,
she thought, the layout of Degannwy’s little community
was extremely organised. Tory had a huge urge to go
shopping as they passed through the marketplace, but
under the circumstances this was totally out of the
question.
Crowds lined the road through the village, some
people hung out their windows and doors. The locals
called out their thanks and praise to the Prince and his
men for their protection and good fortune over the
seasons past. While Maelgwn and his family had been
in power there hadn’t been any serious threat to this
town. The goodwill his people held for Maelgwn was
obvious, as was the genuine regard he felt in return. The
Prince and his knights shook hands with the men, and
were hugged and kissed by the young women as they
passed.

Once they’d cleared the merriment of the village
the riders picked up their pace a little, heading into the
outlying farm land of the common.
Tory watched the workers in the fields that lined
their route. They appeared happy as they went about
the chore of harvesting the yearly crop. As she was
taking everything in, Tory had dropped back a little
behind the others. It was then that a cry for help
reached her ears.
She saw the door of a small farmhouse swing open
and a young girl was propelled out into the yard,
sobbing and screaming uncontrollably. An older man of
unkempt appearance followed. He reached down,
pulling the girl to her feet by her hair then brutally
punching her back to the ground. The girl’s next scream
was loud enough to draw the attention of the entire
party.
Tory jumped from her horse and yelled at the
attacker. ‘Oi!’ she snarled, slogging him fair in the face.
The unsuspecting man was sent hurtling back against
the wall of the cottage. ‘Pig! What right hast thee to
strike this girl?’ Tory demanded, outraged.
‘Tory, no!’ the Prince protested, turning his horse
around.
The young girl staggered towards Tory, falling in a
heap at her feet, blurting out her thanks between sobs.
Tory watched the man stand up, and she prepared to
strike again if the need arose.
By this time Brockwell and Maelgwn had arrived on
the scene. Upon seeing them the man refrained from
retaliating and bowed deeply to the Prince. ‘She be my

wife, Majesty,’ he managed to blurt out. ‘Married this
very day.’
‘And how dost such a poor example of manhood
like thyself end up married to a beautiful young girl like
this?’ Tory asked, as she crouched down to see if the girl
was alright; one side of her face was already a mass of
bruises.
‘It be completely legal,’ he assured the Prince. ‘She
refuses to . . .’ The old man winked at Maelgwn and
Brockwell, ‘. . . fulfil her wedding vows.’ He laughed,
sure that they’d understand. ‘That not be justice. I paid
good for her.’
The Prince closed his eyes, bringing his hand up to
his forehead; he could feel a headache coming on.
‘Thee bought her?’ Tory stood to question the man,
who nodded in response. ‘He bought her!’ She turned to
the Prince, demanding an explanation.
‘’Tis quite common in the lower classes.’
‘Aye,’ Brockwell added. ‘If she had been born at
court, her father would have to pay this man to take her
off his hands.’
Tory was pacing now, furious and shocked. ‘And
thee fails to see anything wrong with this?’ She turned
to Maelgwn, unable to believe the man whom she
thought was sensitive condoned what was taking place.
‘It be none of my affair,’ Maelgwn told her calmly.
‘Thee knows much about the future but little of our
ways. This girl will die without this man to support
her.’
‘She would be better off, goddamn it!’ Tory gave up,
bending down to address the girl. ‘What be thy name?’

Still shaken, the girl raised her tear-stained face.
‘Katren, lady.’
‘Dost thou love this man, Katren?’
The girl shook her head violently. ‘Nay, I do not. I
swear.’ She clung to Tory’s legs, bursting into tears once
more.
‘Get out of that,’ her husband hissed, moving to
drag her away.
‘Do not even think about it, slug,’ Tory warned,
wound up like a coil and fit to burst.
Her tone was so harsh that the old bloke froze. ‘But
she be my wife!’ he implored the Prince.
‘How much did thee pay for her?’ Tory interjected.
‘Two head of cattle!’ He made it sound a lot, grinning broadly when he realised where the conversation
was heading.
Tory was so disgusted she had to laugh. She twisted
a gold ring from her finger and showed it to the man.
‘Will this cover it?’
He nodded vigorously, his face lighting up like a
Christmas tree as he snatched the ring from her. ‘Take
her then, good riddance.’ The man bowed to the Prince.
‘Highness.’ He staggered back inside the farmhouse,
shutting the door behind him.
Poor Katren collapsed from relief. ‘I be so indebted
to thee, lady,’ she mumbled through her tears.
Tory bent down to help her up. ‘I would have done
the same for anyone, and I be no lady.’
‘Thou art right there,’ Brockwell said.
Maelgwn was worried by all this; how was he going
to keep Tory under control? Word got around fast here,

and this kind of news would spread like wild fire. Lucky
for him that none bar his men had witnessed the
incident.
Tory led Katren to her horse, past Brockwell and
Maelgwn. She looked at the Prince, holding her tongue
to save angering him further.
Though the Prince was displeased, he did not have
time to deal with her at present.
Brockwell could barely believe that Maelgwn said
nothing. ‘Great, what art thou going to do with her?’ he
asked Tory.
‘Thee all have squires, well now so do I,’ Tory told
him, helping Katren onto her horse.
Brockwell looked back to Maelgwn.
‘We will discuss it later.’ The Prince’s stern
expression rested on Tory.
‘Thee can count on it,’ she replied, every bit as
annoyed.
By early afternoon they’d met the barge at the Menai
Strait, and the Prince was busy organising his men for
the crossing.
Tory used this time to take Katren aside and clean
her up. She found a shirt that the maid could wear over
her dress to hide the rip that ran all the way down to
her navel. The girl had hardly said a word except
‘Thank thee,’ or ‘Thou art too kind.’ She appeared to
be in her mid teens and was only a tiny little thing.
Tory thought her face almost angelic, despite her
bruises. Her features were small and pointed and her
large round eyes were icy blue. Once unknotted and

brushed, Katren’s hair fell to her waist in large ashbrown waves.
‘Much better.’ Tory sat back to view Katren, giving
her a wink.
‘Did thee mean it when thee said I could be thy
maid?’ Katren asked, timid as a mouse.
‘No, thou dost not have to do that.’
‘But I want to, lady.’ Katren went down on her
knees, pleading. ‘It would be an honour, a dream come
true!’
‘Thee need only be my friend,’ Tory assured her, but
was forced to resign herself to having a maid when
Katren’s desperate expression didn’t change. ‘Alright, if
that be what thee truly wants,’ she announced, caught
up in Katren’s excitement.
‘Oh thank thee, lady.’ Katren bowed a few times,
still on her knees.
Tory couldn’t cope with this a second longer and
placed her hands on the maiden’s shoulders, pulling her
up to look her straight in the eye. ‘Listen to me, Katren.
Unless thou art addressing royalty, never bow before
anyone. From this day forth thou art thine own master.’
‘But I may still be thy maid?’ Katren asked before
getting too excited.
‘If his lordship agrees.’ Tory held up her hand for a
high-five. ‘Now, hold up your hand.’
The Prince turned to see the two girls slap hands
before hugging each other.
‘It would seem they get along.’ Brockwell chuckled,
walking over to get them moving. ‘Thee will have a
whole harem soon.’

Maelgwn considered this statement to be not too far
from the truth, as his intended bride was probably on
her way to Mon by now.
Once they’d reached the isle, the soldiers returned with
the barge to the mainland and only the royal party rode
on to Aberffraw.
The island’s terrain was flatter than the rest of
Gwynedd, which made for an easy ride. They passed
over miles of common, scattered with farms and
cottages, before they finally arrived on the outskirts of
the estate.
The Prince brought the party to a halt, and his
knights and squires gathered around him to hear his
instruction. Tory quietly advised Katren to hang back a
little, as Maelgwn had not said a word to her since their
run-in this morning.
The Prince looked to Cadogan. ‘As soon as we
arrive I want thee to take Tory straight to the northern
caphouse.’ This was one of the chambers to be found at
the top of each of the house’s four towers. ‘Selwyn, thee
will see to it that Katren finds the maids’ sleeping quarters.’ Selwyn nodded. ‘Madoc, keep Gilmore distracted,
and Brockwell . . .’ Maelgwn looked to his champion,
who was eagerly awaiting his task. ‘I will need thee to
help me with thy mother.’
Brockwell’s mother, Lady Gladys, had charge of the
household at Aberffraw, as she was sister to the King.
The Prince’s mother had been slain in the uprising of
his uncle, and Lady Gladys had assumed the responsibility in her stead.

‘I would like to speak to her of Tory before they
meet,’ the Prince explained.
Brockwell nodded, understanding this reasoning.
The royal house at Aberffraw was situated on the coast
of Mon overlooking the ocean. High stone walls ran
between its four towers and the inner bailey courtyard
was located within the walls of the house. The outer
bailey pathways led off in opposite directions to stables
and to a great hall, which Tory presumed to be the army
lodgings. Another large stone wall encompassed this
huge area, its buildings and grounds, beyond which lay
the village and the common.
The Prince and his company were met with a grand
welcome from the locals as they made their way through
the village. Tory noticed a beautiful woman sitting
outside one of the cottages. The woman had drawn her
attention because, unlike all the other women Tory had
encountered thus far, she seemed quietly proud. She was
obviously poor, judging from her dress, and her
expression was one of deep malice. Tory noticed her
spiteful glare resting on Cadogan as they passed.
When they reached the inner court of the grand
Roman castle, Lady Gladys, along with a couple of
young ladies in her care, and the servants of the house,
were waiting to greet the Prince and his party. Sir
Gilmore, the King’s representative at Aberffraw who ran
the estate and trained the men for their ever-expanding
armies, was also in attendance with a small guard.
Madoc kept Sir Gilmore distracted, exchanging
greetings during their long-awaited reunion; they had

become firm friends during their many years of service
to King Caswallon, but had not seen each other for
some time.
The Prince and Brockwell tried to distract Lady
Gladys while Cadogan went about the Prince’s bidding.
As overwhelmed as she was to see her boys safely home
again, Lady Gladys didn’t miss a trick. ‘Where be Sir
Cadogan taking that girl?’ She gestured after him,
waiting for one of them to offer an explanation.
‘Shh!’ the Prince and Brockwell urged her, not
wanting to alert Sir Gilmore.
‘I need to speak with thee at once,’ Maelgwn
whispered to her, stressing the urgency.
Unable to resist getting in on her boys’ secret, Lady
Gladys excused the three of them on the premise that
they needed to discuss an urgent family matter.
Cadogan swung open the heavy timber door to the
tower and beckoned for Tory to enter.
Said the spider to the fly. Tory strolled past him, not
liking the way he leered at her. She entered the
darkened tower to find a couple of stairs leading down
to a stone bath and fireplace, and a high but narrow
stone stairway spiralling up to the main chamber. ‘I will
be fine now, thank you Cadogan,’ Tory assured him,
reclaiming her bags and making her way up the stairs.
When she reached the top, Tory was taken aback.
The round room contained a large bed, a fireplace, a
desk, and a huge mirror that, although it was rather
tarnished, would serve its purpose. Tapestries, archaic
maps and even what appeared to be hand-drawn star

charts adorned the walls. The rugs and furs that covered
the stone floor would help fend off the cold, and there
were candles and torches galore to light the large room
at night. Tory imagined it would be quite bright and airy
by day when the heavy wooden shutters were open.
Cadogan came up behind her, the sound of mischief
in his voice. ‘The Prince did not say that I should leave
thee.’ He took hold of her around the waist and lifted
her off the ground.
Tory pushed him away, most annoyed. ‘Watch
thyself, Cadogan. Do not make me hurt thee,’ she
warned, sure that he couldn’t be serious.
‘Come on,’ he urged, taking a step closer. ‘Do not
save it for the Prince.’
He was serious alright, the smug grin on his face said
it all. Tory raised her hands to defend herself. ‘Last
warning.’
Lady Gladys led her son and the Prince to a small, cosy
room, where they relaxed drinking mead while Maelgwn
explained his woes to the two people he trusted most.
‘I believe Caradoc hast somehow convinced our
father that Gwynedd needs the support of Chiglas and
his armies. This marriage be meant to unite our two
kingdoms, but I do not trust it.’ Maelgwn took a seat,
perplexed. Caradoc, his younger brother, had kept the
constant company of King Chiglas at his court in Powys
since the uprising and subsequent death of their uncle
Cadfer. He was power hungry and more fond of warring
than pursuits of the mind, thus he and Maelgwn had
never seen eye to eye.

It made Gladys’ heart break to see the Prince so
unhappy. ‘Maelgwn.’ She took hold of his hands. ‘Thy
father be no longer a young man, and thou art now of
eight and twenty. Soon thee shall be king, and it be
high time thee took a wife. Gwynedd must have an heir
apart from thy brother.’
‘But the daughter of Chiglas!’ Brockwell cringed,
disgusted by the whole idea. He was in sympathy with
his cousin.
‘I am sure she be lovely.’ Gladys defended the good
judgement of her brother, Caswallon. She then turned
the conversation back to the matter that was of
immediate concern to her. ‘Who be the girl thou art
hiding? And what hast she to do with all this?’
Maelgwn sat forward to explain. ‘I know that her
name be Tory Alexander, though unfortunately her
origins are untraceable as she hast lost part of her
memory. However . . .’ he lowered his voice, ‘she
possesses a fighting style superior to any I have ever
seen. If this can be learnt and applied to our forces, it
would give us a great advantage over the enemies of
Gwynedd, whoever they may be.’
Gladys was intrigued by his story, but knew she was
not getting all of it. ‘Be she a sorceress, this girl?’ Gladys
could not understand a woman possessing such talents.
‘Nay,’ Brockwell assured his mother firmly, much to
the Prince’s surprise. ‘I believe she be a good and honest
person, just different.’ Brockwell was at a loss to explain
exactly how he felt about her.
The Prince told his aunt that the study of Tory’s
style of fighting was to be a special project of his own,

and until he had fully investigated the matter, he
wanted none outside the room to know of it. By some
miracle, he managed to persuade her to help him keep
Tory a secret. Lady Gladys was an intelligent woman
and a good ally in any situation.
Maelgwn left Brockwell with his mother and made
for the north tower to see how Tory was settling in. As
he crossed the great foyer, he chanced to spy Cadogan
limping away in the opposite direction. The sight urged
Maelgwn to make haste to the caphouse to ensure that
Tory was alright.
He found her safe and sound, unpacking her bags on
the bed. She didn’t appear to be in the best of moods,
however.
‘I have just about had it with the lot of thee.’
‘Please, forgive me. ’Twas stupid to send Cadogan to
accompany thee, I was not thinking.’
‘I ask thee.’ Tory unzipped her jacket and threw it
off, too hot and bothered to put up with it any longer.
‘What would a woman do if she could not defend
herself here?’
Maelgwn took a step forward, hoping he wouldn’t
sound like he was condoning his knight’s behaviour.
‘Thee must understand, these men have no great learning. All they know is what they want or need.’ Maelgwn
struggled to keep his eyes from straying to her cleavage.
‘Not thee, too!’ Tory planted her hands on her hips
and flaunted her figure. ‘It be just a body for heaven’s
sake, get over it! It be not like thou hast never seen the
female form before, I am sure.’ She turned back to her
unpacking, surprised that grown men would carry on so.

Maelgwn was quiet for a moment; he could not
deny that Tory aroused in him more than just an
interest in fighting techniques. As he gazed at her, he
could quite clearly make out every muscle in her supple,
young body through the strange black material that
hugged her form like a second skin. ‘Forgive me. I have
not been in the company of a beautiful woman in as
many months as my men.’
Tory felt a sudden twinge of remorse.
‘Although most of them found solace at Degannwy,’
Maelgwn added to lighten the mood.
That’s why Brockwell was so chirpy this morning,
Tory surmised. She felt guilty taking out her anger on
Maelgwn when he’d been nothing but a perfect
gentleman since they’d met. ‘Nay, I am the one who
should apologise.’ She grabbed a sweat-shirt from the
pile of clothes on the bed and threw it on. ‘Back home
we hardly wear any clothes half the year, it be too hot.’
‘Sounds like a nice place.’ The thought brought a
smile to his face. ‘Hast thou seen this?’ He pointed to
two large doors which he pulled open to reveal the wide
walkways of the roof and a view of the ocean beyond.
‘Oh my.’ Tory stepped out onto the walkway, drawn
by the picturesque seascape.
‘I thought thee might like this tower, all my tutors
have occupied it.’ He looked at Tory and was spellbound. The sun shone through her long fair hair,
shedding a golden halo around her. Who was this
extraordinary woman? He couldn’t help but feel that
he’d known her before, though he realised this was
impossible. Perhaps it was just that she bore a vague

resemblance to his mother, Queen Sorcha, yet something inside told him there was more to his attraction
than that.
Suddenly, remembering his place, Maelgwn snapped
out of his daze. ‘I thought thee could teach me here on
the roof. There be plenty of room, and no one would
disturb us.’
Tory was pleasantly surprised that the Prince considered her his tutor, though she hid her astonishment
well. She looked around and nodded to confirm. ‘I
believe this will do just fine.’

5

The North
Tower

T

he Prince arrived at the north tower at dawn the
following day, eager to begin his training. The
wooden shutters had been flung open, allowing
the ocean breeze to waft through the room. As the
sound of gentle music reached his ears, he followed it
outside.
There on the roof’s walkway between the inner
bailey and the sea-wall, he found her. She was dressed
in pure white clothes, resembling his own, that belted at
the waist with a black tie. Her hair had been braided
and the long plait fell to her waist. Tory appeared to be
dancing in a style that strongly resembled the way she
fought. She was beautiful to watch, for her graceful

movements flowed in time with the music. As he didn’t
wish to disturb her, the Prince silently climbed onto the
sea-wall to wait for her to finish.
Without opening her eyes or stopping her graceful
movement, Tory said, ‘This be known as kata.’ Her
voice was very calm, as if she were a million miles away.
‘Kata be performed by every serious student of this art.
It be through kata that one strives for perfection.’ Tory
continued her exercise, her balance and movement
steady and precise. ‘It be repetition in the form of
fighting patterns that one carries out against an
imaginary opponent. Kata, once mastered, will increase
thy expertise and thy powers of concentration.’
Tory finished her exercise, bringing her hands
together and bowing deeply to the Prince.
‘That was wonderful, teach me.’ He jumped off the
sea-wall, eager to get started.
‘Not today. We have much to do before thou art
ready for kata.’ Tory sat on the ground in the lotus
position. ‘This morning, I be going to teach thee
meditation.’ Tory beckoned for him to sit on the
ground.
‘What be meditation?’ the Prince asked, following
her instruction.
‘It relieves one’s body and mind of accumulated
stress. Thee must set aside any emotional upsets or
problems so thy concentration be not compromised.
Only then can thee work to thy full potential. We will
meditate before and after every workout.’
The Prince was intrigued by the way she explained
things, it always made perfect sense.

‘Now, close thine eyes. Let the music relax thee and
just listen to my voice.’
Tory planned to start the Prince’s real training in a few
days’ time. Meanwhile, she’d issued Maelgwn with a list
and the designs of all the equipment she needed made.
She was keeping the local leather craftsmen well
occupied, having requested a punching bag, punching
mitts, padded gear for the head and waist to be used
when sparring, and padded landing mats to cover the
hard stone ground. She made a space for a workout area,
rearranging the room to utilise the large mirror that
stood on the west wall, reflecting the sea through the
windows opposite. She would use this to monitor the
Prince’s movements when they began kata.
Her equipment was delivered two days later by
Brockwell and a few guards. This thrilled the Prince no
end, as now the real training could commence. He
watched while Tory directed the men to set up the
equipment. Maelgwn was considering how Tory had
been pushing him to the limits of his endurance these
past two days. She’d justified this torture by explaining
that she needed to know his limitations to determine
what aspects of his technique required the most work.
He had to admit he enjoyed the meditation though,
and he’d never felt so exhilarated and at peace in all his
life.
In making Tory’s equipment, the Britons had used
hides shorn very short. So once the men had laid the
mats out on the floor, it looked like the room had been
carpeted.

‘What be this?’ Brockwell referred to the punching
bag as he hung it from a large hook and chain which
was secured to a beam overhead.
Tory turned to answer his question and burst into
laughter. The punching bag was made from cowhide,
and it appeared as though she had a dead carcass
hanging from her roof. ‘I will show thee.’
At about six foot long, the bag stopped a foot above
the floor, so that it could be used to practise kicks at any
height. She started with a few low, sweeping kicks and
gradually built up to the stage where she was propelling
herself round in the air and ploughing her foot into it.
Brockwell, Maelgwn and the guards were stunned
by her aggression, speed and accuracy. ‘Unbelievable,’
Maelgwn mumbled in awe, motioning for Brockwell to
get the other men out of there.
Tory grabbed the only pair of stockings she had, tying
one end through a loop in the bottom of the punching
bag, and the other loosely around a hook in the floor.
Brockwell returned after seeing the men out, and
stood watching Tory demonstrate to the Prince how the
bag would bounce back when struck. He observed with
interest as she ducked and weaved her way around the
bag, striking then darting out of the way. Tory was using
more fist and open hand strikes now, and he was
surprised by the amount of force she could summon up.
He spied a punching mitt on the desk and picked it up.
‘What be this?’
They’re like kids in a toyshop, Tory thought. ‘Put it
on thy right hand, I will show thee.’ She almost dared
him. ‘I think thee can take it.’

Brockwell smiled at the invitation, pulling the glove
on firmly.
Tory showed him the correct height at which to
hold his hand to fend off her attack, then took a few
steps back.
Brockwell hesitated, watching her concentrating
closely on the mitt. ‘Thou art not going to do what thee
did with the log?’
‘Kind of . . .’ Brockwell looked distressed. ‘Just a
joke.’ She encouraged him to resume his position. ‘The
purpose of the mitt be to help thee localise thy target.’
She spun round taking a step and kicked out from
behind, driving her heel into the palm of his hand.
Brockwell grinned, impressed. ‘Art thou married?’
He suddenly saw in her his perfect mate.
Tory laughed. ‘Nay, for some strange reason men
find me threatening.’ She grabbed a towel, having
worked up a sweat. ‘What about thee, Brockwell, doth
thou have a lady fair?’
‘Many.’ He smiled with a glint in his eye.
She looked at Maelgwn who was reclining on her
bed. ‘What about thee, Maelgwn?’ She’d been dying to
ask this for days and now seemed like an inconspicuous
time.
The Prince glanced at Brockwell, who was staring at
him. ‘Not yet.’ Maelgwn edged his way round the
question, looking back to Tory. ‘Why? Art thou wanting
a more recreational form of exercise?’ He raised his eyebrows, flashing a cheeky grin. The Prince looked at
Brockwell expecting to find him amused, but his
expression was quite the opposite.

‘In the twentieth century, no problem. Here?’ Tory
smiled. ‘I would be hung.’
Brockwell burst into laughter, pleased that
Maelgwn’s lie failed to get him anywhere.
Tory picked up a book from the desk and opened it
where she had marked her place. ‘In the early sixth
century, and I quote.’ She held up a finger, presenting an
argument she wanted them both to hear. ‘“Sexual
irregularities were not sins punishable by the Church,
but offences!”’ She stressed the word, becoming dramatic, much to the amusement of the Prince and Brockwell
who weren’t really used to women talking openly about
sex. ‘“Demanding compensation.”’ Tory raised her eyebrows. ‘It then goes on to say that a failure to meet legal
obligation would reduce even a king’s thegn to slavery.
See!’ She closed the book and waved her finger about. ‘I
am wise to thee both.’ She then turned to Maelgwn. ‘So
I am not looking for . . .’ her tone became rather sultry,
‘a more recreational form of exercise with anyone who
dost not first place a ring on this finger.’
‘Women!’ Brockwell waved her off. ‘Thou art all the
same.’
‘What book be this?’ Maelgwn playfully reached for
it, but Tory quickly pulled it away. ‘Tory,’ he demanded,
firmly.
‘No, I cannot let thee look at this. It contains
information about thee that thee should not know. I
should not have taken it out in the first place, sorry.’
‘My death?’ Maelgwn guessed, and Tory nodded her
head slightly in response. ‘My wedding?’ he asked, not
looking at her this time.

‘It doth not really say, only that you had a queen,
who was more fine and chaste than any other in the
land.’ Tory felt she could tell him that much. Then it
dawned on her that there was no danger in letting him
see it, as the book was written in modern English and
only small passages were in the original language.
Maelgwn sat staring at the book, and Brockwell
looked wary.
‘It be written in my native tongue,’ Tory explained,
‘and I promise I will translate parts for thee later, but
right now I need a bath.’
Maelgwn rose, his thoughts elsewhere. ‘I will send
Katren up.’
‘I would like to thank thee,’ Brockwell said. ‘It hast
been . . . different.’ He joined the Prince and they walked
down the stairs and out of sight.
Lady Gladys, Cara, and Alma, the two teenage girls in
her care, were organising the servants with setting the
table for supper. Lady Gladys noticed her boys as they
passed through the banquet hall, and as she hadn’t spied
either one all day, she pursued them. She opened the
door to the adjoining room to find her son raising a
goblet to Maelgwn. ‘Thou art absolutely right cousin,
she be incredible.’
‘Indeed?’ Lady Gladys said with interest, closing the
door behind her.
Brockwell nearly dropped his drink at the sound of
his mother’s voice, and the Prince stood to explain.
‘I should like to meet this girl,’ she announced.
Maelgwn moved to object but she wouldn’t hear a word

of it. ‘Maelgwn, I demand thee take me to the north
tower, this instant!’ She spoke forcefully, but without
raising her voice. ‘Unless I see with my own eyes what
the pair of thee have been up to, I shall not be a part of
this another day.’
Just as Tory had settled into her bath, sure that the day’s
events were over, there came a knock at the door.
‘Tory,’ Maelgwn called. ‘I have brought someone to
meet thee.’
‘Now, Maelgwn?’ Tory asked, looking at her towel
across the room; Katren had gone to fetch supper and
there was no one to pass it to her.
Lady Gladys looked at Maelgwn surprised. ‘She
refers to thee by thy first name, she be privileged.’
‘Why dost thou never come to see me when I have
my clothes on?’ Tory sounded annoyed and in a fluster.
Maelgwn held his head, not liking the way this must
sound to his aunt. ‘Tory, it be my aunt waiting to see
thee, Brockwell’s mother and sister to the King. She can
hear every word thou art saying.’
Oh shit. ‘Come in.’
Maelgwn opened the door to find Tory dressed in a
wrap that reached the floor, and he smiled at her in
quiet approval. Her hair was in a bun to save getting it
wet, so she looked quite presentable.
Lady Gladys gazed upon Tory in the soft candle
light. ‘Thank you, Maelgwn, that will be all,’ she
instructed, shooing him out and shutting the door on
him. She then turned to study Tory further. ‘Well now,
thou dost not look so different to my old eyes.’ She

smiled and reached out to lift Tory’s chin higher, so that
her face would catch the light. ‘I can see now what
keeps my boys so enchanted.’
‘Enchanted?’ Tory was struck almost speechless by
this lovely woman. She was so refined in the way she
spoke, the way she moved; her whole manner was most
courteous and genteel.
‘Indeed.’ She let Tory go, looking to the stairway
that lead to the caphouse. ‘I have never known
Maelgwn to be so . . . preoccupied.’ She gestured up the
stairs. ‘May I?’
‘Of course,’ Tory insisted.
Maelgwn waited patiently outside; it seemed that his
aunt had been in there for hours. What could they be
discussing all this while, he wondered.
At last the door opened and Lady Gladys emerged.
‘I will look forward to it, dear,’ she said, closing the door
behind her. Maelgwn approached at once. ‘A lovely
girl,’ she commented as she passed him on the way back
to her duties. ‘I will help thee.’
Maelgwn went after her, still worried. ‘Aunt.’ He
touched her arm lightly to draw her to a stop. ‘Did thee
speak to her of my wedding?’
He seemed ashamed to ask and she sighed, already
aware that this was the main reason he had not wanted
them to meet. ‘Nay.’ She appeared a mite disappointed
in him, but the tone in her voice lifted as she said,
‘Though I did mention that I had never seen thee so
distracted by a woman.’
Maelgwn was shocked.

‘It serves thyself right, Maelgwn. Besides, it be the
truth. Thee can play thy games, dear boy, and I shall
play my own.’
In the weeks that followed, Tory’s life at Aberffraw
began to fall nicely into place. She started her day with
the Prince’s training, which commenced at sunrise with
meditation. Then came a stretch program which
incorporated some yoga and breathing exercises to
warm up and improve flexibility. Maelgwn’s coordination was good from all his sword-play. His body,
however, was so solid from wielding heavy swords and
carrying iron armour, that stretching exercises were
essential. They did a short abdominal program, more for
Tory’s benefit than the Prince’s as his abdominal
muscles were as strong as the stone walls that
surrounded them. This was followed by a series of Taekwon-do movements, which were a faster version of
kata. Once the Prince had mastered these to Tory’s
satisfaction, they would begin sparring and self-defence.
At the end of each session, before their final
meditation, Tory would teach the Prince a small section
of a kata. He had begun to arrive early, to join her in
her sunrise ritual of kata. He would execute the parts
he’d learnt and try to follow those he hadn’t. Tory was
pleased that Maelgwn was so keen, and she found him
to be an excellent student. Further meditation brought
the workout to a close by early afternoon, approximately one o’clock on the sundial.
The Prince had come to look forward to this more
than any other part of her tuition. These stories or

meditations were unlike anything Maelgwn had heard
from the court bards. Taliesin, a former tutor to the
Prince, had schooled him in a similar thought process,
but his lessons had been based on more shamanistic
principles.
Lady Gladys usually arrived just as the meditation
was coming to a close, and everyday she would join Tory
for lunch. Lady Gladys had never invited the Prince to
eat with them; he was excused to have lunch with his
knights and to attend to his stately duties. Lady Gladys
knew all about Tory’s origins, even though neither had
told Maelgwn. Tory could not have kept the truth from
this woman, and she knew Maelgwn trusted his aunt, or
he would not have introduced them.
Lady Gladys found little intelligent female conversation in the court, and so she looked forward to her
discussions with Tory; her favourite topic being the
future. Tory had become like an afternoon TV soapie to
Lady Gladys, who laughed and delighted in her tales.
This stately woman had lived through many an ordeal
in her lifetime, so nothing much shocked her.
Katren had blossomed in the care of Drusilla, the head
maid in the household at Aberffraw. Her bruises had
faded, and so she began to wear her hair pulled back off
her face and curled at the end in Roman fashion. She’d
adjusted to life at the court with considerable ease and,
unlike Tory, looked the part. As well as having charmed
most of the household’s staff with her large soulful eyes
and soft smiles, Katren had also befriended Alma and
Cara. She attended the two young maidens in the free

time she found in the morning after bringing Tory and
the Prince a small breakfast. Katren, born and bred on
the common, seemed like rather a wild child to Cara
and Alma, who were bored with their rigid life at court.
The pair enjoyed the story of Katren’s rescue from her
‘disgusting pig of a husband’. She told them the gossip
she’d overheard when serving lunch to Tory and Lady
Gladys, and stories about the royal knights that she
heard about the house. Katren’s favourite knight was
the young and handsome Sir Brockwell.
Needless to say, Tory had become almost an idol to
Cara and Alma, who hadn’t seen a trace of her since the
day she’d arrived. Only Katren, Lady Gladys, Sir
Brockwell and the Prince were allowed into the north
tower or to enter any of the four towers that led to the
open walkways of the roof. Guards had been posted on
the walls of the outer bailey, so the roof was completely
private and could not be seen by anyone.
Katren had refused to tell the girls what really went
on in the tower. Yet after several days of persistent
nagging, she cracked, making them swear they’d never
tell another soul.
At first Tory didn’t know what to do in the afternoons
after lunch with Lady Gladys. She hadn’t had any time
to herself for so long that it seemed almost boring.
By the third afternoon of peace, Tory hung over the
sea-wall staring at the water. It was a hot day and,
frankly, all she wanted to do was to strip off her clothes
and dive into the ocean. ‘Damn, this was supposed to be
a holiday.’

Growing more restless, she returned to the tower
and changed into a black one-piece swimsuit and a pair
of bicycle shorts. What the hell, Tory figured, as nobody
came up there anyway. She settled down on her towel
to catch a few rays.
Later that day, as Maelgwn was walking across the
courtyard, he stopped to listen to a haunting tune that
resonated down around the walls of the inner bailey.
‘Maelgwn?’ Lady Gladys came outside to join him.
‘From whence comes that lovely music?’
‘It be Tory. Listen.’ Maelgwn was completely lost in it.
‘’Tis beautiful, darling . . . but surely it cannot be
helpful to thy secret.’ She smiled, making good sense as
always.
Tory finished the piece to hear the unexpected sound of
applause. She turned to find Selwyn, the prince’s squire,
standing in the doorway, his eyes lowered to the ground.
‘Please forgive my insolence, lady. I mean no
disrespect. It be just that I am a trained harpist and can
fully appreciate a piece well played.’
‘Thou art excused, Selwyn,’ she assured him.
Selwyn was all of nineteen and gorgeous to look at,
though he was of a smaller build than the other men.
His fine, fair hair, fell to his shoulders in a bob, his eyes
were deep blue and his face was open and full of
expression. Tory thought that in her day he would be
considered quite trendy.
‘Be thine instrument here at Aberffraw, perhaps we
could play together?’

‘Oh, lady . . .’ Selwyn was filled with excitement,
until he spied the Prince approaching.
‘Whoops!’ she said quietly, as she turned to discover
his concern.
Maelgwn waved for Selwyn to take his leave. ‘Thee
knows thou art banned from here,’ he scolded.
Selwyn, disappointed, did as the Prince bade.
‘Hold on,’ Tory called after him. ‘Please, Majesty.
Selwyn only wants to practise his music with me, and
I’ve been so bored these past few afternoons that I’d be
most grateful for the distraction.’
This was the first time Tory had ever called him
Majesty, and Maelgwn rather liked it. ‘Alright. But thee
will have to practise inside the tower . . . for now.’
Tory threw her arms around his neck. ‘Thank thee
so much.’ She let him go before bounding inside to get
changed.
‘My pleasure.’ Maelgwn smiled after her, marvelling
at her attire. He looked to his page, who seemed amused
by it all. ‘Well, off with thee then. Do not keep the lady
waiting.’
‘Thank thee, Majesty. I be greatly honoured this
day.’ Selwyn ran to fetch his harp.
From then on, Tory’s days were filled. In the early
evening she would take supper with Katren. The girl
had begun to ask questions about the way Tory fought
and why she meditated, so Tory proposed teaching her a
few exercises for her own protection.
Cara and Alma got wind of this a few days later, and
soon Tory found them in the tower, accompanied by
Katren who introduced them to each other. Tory was

extremely concerned as she considered their request, as
the pair hardly looked the type for her tuition. Alma
was fair and petite, with wide eyes the colour of acorns.
Her hair was pulled back in a neat bun, which made her
the very image of a little china doll. Cara was just as
slender, though much taller. Her dark, copper brown
hair fell in loose ringlets halfway down her back, and
although her hazel eyes gave her a more fiery
appearance, even she seemed too prim for the request
they were making.
‘Katren, thou promised not to tell anyone. The
Prince will kill me if he finds I am corrupting the young
maidens here,’ Tory appealed to her, emphasising the
sensitiveness of the situation.
‘Doth not every woman have the right to defend
herself?’ Katren took the same stand Tory would adopt
herself. ‘Cara, Alma, and I have already thought of a
good excuse to be here.’
‘And what might that be?’ Tory asked.
‘Singing practice,’ they announced in unison.
‘We all have fine voices and I have heard thee sing,
thy voice be as pretty as a bird,’ Katren continued. ‘I
have spoken with Selwyn. He will tell Prince Maelgwn
that he be accompanying us on the harp, but he will
really be keeping watch by the door downstairs.’
‘Please, lady.’ Cara came forward. ‘Thee cannot
imagine how drab life hast been at court.’
Tory could relate to their dilemma. ‘Alright. We
will start tomorrow night.’

6

The Second
Prince

A

fter three weeks of training, the Prince had
taken to the oriental fighting skills like a fish to
water. He and Tory had recently begun sparring
and had been delighting in toppling each other ever
since.
Tory felt relaxed in the Prince’s company, as she was
not expected to humble herself before him as everyone
else was. Maelgwn, on the other hand, was pleased to
have one person in his world with whom he could be
himself.
Taliesin had also been this way with him, and Tory
made him feel as playful, cocky, and sure of himself as
he had been in his youth. The Prince found himself
sneaking up to Tory’s room after the rest of the

household had made for bed. She would read to him
from her books or speak to him of the future, as he lay
across the end of her bed. Some nights, they would talk
for hours. He would have tried to seduce her weeks ago
had he not known about his damn marriage.
Maelgwn was being particularly attentive to Tory this
morning. He knew she was growing annoyed by his lack
of concentration, but he just couldn’t seem to focus.
They were practising throws and holds. Maelgwn
started the exercise to the side of Tory, bent over her
with his arm across her back. But he became so
interested in the view he had down her shirt that he
showed little resistance to her counter-attack.
Tory stood up, angered by his lack of discipline.
‘Let’s try it the other way around, shall we?’
Maelgwn grinned. ‘I thought thee would never ask.’
This time his heart was in it. He twisted out from
under her hold, and executing a sweeping kick to the
back of her legs, flung her backwards to the ground.
Maelgwn pinned her legs to the mat with his knees and
stretched each of her arms above her head, maintaining
a firm grasp of her wrists. He smiled down at her triumphant, raising his eyebrows as if to say, not bad hey?
‘Much better!’ Tory announced, pleased. ‘I yield.’
She waited for him to ease off, but he didn’t. His dark
eyes gazed at her and he held her fast.
‘I have dreamt of thee,’ he whispered, and their lips
gently met.
A surge of adrenalin rushed through them. Maelgwn
released her legs, sliding himself in between them. Tory

didn’t care about the repercussions of her actions now;
she was tired of having to suppress how she felt about
the Prince. She wrapped her legs around Maelgwn’s
powerful form and drew her body up to meet his in
encouragement.
The expectant lovers didn’t hear the door open and
close downstairs. Brockwell came to a stop at the top of
the staircase, rather perturbed by what he saw. ‘Majesty.’
He waited. ‘Majesty!’
‘What!’ Maelgwn snapped, as Tory ducked out from
beneath him.
‘Thy father, King Caswallon, be here with thine
bride,’ Brockwell announced, with a blatant lack of
diplomacy.
‘Thine bride!’ Tory looked at Maelgwn, who’d
sprung to his feet in a fluster at the sound of his father’s
name. ‘When were you planning to tell me exactly?
Thee told me a bare faced lie and Brockwell be my
witness.’
Brockwell gave Tory a fixed nod to confirm.
Maelgwn didn’t know quite what to say; he had no
excuse. The dream he’d had the night before must have
caused him to take leave of his senses. ‘Please Tory, I
have no time to explain, I have to go.’
Tory ignored his plea and stormed outside.
Brockwell had to grin at Maelgwn’s discomposure.
‘He be waiting, Majesty.’
Maelgwn swung round to confront his champion.
‘Why, Calin?’
‘It not be right that thee should keep her hidden in
this tower and use her ignorance to thine own advan-

tage.’ Brockwell sounded as angered by his cousin’s
behaviour as Maelgwn was about his untimely betrayal.
‘This be a change of heart . . . coming from one who
wanted to slit her throat!’
‘An honest mistake, Sire.’ Brockwell suppressed his
feelings and motioned the Prince to the stairs.
Maelgwn realised he was wrong, this predicament
was of his own making. ‘Forgive me, Calin. I do not
know what hast got into me.’ Maelgwn paused to gather
his wits. ‘I truly need thy assistance this day, as I am not
sure that I shall come through it.’
‘Go, change, and greet thy father.’ Brockwell’s tone
softened upon sensing his cousin’s despair. ‘Thee will
find him in the the west wing gallery and . . .’ he gave
Maelgwn fair warning, ‘thy brother hast returned with
him. In the meantime, I shall see if I can calm the shedevil on thy behalf.’
Maelgwn placed a hand on Brockwell’s shoulder, ‘I
cannot thank thee enough. Thou art a true champion,
Calin.’
Brockwell found Tory in her favourite spot, leaning
on the sea-wall, looking out over the ocean.
She heard footsteps and even though her eyes were
fixed on the blue horizon, she guessed it was Brockwell
and not the Prince who’d come to pacify her. The
gentle lull of the ocean and the warmth of the sunshine
had calmed her, though she didn’t look to him as she
spoke. ‘How long hast everyone known, Brockwell?’
The knight took a seat beside her, looking out in
the opposite direction towards the village. ‘Only
Maelgwn, myself and Lady Gladys know. The Prince

confided in us the night we arrived here. He was only
told of it at Degannwy.’ Brockwell noticed Tory’s
expression darken. ‘But I do swear to thee, Maelgwn
hast never even met the girl.’
Tory turned her large, green eyes his way. ‘Hast thou
met her?’
He smiled at the question. ‘Aye, just then.’
‘Be she beautiful?’ Tory looked back to the ocean,
not really wanting to know.
‘Aye, I suppose, but I doubt she will be to Maelgwn’s
taste, no . . .’
Brockwell cut himself short, and Tory glanced over
to catch him holding his hands cupped in front of his
chest.
‘Let’s just say, thee need not fear comparison.’
She felt mildly appeased by his remark. ‘Thou art a
good friend to him, Calin.’ Tory placed a hand on his
shoulder in her first open show of affection toward him.
She missed having Brian as a confidant and Brockwell
was so like him. ‘May I call thee Calin?’
Both sides of his mouth dropped to a mope as he
considered the request. ‘Well, it is my real name.’
‘Is not Brockwell thy real name too?’
‘Nay, Brockwell was my father’s name. He was a
fierce warrior, so they tell me. He died when I was very
young.’ Calin became melancholy a moment, then
shrugged off his sadness. ‘Sir Calin dost not sound very
ominous. So when I was knighted, I asked to be dubbed
in my father’s name.’
‘Well, you seem to do a fine job living up to his
reputation. So then, Calin, allow me to ask thee, do you

think I am making a contribution to the court at
Aberffraw?’
Brockwell nodded, unsure as to where the
conversation was heading.
‘Then, should I not be allowed to be part of it?’
Brockwell jumped to his feet, alarmed. ‘Thee could
not, not as thou art!’ he spluttered, glancing at her
attire.
She grabbed his hand to implore him. ‘Surely I can
be dressed to appear like any other maiden here. Please
Calin, or I shall surely go mad.’
What could he say? He agreed with her. He placed
his hand on hers, his mind ticking over. ‘If we give
Maelgwn no warning then he cannot object. But there
be much to consider here. Maelgwn’s fears should not be
taken lightly for he hast had good reason to keep thee a
secret thus far.’ He’d heard Maelgwn speak of his concerns about the safety of his father’s kingdom on many
occasions. Yet, perhaps they could use Tory’s introduction
to the court to their advantage, and dispel the rumours
generated by her presence here at the same time.
‘We shall need help,’ he resolved.
Maelgwn took time readying himself; he was not
looking forward to confronting his father, meeting this
woman, or being united with his long lost brother. He
tried briefly to meditate in the hope of becoming
centred and calm, but without Tory to guide him it was
useless.
‘I need her on my side.’ He scolded himself as he
marched down the long hall, the doors to the gallery in

his sights. ‘I must make my peace with her before this
day be over.’
As his hand came to rest on the handle of the large
door, he could hear the murmurs of those who awaited
him. He held his pendant of the Dragon and took a
deep breath.
The Prince entered the gallery to find most of the
knights in attendance, along with his father’s officials
and personal guard. The ladies of the house, with the
exception of Lady Gladys, were standing by the tall,
slender windows. Maelgwn spotted two ladies who were
unfamiliar to him, one of whom he assumed was his
bride to be. He spied his brother, Caradoc, in the
corner, engrossed in conversation with Cadogan. I
should have known they’d seek each other out, they
always were as thick as thieves, he thought. This was a
worry. Maelgwn had hoped to keep Tory a secret from
Caradoc, so he summoned Madoc.
‘Can I help thee, Majesty?’
Maelgwn urged him closer. ‘Get Cadogan away from
Caradoc, I do not trust them.’
Madoc quietly agreed.
‘Send him on an errand of some description . . . I
want him gone for at least a few days.’
Madoc nodded and went about his bidding.
‘Maelgwn, my boy.’ King Caswallon held out his
hand to his son.
The Prince’s expression was solemn as he went
down on one knee before the King. ‘Father.’ He kissed
the ring on his father’s hand. ‘I be comforted to see that
thou hast returned to us in good health.’

At this the King laughed. ‘I was in no danger, I
assure thee. And I must say, thou art appearing exceedingly well thyself.’
But Maelgwn was not so convinced of his father’s
safety. ‘I need to speak with thee at once. Alone.’
‘Later. Percival hast already spoken to me of thy
concern, but now I insist thee meet thy bride before
thee raise an objection to her.’
It will not make any difference, Maelgwn thought,
though he nodded in accordance with his father’s
wishes.
Tory studied her image in the mirror with reservation.
She was dressed in an outfit that had once belonged to
the late Queen, who had been small of frame like
herself. The linen dress, or kirtle, was pale green and
simple in design. It hung from her shoulders in soft
waves and looked rather like a long nightshirt. Over it
she wore a thickly woven tunic, or gunna, which had
sleeves to the elbow, and fell to her knees. It was of a
very deep green, almost emerald, which nicely complemented her eyes. Tory fastened the gunna in tight at the
waist with her black leather belt. The women wore no
undergarments at this time of year, but Tory wasn’t too
comfortable with that idea. She chose to wear her Tshirt, jeans and steel-capped boots underneath, which
were well hidden by the dress.
‘Goodness, I almost look like a lady.’
‘What doth thou mean, almost?’ Lady Gladys
replied. She’d braided strands of hair from each side of
Tory’s face and fastened them in the centre at the back,

leaving the rest of her hair loose. When she’d finished,
she paused to view the result. ‘Thee appears as refined as
Queen Sorcha herself once did, bless her soul. Hast
Maelgwn not told thee that thou bears a likeness to
her?’
Tory didn’t know if this was good news or not. ‘He
never mentioned it, no.’
‘Maelgwn absolutely adored her, everyone did.’ She
paused briefly as the memories came flooding back, then
sighed. ‘If the King dost not take an instant liking to
thee, I shall be very surprised.’ Lady Gladys was struck by
a thought. ‘In fact, we had best couple thee with someone, save Caswallon or Caradoc do take a fancy to thee.’
Tory’s eyes opened wide in horror as Lady Gladys
concocted a strategy. A smile crossed her face as she
made haste for the stairwell. ‘Calin.’
‘Lady Gladys, what art thou thinking?’
She turned back to Tory, taking up her hands in her
own, ‘Thee must trust me, little one.’
The Prince was having great difficulty engaging Vanora,
his intended bride, in conversation. The girl was barely
eighteen years of age, ten years younger than himself.
Her hair, as dark as his own, fell in tight curls around
her face and over her shoulders. She had a round yet
delicate face and ivory skin, flushed rose red in her
cheeks and mouth. She was taller than the other young
maidens and her body was long and slim like a reed. The
Princess, however beautiful, had eyes as cold and dark as
ebony, and Maelgwn thought her a poor compensation
for the bounty he’d forfeited that morning.

Lady Gladys entered the room, and the Prince
excused himself politely then left to pursue his aunt
who had taken a seat by the King. Over the rest of the
conversations going on in the room, Maelgwn heard
Lady Gladys inform the King that she wanted to
introduce a special guest who was presently residing at
the house.
The doors opened and Maelgwn turned to see Tory
enter on Brockwell’s arm. He felt his temperature begin
to rise. Have they gone mad? He should have been
furious but his heart leapt at the sight of Tory dressed
thus, and he felt compelled to fall to his knees; she
looked so much like his mother, the Queen. This
resemblance didn’t go unnoticed by the older members
of the court, and their voices were hushed as Brockwell
proudly led her to the King.
Caswallon was stunned as he stood to greet her.
‘Sorcha,’ he uttered under his breath.
Lady Gladys wore a cool smile of satisfaction as she
rose to introduce her guest. ‘Majesty, this be Tory
Alexander, a traveller left stranded on British soil.’
Tory was nervous, aware that everyone in the room
was watching her, and she didn’t dare venture a look in
Maelgwn’s direction. Instead, she curtsied, her eyes
lowered as she’d been instructed.
‘Thy son saved her from Saxon cutthroats in the
south-east,’ Lady Gladys informed the King.
He extended his hand to Tory and she went down
on one knee before him, kissing his ring.
‘Arise, dear girl,’ he instructed, drawing her up by
the hand, completely enchanted. ‘She be so pretty,

Maelgwn. Why did thee not tell me of this find?’
Caswallon looked at Maelgwn who was at a loss for
words. The King turned his gaze back to Tory, a million
memories flooding his mind. ‘Afraid I might snatch her
up for myself, no doubt.’
Tory smiled at the King, who was tall like the Prince
and no doubt very handsome in his younger days. ‘Thee
flatters me, Majesty.’ Tory flirted ever so slightly.
Maelgwn became concerned by the way his father
was looking at Tory, and also noticed his brother coming forward to eye her over. It was Brockwell, however,
who stepped in to reclaim her.
‘Thou art too late, Majesty. She be well spoken for.’
As Tory gave Brockwell an affectionate smile,
Maelgwn’s blood began to boil.
‘Do sit down and tell me all about thyself.’ The King
motioned her to the seat beside him, choosing to ignore
Brockwell’s claim.
Tory spied Sir Gilmore studying her with a rather
curious expression, as he came to stand behind the
King. ‘I have been recovering from my ordeal in the
north tower, and have not yet had the opportunity to
meet everyone.’ Tory hoped this might explain why she
hadn’t met the man who ran the house in the King’s
absence. ‘Thee must be Sir Gilmore.’ Tory stood and
held out her hand to him. ‘I believe I have much to
thank thee for.’ The knight’s brow was drawn in
curiosity and so she explained, ‘Art thou not the tutor
in swordplay and battle to my saviour?’ Tory motioned
to Maelgwn, who couldn’t help but smile at the way she
so easily charmed everyone.

Sir Gilmore took up her hand and kissed it. ‘Forgive
my staring, lady, but for a moment I thought thee the
ghost of our dear departed Queen.’
Maelgwn relaxed slightly when he realised this was
Gilmore’s only concern.
‘’Tis a remarkable resemblance, I must say,’ Lady
Gladys commented, giving Tory a wink of approval; she
was obviously enjoying herself immensely.
‘How do we know thou art not a simple commoner?
Any woman can look like a lady in the right dress.’
There was such evil in this voice, so deep and harsh,
that Tory turned to view the speaker whom she assumed
to be Prince Caradoc. He looked much like the other
males of his family, but he was not as well groomed. His
hair was very long with braids here and there, and he
obviously took pride in being the black sheep.
‘Prince Caradoc, I presume?’ She tipped her head to
him slightly. ‘I have heard so much about thee.’
‘I do not doubt it.’ Caradoc looked to Maelgwn,
who was watching him closely.
Tory sensed the malice between these two, and decided she’d have to discover the cause of their falling out.
‘Tory possesses an instrument the like of none thou
hast ever heard. It be simply beautiful, Majesty,’ Lady
Gladys announced, to break the feeling of ill will. ‘We
must have her play for us this evening.’
‘Indeed, I shall look forward to it,’ the King replied.
For the rest of the afternoon the King ignored the
bickering of his sons, finding solace in the company of
the women of the house.

Tory met Maelgwn’s intended bride during the
course of the afternoon, and strangely enough they took
an instant dislike of each other. It was not only Princess
Vanora’s expression that made her appear so sombre; a
menacing presence seemed to overshadow her whole
demeanour. Tory considered it a pity that the Princess
and Caradoc weren’t betrothed, as they seemed well
suited.
Later that evening everyone was treated to a feast in
the banquet hall. As Brockwell’s assumed lady, Tory was
seated between him and Madoc; thankfully well away
from Caradoc and Vanora.
A seemingly neverending stream of food was
brought in and laid on the tables before them: meats,
fruit, vegetables, bread, cheese, nuts and mead, which
flowed freely throughout the evening.
Brockwell had been wonderful company, steadily
drinking Tory under the table. Katren was in her
element, pleased to be attending her lady in the court
banquet hall. Tory made a point of properly introducing
her to Brockwell, knowing that Katren had a soft spot
for the knight.
‘Calin, thee remembers Katren,’ said Tory, directing
his attention away from herself to the maid. Katren
curtsied politely, hiding the admiration she felt as
Brockwell eyed her with a look of approval.
‘Well, well, well. Who would have thought thee
would scrub up so nicely.’ Brockwell sat back in his
chair to view her better. ‘A true rose.’
Though her heart was set aflutter, Katren didn’t let
her excitement get the better of her. ‘May I say, Lord,

that I am a great admirer of thee. Thy heroic deeds
these past years be both numerous and notorious.’
‘That thee may.’ Brockwell watched her depart,
thinking that she was as cheeky as her mistress. He took
up his goblet. ‘What shall we drink to this time?’
‘To friends,’ Tory replied.
‘To lovers.’
‘And enemies,’ she cautioned. ‘May we be granted
the foresight to know the difference.’ Tory clinked her
goblet against his.
Brockwell could only smile; it seemed she had an
answer for every advance.
Tory was quite tipsy when the time came for her to
perform for the King. Selwyn, who was to accompany
her, had collected her saxophone from her quarters. She
took a short time to explain to King Caswallon how the
instrument worked before taking up her place by the
harp. The dulcet tones of the two instruments came
together to create an atmosphere of bliss, keeping the
audience spellbound throughout the performance. All
bar the Prince, that is, whose enjoyment was disturbed
by Caradoc who was sitting nearby.
‘Thy little find appears mighty palatable from here,’
Caradoc goaded, as he turned an evil eye to his brother.
Though Maelgwn clearly disapproved of his connotation, he simply focused his attention on the players.
Caradoc laughed at his brother’s restraint, delighted to
have found an obvious weakness.
When the music was finished, Tory and Selwyn were
overwhelmed with applause. Selwyn held Tory’s hand as
they took a bow and his face beamed with satisfaction.

The hour was late and the moon was full, thus the
knights enticed young maidens to stroll in the moonlight. Maelgwn had been urged by his father to
accompany Vanora, and for the first time in her life
Tory felt a twinge of jealousy. She looked at Brockwell
who was slouched in his chair quietly watching her
observe everyone else. ‘Well, I am history thanks to
thee.’ She slapped his knee. ‘And so I should retire.’
‘I shall escort thee, then,’ Brockwell offered in a
drunken but friendly manner, getting to his feet.
‘Good, because I be totally lost.’ They both laughed.
Once Tory had stood up, Brockwell locked her arm
firmly around his own and they bid the royal party
goodnight.
As soon as Tory reached the privacy of her quarters, she
stripped down to her T-shirt and jeans and flopped back
onto the bed. With all the mead she’d consumed, however, the room began to spin and she was impelled to sit
straight back up. She opened her eyes as she regained
her composure, and was startled to find Brockwell
staring down at her. ‘Damn thee, Calin, thee scared
me!’ Tory scolded. ‘I thought thee had gone to bed.’
‘But I am not tired yet.’
Brockwell slumped onto the bed beside her in an
intoxicated state, and Tory couldn’t fail to notice how
amiable was his mood. ‘Now Calin, thou hast had much
to drink . . .’ she began her good-sense lecture, getting
up off the bed and opening the doors to let some fresh
air into the room. ‘And despite how fond I am of thee, I
will have to inflict real pain if thou art up to mischief.’

Brockwell, completely ignoring her caution, slowly
approached Tory to trace a finger along the fading scar
he’d left on her neck. ‘I deeply regret that I ever caused
thee pain, Tory. This scar be a thorn in my side. Each
time I see it, I am reminded of my rash and brutal
judgement of thee.’
This resolve was most unexpected and Tory lowered
her defences. ‘Please, do not feel guilty, I bear thee no
malice. On the contrary . . .’ She took a step away,
feeling uncomfortably intimate with him. ‘Thou hast
been the best friend I could have asked for this day.’
Tory was in need of some air, and moved to the walkway
outside.
Brockwell followed her into the moonlight, more
than a little confused. ‘Then why dost thou keep such a
distance between us? Doth thou find me so undesirable?’
She reached out and gently touched the face that
was so familiar to her. ‘No, thou art very handsome.’
Brockwell took hold of her arms, anxious to know
her mind. ‘Art thou in love with Maelgwn?’
Tory’s head was swimming. ‘It hast got nothing to
do with him. I . . .’ Brockwell startled her with a kiss
filled with passion. After all the mead she’d consumed,
Calin’s attentions were hard to resist and she seemed to
be involuntarily returning his advances. But, as angry as
she was at Maelgwn for his deceit, Tory could not bring
herself to betray him like this. ‘Calin. I am sorry, but I
cannot do this.’
‘But it was going so well?’
‘Please, come inside, I have something to show
thee.’

Tory produced a photo of herself and Brian from her
wallet and handed it to Brockwell. The picture had
been taken at the competition the day before Brian
died; they had been so proud of each other’s win and it
reflected in their faces.
Brockwell went quiet, glancing up from the picture to
his own image in the mirror. ‘Was he thy lover?’ he asked.
‘He was my brother,’ Tory answered, trying to hide
the pain of his loss. ‘He died a couple of years ago.’
‘Thee must miss him.’
Tory nodded her head in confirmation, and the tears
began to roll down her face. ‘Every day.’
Brockwell stood to embrace her; he’d never been too
good at consoling weeping women. ‘So thou art telling
me I remind thee of thy dead brother,’ he surmised.
‘Well, no wonder thou art not swooning at my advances.’
Tory gave half a laugh. ‘I am so sorry, Calin. Under
different circumstances I would be swooning, truly . . .
well I was really,’ she admitted, embarrassed.
‘I should leave thee to thy dreams then.’
‘Calin.’
He looked back to her from the stairwell.
‘I do love thee.’
‘Now thee tells me,’ he rolled his eyes, throwing his
arms in the air. ‘Women!’
Tory felt a warm comfort come over her as the door
downstairs closed. It was the feeling one gets upon
finding a new friend or, in this case, a very old one.
It seemed she’d only been asleep for a minute when
Maelgwn came bursting through the doors from the

wall-walk. ‘Tory! Thou art here?’ He peered through the
darkness to her bed, sounding surprised for some reason.
‘Well where did thee think I would be at this hour?’
‘So, ’tis not thee with Brockwell in his room,’ he
said, breathing a sigh of relief.
‘Brockwell hast a woman in his room?’ Now Tory
was the one who sounded disturbed.
‘Aye.’ Maelgwn wondered why this should bother
her.
‘Typical.’ Tory thumped herself in the head for being
so stupid. ‘And may I say how nice it was of thee to
think that I would take to Calin’s bed, in any case . . . I
mean, what kind of a girl dost thou take me for?’
‘Well what am I to think when I see him carrying a
woman into his room, and thou hast been the only one
flirting with him this day.’
‘Flirting! I was covering thy royal butt. Perhaps thee
would have preferred that I told thy father and thy bride
of our encounter this morning?’
The Prince was not listening. ‘Why art thou so
annoyed with Calin? Was he here with thee this night?’
‘That be my own affair.’ Tory’s head was absolutely
splitting, and she didn’t have the patience to give him a
detailed account at present.
‘He touched thee?’
As Maelgwn suddenly sounded quite hurt, Tory
slowly shook her head. ‘We were both the better for
drink, but nothing came of it. So, my pleasures art still
very much my own. Happy now? Goodnight.’
Maelgwn couldn’t blame her for being angry. He
thought it best to let her be for tonight, to save

aggravating the situation further. ‘Goodnight,’ he
whispered, closing the doors quietly behind him.
‘Lady, lady, please wake up.’
Tory stirred slowly, her head still heavy. A vague
recollection of being wrapped up in Calin’s arms made
her groan, and she held her hands over her eyes in an
attempt to dispel the horror.
‘Lady, I am so sorry to wake thee like this, but I fear
something dreadful hast happened.’
Tory noticed Katren was sobbing. ‘What distresses
thee so?’
‘Sir Brockwell approached me last night as I finished
my duties . . . ’
‘Katren, it was thee in Calin’s room last night?’
‘Nay, lady! I would never shame thee in such a
manner. But when I declined, Sir Brockwell took
Vanora’s maid, Malvina, in my stead. I fear I have
passed up the only chance I shall ever have.’ She
collapsed onto the bed and burst into tears once again.
‘Katren, look at me. Brockwell drank so much last
night that I doubt he will remember a thing this day,
and I’m quite sure he hast kicked Malvina out by now.’
This brought a smile to Katren’s face. ‘Thou hast done
the right thing, believe me. For if thou wishes to catch
Calin for keeps . . .’ Tory paused for confirmation and
Katren nodded eagerly, wanting to hear more, ‘. . . thee
must ignore his every advance. Brush him off as if thee
did not care for him at all.’
‘But then Sir Brockwell will find himself another
woman who be more obliging, like last night.’

‘He will keep coming back to thee, though. Want to
know why?’ Tory prompted, and Katren nodded her
head. ‘Because, although Sir Brockwell be used to
getting what he wants, if there be no conquest, there be
no glory. Understand?’
Katren smiled. ‘Aye, I see the sense of it.’
Tory glanced at the stairwell to find that Maelgwn
had taken a seat, and was listening intently to every
word they said. She leaned closer to Katren, wondering
how long he’d been there. ‘The way I fight seems to
excite these men, and we shall use this to thy advantage
when the time be right.’ Katren giggled as Tory sat back
and gave her a wink.
‘Oh thank thee, lady, thou art too good to me.’
Katren rose, pulling herself together. ‘I shall be about
my duty and get thee fed.’
The maid turned bright red on discovering the Prince.
She curtsied to him then left as quickly as she was able.
Maelgwn’s mind was set at ease by what he’d heard,
and he admitted that Tory was quite correct in her
analysis of his cousin. Her words gave him hope that she
might be using the same strategy on him. For surely if
Tory was advising another woman on Calin’s entrapment, she could hold no true interest in him herself.
‘Art thou still angry at me?’
He strolled over to take a seat on the bed, while
Tory silently debated the issue in her mind. ‘When thee
said yesterday that thou had dreamt of me, what did
thee mean?’ she asked.
He found the question an amusing one. ‘I assure
thee, if enlightened thee would never speak to me

again.’ Some of it had been rather erotic so he wasn’t
lying, yet in his experience the Prince knew it to be
much more than a dream; it was a prophesy. He’d had
these waking dreams when the Dragon first came to
him, and they would stay with him for days, tormenting
and guiding him to do things he wouldn’t normally
consider.
‘I see.’ Tory found it hard to keep a smile from her
face.
The door downstairs slammed open, startling them
both.
‘Majesty, thee will never guess who be here?’
Brockwell reached the top of the stairs, short of breath.
‘Taliesin,’ answered Maelgwn, calmly.
‘How did thee know?’ Brockwell stared at his friend
amazed, before racing back downstairs; he was still a bit
embarrassed by his behaviour the night before and
wasn’t yet ready to face the repercussions.
Tory’s eyes had parted wide. ‘Taliesin! The Taliesin?
Maelgwn, thou dost know him?’ she clutched Maelgwn’s
shoulder, excited. If only part of what the history books
said of him was true, this renowned magician might
know of a way to get her home. ‘Why of course you do!’
Tory hit herself as she recalled reading something to
that effect.
‘Aye. He was my tutor and occupied this very tower.
My mother held him in very high regard.’
The star charts on the wall are his! She viewed her
tower in a different light now. ‘Be he as powerful and all
knowing as they say? Be he truly immortal and a
shaman? He could help me get home, could he not?’

Maelgwn just laughed in response to the interrogation, fully suspecting Taliesin of having everything
to do with her being there in the first place. ‘Thou shalt
have to ask him thyself.’ He rose, eager to greet his old
friend. ‘I will bring him to meet thee.’
‘Can I not come down?’
‘I believe a more private meeting be in order. I will
not be long.’
Maelgwn hadn’t seen his old mentor in over ten years,
and he remembered that they didn’t part on the best of
terms at the time. Still, Taliesin’s indignation about the
puerile resolutions Maelgwn made as a boy hadn’t
stopped the old man from arriving when he was needed
most.
Brockwell strode alongside the Prince, his
conscience plaguing him. ‘I believe I owe thee an
apology.’
Maelgwn was unsure of what he meant and had to
stop and think about it for a moment. ‘If thou art
referring to Tory, I would say she be the one to whom
thee should apologise. I cannot very well blame thee,’
he replied to Brockwell, who appeared surprised that
the Prince was taking it so well.
‘She told thee, then?’
‘Nay, she did not. She knows about Malvina. I saw
thee taking a woman to thy bed last night, and
presuming it was Tory . . .’ The Prince shrugged.
Brockwell was horrified. ‘What must she think of
me now?’ He wondered if perhaps the Prince had told
her on purpose.

‘I am sorry, Calin, but thee made thy own bed, so to
speak.’
As the Prince didn’t have time to train with her this
morning, Tory had decided to jog a few laps around the
open wall-walk instead. After a few simple stretching
exercises, she set off around the path.
By her fourth lap she had settled into a good rhythm
when, to her horror, the door to the west tower opened
and Prince Caradoc led the Princess Vanora onto the
walkway.
Tory didn’t slow down, but nodded in greeting as
she approached. ‘Good morning, Highnesses.’
As she passed them, dressed only in her tracksuit
and joggers, Caradoc’s smirk broadened. Vanora just
stared in cryptic disapproval.
‘Wait downstairs,’ Caradoc urged her.
Vanora stood defiant. ‘Why?’
‘Just do it,’ he hissed back. Caradoc watched the
Princess leave and waited for Tory to make her way
back around to him.
Oh shit, Tory thought, noticing that Caradoc was
alone. She put her head down and picked up speed to
get past him.
Caradoc leaned against the sea-wall to admire Tory’s
form, and allowed her to pass before demanding, ‘Halt
right there!’
As she came to a standstill, Caradoc strolled up to
her. ‘What dost thou think thou art doing?’
Tory was not in the mood to be reckoned with. ‘I
think thou art intelligent enough to work it out.’

Caradoc smiled as he reached his hand round the
back of her neck and gripped her tightly. ‘How sharp be
thy tongue for one of the weaker sex.’ He observed her
closely, considering the pleasure to be had in breaking
such spirit.
His laugh was unnerving, and he pulled her toward
him, forcing his tongue into her mouth. Tory clenched
her fists; this bastard really knew how to push her
buttons.
‘Thy tongue be lush,’ he told her. ‘It would be a
shame to have to bite it out.’
‘And miss the pleasure of my conversation?’ She
smiled, not in the least bit fazed.
Caradoc lifted a hand to strike her but the sound of
his name stopped him. He backed off, letting her go.
Tory breathed a sigh of relief as Brockwell strode up
and stood between them. ‘If thou hast a gripe with my
lady, thee will take it up with me.’
Tory breathed that Brockwell didn’t show Caradoc
the same respect he did Maelgwn.
Caradoc held his disdainful air. ‘Nay, I have no
gripe,’ he assured the knight as if he had never been
angered. ‘But I would suggest thee teach thy woman
some manners, before she lands thee in serious trouble.’
Tory watched Caradoc leave, looking forward to a
time when she could kick his chauvinistic butt back to
whence it came.
‘Art thou alright?’ Brockwell turned to her, pleased
she’d had the sense to refrain from defending herself.
‘Aye, that be two I owe thee, Calin.’ Tory smiled
briefly. ‘I did fancy smashing his royal worship right

between the eyes . . . ’twas a good thing thee came
along.’
‘Dost thou not think me volatile after my wanton
conduct last night?’
‘Who thee chooses to bed be thine own business.
But Malvina, Calin?’ She gave him a distasteful look. ‘I
find that insulting.’
‘Thee did not have to wake up to her.’ Brockwell
held his head that ached with a vengeance. ‘I honestly
swear, I remember naught of it.’
Tory felt sorry for him; men were so stupid sometimes. ‘Doth thy head ail thee?’
‘Aye, almost as bad as my conscience.’
Tory flung an arm over his shoulder. ‘Come to my
tower, I have something that will fix thee right up.’

7

The Magician

M

aelgwn entered the library to find the old
wizard standing in front of the long windows,
savouring the sun’s rays. ‘Should I be glad to
see thee, High Merlin, or hast thou come to vex me?’
Maelgwn poured himself a well-needed drink and filled
a goblet for his guest.
‘Thou art one of my most notable students,
Maelgwn. Thee should know the answer to that. Hast
thou not been expecting me?’
Maelgwn’s fears were set to rest, he knew his old
confidant could never truly despise him. ‘Dost thou
know what lies ahead for Gwynedd?’ The Prince held
out a goblet in offering, observing the aging face of his
mentor. Taliesin’s body, though twisted and old, was still
strong, and he never seemed to lack vigour.
The Merlin turned his eyes of palest violet to the
Prince. Under his long silver moustache and beard

Taliesin smiled as he accepted the drink. ‘This situation
be of thine own making. A monk indeed.’ He chuckled
at the thought. ‘No wonder thy father be so eager to see
thee wed.’
‘That much I know,’ Maelgwn replied impatiently.
‘Be that why thou hast sent Tory and have plagued me
with visions of her?’
‘The dreams be thine own.’ Taliesin cocked an eye.
‘Quite enlightening, were they not?’
‘What am I to do with her? She be driving me to
distraction.’
‘Thee and every other male in this household.’
Taliesin closed his eyes as he sensed a disturbance on
the roof above them. ‘Even as we speak thy brother be
up to mischief.’
‘Caradoc be with Tory?’ Maelgwn didn’t wait for an
answer.
‘Halt, all be well. Brockwell hast found them.’
‘Art thou sure?’
‘Pardon?’ said Taliesin, insulted.
‘My apologies, I should have known better than to
ask. Now, what of my question?’
‘Well, I would marry Tory if I were thee.’
‘Of course! Why didn’t I think of that?’ Maelgwn
gave up. ‘Thou art no help.’
‘Chiglas still despises thee for the loss of his ally,
even though he claims otherwise,’ Taliesin informed
him. ‘Understand, Maelgwn, thy father feared losing
thee to a monastery and his kingdom to Chiglas, that be
why he sought this arrangement. But thine instinct
serves thee well and thy own plans art quite sound.’

Maelgwn was taking him more seriously now. ‘What
should I do, confront my father?’
Taliesin waved off the idea. ‘He be not of the mind
to listen at present. And in any case, there will prove to
be no need.’
‘So what should I do then?’
‘Thou art not a child any more.’ Taliesin became
serious. ‘And soon thee will be king.’
Maelgwn was unnerved by the comment.
‘Stop worrying about thy father’s plans and instigate
thine own.’ The magician began to fade before
Maelgwn’s eyes. ‘The fate of Gwynedd be again in our
hands, Dragon.’
‘Wait! Damn it.’ Maelgwn reached for him but the
Merlin was gone. ‘Thou art always disappearing before I
am done with thee.’
There was an urgent hammering on the door and
Lady Gladys entered with haste. ‘Maelgwn, thou art
here, praise the Goddess.’ She raised her eyes to the roof
and took hold of his arm. ‘Thy father hast taken ill, thee
must come at once.’
Tory waited impatiently for Maelgwn to come with the
famous Taliesin, but with every passing hour she grew
less hopeful of their meeting.
Selwyn had arrived for practice, as he did every
afternoon around three, and upon finding Tory
engrossed in a book, he’d quietly seated himself and
begun to play.
Tory hummed along with his tune as she read up on
her expected guest. She had amongst her things a book

that told of the Mabinogion, a volume of the ancient
writings of the Britons. These were not quite fiction nor
mythology, more folk tales with some history thrown in.
The writings were deemed by historians to be amongst
the few sources of information on the Dark Ages in
Wales, as most of the great scholars and writers had
retreated to Rome more than a century before. This left
only the bards and the romantic poets to record the
everyday life and events of the time. Tory was delighted
to find a whole chapter on the writings of Taliesin. As
she read a couple of passages jumped out at her – the
first was a direct address that the bard had supposedly
made to Maelgwn.
Primary chief poet
Am I to Elffin.
And my native country
Is the place of the Summer Stars.
John the Divine
Called me Merlin,
But all future kings
Shall call me Taliesin.
This long poem went on to tell how Taliesin had been
present at the birth and crucifixion of Christ, with
Noah on his ark, and with Moses at the River Jordan. It
claimed he’d carried the banner for Alexander, and
went on to name just about every significant hero and
event known to humanity at this time. It also told of
how Taliesin knew the names of each star and was able
to instruct the whole universe. He referred to himself as

‘a wonder whose origin was not known’, as one of ‘the
Old Ones’ who were the guardians of cosmic time.
The other passage from the book captured her
interest on a more personal note.
He who would seek the muse, he who would seek
To marry himself to any kind of sovereignty,
Must take the descent down to the earth’s centre,
To face his utmost fears and his most secret
anxieties.
It seemed quite possible that Taliesin would be able to
give her an explanation for her predicament.
Selwyn had moved on to a new piece, which struck
Tory and she was suddenly overcome with the urge to
cry. A small sigh slipped from her lips, and Selwyn
stopped playing.
‘Something ails thee, lady?’
‘It reminds me of a piece my mother used to play,’
Tory answered, overcome with a longing for home. ‘She
be a harpist too.’
‘Be she a great master like thyself, lady?’ Selwyn
hoped he wouldn’t upset her further by asking.
‘Oh,’ Tory waved him off. ‘Far better than I could
ever dream to be. My mother plays alongside many
famous musicians. She hast been invited to play in
huge, grand concert halls all over the world, and
thousands, upon thousands of people gather to listen to
their beautiful music.’
Selwyn’s eyes opened wide in awe. ‘Thee must be
honoured to have such a heritage, music be thy
birthright.’

‘Although I have her love of music, Selwyn, I do
not have her dedication. It is her whole life. Music
consumes her completely.’
Tory sounded a little perturbed by this, and there
was silence in the caphouse for a time.
‘I was not born of a bard,’ Selwyn began his story. ‘I
do not know who my parents were. I have no birthright
to music, only a pure and loyal love of it. So it be grand
that thou hast come to share thy inheritance with me.
Truth be known, lady, I had never before been asked to
play at court. That be a privilege reserved for high court
bards, not a humble squire like myself. I owe thee more
than I could ever repay.’ Selwyn paused, placing the
harp aside. ‘I know thee must miss thy home, but I
assure thee, thou art well loved here. Many of us hope
that one day thou shalt consider Gwynedd thy home.’
‘Oh Selwyn, that be a lovely thing to say.’ Tory
brushed a tear from her face. ‘Truly.’ She went over to
the young page and gave him a huge hug, which he
quite innocently returned. ‘I am happy to know I could
be of assistance to thee in thy quest.’
Selwyn couldn’t recall the last time someone had
held him thus, and it was more than welcome. ‘I swear
thou art too good for this world, lady.’
Katren arrived later than usual with their supper. She
climbed the caphouse stairs with haste to find Tory
engrossed in kata. ‘Lady please, I be sorry to bother
thee, but hast thou not heard, the King hast taken ill.’
‘Good grief, will he be alright?’ No wonder Maelgwn
hadn’t made it back to see her today.

‘He be stable now, but I do not think his ailments
come from natural causes.’
‘Dost thou know something of medicine, Katren?’
‘Nay lady, I do not. I am a simple farmer’s daughter.
But from what Lady Gladys hast told me, the King be
suffering from the same ailment that inflicts cattle who
have been eating hemlock.’
‘Hemlock! Art thou quite sure?’ Tory knew the plant
could be deadly if one ingested it in large quantities.
‘As sure as I be standing before thee. I have already
told Lady Gladys of the remedy, which only be flour
mixed with water to absorb the poison.’ Katren was
obviously proud to have had a hand in saving the King’s
life. ‘Lady Gladys did kiss my cheek and bless the day
thee brought me into the service of this house.’
‘Good for thee.’
The maid glanced around to make sure they were
alone, then added in a whisper, ‘We suspect that witch
Vanora and her maid, but to send her and Caradoc back
to Powys without proof of treason would surely insult
Chiglas and bring his wrath upon us . . . and that not be
the all of it.’ Katren paused to catch her breath. ‘Sir
Cadogan arrived with an urgent message from Castell
Degannwy, and the men have been locked in council
ever since.’
‘How be the Prince faring?’
‘Lady Gladys said he hast the Dragon in him this
day. I do not know if this be good or bad.’ Katren put
her arm around Tory to reassure her. ‘Try not to worry,
lady. Thy prince be the bravest and most feared in all
Britain. He hast seen much worse than this. Allow me

to draw thee a hot bath, then he will surely come to tell
thee all about it.’
Tory laughed. It was true, Maelgwn did seem to
have a sixth sense when it came to her bath time. She
resigned herself to the fact that there was nothing she
could do, at least not until she knew all the facts. Still,
deep down she had the most terrible feeling. Why had
Caradoc waited until now to poison his father? Surely
he would have been a much easier target in Powys.
The meeting adjourned a few hours before dawn.
Maelgwn was tempted to drop off to sleep where he sat,
but with the thought of Tory he had to see her. His
father’s entire kingdom was under threat, yet his main
concern was for her.
As he entered the north tower, Maelgwn heard
sounds of a struggle and a harrowed scream, so he made
haste up the stairs. He found Tory alone, embroiled in a
nightmare. ‘Wake up, thou art dreaming.’ He took hold
of her shoulders and sat beside her.
Tory sat up with a start, flinging her arms around his
neck. ‘Thou art safe,’ she cried into his shirt, not really
awake. ‘I saw thee under siege.’ She pulled away, the
tears and perspiration trickling down her face as she
struggled to recall the rest.
‘’Twas just a bad dream, I expect,’ Maelgwn took her
in his arms, seeking comfort in the embrace himself.
‘I am so sorry about thy father, Maelgwn. How goes
his recovery?’ She gently pulled away from him.
‘My father be a fighter and be holding on.’ As
Maelgwn brushed the hair out of her eyes, he was

alarmed to find the mark of the Dragon upon her
forehead. He promptly covered his surprise and took up
her hands. ‘I have had word from Degannwy that they
be under Saxon attack. At present there be no serious
threat, but I must leave at dawn to see to the citadel’s
defence in the King’s stead.’
Tory gripped his hands tightly; her dream was
beginning to make sense. ‘Be Caradoc going with thee?’
‘Nay, I am afraid not. With my absence and the
King’s failing health, he has managed to secure a station
here. But,’ Maelgwn jumped in before Tory had the
chance to panic. ‘The King’s guards suspect, as do I,
Caradoc’s involvement in our father’s affliction. They
shall keep a close eye on him and his men in my
absence.’
‘Thee will not make it past the Menai, that be what
I dreamt. They had thee surrounded on both banks.’
The tears returned to her eyes and she tightened her
grip on him. ‘I saw myself fight thy brother.’
‘Nay. I would not leave thee here with Caradoc.’
‘So thou art taking me to Degannwy then.’
‘Nay!’ Maelgwn was mortified. ‘I would no sooner
take thee into battle.’
Tory pushed him away, insulted. ‘Goddamn it! Stop
treating me like a defenceless female. I be one of the
best warriors thou hast.’
Maelgwn stood up, and Tory suddenly felt what most
referred to as the Dragon in him. ‘It hast nothing to do
with whether thou art a woman, Tory. I cannot afford to
lose thee. Our plans for an army that could conquer
Chiglas and the Saxons would come to naught.’

Tory bowed her head in understanding, so Maelgwn
softened his tone. ‘I have left instructions with
Brockwell, he awaits thee beyond the stables.’
‘Nay, thee must take Brockwell to Degannwy for
thine own protection.’
‘I trust no one else.’
‘Katren could ride with me,’ Tory pleaded, at her
wit’s end. ‘Please Maelgwn. I felt this dream. It was real.
Like the dream thee had about us. I did not say so
before, but I have had it too.’
Maelgwn shook his head, very doubtful that this was
the case.
‘I saw myself crowned as queen and the two of us
making love in a forest,’ Tory blurted out before she had
the chance to feel embarrassed.
Maelgwn was forced to a smile by the truth of it.
‘Tory, I value thy concern, but I have many knights
around me and I am weary of arguing this day. I have
thought this through well, so please, dress and take thy
things. Katren awaits thee downstairs and will take thee
to Brockwell.’ He turned to leave. ‘If all goes to plan, I
shall meet thee back here in a few days.’
A terrible feeling was still brewing inside her.
‘Wait!’ She sprang to her feet, and gripping hold of his
shirt she drew him into a kiss. ‘I love thee, Maelgwn.
There, I’ve said it.’
Though Maelgwn was stunned he didn’t allow her
to retreat, he pulled her closer. ‘Art thou quite sure
about this?’
‘I am,’ she stated, very matter-of-factly. ‘How do you
feel about it?’

Maelgwn kissed her with fervour. ‘Perhaps thee
should consider wedding me then,’ he suggested, then
left, not waiting to catch her reaction.
It took a minute for his words to register and she
nearly fell over when they did. Still, with none to share
her excitement, Tory resolved to a smile. ‘A British
prince, Father would definitely approve.’
Katren led Tory through the house, across the inner
bailey and into the darkness of the outer bailey. She
couldn’t help but envy Tory, riding off with Sir
Brockwell, but said little of it. She was just thankful to
be in the thick of the action.
At the rendezvous point, Brockwell had the horses
ready.
‘Why Calin, fancy meeting thee here?’ Tory secured
her baggage to the horse that Brockwell was leading and
moved to mount it.
‘Nay. Thee shall ride up here with me,’ Brookwell
told her firmly.
Tory gave him a look of apprehension.
‘It will be much safer for both of us,’ he explained. ‘I
have seen thee ride and quite honestly, it be a worry.’
Tory corked Brockwell in the leg for the insult.
‘Thanks very much. Still, I see thy point.’ She swung
herself up into the saddle behind him. ‘Take good care,
Katren. Remember what thou hast learnt.’
‘I will, lady.’
‘Thou hast done much for the House of Gwynedd
this day.’ Brockwell took up Katren’s hand and kissed it.
‘And I, for one, thank thee for thy part.’

The maiden seemed to be floating off the ground as
she watched them ride into the shadowy morning mist.
‘Aye, he be mine.’
Maelgwn met his men at dawn to ride to Degannwy,
and was not surprised to find his brother waiting to
witness his departure.
‘If thee just gave ransom to the Saxons, they would
not vex thee so,’ Caradoc advised his brother.
‘If our father had wished it, would thee have come
to the defence of the citadel in the name of Cunedda
and the House of Gwynedd?’
Caradoc noticed the Dragon in his brother this
morning, but he was not frightened by that superstitious
nonsense any more. Without the old wizard, Maelgwn
had no more mystical power than he did. He knew
Maelgwn and the bard had not spoken in some time,
having argued over his brother’s desire to study under
the priests of Rome. The Prince had wanted to take the
vows of a monk to spend his life in study. Though
Caradoc thought the notion sickening, it certainly
would have spared him all this trouble. ‘I serve Chiglas,
who be a great great grandson of Cunedda, as indeed am
I. When Degannwy be truly mine, I shall defend it.’
The heat of Maelgwn’s hatred was burning him up.
‘I assure thee, Caradoc, that day will never come.’ He
reared his horse and made for the outer bailey portcullis.
Caradoc smiled. That day hast come.
Brockwell would have known his way to Llyn Cerrig
Bach blindfolded. As they descended into the valley,

towards the blue tranquillity of its lake, the landscape
became extremely pretty and Brockwell slowed his
horse to a more leisurely pace.
‘Where hast thou brought me, Calin? ’Tis most
enchanting.’ As Tory breathed in the scented air, she
became aware of a pulsing that seemed to permeate
everything around her.
‘This was the last stronghold of the Druids against
the Romans some four hundred years ago. The temple
ruins be hidden in the forest yonder.’
‘Taliesin?’
‘I am not at liberty to say.’
‘I know I am right, tell me, Calin.’ She stuck her
hands underneath his breast plate to tickle it out of him.
Brockwell, who was extremely ticklish, jumped right
off the horse. ‘Do not do that, I hate it.’
‘Thou art not getting back on this horse until thou
hast answered me,’ Tory informed him, holding him at
bay with her foot.
Brockwell folded his arms, amused. ‘Thee and what
army art going to stop me?’
‘Thou art so gullible,’ Tory shoved him backwards
and took off with the horses.
Brockwell raced after her, but was not quite fast
enough to grab hold of the horse trailing behind. ‘Tory,
stop!’
She just giggled, safe in the knowledge she could get
away with it. ‘I shall see thee there.’
Tory found the ruins on her own. The forest path
suddenly parted wide to reveal huge stone pillars, ten

times her height. The surrounding trees, so old and
hardy, had overgrown what remained of the temple, and
vines climbed everything in view. The place held the
same mysterious allure as had the stones.
‘Taliesin?’ Tory dared to utter as she dismounted.
She was beginning to wish she hadn’t made sport of
Calin as she became aware of someone whispering close
by, although she couldn’t discern the source.
She was staring at the ominous old temple, thinking
how much her father would appreciate it, when it
dawned on her that she had a camera. She could photograph it for him. In the back of her mind, Tory still held
the hope that she would see her father again and was
confident that Taliesin held the key to her dilemma.
After taking the shot, Tory decided to make a few
adjustments to her attire. She had worn the Queen’s
clothing to leave the castle, but saw no need for it any
longer. She folded the long under dress, and crammed it
into her backpack. The green gunna she belted at the
waist over her jeans and shirt. If not fashionable, it was
at least practical.
The whispering startled her again. Tory was hesitant
as she reached down to retrieve the photo, and was
alarmed when she found a couple of dark, blurry spots in
the otherwise clear exposure. Cold shivers enfolded her
in waves, and Tory felt a hand come to rest her
shoulder. She swung round with full force, setting her
stalker off balance.
‘Tory!’ Brockwell protested.
Tory leapt at him with a big hug. ‘Calin, don’t ever
let me do that again.’

‘The spirits gave thee a scare, did they?’
Tory pushed him away. ‘Thee could have warned
me.’
Brockwell just chuckled. ‘Now who be gullible?’ But
his humour vanished when he noted the dark patch on
her forehead. ‘Thy Dragon hast returned.’
‘What?’ Tory rummaged for her hand-mirror and
checked the mark in its reflection. ‘The dream . . .’ She
paused to recall how real it had been. ‘Maelgwn must
have seen this, how could he not? And yet he sent me
away, anyway, damn it.’
‘I think we should proceed,’ Brockwell said, and
strode off to the entrance of the temple.
As Tory entered the ancient stone structure, the
magnitude of her trip through time really hit home. The
roof, if there ever was one, was long gone; you just
looked straight up into the green canopy of the forest.
The stone floor, like everything else, was slowly being
engulfed by vines. Yet the carved images of the naked
female form which adorned the inner pillars surrounding the large stone altar had been liberated from the
undergrowth. This temple must have been a beautiful
sanctuary once, she thought. It seemed a crying shame
that war had destroyed it. Tory took a few more
photographs, as by the twentieth century nothing would
remain of it at all.
Brockwell was admiring one of the naked women.
At the age of seven, he’d thought himself in paradise
when he and Maelgwn had ripped away the vines to
discover the shapely carvings. ‘Thee can see why I liked
it here.’

‘Calin, thou art incorrigible,’ Tory rolled her eyes
and moved to inspect the altar. ‘So where be this
Taliesin?’
‘Good question.’ Brockwell headed for the huge
altar and jumped up on it to look round.
Tory threw her gear up to Brockwell and stepped
back a moment, encouraging him to smile. He didn’t,
but Tory took the photo anyway, stuffing it and the
camera back in her bag.
Brockwell grabbed hold of her belt and hoisted her
up with one hand. ‘Thee weighs like a feather,’ he said
with disgust; it was beyond his comprehension how she
could possess the strength she did.
‘Just imagine what thee could do with what I know,’
she replied.
Brockwell gazed round the ruins, acting as if he
wasn’t interested. He was a little uncertain about his
next move. ‘Taliesin!’ he cried out into the eerie
silence. ‘I seek thee in the name of the Dragon, and
request that thee show thyself.’ After a few moments, he
wasn’t as confident of finding the bard. ‘I have Tory
Alexander in my care.’ The temple at once became
brighter, even though the sun was still hidden by the
trees above.
Tory chanced to look down at a cross engraved in
the stone under their feet, and found it had begun to
glow. The light gradually extended outwards, engulfing
the whole altar, and a white mist exuded from the core.
‘Calin, hast this ever happened before?’
Brockwell pulled Tory close, afraid she would
become lost in the haze. ‘Nay, never.’

That figures. She looked around, but the mist and
light were so intense that she could no longer see the
temple or the trees.
The ride to the Menai Strait was swift, and so far they’d
seen no sign of trouble. In fact, the place seemed almost
too quiet. Maelgwn paid heed to Tory’s warning about
crossing the strait and sent scouts down both sides of
the waterway.
He boarded the barge, accompanied by Cadogan,
Madoc, and his second battalion. A storm was
approaching from the mountains in the south. Their
party would make the citadel before it reached them,
and Maelgwn was relieved to note that his attackers
would not be so fortunate.
Upon reaching the mainland, the Prince received
news from Degannwy that the Saxons had withdrawn
and were re-grouping with reinforcements in the
mountains. He could hardly believe his ears; the Saxons
didn’t usually band together.
As a race they weren’t that organised or loyal. They
had too many leaders who were all far too greedy and
power hungry to co-operate with each other. Unless, of
course, someone has rallied them together? Maelgwn
recalled his brother’s sly remark about paying off the
Saxons. How could his father have led them into this?
Did he not suspect Caradoc and Chiglas were up to no
good? Maelgwn had asked the King this very question,
but the old man was delirious in his weakened state.
He’d just smiled and told Maelgwn that this was all for
the best, and that in the end he would not think him

such a foolish old man. The Prince, losing patience with
his father, sought the whereabouts of the King’s closest
friend and champion, Sir Tiernan. Unfortunately, the
knight had been sent on a diplomatic errand. The
Prince could only hope that Sir Tiernan’s absence
meant that his father had suspected Caradoc of having
malicious intent, as the rest of the King’s staff seemed to
think this arrangement with Chiglas was legitimate.
They had seen for themselves the armies he was building in Powys and thought the King’s plan to unite the
kingdoms wise. At least Tory was safe from his brother’s
grasp for the moment. It worried him that she had seen
herself fighting Caradoc. Perhaps his decision to send
her away would save her from any such horror.
‘Shall I send word for more troops from Aberffraw,
Majesty?’ Madoc half advised, half inquired.
As Cadogan stood right beside them, following
every word, Maelgwn merely shook his head, and
walked off to be alone with his thoughts. If he suspected
correctly, this was exactly what his brother wanted him
to do. For if Caradoc had poisoned their father and was
conspiring with the Saxons, he must be planning a
simultaneous assault. Maelgwn figured that as the
Saxons besieged Degannwy, his brother might be
planning to bring Chiglas’ forces over the mountains. A
large force could easily be hidden further down the
Menai Strait to await a dawn attack on the island.
Caradoc wants Aberffraw, Maelgwn surmised. Why else
would he have gone to such pains arranging this
marriage, if not so that he could conveniently be
present when all this came to pass. Caradoc knows the

main route that our armies take to Degannwy. He also
knows better than anyone the way through the
mountains of Gwynedd between here and Powys.
As a boy, Caradoc had taken to the mountains to
live wild for months on end in the company of their
uncle Cadfer. Cadfer dabbled in black magic, and
calling upon the darkest aspects of nature, he conjured
up the dead spirit of a wreched witch, who helped him
devise a means to steal his brother’s kingdom. Years
later, Cadfer did rule as King in Gwynedd for a short
time. He seized power from Caswallon and imprisoned
him. Cadfer, who had lusted after Queen Sorcha for
many years, reportedly raped and murdered her. Though
another account claimed Sorcha had cut her own throat
to save her dignity. The Queen swore, with her dying
breath, that upon her passing she would become even
more powerful and her wrath would fall on all those
who opposed Gwynedd.
Maelgwn had arrived on the scene with Taliesin and
Tiernan, but an hour too late to save her. The Prince,
ardent for revenge and only fifteen years old, killed his
uncle with a sword that had been sharpened on the
Whetstone Tudwal Tydglyd – one of thirteen Treasures
of Britain that Taliesin had collected in his travels.
Maelgwn believed that his brother, but ten years of age
at the time, was fully aware of their uncle’s intent.
Cadfer had probably named Caradoc as his heir, as
Chiglas had, with none but bastard sons of his own and
a daughter.
‘I must keep Mon well guarded,’ Maelgwn resolved.
‘Yet, what if this proves to be nothing but a

coincidence? To remove troops from Degannwy, which
be under threat, to meet an army that may not exist
would be ridiculous.’
The best he could do was send out scouts and wait
for news.
Tory and Brockwell felt light-headed and experienced
an eerie sensation of travelling, yet as far as they could
tell they hadn’t moved at all. When the thick mist
cleared, however, they found they were no longer
standing in the temple, but under their feet was the
same intricately carved cross.
‘Well beam me up Scotty, dost thou believe this?’
Tory exclaimed as she ventured into an enormous room
that was similar in style and size to a cathedral. But it
had no windows and was entirely candle-lit. While the
foundation of the structure seemed to be of the same
period as the temple they’d been in only minutes before,
the architraves reflected a distinct Romanesque style.
The room was oblong in shape with double colonnades,
rounded archways, and an apse to one end. This building plan was not employed in Britain until around the
twelfth century. Tory was amazed by the rare exhibits
that lined the walls and covered the floor. Some of the
furnishings, decoration and artwork must date back to
before recorded time, and there were prime examples of
work from cultures throughout the ages.
At the opposite end of the room to the apse were a
set of large mahogany doors, covered with panels of
deep red padded leather fastened into place with flat
silver studs. As Tory was admiring them the doors

unexpectedly opened. She waited with bated breath for
their host to emerge from the shadows. Brockwell, who
was by nature more cautious, took a stand in front of
Tory.
‘Brockwell.’ Tory tapped his shoulder. ‘May I ask
what thou art doing?’
‘I am responsible for thy safety. Maelgwn would
have my throat cut if any harm was to befall thee.’ Why
couldn’t she just be a woman and stop confusing the
issue?
Tory was ready to argue with him when a voice even
more enchanting than Maelgwn’s stopped her.
‘Down, Calin. It be only I, Taliesin Pen Beirdd.’
‘Taliesin, old man,’ Brockwell answered relieved.
Then he moved to greet the aging Merlin.
Tory was a little confused by Brockwell’s words, as
the man she saw before her appeared no older than
about thirty-five. Of a medium build, Taliesin had fair
skin that seemed full of vigour and not old at all. His
hair, as white as snow, sat high on his shining brow and
was pulled back tight off his face, falling in a ponytail to
halfway down his back. The Merlin’s long, thin,
oriental-style moustache and beard were as fair as his
hair. He was attired in a flowing purple robe that
accentuated the colour of his large, soulful eyes, which
were the most amazing shade of mauve-grey.
‘I would be a foolish man indeed to threaten the
lady in thy care.’
Brockwell nodded in response to his words.
‘She be one of the greatest female warriors I have
ever had the pleasure to witness in action . . . no offence

intended,’ Taliesin continued. ‘We are, of course, all
one and the same.’ He graciously bowed to kiss her
hand.
This man was potent. Tory could feel the energy he
generated flowing from his fingertips. She had never
voluntarily knelt before anyone in her life, yet, bowing
her head to rest on his hands, she fell on one knee
before him. ‘I am most honoured, High Merlin, that
thou hast summoned me back.’ Tory realised she was
not speaking with her own voice. She looked up to the
magician’s face; it was so familiar yet she couldn’t place
it.
Taliesin patted her hand. ‘I have been watching and
waiting for thee a long time, Sorcha. Or would thee
prefer I call thee Tory?’
‘Sorcha!’ Tory and Brockwell cried in unison.
‘Alright then, Sorcha.’ He mistook their meaning
on purpose. He let Tory go so he could lead them from
the room.
‘Wait.’ Tory nursed her head, feeling giddy as she
got back to her feet. ‘Would thee mind telling me what
be happening to me?’
‘We have many urgent matters to discuss, lady, but
first let me treat thee both to something to eat. Thee
should rest before attempting to fathom the enormity of
our situation.’
‘No,’ Tory protested, not about to be moved. ‘Why
did thee call me Sorcha?’
‘That was thy name in a previous incarnation, when
I had the honour to be thy close acquaintance and
adviser.’ Taliesin approached her so she could look him

straight in the eye. ‘Following thy needless death, I
waited a long time for thee to incarnate again, and who
should accompany thee into life but the finest warrior
thou shalt ever train.’ Taliesin motioned to Brockwell.
‘Who in turn, did drive thee to be the great warrior
thou art this day.’
‘So Brockwell is Brian?’ she asked, to ensure she was
following him correctly. She didn’t realise she’d broken
into modern English until Taliesin answered her thus.
‘That is correct.’
Tory clapped her hands together, excited. ‘You speak
English, this is great! So you’re telling me that I was
Maelgwn’s mother?’ Tory held her head again. Does this
change things?
‘Once,’ Taliesin clarified. He wanted to ease her
fears and spoke again in a tongue Brockwell could
understand. ‘Genetics art not really a factor here,
though Maelgwn hast got so much of Sorcha in him
that the attraction was, in a way, inevitable. A monk
indeed!’ Taliesin took pleasure in his little ploy to lead
the Prince away from his monastic retreat for good.
‘Maelgwn and thyself have loved each other dearly,
many times, as brother, lover, son . . . and so the world
turns. It will always be thus, forwards and backwards
through time. All of us shall be drawn back together.
Doth this not explain why Brockwell be so attracted to
thee, and the other way round? For you recognise each
other as kindred spirits, a bond that extends far beyond
the boundaries of physical attraction.’
This was true enough. Even that first night in camp,
when Brockwell had vexed her so, Tory could not bring

herself to dislike him. As far as being physically
attracted to the knight, she had always considered her
brother to be good-looking. Had she not been his sister,
she felt she would surely have fallen for his charms.
‘So,’ Taliesin summed up, ‘I have merely bent the
rules a little to bring thee back to us and believe me
when I say, we need thee now.’
Tory had question after question running through
her head.
Taliesin felt this and decided he’d said more than
enough for the moment. ‘Please, will thou not come and
take advantage of my hospitality? I advise thee to
indulge while thee can.’
Tory looked to Brockwell who had turned as white
as a ghost. ‘I think that be a good idea.’

8

The Storms of
Gwynedd

T

he Saxons observed the approach of the Prince’s
party from their vantage point in the mountains;
all was going to plan. They weren’t instructed to
ambush, although they could have massacred the
Dragon’s party with the number of men they’d rallied
together. Still, Maelgwn was notorious for escaping such
ploys and might make it back to Aberffraw before
Chiglas’ troops had finished the crossing. Caradoc had
insisted that they first allow his brother safe passage to
the citadel in order to barricade him in. If they managed
to take Degannwy, all the better. By that time, Caradoc
would have claimed the Isle of Mon and the mountains,
which in his mind belonged to him anyway. Once Mon
was secured, Caradoc would concentrate all his forces

on the citadel at Degannwy. He would slay Maelgwn to
avenge Cadfer’s sorcerous death, and proclaim himself
King of Gwynedd. Upon Chiglas’ death, he would
marry Vanora to become King of Powys and wherever
else he pleased with the armies he’d inherit.
Maelgwn beat the storm to arrive at Degannwy earlier
than expected. He was pleased to find his old consort of
men still together and in surprisingly good spirits,
considering the circumstances. After they’d exchanged
pleasantries, the knights congratulated their Prince on
his engagement to the Princess Vanora. They presumed
he would welcome the arrangement as it would eventually make him King of two kingdoms, so they were
confused by the Prince’s obvious lack of enthusiasm. He
merely thanked them politely, not wanting to comment
further.
Cedric changed the subject, informing the Prince
that the Saxon savages were proving no threat to
Gwynedd. He joked about their poor form and gross
lack of numbers.
It was about this time that Maelgwn noticed that
Cadogan was not present at their reunion, so he sent
Madoc to find him. The Prince hated the fact that he
mistrusted one of his knights, but there was too much at
stake to ignore the danger. With any luck his fears
would prove unjustified.
During the hour the Prince spent consulting with
his advisers, scores of Saxon thugs had joined forces,
preparing to converge on the citadel. Maelgwn silently
observed the multitudes from the court window. The

Saxons could never have organised such a force without
higher supervision, he decided.
The Prince and his knights had been battling
Saxons all their soldiering lives, and in all that time not
one of them could recall seeing so many of these
disgusting barbarians in one place.
Maelgwn ordered every available man to the outer
bailey wall. He knew now that he must return to Mon as
soon as possible, although he would have a huge battle
ahead of him before he could even leave the citadel.
His advisers and knights left the room to see to the
fort’s defence as Madoc entered, his expression grave.
‘Majesty, the scout thee sent down the Menai toward
Caernarvon hast not returned. Apparently when
Cadogan learnt of this he left the citadel, without thy
leave, to investigate.’
Maelgwn looked back to the impending confrontation out the window. Did he know?
As Cadogan trained the younger scouts, it was not
unusual for him to go chasing one of them to check on
their whereabouts. Yet how convenient that this chore
should leave him absent from the imminent onslaught.
The storm clouds began to rumble, black as night.
Drums pounded in the distance and a loud cry sounded
from the Saxon ranks. As they charged the outer walls
of the citadel, a deafening thunderclap was heard and
the rain came bucketing down.
‘Madoc, old friend, I fear I should not have left
Caradoc inside Aberffraw.’
‘Sir Gilmore will not allow any harm to befall thy
home, Sire.’

Maelgwn turned back to Madoc, praying he was
right. ‘May the Spirits of the Otherworld be with us this
day.’
‘The great Houses have always accompanied thee
into battle, Dragon,’ Madoc said as he headed for the
door, full of confidence. ‘This day shall prove no
different.’
Taliesin led them down a wide torch-lit hallway,
beautifully carpeted with long red rugs. Tory had never
seen a wider or wilder array of armour and battle dress
than that which lined the corridor. Even Brockwell was
turning circles in wonder as he viewed the life-size
figures so strangely clad. It seemed that the Merlin’s
entire abode was one big museum that appeared to go
on and on forever.
Their host finally stopped, opening one of the doors
that led into a cosy dining hall. The fire was lit and
their meals were already laid out on the table. For
Brockwell, a quarter of a pig had been roasted to
perfection, with bread, fruit, and mead to accompany it.
Tory’s prayers were finally answered when she spied a
hamburger with fries and a Coke.
‘I wouldn’t go wandering off alone, as my home be a
labyrinth of deception. I designed it that way so in the
incredible impossibility of someone discovering it, they
could never actually find their way out,’ Taliesin
explained, impressed with his own ingenuity.
‘Surely they would find thee sooner or later?’
Brockwell asked, not really understanding what a
labyrinth was.

Taliesin, sensing his scepticism and aware that
Calin was often too adventurous for his own good,
continued. ‘There be over a thousand rooms contained
herein, and only I know what lies behind every door. I
tend to keep some fairly unearthly and somewhat
eccentric company at times, and I have a few animal
acquaintances.’
‘What, like pets?’ Tory asked, not comfortable with
the idea.
‘Nay, of course not. Most art perfectly free to come
and go as they choose. For shamanistic studies I prefer
the more unusual and rare creatures, but unfortunately
these tend to get a bit violent around strangers.’
‘Such as?’ Brockwell inquired, before biting a huge
chunk of meat off the bone.
‘Well, several dragons, one of which I keep for
Maelgwn.’ The bard thought he’d tell the story for Tory’s
benefit. ‘Some time ago, as a test of courage, Maelgwn
sought to slay the dragon that had been menacing King
Catulus’ kingdom for years. The King had offered a great
reward to the warrior who could rid him of this beast. In
the end, however, Maelgwn, who was not much more
than a boy at the time, felt sorry for the dragon. Thus he
befriended the creature and coaxed it back here.’
Tory’s face filled with delight at the story, though
Brockwell seemed rather perplexed. ‘I thought he did
slay it, that be what he boasted to me.’
‘Maelgwn rid Dumnonia of the horror that was
plaguing them and thus earnt the respect and support of
King Catulus. That was all that mattered at the time.
The beast be far happier here with none to torment it.’

‘Dragons art not so fierce,’ Brockwell claimed,
sounding in no way dissuaded by the Merlin’s caution.
‘Dost thou not have any creature more formidable than
that?’
‘Hast thou ever laid eyes on a griffin, Calin?’ the
Merlin asked, smiling.
The knight shrunk away, discouraged. ‘I am happy
to be wherever thou doth see fit to put me,’ he said.
Tory pushed her plate aside. ‘A million thanks,’ she
bowed her head to her host. ‘Best burger I ever had.’
‘Thou art most welcome,’ assured Taliesin, graciously. ‘Now, if thou art both done I would suggest some
rest before nightfall.’
Tory was about to ask why, but Taliesin held up his
index finger to show he was not prepared to discuss the
matter at this time.
‘Follow me,’ the Merlin instructed politely as he
walked towards the door.
His guests looked at each other a moment and
shrugged, resolving that the Merlin knew best.
Brockwell began to realise what a labyrinth was, as
from the hall stairs led off in all directions. The battle
dress that stood between every doorway became more
and more bizarre as they moved deeper into the maze.
Taliesin eventually came to a standstill and gestured
towards a doorway, ‘Brockwell . . .’
‘Nay, I must stay with Tory. Maelgwn made me
swear an oath.’
Taliesin just smiled at him. ‘Surely thee can trust an
old man like myself with the Prince’s lady? I am a
proven ally, after all.’

Brockwell did not favour the bard’s suggestion that
Tory already belonged to the Prince. Maelgwn was
bound to wed Vanora, and Tory would never succumb
to the role of mistress to a married man. Brockwell,
therefore, felt sure he could help Tory over her brother
fixation.
Taliesin, aware of Brockwell’s thoughts, swung open
the door to reveal a sizeable room decorated according
to sixth-century taste, and fit for a king. In it were five
scantily-clad young maidens, who were eager to tend to
Calin’s every whim.
Brockwell looked at Tory, suddenly feeling obliged
to resign himself to the Merlin’s wishes. ‘Rest well.’ He
patted her shoulder and cheerfully entered his abode.
Tory was about to protest, unsure of whether it was
his fickle nature or the ease by which he was distracted
from his duty that bothered her most. But the Merlin
just guided her back, closing the door. ‘Brockwell has
much ahead of him this night. Is it not right that he
should be allowed to indulge a little beforehand?’
‘Something has happened then.’ Tory panicked. ‘It’s
Caradoc, isn’t it? Is Maelgwn in danger?’
‘Indulge me one moment longer.’ He took her hand
and immediately Tory felt her anxiety melt away. ‘I must
show you something that will no doubt be of interest.’
He guided her towards a pair of large doors at the
end of the corridor. Taliesin held his hand out before
him and the doors parted wide to reveal a technological
phenomenon within.
The large, space-age room contained a series of
hexagons that rose out of the floor, and lining the walls

was enough computer hardware to run NASA. ‘This is
far beyond even my time,’ Tory gasped as she perused
the control centre. ‘What are the applications?’
‘Good question,’ Taliesin replied, pleased to see the
same direct manner he’d come to expect from Sorcha.
He walked past the first of the hexagons which
measured about twenty-four foot round, making it much
larger than any of the others. Its base was covered in
chips of black onyx and large glass screens extended to
the roof. Then he took his place behind a smaller
hexagon that housed a control panel. ‘Do you know
much of satellite communication, Tory?’
The hexagon before her lit up like a television
monitor, showing an aerial view of Castell Degannwy
and its surroundings. Tory experienced the sensation of
soaring over the citadel, which could barely be seen
through the storm.
‘How does it happen that a sixth-century Merlin
possesses technology dating far beyond even the
twentieth century?’
‘Beyond the year three thousand, satellites are so
small that they can no longer be seen by the naked eye
and are operated by remote control.’ Taliesin still hadn’t
answered her question, but before Tory could point this
out, he continued with a sigh.
‘I have travelled through time witnessing the Earth’s
disasters, discovering its wonders, and collecting its
treasures. I have returned here to try and restore its
balance and right the wrongs where I can. This is my
quest. I am, as you might say, everlasting, and assume
whatever form I see fit.’ He smiled. ‘That is why

Brockwell refers to me as old man, because to him I
appear thus. Neither he nor Maelgwn would have
listened to a word I’d said if I’d appeared the young man
you see.’
Taliesin passed his hand over a smoky crystal ball
that was embedded in the centre of the panel. The soft
hum of the machinery dropped in pitch, as the ball
changed in colour from purple to red. The image on the
screens of the hexagon became stationary and appeared
to fall flat before rising to display a detailed holographic
image of the citadel at Degannwy, which one could
view from all angles.
Fantastic! Tory walked around the hexagon, observing the miniature world of the fortress below. The storm
clouds sat a bit above eye level behind the glass screens.
‘What’s happening?’ She became alarmed when she
realised the little figures scaling the citadel walls were
Saxons. ‘This is what Maelgwn considers no serious
threat, yet they are being overrun!’ Tory looked on in
horror, wondering where the Prince was placed in the
uproar. ‘He made the wrong decision, didn’t he?’
‘No, he made a decision. There is no right or wrong
when it comes to war, only what we make of it. I had
hoped your dream would keep Maelgwn on the isle. By
ignoring the mark of the folk, he has made matters
worse, but by no means hopeless. Destiny will run its
own course. We can only watch out for the interests of
Gwynedd and try to prevent any disasters.’
‘You know who has been doing this?’ Tory pointed
to the fresh mark of the Dragon on her forehead. ‘Who
are these folk, exactly?’

‘Why the Tylwyth Teg, of course. The etheric
beings, who co-inhabit this planet with us.’
‘Fairies,’ Tory frowned, sure she’d misunderstood
him.
‘Whatever,’ he confirmed with a shrug. ‘The
occupants of the Otherworld are ever mindful of the
events of the Middle Kingdoms. It is through their grace
and guidance that we can see beyond the present, or
travel through space and time. The prophetic dreams
and the mark of the Dragon were a means by which the
folk could warn Maelgwn. But alas, the Prince has spent
too many years away from the native faith. The
Otherworld to him seems nothing more than a childhood fantasy, I’m sure. It was all those years he spent
studying the rigid material logic of the scholars from
Rome that did it.’ The Merlin shook his head. ‘He
should have known better.’
Dumbfounded by his retort, Tory thought it best to
get back to the problem at hand. ‘But there must be
something we can do to help him?’
‘Well, where do you think such a storm came from
at this time of year? In good time you shall have your
chance to help. There is no point running to his
assistance now, however.’
Tory looked at Taliesin, horrified that the fortress
had already fallen.
‘Do not fear, all is well. Look into the screen
opposite mine.’ Taliesin waved his hand over the
control. The tone of the instruments rose as before, and
the holograph flipped back up to a two-dimensional
picture.

The angle of the citadel, featured on each of the
hexagon’s six screens, progressively changed as Tory
walked slowly around it. This gave her the option of
viewing the situation from every possible direction. On
the screen to which the Merlin referred was a view
looking out from the citadel into the distance. She saw
many other armies approaching, which didn’t appear to
be Saxons. ‘My god, Taliesin!’ Tory was overwhelmed by
the multitudes. ‘I hope they’re on our side.’
The Saxon onslaught had been relentless, despite the
pelting rain that hindered them in their repeated
attempts to scale the wall and raise the portcullis. The
Prince took a more active part in this battle than he
usually did and was surprised to find that, without even
thinking, he used his newly acquired fighting skills.
This, combined with his hatred for his brother and his
desire to speed back to Aberffraw, was making him a
fearsome adversary this day. After many hours of this the
opposition were beginning to avoid him, and Maelgwn
had to keep chasing up on his opponents. Six of the
Saxon thugs tried to launch a simultaneous attack but it
did not serve them well. The Prince cut four of them
down with ease before the remaining two turned and
fled. He laughed triumphantly, scanning the area to see
where he could best be of aid. To his horror, he saw the
outer portcullis being raised and ran to prevent it.
‘Cedric!’ Maelgwn spotted his knight and, slaying
the Saxon Cedric was battling, recruited his services to
help him lower the portcullis. ‘We have to stop them, or
Degannwy will be lost.’

‘As be thy wish, Majesty,’ growled the huge, brawny
warrior, charging off to cut a path to the outer-bailey
wall.
The fighting was thickest around the barbican that
housed the heavy iron grille gate, making it difficult to
tell who held the upper hand. With Cedric covering his
back, Maelgwn fought his way to the gate-keeper’s
station. The bodies of men from both sides were strewn
along their path, as the battle for control of the gate’s
winch had been intense. Maelgwn killed a Saxon who
was racing for the tower also, then burst through the
door of the mind to slay the soldier guarding the winch.
‘Nay Majesty,’ the gate-keeper pleaded for his life,
weary from fending off the enemy to secure the gate.
‘We must open it. See,’ he pointed to the scene
unfolding beyond the citadel walls.
Sir Tiernan, accompanied by King Catulus and the
other noblemen of the south, had already dispersed the
enemy outside and were awaiting entry.
‘In that case,’ Maelgwn placed his sword in its
scabbard, and took hold of the huge iron winch, ‘allow
me to give thee a hand.’
Within minutes the portcullis was raised and, as
their allies entered the outer bailey, a victory cry was
heard from the ranks of the Britons.
‘Good show,’ the Prince congratulated the gatekeeper. Then, taking hold of the gates’ heavy iron
chain, he slid down it to greet his fellow nobles.
‘Got a tad quiet down our way. I wondered where all
the lanky bastards had got to,’ King Catulus cried out in
jest to the exhausted Prince.

‘We gathered thee might need a hand,’ Tiernan
added.
So Caswallon suspected after all, the Prince realised.
At this moment Maelgwn had to admit his father was
indeed not the crazy old man he had thought. ‘I tell
thee all, most assuredly, thy timely presence be most
welcome.’ He bowed to them. ‘I fear the battle may be
only beginning, however, for I expect we will find an
even greater threat waiting near Caernarvon.’
Though Tiernan suspected Maelgwn’s fears were
justified, he dismounted to advise. ‘Let us speak inside
the citadel, out of this dreaded rain. I am sure we have
much to discuss before charging off anywhere.’
By nightfall, Maelgwn had conveyed the whole sordid
tale to Tiernan, holding nothing back. The Prince
found it hard to break the news about the King’s
affliction, but Tiernan took it better than expected.
Although Tiernan was only thirty-seven years of
age, he was more of a father figure to the Prince than
the King had ever been. As Maelgwn’s war chief and
right-hand man during the uprising of his Uncle Cadfer,
the Prince trusted him completely and felt at ease to
speak his mind.
When the subject of Tory arose, Tiernan couldn’t
help but notice how Maelgwn’s spirits lifted. ‘I never
thought I would see the day the Dragon would fall,’
commented Tiernan, appearing grave as he swished the
mead around in his goblet.
‘Fall!’ The Prince looked at him. ‘I have no
intention of being defeated.’

‘In love,’ Tiernan explained with a chuckle.
Even at his age, this ruggedly handsome knight was
still a bachelor and openly confessed to being an incurable romantic. Tiernan claimed to enjoy the company of
ladies far too much to ever tie himself down to only one.
Maelgwn grinned with embarrassment, refilling his
goblet. ‘Oh, that. Aye well, if love keeps thee awake at
night, plaguing thy sleep with visions and cold sweats,
then I dare say thou art right.’
The Prince’s view amused Tiernan. ‘Did thee say she
fights, this girl?’ He appeared sceptical.
Maelgwn looked at him earnestly. ‘Thee could not
imagine the power of her technique, not in thy wildest
dreams.’ Maelgwn held up a finger as if struck by a
thought, and retrieved a piece of wood from the pile near
the fireplace. After removing his boots, he instructed
Tiernan to hold the chunk of wood out in front of him.
The Prince focused on the object, then kicked out and
split the wooden target with the side of his bare foot. This
proved impressive enough to capture Tiernan’s interest.
‘By the Goddess!’
‘At first I thought it impossible myself! Yet in only a
month she hast taken me this far. This be nothing
compared to what Tory can do, and I foresee no limit to
how far we could take this skill.’
‘Dost thy father know?’
‘Nay, he fell sick so suddenly that now he be too
delirious to comprehend it.’
Tiernan slapped Maelgwn’s shoulder in excitement.
‘The men said thee fought like a demon today, now I
see why!’

At last the Prince truly felt his plan was plausible; if
Tiernan was excited it had to be sound. This led him to
wonder, and he asked, ‘Must I still wed Vanora?’
Tiernan had to laugh at the Prince, who appeared so
terribly harrowed by the thought. ‘Nay, that was never
truly intended. ’Twas just a means to an end.’
Maelgwn collapsed back into his seat, relieved
beyond all comprehension.
‘After the slaying of Cadfer we suspected Chiglas
and Caradoc would retaliate. It was only a matter of
time before they felt Powys was in a position to do so.
So thy father was compelled to agree with Chiglas’
proposal, and we led everyone to believe thy marriage
was legitimate so that none would suspect us of biding
our time to arrange a counter-attack strategy. We should
rest overnight and make for Aberffraw before dawn
tomorrow.’
‘Nay!’ Maelgwn stood in protest. ‘We must cross
tonight.’
‘Please Majesty, see reason. Chiglas’ troops will not
be able to cross the strait in this frightful weather, and it
be far too risky for Gwynedd’s heir to be crossing in
darkness. I am afraid I must insist.’
‘They will manage, as will I. Caradoc will not
suspect the Saxon defeat here to have been so swift, and
we must take advantage of his ignorance.’ A knock on
the door silenced him. ‘Enter.’
It was Sir Madoc. ‘I hope I am not disturbing thee.’
‘Nay Madoc, close the door. We could use thy
wisdom a moment. Our young Prince hast got it in his
head to cross the Menai this night.’

‘Nay! Certainly not!’ Madoc was horrified. ‘Thee
will surely perish in the storm.’
‘Nonsense!’ Maelgwn was angered by their childish
treatment of him. ‘I can swim that strait four times over,
and I shall be departing this night escort or no.’
After allowing her to witness Maelgwn’s triumph,
Taliesin flatly refused to answer any more questions
until after Tory had some rest. He showed her to a room
that was almost an exact replica of her own at home,
en-suite included. It contained all the twentiethcentury mod cons that she’d been secretly missing this
past month.
‘When you leave take whatever you desire. I know
the adjustment to sixth-century life can’t have been
easy.’ Taliesin sympathised with his awestruck guest.
‘You’ll find shampoo and the like in the bathroom. I
guessed you would probably be low on supplies by
now.’
Tory discovered that the toiletries were the same
brands she normally bought. It spooked her that this
celestial entity, a stranger to her but a few hours before,
could know her so intimately. He’d thought of
everything from toothpaste to tampons. There was a
solar recharger of double A batteries, the size that her
CD Walkman took, and there were new clothes, her
style and size, in the wardrobe. All her books were
there for her reference. Her two other saxophones, a
tenor and a soprano, sat in the corner where she had
left them at home. The only apparent difference was
that there were no windows. ‘I don’t know what to say,’

she told him quietly, feeling both delighted and
surprised.
‘Then best say nothing. This has been quite an
adventure, even for a woman of Sorcha’s courage and
strength, and it is far from over yet.’
There was one question in her million that Tory had
to ask. She approached the kindly bard so he might see
how much it meant to her. ‘I have to contact my
parents, Taliesin. Can you get me back home?’
‘Not till summer solstice, I’m afraid.’ He seemed, in
a way, to be bothered by the notion. ‘I have no machine
for time travel. I brought you here the old way, by
channelling the universal energies that abide at
particular sites on this planet at certain times of the
astrological year. The calculations for such an
enterprise, as you can imagine, are enormous! These
days, however, I have my computers to assist me with
the chore. Now that is all. Time to rest.’ The magician
held the palm of his hand to the Dragon on Tory’s
forehead, and caught her up in his arms as she fell
unconscious.
‘My, how I have missed thee.’ Taliesin laid her down
on the bed, then took a seat to observe her at peace. ‘So
many fine adventures we have had, you and I. And so
many more await us yet.’
Though Tory’s sleep was deep, she woke with a start
feeling ill at ease. Taliesin sat opposite her on a lounge.
He smiled, seeming content to wait for her to get her
wits together.
‘What has happened, Taliesin?’

He rose to calm her. ‘We are one step ahead, fear
not. Bathe, dress, eat . . . there is no rush.’ He waved to
the food that had been laid out. ‘I shall return for you
thereupon.’ He gave a slight bow and headed for the
door. ‘I have need to rally Brockwell, and that could
take some doing.’
Tory did as instructed, sensing as she bathed that
her encounter with Caradoc, which she’d been dreading
these past few days, was soon to take place. She didn’t
understand how she knew this, as she’d never shown
any evidence of psychic skill. Who was this Sorcha?
Could it have something to do with her, she wondered.
Tory didn’t really dig the idea of someone else looming
in her mind. Still, if Sorcha is really just an extension of
myself, a part of me I have long forgotten, a whole wealth of
information may be lying dormant in my subconscious.
Tory picked at the food as she dressed. She found a
new white shirt and pulled out her old Levis from her
luggage. Over the lot she wore the dark green gunna. As
she laced up her steel-capped boots Tory felt prepared
for just about anything. She pulled her hair back into a
tight bun and inspected herself in the mirror. The
Dragon on her forehead held her gaze. She hadn’t
attempted to remove it, for, in this time of war, she was
proud to bear the Prince’s mark.
Taliesin and Brockwell arrived just as Tory was
ready to go.
‘Holy Mother!’ Brockwell strolled in, checking
everything out. ‘Look at this place.’ The bathroom in
particular seemed to interest him and he walked inside.
‘What be this?’

‘Not now, Calin,’ Taliesin scolded him, then turned
to address Tory, employing a very different tone of
voice. ‘You appear much refreshed. Are you ready?’
Tory, unsure, nodded anyway. Ready for what?
‘Caradoc hast made his move.’
Taliesin’s statement was so direct that it startled
Tory, and the very mention of Caradoc’s name sent
shivers down her spine.
‘What doth thou mean?’ Brockwell grumbled loudly,
still blissfully unaware that there was any major threat
to Gwynedd.
‘Come,’ Taliesin turned to guide them, his voice
conveying the gravity of the situation.
As they made haste to the control room, Taliesin
brought them up to date with their state of affairs.
‘Maelgwn hast left Degannwy, and be on his way back
to Aberffraw.’
‘The Menai?’ Tory caught Taliesin up.
‘Nay, he hast yet to cross it.’ Taliesin was well aware
of her fears. ‘Caradoc’s timing be indeed inconvenient. I
fear Maelgwn will not make it home in time to stop
him. That leaves us to prevent a siege at Aberffraw.’
‘Have I missed something?’ Brockwell was stunned
by the news.
Taliesin paid him no mind, holding his hand out
before him and parting the doors to the control room.
Brockwell stopped and took a step backwards. ‘This
be too strange.’
Tory turned to him, feeling pressed for time. ‘Calin,
thou art a child at times, would thee like me to hold thy
hand?’ she teased.

He shook his head slowly, bemused by all of
Taliesin’s paraphernalia. ‘Hast thou no fear at all?’
‘Fear exists in the mind alone.’ She coaxed him
closer.
‘I will remember thee said that,’ Taliesin replied.
But Tory remained focused on Calin, fed up with his
silly superstitions. ‘Maelgwn, King Caswallon, and quite
possibly the rest of thy kin, art in grave danger, so get
over it, soldier!’
Taliesin had taken up his position behind the panel.
Tory approached, stepping up behind him. ‘Okay, let’s
have it.’
The Merlin passed his hand over the crystal ball and
the huge hexagon rotated the equivalent of one screen.
It lit up to display the scene inside the main dining hall
at Aberffraw, in a two-dimensional form.
The entire family and staff were seated at the tables,
still dressed in their bed clothes and closely guarded by
Caradoc’s men.
‘How can this be?’ Brockwell thundered. ‘Where art
our armies?’
‘Those soldiers who have not been ambushed, sleep
on unaware. That be thy task, Brockwell. Chiglas’
forces art on the island but have not yet reached
Aberffraw. Some have split from the main group to
intercept any reinforcements that may try to cross from
Degannwy.’
Maelgwn! Tory’s heart sank. ‘Then my vision was
true.’
‘Aye. Now, I could take thee to his aid, or I can send
thee to theirs,’ he motioned to the hopeless situation on

the screen. ‘I ask thee to bear in mind that there were
no outcomes in thy dream.’
Tory viewed the scene with growing concern.
Caradoc had entered, demanding Lady Gladys accompany him at once. ‘Why must it be like this? Why didn’t
we do something sooner?’ Tory was torn when she saw
Katren in the room with the others. Caradoc harassed
the maid briefly before he departed; Tory guessed he was
inquiring after her whereabouts.
‘I could do naught until Caradoc proved himself
treasonous,’ Taliesin explained with regret. ‘The key
here be prudence, Tory. This be the kind of decision
that could be required of thee at any time if thou art
seriously considering the role of Maelgwn’s Queen.’
‘What?’ For Brockwell, this day was just one shock
after another.
So, this is a test, Tory surmised to herself, recalling
the words of Taliesin’s ancient riddle. He who would seek
to marry himself to sovereignty, must face his utmost fears
and his most secret anxieties.
Taliesin took hold of Tory. ‘Listen to yourself, deep
down you know where you will be of greater assistance
to Maelgwn this night.’
She pulled away from him, reluctant to admit even to
herself that she knew the truth behind his words. ‘Thou
art saying I should confront Caradoc. But he will see the
way I fight and the surprise strategy for Gwynedd’s forces
will be lost. So tell me Taliesin, how can I possibly win?’
‘I shall face Caradoc,’ Brockwell intervened.
‘Maelgwn would not hear of Tory being exposed to such
danger.’

Taliesin shook his head slowly. ‘Thee cannot be in
two places at once, Calin. Thee must contend with
Chiglas’ forces. Tory cannot rally the armies to battle,
and my role in this affair can only be implemented from
here. However,’ the Merlin held up a finger in promise,
one step ahead as usual, ‘thou hast no need to worry
about Tory, as she will be wearing this.’ He walked over
to the wall and motioned to the only spot along it that
was not occupied by computer hardware.
Tory folded her arms, annoyed that he would jest at
a time like this. The same thoughts were running
through Brockwell’s mind until the Merlin revealed a
majestic suit of armour from thin air, and in his hands
was a woollen cape that he’d turned inside out.
‘This be the Mantle of Gwydion, son of Don.’ He
walked towards Tory with his prize. ‘It renders the
wearer invisible, when worn the right way round.’
Tory was speechless as he handed it to her. ‘This was
truly his?’ She felt an affinity with it at once, hugging it
to her breast.
‘Aye. I have also employed it often.’
‘I have heard of this,’ Brockwell said, just as
fascinated by the legend. ‘It be one of thirteen such
treasures.’
‘True,’ Taliesin confirmed. ‘Now listen to me
carefully, we have not got much time.’
As it was a moonless night visibility on the strait was
non-existent, though the pelting rain had eased somewhat. Maelgwn deeply regretted dragging his troops
through another ordeal so soon. He’d wanted to set

forth for Aberffraw alone, feeling he would have a
better chance of going undetected. But Sir Tiernan,
superior in years and wisdom, pulled rank on the Prince,
insisting they take a more cautious approach.
Thus, in the midnight hour of this stormy night,
Maelgwn found himself trying to organise a whole army
of men across the torrid strait. I could be there by now,
he thought.
‘We shall take one of the long boats, there be less
risk of incident,’ Madoc advised.
‘Whatever thee thinks best.’ Maelgwn tried not to
sound short with the knight; he was only doing his duty
in wanting to protect him.
‘Saxons!’ A cry rang out from one of the distant
guard posts. The warning was repeated down through
the ranks as the men hurried to board their transport.
‘Make haste,’ Tiernan urged the Prince, as the
sounds of battle reached their ears.
Tiernan, Madoc and a band of soldiers guided the
Prince swiftly to the vessel. They cast off into the
stormy waters and made for the banks of Mon.
As the boats carrying Gwynedd’s soldiers caught up
with them, the rain started to pour down. Blinded by
the water in his eyes, Maelgwn could see naught of how
his men fared back onshore. Yet he could hear their
death cries, and was startled when a similar commotion
was heard out in front.
The soldiers ahead of the Prince raised the alarm to
an impending ambush.
Maelgwn peered into the darkness, shielding his
face from the water. He spied a multitude of small craft

closing rapidly in on them from Mon. From what he
could discern from their appearance, these men were
Britons. Chiglas’ troops, no doubt. So Tory was right, he
was sorry to concede. The safe crossing of the Menai
had momentarily put his mind to rest in regard to her
warning. I should have known.
The Prince rose, sword in hand, ready to face the
latest onslaught, when Tiernan yanked away the armour
from his body.
‘Into the water,’ he commanded over the rising din,
pushing the Prince overboard before he could argue.
Madoc helped Tiernan out of his heavy battle dress.
‘May the Goddess protect and guide thee both, Sir.’
Tiernan turned to Madoc, hoping he would fare well
himself. ‘Fear not, Madoc old friend, we shall
overcome.’ Tiernan followed Maelgwn into the stormy
waters of the strait.
Madoc turned to view the approaching troops. He
quietly appealed to the Spirits of the Otherworld, as he
always did before battle, for safe passage for his Prince,
his comrades and himself. But Madoc, no longer a
young man, could see little chance of his own escape
this time. ‘Long live Gwynedd!’
Maelgwn heard the cry and the clash of steel as he
rose for air. His heart went out to Madoc and regretted
that he’d been unable to stay and fight.
He and Tiernan managed to bypass the action
unobserved, as they had both been raised near the sea
and were strong swimmers. They agreed it was best to
let the current carry them down river towards
Caernarvon before attempting to go ashore since

Chiglas’ forces had spread themselves across the lower
part of the island.
As he was tossed by waves and showered with rain,
Maelgwn found it difficult to accept Tory’s theory that
pain was all in the mind. After what seemed an eternity
at the mercy of the strait, Maelgwn, exhausted and
freezing cold, dragged himself onto land.
Tiernan collapsed beside him, catching his breath. ‘I
hope she be worth it, this girl.’
Maelgwn’s head shot up. ‘My father’s life and house
art also at stake here.’
‘I know,’ Tiernan said as he got to his feet. ‘But in
my experience, only a woman will drive a man to such
extremes.’
‘Tory warned me not to leave Aberffraw and of the
dangers of crossing the Menai,’ Maelgwn confessed. ‘I
fear for her, as she has seen herself engaged in battle
with Caradoc. And although I sent her away in
Brockwell’s protection, I hesitate to doubt her visions
when she hast been proven right about everything else.’
‘Well then,’ Tiernan said as he helped Maelgwn to
his feet, ‘we had best steal ourselves a couple of horses
and see to the rescue of thy future Queen.’

9

Death of a
King

K

atren sat quietly in the dining hall with the rest
of the servants, cursing over and over that she
hadn’t been born a man. She longed to run her
captors through and save Lady Gladys from whatever
Caradoc intended. The maid couldn’t bear the thought
of any harm befalling the kindly woman. Lady Gladys
had become like a mother to her, as indeed she was to
all of the younger folk of the house without family of
their own. What could Caradoc want with his aging
aunt anyway? With most of the army officials still off
fighting Saxons at Degannwy, Katren fretted for the
household. Sir Gilmore had been badly wounded when
he’d refused to surrender to Caradoc’s treasonous intent.
She feared for the knight’s life, but could do naught but

witness the bound man bleed, as a dozen hefty guards
watched over them.
These warriors from Powys didn’t appear to have a
compassionate soul amongst them and even with as
much gall as she had, Katren was not game to risk
aggravating them. Where were Prince Maelgwn, Sir
Brockwell and her lady? Could Caradoc have been telling the truth when he boasted that Maelgwn suspected
naught, and that by this time tomorrow he, Caradoc,
would proclaim himself King of Gwynedd. Yet King
Caswallon was still very much alive, thanks to her, and
Caradoc would never get past the King’s personal guard.
Katren’s imagination ran wild a moment, her eyes
opening wide. By the Goddess! That be why Caradoc hast
taken Lady Gladys as a hostage, to get past the guard?
Oooh, if only I had trained under my mistress a while longer
. . . Her head awhirl with theories and girlish dreams of
chivalry, Katren stared into the firelight. Sir Brockwell
shall save us. The Prince’s champion would never allow
Gwynedd to fall into the hands of such scum.
Her gaze wandered up over the mantel, coming to
rest upon the weapon of Cunedda the Great. It was a
double-ended iron sword and was comparative in length
to a grown horse. One wielded it with two hands from
the centre, defending oneself against an attacker’s blows
with a long iron rod between the two deadly blades.
Katren sat staring at the weapon, wishing she knew how
to use it, when before her very eyes it vanished.
Startled, she quickly looked about the room to see if
anyone else had noticed. She then turned back to the
wall above the mantel to confirm that it was definitely

no longer there. Katren had but seconds to ponder what
could have become of it when, like a vision from her
dreams, Brockwell came bursting through the doors. In
one hand he held a beautiful sword that bore a white
hilt; its blade appeared to be of solid flame. With the
other he dragged along one of Chiglas’ soldiers. Katren
trembled as her hero let the slain villain drop to the
floor.
‘Come forward, if thee dare, and taste Dyrnwyn –
the sword of Rhydderch. Which one of thee wishes to
die first?’ Brockwell challenged. ‘What, no takers?’ He
winked at the ladies, who all appeared more than
relieved to see him. As he held in his hand one of the
Thirteen Treasures of Britain, Brockwell fancied himself
to be invincible and lashed out with confidence at his
closest opponent.
Caradoc’s troops towered over him, yet this young
swordsman more than equalled their skill and daring.
Katren realised that Tory was right in saying that power
came from will and had nothing to do with size. Real
desire within the heart hast magic power. She recalled the
phrase Tory had quoted, feeling that Sir Brockwell was
living proof of this. The knight jumped up on the tables
to continue his assault with the further advantage of
added height. The remaining guards closed in to attack.
Katren believed her love would surely die, when, one by
one, his attackers were ambushed by an invisible enemy,
which violently slashed out and pounded them into
submission.
‘The Dragon returns,’ Brockwell taunted, exploiting
the old legend. The guards resolved to flee the room but

their attempt was thwarted, as whoever approached the
doorway died.
From the violent action of the surprise attack,
Katren knew immediately that Tory was behind it; she
now had a very good idea of where Cunedda’s weapon
had disappeared to. Not one to waste time, Katren ran
to the side of Lord Gilmore and unbound him. If she
didn’t clean and bind his wounds soon they would
surely become gangrenous. That was, of course, if he
didn’t die from the loss of blood first.
Driven to fits of frenzy, the enemy warriors were
sitting ducks, losing their will even to try to compete
with the invisible onslaught, or the fiery blade. The last
two remaining soldiers, seeing their fate splattered
around them, fell to their knees and begged for mercy.
Brockwell, keeping a close eye on them, instructed
Selwyn to help blindfold and bind the pair. When this
had been accomplished, the knight pressed a button on
the side of his sword’s hilt and the fiery blade vanished.
Tory came out from under her magical cape to
congratulate him. ‘Brockwell, thou art a true master.
High-five!’
Brockwell, familiar with Tory’s gesture, responded
with enthusiasm, yet he held her hand firm. ‘Thou art
the master, Tory Alexander. I was wrong about thy ways.’
His deep blue eyes nearly drowned her and it was
clear that Calin was experiencing some strong
emotions. ‘Thee must go,’ Tory instructed. ‘I shall see to
thy mother and thy King’s safety.’
Katren, having tended Lord Gilmore as best she
could, stood to watch Brockwell depart. She tried not to

envy the way he eyed her mistress. One day soon he
shall long for me, she vowed, I shall train much harder.
To Katren’s great surprise, Brockwell approached her
before leaving.
‘How fares Sir Gilmore?’ he placed a hand on
Katren’s arm, looking towards his mentor with concern.
‘I think it not be as bad as it looks, but he will need
proper attention before long.’ She was elated by his
brief touch.
‘Calin, go now!’ Tory urged, growing impatient.
He bowed to the ladies, serving them one of his
grins. ‘I shall see thee all at breakfast.’
Katren was quietly dismayed to note that most of
the younger maidens sighed as they watched the knight
slip quietly from the room.
What a ham. Tory rolled her eyes, turning her
attention to phase two of their plan. ‘Alma, see to Lord
Gilmore. Selwyn, watch those two and if they move,
kill them.’
Selwyn jumped to his duty, taking up a sword from
one of the dead. Tory realised she felt no remorse for the
men she’d slaughtered, nor did she fear facing Caradoc.
She turned to Katren, taking up her hand. ‘Katren, I
need thee to guide me to the King’s chambers.’
The inflection in Tory’s voice implied that her
request could be dangerous, but Katren’s heart leapt at
the chance of some action. ‘It would give me the
greatest pleasure, lady.’
Tory smiled, giving her a hug. ‘I have much to tell
thee once we have rid Gwynedd of this menace. So let
us be done with it. Cara, bolt the door behind us and

answer to no one but Katren or myself, understand?’
The young girl nodded in confirmation as she sprang to
her feet.
With a dagger resting at the throat of Lady Gladys,
Caradoc had easily persuaded the royal guard to throw
down their weapons. He had locked the men in the
adjacent room and four of his soldiers were now
stationed at the door to the King’s chamber. Caradoc
instructed them to inform anyone from Gwynedd who
wished to enter that he held Lady Gladys and the King
inside, and would kill them both upon sighting
opposition.
Tory and Katren watched the entrance to the King’s
chamber from a doorway down the hall. The four guards
were backed well up against the doors and Tory had no
chance of slipping between them undetected.
‘Art thou ready, Katren?’ Tory whispered, eager to
be done with the task.
‘Aye lady,’ she replied, taking up a jug of mead and
goblets.
Tory placed her hands on Katren’s shoulders.
‘Remember, be meek, and as soon as they art distracted
make for the dining hall as fast as thou art able.’ Katren
gave a firm nod. ‘And most importantly . . .’ Tory paused
to stress, but Katren already knew the punch line and
said it with her. ‘. . . no fear.’ They smiled at their
resolve. Tory resumed her invisible cover and followed
Katren up the hall.
The guards were immediately up in arms upon
sighting a resident of the castle, so Katren stopped some

distance from them. She gave a small curtsey, keeping
her eyes lowered to the ground. ‘Mead?’ she announced,
so timidly the men barely heard her.
‘Good show,’ the most tolerant of them said,
beckoning her to approach.
Tory turned the door handle and slipped inside the
King’s chamber unnoticed.
Those in the room were staring straight at the
doorway, and for a moment Tory was horrified that her
magic cloak had failed her. Caradoc held Lady Gladys
while Vanora stood at the King’s bedside, swishing some
liquid around in a goblet.
‘It be nothing,’ Caradoc resolved, motioning to
Vanora. ‘Get on with it, and make sure to kill him this
time.’
‘Caradoc, I beseech thee . . .’ Lady Gladys begged,
‘he be thy father, thy King.’
Caradoc roughly cast her aside. ‘He be neither. If I
had my way, Caswallon would die by the sword.’
Caradoc approached the bed to gloat upon his ailing
relative.
‘What would thy people think?’ Vanora scoffed
sarcastically at his impetuous nature. ‘Besides, Father
was very specific, best not anger him, save . . .’
‘Just do it,’ Caradoc hissed, intolerant of these
stupid precautions. He wanted to thrust his sword into
someone, namely Maelgwn.
The goblet Vanora had been preparing for the King
flew abruptly out of her hand, and Caradoc drew his
sword.
‘Woman, thou art trying my patience!’

‘It was not me, there be someone else in here,’
Vanora snapped, unnerved as her bottles of poison went
crashing to the floor. Then she screeched as she was
violently thrown across the room.
‘Bitch!’ Tory felt a wave of numbness come over her,
and she started speaking in a voice much harsher and
more mature than her own. ‘Caradoc, thou art a
festering thorn in my side.’ She moved around as silent
as the air itself, so that the mortified Prince could not
follow the direction of her voice. ‘Taliesin was right. I
should have slaughtered thee at birth.’
‘Sorcha?’ He sounded wary.
‘Did thou really think I would allow my noble
husband and his only beloved son to be ruined in such a
manner?’ Tory lashed out with her boot to his stomach,
followed by a knee to the face that sent him rocketing
backwards.
Lady Gladys was speechless, she would have known
Sorcha’s voice anywhere. The Great Sorceress had
returned to seek vengeance as promised.
Caradoc, his noise bloodied, was foaming at the
mouth. ‘Guards!’ he yelled, striking out with his sword
but hitting nothing.
Tory managed to score a nice gash across Caradoc’s
upper leg before turning to face the guards. As the first
two entered she thrust the twin sword forward, and the
warrior’s heads were sliced from their shoulders. The
third was severely beaten about before colliding with a
wall. Tory turned to address the fourth guard, only to
find him mysteriously absent. Where is the son-of-a-bitch?
Oh shit, Katren.

Tory didn’t have the time to chase him as Caradoc
was heading for the King. Oh no you don’t. Under
Sorcha’s wilful control, Tory moved to intervene. She
slashed a long incision across Caradoc’s back from his
shoulder to his hip. ‘Since thou art so fond of pain and
fear, I thought thee should become more intimate with
it.’ She booted him away from the bed and stood to
guard Caswallon. ‘The Dragon wants words with thee,
Caradoc.’ Her voice was colder than his glare. ‘So let us
await his arrival, without thee forcing me to send thee
to thy maker.’
Caradoc lashed out at where he suspected her to be.
‘Cadfer’s dagger did not cut deep enough, Mother. Show
thyself, witch and let me finish the job my father
started. I know thee for the vulgar adulteress thou art,
taking to the bed of thy husband’s brother! Deny that I
be the living proof of it.’
Lady Gladys could barely believe her ears; how was
it that she had never gotten wind of this scandal? She
waited, breathless, for Sorcha to reject his foul claim.
Tory served Caradoc a slight slice to his neck,
having crept up on him from behind. She could keep
him occupied like this for hours, if that’s what he chose.
‘True, thou art nothing but the bastard son of a
treacherous leech,’ Sorcha vexed him back, not
bothered at all that he knew about his illegitimacy. ‘But
get thy facts straight, boy. I cut my own throat. I did not
give Cadfer the chance to take my pleasures from me a
second time.’ Tory felt shivers as she was caught up in
the memory of Sorcha’s last hours; she had died in this
very room.

Vanora had slithered her way round the chamber
during the scuffle, and now held a dagger at Lady
Gladys’ throat. ‘Show thyself crone, or lose another
member of thy family.’
Caradoc smiled at Vanora. ‘I do adore thee at times.’
‘I know.’ Her black eyes were void of any emotion.
‘Finish the King thine own way.’
Lightning tore through the storm clouds and the thunder
boomed so loudly that Maelgwn thought it would burst
his eardrums. The relentless rain made it impossible to
see a thing; they could run straight into the enemy ranks
and not realise. Still, Tiernan seemed to know where he
was going and Maelgwn followed blindly, glad that Tory
had got his physical fitness up to scratch.
Maelgwn gave a thought for his horse, Aristotle,
named after the scholar whose teachings the Prince
respected greatly. He regretted that the magnificent
animal had probably drowned or been stolen during the
dreadful crossing.
Fortunately, the wind was to their backs and seemed
to be spurring them along. Maelgwn felt himself settling
into a good rhythm as they cleared the thicker forest
that boarded the shore of the Menai. But as they
entered the more open expanse of land, Tiernan came
to an abrupt stop.
‘Troops?’ the Prince leaned forward to catch his
breath.
A great flash of lightning lit up the area and Tiernan
clapped his hands together, letting loose a laugh.
‘Behold, our own stampede.’

Maelgwn followed Tiernan to inspect a group of
horses. Aristotle grazed with about a dozen other horses
that must have followed the black stallion from the
barge. The animal looked up to watch the Prince
approach, and shook its head as if to ask what had taken
him so long.
‘I must say,’ Tiernan said, climbing onto his horse.
‘The Gods certainly seem to favour thee.’
‘Let us hope.’ The Prince sprang to his mount,
wasting no time in getting the pack moving.
Exhilarated, Maelgwn hugged close to Aristotle as
they rode quickly towards Aberffraw. He let loose a war
cry, inspired by the furious power he felt in the charge of
these beasts; a whole army couldn’t stop them now.
Brockwell moved silently through the darkness as his
troops spread out to scour the land. He was enjoying
stalking the enemy on foot as they were on familiar
ground and under the cover of rain. Caradoc had only
brought, at most, forty men with him when he’d accompanied the King to Aberffraw, and Brockwell had sent
small parties back to pick them off, leaving a few legions
to guard the house from the outer bailey.
As he crept through the long undergrowth, Calin
sought the strength and guidance of Gwyn ap Nudd, the
Night Hunter. This Underworld King held the right of
passage through darker realms, and always caught his
prey before the light of dawn.
They found the exhausted troops from Powys
further inland, lying in wait for a dawn attack.
Brockwell’s legions managed to catch them off guard, as

they had expected to be the surprise this day. The sword
of Rhydderch was not affected by the pouring rain, and
as Brockwell blazed his way through his foe lightning
began to shoot from the sky to slay them also.
Gwynedd’s troops, inspired by the spectacle and freshly
rested, fought vigorously against the enemy and finally
had them on the run.
The sound of horses’ hooves thundering through the
darkness toward them sent Brockwell rushing to
investigate. Sword retracted, he climbed the nearest
tree and without thought for his own safety he made
ready to jump.
Bodies of the dead and dying were trampled under hoof
as the pack of charging horses came bursting through
the front line. Maelgwn wondered how Gwynedd was
faring, as soldiers from both sides hurried out of the path
of the stampede. As he hunched lower, heading into the
forest, Maelgwn heard Brockwell’s familiar war cry. The
knight came flying out of the tree overhead to land on a
horse nearby. ‘Brockwell!’ Maelgwn cried, astonished.
The knight, clearly having the time of his life, was
ecstatic to find Maelgwn behind the brilliant ploy.
‘Maelgwn! Excellent!’ he yelled his approval loud
enough to be heard over the noise of the horses,
thunder and battle.
‘What art thou doing here, where be Tory?’
Maelgwn shouted.
‘Later,’ replied Brockwell, pushing his horse harder
to catch up with Sir Tiernan. Calin slapped his greatest
rival on the back.

Tiernan smiled. ‘Where did thee come from?’ This
kid never ceased to amaze him. Brockwell was totally
fearless, much like himself ten years ago.
‘I be everywhere, old man,’ Brockwell teased King
Caswallon’s champion, as he often did, taking off ahead
of him.
With the sword of Rhydderch held high, Brockwell
rode towards the outer-bailey wall, its flaming blade a
signal to raise the portcullis. The entire stampede ran
inside the huge stone walls of the outer bailey.
Brockwell, Tiernan and the Prince continued on to deal
with Caradoc.
‘Where be Tory?’ Maelgwn demanded from
Brockwell, beating him to a dismount. Brockwell hesitated but a second to reply before the Prince proceeded
to shake it out of him. ‘Calin, answer me!’
‘She went to save thy father.’
‘Damn it!’ Maelgwn was gone before Brockwell was
given a chance to explain.
Tiernan, who could sympathise with the young
knight’s position, gave him a slap of encouragement to
get him back on track. ‘Thou hast done well this day,’
he assured Brockwell, who obviously felt he’d failed in
his duty to his Prince. ‘But it be far from over yet.’
Tiernan turned a corner in time to see Maelgwn
enter the King’s chamber. Brockwell, who followed
behind him, was distracted from their course by a
scream coming from his own bed chamber. He burst
through the door to discover Katren trying to wriggle
free from beneath a huge warrior twice her size. The
man was having some trouble trying to hold her still to

rip open her gown. Katren was kicking violently, despite
how hard she was struck for her struggle.
Brockwell ran his glowing blade across the
barbarian’s butt, which certainly served to raise him in a
hurry. He grinned at the awestruck villain as he ran him
through, and watched with satisfaction as his foe slid off
his blade to the floor.
Her virtue still intact, Katren pulled together her
tattered clothes.
Brockwell, not good at handling such delicate
situations, thought best to make light of it. ‘What on
Earth keeps possessing men to rip thy clothes from thy
body and bruise thy lovely face, Katren?’ He held out a
hand to help her from the bed.
Katren declined his help, a little upset but stable. ‘I be
fine, Sir Brockwell, really, and I do thank thee. But there
be nothing but a torn dress to cry over here. Please, the
King be more important, thee should make haste to him.’
Brockwell was stunned by her resolve as he backed
up to the door; most women would have been hysterical
after such a violent attack. Katren was truly one of
Tory’s ilk. ‘Thou art right.’ He opened the door to leave.
‘Besides, I quite fancy thee there.’
Having been dragged into the room under force,
Katren didn’t understand his meaning at first. But when
she realised she was in Sir Brockwell’s room, she smiled,
exalted, and collapsed back onto his bed in a state of
bliss.
With only a split second to decide between the life of
the already comatose King and Lady Gladys, it was the

latter Tory chose to save from harm. Her invisible blade
left its imprint on Vanora’s jugular, and the Princess
released her captive when Tory threatened to cut her
throat.
‘Caradoc,’ Sorcha’s voice loudly hissed in caution,
hoping to dissuade him from hurting the King. ‘I care
not for thy whore.’
Lady Gladys, not unaccustomed to harassment,
retrieved the dagger from Vanora and threatened her
with it. ‘Foolish child, thou art dealing with forces
whose power be way beyond thy feeble skills and
understanding.’
Caradoc paused only a moment to consider his
priorities, and unfortunately he did not care for his
lover as much as Tory had hoped. Even though she near
flew to the King’s aid, Tory was not fast enough to stop
Caradoc from running Caswallon through. ‘Damn thee
to hell!’ She booted him away with all the might she
could muster, so he couldn’t repeat the offence.
‘He be mine,’ Maelgwn’s voice resounded throughout the chamber.
With the King’s blood dripping from his sword,
Caradoc raised himself. ‘At last – thou art next, monk.’
Caradoc lunged at his brother with his blade.
The Prince effortlessly blocked Caradoc’s sword
with his own. ‘Thy Saxon thugs have fled in fear,
Chiglas’ armies art massacred,’ Maelgwn informed him,
looking as if he’d been to hell and back. ‘Now thee will
pay along with thy vomitus scum.’ He lashed out with a
powerful kick that thrust his brother clear out of the
room.

Caradoc’s free-wheeling form nearly collided with
Tiernan, who was about to enter. Maelgwn was upon his
brother, not giving him the chance to rise. He dug his
boot into Caradoc a couple of times before dragging the
traitor to his feet.
‘Ah, brotherly love,’ Tiernan said, amused.
Maelgwn ripped the sword from his overwhelmed
foe and cast his own aside, experiencing far more
satisfaction in a bare-handed assault. ‘What be wrong,
dear brother?’ The Prince referred to Caradoc’s
astounded expression. ‘I do not fight like a monk now,
do I?’ Maelgwn belted him with kicks and blows, all the
way down the hall.
Brockwell came racing down the corridor to assist,
but Tiernan stopped him and stood back to observe the
Prince’s new and intriguing form of hand-to-hand
combat. Though Tiernan found the skills very much to
his liking, he left Maelgwn to his fun to seek out the
welfare of his King.
Upon entering the chamber, Sir Tiernan rushed to
the bed where the King lay in a pool of his own blood.
By some miracle, Caswallon was still coherent and
aware of the goings on around him.
‘Did we win?’ The King’s eyes could no longer focus,
yet he knew the one who gripped his hand to be his
champion and dear friend.
Tiernan kept the tears from his voice. He saw that
the King was fading from life as they spoke. ‘Aye
Majesty, thy son hast done thee proud this day, against
unbelievable odds. I dare say, Gwynedd will not be
troubled for a long time to come.’

‘Chiglas lives.’ The King strained to convey his
warning, coughing blood. ‘Guard Maelgwn, guide him
. . .’ There was so much he wanted to tell his son, but
now it was too late; the effort was far too great for his
failing lungs.
Tiernan begged him to hush, hoping Maelgwn
would arrive at his father’s bedside in time.
Brockwell, having liberated the imprisoned castle
guards from the room across the hall, ordered them to
take Vanora out of his sight before he killed her. He
embraced his harrowed mother then quickly spun
around, calling out with concern, ‘Tory, how dost thou
fare?’
Tory, who was right beside him, lifted the mantle
from her shoulders. ‘Thee will not be rid of me so easily.’
He grasped hold of her, relieved to find her
unharmed. ‘I never wish to be rid of thee.’
He regarded her with that same alarming glint in his
eye, which did not escape the attention of his mother.
As Katren humbly approached the doorway, Tory broke
away from Brockwell and rushed to embrace her friend.
‘Katren, art thou alright?’ She held the girl at arm’s
length to check her over. ‘I was so worried when I came
up a guard short in battle.’
Katren smiled meekly, glancing to Calin. ‘Sir
Brockwell came to my aid in time to preserve my
honour.’ She blushed slightly, recalling his last words to
her.
Tory followed Katren’s coy look to catch Calin’s
bashful reaction. How appropriate, she considered. I can
see that I’ll not have to worry about Calin’s admiring

glances for much longer. With Tory’s mind set partly at
ease, Sorcha resumed wilful control and guided Tory to
the bedside of the King.
Tiernan was startled by Tory’s touch, and his eyes
opened wide in amazement as he looked at her.
‘I shall take it from here,’ the young woman told
him calmly in Sorcha’s voice. So close in image to his
Queen was she, that he fell on one knee before her. In
his mind, Sorcha was still the only woman Tiernan
considered worth dying for. In fact, the knight had
willed death upon himself when he hadn’t been there to
prevent her from being slain.
‘The prophecy,’ he uttered, head bowed low to the
ground in homage to her presence.
‘Aye.’ She bent down, lifting his face to look at
him. ‘My devout Sir Tiernan, and we bless thee for thy
part.’
Tiernan, exulted to have met with the touch of a
Goddess, backed away to give the couple some space.
Lady Gladys drew Katren under one arm for comfort
as they witnessed the King’s passing. Though Katren
didn’t understand much of what was happening, she felt
moved to be so intimate with the royal family.
Tory took a seat on the King’s bed, and in the room
so dimly lit she glowed with angelic grace. As she took
up Caswallon’s hand in her own, his eyes opened wide
at her touch.
‘Sorcha,’ he said, a smile of peaceful delight lighting
his wrinkled old face. He stared not directly at Tory but
at a space just above her head, and it was plain to all
present that the King was addressing his dear wife.

‘Indeed Caswallon, I have come for thee at last,’ she
assured him, resting a hand on his cheek. ‘It be time to
leave this rare and gracious woman to the care of our
fair son. It be his time now, my love, and like his father
before him, he will be a formidable king. Come,’ she
beckoned with a soft smile.
Caswallon reached up, and to those who bore
witness to the scene it appeared that the King simply
went to her. As his earthly vessel collapsed back onto
the bed, the King’s expression was one of peace and
contentment.
Sir Brockwell was moved to tears by the sad
occurrence, and waited a few minutes before he
approached to comfort Tory in the wake of the ordeal.
To his surprise, however, she hushed him away.
Tory continued to stare into the King’s lifeless face,
as if listening to him speak. She gestured now and then
to acknowledge the words that none in the room, apart
from herself, could hear. When she finally sat back, Tory
looked up at the ceiling and took in a deep breath. ‘He
hast gone,’ she announced, her head bowing low in
silent respect.
‘Long live King Maelgwn,’ Tiernan said softly,
overcome by what he’d seen. The others repeated this
with conviction.
Maelgwn, dropping the bound and beaten body of
Caradoc in the doorway, drew the attention of all
present. Tory would have run to him at once, but she
suddenly felt as if she would faint.
The Prince’s face was filled with remorse having
heard the announcement, and it was Lady Gladys who

came forward to console him. ‘Thy mother came for
him, Maelgwn. ’Twas lovely.’
‘Aye. ’Twas her.’ Tiernan braced the Prince’s
shoulder firmly. ‘He died a very proud and happy man.’
Maelgwn gently loosened himself from them and
approached the bed where Tory sat with her hand in his
father’s, tears rolling down her cheeks. The Prince had
only to look into his father’s face to see that the end
had been peaceful.
As he crouched down to address her, Tory reached
out with trembling hands to touch his face. She battled
to hold herself together, and she had to force out every
word. ‘He left thee a message.’ She so badly wanted to
convey it, but her body gave in and she collapsed
unconscious into Maelgwn’s awaiting arms.
Distant voices filled Tory’s dreams and she stirred from
her slumber a few hours later.
‘As I told thee, ’twas just the exhaustion of
channelling. She’ll be as right as rain, now.’
Tory opened her eyes upon recognising the Merlin’s
distinguished tone, and sat up. ‘Taliesin, thou art here!’
‘Easy does it,’ he advised with a smile. ‘I be the
bearer of grand news.’
Even Taliesin’s calming aura was not enough to
allay her at once, and she took a strong hold of his
hand. ‘We won?’
‘Indeed we did.’
‘But I failed the test, I did not save the King.’
Taliesin laughed away her anxieties. ‘Dear lady, that
was not the purpose of thy quest. Why, even as we

speak, the folk of Gwynedd are singing your praises and
throughout the land you are being hailed as a warrior
Goddess.’
Tory grinned modestly. ‘That’s ludicrous!’
Nay, it be all important if you truly love Maelgwn,
Taliesin thought, and although he did not say it out
loud, Tory heard every word, clear as a bell. She
frowned in question. ‘More about that later,’ he said.
‘Meanwhile, there be an exhausted young man who hast
been patiently awaiting a word with thee.’
Taliesin stood, bowing to Maelgwn as he came forth
out of the shadows. ‘I shall leave thee to talk. Talk,
mind,’ the Merlin cautioned the Prince. ‘It would be
wise not to anger those who bestowed such a beauteous
paragon upon thee.’
The Prince was deeply grateful for all his mentor’s
support this day, but it seemed that the bard never
ceased his lecturing. ‘Taliesin, old friend, I understand
the behaviour I am required by privilege to uphold.
Thou hast prepared me well for what lies ahead, and
may rest easy that I shall not jeopardise the future of
Gwynedd.’
‘The land shall unite and prosper upon thy
crowning, Maelgwn.’ Taliesin admired his work in the
form of the young King to be. ‘I will leave thee and shall
speak with thee both in the courtroom at thy leisure.’
The Merlin headed back downstairs to tend to the
many affairs of state that needed his attention.
Maelgwn opened wide the caphouse doors to behold
a glorious sunrise. The clouds had departed, along with
their enemy, and a rainbow now sparkled over the land.

‘My court advisers and bards tell me that thou hast been
brought back from the future by the spirits of the
Otherworld, to guide and protect . . .’ Tory rolled her
eyes and made ready to object, but Maelgwn raised a
hand to prevent it. ‘Please, hear me out. I have pondered
these words too many days now, and I shall surely go mad
if thou dost not allow me to speak them.’ The Prince
beckoned for her to join him as he stepped outside.
The inflection of his voice, so anxious and heartfelt,
had Tory fascinated. ‘Maelgwn? I am sorry. I promise I
am listening now . . . to guide and protect . . .’
Maelgwn smiled, as he began to walk with her. ‘I
need thee to understand why the people here in
Gwynedd, who mainly be of the old faith, consider thee
a Goddess. To them, the days of such extraordinary feats
executed by a female be long past with the days of Gaul.
Even then a woman would have had to earn the right to
carry such a title. A good thing too, or I could never ask
of thee what I will.’
‘Which be?’
‘I am afraid this will seem sudden, but my circumstances leave me pressed for time.’
‘Maelgwn, it be me, Tory. Thou art my dearest
friend, thee can ask me anything.’
The Prince took hold of Tory’s right hand and,
confronting his fear head on, went down on one knee
before her. ‘If I am found worthy to hold the office of
King, would thee, Tory Alexander, do me the great
honour of becoming my wife and Queen.’ Maelgwn
couldn’t believe that the words had left his lips, and he
listened to his heart beat as he awaited her reply.

Tory, though stunned, didn’t want to keep the
Prince in suspense and went down on her knees to
speak to him. ‘I am the one who be honoured,
Maelgwn, believe me. But thou art a prince, dost thou
not have to wed a princess?’
Maelgwn was forced to smile; she obviously hadn’t
even mildly comprehended what he’d been trying all
this while to explain. ‘I think a Goddess will suffice.’
‘Oh!’ Tory was enlightened. That’s what Taliesin was
trying to tell me. She was quiet for a moment, considering the proposal seriously.
Maelgwn watched her closely, and to his dismay
Tory’s expression became one of growing concern. For as
much as Tory wanted to say yes, there were two very
important points that she needed to discuss. ‘Hast thou
thought this well through?’
‘Aye, I have.’ He was alarmed by her reaction.
She stood and took a few steps away so he could
view her clearly. ‘Look at me, Maelgwn. I am not like
the women thou art accustomed to, and I have no
intention of changing the way I am, or what I hold true
and just, to suit anyone else’s ideals. I will not.’
‘But I do not want thee to change,’ Maelgwn
insisted, standing also.
‘Wait, thee must hear me out. Please Maelgwn, this
be very important as it bothers me greatly.’
The Prince was silenced and took a seat on the seawall to listen to her.
‘If I was to rule here at thy side then the two of us
would represent the law of the land, would we not?’ she
began.

‘Aye, that we would.’
‘Then, I can only respond thus. Unless certain laws
were enforced throughout the kingdom for the
protection of women and children, then to my deepest
regret I would have to decline thy lovely proposal. For
how can I be expected to represent that which I cannot
condone?’ Tory’s expression was serious and she prayed
Maelgwn would not take offence to her terms, or think
her too insubordinate for saying so.
Already she employs Sorcha’s foresight and strong will.
Heaven help me! ‘I know my kingdom and people be far
from perfect, but together we could change that.’ He
slid off the wall and took hold of her. ‘I have come to
realise these few days past that I do love thee beyond
my life. I am prepared to do whatever I must to be one
with thee, Tory.’
‘I can certainly appreciate that,’ Tory said, sharing
his sense of urgency as he bent down to kiss her. ‘But,
there be one last thing.’
Maelgwn let her go, feeling a mite exasperated by
her resistance. ‘Ask away.’
‘Maelgwn, do not be mad with me. If thou hast
missed me these past few days, please believe I missed
thee ten fold.’ As he appeared to calm a little, she
continued, ‘However, try as we might to forget, the
simple fact remains that I am not supposed to be here.
This doth not worry me greatly, but somewhere in the
twentieth century, the two people I care about most art
beside themselves with worry.’
The Prince nodded slightly. ‘I could not keep thee
from thy kin, Tory. I understand.’

‘I do not want to go back there, silly,’ she teased. ‘I
just want to visit and let them know I be safe and well.
Taliesin said it may be possible next summer solstice.’
Maelgwn reacted to the news like a man possessed.
‘But that not be for near a year,’ he cried, lifting her
into the air.
‘Aye,’ she laughed, revelling in his joy.
‘And would thee promise to return to me?’
‘Nay.’ She toyed with him, trying to hide her smile
as he brought her back to the ground.
‘Nay?’
Tory slid both arms around his neck. ‘I never wish to
leave thee again. Thee must come. My parents would
want to meet my husband.’
Maelgwn’s expression melted to a smile, and with all
the formalities out of the way, he finally induced her to
a kiss.

PART 11

SPACE

10

Inauguration

A

ll his life, Maelgwn had dreading taking on the
huge responsibility of his father’s office. Yet
with Tory at his side, the thought was not so
daunting. He smiled at her as she walked with him. His
inauguration was all that stood between himself and his
idea of paradise. I be deserving of my father’s position, so I
must not doubt my own ability. This vision of the Goddess
be my rightful claim, no matter what the spirits may ask as
proof of my worthiness.
As they stopped outside the Great Hall the Prince
whispered, ‘This could be a little overwhelming, my
subjects tend to get rather excited by the news of a
wedding.’
Tory smiled, every bit as nervous as she was thrilled
by their impending announcement. She had no idea
what to expect, knowing little about local ceremony.
‘Well, I am ready if thou art.’

The Prince hugged her, proud of the way she was
taking this all in her stride. He’d been allowed a lifetime
to become accustomed to the idea of leadership, whereas Tory had only been given a few days. ‘Right.’ He
moved to open the doors.
‘Wait.’ Tory pulled him back for a kiss of encouragement.
The pair, preoccupied for the moment, didn’t heed
the doors in front of them parting wide. When the eyes
of all at court beheld their Prince and his lady in a
strong embrace, the whistles and applause were almost
deafening.
Maelgwn and Tory burst into laughter, embarrassed.
‘I think we’ve been found out,’ she said in jest.
‘Indeed.’ The Prince turned to address the rowdy
gathering and somehow managed to quieten them. ‘I be
very pleased to inform ye all, my family, dear friends,
loyal knights and ladies . . .’ He was forced to pause when
his men again raised riot to confirm their allegiance.
Flattered by their enthusiasm, Maelgwn shouted over the
din, ‘. . . that upon my inauguration, Tory Alexander will
do me the great honour of becoming my wedded wife
and Queen to all Gwynedd.’
Taliesin was overjoyed as the cries of the rejoicing
crowd filled the huge room. But as he rose to address
them, silence fell over the court.
‘As messenger of the Otherworld,’ he began, ‘I
decree that the initiate, Maelgwn of Gwynedd, shall
face inauguration five days hence. Should he be found
worthy and succeed in the task set for him by his
forefathers, he shall wed with the Goddess seven days

thereafter. This be the will of the Great Houses, Don
and Llyr.’
‘So be it!’ the crowd responded in unison, giving a
cheer.
Lady Gladys was beside herself with tears, and near
drowned the couple with her joy as she embraced them.
‘In the whole of creation, thee could not have found
thyself a fairer match.’ She kissed Maelgwn’s cheek then
turned to Tory. ‘May I be the first to welcome thee,
child, to the clan of Cunedda the Great. I cannot
express how overjoyed I be to accept thee as my
kindred.’
Tory was moved to tears as they embraced. ‘I thank
thee Lady Gladys, for everything. I shall do my very best
to live up to thy high ancestral name.’
‘Dear girl.’ Lady Gladys had to chuckle. ‘I hold no
fear of that.’
When silence descended, Tory and Lady Gladys
turned to find that Maelgwn had raised his hands.
‘Good people. Much hast happened this night, and
although Gwynedd will deeply mourn the death of my
father Caswallon, he shall be remembered always as a
great King among Britons.’
Tory considered his words, knowing to the contrary;
Caswallon would only be remembered as father to King
Maelgwn of Gwynedd. It was Maelgwn who would be
revered as the Great King among Britons.
‘My divine mother, Queen Sorcha, manifested to
tend the King in his passing. So I assure all thee who
grieve, that the King be a far happier soul now that he
hast joined his beloved wife. Together may they at last

find their peace eternal.’ Maelgwn bowed his head in
remembrance, as did everyone in the room.
After a moment of silence, the Prince slapped his
hands together and moved on to a brighter subject.
‘However, as my father was a man renowned for
honouring occasion, I feel sure Caswallon would not
have seen his subjects so solemn on a day as auspicious
as this! Sorcha’s dying prophesy of retribution hast been
fulfilled. The Might of Gwynedd hast triumphed over
the treasonous House of Chiglas, and their hired Saxon
thugs!’
A cry of victory was raised.
‘I have never seen him so spirited,’ Lady Gladys
whispered to Tory.
‘And with my imminent wedding to celebrate, I
invite all to join me in a feast, just as my father would
have had it.’
A second cry sounded. Weekends were not heard of
in this age, so a feast was as good as a holiday.
‘Caswallon be dead!’ Tiernan cried, which incited
the rest of the gathering to respond: ‘Long live King
Maelgwn!’
The ladies of the house flew into action with the
announcement of the festivities, and Maelgwn left to
attend the pressing affairs of State.
Tory wandered down the grand halls of the castle,
when it dawned on her that, through her participation
in Gwynedd’s victory she’d not only won the right to
marry her love, but she had obtained her liberty as well.
This prompted her to chance something that she’d

been longing to attempt since first setting foot on
Aberffraw.
The gateway to the stairs leading to the beach was
located below her tower room. There was no access to
the beach from the castle, however. One had to exit
through the inner portcullis into the outer-bailey
grounds then walk round the east tower.
Tory followed a cobbled pathway through the outer
gardens that led down the outside of the northern wing;
the gateway she sought was just ahead. Maelgwn had
given her his medallion of the Dragon, which served
the same function as a backstage pass might in the
twentieth century. She flashed it at the gate-house
guards and was granted access to wherever she pleased.
As the iron grille was lowered behind her, Tory
paused to breathe deeply the sea air and feel the
sunshine on her face. The beach was completely
deserted as everyone was at the celebrations; the peace
and isolation of the moment filled her with joy.
Tory hurried down the old sandstone stairs, then
pulled off her boots. She burrowed her toes deep into
the sand and sighed with delight at the memories of
home. With her jeans rolled up to her knees, Tory
shrieked as she felt the icy water rush against her bare
skin and she splashed her way along the shore break,
basking in the release of her new-found freedom.
When she returned from a brisk jog, Tory met
Brockwell seated on the stairs that led from the beach to
the bailey wall. She smiled, pleased to see him. ‘Hey Bro.’
‘Stop calling me that,’ he shot back at her as he
stood up. ‘I am not thy brother yet.’

Uh-oh! Tory took a step backwards. She was a little
confused by his sudden change of heart. ‘It could be
short for Brockwell. I meant no offence by . . .’
‘Why art thou wedding Maelgwn when thee told me
thee did not love him?’
I see. ‘What I said was that Maelgwn had nothing to
do with why I wouldn’t sleep with thee, or dost thy
memory of that night escape thee completely?’ She
made her way past him, not wanting a confrontation;
Brockwell had, no doubt, been drinking for hours.
‘So now thee will be Queen,’ he called after her in
spite.
Adrenalin shot through her body, and had it been
anyone but Calin Tory would have lashed out. Instead
she paused and took a deep breath. ‘If thou art seeking
to hurt, thou hast succeeded.’ She did not turn back to
look at him but continued her climb.
‘Nay, don’t go.’ His tone softened dramatically and
although Tory was hesitant, his plea managed to sway
her. ‘I did not intend to attack thee, truly.’
As Tory’s eyes met his, she became more sympathetic. ‘Oh Calin, what am I going to do with thee?’
‘Be thee aware . . .’ he informed her, taking her in
his arms, ‘. . . that it be customary for a young knight
like myself to take an older woman as a mistress? I do
truly worship . . .’
Tory panicked. ‘Calin, please. Dost Maelgwn’s
friendship and trust mean nothing to thee?’
‘Honour be more important than life,’ he assured
her. ‘Still, thou art fairer than even honour and I will
fight to the death for thy favours, if need be.’

This angered her; she would not be the cause of
dispute between the Prince and his champion. ‘Over my
dead body, Calin. Just listen to thyself! Hast thou never
heard the tale of Lancelot and Guinevere?’
‘Nay,’ Brockwell shrugged. ‘Was it a tale of love?’
‘Aye,’ Tory thought it rather odd that the knight
should have no knowledge of the Arthurian saga;
perhaps the historians were right in saying that this
King had never existed. ‘And ’twas a tragic love story at
that. When Queen Guinevere fell in love with Sir
Lancelot, King Arthur and his kingdom were lost. She
became a nun, and the gallant Sir Lancelot went mad.
‘Even if thou wast not the very image of Brian,
which thou art, I love Maelgwn. Surely it shows?’
‘Aye, all too well.’ He clenched his jaw, as he looked
away to the ocean.
‘My whole life was just a meaningless stream of
information until I met him, Calin.’
Brockwell wasn’t too thrilled by her reckoning but
the tenderness in her voice urged him to take a seat and
hear her out.
‘And now I have a purpose. I can make a difference
here. I realise,’ she said, only now becoming aware of
her situation as she spoke, ‘that everything I have ever
studied – the fighting, the history, the language – was
not all for naught. It hast all been in preparation to wed
him.’
‘I follow,’ he replied softly.
‘Calin, I am sorry.’ She came to sit beside him. ‘But I
would just be another in a long line for thee, and there
art so many beautiful maidens here that –’

‘Nay, there be none to compare, not here, not
anywhere.’
‘Then I shall have to find and train one to keep thee
out of mischief.’
‘’Tis not possible.’
‘Of course it be possible, dost thou think I was born
with these skills?’ She nudged him, as she would Brian
when he was being stupid.
‘How long would it take?’ he asked and Tory was
forced to laugh.
‘Let us discuss it over lunch.’ She slapped his knee.
‘I need a drink.’
By mid-afternoon, Sir Cedric, Sir Rhys, Sir Angus, and
their legions had arrived at the castle bearing the
headless body of Sir Madoc. They had made the sad
discovery during their passage to Aberffraw, finding the
old knight washed up on the Mon side of the Menai
Strait.
Some of the native clans, like Chiglas, still followed
the savage practice aptly known as ‘the taking of heads’.
They believed that the head was the temple of the soul,
and by decapitation it would be forever trapped there.
The severed remains of their fallen enemy were then
nailed to the front of their houses, as proof of their
prowess.
The knights brought the news to Maelgwn, who was
still in conference with his court. The Prince grieved
Madoc’s death even more than his father’s, feeling
directly responsible. Sir Madoc had been one of
Caswallon’s finest knights and Gwynedd would miss

him dearly. Maelgwn could only hope that Sir Gilmore
would pull through, as he would require the guidance of
his father’s old colleagues in the years ahead.
Cedric reported that the troops at Degannwy had
carried out a dawn raid on the enemy in the strait and
mountains, to prevent any risk of a force regrouping for
a third attack. ‘By sundown,’ he predicted, ‘there will
not be one enemy soldier left in Gwynedd, dead or
alive.’
Except Caradoc. Maelgwn slouched back in his
chair, unsure what should become of him. The Prince
had resolved to send Vanora and her maid, complete
with a letter of warning, back to her father in Powys.
Chiglas may choose to pay ransom for Caradoc’s release,
and if his offer was substantial and befitting his grievous
crime, Maelgwn would consider it. This was the
procedure that the Prince knew he must follow to avoid
further blood feuding. Had the shoe been on the other
foot, Caradoc probably would have disregarded diplomacy and had the King’s murderer and his accomplice
slain. But such an action would cast the kingdoms of
the Britons into another decade of war, and they had
enough to worry about just keeping the Saxons at bay.
So, while Chiglas was making up his mind, the Prince
decided he would have the traitor taken off the island
and away from his peacetime haven and training
ground. Perhaps to Degannwy, where Caradoc could
spend the winter pondering his misadventures in a dark,
squalid dungeon.
‘Our thorough search hast failed to find any trace of
Sir Cadogan, and it be highly unusual for either Chiglas

or the Saxons to take prisoners with so many of their
own wounded,’ Sir Rhys informed the Prince.
A couple of years younger than the Prince and a
distant cousin, Rhys was lord of his own lands on the
island and a married man. His first child was expected
before the end of the fall. Like Maelgwn, Sir Rhys was
quite a scholar and therefore was the obvious choice to
appoint to Madoc’s position as the keeper of the King’s
personal records and accounts. Rhys’ new position
would not become official until Maelgwn’s crowning,
though he’d already assumed the responsibilities of the
office.
‘What art thou implying, sir? Cadogan be no
deserter,’ Cedric demanded of Rhys, annoyed that one
so young was to be appointed to such a high station.
Sir Cedric was not a well-educated man; he’d been
knighted for his battle skills more than his intelligence.
He knew that he was unqualified for the academic
appointment, but at times like this his lack of education
frustrated him; these kids thought they knew
everything!
‘Calm, Sir Cedric, we art implying naught,’
Maelgwn said, detecting the spite in his knight’s voice.
‘We are merely examining all the possibilities.’
‘Please excuse me for saying so, Majesty, but I know
Cadogan better than anyone,’ Cedric persisted. ‘True,
he may have been a friend to Caradoc once, many of us
were. Yet I would stake my life that he be still loyal to
the House of Gwynedd.’ The large, red-headed knight
turned towards Rhys. ‘And treachery be not a possibility
worth wasting our Majesty’s time on.’

Rhys was not intimidated by Cedric’s harsh tone. ‘I
am as confident of his allegiance as thou art, Cedric,
and if it be the truth then Sir Cadogan hast nothing to
fear. However, with circumstances unfolding as they art,
only a fool would not consider –’
Cedric stood ready to draw his sword in challenge.
‘Thou art the fool, boy!’ he growled, spurring Rhys to
his feet.
‘Enough!’ Maelgwn thundered, spared from
lecturing the pair by a knock on the door. ‘Come in.’ He
sat back preparing for more bad news, but to his surprise
it was Tory and Brockwell who entered. ‘Tory.’ Maelgwn
rose to meet them, delighted by the interruption.
All the knights and advisers seated at the table
sprang from their chairs to kneel before her, aware of
her status as a Goddess. Brockwell fell on one knee
ashamed, for he’d not considered the Otherworld
proclamation when he’d propositioned her earlier.
‘Gentlemen please!’ Tory insisted, quite embarrassed. ‘We have all fought hard this day, so please rise.’
They all did as she asked, except Brockwell. ‘I owe
thee an apology, great lady.’
‘Brockwell?’ Tory was alarmed that he sounded so
distant. She knew to what he referred, and wanted him
to drop the subject immediately. ‘Stop being so
ridiculous.’
‘Nay,’ he resisted, making his remorse felt. ‘I have
near shamed the House of Gwynedd with my own
selfish desires and damned love of drink. I do swear, I
shall never touch another drop if thou can forgive my
ignorance.’

‘Calin, thy roguish ways be a growing concern,’
Maelgwn said, most displeased.
‘Your Majesty, please,’ Tory spoke up. ‘Thou hast
been quick to jump to conclusions before. Brockwell’s
offence was neither his fault nor as grievous as he
claims.’
‘Aye Majesty, it was,’ Brockwell said, making
matters worse for himself. ‘The lady doth not understand the all of it.’
Sir Tiernan had turned white at Calin’s confession;
this was Sorcha and himself all over again. ‘Time to join
the festivities downstairs.’ He motioned the other men
to leave.
‘Tory, I bid thee leave us also,’ Maelgwn instructed
her softly, his dark eyes fixed on Brockwell.
‘Nay, Maelgwn, please listen to me –’
‘Why must thee defend him so?’
Those leaving the room froze at the sound of the
Dragon’s roar.
‘Majesty.’ Tory was deeply hurt by his inference. She
was radiating a mystical quality, much like the Dragon
in Maelgwn’s nature, only she projected a sense of love
and calm. ‘As I wanted to tell thee, and Taliesin will
confirm this, Calin be my brother.’
‘Not till four and ten hundred years from now,’
Brockwell added in an attempt to clarify things.
‘What?’ Maelgwn was a little confused; Tory had
never mentioned that she had a brother.
‘That be why I was so shocked in thy bath that first
night at Degannwy,’ she reminded him, pretending to
be unaware that she’d said anything even mildly

humorous, while those around them suppressed their
chuckles. ‘Dost thou not remember?’
‘Aye, I do.’ Maelgwn was forced to better spirits and
continued before she could embarrass him further.
‘Perhaps thou had best send Taliesin up to join us.’
Tory approached the Prince, of the mind to charm
him. ‘But it was Taliesin who sent me to thee. King
Catulus hast arrived, and the High Merlin suggests that
thee join thy people. After all, the celebration be in our
honour, surely this can wait.’
Maelgwn found it very hard to resist her, but he also
realised that, as an outsider, this was beyond her understanding. ‘My request be still the same. I trust thee can
entertain our guest, King Catulus, until I can join thee.’
Tory propped herself up onto her toes to whisper in
his ear.
‘But King Catulus be an old man! Be there no one
in whose company thou art safe?’ Maelgwn said, in a
playful manner.
‘Thy lady shall be safe with me, Majesty.’ Rhys
stepped forward and offered Tory his arm.
‘Of course, Sir Rhys will accompany thee. This shall
not take long, I promise.’
Tory looked back at Brockwell. She knew Calin was
not very good at explaining himself, and he was liable
to land himself in more strife.
‘No harm shall befall him, I promise,’ Maelgwn
assured her as Rhys escorted her out the door.
In amongst the merrymaking in the courtyard, Tory
awaited the outcome of the Prince’s meeting with

Brockwell. She was gradually going insane with worry,
so she decided to seek out Lady Gladys to confide in
her.
As mistress of the house and Brockwell’s mother,
Lady Gladys was most interested to discover what had
been taking place with Brockwell.
‘If I do not see my son wed soon, I know he shall be
the death of me,’ she told Tory in confidence. ‘Do not
get me wrong child, I am overjoyed that thou hast
found in Calin thy lost kin, yet I fear thy pure
intentions art easily misread by him. I think it fortunate
that this hast all come to light now, as Taliesin can deal
with it accordingly.’
‘But thy son did naught to offend,’ Tory stressed.
Lady Gladys was rather surprised by her words,
believing it to be quite the contrary. ‘Tory dear, thou
hast been hailed a Goddess. Only a king by way of
initiation be worthy to lay claim to thy privileges and
not insult the powers that brought thee to us.’
‘What?’ Tory was suddenly alarmed. ‘Art thou
telling me I have to wait until Maelgwn and I are wed
before we . . .’
‘Spirits preserve us!’ Lady Gladys grabbed hold of
Tory’s hands, quickly guiding her to a quiet corner.
‘Doth thou know much of our beliefs, child?’
‘Some, I’m not too sure I understand them all,’ she
admitted, eager to learn.
Lady Gladys took a deep breath. ‘A Queen, to us,
personifies the land and its prosperity henceforth, so if
thou art virtuous, happy, and appear to flourish with the
King . . .’

‘So will the land,’ Tory stated to acknowledge that
she was following.
‘The new monarch, in this case Maelgwn, gains his
right to rule over the land by way of union with the
Goddess in wedlock, thus linking him with the
Otherworld. Only this shall bring the sanction and
glory of the Great Houses upon his reign, Tory. And
thou hast already witnessed the great might of their
wrath when angered.’
Tory became a mite confused as she pondered, the
Gods, or Taliesin? Is there any difference between the
two?
‘And surely thee would not want to risk an
illegitimate heir with Caradoc still breathing,’ Lady
Gladys said.
‘We have not even considered children yet.’ Tory
sounded none too thrilled by the suggestion, she liked
her body just the shape it was.
Lady Gladys shook her head, astounded. ‘But thy
wedding will only be deemed legitimate upon the birth
of a male heir to the throne.’
‘I did not realise.’ Tory was mortified, and she
became a little nauseous at the idea of childbirth in the
sixth century. No happy gas!
‘My dear child.’ Lady Gladys embraced her. ‘I can
see we shall have to sit down and have a long chat
about a great many things. But for now, thee must swear
to me that thee will withhold thy pleasures from
Maelgwn until the appointed time, which be only
twelve days hence.’
‘Aye.’ Tory tried to smile. ‘I swear to thee.’

Lady Gladys, nevertheless, feared this was not
enough to prevent Tory and Maelgwn’s overwhelming
attraction for each other from getting the better of them
too soon. Thus she made the pending Queen repeat an
oath after her, then said, ‘Thou hast sworn by the
elements and art bound by life itself to comply.’
This request was obviously very important to the
stately woman and Tory felt bound to do her will. ‘I
would not bring shame upon thy home, Lady Gladys. In
my time sexual attitudes art very lax, so I hope thou will
not look too poorly on my eagerness to bed the Prince.’
Tory realised she should be more careful with what
she said from now on, at least until she got a grip on the
customs and beliefs of the people in this era.
‘I hardly think so, I was young and in love once.’
Lady Gladys smiled.
When at last Taliesin, Maelgwn, and Tiernan entered
the courtyard, Tory panicked as Brockwell was not with
them. She decided it best not to approach the Prince at
once, he was surrounded by his colleagues and she
didn’t have any desire to get caught up in formalities
again. It would be better to wait for him to seek her out,
or else he would surely become jealous of her concern
for Calin. Tory opted to take a wander amongst the real
folk of Gwynedd and so made her way towards the outer
bailey.
‘My lady Tory.’
Tory turned to find Katren bounding towards her.
‘Or should I say, my Queen,’ Katren giggled, bowing deeply, before overwhelming Tory with a hug.

‘Congratulations! I am so happy for thee – and me, to
be maid to the Queen, a Goddess, what an honour!’
‘Please, don’t remind me.’ This marriage was
shaping up to be much more complicated than she’d
first imagined. ‘Dost thou know if I am allowed a
bridesmaid?’
‘Thou art,’ Katren grinned from ear to ear.
‘Well then, for the next two weeks, as I know
naught of what preparations art appropriate, thee, as my
bridesmaid . . .’
Katren began to squeal softly, the excitement
getting too much for her.
‘. . . will have to advise and educate me. I am in
great need of a friend right now, Katren.’
Tory’s lack of sleep was beginning to catch up on
her, and Katren sensed this. ‘Then as thy friend, I must
recommend that thee take a long hot bath then go
straight to bed.’
Tory nodded in agreement, but she caught sight of a
disturbance that had erupted outside the courtyard
walls.
‘Nay, Lady thee should not . . .’ Katren tried to stop
her, but Tory was already halfway there.
A crowd had gathered to watch a very drunk soldier
teasing one of the village women with a dead fowl. Tory
thought it a game until he punched the woman hard in
the stomach for biting him. ‘Come and get it, wanton
witch. What be wrong, hast thou changed thy mind?’ he
sneered.
‘Enough!’ Tory stepped into the circle. ‘Tell me the
name of thy superior, soldier?’

The soldier just laughed at Tory. ‘Who wants to
know?’
‘Look sharp, thou art addressing the future Queen of
Gwynedd.’ Tiernan came to stand beside her.
‘The War Goddess,’ the soldier said, falling to his
knees.
Upon hearing this the whole crowd went to kneel,
however Tory demanded very loudly, ‘All rise!’
Tory looked to his game, recognising the woman
involved from her first day in Aberffraw. As their party
had passed through the village, this woman had been
viewing Cadogan with some resentment, if memory
served her. ‘Who doth that belong to?’ Tory asked,
pointing to the fowl.
Before the distraught soldier could answer the
woman in question sprang to her feet. She tore the
bird’s carcass from the man’s hand, punching him
straight between the eyes. The crazed woman then took
off through the crowd with her prize, howling and
chattering like a lunatic.
‘Wait!’ Tory leapt over the soldier to go after her.
Tiernan sprang into action, grabbing hold of Tory’s
arm. ‘Thee will not catch her now.’
‘Did thou see that? Incredible!’ Tory could hardly
believe it. ‘Who be this woman, I have need to speak
with her.’
‘Nay, great lady, thee could have nothing to say to
this woman. For she be mute, mad and nothing more
than a whore.’
Tory resented the distaste reflected in the knight’s
tone. ‘Gee, Tiernan, I wonder why?’ she said sar-

castically, as she turned and headed back to the castle in
a huff.
‘She hast got a lot on her mind. I am sure she meant
thee no offence, sir,’ Katren curtsied to Tiernan, before
turning to go after her mistress.
Tory, meanwhile, had done an about-face and
walked back down to them. ‘I apologise to thee, Sir
Tiernan, it hast been one hell of a day. Tell me, what
hast become of Calin?’
Katren’s eyes opened wide with the mention of her
beloved, and she listened intently.
‘I believe the Prince will wish to discuss that with
thee. Understand, it be not my place.’
‘Come on, Tiernan. There art so many seeking
Maelgwn’s council at present that I should be lucky to
speak with him this side of a week from now.’
But still Tiernan refrained.
As she was clearly getting nowhere, Tory changed
her line of questioning. ‘Where be Calin then, I shall
ask him myself?’
‘Nay, thee cannot. He hast been forbidden to look
upon or speak to thee until such time as thou art wed to
thy King.’
What hast happened? Katren wondered, dying to ask.
‘What! I don’t believe it!’ Tory cried. ‘This be too
much! Who decreed it?’
‘Fate.’
Tory swung round to confront Taliesin.
‘Calm thyself.’
‘I am not a child, and I do not require cautioning
from you,’ she said, then controlled her emotions at

once. ‘What else hast thou decreed about my life that I
should know, High Merlin?’
Taliesin stepped forward to touch her, but Tory
backed up to avoid his contact. ‘Oh no. Nobody
controls me, but me.’
‘I think we should talk,’ Taliesin suggested, sensing
her confusion and frustration.
‘I think we should. And I should like to see the
Prince, if that not be too much to ask.’ Tory left them
and made for her tower.
Maelgwn and the High Merlin later found Tory on the
open walkway.
‘I want in on this conspiracy,’ she demanded. ‘Thou
art both making decisions concerning me without my
knowledge!’
Taliesin stepped forward, ever so meekly. ‘Tory, thou
art hysterical.’
‘Do not think for a second that I do not know thy
game, Taliesin,’ Tory said. ‘If thee wishes to see the
native faith strengthened throughout this land, then so
be it, but surely thee must realise that setting me up as
an idol in the eyes of these people can only be detrimental to my mission here. Dost thou want it to seem
humanly impossible to master my fighting skills?’
‘Thee needs to be more of an ideal, to which others
can aspire,’ Taliesin replied, seeing her point.
‘Aye. People have to believe they can achieve all
that I have and more, through their own desire and will
power. Not by worshipping me! That be where the
human race keeps failing. People keep turning to all

these religions, when all they really need, be to love,
know and believe in themselves.’
Taliesin raised his eyebrows. ‘I agree, in principle.
But these art a simple people, Tory. Myths and legends
be how they learn the ethics and beliefs that thou dost
hold so dear. I shall give thee some material to read on
the subject, thou shalt be surprised at how much of it
thee will agree with,’ the Merlin told her.
‘That be not my only beef with thee, High Merlin. I
have a list.’
‘Thou art already beginning to sound like a Queen.’
He folded his arms and leant against the sea-wall.
‘Thee must know I have the situation with Calin
under control.’
Taliesin nodded to confirm this.
‘So why art thou punishing him when thee said
thyself that he could not help but feel as he dost?’
Taliesin rubbed his forehead, frustrated at having to
explain his actions, which were in the best interest of
all involved. ‘I know it doth not appear so at present,
but I assure thee that this will be for the best. Can thou
not trust me, thou hast done so many times before?’
‘Look, Taliesin, thee could be the devil himself for
all I know. Why should I believe one word of what thou
hast told me?’
Taliesin found Tory attractive when she was riled up.
‘My dear lady, Brockwell nominated his own punishment.’
‘No!’
‘Yes,’ Maelgwn finally spoke up. ‘He declined to be
my champion and my first man at the inauguration and
the wedding.’

‘This be all my fault.’ Tory was unnerved by the
revelation. ‘Maelgwn, please, let me talk to him, this be
so ludicrous, he did not do anything.’
‘Tory, thou art exhausted, could we not discuss this
on the morrow? Thee will surely have more patience by
then.’ Saying this, Maelgwn dared to sweep her up into
his arms and take her to the bed himself.
Tory hated herself for not being able to resist his
bidding. ‘Thee should talk. When was the last time thee
slept?’
‘If my brain was still working, I could tell thee.’ He
carried her into the caphouse and collapsed onto the
bed with her.
As they lay there a moment, their minds awhirl in
the silence, another question that had been plaguing
Tory suddenly sprang to mind. ‘What be this inauguration all about?’
Maelgwn kissed her to avoid another inquiry.
‘Tomorrow,’ he vowed as he rose to leave. ‘I shall see
thee at sunrise as usual.’ He closed the door and joined
Taliesin outside.
Tory gazed around the caphouse, realising that all
her belongings that Taliesin had acquired for her had
been placed in her room.
‘Excellent.’ Tory picked up a few history books to do
a little research. She turned to a chapter on the
inauguration of kings, in the hope of gaining some
enlightenment.
Come sunrise, Maelgwn hasten to the rooftop to join
Tory for kata, but he didn’t find her on the sea-wall as

usual. After an extensive search, the Prince leant on the
wall, his gaze falling to the beach below. There, along
with a few early morning fishermen, he spied Tory
seated on the sand in the lotus position.
Tory noticed that the Prince was approaching, but
did not break from her meditation until he’d sat down
beside her. ‘I did some reading last night and I have to
tell thee, this inauguration ritual hast got me worried.’
She turned her large green eyes towards him. ‘I did not
go through all I did for Gwynedd, Maelgwn. I did it for
thee. And now I discover that thy men will probably
kill thee on some male bonding weekend before we art
even wed.’
Maelgwn was amused by her misconception. ‘Thee
need not fear. Inauguration be a test of the spirit. The
task I am requested to perform be usually of a political
nature, rather than a show of strength. Besides, I am the
heir to the throne, dost thou really think my men would
see me killed, when they have dedicated their lives to
keeping me alive?’
Tory saw the sense of this, yet her frown did not
waver. ‘Doth this ritual in any way involve thee having
sex with another woman, fertility rites, that sort of thing?’
Maelgwn couldn’t help but laugh, as he was stunned
by her directness. ‘Well I . . . I do not think so,’ he
answered, as he’d resolved to play naive.
Tory folded her arms, waiting, showing that she
needed more assurance than this.
‘My father was the last King of Gwynedd to face this
initiation, so I have never witnessed it myself. However,
I have survived a similar ritual –’

‘The Dragon, right?’
‘Aye.’ He seemed surprised that she knew. ‘And I
did not have to perform any such rite then.’
This was not the entire truth; following this quest,
Maelgwn had returned to Dumnonia to celebrate the
dragon’s departure with the overjoyed King Catulus. It
was the feast of Beltaine, and the young Prince had
lost his virginity to a willing young maiden by the bonfires.
‘Thou art the Goddess who awaits me at the end of
my quest, and the Great Houses have stated such.’
‘That be good news, indeed,’ Tory warned, and
within seconds had him pinned to the ground. ‘Because
if thee should ever sleep with another woman, I would
make thee wish that thou had wed Vanora.’
The thought of Vanora made him shiver. ‘Nay, thee
and I shall lovers die,’ he said with zeal, and when she
still didn’t release him he added, ‘I swear to thee.’
‘Not good enough.’ Tory was in the mood to play.
‘Swear by the elements for me.’
Maelgwn laughed again. ‘Where art thou getting all
this from?’
Tory let him go, and knelt up. ‘Lady Gladys made
me swear by them.’
The Prince sat up, pulling Tory towards him. ‘And
what did thee swear to exactly?’
Tory wrapped her arms around his neck and
straddled her legs to take a seat in his lap. ‘That until
we art wed, I shall withhold my favours from thee.’
Maelgwn’s expression grew more mischievous. ‘And
thou art doing a fine job of it, too,’ he said.

Tory was enjoying the opportunity to arouse him a
little. We deserve it, she thought to herself as the Prince
caressed her neck with his lips. ‘How would thee define
favours exactly?’ Tory asked him.
‘Um . . .’ He could barely think for the distraction of
her body. ‘I would say that as long as I keep my clothes
on, we art safe.’ Tory went to hit him, so Maelgwn
wrestled her into a more manageable position beneath
him; he noted in the process that Tiernan was heading
down the stairs towards them. ‘Could I come and see
thee later tonight, perhaps?’
‘I think that would be highly dangerous.’
‘I shall behave, I swear.’
Tory procrastinated over the answer for so long that
Tiernan had reached them before she’d had the chance
to reply. Maelgwn climbed off and gave Tory a hand to
her feet, explaining their position to his knight.
‘Training.’
‘I can hardly wait to get started.’ Tiernan grinned
and bowed to them. ‘I am sorry to disturb thee both, but
I bear grave news.’
‘Not more,’ Maelgwn said, his mood darkening.
‘What hast happened now, another death?’
Tiernan gave a slight nod.
‘Please Goddess, not Sir Gilmore?’
‘I am very sorry, Majesty.’ Tiernan felt for the young
leader, it was a cruel stroke of fate indeed to lose
another trusted adviser so soon.
Tory looked at Maelgwn, who appeared as if he
might explode. She quietly wrapped her arms about him
tightly. The Prince, after a moment of resistance,

crumpled into her embrace and she felt he would have
burst into tears had Sir Tiernan not been present.
The King’s cremation ceremony was held the next day
in the traditional burial grounds just outside the town
limits. The Prince tried to dissuade Tory from attending
the funeral as she was not of the faith, and he feared she
would only find the ritual gruelling. But Tory was determined to learn more about the culture and knew that
Calin would be in attendance. She so desperately
wanted to speak to him, or absolve him, or whatever
the hell it was she had to do to have his friendship back.
She’d shown Maelgwn the photo of her brother and
tried to explain to him how much Brian had meant to
her. The Prince began to understand her strange predicament, and so had apologised for his jealousy and for ever
doubting her love. This had not been her main concern,
however. Tory wanted the Prince to make amends with
Calin, or at least to try. After she explained that she
would sooner leave than come between two friends of
such long standing, Maelgwn agreed he would see to the
matter before he left for his inauguration two days hence.
Calin stood only a few feet away from Tory, yet not
once throughout the ceremony did his eyes turn in her
direction. His head remained bowed low in mourning
and his expression was solemn.
The punishment is rather severe for nothing more
than a proposition, Tory thought. If I had been any other
woman he could have raped me and been deemed a
hero. This was part of their way too, she supposed. And,

as this did not seem the right time or place to attempt a
reconciliation, she resolved to let the matter rest.
The overcast sky enhanced the darkness of the
occasion. As the King’s body was set to flame, Taliesin
recited:
I saw death approaching
down the corridor of time,
where it has loitered since my birth,
waiting to accompany my spirit back
through the ethers to the Otherworld.
With the touch of the divine,
I see the sum total of my life, my deeds,
all I have done, that which I leave undone
and shall accomplish upon my returning.
I mourn my loved ones among the living,
whom I will watch over and protect
from my place at the side of the Goddess,
until such time as we are united in the Otherworld,
or in the next earthly life.
Once the day of the burial had passed, the sorrow which
had overshadowed the house lifted, and all began to
look forward to the great celebration that lay ahead. For
the next few days Tory resumed her normal routine:
training with Maelgwn in the morning, lunch with Lady
Gladys, music with Selwyn in the afternoon, and more
training with the maidens in the evening after supper.
The Prince hadn’t spoken again about coming to see
her at night; perhaps he had also decided it was too
risky. Still, Tory needed to see him before he embarked

on his adventure. So on the day before his departure,
she requested that he join her in the north tower that
night. ‘To talk,’ she said, to stress the innocent intent.
It was some ungoldly hour when Maelgwn quietly made
his way across the open wall-walk to Tory’s tower,
carrying a large basket.
He found Tory dozing on her bed. After whispering
an apology for his tardiness, Maelgwn tipped up the
basket and showered her with fresh flowers. He then
tossed it aside and climbed onto the bed next to her.
Tory sat up, enchanted with his gift. ‘Maelgwn, how
lovely.’
He ran his hand down her bare arm and, taking
hold of it, gently urged her to lie back next to him.
‘Aye, now what did thee wish to discuss?’
Maelgwn’s lips enveloped her own, and before Tory
could stop him, he was on top of her. His attentive
kisses slowly moved down her neck, as his hands slipped
the straps of her singlet from her shoulders. She felt a
twinge of guilt as Lady Gladys’ voice resounded through
her brain. Thou hast sworn by the elements and art bound
by life itself to comply.
‘Maelgwn, I am required to take offence if thee
continues along thy current course of action,’ Tory said,
but she made it clear by her playful tone that she was
reluctant to do so.
His kisses had reached her breastbone and he gazed
up at her, smitten as a schoolboy. ‘Thee would not deny
me but a small taste of thy pleasures to see me through
my quest?’

Tory smiled, yet one of them had to be responsible.
‘I am afraid I must insist.’
‘But it be tradition to bed one’s intended wife a
week or so before one weds her.’
Tory laughed, ‘I do not believe thee for a second,
Maelgwn. How gullible dost thou think I am?’
‘It be true: Thus a man be assured his betrothed
will not back out on him for fear she hast fallen with
child.’
Tory sprang up at the suggestion and grabbed her
wrap from the end of the bed to cover herself. ‘Thou
hast no need to worry about that. Thy mother warned
me that if thou had any of thy father in thee, keeping
thee at bay would not be easy.’
‘Thou hast spoken with Sorcha?’ The Prince sat up,
intrigued by her words.
‘Aye, thee might say that. I hear her whispering
little messages sometimes, in my head. And thy father
has spoken to me also, the day he died. That be why I
asked thee here.’ Tory took hold of his hand. ‘He left
thee a message. Caswallon said that the two of thee had
not been very close since thy mother’s death. Thee
claimed, according to thy father, that the only time he
had ever trusted thee was when he had been chained in
prison with no other choice.’
Maelgwn raised an eyebrow, recalling the incident
of which she spoke. ‘I did.’
‘He confessed that he had never thanked thee or
Taliesin for freeing him from Cadfer’s imprisonment, or
for the salvation of his kingdom. This was his deepest
regret in passing, Maelgwn, for he knew he owed thee

much. He was terribly distraught following Sorcha’s
death, and he did not consider how thee might be faring
without her. He believed the reason thee hid in a
monastery for so many years, was to escape his remorse
and narrow-mindedness.’
Maelgwn looked rather surprised. ‘My father said
that?’
‘Aye. He realised he had been a fool for not
listening to thee more often, and he was pleased that he
had trusted thee to contend with Chiglas’ attack. His
last words came in the form of a prophecy, I suppose:
When Maelgwn be crowned King of all Gwynedd, the land
shall unite and prosper. Goddess blessed, he will be hailed as
one of the greatest leaders among Britons.’ Maelgwn
appeared doubtful as he pondered her words, so Tory
added as verification, ‘The history books say the same.’
His eyes met hers. ‘Thou art aware of everything
that shall befall me, art thou not?’ He changed the
subject, not wanting to dwell on his father after the
events of the past couple of days.
‘Some things.’
‘Doth thou know if we will have an heir?’ His siren
mood returned and he was all hands.
She smiled, placing her fingers on the pressure
points at the top of his arms to paralyse them. ‘Do I
have to ask thee to leave?’
The pain forced him to control himself. ‘Forgive
me, thou wast going to say?’
Tory, in all honesty, was a bit perturbed by the
question; this heir business obviously meant a lot to
Maelgwn so she felt she should put his fears to rest.

‘Aye, his name be Rhun. He grows to be a fierce warrior
and a rather notorious womaniser, so they say.’
This made Maelgwn tremendously happy. ‘I can
hardly wait to return to thee so that our life together
may begin. I do miss thee already.’ He leant towards her.
‘Maelgwn, art thou up there?’ Lady Gladys’ voice
echoed up the stairwell.
‘Damn that woman,’ Maelgwn whispered under his
breath, and Tory’s chuckle gave them away. ‘I had best
go.’ He kissed her quickly.
‘Maelgwn!’ His aunt called again in warning.

11

The Quest

T

he Prince’s party left at noon the following day.
Tory was present to see them off, as were most of
the household. Brockwell seemed to be having
no trouble ignoring her, so she returned the favour.
As additional penance, Brockwell was to remain at
the house to attend to the training of the men. Sir
Cedric had been appointed to Sir Gilmore’s old position
as trainer, and Sir Percival, Caswallon’s accounts’
keeper, would be arriving from Degannwy to resume the
administrative work of the court. With Gilmore’s death,
Percival was the last of King Caswallon’s advisers, and
Maelgwn needed him close at hand. The Prince also
considered that Aberffraw was a much cosier environment for the aging scholar.
All knights and lords of high rank in Gwynedd were
to accompany the Prince to Llyn Cerrig Bach for the

ritual. The only outsider permitted was King Catulus.
Over the years, those of the Roman faith had discouraged him from maintaining the old ways and beliefs
of his people. Yet since the King had met Maelgwn all
those years ago, he’d become rather fond of him.
Catulus was inspired by the ancient mysteries in which
his young friend believed, and so he was thrilled to be
along for the ride.
Brockwell’s decision to stay behind can’t have been
easy, Tory considered as she glanced in his direction. A
king’s inauguration was a rare and esteemed affair for
the male members of the court, and it was a great
honour to have earned the right to attend.
Tory kissed Maelgwn goodbye, knowing that he
would come back to her triumphant and unharmed. ‘I
shall see thee at the altar then.’
‘Thee may be sure of that.’ He left in fine spirits to
join his men, who were all mounted and eager to
depart. The knights raised a riot, spurred on by the
cheers of the crowd, as the Prince led them charging off
through the open portcullis.
Once the party had left, the gathering of wellwishers dispersed and Tory turned to Katren. ‘Ready?’
Katren gave a firm nod. ‘Lead the way.’
Katren had been moved out of the servants’ quarters
and into a room with Cara and Alma in the main wing.
Her participation in Gwynedd’s victory led her to be
deemed a lady by royal decree, and she was therefore
eligible to pursue a knight’s affections. Together with
Tory and Lady Gladys, she had been devising Calin’s
entrapment, and he’d become the major topic over

lunch. The three women agreed that Katren and the
other girls would go into intensive training this week
while the knights were away. If Brockwell wanted a
challenge, then that was exactly what they would give
him.
Katren and Tory strolled slowly across the great
lawn of the sunny outer bailey, observing the training
taking place there and remarking on the more skilful or
handsome of the soldiers. Brockwell was not far off,
overseeing a large group of men being put through their
paces. He spied the women walking towards the outerbailey portcullis, and moved at once to inquire as to
their intent. After all, he was in charge, and their safety
was his responsibility. Though he was forbidden to
speak with Tory, he could ask Katren. Lady Katren in
fact. Brockwell considered that she’d done rather well
for herself. ‘Lady Katren, where art thou going this day?’
‘Why Sir Brockwell, we art –’
‘Nay Katren. Why should we answer to one who
hast chosen freely to ignore me,’ Tory said as she
stormed off ahead.
Katren’s soft blue eyes looked up at Brockwell full of
sympathy. ‘She misses thy company, sir, that be all. We
art only going to see the tradesmen in the village about
a wedding gift for the Prince.’ She smiled but did not
linger to chat.
But again the knight stopped her, ‘Lady Katren, I
need to ask thee a great favour. I know I am in disgrace
and thou hast no –’
‘There be no disgrace in the truth, sir . . . if thou
dost not mind me saying so.’ Brockwell’s eyes were so

intense as they heeded her that Katren began to blush.
‘I would be honoured to help thee, what doth thou
require of me?’
Tory wandered round the marketplace meeting the local
merchants while waiting for Katren. She asked
directions to the workshop of a wood carver and a goldsmith, as she had a commission for them to carry out.
The men were most helpful, and very proud to be
entrusted with the creation of the wedding gift for their
future monarch.
Instead of exchanging rings, as is done in modern
ceremony, the Britons exchanged gifts. Tory, knowing
Maelgwn to be a great thinker, decided to have a chess
set crafted for him; after all, chess became known in
later centuries as the game of kings. Tory supplied the
gold and silver for the pieces, courtesy of Lady Gladys,
and selected oak and white willow for the board. She
paid the craftsmen handsomely for the many hours they
would have to put in to finish the gift in time, and they
both set to work immediately, carefully following the
drawings she’d given them.
Katren had caught Tory up by this time, and the pair
ambled back through the centre of the village. As they
walked, Tory noticed that they’d attracted a few children
on the way. The throng of excited youngsters trailed
along behind them, interested to know what a Goddess
was really like. When Katren became aware of the
curious group she initiated a game of chase, so Tory stood
aside to watch and ponder their plight. It would take
little effort to educate these youngsters, she thought.

‘Be Prince Maelgwn going to slay another dragon,
Lady Goddess?’ A young boy, maybe five years old, had
plucked up the courage to approach her.
Tory, rather amused by his title for her, was stunned
when she looked down at him. This boy was the very
image of Calin, the piercing blue eyes, dark curls,
dimple, and all. ‘The Prince never killed the dragon, he
befriended it. Nothing can be learnt from death and
destruction.’
‘I am going to be a knight,’ the young boy told her
with zeal, despite the mocking laughter of the other
children.
‘His mamma was nothin’ but a whore!’ one of the
older boys sneered.
Tory, seeing the boy’s embarrassment, went down on
one knee to address him. ‘And what be thy name,
soldier?’
‘Brockwell.’
His answer nearly knocked her over.
One of the older girls ran forward and clasped a
hand over the boy’s mouth. ‘It be jest, his mamma
claimed Sir Brockwell was his father, and when she died
in birthing old Hetty nicknamed him thus. But he be
really known as Bryce, lady.’
Katren also found the resemblance rather striking,
and was filled with sympathy for the boy. ‘Hast thee no
kin?’
‘Nay.’ The girl held Bryce firm. ‘He be kept by old
Hetty and her whores.’
Katren and Tory looked at each other, unable to
resist investigating this further.

Bryce led them to a small village just outside the
marketplace, that consisted of six or seven little round
huts. Tory spied the town’s presumed mad woman
outside one hut, but she didn’t appear so crazed now.
She was steadily chopping her way through a large pile
of wood, wielding the axe with the same force as any
adult male. When she noticed them, she brought the
axe to rest in a large stump and folded her arms. She
had the build any female gladiator would envy. Her
expression was perfectly blank.
‘Who be this woman, Bryce?’ Tory asked, before
they were within earshot.
‘She be Ione, she hast no tongue and cannot speak,
but I understand her,’ he told Tory. ‘She would not hurt
thee, only bad men make her mad.’
‘I see. Would thee introduce us? I have need to
speak with her.’ Bryce nodded, eager to please.
‘Careful,’ Katren warned, casting an eye over the
strong figure of the woman.
Tory shrugged, not in the least bit worried as she
followed Bryce.
Ione bowed her head ever so slightly as they
approached, before making a few gestures with her
hands for Bryce’s benefit. It was a simple form of sign
language, and Bryce chuckled at what she had to say.
‘No offence, but she thinks thou art rather small to
be a great warrior.’
‘Of course.’ Tory could see her view. So, to the
delight of the children, Tory decided to do her woodsplitting exercise, which left the little audience gaping
in awe. The children begged her to do it again and

when she would not, the rowdy flock ran home to tell
their parents what they’d seen.
After Ione had inspected Tory’s hand, and found not
a mark on it, she bowed low to the ground, urging Bryce
down beside her.
‘Please rise,’ Tory urged. ‘The Goddess be within us
all, Ione. If thou art willing, I would very much like to
instruct thee in my ways. Be there someone I must
speak to about this?’
‘Me.’
Tory turned to find an old woman watching them
from the doorway of the closest hut.
Old Hetty was the owner of the huts, though she’d
never intended the village to become a brothel. After
her husband died, she’d taken in female boarders who
had nowhere else to stay, and the rest was history. She
did seem to be a caring soul and was very businesslike.
She sat Tory and Katren down with a cup of wicked
mead, as she mulled over Tory’s proposition.
‘I believe that with the proper training, Ione could
be as fierce a warrior as any man, and of just as much
service to Gwynedd. I would pay thee for her time, of
course, and Ione for her efforts.’ Tory believed this to be
a fair deal.
‘Ione hast already taught herself to wield a sword,
did thee know that?’ the old woman asked to establish
her girl’s value.
‘Nay I did not,’ Tory admitted, ‘but still . . .’
‘All well and good, but who shall attend to my
heavy chores? Ione be the man around here.’
‘I will allocate a soldier to thee, upon Ione’s arrival

for training every day, to carry out these chores in her
absence. If thou hast any complaints, just let me
know.’
‘I shall, never fear about that.’ Hetty seemed pleased
with the deal, though she did a good job of hiding it.
As the old woman stood to leave, Tory thought to
ask, ‘One more thing, about Bryce. Be his claim to the
name Brockwell true?’
Old Hetty appeared surprised that Tory chose to
bring up the subject. She resumed her seat, pouring
another round of mead. ‘There art many soldiers at
Aberffraw, yet few with such distinctive features as
Calin Brockwell, Duke of Penmon. Bryce’s mother, a
young girl of six and ten, did claim to have sought out
Sir Brockwell on Beltaine that year. When she found
herself with child she believed that it was of the
Goddess and would be born, exactly nine moon cycles
later, on the twelth day of Luis.’
This didn’t make sense to Tory at first, but then she
recalled there were thirteen months in the old calendar.
‘And did she give birth then?’ Katren asked,
intrigued.
‘Aye, and she died that day also. The poor little
mite was so small the effort killed her.’
Tory and Katren looked at each other in horror,
both of a small frame themselves.
‘That be why it dost not surprise me that, as a
Goddess, thou hast come to seek out Bryce,’ Hetty said.
‘And I do not mind telling thee, ladies, I fear for the
child’s welfare when I have passed on. Most of the girls
here have children of their own to worry about, and

Bryce be just another hungry mouth to feed. So, if ye
have some intent for him, I pray thee, speak it.’
Tory was stunned, this woman was more straightforward than she was. She’d been thinking more along
the lines of education than adoption.
‘Oh aye, Tory, I would help thee,’ Katren said, this
miniature of Calin had already stolen her heart.
‘Now hold on one second, I have to think this
through,’ Tory replied. Even if he wasn’t Brockwell’s
son, which she very much doubted, he was bright, eager,
unwanted, and training him would be a good indication
of how the children here might take to her skills. ‘If
Bryce agrees, I shall make provision for him at the
castle.’
Katren sprang from her chair and wrapped her arms
around Tory. ‘Thou art too good to me.’
‘Yeah, yeah.’ Tory patted her arm, wondering how
Calin and Lady Gladys would react when they saw him,
not to mention the Prince.
Hetty smiled. ‘Thou hast brought me great relief,
lady. Both the souls I hold most precious have been
provided for in one day. Let us celebrate.’ She topped up
their glasses for a toast to seal the deal. ‘To the Great
Mother.’
‘To the Goddess,’ they replied.
The outer bailey was in near darkness by the time Tory
and Katren returned with the child. Tory had spent
many hours with Hetty discussing the problems of
women in their society, and she felt angry at the male
population for their irresponsibility. She would begin

work on new laws regarding this immediately, so that
they would be ready to present to court before her
crowning. As Maelgwn was not here to advise her, Tory
felt sure Lady Gladys would be sympathetic to her cause.
Brockwell approached the women with haste,
having had guards out looking for them half the day.
‘Lady Katren, where hast thou been . . . and where did
he come from?’ he asked, sounding most annoyed that
Tory was picking up strays again.
‘Be that Sir Brockwell?’ the boy asked, taking a long
look at the famous knight.
‘Hush now,’ Katren said, leaving Tory to contend
with Brockwell.
‘Bryce came from a night of lust by the fires of
Beltaine some six years past,’ Tory stated, taunting
Calin. ‘A young girl of old Hetty’s keeping. Am I
ringing any bells yet?’
Although he looked as guilty as sin, Brockwell said
naught.
‘Look, forget that, just say something to me. Thou
art breaking my heart with this damn penance.’ Tory
was frustrated by his silence. ‘At least explain!’ But no
matter what she said, Calin would neither answer, nor
look at her. ‘Oh, what’s the use?’ She threw her arms in
the air and made her way to the inner bailey.
When Maelgwn arrived at Llyn Cerrig Bach, Taliesin
led him to a small room. The chamber was designed for
meditation and reflection, as it could be blackened and
silenced completely. Here the Prince was to fast in a
state of trance for two days and two nights, taking only

water during that time. This was the shaman’s way of
getting in touch with a part of one’s inner self that was
wiser, stronger and balanced.
Alone now, Maelgwn was enfolded by the darkness
and he lost all concept of time; was his period of
reflection nearly over or just beginning?
These trance states of fasting and isolation had been
a part of Maelgwn’s childhood tuition, and he had
found them similar to Tory’s meditation. The discipline
brought about a greater level of consciousness by
enabling him to access other realms of awareness.
Taliesin had taught him, as a young boy, that all
mystical paths can only be experienced when one can
suspend normal awareness and rational thought. An
empty mind allows an alternative level of transpersonal
experience.
As part of the traditional inauguration, the Prince
was given a mild hallucinatory drink. Taliesin explained
it to be, ‘An inspiring drink, aged over five brewing
cauldrons.’ This brew of kings was intended for the
main part of the ceremony, when the Prince would
emerge from his reflections to face the Otherworld
spirits who would name his quest and final judgement.
Only a few select descendants of Cunedda had
undergone such an inauguration and amongst the
number was Ambrosius. Ambrosius Aurelianus was
descended from a warrior’s son granted charge of land
around Gwent Is Coed, where Aurelius Caninus now
ruled. This lineage had since turned to the Roman faith,
however, thus improving its trade relations with the
main continent. The other ruler in Prydyn at this time

was Vortipor, in Dyfed. Of Scottic (Irish) blood,
Vortipor had been born in Britain and at one time had
secured the support of Rome to seize his kingdom.
Known as the Usurper of Dyfed, Vortipor also carried
the title of ‘Protector’ and his dynasty was known as the
Desi clan. He was of the native faith by birth, but he
hadn’t descended from the same great liturgy of kings as
had Maelgwn. The Prince’s predecessors, while
inhabiting and ruling Prydyn, had created its
Otherworld legends. No doubt the Desi had brought
with them from Scotia (Ireland) their own legends and
names for their Otherworld ancestors and deities.
Chiglas in Powys, although of the native faith and a
great great grandson of Cunedda, maintained no real
spiritual understanding of the ways of his ancient
forefathers. He knew the legends and teachings as well
as any British king, yet he observed the festivals and
rites of his people mainly for the sake of celebrations.
His bards were foolish men who had failed to give him
any real evidence of Otherworld support.
‘There art three main prerequisites thee must have
to be a king,’ the Prince recalled Taliesin saying to him.
‘The ability to rise above inevitable setbacks. To adjust
the views thee may hold true in the light of new
evidence. And most important of all, one must adhere
firmly to that which one knows deep inside to be right
and just, for true wisdom and awareness come from the
realisation that one knows very little, compared with all
there be to learn and know.’
And wisdom be not synonymous with knowledge,
Maelgwn resolved.

The Prince became comfortably numb as the hours
passed, yet every now and then he was sure he felt
something stroke against his skin. Maelgwn remained
motionless and without fear, for no one could have
found him without the High Merlin’s consent. Through
the darkness, he heard soft humming voices, whispering
and chattering; the same sweet, high-pitched sound that
the Prince knew to be synonymous with the Tylwyth
Teg or fairy folk.
Maelgwn hadn’t considered their interest in him,
even though it was common knowledge that the fairy
folk inhabited Gwynedd in vast numbers. This partly
explained his dynasty’s great wealth, which came
primarily from the livestock and abundant crops
harvested each year from the farm lands of Gwynedd.
Of course, the fairy folk be eager to see me resume the
old ways, Maelgwn realised, so as to ensure they art not
driven from here, as they have been from other kingdoms in Britain. Knowing this, the Prince didn’t object
to them painting his skin for the initiation. It was, no
doubt, for luck and part of the sacred tradition of his
forefathers.
The ladies and Bryce had completed their second full
day of training and Tory’s two newest students were
already showing great promise. Dedication and willpower were essential for mastering these techniques,
and Ione and Bryce had both in abundance.
Lady Gladys was besotted with Bryce, seeing in him
her long-since grown babe. Here stood her own dear
grandson. Whether Calin cared to admit to the

infidelity or not was of no consequence to her, the
Brockwell traits were unquestionable. As the child’s
grandmother, Lady Gladys had the legal right to claim
Bryce, in her husband’s name, as her own. If Calin chose
not to recognise the boy, she would. Thus Bryce became
Calin’s brother and was granted his rightful title of Earl.
Tory stood in the doorway and watched as a storm cut
its way across the heavens. The brilliant spectacle had
been menacing the night sky for hours – booming
thunder threatened to bring rain, yet not one drop fell.
The locals said this was because it was the night of
judgement for the initiate, and the performance of the
ancient rites was evoking the spirits. Rain would mean
that the Prince had been denied any right to his claim
of king. If the storm cleared without a drop, he’d been
found worthy by his forefathers and had set out upon
the task they’d given him, which he was required to
complete by the wedding date.
‘Why did we not elope?’ Tory wondered out loud,
not noticing Drusilla who had come to collect her
dinner tray.
Drusilla, the head maid at Aberffraw, had assumed
Katren’s duties in the wake of her new appointment.
She’d once been handmaiden to Queen Sorcha, and it
pleased her to be in the service of the Goddess again as
she missed the Queen terribly. ‘Do try not to worry about
His Majesty, lady. He will return in time, thee will see.’
‘I hold every confidence that he will.’ Tory smiled
briefly before turning back to watch the stormy scene
outside.

‘Lady Goddess.’
Tory looked around to find Bryce standing at the top
of the stairwell. ‘My dear Earl of Penmon, what drives
thee from thy bed at this hour?’ She received her answer
as he was startled by a clap of thunder and ran to grasp
hold of her around the legs.
‘The spirits art angry.’
‘Nay,’ Tory laughed, as the child’s simple fears took
her mind off her own. ‘I have it on good authority that
as long as it doth not rain, the Prince still holds their
favour.’ She crouched down to him and took up his
hands in her own. ‘Thee must not fear nature’s forces if
thou art to become a brave knight like Sir Brockwell. If
thee can see the beauty of the storm, admire and draw
upon its power, then it be not such a fearful thing.’
Tory stood, raising her arms high into the air, and
while the thunder pounded out its fury she cried, ‘I am
not afraid of thee.’ She looked down at Bryce, who was
staring back at her in wonder. ‘Can thee do that?’
Bryce thought a moment. Then, with a deciding
nod, he turned to face the storm and waited for the
thunder.
Katren appeared at the top of the stairwell, just in
time to catch the child’s proclamation. To Tory’s
surprise, Brockwell was with her.
‘I am not afraid of thee,’ Bryce yelled at the storm
with conviction. He repeated the statement over, more
confident each time as his fear left him. ‘I shall be a
brave knight,’ he told Tory, his head high in triumph.
She knelt and held up her hand for a high-five.
‘Aye,’ she said as he slapped her palm as hard as he

could. ‘Thou art truly legend material, Bryce, but thee
must get some sleep as thou hast much work ahead of
thee yet.’
He bowed deeply and did an about-face like a
soldier, to find Katren and Calin. ‘Sir Brockwell!’ He was
overcome by the presence of his hero and bowed low.
Katren, seeing Brockwell at a loss for what to say to
the child, intervened. ‘Off to bed with thee now, we
have important matters to discuss.’
As she led Bryce to the stairwell the boy looked
back at Calin, a little disappointed not to have been
introduced.
Brockwell just shrugged his shoulders at the child
being hauled away. ‘Women will be telling thee what to
do thy whole life . . . may as well get used to it.’
‘I already am.’ Bryce smiled, pleased to have been
acknowledged, and left them for his bed without further
objection.
Tory stood, looking at Brockwell. ‘To what do I owe
this unexpected pleasure?’ she asked, adopting a more
aggravated tone.
Katren came forward to explain, although she
seemed disinclined to do so. ‘Sir Brockwell would like
to speak with thee, but as he be forbidden, he hast asked
that I act as a mediator. Regrettably, I promised him I
would do this but only if it be pleasing to thee.’
‘Fine, whatever works. I just want to know why thou
art doing this to me?’ Tory aimed her frustration directly
at Brockwell.
Katren looked at Calin, who was finding the
situation extremely difficult.

‘Ask her if she be aware that any grandson to a King
of Gwynedd, such as I, hast the right to lay claim to her
throne?’
Katren’s eyes opened wide at his words, as she was
not aware of this. Tory spoke first, ‘What art thou
saying, that thou hast –’
‘The right, by law, to challenge the Prince for thy
hand. And I very nearly did,’ Brockwell declared,
turning to Katren as if it were Tory he was addressing.
‘The sight of thee did drive me to such distraction, that
I actually considered betraying my oath to Gwynedd to
have thee. Maelgwn hast since spoken of thy love for
each other, and I realise now that I would be wrong to
pursue thee further. So please understand why I must
stay away.’
Brockwell’s confession was driving Katren insane.
She wanted to throw her arms around him to comfort
him, yet his affection was directed at Tory. ‘Excuse me, I
am so sorry.’ Katren had to leave before she fell to
pieces.
‘Lady Katren, please.’ Brockwell watched her
disappear downstairs.
‘It would seem we’ve lost our mediator,’ Tory sighed.
‘Never mind, there be a few things I have been wanting
to say myself, if it be pleasing to thee?’
Brockwell took a seat, folding his arms as he nodded
to let Tory know he was prepared to listen. This made
Tory smile, as Brian used to behave this way when he
didn’t want to hear her out.
‘The blame for our situation hast fallen on the
wrong shoulders, Calin. If I had not made the mistake

of treating thee as my brother, this would never have
happened. Perhaps I should have continued to vex thee,
life seemed much easier when we hated each other.’
Brockwell smiled in agreement. ‘Understand that Brian
was my other half, and thou dost look and act so much
like him.’ Tears welled in her eyes and her voice
faltered. ‘He seemed infallible, I never dreamt I might
lose him . . . and when he died, a huge part of me died
with him.’ Tory drew a deep breath. ‘How could he just
die without warning like that? I miss him so much.’ Tory
turned away and, with a sniffle, brushed the tears from
her face. ‘Perhaps thou art right to stay away from me,
Calin. I will obviously keep misleading thee, as it would
seem I cannot help it.’
As Katren returned, Brockwell rushed over to
resume her services. ‘Please Katren, tell the Lady Tory
that I do look forward to our time together in the
twentieth century, and tell her I promise to try not to
die next time round.’
Tory smiled at his words, though poor Katren hadn’t
a clue what he was raving about.
‘But for the time being,’ he continued. ‘I would
consider it a great honour if the future Queen were to
continue to regard me as her kin.’
‘Doth he mean it, Katren?’
Brockwell looked Katren straight in the eye, and
gave a firm nod.
‘I think so,’ Katren replied.
‘Then may I ask thee a favour, Calin?’ Tory turned
to him.
‘Aye, anything!’ he besought her, or rather Katren.

‘As my only living relative at this time, would thee
stand in for my father at my wedding? If I am asking too
much please say so.’
‘Nay, it would be a fine thing, I agree.’
‘Only we may have to blindfold him. His oath did
say he could not look upon thee till after thou hast
wed,’ Katren pointed out.
‘Then so be it,’ Brockwell insisted. ‘I shall be
honoured, all the same.’
The Prince gradually became aware of the presence of
light in the room, so he gathered that his isolation was
drawing to a close. The fairy folk had left him ages ago,
and as he slowly stretched his limbs he viewed the
detailed artwork of deep blue with which they had
covered his body. The Prince considered he looked
rather like one of the Northern Pictish warriors before a
battle, but even the Picts’ body paint was not as ornate
as this.
The folk had depicted beasts from the legends of the
Old Ones. On the Prince’s chest was the head of a lion,
representing the greatest of the Otherworld deities –
Gwydion, ‘Lion of Greatest Course’. The God of
Science, Music, and Light, Gwydion represented the
old truths as they were brought to the isles from across
the water; thus it was he who set the task that would be
required of the initiate. Serpents wound around the
back of Maelgwn’s hands, around his arms and over his
shoulders; these creatures had long been associated with
wisdom and magic. The Prince looked in a mirror to
follow the tails, finding they crossed to form a crow with

its wings spread wide in flight. The crow was synonymous with the Goddess of Life and Death. Below it was
the head of the stag, its antlers reaching up to the bird.
This beast represented the male companion, protector
or masculine side of the Goddess, like Pan. When
Maelgwn brushed the hair from his forehead he viewed
his own affiliate, the Dragon.
‘Dost thou know who put it there?’
The memory of Tory revealing the mark to him the
first day they’d met, sprang to mind. Maelgwn smiled,
wondering if she would think him mad when he told
her that the fairy folk were responsible for branding her
with his mark.
Taliesin was proud and delighted when he beheld
the folk’s handiwork. ‘The Tylwyth Teg have not left a
blessing on an initiate for a very long time. This be a
splendid sign for thee indeed, but I must say, not
entirely unexpected.’ Taliesin felt he did owe himself
some credit. ‘After thy time away I feared they might
reject thee. Still, as they have marked thee as one of
their Chosen Ones and a Lord of Beasts, thy success be
as good as assured.’
The Prince again looked at his reflection, viewing
the folk’s gift to him in a new light. ‘The land shall
unite and prosper.’ The Prince uttered the words he’d
heard so often since his father’s passing.
‘Aye, that be the prophecy, follow me.’
Night had fallen in the valley, and large torches
encircled the clearing outside the Temple of the
Goddess. Great bolts of lightning and turbulent winds
played across the skies, yet naught but a warm breeze

could be felt in the glen below. Maelgwn, dressed only
in trousers, emerged from the ruins to the sound of
pounding drums. Taliesin brought the Prince before his
men who were seated around a fire where a large
cauldron simmered.
The cauldron belonged to Taliesin’s mother,
Keridwen, the Goddess of Inspiration, hence her
cauldron was renowned for the same. Of the Triple
Goddess, Keridwen was the Crone or Wise Woman. As
the dispenser of the old truths, it was she who would
announce Gwydion’s quest to the initiate. Her cauldron
contained the elixir of kings. The men present, having
painted their bodies in the old tradition, all had a sip
from its contents in turn, but only the Prince was
permitted to drink his fill of the brew.
Maelgwn sat before the cauldron, with his back to
the temple ruins. He felt detached from his physical
form now; it was as though, with the slightest provocation, his mind, thoughts and feelings would float
away. He drank yet another cup of the dreamy brew, and
this sensation intensified with the beating of the drums.
I am the one who heartens the soul,
to the glory of the spirits.
On behalf of us all,
I am the bard, trained through time to treat the great
mysteries.
Taliesin’s words rang out through the din and he came
to stand behind his student. His role this night was both
master of ceremonies and record keeper. When
Maelgwn went into a trance and left them to journey

through the Otherworld, it was the Merlin’s task to note
the Prince’s account of what took place there.
And I am the silent proficient,
who addresses the bards of the land:
it is mine to animate the hero;
to persuade the unadvised;
to awaken the silent beholder –
the bold illuminator of Kings!
The storm crashed and flashed with fury. Maelgwn’s
eyes, which had been lulled closed, suddenly opened
wide, and the drums stopped. ‘The Dragon returns,’ he
told them all, and the breeze rose to a wind with his
words.
Far away, the ancients’ bell began to chime, its
tones so pleasing to the ear. From the most distant
heights behind the temple, the storm clouds gathered
and billowed down over the mountain peak. The thick
white mist whirled its way towards the gathering,
engulfing everything in its path.
Taliesin smiled like a man returning home as the
haze came over them. The scent of a thousand flowers
wafted through it, tranquilising the senses with its
potency. Out of the silence of the forest, a choir slowly
raised a mesmerising chant. The men knew the voices
which graced their ears to be those of the Tylwyth Teg,
come to lay blessing on the future King.
‘The gateway to the Otherworld hast opened for the
initiate,’ Taliesin announced. ‘May he be pleasing to the
Goddess and succeed in gracing this land with her
wisdom and blessing. Summon forth the beast who shall

guard the gateway for thee and allow thy spirit to enter
and travel the Otherworld unharmed.’
Maelgwn closed his eyes in concentration, the bells
and chants filling his soul with a sense of divine power.
From this source that lay seething deep inside, he
silently besought his spirit guide which dwelt beyond
the open gateway to come forth to his aid.
After a moment, a great thud vibrated across the
earth, and then another and another. Tall trees were
heard to topple and the rumble of the pounding became
more intense as the beast approached. King Catulus,
knowing all too well the echo of a dragon’s steps, raised
his horrified eyes. The trees behind the temple shook as
the red glowing eyes of the huge beast emerged from the
dark mists.
Sir Tiernan watched defenceless as the giant beast
came round the ruins. It reared up onto its hind legs and
slowly edged its way forward. The knight wondered
what he would do if the dragon was malicious. But it
came to rest, without incident, directly behind the
Prince, who didn’t even bat an eyelid.
The dragon spread wide its huge wings and released
a mighty screech, the flame of its breath spewing into
the atmosphere way above the heads of the mystified
knights. None had ever expected to see the like of such
phenomena, and those who remembered Caswallon’s
inauguration knew this to be an extraordinary
occurrence. This wasn’t any mortal beast that the young
Prince had summoned forth. This was a creature of the
Otherworld, a pet of the great Goddess Keridwen
herself.

Taliesin, quill in hand, set ink to parchment to
record what would become known as ‘The Legend of
Maelgwn, King of Gwynedd, Dragon of the Isle’.
The Prince’s eyes opened and he began to convey
his tale, ‘I stand outside my body now, and see myself as
I address this gathering. The forest that surrounds us be
alive with colour and light, so bright it be blinding to
my eyes . . .’
The Prince’s spirit left his physical form to the
telling, to get on with his quest. Amidst the electrifying
colour created by the fairy folk, the temple appeared
resurrected to its original form and glory. As he
approached the temple steps, Maelgwn spied a whitehooded figure who awaited him there.
Sorcha drew back the hood and held out her hands
to him in greeting. ‘My beloved Maelgwn, how I have
looked forward to this moment.’
‘Mother.’ Maelgwn knelt before her and kissed both
her hands, before resting his forehead against them.
‘How I have missed thee.’
‘Arise dear child, I have come to show thee the way
to the Goddess, where thou art expected. Come.’ She
took hold of his hand and led him to the altar where a
blinding white light began to stream from the Celtic
cross engraved upon it. The heavy stone tablet slid
aside, revealing a staircase.
Deeper and deeper into the earth his mother led
him. When at last they emerged from the side of a
mountain, they beheld a kingdom so perfect and
beautiful that it could only ever exist in the Land of
Fairy.

‘Do not drink or eat while thou art here, lest thee
may never return to thy bride,’ Sorcha cautioned.
The Prince nodded, heeding his mother’s advice. As
he stepped forward to make his way to the castle gates,
Maelgwn found they were standing in front of two of
the largest doors he had ever seen. These parted wide to
grant admittance to a great feast that was in progress.
Maelgwn entered at Sorcha’s side, doing his best not to
gape at the frivolities taking place around them. As
they approached the main table, his mother kissed him
and left to resume her seat by Caswallon.
Three women were seated at the main table, one
dressed in white, one in red, and the other in black.
When they rose to address the Prince, the entire room
silenced in attention. Maelgwn stopped and bowed
deeply.
These three comprised the face of the triple
Goddess. Branwen, in white, was the maiden, the
teacher of truth and the guardian of righteousness. Her
skin was fair with a slightly golden hue, her long hair as
dark and straight as Maelgwn’s own. The maiden’s eyes
were black as night, and her slender form and beauty
did not escape the Prince’s attention. The warrior
Goddess in red was Rhiannon who had charge of justice
and the airing of truth. Her colouring, build and
appearance were very similar to Sorcha or Tory, but her
hair fell in fiery red waves. The enchantress or wise
woman in black was, of course, Keridwen. Although
young of face, her hair was as silvery as her son’s and her
eyes of soft green-grey were the colour of the ocean after
a storm. Her build was tiny, like that of the Tylwyth

Teg, and she exhibited the same pixie-like features and
huge slanted eyes they did.
Maelgwn had stopped in front of the Crone, who
eyed him over with decided interest. ‘We bid thee
welcome, young Prince. The folk have marked thee as
Chosen, we see. And Taliesin claims thou art his most
promising initiate ever. We have considered this in
naming thy quest, Maelgwn of Gwynedd.’
The maiden Branwen passed straight through the
table before her to approach the Prince. ‘Dragon of the
Island, we call upon thee to defend the Chair and the
Cauldron of Keridwen, lest thine people will not always
be free to honour the Goddess.’ The beautiful maid
offered him encouragement as she moved gracefully
round him, gently running her fingertips over his bare
skin. ‘Our pleasures await thee upon thy return . . . Our
milk, our dew, our acorns, shall be thy reward.’
Rhiannon, the warrior Goddess, approached
Maelgwn, cluching a bunch of grapes in one hand. She
clasped him firmly round the back of the neck, her eyes
looking deep into his soul, and her words mesmerised
him. ‘We have considered what could befall us. Trouble
already menaces the lands to the East and Powys.’ She
popped a grape into his mouth, and in his enchanted
state, Maelgwn very nearly ate it. When the Prince spat
out the forbidden fruit, Rhiannon was quite impressed.
‘Thou art not easily distracted, Dragon. Good, very
good.’
The women withdrew to the side of Keridwen,
where they merged to become one being that glowed
green and spoke with the voices of all three.

Maelgwn, overawed, fell on one knee before Don,
the divine mother.
‘We must unite Prydyn against Powys and the
invaders, my people must become as one race. Only
then shall the Goddess be preserved in our great land.
Maelgwn of Gwynedd, thou art destined for this duty
and thus we find thee worthy to hold the office of thy
forefathers. Dost thou accept this as thy quest in the
name of the Goddess?’
‘Aye, I do.’
‘Then stand and face thy task.’
As the Prince did as he was instructed, the three
women again separated and Keridwen alone addressed
him.
‘Gwydion hast decreed that thee must go as thou art
to Castell Dwyran in Dyfed, for there thou shalt find
Vortipor of the Desi Clan. Then on to the court of
Aurelius Caninus in Gwent Is Coed, where thee will find
the King at his residence in Caerleon. Thou art to warn
these men of the alliance between Powys and the
invaders, and must invite both kings to thy wedding
celebrations. King Catulus of Dumnonia be required to
attend also. Upon the fourth and last day of the feasting, I
shall address all these leaders. If my dragon consents, take
him to speed thy journey, for he shall mark thee as our
messenger. If these kings consider themselves of my flock,
they shall be urged to comply, lest they risk our disfavour
on their kingdoms. Thy words Dragon, be my own. For
this be the will of the Great Houses of Don and Llyr.’
‘So be it,’ the men all cried.

Maelgwn blinked to find himself returned to his seat
before the cauldron. He stood and faced the dragon.
‘What say thee, Rufus?’ (the dragon’s chosen name).
‘Would thou consider braving the Middle Kingdoms
again to aid me in my quest?’
One might consider it, if one may be permitted to make
a small request in return, the dragon bethought the
Prince as it gazed down upon him.
‘What be thy request, old friend?’ the Prince asked
before agreeing; he’d played with this dragon before and
they didn’t always see eye to eye.
If Chiglas fails to buy thy bastard brother back, thee
must give him to me. As one hates the little mongrel, and
imagines he would make a very tasty appetiser.
‘Well I cannot blame thee really, although I would
not fancy eating him myself,’ the Prince said, still
considering the beast’s request. If Caradoc’s own people
didn’t want him back, Maelgwn certainly didn’t hold
any love for him. ‘Alright, if a fair price be not set by
the spring, Caradoc shall be thine.’
The dragon seemed to smile as it lowered its claw to
give the Prince a hand up to sit between its large
shoulder blades and wings. Without further ado, the
beast screeched, raised its huge body and flew off into a
hazy dawn sky. The mist had settled over the land,
where it would stay until the Prince returned from his
quest, triumphant.
Tory was summoned from her training by Lady Gladys,
who announced the arrival of Taliesin Pen Beirdd. Thus
she left Katren to continue the lesson and accompanied

Lady Gladys to greet him, relieved by his visit. In
addition to wanting to inquire after Maelgwn, Tory had
been pondering her harsh words to Taliesin on the day
of their victory, and felt she owed him an apology.
Taliesin had been right about the teachings of the
Old Ones, they were much closer to her beliefs than the
more orthodox religions to which she was accustomed.
There was no life and death for these people, just
differing states of consciousness on the path to the soul’s
perfection. This was basically what she believed, and
Taliesin had, of course, known this all along.
Tory entered the library to find the Merlin gazing
out the window.
‘There is no need to apologise, dear lady, you were
perfectly right. I should consult you and Maelgwn
before deciding the course of matters that concern
yourselves and Gwynedd,’ he announced, already
understanding her mind.
‘Taliesin!’ She smiled, feeling a twinge of annoyance. ‘Will you please let me speak my mind before
jumping in with a resolve. You’re always two conversations ahead of me.’ Tory noticed she was becoming
flustered again and calmed down. ‘Here I was coming to
apologise for being angry with you and you’ve made me
angry again.’
‘So sorry, please run through the formalities if you
feel you must.’
‘I give up, why bother?’ Tory concluded, eager to
find how Maelgwn fared.
Taliesin almost answered but conforming to her
wishes, waited for Tory to ask.

‘How is Maelgwn? I know he must have embarked
on his quest by now as the storm has cleared. You know
his quest, do you think him capable of completing it in
time for our wedding?’
‘My dear child, all goes splendidly. You are the bride
who shall be Queen, rejoice and indulge yourself. You
have naught to worry about but your wedding
preparations. I assure you that the celebrations shall go
ahead as planned.’
Taliesin and Tory had lunch served in the library.
The Merlin told her most of the story of Maelgwn’s
journey into the Otherworld and of his quest, omitting
only the details that the Prince would wish to discuss
with her himself.
‘Fairies, shamanism, astral travelling, what else is he
into that I don’t know about?’ She was only just
beginning to realise how extraordinary the man she was
to marry, truly was.
Over mead they spoke of a great many things, but as
a bride, naturally her first concern was the dress.
‘Dresses,’ Taliesin corrected her, explaining that the
celebrations would span the period of four days.
‘Four days! That’s what I call a party.’
‘The first day you shall wear a dress of white,
representing the maid and first aspect of the triple
Goddess. After the Prince hast been crowned in the
presence of his men, you will be brought forth to
exchange gifts with him. There will be a great feast and
the Prince will lay claim to you this night.’
‘There is a God,’ Tory remarked in jest. ‘Do go on, I
am listening.’

‘After your union with the Prince you shall wear
red, the colour of the warrior. This day is for tournament, the quest for the Queen’s Champion amongst
other competitions.’
Tory wasn’t too sure how she felt about that. What
do I need a champion for, she wondered. Still, she’d
never seen a tournament, it could be interesting.
‘And no, you can’t compete.’ Taliesin knocked that
question on the head before she’d even thought of it.
Tory rolled her eyes as if to imply it had never
entered her mind. ‘The third day?’ she prompted.
‘Black. The colour of the enchantress, the wise
woman and third face of the Goddess. This shall be your
first day in court with your advisers and officials. A
perfect time, if I may say so, to present your proposals
concerning the women of this land.’
‘You truly know everything, don’t you?’ Tory looked
at him surprised. ‘But I thought, in all fairness to the
Prince that, as this proposal was a condition of our
wedding, I should really present it to him on day one.’
‘Why? Maelgwn will agree, I do! And I shall be
present to support your cause. After all, is it not in the
best interest of the Goddess? A bit more respect for
women would certainly not go astray around here.’
Again he surprised her. Remarkable.
‘Thank you.’ He gave a smile. ‘Now, where was I?
Ah yes, the fourth and final day – a dress of green, the
colour of the land, the triple Goddess and Mother
Earth. This day you shall be crowned Queen before
holding conference with all the Kings of Britain, bar
Chiglas of course.’

‘What! What am I supposed to say to them?’
‘When the time comes, you will know, trust me.’
‘Trust you! Taliesin, that’s a lot of faith. I don’t want
to look foolish –’
‘Tory please, I can’t discuss it with you as the Prince
wishes to first. But you will be well briefed, I promise.’
‘Okay, I’m sorry. I’ll try to relax,’ Tory resolved,
feeling it wasn’t going to be easy. ‘One more thing.
Where are these dresses coming from? I hope I’m not
expected to make them, I’m hopeless on a sewing
machine.’ Taliesin laughed and Tory caught on to his
amusement. ‘Needle and thread, you know what I
mean. I’m hopeless!’
Taliesin didn’t appear too worried about it, gesturing
over her shoulder. ‘With many thanks from the Goddess
and her folk.’
Five beautiful garments suddenly materialised
behind her.
‘Oh my stars,’ Tory gasped as she rose to her feet.
She circled the garments, thinking them too beautiful
to touch, let alone wear.
The fifth dress was of white with a sash of green, red
and black that draped over the right shoulder and fell in
a long train behind. Taliesin explained this was for her
bridesmaid, and Tory knew Katren would simply die
when she saw it.
‘Thank you Taliesin, they are exquisite.’
The Prince was near frozen by the time the dragon
landed in the courtyard of Castell Dwyran, in Dyfed.
Needless to say, the court’s soldiers were quite alarmed

and would have attacked the great beast if Maelgwn
hadn’t emerged from its shoulders to prevent them.
‘I am Maelgwn, Prince of Gwynedd, and this be the
pet of the Goddess Keridwen. I am unarmed and bring a
message from the Goddess for Vortipor, the Protector of
Dyfed. Will he grant me audience or doth he wish to
bring the wrath of our Otherworld forefathers upon
himself and his kingdom?’
The Prince was soon led to Vortipor’s private
chambers, with the assurance that the beast of the
Goddess would not be harmed. Maelgwn found his
Roman-appointed counterpart reclining by a fire with a
couple of maidens tending his every whim. When the
Prince had been formally announced, he bowed deeply
to his adversary before stating his business. ‘I have but
two questions to put to thee, Vortipor of Dyfed. Dost
thou still hold true and honour the ways of the Goddess
in thy Kingdom? And dost thou hold any allegiance to
Chiglas, King of Powys, or the barbarian invaders that
raid our land?’
Vortipor gave a hearty laugh, brushing away the
attentions of the women. ‘My dear Prince of Gwynedd,
do slow down. I can hardly follow a word thou art
saying.’ The ruler sat up to address the Prince, who
appeared even younger than himself. ‘It be so rare that
we art honoured by a legend, do sit for a moment and
have some wine. It be imported from Italy, compliments
of King Aurelius Caninus of Gwent Is Coed, and be
truly a treat.’
Maelgwn was relieved that the two leaders knew
each other, and Vortipor appeared quite a civilised

fellow. Although shorter than Maelgwn, Vortipor
appeared of sturdy build and a warrior to be reckoned
with.
‘Thy hospitality be most generous, sir, but I regret
that I must decline. I am to be wed in a few days, and
must complete this errand for the Goddess before then.
So, if thee could answer my questions, I shall be on my
way. I still have Aurelius Caninus to see before I may
return to my bride.’
Again Vortipor laughed but with greater understanding. ‘Now I see what drives thee so. Could I not
offer thee some relief, perhaps?’ He motioned to the two
lovely young maidens in his company, who appeared
more than eager to oblige.
‘Thy women be truly tempting, but I must again
decline, as only my due bounty shall bring me any
solace, I am afraid.’
‘If thou insists on being so damned official.’ Vortipor
clapped his hands and the maidens left the room. ‘Thy
bride must be quite a prize. Come and seat thyself,
friend. I shan’t keep thee from her any longer than
necessary.’
Their talks began over lunch and finished over
dinner. Sharing the same age, the same beliefs, education and ideas, made it very easy for the two to agree
on most subjects. Maelgwn informed Vortipor of the
attack on Degannwy, of Chiglas’ growing forces and of
Powys’ alliance with the invading savages.
Vortipor found the information fair cause for
concern. He could count on little support from Rome,
should such a situation arise in Dyfed, as they had

plenty of battles of their own to contend with. Thus he
had good reason to unite with other kingdoms against
Chiglas, and was delighted to agree to attend Maelgwn’s
wedding and the gathering, called in the name of the
Goddess.
‘Allow me on the morrow to accompany thee to the
court of Aurelius Caninus,’ Vortipor suggested. ‘Not
that any harm might befall thee, mind. It be more that
the King, no longer a young man, could keep thee
detained for days with his damned procrastinating. I
have been dealing with him for years, he trusts me and
tends to follow my advice.’
So they sat drinking wine by the fire in Vortipor’s
private chambers until well into the wee hours.
At dawn the Prince woke his new companion,
eager to get on the move. Vortipor, somewhat amazed
by Maelgwn’s powers of recuperation, dragged himself
from his peaceful slumber, not wanting to miss out on
the adventure. Times had been quite blissful in the
Kingdom of Dyfed since the Desi had assumed power.
Till now, Vortipor had only to send troops to the aid
of Gwent Is Coed to hold back the encroaching
Danish and Saxon raiders. Chiglas in Powys, however,
was a threat that was much closer to home. If he’d
indeed made a pact with the barbarian bastards, they
could pass right through Powys and ravage Dyfed
directly.
The allies entered the courtyard of the huge fortress
to find Rufus peacefully curled up asleep. The locals all
gasped in awe at the dragon as they went about their
daily business, trying to avoid the huge obstruction.

Vortipor stopped in his tracks and roared with
laughter. ‘When my men told me thee had arrived on a
dragon, I thought them exaggerating. Thou art a truly
wondrous soul, Maelgwn of Gwynedd.’
The dragon opened one eye to observe the Prince.
Like I have nothing to do with it, I suppose.
‘Ah Rufus.’ The Prince ignored its comment. ‘This
be Vortipor, the Protector of Dyfed.’
The dragon turned his one open eye to view the
man as he stepped forward and politely bowed. A big
brawny Scottic man, yum, yum!
‘Now that be enough of that,’ the Prince insisted,
and Vortipor took a step backwards, wondering what
the dragon had bethought his affiliate. ‘I believe
Vortipor will be of great assistance to our quest. Would
thee mind if he accompanied us to Gwent Is Coed?’
Depends. What does he have to offer one in the way of
breakfast?
Maelgwn turned to Vortipor, a mite embarrassed by
his travelling companion’s hideous taste in cuisine. ‘I
hate to ask, but dost thou have any grievous criminals
lying about that thee might want to be rid of? It would
seem Rufus here be a bit hungry, and thou art appearing
a bit too appetising to merely transport.’
‘I see, well we can’t have our Otherworld friend
going hungry now, can we?’ He addressed the dragon
directly, ‘Would a couple of fat thieves do? Unfortunately most of our more grievous offenders have
grown rather thin, and would not be very appetising,
I’m afraid.’
One finds this acceptable.

The Prince gave his friend the nod and Vortipor
clapped his hands together. ‘Splendid! I shall have them
brought to thee at once.’
Rufus threw down breakfast in seconds flat, and was
then more than happy to make haste with the Prince
and his new ally to Caerleon.
Vortipor was so exhilarated by his first experience of
flight that he gave the Prince a sterling introduction
and recommendation to Aurelius. He ranted and raved
about their journey, the Prince’s great quest, and his
invitation from the Goddess.
At first, the old King appeared rather caught up in
the excitement of his younger colleague. But when it
came down to Aurelius agreeing with Vortipor, his
procrastinating began.
Known as ‘the dog’, King Caninus reminded
Maelgwn of an old hound that had lost the scent and
couldn’t decide which way to go. The Prince was quietly
driven insane by the King’s unwarranted fears and
delays, as he impatiently watched the day slip into
night. He thanked the Goddess for Vortipor, if not for
him they may well have been stuck there for months.
By the end of supper the King had agreed to attend
the wedding and hear what the Goddess had to say.
Maelgwn was satisfied to have accomplished this much,
and on the morrow he would return to his men at Llyn
Cerrig Bach. There he would celebrate with them, as he
had a day to spare, before he would, at last, wed his lady.

12

Union

T

he mist vanished from the land the day before
the set wedding date, and Tory was advised that
the Prince had most surely returned from his
quest, successful. She waited all day and late into the
evening for his arrival, but fell asleep while finishing off
her proposal for the court, to be delivered three days
hence. Not that they were allowed to see each other
before the wedding; this superstition existed even then.
A good thing too the way Tory saw it, as her hair was
wrapped in long tight rags which were not very
flattering.
She awoke the morning of her wedding to find
Katren at her side, waiting to serve her breakfast. Fresh
flowers covered the bed and Tory cringed. ‘Please tell
me that Maelgwn did not see me like this?’
‘Nay,’ Katren giggled. ‘The flowers be from thy
Prince, though. He asked that I deliver them to thee,

and instructed me to give thee this.’ Katren passed Tory
a note, which she opened and read:
We strangely met,
like not so many,
yet still my love
be true as any.
In the Old One’s choice,
my soul does rejoice.
And no gift could express
the love for thee I do possess.
So love him in thy heart,
whose forever joy thou art.
And our love will know no end,
my dear and sweetest friend.
After reading it to herself, and taking delight in the
lovely verse, Tory read the note out loud to Katren,
knowing she would well appreciate it.
‘If only every man were so true and could express
himself so beautifully, every woman would know thy joy
this day, Tory.’
‘Every woman in Gwynedd shall by the time we
finish with the men here. Mark my words Katren, thou
shalt know this joy and in the not too distant future.’
‘Be that a prophecy, Goddess?’
‘It be a promise, provided of course that thee can
stick to our plan. I know how persuasive Calin can be, it
will not be easy to resist him, especially when thou wilt
be wearing that dress!’
‘If thee can do it, I can do it. Anyway, no one shall
even notice me for the beauty of my lovely mistress.’

They had the good part of a day to prepare as
Maelgwn’s crowning, which none of the women bar
Lady Gladys were permitted to attend, would run well
into the noon hours. They also had every woman in the
household waiting to assist them, so there wasn’t really
any need to rush.
Rhys, Tiernan, Selwyn, and Taliesin were all present to
attend the Prince as he prepared for his crowning and
union with the Goddess. This was fortunate for
Maelgwn, as he had a mild case of the premarital jitters.
His support team did their best to calm him, filling him
with mead and assurances while they near drowned him
in a hot bath.
Selwyn was having a fine time trying to scrub away
the fairy folk’s artwork from his Majesty’s torso and
arms, whilst Rhys poured the drinks for everyone and
pointed out the advantages of wedlock. Tiernan was no
help, as a confirmed bachelor he was constantly
contradicting Rhys with his point of view.
Rhys turned to Tiernan. ‘Thou shalt die a very
lonely and bitter old man, sir. And if thee insists on
being a hindrance, thee can leave.’
The Prince panicked. ‘Where be my gift from the
folk for Tory?’
‘I have it,’ Taliesin answered. For the wedding,
Maelgwn was fitted out in a shirt of the purest white
linen, and his trousers, gunna and long cape were pitch
black, like his belt and boots. Taliesin placed the
medallion of the Dragon over the Prince’s head, and it
sat on his chest as the perfect finish to a majestic outfit.

Lady Gladys knocked and entered, followed by Cara
and Alma who were carrying large baskets of freshly cut
flowers and vines. The three women were dressed to the
nines in new creations of their own, that they had been
working on since the announcement of the wedding.
Lady Gladys’ dress was of dark green, in honour of the
Goddess, and it had been created to enhance her
favourite pieces of the family jewels. The earrings,
bracelets, necklace, and tiara of gold were set with
emeralds and diamonds, and had been a wedding gift to
her grandmother from the folk.
‘My dear boy,’ Lady Gladys took up Maelgwn’s
hands, standing back to view him. ‘Be he not the most
handsome man in all Brittany?’ she asked the girls who
would have become rather coy at the question only
months ago. Since their frequent association with Tory,
however, Cara, the older and gamer of the two, was
more than happy to step forward and voice her opinion.
‘Aye Lady Gladys, it be a sad day for the womenfolk
of Gwynedd.’
‘Indeed,’ Alma nodded in complete agreement.
It was seldom Maelgwn blushed, but feeling the heat
rising in his face, he bowed to them. ‘Thou art too kind,
ladies. And may I say that thou art all the very picture
of the Goddess this day.’
‘Here, here.’ Tiernan held up his goblet in agreement.
Lady Gladys beamed with pride as Maelgwn kissed
her hand. ‘Well enough chatter, it be high time we got
thee crowned and out of here, so that these ladies can
prepare the chamber for thy wedding this night.’

This brought a round of whistles from the men
present, embarrassing the poor Prince yet again.
‘A definite advantage of wedlock,’ Rhys commented
with cheer, looking at Tiernan.
‘I cannot argue there, my friend,’ the bachelor was
pleased to admit.
Katren gazed into the mirror with disbelief; she didn’t
recognise herself. ‘Thy talents be truly endless. I never
imagined I could appear thus.’
Although she seldom bothered with them herself,
Tory carried a few cosmetics when she travelled and
certainly knew how to use the array of colours to their
best advantage. ‘My mother was vain to a fault, being
in the public eye all the time,’ she explained. ‘I’d
learnt how to do a complete make up by the time I was
ten.’
The white dress of the maiden made Tory feel and
look every bit the feminine Goddess. Its neck draped
across her shoulders in soft folds, as was the Roman
fashion. The silky fabric drew in tight to fit her tiny
waist, dropping to a V-shape at her hips. The skirt then
fell in gentle waves to the floor and to a long train. The
sleeves were transparent and flared wide from the elbow,
with the underside dropping by her side almost to the
floor.
Tory’s mass of long golden ringlets had been
smoothed back tight to her crown. Combs, laced with
tiny white flowers, held in place a shimmering veil, so
sheer and delicate that it appeared almost as if it were
not there at all.

As the bell of the south tower tolled to inform all of
the King’s crowning, Lady Gladys arrived to fetch the
pair. She held out her hands, glowing with happiness as
the girls approached her. ‘I swear thou art more
breathtaking than even Sorcha. Thee and Maelgwn art
a most handsome match, indeed,’ she told Tory as they
all linked hands. Her eyes turned to Katren. ‘And I
foresee a double victory for us this day. We art counting
on thee, child.’
‘Fear not, Lady Gladys,’ Katren said with
confidence. ‘I will not fail thee in this.’
Tory walked through the courtyard arm-in-arm with
Lady Gladys, listening carefully to her last minute words
of wisdom. The balmy aroma of her beautiful bouquet of
white flowers, thankfully seemed to be calming her
nerves.
Katren moved quickly ahead of them to meet
Brockwell, who was the only member of the household
who still remained outside the Great Hall. He was
wearing a blindfold, having decided he wouldn’t be able
to resist the temptation to look upon Tory this day.
‘My dear Sir Brockwell, I was joking when I said
thee would have to be blindfolded. It appears more like
thou art going to an execution,’ Katren said.
‘Be she here yet?’ he asked, catching a most
beautiful scent in the air.
‘Nay, I have been sent ahead to prepare thee,’ she
informed him, reaching up to untie the blindfold.
‘Nay, lady please. I shall surely fail.’ He took hold of
her hands to stop her, noticing how tiny they were in
his own.

‘Trust me. I shall make it very easy for thee.’
When the cover was lifted from his eyes, Calin
beheld the face of an angel gazing back at him and he
returned her smile, completely enchanted.
‘I will be in front of thee all the way, so thou hast
only to keep thy eyes fixed firmly on me,’ Katren
whispered.
Brockwell was still a little dazed by this vision and
wondered how a maiden of such beauty could have
escaped his attention this long. ‘That will not be
difficult Katren, thou art the very image of beauty. How
could even the Goddess compare?’ He took up her hand
and lightly kissed it. Here be the one I shall have the
Goddess train to my liking.
For once Katren was not overcome by his flattery,
but rather amused by it. ‘Hast thou not discovered that
the Goddess be in us all, Calin. I am sorry, I meant –’
‘Nay please, call me Calin.’
‘As thee wishes.’ Katren’s slip of the tongue had
been quite purposeful. She turned to see Tory approaching. ‘Here she comes. Now remember, just concentrate
on me and all will be well.’
‘Be that a promise, Katren?’
Though she was amused by his sultry tone, she
chose not to comment and turned to face the doors
before them.
Tory stopped beside Brockwell, placing her hand on
top of his. ‘I truly thank thee for doing this, Calin, and
my father thanks thee also.’
The huge doors of court parted wide and as Katren
led them down the long aisle, Calin’s eyes were glued to

her slender, shapely form. ‘It gives me the greatest of
pleasure, I assure thee.’
The guests and members of the royal household
stood for the exchange of vows. Selwyn was honoured
to be playing harp alongside twenty-five visiting bards
of prestige from all across Brittany. The holy men had
come forth to raise song in celebration of this great
occasion.
Maelgwn was entranced as he beheld his bride. The
King felt a hand come to rest on his shoulder and
Tiernan, his best man, whispered his mind, ‘I do believe
that in this case, even I would wed in thy place.’
‘Not a chance.’
Just as Tory and Brockwell had almost reached
Maelgwn, she brought him to a standstill and turned to
face him. ‘Look at me, Sir Brockwell, Duke of Penmon.’
Taliesin, who was conducting the ceremony from an
indiscernible pulpit in mid-air, nodded to Calin to
comply.
Given his leave, Brockwell turned his eyes to Tory.
Although she was more beautiful than he’d ever seen
her, he was surprised to find that she no longer stirred in
him the same desire that he’d felt for her only weeks
before.
‘I release thee from the punishments of thy own
design and declare that, if so desired, thee may compete
on the morrow for the title of my champion.’
‘I thank thee, great lady. I have seen the error of my
ways, which shall be much improved from this day
forth,’ Brockwell pledged solemnly as he bowed to her.
‘On behalf of thy father, allow me now to present thee

to thy King.’ When Tory’s hand was placed on
Maelgwn’s, the couple saw no one else. Taliesin led
them through their vows, very similar in intent to those
still made today. In place of rings, a ribbon was tied to
Tory’s right wrist and Maelgwn’s left. These ribbons
were then wrapped around and over their hands as they
were joined in wedlock.
‘Those whom the Goddess hast joined, let no man
put asunder.’ Taliesin rested his hands on both their
heads, serving Brockwell a look of caution. ‘For this
union be the will of the Great Houses Don and Llyr.’
‘So be it!’ the gathering responded with great
merriment.
‘By the power invested in me, I pronounce thee
husband and wife. Thee may kiss thy bride, Majesty.’
Maelgwn raised Tory’s veil. As he leant down to kiss
her, the gathering was thrown into riot, for this kiss
marked the beginning of the four days of feasting, sport,
music, conference and merrymaking.
The guests were guided into the banquet hall, while
the wedding party remained present to witness the
signing of the marriage document for the archives. Tory
asked Taliesin to take a photo of the wedding party for
her parents, a subtle hint to the bard in reminder of the
matter they had yet to discuss in detail.
By the time the King and his bride joined the rest of
their guests in the huge dining room, the feasting and
music were well under way. Maelgwn and Tory took
their places in the middle of the main table. Brockwell
and Katren beside Tory, Lady Gladys and Tiernan to
Maelgwn’s other side. Their guests, in order of

precedence, were now allowed to approach the couple
to congratulate and present them with gifts.
King Catulus was the first to address the newlyweds.
The elderly warrior was obviously still reeling with
exaltation for his young friend following the events he’d
witnessed at the initiation. After expressing his honour
and great delight in their invitation, he presented the
couple with two large goblets of gold, set with rubies
and intricately engraved with Celtic motifs.
This gift was to the great delight of the old King of
Gwent Is Coed, Aurelius Caninus. He bestowed on the
couple five whole barrels of the imported wine that he
so cherished and for which he was famous. His daughter
brought forth a decanter and filled Catulus’ golden
goblets with a sample for the recipients’ approval.
Maelgwn toasted his bride before entwining his arm in
her own to drink. There were cheers from the court and
all present did likewise with whoever of the opposite sex
was closest.
When Vortipor came forward, the King rose to
introduce his new and respected colleague to Tory.
Maelgwn explained briefly how much assistance the
Protector of Dyfed had been to him in his quest, thus
speeding his return to her. Tory stood to express her
gratitude, and their new ally took up her hand and
kissed it.
‘The very least I could do for the Goddess. I
understand thy king’s sense of urgency to return to thee,
for thou art truly the paragon he described.’ Vortipor
then turned back to Maelgwn. ‘I am an envious man
indeed, Dragon.’ He clicked his fingers and his squire

came forward bearing a gift in a long wooden box. ‘Such
a jewel be well worth protecting, sir, and when thee
mentioned that thee still wielded a sword of iron, I
knew at once the perfect gift.’ Vortipor opened the box
and lifted a gleaming sword in its scabbard from the
case. He then drew the sword to display it. ‘Welcome to
the age of steel, my friend. After all, we can’t have a
legend wielding any less than the best now, can we?’ He
replaced the sword in its sheath and launched it in
Maelgwn’s direction. ‘Compliments of Rome,’ he bowed
in conclusion.
Maelgwn was exulted by the man’s gesture, for to
give a fellow ruler such a fine weapon was a true token
of one’s goodwill and allegiance.
The other lords and ladies of Gwynedd came forth
to bestow their gifts and be introduced to their new
Queen. When all had been seen in turn, it came time
for Tory and the Prince to exchange gifts.
Maelgwn summoned Taliesin forth. He carried a
cushion of red, on top of which was a fine silver necklet.
It featured a dainty pendant, no bigger than Tory’s
middle fingernail, with the same black onyx dragon that
Maelgwn wore. The King lifted it and spoke in a
whisper as he placed it around her neck. ‘This be the
work of the folk. I shall explain its enchantment and
place it where it be truly intended, later.’
Tory raised her eyebrows at the suggestion. ‘I can
hardly wait,’ she kissed him. ‘I love it.’
On cue, Bryce carefully made his way toward the
King, the gift of the Goddess that he carried in his
hands was hidden by a cloth of royal blue.

‘I thank thee, Bryce,’ Tory said. ‘Majesty, may I
introduce the young Earl of Penmon.’ Bryce bowed
deeply to the King, dumbfounded by the honour.
Maelgwn could barely believe his eyes; this was
Calin, just as he remembered him from childhood. The
King didn’t have to think too hard to figure out where
he’d come from. ‘Arise dear cousin, I am pleased thou
hast found thy way home to thy kindred.’ He ruffled the
boy’s hair. ‘And what have we here?’ He cocked an eye
at Tory as he raised the cover and observed the beautiful
set before him. ‘Magnificent! A game of sorts?’
‘Aye. A game of wits and strategy known as chess.’
As Maelgwn hugged her tightly, Taliesin came
forward rubbing his hands together. ‘Splendid, so who
fancies a game?’
Sir Rhys approached the royal table and politely
interrupted the merriment. He bowed before announcing
quietly to the King, ‘Chiglas hast sent thee a wedding
gift, Majesty, and frankly thou art not going to like it.’
Tory’s eyes narrowed at his words. ‘Cadogan,’ she
concluded without a doubt.
‘Aye,’ Rhys nodded, his tone as suspicious as her
own. ‘Chiglas wants to offer him in exchange for
Caradoc’s release. Shall I show the messenger in, or
have him wait for thee in thy room of court?’
Maelgwn looked at Tory, confused. Should he
rejoice at Cadogan’s deliverance, or lock him up for fear
of treachery?
‘Do not trust it,’ Tory cautioned.
Maelgwn, still unsure, turned to Taliesin for advice,
but the High Merlin only shrugged. ‘Thou art well

aware that I am not permitted to advise thee in such
matters. In thy place, however, I would surely heed my
wife, for she be thy intuition, Majesty.’
Tory held a hand to her heart. ‘I feel I am right
about this.’
Though he was still far from convinced, Maelgwn
said, ‘Take Cadogan to his chamber where he may
bathe, eat, and recover. See that both he and the
messenger are confined to separate quarters until two
days hence, when we shall consider the matter at court.
Place a guard to ensure my wishes art adhered to, and
tell Cadogan I shall see him on the morrow.’
Rhys bowed and went about his bidding at once.
‘I hope thou art right, Tory. Cadogan hast served me
well in the past.’
Tory was not about to let Chiglas spoil the day. ‘My
dear husband, if Cadogan hast truly been held prisoner
these two weeks past then he shall need to rest. And
besides, this be our wedding day, dost thou not have
more pressing matters to attend to this night?’
Maelgwn grinned. ‘Of course, I quite forgot myself
for a moment. Please, tell me of thy wondrous game.’
Tory presented him a book of instructions and
moves that she had written, with a little help from
Taliesin, in the King’s own tongue.
‘Thy penmanship be truly outstanding,’ Maelgwn
noted, and he invited Tory to a game. This was to the
great entertainment of the menfolk, who all gathered
around with their mead trying to get the gist of the rules.
Following a scintillating match of wits, Tory found
herself in checkmate and so took the opportunity to

leave. It was high time she made for her husband’s
chambers to ready herself for her wedding night.
‘How long?’ Maelgwn whispered, wearing a lurid
grin.
‘Katren will fetch thee.’ She kissed him, before
bidding all a good night.
The whistles and cheers of encouragement that
arose from the men as she accompanied Katren, Alma,
and Cara from the room could only compare to a grandfinal football match. As bold as she was, Tory
nevertheless found this embarrassing and was glad when
they reached the hallway.
The girls quickly ushered Tory to Maelgwn’s
chambers, but she came to a stop in the doorway, taken
aback by the sight and perfume of so many flowers. Ivy
spiralled up the posts of the huge bed, and was
intertwined with roses, jasmine and lily of the valley.
Posies of flowers filled the candle-lit room, and a small
feast was set out on a table by the fire. Tory had never
seen Maelgwn’s room at Aberffraw and considered it a
fair exchange for her tower. All her things had been
brought to her new quarters, which were not as large
and grand as Maelgwn’s room at Degannwy but more
snug and intimate. Her love had grown up in this room,
and thus she felt an immediate affinity with it.
‘Say something!’ Katren prompted.
‘It be simply beautiful, ladies.’
‘Jasmine be for joy and lily of the valley be for thy
happiness,’ Alma explained with delight.
‘White roses represent spiritual love.’ Cara raised
her hands to prayer position.

‘Red be for passion and the ivy . . . be for devotion,’
Katren finished in a dramatic fashion, before she broke
into a giggle.
‘What be this?’ Tory asked, lifting off the bed a
perfectly plain, long, white silk slip.
My wedding gift to the King.
Tory heard Taliesin’s voice in her mind.
Let us just say, I know what he fancies.
Aye, Tory thought, decidedly. Maelgwn will love it.
Maelgwn was aware of Katren the second she entered the
room, as was Sir Brockwell. Despite being in the midst of
a game of chess, the King didn’t wait for Katren to reach
him before he stood to take his leave. ‘My greatest
apologies to thee, Vortipor, but I am afraid duty calls.’
Maelgwn grinned broadly as he bowed to his guests.
‘I shall not detain thee when such fair game awaits
thee elsewhere. Nominate a replacement that I can
massacre in thy stead,’ Vortipor requested with cheery
confidence, before adding as an afterthought, ‘Not the
magician!’
Maelgwn looked about at those who had been
following the game. ‘Sir Rhys, doth thou feel confident
to complete my victory?’
‘Aye Majesty, blindfolded.’
With this settled, Maelgwn made haste to his
chambers. He passed Alma and Cara in the hall, who
were en route back to the festivities.
‘Sleep well, Majesty,’ Alma said.
‘But I doubt it,’ Cara emphasised as they both
hurried on.

Tory was kneeling down in the middle of Maelgwn’s
bed when he entered. Her long golden ringlets, freed
from the combs, fell softly about her bare shoulders and
down her back. The white silk of the slip caught the
candlelight, and she furnished Maelgwn with an
alluring smile. ‘More becoming, I hope?’
He recalled the conversation they’d had on her first
morning at Degannwy. ‘I have no objection.’ He gloated
upon her loveliness as he removed the black gunna and
cast it across the room. ‘So long ago, yet I desired thee
even then. I must confess, I did battle with my
conscience when I found thee asleep by the fire that
night.’
‘So that be how I got to bed.’ Tory smiled in
recollection; it had all been a bit hazy at the time.
‘Aye.’ He threw aside his boots. ‘I showed great
restraint, I must say. Thou wast rather the worse for
mead as I recall, and somewhat keen to oblige.’
This was news to Tory, still she didn’t care about
that. ‘I shall always be keen to oblige thee.’ She watched
as Maelgwn removed his shirt, exposing the smooth
muscular torso that she hadn’t even been granted a
glimpse of till now.
‘In that case . . .’ Maelgwn crawled onto the bed to
take a seat before her. He’d dreamt of their union many
times, yet now that it had arrived he no longer felt in
any hurry. ‘I promise I shall never leave thee wanting.’
He held a hand to her cheek and gently guided her lips
towards his own.
For a warrior of such size, Maelgwn’s caresses were
very tender. His hands almost quivered as they slid from

her neck down over the thin film of silk that concealed
her naked body.
A wave of awareness beset Tory, and every inch of
her tingled as her skin became alerted to his touch.
Maelgwn’s hands slipped to her waist, his kisses
finding their way towards her cleavage. Ever so gently,
he raised her to a kneeling position and paused to look
at her.
‘I almost forgot.’ He smiled as he lifted the thin
straps of the slip from her shoulders. As he let them go,
he delighted in the sight of the garment slipping down
over her body. His fingertips glided over her soft,
smooth skin, from her knees, over her thighs, and up
behind her neck to remove his wedding gift. ‘This,’ he
began, but he was distracted by the desire to kiss her
and did so several times; the sensation of her naked
body pressed hard against his own was far too
compelling. ‘This,’ he tried again, ‘is very special, and it
belongs . . .’ His eyes lowered and he gently kissed each
of her breasts before kissing the space just below her
navel. ‘Here.’ He hung the charm in its place. ‘It shall
protect thee, and Gwynedd’s heir from harm.’ He kissed
the pendant.
Tory reached down, running her fingers through his
long silky hair and held him close a moment. ‘I do love
thee, Maelgwn of Gwynedd.’ She thought the intent of
his gift sweet, though its purpose was a bit of a worry.
‘And I thee, Tory Alexander.’ He overwelmed her
with affection as they sank back onto his bed.
The desire she’d been suppressing for so long finally
found its release, as the tears of sweet relief trickled

down her cheeks. She closed her eyes and lay back in a
state of rapture, savouring the sensation of her husband
exploring her pleasures for the first time.
Rhys had gone on to victory over Vortipor on the
chessboard, and King Catulus of Dumnonia now
matched wits with the old King of Gwent Is Coed. In
his drunken state – one that now prevailed over the
whole court – Catulus was furnishing old King Caninus
and Vortipor with a detailed account of the new King of
Gwynedd’s colourful history.
Taliesin was pleased to expand on the stories,
feeling that his every word drew the allies closer
together. Rome had many problems and was far away.
Its priests here numbered but few and could be easily
suppressed before they forced the native people into
submission. Catulus seemed more than eager to return
to the old ways in Dumnonia. King Caninus, although
truly amazed by it all, had been raised in the Church of
Rome and admitted to hold little understanding of the
great mysteries of the land of his birth. He was,
however, curious to learn, as Maelgwn’s great ancestry
was also his own.
Lady Gladys was in her element, seated by two kings
who were roughly the same age as herself. She lent her
wisdom to advise on the game and the great legends, as
she remembered them. The aging widow was constantly
flattered and propositioned by the noble pair, and she
basked in the attention.
Tiernan, Angus, Rhys and his wife Jenovefa, who
was heavy with child, were seated by the fire. The

knights were entertaining Cara and Alma with mead
and adventurous tales of battle. Selwyn accompanied
their stories with his harp to intensify the mood.
Brockwell looked on, discontented. He hadn’t had a
drink all night in a gallant attempt to stay out of
trouble, but his sobriety only served to make Katren’s
virtuous curves seem all the more attractive to him. To
add to his woes, he hadn’t been given a chance to say
more than two words to her since the wedding. Now
that he thought about it, she hadn’t returned to the
dining room in quite some time . . .
As Brockwell made his way to the kitchens, he
conceded that he was quite pleased with the way things
had turned out. His King and Tory were most likely in
the throes of marital bliss, and if Katren was in the
mood to show him some favour, all would be rather
grand this night.
The huge kitchens of the house were a hive of
activity, as they would be for the next three days.
Brockwell found Katren sponging Bryce’s face clean,
preparing the exhausted youngster for bed.
‘Sir Brockwell.’ Bryce became excited and Katren
turned with a smile to greet him.
‘Bryce, thou art my brother now, thus thee must call
me Calin.’ He lifted the boy from the bench and
relieved him of the tedious task of being bathed.
‘Wow! Will thou teach me to be a great knight like
thou art, Calin?’
‘Aye. And in years to come, thee shall grow to be
the King’s Champion.’

‘Thou art going to win on the morrow, I know it.’
Bryce placed a small hand on Brockwell’s shoulder in
support.
‘I shall certainly pursue the title to the best of my
ability, and thou art coming to watch, of course.’
‘Aye, I have never been to a tournament before,’
Bryce exclaimed, jumping up and down, unable to
contain himself.
‘Then thee had best get to bed where thee should
have been ages ago, or thou shalt surely sleep in and
miss all the action,’ Katren teased, taking up his hand.
‘Nay.’ Bryce withdrew his hand from hers. ‘My
brother will take me.’ Bryce looked at Brockwell, who
shrugged at Katren as he tossed the boy over his
shoulder.
‘Do not go anywhere, I will be back,’ he advised her
over Bryce’s squeals of delight.
Upon his return, Katren was fussing about preparing
trays of food.
‘Katren!’ Calin took hold of her hands. ‘Leave this
to the servants, thou art a lady now and the last place
thee belongs be in a kitchen. Come with me for a stroll
through the grounds instead.’ He raised his brow in
anticipation.
‘Some fresh air and exercise before bed would be
good,’ she supposed, wrapping the long train of her dress
about her shoulders and accompanying Calin outside.
‘Thou hast done very well this day, Calin.’ Katren made
polite conversation as her escort had gone rather quiet.
‘Thy lady love married another, and still thou hast not
touched a drop of mead all day.’

He turned to her, somewhat alarmed, sorry now that
Katren even knew of his feelings for her mistress, as she
would think his sudden change of heart just a ploy to
seduce her. ‘I am overjoyed for my King and sister. I feel
no need to drown my sorrows, believe me.’
Although well pleased to hear this, Katren didn’t
show it. She maintained an expression of interested
concern as they resumed their stroll.
‘I have not indulged, as I wished to see if my wanton
thoughts were provoked by drink alone.’
‘And were they?’
‘It would seem not.’ He turned to face her again, his
expression torrid.
Here it comes. Katren prepared herself. Stay in control.
‘I know this confession will sound volatile, Katren,
but I have seen no one but thee this day. Thy beauty be
a revelation to me.’
To her great relief, she was not set swooning. Katren
felt she held a kind of power over him, and she had the
royal consent to use it. ‘How awful for thee, Calin, for I
fear that I can only bring thee more torment.’
A submission or flat denial he had expected, but
this response was not anticipated. ‘Nay Katren please,
thou hast not pledged thy love to another?’
‘Nay.’ She was pleased with his dismay and began to
spin her tale. ‘Though I have sworn an oath of celibacy.’
‘Katren! To whom?’
‘To the Goddess, of course.’
‘Tory,’ Calin spitefully concluded.
‘Nay, the Goddess herself. I have no husband and
no deep desire to keep or obey one. Thus, I have spoken

with Taliesin, and he feels I would make a fine priestess.’
Calin was completely taken aback, and Katren played
on this. ‘Be it not truly wonderful? Me, a priestess of the
Honey Isle.’
Brockwell sat down on a long garden bench, disheartened.
Katren let her excitement wane a little. ‘What be
the matter?’ She took a seat beside him.
‘I thought thee, I mean, I felt sure . . .’ He was
tongue-tied a moment.
‘That I was attracted to thee?’
‘Aye!’ he acknowledged.
‘Calin, I was.’
‘Was?’
‘Indeed.’ She stood to finish her address. ‘But any
woman who believes herself capable of keeping thee
faithful to her and her alone, be truly fooling herself, and
I am no fool. Thou art a free spirit and that be fine, most
men art by nature.’ She smiled, very sincere in her
intent. ‘The kind of love I seek, I fear I shall be hard
pressed to find. So, that be why I have chosen to devote
all my time to pursuing the greater mysteries of this land
and leave the lesser ones to other women who wish to be
subjected to the frustrations of seeking and holding a
husband. I have been there once, Calin, it be not for me.’
‘Thee listens to Tory too much.’
‘Calin, please give me my due. I had thee figured all
by myself.’ She remained very cool, which frustrated
him all the more.
‘How do women do that? Feel that way for someone
and just walk away?’ Brockwell rose, angered that all

wasn’t going to plan. What was wrong with him lately?
Was he losing his charm, or were the women becoming
more difficult?
‘Not how do women do it, Calin, but why? Women
do not have the choice.’ As Calin appeared sceptical
and bored by the answer, Katren continued. ‘Ask
Bryce’s mother, the price she paid for her choice was
dear. But thee had a good time, right?’
‘She sought me out.’
He obviously thought this justified his part in the
incident, which served to anger Katren all the more.
‘She was just a child.’
‘So was I!’
‘And thou still art.’
‘What can I do about it now, Katren, I beseech
thee?’
Katren glared at him. ‘Grow up,’ she suggested, and
left.
Much to the new King’s amazement, he had overslept.
He snuggled closer to his wife, deciding that married life
was going to do him the world of good. He could have
snoozed blissfully on all day, and probably would have if
Lady Gladys hadn’t woken them politely with breakfast.
She informed them that it was fast approaching noon,
when the tournament was hailed to begin.
It was the red dress of the warrior that Tory proudly
paraded this day. Of a similar cut to the first, this
garment was made from a heavier fabric that did not
shimmer like the silk of the maiden’s gown. Its sleeves
came in tight at the wrists and it had a high neck. The

dress sat well in her opinion, but it was the accessories
that excited her most. Made of fine chain mail, the belt
hung in a V-shape following the waistline. The neck
piece had a wide band that fastened tight around her
throat, then spread out over her shoulders. The two
matching rings that slid onto the middle finger of each
hand, featured the same fancy chain mail, running in a
V from the ring to a band that fastened about her wrists.
Tory truly adored this outfit, it felt powerful to wear and
made her look every bit the proud warrior.
The guests were feasting in the sunshine and making
ready for the tournament in the inner bailey. The crowd
sounded with fine force as the King and Tory entered
the courtyard, clinging to each other to endure the jests
from the men in regard to their tardiness.
‘Majesty, how grand that thee could join us,’ Rhys
said, in very good spirits. ‘Dost thou wish to compete for
Gwynedd this day? Vortipor of Dyfed hast suggested
that instead of single competition, we should have
teams that art allowed five men-at-arms.’
Rhys spoke of the general competitions that were
held as entertainment prior to the main event – the
battle for the title of the Queen’s Champion. The heats
for the Queen’s event would continue until only four
warriors remained. These final competitors would do
battle before the guests in the marquee, in the final
three duels of the day. The runner up, if still alive,
became the King’s Champion, as the Queen was
supposed to require the greater protection. This
competition was for the locals only, though the other

games gave the visiting legions a chance to be involved
in the festivities. It was left to Tory to nominate the
mode of battle for her title. The games that preceded
this event were swordplay, archery and, of course,
jousting.
‘Very tempting indeed,’ Maelgwn smiled, rather
keen on the idea until Tory raised an objection.
‘Hold on, I would still like thee in one piece
tonight.’
‘Never fear, Goddess,’ Vortipor came forth, claiming
her hand for a kiss. ‘I shall leave all the important parts
intact.’
‘My dear Vortipor, how gracious, but it be thy own
safety that concerns me. For if thou was to harm my
husband in any way, I would have to beat thee most
grievously – hardly the way I wish to treat such an
honoured guest.’
Vortipor laughed, delighted by her wit.
‘My good man, she be quite serious.’ Maelgwn told
him. ‘My people have not hailed Tory as the War
Goddess without good reason. Besides, I have been
looking forward to a day of leisure with my fair wife. Sir
Cedric shall fight in my stead.’
Maelgwn was the first interesting challenge Vortipor
had come across in quite some time, both mentally and
physically, and there was no way he was going to give up
so easily. ‘Come my friend, humour me. We art going to
keep points, so the challenge be nothing more than a
game. It will not be any fun if thou dost not compete.’
Maelgwn’s men voiced their agreement with
Vortipor.

‘What, outrageous! Maelgwn must complete!’
Catulus protested as the news reached him. ‘I have a
wager on thee boy, thee cannot let me down.’
Maelgwn laughed at the King. ‘Surely thou hast
thine own representatives, Catulus?’
‘Aye, but I know too well how the Otherworld
favours thee, thou hast never lost. Thus I put my gold
on Gwynedd,’ he chuckled, turning to appeal to the
bride. ‘Thee will have a whole lifetime to be together,
lady. Could we not steal Maelgwn for the afternoon?’
‘Alright, if he wishes. But be warned, gentlemen, I
shall hold every one of thee responsible if any dire harm
befalls my King.’
‘Understood, lady, thou art most gracious.’ Vortipor
bowed to them both. ‘May the best team win.’
Maelgwn greeted the rest of his guests, before
accompanying Tory to a large marquee, that opened
onto the view of the battlefield. Chairs, rugs, cushions
and refreshments had been placed in the shade of the
tent for the honoured guests and family. Selwyn
strummed a blissful tune on his harp, creating a very
pleasant ambience. Similar shelters had been erected on
the upper green of the outer bailey, around the main
arena, to accommodate the visiting lords and their kin.
In the main arena, one could view Dyfed as they
thrashed Dumnonia in the first round of the challenge,
which was archery. The King kissed his bride then left
her to join Rhys, Angus, Tiernan and Brockwell for the
challenge.
‘Lady Goddess, come quick.’ Bryce came racing up
to Tory. ‘The men will not let Ione enter.’ He took hold

of her hand and raced away with her to the lower green,
where the initial heats were about to commence.
Tory strode up to address Cedric, who was in charge
of the proceedings. ‘Sir Cedric, I have been informed
that thee forbids Ione to enter my quest. May I ask why?’
‘Lady.’ He bowed slightly, surprised she even knew
the crazy woman. ‘To compete one hast to be a knight
of Gwynedd, or be nominated by a knight or one of
nobility. And with good reason! This prevents those
unready to meet the challenge from being able to enter
and be unduly harmed.’
‘Do I qualify to have an entrant, Cedric?’
‘Why, I . . . I guess.’
‘Good. Then I shall nominate Ione as my representative.’
‘Excellent!’ Taliesin slapped a hand on Cedric’s
shoulder. ‘The fee shall be on me, and here be the fee
for my own entrant.’ The money went into a pot, and
‘winner takes all’ were the stakes. Taliesin motioned to
a short but well-built knight as he dropped the gold
pieces into Cedric’s hand.
The knight was quite unlike any warrior Cedric had
ever seen, and wore no armour. He was dressed totally
in black, even his face was covered by a tight black
balaclava. Dark glasses covered his eyes, and black
gloves concealed his hands. The only trace of him that
could be seen at all, was the long brown braid that fell
over his broad shoulders to his waist.
Cedric was disgusted by all this; first a woman in the
tournament, and now a demon or the like. ‘What
manner of knight be this, High Merlin?’

‘Why, he be the Black Knight, of course. Every
tournament hast to have one.’
‘His Majesty will have to consent, I do not have the
authority –’
‘What art the two of thee doing to poor Cedric?’
Maelgwn, having caught the last part of the conversation, relieved the knight of his woes. ‘Whatever
they ask be fine, Cedric. What my lady wants this day,
my lady gets.’ Tory squealed as the King lifted her high
in the air. ‘What mode of contest shall proceed this day,
as if I did not know?’ he asked her as he brought her
back to earth.
Tory returned his knowing smile, holding up her
fists to confirm. ‘But there art rules. Gather the
competitors and I shall enlighten everyone.’
Cedric appeared rather bothered by this break in
tradition, as he watched the King and Tory make their
way to address those concerned.
‘By jove, I am having fun! Be this not truly exciting?’ Taliesin implored Cedric with a slap on the back.
Cedric managed a meagre sneer as they followed the
royals.
Maelgwn called for the attention of everyone and
thanked the competitors for their participation. Then
Tory came forward to make the announcement they had
all been waiting for. ‘Warriors of Gwynedd, thee will
compete this day with naught but what the Goddess
gave thee at birth,’ she decreed, before going on to
explain the rules.
Anyone who failed to comply with them would
immediately forfeit the match to their opponent. Tory

had four large circles marked out on the lawn with long
pieces of thick rope. Each circle would yield, after a
series of knockout rounds, one of the four finalists. If
one could force their opponent out of the circle, it was
worth a point. If one wrestled their opponent to the
ground and held them for a count of five, it was a point.
A clean, undefended punch would also fetch a point,
but one’s opponent must refrain from retaliation until
the point was awarded. Any combination of these, for
example, forcing one’s opponent out of the circle with
an undefended punch, was worth two points, and so on.
No biting, hitting below the belt, or head butting was
allowed, and the first to gain a lead of three points won
the match. This form of challenge was fast, effective,
and comparatively less harmful than some of the
alternatives she could have chosen.
Not only were these rules to Ione’s advantage, but
they gave Tory a chance to investigate any undiscovered talent that she could train as one of her masters
– who would, in turn, become her trainers for the
masses.
She already had her female contingent, and had
spoken to the King about training Rhys, Tiernan, Calin,
Angus, and perhaps Cedric, over the autumn and
through the cold seasons. This would mean that the
knights and their families would have to stay in the
house at Aberffraw throughout the long cold spell
(known as sleep or burgeoning) instead of returning to
their own estates. Of course, this would be their choice.
In the first clash of the knockout competition, Sir
Cedric thought he was being smart when he matched

Ione to fight against Sir Rhys. The poor knight was
subsequently humiliated when he lost three points to
naught. Sir Cedric, after bearing witness to the
unfortunate occurrence, didn’t sacrifice any more of his
valued knights to her fury so early in the competition. If
this woman did manage to make it to the finals, she
would be weary and one of his finer champions,
Brockwell or Tiernan, would surely finish her.
Ione silently basked in her win. She waited in the
circle, arms folded, eager to take on the next challenger.
The wind blew the long, brown strands of her hair about
the striking features of her face, and she looked rather
fine dressed in men’s attire. In fact, she quite reminded
Tory of one of the proud women of ancient Gaul.
Tory kept the company of Bryce and Taliesin for
most of the afternoon. On the lower green they witnessed their representatives go on to win their heats,
and make the final four who would compete for the title
and the pot of gold.
Taliesin’s entrant, whose fighting style was quite like
that of the Queen’s, had all speculating as to what
Otherworld ancestor the Merlin had conjured up to
compete on his behalf. Or perhaps he was a warrior
from the future or the distant past? But the Merlin was
tight lipped and refused to comment.
The Black Knight became the third of the final four,
and Ione the last. Calin and Tiernan had won the first
two placings, managing also to aid Gwynedd to victory
against Gwent Is Coed in the challenge.
Things had looked bad for Gwynedd at first, as the
knights from Gwent in the south, who were constantly

plagued by seafaring attacks on their harbour ports, had
won the archery competition. The warriors from
Gwynedd, who were more accustomed to ground assault
both on foot and horseback, triumphed in the end,
however, winning the greater points in the jousting and
swordplay events.
As Dyfed had only just defeated Dumnonia in all
three trials, Vortipor had got his wish and would
compete against the legend of Gwynedd. It was plain to
all that the two young leaders were greatly looking
forward to the match, as they raised a goblet of mead to
each other’s success and well-being.
Once again, the boys from the south clenched the
greater points for archery, and although Maelgwn shot
much better this time round the more experienced
bowmen from Dyfed won out in the end.
Tory found the jousting and swordplay hair-raising,
yet after Angus, Rhys, and Tiernan had won their heats
it was plain to all who the greater horsemen and
swordsmen were. Dyfed, having seen little hostile action
of late, found their battle skills in this area somewhat
lacking.
Brockwell managed to conclude his heat against
Vortipor’s champion, Sir Queron, in a matter of
minutes. Calin was just as amazing to watch in action as
Brian had been, Tory thought. So at home on a horse
and with his weapons was he, that they seemed a mere
extension of himself. He dismounted his opponent on
the first pass of their joust. Brockwell then sprang from
the charging horse and had his sword poised at the
throat of his adversary before Queron realised what had

hit him. Sir Queron, twice his opponent’s age and far
more experienced, could hardly believe it.
‘Wast thou born on a horse with a sword in thy
hand, boy? I have never seen such skill in one so young.
I do humbly yield to thee, Sir Brockwell of Penmon,’
Queron said, holding out a hand for Brockwell to help
him up.
Under normal circumstances, Brockwell would
probably have taken offence to the older knight
referring to him as a boy and run him through. Yet, Sir
Queron was quite notorious himself, so Brockwell
considered this to be a compliment and gladly helped
him to his feet.
Maelgwn hoisted himself onto the black stallion,
Aristotle, and Tory grew nervous as she watched. She
sat forward in her seat, unsure if she felt thus because he
appeared so gallant, or if it was a premonition. ‘I do not
know about this,’ she uttered, feeling uneasy.
Brockwell claimed the seat beside her, lifting Bryce
to sit on his lap. ‘Fear not. Maelgwn be good at the
joust.’
‘Aye,’ Catulus seconded Calin’s view. ‘The best.’
Cedric sounded the cry and the two began their
charge towards each other.
Tory’s pulse was racing but she couldn’t look. She
heard the sound of the lances meet.
‘Wooh!’ the crowd cried, before breaking into
applause.
‘What happened?’ Tory asked, not opening her eyes.
‘Tory!’ Brockwell sounded disgusted. ‘Thou art
supposed to watch. Nothing hast happened.’

Upon daring to open her eyes she found them lining
up for another pass. ‘Damn.’
She was not to be put out of her misery upon this
clash either. Five more passes followed before Maelgwn
finally toppled Vortipor from his horse and they drew
their swords to do battle.
‘Good show, Maelgwn! Finish him off,’ Catulus
yelled in encouragement, holding up his mead to the
young King.
Both men used swords rounded blunt at the point,
although one could still inflict a nasty gash if desired, as
the blades were left quite sharp.
The two leaders battled and sidestepped each other
for a time to the great excitement of the spectators.
Finally, Vortipor took advantage of the sun setting
behind him, and Maelgwn sustained a gash to the upper
left arm.
Tory stood and called out to her husband’s assailant.
‘Thee will pay for that one, Vortipor.’ She gestured to
Maelgwn in a sign language only they understood.
He gave her a nod of understanding and returned
his attention to the fight, again clashing swords with
Vortipor. Maelgwn held his attacker’s blade at bay with
his own and startled Vortipor with a numbing kick to
his jaw. When the Irish warrior hit the ground,
Maelgwn stepped hard onto his sword arm, forcing him
to lose his weapon. The King rested the blunt end of his
blade against Vortipor’s jugular. ‘The Goddess warned
thee friend, dost thou yield?’
‘What happened?’ Vortipor rested his free hand
against his bruised jaw.

‘Dost thou yield?’ The King looked down at his
stunned foe.
‘It would seem thou hast left me little choice,’
Vortipor granted, and Maelgwn gave him a hand to his
feet. ‘Congratulations Dragon, thou art a formidable
opponent. And ah, sorry about the scratch, got a tad
carried away.’
Maelgwn shrugged as if it were nothing. ‘Come, let
us relax with a drink and watch for a while.’
The King reclined in the marquee while his cut was
dressed. Gwynedd had won and there was much cause to
celebrate, especially for King Catulus, who’d clenched
the wager he’d held with Vortipor and Aurelius
Caninus.
‘I told thee, he never loses,’ King Catulus chuckled,
merrily pouring more mead for them all.
Tory’s attention drifted to the arena where Sir
Tiernan and Ione stood opposite each other, ready to
commence the first of the three final fights of the day.
The winner of this would meet the Black Knight and
the winner of that would fight Brockwell for the title, as
he was ranked most highly.
As soon as Cedric gave them leave, Ione charged
Tiernan. The shock tactic worked, as she was able to
throw him off balance and out of the circle.
Tiernan protested and cursed his ridiculous
situation, insisting he could not fight a female.
‘Get used to it,’ was Tory’s response, and Maelgwn
merely shrugged; it was Tory’s day, her quest, her rules.
Tiernan reluctantly returned to the arena to lose
three to one.

None too happy, he entered the marquee to join his
fellow knights. ‘Do not feel bad, Tiernan, she licked me
first round.’ Rhys, who had recovered from the
embarrassment, held a drink out to his friend.
With his pride and body still freshly bruised,
Tiernan was not yet ready to laugh it off. ‘It be
ludicrous!’ he insisted, accepting the goblet of mead.
Tory stood to face him and Maelgwn rose beside her,
a mite worried she would cut loose. ‘Then thou art not
serious about my instruction, Tiernan?’
The knight cooled at the sight of her, nodding his
head to confirm both her statement and his mistake. ‘I
did not think. Apologies lady, if I have offended the
Goddess.’
A commotion erupted in the arena and Tory turned
to see soldiers dragging Ione away from the Black
Knight, kicking and screeching in protest. Cedric
approached the royal marquee, appearing rather
pleased.
‘I be very sorry, lady but thy entrant hast attacked
her opponent before we commenced. That warrants
disqualification doth it not?’
Tory appeared disappointed. ‘Those art the rules.’
‘Match to the Black Knight, he shall meet
Brockwell for the Queen’s title,’ Cedric decreed.
Rhys and Tiernan were overwhelmed with delight,
clinking their goblets and taking a swig.
Tory rolled her eyes at this. ‘Typical.’
Before the last match of the day began, both
contenders were brought before Tory for her blessing.
The knights knelt before her, heads bowed low.

‘Brave warriors of Gwynedd, who have fought so
gallantly this day, I wish thee the best of luck in thy quest
for the title and the gold. May the greater warrior win.’
The two knights rose, the Black Knight returning
immediately to the arena. Brockwell, however, lingered
near Tory to ask her in a whisper, ‘Where be Katren, she
be missing this?’
‘I did speak with her earlier, and I hate to say it but
she sounded a mite upset with thee. But I feel sure she
will be watching in any case.’
Calin was most perturbed as he returned to the ring
for the challenge.
As Tory took her seat next to Maelgwn, appearing
rather pleased with herself, he leant over to her. ‘What
art thou up to? Something be going on, I can feel it.’
‘Trust me,’ she advised, patting his knee.
Bryce came racing up and sat on Tory’s lap. ‘Calin
be going to win!’ The boy was convinced, having
witnessed his idol undefeated this day.
‘I would not count on it,’ Taliesin commented,
quietly confident of a win himself.
‘Who be this knight, Taliesin?’ Maelgwn was finally
curious enough to inquire. ‘He cannot be a local, I
would surely know such a fine warrior.’
‘I assure thee, Majesty, my knight lives up to all of
thy requirements.’
‘In other words, thou hast no intention of telling
me.’
‘Correct.’ Taliesin looked back to the arena where
the clash was about to commence. ‘The Black Knight’s
identity shall be revealed to thee upon my victory.’

Cedric sounded the cry and the two warriors began
stalking each other in a circle round the edge of the
rope. Calin was about to make his move when the Black
Knight spun round and planted a heel in his stomach
with such force that Brockwell was driven to the ground
well outside the circle.
‘Two points to the Black Knight.’
Cedric’s announcement angered Brockwell; he
hadn’t lost a point all day. ‘Who art thou, sir? I want to
know.’ He rose, angered.
The Black Knight stood in defence, urging Calin
back into the ring.
‘Now Sir Brockwell, let’s not do anything rash,’
Cedric cautioned. He did not want his last hope
disqualified for misconduct.
‘Nay, let us get on with it,’ Brockwell growled,
taking his place.
‘Match point,’ Cedric informed the crowd to Calin’s
further irritation. ‘Begin!’
Again they circled, yet Calin was more cautious this
time and stayed further inside the ring. The Black
Knight seemed to be taunting him, darting around his
attack with apparent ease. In the glossy black shield
that covered his opponent’s eyes, Brockwell could see
his own clumsy attack, and he now wished he’d
encouraged Tory to train him sooner. Calin lashed out
with a punch, and his arm was unexpectedly trapped
mid-flight. The next thing he knew, he was twisted
around to land face down in the dirt.
As Cedric started the count, Brockwell struggled in
vain to break loose. His arm was pushed hard up across

his back, and the Black Knight’s knee was firmly
embedded in his back.
‘Four and a half . . . ?’ Cedric tried to stall and was
finally forced to concede defeat. ‘Five. I hail the Black
Knight to be the Queen’s Champion and victorious this
day.’ He didn’t sound at all excited about the announcement.
There was a silent pause as Brockwell rose and turned
to face the Black Knight. ‘Show thyself,’ he demanded in
anger, planning to kill him, whoever he was.
The Black Knight bowed politely, conforming to his
wish. As the knight removed the head cover, all gasped
in awe.
‘Lady Katren!’ Brockwell went weak at the knees,
stunned.
‘Aye, a woman be capable of so much more than
just warming thy bed, Calin. Here endeth the lesson.
Now if thou would excuse me, I shall be off to collect
my due.’ She turned to make her way to the King and
Queen, looking back briefly to add with glee, as she
removed her gloves, ‘Fair fight.’
Calin was totally beguiled as Cedric placed a hand
on his shoulder to comfort him. ‘It be a shock to me
too, Brockwell. I think we had best take up the way of
the Goddess before the women take over!’
Ione held her hand up to Katren as she approached
the royal tent, and Katren served her a high-five as she
passed.
Maelgwn couldn’t help but smile at this. ‘Katren,
thou art all swollen.’ He made jest of the padding of her
disguise.

‘Ate too much at thy wedding, Majesty.’ She
curtsied to him, very pleased with herself.
Tory, Cara, Alma, Ione, Lady Gladys and Taliesin
gathered around Katren. The Merlin placed a goblet in
her hand, as the group of women raised their drinks in
the air.
‘A toast to the Goddess, ladies,’ Taliesin said, briefly
admiring the lovely women around him. ‘The Goddess
returns!’
‘The Goddess returns!’ the women repeated after
him, clinking goblets to drink to their first victory.
After claiming her gold, Katren made her way back to
her quarters to clean up before the night’s celebrations.
She was not surprised when Calin followed her.
‘Why, Katren? Why hast thou done this to me?’ he
asked. ‘I even saved thy virtue not so long past . . .’
‘Only to try to steal it last night!’ she snapped back.
‘I do not regret my actions, Calin, thou deserved it.’
‘Alright, I deserved it,’ he agreed, not wanting to
fight. ‘I apologise for what I said last night, can thou not
forgive me?’
‘Of course,’ Katren said without hesitation. ‘Thou
art forgiven.’ She turned and continued her stride up to
the house.
Brockwell was stumped for a moment by the ease of
his absolution and ran to catch her up. ‘Katren.’ He
caught her arm. ‘I wish to court thee,’ Brockwell blurted
out, barely believing the words that had left his mouth.
Katren smiled, patting his cheek. ‘I do not think so,
not yet. Next spring perhaps, if thou art still so inclined.

I have a fair idea thy feelings for me may change in the
near future.’
‘Why spring? I shall surely die before then.’
‘Art thou intending to train under Tory this coming
autumn and beyond?’ She slipped her arm away and
ever so gently pushed him back a little.
‘Aye.’ His brow became drawn. ‘Why?’
She began to move off, her eyes still fixed upon him.
‘I do look forward to it then – as I am to be thy sparring
partner.’ She punched the palm of her hand and
laughed.
Brockwell wasn’t quite sure how he felt about the
news, but recalling the way Maelgwn and Tory were
always rolling around on the floor together, he shrugged
and grinned. ‘How bad could it be?’

13

Winds of
Change

T

ory’s first day in court with the knights and
advisers of Gwynedd was going to prove every
bit as difficult as she’d imagined. The men were
riled after their defeat at the hands of the female
warriors the day before. Tory deemed that the demonstration had been necessary, however, in light of the
proposal she was about to put forth.
On the court’s agenda were four main items for
discussion – Chiglas’ wedding gift being the first. The
laws regarding provision and protection of the women
and children of Gwynedd would follow, along with the
new marriage laws. The meeting would conclude with
an outline of the role and standards that would be

expected from the elite group of masters that Tory
planned to train.
With so much to discuss before the court convened,
Tory and Maelgwn retreated to the comfort and privacy
of their chamber. There the King read Tory’s proposal
thoroughly, which they had discussed in part before his
inauguration. Lady Gladys had advised Tory well, and
Maelgwn agreed that the work displayed much
foresight. Although he was quite sure some of his men
would not take too kindly to the restraints of the new
laws, Maelgwn agreed that the plans would undoubtedly
benefit Gwynedd and the Goddess in the long run.
A State-subsidised orphanage would be opened
where old Hetty’s brothel village now stood, to house
and protect the neglected children of Caswallon’s rule.
It was to be run by Hetty and two of her older girls, thus
giving them gainful employment and ridding them of
the need to solicit. The bastard children would be given
every opportunity to advance socially of their own
accord and initiative. A school and playground for the
village would also be opened in the spring. From then
on, every child between the ages of five and fifteen who
could travel to the school in Aberffraw, would be
required to attend.
Tory proposed that Selwyn, who was fairly well
educated, could train under Taliesin over the cold
season and teach at the school when it opened. The
King obviously didn’t fancy the idea of giving up his
page, but Tory pointed out that the aspiring bard could
be far better employed as a teacher. Selwyn could
instruct the children in basic mathematics, language,

history and music while one or two of her ladies
instructed them in self-defence, meditation and basic
combat skills.
The parents of the children, where applicable,
would be required to pay a small fee in addition to their
normal taxes for each child. In return, their children
would be educated, fed, and upon reaching the age of
fifteen, taken off their hands completely. This was
already the case with the males of the kingdom, and by
the spring a new hall would be erected in the outerbailey grounds to house the young females. From then
on, rather than being sold to the highest bidder, the
daughters of Gwynedd would be sold to the State; this
was also true of the young unwed girls of old Hetty’s
keeping. That way, women would serve the royal family
for a term, in the same fashion the men did, giving
them a few years to discover their calling. Tory hoped
this would make it easier for the young men and women
of the kingdom to meet, mix, and hopefully match, as it
should be.
In future, all marriages would have to be not only
recorded, but approved by the State. Both parties would
have to freely consent before the court and their
immediate family, and if there was no serious cause for
objection, the couple would be granted permission to
wed. Hence the buying and selling of human beings
would become a criminal offence. Dowries were an
exception to this rule, as they were considered more of a
savings plan to support the daughter in married life.
The wife would bestow this wealth on her chosen
husband, and should the marriage end in divorce, she

could reclaim the same amount to support herself and
any kin for whom she may have to provide.
The beating of women and children would become
a punishable offence throughout the land, as would
rape. Tory knew these cases would be hard to try in
court, especially in that period in history, yet until some
sort of deterrent was put in place, the culprits would not
be dissuaded.
Maelgwn found the outline for the Master’s training
scheme fascinating. First and foremost, these men and
women would be required to abide by the new laws as
set by the Goddess. Those chosen would guide and set
the standard for the many who would follow. If her
masters didn’t display consideration and understanding
for each other, they could not respect the Great Mother
and would cease to serve her. The masters would also be
asked to take a vow to Gwynedd – that they would
never instruct or speak to another outside their ranks
about their skills without the Queen’s personal consent.
To break this vow would be punishable by death.
Tory decided to follow the traditional belt colourcoding system to define the achievement of each
individual. The masters would wear white uniforms, like
her own, while they were students, and black once they
became teachers. The belts would define how masterful
one was personally. In Tae-kwon-do there were ten
different coloured grades before the black belt, these
lower grades were known as Kyu. Kyudan, dedicated to
the refinement of the self, consisted of ten different
grades of black belt, of which Tory had only reached the
second grade.

Maelgwn was inspired by the thought of so much
learning. At present, once one became a knight that
was as far as it went, except for the odd title challenge.
With this proposal his men would have something new
to strive for and he, like never before, could compete
alongside them.
As the teachers, champions, and representatives of
Gwynedd, this elite group of masters would be the first
to be awarded special privileges, like a weekend. With
intensive training all week, these two days would be set
aside to relax, practise, or study.
There were other details to be finalised but on the
whole, Maelgwn conceded that Tory could do a fine job
of running his kingdom, all on her own. Yet as he
embraced her, claiming she was the most miraculous
woman he’d ever known, Tory had to wonder if he’d
still think so on the morrow, when his men wanted his
head for agreeing with her.
In court the next day, Tory wore the gown of black,
representing the Crone or wise woman of the Triple
Goddess. With the same cut as the other two dresses,
this one laced up the front from her hips to a sweetheart
neckline, and the collar sat stiff about her shoulders,
framing her face. Her hair had been bound up tight in a
bun at the top of her head, and her make-up was dark
and striking.
Chiglas’ messenger had presented his case to the
court, yet the King gained no further insight into either
Chiglas’ or Cadogan’s true intent. For Chiglas to offer
only Cadogan in exchange for Caradoc’s list of offences

was laughable; surely Chiglas must realise that
Maelgwn could never accept, and this made the new
King uneasy.
If Cadogan was lying about his imprisonment, he
was very convincing. Still, Tory noticed he didn’t
appear any worse for it, and she could hardly blame the
man because he’d managed to come through his ordeal
unscathed. To be sure, she didn’t know what to think.
Her solemn glare of accusation failed to make him
flinch from his story, and pretty soon even she began to
question her doubts about him.
In the end, the King decreed that Cadogan was by
no means enough ransom to buy Caradoc’s freedom or
pay for his grievous crimes against the kingdom of
Gwynedd. He thanked Chiglas’ messenger for
Cadogan’s safe return and bid him tell Chiglas that if he
wished to make a more substantial offer, he would
consider it. If not, come spring he would feed Caradoc
to the dragon of Keridwen, as promised.
This decision worried Tory greatly; if Cadogan was
conspiring with Chiglas, this would be exactly what
they wanted Maelgwn to do. Cadogan would be snowed
in for the whole of the cold season at Aberffraw, and
with Tory’s training about to commence, she didn’t like
the idea one bit. She would wait, however, and discuss
it with Maelgwn when they were alone and at liberty to
speak their mind.
As Tory refrained from commenting on the matter
of Cadogan, Maelgwn wondered if perhaps she’d
changed her mind in regard to his knight’s loyalties. Yet
when she politely refused to begin her address to the

court until Cadogan had left the room, the King
realised their difference in opinion still remained.
Following a heavy day in court and all the frivolity of
the feast that followed, Tory and Maelgwn finally
returned to the solace of their chamber for some wellearned time alone. Tory collapsed onto a chair
exhausted, unwinding her hair from the tight knot on
top of her head.
‘Thee spoke like a true Queen in court today. And I
must say, the men accepted thy proposals more readily
than I expected. Well done.’ He took a seat beside her,
planting a kiss on her forehead.
‘Why thank you, kind sir.’ Tory conjured up a smile.
‘We shall see if they art still so agreeable when the laws
come into force.’
Selwyn knocked on the door before bounding into
their room, appearing as if he’d just won a prize.
‘Forgive me for disturbing thee, but I have just heard of
thy plans for me. Oh lady, could it be true?’
Tory delighted in his excitement, holding out her
hands to him as he approached. Selwyn grasped them and
fell to his knees before her. ‘Aye Selwyn, if thee wishes it.’
‘Oh lady, I do, I do. And with all my heart, I thank
thee.’ He kissed her hands repeatedly.
‘Enough.’ Maelgwn swiped his page across the back
of the head.
Selwyn apologised to his lord and turned back to Tory.
‘There be no need to thank me, Selwyn. Thou art
the best one for the appointment, and I believe Taliesin
will be well impressed with thee.’

‘I do hope so, lady. I shall do my very best to make
thee proud.’
Again, she was amused. ‘Selwyn, I am already proud
of thee. Always remember that.’
‘Aye lady, I will.’
‘Go now.’ She smiled down on him, gently stroking
aside a long strand of golden hair that fell across his
face. ‘I believe the High Merlin awaits thee in the
library.’
Selwyn jumped to his feet, startled by the news.
Then remembering his place, fell on one knee again to
kiss her hand, then stood and ran backwards to the
door. ‘I owe thee everything, lady. I cannot thank thee
enough.’
Maelgwn turned to Tory, ‘I wonder at times whose
squire he be.’
Selwyn knocked and entered again. ‘My greatest
apologies, Majesty. I do thank thee also and bid thee a
very goodnight.’ He left again before Maelgwn had a
chance to respond.
The King turned to Tory, a mite surprised by just
how well she understood his subjects. ‘I think he likes
the idea.’
‘I think thou art right.’ Tory was elated to have
made the youth so happy.
‘Thou dost not think me right about Cadogan
though?’ Maelgwn asked, though he seemed reluctant to
bring up the subject.
‘If thee wishes to give thy knight the benefit of the
doubt, I will accept thy judgement. I do realise there be
no solid evidence against him.’

‘But?’
Tory shrugged. She really didn’t want to discuss
Cadogan now, when they finally had a few hours alone
together.
‘Tory, I am thy husband, thus I hope thee will feel at
ease to speak thy mind.’
The tenderness in his voice both touched and
infuriated her. ‘Must we pursue this now?’ Tory asked
meekly, so as not to anger him.
‘Tory?’ Maelgwn was alarmed by her timid stance
and reluctance to speak with him. He took up her hands
and held them tightly. ‘I will not be angry with thee, I
could not! Thou art my wife. I respect thy judgement
and need to hear it. Please.’
‘Maelgwn, thou art most frustrating at times.’ Tory
stood. ‘Thou art already well aware of how I feel about
Cadogan, why push the issue?’
‘I had thought perhaps thee might have changed
thy mind.’
‘I have not, nor will I ever.’
‘I see.’ He was displeased. ‘And what would thee
now have me do with him?’
Tory could feel her adrenalin rising and paused
briefly to retain her composure. ‘I would send him to
Degannwy for the cold season and away from thy
training ground.’
‘But Aberffraw be Cadogan’s home, as well as it be
my own.’
‘Not only that. I would have someone keep a close
eye on him while he was there, in case he should seek
out Caradoc.’

Maelgwn stood, outraged. ‘Tory, thou art being
unreasonable. Cadogan hast done naught wrong, and
he’s been through a great ordeal. Now thee would have
me send him from his home, for the whole duration of
the autumn and burgeoning? Nay, I will not do as thee
suggests.’
‘Be that what Caswallon told Sorcha when she
warned him about Cadfer?’ Her retribution, so swift and
to the point, stunned Maelgwn to silence, and he slowly
sat down. Tory feared she had hurt him and rushed to
kneel at his side, resting her head on his lap. ‘Maelgwn,
forgive me. I had no right –’
‘Nay, thou hast every right. I had near forgotten
myself.’
Tory looked up at him to hear his resolve.
‘I shall do as the Goddess bids me. But if Cadogan
remains at Degannwy without incident till spring, will
thee accept this as proof of his loyalty?’
‘I would certainly reconsider the matter.’
Maelgwn smiled at her as he stroked her hair. ‘Then
it will be done.’
The morning came too soon in Tory’s opinion. She felt
the warmth of Maelgwn’s body leaving hers, and dreamt
of the weekends that lay ahead when they might spend
the whole day snuggled together. This morning, however, she would not be allowed to escape her duty. For
today she was to be crowned Queen, and address the
great leaders of Britain.
She hadn’t the slightest idea of what she was to say
to them. Maelgwn had conveyed to her the words of

Keridwen, so Tory could only presume that she had
another cosmic episode to look forward to. So much for
being well informed.
When Sorcha had held control over her, she and
the Queen had seemed to Tory as one. She felt what
Sorcha did, she knew her mind, and she even recalled
some of her memories. When Sorcha had addressed Sir
Tiernan at the time of Caswallon’s death, Tory saw and
felt things between the two that she was quite sure none
of the kindred knew about. Tory couldn’t imagine how
it would feel to have the entity known as the Triple
Goddess inside her, so she was as nervous as hell.
All the women of the household were fussing about
her, fixing her dress and combing her hair. Tory was
pleased that today was the last day of celebrations; the
novelty of dressing up had worn thin.
The tunic-style dress of green had a bodice and skirt
the like of the others, but it squared at the neck and was
sleeveless. A shirt of the palest green silk was worn
under it, and the underside of the sleeves fell to the
floor. Her hair was left to fall naturally, crowned by a
wreath of ivy, pink roses and lily of the valley.
‘Tory, thou art as pretty as a nymph,’ Lady Gladys
concluded. ‘Doth thou now feel prepared to face thy
subjects?’
Tory rolled her eyes at the question. ‘If we wait until
I feel ready, Lady Gladys, Gwynedd may well remain
without a Queen for Maelgwn’s entire rein.’
Lady Gladys chuckled, taking Tory by the arm. ‘Thou
art the fairest, strongest, and dare I say, wisest Queen this
kingdom hast ever known. Thee shall do well.’

In Tory’s mind, the processional walk to her
crowning was far more gruelling than that of her
wedding. Today she was not expected to be a blushing
vision of sweetness, but a wise and fearless leader.
Just who am I fooling, I can’t do this, she thought.
What in hell’s name was I thinking when I agreed? I’m
not even supposed to be here! Her stately air did not
waver as she made her way up the long aisle. All alone,
she felt every eye in the hall upon her, and this
knowledge made her temperature rise to near boiling
point. How could you do this to yourself, the voice in
her mind scolded as she approached the stairs at the end
of the aisle, where Maelgwn met her. His smile was a
revelation. That’s how. Tory’s fear subsided, as she placed
her hand on Maelgwn’s to accompany him up the stairs
to the throne.
Taliesin led Tory through her pledges, both to
Gwynedd and the Goddess. Maelgwn then removed the
garland of flowers from her head and took great pleasure
in bestowing the crown of Gwynedd in its place. The
silver counterpart to his own of pure gold had been
worn by the queens of his kingdom for generations, and
it fitted perfectly.
As all present joined to hail the new Queen by
kneeling before her, Tory marked how heavy the crown
felt on her head and took hold of Maelgwn’s hand to
squeeze it tight. Suddenly she had gained a greater
understanding of what must have been for Maelgwn a
lifelong plight.
Tears rose in Tory’s eyes at the overwhelming scene
before her, yet she held her head high and smiled for all

to see. None, bar Taliesin, knew how deeply dismayed
the young Queen really was. The High Merlin wasn’t at
all worried about this, as Sorcha had been the same.
The position would seem a little overwhelming at first,
of course, but after witnessing how Tory had handled
the men at court the day before, he held no doubt she
would cope well enough.
All was going according to plan for the High
Merlin. The Prince had fallen in love with Tory and
brought the British leaders of the land together for
conference; now they entered an unknown future. The
three of them, this very day, would change the course of
history forever.
King Maelgwn, his new Queen and Taliesin dined in
Gwynedd’s court with the other noble personages of
Britain. The room had been beautifully adorned with
fresh flowers to honour the coming of the Goddess, a
great feast had been laid out for their guests, and the
sound of Selwyn’s harp echoed softly in the background.
Over good mead and fine food, old King Caninus,
King Catulus and Vortipor each expressed the great
pleasure they’d savoured during the past few days. So
much so that they were tempted to stay at Aberffraw for
the whole of the cold season!
Once the feast had been cleared away, Selwyn was
excused, for it was time to get down to the business at
hand. Tory sat in a throne at the end of the table.
Maelgwn sat at the opposite end, which was too far
away for her liking.
‘Art thou ready, Majesty?’ Taliesin stood up.

‘I am.’ Tory sounded confident, yet inside the
butterflies almost made her sick.
Taliesin laid his hands on Tory’s shoulders as he
came to stand behind her, proud of how well she
concealed her doubt from their guests. The High
Merlin calmed her with his healing energies, and Tory’s
eyes closed with the relief she suddenly felt. Taliesin
took this opportunity to formally introduce himself to
the representatives of Britain as he opened the
proceedings:
The Books of Bede do not lie,
the chair of the guardian is here,
and shall so continue in Europe till the judgement.
The High Merlin’s eyes became glazed and his voice
monotone. The leaders looked on with great anticipation, hanging on his every word.
I am Taliesin, son of Keridwen,
my charge be to protect her true descendancy.
For all time I shall be here
as prophet to Gwynedd and her allies.
My knowledge is the wisdom of the Ancients.
I foresee danger from afar,
and devise strategies for protection.
And I serve only the offspring,
who uphold the way of the Goddess.
Today I come before these men at Mon,
seeking their esteem and blessing.

An eternity I have endured this
earthly existence,
dwelling in the shadows with the elements.
I alone bespeak the custom of our forefathers,
as they have nominated me as one of the three
great judges.
Taliesin paused to take a deep breath. Tory did likewise.
Next thing she knew, the room seemed to be throbbing
in time with her heart. Her head felt heavy and, no
longer able to support it, she let it drop forward.
Bountiful Mother, fair as the dawn,
wonder to the land of Britain,
cast thy rainbow around this court,
that we may drive back the attack against
our land.
Pray, great lady, show thyself
so that on this day we may all be graced with thy wisdom.
Taliesin gently lowered Tory’s semiconscious body so
that she was slumped over the table. She groaned,
appearing to be in a bit of discomfort.
When the King rose concerned, the High Merlin
sternly motioned to him to stay put, and they all waited
breathlessly for Tory to rise.
Tory’s body slowly sat up in the chair, and the four
nobles knelt and humbled themselves as they beheld
the fairy features of Keridwen and the angelic green
glow of the Divine Mother.

‘Mother of God!’ King Caninus uttered aghast, as he
strained his old bones to kneel for the first time in
nearly twenty years. Although he didn’t recognise the
Goddess by sight, something miraculous had happened
to this woman’s face; her entire demeanour, bone structure, and eye colour had changed right before his eyes.
‘Greetings gentlemen, I thank thee for thy
attendance and the new King of Gwynedd for his pains
in calling this meeting in my name.’ The large, dark
eyes of the Crone looked at Maelgwn. ‘My son’s
expectations of thee have not fallen short of his boast.
Thou art truly one of the Chosen and do serve thy
forefathers proud.’ Again her voice resounded with the
voices of all three aspects of her nature.
‘I live only to serve the Great Houses, my lady,’
Maelgwn replied, full of ardour.
‘And we art most gratified by thy devotion,
Maelgwn. Please be seated, lords, as we have much to
discuss. I should not tax this sweet child any longer
than necessary.’
The Goddess kept her address short and to the
point. She outlined the problems that Chiglas and the
raiders posed, and the future of the native Britons if
they did not pool their resources to defend their lands.
‘These raiders art not as the Romans were. They do not
seek to control my people, but to eradicate them
completely! By the year two thousand and twenty, no
trace will remain of our culture or our people. Our land
stolen from beneath us, will wither and die with the
exile of the folk. Forever barren, no life shall be able to
sustain itself and Mother Earth shall be lost for eons.’

This insight rang true with Maelgwn in particular,
as this confirmed many things that Tory had told him of
her time.
‘In this knowledge shall ye unite under one banner
to defend the mother country?’ The Goddess cast her
sights over them.
‘Dumnonia merely awaits thy instruction lady, thy
folk and ways shall be honoured henceforth throughout
my kingdom. And I assure thee, King Maelgwn and
Gwynedd have held and will continue to hold my
allegiance for the duration of my lifetime,’ Catulus
answered her. He felt a new man for his adventures. He
cared not what the priests of Rome would say or those
who followed them; anything that made him feel so
alive was worthwhile in his mind.
The Goddess nodded to Catulus, thankful for his
support. She then shifted her gaze to Vortipor, who sat
beside him.
Vortipor slowly shook his head as he smiled. ‘I have
been witness to many a strange occurrence in my time,
but since the fateful day I met the good King of
Gwynedd here, I have never known such wonder. I wish
nothing more than to link our nations against thy foe,
lady.’
As the Goddess looked to Aurelius Caninus for his
thoughts, Maelgwn and Vortipor silently prayed that
the old King of Gwent Is Coed wouldn’t complicate the
issue.
The King’s eyes, still wide with wonder, suddenly
lowered as the Goddess turned her attention to him. He
was attempting to hide the tears of shame that welled in

them. ‘Great lady, I fear I am an old misled fool and a
great disappointment to thee. I do solemnly swear that I
shall dedicate my every free moment in the short time I
have left on this earth, to studying and honouring thy
greatness. I beg thee forgive my ignorance, for I have
truly known no better. I ask that thee accept my humble
offer of service to aid thy cause.’
The Goddess reached out and took up the old King’s
hands, smiling in delight at her prodigal son. ‘My good
King Caninus, thou doth cause naught but much
rejoicing in my heart, and thy noble ancestors art
appeased by thy faith this day. I do wholeheartedly
welcome thee home.’
‘Oh praise thee, lady.’ A couple of tears trickled
down his wrinkled face. ‘Thou art far too forgiving.’
‘Nonsense, that be my way, Aurelius.’ She turned to
motion Taliesin forth.
The Merlin unrolled a scroll on the table to present
his outline of the treaty for all to consider.
The Goddess remained with them only long enough
to witness them sign the pact. Once her task had been
accomplished, she bid her new representatives farewell.
‘Henceforth, thou art all delegates of the Otherworld
and the esteemed protectors of Britain. Be as brothers,
for thou art one, and let none divide thee. This be the
will of the great Houses Don and Llyr.’
Maelgwn placed his hand face down on the treaty.
The other three followed suit, placing their right hands
on top of his. ‘So be it.’
Tory slumped forward onto the table, unconscious.

14

A Winter
Solace

T

ory woke two days later to find Maelgwn by her
side, he’d been keeping a constant vigil since her
collapse.
‘Praise the Goddess,’ he uttered as he wiped her
brow gently. ‘I feared I had lost thee indefinitely.’
Maelgwn poured a drink of water and helped her up so
she could take a few sips. ‘How art thou feeling?’
Tory leant back, smiling, thankful for his aid; she
had barely enough strength to keep her eyes open. ‘Out
of it,’ she mumbled, slowly raising a hand to her head as
she became more coherent. ‘My face aches. What
happened? Did we succeed?’
‘We did indeed.’ Maelgwn took hold of her
wandering hand and kissed it. ‘Thou wast simply

magnificent, and have made me the envy of every
leader in Britain.’
‘So they agreed with us?’ Tory pressed for
confirmation, the matters of State still foremost in her
mind.
‘Aye. The pact hast been set in place, and the Kings
have returned home for the cold seasons with their
legions. Taliesin, too, hast taken his leave. He decided
to retire to Llyn Cerrig Bach last night and hast invited
us to visit him there as soon as thou art able. All were
left swooning by thy address, Tory, and did ask that I
pass on their humble gratitude and good tidings for the
festive seasons ahead, all bar Vortipor.’
‘Why not he? Did I do something to offend our
guest?’
‘Nay, to the contrary, he wishes to remain over the
fall and burgeoning.’ Maelgwn laughed. ‘It would seem
that the dear Protector of Dyfed hast got it in his head
to persuade thee to train him as one of thy masters. I
told him he would have to take it up with thee, once
thou hast fully recovered.’
Tory only smiled in response, patting his hand as
she closed her eyes to rest.
‘What amuses thee? Dost thou like the idea or not?’
‘Whose idea was it, exactly?’ Tory opened one eye to
view him.
Maelgwn reacted with surprise. ‘Why dost thou ask?’
‘Just answer the question, if thee please,’ Tory said,
giving him a whack of encouragement.
‘I do not understand how, but thou art obviously
aware the idea was my own.’

Tory sat down, stunned. ‘Maelgwn, I knew that! I
swear, I just read thy mind!’
‘Could thou have acquired it too?’
‘Thou hast this ability, Maelgwn?’
‘Aye, that be how I bespeak the dragon and Taliesin,
at times. But alas, there be a fine art to it that I have
had neither the time nor inclination to refine. The little
use I have made of the gift, I have left to pure faith.
Sorcha, however, had perfected the art, which be why
Cadfer killed her, for fear of her truth saying.’
They were both quiet in thought a moment before
realising at the same time, ‘It must have been the
Goddess.’
‘Aye, I think so.’ Tory began to remember her
experience. ‘I recall that when the Goddess came over
me, it seemed that I had gained, for that time, total
knowledge.
‘I know this feeling,’ the King said, recalling his
inauguration and similar Otherworld rites where this
experience had occurred.
‘Everything from the beginning that would go on
without end, was made known to me,’ Tory excitedly
explained, as Maelgwn nodded in confirmation. ‘Past,
present and future existed simultaneously. All the
secrets of the ages, the meaning of the universe, the
stars, the moon, I understood. Wow, I feel great!’ But
she spoke too soon, as she immediately became woozy
and lay back down.
‘So what dost thou say about Vortipor? Doth thou
not think it would be a grand gesture, like the sword he
gave to me?’

Tory ran her fingers through the long smooth
strands of Maelgwn’s dark hair. This was the trouble
with the Celtic people, Tory thought, they were
generous to a fault at times. Such a show of goodwill
could easily backfire. Yet, if indeed I can discern
whether or not a person is telling the truth, she decided,
then I will personally interview every aspirant before I
agree to train them. If I believe Vortipor is truly loyal to
the treaty, which I must admit I do at present, I see no
reason why I shouldn’t agree. Thus Vortipor, upon his
return to Dyfed, could begin the instruction of others.
‘I suppose I could allow Vortipor to stay and play
with thee awhile longer. And yes, if I feel him truly in
league with Gwynedd, I shall train him as a master.’
‘This be grand news.’ The King hugged her tightly.
‘May I leave thee to rest a moment? I really should let
Vortipor know at once.’
Tory nodded with a smile. Yet, as she watched him
leave, she had to shake her head. This winter at
Aberffraw was shaping up to be like her university days
all over again. Only here, heaven forbid, I’m supposed to
be the teacher.
Most of the senior staff of Caswallon’s old court had
died during the battle, and those who survived had their
hands full maintaining the other estates within the
kingdom. Besides Sir Percival, the old accountant who
kept pretty much to himself, Sir Cedric, aged roughly in
his mid-forties, was the oldest amongst those staying at
Aberffraw over the cold seasons.
Lady Gladys had decided to leave all the young
people to it and retire to her estate at Penmon. Bryce

would be going with her, as Tory could hardly deny the
lady time with her grandson. The boy could recommence his tuition in the spring with the other children
from the village.
Thus, from autumn, only the masters and the
immediate staff would occupy the house. Many of the
soldiers returned to their families, homes and farms.
Those with no kin stayed in the huge hall in the outer
bailey and saw to the chores around the house, as little
defence was required during the weather that was to
come.
After a few days, Tory’s health gradually began to
improve. So, at Taliesin’s request, she accompanied
Maelgwn on Aristotle to Llyn Cerrig Bach.
As they neared their destination the sunlight
filtered through the canopy above, and Tory closed her
eyes. The huge black stallion lulled her to rest with its
gentle steps. She leant back against Maelgwn, her head
rested on his shoulder, as they proceeded down the
forest track to the temple ruins.
‘I have never seen thee so at ease on a horse,’ the
King commented.
‘It be this place . . .’ Tory held her arms wide,
admiring the wonders of Mother Nature all around her.
‘I feel strangely at home here.’
‘My mother did love this valley also. She claimed
the earth energies were very strong here.’
‘Really? Did she mention why?’
‘Sorcha thought it because of the fairy folk, as they
live here in great numbers. And Taliesin explained that

the folk art attracted to such places because it be where
the invisible paths of power, that pass over and under
the land, cross over.’
‘Ley-lines,’ Tory surmised, thinking she would have
to discuss this further with Taliesin.
Before long they reached the overgrown temple
ruins. Aristotle was left to roam the wood, and, handin-hand, Maelgwn and Tory walked towards the large
stone altar inside the temple.
Maelgwn lifted Tory up onto it, and leapt up after
her. ‘Taliesin!’ No sooner had he called the name than
the misty haze began to rise; a brilliant white light came
bursting forth from the altar and engulfed them.
The High Merlin was overjoyed to see the pair.
‘Majesty.’ He bowed to Maelgwn and held out his hands
to Tory. ‘My dear Queen, thou art simply radiant.’
Taliesin knelt to kiss her hand, which made Tory
uncomfortable.
‘Taliesin! I do thank thee, but surely thou art aware
of how I detest formality. Thee of all people hast no
need to kneel before me, not now or ever!’
The High Merlin smiled as he stood, her hand still
in his own. ‘Sometimes, dear lady, honour and gratitude
art well deserved. For thou hast accomplished more in
the last few days than thee could possibly realise. Thus,
on behalf of the Goddess and her folk, thy ascendants
and descendants, I humbly thank thee.’
‘What have we done exactly?’
‘Hard to say really, but thou art the ones who shall
find out.’
‘What? Taliesin, thou art speaking in riddles again.’

‘I shall explain over lunch. For I am very pleased to
inform thee, that for thy selfless efforts and loyal service
to the Goddess, thou hast set thyself apart as one of the
Chosen.’
‘Which means?’
‘Oh, a great many things,’ Taliesin said. ‘But simply
put, thou art spiritually moving up in the world. In a
karmic sense, it be pay back time. Now if thee will just
follow me, all shall be made clear.’
Tory, a little perplexed, looked at Maelgwn.
‘Fear not. Thy power to bethink others be part of
being Chosen.’
Taliesin swivelled around, ‘Tory! Thou hast bethought another?’
‘Aye,’ Maelgwn informed him, proudly. ‘Myself in
fact.’
‘Wast thou touching Maelgwn at the time?’ the
Merlin queried.
‘Well,’ Tory had to think about it. ‘Yes.’
The Merlin’s smile broadened. ‘Still, this be much
sooner than even I anticipated. One day thee may learn
to bethink others without needing to have physical
contact with them.’ Such refinement be truly astonishing in
one so inexperienced. Perhaps Sorcha and her teachings are
more deeply embedded in her soul mind than I’d first
imagined, Taliesin thought.
Lunch was to be served in the cosy room where Tory
and Brockwell had dined during their last visit. Tory
was invited by their host to choose whatever she desired
to eat, and as Taliesin so enjoyed these little challenges,
Tory played along. After careful thought, she requested

something that she would not otherwise be able to
indulge in. ‘Mexican food and perhaps a large
strawberry marguerita, or two.’
Maelgwn, always open to a new experience, decided
with a shrug to join her. He considered it might be nice
to learn a thing or two about Tory’s old way of life.
No sooner was her request noted, than Taliesin
waved his arm over the table and the lavish feast
appeared. Tory gasped in delight at the sight of all the
dips, tacos, burritos, enchiladas and the like. These were
accompanied by a varied array of seafood, salad, garlic
bread, cocktails and desserts.
‘A Mexican feast.’ Taliesin smiled at Tory, flicking
his fingers and igniting every candle on the table.
Tory applauded his display. ‘I am most impressed,
sir.’ She reached out for a large pink drink. ‘Cheers.’
Maelgwn followed her example. ‘Looks most
agreeable, I have to say.’
‘Indeed, my young friend, I believe thee will find
many aspects of twentieth-century life to thy liking, but
then there art many things that art most disagreeable,
like the air,’ Taliesin informed him, as he peeled a large
green prawn.
‘Thee speaks as if I were going there.’
‘Why thou art. It be thy destiny.’
‘But I cannot. I have a kingdom to rule. I have –’
‘Maelgwn, Maelgwn, Maelgwn, trust me. There be a
way and I, of course, have found it. In theory anyway.’
Taliesin’s excitement waned momentarily. ‘In truth, the
exact calculations art going to keep all my computers
and my brain very busy throughout the cold season.’

‘Calculations for what, Taliesin?’ Tory cut straight to
the heart of the matter, her smile broadening.
‘Well, I believe I can send thee into the future for a
year, then bring thee back to find that only an hour hast
lapsed here.’
‘Wow! Now that’s a concept. Thou art truly
brilliant.’
‘Aye. But there be something I have not told thee,’
he said.
Tory placed her glass aside and sat back in her seat.
‘I’d say there be many things thou hast not told me,
High Merlin. Please be more specific.’
‘I have already stated that we have altered the
future, just how much I cannot say. One thing be for
sure though, thou shalt not be returning to exactly the
same reality thee left. I can only send thee to the
parallel existence in accordance with the destiny of the
world, as it stands next summer solstice.’
‘Surely I have not changed history so much in such
a short time?’
The Merlin nodded to confirm. ‘In the many
differing dimensions through time and space, every
possibility comes to pass to determine each conceivable
outcome. It be impossible to predict what scenario
many have eventuated by thy return.’
‘Wast thou aware of this when thou brought me
here, Taliesin?’
‘Aye, I was.’
Tory stood as her anger mounted. ‘Well, dost thou
not think that just a tad presumptuous?’
‘I acted only upon thy instruction, Majesty.’

‘Look, just because I had a romantic interest in the
Dark Ages did not necessarily mean that I wished to
take up permanent residence here.’
The King chose to stay well out of the contention, a
little hurt that Tory seemed not entirely happy with
sixth-century life.
‘I refer not to the past, Tory, but to the future. I
assure thee, that upon thy return to the twentieth
century, thee will seek me out and tell me of this very
conversation and of thy destiny.’
Tory was stunned. ‘So again I must blindly trust in
thy word, High Merlin.’
‘My dear Queen, I would not leave thee without a
means of escape. A back door, so to speak.’ Taliesin felt
Maelgwn’s quiet dismay, but Tory had the right to know.
‘For thee may choose not to return here, which will
break the cycle of thy destiny and undo all that hast
taken place here. Thee would return home, all being as
thee left it, and lead a totally different life. Maelgwn
will find himself married to someone else, and thee will
remember naught of each other, or indeed, any of this.
Alas, there would be no chance of a reversal then, as
none of this will ever have happened.’ Taliesin paused.
‘The choice of thy destiny be thine own now, Tory, and
I shall abide by thy wish whatever it may be.’
Tory sat silently staring into space, remembering
those she’d left behind. As much as they might grieve for a
time, I cannot imagine that I have left anyone who needs me
as much as these people do.
Maelgwn placed his hand over hers, and at once she
felt his deep fear of loss. Tory thought her heart would

break and she turned to him. ‘I could never bring myself
to leave thee, Maelgwn, never.’ Tory cast her eyes to the
High Merlin, feeling a mite ashamed by her behaviour.
‘How can thee be so good to me, Taliesin, when I
constantly take thee for granted and misunderstand
thee so. I feel totally unworthy of any of this.’
‘Enough said,’ he insisted. ‘Thou art obviously very
much in love, and therefore most worthy. The food be
getting cold, so please, dwell on it no longer and start to
eat. There be something I wish to show thee after
lunch.’
Uh-oh, Tory thought. What next?
‘Fear not. I promise it will be very much to thy
liking.’
Taliesin led Tory and Maelgwn through his maze,
stopping in front of a door identical to all the others.
‘This be a small token of my personal appreciation, lady,
and I have waited an eternity to present it to thee.’ He
smiled, swinging the door wide open.
Tory gasped, holding her hands to her face in
amazement. ‘Where on earth? I don’t believe it!’ She
wandered slowly around the large room, full of
gymnasium equipment. The King, even more surprised,
followed her.
‘I thought thee might find it useful when training
thy masters.’
‘Useful. It shall be invaluable!’ Tory walked up to
one of the punching bags that appeared older and more
worn than the others. Her brow became drawn when
she noticed her initials on it, those of her brother, and

others she’d known. ‘Taliesin, I recognise this, it
belonged to my old sensei, a young master who went by
the name of Teo.’
‘Really?’ he smiled. ‘What a coincidence.’
Tory looked at him, hands on hips, feeling not
entirely satisfied with his response. ‘Do not try to tell
me that the all knowing Taliesin did not realise?’
‘I must have overlooked it, some of the equipment
was secondhand.’ He carefully avoided her query. ‘In
those boxes yonder, thee will find the uniforms thee
desired with the various coloured belts.’
Tory and Maelgwn, like a couple of kids at
Christmas, quickly investigated.
‘Old man, thou art a wonder.’ Maelgwn was most
pleased, seeing the Dragon motif embroidered on the
back of all of them.
‘Come on then.’ Tory encouraged the King with a
slap on the shoulder. ‘Allow me to run thee through a
proper work-out.’
‘Splendid idea,’ Taliesin announced, pleased that
Tory had forgotten the other matter. ‘After that, thee
may refresh thyselves in the room opposite. Then
perhaps a stroll around my garden before dinner?’ He
gave Maelgwn a wink. ‘Thee must both stay the night as
my guests. I shall have this equipment transported to
Aberffraw on the morrow. Till then, enjoy.’
‘What was that all about?’ The peculiar intonation
in Taliesin’s parting words had her curious.
‘Pardon?’
Tory winked at him to clarify.
‘Oh that!’ Maelgwn shrugged. ‘I cannot imagine.’

His smile was far too mischievous for Tory to believe
him. Still, when even physical torture failed to prompt
him into disclosing what he knew, she gave up, figuring
she’d find out soon enough.
They spent a few hours running through the use of
each piece of equipment. Afterwards, when they retired
to their room to bathe and dress for dinner, they each
found a change of clothes laid out on the bed.
Tory was not surprised to see that Taliesin had
chosen a dress for her to wear and, funnily enough, she
liked it very much. Made of a white shimmery fabric,
the garment hugged the body in the torso and was cut
very low to the cleavage, akin to the more romantic and
revealing attire of the seventeenth-century ladies. It was
v-waisted, as suited her figure, and fell to the ground in
wisps of fabric, which parted when she walked to reveal
her bare legs. The shoes, of the same fabric, were like
ballet slippers.
‘I could never get around wearing this in thy court,
Maelgwn.’ Although Tory was positive she’d never seen
the garment before, she was just as sure she recognised
it.
‘If Taliesin was not such an old man, thee would not
be wearing it here either.’ Maelgwn admired her a
moment. ‘So, art thou ready?’
‘Aye . . .’ Tory was forced to grin, turning to face
him. ‘What art thou up too, my lover?’
‘Thee shall see.’ He took her hands to lead her out
the door.
‘Nay, we should not. Taliesin warned me about
wandering off in this place.’

‘Believe me.’ His smile did not waver. ‘I know where
I am taking thee.’
Maelgwn led her out into the hallway, and upon
reaching the end they entered a maze of stairs, doorways, archways and open chambers that could have
been designed by Escher himself.
She leant over a banister to admire the grand feat of
illusion created by the stairwell. It seemed to twist for
miles below her and, although it was difficult to tell,
Maelgwn seemed to be leading them downwards. The
King amused her with stories of his childhood
adventures within the labyrinth as he confidently
guided her through the maze. Finally, they entered one
of the many long hallways that extended off from the
central area of the house. When they reached the door
at the very end of the corridor, Maelgwn turned to her.
‘Close thy eyes.’
Tory did so gladly, eager to learn what was amusing
him so. As soon as the door was opened she knew they
had stepped outside, as the sounds of little creatures met
her ears and the fresh, scented air filled her nostrils.
‘Now.’ Maelgwn gave her leave to open her eyes.
Tory beheld a woodland garden that was so beautiful
it took her breath away. The life force emanating from
it was overwhelming – it was purer than anything she
had encountered before. She sensed that they were
being watched, yet not a single animal could she see.
There were, however, an abundance of tiny earth lights
that hovered around the trees. Yet as she approached
them to investigate, they twirled off, beyond her
scrutiny.

‘There be something altogether familiar about this
place.’ She turned to see where they’d entered, to find
only a door and frame standing alone in the middle of
paradise. A smile swept over her lips as she experienced
deja-vu.
‘Thee may know it as the Land of Fairy. As thou art
one of their Chosen, thou art now permitted to enter
their realm.’ Maelgwn took up her hand and began to
walk with her.
Tory felt as if she would burst with happiness as the
tranquillity of the surroundings engulfed her. ‘I
remember this place now, I dreamt of it several times
after we met.’
Maelgwn stopped still and turned to face her. ‘As
did I. Many times.’
Upon the King and Queen’s return to Aberffraw, they
were besieged by all at court. From the little they could
discern from their subjects’ garbled reports, they guessed
that Taliesin must have delivered the gymnasium. The
royal couple were whisked to the Great Hall to view the
mysterious manifestation that had fascinated their
subjects.
The magician hadn’t just delivered the equipment,
he’d installed it as well. The weights, benches and other
equipment were well spaced around the walls and the
punching bags hung from the high timber beams
overhead. The walls of the court were now lined,
between the windows, with the same huge mirrors that
had been in the gymnasium at Llyn Cerrig Bach. In the
centre of the hall was a padded mat to be used for

sparring. It had a large black circle marked upon it and
a huge motif of the Dragon in the centre.
‘How?’ Tory shook her head, mystified by the High
Merlin’s means.
‘The folk,’ Maelgwn answered simply, then he began
to show his men a thing or two of what he’d learnt.
After all had enjoyed a bit of a play, Tory
summoned her masters together, asking them to sit on
the perimeter of the circle marked on the mat. She had
to laugh when she found all the men seated to the left
of her and the women to the right, with the gaping
space of the circle between them. ‘This will never do,’
she concluded, clapping her hands to draw their
attention. ‘Right, it be high time that I enlightened
thee all to exactly what thou art letting thyselves in for.
I assume that everyone seated around this circle aspires
to study under me through the cold seasons. If this
should not be the case for any of thee, please leave the
room at once.’
Old Percival, the accountant, and the very pregnant
Jenovefa, who stood looking on from the outside of the
circle, moved to leave at the Queen’s request.
‘Nay,’ Tory called after them, waving them back.
‘Percival, I believe one could regard thee as well
trusted.’
The old man smiled, delighted that he might still
observe, as it was extremely interesting to him.
‘And Jenovefa, thee may want to hear what I have
to say for future consideration.’
Jenovefa could hardly believe that the Queen would
even consider her, and she opened her mouth to answer.

‘Nay.’ Rhys laughed at the ridiculous notion. ‘My
wife hast no desire to be a warrior! She shall be a
mother before long and will have plenty to occupy her
time.’
‘With all due respect to thee, Sir Rhys, I do believe I
am addressing thy wife.’ Tory didn’t even look to him. ‘I
am sorry, Jenovefa, thou wast about to say?’
‘I am most honoured by thy suggestion, Majesty, but
I feel I must decline.’ Though she smiled, her expression
was cold as she curtseyed.
‘The choice be yours, Jenovefa, but should thee
change thy mind . . .’ Tory added with regret as she
watched her go.
Jenovefa nodded back to her and quietly left the
room.
‘So, am I now safe in assuming that only the
potential initiates remain?’
‘Aye,’ they all responded in good cheer.
‘Then know this,’ Tory’s voice resounded in the
large room and all her pupils hushed in anticipation.
‘My role for the duration of thy training be that of thy
Sensei. Whilst thou art in training under me, ye will all
refer to me as such. Sensei means head teacher, and my
word henceforth be law for all the initiates of the
Goddess. Anyone who finds themself unable to adhere
to my conditions, now or at any time, need only leave.’
Tory raised her arm and pointed to the door. ‘These
terms and standards of behaviour will be adhered to
without exception or question. I will, of course, be more
than happy to explain anything thee may not
understand. I suggest thee all consider carefully thy

actions before withdrawing, as there will be no second
chances for the indecisive.’ Tory took a long pause to
allow them a moment to absorb her words. ‘Upon thy
arrival in this room tomorrow at noon, I expect all or
nothing, ladies and gentlemen. Have I made myself
plain?’
‘Aye,’ they responded, a few of the men sounding
more wary now.
‘Alright then, it be time thee all became acquainted
with thy sparring partners.’
Brockwell’s eyes darted straight across to Katren,
who had seemed to be avoiding him since their day of
combat. He was pleased to find her eyes rested upon
him also, a gentle smile of confirmation gracing her lips.
‘These partners art permanent and again, not
negotiable.’
She called them forth in their set pairs, directing
each to their designated places alongside the other
around the circle’s circumference. As they numbered
twelve, including herself, Tory gave them all a position
in the circle, corresponding to a number on the sundial
in the courtyard. The head of the Dragon marking
twelve was Maelgwn’s position, so Tory asked the King
to take his place.
‘Thou art still my partner, I hope,’ Maelgwn said on
his way past her.
‘Eternally,’ she assured him. ‘Now remember these
places when I call thee to meditation, before and after
training each day.’
Tory looked at Calin, who appeared miles away as
he gazed at Katren. ‘Sir Brockwell.’ She gave him a

start. ‘Thou art number one, next to Maelgwn.’ Tory felt
the two of them still had a few problems to work out.
‘Lady Katren, as two, shall be thy partner. For as we
have already witnessed, she be a fine challenge for thy
capabilities at present.’
The rest of the men laughed and made jest of the
match. Yet Katren and Brockwell happily stepped
forward, ignoring them all to take their places alongside
each other at one and two o’clock.
‘Just wait,’ Tory warned the rest of them. ‘I have not
finished yet. Sir Angus, thou art number three and
Alma shall be thy partner as number four.’ The reason
for this match was obvious, as they struck Tory as
having the same problem – they were both very shy
when it came to dealing with the opposite sex. Tory
hoped that if thrown together, they might stumble upon
the understanding they lacked and secretly longed for.
Angus and Alma, who’d barely exchanged more
than two words, coyly acknowledged each other and
quickly took their places. Poor Angus, a few years older
than Brockwell and having only a fraction of his
experience with women, found himself between two of
them.
‘Vortipor.’
‘Lady.’ He stepped forward, ever so eager to see who
the Goddess had chosen for him.
‘Five o’clock. Cara . . .’
The girl came bounding forward, just as eager. ‘At
thy service, Majesty,’ she announced, admiring the great
leader beside her.
‘. . . six.’

Vortipor had already led Cara to their places. This
made Tory smile; if their ally was going to take a bride,
it may as well be one of her own flock.
‘My dear Sir Tiernan,’ Tory beckoned him closer,
with a sweet smile.
‘Aye, lady.’ He approached, a mite reserved as only
Sir Rhys, Sir Cedric and Ione remained.
‘Thou art number seven. Ione, thou art eight.’
‘Nay!’ Tiernan cried in protest, as he and Ione both
stubbornly headed to opposite ends of the room.
This was so predictable it made Tory furious. ‘Listen,
I have very good reason for this which we will discuss
later.’ Tory lowered her voice. ‘But for now I ask that
thee kindly take thy places, or take thy leave.’
With a certain degree of disfavour, Tiernan and Ione
took their mark.
Sir Cedric was number nine and was positioned to
the other side of Ione. Rhys, the other married man, was
number ten and was Cedric’s partner. Maelgwn had
mentioned that the two had had contentions of late, so
this was the perfect opportunity to knock that on the
head.
Lastly was herself at eleven, beside the King. The
Knights of the Round Mat, Tory thought amused, as she
took up her position. Just doesn’t have the same ring to it,
really.
Tory instructed them all to take a few deep breaths
and still their minds, before taking hold of the hand of
the person on either side of them. After much complaining, they finally followed the simple instruction.
‘Culprits pay for time wasted.’

‘I can vouch for that,’ Maelgwn added to lighten the
mood.
Tory flashed him a smile, ever thankful for his
constant support. She drew another deep breath, of the
mind to unite this mismatched bunch by spring if it
killed her. ‘Take a look around this circle . . . at each
other. Thou art going to be spending much time
together, and thus it will be far less painful for us all if
everyone makes an effort to get along.’ Tory’s eyes rested
on Ione and Tiernan a moment as she said, ‘Remember,
thou art all on the same side, a team, one whole. Thou
art the future teachers, protectors and representatives of
Gwynedd, of the Goddess and her mysteries.’
Tory noted they all sat a little taller, proud to have
been chosen to be a part of this elite club. If she could
just keep this momentum going, all would be well. ‘I
want everyone here to consider the people seated
around this circle to be as sacred to thyself as thy right
arm. Regard them, at all times, with the same respect
thee would want for thyself. This be the will and the
way of the Goddess.’
‘So be it,’ came the reply, with good cheer from
most.
She went on to inform them of the advantages,
like the weekends of leisure time, and of the grading
system and how it worked. The King and Tory then
presented them with their uniforms of white. For now,
only Tory’s clothes would be black. Her belt was also
black, with two white bars. Those who were beginning
were given white belts (tenth Kyu), the lowest grade.
She considered Katren, Maelgwn, Cara and Alma to

be a grade above (ninth Kyu), knowing more than the
others, and thus they had belts of white with a yellow
bar. She then explained to them all that these grades
were only temporary and that the first real grading
would take place two months hence on the feast of
Samhain.
This feast marked the beginning of the year for the
Britons. The official date was the fifth day of Pethboc
(November first), and it was celebrated the night
before. Tory had decided upon this date when informed
that it was also the traditional feast day of the War
Goddess.
Sir Tiernan sought out the Queen that same night, and
finding her alone in the library, he beseeched to know
why she disfavoured him so.
Tory was surprised by his words. ‘On the contrary,
Sir Tiernan, thou art very dear to me.’
‘Then why hast thou placed me with Ione, when
thou art well aware we do not like each other.’
‘Really? I have spoken with Ione and she hast no
problem with the arrangement. She only reacted as she
did because you were so obviously opposed to the idea.
What’s more, I feel quite sure that it be not Ione that
thou art objecting to, but rather an idea of her and “her
kind” that thou hast built up in thy head.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘Tiernan.’ Tory’s tone softened. ‘There be another
reason, which I hope thee will be sensitive enough to
understand. I ask that it will go no further than thyself,
as indeed I have not even told Maelgwn.’

This was the tone Sorcha often used, and he looked
up, almost expecting to see her. ‘Pray speak, Majesty.
Thou hast my strictest confidence.’
Tory invited him to sit down. She took a deep
breath before beginning and spoke softly so that none
might overhear. ‘This much I know of Ione for true. She
was raped and relieved of her tongue at the tender age
of eight. I have asked her about the incident, but she
cannot or will not confide in me. Still, I have a fair idea
who was responsible.’
Tiernan felt remorse for his rash judgement, and he
hadn’t yet heard the half of it.
‘This be where, I believe, her intense hatred of men
– soldiers and nobles in particular – stems from. This
also explains why she pretends to be crazy and why she
hast built herself up so, to protect herself and others like
her who may fall victim to the same fate. Ione be no
whore, Tiernan. She can scarce tolerate a man near her,
let alone . . .’ Tory waved her hand around a second,
trying to find an apt way of putting it.
‘I did not realise.’
Tory was warmed by his apparent change of heart
and placed both her hands upon his. ‘Tiernan, thou art
one of the most sensitive men I have ever known. I do
not expect thee to court the girl, for heaven’s sake, but
if she can see that not all men art violent, mindless
barbarians, perhaps she might lose some of her hatred
and fear. I realise this shall require much patience on
thy behalf, but I believe thou art well able to cope with
the task. The question be, however, art thou prepared
to?’

‘Aye, Majesty.’ He seemed lost in thought for a
moment, before he gave half a laugh. ‘It would seem I
do not understand women half as well as I would like to
believe.’
‘I would say that most of the men here art of the
same mind at present. I do thank thee for thou consideration and kindness.’
‘Thou art the considerate one, Majesty.’ Tiernan
stood to kiss her hand in leaving. ‘May I ask, who dost
thou suspect the attacker might have been?’ The Queen
seemed hesitant to answer, so he added, ‘I might be able
to assist in some way.’
Tory resolved to confide in him, feeling Sorcha
quietly influencing the decision. ‘Cadogan, and perhaps
Caradoc as well.’
Tiernan didn’t seem at all surprised by the
suggestion. ‘I would say that thy instinct serves thee
well. I would certainly not put it past either of them,
especially in their younger days together.’
‘Dost thou think Cadogan loyal to Gwynedd,
Tiernan?’
‘My good Queen,’ he answered, knowing that this
had been a point of contention between herself and the
King, ‘in truth, I think Cadogan be loyal to Cadogan. I
shall keep my eyes and ears open for thee.’ He bowed
and departed.
As she watched the knight leave, she recalled what
she’d learnt of him from Sorcha’s memories. Tory feared
that he still pined for the Queen he’d loved so dearly
and, moreover, blamed himself for not being there to
save her from Cadfer. This was the reason Tory had

placed the two together, for deep down they had the
same problem. Ione and Tiernan were both consumed
by past tragedies, making them feel unworthy of love, or
oblivious to it. This was a pity, as both were intelligent,
handsome and deeply caring souls. How sad that people
couldn’t see through society’s facade to behold the
simple truth about each other, she thought.

15

Full Moon

O

n the Saturday that marked the masters’ first
full moon together, Tory woke earlier than
usual. Her sleep had been disturbed by a dream,
though she couldn’t remember the details. Maelgwn was
still blissfully asleep beside her, and as it was not very
often that he slept so well, she decided to leave him to
dream on in peace.
After she’d slung on her training gear, Tory headed
down to the huge kitchens to see what she could find to
eat. As she crossed the entrance hall, she was surprised
to spy Sir Angus slipping out the main doors that led to
the inner bailey. Tory moved quietly to see what he was
up to at this early hour.
Angus had taken a seat at his appointed position on
the sundial, to watch the sun rise in the dawn sky
beyond the bailey wall.

‘Am I disturbing thee?’ Tory asked softly, as Angus
seemed miles away. Her voice startled the knight.
‘Sensei.’ He went to stand.
‘Please, stay as thou art, Sir Angus. Sorry I gave thee
a fright, it was not my intent.’
Angus just couldn’t stay seated while he addressed
his Queen and Sensei, so he stood in any case. ‘I did not
expect to see anyone else up before sunrise.’
‘Nor did I,’ Tory smiled, aware of his discomfort, and
took a seat on the ground. ‘Why art thou up so early, sir,
can thee not sleep?’
As he sat down again, his eyes drifted back to the
sunrise. Angus didn’t have the good looks shared by most
of his comrades, yet he was by no means unattractive.
And his angular face seemed very open and honest.
‘I come here every morn, in homage to the Goddess
who hast chosen me as a master.’
‘Thy progress be most pleasing to her, Angus. Thee
cannot honour her more than by giving her thy all.’
Tory didn’t really go for the idea of ritual worship; if one
was doing what the ‘Divine’ intended, what greater
form of worship was there?
‘But there be no chore in it, Sensei. I have never
known such joy as thy lessons bring me.’
‘My dear Sir Angus, in thy short life, thou hast
already endured enough perilous tasks to keep the
Otherworld and thy country indebted to thee for six
lifetimes! Thou dost well deserve the rewards thou art
only now beginning to reap.’
‘Still,’ Angus appeared fit to burst. ‘I want to do
more for her.’

Tory was pleased to notice that his eyes had drifted
to the number four on the sundial, Alma’s place in the
circle of twelve.
‘She hast been so good to me.’
‘Well, a man hast got to do, what a man hast got to
do, Angus.’ She stood, adding with a smile as she
departed, ‘Please stay, and by all means continue.’
Later that day, Tory and Maelgwn sent Selwyn on his
way to Llyn Cerrig Bach to study under Taliesin till
spring. The Queen had never seen the young man so
excited, and although she knew he was in for the time
of his life, she would miss him and his harp through the
cold time.
“I shall think of thee, Majesty, every half noon.’
‘Oh Selwyn.’ She gave him a huge hug, which he
returned in earnest. ‘I believe the High Merlin shall put
my playing to shame.’ They drew back to look at each
other. ‘And besides, thou shalt be so engrossed in thy
studies that flowering shall be here before thee even
realises. I feel sure Taliesin shall bring thee to visit us on
Samhain. We cannot have thee missing all the fun, who
shall play the harp for us?’
‘I shall be here if I have to come through a blizzard,
Majesty.’ Selwyn stepped back and bowed to them both.
He then took up the reins of the mule that lugged his
few belongings and led the animal towards the portcullis.
That same evening, when Maelgwn and Tory were
engrossed in a game of chess by the fire, Brockwell came
knocking at their chamber door.

‘Forgive the intrusion, Majesty, but I was wondering
if I may speak with my sister a moment.’
‘Of course thee may, Calin.’
When Maelgwn showed no sign of leaving, Tory
said, ‘I think Calin meant alone, Maelgwn.’
‘Why?’
‘Why not? Checkmate.’
Maelgwn stood, a little hurt not to be included.
‘Again, after dinner perhaps?’
‘My pleasure.’
Calin recognised this kind of abrupt behaviour in
his friend and wanted to clear up any misunderstanding
he might have. ‘I be seeking naught but a female’s
advice, I assure thee.’
‘Take thy time,’ Maelgwn replied, as when it came
to Tory’s free time he had been a bit selfish of late. He
left the room, closing the door on his way out.
Tory looked at Calin and had to laugh. Everyone
else’s uniform was perfectly neat, but the way Calin
wore his it looked more like pyjamas. His pants were
rolled up at the bottom as they were too long, while his
shirt hung open and was all caught up at the belt. Calin
looked just like Brian after a workout; he had never
been shy when it came to flashing his robust body
either.
‘What?’ Brockwell couldn’t understand her amusement.
‘Thee could have tidied thyself before coming,
Calin. What be Maelgwn to think when thee arrives to
speak with me appearing thus?’
‘But I did.’

Tory laughed again. ‘Why art thou here? No wait,
let me guess . . . Katren.’
‘What am I to do, she hates me.’ Calin collapsed
onto the chair in front of her.
‘Of course she doesn’t.’
‘She does! She flatly refuses to so much as see me
outside of mastery.’
‘Perhaps she’s just looking for a more permanent
relationship than thou art willing to offer.’
‘But I asked her to marry me!’ he declared,
exasperated with the whole affair.
‘I said permanent.’
‘Awe, thou art no help.’
He was about to storm out when Tory suggested,
‘Why dost thou not write to her, Calin?’
Brockwell turned back to her, struck dumb by the
notion.
‘Anything, a poem, a letter. Maelgwn wrote to me
the day we wed and Katren thought it very romantic.’
Tory felt that as he would one day be her brother, she
did owe him a little advice.
‘I am no good at that sort of thing,’ Brockwell
groaned. ‘Would thou help me?’
Tory laughed, considering it was unfair to assist him
when she was also advising his foe. ‘I am no poet. Why
not ask Maelgwn, he be most accomplished.’
‘Nay, he would laugh.’
There came a knock on the door and, as luck would
have it, the King entered.
‘Sorry, we need the chessboard,’ Maelgwn said, to
explain his intrusion.

Tory looked at Calin who shook his head in
response. She frowned, for she was determined to bury
the hatchet between these two. ‘Maelgwn?’
Calin repeatedly motioned her no, but stopped still
as Maelgwn turned around.
‘Calin requires thy assistance in a small matter,
could thee spare him some time?’
‘Sure, I owe thee a favour or two if memory serves.
What be thy trouble?’
Tory approached the King, sliding her arms about
his neck. ‘Remember the note thee sent me on the
morn of the day we wed?’
‘I do.’ He wondered what that could possibly have
to do with anything.
‘Well, Calin be wanting to write something similar
and doth not feel himself very gifted with words.’
Maelgwn turned to Calin, delighted. ‘Art thou in
love, Calin?’
Calin nodded, unable to say it.
‘My darling,’ Tory said to the King, ‘for a scholar
thou art totally unaware at times.’
Maelgwn cocked an eye at her. ‘The lady in
question would not be Katren, by any chance?’ He
recalled Tory and her maid plotting Calin’s entrapment
months ago.
‘Aye,’ Brockwell grumbled. ‘The most stubborn,
chaste maiden, one could ever come across.’
Maelgwn turned back to Tory. ‘My but thou art a
crafty woman.’
‘The Goddess works in strange ways,’ Tory rolled her
eyes off to the side, not prepared to plead guilty.

‘As far as I be concerned anyway, damn her,’
Brockwell said, becoming all hot and bothered.
‘Now, Calin, fear not! If thou wants this maiden,
thou shalt have her. I feel sure between the two of us,
we can have her won by Samhain.’
‘That be less than one month hence, Maelgwn,
Katren swore she would not wed till spring, at least!’
Brockwell replied.
‘Indeed, and the Goddess will not take kindly to
those who disclose her secrets,’ Tory cautioned the
King. If Calin thought that his infatuation had been
carefully devised and not of his own invention, he
would lose interest at once.
‘Trust me.’ Maelgwn winked at her as he escorted
Brockwell to the door. ‘End of the month.’
Tory stared at the full moon from her window. Its
intensity was apparently being felt by all, as it was not
long before Alma, Cara, and Katren arrived at her door.
Katren was overjoyed to hear of the King’s suggested
date of Samhain, she was sure that she couldn’t deny
Calin his will, or indeed her own for much longer. ‘Oh
Majesty, less than a month,’ Katren hugged her. ‘Thee
said I would know this joy, but I did scarce expect it
would be so soon.’
‘I wish,’ Alma sighed.
‘Me too,’ Cara added.
‘Still, there be much work to be done before then.
The fact that Calin wants thee be not enough in his
case, I fear. He must want thee beyond all others, so
again I caution, do not make it too easy for him.’

‘I have no intention of it,’ Katren told her. ‘I plan to
enjoy my independence while it lasts.’
‘Good for thee. Now,’ Tory turned to Alma and
Cara, ‘what art the two of thee pining about?’
‘I find Vortipor too forward, Majesty,’ Cara sulked.
‘How doth one control a man?’
‘Try not leading him on?’ Tory fluttered her eyelids
at the girl, mimicking her manner of late. ‘Thou art
rather forward thyself, Cara. He misconstrues thy
affections as an open invitation to thy favours. Thee
would do better to treat Vortipor as Katren dost
Brockwell if thee wishes to win him for thy husband,’
she warned.
‘But I want him to pursue me.’
‘And he shall, whether or not thee gives him any
encouragement.’
Cara pouted, dissatisfied with such a boring instruction.
‘Listen to her, Cara,’ Katren urged. ‘The Goddess
knows best, believe me.’
‘We need to swap,’ Alma softly stated her woes. ‘I
do not think Sir Angus likes me at all.’
Tory was amused, knowing otherwise.
‘Majesty please,’ Alma asked, ‘I like him very much.
What should I do?’
By this time, Tory was beginning to feel like a
marriage counsellor. She had decided to match all the
single folk in male–female pairs, not in an attempt to
play Cupid, but rather to give those not in a steady
relationship a greater understanding and balance of Yin
and Yang in their lives. ‘Thee should arise on the

morrow before dawn. Go sit on thy number on the
sundial in the courtyard, and as thee bears witness to
the dawn of a new day, I grant that the Goddess shall
bring thee inspiration, Alma.’
The girl’s eyes opened wide with intrigue. ‘Dost
thou really think so, Majesty?’
‘Indeed, but thee must not be too impatient with
Angus. He be known as a loner and shy of women, so
thou shalt have to take a few pages from Cara’s book to
lure him out.’
All in the room fell silent with the sound of a knock
at the door.
‘Enter,’ Tory bade.
The door burst open and Brockwell came charging
forth. He was holding a sheet of parchment in his
hands, paying no mind to who was present. ‘I did it!’ he
announced, appearing rather pleased with himself. But
as he looked up to see all the women he was startled
back a few paces, and hid the parchment behind his
back.
‘Did what?’ Katren asked as she bounded playfully
towards him.
The King had followed Brockwell into the room,
and was staring sternly at Tory with his arms folded.
‘I have said naught of it,’ Tory assured Calin and her
husband.
The shock of seeing Katren so playful made Calin
easy prey, and she succeeded in procuring his master
work. ‘What be this, then?’
Calin, embarrassed, would have retrieved the letter,
but the King quietly motioned him against it.

The smug grin slowly slipped from Katren’s face and
for a magical second she couldn’t hide her true self.
‘Thee wrote this for me, Calin?’ Katren gasped in shock.
‘Aye,’ he was almost keen to admit, surprised by the
effect it seemed to have had on her.
Calin took a step closer so Katren took a step away,
her defences raised again. ‘I do not believe thou art
capable of such feelings,’ she coldly concluded. ‘The
King hast been putting his sweet words to thy pen.’
‘Lady Katren, thou hast my word as a King that I did
not string two words on that parchment together. In
fact, Calin would not even let me read it.’
This proclamation left poor Katren dumbfounded;
her image of Brockwell as an unfeeling womaniser was
shattered forever. How could she be expected to defend
herself till Samhain? ‘Then I do owe thee an apology,
sir. Thy words art deeply moving.’ A lump rose in her
throat as she read his letter.
For the first time, Calin was overjoyed to have a
woman so upset in his presence. Quite unable to believe
that the truth had actually worked, he moved on to
plan B. ‘If thou doth believe these words art my own
and true, I seek to make a request.’
‘And what might that be, sir?’ Katren asked.
Calin took another step closer, a little more confident, and this time Katren didn’t back away from him.
‘The King hast suggested we might like to join him and
the Queen for dinner and chess this evening?’
Tory looked at Maelgwn, amazed at his ingenuity.
‘Brilliant,’ she mouthed in approval, and the King gave
her the thumbs-up in return.

‘Why, I would love to,’ Katren answered, taking
Calin by the arm. ‘Very much.’
‘I shall take thy advice, lady,’ Cara resolved,
watching the love-struck knight lead Katren from the
room.
‘Aye.’ Alma could barely talk, she was so overcome
by the sight.
‘And what advice might that be?’ Maelgwn thought
he’d scare them all out of his room.
‘Good day, Sensei, Majesty,’ they both said as they
bowed and quickly took their leave.
‘Not Angus and Vortipor too?’ the King asked.
Secretly he was pleased; everyone deserved to feel such
bliss as he and his lady.
‘Looks that way.’
The young couple joined the King and Queen for
dinner, and the evening was well spent with much good
mead, fine food and amicable conversation.
Afterwards, Tory watched the pair laughing and
chatting by the fire like the oldest of friends. ‘There be a
lot to be said for the tradition of chaperoning.’
‘Aye,’ Maelgwn agreed. ‘Still, I hope we shan’t have
to provide this service for every couple in the kingdom.’
‘Here, here. But I think we would both agree we
have a vested interest in this case.’
‘Indeed.’
Maelgwn remained so absorbed in the book he was
reading that Tory, who couldn’t follow much of the
hand-written script, had to inquire, ‘What art thou
reading about that keeps thee so fascinated?’

‘The female reproductive system,’ he told her, with
glee almost.
‘Did someone call?’ Calin, a little tipsy, commented
to the amusement of them all. He appeared most
impressed with himself, as he made his next move on
the chessboard. ‘Check.’
Katren quickly made a move and announced,
‘Checkmate. I win. Now, let us depart and leave our
King and Queen in peace.’
‘Dost thou feel like a walk?’ Brockwell jumped to his
feet to assist her up, inspired by the idea.
‘Perhaps.’ She took his hand to lead him away.
‘Thee understand, Majesties, that the last thing Calin
requires be any more information on the female reproductive system.’
‘Goodnight.’ Calin waved on his way out, glad to
follow her anywhere.
‘A lovely couple,’ Tory commented, admiring their
work. ‘Now, why on earth art thou reading about reproductive organs? If thou art wondering why Gwynedd
doth not yet have an heir, it dost take at least nine
months.’
‘Tell me something,’ Maelgwn inquired politely,
ignoring the fact that she was mocking him. ‘If a woman
hast one turn of the moon cycle and we have been
married well over that now, when art thou due?’
Tory’s good cheer waned, she had been so busy of
late that she hadn’t even given the matter a thought.
Her hands gripped her face as she admitted with a
tortured strain, ‘Ages ago!’
‘Art thou ever late?’

‘No!’ she whined, thumping the lounge with both
her fists. ‘Never.’
‘Praise the Goddess!’ Maelgwn jumped to his feet,
letting loose a laugh. He tossed the book aside and took
hold of Tory. ‘That be it then, thou art with child
already!’ The King noticed that his wife didn’t appear to
be as happy as expected. ‘Tory, thou could not make me
more proud.’
‘I know.’ She pulled away from him, unable to look
him in the eye. She didn’t want to put a dampener on
his dream, but he wasn’t the one who had to give birth.
‘But thy greatest infatuation of late, would seem in truth
my worst nightmare.’
‘But thus our marriage shall be recognised.’
The tone in Maelgwn’s voice said it all to her, ’tis
not his want of a child that motivates him. ‘Legal marriage
or not, favoured or not, I shall do whatever I must to
stay with thee, just as thou hast done for me,’ she said,
looking at him, her face suddenly pale. ‘It be just that, I
know how dangerous childbirth really be, Maelgwn, not
like these poor woman who enter into it in ignorance.’
Maelgwn had never seen Tory frightened before and
as he moved forward in an attempt to comfort her, she
kept the distance between them. ‘Even in my time, I
would have a difficult labour with thy child, but here . . .’
She slowly shook her head, petrified by the thought.
‘Tory, stop right there, or thee will work thyself into
a state,’ Maelgwn quietly cautioned her. ‘Dost thou
think I have not considered this? Thou hast no need to
fear birthing here. I know the best midwife thee could
wish for, in any age.’

Although Tory was fairly sure Maelgwn still wasn’t
getting the full picture, she decided to give the King the
benefit of the doubt. ‘Who then?’
‘Why Taliesin, of course.’
With the mere mention of the High Merlin’s name,
her fear dwindled. God knows what tricks he might have up
his sleeve. Tory gave a slight smile at the notion. ‘Was he
midwife to Sorcha?’
‘Aye, and she was no better equipped than thee,’ the
King answered, simply beaming with delight. ‘I shall
never allow any harm to befall thee.’
‘What dost thou mean?’ Tory pulled away, making
sport of his ardour. ‘I do not want to get fat, Maelgwn. I
have never been overweight in my whole life.’
‘Tory, it will not be fat. It will be flesh and blood.
Thine and mine – ours.’
Tory relaxed, so pleased she’d married this extraordinary man. ‘What if the baby is a girl?’
‘I should love her just as well as her mother, I
expect. But he not be a girl.’ Maelgwn sounded very
sure about it, and with a slap of his hands he returned to
the book. ‘I can hardly wait to make the announcement, Taliesin will be beside himself.’
‘I want thee to know, Maelgwn, thou art the only
man in this entire universe I would do this for,’ Tory
said solemnly.
‘And I do love thee for it.’
The King’s new wife falling with child so soon
would be regarded by all as an Otherworld blessing – a
sign of both a fortunate reign for Maelgwn, and of rich
harvests ahead for Gwynedd and her allies.

Consulting an old calendar of her own, Tory figured
that the baby was due in mid-June (Duir), just before
she was to return home.
So much for the hope of giving birth in comfort, she
decided. Still, Taliesin was not a bad consolation. No
fear.

16

Samhain

T

he festival of Samhain, better known to future
generations as Hallowe’en, was only two days
away and tension amongst the masters was high
as they approached grading.
Sir Brockwell, under Maelgwn’s guidance, had been
favourably courting Katren. Finally, he plucked up the
nerve to pop the question for the second time, asking
her to marry him at the forthcoming feast. To Calin’s
great amazement, Katren accepted and they would be
wed the following week.
As fate would have it, however, this arrangement
was short lived. Brockwell’s recollection of the tradition
of taking one’s intended to thy bed the week before the
wedding, thwarted him within the hour. He tried as
subtly and as sweetly as he knew how to entice Katren’s
favours from her in advance, but she only took offence
to the suggestion. She accused her ‘briefly intended’ of

being fickle, presumptuous, and displaying a total lack
of respect for the Goddess. Katren promptly withdrew
her acceptance, vowing she would never consider him
as a suitor again.
Calin was crushed, and he’d failed to sway her in
the two days that had since passed. His written words of
explanation, which had proved far more eloquent than
anything he could say, had not managed to appease her
this time.
Tory tried to allay her fears on Calin’s behalf,
explaining that even King Maelgwn endeavoured to
uphold the old tradition, but Katren was adamant. She
explained that if he didn’t respect her now, he never
would. ‘’Twas not the act so much, more that he
expected it – as if I owed it to him. If becoming his wife
means favours on demand for life, I do not want to be
wed. It be not that I do not find Calin attractive, as
thou art well aware. But right now, my will be my own.
Why should I give up my freedom to satisfy what is
obviously nothing more than a lustful whim?’
‘A lustful whim, Katren? Be that really all thee
believes Calin holds for thee?
‘Aye, I do. I think to marry the man I love would be
entrapment. In fact, the only way I shall ever really
know if Calin loves me for sure, would be to do as he
wishes. Then at least when he discovers that this great
love he boasts for me disappears upon consummation, he
will thank me for not trapping him. If he continues to
pursue me then perhaps it be love. Now I see why the
other women who have lusted after Calin have resolved
thus.’

Tory couldn’t argue with her reasoning; the decision
was Katren’s to make. Since the Queen had become the
confidant of so many, she tried to listen and advise
without interfering with anyone’s views.
Despite Tiernan’s constant efforts to befriend Ione, no
amount of patience and understanding seemed enough;
Ione had not warmed to him at all. Tory thought this
rather strange as they appeared so in tune when they
worked together, especially during kata. Still, the more
determined Ione was to ignore Sir Tiernan’s goodwill,
the more determined he became to win her trust.
Tiernan was going to see this woman smile, or even
better laugh, if it killed him, and Tory had faith that he
would finally succeed.
Vortipor wasn’t disillusioned by receiving a cold
response from Cara of late. He was charming, goodlooking and quite used to getting what he wanted. The
young maiden was delighted when he merely doubled
his efforts to impress and pursue her. A vague suggestion
of marriage was underlying his advances, Cara felt sure
of it.
After following her Sensei’s instruction, Alma took
to meeting Angus at the sundial in the courtyard every
morn at sunrise. Much to Tory’s satisfaction, the two
had actually realised why she had matched them as a
team and were using it to their individual advantage.
They’d agreed not to become romantically involved just
yet, as neither wished to be distracted from their studies.
Thus, with the aim of reaching the highest standards,
Alma and Angus spent most of their free time together

practising, meditating and talking, content to avoid the
misadventures of others.
The weather grew ever colder, and a howling wind
ripped at the trees outside the long windows of the
Great Hall. As grading was nearly upon them and the
masters were all so malcontent for one reason or
another, Tory decided to try something a little different
this morning and prepared herself for a drama. Ione was
late to arrive, probably because of the frightful weather.
She refused to stay overnight in the castle with the
others, due to her adversion to soldiers. Her absence
gave Tory time to brief Sir Tiernan on her intended
exercise and the special part he may have to play in it.
Rhys and Cedric seemed a mite perturbed when the
Queen sent for their wives. Tory didn’t attempt to ease
their troubled minds, concluding that the pair of
chauvinists deserved to sweat a little.
Everyone had gathered when Ione finally joined
them, wet and windblown after her trek up from the
village. She begged forgiveness by bowing before Tory,
holding her cupped hands to her heart.
‘My dear Ione. I do wish thee would stay in the
house with us. Thou shalt catch thy death making thy
way up here every morn, come snowfall.’
Again Ione gestured that she was sorry, but
motioned a firm no, before she took up her place
between Tiernan and Cedric.
Tory led the masters through a meditation. Today
they were exploring the seven chakras located in the
subtle body, where the spine is found in the human

physical form. ‘These seven concentrated centres of
energy convert Otherworld, or cosmic energy, into body
energy, and vice versa. Thy chakra system transcends
the constraints of time and space. It connects thee to
the Otherworld, thus uniting all of creation into one
force. This be what I mean when I say that we art all
one,’ Tory explained.
After much deep breathing and chanting, all
seemed relaxed and elated. Satisfied that this was as
amiable as they were going to get, Tory asked them to
stand and face their partners. She requested that
Jenovefa take a place in front of Rhys, likewise with
Mabel and her husband, Cedric.
‘I have noticed that thou art all seeming rather
tense,’ Tory began to a mixed reaction. ‘Thus today we
art going to try something a little different. Please allow
me to explain.’
Tory walked into the centre of the circle and
Maelgwn followed, coming to stand behind her. ‘When
I give the word, I want all of thee to hug thy partner as
thee would a wounded child.’
There were a few disgruntled murmurs until Tory
reminded them, ‘Anyone who wishes to object be free
to leave.’ She waited for silence again. ‘Now thy aim in
exchanging this energy be to comfort the other person
to the very best of thy ability. I would like to stress this
be not for thy sexual stimulation, gentlemen. I expect as
adults thee will be well aware of the difference.’
They all laughed as Tory drew the long drapes to
dim the light in the room. She had participated in
similar exercises in the past, during various self-

development courses, and even if there were no truly
amazing breakthroughs this day she considered every
person in the room could use a good hug.
‘Face thy partners.’ Silence again fell. Tory nodded
to Maelgwn by the CD player, and soft ambient music
began to filter through the room, creating a perfect
mood.
‘My instruction be this . . .’ Tory said, her tone as
soft and soothing as the music, ‘thou art to hold thy
partner, eyes closed and in silence, until I ask thee to
stop. No matter what may be going on around thee,
under no circumstances art thou to open thy eyes or let
go of thy partner. Be aware of how this exercise makes
thee feel, perhaps it will stir a memory, perhaps an
emotion, but only the truth shall serve thee well. For if
one cannot face the truth about one’s self, one can
never expect to understand another. This interaction be
part of the quest of the spiritual warrior who strives for
total self-awareness and understanding. Please begin.’
Katren and Brockwell, who were still not on speaking terms, seemed somewhat reluctant. So in a gentle
voice, Tory advised the whole gathering, ‘Forget the
past, forget the future, there be only here and now. We
all have troubles and sorrows in our lives, but just for
this moment I want thee to relax and forget them.
Forget from whom thou art seeking comfort at this time,
they art whoever thee wants them to be.’ Tory smiled as
Calin and Katren now appeared more absorbed.
Angus and Alma stood perfectly still, smiling
blissfully in their embrace. As they appeared to have
nothing to resolve, Tory instructed that they could stop.

Neither flinched and with a giggle, remained as they
were.
Tory moved on to Vortipor and Cara. ‘For holding a
child thus, thee could be charged, sir,’ she commented
quietly in jest, removing Vortipor’s hand from Cara’s
behind.
Vortipor smiled, raising his eyebrows, but didn’t
stray from Tory’s instruction and remained silent with
his eyes closed.
Tiernan and Ione, funnily enough, seemed quite
content, gently swaying to and fro to the music. When
Tory had given them leave to begin Ione had seemed
hesitant, yet she was quite relaxed now. How odd, Tory
thought. She had felt sure this little exercise would
spark some diverse reaction in Ione. Perhaps she was
wrong about Ione’s motives?
Rhys and Jenovefa had opted to sit on the floor and
thankfully appeared to have overcome their differences.
It had not been Tory’s intention to divide the pair when
she’d invited Jenovefa’s interest in her craft, she’d only
wanted her to feel included. She was about to give them
leave when suddenly Katren burst into tears. Tory knew
Calin was uncomfortable with such behaviour in
women, and held back to see if he could cope with the
situation on his own.
Even though Katren pushed away from him, Calin
wouldn’t let her go. He broke Tory’s instruction,
determined to console her and asked, ‘What upsets
thee?’
‘Thou dost,’ she sobbed, thumping his chest with
her fists, too dismayed to put any strength into the

struggle. ‘Thou art the one . . . doth thou not see?’ She
broke away from him. ‘Forgive me Sensei.’ She bowed
quickly to Tory and ran from the room.
Calin looked to Tory, at a loss for what to do. Tory
indicated for him to go after her.
‘Sensei,’ Tiernan drew Tory’s attention to Ione, who
had suddenly begun to struggle. When she could not
break free from his restraint, the woman began to
shriek.
I was right after all, Tory thought, as she approached
the pair.
Tiernan held Ione firm, as Tory had instructed, and
spoke gently to calm her.
‘Sshh, thou art fine.’ Tiernan persisted warmly,
despite Ione’s protest to the contrary.
Tory asked her to look her in the eye. With a grunt,
Ione ceased her struggle. ‘What disturbs thee so?’ the
Queen said, wiping the hair and perspiration from the
woman’s forehead.
Ione shook her head repeatedly and began to push
away again. Then with one almighty screech, she
collapsed into tears.
Sir Tiernan, who was handling the situation very
well, was close to tears himself. Tory smiled to him in
quiet support as she gently rubbed Ione’s back. As Ione
began to settle and her breathing grew more regular,
Tory was gripped by fear. Her heart began to pound, the
room rushed away from her, and she found herself
running scared through a forest.
‘Sensei?’ Tiernan called as she began to tremble, and
beads of sweat formed on her skin.

‘Stay away,’ Tory uttered, no longer aware of their
presence as she dropped to her knees.
Ione’s weeping ceased and her eyes opened wide in
recognition. She gripped the Queen’s hand in
desperation.
‘Tory?’ Maelgwn approached.
‘Nay! Stay away!’ She cried out, her eyes open and
staring straight ahead.
Kicking and screaming she struggled to break free
from her attackers, who were boys of no more than
fourteen or fifteen years old.
‘Hey, brothel bitch, save your energy,’ a very young
Caradoc advised her, with a sharp slap to the face.
‘We’re only just getting started.’ He unbelted his
trousers, then forced his pelvis between her legs.
‘We shouldn’t be doing this,’ she heard the boy
behind her say, as he restrained her arms. ‘What if she
tells somebody?’
‘I always said thou wast a whimp, Cadogan,’
Caradoc snarled, looking back to his victim and
gripping her about the neck to draw her face closer. ‘She
won’t utter a word.’ He opened his mouth wide as it
converged on hers.
Tory began to shake her head, letting loose a blood
curdling scream, before she began to choke.
The King dragged her away from Ione and she broke
from her trance. She freed herself from Maelgwn’s
restraint to run back and embrace her harrowed pupil.
‘I saw them, Ione, I saw their faces.’ Tory was barely
able to breathe from the shock of the horrid scene she’d
just witnessed. ‘I know them, I know what they have

done and they will pay. I swear to thee, Ione, they will
pay.’
Ione collapsed into her arms, not knowing whether
to laugh or cry from relief. Though tears streamed down
her face, Ione’s smile had warmth.
Tory looked at Tiernan, who appeared most gratified
by what he’d helped to accomplish this morning. He took
Ione in his arms, rocking her ever so slightly. Tory left her
in Tiernan’s embrace, giving the others their leave.
‘Those who wish to break may do so.’ Nobody moved.
‘Ooh!’ Jenovefa gasped in pain. ‘The babe . . .’
Rhys was besieged by panic and managed to incite
the whole room into a state of alarm within seconds.
Brockwell pursued Katren to the women’s quarters.
Once inside she closed the door behind her. Under
normal circumstances, Brockwell would not have
entered unannounced. In fact, he hadn’t been inside
these chambers since he was knighted. However, as he
had the leave of the Queen this day, he barged in after
her. ‘Katren, I give up, thou art driving me insane.’
‘Thou art not allowed in here!’
‘Katren please, talk to me. I so want to understand.
Be my embrace so horrible, did I hurt thee?’
Her stance weakened, the tears silently falling from
her eyes. ‘Nay,’ she confessed, ‘Thou art the one I wish
would hold me all my life.’
‘Then marry me!’
‘I cannot do that, Calin.’
He rolled his eyes, ‘In the name of the Goddess,
Katren, why not?’

In the midst of her hysteria, Katren unexpectedly
found some clarity and she replied, ‘Because thou art
not in love with me.’
‘Nay, Kat –’
Katren placed her fingers to his lips to silence him.
‘Aye, it be true enough, and I can prove it,’ she
whispered, before bestowing on him the most luscious of
kisses.
This was quite a change for Katren, and Calin was
more than happy to go with it. But when she slid her
hands inside his jacket, he backed off. ‘What art thou
doing?’
‘I want to Calin, really. It be alright.’
‘So thou shalt marry me?’
‘Nay.’
Her reply made him frown. ‘Art thou saying thee
will be my mistress, but not my wife?’
Katren nodded to confirm.
Brockwell paused, appearing rather bemused. He
slipped Katren’s hands from his chest and stepped away
from her. ‘Nay, Katren, I shall have thee as my wife or
not at all.’
‘Calin, see reason! Why should I be different from
the others? If thou would just take me thee would find
that thou art not really in love with me at all, and thus
we will be saved a lifetime of heartache.’
‘How can thee say that? I have sworn on my honour
that I love thee, why will thee not believe me?’ He took
hold of her. ‘Should I swear by the elements for thee,
Katren? Send me on a quest to prove my love, anything,
just tell me what I should do.’

She gently held her hand to his face and smiled as
she caressed his skin. ‘Make love to me.’
The answer brought a tear to his eye. Maelgwn had
warned him many times that his past would catch up
with him, but only now did Calin truly realise what the
Prince had meant. Here he had finally found the one
woman to whom he could remain loyal, yet no amount
of assurances would convince her of it.
‘Katren, come quick,’ Alma called, racing into the
room, too preoccupied with her news to notice she’d
interrupted anything. ‘It’s Jenovefa, her water hast
broken.’
Katren looked at Brockwell. She was reluctant to
leave him when he appeared so forlorn.
‘I am not going anywhere.’ He gave her leave to
tend to the emergency. ‘Thee should go.’
For nine hours the Queen remained at Jenovefa’s side.
Ione had fetched Old Hetty from the village to attend
the birth. The old woman had delivered more children
than everyone else in the area put together, and Tory
felt Jenovefa was in the best of care.
This shall be me before too long, Tory gulped, as she
watched Jenovefa, sweating and screaming through her
agony. I must be insane, Tory concluded as she left the
room.
‘How doth she fare, Majesty?’ Rhys was upon her as
soon as she emerged.
Tory smiled. ‘As well as one could expect, sir, but
she be only halfway there at best. So thee may as well
get some rest.’

‘Who could sleep? I want to see her.’
‘I would strongly advise against that. At this stage,
Rhys, I think she would probably kill thee. Tiernan,
would thee take Rhys and fill him with food and mead
until he passes out.’
‘With pleasure.’ Tiernan took hold of him.
‘Nay, I do not want –’ Rhys protested, but Tiernan
was by far the stronger of the two.
‘That be an order, sir, not advice,’ Tory raised her
voice, too tired to argue with him.
‘How art thou faring?’ Maelgwn approached to ask.
The look she gave him implied that it was a stupid
question. ‘That shall be me in seven months.’
‘Aye.’ He smiled.
‘Thee need not appear so happy about it. Thee shall
owe me big for the favour, believe me.’
‘Indeed, I shall,’ he agreed, in good spirits. ‘But right
now thou art tired, and well in need of food and rest
thyself. Come.’ The King could see a protest surfacing.
‘That be an order,’ he cautioned, leading Tory off down
the hall.
Maelgwn let Tory sleep till after dawn the next day.
When he entered their chambers to wake her, he found
the Queen tossing about and saturated in sweat. ‘Tory,
Tory wake up, thou art dreaming again.’
Her eyes opened wide and she sat up. ‘Jenovefa’s
babe?’ she asked in a panic.
‘Jenovefa be fine and very close now,’ he assured her,
surprised to see her scrambling out of bed. ‘What be the
matter?’

‘I have had another prophecy,’ she explained,
pulling on her clothes.
‘What hast thou seen?’
‘Blood.’ She tied her belt and made for the door.
‘Lots of it.’
Tory arrived at Jenovefa’s side, finding all as it
should be.
‘Majesty.’ Jenovefa reached her arm out anxiously
for Tory.
‘I am so sorry, Jenny. Maelgwn did not wake me.’
Tory clenched her hand tight.
‘The King only be watching out for his own heir,’
Jenovefa uttered. She gasped for breath, too fatigued to
scream anymore.
It seemed that she had something to say, if only she
could find a moment’s peace.
‘I have changed my mind, Majesty. I wish to study
under thee, with my husband’s permission or no. I will
not spend the next twenty years thus,’ she panted
heavily, a groan escaping her lips.
Mabel, one of the other noble women of the court,
gently wiped her brow with a cool cloth. ‘Shh Jen. She
be delirious,’ she informed Tory.
‘I do not think so somehow,’ Tory replied.
‘Nay, I am not!’ She pushed Mabel away. ‘Majesty
please. Better I die now than my life amount to naught
but that of a glorified mare.’
‘Jenovefa! What art thou saying?’ Mabel, the
mother of four, was horrified.
‘Thee understands, Majesty.’ Jenovefa ignored
Mabel’s protest, awaiting the Queen’s word.

‘Aye.’ Tory politely asked Mabel to fetch some more
water. Once she’d closed the door behind her, Tory
consoled Jenovefa. ‘I be not sure how we shall get
around thy husband, but we shall work something out.’
Although the agony of the moment seized her,
Jenovefa managed to smile.
‘Push child . . . I see the head,’ Hetty instructed.
With that, Jenovefa screamed with all her might.
‘What be going on in there?’ Rhys demanded to
know, heading for the door.
Maelgwn and Tiernan advanced to stop him. ‘Tory
shall let thee know as soon as there be any development,’ Maelgwn instructed, leading him back to his seat.
‘But listen to her!’
‘That be nothing.’
They turned to find Taliesin and Selwyn striding
down the hall.
‘Thee ought to have heard Sorcha giving birth to
this one,’ the High Merlin chuckled, making light of a
serious situation.
‘High Merlin, praise the Goddess thou art here. I
think she be dying!’ Rhys raced to meet him.
‘Nay.’ Taliesin rested a hand on his shoulder,
sending surges of calming energy through the expectant
father. ‘She be in agony, I’ll grant, but fear not, she shall
survive.’ The High Merlin looked at the King, his old
face filled with pride. ‘And there be more congratulations in order, I believe.’ He embraced Maelgwn as he
had not done since the Prince was a small boy,
overwhelmed with delight.
‘I suspected the news might please thee.’

‘Pleased! I couldn’t be more so. I am to be his tutor,
of course?’
‘Who else?’ Maelgwn answered with a smile.
‘Please, High Merlin, can this not wait?’ The
screams from his chambers caused Rhys to fret more.
Suddenly all was was quiet. The men held their
breath, looking to the closed door, until the sound of a
babe crying caused them to break into rejoicing. Rhys
rushed through the well-wishers as the door opened.
Tory came forth, quietly closing the door behind
her. ‘It be a boy.’ She burst into tears, as did Rhys as he
embraced her, elated and relieved.
‘A son! May I see them?’
‘Jenovefa asked that thee give her a moment, but I
assure thee, both mother and child art in fine health.’
‘So, by what name shall thy son be known, Rhys?’
Maelgwn handed the proud father a goblet of mead to
toast the new babe’s health.
‘We have agreed on Gawain.’ The name meant
hawk of battle.
‘Splendid choice.’
Everyone raised their goblets as Taliesin made a
toast. ‘To the young Lord Gawain of Din Lligwy. May
he find beauty, wisdom and joy in life. And may the
Goddess bless him with the health and strength to do
his father and his forefathers proud.’
‘So be it!’ One and all resounded as their goblets
met.
The herds and flocks of Aberffraw had been gathered
together over the weeks prior to Samhain. The choice

animals were spared for breeding purposes, but the
majority had been killed the night before the feast for
the winter stores. The King and Taliesin had both seen
this as the possible inspiration for Tory’s dream. As
Taliesin had experienced no such premonition, he felt
that in this case Tory was perhaps confusing prophesy
with a nightmare. But the Merlin did not say so in front
of her. He explained that he felt the Queen so in tune
with the Goddess and the land that she must have
sensed the panic of the beasts led to the slaughter.
Tory had seen naught but blood, gushing down
walls, stairs, floors and eventually all over the earth,
staining everything in its path a coat of red, so dark it
appeared almost black. As life in the castle was calm
now and Jenovefa and her child were well, Tory
accepted this conclusion.
By evening every fire in the kingdom would be
extinguished, only to be rekindled from a ceremonial
fire lit by a druid. From this fire, others would be lit in
the outer bailey where the folk from the surrounding
common could offer sacrifices to the Goddess in the
hope of gaining good fortune for the coming year.
Samhain was a very magical and spiritual time for
the people of Britain, for it was thought to be the day
when the Otherworld became visible to all humanity.
Under the veil of night, the ghosts of the dead set out to
wreak vengeance on the living, and evil marched
unbridled across the land. Hence everyone was very
aware of their behaviour at this time; if one angered the
spirits, one would surely bring misfortune upon themself
and their kin.

This last day of the year had a sacred name of its
own in the darker mystic circles. So dreaded by the
ancients was it, that its true name was never uttered
aloud and its rituals were never committed to parchment. The Nameless day, when an old King was dead
and a bright new King not yet born, was especially
sacred to the dark Queen in her destructive aspect. The
shadow of the triple Goddess, and patron of all that is
unwholesome in nature was a deity that thrived on
humanity’s most selfish desires. Like her day, she too was
nameless to the pure of heart. For once invoked she was
a negative force to be reckoned with, as Sir Cadogan
was about to discover.
Cadogan had been drinking with his old comrades, Sir
Vaugnan and Sir Jeven, who were also stationed at
Degannwy for the cold seasons. Later that evening,
Cadogan, who was good looking in a snakish kind of
way, had managed to win the favour of a young maiden
staying at the citadel, and had whisked her back to his
chambers for a night of mischief. Samhain, like
Beltaine, was renowned for it.
The girl collapsed onto his bed as intoxicated as the
knight, her arms outstretched high above her head. ‘Do
what thou will, sir,’ she invited, as he crawled on top of
her, eager to oblige.
Cadogan fumbled with her clothes, his fingers
lacking any coordination due to all the mead he’d
consumed. The girl giggled as she returned his affection,
yet as his lips caressed her neck she began to quiver and
shake. Cadogan, assuming this was due to his personal

magnetism, thought nothing of it until she suddenly
thrust him from her.
‘Get off me!’ Vanora’s harsh voice thundered, as she
raised herself and stood beside the bed.
‘Art thou playing me for sport, child?’ Cadogan was
rather annoyed.
‘Imbecile, it be me, Princess Vanora. Remember?
Daughter of the great Chiglas? So much for thy
proclaimed love for me and desire to assume the role of
my father’s heir.’ Vanora was most displeased, as she
observed the body of the maid she had seized.
It was Vanora’s voice alright and her manner, yet it
was the same maiden he’d been entertaining all night
who stared him back. ‘Princess Vanora! How can this
be?’
‘Never mind how I did it,’ Vanora commanded.
‘What of thy vow?’
Cadogan finally got a grip on the situation and fell
to his knees before the maiden. ‘But thee called my love
a farce, claiming thy heart was already lost to Prince
Caradoc.’
‘Well, I have changed my mind. My father hast
decided Caradoc to be a mindless cretin, and thus unfit
to succeed him. Hence he be most certainly unfit to
claim my hand.’
‘Oh Majesty.’ He took her hand to kiss it, but she
withdrew it immediately.
‘Not so fast,’ she walked away from him, observing
his quarters with apparent distaste. ‘I have consulted
with the dark forces and my father on the subject of thy
origins, Cadogan. It would seem that thou also hast the

right to claim the title and power of a prince, as thy
father was the once King of Dyfed. Apparently he was
unjustly done out of his title and kingdom by the Desi
Clan, with the help of the damn Romans.’
‘Vortipor,’ Cadogan uttered the name with a
vengeance. ‘Art thou sure of this?’
‘Of course I am!’ Vanora snapped. ‘Dost thou think
for a moment that we could even consider thee if it
were not the case?’ Her tone and manner became more
ardent. ‘So, if thou dost still desire to lay claim to my
hand, Sir Cadogan, to rule Powys one day in my father’s
stead and claim back thy rightful seat in Dyfed, then,’
she moved closer, in encouragement, ‘my father, as with
Caradoc, hast set thee a task to prove thy worthiness. If
thou art successful, then my hand and title shall be
thine.’
Cadogan grinned broadly. In his drunken stupor her
proposal sounded even more enticing than the maid’s.
‘Whatever service thy mighty father requires of me,
consider it done. Just name the quest.’
Vanora smiled broadly, pointing to his bedside table
where a tiny black bottle slowly materialised. ‘It hast
been made known to us that the new Queen of the
Dragon, the War Goddess, already carries his heir. King
Chiglas wants the Otherworld warrior from the future
for himself. It be his wish that, come the first snowfall,
thee take this bottle and make with it to Aberffraw.
Then, without alerting any to the fact, give the
contents to the Queen.’
‘What will it do to her?’ Cadogan didn’t seem as
keen now.

‘It will sedate her for the journey to Powys and help
rid us of Maelgwn’s troublesome seed.’
‘I do not know about this, the risk involved in just
getting her out of Aberffraw unnoticed be very high
indeed.’ He seemed to have sobered somewhat, giving
the matter closer consideration. ‘Let alone the trip back
to Powys! The mountains will be perilous come
snowfall, I cannot guarantee she will survive.’
‘My love.’ Vanora crouched beside him, aroused
that Cadogan, unlike Caradoc, actually seemed to be
mildly intelligent. ‘My father shall send a boat that will
await thee at the end of the Menai. This can bring thee
all the way back to Powys – no mountains, just a short
ride inland to our capital, Arwystli. What could be
easier?’
‘It shan’t be easy, I assure thee.’ Cadogan, knowing
Tory better than Vanora or her father did, thought it
would be near impossible. Yet, he had so much to gain.
‘But thou art so smart, Cadogan. Thou hast not
been caught out yet for the treacherous leech thou art.’
‘True.’ He took hold of her around the waist as the
Princess seemed rather amiable at present.
‘So thee shall do it?’
He nodded.
‘Excellent. Oh, there be one more thing, if I may?’
she flirted, aware this was the only way to persuade him.
‘Ask and it shall be done.’
‘We also want her maid, Katren, as we might need
her for persuasive purposes.’
‘Wise move.’ Cadogan considered he could use her
to the same end.

‘Stay in thy room this night and take advantage of
this silly child, as she shall prove thy perfect alibi.’
‘But we have planned nothing for this night, why
should I need an alibi?’ Cadogan was afraid he might
have missed something.
Vanora smiled, dropping her voice to a whisper. ‘So
that when Caradoc escapes, thou shalt not be suspected.
King Chiglas wishes to punish him for his bungling.
Caradoc, of course, will believe his love coming to his
rescue. But after he hast made it all the way back to my
father at Arwystli, he shall find a very different
reception awaits him.’ The pair grinned mischievously.
As Cadogan broke from a kiss with her, he was
startled to find the young maid had regained her own
drunken sensibilities.
‘How did we end up on the floor?’ The girl burst
into laughter.
The knight didn’t bother with an explanation.
Come grading day, the masters had burnt off much of
their nervous energy at the Samhain celebrations. As
they’d also had a day to rest and recuperate, they were
all in a much improved frame of mind.
Tory began with a simple meditation to relax them.
‘The perfect balance of mind, body and nature be what I
expect to see this day. We have come a long way in just
two months, so remember what I have taught thee.
Remain calm, balanced and focused. I wish thee well.’
Percival was seated at a small desk with pen and
parchment, keeping score and jotting down the Queen’s
notes as she discreetly conveyed them to him.

Tory ran each master through what they’d learnt:
kata, Tae-kwon-do exercises, kicks, and strikes on the
bag. As this grading was a test of the self, competition
through sparring wasn’t a factor. But when the masters
had completed the program, they were given the option
of taking a breaking test.
Tory had been training Maelgwn in this technique,
known as Shiwari, since their first lesson. The King had
spent many hours hitting the straw pad, which
hardened the hands, fists, and outer edge of the foot.
Most of the masters had taken up the practice, yet none
bar the King and Queen had ever tried it out on a
wooden board.
Some of the masters declined the test when
informed that if they did not succeed, it would be
deducted from their grade. This stipulation
differentiated between those who truly believed it
within their capabilities and those who did not; this
belief was essential if one was to succeed.
Most of the men opted to test their new skills,
except for Rhys and Angus. Only Ione stepped forward
to represent the women. Tory knew Katren was
procrastinating, but her fear of loss prevented her from
stepping forward. Tory thought this a shame, as Katren
was quite capable and the planks were not very thick.
First up was Brockwell, as he was so sure of himself.
‘Calm and focus thyself, Calin,’ Tory instructed
gently. ‘Thought and action must be one, no hesitation.’
At the point where Brockwell unleashed his power,
Tory realised that she was witnessing the warrior she’d
known in Brian. A tear escaped her eye as she watched

his unmistakeable technique, the wood splintering apart
under the force of his blow.
Vortipor, who hadn’t been concentrating from the
start, was next. The trouble with Vortipor was that
everything was a game to him, thus he accomplished
naught but a bruise for attempting the feat.
Cedric also failed. Tory knew that he’d only
attempted the blow because he felt he had something to
prove to everyone, which subsequently he did not.
Ione had no problem with the test. Tory’s heart
warmed when Ione then encouraged Tiernan with a
light thump on the shoulder and a smile, as it came his
turn. The knight, in the quiet realisation that his own
personal mission had been accomplished, stepped
forward confidently to face the breaking test. When
Tiernan accomplished the deed, he and Ione actually
hugged each other voluntarily. He then took the liberty
of declaring them the supreme team, as they were the
only pair to successfully perform the task.
The last to step forward was the King, who did so
with a huge smile on his face. ‘Two,’ he motioned,
holding up two fingers.
‘Two!’ Tory just adored his spunk, challenging him
in fun only as she felt confident he could do it.
‘Aye.’
Tory gave him the go ahead. He has worked so hard
on this skill, she quietly prayed, Goddess grant him
victory.
His subjects watched breathlessly as the King
brought his closed fist down to shatter the two pieces
of timber, and a round of applause was raised to

commend the achievement. With this the examination
was over.
After tallying the points scored throughout the day,
Tory gathered her students in the circle to award them
their new colours. She first addressed those who’d made
the least rate of progress.
Cara had jumped a half grade from white beltyellow tip (ninth Kyu), to yellow (eighth Kyu). Her
progress and fighting style were good, but her concentration was not. Rhys, Cedric, Vortipor, and Angus had
jumped a grade from white (tenth Kyu) to a yellow belt.
Katren and Alma achieved a whole grade, from
ninth Kyu to a yellow belt-green tip (seventh Kyu).
Calin, Tiernan and Ione, who’d proven themselves
outstanding, progressed from their white belt (tenth
Kyu) up one and a half grades to the yellow belt-green
tip (seventh Kyu).
The star of the day was, of course, the Dragon
himself, who proudly stepped up to receive his green
belt. Maelgwn had jumped one and a half grades to
sixth Kyu. He tied on the new belt that represented all
those months of hard work, and wore it with great
pride.

17

The Five Dark
Days

O

ver a month had passed since the news of
Caradoc’s escape reached Aberffraw, and still
the soldiers at Degannwy had failed to find any
trace of the treasonous prince, nor had they determined
how he’d escaped.
‘Cadogan had a solid alibi,’ Sir Vaugnan, who had
been keeping an eye on the knight’s movements for the
King, told the court. The guard who held the prison
keys had been in attendance all night, and vowed he’d
not lapsed into sleep at any time. Still, come the
morning after Samhain, Caradoc was not to be found in
the supposedly impermeable oubliette.
The report had set Maelgwn on edge for a week or
so. But when Caradoc didn’t rear his ugly head to

avenge him, the King felt he could safely assume that
his half-brother had run back to Powys where he would
hide out until the snow had passed. The next day, the
nineteenth of December by a modern calendar, marked
the first of the five ‘Dark Days’. The Britons called this
five-day period of sorrowing, when time stood still, the
dead of the year. Soon the land would be covered in
snow for the sleep time, better known as burgeoning.
Maelgwn was rather pleased at the prospect that he
could beat Caradoc senseless all over again come spring.
For his brother would most certainly return then, to
atone for his past failures and imprisonment.
Come dawn of the first of the five days of sorrowing,
Tory awoke from a frenzied dream.
‘Tory, what ails thee?’ Maelgwn hugged her close,
trying to calm her.
‘Blood, so much blood . . .’ She could not convey
how nauseous the vision made her feel. But this time
there had been something else – Tory recalled a face. ‘I
saw a man! At least I think it was a man. He looked
more like a slug.’ She shuddered. ‘And he was reaching
for me.’
Maelgwn’s embrace tightened, and he went very
quiet.
Tory could sense that fear of loss in him again, and
pulled back a little. ‘Who be it that I see, Maelgwn? Be
it Chiglas?’
‘Aye.’ He hesitated then agreed, ‘There be no
mistake by thy description of him. Caradoc may have
told him something of thee.’

‘But he knows little. None of Chiglas’ kindred saw
me fight. The only way Chiglas could know anything of
my skills or origins would be if Cadogan had said
something to him.’
‘Thou art right. Still, a dream cannot be deemed as
proof of his treason, Tory, and Taliesin warned thy
dreams could be misleading whilst thou art with child.’
‘Oh please, Maelgwn, don’t patronise me. I do not
wish to start arguing about Cadogan again, I am just
telling thee what I saw.’ She climbed out of bed,
annoyed with him.
Taliesin had also warned that Tory would be much
moodier while she was pregnant, so the King was
patient and held a good mood. ‘Of course. I shall be
alert, I promise.’
‘I am sorry. I did not mean to snap. Oh look!’ Her
whole manner softened as she looked outside.
‘Aye, an early snow.’ Maelgwn watched with a smile
as Tory approached the huge long windows; now their
winter seclusion had truly begun. Peace at last.
That evening, the King met with a rude shock when he
was informed that Cadogan was on the doorstep bearing
a grave message from Degannwy.
‘Thee must forgive my setting foot on Mon before
spring, Majesty, but I am the only courier of merit who
be fit to ride in such weather. There hast been a murder
at the citadel.’ He pulled a scroll from inside his clothes
and handed it to Maelgwn.
‘And there seemed no cause for the attack whatsoever, sir?’ the King asked after reading.

‘Nay, Majesty. Some have speculated that perhaps
Prince Caradoc never left Degannwy after escaping the
oubliette. It could be possible, I suppose . . .’
‘Aye, Sir Vaugnan stated thus in his note.’ Maelgwn
was thoughtful a moment. ‘I shall have Sir Rhys and Sir
Brockwell accompany thee to Degannwy at once. I feel
sure they can resolve this in my stead.’ He felt nervous
about having Cadogan so close at hand after Tory’s
warning this morning.
‘Majesty, please.’ Cadogan’s voice was meek, as he
dared to make a request. ‘The weather outside be truly
fierce. Could I not rest the night and set out in the
morning?’
The King was disinclined to agree, but he could
hardly expect the man to turn around in near darkness
and head back through the snowfall. ‘Of course. I shall
send Sir Rhys and Sir Brockwell on ahead of thee to
investigate, just in case the situation at Degannwy
worsens overnight.’
‘Very good, Highness. I do appreciate it, I assure
thee.’ He bowed.
‘Send Tiernan, Brockwell, and Rhys to me,’ the
King commanded.
After the King briefed Rhys and Brockwell on their
errand, they left at once. They were eager to return to
Aberffraw and their training before the weather became
too bad to permit safe passage home. The King
instructed Tiernan to ensure that at no time while
Cadogan was in the house was the Queen to be left
alone.
Heeding the implication of mistrust in the King’s

voice and having just cause to be suspicious of Cadogan
himself, Tiernan swore this would be done.
As the five days of sorrowing were observed as a holiday,
the courtiers were at leisure to do as they pleased. Katren
was taking an early morning stroll along the east hall
when she spied Sir Cadogan, sneaking around. What be
he doing here? She was quick to conceal herself in a
doorway to observe his movements. The knight glanced
back in her direction, and Katren flattened herself hard
against the door. When she ventured another glance
down the hall, Cadogan had vanished. Did he see me? She
proceeded cautiously along the corridor, keeping her back
to the wall. The large stone buttresses, which jutted out
between the doorways, provided many a place to hide.
‘Lady Katren.’
The maiden was startled as she felt the cold steel of
a knife against her throat.
‘Just the maid I am looking for,’ he hissed, dragging
her into the room from which he’d emerged. Cadogan
closed the heavy door behind them, keeping the knife
hard pressed against his captive’s jugular. ‘Where be the
Queen?’
The tears welled in her eyes. She so wanted to test
her skills, but could she move fast enough to escape his
blade? ‘I am no longer the Queen’s maid, sir,’ she said. ‘I
do not follow her schedule as closely as I once did.’
‘Do not test me girl!’ Cadogan turned her around,
and thrust her hard against the wall.
This was the break Katren had been waiting for. She
drove her knee deep into his stomach and, clenching

her hands together, took a swing at his face. Half keeled
over, Cadogan stumbled backwards. Unable to believe
her own strength, Katren raced for the door.
‘Damn it!’ Cadogan lunged forward to grab her, but
fell short.
As Katren fumbled with the door handle, she lashed
out with a kick to her attacker’s jaw to buy her some
time. The door swung wide and she escaped into the
corridor, only to be tackled to the hard stone floor and
dragged back inside the room.
‘Blasted bitch!’ Cadogan rolled her over and belted
her across the face repeatedly, until she was too delirious
to resist him. ‘Now.’ He raised the maiden up and shook
her, to make her conscious. ‘Thee will tell me where
Maelgwn’s whore be, or I shall gut thee before thy own
eyes.’ He made the knife at her belly felt.
‘The north tower,’ Katren mumbled, ashamed.
‘Much better.’ He roughly locked arms with her
again.
Tory was taking a bath in the north tower this morning,
as the bath in the royal chamber was being cleaned and
refilled. Sir Tiernan had instructed Ione to keep an eye
on her until she joined the King for supper, as Maelgwn
was attending to some matters of State. Tory laughed
when there came a knock at the door, sure that it was
Maelgwn neglecting his duty yet again for a little play.
‘Enter.’
‘It be Katren, Majesty,’ the maid announced
through the door without entering.
‘Well, thee may enter, my sweet.’

‘Could thee get the door?’
Tory nodded to Ione, who moved to oblige. As the
door was unbolted, it burst open on her and the heavy
oak wood knocked Ione unconscious. Katren came
hurtling into the room, followed by Cadogan who
strode in, closing and bolting the door behind him.
He stepped over Ione’s body and drew his sword,
thrusting it towards Katren. ‘Get out of there,’ he
instructed Tory, a lustful glint in his eye as he watched
her huddled in the bath.
‘I am so sorry, Majesty,’ Katren cried.
‘Thou art a spineless snake, Cadogan.’
‘Thou art so right,’ he was pleased to agree. ‘Do it!’
Tory stood up, as Cadogan’s sword was getting
awfully close to her friend. As his eyes ravished her
naked form, Tory recalled her wedding gift from the
King. She quickly let down her long hair, which fell
about her like a cloak, and she wondered if she’d acted
fast enough to prevent him noticing the waistlet. She
climbed out of the bath and retrieved her jeans and
jumper from the back of the chair, pulling them on.
‘My, but thou art a sucker for punishment,’ Tory decided
to try to provoke him in the hope of drawing him closer
to herself and away from Katren. ‘Doth thou want to
tell me of thy game before I beat thee senseless?’
Cadogan pulled the black bottle from his bag,
placing the potion on the ground before stepping away
again. ‘Come here.’ He took hold of Katren by the hair,
jerking her head back and placing his blade across her
stretched neck.
‘Drink the contents,’ he instructed Tory.

‘One of Vanora’s concoctions, I presume. Poison?’
She slowly knelt down to retrieve the bottle. It made
her hand ache just to touch it; this brew had dark
origins indeed.
‘Nay, it be not designed to harm. It would seem the
great Chiglas hast taken an interest in thee and requires
thee still functional.’ Cadogan didn’t disclose that he
knew of her pregnancy. ‘It be naught but a sleeping
potion, so drink it.’
As she appeared to have little choice in the matter,
Tory did as she was instructed. She raised the bottle to
her lips, spying Ione coming round out of the corner of
her eye. The taste of the evil brew made her gag as it
trickled down her throat. Tory stood, casting the empty
bottle to the floor. It smashed into pieces on the stone
flagging confirming that the contents had been
consumed. ‘Now release her.’
Cadogan scoffed at her command. ‘I am the one
giving the orders now, Highness.’
Tiernan made his way through the house, inquiring as
to the whereabouts of the Queen. He was not alarmed
by her apparent absence, safe in the knowledge that
Cadogan had left Aberffraw early this morning.
‘Lady Cara.’ He spied someone who was sure to
know.
‘Sir Tiernan,’ she bowed to him.
‘Where be the Queen hiding herself?’
‘Why I do not know, sir. I have not seen the Queen
or Lady Katren all day. Perhaps they took a walk
together?’

Tiernan became concerned. ‘What about Ione, hast
thou seen her?’
‘Nay. Be something amiss?’
‘Fetch the King from the library, I shall be in the
north tower.’ Tiernan urged her to hurry. He should have
thought of the tower earlier, as Ione and the Queen had
been headed there when last they spoke.
Tiernan entered the tower and froze as he beheld a
pool of blood, intermingled with water and glass on the
stone floor. ‘Please not the Queen,’ he prayed. He
couldn’t bear to be responsible for failing her twice in
his lifetime.
He followed the trail of blood that led around the
large stone tub, and spied a body which had been dumped
there. Tiernan, realising it was Ione, rushed to her aid.
‘Unmerciful Goddess. Hast this one not been through
enough!’ He crouched to hold her in his arms, washing
the blood from her face with cool water in the hope of
reviving her. ‘Ione. What happened . . . who did this?’
As he cleaned the gash on her head, Tiernan
realised that it didn’t seem so bad as to warrant so much
blood. He desperately sought another source, finding a
bump on the back of her head and a gash on her upper
arm also. ‘Please Ione, open thy eyes.’ He took the belt
quickly from his waist and bound her arm tight near her
shoulder to stop the loss of blood.
Ione’s eyes parted and she silently watched Tiernan,
who tended her unaware that she had regained
consciousness.
‘Thou art too a fine a woman. Damn it, wake up,’ he
pleaded as their eyes met. An awkward feeling beset the

knight’s stomach as he caught the look of perfect
wonder that graced Ione’s face, as if she were witnessing
a miracle. She reached out slowly and wiped a tear from
his cheek, then she watched it trickle down her finger as
if it were an incomprehensible phenomenon.
The door burst open and the King paused a moment
upon sighting the blood. ‘Tiernan!’
‘Here, Majesty.’
With the spell suddenly broken, Ione gripped
Tiernan’s shirt and pulled herself up as she recalled what
had befallen the Queen. Ione had regained consciousness before Cadogan made his getaway. In her
bleary state she’d endeavoured to overpower him,
resulting in the further injuries she’d sustained.
‘Ione, what hast befallen you? Dost thou know who
attacked thee?’ The King was getting more used to
communicating with her now; simple yes or no
questions saved a lot of guesswork.
Ione nodded to confirm and pointed to the stub
which was all that remained of her tongue, the
expression on her face appearing hopeless. If she’d never
been able to convey the identity of her attackers before,
how was she going to do it now. The Queen was the
only one who knew her secret.
Maelgwn frowned, frustrated, he didn’t understand.
‘What doth that mean?’
‘The same man who attacked thee?’ Tiernan asked.
Ione nodded, rather surprised that he’d guessed. The
Queen must have told him how she’d lost her speech.
‘Caradoc?’ Tiernan presumed, as the bastard prince
was still on the loose and hot for revenge.

She shook her head with a frown and encouraged
him to guess again, wondering how long he’d known
about her ordeal.
‘It was surely Cadogan then,’ Tiernan informed
Maelgwn, and Ione nodded.
‘He hast taken Tory?’ Maelgwn was seeing red.
Ione nodded again, holding the tips of her fingers
together before drawing them apart. She repeated this
action a few times.
‘What doth that mean?’ The King was stumped
again and rose frustrated. If Cadogan had Tory out in
this cold too long, she could lose their child; perhaps
that was the whole plan. ‘Damn! This be impossible!
Why did Taliesin not foresee this?’
‘It means . . . longer?’ Tiernan ignored the King’s
panic, remaining focused on Ione, determined to solve
the mystery.
She motioned no and repeated the movement.
‘She means more,’ Cara uttered as she walked in
and saw the blood covering the ground.
With this established, Tiernan surmised. ‘Cadogan
hast taken more than the Queen?’
Ione slapped her hands together with a nod.
‘He hast taken someone else? Who?’
Cara crouched down beside Ione to look over her
injuries. As she’d seen everyone else this day, she
concluded, ‘Katren?’
Ione again slapped her hands together to confirm.
The King was saddened to learn this, as Cadogan
would never cart an extra body without good reason.
No doubt he intended to use Katren to threaten Tory

into submission. I had best get word to Brockwell at
Degannwy immediately.
‘I do not understand.’ Tiernan stood to address the
King. ‘Majesty, how could Cadogan have taken both of
them out of the house without detection? ’Tis
impossible.’
‘The same way we entered the house when Cadfer
seized power,’ Maelgwn surmised.
Tiernan looked to the King: ‘The west tower.’
‘Cadogan knew about the passage, we used to play
in it all the time when we were boys,’ the King
explained as he scaled the northern caphouse steps,
with Tiernan in hot pursuit.
They followed tracks left in the snow on the open
wall-walk, between the north and west towers. When
they descended the stairs from the west caphouse, the
King’s fears were confirmed. The furniture and rug that
usually concealed the passage had been pushed aside.
Beneath the trapdoor lay a secret path that led one way
to the prison level, and the other way to an
underground passage that brought one out at a cave in
the cliff face some distance down the beach. This exit
could only be used at low tide, which it had been earlier
this morning.
‘The Queen warned me, over and over. Why did I
not listen?’
‘He cannot have gotten far in this weather, Majesty.’
Tiernan attempted to keep him rational.
‘If Cadogan be taking her to Chiglas, as the Queen
foretold, I suspect he will have sent one of his larger
boats to speed their journey to Powys.’

‘Goddess forbid, Majesty, Chiglas! What dost thou
propose to do?’ Now Tiernan was panicking.
The King’s eyes narrowed, his remorse and anger
consumed him. ‘End this damn blood feud.’
‘An attack on Powys in spring would be difficult
enough. We would lose hundreds more men in this
weather,’ Tiernan reasoned.
‘No forces this time, Tiernan, just thee, Angus and
myself. We leave for Llyn Cerrig Bach within the hour.’
It had been some time since the Dragon had
overshadowed Maelgwn’s demeanour, thus Tiernan
didn’t question his instruction. ‘As thee wishes, Majesty.
We shall make ready.’
When the party met in the stables, the King was
surprised to find Vortipor in attendance. ‘This be not
thy fight, friend. I advise thee stay well out of it, to
avoid any repercussions on Dyfed.’
‘Sorry friend,’ Vortipor corrected him politely. ‘The
Goddess hast clearly stated to the contrary. Be as
brothers for thou art one, and let none divide thee. Thy
woes art my own. Besides, if thee believes for a moment
that thou art taking off on an adventure without me,
thou art much mistaken.’
Maelgwn shook his hand, more than thankful for
the support. ‘So be it then,’ he resolved, slapping
Vortipor on the shoulder. It would seem the Protector of
Dyfed did take some things seriously after all.
As they mounted their horses, Ione rode into the
stables, of a mind to go with them.
‘What art thou doing here, thou art ill,’ Tiernan
declared, knowing she was going to dispute the issue.

Ione flipped the fur cloak from her shoulders and
flexed her muscles assuredly to imply that she felt fine
and was raring to go.
‘I do not care, Ione, thou art staying here,’ Tiernan
instructed.
Ione, who answered only to the Queen, held up her
middle finger in protest; Tory had been teaching her a
few silent expressions of her own. She motioned to her
mouth, adamant about her right to go.
‘I know thee owes him –’ Tiernan began.
‘She will be useful, Tiernan. She may come,’ the
King intervened, then he dug his heels into Aristotle
and rode out the stable doors.
Ione gave Tiernan a smug grin as she took off with
the others to pursue the King.
The party sped across the white countryside. The
snowfall had eased for a time and they made Llyn Cerrig
Bach just after nightfall.
Tiernan and Angus knew that the derelict site
housed more than met the eye. Yet Vortipor and Ione
were left to wonder why the King would ride for hours
in the opposite direction of his foe to visit such a
desolate place.
‘Maelgwn, old boy.’ Vortipor was quite sure the King
had taken leave of his senses. ‘I hate to point out the
obvious, but if thou art seeking assistance here, thou art
about five hundred years too late. There be naught left
but a pile of old ruins.’
‘Let this be a lesson to thee, Vortipor,’ the King
answered, then turned and headed for the temple
remains. Angus and Tiernan smiled broadly as they fell

in behind the King and followed him towards the
entrance. Neither had ever been granted entrance to
what lay beneath the altar, but they had heard
Brockwell and the King speak of the High Merlin’s
abode.
Taliesin hadn’t been informed of their arrival, yet
the torches within the temple were lit and the top of
the altar was free of snow. ‘It would appear we art
expected,’ Maelgwn observed, taking a stand on top of
the large stone tablet and helping the others up after
him.
No summons was required this time as Vortipor,
who was the last up, barely had the chance to get on the
large stone before the illuminated mist began to billow
forth from the cross.
Ione appeared ill at ease, so Tiernan thought he’d do
the right thing and put his arm around her for comfort.
This only served to score him an elbow in the side for
his trouble. She looked at him sternly, standing firm,
with her arms folded. If he wasn’t afraid, she wasn’t
either.
Vortipor, beholding the mystic event, began to
laugh. The bright light bursting forth from beneath him
felt like pure life force, it cleansed and empowered him
as it penetrated every fibre of his being. ‘Dragon, thee
never disappoints!’
As the mist gave way to the great entrance room of
Taliesin’s abode, the new arrivals were awestruck.
The King didn’t share their elation. He thundered
forward to address Taliesin, who awaited him with
Selwyn. ‘Why hast thou not told me of this, old man?

How could thee allow Tory to fall into the hands of
Chiglas?’
‘Calm thyself, Dragon,’ the Merlin cautioned,
appearing rather angered himself. ‘Do not blame me for
thy shortcomings. The Queen warned thee only
yesterday, which be far more warning than I had.’
The truth hurt and only served to fuel Maelgwn’s
fury. ‘Thee cannot tell me that the eminent, infallible,
Taliesin Pen Beirdd did not know of this. What kind of
a fool dost thou take me for!’ The King’s harsh words
resounded around the room as he glared at his mentor.
Taliesin slowly walked forward to address Maelgwn,
and he appeared to be calling on such restraint to
remain civil that it caused his whole body to tremble. ‘I
cared for her long before thee ever knew she existed!
Doth thou think for a moment that I would have gone
to such pains with her, so that I could lose her to
Chiglas?’ Taliesin calmed himself once more. ‘Understand that we art history in the making, my friend. From
the time thee wed Tory and signed the pact with the
neighbouring tribes of Britain, we entered an unknown
future. How can I be expected to recall this incident in
time, when it hast never taken place before?’
Maelgwn realised that he had no one to blame but
himself. ‘It would seem I am the fool, High Merlin.’
‘Nay, thou art human, Majesty.’ Taliesin placed a hand
on his shoulder. ‘And if thou art through with feeling
sorry for thyself, we can see to the rescue of thy Queen.’
Before news of the abduction reached Brockwell at
Degannwy, he and Rhys were approached by the young

maid whom Sir Cadogan had vanquished on the night
of Samhain. She appeared very ashamed of herself, not
looking up from the floor as she quietly announced,
‘Call off the murder investigation, I know who
committed the grievous crime.’
Cadogan hadn’t pursued her since the festival and,
sure that he had another lover, she’d been secretly observing the knight’s movements. ‘Please understand that
to witness such an act ’twas a terrible shock.’ She began
to sob. ‘That be why I have not come forth before now.’
Brockwell, considering what Tory would do in his
place, approached the girl and placed a hand on her
shoulder. ‘We understand, please take thy time.’
Rhys sighed at Brockwell’s patience. ‘However, we
would like to catch the offender before he strikes again,’
he added, hoping to move things along.
‘He will not,’ she sniffled.
Brockwell went down on one knee before her. ‘How
art thou so sure?’
‘He be no longer here, sir. He was sent on an errand
to Aberffraw yesterday.’
‘Cadogan.’ Both men resolved at once.
Rhys rushed forward to question the subject more
closely. ‘What just cause did Cadogan have to murder
the soldier?’
‘I do not know, sir.’ She was flustered by his forceful
manner and began to weep again.
‘Thee must suspect at least?’ Rhys pressured her
harder.
‘Rhys,’ Brockwell stood and gently urged him to
back up a little. ‘Please, permit me.’

Rhys agreed to Brockwell’s request, moving to
answer a knock at the door. He was handed an urgent
communication from the King at Aberffraw.
‘Calin.’ Rhys appeared rather ill as he read. ‘Forget
her, I know his motive.’
‘What hast happened?’
Sir Rhys stepped forward and handed Brockwell the
note.
Calin read, then crushed the parchment in his
hand. His eyes moistened with the thought of the
horrors that may lie in store for the women he loved.
He inhaled deeply to control the anger brewing within
him. ‘Let us be gone, sir.’
As usual, Taliesin insisted that everyone eat before he
explained what he knew. Maelgwn protested, anxious
about his wife and unborn child.
‘Thee may leave tonight, unprepared, or leave on
the morrow with some hope of saving her.’
‘Explain.’ Maelgwn hated the fact that Taliesin
always got his way, and the Merlin raised his brow,
aware of this.
‘I shall, after supper.’
Once the party had dined on the beef of two white
bulls that had been slaughtered and cooked according
to an old druidic tradition, the Merlin began to explain
the reasons for their delay. ‘I can safely say that thou art
one of the most fortunate men I have ever known,
Majesty.’
The look the King gave him implied that the
remark didn’t even warrant a response.

‘Tomorrow happens to be the sixth day of the
moon, when the influence of the orb be at its height.
At this particular time of year, after a traditional
sacrifice and an elaborate feast . . .’ he waved his hand
across the food on the table before them, ‘one can cut
mistletoe from the sacred oak to make an antidote for
all poisons.’
‘Be Vanora intending to poison my wife?’
‘Nay, not the Queen, but thy heir.’ The King rose
immediately, but Taliesin gripped his arm. ‘Thou art
already too late, Maelgwn. Cadogan forced Tory to take
the brew before she’d even left Aberffraw, under the
premise it was just a sleeping potion. But fear not! Thy
enchanted wedding gift still protects the child. But
without the potion, that I can only make on the
morrow, thy heir shall surely perish.’
The King’s eyes closed and he resigned himself to be
patient and trust in the Goddess, as she’d never steered
him wrong before.
‘There be one other very good reason for delay,’ the
Merlin informed them, his spirits lifting. ‘If thee would
all care to follow me.’
Taliesin guided them to the room housing his
hexagons. The party was astonished to behold within
the largest of these a holographic image of Chiglas’
capital, Arwystli, and the surrounding terrain.
‘Sacred Mother!’ Angus mouthed the words as his
voice escaped him.
‘Great wonders of Britain, High Merlin!’ Vortipor
cried in amazement. ‘I am mighty glad I am on thy
side.’

‘Arwystli?’ Maelgwn sought to confirm, leaning
against the glass to try to find whatever was amusing
Taliesin so.
‘Aye,’ Taliesin smiled, waiting for the King to spot
their saving grace.
Maelgwn had no fear of the technology, as they’d
used this equipment to crush Cadfer fifteen years ago.
‘What be all that commotion in the mountains yonder?’
The King assumed the control position behind the
panel and proceeded to zoom over the countryside, to
take up a vantage point closer to the mountains.
‘They look like Saxons, Majesty,’ Tiernan said as he
ventured closer.
‘Undoubtedly,’ Taliesin said. ‘It would seem Chiglas
did not see fit to pay them for their unsuccessful attempt
to seize Gwynedd. And with no spoils to cover the
plundering scavengers through winter, they intend to
take their due by force. And they will, on the morrow.’
‘Saved by the Saxons, well I never!’ Maelgwn
almost had to laugh.
‘Indeed, the perfect diversion. Wait for them to
break through the outer defences, sneak in while all art
engaged in battle, and make for thy Queen.
Unfortunately, I shan’t be able to tell thee her situation
within the city until morn, when she hast reached
Arwystli.’
‘Excellent!’ Maelgwn greatly approved.
‘I thought so.’ Taliesin was gracious.
‘Excuse me,’ Vortipor interrupted politely. ‘I know
this may seem a stupid question, but if we do not leave
now, how shall we make Powys in time?’

‘Rufus, I hope,’ the King answered, but he could
never tell just how much persuading it would take to
draw the dragon out into the Middle Kingdoms.
Sir Brockwell and Sir Rhys reached Aberffraw in the
early hours of morning. Brockwell charged into the
house, yelling at the top of his lungs to draw the
attention of anyone who could tell him what was going
on.
Cara, Cedric and Alma came racing to him.
‘Where be the King?’ Calin panicked.
‘He makes chase,’ Cedric assured him, taking hold
of the young knight’s arm to prevent him from dashing
off in pursuit. ‘He said thou art to remain here, for the
way the King hast taken the others, thee cannot follow,
Calin.’
‘What art thou saying, Cedric? Chiglas holds my
lady captive!’
‘The King hast got Vortipor, Tiernan and Angus
with him, they shall see to Katren’s rescue. We need
thee here, in case this be another damn trick.’
‘Cedric, my love, my sister and my King art out
there!’ He pointed to the darkness beyond the frosted
windows. ‘Without them, there be nothing left here for
me to protect. I am the King’s Champion, I should be
with him now. Please, tell me which way they went?’
Cedric let Brockwell’s arm go. ‘Llyn Cerrig Bach.
The King sought the High Merlin there.’
‘Bless thee, Cedric.’ Brockwell backed up in haste. ‘I
shall make thee glad thee told me, I swear.’
‘I am coming with thee,’ Rhys resolved.

‘Nay Rhys, stay with Cedric, thy wife and thy child.
No offence, but I will get there faster on my own.’
‘May the Goddess speed thee,’ said Rhys in parting.
‘How could she not,’ Brockwell reasoned, as he
made for the door.
Taliesin performed the ritual at the first rays of dawn,
and, with the aid of a golden sickle, he cut the plant
known as mistletoe from the oak tree. The Merlin was
mindful not to cut the oakwood, as this would be considered unfortunate and thus condemn their mission.
On the pure white blanket that covered the fairy
wood, the small group of warriors observed the rites
taking place. They made the most of the opportunity to
focus and centre themselves, for it had been decided
that they would go into Arwystli without their cumbersome armour to gain the vantage of speed and agility.
Whilst the potion brewed, the party returned to the
Merlin’s control room to view the current situation at
Arwystli. Taliesin’s tiny satellite camera was homing in
on a microscopic device that lay inside the charm Tory
wore around her waist. As it shot past on the screen
before them, the masters noted the course they would
take. After passage through the outer and inner baileys
on the screen, they entered the huge dark fortress that
housed Chiglas and his forces. There they found the
Queen and Katren in the throne room, standing before
King Chiglas and the Princess Vanora.
Tory had been unconscious for most of the icy crossing
from Mon to Powys. The potion had drained every

ounce of strength from her body, and the cramps in her
stomach were becoming harder to ignore. Katren grasped
her tightly around the waist to help support her in a
standing position. Tory had never felt this vulnerable,
ever. She recognised the man seated on the throne from
her nightmares. This disgusting individual was obese to
the extreme, with sores covering his face, hands and feet
which indicated that he was riddled with disease. The
advisers standing around his throne appeared to be
suffering from the same ailment. Chiglas was bald except
for a few strands, and his beady little eyes appeared
ridiculously small in comparison to his huge crooked
nose and large lips, which were almost purple in colour.
Vanora watched her father intently as he grunted
and snarled, his tongue quickly lapping over his lips on
occasion to keep them moist. She nodded ever so
slightly in acknowledgment, then stepped forward to
speak on his behalf. The evil King and his daughter
were using telepathy to communicate, which made Tory
wonder how they had the power to bethink each other.
Surely they had not been set apart as Chosen.
‘Sir Cadogan, we art greatly pleased that thou hast
delivered the War Goddess as promised. We find thee
worthy to bear the title of Prince of Powys, heir to our
kingdom.’ Vanora paused, her cold black eyes looking to
Tory. ‘Did thee give her my potion as instructed?’
‘Of course, Highness.’ Cadogan placed his right
hand on his heart.
‘Then where be the blood of the Dragon’s heir?’
What! Tory turned to Cadogan who was standing
next to her. She summoned what strength she had left

and served him a punch to his temple. Such a strike was
known to cause loss of vision, balance, consciousness,
even death through a brain lesion.
Cadogan dropped like a ten tonne weight to the
floor, bleary eyed and shaken.
‘Thou art a lying maggot, Cadogan. If my child dies
I shall crush every bone in thy body, one by one.’
Cadogan’s eyes rolled back in his head as he passed
out.
Tory received a backhanded blow to the face from
the guard closest to her, but she only smiled in
satisfaction. ‘Weak as piss,’ she claimed, as the guard
raked her arms behind her back to restrain her.
Princess Vanora didn’t seem at all bothered by her
future husband’s affliction; the Queen of Gwynedd was
more her concern. ‘So then, thee must have on thy
person some fairy enchantment that protects thy child.
What might that be?’
Think of something else, Tory told herself in desperation, knowing that Vanora would only see whatever
came into her mind. The Queen conjured the image of
an alien creature from a horror movie she’d seen. She
recalled the close-up of the beast’s head as it slowly
parted several sets of extendible jaws, dripping with
saliva and slime.
Vanora screeched as the horrific vision entered her
mind, and backed away quickly to escape it.
‘I will find it!’ she thundered. ‘Remove thy clothes.’
Chiglas appeared inspired by the prospect, licking
his lips as his arms reached out towards the Queen; this
was truly Tory’s worst nightmare.

‘Eat shit!’ She made her resolve plain.
Fortunately for Tory, just then a guard rushed in to
inform Chiglas that the Saxons were storming the
walls.
‘What?’ Vanora moved to the window to determine
the size of the threat. ‘Lock up the Warrior Queen and
her servant,’ she ordered. ‘I will contend with them
presently.’
After bearing witness to the scene in Chiglas’
courtroom, Maelgwn would not delay his departure any
longer. While Taliesin bottled the antidote, the King
made haste through the labyrinth to seek the dragon’s
lair.
Maelgwn walked along the stony track that led up
to the cave which Rufus frequented. As the King
reached the entrance, he was startled to encounter not
one dragon but two. The second dragon would have
taken his head off, had he not been fast enough to duck
into a crevice in the rock and escape injury.
Albina!
Maelgwn heard the sound of Rufus’ familiar voice
resounding through his brain, even though nothing but
a low growl reached his ears.
That be one’s penance to Keridwen, that thou art about
to swallow.
Rufus, the larger of the two, came to stand beside
the unknown dragon, bringing chunks of rock and dirt
crumbling down inside the cave with the vibration of
his every step. Please accept one’s apologies. Albina, my
mate, be brooding at present. The dragon motioned with

his claw to an egg that was larger than the King. Not
unlike thy Queen.
‘I understand completely. I am sorry if I startled
thee, Albina.’ The King bowed politely to her. The
beast seemed unimpressed, and with a snort returned to
her position curled around her spawn. ‘I would have
sent word of my visit, but I am pressed for time and
greatly in need of thy assistance.’
One knows why thou art here. And one could be in
favour of helping thee, provided . . .
‘Provided what, Rufus?’
In return for a fast flight to Powys, one wants all the
dead of all thy foe, including thy brother and the corpulent
Chiglas. However, these latter two, one wants alive! Thus
the beast claimed their souls and would wipe them from
existence forever.
‘I shall do my very best to meet thy request, Rufus,
but I cannot promise them alive without question.’
Maelgwn hoped the beast would see reason.
Done. One shall meet thee and thy masters at the
temple, presently.
Brockwell spurred his horse on through the snow, heading down the valley trail to the ruins. He arrived at the
site to witness the dragon departing overhead. ‘Maelgwn!’
he cried in vain, watching the huge beast soar to such a
height that he could no longer see it through the cloud.
Brockwell slouched in his saddle, disheartened.
‘Calin, why so glum?’
Brockwell spun round to find Taliesin on the stairs
of the temple. ‘I have failed the Lady Katren.’

The High Merlin laughed wholeheartedly as he
approached the young knight. Calin, feeling that
Taliesin mocked his pain, folded his arms indignantly.
‘Thou art discouraged too easily, my young friend.
Have I not told thee, where there be a will, there be a
way.’
‘So thee will help me?’ Calin sprang off his horse to
meet him.
‘Aye, but I do not know if thee will like the form of
assistance I have to offer,’ Taliesin cautioned.
‘I will do anything.’ Calin fell on one knee before
the High Merlin. ‘Just name it.’

18

Anger to
Avenge

T

he tortured screams of anguished souls echoing
up from the dungeon rooms mixed with the
unearthly groans of the sick and dying. In light
of the Queen’s performance in the throne room, Katren
and Tory were escorted to their cell by several very large
armed guards. Tory buried her fear under an indifferent
facade, but in truth, she could never have imagined a
more horrid place. The stench on its own was near fatal,
and she thought it little wonder that half of the
populace at Arwystli were diseased.
Katren trembled so much she could barely walk. Yet
she managed to hold her head high and not shed a
single tear, even as the men they passed in the cells

leered and grabbed for them. I must not fear, Calin will
come for me. Katren only hoped there would be
something left of her to save.
The women were cast inside a dark tower, and the
door was bolted shut behind them. They needed a
moment for their eyes to adjust to the dim lighting. A
foul odour hung heavy in the still air, vexing their
nostrils as the source was not far away.
As Katren picked herself up from the floor, she
heard the scratching sound of rats. ‘I think we should go
upstairs, Majesty.’ She got to her feet, quickly helping
Tory up.
‘I tend to agree,’ Tory said and looked up the stairs
toward the caphouse, where glimmers of daylight could
be seen.
‘Sorcha?’ said a voice.
Tory and Katren both froze in horror.
‘Caradoc?’ Tory edged Katren to a safe position
behind her.
‘Aye, sorceress, come to finish me?’ He inquired in a
way that implied he couldn’t care less.
Katren noticed something move in the shadows,
back against the stone wall. Tory inched closer to
investigate, despite Katren’s whispered protests. ‘Art
thou hurt, sir?’
‘I feel nothing.’ Caradoc’s response was spiritless.
Tory considered that it could be a trick. But when
she saw him, she realised Prince Caradoc was no longer
any threat. Katren shrieked when she saw the pile of
skin and bone, covered in gashes and sores. Gangrene
and maggots had besieged his body long ago, fuelled by

the pool of filth from his own secretions, in which he
lay. The rats had also enjoyed a feed. Katren, in spite of
her loathing for the man, kicked the scavengers away.
How on earth is this man still breathing? Tory asked
herself. Surely not even the lowest of creatures deserves
to die like this.
‘Well, come on. Do it! Be this not what thou hast
always wanted, Mother dear, to rid thyself of thy
greatest mistake?’ he yelled, overwhelmed by his
contempt for her.
Katren urged Tory back but the Queen only patted
her hand, crouching down to look Caradoc in the eye.
The man was obviously delirious and beyond pain. ‘Nay
Caradoc, ’tis not true.’
‘Liar! Thou hast always favoured Maelgwn over me.
Was it my fault I was conceived as I was? Nay! Yet thee
drove me away.’
Tory felt Sorcha’s presence upon her and motioned
Katren away. ‘Upstairs.’
‘Nay, Majesty, I will not leave –’
‘Do as I say child!’ Tory roared in Sorcha’s voice and
her own, startling Katren into complying at once.
When she turned back to Caradoc, his mood had
calmed somewhat and he stared wide-eyed at her
angelic presence. ‘Dost thou not recall our time
together when thou wast still a young boy? Before
Cadfer got hold of thee, before the blood feud and the
uprising, my sons were fast friends then.’
‘Aye, I do,’ Caradoc acknowledged, as if he could
see his past before his eyes while they spoke. ‘I
remember thee would read to us in the shade of the

trees in the courtyard. Games, good food, friends . . .
’twas the best time of my life,’ he resolved with a distant
smile.
‘The Goddess understands thy plight, Caradoc, and
shall be lenient.’ At the mercy of Sorcha’s will, Tory
administered a fatal blow.
In the blink of an eye Sorcha was gone and Caradoc
was dead on the ground at Tory’s feet; his nose had been
broken at the bridge and smashed back into his brain.
She stepped away from him, totally appalled by the
deed. ‘Damn thee, Sorcha, I am sick of doing thy dirty
work.’ As the rats took to the corpse, Tory’s nausea set
in. ‘Get me out of this place.’ She burst into tears. The
cramps in her stomach intensified until she was reduced
to a huddle on the floor.
‘Majesty.’ Katren rushed down the stairs to her side,
but the Queen’s eyelids were already closing. ‘Please,
Majesty, don’t leave me on my own in this place.’ The
maiden patted her cheeks, losing the battle to keep her
conscious. ‘We must get thee upstairs.’ She hoisted the
Queen upright and, struggling with the dead weight,
dragged her towards the caphouse.
Brockwell awaited the High Merlin in the hall outside
one of the thousands of identical doors within his maze.
Taliesin was having words with Brockwell’s transport,
which was another winged beast – a griffin.
It was said that the creatures were so fierce in
appearance that one couldn’t help but be afraid of them,
and if a griffin sensed fear it would devour thee at once.
Thus Brockwell wasn’t really looking forward to the

test, and he thought of Katren to save losing face. As
luck would have it the griffin owed Taliesin a favour or
two, so if Calin was dauntless when he met the beast
he’d have his ride to Powys.
Calin grew tried of pacing up and down the hall as
it only served to make the delay all the more frustrating,
so he took a seat on the floor and assumed a meditative
position. He drew three long, deep breaths to seek the
guidance and blessing of his forefathers. ‘Please protect
my love until I can make it to her.’
‘Calin.’ The Merlin finally emerged.
‘What did it say?’ Brockwell jumped up to confront
the news.
‘Thou art not going to like it, I fear.’
‘High Merlin please,’ Brockwell was eager to leave
as the distance between himself and his King grew wider
with every passing second.
‘The situation be this, thee must walk into the
centre of the lair. If thee shows the slightest fear, the
griffin will turn thee to stone for wasting its time, and
thy spirit will remain entrapped thus for all eternity.’
Brockwell looked to the ground to think a second. ‘I
should rather be turned to stone trying, than risk a
lifetime without her.’
Taliesin smiled. ‘Bear that in mind and thou shalt
do just fine.’
Calin nodded in gratitude and cautiously
approached the door.
‘A word of advice . . .’
Brockwell looked back, thankful for any assistance
the Merlin had to give.

‘Do not draw thy weapon, and think only the purest
of thoughts. These beasts, although ferocious on the
outside, art fools for sentiment deep down.’
Brockwell nodded once again, turning the handle of
the door that concealed his fate.
The room was huge – a deep, dim expanse of stone
and rock. So high was the roof, Calin could not view it
and the wall around the door faded into nothingness on
both sides. Torch-lit stairs led downward through the
rocky terrain. No wonder the old man took so long,
Brockwell concluded, as he began his descent into the
beast’s dominion.
Brockwell finally reached a large plateau of rock,
and from its edge was a sheer drop to infinity down a
rocky cliff face. The knight peered into the darkened
shadows beyond the torch light. ‘Hello.’
The sound of wings came from above like that of an
eagle swooping down on its prey, only this was far
louder. Calin looked up to behold the huge creature. Its
head, chest and wings were feathered and it displayed
the forelegs and talons of an eagle. This one, however,
was about ten times larger than the average eagle, and
was plummeting head first with its claws outstretched
towards him.
Brockwell’s first reaction was to draw his sword, but
he refrained as advised. He waited until the beast was
near upon him before ducking away from its sweeping
grasp. Brockwell quickly turned to face the beast, so it
would not think him trying to flee.
It was only as the creature landed before him that
Calin could observe the rest of its form. From its

shoulders a metamorphosis took place; the griffin had
the hindquarters of a lion, and tawny coloured fur
covered the rest of its body. Although legend has it that
these creatures have the tail of a serpent, Calin
observed nothing more than the normal tufted tail of a
lion. The only other unusual feature he could note was
that on its eagle head it had the ears of a lion.
The griffin had begun to circle him on all fours. It
opened its huge beak and let loose a deep, loud roar, the
force of which near blew him off the plateau. Brockwell
roared right back at the beast grossly larger than
himself, and continued to yell even after the beast’s
roaring had ceased.
Why art thou not afraid, when one plans to eat thee?
Calin hushed as he heard the words and looked
about him. ‘Did thou say something?’
Nay. One be waiting around for the good of one’s
health.
The creature’s mouth made no movement, and
Brockwell realised that he was not hearing with his ears,
but with his mind. ‘Thou art bethinking me?’ Brockwell
said with excitement, simply delighted with himself.
‘Excellent!’
The griffin didn’t seem to share his rosy view, for a
long, slow growl escaped its beak as it continued to
circle. Answer one’s question . . . How be it that thou art
not afraid?
Calin shrugged. ‘Because thee will only eat me if I
show fear.’
Hah! Never listen to human beings. One said one would
turn thee to stone if thee showed fear. One did not mention

what one would do in other circumstances. The beast’s
sinister laughter echoed through Brockwell’s brain, and
the griffin chopped its beak a few times to emphasise
the point.
The Knight wasn’t alarmed, as he figured the
creature was still testing him. ‘Thou art not going to eat
me.’
Why not? The creature snapped.
‘Because I am a warrior of the Triple Goddess. My
quest be to the save the life of her greatest representative, thine sister the good Queen of Gwynedd, and
my love, the Lady Katren, for they art being held captive
by the savage Chiglas. Surely as a creature of the
Goddess thee would rather make a meal of her foe, than
her humble servant.’
There art precious few of thy kind who art humble, the
creature scoffed. One cares not about the affairs and
occupants of the Middle Kingdoms, thou art all just as bad
as one another.
‘Nay, thou art wrong.’ Brockwell was adamant as he
strode forward to address the animal. ‘The two women
whose lives I seek to save art the purest of souls. If thee
could only know what I know of them.’ Calin’s eyes
began to flood with tears as he recalled the fine times
they’d seen since they’d been brought together, some six
months ago. ‘I love them, understand! And I shall not
allow thee to let them perish. They need us and thou
art going to take me to them.’
Calin noticed the tears that had filled the eyes of
the huge animal. It plonked itself back onto its hind
quarters and proceeded to cry like a baby.

‘I am sorry,’ Brockwell said, and he felt as awkward
with the sobbing beast as he did with a weeping woman.
‘’Twas not my intent to upset thee.’
Please stop, one cannot take it.
‘Stop what?’
Thinking of her! So beautiful, so strong. The beast’s
voice wavered with emotion. One hast decided to help
thee, but thee must make me a promise in return. The
creature’s sobbing subsided.
‘What kind of promise?’
Wed the girl of thy heart and remain beholden to her
alone for as long as ye both shall live.
‘But I want nothing more.’ Brockwell felt the
request too easy.
Should thee ever break this vow, thou shalt bequeath thy
bountiful mate and all thy offspring to me, never again to lay
eyes on them. Dost thou consent?
In light of his promiscuous past, Brockwell took a
moment to consider the proposal. Did he possess the
willpower to meet the lifelong challenge? ‘I do.’
Tory had regained consciousness, but she was still
weaker than ever she’d felt before. From the barred
windows of the prison tower, she and Katren observed
the situation unfolding in the city below.
Arwystli was similar in layout to Degannwy in that
it housed a whole city inside its outer bailey walls,
rather than just a castle. But as it did not have the same
topographical protection Degannwy did, the city’s walls
were higher than most other British strongholds. Many
of Chiglas’ soldiers scurried to reinforce the outer and

inner-bailey wall-walks, as Saxon troops came down
from the outlying mountains and gathered outside the
city.
‘I thought the Saxons were allied to Chiglas?’
Katren tried to assess what was happening.
‘It would seem they have had a falling out,’ Tory
commented, as she heard the tower door downstairs
open. She stood to address the impending confrontation, urging Katren behind her.
‘Nay Sensei, I am ready to fight,’ Katren insisted, fed
up with being afraid.
‘Savour the element of surprise, Katren. They will
not hesitate to kill thee. So, if I squeeze thy hand, I
want thee to get down and stay down.’ Tory again
pushed her into the background.
Four large guards emerged, two bowmen and two
swordsmen. They were accompanied by Vanora and the
revived Sir Cadogan, who came over to stand opposite
Tory.
‘Thee shall find the charm about her waist,’
Cadogan informed Vanora with malice.
‘Thou art a son-of-a-bitch, Cadogan! I do solemnly
swear that thee shall not live to see this night fall.’ Tory
seethed as the swordsmen stepped forward to take hold
of her, the bowmen covering them from a safe distance.
There be no pain, there be no fear. Tory squeezed
Katren’s hand and lashed out at the first swordsman
with a kick, knocking him back into his bowman and
sending them both tumbling down the stairs.
‘Get the maid,’ Vanora instructed, frustrated by
their incompetence.

But Tory had already spun around to take out the
other swordsman with a high kick to the side of his head,
sending him on a collision course with the hard stone
wall where he fell unconscious. There was a momentary
pause, then the other bowman tried to get a clear shot at
Katren, but Tory was too quick to resume her cover.
Cadogan drew his sword and wielded it back and
forth in warning.
Vanora, as usual, sounded completely unaffected by
it all. ‘The child in thy womb be dead anyway, thee may
as well let it out.’
‘Like I would take thy word for it,’ Tory replied. He
wasn’t dead, she could feel him fighting it, but god
knows what damage the poison had already done to the
tiny foetus. ‘What hast she promised thee, Cadogan?
The same deal as Caradoc? For his loyalty he became a
diseased banquet for the rats down below.’
‘Caradoc was a fool,’ Cadogan snarled; she’d hit a
nerve.
‘Thou art the fool, Cadogan, for believing this
juvenile capable of keeping her word.’
That was it. Regardless of orders to the contrary,
Cadogan swung his sword at her, mid-height, and there
was no escaping the blow. Tory turned and ducked to
avoid the blade making contact with her body, thus
taking its full force in her upper left arm. The pain was
real. She fell to her knees, gripping her arm as the blood
gushed through her fingers.
‘Hold her,’ Cadogan ordered the guard as he hauled
Katren aside by the hair and cast her across the room to
the bowman.

‘Nay, Sir Cadogan please,’ Katren begged him.
‘Gwynedd took thee in when thee had no other. How
can thee betray her like this?’
Vanora, annoyed by Katren’s whimpering, slapped
her hard across the face. ‘Save thy breath.’
Katren spat at the Princess and for a moment they
glared at each other, neither wavering.
‘Kill her,’ Vanora resolved, as she turned to see how
Cadogan was doing.
‘Wait! We may still need her.’
‘Now what?’ Vanora was losing her cool.
Cadogan, with a knife hard to Tory’s throat, dug
through her layers of clothes to take hold of the charm.
But it would not be pulled off. ‘It will not break, not
even my steel can budge it.’
‘Curses!’ Vanora thumped her foot like the spoilt
child she was. ‘Take it off!’ she demanded.
‘I cannot,’ Tory said, remaining very calm. ‘Only the
Dragon himself can remove it, as he was the one who
placed it there.’
Vanora’s black eyes were filled with spite as they
glared at her. ‘We shall see about that.’
The sight of the Saxons raising the portcullis of the
outer bailey at Arwystli was satisfying for the young King
of Gwynedd, as he watched from the cover of a ridge.
‘Won’t be long now,’ Tiernan affirmed, speaking the
King’s mind for all to hear.
‘Why do we not get the dragon to storm the castle
before us,’ Angus wondered aloud. Since they had such
a show of power, why weren’t they using it?

‘This dragon and myself art synonymous these days
I’m afraid, and I want none to know of our presence,’
Maelgwn explained.
The huge beast was rolling around in the snow like
a dog with an itchy back. Ione applauded the antics of
the creature, simply delighted by its play. She didn’t
seem to fear it at all as she approached the dragon with
a large forked stick to help relieve its frustration. The
group of men nearly dropped dead when she served its
thick scaled hide with a good scratch, right in the place
it sought to reach. This was much to Rufus’ satisfaction,
as his eyes rolled about in his head uncontrollably, his
tongue hung out the side of his mouth, and his tail
lashed about, kicking up more snow.
‘Ione, it be time,’ the King called her back to the
others, who pulled black masks over their faces.
Maelgwn drew his new steel sword and held it out
before him, then the others brought theirs to rest across
it.
‘Go forth in the name of the Goddess this day,
recalling all she hast taught thee. May the might of
Gwynedd prevail and may the Great Houses guide and
protect us all.’
‘So be it!’
The battle raged on in the city below. From what
Katren could surmise from the prison tower, the Saxons
appeared to be the stronger force. She turned back to
view the Queen, whose hands and feet were now
shackled together. The guards hadn’t bound Katren, as
they obviously didn’t consider her to be a threat. She’d

wrapped Tory’s wounded arm with a strip of material
torn from her skirt. Katren had never before seen Tory
so despondent. She certainly be worried about her babe,
she reasoned, for Tory had said naught since the guards
departed.
Tory gazed quietly at the shadows on the floor. She
was thinking of Caradoc’s death, or rather just after it,
when she had cried, ‘Get me out of this place.’ She was
considering in retrospect that she’d been referring to
her whole situation, not just Arwystli. This truly was
the age of darkness and Tory knew her current plight
was only a taste of what her future, as Queen of
Gwynedd, held in store. Every day here was a fight for
survival. What if her unborn child did live? What kind
of a future would he have? There would always be
someone waiting in the shadows to do Gwynedd out of
an heir. Her thoughts turned to home, her parents, her
house, and her studies; the tranquillity and anonymity
were just a cherished memory. If she returned to the
twentieth century next summer solstice, as Taliesin
suggested, would she even know her parents, or worse,
would they know her? If, of course, they even existed
within the new reality she would encounter upon
arriving home.
There are three candles that illuminate every darkness,
child. Tory recalled her father’s voice so clearly that it
brought tears to her eyes. Truth, nature, and wisdom.
View life’s dilemmas with their combined enlightenment, and
you will always find the right solution.
As Tory considered this a feeling of intimacy swept
through her body, filling her soul with the sweet

recollection of the beautiful man she’d managed to
secure for herself, and herein she found her truth. For
she was bound to Maelgwn, not by patronage or law, but
by the very knowledge of his existence. Even if she
could escape this nightmare of an age, life without him
would be far more torturous than any horror Chiglas or
the Saxons could dream up for her.
Once again she heard the door downstairs open.
Come on, Tory, it’s your very nature to fight. And if the
universe in its wisdom has seen fit to throw this test your
way, you must meet the challenge head on and to the best of
your ability.
‘What should I do, Majesty?’ Katren asked, fearful of
the outcome.
‘Only what thee must to save thyself. If thou finds
an opportunity to flee, take it,’ she stressed as they
looked to the stairs.
They were both very surprised to see only Princess
Vanora and a small hooded figure.
Katren remained frozen, her back against the wall,
as the hunched little figure hobbled slowly towards the
Queen.
‘We meet again, Sorcha,’ the old creature croaked,
removing her hood to view her prey more closely.
The hag appeared older than time itself, and Tory
could easily sense the evil emanating from her. Warts
covered her face and hands. Her straggly silver hair
hung dead around her diseased features, and her
fingernails were as long and sharp as knives. Albino in
colouring, the witch’s pupils were red within an iris of
white.

‘Nay Mahaud, her name be Tory Alexander,
Maelgwn’s Queen, brought from the future by the Old
Ones.’
Mahaud burst into laughter. ‘It be Sorcha, make no
mistake. Taliesin hast learnt some new tricks. But, of
course,’ the old crone looked at Katren and with a wave
of her hand the maiden fell unconscious, ‘it shan’t do
him any good.’
That’s what you think. Tory attempted to strike at
Mahaud but the shackles hindered her attempt.
‘And, as usual, I am right.’ The witch extended her
arm in Tory’s direction, the tips of the hag’s fingers
glowing red as hot coals.
Every muscle in Tory’s body suddenly froze, and her
shackles fell away to the floor. She then rose to a stable,
horizontal position about three feet above the floor. So,
you are the source from which Vanora is learning her craft?
‘Aye,’ the witch confirmed. ‘Did thee not get my
message? I sent it twice, so thee cannot say I did not
give thee fair warning.’
The dreams, all the blood, Tory realised, her panic
rising.
‘It be the future thou hast seen,’ the witch taunted,
‘thy future! For as thou art about to discover, my sweet,
there be a fourth side to the Goddess.’
The King and his small band entered the outer bailey,
cutting their way through the commotion. Neither the
Saxons nor Chiglas’ men could figure whose side the
masked warriors were on, and most avoided the party to
concentrate instead on the known enemy.

The fighting became more intense as they neared
the inner-bailey portcullis. The Saxons could not raise
the gate, though many of the barbarian raiders had
scaled the fortress walls.
Ione, who was having a field day wielding fatal
blows to every man who got between her and the inner
bailey, drew the King’s attention to the sky.
Maelgwn looked up as the huge shadow of a griffin
fell over the fortress. The fighting waned as all gasped in
horror at the beast, and many soldiers ran in fear of
their lives.
‘Now we have a problem.’ Vortipor observed the
mighty creature circling overhead.
‘Perhaps not.’ Maelgwn was quietly confident that
this beast was the same one allied to Taliesin.
Those Saxon fighters who had been scaling the wall,
took their leave and ran away. But one huge warrior
decided to stand his ground, cursing those who
scampered in fear. The King recognised him as he had
confronted this scoundrel in battle before. He was Ossa,
the Warlord of the Saxon invaders. Ossa was the son of
Octa, who had plagued Ambrosius, High King of
Briton, and Caswallon, in his early days as King of
Gwynedd. The King and his knights didn’t understand
much of the Saxon language, but through the Saxons’
alliance with Chiglas many of their foe had learnt the
native tongue. Thus it was understood by Maelgwn and
his band that Ossa accused the deserters of being no
better than a bunch of women.
Ione caught the comment, and as she was to the
Saxon leader’s blind side, she gave him a kick up the

butt for the insult. Ione ripped the mask from her head
to make her gender plain and held her sword poised to
challenge him.
Ossa let loose a riotous round of laughter upon seeing her. ‘Well my lovely, want a taste of my sword, hey?’
Tiernan, who was also well aware of the Warlord’s
status, ran to Ione’s aid. But when he saw she was
holding her own, he slid to a stop on the wet snow to
admire her prowess.
The big, brawny warrior was growing increasingly
frustrated with her audacious moves. She was making a
mockery of him in front of his men and his foe, and all
seemed to be getting a good laugh out of it.
‘Great Goddess,’ Tiernan uttered. ‘She be
magnificent.’
As Ossa’s anger mounted, his concentration and
skills waned. Ione’s moves became twice as daring, her
strikes harder and more precise. Soon Ossa’s sword was
sent flying into the distance, and the point of Ione’s sat
poised at his throat.
‘I am sorry if I offended thee,’ he grumbled.
Ione motioned him to his knees, indicating that she
wanted him to beg. When he refused, she applied
enough pressure to persuade him to comply.
‘Who art thou?’ the warrior asked, more interested
than angry.
Ione’s beautiful dark eyes gazed down upon him a
second, the perfect features of her face devoid of any
expression.
As she raised her sword into the air, Tiernan fended
off the Saxon soldiers who rushed towards her. With no

time to procrastinate, Ione clobbered the Warlord in
the head with the iron hilt of her sword, and he passed
out in the snow. She turned to assist her partner with
the masses but many of them backed away, fearing that
perhaps she was the fabled War Goddess who had
thwarted their attempt to take Gwynedd.
The griffin came to land on the wall that harboured
the inner bailey portcullis. Warriors from both sides fled
its path, and the ones who didn’t became a fast snack
for the beast.
Brockwell, having assessed the situation from the
air, jumped from between the wings of the animal and
took a stand on the wall to call to those down below.
‘Would thee like me to get the gate?’ He appeared
rather impressed with himself, for his question met with
an overwhelming response from all below.
‘A champion indeed,’ Maelgwn said, and was forced
to smile as the portcullis went up and the barbarian
warriors rushed into the fortress.
I thank thee, my friend. Brockwell bowed to the
Griffin, who’d lived up to its end of the bargain. Thou
art free to go.
Remember thy vow, warrior, the beast cautioned, as it
took flight from the battle scene. For I will.
‘Speaking of which . . .’ Calin made haste inside the
castle.
As Katren came round she heard the muttering of an
alien tongue being uttered in a deep, malign tone. It
sounded suspiciously like an incantation, and without
moving she slowly opened her eyes to view the situation.

Tory was suspended in the air. The old crone was
standing over her, and appeared totally focused on her
task. Vanora, too, had her back to Katren as she stood
close by Mahaud to witness the deed.
By the time Vanora sensed the movement behind
her, it was too late. Katren served her a punch right in
the vital point at the root of the nose, and the Princess
dropped like a rock. She then turned her sights to the
old woman, who seemed oblivious to the fact that
anything had happened. Katren scraped together every
ounce of bravery she had and moved to attack.
Without even turning from her hex, Mahaud waved
a finger in Katren’s direction and the young maid
suddenly found herself airborne. She literally flew down
the long spiral staircase without so much as touching
one stair. The door to the tower downstairs opened to
allow her passage and she was cast against the stone
wall in the corridor outside, the door slamming shut
behind her.
Katren jumped up at once to see if she could regain
entry. When she could not, she began pounding
furiously on the door. ‘Let her alone, witch. The
Goddess will damn thee both to the Underworld for
this.’ She slid down against the heavy wooden door to
the ground where she sat, helpless in the face of the
tragedy.
‘Just the maid I am looking for.’
Upon hearing the sound of Cadogan’s sleazy voice,
Katren realised she had problems of her own.
‘Allow me to show thee my new quarters here at
Arwystli.’

‘I would rather die,’ she stated, defiantly, as she
moved to raise herself.
‘Ah!’ Cadogan drew his sword to discourage her. He
brushed the long brown hair off her shoulders with its
point then slid the blade under her chin, lifting her face
up to view him. ‘What a waste.’
As Cadogan raised his sword, Katren closed her eyes
and shed a tear. Her only regret in passing was that she
would never wed her love.
‘Cadogan!’ Brockwell charged down the corridor at
such speed that Cadogan was forced to defend himself.
‘Thou art a dead man,’ Brockwell pledged as he engaged
his former ally in combat, drawing him away from his
lady.
The King’s party arrived on the scene in time to
see Brockwell disarm Cadogan. Ione cried out in
protest as Cadogan was driven to his knees by
Brockwell’s sword.
‘Calin. Leave him,’ Tiernan voiced Ione’s mind.
Ione walked steadily towards them, casting her
sword aside with an ardent look in her eye. She’d been
waiting over ten years for this, and no one was going to
do her out of the pleasure. She swung open the door to
an empty cell, and tossed the key to Tiernan.
Cadogan, foreseeing his fate, became distraught.
‘Nay please, Calin, kill me. I beg thee, do not leave me
to her.’
‘In a couple of hours, perhaps.’ Calin laughed as he
backed off.
Ione clutched the front of Cadogan’s shirt, dragging
the spineless weasel to his feet.

‘Where be the key to the tower?’ Maelgwn
demanded.
Cadogan produced the key from his pocket, his eyes
flooding with tears of remorse. ‘Majesty, have mercy,’
Cadogan cried, kneeling at the King’s feet.
Maelgwn could not speak to him; the repulsion he
felt was so great that he addressed Ione instead. ‘Leave
him alive, the dragon wants him.’ Maelgwn left to
unlock the tower door.
Ione dragged Cadogan, still kicking and screaming,
into the cell. She cast him in, slamming the door locked
behind them.
‘I knew thee would come.’ Katren flung her arms
around her rescuer’s neck.
It seemed to Calin as if an enormous weight had
been lifted from his shoulders when he cradled her in
his arms. ‘Marry me?’ he whispered softly.
‘All the warriors in Britain could not stop me,’ she
confirmed with a kiss.
The King flung open the heavy tower door and ran up
the stairs as fast as his body was able, Mahaud’s
fervoured words spurring him to move faster.
‘Heed me demons at this our desperate hour, abate
this charm of fairy power.’
Maelgwn reached the caphouse just in time to
witness the chain snap off in the witch’s hand, and her
wicked laughter filled the room. At this moment Tory’s
body dropped to the hard stone floor in a pool of blood.
‘Die witch!’ Maelgwn ran at her with his blade, but
he wasn’t fast enough to kill the sorceress.

In a blink of an eye the hag changed form into a
bat, the waistlet fell to the floor, and she made her
escape through the bars in the window.
With the witch’s hold over her broken, Tory had
drawn herself up into the foetal position. Tiernan
dropped to his knees at her side and called out,
‘Maelgwn, the potion.’
The King held the tiny bottle in his hand. ‘’Tis an
antidote for poison . . . but this?’ Maelgwn slowly shook
his head as he bent down beside her, overwhelmed by
the excessive amount of blood she’d lost already. It was
worse than any wound he’d ever seen; she would surely
die within the hour.
As the pain from the explosions taking place inside
her body became too much to bear, Tory screamed in
agony, ‘Forget me.’
‘Nay, Tory.’
Maelgwn drew her up in his arms but Tory gripped
hold of his shirt, determined to make herself clear. ‘I am
dead anyway, but Chiglas . . .’ she gritted her teeth a
moment to endure the pain, ‘. . . must pay for this.’ She
cried out, hunching her knees to her chest even tighter.
‘Tory, I cannot leave thee, ’tis all my fault, I should
have listened to thee.’
‘Shh.’ She brushed the tears from his eyes, as she
felt herself become separated from the pain in her body.
‘Maelgwn, my love, do this for me.’
He nodded reluctantly. ‘Hold on,’ he whispered,
softly. ‘I will think of something, I swear it.’
The King passed Tiernan the bottle and stood to
leave. ‘Stay with her, I shall return as fast as I can.’ He

pointed to Vanora’s comatosed body on the ground.
‘Bring her,’ he instructed Angus.
The King and all the masters, bar Tiernan, made
their way to the throne room to confront Chiglas. Even
Ione joined them, as Cadogan had lost consciousness for
the moment and she’d found there wasn’t the same
satisfaction to be had in beating his senseless body
senseless.
Chiglas was seated on his throne appearing quite
unconcerned that he and his advisers were surrounded
by the enemy that had every imaginable form of
weaponry pointed at them. Ossa, who’d managed to
seize control of the fortress, was in the process of
announcing that he was going to have the lying
mongrel of a king ripped limb from limb.
‘He be mine, Ossa,’ Maelgwn announced rather
bravely, as his warriors entered the room filled with
Saxon soldiers.
‘Well now, who should appear but Maelgwn of
Gwynedd,’ the Warlord said, noticing Ione was with him.
‘What right hast thou to lay claim to my spoils, Dragon?’
‘Chiglas hast slain my father, my unborn heir, and
near killed my Queen. I have no argument with thee
this day, Ossa, take thy due, but leave Chiglas to me.
This be a kindred affair and none of thy concern.’
‘Then we do have an argument,’ Ossa concluded,
not liking being told what to do. ‘I took this fort,
therefore Chiglas be my prisoner.’
‘Thee could not take a horse! I had to open the gate
for thee,’ Brockwell heckled, and his fellow masters
collapsed into laughter.

‘Do not play me for the fool, boy, we raised the
gate!’ Ossa insisted.
Maelgwn, not so amused, replied, ‘How would thee
know, when thou wast unconscious at the time?’
Ione stepped forward to jerk Ossa’s memory,
appearing more than willing to knock him out again.
‘But for my knight’s mercy, thee would be a dead
man. And believe me, she will not be so gracious next
time,’ Maelgwn cautioned.
Ossa observed Ione closely. ‘A deal, then, Dragon.
Give me this knight and I shall leave thee Chiglas.’
Ossa was not a young man, and his ungainly body
was tall and top heavy. Most of the warrior’s face was
covered by a long, fair moustache and beard, which
parted into two long braids. His long, thick hair was as
fair as his beard and was beginning to grey with old age.
The rest of his face, bar his small eyes of deep blue, was
shielded by a heavy iron helmet that bore the face of a
wildcat. He was clad in furs and armour, and on the
whole was rather fierce in appearance.
Ione looked to Maelgwn for fear he might agree;
most of the men she’d known would have.
‘The exchange of women for profit be outlawed in
Gwynedd, Ossa. But quite apart from that, Ione be one
of my finest knights. I could ask her if she wishes to go
with thee, but I have a feeling she would much prefer to
take off thy head.’ The King smiled as Ione drew her
sword to confirm.
The Saxon Warlord was outraged at the insult.
‘Enough! If thee will not make a deal, then die!’ he
decreed. ‘Take them, but I want the girl alive.’

The room was thrown into chaos at his word. The
Saxon cutthroats began to charge Maelgwn and his
handful of knights, when the floor beneath their feet
began to tremble.
In a flash of lightning, Mahaud appeared alongside
Chiglas’ throne. ‘Fools!’ the wretched hag shreiked,
mocking the invaders with her laughter. ‘Thou art all
going to die.’
She raised her glowing fingertips to the closest
Saxon soldier, and every man in the room took a step
backwards as her victim yelled and burst into flames.
Vortipor turned to the King of Gwynedd, and
whispered, ‘I am beginning to wish I had let thee talk
me into staying at home. How dost one compete with
this?’
Maelgwn looked at the flaming carcass, twitching
furiously on the floor. ‘I wish I knew.’
Chiglas’ laughter was resonant over the din. He
applauded Mahaud’s display and continued to delight in
it as she randomly picked off his foes. His enjoyment
was thwarted, however, as once again the room began
to shake, even more violently than before. Upon the
first sign of danger, Mahaud suddenly vanished into
thin air.
Each of the long windows around the room
shattered, one by one, and the large doors burst open
sending a wild wind ripping through the chamber.
When all had calmed and those present dared to raise
their heads, they saw Tory’s bloodstained form in the
doorway. She floated just above the ground, radiating a
green glow so bright that the onlookers had to shield

their eyes, and it was obvious to all that a divine force
was upon her.
Maelgwn fell on one knee, so thankful he was to
see the Goddess; now Tory would surely live. The King
was not at all surprised when Taliesin followed Tory
into the room with Sir Tiernan at his side. As they
advanced, all present fell to their knees to pay homage
to the miracle. Except, of course, Chiglas, who was
now reduced to a blubbering mass of nerves. He sat on
his throne, way too overweight to move of his own
accord.
The Goddess first approached Maelgwn, touching
his bowed head lightly with her fingertips. ‘Fear not my
young King, all shall be well with thy Queen. Thy
forefathers will watch over thy heir, and I vow he shall
return to thee.’
Maelgwn was so overcome, he could barely thank
her. ‘I am deeply indebted to thee, lady.’
Her huge, green–grey eyes turned to the Saxon
Warlord, her expression more sombre. ‘Ossa, son of
Octa, thy breed have been a thorn in my side, ravaging
my people and my lands.’
Ossa raised his eyes to look at the Goddess and was
momentarily overcome by the great energy force that
confronted him. Amazed, the Warlord experienced
the wondrous peace and love that emanated from her,
and begged, ‘Be merciful on us, lady. We did not
know.’
‘How soon thy race forgets, Ossa. What of the
repeated warnings Ambrosius gave thy father? Take thy
due, no more or less, then return to the far east of the

land with thy clan. And remember this, the moment
any Saxon, Angle or Jute makes war on my native
people, thou shalt all be driven from this land
completely. If thee cannot live here in peace with us,
thee shall not live here at all.’
Ossa nodded to confirm his understanding. ‘Thou
art too gracious. I shall do as thee bids at once.’ He
raised himself, rather eager to be gone. At his word, his
men rose in an orderly fashion and quietly left the
room.
The Goddess then turned to deal with Chiglas, who
quivered like a great pile of jelly. ‘I have nothing to say
to thee Chiglas, although I do know someone who
wishes an audience.’
Rufus’ huge head appeared outside the broken
windows, eyeing the wretched King with relish.
All of a sudden, Chiglas, throne and all, rose from
the floor and was drawn closer towards the mouth of the
huge beast, squirming and squealing in horror. His
advisers, still cowering on the ground, prayed they were
not next on the menu as the dragon opened its mighty
jaws to swallow their King. The fire of its breath
reduced the obese leader to dripping lard, and its mouth
snapped shut, doing away with Chiglas’ evil soul
forever.
A round of applause sounded out, even from those
who’d served him.
The Goddess faced Sir Brockwell and Lady Katren.
‘As the next of the true lineage of Cunedda, after
Maelgwn, I acknowledge thy right to claim the title of a
King, Calin Brockwell, through thy grandfather King

Einion Yrth of Gwynedd. Thou hast always done the
Great Houses and thy forefathers proud, and hence I
offer to thee the throne of Powys. Dost thou accept this
as thy destiny?’
Brockwell couldn’t believe his ears. Nor could
Katren, realising she was to be a Queen.
‘I am thy humble servant, lady, and I thank thee for
the honour.’
‘You must join with Gwynedd, Dyfed, Dumnonia
and Gwent Is Coed in the pact against the foreign
raiders. For although Ossa hast promised to keep his
distance, his race art of feeble character. We must
prepare to confront them and others like them when
they return.’
‘Aye lady, I understand.’ Brockwell held his hand to
his heart to pledge this.
‘Taliesin, I shall leave the Princess Vanora for thee
to contend with as thou sees fit.’
The High Merlin bowed graciously.
The Goddess turned to Ione, who’d been watching
quietly from a distance. ‘Come forth child, I will not
harm thee.’
Ione, sword in hand, came and knelt before the
Goddess, her head bowed low as her eyes filled with
tears of adoration.
‘Thou art most pleasing to us, child. So much
hardship thou hast known in thy short life, and still
thou hast the faith to defend my cause. I could not
leave such loyalty unrewarded, and thus my dear Ione,
be silent no more.’ The glowing figure reached down to
hold Ione’s face between her hands. The brilliant

emanation enfolded her, before it dispersed completely.
Thereupon, Tory collapsed and Ione caught her up
before she hit the ground.

19

Burgeoning

T

he whole of Prydyn was thus united with
Dumnonia against the invaders of Britain.
Brockwell, Sir Tiernan and Vortipor remained at
Arwystli to help set the kingdom’s affairs in order.
Reinforcements in the form of soldiers, accountants and
advisers were assigned to the city from Gwynedd, Dyfed
and Gwent Is Coed. It had been decided that Awrystli,
in Powys, being the point most central to all, would
become the official meeting place of the allies.
Sir Cadogan met his end in the belly of the dragon,
as Maelgwn wasn’t prepared to take any more chances
with him. Lady Katren conveyed to the King the story
of Caradoc’s end and of his mother’s last words with
him. Hence Maelgwn resolved to have Caradoc’s body
taken back to Gwynedd, where he would have him
cremated and his spirit put to rest in the mountains that
he’d loved.

Rufus transported King Maelgwn, his unconscious
Queen, Sir Angus, Lady Katren and Ione back to
Gwynedd.
Tory remained in a deep sleep for days. Before the
Goddess had left her body, Tory’s bleeding had stopped
and even the gash on her arm had vanished. Maelgwn
had the word of the Goddess that his Queen would be
alright, so he didn’t fret for her physical welfare; it was
more her mental and emotional state that worried him.
Although Tory hadn’t welcomed her pregnancy at first,
prior to her abduction she had begun to warm to the
commitment. Consequently, Maelgwn felt her ordeal all
the more tragic.
On the eve following their return to Aberffraw,
Maelgwn entered his chamber and was alarmed to find
the bed empty. ‘Tory?’
‘Aye.’
He turned to see her huddled in the bath, gazing at
the candle light reflected in the water. ‘How art thou
feeling?’ He heeded the sorrowful air about her.
‘Empty,’ she answered, but did not break from her
trance.
Maelgwn’s heart sank in his chest. ‘I will not blame
thee if thou doth despise me for life, I should have
listened –’
‘Nay!’ Tory was jolted from her sad reflection. ‘’Twas
not thy fault, Maelgwn, and I do not blame thee.’ Her
tone was firm, yet she did not look at him. ‘I blame
myself.’
‘That be ludicrous! How in the name of the
Goddess could thee have –’

‘I did not want this child!’ She interjected, angry at
herself. ‘I am responsible for everything that happens to
me in this life! I create my own reality. My mentors have
warned me repeatedly to be careful of what I wish for.’
‘But thou wast of a totally different mind before thy
betrayal.’
‘But by then it was already too late. Dost thou not
see?’ Her sorrow came to the fore and tears began to roll
down her cheeks. ‘I had already sealed its fate.’
Maelgwn couldn’t just stand by and watch her fall
to pieces. ‘Come on.’ He took up her big wrap to
encourage her out of the bath.
Tory was slow to comply. But when she did finally
emerge from the water, Maelgwn placed the garment
around her and carried her to the bed. It was comforting
to feel him close, and Tory hated to feel that she’d let
him down. ‘I made the wrong decisions and sacrificed
thy heir. I am so sorry, Maelgwn. I know how much it
meant to thee.’
‘Tory!’ He placed her on the bed, and took a seat
beside her. ‘Only so our marriage could be recognised
and no other reason. I would not care if we never have a
child, so long as I have thee. This law in regard to an
heir be totally absurd. And I, as the King, intend to do
away with it. If we do not have a boy child, Brockwell
and his sons shall inherit the throne of Gwynedd.’
Tory threw her arms over his shoulders to embrace
him. ‘Doth thou really mean it?’
‘Aye, I do. Thou art the only thing on this earth
that I care about, Tory. Nothing should overshadow our
life together.’

Tory drew away from him as another matter came to
mind that was just as disturbing. ‘How can I still be
living and breathing, Maelgwn? Was I not dying when
thee left me in the prison tower?’
‘Dost thou not remember?’ The King had quizzed
Taliesin about this, yet the Merlin refused to discuss it
until he had spoken with Tory first.
‘Nay, last I recall was when I saw thee leave. Beyond
that? Just all the blood, Sir Tiernan’s face, and then
nothing.’ Tory become more anxious as her senses
returned to her and she considered all she’d missed.
‘Tell me everything Maelgwn, what hast happened? Be
everyone alright? What of Katren?’
‘Slow down. Everyone and everything be fine, I
assure thee. Taliesin said he would visit soon to clarify
all that I cannot. However, I can endeavour to tell thee
what I understand befell at Arwystli.’
‘Please do.’
The King began his tale at the discovery of her
abduction, omitting nothing as he described the events
that led to her collapse in Chiglas’ throne room, where
the Goddess left her body cured of all its ailments.
Tory had to admit she was a mite disappointed
about the wound on her shoulder. After all that pain,
she didn’t even have a battle scar to show for it. In fact,
as Maelgwn pointed out, even the scar on her neck that
Brockwell had given her the day they’d met had
vanished.
She was delighted to learn of Brockwell’s firm
engagement to Lady Katren, and of their plan to wed on
Beltaine, just as Katren had originally requested.

Brockwell had also decided to recognise Bryce as his
son. He knew how much his intended bride cared for
the boy, and he had grown rather fond of Bryce himself.
The spirited child, who was already the recognised heir
to his estate and title at Penmon, would now be
recognised as heir to his throne in Powys, should Calin
and Katren not have a male child of their own.
Only one thing remained to taunt Tory in the wake
of the ordeal; the crone had escaped.
‘Who was Mahaud?’ she asked the King.
‘I know little, bar that she lives in the land of
shadows consorting with the powers of darkness, the
lowest forms of Otherworld entities that dwell in the
deepest depths of consciousness. To support her earthly
existence, she must feed upon the energy generated by
the negative thoughts and the low acts of human beings.
Hence, she attaches herself to any ruler with evil intent.
This be why the dark sorceress cannot exist here in
Gwynedd, as there be insufficent evil to sustain her.
Cadfer sought her aid to overthrow my father but, as
with Chiglas, she fled. Mahaud must have been quietly
spinning her evil web in Powys ever since. Taliesin be
the one to ask about her, not me. For it be the Merlin
whom Mahaud fears and ultimately wishes to thwart.’
‘But why, what did Taliesin do to her?’
Maelgwn shrugged, apologetically. ‘Taliesin did
explain it all to me once, but I am afraid I was too
young to truly grasp it. I think he said it had something
to do with polarity.’
‘What? Like the law of opposites, positive and
negative, that sort of thing?’

‘Aye, I believe so,’ Maelgwn confirmed, wanting to
put her mind at rest. ‘Please, Tory, forget Mahaud, she
cannot seek thee here.’
But the Queen could not forget the old witch, or
what she had done to their child. There were still so
many questions in her mind, and Tory was sure Maelgwn
was hiding something. ‘So if Mahaud was aiding Cadfer,
she was the reason Sorcha took to studying under
Taliesin.’
‘Perhaps thou art right, Tory, I really would not
know. I was only two years of age at the time.’ Maelgwn
raised himself from the bed.
‘Have I said something to annoy thee?’
‘All I know,’ Maelgwn replied, ‘be that after she
took to studying under the High Merlin, her relationship with my father was never the same.’
‘Thy father did not approve?’
Maelgwn was silent a moment. ‘He did not
understand.’
Tory knew she would only aggravate him further if
she pursued the issue, so she would just have to wait till
Taliesin arrived to get some answers.
The High Merlin made his appearance at Aberffraw late
the next morning. He explained over lunch, with those
masters left at the house, that he’d been detained at
Arwystli, weaning out Chiglas’ die-hard supporters. To
set Lady Katren’s mind at ease, Taliesin remarked that
most of the land owners in Powys were gratified to be
rid of the tyrannous king and were eager to embrace the
ways of the Goddess once more. It was common

knowledge that Gwynedd had been well favoured by
the Goddess, and as a result had become the most
prosperous kingdom in Prydyn and most likely in the
whole of Britain. Thus the lords of Powys hoped that
now their kingdom would again see peace and prosper
as did its neighbours within their allegiance. Taliesin
explained that Brockwell, Sir Tiernan and Vortipor
would return within the month to see out the rest of the
cold season at Aberffraw.
Those present at the castle had continued to train
in the absence of the others, but it wasn’t the same
without the complete circle of twelve. Calin’s one regret
about his new appointment was that his tuition might
have to come to an end. With this in mind, Taliesin
suggested that the masters should continue their
training during the cold seasons. Though many had
kingdoms and estates of their own to run, in the heart
of winter there was little required of a custodian to
maintain his lands. The individual heads of State could
then train their own troops in the warmer months.
All at lunch agreed wholeheartedly to the
suggestion and drank a toast to the High Merlin, the
Goddess and the Masters of the Dragon.
After they had dined, the King and Percival excused
themselves as they had much work to do. Taliesin
considered this rather fortunate, as he could now speak
to the Queen in private. He led her to the north tower,
where they would not be disturbed.
‘What is the great mystery, Taliesin? Why are you
acting so strangely?’ Tory waited patiently while he
fumbled with the key in the door. He then gestured

politely for her to enter, his eyes of soft mauve meeting
hers as she passed him.
Tory climbed the stairs to the caphouse. ‘I shall send
for some firewood,’ she said, as the temperature here was
well below freezing.
‘No need,’ Taliesin replied. He flicked his fingers
over the fireplace, igniting the pile of damp and rotting
timber as though it were dry twigs.
‘I keep forgetting.’ Tory smiled, moving to warm
herself by the raging fire. ‘Do you feel the cold?’
‘No.’ The Merlin took a seat on the bed.
‘Temperature is just the elementals playing tricks on
your mind, you know that.’
‘Do you feel anything at all?’
‘No, I do not feel . . . I experience. So while I do not
feel the cold, I may experience it, if I so choose.’
‘Does the same rule apply for emotions?’
‘The emotions one experiences are always of one’s
own choosing, Tory. Though I endeavour to surround
myself with positive ones.’
‘But what of love, Taliesin? Have you never been in
love?’
A smile crossed his lovely face, and for a moment
Tory could have sworn that he was blushing. ‘Why of
course I have. I have not always been as I am now.’
Taliesin cunningly led the conversation toward another
more relevant issue, and Tory took the bait.
‘So what are you now?’
‘Where, is a more apt question. Have you ever heard
of the Spirits of the Seven Rays, or in angelology, the
Seven Spirits of God?’

‘The what? It sounds like something religious, and
therefore I would know nothing about it.’
‘No it isn’t really, though every religion and culture
has its own explanation of it. I just have to figure by
what term you would know it. Let me see now . . .’
Taliesin paused to consider. He knew Tory understood
this, as in pastlife incarnation, it had been he who had
taught it to her. ‘Do you know anything of theosophy, or
more specifically, the Seven Planetary Chain Logoi,
perhaps?’
‘Is that something to do with the Greeks?’ Tory had
a vague recollection of it in one of her courses.
‘I’ve got it!’ He held up a finger, bursting into a
smile of revelation. ‘The seven planes of existence, the
seven bodies or principles of man.’
‘Now you’re talking.’ Tory slapped her hands
together. ‘Yes I do, this physical or earth plane being the
first of the seven and that of nature. There are planes to
be found lower in density, or hell, as some might choose
to call it.’
The Merlin encouraged her to continue, leaning
back on the bed to get more comfortable. Let’s see how
much she remembers.
‘Alright,’ Tory began, a mite bothered that he saw
fit to test her. ‘The astral plane is the second body or
plane, which is comprised of emotion. As Earth’s
etheric double, it penetrates the physical. On the third
plane, the forces of will find expression, as it is the plane
of thought. Again penetrating the first two planes, it is
of a faster vibrational frequency. Therefore, like the
astral plane and the planes that exceed it, it cannot be

viewed by the human eye, but may be perceived
through the third or mind’s eye.’
The Merlin bowed his head as if to compliment her
understanding, and awaited the rest of the address.
‘The fourth is the plane of wisdom, from whence all
imagination and inspiration comes. The fifth plane is
spiritual or the plane of the self, from which stems
desire, but only the desire for the highest good of the
overall plan of creation. Must I go on?’
‘Please.’
‘The sixth plane is . . . let me think? Oh yes! The
sixth is that of involution, the last progression of the
soulmind before it again becomes one with the
perfection of totality, which is, of course, to be found on
the seventh plane. Hence where comes the term
“seventh heaven”. Good enough?’ Tory concluded,
rather pleased with herself.
‘That’s what you meant, isn’t it?’ she realised.
‘When you said you had been forward and backward in
time. Time meaning the moment when you parted from
totality, to the moment you shall become one with it
again. Rather than human time, as it is known and
counted in years or minutes.’
Taliesin smiled, pleased with her conclusion. ‘You
have learnt your lessons well, Tory Alexander.’
He paused to observe her for a moment, making
Tory feel altogether ill at ease. It was as if he was
adoring her and she experienced an eerie sense of dejavu.
‘So in answer to your question, “where am I now?”’
he sat upright, ‘in angelology terms I would be known as

a Master, as say the Master Buddha before he moved on
in his journey toward awareness. This be the last level
of consciousness where I may still function in a physical
body. Beyond the understanding I have, there are only
two higher realms of awareness that exist in the etheric
world – Lordship and Godhood.’
‘The sixth and seventh planes . . .’ Tory uttered, as
she attempted to digest his story. ‘So what you’re telling
me is that you are a real, honest to god angel!’
‘Angel, deva, etheric world intelligence, whatever
you want to call it; as is everyone and everything that
has a soul, to differing degrees and polarities.’
Tory was fit to faint. ‘But how? Taliesin, you must
have been human once, how did you become so aware?’
‘Well, to tell you the truth, it was a bit of an
accident really, and a very long story . . .’
‘Please, Taliesin, I would love to know, if you are in
any way disposed towards enlightening me,’ Tory
pleaded, using her big green eyes to her best advantage
as she knelt down beside the fire.
‘Well, if you really want to hear it.’ He reclined on
the bed to tell his tale. ‘I’ve lived many different lives,
just as you have, not consciously recalling one from
another, until I was born in Britain, the son of Gwreang
of Llanfair who named me Gwion Bach. This was about
the same time the great Pyramid wars were taking place
in Egypt, and here in Britain, it was a time of great
sorcery, to be sure!’
‘But that was four thousand years ago! I didn’t
realise Britain was even populated then, by civilised folk
anyway.’

‘Oh yes,’ Taliesin assured her. ‘What of Stonehenge
and the Glastonbury Zodic? Under the roads built by
the Romans during their invasion, there are tracks
dating back thousands and thousands of years. The
Middle East was not the only area to which the
Atlanteans fled,’ he explained before returning to his
story. ‘It was here in Gwynedd that I met a High
Merlin, through whom I was eventually introduced to
the great Goddess, Keridwen.’
‘Your mother?’ Tory was confused already.
‘My spiritual mother. She transformed my consciousness and thus I was reborn and proclaimed my
true name, Taliesin. Keridwen was once a guardian of
Britain, as I am. I inherited the position, so to speak.
And although she now resides in the Otherworld, she
still sees and speaks through the more enlightened souls
who remain here in the Middle Kingdoms.’
‘I don’t understand. What do you mean when you
say Keridwen transformed your consciousness?’
‘Ahh well, that’s where the mistake comes in. You
see, I was assisting in an experiment, the creation of a
brew of knowledge that was intended for her son.
Keridwen had many children, two of which were twins,
a boy and a girl as it happens. Her daughter, Creirwy,
was a raving beauty, intelligent and perfect in every way.’
‘But he was just the opposite, right?’
‘Right. Monfan, which meant great cow, was
nicknamed Afagddu, meaning utter darkness.’
Tory burst into laughter, but her expression reflected
disgust. ‘Didn’t have much of a chance either way, did
he?’

‘Not really, no. He was so ugly that no man would
fight him at the battle of Camlann, mistakenly thinking
he was the devil. Hence with her brew, Keridwen
sought to make Monfan wise, to overcome his other
more obvious disadvantages.’
‘You didn’t drink it, Taliesin?’
‘No, but just as the cauldron had almost burnt dry,
after a year and a day of careful tending and stirring,
one drop of the three that remained accidentally
splashed on my hand, and I was rushed by waves of
knowledge for which I was totally unprepared. Needless
to say, Keridwen’s potion was ruined.’
‘She must have been furious,’ Tory said, fascinated.
‘What did you do?’
‘What did I do? I changed into a hare and fled as
fast as I could.’
‘Can you really change form?’
‘Even Maelgwn could change form when he was a
child, and was well practised at it. I learnt the craft
from a High Merlin way back in the early days of my
youth as Gwion Bach. In any case, I needn’t have
bothered. Keridwen caught up with me in no time.’
Taliesin came to sit by the fire with Tory. ‘The Goddess
knew it hadn’t really been my fault, yet I did pose a
problem. A soul mind as naive as mine was then wasn’t
ready for the wealth of knowledge that had been
bestowed on it. I became, as most who delve into
mysteries and powers beyond their understanding,
prone to be led astray by negative or dark forces, like
Mahaud, for example.’
‘Mahaud!’

‘Yes, but I shall speak of her another day,’ Taliesin
said quickly, as they had already moved too far from
what he’d really come to say.
‘So how did Keridwen expect her son could cope
with all this knowledge?’
‘She intended to mould him over the years, and was
not so inclined towards awarding me such time and
attention. Yet, she did not want to waste the knowledge
I had gained. What happened next is hard to explain.
She swallowed my soul, and it was how it might feel to
you when she takes over your body: purifying,
exhilarating, enlightening! She stayed at one with me
for nine months.’
‘You must have been completely wiped out.’
‘Well I was! When I emerged from the daze I was
unrecognisable and remembered little. I was sent as a
bard to the court and service of Elffin, a distant
ascendant of Maelgwn’s great grandfather. The rest is
history really. In time, I discovered that I had
transcended death. I was free to explore all the realms of
time and space, those to which one can transport a
physical form, that is. I’ll grant that the thought of
being immortal, free from disease and death for all time,
was rather daunting at first. Until I discovered that it
was just one simple step in many during my soul mind’s
evolution.’
Tory leant back against a chair, her brain on
overload. ‘Is there a reason why you’re telling me all this
now?’
‘Yes there is,’ he confessed, not feeling as eager to be
out with it now.

Tory closed her eyes, already knowing what Taliesin
was about to say. ‘I knew it, I should have died at
Arwystli.’
‘Indeed.’
‘So I’m immortal, am I!’ She scoffed at the notion.
‘Haven’t you noticed that your body is no longer
scarred or blemished, and all those aches and pains you
used to have are gone?’
Tory couldn’t dispute this. She wasn’t sure that she
wanted to know anymore, but she had to ask, ‘How,
Taliesin?’
‘An immortality potion of the ancients. I have been
saving it for eons.’
Now Tory really was confused. ‘Well why didn’t you
just give the potion to Sorcha when she was dying? It
would have saved you all this trouble?’
Taliesin was somewhat disconcerted by the
question. Tory sensed this and what’s more, he detected
her doing so. ‘It wasn’t meant for Sorcha, the ancients
intended it for you.’
‘But why me? Are the Gods following the
development of everyone on this planet as closely as
they have apparently been following mine?’
‘Yes they are, as a matter of fact.’ He bowed his head
to confess what he must. ‘I have been deceiving you,
Tory Alexander.’
Tory was taken aback, as a white light began to
exude from his body and a transformation began. She
stopped breathing as the Merlin’s hair, skin colour and
very form changed before her eyes. Staring back at her
was a totally different man.

‘Teo.’ Tory beheld her sensei of many years. He was,
besides Maelgwn, the only man she’d ever slept with.
‘God, no.’ She rose to her feet, scared of the feelings the
sight of him aroused in her. ‘It isn’t true.’
‘Tory, be calm.’
But she turned away, not wanting to look into those
dark eyes so full of reason. Unfortunately, Teo had a
body and face that would shame Adonis. His long dark
hair fell in a braid to his waist and his smooth olive skin
had never known a blemish.
‘I knew he was too perfect to be real,’ she
exclaimed.
‘This is how I appeared when I was Gwion Bach.
Teo was one of my earthly incarnations, long before I
ever met with Keridwen. What I felt and did when I
was Teo was very real, to me anyway.’
She raised her hands to block her ears, for it was
Teo’s voice also. ‘So why the disguise? Why did you
allow me to fall in love with Maelgwn, if you only
intended to haunt me thus? Or is this your revenge for
my decision, when it was you who served me the
ultimatum?’ Tory burst into tears.
Taliesin took hold of of her arms, his energy calming
her at once. ‘Listen to me, I did not assume this form to
deceive you. With all my travels through time I found a
disguise necessary. I have bumped into many of my pastlife incarnations in different periods of history, and it
saved me from being confused with them, or giving
them heart failure upon meeting themselves. Maelgwn
is your destiny, I know that now. Please believe I am
beyond the concept of earthly love, as you and

Maelgwn know it. I flourish, as do we all, on the pure
energy your devotion for each other creates. The last
thing in the world I wish to do is to divide you.’
‘I did love you, Teo. I remember everything you
taught me.’ She drew enough courage to reach out and
hold his face. ‘I always thought you had the makings of
an angel, and now you are.’
‘See, you made the right decision after all. If you’d
stayed with Teo, you wouldn’t have ended up here.’ He
let her go and took a few steps back, resuming his
normal form. ‘I can be of much greater assistance to you
now than I could ever have been then.’
‘You are. I want you to know that, no matter how I
do challenge you at times.’
‘I know.’ He put his arm around her and gave her a
squeeze of assurance as he led her back to the fire.
‘You still haven’t explained why the Gods chose
me.’
‘Why do they choose anyone?’ he answered. ‘All
shall be made clear to you in time. As I have had to
seek my own truths, so must you seek yours.’
Tory resumed her seat on the large floor cushions,
with Taliesin beside her, finding his reason of no
comfort. ‘Well how are we going to break this to
Maelgwn?’
‘A good question, but you must decide the answer
on your own, I’m afraid. Although, I will say this, if you
wish it, Maelgwn and indeed all around you may
witness you age gradually. You can appear to be
whatever image you choose to project, as I do. You shall
simply outlive everyone and move onto new realms and

adventures. But you won’t have to die in between, and
you won’t lose track of your accumulated knowledge.’
‘I will see everybody die.’ Tory was saddened by the
thought.
‘And reborn again.’
She tried to comprehend his words, but the concept
was too overwhelming to cope with in a second. ‘You
will always be here?’ she asked, seeking some sort of
stronghold in the universe she now seemed lost in.
‘For some time yet.’
Tory exhaled deeply and her thoughts turned back
to the King; this was a tough one. ‘I have always been
honest with Maelgwn. But I dare say, if he finds out you
were an old flame, past incarnation or no, we’d have
Buckley’s chance of you ever being allowed to teach me
anything.’
‘Now did I say anything about instructing you?’
‘Come on, Taliesin. I may be naive but I’m not
stupid. Isn’t that what this is all about? You’ll want to
move on eventually, as Keridwen did, and seek another
to take your place.’
Taliesin didn’t have to confirm her query, as his grin
gave him away. ‘Perhaps that is the way of it, but only
time will tell.’
Tory and Taliesin talked well into the evening
before he bid her farewell. The High Merlin still had
much work to do before summer solstice, when he
would attempt to send Tory home. Taliesin swore he
would return with Selwyn before Beltaine, May first, to
celebrate the feast of the Goddess, and indeed his own
birthday, with all at Aberffraw.

As predicted, Brockwell, Tiernan and Vortipor
returned to Aberffraw within the month, eager to
resume their training and the company of their close
circle of friends.
The winter cold was well upon the isle, isolating it
from the treachery and strife of the outside world.
Those staying at the castle were more than thankful for
the time to recuperate; their peaceful interlude would
span near one third of a year.

20

Beltaine

B

y spring the snow had passed and torrential rain
had transformed the pure white fields into dirty
brown puddles of sludge. It wasn’t until late April
that the sun really burst through the clouds, awakening
the land from its sleep. With the days growing longer,
farmers began ploughing their fields, and the animals
were freed from their winter confinement. Trees and
flowers were budding, and it seemed the whole land was
crying out for joy in the warmth of the sun’s rays.
The soldiers who’d left Aberffraw for the cold spell,
now returned to their posts. Lady Gladys and the young
Earl of Penmon arrived back earlier than expected. The
suspense of waiting to hear what had happened at the
castle over the cold seasons had become too much to
bear. Bryce was particularly eager to get back to all the
action, and had been so for months. Lady Gladys was
overjoyed to learn of Calin’s intent to wed Lady Katren,

and the old schemer acted completely surprised when
he told her. But when Calin sprang on her the news of
his Princedom, the old lady became so excited, she
fainted. When she was revived the courtiers all teased
her by threatening not to tell her the rest of their news
as they feared it might be fatal.
Bryce could hardly contain himself when he learnt
he was to be a prince, and was addressing Calin as
Father by the end of lunch. Likewise, the child was
thrilled to know that Lady Katren would soon be his
mother. He had wished for nothing more since the day
they’d first met, and quite openly stated as much. The
young Earl of Penmon, unlike his father, had no
problem expressing his emotions.
Jenovefa and Rhys introduced Lady Gladys to their
new son, Gawain, and she eagerly embraced him.
Amidst all the stories of creatures, sorcery, villains
and battles that were being sprung on the wide-eyed boy
and his grandmother, Cara and Vortipor brought the
whole room to silence with the announcement of their
engagement.
Vortipor apologised for having to steal such a lovely
lady from the household at Aberffraw, but he could not
bring himself to leave without her. The couple planned
to leave for Dyfed before Beltaine, also wanting to wed
on the feast of the Mother Goddess, but in accordance
with the traditions of the Desi Clan. King Maelgwn
congratulated his friend, expressing his heartfelt
disappointment they would not be able to attend, with
Calin and Katren’s wedding the same day in Gwynedd.
Vortipor understood and promised he would stay with

them until after Calin’s inauguration, two weeks
hence.
In the short time that was left of their winter training,
the masters began to practise in the wide open spaces.
Tory held kata on the beach, which was quite a
spectacle for the locals. Stories of the masters’ escapades
had spread throughout the land over the long cold
months. Common folk and soldiers alike had begun to
gather at dawn to observe the band as they practised the
art of the Goddess. Within a few days, Tory noticed that
some of the onlookers were trying to grasp the
movements, especially the children.
This pleased her very much, as the work on their
school was nearly complete, and it was obvious that the
youngsters would take to the training as ardently as had
Bryce. Alma was appointed to instruct the local
children in self-defence and meditation over the warm
seasons. Angus was training the men at Aberffraw, so
the pair could still work together.
The female hall was only weeks away from opening
– Old Hetty’s girls and the young maidens throughout
the kingdom would be able to take up residence after
Beltaine. Ione would be their instructor. She was to sort
out the warriors from those who were more domestically
inclined, and thus develop the girls’ individual interests
and talents. The maidens who opted for domestic
training would be assigned to Lady Gladys and the head
maid, Drusilla, for some of their instruction, but all
would be taught basic self-defence.
Ione was now enjoying a vastly different lifestyle

and outlook. She strutted around dressed like a man, as
did the Queen more often than not, her sword at her
hip and her head held high. Men who had once abused
and looked down on her, now praised and adored her,
for she was the woman who had defeated Ossa, Warlord
of the Saxons, in armed combat. This was a formidable
triumph for any warrior. So Ione, who claimed to be
totally disinterested in men, had more suitors than she
knew what to do with, though Tiernan wasn’t one of
them. The gift of speech didn’t seem to make it any
easier to express her true feelings; after eleven years
without words, they did not come easy.
The other masters were basking in the notoriety, as
everywhere they went people stood in awe of the
uniform bearing the Dragon. No one could understand
how such a small group of knights, half of which were
women, could seize a whole kingdom. It was said the
divine was upon the order and thus everyone wanted to
be part of it.
Grading was held two days before Calin’s inauguration, and all the students managed to achieve a whole
grade this time. The masters could now wear their
uniforms of black, for they departed the room as
teachers, until next autumn when they would again
return to Aberffraw to resume their training.
The males of the household at Aberffraw were joined by
the knights and landowners of Gwynedd, as well as the
heads of State and noblemen of Powys, to bear witness
to Prince Brockwell’s inauguration. King Catulus of
Dumnonia had made the trip especially and brought

with him old King Caninus of Gwent Is Coed, who
hoped to gain a further insight into the ways of his
ancestors.
Tory waited patiently for Katren to wish Calin
farewell. By the time she did finally part with him, some
of the men had already begun to leave. As Calin ran to
his mount, Tory called after him, ‘Calin wait.’
He paused, one foot already in the stirrup. ‘Majesty
please, I shall never get out of here.’
Tory ran to catch him up, pulling out from behind
her back Brian’s leather jacket. ‘I just wanted to give
thee this, for good luck.’
Calin was truly touched and took hold of the jacket
as if it were a great treasure. ‘But this was thy brother’s,
all thou hast to remember him by.’
‘I have thee,’ she proffered assuredly. ‘Besides, it was
Brian’s lucky jacket. Saved his butt so many times thee
would not believe! Take it, it belongs to thee.’
Calin removed his woollen cape and pulled on the
jacket, which fitted him perfectly. ‘This be truly
remarkable,’ he exclaimed, as he admired the workmanship.
‘It will help to keep the rain out, too,’ Tory
informed him with a pat on the back. ‘Good luck on thy
quest bro, though I know thee will not need it.’
‘Many thanks.’ Calin unexpectedly hugged her
tight. ‘I do love thee, Tory,’ he whispered.
She pulled away from him, rolling her eyes that
were now moist with tears. ‘Men!’
They both laughed and with another embrace,
Calin finally mounted his horse.

‘I shall see thee soon.’ Tory held out her hand for a
high-five in parting.
Calin slapped it. ‘Count on it.’ He dug in his heels
and was away after the others.
No sooner had the last man departed, than Tory
found Jenovefa at her side. ‘Majesty, I have had the
most wonderful idea.’
‘And what might that be?’ inquired Tory, as if she
couldn’t guess.
‘Well, as the men will be gone for the next few days,
and I am much recovered from Gawain’s birth, I
thought that perhaps I could train with thee and the
other girls, just to see how I fare.’ Her large eyes that
looked up at Tory were so filled with ardour that the
Queen could hardly say no.
‘Thou hast discussed this with Rhys?’
‘Nay,’ Jenovefa replied, disappointed. ‘Not since
before the birth, and then he refused to so much as
consider it. But, Majesty, thee said . . .’
‘I know what I said. It be your choice, Jenovefa, and
I will train thee. But thou must take responsibility for
thy own decisions, speak up for thyself. And if thy
husband does not like it . . . then . . . then, I shall talk
to him,’ Tory resolved, knowing she was destined to get
the blame anyway.
Jenovefa was so ecstatic that she hugged the Queen.
‘Oh how can I thank thee, Majesty?’
‘Talk to thy husband.’
‘I will Majesty, I promise. As soon as he returns.’
Her excitement waned a little. ‘Still I fear his response
will be the same.’

‘We will see.’ Tory seemed so confident that
Jenovefa’s spirits lifted, and she escorted the Queen to
the gym.
To prove his worth, Calin was sent on an errand to
Dalriada, lower Scotland, to see a man by the name of
Fergus MacErc who had arrived in Dalriada from Scotta
(Ireland), only a decade before. He had established his
dynasty at Dunadd with the aid of a mere one hundred
and fifty men and his two brothers, Loarn and Aengus.
Although the MacErc clan had yet to come to power, it
was known to the Goddess that every great Scottish
king would be derived from their seed.
The task assigned to Brockwell by the Goddess
proved not so daunting as first expected. The leader
turned out to be an old ally of Vortipor’s kindred, and
thus the protector of Dyfed had written a letter of
favour sealed with the mark of the Desi. With this letter
and a copy of the pact, which now also encompassed
Powys, Brockwell climbed upon the griffin and flew off
into the sunrise. He was to deliver a message from the
Goddess to the Clan MacErc. The message was a
warning and pertained to the fate of their descendants
and of Dalriada, if they did not heed her call. For as
history stood, the Scots, as they were to be known,
would spend the next five hundred years trying to
establish their kingdom while fending off Viking,
Anglo-Saxon and Norman raiders, to whom they would
eventually lose not only Dalriada, but their homeland of
Scotia as well. Brockwell was to inform the MacErc of
the victories the pact had already won and invite the

leaders of the clan to the next meeting of the alliance,
to be held in the middle of the month-long festival of
Lughnasa, at Arwystli in Powys.
The inauguration party arrived back from Llyn Cerrig
Bach two days later to feast and await Brockwell’s
return.
Selwyn accompanied the men back from the temple
ruins, where he’d assisted Taliesin in performing the
initiation rites. The young musician was truly beginning
to look like a bard after spending the winter with the
High Merlin. He had a kind of windswept and
mysterious look about him, and he appeared not at all
like the boy who’d left Aberffraw less than six months
before. Selwyn rode back into town on a handsome
white horse, his mule lugging his harp and other
possessions behind him.
Not in the mood for feasting with a bunch of guys still
tripping out on one of Taliesin’s concoctions, Tory
suggested to Selwyn that they sneak away to her
chambers where it was quieter and they could talk in
peace. Maelgwn joined them by the fire for a time, and
Tory was gratified to see that the King no longer addressed
Selwyn in the manner he had when the boy was his page.
Selwyn marked the change also as he excitedly
conveyed to Maelgwn the tales of his adventures inside
the Merlin’s labyrinth. For the first time, His Royal
Highness was listening with interest to the boy’s words,
laughing in delight and recognition at his stories.
Maelgwn had never known anyone, apart from
himself and his mother, whom the Merlin had taken

under his wing, and he understood all too well the
standards that Taliesin expected. If the High Merlin was
tutoring Selwyn in the mysteries, the boy must be a fine
scholar indeed and no doubt had an important role in
Taliesin’s scheme.
Maelgwn had acquired another young page to order
about in Selwyn’s stead. He went by the name of Tadgh,
and had served Sir Gilmore before his untimely death.
Tadgh seemed too light-hearted to succeed as either a
scholar or a soldier, as he was more like a court jester.
He was frightfully amusing at times, very polite and
entirely trustworthy. Still, the King was disappointed
that his new page was not musically inclined like
Selwyn. He’d been trying to ignore the humour of his
new aspirant, but Tadgh was proving far too likeable.
He was determined to win the King’s favour and no
matter how short Maelgwn’s tether, Tadgh kept his good
spirits and employed a quick wit. A little smaller than
Selwyn and of slight build, Tadgh was aged four and ten.
He had waves of thick dark brown hair that fell to his
shoulders, green eyes, rosy red cheeks, and was of a fair
complexion.
The page was pouring mead while Tory and
Maelgwn listened intently to Selwyn tell the tale of
how he’d come by his horse. But the enchanting
anecdote was cut short by an impatient pounding on
the door.
‘Please, make haste if thy matter be so pressing,’
Maelgwn instructed, not really wishing to be disturbed.
Sir Rhys entered holding a hand over one eye, and
he appeared extremely angry as he stormed towards

them. ‘I am sorry to disturb thee, Majesty.’ The knight
was so enraged that he had to grit his teeth to articulate
his words. ‘But I demand to know what thy Queen hast
done to my wife?’
The King remained seated as he addressed his
knight, sounding not in the least bit bothered by Rhys’
foul mood. ‘Something vexes thee?’
Rhys’ hand half covered his face, as he turned to the
Queen. ‘Why be my wife practising mastery techniques
in our chamber? She near took my eye out when I
entered.’ Rhys divulged his afflicted eye, which was
inflamed and beginning to darken to a bruise.
The King couldn’t refrain from laughter, and Tory,
Selwyn, and even Tadgh collapsed into hysterics.
‘This be no laughing matter,’ Rhys beseeched them,
indignant. ‘Jenovefa was perfectly content to be my wife
before she met thee, Your Majesty. To love and obey,
that be what our vows stated. Thus, I forbid her to train
under thee.’
Maelgwn felt Tory’s patience snap and he rose to
intervene if necessary.
‘Then I shall divorce thee.’
They all turned to find Jenovefa standing in the
doorway.
‘Better a life without love, than a life without
freedom,’ she resolved, solemnly.
‘I thought I told thee to wait in our room.’ Rhys
moved to physically remove her.
‘Art thou not listening! I shall leave thee, Rhys, and
then thee will have no say in what I do.’ She avoided
him and made haste to the side of the Queen.

‘She can legally do that,’ Maelgwn cautioned Rhys,
who was becoming increasingly agitated by the second.
‘I blame thee for this, Maelgwn. This whole
situation be well out of control and ’twas of thy
making.’
‘Now wait a minute.’ The Queen approached the
knight. ‘I believe there be one small point thou art
overlooking. What would happen if thou wast away
fighting a campaign somewhere . . .’ Tory circled Rhys as
she spun her scenario. ‘And thy estate at Din Lligwy was
raided? Now most of the women in Gwynedd will have
been trained in self-defence, but not Jenovefa. So what
becomes of thy wife then? Need I tell thee, she would be
dead!’ Tory thundered, annoyed by his selfishness. ‘How
dare thee blame thy King for thy shortcomings. Thine
own fear and arrogance hast brought about the ill will
between thee and thy wife. Face it Rhys, though thee
may have the mind of a great scholar, thee can still not
grasp the simple concept that we art all created equal.
Every human being hast the right to their freedom, to be
heard, to make their own decisions, to live and love as
they see fit. Love and respect, sir, art not a condition of
marriage, they must be earned!’ Tory paused, having
exhausted her frustration. ‘Am I getting through at all?’
Rhys, whose eyes were downcast, nodded and
replied, ‘I understand well enough.’ The law was on the
Queen’s side. If he didn’t agree with her he would lose
his wife and be forced to forfeit his place in the circle of
twelve, neither of which he was prepared to relinquish.
‘I apologise, Majesty.’ Rhys swallowed his pride. ‘I did
not think.’

Satisfied that her husband had realised his mistake,
Jenovefa said she was sorry she’d punched him in the
eye and swore that from now on she would confine her
practice to within the walls of the gymnasium.
Three days later, Brockwell arrived home from his quest
triumphant. He rode into Aberffraw in the company of
the High Merlin. Katren made sure the whole
household was aware of his return, and everyone rushed
to the courtyard to meet them.
Calin jumped from his saddle, appearing most
impressed with himself. He took hold of Katren to
bequeath a kiss, pleased to confess, ‘’Tis all I have
thought about for days.’
As Calin couldn’t drag himself away from his
beloved, Taliesin took the liberty of informing the
gathering of the outcome of the quest. He announced
that the pending King of Powys had not only persuaded
the MacErc clan to come to the allies’ gathering, but
had also convinced the leaders to sign the pact. The
Anglo-Saxons had already begun to raid their lands in
Cumbria, and the Picts, in the upper highlands of
Alban, were proving just as troublesome. The men who
had witnessed Calin’s initiation rites were most
impressed, for no one had ventured into the mysterious
and savage land of Dalriada and lived to tell of it.
The Merlin dismounted and Maelgwn greeted him
warmly. ‘Good morning, High Merlin, how is
everything with you this fine day?’
‘Very well indeed, Majesty.’ He thought nothing of
the King’s words for a moment and then he realised.

‘Splendid! Tory hast been teaching thee English.’
Taliesin was in the best of moods as he placed his arm
around his pupil and accompanied him inside. ‘It would
seem there be much to celebrate at Aberffraw this
night.’
On the eve of the wedding and the feast of Beltaine, the
guests residing at the castle at Aberffraw were treated to
the story of the first of May which they were to
celebrate. The High Merlin took his place by the fire,
his goblet filled with mead. Selwyn sat alongside him
with his harp to enhance the tale with the heavenly
strains of his strings. Taliesin waited for his audience to
settle before he began the tale. As a hush came over the
room, he asked, ‘The word “Beltaine” means?’
‘Fires of Beli.’ All bar Tory replied in unison; they
had obviously heard this story before.
‘And Beli was?’
‘The God of life and death. The father of gods and
men.’ The room resounded with amusement.
‘Who be telling this story?’ Calin added in jest, not
moving from his place alongside Katren at the Merlin’s
feet.
Taliesin gave Calin a look of caution as he resumed.
‘Beli’s story dates back to a time when the Otherworld
and the Middle Kingdom co-existed on the same plane.
Beli came to our land from the Honey Isle, which your
Majesty,’ Taliesin pointed out for Tory’s information,
‘might know better as Atlantis.’
The Merlin had spoken to Tory about Atlantis
when they’d last met, nearly five months ago. The

subject had arisen when Tory had asked how Taliesin
had obtained his knowledge of the mystic forces that
surrounded the planet; how he had learnt the secrets of
time travel, the megaliths and the higher realms of
consciousness. Taliesin explained that he’d lived year to
year through history, growing increasingly frustrated
with humanity’s decline, and his inability to do
anything about it. At his wit’s end, Taliesin finally
besought Keridwen to help him amend the state of
Britain. The Goddess had previously said that Taliesin
must acquire these skills on his own to amend his error
in ruining her potion. But in her mercy and wisdom, she
sent the High Merlin back to Atlantis to learn from the
Ancients.
‘I follow thee, Taliesin,’ Tory told him. ‘I recall thee
mentioning Beli in one of thy poems, where thee
described the land surrounded by deep moats from
which he came. I understand that thee referred to
Atlantis as the Honey Isle in the poem, because of the
sweetness of the forgotten knowledge to be found
there. As thee depicted Beli as the Dragon, who
became the guardian spirit of Britain, I assume he was a
great ancestor of Maelgwn.’ Tory had been taking a
closer look at the Merlin’s writings over the cold season
and his riddles were beginning to make more sense to
her.
Taliesin confirmed her conclusions with a wink. He
then went on to tell of how Beli, the husband of the
great Don, gained victory over the powers of darkness in
their land. He brought the people of Britain the secrets
of the harvest and knowledge of the seasons of the year.

Beltaine marked the birth of the harvest year, and the
fires did honour to him.
As the Merlin recounted the tale, Tory thought it
strikingly familiar to the story of the great deluge as
written in Genesis. It was even closer to the ancient
Sumerian account of the tale. In this version it was Beli
(under the name of Enki) who advised Noah (who was
also known by a different name). When the select few
who had been spared from the disaster again found dry
land, they built an altar to the god and burnt offerings
in his honour, giving thanks and praise.
This led Tory to wonder if the Celts had borrowed
the tale from the Jews and Christians? Yet it seemed
more likely that the Judeo-Christian saga had been
derived from the earlier Sumerian version.
As with Samhain, all the fires in the land would be
extinguished to be rekindled from the sacred fire. The
fire would be lit by the druids on the morrow at eve, and
left to burn all night. Prime cattle would be driven
between the fires for purification and fertility. Men and
women would take to the fields and make love to
enhance the fertility of the earth and ensure a good
crop. Come dawn, the people of the land would take
the new flame home and light their own fires again.
This symbolised a fresh start and gave all the hope of a
good yield.
Tory rose early the next day to help Katren prepare for
her wedding. As the Goddess’ representative at the
house at Aberffraw, Tory was required to attend Calin’s
crowning this morning and so she wore the green dress

of the triple Goddess. Tory was the only woman
permitted to attend, just as Lady Gladys had been at
Maelgwn’s crowning.
The bride awoke in a bed covered in fresh spring
flowers. Tory and Ione were there to greet her with
bread, fruit and a jug of mead to calm her nerves.
Katren had asked Ione to be her bridesmaid, for
Ione had helped her to win the title of Queen’s
Champion and, indirectly, Calin’s heart. Ione was
thrilled by the honour and had graciously accepted,
even though it meant appearing feminine for a day.
Calin wrote a love letter in the early hours of the
morning after he’d picked the flowers that now covered
Katren’s bed. His note explained that this inability to
rest stemmed not from nerves but from his anticipation
and elation of their imminent union and life together.
Katren, who had been reading the note aloud, went
quiet and read the rest of his letter to herself. With a
devious chuckle, Katren’s cheeks flushed red. She folded
the letter and held it to her breast. It was hard to
believe the turn her life had taken, considering the way
it could have been had Tory never come bounding into
it.
‘And?’ Ione prompted, as it was just getting
interesting.
‘And then he just reverts into obscene degeneracies
pertaining to his lustful intent, but I will not bore thee
with my love’s unscrupulous appetite.’
‘Why not?’ Ione protested.
‘Ione!’ Tory was surprised. ‘I thought thou wast not
interested in men?’

‘True. But there be no harm in learning how they
think,’ she smiled. ‘Know thy enemy. Thee said that,
Sensei.’
Ione was wrong in thinking that all men were her
enemy and Tory had corrected this misconception so
many times that she decided a different approach was
required. ‘It be the key to defeating thy foe, to be sure,
dost thou have a particular conquest in mind?’
‘Nay, I do not!’
Ione was so disgruntled that Tory and Katren had to
delight in her obvious lie.
‘Well, whoever he be, I assure thee, he shall lose his
heart this day,’ Tory said, feigning ignorance.
‘Majesty, I beseech thee, there be no one,’ Ione
stated in a huff. ‘Thou art my only concern.’ Ione was to
assume the role of Queen’s Champion in Katren’s stead,
as she was the highest ranking female warrior among
the masters.
Katren decided to put her at ease. ‘In that case, thou
shalt be breaking hearts all day.’
‘Now that be much more to my liking,’ Ione
informed them.
Tory made Katren a wedding gift of her make-up,
and with it they set about preparing Ione for the event.
As they did, Tory considered that even the most
beautiful models of her time would pale in comparison;
this woman had features and a body that superstars
would pay millions for. Heaven help poor Tiernan when
he set eyes upon the true beauty of his partner. The only
trouble was that the knight still pined for Sorcha and
might fail to notice even Ione. This certainly seemed to

have been the case so far. Nevertheless, over a decade
had passed since Sorcha had stolen his heart. It was
time Sir Tiernan got over the loss of his first love, who
had never really been his anyway, and got on with the
rest of his life.
The Queen left Katren and Ione to dress as she was
running late to escort Brockwell to his crowning. She
knocked before she entered Calin’s chamber. ‘Calin, it
be Tory. Art thou decent?’
‘Not since the day I was born,’ he replied,
motioning to Sir Tiernan to open the door for her.
Tory rolled her eyes at Calin’s jest and burst into the
room, only to have the heavy oak door near close on
her again when it accidentally met with Sir Tiernan’s
head.
‘Tiernan! . . . Art thou alright?’ Tory crouched
beside him.
‘Nice going!’ Calin threw his arms in the air. ‘As a
lady, thou art supposed to wait until the door be opened
for thee.’
‘I am sorry,’ Tory said. ‘But I wast running late.’
‘Well thee could have picked someone other than
my best man.’ Tiernan’s eyes were rolling around in his
head but he was still conscious. ‘This doth not look
promising.’
‘He will be fine, there be no need to panic. Tiernan,
look at me. Focus.’ Tory endeavoured to keep him with
them. ‘Can thou hear me?’
Maelgwn came over to give her a hand to get him
on his feet.

‘Aye, my love, I can,’ Tiernan mumbled, smiling
deliriously, his eyes lulled closed.
Uh-oh! Tory cringed, as Maelgwn knew nothing of
the knight’s feelings for his mother.
‘What?’ The King dropped him back on the floor
with a thud.
‘Nay, please Goddess, do not let this happen today!’
Brockwell pleaded, his eyes raised to the ceiling.
‘What doth he mean?’ Maelgwn’s tone dropped just
short of an accusation.
This surprised and angered Tory. Yet, as it was
Calin’s wedding day, she kept a civil mood.
‘Sorcha,’ Tiernan held a hand out to touch her
cheek in wonder. ‘How I have longed for thee.’
‘Shh,’ Tory consoled him, not knowing what else to
do; Tiernan would kill himself if he realised what he was
disclosing.
‘Sorcha?’ Maelgwn was shocked and backed away,
trying to comprehend the full implications of the news.
‘Tiernan was my mother’s lover?’ Maelgwn was
mortified. ‘Mercy sakes, how many did she have?’
‘Please, Goddess!’ Calin repeated his plea, more
desperate this time.
Lady Gladys entered in the midst of the confrontation, wondering what was holding everyone up.
‘Stop right there,’ Tory cautioned, feeling Sorcha’s
presence was very close. ‘It be true to say that Tiernan
was in love with thy mother, it would seem just about
everybody was. But he never laid a hand on her, I swear
to thee. He was loyal to Caswallon to the end.’ Tory
gently placed the knight’s head on a pillow.

‘So, thou art Tiernan’s confessor now, I did not
realise the two of thee were so close,’ Maelgwn said.
Tory stood, trying desperately to contain her rage.
He’s just upset, don’t take it personally. ‘I know purely by
accident, for when thy mother’s spirit comes over me, I
experience many of her memories and feelings. So
please, allow me to tell thee the full story, before thee
condemns anyone. When Cadfer raped her, Sorcha
decided not to tell Caswallon, fearing a civil war in
Gwynedd. But when she fell pregnant with Caradoc,
the guilt drove her away from thy father. Not Taliesin
and her study of sorcery, not Tiernan’s attentions, but
Cadfer’s spiteful act.’
‘She speaks the truth, Maelgwn,’ Lady Gladys
assured him.
‘Thy father, feeling Sorcha no longer desired him,
stopped taking her to his bed and took others in her
place. With two young sons and thy uncle and his witch
ever menacing her, it was only the young Sir Tiernan’s
adoration and confidence that kept her going. It be true
they aspired to be lovers, but their devotion to thy
father surpassed their love for each other – this kept
them apart and loyal to the crown of Gwynedd,’ Tory
explained.
Maelgwn collapsed into a chair, overwhelmed by
this revelation. ‘Why did thee not tell me all this
before?’
Tory crouched before him, taking hold of his hands.
‘Because if Sir Tiernan chose not to tell thee in all these
years, he obviously did not want thee to know. Maybe
he thought thee might look back on thy mother in a

bad light, or perhaps he feared thee wouldn’t
understand. I hate to say it, Maelgwn, but he would
have presumed right.’
Maelgwn squeezed Tory’s hands. ‘I am ashamed of
my behaviour.’
‘No need. It be a rude shock, I know,’ she replied. ‘I
think it might be best if this dost not leave this room. It
hast been Sir Tiernan’s secret this long, let us keep it
that way.’
‘Indeed,’ Maelgwn agreed. ‘That explains why
Tiernan never married. How sad.’
‘Well, I will never marry at this rate,’ Calin
exclaimed. ‘What am I supposed to do with this?’ He
motioned to his best man, passed out at his feet.
‘Calm down,’ Tory took up her brother’s arm. ‘So he
shall miss thy crowning. He’ll sleep it off and will be
fighting fit by the wedding.’
‘I shall see to Sir Tiernan,’ Lady Gladys assured her
son, before embracing him. ‘Thy father would have
been very proud this day.’
‘I shall do my very best to do honour to his memory.’
Brockwell hugged his mother tight.
This took Lady Gladys by surprise as it was very rare
that Calin was so affectionate with her, especially when
there was company about.
Bryce came running into the room, all hot and
bothered. Dressed in his best clothes, he dragged at
them in an attempt to improve his comfort. ‘Father, thy
guests art getting restless.’
‘Indeed. Let us be gone.’ Maelgwn shuffled them all
out the door, picking up the excited boy on his way

through. ‘Best not keep thy people and thy bride
waiting.
The ceremonies were performed in the sunshine of the
inner-bailey courtyard. Taliesin led Brockwell through
his vows, and Tory had the honour of crowning him.
That afternoon, when they had been wed, Brockwell
crowned Katren as his Queen and Bryce as Prince of
Powys, whereupon the real festivities and magic of
Beltaine took over.
Tiernan regained consciousness in time for the
wedding ceremony, although he seemed to be having
trouble concentrating on it.
Katren, so tiny and petite, appeared the very picture
of a fairy princess in her wedding gown, but it was Ione
who stole the show. Her flowing gown of olive green
complemented her colouring and muscular curves, and
her brown hair had been wound up into a bun and
interlaced with tiny white flowers. Whispy curls
accentuated her long neck and fell softly about her. As
Ione took pleasure in smelling the magnificent bouquet
of white flowers in her hand, she truly did appear the
very image of a Goddess.
Tiernan was seated next to Ione at the wedding
banquet, and was thus forced to witness the endless
stream of admirers who approached to address her and
dote upon her beauty. The knight’s sanity received its
final blow when Ione, quite by accident, turned from a
conversation with one of her devotees to catch Katren’s
wedding bouquet. Ione’s young suitor insisted this
meant their union was fated, and it was at this time that

Sir Tiernan took his leave. With a goblet and jug of
mead in hand, he headed toward the bonfires that were
now blazing in the outer bailey.
Tory watched him depart, and suspecting it was
jealousy that drove him away, she followed him to find
out.
The drunken festivities were in full swing on the
common ground, and Tiernan found a quiet place under
a tree, where he sat down and proceeded to get sloshed.
‘It will not help.’ Tory looked down at him as he
refilled his goblet.
‘It cannot hurt,’ he replied. ‘Please sit, Majesty, I be
glad thou art here. I have something I wish to discuss.’
‘About this morning?’
‘Aye. I am sorry to say, I have since recalled the
whole of it. I apologise for landing thee in trouble with
thy King, but I also thank thee, thy words to him were
most eloquent.’
‘I am the one who should apologise, Tiernan. I hit
thee in the head with the damn door.’ This made him
laugh and she was glad. ‘I be sorry Maelgwn found out
after all these years.’
‘Ahh,’ he waved it off. ‘So it means I must confront
the conversation I should have had with him years ago.
I have been forced to face up to many things this day.’
He watched a group of people, Ione amongst them, as
they approached one of the bonfires. ‘The most obvious
of which was a ten-ton door.’ He spurred Tory to
laughter and lightened the mood. ‘Only joking. In fact
I am glad, it seems to have knocked some sense into
me.’

‘Pleased to be of service.’ Tory raised her goblet to
him. ‘Cheers.’
Tiernan returned the gesture. ‘How long hast thou
known about the Queen and myself?’
‘Since the day I met thee at Caswallon’s bedside.’
‘Thee told the King that thee felt Sorcha’s feelings.
What did thou mean by that, exactly?’
He edged around the question he truly wanted to
ask, but Tory guessed his mind. ‘She did love thee. I
know Sorcha never said it outright, as it lingers in her
memory as one of her greatest regrets.’
Tiernan let loose a cry of relief. ‘I knew it.’
‘Sorcha in no way held thee responsible for her
death. She was far happier knowing that her champion
was protecting her son.’
‘She loved me.’ Tiernan leant back against the tree,
lost in this discovery.
Tory, judging from the smile on his face, considered
that this knowledge was perhaps not so good for him at
this time. ‘More than thee will ever realise, Tiernan.
But thy love that once gave her reason to live, now
grieves her terribly. She will not be able to rest in peace
while thou art still clinging so tightly to her memory. It
hast been three and ten years since she died, be it not
time thee let her go?’
‘Tory.’ Maelgwn caught sight of her and made haste
to join them.
‘Oh no.’ Tiernan held his head, not ready to face
Maelgwn yet.
Tory sprang to her feet to distract her husband.
‘Aye, my love.’

Maelgwn didn’t pause to make conversation, he just
whisked Tory up over one shoulder and began to make
off with her.
‘Maelgwn! Where art thou taking me?’ She was
amused by his playful manner.
‘Sorry Tiernan, got to do our bit for this year’s
harvest. I do love Beltaine!’ Maelgwn cried with glee.
‘Good form.’ Tiernan held up his glass to toast the
King. ‘Plant a few seeds for me,’ he chuckled, watching
the young lovers depart.
Tory waved to him, too drunk to be bothered
retaliating against her degrading predicament. ‘Plant a
few seeds for thyself,’ she squealed as Maelgwn picked
up speed, heading for the outer-bailey portcullis and the
fields beyond.
In the midst of the formalities, Katren managed to steal
her husband away from their guests. She led him out of
the inner bailey, and down the pathway towards the
beach.
‘Where art we going?’ Brockwell merrily inquired.
Katren giggled as she pulled him aside into the
trees. ‘Here will do.’ She obliged him with a fervoured
kiss of encouragement.
‘What? Now?’ The notion made him smile.
‘Why not?’ She wrapped her arms around his neck
and drew herself in close to him. After all, everybody
else was doing it and she’d never had the opportunity to
participate in the Beltaine festivities before.
Caught up in his rush of passion, Katren could
hardly breathe for her excitement. Calin’s lips caressed

her neck and shoulders, as his hand slid underneath her
long skirt and over her bare thigh.
‘Oh, aye,’ she whispered to spur him on. Yet the
next thing she knew, Calin had backed off completely.
‘Damn it!’ He wanted to hit something. ‘I cannot. It
dost not seem right.’
‘But Calin, we art married now!’ she implored him.
‘That be exactly my point. Every woman I have ever
had, I have taken thus. But thou art my wife, Katren,
whom I have vowed to love and respect for the rest of
my life.’ He took hold of her hands. ‘We shall look back
on this moment in years to come, and I want thee to
remember how special it was, not how quickly it was
over. So please, allow me to try to make it so.’
‘Of course.’ She smiled, her heart near bursting from
the sweet sentiment of his resolve.
‘Now stop that.’ He wiped her tears away. ‘Thou art
supposed to be having a good time.’
‘Then how come everyone else gets to have all the
fun, and we have to wait?’
‘Why indeed.’ He gripped her hand tightly, leading
them off towards the inner bailey.
‘Where art thou taking me?’
‘To bed,’ he stated, determined.
‘But it be too early to totally abandon our guests.’
‘We can sneak into the house via the servants’
entrance, no one shall even miss us.’
Ione had been watching Tiernan very closely, and
spying him on his own, she excused herself from her
present company to join him.

‘Thou art a worry, friend.’ She stood before him.
‘On a night such as this, with thy reputation, why art
thou all alone, Tiernan?’
He smiled, beckoning her to sit and offering her
some mead. ‘It is because I have been in love with a
memory for the past three and ten years. Why art thou
alone?’
Ione accepted his invitation, taking a seat and his
mead. ‘Because I have hated men for the last ten years.’
‘But what of all thy suitors, Ione? Surely one of
them must be mildly attractive to thee.’
She forced a laugh. ‘Most of them have taken off to
the fields with far easier game than I.’ She had a long
drink to build up her courage. ‘The only man that I do
find mildly charming at times ignored me all day.’
‘Bastard,’ Tiernan said in his drunken stupor.
‘He seemed to prefer to get drunk under a tree, all
by himself.’
Tiernan froze, caught quite off guard.
‘Thee did not even mention whether thee thought I
looked nice,’ she added softly, her eyes to the ground;
she was so afraid of leaving herself vulnerable to him.
‘Dear Ione, thou art a paragon of beauty to be sure,
but . . .’ Tiernan was bewildered, how could he put this
without hurting her.
‘But what?’
‘I am too old for thee. Thou already hast thy pick of
every eligible young knight in the kingdom. Thee
should consider one of them.’
‘Thou art only of eight and thirty, Tiernan. ’Tis not
like thou art at death’s door.’

Tiernan was not amused. ‘And thou art not much
more than a girl at one and twenty. Thou dost not need
an old man.’
‘Aye, I do.’ She gently grasped the back of his neck
and drew him in till his lips met hers.
Tiernan parted from the kiss, rather dazed. ‘Now
Ione, listen to me –’
Again she kissed away his protest and whispered,
‘Only thee can prove me wrong about men, Tiernan.’
This was the moment of truth for the knight. He
had been faithful to none but Sorcha – in a rampage of
regret, since her death he had broken a hundred hearts.
‘I am a fickle lover, Ione. I fear I cannot help thee, as I
cannot even help myself.’
Ione smiled. ‘Then perhaps we can help each other.’
She stood and held out her hands to him. ‘Come plant a
few seeds with me.’
He took her outstretched hands and raised himself
to his feet, finding he was a little more intoxicated than
he thought. ‘Be gentle with me,’ he mumbled in jest,
placing his arm over her shoulder to steady himself.
‘Do not fear old man, I shall leave thee alive.’
‘We made it!’ Katren gave a cheer as Brockwell carried
her into his room, kicking the door closed behind them.
‘Oh, it be lovely,’ she gazed round at the flowers
adorning the chamber that her bridesmaids had
prepared for them.
‘Aye.’ Calin’s eyes did not shift from his new wife.
‘My room hast never looked so good.’ He kissed her and
set her down on his bed.

‘What be wrong?’ she inquired, as he was staring
blankly at her.
‘I am just waiting for a protest,’ he joked.
This made her smile. ‘There shall be none this
time.’
‘So.’ He looked to the laces down the front of her
gown and lightly tugged at the bow so it fell undone.
‘Thee can see no reason why we cannot be joined in the
union of wedlock?’
‘None whatsoever,’ she confirmed with adoration.
He guided the gown over her shoulders and down
her arms. ‘Then, so be it.’
His lips pressed into her cleavage and a fever beset
Katren’s body, her nipples hardening in the warmth of
his hands.
Calin looked up, filling his eyes with the sight of
her. The sentiment he felt reminded him of a fable he’d
once heard. ‘And her beauty was so overwhelming that
he could no longer deny his love for her, and thus he
confessed with all his heart that he did so.’
Katren’s eyes filled with tears at his lovely proclamation. She gently held his face between her hands to
vow, ‘And with his realisation he made her very
joyful.’ Brockwell’s lips then enfolded her own to
convey his feelings more eloquently than any spoken
word.
The first rays of dawn found Tory and Maelgwn by the
embers of a fire in the outer bailey. Most of the villagers
had left, and the world was peaceful and still in the
wake of the night-long celebration.

‘Good morning!’ Calin announced very loudly and
with much cheer, giving the pair quite a start.
‘Well it was,’ Tory said sarcastically as Calin took a
seat beside them. ‘Where be thy better half?’
‘Asleep.’ He grinned broadly. ‘I thought it best to let
her rest before the trip back to Powys.’
‘We shall miss thee both, Calin, very much.’ Tory
reached out to grip his hand.
‘Aye, we will.’ Maelgwn patted his old friend on the
back.
‘Excited as I am to be a king, I must confess, I do
not want to leave. I imagined I would live out my life in
thy service, Maelgwn. I have rarely been parted from
thee for more than a day since thee returned from the
monastery.’
‘Life be like that sometimes. But if we always knew
what to expect in advance, then what would be the
point of living at all.’
‘Quite right,’ Tory confirmed. ‘Less than a year ago,
I certainly did not suspect where my life was taking me,
but I am mighty glad it led me where it did.’ Tory smiled
up at her husband who was being particularly attentive
this morning.
‘And we will be back here come Samhain, I
suppose.’
‘Aye, and we shall see thee before then at the
meeting of the alliance on Lughnasa. What be wrong?’
Tory asked when she saw that Brockwell still looked
concerned.
‘Art thou still planning to return home come
summer solstice?’

‘Aye, I must. But while our visit to the future shall
span a whole year, we shall only be gone from thy
reality for an hour. Thee will not even miss us.’
‘I wish thee would take me with thee.’
‘Nay, Calin. I realise thy woes, but I do not know
how my parents would cope with their dead son
appearing together with their missing daughter and her
new husband, who just happens to be a sixth-century
king. I think it all might be a bit much. I can take care
of myself, believe me. Nothing will go wrong.’
‘Well then, the stones art not far from Powys, so I
shall go to them in any case, to bear witness to the
event.’
‘As thee wishes.’
‘Speaking of events . . .’ Maelgwn spied Tiernan and
Ione as they came strolling in through the outer-bailey
portcullis with their arms wrapped round each other,
appearing lost in their own little world.
‘Well I never.’ Calin gave half a laugh.
‘We shall have to start calling thee Eros soon,’
Maelgwn said as he nudged Tory affectionately for
another good deed well done.
‘I had nothing to do with it.’
‘That be what thee said about Calin and Katren,
and look how they ended up,’ Maelgwn joked.
‘Shh . . .’ Tory didn’t want Calin becoming wise to
the conspiracy.
‘I know thee all drew me in, thyself, Katren and my
mother,’ Calin admitted. ‘But as thou had already
promised to train me the perfect wife, I thought it
would be downright rude to ignore such a gift.’

‘Sure, sure . . .’ Tory and Maelgwn made sport of his
tale.
‘Good morning, Majesties.’ Tiernan and Ione finally
reached them.
‘So it would seem,’ Maelgwn teased, while Calin
whistled and cheered.
‘We were just heading to the beach for kata, art
thou coming, Sensei?’ Tiernan inquired.
‘Aye.’ Calin jumped to his feet, to second the
notion. ‘Please, it be my last day.’
Tory looked at Maelgwn who nodded with a smile.
‘Alright!’ Calin cried as he took off towards the
beach after Tiernan and Ione, the King and Tory not far
behind.

PART 111

REALITY

21

Secrets from
the Stones

T

he month leading up to the summer solstice flew
by. The new recruits had begun their training,
the school in the village was opened, and Tory
helped Maelgwn prepare for his journey into the future.
Taliesin had remained at the court to lend a hand,
and Tory was delighted to be able to spend more time
with him. She often tried to quiz him about what he
knew of her journey home and why it was so important
that Maelgwn came too. The Merlin was unable to
answer her questions, however, as the situation she
would return to in the future was sure to have changed.
Taliesin didn’t want to influence any decisions Tory
might make by discussing some of the possible outcomes

of her journey. The only thing the Merlin would say was
that he was quite sure Tory would make contact with
him.
‘I was not so experienced then as I am at this point
in my evolution,’ he warned her. ‘You will find my
insight lacking a tad. But be patient, for I shall make
sense of it all eventually.’
‘Make sense of what, Taliesin?’
‘What you tell me.’
‘Which will be?’
‘What’s important.’
Riddles, that’s all Tory ever got from him. ‘Don’t
you have any advice for me at all?’
‘Yes, I have,’ he answered, becoming more focused.
‘Stay in tune with yourself, Tory, and use your newfound abilities of second sight and truth saying. As you
know, the forces of evil run rampant across the earth in
your time and they are in a more sophisticated form
than ever before. So stay alert to those around you, and
beware of whom you take into your confidence.’
Tory was alarmed by his warning. But when she
tried to question him further, the Merlin maintained
that he had no real reason for the caution. He advised
her to pay heed to his words and learn to trust in the
universal scheme of things.
This was easy for him to say, she thought. Taliesin
had been trusting and using creation for eons, while
Tory was a mere novice at this immortality thing. It was
rare that she felt physical pain anymore, or tired, and
the elements certainly didn’t bother her. She had no
need to worry about hurting herself, or what she ate.

Which left her free to ponder the answers to the secrets
of the ages.
The High Merlin explained that Tory’s first
encounter with the divine, at her wedding, had set her
apart as one of the Chosen by enhancing her second
sight. This enabled her to see the truth in others and
future events. Tory’s episode at Arwystli, however, had
empowered her to such a level of awareness that she
could not only see the future, she could change it.
This level of awareness was the plane of thought
where most negative thinking had been eliminated. It
was made up of two regions: the first was the region of
abstract thought, where plans and ideas form the
blueprints for earth life. The second was where these
thoughts became concrete. Here, will was one’s
strongest form of expression.
‘So basically,’ the Merlin concluded, ‘you have to
understand, or rather believe, that whatever you want
to happen, will . . . as it always has. You know all this,
Tory, it is the very nature of personal reality. Just put
your beliefs into action.’
Following Taliesin’s advice Tory resolved to visualise
a wonderful homecoming. To test her new abilities
granted from the powers that be, she convinced herself
beyond any doubt that her parents would be waiting for
her at the stones when she arrived home. She couldn’t
imagine how this would ever come to pass, but then
these details were a problem for the universe to sort out.
Those members of the court of Aberffraw who were to
be present at the stones on summer solstice were invited

by King Brockwell to stay at Arwystli, as it was much
closer to the site. The party could easily reach the
‘King’s Men’ stones by midnight, when the astrological
conditions were forecast to be correct for the time
travel. Brockwell had invited all the masters, even
Vortipor and Cara made the trip up from Dyfed to be
present. Tory couldn’t see what the fuss was about,
however, as they would only be gone an hour.
On the morning they were to leave, Taliesin
provided Maelgwn with a change of clothes for the trip:
jeans, a shirt, a jumper and trekking boots. Tory
whistled in approval when she saw him in his modern
attire. ‘I cannot take thee back to the twentieth century
looking like that!’
‘Why not? Be something amiss?’ Maelgwn already
felt awkward in the restrictive clothing.
‘Nay, but thou dost appear most tempting. The
modern women will find thee way too delectable, I fear.’
‘Thee need have no fear,’ Maelgwn said, as he took
hold of her. ‘If any other woman sought my favour, thou
art well aware I would have to decline.’
‘Am I?’
‘Of course, I probably wouldn’t understand her
proposition.’ Maelgwn copped a hit for his wit.
‘Thee would understand well enough. Women art
not backward in coming forward where I am from.’
‘Oh really?’ He laughed. ‘I never would have guessed.’
The party reached the stones with plenty of time to
spare. They set up camp, ate and drank their fill, then
sat around reminiscing about that extraordinary day one
year ago when Tory and Maelgwn had first met.

Tory had one photo left in her camera and asked
Taliesin to take a photo of all the masters together. She’d
wanted the High Merlin in the picture, but he regretted
to inform her that he would just ruin the exposure.
Midnight approached, so Tory dragged her
belongings into the ring of stones. She bid everyone
goodbye in turn, asking them what they would like her
to bring back for them from the future. She had become
a mite teary eyed by the time she reached Brockwell,
and his request set her tears flowing.
‘Just thy good self.’ He embraced her.
‘I shall see thee in an hour.’ She smiled to console
him as they parted. Yet with the thought that she would
not see Calin for a whole year in her time, she had to
turn back to hug him again. ‘I will miss thee, Bro.’
‘Then let me come.’
Tory saw Katren’s shocked expression at the
suggestion and so advised, ‘Nay Calin, thy home be
here, for now. I shall see thee soon, I promise.’
The Merlin moved to escort Tory to the middle of
the circle, where Maelgwn awaited her. ‘Just make it
back to this place one year from tonight and I shall take
care of the rest. Tory, I would ask that thee note any
changes in the twentieth-century Britain you are about
to encounter, compared to the twentieth-century
Britain you left behind, no matter how small or
insignificant the difference might seem.’
‘I will.’
‘The Goddess will guide and protect thee both.’ He
embraced them, showering the couple with his calming
energies.

‘See you in the twentieth century, dude,’ Tory called
after him, giving Taliesin the thumbs-up.
At his station behind the King’s stone, the Merlin
focused himself, uttering an incantation under his
breath. He raised his arms and floated upwards until he
was suspended over the huge stone. A loud thunder clap
sounded and all eyes looked at a turbulent storm cloud
erupting in the otherwise clear night sky. A charge of
lightning shot from it to meet with Taliesin’s extended
palms, and flowed into his body in a steady current.
‘What’s he doing?’ Tory was distressed, watching as
the great force surged through his being. Maelgwn
pulled her close to him and the mist began to rise,
spreading around them as it twisted its way towards the
raging storm cloud above.
‘He’s creating a circuit,’ Tory answered herself in a
whisper, astounded by the spectacle. Hollywood was
never this good, she decided.
The masters watched the centre of the circle until
the light, generated from the mist, became too intense.
The haze spiralled up into the cloud, like a tornado
being sucked up from the earth, and left the circle void
of its occupants. Thereupon, the large cloud seemed to
vanish into the heavens. Those who bore witness to the
phenomenon were left gaping in its wake, and made
themselves comfortable to await the final outcome; the
next hour was going to be a long one.
Tory woke to find herself curled up in Maelgwn’s
embrace, the morning sun streaming down upon them.
She had trouble raising her head, feeling as groggy as

she had after her first experience of time travel.
Eventually, she freed herself from Maelgwn’s grasp,
knelt up and looked around. But she was rather
disillusioned by what she saw. ‘It didn’t work, shit!’ Tory
stared at the stones that stood in their original form,
just as she’d left them in 520 AD. ‘Where the hell are
we now, then?’
Maelgwn sat up. ‘What be that noise?’
Tory listened a moment. ‘What noise?’
Maelgwn stood to focus on the sound, and pointed
to the sky.
Tory gazed up and jumped to her feet, excited.
‘Power lines. Maelgwn, I am home!’ She overwhelmed
him with a hug.
The King’s attention was then diverted by another
foreign sound, as he heard a car approach and pull up
on the road opposite the stones. ‘Plane?’ he guessed.
‘Nay, planes travel through the sky. That be a car.’
Maelgwn drew his brow as this made no sense. Why
not call this a plane, when it moves across it?
‘We had best get moving.’ Tory quickly collected her
bags, not wanting to explain to some custodian of the
site what they were doing there. So much for the powers
that be! Looks like I’ll have to find my parents on my own.
Maelgwn threw on the backpack and followed her
as she set off through the fields. Tory considered that
walking along the road might overawe Maelgwn, so
they would stay in the fields until he became
accustomed to the different noises. She decided they
should first see if they couldn’t find her elusive Aunt
Rose, so she pulled out her old road map.

‘Tory?’
A voice from her past resounded through her brain
and she stopped dead in her tracks. No, that’s
impossible, it couldn’t be! she resolved as she turned
back to view the stones.
‘Tory, it is you!’
‘Brian!’ Tory dropped everything and ran to him.
‘Tory.’ He caught her as she flung herself into his
embrace. ‘Where the hell have you been! I thought I
was coming here to pay my respects to your memory,
and here you are!’
‘I don’t believe it!’ They laughed, elated, echoing
each other’s mind.
I promise I shall try not to die on thee next time round.
Tory grinned broadly as she recalled Brockwell’s pledge.
She was so blown away to see Brian she could barely
speak, and she turned to her mystified father. ‘Dad,’ she
cried, and ran to his awaiting arms.
‘Child, you had us so worried.’
‘I missed thee so.’ She used the old tongue, backing
up to hold him at arm’s length. ‘And I have so much to
tell thee.’
‘Where hast thou been this past year?’ Renford
implored her. ‘When we found the hire car and no trace
of thee, we . . .’ He shuddered to think of what he’d
suspected. ‘Let’s just say we feared for thy safety.’
Maelgwn, who had walked back to them, dropped
the luggage on the ground. ‘Calin, Myrddin, what art
thou doing here?’
‘What!’ Tory smiled as she corrected his mistake.
‘No, no, no. This be my brother, Brian, remember the

photo? And this be my father, Professor Renford
Alexander,’ she announced with pride. ‘Brian, Dad, I’d
like you to meet Maelgwn of Gwynedd, my husband.’
Her father’s pipe dropped from his mouth. ‘Tory, this
be no time for thy fairytales. Dost thou want thy poor
father to have a heart attack?’
‘Tory, I swear to thee, this be Myrddin,’ Maelgwn
insisted, looking at her father. ‘I would know thee
anywhere, High Merlin.’
‘Whoa there,’ Brian said. ‘Tory, are you telling me
you’re married to this huge dude here?’
‘Yes.’
‘Awesome.’ He shook Maelgwn’s hand with a dumbfounded look on his face. ‘Hey, bro.’
Tory then turned to her father, playfully placing her
hands on her hips. ‘And I am not spinning one of my
tales. He be exactly who I claim, and I can prove it.’
‘I am honoured to meet thee, sir, again.’ Maelgwn
held out his hand in greeting. Myrddin had been his
favourite of Taliesin’s long list of esteemed colleagues,
and the King felt sure this was he.
The professor, noting Maelgwn’s fluent use of the
ancient tongue, gripped hold of his new son-in-law’s
hand with his own. ‘Spirits preserve us! The honour be
all mine, son. Welcome to the family.’ He began to
chuckle; whoever this tall, dark man turned out to be,
Renford was more than happy to make his acquaintance. ‘Well, we had best get thee both back to your
aunt’s, we can speak in more comfort there.’ The
professor escorted Maelgwn to the car, making polite
conversation in the King’s own language.

‘It’s so good to see you.’ Brian took up Tory’s
saxophone case in one hand and put his other arm over
her shoulder.
‘Ditto.’ She smiled. Strike one up for the powers that
be.
Brian drove a large four-wheel drive these days,
which surprised Tory. ‘What happened to the bike?’ she
said.
‘Wrapped it round a tree,’ he confessed, tossing her
luggage in the back. ‘You live and learn.’
‘If one is as lucky as it seems you are,’ Tory said with
a grin, considering that he had had at least two narrow
escapes from death.
Maelgwn was more exhilarated by the car ride than
Vortipor had been when he had first experienced flight.
The noise blasting from the cassette deck didn’t escape
his attention though, as his frown clearly indicated.
‘Terrible, I know,’ Tory’s father agreed. ‘It be music,
supposedly.’
‘Metallica,’ Brian explained, getting into it.
Maelgwn listened carefully, trying to appreciate it.
‘I think Albinoni is more his pace,’ Tory informed
them, laughing at Maelgwn’s bemused expression.
‘Nay, this hast a certain quality.’ Maelgwn didn’t
want to insult anyone. ‘It be . . . powerful.’ He smiled at
his new kin, who appeared so familiar; this was
Brockwell alright, no doubt about it. Maelgwn was
amazed at the technology of the vehicle and asked
Brian questions about how the car was driven.
‘I could teach thee, if you like,’ Brian suggested,
drifting from language to language.

‘That would be wonderful.’
‘No, you say awesome,’ Brian corrected him. ‘That
would be awesome, get it?’
‘Awesome,’ Maelgwn repeated with a smile.
Oh brother! Tory rolled her eyes. Please Goddess,
don’t let him turn into a twentieth-century yobbo.
Once they reached Aunt Rose’s lovely thatched
cottage, on a farm in Oxfordshire, Maelgwn and Tory
received another rude shock.
‘Lady Gladys!’ they both exclaimed, as she came
running down the garden path to greet them.
‘Dear child! I knew it, what did I say?’ she asked her
brother as she reached Tory and hugged her niece
fiercely.
‘Tory, this be thy Aunt Rose,’ her father said,
explaining that Rose fancied herself as a bit of a
psychic.
‘Your father thinks such things are nonsense,’ her
aunt said, as if to imply that he was the one who was
potty, not her. ‘I told him you would return but, of
course, he wouldn’t believe me. This must be your
Otherworld companion, no doubt?’ Rose turned to
Maelgwn, who stole her heart as he took up her hand
and kissed it.
‘Lady, Maelgwn of Gwynedd, at thy service.’
‘My husband,’ Tory clarified.
‘Delighted,’ Aunt Rose said coyly, though she’d
barely understood a word Maelgwn said. ‘The spirits
have had much to say about you two.’ She led them
towards the house, thumping her brother on the way
past. ‘I told you she got married.’

Brian laughed as he pulled the bags out of the car.
‘Well, it would seem the women in our family aren’t as
looney as you thought, hey Dad?’
The professor was quite perplexed. ‘I must confess, a
wee dram would be mighty friendly at this stage, Brian.’
Aunt Rose put on a delicious lunch of wondrous
foods in Maelgwn’s honour: pies, fresh bread and salads,
followed by Devonshire tea.
Tory told them of her journey to the Dark Age, and
Maelgwn expanded on the story here and there. She
also produced the instant photographs she’d taken that
confirmed elements of her adventure.
‘Hey, that’s me!’ Brian spotted Calin in several of
the shots.
‘Indeed, Calin Brockwell, King of Powys and Duke
of Penmon in Gwynedd. He is also Maelgwn’s
Champion and one of the bravest warriors I’ve ever
met. He just got married.’ Tory pointed out Katren to
him.
‘Wow, what a babe.’
‘And look Renford, there’s me.’ Rose pointed to
Lady Gladys in Tory’s wedding photo. ‘My, I do look
nice, don’t I? And I must say, you look rather lovely
yourself, my dear.’ She winked at Tory.
With the aid of a magnifying glass, the professor
carefully scrutinised the photo of the seat of Gwynedd
at Aberffraw and the picture Tory had taken of the ruins
at Llyn Cerrig Bach. ‘What are these blurry patches?’ he
asked.
Tory leant over his shoulder. ‘Oh, they’re ghosts.’
‘Get outta town. Let me see,’ Brian demanded.

‘Well Tory, I certainly have no explanation for all
this,’ her father confessed, pouring himself another
drink.
‘Where’s Mum?’ As soon as she asked, Tory knew
something was wrong when everyone’s expression
changed. ‘What? Has something happened to her?’
‘No.’ Brian sounded as if he wished something had.
‘Your mother and I have separated, child. She’s
currently on tour in America somewhere.’
‘With her new composer boyfriend, who’s half her
age,’ Brian added with spite.
‘Brian, please,’ his father urged, as he was not
making it any easier on his sister.
‘Well, she should know all of it,’ Brian protested.
‘We are in the process of a divorce, Tory. I am sorry.’
Maelgwn placed a hand on Tory’s shoulder and she
patted it to assure him she was fine. ‘Don’t be.’ She
kissed her father. ‘I know what Mother is like, and so I
suppose it’s probably for the best.’ Tory came round her
father’s chair to take a seat on his lap. ‘Are you alright?’
‘Quite blissful, thank you. I much prefer living in
Britain.’
This house in Oxfordshire belonged to his sister
Rose who had no children of her own and her husband
had died many years ago. So she was delighted to have
her brother and Brian living there.
Tory and her father walked off lunch in the garden.
She took the opportunity to ask him about the perfectly
preserved ring of stones she’d seen this morning, as this
was the first major change Tory had noticed in Britain
since her arrival.

‘What do you mean?’ Renford was puzzled. ‘We
Britons have always taken pride in preserving our
ancient sites.’
Tory found his response very confusing as this would
mean that the land ownership in Britain had changed
from the last time she was in the twentieth century. The
ring of stones was in Oxfordshire which, according to
history in the modern reality Tory had been born into,
belonged to the Saxons who would in time become the
English people.
Therefore, by Tory’s reckoning, Wales must reach
way beyond the borders of what had once been known
as Prydyn.
‘The Saxon raiders that ravaged Britain during the
Dark Ages never managed to gain supremacy over the
allegiance set in place by the Dragon and his allies,’
Renford explained to her.
If this was true, then most of Scotland, Ireland and
Prydyn had never fallen into the hands of raiders, and
much more of their native culture must have been
preserved, Tory mused on the quiet. These lands had
therefore maintained their own identity, separate
governments and individual beliefs, as their people had
never been forced by the English to give them up.
Tory was very pleased to learn this; Taliesin, as
always, had been right in thinking the pact would serve
the native Britons well. She could hardly wait to start
delving into the history books to find out what else had
changed. Tory guessed that the way history had
unfolded in this reality explained the fine condition of
the stones. The absence of war and the greater respect

for the native culture in Britain had managed to
preserve them this time round.
Later that evening, while Tory and Brian were beating
each other up in a sparring match in the garden, Tory’s
father showed Maelgwn his library which had been
carefully transported from Australia.
‘Well I can certainly see where this year will be best
spent, Professor.’ Maelgwn’s attention was drawn to a
parchment written in the ancient text that was lying on
the desk. ‘This be about me.’ He read the ancient
tongue, understanding it perfectly.
I saw Maelgwn on a great journey
his life spent in preparation.
Plans hidden within plans,
he knew naught of the Goddess’ intent
The Otherworld sped him on his quest
to awaken their sleeping prophet.
The fate of the Mother Country,
held within a single memory.
‘Indeed. I have seen these words before, they be part of
a dialogue claimed to have passed between Taliesin and
Myrddin. Can thee tell me anything of the origin of this
particular copy?’ Renford asked.
Maelgwn held the tattered parchment in his hand
to inspect it more closely. ‘It be Taliesin’s penmanship.
A poem of which I know not. Where did thee find this?’
‘An archaeologist working at a dig at Lynn Cerrig
Bach found it and asked me to look into it for him. Art
thou sure of its writer?’ The professor restrained his

excitement as he awaited the reply. ‘It was Taliesin Pen
Beirdd?’
‘Aye, I would know his script anywhere. I have
certainly read enough of it.’
‘I knew it. I don’t know how I knew it, but I knew
it!’
Maelgwn was pleased to have made him so cheery,
but he couldn’t understand the professor’s doubt. ‘But
surely thee recognises Taliesin’s hand, Myrddin?’
‘Why doth thou think me to be this old wizard,
Maelgwn?’ He had seen the photos of Calin and Lady
Gladys, who were clearly recognisable as Brian and
Rose. Was it any more unlikely then that he might have
lived in another life and time? But as Myrddin, the
High Merlin of the druids? Although this was very
flattering, Renford thought it rather unlikely.
Maelgwn did his best to be tactful, seeing how ill at
ease the comment had made the professor. ‘Why, thou
art his very image, save quite a bit of hair and thy attire.
But as well as this, I have been considering Taliesin’s
story of thy origins and what became of thee, and it
seems to make sense that I should find thee here.’
Renford took a seat, waving for Maelgwn to do the
same. ‘Please, tell me the story of Myrddin’s origins.’
‘Surely as a historian thou art aware of the story of
Myrddin?’
‘Believe me, Maelgwn, I have read many theories, so
varied and outrageous that I would dearly love to hear
thy version of it.’
Maelgwn drank the shot of liquor, and gasped for
air. ‘Whoa, good mead.’

‘Whisky, mother’s milk.’ Renford grinned, pouring
him another as he awaited the tale.
Maelgwn accepted the refill, deciding to take this
one a little slower, and leant back in the comfortable
armchair. ‘According to Taliesin, Myrddin was begotten
by an incubus. His mother was of the Middle Kingdoms,
but his father was of the Otherworld. He was
bequeathed by the sorcerers of Vortigern, the archtraitor and one-time overlord of Britain, to appease the
spirits. The leader had fled his allies, the Saxons, and
while Vortigern attempted to build a fortress to keep
them and the might and anger of Britain at bay, all his
building materials kept vanishing. Vortigern’s wizards
told him he must find a fatherless boy whom they could
slay and sprinkle his blood on the foundations at the
site. After an extensive search, Myrddin was brought
forth to be sacrificed, having no earthly father at least.
Although only a boy, Myrddin outwitted them all. He
explained the real reason for the disappearances was due
to a subterranean pool on the building site that housed
two dragons.’
‘“Dragons” meaning?’ Renford queried, quite sure
there was no such thing as a dragon.
Maelgwn recalled Tory mentioning that very few
beasts of this type still existed in this time, so he
explained. ‘Big, burly, fire-breathing, and quite often
airborne creatures of the Otherworld.’
‘I see.’ Renford quickly poured another shot. ‘Do go
on.’
‘Vortigern had the pool drained, and as predicted
two dragons emerged. One was white, and Myrddin told

the leader that it represented the Saxons and Vortigern
himself. The other dragon was red and personified our
ancestors, the Britons, led by Aurelius Ambrosius and
my grandfather. The dragons did battle and despite the
white dragon seeming at first the more powerful, the red
dragon recovered and drove the other one back. Thus
Myrddin foretold the downfall of Vortigern and the
Saxons, and the coming to power of Ambrosius and the
native Britons. The boy was imprisoned by Vortigern for
his prophecy, but was rescued by Ambrosius when he
conquered Vortigern as predicted. Myrddin then
remained in the service of Ambrosius for many years.’
‘So what became of him after that? Some say he was
trapped by an enchantress in a tree, others claim he went
mad.’ Renford quoted from the depths of his memory:
After the Battle of Arthuret
he led a secret life,
concealing himself amid the trees
of the great wood, like a hermit.
There he remained for an eternity
with no memory of his former life or kin,
living wild with the beasts of the earth
until the time of the gathering,
when his senses would be restored.
Maelgwn sat forward in his chair, wide-eyed at the
professor’s words, feeling this confirmed his suspicions
even more. ‘This could be applied to what Taliesin
claims became of thee. For Taliesin was sent, by the
Goddess, back to the Old Land, to learn the secrets of
the ages from the Old Ones.’

‘Do you mean Atlantis?’ Renford asked.
‘Aye, Tory hast referred to it thus,’ Maelgwn recalled.
‘After he’d studied the old ways, Taliesin returned to
Britain, twenty years before I was even born. He sought
out Myrddin and found him trapped in a tree, only not
by a beautiful enchantress but by an evil sorceress named
Mahaud. She had disguised herself as an alluring wood
nymph to fool the Merlin into teaching her his craft,
which he did. Mahaud then used this knowledge to
imprison him. After breaking the enchantment, Taliesin
instructed Myrddin in the greater mysteries for a time
and together they devised a scheme to save Britain.’
‘Did he tell thee what they planned?’ The professor
was becoming very interested now as something deep
inside him seemed to stir, sending cold shivers down his
spine.
Maelgwn chuckled. ‘The thing about Taliesin be
that he never tells anyone anything, outright. He said
they went opposite ways through time and that when he
and Myrddin were reunited, the Chosen Ones would
rise and Britain would be redeemed.’ Maelgwn reached
over and took up the parchment he’d read earlier. ‘’Twas
this that got me thinking though, for I know Taliesin’s
writings art housed where no amount of digging would
uncover them. Thus, I do not think thou hast acquired
this by accident.’
‘I was beginning to think the same thing myself.’
Renford had turned white.
‘If Taliesin stayed in my time to tutor my mother
and then myself, does it not make sense, therefore, that
Myrddin came forward to tutor and guide Tory?’

‘Aye, perhaps.’
‘Then thy poem of Myrddin’s plight makes some
sense. If one considers that the “wood” spoken of refers
to life itself, and if Taliesin knew that thou had lost all
memory of thy origins, thy kindred, and thy pact with
him, then perhaps he sent this remnant of thy
conversation to jog thy memory.’
‘And thy good self also, let us not forget.’ Renford
had reserved judgement on whether or not this man was
who he claimed to be. He was either a brilliant
impostor, or the genuine article; very few people spoke
Brythanic with such ease.
‘That would answer Tory’s question as to why it was
so important that I come with her,’ Maelgwn thought
aloud.
‘I note thee speaks of Myrddin in hearsay only, how
be it then that thou recognises him in me?’
‘The truth may seem strange, sir, still it be all I have
to offer.’
‘Please Maelgwn, I will not doubt thy word. In fact,
there be very little I will doubt after this day.’
Maelgwn nodded in agreement. ‘In my youth,
Taliesin enlightened me to many different states of
being, so that I might learn the wisdom through my
own incarnations, past and future,’ he explained. ‘In
short, I met Myrddin in a dream state in the
Otherworld, where no time exists. Myrddin could
assume several different guises. There was the face of
the Merlin, which was vaguely recognisable as thee.
The appearance of a simple apple tree was one of his
favourites, until the incident involving Mahaud. But in

his mortal form,’ Maelgwn sat forward, ‘I swear, he
looked just like thee.’
Tory and Brian had worn each other out. Tory was
envious of her brother who had achieved another Dan
grade in her absence and, coincidentally, had started
tutoring others in his skills since moving to Britain.
‘Funny, hey, that we both ended up doing the same
thing?’ Tory said as they took a seat on the back step,
peeling off their protective layers and sculling down
bottles of water.
‘Yeah, only your pupils changed the course of
history. I wish I’d seen one tenth of the action you and
Maelgwn have.’
Tory was amused. ‘Spoken like a true Brockwell.’
‘So, what’s the story with this guy, was he really me?’
‘For sure, Taliesin said we emanated from the same
soul mind. All of us: you, me, Maelgwn, Taliesin, Dad,
Aunt Rose, and god knows who else. We are all twin
souls who incarnate together over many lifetimes and
are constantly drawn to each other as we are so compatible.’ Tory began to laugh, tickled by a memory.
‘What?’ Brian urged, hating to be left out of the joke.
Tory had to catch her breath before explaining. ‘You
actually tried to take advantage of me.’ She cracked up
again.
‘Get-outta here!’ Brian sprang from his seat. ‘No
way man, he wasn’t me then.’
‘Relax, I told you then you’d feel this way.’ She
squirted him with her water bottle. Brian would have
got her back but his was already empty.

Tory went quiet for a moment as Brian shook off the
attack and resumed his seat. ‘Do you remember the
championships just after we’d reached Dan grade?’
‘Oh, cruel!’ He reacted as if he was mortally
wounded by the memory.
‘What?’
‘What!’ He echoed her innocent air. ‘You’re talking
about the year you broke my leg, two days before we
competed, and then went on to victory without me,
yeah?’
‘I guess so,’ Tory concluded with a smile, relieved
that she didn’t have to reveal his previous fate.
‘So what about it?’
‘Oh nothing. How is Master Teo these days?’
‘I haven’t seen him since we moved. He and I had a
bit of a falling out, I’m afraid.’
Tory couldn’t understand this, as they’d been the
best of friends before Brian’s death. ‘What about?’
Brian stood, hesitant to answer. ‘I kind of blamed
him for your disappearance . . . if he hadn’t made the
situation so tense for you, you never would have left. I
know you said Teo wasn’t the reason, but I thought he
was.’
In a strange way Brian was right; Teo would
eventually evolve into Taliesin and he was the catalyst
behind her trip back to the Dark Age.
‘Why, what other explanation did I give for going?’
‘I don’t know, you wanted to find yourself, or some
shit like that.’ As Brian calmed a little he had to laugh
at the notion. ‘You obviously did, huh? I should have
gone with you.’

Tory raised her eyebrows. ‘Well, you certainly would
have found yourself!’
Tory woke at dawn the next day. She left Maelgwn in
bed, still sleeping. A year in the future would be a well
earned holiday from royal life for the King, time out
from the chaos to do what he pleased for a change.
Tory wandered down to the kitchen, still half asleep.
‘I want one,’ Brian whinged, when he saw her
master’s attire, displaying the Dragon on the back.
She hadn’t even heard him enter. ‘No problem. I
have friends in high places.’ Tory gulped down some juice.
Brian watched her; she’d changed somehow, but not
on the outside. Although she looked healthier and
happier than he’d ever seen her, no matter how she
tried to act the rough and tumble, outspoken rebel she’d
been before she left, his sister had acquired a certain
quiet wisdom. ‘So you’re really a queen, hey?’
‘Yeah. And you’re really a king. Let’s train.’ Tory
brushed off his admiration, she wanted to forget all
those airs and graces.
‘I was just asking.’ Brian heard the annoyance in her
voice.
‘Brian, I don’t mean to be blunt, but I really need to
forget all that for a while and just be me, Tory
Alexander. One gets so tired of being adored all the
time.’ She held her hand to her head in a dramatic pose.
‘I’m sure.’ Brian pushed her out the door.
When Maelgwn stirred to find that Tory was already up,
he wandered downstairs to the back garden where he

beheld a most idyllic scene. In harmony with the misty
countryside, streaked by early morning sunshine, Tory
and Brian practised kata. They appeared perfectly in
tune with each other and all around them.
He sat down and watched, realising how alike Tory
and her brother truly were: the way they moved, how
they spoke and appeared. Brian’s hair, half as long and
just as fair as his sister’s, was pulled tightly off his face
into a ponytail that hung down his back, as Tory’s did. It
was strange having this older, sharper version of Calin
around. It was also a little off-putting to have to share
so much of Tory’s attentions with him. The pair had
scarce been out of each other’s sight since he and Tory
arrived.
‘Hey bro.’ Brian startled him out of a daze. ‘You on
holiday or something?’ He beckoned Maelgwn to join
them.
As Maelgwn wandered over, Tory announced with
excitement, ‘Thou shalt have to get used to taking
orders from Calin for a change. Brian has agreed to take
over thy training for a while, and mine.’
Maelgwn was pleased, well aware of Brian’s skill and
status. ‘Awesome, dude!’ the King said and gave him a
high-five.
Tory rolled her eyes melodramatically. ‘How quickly
they learn.’
‘You bet, babe.’ Brian appeared pleased with himself,
assuring his brother-in-law, ‘Thou art going to reach
Dan grade by the time I get through with thee.’
Brian was making a good living out of teaching his
skills in Britain and had many promising students. The

martial arts had been a part of British culture and
heritage since the Dark Ages, akin to the Asian cultures
of Tory’s past reality. This was one of those mysterious
coincidences that had the modern historians puzzled;
how had these skills developed concurrently in two
different civilisations that supposedly didn’t come into
contact with one another until a much later date?
Tory began to wonder if other time travellers had
been the cause of similar mysteries that had puzzled her
as a student. Local folklore told of a great War Goddess
who brought the fighting skills to Britain from the
Otherworld. The fact that Tory had come from the
future must have been overlooked, misinterpreted, or
purposefully never recorded, and so another misconception had occurred.
Who could say if the similarities in language, ritual
and beliefs of vastly removed tribes in her past reality
hadn’t been caused by others like herself? Still, as
Taliesin had learnt his craft from the Atlanteans, she
supposed that the credit for the similarities did
ultimately fall to them. Without their insight and skill
her quest through time and space, whatever that truly
was, would never have been possible. Perhaps the gods
of Ancient Greek and Roman mythology were still
sitting back in Atlantis, or Olympus, moulding future
history. If so, then the like of Taliesin, Maelgwn and
herself were just pawns in a game that the gods were
constantly striving to complete.
It took the King all of a week to settle into twentiethcentury life.

Maelgwn had no fear of the technology around
him, as he had come into contact with most of it
before through Taliesin. He was even surprised a few
times by electrical items that didn’t have all the
functions he expected, as some of Taliesin’s appliances
were even more advanced. Modern inventions that he
hadn’t seen before, like the different forms of
transport, he had been told about. Still, he didn’t
much like all the noise they made or how they
polluted the air, and he had certainly lost all
enthusiasm for learning to drive. Aunt Rose had a
couple of horses which had belonged to her husband,
so Maelgwn happily took charge of grooming and
exercising them, and he rode to most places. He loved
staying at the farm and was happy not to venture far
from it as everything he desired of the modern world
was right there. Brian and Renford had built a large
shed for a gymnasium, where Brian held his classes.
Maelgwn trained with the rest of Brian’s students, and
had additional lessons after hours when his brother-inlaw could give him extra attention. All the great
literature the King could possibly desire was to be
found in Renford’s library, and Maelgwn liked to help
Rose and Renford out around the house in return for
their hospitality.
Tory and Brian took Maelgwn on a day trip to see
the sights of London, which was not at all as the King
expected. He explained he’d never actually visited the
city, as it was in Mercia – Saxon country – though he
had fought quite near there once or twice. The museum
fascinated him most of all. After spending the morning

there, the three of them wandered around the city for
hours. Some things Maelgwn found inspiring, some
wondrous, and other so-called achievements he
considered just plain sad. By the end of the day, the
noise and the pollution were beginning to take their
toll. So the three of them decided to escape reality for a
while and took solace in the cinema watching the
latest Spielberg flick, which Maelgwn absolutely
adored.
After this little adventure, however, the King was
none too keen to leave his tranquil nook in the
country; the various noises of the city made his head
ache as they put all his senses on overload. From a
young age, Maelgwn had been trained to hunt and
track, and thus his ears and mind were constantly
alerted to every little sound. He liked the quaint
country towns though, and was becoming something of
a regular at the local pub, where he, Brian and Tory
often went to play pool.
For these reasons, Tory wasn’t surprised when
Maelgwn declined a trip to Gwynedd. Brian was driving
their father to Mon to return the parchment, offer his
professional analysis, and collect his fee. Maelgwn
explained that he was happy to remember his home as
he knew it, and Renford agreed with his reasoning. The
professor had seen a photo of the valley as it had existed
in Maelgwn’s time and felt it would certainly break the
King’s heart to see Llyn Cerrig Bach in its present state
of upheaval.
In a sweet gesture, Aunt Rose decided to go along
for the weekend trip. So Tory and Maelgwn had some

time alone together to celebrate their first wedding
anniversary.

22

Dissolution

R

enford had spoken to the archaeologist who was
in charge of the dig at Llyn Cerrig Bach,
Professor Miles Thurlow, and had obtained
permission to inspect the pieces they’d uncovered at the
site, none of which dated beyond 60 AD. This was why
the parchment had been such a curious find; apart from
the fact that it hadn’t disintegrated over the centuries,
it dated to a much later period around 500 AD,
Maelgwn’s time. This was one of the reasons that
Maelgwn’s little anecdote regarding Myrddin had made
such an impact on Renford. The mysterious disappearance of his daughter had prompted the professor to
take an interest in the sacred sites of Britain that had
been used by his ancestors to some unknown end. This
kind of phantasmic research was completely against his
professional ethics, and so Renford had kept his study of
the sites and the cosmology behind them to himself.

Originally he’d sought only to find a possible
explanation for Tory’s disappearance.
After her hire car was found abandoned on the
roadside, police had questioned the locals who all
claimed to have seen a great light emanating from the
King’s Men stones the same night Tory had vanished
there. As Renford was well aware that Myrddin had
been one of the greatest curators of the sacred mysteries,
he had to wonder if this was the real reason he’d taken
to the study of the megaliths far more ardently than
expected.
Surely not, Renford assured himself, as they sped
along the road. Still, he was interested to see what the
dig at Llyn Cerrig Bach had turned up.
After dropping Aunt Rose at the hotel, Brian drove
Renford to the site. Brian followed his father to the
office, not the slightest bit interested in what was going
on. He had also seen the photo of the valley as it had
once been, and considered the upheaval around him a
crying shame.
Renford introduced himself to the woman at
reception, advising her of his appointment to see
Professor Thurlow. Brian eyed her over, and thought
about trying to chat her up, until he noticed her
wedding ring.
She was most apologetic, explaining that the
professor had been called away early this morning and
she didn’t know how long he might be detained. He
had, however, left the professor’s payment with her and
arranged for his partner, Professor Paradis, to show
Renford around.

When Professor Paradis met them at the office,
Brian was pleased to see that he was accompanied by
the most delectable looking woman he’d ever seen. ‘I
should hang out with you more often,’ he said quietly to
his father, as they watched them approach. She was
introduced to them as Professor Paradis’ daughter,
Naomi, and she wasn’t wearing a wedding band. As
they were escorted to the main dig, Brian couldn’t take
his eyes off her; he was racking his brain to think of
where he’d seen this woman before.
When Naomi politely excused herself to get back to
her work, Brian left his father to converse with Professor
Paradis and followed her. ‘So, what do you do here?’
‘I doubt very much that my work would be of any
interest to you.’ She sounded less accommodating now,
but her French accent was driving him out of his mind.
‘To the contrary,’ Brian assured her, before
delivering an intelligent insight into the valley’s history
in fluent Brythanic.
She tipped her head to him to acknowledge her
mistake. ‘Perhaps it might after all. Follow me.’
To the ends of the earth, Brian thought, admiring
her form.
‘So, Mr Alexander, what kind of work do you do?’
‘Well, Ms Paradis.’ He ever so nicely made a
mockery of her formal tone. ‘I’m a triple black belt. I
teach Tae-kwon-do and kick boxing in Oxfordshire.’
She was impressed but tried very hard not to show
it. ‘Funny, I’ve always wanted to learn, but, of course, I
never get the time.’ Naomi led him into the restoration
room, where the finds were being cleaned and housed.

Here he saw one of the goddess statues from the temple
and a wave of recognition rushed over him. This was
accompanied by a clear memory of ripping away vines
to reveal the shapely carving.
As Brian was so obviously stunned by the find,
Naomi commented, ‘She is beautiful, isn’t she?’
‘Aye, I’ve seen her before,’ he uttered, as he viewed
the statue more closely.
‘That is impossible I’m afraid, as she only came out
of the ground a few days ago. She hasn’t even been
photographed yet.’
The vision hung with Brian like a screen between
himself and reality. ‘There are more of them.’
‘How do you know?’
‘I remember them, from when I was young, I think.’
Naomi began to laugh, convinced that he was
pulling her leg. ‘Very funny.’
‘I’m serious,’ Brian insisted. ‘I have a memory like
an elephant and I distinctly remember this statue and
eight or nine others just like her in a circle.’
She stopped laughing when she saw that he was
sincere. ‘But my father estimates that this statue has
been lost underground for at least five hundred years.’
‘He must be mistaken. I’m sure I remember her.’
Naomi shook her head slowly. ‘Father is never
wrong. But should we find any others, I will be sure and
let you know.’ With this she moved to the desk to
resume her work.
Renford had been left to study the site alone for a time
as his guide had been called to the phone. He wandered

away from the action to have a puff on his pipe without
offending anyone. Finding a large rock in the shade of a
couple of huge trees, he sat down and began to chug
away on his pipe.
He hadn’t been settled but a couple of minutes
when he heard someone whispering close by. The
professor looked around, but seeing no one, decided he
was imagining things. A few moments later the
whispering began again, only louder. The professor felt
cold shivers pass over him as he recalled his daughter’s
comment regarding the ghosts in her photograph of
Llyn Cerrig Bach. He strained his ears a moment to
hear if he could make out what the whispers were
saying, but they stopped again, and he heard naught but
the sounds of the work site. ‘Don’t be so ridiculous. You
don’t even believe in ghosts,’ he mumbled to himself.
With his words, the utterances intensified. They
were garbled at first, but gradually grew louder until a
word was finally audible. Myrddin.
Professor Paradis was alarmed to see his esteemed
colleague running as fast as he was able back towards
him. ‘What is it, Professor? Is there something wrong?’
‘No,’ Renford assured him, as white as a sheet. ‘I was
just startled by a snake. I’ll be fine.’
When Renford had calmed down, he viewed the
pieces in the restoration room. Then he collected Brian
and thanked Professor Paradis and his daughter for their
time.
‘I left my number on your desk,’ Brian told Naomi.
‘So when you find those other statues, you can let me
know.’

Professor Paradis looked at his daughter curiously as
their guests departed. ‘What other statues?’
‘God knows.’ She shrugged, heading back to the
site. ‘Pay him no mind, Father. I shan’t.’
Renford said nothing of his experience to anyone, and
had no intention of mentioning it until Brian came to
see him that night.
‘I want to talk to you about something, got a
minute?’ Brian said as he stuck his head in his father’s
room.
‘Of course. What is it?’
Brian was a little backward in coming forward. ‘I
had a kind of . . . mystic experience today.’
Renford chuckled. ‘Brian, I assure you, an erection
is not a mystical experience and no, I do not have
Professor Paradis’ home phone number.’ His father went
back to the book he was reading.
‘Dad, I’m not talking about that. It’s that statue they
dug up.’
‘What about it?’ Renford was still only half with
him.
‘Have you ever taken me there before? Llyn Cerrig
Bach I mean, when I was a child perhaps?’
‘No. You stayed in Australia with your mother most
of the time. Why do you ask?’
‘Then it must have something to do with that
Brockwell guy,’ Brian thought out loud. ‘Thanks Dad.’
He moved to leave.
‘Hold on a second. Would you mind telling me what
this is all about?’

‘Don’t worry. You don’t believe in all that shit,
anyway.’
‘It would seem I’m up to my neck in “that shit”, as
you so eloquently put it,’ Renford confessed, peering
over his reading glasses.
‘Why, did something weird happen to you at the site
today?’
‘You might say that. But first, tell me about your
statue, I’m most interested.’ Renford propped himself up
in his bed to pour a whisky.
Brian grabbed himself a shot glass and sat down.
‘Well, I remember seeing that statue when it was still
standing, alongside others like it. But Naomi told me
that they’ve been five feet under for hundreds of years.
How would you explain that?’
His father just shook his head.
‘I figure it must have something to do with King
Brockwell. I mean, he was there, right? So what if I am
remembering one of my memories from when I was
him?’ Brian cringed in retrospect. ‘Shit, I’m starting to
sound like Aunt Rose.’ He drank the shot his father had
poured for him. ‘So, what say you, Professor? Do you
think there might be something in all this? Or is the
mystery that surrounds one’s life on earth only here to
mess with your head, until you die or go insane trying to
figure it out?’
Renford shrugged and answered, ‘I’m not the one to
ask, son. I think my mental faculties have finally taken
their leave.’
‘Don’t be ridiculous, Dad, what would make you say
that?’

‘I believe I ran into a couple of Tory’s ghosts today,
and it would seem Maelgwn isn’t the only one who calls
me by the name of Myrddin.’
‘That’s right, Maelgwn called you that the day we
met. What do you make of it?’
‘After today, well?’ Renford gave a shrug. ‘But you
must swear not to mention this to anyone. Especially
not your Aunt Rose, I’d never hear the end of it.’
‘Sure, but what are you going to do?’
Renford was bemused. ‘What else can I do, but find
out as much as I can about Myrddin and see if anything
gels, as with you and the statue.’
The fact that his son had had a psychic experience
scared Renford; first Rose, then Tory, and now Brian.
His wife had certainly never shown any sign of
clairvoyance, and as his sister had perceived Tory’s
situation after her disappearance it was clear that these
abilities unquestionably ran in his side of the family.
On Sunday morning, Maelgwn rose, leaving Tory to
snooze for a change. They’d been making the most of
having the place to themselves, and so hadn’t had much
sleep.
We could just stay here, settle down, have a family. If
we never return to all the responsibility, war and politics of
my time, would history really miss us? Maelgwn smiled at
his dream. Unfortunately he knew he was predestined
to return home to become this great king everyone kept
predicting he’d be, and Taliesin would surely hunt them
down before long if they failed to join him again in the
past.

Maelgwn was heading to the kitchen to make a pot
of tea when he was distracted by a knock at the front
door. Upon answering it, he was confronted by a man
who appeared not much older than himself and whose
nationality was unfamiliar to him. His reddish skin was
much darker than Maelgwn’s, and the man’s size and
build were similar to Brian’s. His eyes were very dark,
almost black, as was his hair, which was braided into a
long plait that fell all the way down his back. The man
stood out as a warrior, unlike most of the men the King
had met here, so Maelgwn figured him to be one of
Brian’s students.
‘Is Brian home?’ The visitor appeared just as
stunned by the sight of Maelgwn’s huge presence in the
doorway.
‘No, sorry. But Tory be.’
‘Tory!’ the man cried, aghast. ‘May I see her please?’
He made it sound as if he had every right to speak
with her, so Maelgwn inquired, ‘Who are you, sir?’
The man smiled broadly. ‘Tell her Teo is here.’
‘Her sensei?’ Maelgwn remembered the name.
‘The same,’ Teo confirmed, appearing a little
curious. ‘And who might you be?’
‘Maelgwn, Tory’s husband.’ He held out his hand in
greeting.
‘What?’ He pushed Maelgwn aside and stormed
down the entrance hall calling out, ‘Tory!’
It took but seconds for her to appear at the top of
the stairway, having recognised Teo’s voice the first time
he’d cried out her name. ‘Teo, what are you doing here?
Brian said –’

‘Your husband!’ He pointed a finger in Maelgwn’s
direction. ‘You got married?’
‘Well, yeah. I thought you’d be happy for me.’ Tory
was confused. She had only ever known Teo to be calm,
gentle and full of reason, but the man before her seemed
to be a completely different person. They’d had a brief
affair, so what? It had been his decision to end it, so why
all the drama? Unless, of course, their story had also
unfolded differently this time round.
‘Happy for you!’ He gripped his brow with both
hands. ‘Could I speak with you a minute please . . .
alone.’
‘Of course.’ She beckoned him towards her father’s
library, then looked to Maelgwn with a shrug. The King
appeared irked as he folded his arms. ‘Please Maelgwn, I
shall explain later. I promise.’ She ventured a kiss before
heading to the library, scratching her head. As soon as I
find out what’s going on, myself.
Just as she closed the library door, Teo was upon her.
He spun her around, backing her up to the door, his lips
and body pressed hard against her own.
What in hell’s name? Tory jabbed him in both kidneys
before thrusting him away from her. ‘Have you taken
leave of your senses, I just got through telling you I am
married!’
‘I lost my mind, alright, and my best friend. Over
you!’ he appealed in anger. ‘To discover that you were
off getting married to some . . . giant! Tory, how could
you do this to me?’
‘What is all this guilt shit, Teo! Don’t try to lay that
on me, my friend, ’cause I am over it! For starters, Brian

has told me that he realises his mistake and has every
intention of apologising. Secondly, you were the one
who decided you couldn’t teach and sleep with me at the
same time, not me! And thirdly, I would have let you all
know what had happened to me, if I’d been able to.’
‘So where were you then? Where were you that you
couldn’t pick up a phone or post a letter at least, huh?’
Good question, Tory thought, and she wasn’t sure if
she should confide in Teo in his current mood. But
surely Taliesin wasn’t referring to himself when he warned
me to beware of who I took into my confidence. Still,
something inside told her to be careful. ‘I had a bad fall
and suffered amnesia for a time,’ Tory explained without
too much of a pause, so it sounded quiet believable.
‘So that’s how you ended up married to someone
else.’ Teo’s tone became more intimate as he again tried
to approach her.
‘No, Teo. Let’s get this straight right now. I married
Maelgwn because I love him, understand?’
Tory withdrew from his grasp, yet he was not
swayed. ‘I don’t believe you, Tory. You’ve just forgotten.’
‘I forget nothing.’ She stopped and held him at
arm’s length. ‘For heaven’s sake, when we split up you
said if I found somebody else, so be it.’
‘But I didn’t mean it!’ He took hold of her hand and
held it to his heart. ‘We had something special, didn’t
we? I just presumed that in the end . . .’
‘I know you did. But you made all your own choices,
Teo, as did I.’ She slid her hand out of his grasp and
placed it on his shoulder. He appeared dazed and hurt,
but he had calmed down since she’d made contact with

him. ‘I can’t say I’m sorry, Teo, when I’m not. I have just
had the best year of my life. I had no way of knowing
what you were going through,’ she added quickly to
appease the anger that was again rising in him. ‘If it’s
any consolation, when my memory finally started to
return, I did miss you. Brian tried to contact you, but
nobody seemed to know where you were.’
Teo nodded, his head bowed low, and unexpectedly
he collapsed into tears. This caught Tory off guard; she
had never seen him cry before.
‘I don’t know what’s happening to me, Tory.’ He
sounded scared.
‘What do you mean?’
‘I don’t know, I’m not myself, am I?’ He raised his
head and stared deep into her eyes. ‘Don’t you think
I’ve changed?’
Tory’s heart sank and her stomach churned. Indeed
he had, he was so negative, so angry. ‘You’ve been in
torment, Teo. But you don’t have to feel that way
anymore. Things will sort themselves out now, you’ll
see.’ She gave him a hug.
Teo had no real kin and had been on his own all his
life. His childhood hadn’t been so good, but his interest
in the martial arts had saved him.
‘I’ve lost you, though.’ He pulled himself together,
and Tory wiped the tears from his face.
‘No you haven’t, I’m right here. You just can’t shag
me anymore.’ This got half a laugh out of him.
‘But that was the best part.’ He invited a punch and
received one. ‘Ouch, I meant to mention that before,
your strikes have improved.’

‘You’d better believe it.’
Teo stayed for a cup of tea then left peacefully. He
apologised to Maelgwn for his rudeness, but Tory knew
he did this more as a good show for her benefit than
because he was truly sorry. Teo said he would return to
see Brian in the next day or so and asked Tory to give
her brother his regards.
‘He has a darkness about him,’ Maelgwn said as they
watched Teo drive off.
‘I noticed that, too. But Teo’s been through much
worse than this little trauma, and he will get over it,
given time.’
They returned inside where Maelgwn sat Tory down
at the kitchen table. ‘He was thy lover, was he not?’ he
asked in a very civil manner, not jealous as he’d been in
the past.
‘Aye, Maelgwn, he was.’ The confession saddened
her. They had never spoken about her past, or his, still
it was bound to come up sometime. ‘The first and last,
before thee. I was going to say something about him,
but when thee never asked, I guess I put it off. I was
afraid thee would be disappointed that the Goddess had
not sent thee a virgin. And never in a million years did
I think that the two of thee would meet, or I would
have told thee sooner, I swear!’
‘Tory, calm down. I am not angry with thee, nor
disappointed. In my experience, there be no great thrill
in taking a virgin to thy bed. I would have wed thee if
thou had known a million lovers before me.’
‘Really?’ Tory sprang to her feet and hugged him. ‘I
do love thee, Maelgwn of Gwynedd.’

‘And I love thee, Tory Alexander.’ He held her face
in his hands and kissed it.
‘So what about thee? “In my experience” thee said
just now. How much experience is that exactly?’
Maelgwn’s smile was broad, his cheeks flushed. ‘Well
I was in the monastery for some time, as thou art aware.’
‘And how about before and after that . . . hmm?’
As Maelgwn seemed to be having a bit of trouble
answering, Tory thought she’d give him a hand. ‘At
what age did thee lose thy virginity then?’
‘Five and ten.’
‘Five and ten!’
‘That be late, Brockwell was only two and ten when
he lost his.’
‘I’d believe it. So who was she?’
‘Why, I do not know.’
‘I was referring to thy first love, Maelgwn, not
Brockwell’s.’
‘Oh I see. I do not know that either.’
‘Thee must have been there, Maelgwn. How could
her identity escape thee?’
‘Well, it was the feast of Beltaine, and King Catulus
was giving a huge celebration as I had rid his kingdom
of the dragon. He was into masquerades at the time, so
we all wore masks. Yet I have to confess, I am fairly sure
it was his daughter.’
‘And?’
‘And what?’ He laughed.
‘And so how many others have there been?’
‘None, that I have felt enough for to even
recognise.’ He raised Tory and seated her on the table

before him. ‘Now let us forget my conquests a moment,
I have need to ask thee something.’ He paused to look
her in the eye, suddenly serious. ‘Dost thou still love
him, Tory?’
She smiled at his concern. ‘I believe I did once,
though thinking back, it may have been more curiosity
and lust. But, he be a dear friend, always was. Please do
not judge him from what thee saw of him today, Teo be
a good and learned soul really.’
Maelgwn wasn’t so sure and he felt awkward
speaking his mind; he didn’t want to seem as if he were
condemning her friend. ‘Hast thou told him anything of
thy journey?’
‘Nay, I said I fell and got amnesia. But I did intend
to tell him the truth.’
‘I’d rather thee did not and I cannot really explain
why, only that I wish it. Please Tory, if thee would do
this for me, I would be most grateful.’
As the request seemed so important to him, she
agreed.
Six weeks later, Tory discovered that she was pregnant.
She had conceived at exactly the same time as she had
the year before. The child was due just before summer
solstice, which meant that she could give birth in the
safety of a hospital. Tory just hoped the baby was on
time.
Maelgwn was ecstatic and wasn’t prepared to accept
that any problems might arise. This was fate as he saw
it, and best of all, his wife and unborn child were
completely safe. In this time nobody knew, or would

even care that Tory carried the heir to the throne of
Gwynedd. This was the perfect sanctuary, as Taliesin
had obviously foreseen, and it proved to be yet another
reason why the Merlin had insisted that Maelgwn
accompany Tory to the twentieth century.
When the rest of the family were told the news they
were overjoyed. Tory had assumed that Brian would
tease her about becoming fat and so forth. But when he
didn’t she finally realised that he was not a child
anymore, he had matured just as she had. In fact, Brian
was rather excited at the prospect of becoming an uncle
and his delight equalled that of their father, who was
more than ready to become a grandfather. Tory laughed
as she watched Maelgwn’s enthusiasm wane when Brian
explained that in this day and age, the father was
expected to attend the birth.
‘Maelgwn hast studied medicine, thus I expect the
whole process shall interest him greatly. Be that not
right my love?’ Tory added to his discomfort.
‘Don’t let her trick you, bro,’ Brian advised. ‘She
just wants thee close so that when the pain gets really
bad, thee will be within striking distance.’
‘Now stop confusing the poor lad.’ Renford had seen
his children’s routine before; Brian and Tory often
ganged up on others in this way. ‘I was present at the
birth of these two and I assure you, Maelgwn, I would
not trade that experience for all the knowledge of the
Ancients.’
Tory and Brian appeared quite touched.
‘Indeed, I have not known a single day as joyous
since.’ Renford chuckled as the expression on his

children’s faces changed, and they both grabbed for the
closest cushion to throw at him.
It was a stormy winter’s day and everyone decided to
stay indoors. A fire was blazing in the lounge and the
whole family sat around, doing little more than drinking
tea, eating and reading.
Tory was reading out and translating a book on
childbirth to Maelgwn, while Renford silently read a
book on Myrddin that was hidden by the cover of the
latest spy novel. Aunt Rose had started knitting baby’s
clothes already and was finishing off a bonnet in blue, as
she and Maelgwn both insisted the child would be a boy.
Brian was the only one who seemed disgruntled by
the peace and quiet, and when Rose noticed she called
him over. ‘Show me your hands, Brian.’
‘Cool, are you going to read them?’ He had been
wanting her to do this ever since he’d discovered she
could read palms.
Rose usually steered away from reading the fortunes
of those she knew, afraid of seeing something tragic, but
today the mood took her. She studied her nephew’s
palms carefully and then gasped, nearly scaring Brian
out of his wits.
‘What? What is it?’ Brian asked her, ignoring the
phone that had started to ring in the hall.
‘Why thou art about to fall madly in love, my boy.’
‘Really. How do you know?’ Brian frowned, as the
ringing was starting to bother him, and nobody else
seemed to hear it. ‘Isn’t anyone going to get that?’
‘Yes, you are,’ Tory said. ‘It will be for you, anyway.’

‘Hold that thought.’ Brian made for the phone and
answered it with an air of annoyance. ‘Hello? Who?
Naomi! Yeah, I remember you.’ He sounded pleased,
closing the door to speak with her.
All eyes looked to Rose, rather amazed.
Even Renford had to laugh, knowing who the
woman on the other end of the phone was. ‘You’re
good, Rose, I have to say.’
Rose and Tory were rather rocked by his statement,
not that the professor noticed as he’d gone straight back
to his book.
‘Read mine, Aunt.’ Tory approached Rose holding
out her hands before her.
Rose sat staring at Tory’s hands for some time and
finally looked at her niece, completely stumped. ‘I can
see nothing. The lines on both your hands are exactly
the same, child. Usually right is past, left is future, so
this would indicate that for you, time has simply stood
still!’ her aunt joked, unable to explain it.
Of course, I should have known. Tory had nearly
forgotten about her immortality, though her new state
of being had made her pregnancy noticably more
comfortable this time round. Her morning sickness was
practically non-existent and she certainly wouldn’t have
to worry about dying in childbirth or the scars it might
leave. ‘Must have something to do with the time travel,’
Tory put forward as a feasible excuse.
Brian returned, appearing as white as a ghost. ‘They
found another statue, Dad.’
Renford removed his glasses as he looked to his son.
‘Oh dear.’

Tory asked what he meant, and so it was confession
time.
She suggested that perhaps Brian recalled seeing the
statues in her photos, bringing them out again for him
to look over. But once she’d sorted through them, she
realised she had only photographed one of the statues.
‘Then how did I know there was more than one?
You didn’t mention it.’
This was true and Tory confirmed that his guess that
there were eight or nine statues was exactly right; it had
to be a past-life experience.
‘They would represent the nine muses who warmed
and guarded the sacred cauldron. They each bequeathed
one of the nine metaphysical laws,’ Renford informed
them.
‘How knowledgeable of you, Father.’ Tory was surprised at the information he stored in the recesses of his
mind. But in truth, Renford had just been reading about
them in his concealed copy of the book on Myrddin.
Brian snatched up one of the other photos. ‘The
babe! Of course, that’s where I’ve seen her before.’
‘Seen who?’ Tory inquired.
‘The babe in the photo, she’s Naomi. I knew I’d
seen her before.’
Tory and Maelgwn both laughed at the news.
‘What’s so funny? It’s the truth!’
‘Then you’re in big trouble, bro.’
‘Aye, she be a spirited creature to say the very least,’
Maelgwn agreed.
‘Well, she’s invited me up there for the weekend,’ he
boasted, not at all worried about their comments.

‘That is purely so she can quiz you about the statues.
I’ll stake my life on it,’ Tory teased.
‘If she wants to know bad enough, I just might get
laid,’ Brian scoffed. ‘So, if you will all excuse me, I’m off
to pack.’
‘If Professor Paradis has you locked up, I’m not
coming to bail you out,’ Renford warned his son as he
left the room.
‘Fear not Dad, no woman can resist me.’
Tory and Maelgwn were reduced to laughter again.
‘That’s what he thought last time,’ Tory said wryly.
When Rose left the room to make supper, Renford
seized the opportunity to confide in his daughter and
her husband. He told them his own strange story
regarding the visit to Llyn Cerrig Bach, and of the
whispering voices he’d heard.
Tory explained that she too had heard the voices,
however their message to her, if any, had not been
audible. Her words proved to Renford that he was not
going mad, but this didn’t really make him feel better. If
anything, he felt worse, as he couldn’t write the
experience off to senility.
‘It may not have been ghosts,’ Maelgwn suggested.
‘It could have been the trees.’
‘The trees!’ the professor repeated, sounding even
more horrified.
‘Aye. As a shaman, Myrddin had a great
understanding and communication with all forms of
life, especially trees.’
Renford knew his son-in-law’s comment to be in
accord with what he’d read of the Merlin. This was the

one thing about Myrddin that Renford could identify
with; he did love his native woodland.
Renford resolved to spend more time in the
countryside becoming attuned to nature once the
warmer weather returned. Until then he would study all
the sites associated with the Merlin, like Dinas Emrys.
This was where the story of the boy Myrddin and
Vortigern had unfolded. Myrddin reportedly lay
sleeping in a cave at this site, with the Thirteen
Treasures of Britain. It was said he awaited a particular
person, a youth with blue eyes and golden hair. When
this youth approached the cave, a bell would ring. A
black dog with yellow eyes would appear and lead the
youth to the spot where the cave would be revealed to
him. Apparently all false seekers who pursued the
treasure were turned from the quest by storms or sinister
omens.
After patching things up between them, Brian and Teo
had taken to hanging out together as they did before
Tory’s disappearance. Yet the friendship Tory once
shared with Teo hadn’t been the same since he’d
learned of her pregnancy. Words seldom passed between
Teo and Maelgwn. They were both learned men of high
spiritual awareness and she had hoped they might get
over it. Judging from the way they’d been avoiding each
other, however, she supposed not.
Fortunately Teo was not hanging around as much as
he might have, as Brian had become infatuated with
Naomi who lived halfway across the country on
Anglesey. Brian made the trip up through the snow

covered countryside nearly every weekend to visit her
and help out at the site.
By the end of winter Tory looked like a beach ball,
yet wore her bundle very well. The extra weight didn’t
bother her in the least. She was still practising kata to
the best of her capability and steered away from the
more strenuous exercises. She was much more accepting
of her pregnancy this time, and soothed the child in her
swollen belly with soft ambient music every day. The
tragic loss of her last child still haunted her, so she made
damn sure this child knew that it was wanted and well
loved.
Maelgwn was surprised at how much he enjoyed
helping Tory prepare for the coming of their babe, and
attending birthing classes with her had been a real
education for him. He was not at all afraid of being
present at the birth anymore, feeling himself well
prepared for the event.
As the months rushed by them, Maelgwn’s
reluctance to leave the twentieth century intensified.
Sure the air was more polluted here, modern Britain was
crowded, chaotic and noisy, but the amount of
information that was at his disposal was phenomenal.
The evening television news was an education in itself.
He imagined he could spend his whole life studying and
not even make a hole in the amount of material that
was available. There were texts on subjects he had never
even heard of: scientific theories and technologies,
countries and cultures, the list was endless. He did not
miss his kingdom and his position at all – were it not for
his loyal subjects, the King felt he would never return.

The baby’s due date came and went and Tory was
beginning to despair, afraid she’d created a delay by her
very fear of it. She wished now that she’d maintained
the same mind as Maelgwn who believed that nothing
would go wrong. Instead, the household was thrown
into an uproar come the stroke of midnight that marked
the eve of summer solstice, leaving Tory but twenty-four
hours to have the child, recover, and make it to the
stones.
While she was rushed to the hospital, a million
thoughts raced through her mind. I haven’t run into
Taliesin here, as he said I might. Perhaps this child was the
only real reason I had to return here, and if so, then surely
the birth shall be over in no time.
Her illusion of a quick and easy birth was shattered
when eighteen hours later she found herself still sweating it out. ‘Maelgwn, thee must return without me.’
‘Nay, my love, I am staying right here.’ He kissed
her hand that gripped his so tightly.
‘Gwynedd cannot afford to lose thee,’ she reasoned
with him, so exhausted she could barely speak.
‘And I cannot afford to lose thee.’ Maelgwn
tightened his grip.
‘Thee will not. Taliesin said his younger self was to
be found here, in the twentieth century. Therefore, I can
seek him out and instruct him to prepare for this
instance. So in many years from now, after he has
travelled to the Old Land and returned to Gwynedd to
rewrite history by taking me back there, he will know
that I have been detained in labour and devise a means
for my return. Before we left, Taliesin hinted that a

situation might arise causing me to seek him out, and I
am guessing that he knew this would happen all along.
Which, of course, he must, as this is all in his distant
past.’
‘But what if he dost not? Nay Tory, I shall not risk
it.’
‘Listen to me, Taliesin said I sought him out and told
him of my destiny, remember?’ Tory finally recalled the
conversation with Taliesin that had been eluding her for
hours. ‘If I never seek him, then how shall he know? It
was meant to happen this way, Maelgwn, I am sure of it.
I shall join thee in the past in but a few hours.’ Yet Tory
knew that in her reality she faced a whole year without
him, and what if she proved wrong in her presumption?
I shall find a way back, no matter what.
Maelgwn bowed his head, disappointed that he
would miss the first year of his child’s life and even the
chance to glimpse his babe before departing. ‘I will not
leave the two of thee here unprotected.’
‘Maelgwn, besides my own skills, I have Brian and
Teo.’
‘Nay! Swear to me, Tory, that thee will not let Teo
near our child.’
Tory was alarmed by the malice he still held towards
Teo, but she nodded faintly. ‘I promise.’
‘Or near thee,’ Maelgwn added in a much softer
tone.
‘Beholden to thee alone until death do us part, that
be what I vowed, Maelgwn.’ She held his face; the pain
in her heart was more overwhelming than that which
emanated through her body. ‘Fear not, I will find thee.’

Although the staff in attendance could not
understand the language the couple were speaking, they
were all close to tears as they witnessed the lovers’
parting kiss.
Maelgwn said his farewells to his kin in the waiting
room. It wasn’t easy to leave the quiet family life, the
like of which the King knew he would never see again.
Renford, in particular, was sorry to see him go, and
although he understood that his son-in-law was obliged
to do so, there was a tear in his eye as he hugged the
huge King. ‘May God speed thee, son.’
‘And may the Goddess protect thee, Professor, until
next we meet.’ As Renford appeared doubtful, Maelgwn
threw his arms wide to add, ‘Anything be possible.’
Brian drove Maelgwn to the stones in silence. He
didn’t know what he could say that might ease the
torment his friend was going through.
It was very close to midnight by the time they
arrived, and Maelgwn was a bundle of nerves. He hadn’t
felt so torn in all his days; it still wasn’t too late for him
to change his mind and stay with her.
‘Maelgwn, I know you are worried, but you must
realise by now that I would never let anything happen
to Tory or your child. So please, consider the fate of
Britain first,’ Brian said, as it was his task to see that the
King returned.
‘I am tired of putting my country first, why must it
always come before me!’
A crack of thunder startled them both and they
looked up to witness the storm cloud unfolding
overhead.

‘Holy shit!’ Brian began to back out of the circle.
No sooner had he cleared it than a bolt of lightning
shot from the clouds and struck the King’s Stone,
causing the mist to rise.
‘Brian, swear to me that thee shall see my wife and
child safely here next summer solstice.’
‘I swear it to thee, Maelgwn,’ Brian announced. The
mist became too bright for him to see the King
anymore. ‘I shall miss thee, bro.’
Maelgwn bowed to him. The Prince watched as his
brother-in-law became obscured by the haze, then a
shape began to emerge from within the trunk of the tree
behind Brian. A familiar face took form – blazing red in
colour, it stood out in the darkness. The sound of
sinister laughter reached the King’s ears, yet Brian
appeared totally unaware of it.
No! It was too late to turn back. ‘Brian, be –’
Maelgwn tried to yell out a warning but the haze was
sucked up into the sky, the King’s body and soul along
with it.
‘Where be Tory? Maelgwn, wake up, please!’
The King’s eyes opened to see Brockwell and his
other knights hovering over him.
‘Where be Tory?’ Brockwell repeated.
‘Give him room.’ Taliesin pushed the knights aside
and knelt beside the King.
When the Merlin was within range, Maelgwn
clutched him tightly by his robe. ‘Did she find thee?’
‘Aye, that she did. Rest assured, all be going to
plan.’ Taliesin patted the King’s shoulder.

Maelgwn breathed a sigh of relief then became
tense again. ‘Did thee know Mahaud was in the future
with her?’ The King sat upright to get his bearings and
pointed. ‘She emerged from that tree and made herself
known to me, just as it was too late to turn back.’
The Merlin recognised it to be an elder tree, which
in the sacred alphabet of the tree calendar was called
Ruis. This was akin to the thirteenth month of the year,
which was attributed to the Dark Queen of fate and the
inevitable. Cute, Mahaud.
Taliesin frowned and answered, ‘Nay, Maelgwn, this
be unexpected and unfortunate. The Goddess used her
powers to assist Myrddin to suppress his great knowledge for a time, in the hope of preventing the witch
from finding him. Did thee find Myrddin?’
‘Aye, but as thou hast said, he remembers naught.’
Maelgwn was frantic. ‘Send me back, I must protect
Tory and our child.’
‘Child!’ All present looked at their King amazed;
he’d only been gone an hour.
‘Tory hast given birth?’ Katren was eager to hear
how she fared.
‘Aye.’ Everything had happened so quickly that
Maelgwn hadn’t really had time to consider that he was,
most likely, a father by now.
‘I am impressed.’ Calin helped Maelgwn to his feet.
‘Congratulations.’
‘So was it a boy or a girl?’ Katren asked.
‘Why, I do not know.’ Maelgwn was immediately
saddened by the thought of missing the birth. ‘’Twas a
boy, I think.’

‘Indeed! A strong, healthy boy and he enters this
world as we speak,’ Taliesin announced, raising everyone’s spirits.
But Maelgwn’s attention wasn’t distracted for long.
‘Taliesin, I have to warn them.’
‘Please everyone, calm down. I cannot send thee
back, the channel hast passed until the next hour.’ The
Merlin wasn’t even sure he could raise the energy to do
it then, as he was already exhausted from completing
the feat twice in as many hours. ‘Myrddin will find
himself.’
‘And what if he dost not? There must be a way I can
speak to Tory.’
‘Rest a moment,’ Taliesin advised him. ‘There be
one thing we might try.’

23

Where is
Home?

M

aelgwn and Aunt Rose’s prediction proved to
be right. After twenty-four hours in labour,
Tory gave birth to a boy whom she named
Rhun. He was in perfect health and of a fair size,
weighing in at seven pounds. Rhun had his father’s
colouring, and masses of dark hair already covered his
tiny head. Tory and her family fell madly in love with
him at once.
Brian returned to the hospital by morning, shaken
by what he’d seen. Still, he could confidently tell Tory
that Maelgwn had returned, if not without much
procrastination. Brian held his little nephew in his arms
and told Tory of his vow to Maelgwn and how
determined he was to keep it.

‘He also insisted I keep Teo away from Rhun,’ she
informed her brother.
Brian wasn’t at all surprised to hear this, knowing all
too well how the two felt about each other. For months
he had listened to Teo going on about what he believed
was Tory’s betrayal of him. Although he was Brian’s best
friend, there was nothing Teo could say about Maelgwn
that could tarnish the respect Brian felt for the King.
‘Well, Teo doesn’t know who your father truly is,’ Brian
said to the babe he held. ‘Nor does he know of the part
your parents have to play in history. So if the Dragon
wants Teo kept away from you, we shall just have to
oblige him, won’t we?’
‘Do you think he’s changed? Teo, I mean. You know
him better than anyone,’ Tory asked.
‘Well, he claims you hurt him badly,’ Brian began.
‘But such melodrama isn’t like Teo at all. Even if your
marriage had hurt him, the Teo I used to know would
have been happy for you. I mean, what happened to
“our friendship is the most important thing”?’
‘That’s exactly what I thought.’ Tory didn’t know
what to make of it. ‘So when am I going to meet this
girl of yours?’ Tory gently took her child, smiling at him
in adoration.
‘This weekend. I invited her down to see the baby.
Typical woman, she went all gooey on me, she loves kids
apparently. I thought it was a good excuse to get her away
from her father and the dig for more than five minutes.’
‘You’ve spent just about every weekend this winter
up at the dig, and you still haven’t nailed her in all that
time?’ Tory pretended to be horrified.

‘Of course I have.’
But Tory knew Katren better than that. ‘Liar.’
‘Alright, I didn’t. Something about her keeps
bringing out the gentleman in me,’ he explained, taking
up Rhun’s tiny hands. ‘But this weekend is going to be
different, because this little guy is going to get Naomi’s
maternal juices flowing for me. Aren’t you mate?’
Tory chuckled; Brian was a lot smarter than
Brockwell. ‘You just might be right there.’
Tory and Rhun went home sooner than expected. The
doctors had been so amazed by the speed of her recovery
that Tory thought she’d better leave before they started
asking questions.
Rhun was proving to be exceptionally resilient as
well. The nurses in the maternity ward were sad to see
him go as he was such a placid, happy baby, who was
calm even amongst the other screaming babies in their
care.
Within a few days of their arrival home, Tory began
to notice how Rhun’s moods reflected her own.
Whenever she started to miss Maelgwn, no matter how
far she was from the baby, Rhun inevitably started to
cry. This was added incentive to put her love to the
back of her mind and concentrate on finding the elusive
Taliesin. This was going to prove a challenge, as Tory
knew the dig on Mon had yet to uncover the temple
altar. She wasn’t too keen to tell them about it either, as
they would surely want to cart it off to a museum somewhere. Most likely this would render the relic useless
and close yet another doorway to the Otherworld

forever. In any case, Tory decided it was about time she
went up and had a snoop around the site herself. Naomi
was expected tomorrow, so Tory would ask her
permission. Perhaps the spirits at the site could tell her
of Taliesin’s whereabouts.
Naomi still hadn’t arrived by late Saturday afternoon,
and Brian began to worry that something might have
happened to her. He appealed to Rose to ask her spirits
if they knew anything. She explained that they could
see no immediate tragedy, but they did indicate a
surprise.
‘Well, I hope it’s of a hot and sweaty nature,’ Brian
remarked, as the sound of a car coming down the drive
sent him racing out the front door.
Brian was surprised to see a large black Mercedes
four-wheel drive, with black tinted windows. This was
not Naomi’s car, nor her father’s, but it was a beauty.
Naomi sprang out of the passenger seat and wrapped
her arms around him. ‘Sorry I’m so late, Miles held me
up.’
‘Miles who?’ Brian became immediately jealous.
‘Thurlow, my father’s partner. He arrived back from
the Azores a couple of days ago, and when he heard I
was coming down to Professor Alexander’s place he
offered to drive me. I hope you don’t mind?’
‘Mind, why should I mind?’ Brian tried to sound
pleased that they again had a chaperone.
The professor jumped out and shook Brian’s hand.
‘Sorry to intrude like this, but I needed to speak with
your father about the implications of his analysis.’ Miles

noted Brian appeared somewhat overwhelmed. ‘Is there
something wrong?’
Although Professor Thurlow was not as large as
Maelgwn, and appeared perhaps a few years older, if it
weren’t for the glasses and the ponytail they could be
one and the same. This is going to be a surprise alright!
‘Sorry, Professor, you just look a lot like my sister’s
husband, a hell of a lot!’
‘Tory!’ Brian bolted down the hall and into the
lounge. ‘I think you’d better prepare yourself for a shock.’
‘Do you want to be more specific?’ Tory marked her
place in the book she was reading and looked up at him.
‘Professor Thurlow is here to see Dad,’ he explained,
gaining his father’s attention also. ‘But he looks more
like Maelgwn to me.’
‘Ha-ha.’ Tory went back to her reading.
‘Hello?’ Naomi called from the front door.
Brian, becoming flustered, disappeared again to
retrieve Naomi. He guided her and her companion
through to the lounge.
Tory didn’t look up immediately as she wanted to
finish the sentence she was reading.
‘Tory,’ her father urged.
She raised her eyes and nearly had a stroke. By the
Goddess!
Miles held out his hand to greet her. ‘Miles
Thurlow, pleased to meet you.’
He smiled and Tory’s heart leapt into her throat.
‘How do you do.’ After quickly shaking his hand, she
greeted Naomi and then excused herself on the premise
that she had to check on the baby.

She raced to the solace of her room and closed the
door behind her. ‘Holy shit!’ she exclaimed, horrified by
the connotations of his presence here. ‘Please God let
me be mistaken about this.’ Maelgwn had been gone
less than a week and she missed him like crazy already.
Rhun sensed his mother’s dismay and started to cry.
‘Hush now!’ She took Rhun in her arms to comfort
him. ‘It was just a bit of a scare, that’s all. We’re okay.’
She comforted the baby, rocking him to and fro.
Hearing the child’s cries and knowing that Tory
must also be upset, Brian knocked and entered. ‘I tried
to warn you.’
‘I know, thanks.’
As she didn’t seem to want to talk about it, Brian
edged around the subject. ‘Well then, are you going to
bring Rhun downstairs so he can go to work on my
girlfriend, or what?’
Tory smiled faintly. Something told her she should
keep the child out of Miles’ sight, herself too for that
matter. ‘I’ll tell you what, you bring Naomi up here to
see him and I’ll go and workout for a while, okay?’
‘Alright!’ He landed a big kiss on her cheek. ‘Good
call.’
‘Just take good care –’
‘Tory? It goes without saying. Don’t worry about a
thing.’ He handed Tory her towel as he guided her out
the door. ‘Do me another favour, send Naomi up on
your way past.’
Renford found it difficult to answer all of Professor
Thurlow’s questions. He was put off by the fact that he

looked so much like his son-in-law, yet he lacked
Maelgwn’s broad-minded understanding.
‘So why has the parchment not perished by now?’
Miles queried.
‘I have no answer for that. Yet I can assure you, it’s
not a fake. I had it concisely dated.’
Miles didn’t appear satisfied or completely convinced, as he mulled over Renford’s answer. ‘I also
wanted to ask about your son’s knowledge of the statues.
Do you know anything about that?’
Renford was again hesitant to reply. ‘I am a seeker of
facts myself, Miles, but some things, I’ve come to
realise, defy explanation. Brian claims he remembers
seeing them standing, which has led most in this family
to believe it was a past-life memory. For, as you know,
the relics have been buried for several centuries.’
Renford poured them a whisky, and Miles thought
perhaps the professor had already had one too many.
But then the whole family seemed a bit strange; what
did it take to get a straight, logical answer around here?
Dinner that evening proved rather interesting. Brian
had obviously had his way with Naomi as they were all
smiles for each other. Thus with romance in the air,
Tory sat as far away from Miles as possible. She’d
convinced herself that she was not the slightest bit
interested in getting to know him, and resolved to avoid
him if she could. Tory would have taken dinner in her
room but her family wouldn’t hear of it.
To Miles, Tory seemed the sanest of the clan, and
her beauty hadn’t escaped his attention either. This led

him to wonder where and who the father of her child
was, and Naomi conveniently inquired for him.
‘Is your husband not here?’ Brian had told her that
his sister and her husband were staying at the house, yet
there was no place set for him.
‘He has been called away on business, I’m afraid.’
‘What kind of work does he do?’ Miles asked.
‘He works for the government,’ Tory responded
without so much as a second’s thought, astounding
those in the room who knew the truth with her quick
retort.
‘Really, in what field?’
‘That, Professor Thurlow, is on a need-to-know basis
and you don’t need to know. In truth, where he goes
and what he does is a mystery to me most of the time.’
‘What, are you saying he’s secret service?’ Miles
smiled, half disbelieving her.
Tory merely shrugged in response, turning her
attention to the wonderful meal before her, and Miles
was again left to ponder what it was they were all
hiding.
As soon as dessert was finished, Renford bade them
all goodnight. Tory and Naomi helped Rose in the
kitchen, leaving Miles to question Brian about the
statues.
‘Look, I’m not saying I saw them in a past life. All
I’m saying is that I recollect seeing them covered in
vines. When that was exactly, I don’t claim to know, I
just remember I was young, say six or seven at the time.’
‘And you can’t tell me anymore about the site, you
don’t remember anything else?’

‘Sorry.’ Brian shook his head. ‘Tory’s the one you
should be asking, she’s the expert on Llyn Cerrig Bach.’
Miles seemed very interested to hear this. ‘Why is
that?’
Brian suddenly realised he’d almost put his foot in
it. ‘Well, she’s the real psychic of the family.’ He then
laughed, which led Miles to wonder if he was joking.
Tory and Naomi returned with a fresh pot of coffee,
and Brian pulled a large joint from his pocket.
‘Anybody interested?’ He looked up to catch
Naomi’s reaction and was surprised to find it quite
agreeable.
‘I have been known to indulge.’ She sat down beside
him.
‘I don’t think I should, Brian, with the baby and all,
besides I’m kind of tired.’ Tory tried to graciously
decline.
‘Oh come on, Tory, you piker. One joint isn’t going
to hurt. We haven’t got blasted together in ages,’ Brian
appealed.
Tory rolled her eyes, twisting her arm up behind her
back. ‘Okay.’ She took her seat again.
Brian then looked at Miles, who laughed at the
suggestion. ‘I haven’t smoked grass since the seventies,
Brian.’
‘Then you can have a flashback,’ Brian insisted,
lighting up and passing the joint to the professor.
‘Really I . . .’ Miles observed the joint smoking away
before his eyes. ‘Well, perhaps just a small toke.’ Maybe
if he played along, someone might open up and start
talking sense.

As soon as Naomi got the giggles, Brian carted her
away to his room. Tory, not wanting to be left alone
with Miles, rose to leave also.
‘I wonder if I might talk with you a moment?’ Miles
reached out to take hold of her hand as she moved past
him.
‘What about?’ She shrank from his touch.
‘Sorry.’ He’d obviously made her feel ill at ease and
couldn’t figure out why he’d reached for her in the first
place; he was normally much more reserved. ‘I just
wanted to ask you about Llyn Cerrig Bach. I spoke to
Brian about it earlier and he suggested I talk to you. He
claimed you were psychic, but I wasn’t sure if I should
take him seriously or not.’
Thanks a lot bro! Tory could just imagine how a
truthful response would grab Miles. ‘I take it you don’t
believe in that sort of thing, Professor?’
He looked up at her, wondering what was causing
her obvious dislike of him. ‘Tory, you can call me Miles.’
‘I think “Professor” suits you better.’ Tory kept her
distance, almost as if she were afraid of him.
‘Have you got something against me because I look
like your husband?’
Tory was alarmed. ‘Who told you that?’
‘Brian,’ they both announced at once. Brilliant,
Tory thought, with a shake of her head.
‘Look Tory, whatever the problem is, I’m truly sorry.
I just want to know if there is anything else you can tell
me about the site, that’s all.’
Tory looked at him blankly, knowing damn well he
wasn’t going to take anything she said seriously.

‘Professor, I could tell you a thing or two about the
temple in the valley, but I can’t give you a logical
explanation for how I know what I do.’
Miles was getting a bit fed up with these incoherent
answers. ‘That’s what Brian said. What do you mean
exactly? Were you there in a past life too?’
His tone was extremely patronising in Tory’s
opinion, thus hers became equally so. ‘No, actually I
wandered into the Otherworld and the fairies took me
back to the year five hundred, so I could have a look
around for myself.’ She smiled at him ever so sweetly.
Miles tried to calm himself, not wanting to seem
rude. ‘Alright, I apologise. Please, just tell me, do you
claim to be psychic or not?’
‘I don’t claim to be anything. I am, however,
chosen,’ Tory answered, using ‘Taliesin tactics’, in the
hope he’d get frustrated and give up.
‘Chosen for what?’
‘Whatever.’ She shrugged. ‘Look, I don’t have all
the answers, Professor. If I did I’d be in seventh heaven.
However,’ Tory was struck by a thought. ‘I will say this,
you haven’t found the site’s greatest treasure.’ Tory
smiled at her own brilliance; she would get them to
unearth the gateway for her.
‘How do you know?’ Miles was exhausted with the
conversation and wondered why he’d even bothered
asking; she was only going to serve him another riddle.
‘Professor, let’s pretend for a moment that you’re not
a sceptic. Then you would ask, what is it?’ Tory
lightened up a little. He’d obviously never even considered the possibility of the greater mysteries, and so

would find it hard to accept the suggestion of psychic
ability unless she could prove it.
‘Alright. What is it?’ Miles slouched back in his
chair to finish his cold cup of coffee.
‘Dig in the centre of the circle of nine and there you
will find a large stone altar that bears the Celtic cross.’
Miles sat forward in his seat, more interested, but Tory
continued before he could start asking questions.
‘However, you must not remove the tablet from where it
is unearthed, until I have seen it, agreed?’
‘Why?’
‘Agreed?’ Tory was adamant. ‘If I cannot trust you,
Professor, I shall tell you naught. And believe me, you
know little of the toys with which you play.’
Miles was awestruck, as Tory’s entire presence
appeared to change. She seemed larger somehow, more
powerful. ‘I agree. If we find it, I will call you at once.’
‘When you find it, Professor. If you are always so
afraid to commit yourself, I’m surprised you have ever
obtained anything you sought,’ Tory said in jest.
‘No offence, but my sources are usually a little bit
more concrete.’
‘No offence to you, but they are usually the vaguest
kind of reference, being entirely derived from nothing
more than physical understanding.’
Miles laughed at the way their conversation was
progressing. ‘Is this where we start talking about life, the
universe and everything?’ He decided it was the grass
causing the peculiar feeling he had in his stomach, and
the illusion that Tory seemed to glow like an angel.
Yeah, I’m stoned alright.

‘No, this is where I bid you a goodnight, sir.’ Tory
made her way to the door. ‘And don’t forget, you
promised.’
Come Sunday morning, Tory decided to make herself
scarce to avoid answering any more of Professor
Thurlow’s questions, at least until he’d found the altar
and was more accepting of her abilities. She had also
felt the need for some fresh air, so she packed a picnic
lunch, a rug, the baby’s things, and a couple of good
books in her backpack and, with Rhun resting
comfortably in a pouch against her chest, she made her
way across the fields.
It was a fine day and a cool soft breeze was blowing.
As Tory walked along relishing the great outdoors, she
thought about Miles Thurlow and wondered how he
could possibly be a future incarnation of Maelgwn. Her
husband was certainly more broad-minded than the
professor, and unquestionably more developed physically.
Perhaps when a soul incarnated, its progression didn’t
necessarily develop akin to that of human civilisation.
From what she could surmise this theory was certainly
true of Taliesin; he’d been Teo in the twentieth century
long before he’d become Gwion Bach in the fifth.
Tory ambled on with no real destination in mind
but when she came to the King’s Men stones, she
figured it was as good a place as any to settle in the
shade of a tree and read. She found it comforting to
consider that Maelgwn was in this very spot awaiting
their return home, and in a sense she felt closer to him
here.

Tory got lost in the silent bliss of a book for some
time, before she became aware of footsteps. She looked
up to see Teo, who appeared as if he’d just been to hell
and back. How on earth?
‘I thought I might find you here,’ Teo explained
with a smile.
Odd, Tory thought, when I didn’t even realise I was
coming here myself.
‘Hey, you look great!’ He took a seat beside her and
planted a kiss on her cheek.
‘Well thank you, kind sir. I wish I could say the
same. What happened to you?’
‘Saturday night.’ He flopped back onto the large rug,
his shirt falling open to expose his smooth, bronzed,
muscular torso.
‘Do you end up in this state every weekend?’ Tory
didn’t mean to sound condescending, but it was rather
disheartening to see her former sensei in such a decrepit
state.
He laughed. ‘Every weekend? Every night more
like,’ he explained, holding his head that clearly pained
him. ‘It’s got to stop, I know.’
‘Then just don’t do it! Self-inflicted, no mercy.’
‘I know, I know.’ Teo sat back up, not looking at
Tory. ‘But I’m finding it hard to get back on track, and
I’m in no way blaming you for that,’ he said before she
could get the wrong impression. ‘The simple truth of it
is, I just can’t seem to get you out of my system.’ He
turned his dark eyes to Tory to catch her reaction.
‘I don’t know what I can do,’ Tory said, wishing she
could somehow take the memories back; she couldn’t

stand to see him so dispirited. But when he leaned
across to kiss her, Tory stood up quickly. ‘Damn it, Teo.’
He held his palms up, motioning his surrender. ‘I’m
sorry.’
‘No you’re not,’ Tory insisted, hands on hips.
‘You’re right. I’m not,’ he grinned, trying to make
light of it.
‘If you think I’m going to be dipping and dodging
your advances the whole time Maelgwn’s away, you’ve
got another thing coming, mate. I could certainly whip
your arse in its present state, so don’t push me!’
‘I can’t help myself,’ he replied, looking defenceless.
‘In that case, I can’t see you anymore.’ Tory
crouched down and began to pack up.
Teo reached out and clutched her right wrist tightly.
‘No, Tory. I’m truly sorry, I am.’
Tory wrenched her arm away from him, far from
convinced.
‘Even when we weren’t lovers, I used to flirt with
you. I’m just having trouble adjusting to this no
affection bit, but I’ll try. I will.’
His plea seemed heartfelt and even a little fearful.
Tory realised she couldn’t abandon Teo just because he
was going through a rough time, for which she had been
the catalyst. ‘I want to stand by you, Teo, because you
are my good friend, and I love you. But you always make
it so damn difficult for me.’
‘I know I do,’ he admitted. ‘Please, couldn’t we just
start over? I’ll act like a long-lost brother, if you would
regard me as such again. I really miss the three of us,
Tory. I miss being part of the family. I guess the reason I

was so pissed off at Maelgwn was because he’d taken my
place.’
‘How can you say that?’ Tory sounded hurt. ‘You
were, are, and always will be, an integral part of my life.
And not just this life, I’m talking forever!’ She
wandered a little way from him, as a tear escaped her
eye; she missed Taliesin, too. ‘You really have no idea.’
Teo was surprised by this. He hadn’t seen Tory so
upset since the day they’d decided to stop seeing each
other, and he stood to calm her. ‘Tory? I didn’t mean –’
Tory turned abruptly and grabbed hold of his shirt. ‘I
want the real you back! I know that sweet, wise and
understanding guy I loved is in there somewhere, and I
want to see him, I miss him.’ She let go, having
expended her frustration.
‘From now on, I promise. Just one more chance.’
‘Alright,’ she decided after much procrastination,
and Rhun at once began to cry. This struck Tory as
unusual as she almost always sensed when Rhun wanted
something, long before he’d have to cry for it.
When she settled her child easily and found he
wanted nothing bar her attention, she decided she
should be very wary where Teo was concerned. But as
the afternoon sky was fast clouding over, she took him
up on the offer of a lift home and kept her suspicions to
herself.
Over the next couple of months, Brian, Tory and Teo
spent much time together focusing on their art, each
with their own objective. Brian had students approaching grading, including Tory. Teo, having given up his

vice, had been invited by the family to take up
residence in the gym, as he practically lived there
anyway. They had offered him a room in the house but
he had insisted that the spare room in the gym was fine.
Tory thought it was important for Teo to feel part of the
family again if he was to overcome the negativity that
seemed to overshadow his every thought.
A few weeks of country life and the constant
familiar company of the Alexander clan made Teo feel a
new man. Able to maintain his focus with greater ease,
Teo was happy assisting Tory in her preparation for the
next Dan grade and he seemed almost back to his old
self. At times he abused his privilege as her teacher, but
it was usually in jest and no more than any other male
might have done. Tory didn’t find Teo’s flirting to be
seriously offensive and had started to relax in his
company, every so often spying a glimpse of Taliesin’s
brilliance in him. However, he chose to ignore Rhun
most of the time, just as he had Maelgwn. This
unfortunately seemed to indicate that the malice Teo
felt for her husband was still very much alive, and
though Teo never spoke of his feelings for her anymore,
Tory knew they still underlay everything he did.

24

The Visit

O

n the day marking her second wedding
anniversary, Tory finally heard from Miles about
the altar. He apologised for taking so long to
contact her, explaining he’d been tied up with other
projects.
‘You didn’t take me seriously, did you Professor?’
Tory saw straight through him, even with a telephone
line between them.
‘No, I didn’t, regrettably. Yet, as fate would have it,
we’ve stumbled upon your altar anyway. And it’s just as
you described,’ he was excited to confirm.
‘Indeed,’ Tory said, not in the least surprised. ‘You
haven’t moved it?’
‘No.’ He sounded amused by the notion. ‘I think
we’ll need more equipment.’
‘Please Miles, promise you won’t touch it until I get
there.’

‘That was the deal,’ he confirmed, a smile reflecting
in his voice; he was glad for an excuse to see her again.
‘Good. I’ll catch a ride up with Brian tomorrow.’
Just one problem; Brian was planning a dirty
weekend, and so Naomi was driving down to visit him
instead.
‘Now what am I going to do,’ she wondered, as she
didn’t want to be left alone with Miles for any length of
time.
‘Well you can still borrow my car. It will do you
good to get away for the weekend.’ Brian totally misconstrued her woes. ‘Between Naomi and Aunt Rose,
I’m sure Rhun will be well cared for.’
‘It’s not that.’
‘You fancy him, don’t you, Tory? You think he’s
Maelgwn.’
‘I don’t know what I think. Though the professor
looks a lot like Maelgwn, they don’t seem the same in
other respects. You hang around at the site all the time,
haven’t you gotten to know him at all?’
‘Well, to tell you the truth, Naomi and I haven’t
been spending as much time at the dig of late,’ Brian
was pleased to say. ‘And Thurlow travels a lot, he never
seems to be there. Look, if he bothers you so much, you
could always take Teo with you,’ he suggested, tongue in
cheek.
‘Yes, I can just imagine how they would take to each
other.’
‘I don’t see what you’re so worried about, if Thurlow
gets out of line just hit him.’ Brian dangled his car keys
before her eyes, and Tory grabbed hold of them to stop

the annoying noise he was making. ‘So why are you
going up there, anyhow?’
‘I just want to have a look around. I’ll let you know
if I discover anything of interest.’
Tory reached Llyn Cerrig Bach that afternoon. There
was very little resemblance between the valley she
drove through and the one she remembered, and
although the road to the dig ran the same course as the
old dirt track, much of the fairy wood had unfortunately
disappeared.
She was pleased Maelgwn hadn’t visited Gwynedd
during his stay; she had taken a detour to see the
remains of the citadel at Degannwy and found nothing
but the mound on which it had been built. Where the
great house at Aberffraw had once stood on Anglesey,
as home to the Kings of Gwynedd for generations, there
was but one small cottage on a vast expanse of land
overlooking the ocean. To see both his estates
completely obliterated would surely have rattled
Maelgwn – it bothered her and she’d fully expected to
find them thus.
Miles had been impatiently awaiting Tory’s arrival all
day. This wasn’t at all like him, as he was usually too
absorbed in what had been going on in the world
centuries ago to worry about anybody or anything in the
present. Yet today he had the concentration span of a
two year old. He couldn’t stop his attention from
drifting to the entrance to the carpark, all the while
praying that Tory hadn’t changed her mind.

She’s married, he reminded himself as he spotted
Brian’s car and so left his office to greet Tory. ‘How do I
look?’ he asked his secretary, Amanda, as he passed
through the reception area.
‘As windswept and handsome as always. Why?’
‘No reason,’ Miles replied. ‘Remind me to give you a
raise.’
Professor Paradis opened his office door, and
emerged reading a report that was falling to pieces in his
hand. ‘Was that Miles I just heard come through here?’
‘I think so, he must be ill.’ Amanda sounded quite
serious. ‘He’s all . . . playful.’
‘Playful. Miles?’ Paradis sounded rather sceptical.
‘Well, he just gave me a raise for saying he looked
nice.’
‘What?’ Paradis moved to the door to see if Miles
was still about, and spied him speaking with Tory. ‘Uhhuh, well there’s your answer right there.’ He chuckled
as Amanda hurried over to take a look for herself. ‘Must
be Renford’s daughter. Apparently this psychic thing
runs in the family. She told Miles about the altar
months ago.’
‘Wow! Just like Brian.’ Amanda took another look
to see Miles and Tory heading for the office. ‘Quick,
they’re coming.’ She hustled Paradis back to the desk
and she sat down, sporting an innocent look, just as
Miles entered with his guest.
‘Wait till you see it, it’s just beautiful.’ Miles was
truly excited by the significant find.
Tory just shook her head with a smile. ‘I’ve already
seen it, Professor. I keep telling you.’

Miles opened his office door and invited Tory in.
‘Could we get some tea, Amanda? Thanks.’ He closed
the door.
Paradis stared at his partner’s office in disbelief; it
was not like Miles to skip an introduction. Professor
Thurlow was notorious for being preoccupied with his
work, but never so with a woman. Paradis shook his
head finally. ‘It’s a pity she’s married.’
After Amanda had brought in the tea and left the
room Miles said, ‘I’ll show you, as soon as you finish
your cuppa.’
‘No, I need to see it when nobody else is around,
like tonight,’ Tory stated very matter-of-factly. ‘Can you
arrange that?’
‘Not tonight, no. There are others who want to see
it. But perhaps tomorrow night, as it’s Sunday, it’s a safer
bet.’ That worked out well, he thought, Tory would
have to stay overnight.
Tory just nodded, accepting the delay as she sipped
her tea.
‘May I ask why you have to see it alone?’
Tory placed the cup on the table and smiled. ‘No,
that wasn’t part of the deal.’ She stood up, tossing the
strap of her bag over her shoulder. ‘Do you know of a
good hotel around here?’
‘I do, in fact.’ He paused. ‘My place. It’s on the
island, it’s quiet.’
‘It sounds way too nice for a happily married woman
like myself. I’m afraid a hotel will have to suffice.’
‘I wouldn’t hear of it. I was your guest in
Oxfordshire.’

‘You were my father’s guest,’ Tory said, smiling at his
persistence as she headed for the door; his grin was
starting to get to her. ‘I’m sure there must be a nice
hotel around here somewhere.’
‘There isn’t.’ Miles leant on the door to block her
escape. ‘They’re all terrible.’ His dark eyes met hers.
‘Look Professor, I’m married.’
‘I know,’ he stressed, taking a few paces away from
the door. ‘I just want to spend some time in your
company. I find you . . . interesting.’
‘I realise this, and that’s why I’m not going to sit
around all night while you make a mockery of
everything I say.’
‘But I think you’re for real.’
‘Well there’s a breakthrough.’ Tory clapped her
hands together with a laugh.
‘Why are you being so hard on me? You don’t know
me.’
‘Oh, yes I do. You’re exactly like my father aged,
what . . . thirty-seven?’
‘Thirty-five,’ he corrected her, catching her drift.
‘Whatever. But even Dad’s wising up in his old age,’
she said.
‘Wising up to what?’
‘The greater mysteries.’
Miles stared at her then asked, ‘What is this hunk of
rock we’ve dug up?’
‘It’s an altar.’ Tory wondered why he’d asked when
she’d already told him.
‘Right. An altar that even a crane can’t lift.’ Miles
folded his arms.

‘You tried to move it? You shit, Miles!’ Tory whacked
his shoulder. ‘You specifically promised me you wouldn’t.’
Her eyes became stormy, as did the weather. Miles was
silent in the wake of his betrayal, and Tory gave him a
shove to wake him up. ‘You could have destroyed it,
don’t you realise.’ She calmed down to a degree,
knowing that anger wasn’t going to help the situation
any. ‘This isn’t just some ancient stone you’ve dug up, it
is a sacred site. You can’t take off with part of it.’
‘Apparently not.’ He frowned. ‘And now that
you’ve told me what it isn’t, could you kindly tell me
what it is?’
‘I don’t see why I should tell you anything.’
‘Well, perhaps the reason I don’t understand is
because you never explain whatever it is you’re talking
about,’ he said, throwing his arms in the air,
exasperated. ‘Every time I have a conversation with
you, I just end up with this labyrinth of answers that I
can’t even recall the questions to. For instance, what
did you mean when you said that I had no idea of the
toys with which I played? Were you referring to the
stone?’
‘Don’t be ridiculous, Professor. That’s only a piece of
rock, what could it possibly do?’ Tory said sarcastically.
‘Okay, I deserved that. But if you’d just give me a
straight answer, I promise I’ll believe it.’
Miles appealed to Tory in a way that reminded her
of Maelgwn, and it was just as hard to resist him. ‘I’ll
show you tomorrow night, and I can guarantee you
won’t want to move it anywhere. So, I suggest you look
into restoration.’

‘Restoration! You can’t be serious?’ There was little
profit to be had in restoration, and in this case it would
require a huge initial outlay. ‘I’m not in the restoration
business, I’m afraid.’
‘Look, I’m just trying to save you some time.’
Miles shook his head, as he fell into his seat and
observed her for a moment. ‘You are the most peculiar
person I have ever met.’
‘Peculiar is good,’ Tory decided.
‘Please allow me to cook you dinner. I’m a great
cook.’ She looked as if she was about to decline again,
and Miles held a hand over his heart. ‘You’ll be
perfectly safe, I promise.’
Tory knew he was trouble, but there was nothing to
be gained by running away from it. ‘Then, I accept.’
Naomi reached the house at Oxfordshire about five
hours after Tory’s departure. The altar was foremost in
her mind and the news of it threw Brian into a state of
panic.
That’s why Tory’s so interested all of a sudden, Brian
surmised. She’ll tell me if she discovers anything of
interest . . . no way! I’m tired of missing out on all the
action.
‘Brian, what’s wrong?’
‘Nothing,’ he answered, pulling on his jacket as he
stood. ‘We have to get up there.’
‘What! But I just drove all the way down here.’
‘Shit!’ Brian wasn’t paying the slightest attention to
Naomi’s grievances. ‘Tory’s got my car, you’ll have to
drive.’

‘But what about our weekend together? I’ve been
looking forward to it all week.’
‘We’ll still be together.’ Brian helped her to get
moving, pulling her gently but impatiently from her
chair. ‘And that’s the most important thing, right?’
‘I suppose so,’ Naomi growled. ‘At least tell me
why?’
‘I just have a premonition, I have to find Tory. Will
you help me, please?’
Naomi sighed; how could she possibly say no to
such a rueful face.
Tory left Brian’s car in the enclosure at the site and
Miles drove them back to his place. Tory hadn’t given
any thought to where he might live, until the car pulled
into the long dirt driveway. It was the cottage on the
point at Aberffraw where the house of Cunedda had
once stood. She hit herself on the head for not guessing.
‘You live here?’
‘Yes. What’s wrong with that?’
‘Nothing.’ Tory began to laugh.
‘What’s so funny?’
‘Nothing, really.’ Tory caught her breath. ‘I love this
place, and it just seems a coincidence that you own it.’
She tried to cover up what she was really thinking as he
certainly wouldn’t believe the truth without proof.
‘All the way down to the water,’ Miles said with
pride.
As soon as Tory climbed out of the car she romped
off across the property like a woman possessed, laughing
and exclaiming with delight. She didn’t care what Miles

made of this behaviour, the call of the familiar
consumed her as she ran towards the beach. ‘I’m home
. . . yes!’
The clouds rumbled as lightning flashed across the
sky, yet Tory wasn’t swayed from her course; the storm’s
pending fury only added to her release. She discovered
that something of the house at Aberffraw did remain –
the stairs that led to the beach. Tory stopped still,
astounded by the sight of a familiar landmark. She and
Calin had argued in this very spot. ‘Ha!’ she shrugged,
running down to the beach.
‘Tory, it’s going to pour any minute,’ Miles called
from the bottom of the stairs.
‘I don’t care!’ she cried out, but didn’t stop running.
‘You’ll catch your death,’ he insisted, not prepared
to follow her further.
‘No, I most certainly won’t.’
‘Well where do you think you’re going, exactly?’
Tory laughed. ‘Exploring, wanna come?’
Miles was exasperated; she did pick the strangest
times to do things, and this wasn’t really what he’d
planned for this evening. ‘Then who would cook
dinner?’
Tory merely shrugged and flashed him a cheeky
smile, then continued on her way.
‘Damn it!’ Miles couldn’t figure out if he was
annoyed because Tory had run off on him, or because he
hadn’t followed her. She was a real wild child alright,
being in her company was like the magical mystery tour.
But she was fascinating, for she lived in a world so much
more wondrous than his own. Her world was more like

the relics he dug up from the ground, the remnants of
the fabled Old Ones.
He watched her disappear along the beach; she
would surely return once it began to rain.
By the time Brian and Naomi arrived, the dig was
practically deserted. Brian found his car at the site, but
nobody there could tell him where his sister had gone.
‘Great!’ He gave his tyre a boot.
‘What’s so important?’ Naomi asked, becoming
annoyed. ‘If you don’t tell me, Brian, I’m not going to
pursue this little adventure any further, and remember,
I’ve got the car keys.’
Brian took hold of Naomi, figuring he’d get around
her with a bit of charm. ‘When you get all riled up like
that . . . I gotta tell ya, that accent just makes me crazy.’
Naomi laughed. ‘So what are you going to do about
it?’
Good question.
Tory had to return to the car sooner or later, and it
wouldn’t be the first time he’d slept on a back seat.
The rain came, as did nightfall, and Tory still hadn’t
returned. As he’d finished cooking dinner, Miles
grabbed a torch to go after her.
He opened the back door and was startled to see her
looking like a drowned rat on his doorstep. ‘Where the
hell have you been?’
Tory only smiled as she pulled a chunk of rock and
metal from behind her back and placed it in Miles’
hands.

‘What is this?’
‘A little more credibility for me, another perplexing
mystery for you.’
Upon closer inspection he discovered that it was an
iron helmet, or part thereof, that looked like it had
been embedded in the rock for some time. His smile
grew suddenly. ‘Where did you get this?’
Tory pulled off her wet jumper. ‘In a cave down by
the beach. Your beach,’ she stressed.
The professor was speechless; he’d explored nearly
every corner of the world in search of antiquities, but
he never thought that he’d find them in his own
backyard. ‘I grew up here and there’s no cave down by
the beach.’
‘Oh yes there is. At low tide there used to be a cave
leading up inside the cliff face. Unfortunately it’s now
permanently underwater, so I had to go swimming.
Could you direct me to your bathroom?’ she asked as
she was dripping all over his kitchen floor.
‘You went swimming? In this! Below a rock face, in
near darkness! Tory, are you mad?’
Tory knew the cave was there, alright. She may
have been heavily sedated when Cadogan carried her
through it, but she remembered. The temptation to
investigate the remnants of Aberffraw had been too
great. In the water she had felt battered and confused,
panicking as the waves pounded her under. Finally, she
was forced to let go and stop breathing, only to discover
there was no need. Not far down the cliff face she found
the underwater cavern and was thrust by the sea up
inside it. Afterwards, when Tory had made it back to

the beach, her body healed itself as before, so now she
was just a bit shaken and cold.
‘One more question,’ Miles asked as he showed her
to the bathroom. ‘How could you see anything in
there?’
She pulled Brian’s car keys from the pocket of her
jeans, holding up a mini torch. ‘It’s waterproof, there’s a
Swiss Army knife on it too.’ She tossed them to Miles
and grabbed her bag. ‘Hey, nice place you’ve got here,
Professor.’
Miles stared at her intently. ‘How come your clothes
are all tattered and yet there’s not a mark on you?’
Tory just smiled, waving a finger at him. ‘You’ve
used up your twenty questions for this hour, now I’m
going to take a bath, if I may.’ She looked to the large
footed tub with relish.
‘Of course.’ He examined the dripping wet chunk of
rock in his hand. How could Tory be married when she
was the perfect woman for him? He might not
understand her at all, but how nice it would be to have
a lifetime to figure her out. Her husband was fortunate
indeed. Miles only hoped that he realised it, for if he
were married to such a woman, he would certainly not
be leaving her on her own.
Tory came out from the bathroom to find dinner on
the table, and they ate in relative silence for a while.
‘This is very good.’ Tory gave her compliments to
the chef, whose thoughts seemed elsewhere.
‘So what’s he like, this husband of yours?’ Miles
suddenly emerged from his daze. ‘Brian said I look a lot
like him.’

‘Quite.’ Tory took up her wine. ‘But you’re very
different in other respects.’
‘How so?’
‘You don’t think alike, or have anything in
common, as far as I can tell.’
‘But surely, some of our physical features are
different?’ Miles reached for the remote control and
aimed it at the stereo.
‘Well, he’s of a bigger frame than you, though you’re
probably about the same height.’ Tory observed Miles
closely, trying to define the other differences, and
shrugged. ‘You’re a bit older . . .’ The music began to
play, and Miles’ choice rocked Tory to her foundations.
‘Albinoni.’
‘He is one of my very favourite composers.’ Miles
put down the remote to get back to his dinner. ‘Some
say this is the saddest piece of music ever written, but I
find it rather beautiful and uplifting.’
Tory smiled in agreement, absolutely speechless, her
heart pounding in her chest.
‘So then, are you ready to tell me about your little
discovery?’ He referred to the helmet. ‘And I am warning you now, I won’t believe you found it by accident.’
‘I don’t know what I can tell you, Professor. I just
know things about certain places, certain people.’
‘Well, you have my fullest attention,’ Miles
encouraged her to continue.
‘I am wary about saying any more as I fear that you
shall sell off the treasures left here by your ancestors,
just as you intend to sell that altar to the highest
bidder.’

Miles was a little stunned by the remark. ‘How did
you find out about that?’
‘If restoration is not a possibility, Professor, it doesn’t
take a genius to figure it out,’ she reasoned. ‘Can I ask
why you got into archaeology?’
‘Because I enjoy digging up the facts . . . you know,
those little details you seem to forget all about.’
‘And what about the truth? You’ll never learn the
truth about the treasures you find, because you can’t see
beyond their surface value. How do you put a price on
the greater mysteries of the ages, Professor?’ Tory
paused, angry at herself for losing her cool.
‘Who are you, really?’ He sat back in his chair,
intrigued.
‘I think it’s time I went to bed, where shall I sleep?’
As she sounded exhausted, Miles stopped his
inquisition and gestured towards his bedroom.
‘The couch will be fine.’
‘I’ll take the couch,’ Miles insisted. ‘I sleep on it
more often than the bed anyway.’ The house did have a
spare room once, but it had long since been turned into
an office, cum library. ‘You don’t have to turn in so
early. If I promise not to hound you with any more
questions?’
Tory shook her head as she collected her bag. ‘I am
truly too tired, Miles, or I would love to. We can talk
tomorrow. Goodnight.’
Brian’s hunger woke him early. It was so snug
underneath Naomi and all the blankets, towels and
clothes that lived in the back of his car, that he was

very reluctant to move anywhere just yet. The sun was
barely up and as it was a Sunday, no one would arrive at
the site for hours. With this revelation Brian decided to
rouse Naomi, and he became so engrossed in the
exercise that neither of them heard a car arriving.
Professor Paradis approached the steamed-up
vehicle to hear the sound of his daughter’s voice coming
from within. The car windows were fogged over so he
knocked. ‘Naomi, are you in there?’ he asked, sounding
very calm though a little surprised.
‘Holy shit, it’s my father,’ Naomi whispered, thrown
immediately into a panic as she searched through all the
layers on top of her for her clothes. ‘Yes,’ she answered,
mildly comforted that the windows were frosted over.
‘Well, what are you doing sleeping in the carpark,
child?’ Paradis had to wonder, amused by her dismay.
‘She does have a bedroom at home you know, Brian,
and you are both quite welcome to occupy it when on
Mon.’ The professor laughed. He knew Naomi was not a
child anymore, and since his wife had died he was just
thankful to have his daughter still around to care for
him in his old age. Her love life was her own business.
Naomi relaxed a little. ‘It was rather late when we
got here.’ She pulled on her jeans, battling with Brian
to do so. ‘We were looking for Brian’s sister. You
wouldn’t happen to know where she is?’ She slapped
Brian away from her so she could finish dressing.
‘Why I believe she stayed at Miles’ place,’ her father
informed them.
‘What!’ Brian was spurred into action, ripping on
his jeans. ‘Do you know where he lives?’

Naomi nodded.
‘Then let’s go.’ Brian, still half naked, burst out the
back doors to greet the professor, pulling on the rest of
his clothes.
Naomi couldn’t believe him at times. Still, she had
to admit his body did warrant exhibition. As she
finished tying her laces and climbed out of Brian’s car,
her father commented, ‘Your standards seem to have
waned of late.’
Brian, realising the old professor was having a dig at
him, slapped a hand down on Paradis’ shoulder and said,
‘Disproving the age-old theory that quality is more important than quantity.’ Brian served him a wink, ducking
very quickly towards Naomi’s car before she killed him.
‘Just promise me you won’t marry him.’ Paradis
pretended to be concerned for her.
‘Come on Dad, I know how you treasure the
thought of having five or six little ones just like him
running around your feet in a few years.’
Paradis appeared to be wounded, holding a hand to
his chest. ‘No more please, my weak heart.’
Naomi smiled and kissed her father’s cheek. ‘Later,
Dad.’
‘Heaven forbid, you’re even starting to speak like
him.’ His daughter just laughed as she ran off to the car.
It was wonderful to see her so happy and, as far as sonsin-law went, he could do much worse than Brian
Alexander.
Miles was awake when Tory raised herself for kata at
dawn the next morning. He had managed to sleep for a

few hours during the night, yet even then his mind had
been plagued by images of her. Such an erotic dream, he
recalled, and so vivid! He could still feel her dress of
shimmery white, still smell the lushness of the wood
where he’d lain down beside her.
He watched Tory creep through the early morning
shadows of the cottage towards the back door, and he
held his silence, wondering where on earth she was off
to now. As soon as the door had closed, Miles quickly
ran to watch her from the kitchen window; she was
heading for the beach.
Brian and Naomi arrived at Miles’ place to find the
house empty.
‘Brian, they’re not here,’ Naomi said, to stop him
from pounding the front door down.
‘Well, the car’s here,’ Brian roared. ‘He’d better not
be up to anything with my sister.’
Naomi was not bothered by his mood. ‘Well maybe
they’re down on the beach.’
‘Good call.’ Brian’s spirits lifted as he headed off to
check.
He found Miles seated at the top of the stairs. Tory
was further off along the beach, watching the ocean as
she practised her art.
‘I had no idea Tory was into martial arts.’ Miles
looked up at Brian as he came to a stop alongside him. ‘I
knew you were, of course. But Tory?’ Miles shrugged,
astonished.
‘A triple black belt, my friend. You obviously didn’t
try anything, then.’ Brian patted the professor’s

shoulder. ‘Good man, now I don’t have to kill you,’
Brian said, jogging off down the stairs to speak with his
sister.
Miles watched them closely. Tory seemed to have a
strong objection to whatever Brian was telling her, and
Brian seemed to be doing a lot of pleading.
‘Hi.’ Naomi took a seat beside Miles. ‘Sorry if we’re
interrupting anything.’
‘Not at all,’ Miles assured her, sounding rather
disheartened about the whole thing. ‘What brings you
two here?’
‘I have no idea. You know what they’re like,’ Naomi
said, looking down at Brian and Tory, and really
meaning their whole family.
‘I’m beginning to.’ And what I wouldn’t give to know
their secret. ‘You want some breakfast?’
‘I do,’ Naomi sighed.
Brian and Tory followed them back to the house
sometime later. Brian was quietly exploding with
excitement, as he’d managed to persuade his sister to
let him accompany her to see the High Merlin. They’d
spent much time discussing how they could manage
this without Miles and Naomi realising what was going
on.
Later that day, Tory accompanied Miles to the top
of the cliff at the end of the beach to point out where
the underwater cavern was to be found.
‘I didn’t go all the way in, you’ll need a chainsaw to
get through some of it, but the passage used to lead to
the west tower and to the dungeons of the Royal House
of Aberffraw.’

‘But how can you be so sure the remains are of that
particular castle? It was only ever mentioned in
mythology, after all.’
Tory, who’d already started to head back to the
house, rolled her eyes. ‘I just am, okay?’
‘Was it a past-life thing?’
Tory hated the way Miles spoke about anything he
didn’t understand, he made it all sound so ludicrous and
puerile. She stopped and looked back at him, too
annoyed to even comment.
‘Look I’m sorry, Tory.’ Miles didn’t want her to get
mad at him again. ‘But nothing you say ever makes any
sense.’
‘Why does everything have to make sense?’ Tory
was tired of having to argue with those of rational logic.
‘Just face it Miles, life’s not logical.’ She strode off and
Miles followed.
‘Tory please . . . I just want you to tell me the truth.
Is that so much to ask?’
‘Yes it is, as a matter-of-fact. I’ve given you
everything you need to find the truth out for yourself,
just like the altar. If you’d just put two and two together,
you could figure out what the site at Llyn Cerrig Bach is
all about.’
Tory considered that the nine statues should have
been a large enough hint. Surely it was obvious that the
statues represented the nine muses who guarded the
cauldron, all he had to do was study the local
mythology. The cauldron was also commonly referred to
in druidic script as the Chair, the Honey Isle or Avalon.
Thus, was it not as plain as the nose on his face that the

site was considered by the ancients to be a doorway to
the Otherworld?
‘The mysteries of this planet exist so you can solve
them for yourself, Miles, not so I can solve them for
you. For heaven’s sake, just open your mind. Anything
is possible, until proven otherwise.’
Miles looked very perplexed and he said nothing for
a while. ‘I have a confession to make,’ he announced
finally. ‘I had a dream about you last night.’
The hair on the back of Tory’s neck stood on end,
and her eyes opened wide at his words. ‘Describe it to
me.’
He grinned. ‘I don’t think I should somehow.’
Oh shit! Tory raised a hand to her mouth. ‘Just tell
me where it took place then?’
‘Well, actually . . .’ Miles scratched his head, seeming a little embarrassed about it now. ‘In a wood.’
Tory jumped into the air, slapping her hands
together. ‘It is you!’ she announced excitedly, taking
hold of Miles by the shoulders and giving him a hug.
‘What do you mean?’ Miles was happy to learn he’d
said something right, yet he hadn’t a clue what that was.
‘You can’t make a mockery of my psychic episodes
anymore my friend, because you’ve just had one.’ She
laughed at his look of despair. ‘That’s the past you saw.’
‘I hate to be a stickler for convention, but you could
never prove that.’
‘I was there, wasn’t I?’ Tory challenged him.
‘Alright then, what were you wearing?’
Tory began to back up, a large smile growing on her
face. ‘A dress made of a mysterious white shimmery

fabric that sparkled the colours of the rainbow. Of a sort
of seventeenth-century, nymphish design, I recall.’ Tory
giggled at his bewilderment, and bounded back towards
the house.
‘It’s psychological ambush, she’s trying to drive me
mad!’ Miles concluded, in a daze. How could she have
seen a dream? Perhaps Tory had more psychic ability
than he’d given her credit for.
They all drove out to the site that evening and waited
around for Professor Paradis, the last person on the site
to leave. Brian tried very subtly to persuade Naomi to
wait for him back at her place, but she wasn’t about to
leave him before she had to. So the four of them
watched from the office window as Paradis drove out
the gate.
‘Okay, now what?’ Miles was dying to know what
this was all about.
‘Shut off all the power on the site and wait here,’
Tory instructed, grabbing her bag and heading for the
door. ‘Brian.’ She beckoned for him to follow.
Miles protested. ‘Hold on a minute, you said –’
‘I know.’ Tory cut him off. ‘But I have to check it
out for myself first. No offence, but you’re like a walking
negative charge. So please, just shut off the power as I
ask and we’ll get this show on the road, okay?’
‘What about me?’ Naomi moved to follow Brian.
‘I’ll be back in a second.’ He kissed her then darted
off after his sister.
Naomi folded her arms, irked that he would rather
spend time with Tory when he saw her every day of the

week. ‘Who does she think she is, anyway? Just taking
over like this?’
‘Unfortunately, I promised. And I do sort of owe her
a favour or two,’ Miles explained, shutting off the
power.
‘Wow, you can sound like a real bitch when you want
to.’ Brian congratulated Tory on her performance as
they made their way down into the dig.
‘You liked that?’ Tory was rather pleased with it
herself. ‘Question is, did they buy it?’
The lights went out.
‘Guess so.’ They both laughed as they paused for
their eyes to adjust to the darkness. The waxing moon
was nearly full, and after a moment they could see their
way by the beautiful blue light it cast over the site.
Tory approached the large hole in the ground where
the altar stone lay, avoiding the other pits from whence
the statues had been raised. She wanted to cry at the
sight of the pillage, as the energy was so much weaker
now. She slid down the earth bank, coming to land on
the stone. ‘I hope this still works, or I’m in deep shit.’
‘Check it out!’ Brian admired the rock he landed
on. ‘I kind of recognise this.’
‘No doubt,’ Tory assured him. ‘Let’s see if anybody’s
home, shall we?’ Tory took a deep breath and prayed to
the Goddess that the Merlin heard her. ‘Taliesin! In the
name of the Dragon, I seek an urgent audience with
thee,’ she cried out into the night sky.
After a couple of minutes, when nothing had happened, Brian cocked an eye. ‘Are you sure about this?’

Tory was looking a bit doubtful herself. Taliesin
hadn’t met her yet, so it was no use announcing herself.
Still, there was another whom he might answer. She gave
Brian a pat on the shoulder for assurance, and readied
herself for a second attempt. ‘Taliesin Pen Beirdd, my
name be Sorcha Lawhir, wife of King Caswallon of
Gwynedd and messenger of the Goddess. I ask thy
counsel in her stead and in the name of the Dragon that
guards this island,’ she yelled with zeal as the light began
to burst forth from the ground beneath their feet.
Miles was back at his desk, going over some data on his
computer when Naomi entered with two mugs of coffee.
‘Thanks.’ Miles glanced up to find her staring out
the window behind him, and he turned quickly to see
what had her so mystified. A huge expanse of light
emanated from the location of the altar. ‘God damn
you, Tory!’ He made for the site as fast as he could with
Naomi following close behind.
They reached the excavation in time to see the last
of the glowing mist retracting into the stone. Then all
was dark and still as before, and there was no trace of
Tory or Brian.
‘It’s some sort of doorway, Miles.’ Naomi freaked,
she’d never witnessed anything like it.
‘That’s impossible, Naomi, people don’t just
disappear. I’m sure we’ll find them around here somewhere.’
‘No Miles, you’re wrong. This place is even marked
as sacred. It’s something beyond our understanding and
we shouldn’t be messing with it.’

Miles stared down at the cross that taunted him
with guilt for ever daring to try to move it. Was that
why he’d been denied passage to wherever it led?
‘You bastard, Brian, you’d better be coming back,’
Naomi yelled into the pit.
‘Don’t worry. Tory left her son behind, she won’t be
long.’
‘But if she has no idea what she’s doing?’
‘She knows.’
After dinner on Sunday night, Renford went upstairs to
fetch the book he was reading from his bedside. As he
passed Tory’s room, he was surprised to find Teo
creeping around. The professor could have sworn he’d
just heard Teo in the kitchen, but he quietly ducked to
one side of the doorway to see what he was up to.
Teo approached the cot where Rhun lay sleeping
and watched the babe a moment, a smile crossing his
face. He reached down to touch the child and a flash,
like blue lightning, lashed out from the dragon
medallion that hung above the child’s bed. Before he
left, Maelgwn had given Tory his medallion and asked
her to hang it over their baby’s bassinet to protect him.
The impact of the energy force had obviously hurt Teo,
and it cast him halfway across the room, yet he maintained his silence as he recovered from the shock of it.
A moment later he bounced back up, appearing most
annoyed. He held the palms of his hands out towards
the child and his fingertips began to glow like hot coals.
That was enough for Renford, he quickly and
quietly crept to the stairs then thumped his way back

down the hall to the doorway. He barged into the room
to find nobody but the sleeping child. The professor
searched all the possible hiding places, but to no avail.
All the windows were shut and he hadn’t taken his eyes
from the door. Now he really thought he was losing his
marbles! He took up the sleeping child, resolving to
watch him until Tory returned. He fetched his book and
returned downstairs to the kitchen to get a cup of tea.
There, once again, he encountered Teo, wiping up
dishes as Rose washed them. This confirmed what
Renford had thought all along. ‘Did you just go upstairs
for any reason?’ he asked; if Teo lied, Rose would
certainly correct him.
‘No.’ Teo seemed surprised by the question.
Renford looked at Rose, who shrugged. ‘We’ve both
been in here since dinner.’
The professor wasn’t so sure of what he’d seen, as
any possible explanation for it escaped him. He’d never
had any reason to distrust Teo, but he would keep Rhun
close in any case.
When they appeared at the Merlin’s hideaway, Tory
attempted to set straight Taliesin’s initial confusion. He
knew she wasn’t Sorcha, though he commented on the
resemblance. She had every intention of introducing
herself properly, but Taliesin interrupted her.
‘You are Tory Alexander, who I gather, was once
Sorcha Lawhir . . . a sad, sad loss for Gwynedd and
indeed all of Britain.’ He shook his head. ‘And Brian,
my it’s good to see you.’ The Merlin shook his hand.
‘How do you know me, we haven’t met before?’

‘I seem to recall I was your sensei once.’ Taliesin
struggled to recollect when exactly. ‘I’ve been doing a
lot of past-life regression lately, I could have my
lifetimes mixed up.’
‘What?’ Brian looked at Tory, who urged him not to
worry about it.
Tory dispensed with the formalities, preparing the
Merlin for her tale. ‘This may sound a little strange –
you told me yourself that you wouldn’t understand it all
at first – but I promise, you will.’
She recounted the story of her plight, informing the
Merlin about the role he had played in it. Yet she
omitted the part about the immortality potion he’d
given her, as it was up to the gods to inform Taliesin of
this, in accordance with what the Merlin had already
told her. Moreover, Brian was present and Tory wanted
no one to know her secret. As she spoke, she noticed
that where once Taliesin’s abode was enormous, it now
only comprised one chamber. Although it still housed
many beautiful antiques, the room no longer contained
anything dating beyond the period of 2000 BC–1994
AD, as this represented the span of Taliesin’s life so far.
‘Keridwen said I must learn the sacred mysteries on
my own. This is my cursed punishment.’ Taliesin was so
despondent, not himself at all.
‘Well, you told me that you’d grown so disheartened
with the state of Britain that you besought Keridwen to
teach you the proper use of your knowledge, so that you
might instigate the plan I have spoken of and change
the fate of this land altogether! Now the Goddess will
not agree, but she will compromise in the end and send

you back through time to learn the greater mysteries
from the Old Ones in Atlantis.’
‘Atlantis! How grand, I tire so of the modern world.’
Taliesin sounded excited by the prospect. ‘And I
actually did all this, already?’
‘Aye.’ Tory was pleased that he was looking more
eager.
‘Splendid! I should summon Keridwen at once.’
‘Wait a minute.’ Tory took hold of his arm. ‘You
must not forget the reason why I’m here.’ She made sure
she regained his full attention. ‘You have to remember
that I don’t return with Maelgwn to the Dark Age as
planned. I’m stuck here in the twentieth century, as I
have already explained. You must remember, therefore,
that when you calculate the first return, you also have
to consider my return the following hour, or none of
this will ever come to pass.’
‘What?’
‘Look, I don’t need you to understand this right
now, I just need you to promise that when the time
comes, you’ll remember what I’ve said.’
‘I shall remember, gracious lady.’ He took up her
hand and kissed it.
Brian thought this was rather gross; he still saw
Taliesin in the image of an old man, as had Brockwell.
‘So, how do we get out of here?’
‘The same way you came in,’ Taliesin answered,
motioning to the stone in the middle of the room.
‘Oh yes, I nearly forgot to warn you.’ Tory frowned,
anxious. ‘People upstairs are trying to remove your altar
stone from its resting place.’

Taliesin laughed away her fears. ‘Good luck to them,
nobody else has managed it. And even if they do move
it, the stone shall only return by the next morn.’
Tory smiled at this, as he led her to the stone.
‘Hey, Taliesin,’ Brian turned to them, already in
position. ‘You wouldn’t happen to know where Myrddin
is hiding out, would you?’ Brian wondered if Taliesin
could shed some light on their father’s dilemma.
‘Why no, I haven’t seen him since the battle of
Arthuret,’ the Merlin replied.
Of course, Tory realised, if Taliesin has not yet
returned to Atlantis, then he has not yet learnt the
secrets of time travel. So he had yet to return to fourthcentury Britain to free Myrddin from the tree, and
hatch the scheme that would change the course of
Britain.
‘Fear not great lady, I look forward to embarking on
this quest, and I shall leave as soon as I can persuade
Keridwen.’ Tory took her place next to Brian, and
Taliesin bowed to her in parting. ‘I will see you in the
past, Tory Alexander.’
‘And I look forward to seeing you, sir, in the future.’
She gave him the thumbs-up, turning her attention to
Brian as the mist began to rise. ‘When we get back, I
have to get out of there quickly. I don’t want to have to
answer any questions.’
‘You got it,’ Brian assured her, grabbing hold of her
hands.
Miles had just started to doze off when a blinding light
burst forth from the cross, and the mist began to rise

before his eyes. It felt like the apocalypse as he watched
Brian and Tory emerge from the haze, unscathed.
‘Brian!’ Naomi jumped on him. ‘Don’t ever do that
again, not without telling me.’
‘I have no intention of doing that again, period.’
Miles stood, arms folded, as Tory made her way past
him in silence. ‘Thanks for telling me.’
‘Why Professor, I showed you, didn’t I? In case you
haven’t worked it out yet, it’s a doorway.’
‘To where?’ he demanded.
‘You find out,’ she said, picking up her pace.
‘I gotta go.’ Brian pulled himself away from Naomi.
‘But I’ll call you tomorrow.’ He crossed his heart and
blew her a kiss as he ran to catch his sister up.
‘Brian!’ She wanted to tell him not to bother, but
she couldn’t; the thought of never seeing him again was
too horrible. ‘I love you.’
‘Right back at ya.’ Brian’s voice echoed through the
darkness.
Tory had reached the car by the time Miles caught
her up. As she unlocked the door and opened it, he
slammed it closed. ‘You know I’ve got no chance of
working it out without you.’
‘Well, maybe next life.’ She opened the door and he
again slammed it closed.
‘Damn it, don’t leave.’
‘Come on, Miles. You wouldn’t even have called me
if you’d been able to move the bloody thing. No one
gets the chance to lie to me twice.’
‘Absolutely correct.’ Brian came to stand between
them, urging Miles back. ‘Don’t make me kill you now,

when you’ve been doing so well.’ He held Miles at bay
while Tory got into the car.
‘Brian, you don’t understand.’
‘Oh, yes I do.’ Brian jumped in the car, starting up
the engine. ‘Better than you do, I’d say.’ He winked,
backing the car up at racing speed and taking off into
the night.
‘Why does everyone know more about me than I
do!’
‘So what do you make of it now?’ Naomi joined
Miles in the carpark.
‘I don’t know,’ he answered, annoyed by the
question. ‘I need time to think.’ He headed for his car,
turning back as he walked. ‘Sorry, Naomi. Goodnight.’
‘It has been,’ Naomi decided, as she headed for her
car to drive home to bed.

25

Awakenings

T

ory and Brian arrived home from Llyn Cerrig
Bach in the early hours of the following morning
to find their aunt sitting in the kitchen, near
scared out of her wits.
As Tory made them all tea, Rose told them of a
nightmare she’d had. ‘A horrid old woman, a witch I
think, was standing in the middle of my kitchen,
laughing at me. It felt as if my entire body was being
restrained by her. It was awful!’
From Rose’s description of her assailant, Tory feared
it was Mahaud. Although, as she sat in the kitchen with
her family, she couldn’t sense the presence of the evil
crone. Tory assured her aunt that the wicked witch
could never exist in such a harmonious environment,
and hoped that Maelgwn had been correct when he’d
told her thus.

Weeks passed and still Tory refused to take Miles
Thurlow’s calls. He’d tried writing to her but she
wouldn’t even open the letters, let alone read them.
Tory kept up her training, practised her saxophone,
and submerged herself in her history studies. Though
she had achieved her third Dan grade and found
Taliesin, there was still close to nine months remaining
before the summer solstice. She’d thought that she
would welcome some time to herself, yet within a week,
she was bored and hankering for a quest of some kind.
Rhun was no trouble, and although Tory loved
spending time with him, she craved an intellectual
challenge. Since the night of her aunt’s dream, she’d
also been thinking about finding a place of her own.
She feared that if Mahaud was in the twentieth century,
it was Gwynedd’s heir she was seeking. Tory considered
she could do something really novel and get a job of
some kind. But then again, if she was living alone this
would prove difficult with a young child. She was
mulling on this notion when her father came into her
room.
‘Tory please, Professor Thurlow is on the phone.’
‘I’m not here,’ Tory said, remaining engrossed in her
study.
Renford frowned at her childish retort. ‘Yes, yes, but
he asked me to give you the message that he’s in the
restoration business, and he urgently needs to speak
with you about it.’
Tory turned to her father, considering whether or
not she should take the call. Renford was relieved when
she followed him to the phone

‘Alright, what’s the story?’ Tory said flatly.
‘Thank God, I was about to jump in the car! I’ve got
to hand it to you, Tory, you really know how to hold a
grudge,’ he replied, his tone warm and friendly.
‘Well, you really know how to piss me off, Professor.
Speak now or forever hold your peace.’
‘Okay, please, just don’t hang up. I’ve been calling
because, after investigating the possibility of restoring
this site of yours, I have a few investors who might be
interested in getting the funding under way. But . . .’ he
paused before posing his problem. ‘I have a feeling they
will respond with more enthusiasm to a sales pitch
coming from you.’
‘So who are they, perverts or psychics?’
Miles laughed, he liked her humour. ‘Druids, in fact.
It would seem that in the order are some of the richest
and most highly placed men in Britain these days.’
That’s not surprising, Tory thought.
‘One of them called me when he read about the site,
and asked if we were considering the possibility of
restoring it.’
‘You, of course, lied and said you were.’
‘Indeed.’ Miles feared that he would never live long
enough for Tory to allow him to forget his misdemeanour. ‘But the trouble is, we didn’t exactly see eye
to eye. I think if anybody’s going to sell them on this
project, it will be you. So, when can you get here?’
‘Wait a minute, are you hiring me?’
‘I am, we can discuss the details when you arrive.
The druids have asked to view the altar and the statues
on the weekend, and we need some time to get a

strategy together before then. So your presence is
required yesterday.’
‘I need some time to think about this.’
‘What’s there to think about?’
‘I’ll call you in the morning, I promise.’ She hung up
before he could argue.
This would get Rhun away from the house, which
would make her feel much safer. Ever since Maelgwn’s
departure she had sensed something watching her. The
job Miles offered her was too tempting to resist, yet she
had to consider her own emotions. She was pretty clear
about how she felt. Although Miles was Maelgwn, deep
down inside her, Tory knew that Miles didn’t possess
the qualities that she most adored in her husband. The
way she saw it, this was some kind of test. The powers
that be were making it a little difficult, in her opinion,
but there must be a reason why such an opportunity
had been thrown her way. After all, it had originally
been her idea to restore the site, why shouldn’t she
have a hand in its resurrection? Not that she hadn’t
already.
After a very restless night for both herself and
Rhun, Tory decided she would take the challenge. She
would make sure that she was earning enough money to
get her own place, support herself and get a nanny. If
this couldn’t be arranged she would decline, as she
wouldn’t stay with Miles again. She could foresee the
long hours she would be putting in with him on this,
and it was going to be hard enough to keep him at bay
without living with him to boot! If their relationship
remained on a professional level this was exactly the

kind of project she’d been waiting for, and it was
certainly a cause she believed in.
Tory announced her immediate departure to her
family at breakfast that morning. Teo wasn’t there as he
was sleeping off a hangover from a party the night
before. Brian pleaded his friend’s case on his behalf,
telling them that the celebration was in honour of an
old friend and so Teo had been obliged to go.
Tory hadn’t been spending as much time in Teo’s
company since grading, but he seemed to be powering
along quite well on his own. She feared that, in her
absence, Teo’s decadent binges might start all over
again. So, as much as Tory hated to sound like a mother,
she asked Brian to keep an eye on him.
He understood well enough and urged her not to
worry. ‘You just keep your eye on Thurlow,’ he warned,
before telling her to pack her things and he’d drive her
up to Mon.
Her father was thrilled by her involvement in the
project. Rose asked Tory to keep in touch and swore
that she’d contact her if her spirits had any word from
Maelgwn.
When Tory arrived at the site’s reception desk, baggage,
baby, and all, Amanda didn’t quite know what to think.
‘Tory!’ Miles surfaced from his office to greet her.
‘Thank god you’re here.’
‘Professor.’ Brian followed Tory in carrying her
saxophone case.
‘And you’re here too.’ Miles didn’t sound as thrilled
to see him.

‘Not for long, I’m afraid. I’ve got a class to teach
tonight.’ He dropped the luggage and winked at the girl
behind the desk. ‘Hey Amanda, looking mighty good,
babe.’
‘Why Brian, you’re looking rather fine yourself.
Thank you so much for noticing.’ She graced Brian with
a smile.
‘Well, we should really start work.’ Miles was eager
to get Tory alone, or at least away from her brother.
‘Actually Miles, I only dropped in to tell you I’m
here. I thought I should hire a car and find somewhere
to live.’ Tory knew he wouldn’t be game enough to
suggest she stay at his place while Brian was standing
there.
‘Then I’ll give you a hand,’ he said. ‘The quicker we
get you settled, the quicker we can get started, right?’
Satisfied that all was to his liking, Brian left. Miles
offered Tory some tea before they began all their
running around, and she was thankful for a moment to
rest.
No sooner did Miles have Tory in the privacy of his
office, than he changed his tune. ‘Tory, I really think
you should consider staying at my place, just until the
weekend.’
‘No way, Miles. No offence, but we will drive each
other nuts.’
‘Look, think about it a second. If you find a place of
your own today, you’ll have to find a nanny and who
knows what else. We don’t have the time to spare. If we
work on the proposal at my place, the long hours won’t
tax you so much as there’s no travel time, and the baby

can be with you while you work. Then, after we secure
the interest of the investors on the weekend, we’ll be
able to relax a bit and I’ll do whatever I can to help you
get settled elsewhere. Please Tory, I really need your
fullest attention right now.’
‘You’ve obviously given this some thought.’ Tory
really didn’t want to admit that what he said made
perfect sense. ‘Alright, but just till the weekend,
promise?’
‘I do.’ Miles was pleased with the outcome. He then
turned to the baby basket on his coffee table. ‘Wow, he
looks just like me.’
Tory smiled. ‘He takes after his father.’
Miles ventured so far as to touch Rhun’s little
hands, and was rather happy to be given a huge smile in
response. ‘What’s his name?’
‘Rhun.’ Tory almost cringed as she said it, hoping he
didn’t ask why on earth she’d chosen such an Old
World name.
‘That’s a very traditional name,’ Miles remarked,
thinking nothing more of it.
Tory restrained her amusement. ‘His father’s from a
very traditional family.’
The decision to start work on the proposal first thing
the following day was unanimous. Miles cooked up a
feast, after which they sat and talked by the fire for
hours. Tory was surprised to find that Miles’ whole
manner had changed since their last meeting. He’d
stopped plaguing her with questions, content just to be
in her company. This was a worry for Tory as Miles was

much more like Maelgwn now, and several times during
the course of the evening she forgot herself and nearly
mistook him for her husband.
Although Miles was making a distinct effort not to
annoy his guest, when they finished off a glass of port
before bed he chanced one question. ‘I know you’ll
probably get angry at me, but there’s something I have
to ask.’
‘Where did I take Brian that night?’ Tory guessed his
mind but she wasn’t upset by it, in fact she was rather
impressed that he hadn’t asked earlier.
‘Yes.’ Miles felt a bit disappointed to be so predictable.
‘Surely you have worked out where it leads by this
time, Miles. Just out of curiosity, where do you think we
went?’
Miles hesitated, then realised that in all probability
nothing he could surmise would sound as ridiculous as
the truth. ‘Well, the statues seem to indicate a doorway
to . . . the Otherworld?’
Tory applauded his conclusion. ‘Very good . . . and
correct, too.’
Miles half frowned, half smiled. ‘And what business
did you have there?’
‘I had to meet someone.’
‘Anyone I might know?’
‘You wouldn’t believe me if I told you.’ Tory stood
up to go to bed.
‘Try me.’
‘Taliesin Pen Beirdd.’
‘You’re right, I don’t believe you. But still, I would

be interested to know, did you have any reason to seek
him, in particular?’
‘I had to deliver a message.’
‘From whom?’
‘Himself.’ She flashed a smile and waved goodnight.
As agreed, Tory and Miles began work early the next
day. Though there was a mountain of figures, estimates,
and documents to be compiled, the task proved to be
easier than they’d first imagined. Tory had the vision
where Miles had know-how, and they were surprised at
how easily the proposal fell together; the days simply
flew by.
For Tory it seemed like working with Maelgwn
again, and she found herself daring to trust Miles once
more. He was wonderful with Rhun, and Tory half
suspected that Rhun instinctively sensed his father in
this man. Although she was pleased they got along so
well, she would be relieved to find a place of her own
before they got too attached to each other.
Through living with Tory and Rhun, Miles
discovered a cosy kind of family bliss he’d never known
or even considered before. He loved the sound of the
saxophone wafting through the house in the late
afternoon as he cooked dinner. He loved rising at
sunrise and minding Rhun as he watched Tory practise
kata on the beach. Once again, he’d begun to wonder
about this husband of hers. Tory never mentioned him,
only that she was to meet up with him in June the
following year. Miles wanted to tell Tory how he felt
about her, but he’d decided to refrain from saying

anything until their conference with the wise and
wealthy of Britain was over.
The meeting went extremely well, far better than Miles
could have hoped. Tory’s manner and repartee was
nothing short of spellbinding, and exhibited all the
knowledge of someone three times her age. The druids,
who were primarily scholars and businessmen, were
impressed by her presentation and, in the end, were
eager to get involved.
In appreciation for a job well done, Miles insisted
on taking her out to dinner. As he’d already arranged
for Amanda to mind Rhun for the evening, Tory agreed
to the plan.
They celebrated their triumph with champagne by
candle light, and Tory’s defences dropped to an all-time
low. Miles held his glass up to her and proposed a toast,
‘To the modern miracle, Tory Alexander. Whose
presence and insight have been a godsend to this
project. And though words are inadequate, I want to
express how much I appreciate all your hard work.’
‘Well you haven’t seen my fee yet, Professor, but
you’re welcome. It’s been a pleasure.’ Tory clinked her
glass against his and had a sip. ‘Your performance today
was quite outstanding too, Miles. I have to admit, I was
fairly impressed.’
He nodded with a grin, graciously accepting the
compliment. ‘Well I had a remarkable tutor.’
Though Miles had been the perfect gentleman all
week, he was definitely seeming a bit fresh at this
moment. Tory considered this might be a good time to

bring up her living arrangements. ‘You haven’t forgotten
we’re finding me a house on Monday morning?’
Miles became mildly disgruntled by the notion. ‘It
hasn’t been so awful, has it? And my place is certainly
convenient for you and Rhun.’
‘I know it is, but that’s the whole point.’ She
reached out and placed her hand on his. ‘I don’t want to
make a convenience of you. It’s not fair and it’s not
right.’
‘I don’t mind.’ He placed his free hand on top of
hers.
‘I know you don’t, not now. But come time for us to
leave, you shall not be of the same mind, Miles. It’s
going to be hard enough as it is.’
‘Well this is a cosy little scene.’ Brian made his
disapproval felt as he seated himself at the table.
‘I’m so sorry, Miles,’ Naomi said as she caught Brian
up. ‘He saw you from the street.’
‘That’s quite alright, Naomi.’ Miles leaned back in
his chair, clearly put out by the intrusion. ‘We have
nothing to hide.’
‘I thought you weren’t going to stay at his place?’
Brian’s accusing eyes rested on his sister.
Tory sat back, folding her arms, irked that Brian saw
fit to check up on her. ‘Hi Brian, so nice to see you.’
‘Tory.’ Brian leaned over and grabbed hold of her
arm, so as to hiss quietly in her ear. ‘You’re a married
woman, and despite how much he may look like him,
the professor here is not your husband.’
‘Really?’ Tory reclaimed her arm, and in a very dry
tone said, ‘I never would have guessed.’

‘Look Brian, this is not what you think.’ Miles
attempted to defuse the situation. ‘There’s absolutely
nothing going on.’
‘Damn right, nor will there be.’ Brian stood, ready
to throw his weight around.
‘Brian, please! Sit down.’ Tory gave him a very cool
glare, but Brian didn’t comply. ‘Look, I want a place of
my own, but in all honesty I haven’t had time to find
one. I had to prepare for the conference today, which,
by the way, was very successful, thanks so much for
asking.’
‘You can stay at Naomi’s place, there’s plenty of
room there.’
‘Brian, I really don’t think this is any of your
business.’ Naomi tried to urge him to leave with her.
‘I promised him you’d be there, Tory, and I meant
it.’ Brian’s glare was intense.
‘When I need your help, I will ask for it.’
‘Brian, please, can we just leave,’ Naomi begged
him.
‘He’s not Maelgwn,’ Brian stressed again as he was
leaving.
Miles looked at Tory who was very perplexed after
her brother’s little outburst. ‘Your husband’s name is
Maelgwn?’
Tory nodded. ‘That’s how Rhun got his name. It’s a
kind of family tradition.’
‘Let me guess,’ Miles lightened the mood a little.
‘Your husband’s father’s name was Caswallon.’
‘You got it.’ Tory tried to regain her cheery mood,
but with little success.

‘Come on, we’ll fetch Rhun and go back to the
house.’
Though she thought his suggestion was sweet, Tory
realised that Brian was right; she could easily fall for
Miles if she didn’t make herself more distant from him,
and fast.
Her feeling of foreboding grew; was it wrong to have
befriended this man, knowing their attraction to each
other was inevitable? When they returned to the
cottage, Tory told Miles she wanted to take a bath and
go to bed.
Damn you Brian! Miles couldn’t see Tory allowing
such an intimate situation to arise between them again.
He dreamt of her every night now, and the impression
of urgency and love these dreams left him with grew
stronger and stronger each time. The images varied but
in his dreams Tory hardly ever appeared to be of the
modern world. This was quite alarming, with her whole
family running round claiming to have had past life
experiences. Did Tory’s mystic ways rub off on everyone
who came in contact with her?
When Tory came in from kata the next morning, Miles
announced that he planned to go into the office. He
didn’t say why he was going into the site on a Sunday
morning, but he needed to take a look at the piece of
parchment that was in the safe in his office. The night
before he had dreamt not about Tory but about a huge
room of books, written in the same hand as the
parchment they’d found at the site. He also recalled
seeing an old, old man.

‘Remember how I taught thee, concentrate,’ the old
man had instructed him with zeal. ‘For thou art there
with her now. The soul is everlasting, thou art part of
one and the same whole. Reach out.’
‘What does your friend Taliesin look like?’ Miles
asked, as he buttered some toast.
Tory gave him a peculiar expression. ‘Taliesin looks
different to different people. But to most men, he
appears old and wise. Why?’
‘No reason.’ Waves of goose bumps came over him,
and he made greater haste to get to the office. As Miles
drove, he wondered about the mysterious parchment.
Perhaps it held an explanation of the old man’s
directive.
Tory phoned Naomi to ask her to pick them up while
Miles was out. It would be easier this way, she thought,
as she wouldn’t have to argue with him about the
move.
When Naomi got the call, she was more than happy
to help. Brian hadn’t enjoyed setting his sister straight
and had been brooding over their harsh exchange of
words all night.
‘You can stop pining now, that was Tory,’ Naomi was
pleased to inform Brian as he looked such a sorry sight,
moping over a bowl of cereal. ‘Miles has gone out to the
site for the morning, so Tory asked if we could pick her
and Rhun up before he gets back.’
Brian’s spirits lifted with the news, but not in the
way Naomi expected. ‘You do that then.’ He kissed her
as he rose and pulled on his jacket.

‘Why, where are you going?’ She was bothered by
his mood, as he grabbed his car keys and headed for the
door.
‘To see Thurlow.’
Brian drove into the site and was pleased to see Miles’
car already in the carpark. He made his way to the office
and found the professor behind his desk, seemingly lost
in his thoughts as he gazed out the window. The piece
of parchment was in his hand, and Brian’s father’s report
was spread out before him.
‘I need to speak with you, Professor.’
Miles turned with a start, appearing overwhelmed to
see him. ‘Brian! Praise the Goddess, thou art here.
Where am I?’
‘Maelgwn?’ Brian recognised his brother-in-law’s
voice, but he could hardly believe that it was coming
from Miles.
‘Aye.’ The King appeared somewhat disturbed by his
dilemma.
‘Get outta town, how did thee get in there?’ Brian
peered into the man’s eyes. ‘And where be Miles, then?’
Maelgwn took hold of him and gave him a shake.
‘Brian, I have to see Tory. I do not know how long I can
remain focused. It hast been a long, long time since I
attempted something like this.’
‘Awesome.’ Brian was so amazed that he had trouble
thinking straight. ‘The phone,’ he suggested, grabbing it
and dialling Miles’ home phone number.
When his sister answered, Brian instructed, ‘Stay
there, don’t move until I get there.’ He hung up, proud

to be of service to the Dragon. ‘Come on, my car is
outside.’
Brian sped them towards Aberffraw, considering as
he drove that this morning hadn’t turned out at all as
he’d planned. His objective had been to get the
professor away from his sister, and here he was driving
him to see her. ‘So you are Miles after all?’
‘Aye, he be my twentieth-century embodiment.’
Maelgwn looked down at himself. ‘I could certainly use
a bit of building up.’
‘So where is Miles?’
‘I expect he be in here too, but only I have
conscious command.’
‘For how long?’
‘Well, that depends on how long I can concentrate,’
Maelgwn said.
‘Wow!’ Brian was utterly mind-blown.
‘I’m not as practised at mind control as I once was.’
Maelgwn regretted his lack of discipline. ‘How fares
Tory and our babe?’
‘Good, great in fact! Your son is excellent value,
Maelgwn. He even got me laid!’
Maelgwn was amused to hear this. ‘Naomi?’
‘Scoop, ay?’ Brian gave him a wink, becoming more
serious. ‘This guy, Miles, he has his eye on Tory.’
Maelgwn gave half a laugh. ‘Somehow, Brian, I do
not find that at all surprising. What dost Tory think of
him?’
‘Not much at first, but lately they seem to be getting
along better.’ Brian couldn’t work out what to make of
the relationship now. ‘Does that bother you?’

‘I do not know,’ Maelgwn answered, then became
quiet as he contemplated the question, but his deliberation was cut short when Brian pulled into the
driveway of the cottage.
‘Could it be that I still own this place?’ Maelgwn
asked, recognising the landscape. ‘After all this time.’
He climbed out of the car and wandered in circles for a
moment.
‘This way old son.’ Brian steered Maelgwn towards
the front door. ‘She’s in here.’
When Tory saw Brian come through the door with
Miles, she nearly had a fit. ‘Thanks a lot bro.’ Tory
thought it must look wonderful to the professor, her
sitting there all packed up and ready to leave.
‘We have a surprise.’ Brian turned to Maelgwn, who
stood speechless staring at his beautiful slender wife
with their child in her arms. Brian gave him a shove to
wake him up, yet Maelgwn was still hesitant to speak.
The King’s eyes darted across to Naomi. Brian became
aware of the problem, so he grabbed hold of her and
quickly escorted her towards the door.
‘Tory, it be me,’ Maelgwn ventured in a whisper.
Tory knew her husband’s sweet resounding voice at
once, and her eyes closed with relief. Thank you.
‘What’s going on now?’ Naomi asked Brian, as she
watched Miles and Tory come together for a fevered
kiss. ‘What’s wrong with Miles’ voice?’
‘I’ve been giving him lessons,’ Brian explained,
picking Naomi up and carrying her out of the room.
After a long embrace, Maelgwn turned to the baby.
‘Oh Tory, he be so fine!’

She gently placed Rhun in Maelgwn’s arms and the
look of pride on his face said it all. ‘There’s not a thing
wrong with him, he’s as strong as an ox,’ she said.
‘I can see that.’ Maelgwn held out the child to
admire his form.
Tory gazed at Maelgwn, ever astounded at the scope
of his abilities. ‘How hast thou managed this?’
Maelgwn remembered his task suddenly, holding
Rhun closer to himself. ‘That not be a concern at
present. First I must warn thee, I have seen Mahaud
here. The night I left she was waiting at the stones.’
His claim brought to her mind Rose’s dream. ‘Well I
have seen no sign of her, though I think Rose dreamt
she saw her in the kitchen back in Oxfordshire. That’s
one of the reasons I moved here.’
‘A wise move too, this be fairy country. If Mahaud
dared to set foot here her powers would be considerably
weakened.’ Maelgwn kissed the top of his son’s head,
relieved to find them both safe and well.
‘How long art thou here?’ Tory’s tone became more
intimate.
‘I cannot say . . . perhaps a day, perhaps less. So thee
must listen to me carefully.’
Maelgwn rekindled her knowledge of the nine
metaphysical laws, so that she might better be able to
physically defend herself against Mahaud. These laws,
revealed by the nine muses of the cauldron, were the
Law of Rebound, the Law of Challenge, the Law of
Equalities, the Law of Summons, the Law of Polarities,
the Law of Abundance, the Law of Balance, the Law of
Cause and Effect, and the Law of Three Requests.

He said Taliesin had suggested that Tory try to make
contact with the fairy folk to seek their assistance and
protection. Apparently the elementals that occupied
this land were more than familiar with the crone, for
they had withstood her evil intent throughout the
centuries to maintain a free reign here, and indeed,
throughout most of Britain. The nine laws applied to
dealing with the nature kingdoms also, especially the
Law of Summons. It was, therefore, doubly important
for Tory to know the laws by heart. The Merlin was
quite sure his mother’s kin would come to the party, but
only if they were specifically invited. Maelgwn then
passed on Taliesin’s advice as to how she might win the
trust and favour of the folk.
This instruction was sheer heaven to Tory, for it was
the kind of knowledge she’d craved, and missed since
leaving the Dark Age.
Maelgwn also confirmed her father’s true identity.
He conveyed Taliesin’s claim that Mahaud had been
the reason Myrddin had shed his great knowledge for a
time, and with the assistance of the Goddess, he’d
disguised his form so that he would not even know
himself. Taliesin, Keridwen and Myrddin deemed this
to be a necessary precaution to avoid detection by the
negative forces that constantly worked against them.
When the time came to put their divine plan into
action, Myrddin would seek out his true self. So, with
Mahaud at large waiting to corrupt anyone who showed
enough negative potential, Maelgwn urged Tory to
warn her father, as the evil witch had tricked him
before.

The King decided it would be best for Tory and
Rhun to stay here at Aberffraw, for this was the land
and burial place of his great ancestors. All of them were
here, and Maelgwn felt they would surely be keeping
guard over Gwynedd’s heir.
Tory hated to question his wish but she felt that this
arrangement was not really fair on Miles.
‘Tory, I promise that he will understand so much
more now, thou shalt not have to lie anymore.’
‘Maelgwn . . . !’ Tory took a seat on his lap. ‘Thou
art missing the point. I am driving the poor man out of
his mind, not to mention thy visions of me plaguing his
sleep.’
‘Sorry, I could not help it. I had to focus on thy
image to find thee, and in my fondest memories thou art
always naked, or becoming thus.’ He sounded rather
casual about the whole thing, until his hold over Miles
began to weaken. ‘I was not to know Miles was
perceiving the all of it.’
‘Maelgwn, what be wrong?’ Tory held his head
firmly between her hands. ‘Please, not yet, I am not
ready to let thee go.’ As Tory became distressed, so did
Rhun. ‘Maelgwn?’ The tears began to stream down her
face as the lids of his eyes closed, and his head became a
heavy weight in her hand. ‘I miss thee.’ She held his
unconscious form until her weeping had ceased.
Brian was at the front door within the hour. He was
funny like that, he always seemed to sense when Tory
needed him. From the state he found her in, he
presumed that Maelgwn had left.

‘How did Miles react?’ Brian asked.
‘He’s still passed out,’ she told him meekly. ‘What
am I going to say to him, Brian?’
Her brother didn’t see a problem. ‘Tell him I
punched him out at his office and he must have dreamt
the whole thing. That explains why he’s missed a whole
day.’
‘I cannot lie to him.’ Tory had never had to lie in
her life, she’d just stretched the truth a bit here and
there. ‘Lying is for cowards who are too afraid to face
the truth.’
Brian shrugged as he came to sit beside her and
began to stoke the fire.
‘Brian, where’s Naomi?’
‘She’s not talking to me.’ He wasn’t angry, just sad
and resigned.
‘She started asking questions you couldn’t answer?’
Brian nodded. He wanted to keep their secret, yet it
was becoming increasingly difficult with all that had
gone on in the past few months. ‘She said if I don’t trust
her by now I never will. But I do, Tory.’
She took a deep breath. Naomi was part of all this
now but Tory was not sure if she was ready for it. ‘Call
her up, get her over here,’ she resolved with a smile.
‘No, on second thoughts, I’ll do it.’
‘You’re the best.’ Brian hugged her, as she reached
for the phone.
Tory had long since disappeared with Naomi along the
beach when Miles finally emerged from the depths of
his slumber to find Brian making coffee in his kitchen.

Brian saw him slouched in the doorway of the
bedroom and moved quickly to help him to a seat.
‘How’s it going, Professor?’
‘As well as could be expected.’ Miles was shaking,
though he was neither cold nor fearful. It was pure
awareness that made him tremble, and it passed over
him in waves, alerting all his senses.
‘Do you remember much?’ Brian thought he’d try to
calm the way for Tory, if he could.
‘I have seen . . .’ Miles held his head with both
hands; he remembered so much he didn’t know where
to start. ‘Where is Tory?’ he panicked, thinking that she
may have left.
‘She’s on the beach, clearing up a few things with
Naomi for me. They’ll be back presently, I hope.’ He
walked into the kitchen to get the professor some
coffee. ‘But if there’s something on your mind, feel free
to ask. I know most of what Tory knows.’
In the depths of Maelgwn’s memory, Miles recalled
seeing Brian as the dark warlord of the past. ‘I know
thee. I mean, you, Brian, or is it Brockwell?’
Brian nearly dropped the cup in his hand. ‘Oh shit.’
Tory and Naomi had walked all the way to the cliff top
that overlooked the ocean, and sat watching the waves
crashing against the rocks below. Naomi stared at the
photos of Katren and Brockwell, appearing at a loss for
words.
‘Are you okay?’
‘Oh yes,’ Naomi confirmed in earnest. ‘This explains
so many things, it’s as if I have been released from

death, somehow.’ She beamed with happiness. ‘I always
knew there was more to this life, and now I find I was
right. I am grateful that you confided in me. I was too
harsh on Brian, I should have known he would have
told me, if he could.’
‘Make no mistake, Naomi, Brian loves you. Always
has, always will.’
Naomi was touched. ‘I had you all wrong. I won’t be
so quick to judge in future.’
‘Tory!’ Brian came racing towards them. ‘He’s
awake.’
‘How much does he remember?’ Tory got to her feet
as he reached them.
‘Well, he called me Brockwell.’
Tory entered the house with her heart in her mouth.
‘How are you?’
‘Feeling more myself now, thanks.’ He smiled.
‘I’m so sorry, Miles.’
‘Please don’t apologise. You were right, even if you
had confided in me, I wouldn’t have believed you . . .
not in a million years. I have learnt much these past few
days, about a great many things.’ Miles shook his head,
unable to believe that after so many years of study and
travel, one could still be naive to the ways of the world.
Tory sat down opposite him, finding comfort in his
resolve.
‘That’s some man you’re married to, talk about a
lateral thinker! After being granted a glimpse of my past,
I’m not surprised that you’ve been frustrated with me.’
Tory noticed him trembling and pulled a large
blanket from the back of the lounge to place around his

shoulders. ‘Miles, I’m not entirely convinced that it was
your past.’
‘But the time period I saw couldn’t have been later
than . . .’
‘Sixth century.’
‘So that is the past, no?’
Tory smiled and shook her head. ‘No. Time is an
illusion, you won’t still be running your life around a
clock when you’re dead, Miles. Your soul mind could
choose to go anywhere, backwards, forwards or sideways
– as in another dimension or an alternative reality. That
would depend on what you were ready to conceive of
and that which you needed to learn. I have already
passed through all these different realms. I was born in
the 1960s, but in a world far removed from this one . . .
more polluted, with more prejudices, wars, hatred and
greed than at present. I know I am not mistaken about
this, as in the reality I originally stemmed from, Brian
died four years ago.’
Miles shook with another burst of awareness. He
could almost feel his brain expanding to absorb all the
possibilities. ‘You are a phenomenon.’
Tory shook her head modestly. ‘I had very little to
do with it.’
Miles wasn’t referring to her travels, but to what
she’d accomplished through them. He had seen her
hailed as a queen and a goddess, a sensei and a warrior, a
teacher and an adviser to kings – the same kings who
had indeed changed the course of British history.
‘Maelgwn was right. I understand why you must return,
and I would be honoured to have you and Rhun stay

with me under the protection of this house and our
forefathers until that time.’
‘Miles, that’s a lovely thing to say. Still it is I who
art beholden.’ She crouched down before him and took
his hands. ‘Thank you so much for understanding, but
it’s close to eight months till summer solstice, so you’d
better think about this a while.’
He slowly shook his head, very calmly. ‘There is no
question, not with that witch on the loose. You are
staying here, even if I have to move out.’
‘Well then.’ Tory warmed to a smile. ‘We’ll see how
we go.’
Tory called her father in Oxfordshire, as Maelgwn
had suggested, and passed on the message from Taliesin
regarding Mahaud. Renford confessed that since she’d
moved to Mon, he’d visited many of the sites that had
been associated with Myrddin and had felt and seen
nothing that would lead him to believe that he was who
Maelgwn claimed.
‘Even Dinas Emrys?’ Tory asked.
‘Even there.’
Tory couldn’t understand this at all. She insisted
that her father must stop harbouring doubts and asked
that he keep looking, as she knew Taliesin was never
wrong.
Life was very tranquil at the cottage in Aberffraw until
one afternoon, late in December, when Teo showed up
to pay Tory a visit. They’d spoken a couple of times on
the phone since she’d left Oxfordshire, but he hadn’t
mentioned driving up to Mon.

‘Teo, what a surprise!’ She met him in the garden, a
little startled by his presence.
‘Hey sunshine.’ He climbed out of the car. ‘It was
getting a bit chilly down home, so I thought I’d pay you
a visit.’
He was in a wonderful mood as he walked up to
meet her, until he spied Miles standing in the doorway
with Rhun. Teo came to a halt, his mood changing
immediately. ‘I thought you’d gone away somewhere on
business?’
Miles didn’t know this guy very well, but he recalled
Maelgwn hadn’t liked him much and in his arms Rhun
became disgruntled at the sight of him. ‘What difference does it make?’
‘Miles.’ Tory cautioned him to stay out of it; this was
none of his business.
‘Hey, what gives?’ Teo realised this wasn’t Tory’s
husband at all, but someone who looked very much like
him. ‘Are you living with this guy?’
‘We’re working together.’
Teo backed up, seeming disillusioned with her. ‘Yeah
right,’ he shook his head and headed back to the car.
‘Thanks so much for the benefit of the doubt. Think
what you will then.’
‘If it’s all so innocent, why didn’t you tell me?’ Teo
chose to pursue the argument, as he usually did, and
Tory didn’t appreciate his tone of voice.
‘I don’t have to answer to you.’
‘Damn right, I’m history.’
After taking a moment to get over her pride, Tory
went after him. ‘Are you going back to Oxfordshire?’

‘What do you care?’ He slammed the car door as the
engine roared to life. ‘Friends don’t hide things from
each other.’ He glared into her eyes for a moment, and
Tory was startled as his pupils flashed red.
‘No, Teo wait. Please!’ she cried as the car tore off
down the drive.
‘Wow, what an arsehole.’ Miles came out to join her.
‘We’ve got to find him. I think I know where
Mahaud has been hiding out.’

26

Tylwyth Teg

T

heir search proved fruitless. Tory called Brian at
home to warn the family to keep an eye out for
Teo. But she wasn’t sure what to advise them to
do if they did meet up with him, beyond trying to act
completely normal.
Her father phoned her straight back to tell her
about what he’d seen in her room when she was at Llyn
Cerrig Bach that first time. He and Rose had just
spoken, each about their experience that night.
Between what Renford had witnessed and Rose’s nightmare, they had managed to piece together how the
events they witnessed may have unfolded. Renford was
sorry he hadn’t mentioned the occurrence sooner, but
he’d convinced himself it must have been his
imagination playing tricks on him.
Tory had been right in saying that the witch
couldn’t survive in the harmonious environment of the

house, that’s why Teo chose to stay in the gym. This
latest case of possession also explained why Teo was so
much more himself when he was in frequent contact
with her family. Tory supposed that her own
disappearance, and Brian blaming him for it, might
have been so traumatic that it created sufficient
negativity around Teo for the witch to attach herself to
him. Now Mahaud had only to feed Teo’s negativity
with any mixture from her select menu of deadly
emotions: hate, fear, jealousy, greed, pride, excess, lust,
and the like. This sustained her until such time as Teo
was evil enough to generate the right amount of
negative energy to manifest her own wicked form. Teo
was a mighty powerful soul and Tory didn’t like to think
what could eventuate if Mahaud fully possessed such a
warrior.
This was what Teo meant when he’d said he wasn’t
himself. He had repeatedly asked Tory to help him, but
she hadn’t understood what kind of help he needed.
She could see now why he was always touching her.
Tory thought back to the day Teo had learnt of her
return. During the course of their confrontation, as long
as she’d been touching him he’d remained calm; the
conflict of energy within him must have been what
caused him to cry.
Rose also brought to Tory’s attention the fact that
Teo had chosen to visit the cottage at Mon on the last
day of the thirteenth month, by the old calendar. The
Nameless Day. The thought sent shivers down Tory’s
spine. This was the time of the year when the Dark
Queen, in her destructive aspect, was most powerful.

Tory thanked the Goddess now that Miles had been
present, or she surely would have invited Teo inside.
This, no doubt, would have sealed her son’s fate. The
power of the enchanted land where she was living to
dispel evil would not apply if she invited an evil
presence onto it.
I have to be smarter than this, I should have
known! Tory scolded herself, considering it was high
time she sought professional help.
She’d been mulling over Maelgwn’s instruction in
regard to contacting the elementals of the Middle
Kingdoms, or the Tylwyth Teg as he called them. She’d
brought herself up to scratch on the nine laws, and now
felt as ready as she would ever be to form such an
alliance.
Although the devas of the Otherworld were as
varied as the more physical species of life on earth, they
had four main groupings belonging to one or more of
the four elements that constitute all physical matter.
Salamanders were fire fairies that would appear to
the naked eye as nothing more than the bright little
sparks dancing around above a camp fire. They could be
found in a soft burning candle flame, swaying before
your eyes, relaxing your mind and your mood. But they
could also manifest as a huge, raging monster,
mercilessly laying waste to everything in its path. As
Tory had grown up in Australia, she had come face to
face with this element in the native bushland many
times. Although the destruction did seem harsh, fire was
simply part of nature’s replenishing process. She’d been
told that fire, being the first element of creation, was

also the least accommodating to humans. The
Salamanders personified courage, creativity, valour, and
loyalty – the traits most lacking in modern society. If
one didn’t grasp these traits, it would be dangerous to
seek Salamanders. Still, Taliesin had predicted that Tory
should fare well with them.
Sylphs, the devas of the air, were the second
element of creation. They concerned themselves mostly
with learning and the intellect, adaptability and travel,
and anything to do with speed or thought. These
elementals are commonly found floating about in the
mists of Britain. In addition, they are the howling
demons who couple with the other elements to incite
storms of dirt, fire and water. Tory had always been an
ardent student, and with all the travelling she’d been
doing lately, she figured she and this element had a bit
in common.
The third element of creation was water, and its
race was known as the Ondines. Tory believed she may
have brushed with this clan on the night of her swim, as
something had certainly been guiding her through the
dark watery depths. These water devas concerned
themselves mainly with emotions, one’s understanding,
receptivity and sympathy.
The Gnomes of the Earth represented the fourth
element of creation. Tory had been born under the sign
of Taurus, and as an Earth sign she showed the traits of
practicality, conversation, thrift, and abundance.
She had been advised that the key to communicating with any life form was to first win its favour and
trust. The best way to do this was simply to offer

something that the particular elemental might fancy or
need, and then introduce yourself. What on earth
would an element desire, Tory wondered. Maelgwn
hadn’t worked with the fairy kingdoms much, although
his mother had. He had advised Tory that the task of an
elemental, besides its care of Mother Earth, was to try to
obtain its four-fold nature. That is, the understanding of
the other three elemental groups aside from that to
which it already belonged. This was one of the few areas
in which fairies found the human race could actually be
of assistance to them, as people were made up of all four
elements. Therefore, Tory considered at great length
what she might offer the differing clans, to help them
better understand the traits of the others.
One evening, when Tory found she had the house
to herself, she impatiently waited until dusk to perform
the rites. Sunrise or sunset was the best time to attempt
to communicate with the folk. Tory had chosen sunset
because in Wiccan belief, this was the time for truth
finding rather than new beginnings, as sunrise would
suggest. So as the sun sank low in the sky, Tory headed
to the beach bearing her gifts and enough wood to make
a fire on the sand.
Rhun was comfortably resting in his pouch against
her chest, taking a great interest in what his mother was
doing. So much so that Tory was forced to turn him
round, so that he might have a better view and stop his
squirming.
Tory stood with the ocean to her west, as this was
the water element’s associated direction. The fire was
blazing to the south, while a mound of sand to her

north represented the earth. She had borrowed a sword
that usually hung on the wall of Miles’ living room, and
she stuck it into the sand pointing east; in the sacred
tarot and ritual of the druids, the air was represented
and summoned by a sword.
As she’d been advised to always address the
elements in the order of their creation, Tory turned to
face the fire and stated in the old tongue, ‘My name be
Tory Alexander, Queen of Gwynedd, and messenger of
the Goddess. Denizens of the Otherworld, I come before
thee now, seeking thy wise counsel and protection.’
Tory turned to each symbol and direction in turn.
Come to my aid ye of Fire,
the fire that first gave me life.
Hear my plea, ye of Air,
the breath of life that set me free.
I seek thy comfort ye of Water,
purge me and bring me clarity.
Be my support ye of Earth,
the mother that has always nurtured me.
Rhun began to chuckle with delight, his arms outstretched as his eyes darted about in wonder; Tory was
curious to know what he saw that she could not.
She approached each symbol bearing the gift she
wished to bestow, again in order of their creation. To the
Fire she gave her pocket encyclopaedia, explaining that
perhaps it might better understand the air’s great thirst
for knowledge. She moved to the sword and tossed a
tissue to the wind. This tissue held tears she’d shed when
pining for her love. Tory expressed that she hoped the

Sylphs might better grasp the emotional depths of water.
Tory then wandered to the water’s edge and sprinkled it
with fresh rose petals, so that the Ondines might
experience some of the earth’s sweet pleasures. And
lastly, in the mound of sand, Tory buried a hand-written
copy of the small verse she’d used to request the presence
of the elementals, as it was as close as she’d come to
Fire’s creative talents of late. She’d wrapped inside the
paper one of her rings, some Australian coins, and a few
other little trinkets she thought they might like. Gnomes
were very predisposed towards material possessions, and
relished unusual bits and pieces made of any sort of
metal, especially gold. She then returned to the centre of
the circle and stated her woes in regard to Mahaud.
Afterwards, Tory thanked the elementals in turn for
listening. She requested politely that if any of them
thought or heard of anything that might help to guard
her child from the crone, to please let her know. She
then bid them all good tidings and a goodnight.
With her task completed she kicked sand on the fire
to put it out, stamped the sandy mound down hard, and
retrieved the sword, bowing to the ocean. She then
wandered back to the house with Rhun, basking in the
light of a beautiful moon. Although nothing miraculous
had happened to prove she’d made contact with the
occupants of the deva kingdoms, within herself, Tory
felt closer to the divine, that unexplainable force from
whence all life stems.
The next day Tory rose before sunrise as usual, to feed
and change Rhun before kata. Miles was up and about

also and, after making himself a cup of tea, he took
Rhun to escort Tory down to the beach.
It was a beautiful morning, not cold at all. The dim
sky was perfectly clear, as was the air. After Tory had
kissed Rhun and continued on her way, Miles sat down
with the baby on the stairs. This ritual had been the
same every morning since the snow melted. Yet this day,
for reasons unknown, Rhun began to cry as he watched
his mother depart.
Miles didn’t know what to do. This had never
happened before. ‘Tory,’ he called her back. ‘Are you
upset about something?’
‘No,’ she assured him as she jogged back up the stairs
to see what the problem was, whereupon Rhun calmed
down and was as sweet as pie. Tory shrugged, a little
baffled, then turned to leave them once more, but before
she’d reached the bottom step, Rhun began crying again.
So Miles decided to follow Tory down to the beach, and
Rhun seemed quite content to sit in Miles’ lap and watch.
Tory hadn’t been at her exercise but five minutes
when a mist came rolling in over the water. As it
enveloped them, they were astonished to find that the
haze gave host to hundreds of tiny balls of light.
‘Unbelievable,’ Miles said as the child in his arms
began squealing with elation, openly reflecting his
mother’s mind.
‘They must have liked our offerings, hey?’ Tory
acknowledged Rhun’s excitement.
‘Tory.’ Miles’ face turned as pale as a sheet.
She turned to see what had him scared him so, and
at first glimpse Tory thought his horror was due to

naught but a horse. Yet, as the animal came closer, she
noticed the horn on its forehead. ‘What do I do?’ Tory
said to Miles; she wasn’t good with animals.
‘You’re asking me?’ Miles could barely speak, let
alone think. ‘Just don’t touch it. According to fairytales,
they can only be touched by a virgin.’ He grinned.
Tory took a few hesitant steps towards the beautiful
white beast before bowing to it. To her surprise the
animal stopped and bowed to her also. Then, to
discredit Miles’ claim, the unicorn came forward to
place its snout under Tory’s hand and gave her a soft
nudge.
‘I could be wrong, of course,’ Miles said, admitting
he stood corrected.
Like me, thou art eternally virtuous, Tory was
informed by a sweet and somewhat mischievous male
voice. ‘Who are you?’ she asked as she stroked the
animal’s nose gently.
A messenger.
‘And what be thy message?’ Tory smiled, delighted
they were understanding each other so well.
Miles was confused; Tory appeared to be having a
conversation with the animal, yet all he could hear was
the singing of a choir – the voices more beautiful than
anything he’d ever heard.
The adverse presence that plagues thee hast gone into
hiding and shall remain thus until both thy homes are within
thy sight. She desires to keep thee here, but it be not safe for
thy babe. The child must return.
The animal began to back away, the mist thickening
in its wake.

‘What are you saying, that I do not go? I must!’ Tory
pleaded. ‘Taliesin has left for Atlantis, and I have no
way of contacting him if I am delayed again.’
The long road home be no longer. The mist consumed
the beast completely.
‘Wait,’ Tory pursued it. ‘I don’t think I understand.’
Tory came to a standstill when she realised her chase
was useless. I don’t want to understand. Please don’t let
anything go wrong, I couldn’t bear another year here alone.
Time proved the unicorn right; no one saw or heard
from Teo, not even Brian. Tory worried for his safety, as
Mahaud would be feeding his lesser desires to increase
her power.
Tory had more or less left the project at Llyn Cerrig
Bach since her job there was done. She’d been spending
all the money she’d earnt on necessities to take back
with her and gifts for all the friends she so dearly
missed, the largest of which was a Spanish guitar for
Selwyn. Tory just hoped all the excess baggage she was
carting wouldn’t be too much of a strain on poor
Taliesin.
Days before Tory was due to depart, her father and
Aunt Rose made the trip up to Mon. Tory had told
them of the Otherworld warning, thus none of them
were prepared to take Rhun from the protection of the
property at Aberffraw until the last minute.
Brian, who had classes to teach, said he would meet
Tory at the stones to say goodbye. They’d spent a lot of
time together of late, and neither one wanted to stretch
out their farewell. Her brother was presently of two

minds; he didn’t want Tory to leave but he couldn’t go
back with her either, as Naomi was now pregnant with
their child and so his life was here.
Miles, too, would prove hard to leave behind, Tory
thought. His support and company had been nothing
short of a godsend to her. Yes, she was in love with him,
and she hoped that when her time with Maelgwn had
come to an end she would somehow be able to find
Miles again.
In the early hours of the eve of the summer solstice,
Miles was wrapped up in a blanket on his lounge still
wide awake. Tory would soon leave him, and his heart
wouldn’t let him rest. It was near daybreak when he
heard weeping coming from his room, and he walked
quietly over to find the door open. Moonlight streamed
in through the window onto Tory who was propped up
on her pillows, her head in her hands.
‘Are you alright?’ he asked in a whisper, fearing he
would wake the child.
‘Damn it,’ Tory cursed upon seeing him in the
doorway. ‘I didn’t want to wake you.’
‘Who can sleep?’ he joked, leaning against the doorframe to support his weary head.
‘You’ve been so good to us, Miles. It’s not fair the
way things worked out.’
‘Oh I don’t know, it’s not really so bad. The project
is coming along nicely, I’ve got this new head space to
explore, and I even had a family for a while.’
Tory’s heart split in two, as she knew how hard it
was for him to refrain from saying what he really felt. ‘If

I wasn’t married I would stay, really I would. Perhaps
someday . . .’
Tory stopped abruptly and Miles moved closer. ‘Go
on.’
‘Forget it.’ Tory had a mental flash of Miles still
waiting around for her when he was sixty and her never
showing. She couldn’t make him a promise she wasn’t
sure she could keep.
‘Tory.’ Miles knew she was edging around something. ‘I love you.’ He sat down and took hold of her. ‘If
there is any way you can foresee that we can be together
in this life, I want you to tell me.’
‘I love you too,’ she admitted, softly. ‘I can promise
I’ll try to find my way back here, Miles, but the cosmos
works in strange ways, so you must not wait for me.’ She
gave a heavy sigh. ‘I’m going to miss you, Professor.’ The
tears began to flow again down her cheeks. ‘I just don’t
know where I’m supposed to be anymore. No matter
where I am, I will always miss someone else, somewhere
else.’ She raised her eyes to look at him.
‘That’s the story of my life.’ Miles placed his arm
around her. ‘But from what I can gather, we shall be
together at some point. So we’ll just look forward to
then, shall we?’
Tory nodded with a sniffle.
‘Alright then.’ He let go of her to take up his
blanket. ‘I’ll see you at breakfast.’
‘Goodnight, and thanks again, for everything.’
‘Anytime.’
She lay down to sleep, but her anxiety made a
mockery of her attempt. This time tomorrow I shall be

with him, and nothing will go wrong, she told herself. Yet
all the while in the back of her mind, the Otherworld
prophecy played on her fears.
Brian had finished his last class for the day and decided
to take a shower while he awaited Naomi’s arrival. They
planned to eat dinner somewhere then meet up with
everyone at the stones later. Tory and the others had
planned not to arrive at the site until a half an hour
before midnight, to minimise the danger.
By the time Brian was dressed Naomi still wasn’t
there, so he presumed she was just running late, as
usual. Glancing out his bedroom window, he spied her
car and, to his horror, Teo’s as well.
This sent him rocketing downstairs, and outside to
investigate. Brian found no trace of either of them,
though the engines of both cars were still warm. If he
touches her, his life won’t be worth living. Brian crept
around the side of the house to the gym. As he peeked
his head around the corner he was startled by Teo,
waiting for him. The laughter that echoed from his
friend chilled Brian to the bone.
Teo looked and smelt awful, sick even. His features
appeared more hardened than before, dark rings circled
his eyes and his whole body exuded perspiration. When
his laughter ceased, Teo’s mere breathing was a worry as
it loudly resounded with the growling presence of a
beast – like a lion but more human.
‘What’s happening, bro?’ Brian thought he’d best
handle this calmly.
Teo smiled, the pupils of his eyes burning red. He

motioned Brian to follow him down to the gym, then
disappeared into thin air.
‘Oh shit!’ Brian looked about him, then back to the
gym where his friend reappeared. Teo opened the door
and vanished into a red haze that appeared to emanate
from inside, closing the door behind him with a laugh.
‘Naomi!’ Brian tore to the door. After battling to
open it, he was overwhelmed by the abomination he
found seething within.
The gym floor dropped away into a bottomless fiery
pit that was crawling with life forms so hideous and vile
smelling, that Brian gagged on the first whiff of their
putrid existence. Evil spirits joined to form a whirlwind
of red gases which girded the centre of the room. Here
Naomi was huddled, terrified by the hellish abyss
surrounding her. She didn’t dare raise her head as the
archfiends in the whirlwind lunged at her to frighten
her back into retreat.
Holy Mother! Brian gasped; he’d taught a class in
here not an hour before.
Teo appeared again on the island in the centre
where Naomi was stranded. He took hold of a clump of
her hair, dragging the sobbing girl to her feet.
‘Teo, you son-of-a-bitch, I know you’re in there
somewhere. Don’t you hurt her.’ Brian was at a loss for
what to do.
‘Oh, we don’t want to hurt her.’ The creature that
was Teo put his arms around Naomi. ‘We like her.’ He
licked her cheek.
‘Brian!’ Naomi struggled to get away from Teo’s
restraint, she was going to be sick.

‘And,’ Teo added, passing a hand over her belly and
raising his eyebrows.
‘What do you want?’ Brian snarled, as if he had to
ask.
‘We want Tory of Gwynedd.’ Teo’s own voice was
now completely drowned out by the other. It gargled
and snarled so loudly that Naomi passed out from
shock. ‘Bring her back to us. And be sure she brings the
child with her, or thee shall pay with the life of thy
own!’ The force of the words blew Brian back from the
doorway and the door slammed closed.
He sprang to his feet, but the door handle burnt the
flesh of his hands and Brian was forced to let go. Although
the evil voice that stemmed from Teo sounded male,
Brian knew well enough who it was. ‘The bitch must pay!’
He kicked the door, melting the toe of his shoe.
They were doing splendidly, Tory thought, arriving at
the stones with only fifteen minutes to spare. But when
Brian met her with his news, Tory was frustrated to
admit that the Otherworld had been right; she was not
going anywhere, just yet.
She was no longer afraid of facing Mahaud, now she
was just plain angry. ‘What does it take! All I want is for
my husband, myself, and our child to be together in the
one place, at the one time. Really! Am I asking too
much!’ Tory shouted at the heavens. She asked for a
pen and paper to quickly write a note, which she tied
around Rhun’s waist so it would not go astray.
‘Be brave little one, thy father awaits thee at the
other end.’ Tory lay Maelgwn’s medallion across Rhun

for protection and kissed him goodbye, for who knows
how long. Still, she remained calm and accepting so as
not to unduly upset him.
As Brian witnessed his sister leave her child’s basket
in the middle of the circle, he became alarmed. ‘She
said you had to bring Rhun.’
‘And the folk said he had to go back to his father.’
Tory was not in any mood to be reckoned with. ‘Don’t
worry, I have a plan.’
‘Tory! You weren’t there, you didn’t see’
‘You wouldn’t believe what I’ve seen!’ she roared.
‘And I’m telling you, if you march in there unprepared
she’s going to fry us all.’
‘Listen to her, Brian, she’s right.’ Miles knew from
Maelgwn’s recollections of the instance to which Tory
referred.
‘What are you going to do, child?’ Renford wished
he could help but he wasn’t very knowledgeable about
such things.
‘We’re going to find your bloody memory . . .’
A cloud appeared in the night sky, and lightning
flashed down to make contact with the King’s Stone.
Tory could feel Rhun’s fear and he began to cry. She
wished with all her heart that she could run to his
comfort, and into the comfort of Maelgwn’s arms, yet
somehow she remained still as the mist ascended into
the heavens, her child along with it. ‘Myrddin is my
only way back now.’
The basket containing Rhun materialised in the Dark
Age, along with all Tory’s gifts. But everyone at the

stones became disgruntled when, once again, their
Sensei did not show.
‘Be this in thy plan, also?’ Maelgwn angrily quizzed
Taliesin, as he approached the manifestation to claim
his son.
The Merlin didn’t have to answer, the look of
horror on his face said it all.
The King held his child, who had grown so since
their last meeting, and read out aloud the note he
carried.
Major problem hast erupted. Mahaud.
Could use thy help, if thee can lend it.
I am seeking Myrddin. WAIT FOR ME.
Love thee, miss thee, Tory.
‘Maelgwn, you must concentrate right now. Every
second thee wastes, be hours, days passing,’ Taliesin
urged, somewhat bewildered by this unforeseen
development.
‘Well, am I not there too!’ Brockwell pointed out,
stepping forward. ‘I am not afraid of the witch, we’ve
met before.’
‘True,’ Taliesin considered his plea, motioning the
King to the spot before him. ‘But Maelgwn hast been
taught certain techniques that enhance his soul’s
mobility and allow him to concentrate for extended
lengths of time.’
‘But with thy help, High Merlin,’ Brockwell
insisted. ‘Please, can I not try?’
‘No harm in that, I suppose.’ Taliesin ushered him
to a seat beside Maelgwn.

Maelgwn passed the child to Katren. ‘I want my
Queen back before this night hast passed,’ he
announced to Taliesin in warning.
The Merlin was weary from incanting and running a
tad short on patience. ‘Then let us get on with it.’ He
placed one hand on Brockwell’s forehead, the other on
Maelgwn’s. ‘Close thy eyes now, and be at peace.’
Miles drove all night and the party reached Dinas Emrys
by dawn. As they climbed out of the car and stretched,
Tory woke her father who’d slept most of the way.
Upon finding himself at the site, Renford was convinced they would only be disappointed by pursuing the
legend of Myrddin’s cave here. ‘Tory, my sweet, didn’t I
tell you I have already sought out this area to no avail?’
‘But the legend required a blond-haired, blue-eyed
youth,’ Tory said as she waved Brian over. ‘Does it not
make sense that your son would be the key?’
‘I’m not a youth!’
‘Compared to Myrddin,’ Tory threw an arm around
Brian’s shoulder, ‘you’re a baby. Let’s go.’ She gave him a
slap on the back and headed off towards the mountain.
Aunt Rose, although she would loved to have gone,
settled back in the car. Poor Renford, however, was
obliged to make the hike.
‘Come on, Dad,’ Brian urged him along, as Miles
gave him a hand.
Tory led them round the base of the mountain, and
Miles drew her attention to the mist rolling in. They all
stopped in their tracks as the haze rolled over the
landscape and surrounded them. There were no lights

this time, but as the legend stated, there were bells –
sweet, resounding bells – that filled the senses with a
lovely feeling of peace.
‘I think we might be onto something,’ Renford said,
though he didn’t sound too keen, especially when he
heard the growling.
From the mist emerged a large, black, wolf-like dog,
its eyes blazing yellow, its upper lip raised to expose its
huge, white fangs.
‘Easy boy.’ Miles attempted to calm the animal but
it only snarled louder, forcing him to back up before it
took off his hand. ‘Jesus Tory, are you sure about this?’
‘Allow me.’ Brian came forward to try his luck.
As soon as it caught sight of Brian, the dog humbled
itself. It began to whimper as it approached him, as if
apologising for mistaking him.
‘Hey boy.’ Brian absolutely loved dogs, so he
rumbled and patted the animal affectionately. ‘I think
he likes me, hey?’ He then looked at the dog rather
curiously and asked, ‘Did you say something?’ He paused
for confirmation. ‘Yeah, we are as a matter of fact.’
The dog took off in front of him.
‘Okay.’ Brian stood to follow the animal, presuming
everyone else had heard their conversation. ‘Well come
on, you heard the dog.’ He rolled his eyes and
disappeared into the mist.
‘Oh dear,’ was all Renford could say as he obliged.
‘I just love your style of archaeology,’ Miles
commented to Tory as they fell in behind the others.
The dog led them to a stone wall in the cliff face at
the base of the mountain, and instead of stopping before

it as expected, the animal disappeared into the stone
obstruction. Brian reached out to the rock face before
him, passing his hand through it. ‘Whoa, way cool!’ He
motioned everyone in behind him as he penetrated
beyond.
‘I don’t believe it.’ Renford paused halfway,
unwilling to face his destiny. So Tory and Miles grabbed
hold of him on their way through.
The cave was torch lit. Brian followed his guide
down a long, stone passageway that led to a door with
no handle. Brian tried to push it open but without
success. ‘Damn, now what?’
Tory shook her head; how thick he was at times.
She took up his right hand and placed it on a silver
plate embedded in the wall, and the door simply
disappeared. ‘Indiana Jones you ain’t, mate,’ she
commented, wandering in to take a look at their
findings.
‘What is it all?’ Brian asked as he followed her.
‘Nobody touch anything,’ Tory warned them.
‘Amongst this lovely little collection of antiquities be
the Thirteen Treasures of Britain.’ She recognised
Dyrnwyn (White Hilt), the sword of Rhydderch,
mounted on the wall.
‘I thought you said Taliesin had the Thirteen
Treasures.’ Brian was confused.
‘He has. I presume he picked them up at a later
date.’ Tory was drawn to a large obstruction that was
covered with a glittering golden cloth. She cast the
cover aside to reveal a strange silver chariot. The discshaped vehicle could have been mistaken for a space-

age motor-scooter, but Tory knew well enough what it
was and she squealed with excitement.
‘What is it?’ Brian couldn’t imagine.
‘This be my ride home,’ Tory answered as she circled
it, running her fingers over its frame. ‘Behold the
Chariot of Arianrod, it is said to take one quickly to the
place of one’s desire.’
‘Hold on a minute, this looks like it’s from the
future,’ Brian protested.
‘But it isn’t. It’s more likely to have Atlantean
origins. What do you think, Miles?’ Tory turned to seek
his opinion.
‘That’s an interesting theory.’ Miles gazed fondly at
Tory a moment, before they were all startled by a
movement overhead.
An owl came swooping out of the shadows to take a
seat on a perch next to Renford. It’s about time!
‘Pardon?’ Renford looked at the bird.
That thee showed thyself.
Renford turned to the others. ‘Did you hear that,
the owl spoke. Didn’t it?’
Though they had heard naught, all three nodded in
the hope that Renford would pursue the conversation.
Oh brother! We had best get thee back to normal
Myrddin, one cannot bear to see thee living in such ignorance.
‘I beg thy pardon?’ Renford was insulted.
Then, I forgive thee. The bird vexed him further. See
that chalice over there?
Renford turn and spied an old goblet. ‘Yes.’
It be thy Holy Grail, Myrddin, where thee bade the
Goddess to store thy knowledge. Go and drink from it. It is

high time thee freed thyself from the menial existence thou
hast been forced to lead.
Renford didn’t know if he was suited to being a
Merlin. ‘Art thou sure thou hast the right man?’
One would wonder, I know, but I would recognise thee
anywhere, old friend, trust me.
Renford looked at his daughter for support, as he
ever so slowly approached the piece in question.
‘It’s alright, Dad, really.’ Tory urged her father to do
whatever the hell was being asked of him.
Everyone held their breath as Renford reached out
and took possession of the Grail. ‘Shouldn’t we put
something in it first?’
As Renford moved to turn the seemingly empty
goblet upside down, Tory recalled how Taliesin had
acquired his knowledge from a single droplet. ‘No Dad,
the droplet, catch it.’
Renford watched the drop fall from the rim of the
chalice, and holding out his hand he chanced a catch
that was successful. As the liquid splashed against his
skin, Renford fell to his knees in much pain.
‘Dad!’ Brian moved to his aid but Tory held him by
her side.
‘Stay back,’ she whispered. ‘He’ll be fine.’
Brian wasn’t so sure he agreed with his sister’s
diagnosis, for a brilliant white light shot out through his
father’s eyes, nose, mouth and ears, forcing them all to
turn away a second.
When they heard Renford’s hysterical laughter,
which seemed to have an added depth of lunacy about
it, the three dared to look up.

‘The sleeper awakens!’ Myrddin announced, raising
his arms into the air.
Tory didn’t recognise her father at first, the man
before them was so much younger and had so much
more hair!
Brian freaked. ‘Tory! Where is Dad?’
Taller and more slender than Renford, Myrddin had
long, jet-black hair that fell about him in wisps. A
patch of white hair sprang from both his temples,
making him appear all the more wise and weird. His
face and features were more gaunt than before. His
eyebrows were bushy, his beard and moustache trimmed
and neat. Two streaks of white hair sprang from the
corners of his mouth and ran through his beard to meet
very neatly at a point below his chin, forming a perfect
‘V’ in amongst the black. The Merlin wore a long robe
of dark blue, girdled at the waist, and a mantle about his
shoulders. But his eyes were her father’s.
Tory had inherited these same green eyes, where
Brian’s baby blues had been passed on from their mother.
‘This is he,’ Tory, wonderstruck, concluded upon closer
inspection. It is true then, I am the daughter of Myrddin.
‘Indeed, Taliesin is never wrong,’ the Merlin
confirmed. ‘Speaking of which, we have to save him.’
‘No, it’s Naomi we have to save,’ Brian told him.
‘And Teo,’ Tory added.
‘Well, I was close.’ He winked at Tory, before
looking to the owl. ‘Tobias, old friend.’ He wandered
over to have a chat.
‘Now I have seen everything.’ Miles was looking
rather pale.

‘How are we ever going to explain this to Mum?’
Brian whispered to Tory.
‘We don’t explain anything to anyone. For I am . . .’
Myrddin looked at Brian, transforming himself back to
Renford’s form, ‘our secret.’ He chuckled. ‘Fear not my
lad, Mahaud will pay.’

27

The Returning

M

yrddin declared that they needed to draw
Mahaud further into Gwynedd and away from
the borders of the old Saxon country in
Oxfordshire, so the party headed to the cottage at
Aberffraw. Rose and Renford had been having a lovely
discussion on the way there. Renford had returned to
the car with the others a much changed man, and had
apologised to his sister for his profound ignorance of her
abilities all these years. He vowed from now on that she
would find him far more open-minded.
Brian drove this time as, unlike Miles, he was
having no trouble keeping his eyes open; he was worried
sick about Naomi.
Tory placed a hand on his shoulder. ‘The hell you
saw was just an illusion, Brian, designed to appeal to
your greatest fears.’

Brian showed her the burn marks on his hand. ‘Is
this an illusion, Tory?’
‘In a way, yes. It is just the result of a clash of
polarities, which you lost, because Mahaud’s will was
more focused and therefore stronger than yours.’
Myrddin sat forward in his seat to verify Tory’s
claim. ‘Mahaud is what is known as a Mental elemental,
she feeds off negative thought patterns. She has made
mental and mystical psychism her forte, so as soon as
you display a negative emotion or have a negative
thought, you are granting her control over the
conscious, then subconscious or subliminal level of your
mind. If she obtains a firm hold, as with Teo, she can
pollute your superconscious and universal mind as well.’
As Brian still looked a little confused, Tory outlined
the situation. ‘Mahaud would have overawed you with
her horrors, vexed you to the point where you lost your
temper, and then by-passed your conscious to your
subconscious to suggest that the door would burn you
when you touched it. As you believed that she was the
greater force, you accepted the notion instead of
rejecting it.’
‘But how am I to reject a notion, if I don’t even
know of its existence, that’s not fair.’
‘Exactly,’ Myrddin stated with conviction. ‘Mahaud
represents all that is unfair, unwise and impure, so
believe nothing she presents to you. Trust your
instincts, stay positive, and know your own mind. Then
nothing can harm you.’
Brian pulled into the driveway at the cottage,
bringing the car to an abrupt halt. ‘Are you telling me

that I could’ve just walked over to Teo and reclaimed
Naomi from him, there and then?’
‘If thy belief had been strong enough, yes.’
‘Shit!’ Brian thumped the steering wheel.
‘Hey Brian, you wanted action,’ Tory reminded him
as he opened his door in a huff.
Myrddin nodded in agreement as he climbed out of
the car after Rose, stretching and exclaiming rather
loudly, ‘Ah, Aberffraw!’ He wandered around the
grounds of the cottage. ‘This will do just fine. There be
a transverse of energies here that should serve our
purpose nicely.’
‘A ley crossing, you mean?’ Tory inquired.
‘Indeed.’ He walked off to the lawn behind the
cottage, rather excited.
Tory turned her attention from the Merlin to Miles
who was still sleeping in the back seat of the car, and
noticed he was shaking. ‘What’s wrong?’
‘Die witch!’ he cried, becoming agitated.
‘Miles,’ Tory shook him, ‘wake up.’
‘Huh!’ He sat up, eyes parted wide and full of fear.
‘Tory!’ He grabbed her and held her tight. ‘I saw your
body fall on the stone ground in a great pool of blood. I
saw a bat, I saw a necklet.’
‘Waistlet,’ Tory corrected, stroking his hair to pacify
him. ‘Fear not, it was my past you saw.’
‘And you survived?’ Miles sat back, unable to shake
the feeling of dread and loss he felt. He vaguely recalled
seeing this vision before when Maelgwn had been
speaking to Tory of the crone, but it hadn’t affected him
then as it did now.

‘I did.’ She smiled. ‘I have to go check what my
father’s up to, will you be okay?’
When Miles nodded, she kissed his cheek and made
off around the back of the house.
Tory caught up with her father. He’d stopped in the
middle of the grassy flat and was concentrating on
seeking the point where the energy grid crossed.
‘Pardon my ignorance,’ Tory said to him. ‘But
weren’t such doorways usually land-marked by the
Ancients?’
‘Do you recall a large sundial?’
‘Yes, in the courtyard.’
‘It would have been located about here, wouldn’t
you say?’ Myrddin sized up a location before him.
‘Aye, that’s about right.’ Though everyone else saw
him as Renford, Tory chose to see her father as he truly
was. She found it comforting to see him so young and
virile. Myrddin, holding his palms together and his
arms outstretched, pointed his fingers towards the
ground. With a deep breath, he lunged forward and
spread his arms. As he did so, the earth before them
piled aside into a tidy mound around the sundial’s
perimeter.
‘By the Goddess, Renford.’ Aunt Rose was aghast.
‘You have come a long way.’
‘Thank you, dear lady.’ He bowed. ‘’Twas nothing
really.’
‘That was just great. Wait till Miles gets a load of
this,’ Tory squeezed her father’s arm, before taking off to
fetch Miles. ‘I’m so excited to have you back!’
‘Well, I’m so pleased to be here,’ he exclaimed.

Tory just laughed; he was so different, kind of mad,
yet all-knowing. Now she knew at least two other souls
who were in the same predicament as her, as Myrddin
and Taliesin were also everlasting. Perhaps there are
more of us, Tory considered, as she rounded the cottage
to find Miles and Brian sprawled out on the ground.
Brian was just sitting up when Tory ran to his aid.
‘What happened? Are you alright?’
‘Great!’ He stood up and jumped about. ‘I made it
here before Maelgwn did. See, he still be out cold.’ He
staggered about, a little woozy.
‘Brockwell!’ Tory nearly fell over. ‘What art thou
doing here?’
‘I have come to fight Mahaud.’ He reached for his
sword and was confused when he found it missing.
‘They said I couldn’t do it, but I be here alright.’ He
looked over at the car rather cautiously.
Miles stirred and Tory knelt down to help him.
‘And who are we at the moment?’
Upon seeing her, he pulled her down close and
kissed her.
‘That had better be you, Maelgwn,’ Tory threatened.
‘Aye.’ He smiled broadly, propping himself up onto
his elbows. ‘Now, tell me why thou hast chosen to stay
here to confront Mahaud, when she surely would have
followed thee back?’
‘Because she holds Katren hostage.’ Tory used the
name Katren instead of Naomi so Maelgwn would
understand who she meant, totally forgetting how
Brockwell would react.
‘What! How?’

‘Calm, Calin. I do not mean thy wife. Her name be
Naomi, she be my brother’s lady. But as thou art Brian,
Katren be Naomi, understand?’
‘Aye . . .’ Brockwell thought but a second, ‘then we
must save her.’
‘Well Myrddin be around the back working on that
right now. Thou should go and let him know of thy
arrival.’ Tory gave him a slap on the shoulder and
headed him off in the right direction. She considered it
was rather good that Brockwell would be filling in for
her brother through all this, as Brockwell wasn’t as
personally involved and would not be as easily
distracted by Mahaud’s tricks.
‘Come on.’ Tory helped Maelgwn to his feet. ‘The
house be much more comfortable.’
As they walked, Maelgwn was very quiet. They
paused to unlock the door and he touched Tory’s chin,
turning her around to look him in the eye. ‘Be Miles
part of the reason thee wanted to stay?’
‘Nay.’
Maelgwn followed her inside, silently closing the
door behind them. ‘Thee told him thee loved him, Tory.
Be that true?’
So it works the other way round; Maelgwn also recalls
Miles’ thoughts and memories. ‘Of course I do, I love
thee!’ Tory was burning up and her heart began to
pound in her chest. ‘But I haven’t so much as kissed
him, Maelgwn. In fact, he never even tried!’
‘I know.’ He held his palms up to her, motioning her
to calm down. ‘What I be trying to say be that, if thee
wishes to stay here in the future with me, I understand,

for ’twas most probably the way it was meant to be in
the first place.’ Maelgwn had to say it, though he’d
fought through every syllable.
‘Goddamn it, Maelgwn!’ Tory sounded annoyed
with him as she grabbed hold of the collar of his shirt.
‘How many times do I have to tell thee! I love thee! I
wed thee! I even had thy child, which, by the way, I
would not have endured for another living soul.’ She
took a deep breath, and was forced to a smile when
Maelgwn relaxed. ‘Yet, still thee can doubt it. I am
coming back! I already have the means, I found the
Chariot of Arianrod.’
‘Truly?’ Maelgwn couldn’t believe it. ‘That be the
only one of the Thirteen Treasures which Taliesin doth
not possess. He never did find it.’
‘Then that confirms my return. He hast been unable
to find it because I am to bring the chariot back to him
when I return. That be why it was not with the other
twelve Treasures when Taliesin found them. How could
it be, when I will have taken it back already? Time be
very deceiving, indeed.’
‘Taliesin will be beside himself if this be the case, as
the chariot would simplify his life greatly.’
‘I do not mean to interrupt.’ Myrddin walked right
through the wall of the cottage. ‘But I need to use thy
phone.’
‘Myrddin, thou hast found thyself at last.’ Maelgwn
was very pleased to meet him face-to-face.
‘Thanks to thee, Maelgwn, old son. How art thou,
and how fare all in the Gwynedd of old?’
‘Very well indeed,’ the King replied.

‘Yet I be sure it would be even more so if we could
get thy lovely Queen back to thee. So if it pleases thee,
the phone?’
Tory pointed to it, a little surprised, but asked
naught of his intent.
He dialled a number. ‘Stay very quiet,’ Myrddin
instructed them before turning back to the phone. ‘Teo!
What are you doing there?’
The Merlin spoke with Tory’s voice, and she was so
shocked she nearly forgot his instruction and laughed
out loud.
‘I do realise that, yes. I’m not going now,’ the Merlin
informed Teo. ‘It’s a very long story, is Brian there?’ He
paused. ‘No, I’ve been looking for him all night, and
Naomi. Have you seen them?’ He paused again,
appearing rather amused. ‘Teo, is there something
wrong? You were acting a little strange last time we
met.’ His tone became more inviting. ‘No, I forgive you,
you should just take better care of yourself.’ He
suppressed a laugh. ‘Well if you do see Brian, tell him
I’ve got a couple of problems that I really need to
discuss with him. Tell him to call me urgently.’ He
waited for the next query. ‘Oh, Miles got called away to
some island off the coast of Africa, and I can’t find Dad
or Aunt Rose anywhere.’ He winked at Tory. ‘Look, I
can’t talk, the baby’s crying.’ Myrddin pointed to a
distant corner of the room and the sound of a child
crying resounded for all to hear. ‘I’m still at the cottage,
so he can call me here. Thanks Teo. Bye.’
Tory and Maelgwn shook their heads, amazed by the
man’s brilliance.

‘She suspects a trap,’ the Merlin informed them
with a smile. ‘Thus she shall certainly bring the girl as a
hostage.’
‘I believed it,’ Maelgwn assured him.
Myrddin shrugged. ‘Whether she did or not, she will
come. So we must prepare. Tory, grab your saxophone.
There be a little tune I wish to teach thee.’
Tory moved to do so at once, although she thought
his timing rather inappropriate. ‘Haven’t we got more
important things to do right now?’
The Merlin smiled. ‘This tune be known to some as
the Pan call.’
‘I’ll be right back.’ Tory hastened to fetch the
instrument.
Myrddin explained that each elemental had an
appropriate musical note, which resonated to its correct
frequency: Fire – C, Air – E-flat, Water – G, Earth – F.
These four notes, when played in the right sequence
and key, comprised the Pan call. But Myrddin warned
her that the forces of Pan should never be summoned
unless truly required, for Pan’s energies were known to
be highly stimulating and if not used once invoked,
could cause complete havoc. The true power of the Pan
ray was that of healing, especially in cases of fever. The
only way to destroy Mahaud was to charge her with as
much positive energy and love as they could summon,
for this was poisonous to the evil crone.
Evening found them all well briefed by the Merlin. No
matter what took place, it was imperative that they all
maintain a positive view; anger and fear were the air

Mahaud breathed. Myrddin cast an etheric shield
around his novices. He explained that the invisible
shield of white light would block out harmful thoughts
from any earthlings, or earth-bound entities from the
etheric world. It was a kind of sealing of one’s aura,
preventing the witch from detecting their presence
before they wished to make themselves known.
Once they had Mahaud surrounded, the Law of
Rebound (a greater force will always rebound a lesser
power) would come into play; there would be no escape
for the evil crone this time. But their success depended
upon maintaining a focused and positive outlook as a
combined power. If they could sustain this unity, any
negative force Mahaud projected at them would
rebound back on herself as positive energy.
The evil witch would be taking a great risk venturing
so far into fairy country. But the idea of Tory and her
child left alone and defenceless would be far too attractive
for the witch to resist. The moon was waning, which
would work very much in their favour, as practitioners of
magic knew this was the time of the month for endings,
undoings, eliminating and separating. In addition,
Mahaud still hadn’t an inkling of Myrddin’s involvement,
which put them at a very definite advantage.
The stage was set and all lay waiting in the shadows
for the crone to make herself present.
Rose, Brockwell, Maelgwn and Myrddin were all
armed with one of the four implements, by means of
which they could each summon an element. The
Merlin had brought this personal collection from
amongst the antiquities in his cave. These were the

tools he used when performing such rites. The choice of
who would be best to summon each element was
decided by their individual birth signs.
Maelgwn was a Leo and thus a fire sign, so he was
sent to hide in the south, armed with a large rod,
because in the old rituals of the druids, fire was
summoned by the rod and was represented by the
similar symbol of wands in the sacred tarot.
Aunt Rose, a Pisces and therefore of water, hid in
the west, holding a chalice that represented the cups of
the tarot.
Brian was a Taurean, like Tory, but Brockwell had
been born under the sign of Aquarius. So, belonging to
the element of air, he headed east with White Hilt, the
Sword of Rhydderch, on the proviso he did not use it
for anything but the summons.
Myrddin, having strong associations with the Earth,
awaited the confrontation to the north. He had in his
possession a sanctified stone of crystal, which was
represented by the pentacles in the tarot.
Tory stood in the middle of the sundial, holding her
saxophone and a doll wrapped in a blanket. Myrddin
had cast a spell on the bundle so that when the witch
saw it, she would believe it to be the real heir of
Gwynedd. The circumference of the sundial performed
the same function as the ‘casting of a circle’ in Wiccan
practice. This was to protect and harness one’s own
power, which in Tory’s case was positive. At the stations
of north, south, east and west, a torch burned brightly
to acknowledge the four elements and the four winds.
Once inside this circle, Mahaud could be contained and

she could not call upon any other dark forces to assist
her in her struggle. The trick was to entice her to step
into the fairy ring, and this was Tory’s task.
As they heard the sound of a car tearing into the
driveway Myrddin bethought them all. Now whatever
happens, do not reveal thyself until Tory hast Mahaud in the
circle. Save the evil crone eluding us again.
Teo stormed down the hill dragging Naomi along
with him. He clenched the back of her neck and her
hands were bound behind her back. ‘What trickery is
this?’ he hissed upon viewing the set-up.
Teo and Naomi walked straight past Brockwell, who
was hiding in the east near the house. Upon seeing
Naomi, Brockwell was tempted to do her captor in
there and then. Tory, however, had insisted that Teo
must not be harmed; they must draw the crone out.
‘This be merely a precaution to protect myself,
Mahaud. I want Teo and Naomi back please,’ Tory
requested politely.
Teo laughed. ‘Nothing can protect you,’ he told her,
his voice so deep and husky it was nearly inaudible.
‘Give me the child.’
‘But if you are so powerful you can take it, surely?’
The doll in her arms was heard to cry – a nice touch on
the Merlin’s part. This seemed to make Mahaud all the
more anxious to get hold of the baby.
‘Foolish child. Do you think me an amateur?’ Teo
became angry, pacing to and fro with Naomi in tow.
‘Place the child outside the circle and I shall cast forth
this whimpering mass.’ He shook his hostage like she
was a rag doll.

‘Please Tory!’ Naomi begged her.
The girl was hysterical, not that she could blame
her, yet Tory demanded calmly, ‘But what of Teo?’
The beast erupted into laughter again. ‘He’s not
talking to you.’
‘Why, he knows I love him. I miss you, Teo.’ She
looked straight into his burning eyes.
Teo let loose a long growl, indicating that there was
a struggle going on within him. Naomi screamed also, as
the volume of his protest was overwhelming.
It works! Tory surprised herself, not that she’d ever
doubted it. ‘Teo, listen to me.’
‘No, he’s not interested,’ the beast snapped at her.
‘Place the child outside the circle, or she’s toast.’ Teo
raised his fingertips to Naomi and they began to redden.
‘Alright!’ Tory gave in. She moved to the perimeter
and kissed the doll in her arms, before raising her tearful
eyes to view the crone. ‘I’ll place the child outside and
back away, and you let Naomi walk.’ Tory set down the
bundle and then backed away with caution, watching
the crone carefully to make sure she complied.
Teo thrust Naomi on ahead of him and she ran to
the safety of the circle into Tory’s awaiting arms.
Mahaud snatched up the bundle, most impressed
with herself, only the Merlin had designed the spell to
wear off upon her touch. The beast’s holler of
aggravation rocked the very pillars of hell. The doll
ignited into flames and the witch cast it aside. ‘Now you
die!’ Teo turned his ravaged sights to Tory.
‘Teo wouldn’t hurt me,’ Tory said, and she seated
Naomi on the ground in the centre and approached the

edge of the circle again. ‘Who be the least afraid,
Mahaud? Shall I meet you on your ground, or you on
mine?’
‘Teo hates you!’ The witch snarled, avoiding her
challenge.
‘Does not.’ Tory played along.
‘Why didn’t you help me, Tory?’ Teo’s own voice
returned for a second, and the evil fell from his face. He
appeared exhausted as the evil again came over him,
and the beast that was Mahaud laughed to mock her
adversary’s pain.
‘Teo is a far stronger soul than you, Mahaud. I still
believe he can beat you. You’re no threat to our
friendship.’ Tory confidently stepped outside the circle
and took a stand. ‘I am not afraid of the likes of you.’
Teo approached her and to ensure he had her full
attention, he pulled her chin up so she had to look into
his eyes. ‘You should be.’
A cold, sharp knife punctured her skin and bore
into her stomach, then Teo twised the weapon up to her
ribs to ensure the strike was fatal. The afflicted area
went numb, it was as if she was just a spectator and
someone else had been wounded. She felt her blood
gushing from her body, and for a moment reality
became a total blur.
Naomi screamed. Maelgwn and Brockwell, despite
specific instructions to the contrary, divulged their
presence as they came screaming towards the crone.
‘Stop where thou art!’ Tory demanded their restraint
and her tone was so sharp that both men halted at once.
She lifted her head to view Teo’s expressionless face as

she withdrew his blade from her body. ‘I know it wasn’t
you, Teo.’ She placed a hand on his shoulder and
crouched over as if she were going to die, yet her wound
was already healing. Tory looked back up to him, her
eyes filled with compassion as she grabbed him by the
pressure points in his neck and squeezed as hard as she
could muster. ‘Nice try, Mahaud, but not good enough.’
When Teo’s body began to lose power, the beast
roared in protest as he shrank down to the ground.
‘Sorry Teo.’ Tory shut out the blood-curdling
screams, dragging his motionless body into the circle.
‘Get out, quickly,’ Tory urged Naomi.
Teo began to lose consciousness, his eyes still ablaze,
then a red and black haze slowly escaped through his
eyes, nose, mouth and ears.
Maelgwn was left totally bewildered by the scene
he’d just witnessed. Still, as the crone began to
materialise before him, he put it to the back of his mind
and stepped forward to execute his role. He pointed the
rod towards the circle, and when engaged it took on a
strange glow. ‘I am Maelgwn, King of Gwynedd, and I
hold thee Mahaud in this sacred ring by the power of
fire, by all that is creative, brave, and strong.’
‘I am Brockwell, King of Powys, and I hold thee
Mahaud in this sacred ring by the power of air, all that
is knowledgeable, free and of speed.’
Naomi was rather surprised to hear Brian address
himself thus. He looked mighty fine, nevertheless, as he
pressed the button on the hilt of his sword and a laser
beam of red extended from it, which he aimed towards
their foe.

Rose came forth from her hiding place. She held out
her chalice, which was illuminated from within, toward
the sundial. ‘I am Rose, confidant to the spirits of the
Otherworld. I hold thee Mahaud in this sacred circle by
the power of water, by all that be feeling, understanding, and sympathetic.’
With this, Teo seemed to have excreted all the
poisonous gases from his body, and Tory dragged his
comatosed form back out of the circle and well clear of it.
Myrddin emerged from his cover, his crystal ablaze.
‘I am Myrddin, High Merlin of the Druids, second only
to Taliesin. I hold thee Mahaud in this sacred circle by
the power of earth, the great mother of all that be
productive, nourishing and balanced in this world.
Thou art constrained by the four elements of creation
and are bound by life itself to comply.’
Mahaud’s body, still lacking enough density to be
totally solid, took the form of a beautiful maid – the
maid to whom Myrddin had once lost his heart. ‘And
where hast thou been hiding thyself my love, in a tree
perhaps?’ She laughed, rather sweetly.
‘I forgive thee, Mahaud. I bear thee no malice,’ he
stated very sincerely. ‘In fact, thou taught me an
invaluable lesson.’
‘Stop it!’ she shrilled, annoyed that she hadn’t
vexed him. Mahaud again changed form into a hideous
beast with seven heads, snarling and breathing fire, but
not even the flames seemed to be able to extend beyond
the circle.
The Merlin grinned at this as he quietly began to
recite a healing incantation.

The seven heads of the beast took on human faces,
one of which was the wicked crone’s. The creature’s tail
began to lash out violently, as all seven heads screamed
and cursed in pain. Then it began to emit the foulest
odour, worse than the smell of death – more like that of
the already decomposed. ‘Thou art a fool, Myrddin! Thy
betrayal was so easy,’ the witch taunted him.
Yet the Merlin remained focused on his purpose,
because with every attempt to vex him the witch grew a
little weaker. Maelgwn, Rose and Brockwell had joined
the Merlin in his verse.
Mahaud was obviously having no luck with
Myrddin, so she turned her eyes to Maelgwn. ‘Thy wife
never told thee of her immortality, did she, Dragon?’
The witch laughed; she didn’t miss a trick.
Maelgwn struggled to concentrate on his words of
peace, love and healing, though her tone was so cutting
it was hard to ignore.
‘She longs for the arms of another.’
Tory confronted the witch on his behalf. ‘Our love
be eternal, Mahaud. One should not offer views on
matters thou could not possibly understand.’
‘I understand everything!’ she roared, feeling
Maelgwn’s faith strengthen.
‘Then why are you like this?’ Tory tried to reason
with the old witch, for she truly couldn’t fathom why
one would choose to be hurtful, it seemed so useless
and unnecessary, illogical even. ‘You could be
beautiful.’
Mahaud roared with laughter, weakened by Tory’s
concern. ‘And thee could be a whore hound to the

satanic forces, just look into my eyes, little girl.’ The
witch stuck out her long tongue and started wriggling it
around in an attempt to disgust her.
This was not the prettiest of sights really, and the
odour was becoming insufferable. Yet Tory kept her
humour. ‘Quite frankly, my husband be proving enough
of a handful at this time.’
‘Well, he’s had so much practice. Hast thou any idea
how many lovers he had before thee?’ The witch turned
an eye to catch Maelgwn’s reaction, and she felt him
again straining to concentrate. ‘Did he tell thee about
his more debauched activities in Cornwall?’ She swung
back round to vex him, the groans from the other heads
turning into mocking laughter.
Tory blasted out the note of F on her saxophone.
Then G, C and by the last note of E-flat, Tory had
Mahaud’s full attention.
The witch swore and cursed in protest, yet Tory paid
her no heed. She repeated the sequence over and over,
as the other four intensified their efforts. The crone was
in pain, so she changed her form continuously from one
vile manifestation to the next in an attempt to thwart
the tranquillity they sought to create.
But she was too late. A green mist rose out of the
ground all around them. A million tiny lights
encompassed the circle, gracing it with their lustre, and
the voices of fairy folk sang to the tune that Tory
played.
The witch was so weakened by the enchantment
that she was obliged to resume her true form, which was
nothing more than a dark mist. This was quickly swept

away by the swirling beams of light, the witch’s evil
noise and odour along with it.
Those left in her wake wondered at the spectacle
surrounding them. The healing energy that emanated
from the etheric matter was so exhilarating it made
them tremble, and the scent of spring flowers filled the
air.
The Merlin thanked all the elements in turn, the
others echoing his appreciation, before he dismissed
them and the mist dispersed.
‘Brian!’ Naomi went racing over to Brockwell,
smothering him in kisses. ‘Is she gone?’
‘Pardon?’ Brockwell asked in the old tongue, not
understanding a word she’d said.
‘What? Speak English, darling,’ she said, thinking
that he was teasing her.
Brockwell frowned. There must be an easier way of
communicating, he thought, resolving, with a shrug, to
kiss her.
‘Is it over?’ Rose asked Myrddin.
The Merlin raised his eyebrows. ‘Until such time as
humankind hast perfected itself, we shall never see the
back of these low-grade beings, I am sad to say. Though
Mahaud, as we know her, hast definitely been
neutralised.’ Myrddin gave Rose a hug of assurance as
he escorted her to the house. ‘So you can add another
to your long list of talents, sister.’
Tory approached Maelgwn and they held each other
for some time. It was he who pulled away first, looking
to the bloodstained tear in her shirt. He caressed her
skin, soft and smooth underneath. ‘How, Tory?’

‘Taliesin,’ she confessed. ‘I should have died at
Arwystli, but he gave me an immortality potion of the
ancients. I found out later.’ Tory looked up at him.
‘Be there anything else thou hast failed to tell me?’
He remained very calm.
‘In regard to what?’ Tory asked in her sweetest
manner.
‘Everything, Tory, I want to know everything about
thee.’
‘Well, be that not the whole idea behind being wed?
So we can spend the rest of our lives getting to know
each other.’
‘But it would suddenly seem that we can expect thy
life to be considerably longer than mine.’ Maelgwn’s
voice became more tense, though he tried hard to
remain civil.
‘Maelgwn, this be exactly why I failed to tell thee.
Would thee rather I had died, perhaps?’ The events of
the past few days piled on top of her and within a
second Tory was in tears.
‘Nay, of course not.’ He took hold of her and
squeezed her. ‘I would prefer thee had confided in me,’
he explained in a softer tone. ‘I know I give thee just
cause to doubt me at times.’
‘Nay, Maelgwn, I never doubted thee.’
‘Well, whatever the case may have been, from now
on, no more secrets, agreed?’
‘Aye.’ Tory’s crying subsided and she wiped the tears
from her face. ‘So art thou going to tell me all about thy
debauched activities after thee fled thy father’s kingdom
for Cornwall?’

Maelgwn didn’t seem too keen. ‘Thou dost not want
to know about that.’
‘Aye, I do, I want to know everything about thee,’
she mimicked him, but Maelgwn was conveniently
distracted.
He appeared concerned as he watched something
going on beyond Tory in the distance.
‘What be wrong?’
‘Dost thou think we should tell Naomi that this be
Brockwell, not Brian, before he rapes her?’
Tory looked at the pair and laughed. ‘Indeed, Brian
won’t be at all amused.’
Teo woke the next day remembering little of his life
since Brian had left Australia, over two years ago. He
didn’t even know how he’d managed to get to Britain.
Brian and Miles had also regained control of themselves
by morning. So Brian was there to greet Teo and
apologise to him for accusing him; he’d never imagined
it would cause such grief.
Teo was so stoked to see both Brian and Tory that
he could bear them no ill will. He wanted to hear all
about what had transpired while he’d been out of it, so
everyone kept him entertained for the rest of that day
with their many tales of the weird and wonderful.
Miles still kept a close eye on Teo, but this was not
necessary. Teo was his own person again, his beaming
expression was evidence of this. As expected, he was a
little sad to hear of Tory’s marriage. However, he
accepted it was his own fault, as he should never have
let her go in the first place.

Tory decided to stay with her family for a few more
days, as with the chariot she could cheat time a bit.
Now that her secret was out in the open, her kin had
faith that she would return to them and were not as
reluctant to let her go.
The entire clan made the trip to Dinas Emrys, and even
Aunt Rose managed the hike to the cave. They were
not met by a beast or bells this time, for Myrddin knew
his way through the mists well enough. He stopped to
speak with particular trees along the way. Tory had half
expected that her father would accompany her back to
the Dark Age, considering Taliesin’s prophecy.
‘Oh good heavens, no,’ he exclaimed as they
entered the cave. ‘Although I would dearly love to see
my old friend, I have much to do before that time. Our
reunion will come in due course and, dear daughter, I do
believe you’ll be there to witness it,’ he announced with
a wink of encouragement.
Tory hugged everyone in turn, her father, Aunt
Rose, Naomi and Teo, who she thought was not going
to let her go at all.
‘I have just got you back and now you’re leaving me
again.’
‘I am coming back,’ she repeated for the fiftieth time.
Brian encouraged his friend to let go, applying a
little pressure in the right place, and then took hold of
Tory himself. ‘Make the world a better place,’ he
whispered, a lump forming in his throat.
‘I’ll be back before you know it and we’ll work on it
together,’ she resolved, refusing to get upset.

Brian nodded then took a step back so that Miles
might have a moment.
Miles didn’t say anything, he just threw his arms out
wide in his own endearing fashion and Tory melted into
them.
‘Words cannot express, Professor, so I will not
even try,’ she sniffled, releasing him and stepping
away. ‘I’ll be back.’ She turned and stepped into the
chariot, not sure what to expect. ‘Now, how do I drive
this thing?’
‘As you are familiar with where you are going, just
the thought of your destination should be enough,’
Myrddin instructed. ‘Send Taliesin my highest regards.
Tell him all goes splendidly, and to take good care of my
treasure until next we meet.’
‘I shall.’ Tory had one last look at them all. She
released a deep sigh as she closed her eyes and her
thoughts turned to Maelgwn and Rhun, to the masters
and the stones. She concentrated harder, believing
nothing had happened, when the cheers of a familiar
crowd reached her ears, and Tory opened her eyes to
find that she had at last made it home.
Maelgwn lifted her out of the chariot and, after a
long kiss, set her down on the ground.
‘Sorry to have kept thee all waiting around like this,
the twentieth century be hell!’
From the garbled sound of thirteen excited people
all talking at her at once came a ‘Here, here!’ from
Brockwell. ‘Although the women art mighty fine.’
Katren kicked Brockwell for his observation, as she
had her arms full with Rhun.

‘But not as fine as here, of course,’ he quickly
appeased his wife.
Katren handed Tory her child. ‘He be sovereign,
Tory, in every sense of the word.’
‘I know.’ Tory smiled, pleased to see her dear friend.
‘He takes after his father.’ Tory turned to her husband,
but the fond exchange was disturbed by Taliesin’s
incessant chuckling.
‘Alright, old man?’ Maelgwn asked. ‘Doth thou wish
to share thy amusement with the rest of us?’
Taliesin, who was so hysterical and exhausted that
he could barely move, had somehow managed to drag
his near useless carcass into the chariot. ‘I shall see thee
all back at Aberffraw.’ He contained his amusement as
he closed his eyes to concentrate. ‘In a couple of
thousand years.’ He burst into laughter once more and
vanished without a trace.
‘I told thee he would be pleased,’ Maelgwn said.
‘Come Majesty, tell us everything,’ Ione urged her,
the others echoing the request. ‘We have several hours
till sunrise.’
Come first light, they broke camp. Although sorry to
part, the masters were all eager to get home to their
own estates, kingdoms and kin.
‘See thee all in Arwystli on Lughnasa,’ Vortipor
declared, as he and Cara took their leave to the southwest, towards Dyfed.
‘Indeed,’ Brockwell confirmed, then turned to
Maelgwn. ‘Art thou quite sure we cannot tempt thee all
to a feast tonight?’

‘Any night but tonight, friend.’ Maelgwn helped
Tory up onto his horse. Rhun was nestled in his pouch,
fast asleep for the moment.
‘Lughnasa, then,’ Brockwell said with a wave, and
rode off towards Powys in the west with Katren close
behind.
‘Ready to go home?’ Maelgwn asked.
‘Yesterday.’ Tory beamed, still unable to believe they
were really going home.
So the King led the rest of their band once around
the stones, then away to the north-west towards the
sweet fairy lands of Gwynedd.
Within moments of Tory vanishing, the spirits of
everyone in the cave waned considerably.
‘Oh, come on,’ Myrddin encouraged them all. ‘It’s
not the end of the world.’
‘Yeah, but it’s the end of living in Tory’s world,’
Brian grumbled as he left the room of treasures to trudge
back down the stone entrance hall from the chamber.
Teo and Miles followed him out, not much happier
about the state of affairs.
‘Oh ye of little faith.’ The Merlin rolled his eyes, as
he and Rose fell in behind Naomi.
Both Brian and Miles had their eyes to the ground
as they passed through the rock face into the bright
daylight.
‘No way!’ Teo exclaimed, thumping the other two
in the shoulder, and they looked up to discover a
woman who, judging from her appearance, they could
only assume was a goddess.

She was of sturdy build and wore a large sword on
her hip. Her attire had a distinctly tribal feel, though it
was of pure white. Her long, golden hair fell in
thousands of tiny braids, weighted at the ends with
ornate silver beads. There was a band of gold around her
crown and her waist, and she wore matching silver
bands around her upper arms.
‘Did you miss me?’
My name be Tory Alexander
and my memory burns eternal.
I have been a traveller
through the Otherworld,
through time, reality and dimension,
I have known no bound.
I have been with the Dragon
in his lair at Aberffraw.
I know the strength of his roar,
the sweet passion of his fire.
Proud are his people
and brave are his warriors.
The Goddess shall evermore sing thy
praises, Maelgwn of Gwynedd,
great King among Britons.
I have sought the greater mysteries
from the wisest of souls.
Myrddin and Taliesin
know my plight.
How wondrous their teachings,
how widespread their journeys.

Oh for their reunion,
and the sweet purification
of the mother country.
I have seen the mist rising on the land,
I hear the four winds,
seek the four elements,
I follow the phases of the moon and stars.
Messenger and warrior of the Goddess,
I have felt Pan’s healing ray,
sent on the aroma of a thousand flowers,
and a million tiny beings of light.
As sure as my name be Tory Alexander,
my quest shall always lead me
in search of the greater truths,
that have been forever lost
in the Dark Age.

Bibliography
Alcock, Leslie, Arthur’s Britain, Penguin, London, 1973.
Ashe, Geoffrey, The Landscape of King Arthur, Webb & Bower, London,
1987.
Bede, Ecclesiastical History of the English People, Penguin, London, 1990.
Berresford Ellis, Peter, Dictionary of Celtic Mythology, Constable & Co,
London, 1992.
Bletzer, June G, Encyclopaedic Psychic Dictionary, Donning Co, Virginia,
1986.
Chadwick, Nora K, Celtic Britain, Newcastle Publishing Co, California,
1989.
Coghlam, Ronan, An Illustrated Encylopaedia of Arthurian Legends,
Element Books, Dorset, 1993.
Devereux, Paul, Earth Lights Revelation, Blandford Press, London, 1989.
Devereux, Paul, Places of Power, Blandford Press, London, 1990.
Frederic, Louis, Dictionary of the Martial Arts, Athlone Press, France,
1991.
Hope, Murry, Practical Celtic Magic, Aquarian, London, 1987. See section
on The Nine Metaphysical Laws.
Maclean, Fitzroy, A Concise History of Scotland, Thames & Hudson,
London, 1970.
Matthews, Caitlin, Mabon and the Mysteries of Britain, Penguin Arkana,
London, 1987.
Matthews, C and J, The Little Book of Celtic Wisdom, Emement Inc.,
London, 1993.
Matthews, John, The Song of Taliesin, Aquarian, London, 1991.
Matthews, John, Taliesin, Aquarian, London, 1991.
Matthews, John, A Celtic Reader, Aquarian, London, 1991.
Geoffrey of Monmouth, The History of the Kings of Britain, Penguin
Classics, London, 1966.
Nennius, Historia Brittonum, British American Books, California.
Roberts, Anthony, Atlantean Traditions in Ancient Britain, Rider & Co,
London, 1977.
Somerset Fry, P, Castles of the British Isles, David & Charles, London,
1990.
Stewart, R J, The Way of Merlin, Aquarian, London, 1991.

References
The author gratefully acknowledges the use of the following
quotations.
The extract from The Primary Chief Bard in Part One, page
114 and the The Chair of Ceridwen in Part Two, at the top of
page 308, are both taken from Taliesin: Shamanism and the
Bardic Mysteries in Britain and Ireland by John Matthews and
are reproduced with the kind permission of The Aquarian
Press, HarperCollinsPublishers, London.
The extract from Artorius by John Heath-Stubbs in Part
One, page 115 and the extract from The Chair of Taliesin in
Part Two, page 239, are both taken from Practical Celtic Magic
by Murry Hope and are reproduced with the kind permission
of The Aquarian Press, HarperCollinsPublishers, London.

Acknowledgments
What is a storyteller without the captive imagination of an
audience? I would, therefore, like to thank all the girls and
boys who have been following this adventure since its
conception, especially Karen and Lisa, whose enthusiasm
encouraged me, chapter by chapter, to finish this work.
I praise the universe for the unconditional love and faith
of my husband, David. His creative genius, and many a late
night in front of the computer, produced the fabulous cover
artwork for this book. This could not have been closer to
what I’d envisaged if he’d taken the picture straight out of my
head; the ability to read my mind is only one of the many
reasons I married him.
My gratitude also goes to my father, Terry Ludgate, for his
creative stimuli and ongoing support.
I am deeply indebted to my three fairy godmothers, for
weaving their magic to make this book a reality. The first
being my earthy mother, Toni Ludgate, for her neverending
belief in me. Lynny Rainbow, for helping me to find the right
connections. And Selwa Anthony, my agent, a godsend, not
only to me, but to the entire Australian literary world.
Most of all I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to
my editor, Susan Moran, to whom I dedicate this work. She
took a thousand-page nightmare from me – a dyslexic with no
spelling sense – and turned it into a beautiful read of which I
am most proud. I could not have written this without her.

About the Author
Traci Harding lives on a quiet acre of bushland on the
Hawkesbury River, with her exceedingly talented husband,
David, and their beautiful daughter, Sarah.
Book One of the Trilogy, The Ancient Future: the Dark
Age was published in 1996; Book Two, An Echo In Time:
Atlantis was published in 1997; and Book Three, Masters of
Reality: the Gathering in 1998. A stand-alone book, The
Alchemist’s Key, was released in 1999. Her next trilogy was
The Celestial Triad: Chronicle of Ages, Tablet of Destinies and
The Cosmic Logos.
In 2002 HarperCollins Australia created a new Traci
Harding website and Traci visits the message board in the
community section daily, to discuss the greater mysteries with
her readers. At the website there are glossaries of the terms
used in Traci’s books and author notes for those interested in
delving deeper into different esoteric and historic aspects of
this author’s work. You’ll find Traci’s new website and message
board at: www.voyageronline.com.au/traciharding
Feel free to write to Traci Harding at the following
email address: hardingd@ozemail.com.au.

For information about Traci Harding and her
books, plus all the latest science fiction news, visit:
Voyager Online: www.voyageronline.com.au
the website for lovers of science fiction and fantasy.

Credits
Cover and internal design by Darian Causby, HarperCollins
Design Studio, Australia
Cover illustration by David Harding

THE ANCIENT FUTURE: THE DARK AGE.
Copyright © 1996 by Traci Harding. All rights reserved
under
International
and
Pan-American
Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have
been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to
access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of
this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded,
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical,
now known or hereinafter invented, without the express
written permission of PerfectBound™.
PerfectBound™ and the PerfectBound™ logo are trademarks
of HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
Adobe Acrobat E-Reader edition v. 1. March 2003
ISBN 0-7322-7793-0
Print edition first published in 1996 by
HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.perfectbound.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.perfectbound.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.uk.perfectbound.com
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.perfectbound.com

