TO SELWA ANTHONY
FOR MAKING MY DREAM
A REALITY

an

Echo
in Time
A t l a n t i s

Book Two: The Ancient Future Trilogy

Traci Harding

Contents
Dedication
Characters of the Dark Age
Map of Britain, 539 AD

PART 1: LIFE
1 Ossa and the Elder Tree
2 Lughnasa — The Gathering
3 The Cauldron-born
4 Ruination
5 Betrayal
6 History’s Reprise
7 The Grifﬁn’s Vow
8 Judgement
9 The Yellow Monster
10 Divine Intervention

PART 11: The UNIVERSE
Characters of Atlantis
Map of Atlantis
11 A Healing Place
12 To Delve Beyond
13 Three Wise Men
14 Night of the Soul
15 City of the Golden Gates
16 The Mortal View
17 Time Loop

18 The Mating Game
19 Call of the Unknown
20 Worth Killing For
21 The Quiet Art of Deceit
22 Genocide

PART 111: & EVERYTHING
23 An Echo In Time
24 The Hunt
25 Conﬂicting Interests
26 Lost and Found . . . Out
27 Trusting the Self
28 Fun and Games
29 The Dragon’s Seed
30 Opposing Elements
31 Love, Birth, Life and Death
Bibliography
References
Acknowledgments
PerfectBound Special Feature:
Gods and Godesses of Atlantis
About the Author
Credits
Copyright Page
Cover
About the Publisher

Characters of the
Dark Age
Queen of Gwynedd
King of Gwynedd
High Merlin
Prince of Gwynedd:
King of Powys:
Queen of Powys:
King of Dumnonia:
Ruler of Dyfed:
Ruler of Dalriada:
Ruler of Alban:
Ruler of Mercia:
Eldest Son of Ossa:
Youngest Son of Ossa:
Daughter of Ossa:
Maelgwn’s Champion:
Tory’s Champion:
Maelgwn’s Keeper of Rec:
Maelgwn’s Rep. Aberffraw:
Court Bard:
Maelgwn’s Squire:
Brockwell’s Sons:
Rhys’ Son:
Tiernan’s Son:
Rhys’ Wife:
Vortipor’s Daughter:
Sir Angus’ Daughter:
Sir Augus’ Wife:
Ossa’s Crone:
Mahaud’s Pupil:

Tory Alexander
Maelgwn
Taliesin Pen Beirdd
Rhun
Calin Brockwell
Katren
Catulus
Vortipor
Fergus MacErc
Cailtram
Ossa
Ongen
Eormenric
Aella
Tiernan
Ione
Rhys
Angus
Selwyn
Tadgh
Bryce, Blain, Owen, Cai
Gawain
Gareth
Jenovefa
Bridgit
Javotte
Alma
Mahaud
Vanora

part 1

life

1

OSSA AND THE
ELDER TREE

T

he night was dark and the storm was ﬁerce.
Onward they rode at the mercy of the howling
winds. The open plain offered little shelter for
Ossa and his band, but they pressed on in the hope of
ﬁnding a refuge nearby.
The whole of Saxony had been ravaged by storms
for months. Unharvested crops lay rotting in the ﬁelds
from Northumbria to Kent, whilst the menfolk
struggled to divert the worst ﬂoods in their settlement’s
history. Meanwhile, the rain just seemed to avoid the
lands belonging to King Maelgwn and his allies; the
western kingdoms had reaped enough produce to sustain
them the length of ten seasons.

Why was the Goddess compelling him to make war
on her native people? If this rain persisted, Ossa’s winter
stores would not see his army and kin through the Fall.
Perhaps the Great Lady sought to test his oath, but if
there was not some sign of relief soon, Ossa felt he’d be
forced to go back on his word to her. Every day the
Saxons grew weaker, whilst the neighbouring Britons
grew strong.
The time-worn Saxon warlord was not so old that
he’d forgotten the battle at Arwystli. How could he
forget when he’d lived in the shadow of defeat every
day since?
The moment any Saxon, Angle or Jute makes war on
my native people, thou shalt all be driven from this land.
Twenty years had come and gone, and still the
prophecy of the Goddess remained chiselled in
his memory.
If thou cannot live here in peace with us. . .thou shall
not live here at all.
Ha! Ossa scoffed at the echo of her words; ﬂooding
his lands and starving his people was not his idea of
living together in peace.
The promise of the Goddess’ wrath had subdued his
advancement into the west because he still feared her
might. However, his youngest son, Eormenric, believed
the sorcerer of King Maelgwn of Gwynedd was to
blame, the one they called Taliesin. Eormenric felt that
the Merlin was as responsible for Ossa’s tribe being
tricked into defeat at Arwystli twenty years ago, as he
was for the sad predicament of their lands this day. It
was known that Taliesin had used wizardry in the past

to enchant the very elements to war. Ossa had seen this
ﬁrst-hand, as had Octa, his father, before him, thus Ossa
felt there could be some merit in Eormenric’s theory.
Octa had waited his entire reign for the aging wizard to
die, as had Ossa, but it would seem the Merlin had
found a way to cheat even death.
I shall be seeking a way to cheat death myself if I
don’t get out of this blasted rain, Ossa considered, as
the gale force winds threatened to blow him from
his mount.
‘My Lord.’ One of the soldiers directed Ossa’s
attention to a white light up ahead.
As they neared it, the light turned a deep red and
the band of Saxons slowed their horses to a halt.
‘What dost thou thinkest, Lord . . . sorcery?’ The
young soldier was wide-eyed with amazement.
‘Perhaps.’ Ossa was intrigued. ‘Wait here.’ He dug
his heels in and went to investigate.
Eormenric, feeling he was the only man present who
could get away with disobeying the order, took off after
his father.
Ossa stopped and dismounted, still some way from
the light’s source. When Eormenric rode up to join
him the Warlord became most disgruntled. ‘Go back to
the men. Who shall take charge if something should
happen to me?’
‘No harm shall befall thee.’ Eormenric decided to
push his luck and sprang from his mount. ‘I am here,’ he
explained in a cocky manner, which Ossa couldn’t help
but admire.
‘Oh alright . . . but stay alert.’

Lightning lit the sky above, awarding them a better
view of the area. ‘This place be marked as sacred.’ Ossa
noted the large stones that encompassed the seething
spring of misty red.
‘I think thou art too easily spooked,’ Eormenric
whispered in jest as they crept closer to the circle,
seeking cover behind a tree that grew just outside it.
Ossa’s brow raised at his son’s blatant scepticism.
‘Had thou ever seen true sorcery at work, thou would be
of a different mind.’
Eormenric looked to the blackened sky and held out
his hand, which was instantly ﬁlled to overﬂowing by
the teeming rain. ‘I have seen it.’
‘Indeed.’ A malign whisper echoed past them. ‘And
what defense dost thou have against it?’
Eormenric, startled at ﬁrst, became irked when he
couldn’t spy their voyeur. ‘Show thyself,’ he demanded.
Ossa clasped a hand over Eormenric’s mouth,
recognising the evil accent. He knew the voice
belonged to the wicked old crone named Mahaud.
At one time, she had been ally and sorceress to a fallen
compatriot of his, Chiglas. But they had all
parted company when the treacherous King’s capital
city in Powys, Arwystli, was taken by Maelgwn
Gwynedd and those now known as the Twelve Masters
of the Goddess.
‘This witch can set a man ablaze by the very
thought of it,’ Ossa hissed quietly. ‘So hold thy tongue,
lest we both end up naught but ﬂaming corpses.’
‘If I had wanted to kill thee, Ossa, I would have
done so twenty years ago.’

Ossa and his son jumped away from the tree they
huddled behind, as the voice seemed to be coming from
within it. ‘Really . . . then why did thou not ﬁnish
Maelgwn Gwynedd, instead of allowing him to destroy
the king and kingdom that thy magic wast supposedly
safeguarding?’
‘The Goddess be too powerful to assault directly.
But I believe she can be overthrown . . . indirectly.’
‘How?’ Eormenric could not contain his curiosity.
‘Ask nothing of the foul hag.’ Ossa belted his son for
his ignorance and led him away.
‘I can wait, Warlord. Come back and see me when
thy kingdom hast turned to a lake.’ Her dry, conﬁdent
tone ﬁlled Ossa with great loathing. She could feel his
hatred brewing. How attractive this emotion was to her;
it was the ticket to her release.
‘Thou cannot help me, witch. One so evil cannot be
of help to any man.’ Ossa turned back and roared,
ensuring that he was heard.
‘Be that so?’
The teeming rain eased to a light drizzle and the
winds just died away. Ossa and Eormenric were stunned
to a standstill.
‘Perhaps we art being a bit rash, Father. Be this . . .
Taliesin any different?’
‘Taliesin doth not disappear when the odds art
against him,’ Ossa snarled at the elder tree, none to
eager to admit that the witch might be of use to him.
‘Self preservation,’ she explained. ‘I told Chiglas it
was suicide to withhold the payment he had promised
thee. And kidnapping the Queen of Gwynedd was not

my idea of a brilliant move, either! I was not about to
hang around and suffer the repercussions of Chiglas’
feeble-minded decision making.’
‘Well, if thou could not defeat the Goddess at
Arwystli, what makes thee think that thou could defeat
her now?’ Eormenric received a pat on the shoulder
from his father for having asked a valid question.
‘I just calmed a storm of her making, did I not?’
‘Aye,’ Eormenric acknowledged, cocking an eye. ‘So
thou did.’
She hadn’t, as the storm had been of her making
in the first place; the witch had a real knack for
twisting the truth to her advantage in this manner.
There were certain creatures from the deva kingdoms
between the earthly plane and lower realms — where
Mahaud was currently biding her time — and, just
because she was banned from functioning within a
first plane reality, some of her fellow archfiends did
not mind whipping up a storm at her request. They
enjoyed nothing better than wreaking havoc for
havoc’s sake.
The Dragon can be destroyed from within . . . I have
foreseen this.
The dragon was the guardian spirit of Britain; thus
she referred to Maelgwn, King of Gwynedd.
‘Then why not just do it, and put us all out of our
misery,’ Ossa smirked.
That would give me the greatest of pleasure. The
crone was growing impatient with him. But as I have
been banished from the earth plane, I am finding it a
bit difficult!

‘Oh! . . . I see.’ Ossa delighted in her problem. ‘And
what guarantee do I have that thou shall not turn thy
sorceress ways on me, should I free thee?’
Without a patron to serve, I am without purpose . . . I
have no direction, no cause for being. I desire the downfall
of Maelgwn Gwynedd more than the entire populace of
Saxony combined . . . including thyself, Ossa.
The malice Mahaud bore for the High King of the
Britons was made plain in her harsh inﬂection.
Although Ossa was curious to learn her reasons, he
hadn’t ruled out the possibility of trickery. ‘Why dost
thou despise the Dragon so? Because of Chiglas?’
She laughed hysterically, then stopped abruptly, her
mood becoming altogether more sinister.
I think not. Maelgwn Gwynedd, his whore of a Queen,
King Brockwell of Powys and Myrddin were the ones who
had me exiled to the lower etheric world. But I have been
watching them from my timeless prison cell and they all
possess certain ﬂaws in their nature that, with just a tiny bit
of encouragement from me, could cause divisions in the
Dragon’s kingdom and restore the perfect little world of the
Britons to the chaos of yesteryear. There shall be ﬁne
plunder and spoils for whomever releases me to spin my web
of retribution. With me to enchant, no one will even suspect
foul play until their defeat is complete. I shall make
Maelgwn Gwynedd look so wretched in the eyes of his
people that he shall be remembered thus for all time. The
ways of the Goddess will be cast aside once more, and my
Lord will be the hero in history’s eyes.
Ossa and Eormenric were mesmerised by her
ploy, but it still sounded too good to be true. ‘And

what shall become of thy compatriot after the
Dragon’s defeat?’
What kingdom dost thou fancy, Warlord? The
possibilities art endless.
The voice of the enchantress was so inviting; she
made it sound so easy. This was the ally Ossa had been
waiting for, his key to the greater mysteries of this land.
‘If I agree, what must I do in order to release thee?’
Dig under this tree and there ye shall ﬁnd a cauldron
buried with a map. Do not open the cauldron, but take it
directly to the house marked on the map. A woman lives
there who was my prize student until Taliesin stole her away
and brainwashed her with all his positive nonsense.
‘Vanora,’ Ossa surmised. ‘The daughter of Chiglas.’
Aye, she conﬁrmed in encouragement, pleased that
he was seriously considering her proposal. Now, although
she may appear as pure as the virgin snow, all ye must do to
bring her to her senses be to lift the lid from the cauldron and
persuade her to look inside. Vanora will know what is
required for my release and will devise a means.

2

LUGHNASA — THE
GATHERING

T

he month-long festival of Lughnasa had always
been celebrated by the native Britons to honour
the harvesting of their yearly crop. But for the
past twenty years, the feast of the God of the Sun also
commemorated the signing of the pact that now bonded
each British kingdom to the other. Every year these
great kings and leaders met to discuss their progress and
the problems facing their alliance. This gathering was
held at Arwystli, in Powys, for it was the most central
point of allied Britain.
In addition to the normal festivities that such an
occasion would suggest, Arwystli was also celebrating
the twenty years of prosperity it had seen since Powys

had been freed from the tyrannous reign of King
Chiglas. Powys had then entered into an alliance with
neighbouring kingdoms, under the guidance of Chiglas’
successor and its current ruler, King Brockwell.
Brockwell was the great-grandson of the famous
warrior, Cunedda, as his predecessor Chiglas had been,
and although Brockwell was originally a son of
Gwynedd, the people of Powys adored him. For this
King was of good heart and possessed a fearless
disposition. Nominated by the Goddess to lead Powys
out of darkness, lead them out of darkness he did. The
kingdom’s ﬁelds overﬂowed with the bounty of the
Goddess and peace had prevailed in the wake of the
eons of turmoil their forefathers had known.
Brockwell’s Queen, Katren, was the epitome of a
rags to riches story. Born the daughter of a simple
farmer, she had elevated herself in society through her
acts of bravery for King and country. The ﬁrst female
warrior to be initiated into the ‘circle of twelve’, known
as the Warriors of the Goddess, she had won her social
standing and the heart of Brockwell during the debacle
of Chiglas. As tiny and petite as she was beautiful and
chaste, Katren had blessed the kingdom with three ﬁne,
strapping sons to succeed the King.
Her eldest son, Blain, aged eight years and ten, was
heir to the throne of Powys. Owen, her second-born, was
ﬁve years and ten, and Cai, her youngest, was two years
and ten. The eldest son of King Brockwell was Bryce,
aged ﬁve years and twenty. Bryce was the adopted half
brother of the other three, who, due to a confusing set of
circumstances early in life, also carried the title Earl of

Penmon (his father’s estate in Gwynedd). Bryce would
have been the heir to Brockwell’s throne in Powys had
he not been illegitimate. But as it was, his three younger
legitimate brothers, all had the right to claim the crown
before him.
Though the Queen had not borne Bryce of her own
loins, she loved him dearly. So much so that she found
herself favouring him over the others at times — for
how could she help but feel responsible for doing him
out of his inheritance.
Tory had a lot on her mind as she followed the maid to
the High King’s chamber at Arwystli. She’d been
mindful of the sad state of the lands that lay in the east,
and an updated report had her worried.
For it seemed somewhat suspicious to her that the
farmland of their foe could be so badly ravaged, when
the allied kingdoms under her husband’s rule had
reported a greater yield than ever before. Undoubtedly,
the Saxons had ﬁgured a way to pin the blame for their
misfortune on allied Britain. They’ll be blaming it on
sorcery, most likely. But whatever the cause truly was,
this imbalance had to be rectiﬁed or it would plunge
Britain into war.
I shall put this forward at the meeting. For if we do not
attempt to aid these people, they will surely set about to take
what they need to survive the cold seasons.
Tory’s word was second only to the High Merlin of
the Druids during these annual meetings of the alliance,
and she was the only woman permitted to attend. For
she was the chosen representative of the Goddess,

through which the divine mother spoke in council to
guide the leaders of Britain.
‘Thy room, Majesty.’ The head maidservant
announced, as she entered and stood aside for the High
Queen to enter. ‘I have prepared a hot bath, just as it
pleases thee.’
‘Many thanks, Ganivra. This place seems like a
second home these days.’ Tory breezed into the room,
placing aside her hand luggage and making herself at
home on the lounge.
‘We aim to keep it that way, Majesty. King Brockwell
does look forward to thy visits.’
‘As do I,’ Tory assured her.
‘Majesty!’
Tory turned in her seat to ﬁnd Katren poised in the
doorway, the skirt and sleeves of her gown still caught
up in the vacuum of her hasty entry.
‘Why did thou not send a messenger ahead?’ Just for
a second, Katren appeared disappointed. ‘I wanted to
greet thee upon thy arrival.’
Tory stood as Katren approached with her arms
outstretched. ‘Oh Katren, thou art well aware of how I
detest formality.’
The Queen of Powys beamed with excitement as
she embraced the High Queen. ‘And thou art well
aware of how I adore it.’
‘I much prefer to be welcomed in this way.’ She held
Katren at arm’s length to look at her.
‘It feels like an eternity since last I saw thee.’ Katren
was so overjoyed that she burst into tears. ‘I do miss
thee so . . . and the Masters.’

‘Well, here I am.’ Tory smiled. ‘And please, stop
calling me Majesty.’
‘But, Majesty! Thou art the High Queen of Britain
now.’
‘Katren!’ Tory found it hard to believe that anyone
could be such a stickler for ceremony. ‘Okay . . . I forbid
thee to call me anything but my given name.’ She
grinned, satisﬁed that she’d now get her own way.
‘If that be thy will.’ Katren gave in gladly.
Tory resumed her seat, half expecting her friend to
settle beside her. ‘How fares all with thy kin?’
‘Well, actually, my boys are awaiting an audience
just outside.’ Katren waved a ﬁnger over her shoulder.
‘Should I summon them in?’
Again Tory was surprised at her. ‘Why, of course!’
Ganivra left them at Katren’s word, and the next
moment all four brothers came striding through the
door. Bryce approached Tory ﬁrst, as he was best
acquainted with the High Queen.
‘Sensei, welcome.’ He bowed deeply before her, his
hands clenched in front of his solar plexus as they did in
Mastery.
Bryce had replaced his mother in the ‘circle of
twelve’ at the age of ﬁve years and ten, making him the
youngest initiate to date. Ten years down the track, he
was one of the ﬁnest warriors Tory had ever trained.
Tory returned the gesture in a not-so-formal fashion
and then hugged him. ‘Dear Bryce, I do swear thou art
the spitting image of thy father at times.’
I have need to speak with thee. Bryce bethought her,
knowing his sensei would hear him if he willed it hard

enough. He then stepped aside for Blain and smiled, as
if he’d thought nothing of the like.
A feeling of urgency accompanied his message, but
Tory inquired no further; she would know the all of it
soon enough.
‘Majesty.’ Blain came forward and bowed in the
regular fashion. ‘I have need to speak with thee —’
‘Wait!’ Tory held out her hand. ‘Let me guess. Thou
hast heard that there will soon be a position within my
circle of twelve, and it be thy wish to compete for the
seat.’ Tory raised her eyebrows as Owen and Cai
conﬁrmed her guess with a ‘Gosh!’
Blain staggered back, grinning from ear to ear.
‘Majesty, thou art a wonder to me . . . those were the
exact words I would have chosen.’
‘Indeed.’
‘So what be thy answer?’ His piercing blue eyes
compelled her to speak.
These eyes were one of the more distinguishing
features of the Brockwell clan — all the sons had
inherited them. Although Bryce and Blain had their
father’s long dark curls, Owen’s hair had shimmers of
his mother’s coppery colour, and Cai was as fair as
they come. Bryce had grown taller than his father,
who only stood around five foot four, and, although
his brothers had yet to reach their father’s height,
they would all maintain the same stocky build when
fully grown. The only other unmistakable feature
Calin Brockwell had passed down to his sons was that
of the dimple on his chin, though Bryce and Cai were
the only recipients.

Tory teased Blain with her pondering. ‘Maybe. I
shall think about it.’
‘But Majesty, I am heir to the throne of Powys, and
Rhun be one of the twelve . . .’
‘Give Rhun his due, Blain. He started his training
before thou wast even born.’
Rhun was Tory’s only child and sole heir to the
throne of Gwynedd. Her lack of offspring had been
quite purposeful in that she wanted none to contest
Rhun’s right to the throne in his father’s wake. This
way, there would be no needless blood-feuds that might
throw Gwynedd back into turmoil during his reign. As
soon as Rhun could walk, Tory started training him in
the skills of self-defense. He was three years older than
Blain, and although they were fast friends they were
also ﬁercely competitive.
‘But Rhun had the good fortune to be trained by
thyself, Majesty. Will thee not at least give me that
same chance?’
‘Bryce be one of the ﬁnest trainers I have, Blain.
Thou should be proud to have him as thy Sensei.
However, as I said, I shall think about it.’
The High Queen looked to Owen, who’d been
patiently awaiting her address.
‘Of course.’ Blain backed off, feeling rather put in
his place. They all favoured Bryce. Why had he thought
that the High Queen would be any different.
Owen bowed and wore a cheeky grin on his face
as he politely took up Tory’s hand and kissed it. ‘It be
a pleasure to see thee, Majesty. Thou art as radiant
as ever.’

Tory glanced at Katren, who rolled her eyes. ‘My,
but thou hast a good serve of thy father in thee, too.
What dost thou want of me?’
‘Nothing at all, Majesty. I am perfectly content,’
Owen seemed rather pleased to admit.
‘Then tell me, Owen, what be happening in thy
world?’ Tory hadn’t encountered these two younger boys
very often.
‘I thought thee could tell me.’ He commented in a
playful manner.
‘Well Owen, I could . . . if that be thy wish,’ Tory
offered, very much doubting that he would want his
brothers and Mother to know of the young housemaid
that was driving him to distraction.
‘Nay, Majesty, ’twas a joke.’ He blushed, wondering
if she knew; legend had it that she knew everything
about everyone.
‘Tell us, Majesty,’ Blain teased Owen, taking hold of
him in a headlock.
‘Not now, Blain,’ his mother scolded, urging her
youngest son to come forward.’
‘By the Goddess!’ Tory was taken aback. ‘This could
not be little Cai!’
Cai bowed astutely and Tory hoped she’d not
embarrassed him.
‘Aye, Majesty.’ His sights wavered between her face
and the ﬂoor.
Cai was shyer than the others and spent most of his
time with his head in a book: ‘How go thy studies, Cai?’
A smile swept over his face. She remembers! ‘Very
well, Majesty. Very well, indeed.’

‘He hast become rather proﬁcient on the harp, also,’
Katren added with pride, as if she and the High Queen
had never discussed his talents before.
‘So art thou ready for Selwyn yet?’ Tory questioned,
completely stunning the boy.
Selwyn was Chief Bard in the court of the High King,
but he was also a merlin among Druids. He’d studied
under Taliesin a good part of his life, and was regarded as
one of the wisest men in the whole of Britain.
‘Dost thou not expect me to be a warrior like my
brothers and Father before me?’ Cai was beaming now,
scarcely able to believe that she knew of his aspirations.
‘We do need scholars, too, Cai.’
‘Hey!’
Everyone present turned to behold Rhun leaning in
the doorway with a goblet of mead in his hand.
‘What shall a lad do for amusement around here?’
The young Prince of Gwynedd did not enter, but rather
waited for everyone to come to him — all of the boys
did, bar Bryce.
‘How did thou manage to sneak in?’ Owen was
clearly overjoyed to see him.
‘An excellent surprise!’ Blain stepped up after Owen
to give Rhun a high ﬁve; it would appear a little
something still remained of Tory’s twentieth century
childhood. ‘Who be holding the fort if thou art here?’
‘Sir Tiernan stayed behind in Rhun’s stead this year,’
Tory explained with delight.
She was proud of him; Rhun was a handsome piece
of work, just like his father. He’d inherited her art of
truthsaying, and as he knew everybody’s thoughts, he

knew exactly how to keep everyone happy. It was
common knowledge that no maiden was safe from him,
and Tory knew this was no exaggeration.
‘Aye, I hope ye all appreciate that I had to beg to get
here.’ Rhun grinned, though he tried to sound put out.
‘Thou begged to come see us?’ Bryce had to laugh. ‘I
think not! I think thou hast heard that Vortipor ﬁnally
got up the courage to bring his daughter, and thou hast
come to see her.’
Rhun looked to Bryce and gave him a wink. ‘And so
I say, lead me to her.’ He spurred his three young
companions off on a quest.
‘Duty calls.’ Katren made after them. ‘I am not
entirely sure Bridgit can handle all four of them at once.’
‘I shall be down shortly.’ Tory looked to Bryce.
‘Well, sir, I pray thee speak. I am listening.’
Bryce seemed hesitant to voice his mind at once.
‘Come on, Bryce, out with it.’ Tory closed the door.
He was still pondering how best to put forward his
dilemma as he raised his big blue eyes to look at her. ‘Dost
thou think Blain shall get the seat in thy circle, Sensei?’
‘Well, there are other candidates, but Blain stands a
fair chance.’ Tory was straight with him. She had
known there would be brotherly friction between Bryce
and Blain. It had just been a matter of when. ‘He be thy
pupil, Bryce. Surely thou wants him to succeed?’
‘Aye, Sensei, I do. Then he would become a trainer,
as I am, and could instruct here in Powys in my stead.’
Tory returned to the lounge and sat down. ‘Why,
where art thou off to?’ she questioned with a laugh
in her voice.

Bryce made haste to sit beside her. ‘I wish to return to
Gwynedd, Majesty. After all, I wast born there. Ione shall
be resigning as thy champion before long . . . I wish to
compete for her title and serve under thee all the time.’
‘But thy father needs thee here, Bryce. Hast thou
discussed this with him?’
‘Nay. But if Blain becomes one of thy Masters, he
shall not need me as much.’ He looked a little sad to
concede this.
‘Blain be very young, and hardly a worthy
replacement for one with thy experience,’ Tory assured
him honestly.
‘Blain shall be King, not I. Surely . . .’
‘Be that the real problem, Bryce?’ It was not like
him to be jealous.
‘In a way.’ He was disinclined to admit it. ‘But, as it
no longer be my fate to be King, I feel I must follow my
own destiny. And I wish, more than anything, to be a
champion of Gwynedd like my father once was. It be all
I have ever desired, Sensei, and thou knows I would
serve thee well.’
Tory could not disagree with his reasoning. It was
true that he had always aspired to hold the position his
father once had. Yet she could not see Brockwell
wanting to release Bryce from his role as trainer to his
armies here in Powys. For Brockwell, as a King, had
little time to spend instructing his soldiers and he would
not entrust the responsibility to one as young as Blain.
‘In a few years perhaps —’
‘Nay, Sensei, please! Thou dost not understand the
full extent of it.’ Bryce stood, driven by his belief.

‘Father will never entrust Blain with any responsibility
whilst I am still here. Already Blain feels the King
favours me, as doth our mother most of the time.’
‘I see.’ Tory motioned him to be seated and calm
himself. She should have known Bryce could never be
impelled by selﬁsh cause. ‘Thou dost feel thou art
treading on his toes.’
‘I know it, Sensei.’ Bryce sat as instructed. ‘And
Blain be more than capable of succeeding me . . . just
wait until thou sees him in action, he shall make a ﬁne
Master.’
‘Well, as I said, Blain be not the only candidate I
have.’ Tory took up his hand and patted it. ‘I shall see
what I can do.’ Her mind boggled at the chore. ‘But
only the Otherworld knows how we shall get around
thy father.’
As Rhun entered the huge banquet hall with the rest of
his entourage in tow, he spied Gawain and Gareth
already approaching to acquaint him with the situation.
Sir Gawain was the latest initiate to the ‘circle of
twelve’ and son of one of the High King’s most trusted
advisers, Sir Rhys. Although Gawain was a year older
than Rhun they were of similar build, both reasonably
tall, lean and broad-shouldered. They were often
mistaken for brothers. They both had the same straight,
dark hair, yet where Gawain’s eyes were steely blue,
Rhun’s were dark brown. Sir Gareth, on the other hand,
was a year younger than the Prince. A good height and
size for his age, Gareth’s hair was the colour of honey,
and his eyes were a pale, icy blue. His father, Sir Tiernan,

had charge of the High King’s armies at Aberffraw,
where Gareth, Gawain and Rhun had grown up.
This was the ﬁrst time in ages that all the sons of
the ‘circle of twelve’ had been brought together in the
one place. These lads were the brightest stars in
Britain’s future and it was clear to all in the banquet
hall that they knew it, too. For theirs was a very noisy
reunion — that is, until Queen Katren entered,
whereby they all simmered down to polite conversation.
‘Damned shame thy father had to stay home this
year.’ Blain nudged Gareth with his shoulder.
‘Aye, damned shame,’ Gareth considered with a
smile on his face.
Sir Tiernan, in addition to his responsibility for
training, was still the High King’s champion at the age of
eight years and ﬁfty. He was feared by these boys, and
thus did a fair job of keeping them all in line. But it was
Ione, Gareth’s mother, that his friends feared more. She
trained the female warriors of Gwynedd and was the
champion of the High Queen, which was the greatest
honour any ﬁghter within the alliance could have.
‘Mother stayed at Aberffraw, too,’ added Gareth.
‘Phew . . .’ Owen voiced the general view. ‘The
Goddess be truly smiling on us this year.’
Rhun was still watching Queen Katren, who’d
crossed the room to speak with a group of maidens. One
of girls turned to look in their direction.
‘That must be her,’ Rhun announced discreetly to
the others. ‘Queen Katren hast gone to forewarn the
maiden.’ He raised his eyebrows as he took a seat at the
closest bench to begin feasting.

‘Art thou not going to speak with her, then?’ Owen
wondered.
‘Nay. I shall wait for the lady to seek me out.’
Gawain laughed. ‘She will never come over here
whilst there art so many of us.’
‘Well, then?’ Rhun grinned, raising his eyebrows as
Gawain and the others stared back at him blankly.
‘Shall we leave then?’ Blain suggested, making his
offer sound more like a dare.
‘Would thee? How kind.’ Rhun thanked them as they
parted company. ‘Cai can stay, though, if he chooses.’
Cai, pleased to have been chosen, sat where Rhun
motioned him and joined the feast.
‘So tell me, Cai, what are the maidens doing now?’
Rhun continued selecting food at random from the
platters before him and popping it into his mouth.
Cai observed a moment before reporting. ‘I think they
art being introduced to Gareth, Gawain and my brothers.’
‘What!’ Rhun had to look for himself. ‘Oh dear.’ He
shrugged off his defeat with a sigh. ‘We shall just have
to get drunk on our own then.’ The Prince raised his
goblet to Cai’s and clinked it.
‘Wait a moment.’ Cai froze, his eyes still ﬁxed on
the cluster of women. ‘One of the maidens be coming
this way, but not the one who wast observing us before.’
‘Interesting.’ Rhun reﬁlled his goblet. ‘In a word,
how would thou describe her?’
‘Ah . . . stunning,’ Cai concluded without hesitation.
Rhun became more interested. Stunning, ay?
‘Majesty.’ She requested his attention, having
reached them.

When Rhun turned to view the maiden he was
more than pleasantly surprised, for here was a face that
caught the eye. It gave host to features that were almost
angelic, and skin that glowed as soft and fair as a child’s.
Long, thick masses of auburn-brown curls had been
rolled, and pinned off to each side of her face. But the
bulk of her hair sat in long clusters that fell about her
shoulders and down her back. Despite the rest of the
maiden’s slender, yet shapely, form Rhun’s eyes did not
waver from her face. Exquisite would have been my
description. ‘Can I help thee, Lady?’
‘Nay,’ she giggled. ‘I am the maid of Lady Bridgit,
who —’
‘How unfortunate.’ He took hold of her hand and
coaxed her into taking a seat beside him. ‘Do have a
drink . . . what did thou say thy name was?’
‘Ah . . .’ She was hesitant to answer right away; his
forward, though charming, manner had her in a bit of a
ﬂuster. ‘Lucinda, Majesty. But my La—’
‘Well, do have a drink, Lucinda.’
The Prince was so amiable that she nearly
succumbed to his kind offer. ‘Nay, Majesty, really. I am
just here to deliver a message.’ She rose, observing the
expression on his face, so soft and open for one of his ilk.
The Prince had suddenly become so intent upon hearing
her message she almost forgot it. ‘The Lady Bridgit . . .’
‘Thy mistress,’ Rhun interjected, to conﬁrm he was
following her tale.
‘Indeed.’ The maid found herself frowning and
grinning at once; how peculiar he was. ‘She be
wondering if thou would grant her an audience?’

Rhun laughed, seemingly delighted by the notion.
‘After such a becoming invitation, how could I
possibly refuse?’
The maid bowed graciously, sporting a half grin on
her face, when Rhun stood to block her escape. ‘I am
pleased to make thy acquaintance, Lady Bridgit. Please
sit down and have a drink with us.’
Her eyes, the colour of amber jewels, were wide at
his words. ‘Majesty, why dost thou insist I am who I
have already told thee I am not?’
Rhun looked to Cai who was following the
conversation with decided interest. ‘Dost thou think
she could possibly see ﬁt to test me further?’
Cai nodded with a shrug. ‘I guess she doth not
know then?’
‘Know what?’ she inquired.
Rhun turned back to the maid to enlighten her.
‘How I detest being tested?’
She was taken aback by his tone, and so resolved to
be open with him.
‘My game be up then?’ she asked Rhun.
Cai and Rhun nodded in sympathy with her
predicament.
‘They said thou could not be fooled . . . though I
have led the others a merry dance.’ She sounded pleased
to have accomplished that much. ‘They art still making
eyes at my maid.’
The three looked to the parties to which she
referred, spurring the two Princes to laughter.
‘It be a pity really . . . that thou found me out so
soon.’ She cast her sights to Rhun, who stood right

beside her. ‘It could have been fun.’ She smiled with a
pout, and wandered away.
‘Whoa there.’ Rhun went after her. ‘Nobody said we
had to tell anyone.’ He turned Bridgit around and led
her back. ‘Cai can keep a secret . . . and, after all, if I say
thou art the maid, I doubt even thine own father would
disbelieve it.’
Everything she’d heard about Prince Rhun was true.
Bridgit’s smile broadened; she liked him already.

3

THE CAULDRONBORN

O

n the map, which Ossa and his men had dug up
from under the elder tree, X marked a spot right
in the heart of allied Britain. It appeared that
the Princess Vanora now resided on the outermost tip of
the Isle of Mon, which was territory owned and
frequented by the Dragon himself. The Gwynedd
stronghold was situated on the mainland at Degannwy,
but King Maelgwn’s home and training ground were at
Aberffraw, on Mon. Thus, the Saxons expected the
island would be well guarded.
Along with the map, the witch had left a spell with
them. She claimed the incantation would shield
whomever bore her cauldron from the eyes of the

Otherworld, so they could pass through the land that
the Goddess safeguarded without fear of detection.
However, it would only cloak the party from
Otherworldly eyes — Ossa still had to deal with those
of a physical nature.
Eormenric mapped a course that would take them
round all of Gwynedd’s major strongholds, yet they still
had to devise a means to cart the weighty cauldron
across the Menai. The easy way, in his mind, was to take
the barge across the strait as the locals did.
‘Thou dost already speak the local dialect, thanks to
thy dealings with Chiglas,’ Eormenric put forward. ‘We
could enter Gwynedd in the guise of peasants . . . shave
and dress as the Britons do.’
‘I would rather ﬁght the whole of Britain than shave
this beard.’ Ossa motioned to the growth on his chin
that fell in two long braids down the length of his body.
‘Father, even I would not recognise thy cleanshaven face.’ Eormenric knew his father was going to be
difﬁcult about this. ‘Once we free Mahaud, I am sure
she will restore thy beard.’
‘Thou art assuming an awful lot,’ Ossa snarled. But
the aging warlord knew he would not see too many
more adventures of this magnitude in his lifetime. Thus
he was ﬁnally persuaded.
They cast the witch’s spell over their party under the
conditions the she had outlined.
Only those who would make the journey were
present — Ossa, Eormenric, and their two ﬁnest
warriors. The midnight hour approached as they stood

in a clearing of the forest that bordered the Dragon’s
realm. It was a still night with no moon.
To recite the incantation, Ossa and his men stood
in a circle that was marked by four lit torches to their
north, south, east and west respectively. The words of
the incantation meant nothing to the men, as they
were in a foreign dialect that was neither Anglo-Saxon
nor the native tongue. Ossa was unsure as to whether
they were even pronouncing the chant correctly, until
the atmosphere surrounding them became unsettled.
Tiny whirlwinds rose out of the forest floor,
stirring up the dead foliage that lay about the ground.
The breeze built steadily to a gale that howled up and
down through the trees, routing the wildlife, who fled
the area.
At the end of the third, and ﬁnal incantation, the
wind ripped around the clearing, extinguishing all four
torches in turn.
An eerie silence hung over the place in the wake of
the disturbance and the air, now stagnate, felt deathly
cold. The presence of the dark force they’d invoked to
protect themselves was making itself at home.
The conference was going splendidly. These leaders very
much enjoyed their annual reunion, revelling in the
company of those who could truly understand their
aspirations, responsibilities and woes. Thankfully, their
woes had been few of late; the various kingdoms within
the alliance boasted of their harvests and of the progress
their cities and industries had made during the relative
peace of the past year. It wasn’t until Tory suggested

giving aid to the lands in the east that the leaders
seemed to lose their high spirits. Still, old King Catulus
of Dumnonia had to laugh.
‘One doth not aid thine enemy when he hast been
substantially weakened, Majesty. Now would seem a
better time than any to drive them out.’
‘I agree.’ The other representatives backed his view,
all bar Maelgwn; he’d learnt to hear Tory out before
trying to win an argument against her.
‘I beg to differ, gentlemen.’ Tory’s voice rose over
the din. ‘I have learnt from my own experience that war
begets war, peace begets peace.’
King Brockwell, though he loved Tory dearly, felt he
must strongly protest. ‘Nonsense! If the situation wast
reversed, dost thou think for a moment that they would
do the same for us?’
‘Nay, I do not.’ Tory was short with him. ‘That be all
the more reason why we should do it for them. I am not
asking this council to supply them with weapons, just
food enough to see them through the snowfall. For if we
do not, starvation shall surely push them to plunder to
sustain themselves.’
‘If the Saxons make war on us, we shall cast them
out of this land as the Goddess forewarned.’ Vortipor,
the Protector of Dyfed, took a stand on the issue. ‘I shall
not feed their children so they can live to take the lands
of my descendants.’
‘Here, here!’ Fergus MacErc of the Scotti agreed
whole-heartedly.
Tory shook her head, disappointed that the council
could not see the opportunity for lasting good relations

with their neighbours. ‘Thou shalt all have to lose thy
fear sometime.’
‘She speaks wisely, gentlemen.’ Taliesin, who’d been
keeping a low proﬁle during the proceedings, ﬁnally
came forward to voice his view. ‘Our motherland be
experiencing a major imbalance. Though one half of
her lives in the sunshine and prospers, the other half
lives in dark despair. Now what hast been the cause of
this dis-ease I cannot say, but it will surely spread into
our lands if not addressed soon.’ The Merlin looked to
Brockwell. ‘So ask not if they would do the same for
thee, but rather, how would thee have them treat us in
the same circumstance.’
‘I already know how they would treat us.’ Brockwell
was getting edgy.
‘Be that so? Think about it?’ Tory strengthened the
argument. ‘Thirty years ago, who would have thought
that thy good selves would prosper within this
association? We have brought about peace and cooperation between half the kingdoms in this land. Why
should it end there?’
‘What makes thee think they would accept our
help?’ Maelgwn grinned at his lovely wife; she was
doing a ﬁne job, as always.
‘Do we have to call it charity? Call it a peace
offering, a token of friendship, or goodwill.’
‘Well . . .’ King Catulus decided to give the High
Queen’s notion some consideration; she’d never steered
them wrong before. ‘We could send some poor, suicidal
knight to Londinium with a letter of our intent . . . see
what kind of response we get?’

‘All in favour?’ Maelgwn raised his hand, followed
by Catulus and the others. Only Brockwell remained
opposed to the notion.
‘Not the Saxons!’ Brockwell pleaded, collapsing
onto the conference table as if he would cry.
‘Come on, Brockwell . . .’ Tory nudged a little
harder. ‘Just let go of thy fear.’
He ﬁnally gave in, raising his arm in the air.
‘So be it.’ The council declared.
It was decided before the meeting adjourned that one
of the ‘circle of twelve’ should deliver the message.
Sir Tiernan, Ione, Sir Angus, Lady Alma and Sir Rhys
were not present, as they’d stayed in Gwynedd to look
after its affairs whilst Tory and Maelgwn attended the
conference. Brockwell and Vortipor, as heads of
state, could not be sent. Thus, only Bryce, Gawain
and Rhun remained as possibilities. After some
discussion it was decided that Bryce, as the eldest
and most experienced, should go. Only one soldier
would accompany him, as they did not want to alarm
their foe by sending a whole battalion to deliver
a message.
Naturally, his father was not completely thrilled by
the idea, but Bryce was the obvious choice.
Maelgwn and Tory returned to their chamber after the
long day in court to ﬁnd their son sprawled across one of
their lounges, engrossed in a book.
‘How went thy meeting?’ Rhun rested his reading
matter on his chest as they entered.

‘Thy mother stirred up a hornets’ nest.’ The King
didn’t sound too worried about it. He took hold of his
son’s feet to twist him around, and then let them drop
to the ﬂoor. ‘Why art thou not out playing with that
maid, whatever her name wast?’ Maelgwn took a seat
beside Rhun.
‘So many people, for too long, make me dizzy . . .
all those minds thinking at once.’ Rhun pulled
himself back up to a seated position. ‘And her name
be Lucinda.’
Tory laughed. ‘Bridgit, more like.’
Rhun’s head shot up, as did his father’s.
Tory laughed again. ‘The pair of thee have not still
got everybody fooled, surely?’
Rhun grinned. Even though he’d scarce seen his
mother since they arrived, he should have known she
would ﬁnd out. ‘A ﬁne performance by anyone’s
standards. None had guessed till now.’
‘Thou art not fooling around with Vortipor’s
daughter?’ Maelgwn sounded perturbed. ‘He hast been
looking for an excuse to challenge me to a sword ﬁght
for the past twenty years.’
‘Fear not,’ Rhun assured. ‘She be safer with me than
anyone.’
Maelgwn split his sides laughing. ‘Her father doth
not agree. He arranged a guard for her as soon as I
mentioned I brought thee.’
‘I know,’ Rhun informed him. ‘They art fooled, too.
They have been guarding her maid these two days past.
It be a good thing Vortipor sent Bridgit away to Brittany
for so long . . . no one seems to know what she looks

like. Except her father, of course, and he’s been too tied
up to expose us.’
Tory couldn’t help but be amused, though Maelgwn
was looking a little pale. ‘So long as thou art treating
her as a lady of royal blood.’ She came to sit between
them, taking hold of Rhun’s hand.
‘Mother, thee would know if I did not,’ her son said
emphatically. Then, perceiving his mother’s mind, his
expression became more disturbed. ‘Why art thou
sending Bryce to Londinium?’
‘The council hast decided to see if we can aid the
Saxons in their time of need,’ Maelgwn put forward in
an impartial fashion, interested to see how his son
would respond.
Rhun stood, taking a few paces away then turning
back. ‘I see the sense of it . . . but, let me go. Bryce doth
not have the same talents for reading people that I do.’
As his parents both moved to contest him, Rhun added
quickly, ‘And do not try and tell me heirs to the throne
cannot risk this kind of quest — look at what Father
accomplished on his own before he assumed his position.’
The young warrior, having been raised in peacetime,
hadn’t seen much action, and a royal errand into the
centre of enemy territory sounded terribly inviting.
‘That was part of Maelgwn’s inauguration, a
challenge thee, too, will face in time. Bryce, most likely,
shall never face that kind of initiation. Thus, I feel this
quest be the chance for him to prove to himself his
own worth.’
Rhun was aware of what Bryce had been going
through these past few years, with Blain out to establish

himself as a suitable heir. ‘Could I not accompany him
then? Together we will be invincible.’
Tory and Maelgwn looked to each other; it was hard
enough risking Bryce on the errand, but their own son?
‘I speak the language better than he does. I am
much more diplomatic, not to mention charming.’
‘Enough!’ Tory knew he was right. What’s more,
Rhun knew she knew it, and he smiled broadly in spite
of being interrupted. Maelgwn had won wars at Rhun’s
age, and with far less training than his son.
He didn’t wait to hear his mother’s verbal response;
Rhun felt her let go of her dread. ‘Many thanks for the
vote of conﬁdence, Mother. I shall make ready.’ He was
out the door before his father had the chance
to comment.
‘Tory!’ Maelgwn looked to his wife, who was almost
in tears.
‘That was the hardest thing I shall ever have to do.’
Tory’s wise and strong state of being departed as she
realised what she’d done. ‘Due to a notion I had a few
days ago, two of my Master’s must risk their lives. I very
much despise my position at times.’
Their expedition had been a misery, and it seemed like
one of the longest Ossa had undertaken in his life.
One cart and two horses to carry four men and a
cauldron may have been ﬁne on the eastern plains, but
through the mountains of Gwynedd it was a nightmare.
The freezing cold presence their hex had conjured
hung over them like a curse. On the second night of
their travels they’d been robbed of their weapons and

food as they slept. They’d been bogged, lost and now
they were hungry, too. All four men were suffering from
the extreme cold and running a fever, hence the entire
party was short on patience; no matter how hard they
tried, they could not cooperate or agree with each other.
The sight of Bangor (a small ﬁshing community on
the banks of the Menai Strait) raised their spirits
considerably. The party found the local people very
helpful. They believed Ossa’s ‘poor farmer and his three
sons seeking better fortune in Aberffraw’ story and
provided accommodation, a hot meal, and instructions
as to where and when they could catch the barge.
Gullible fools, the Britons, Ossa thought in retrospect, as
he made the ﬁnal leg of their trek across the more
obliging terrain of the island. If not for the Goddess, I
would have possessed this land long ago.
Yet Eormenric’s thoughts were of a different nature.
These folk were not at all like he’d expected. How
generous they were to have given all four of them
shelter and food, when they’d nothing to give in return.
Even the ride across the Menai had been rendered free
of charge. The ferrymen had laughed when his father
informed him they had no money to pay.
‘We art in the service of the crown, Sir,’ the ferryman had explained. ‘None of the High King’s subjects
art expected to pay to cross the strait . . . where would
our industries be?’
Where indeed, Eormenric thought. We could learn a
thing or two from these people. What a ﬁne race they
seemed, too — so happy, healthy, and full of praise for

their King. They also acclaimed his Queen, though the
locals referred to her as the Goddess.
‘Why do they call Maelgwn’s queen, the Goddess?’
Eormenric had to ask.
His father, who sat beside him steering the cart, was
distracted by the question. ‘I do not believe the wild
tales the Britons spin.’
‘What tales?’ Eormenric prompted.
Though Ossa wasn’t thrilled about his son’s chosen
subject matter, the pace of their journey was slow and
some conversation seemed better than none. ‘Well . . .
the story goes that she wast brought from the future by
the Old Ones.’ He shrugged to imply that he didn’t
know who the ‘Old Ones’ were. ‘They say it was she
who formed and trained the circle of twelve. For she
brought with her the knowledge of an advanced ﬁghting
skill, which I glimpsed only once at Arwystli. A warrior
who had trained under the Goddess, the one they call
Ione, disarmed me in single combat. I was so stunned by
her bold ﬁghting technique and her beauty, that I
offered to swap our mutual enemy, Chiglas, in exchange
for her. Maelgwn Gwynedd refused.’
‘Hast thou met the Goddess?’ Eormenric wondered
if Maelgwn’s queen was the one his father had lived in
fear of all these years?
‘Aye.’ Ossa went silent.
The memory of her angelic presence and the
divine authority of her voice brought a tear to the
warlord’s eye. But Ossa repressed his guilt quickly; the
Goddess had caused his people pain, and now her
people would suffer.

The errand Bryce and Rhun were embarking upon was
known only to the immediate members of the alliance
and the messengers themselves; not even their
destination had been disclosed. It was decided by the
council that their intent should remain a secret until
such time as they’d received an answer. They’d allowed
six days for the princes to return, or send word. If any
dispatch they sent was not signed by the both of them,
the council would presume the worst and take action.
‘Camp tonight this side of Powys’ border,’ Maelgwn
advised his son in a whisper. ‘Then ride until thou hast
reached Ossa.’
‘I promise,’ Rhun assured, breaking into a smile.
‘Father, stop worrying. I shall be ﬁne.’
The young Prince of Gwynedd looked to his
mother. He felt the conﬂict eating away at her, just as
she felt the excitement welling within him.
‘Thy decision be a sound one,’ Rhun told her. ‘Dost
thou think for a moment I would go along with it, if it
wast not?’
‘Make me proud.’ Tory smiled, despite the tear that
escaped her eye.
‘That goes without saying.’
Bridgit waited patiently for Rhun to ﬁnish speaking
with his mother. The High Queen smiled as she
addressed him, giving all the impression that her son
was heading off on no more than a picnic. But when she
held him close in parting, a brief ﬂash of sorrow swept
her face. This led Bridgit to believe that perhaps
Rhun’s mission was indeed as dangerous as he’d boasted
the night before.

Why did I not submit when I had the chance? she
scolded herself. All he’d wanted was a kiss. What if he
gets killed? I may never see him again.
Rhun turned and made for his mount when a hand
touched his shoulder to delay him. He knew it was
Bridgit before he’d even turned. ‘My Lady of Dyfed.’
‘Majesty.’ She curtsied quickly, all in a ﬂuster. ‘I
wanted to say how sorry I am about last night. I should
have believed thee.’
Rhun laughed, for he’d had quite a bit of mead at
last night’s feast. ‘Nay, thou acted wisely. Truth be
known, thou probably saved my life.’
‘Well, in any case . . .’ Bridgit persevered to speak
her mind, pulling Rhun’s knife from its sheath at his
waist, ‘I wanted thee to have this.’ She cut off one of
the many tiny braids that were bound with ribbon and
laced through her curls. ‘For good luck.’ She explained
as she placed it in his hand. Then in front of the entire
gathering, she kissed him.
‘Looks like he accepts favours from the hired help,
too,’ Gawain commented, fetching a chuckle from
his peers.
‘Get him away from my daughter!’ Vortipor roared,
striding towards the couple to reclaim his kin.
‘What?’ Blain, Gareth, Gawain and Owen all
exclaimed at once.
Cai began to chuckle. ‘It seems thou art the ones
who art chasing the affections of the hired help.’
‘Damn it.’ Blain conceded defeat. ‘He did it again!’
Rhun glanced around, and it appeared that
everyone had seen them. ‘Thou art a crafty woman,

my lady. They shall be expecting me to marry
thee now.’
The smile he wore made it difﬁcult for Bridgit to tell
exactly how he felt; he’d certainly cooled since last
night. He enjoys confusing me. ‘Surely, thou art not
serious, Highness?’ She smiled as Vortipor took hold of
her. ‘Father would never allow it.’
‘Keep thy claws off my daughter, little dragon, or I
shall be forced to squash thee.’
Bridgit raised her eyebrows and shrugged as Vortipor
led her away, thus it was Rhun who was left wondering.
The braid in his hand would have much to tell
when he had the time to sit down and concentrate on
it. Right now, however, as Bryce was already mounted
and obviously eager to get on the move, Rhun made
haste to his horse.
By nightfall, Ossa’s party had found the cottage they
sought. It was a small yet cosy dwelling, and if all was as
it seemed Vanora lived alone.
A tall, slender maiden opened the door. This was the
daughter of Chiglas, Ossa was quite sure about it; she
didn’t appear to have aged a day. Her black, curly hair,
longer now, was neatly tied off her face. Her facial
expression had lost the sternness Ossa remembered,
though her eyes, black as night, were a steadfast reminder
of the wild child she’d been when last they’d met.
‘Can I help ye, sirs?’ she inquired, politely.
‘Aye.’ Ossa grinned; she did not recognise him. ‘Art
thou the maiden, Vanora?’
‘I am.’

‘I have been bade by the High King to dispatch
this crate to thee.’ Ossa motioned to the back of
his cart.
Vanora looked puzzled, though delighted, by the
announcement. ‘What hast the High King sent me?’
‘I do not know, Lady.’ Ossa humbled himself. ‘He
said only that it was something that once belonged
to thee.’
Vanora was intrigued. ‘Then, if ye would be so kind
as to bring it inside, I shall fetch some water and food
for ye all. It be quite a hike to get to these parts, ye must
be exhausted.’
Eormenric was completely dazed by her sweet
smile; she was nothing like what he’d expected. She
looked hardly a day older than himself, yet by his
father’s reckoning she was aged eight years and thirty.
She was a vision, as Mahaud had foretold, but he could
scarce believe her to be the wretched woman his
father had described.
‘Heartless and cruel,’ he’d said. ‘She bewitches many
and loves none. Men died for her and yet I never saw
her shed a single tear.’
Ossa was busy supervising their soldiers to move the
crate when Eormenric spied Vanora battling to raise a
loaded bucket from the well.
‘Ah!’ She gave a laugh as he took the load from her.
‘The Goddess always provides.’ She wiped her hands of
the chore.
Eormenric smiled; although he hadn’t understood
much of what she said, she seemed thankful for his aid.

She wandered away from him a little and stopped on
the hill’s incline, looking down through the trees to the
ocean beyond.
How dost thou survive in this remote place all alone?
Eormenric wanted to ask, although the maiden
appeared quite joyous and content. He wasn’t so sure
about exposing her to this witch any more, for
Mahaud certainly hadn’t done them any favours.
Their whole party wore several layers of clothing, yet
still they felt the cold of the cursed presence looming
over them.
What if Mahaud lied? Eormenric considered. What if
the spell was a curse to insure that we delivered the cauldron
to Vanora? For until we persuade her to look into it and
recall her sorcerous ways, we shall never learn how to lift the
icy shield we’ve cast.
Nobody outside their party seemed to notice the
lack of warmth, life, moisture or breeze, though the folk
at Bangor had commented that none of their party
appeared at all well.
I cannot let him do it. I must warn her. Eormenric
decided, lifting the bucket from the well. But how? They
didn’t even speak the same language.
A hand clamped down hard on Eormenric’s
shoulder and startled him.
‘Get that inside.’ His father grumbled softly, before
looking to Vanora and stating in a manner more
becoming. ‘Thy crate be in thy house, my lady.’
The three of them entered the cottage to ﬁnd that
the soldiers had removed the wooden packaging from
their load.

‘Why it be a cauldron.’ Vanora seemed stunned. ‘I
do not recall ever owning such an item. There must be
a mistake.’
Vanora moved to fetch a jug and goblets, appearing
not the slightest bit interested in investigating it
further. Eormenric smiled at this, though his father was
appearing a mite frustrated.
‘The cauldron might be just the container, Lady.
Perhaps the item to which the King referred be inside,’
Ossa suggested, one side of his mouth curving to a smile.
‘Perhaps thou art right.’ Vanora placed the jug of
water aside and approached the huge iron pot.
‘No!’ Eormenric cried, and although it was AngloSaxon he spoke, his intonation was clear enough to
deter her.
‘Silence.’ Ossa was outraged and lashed at his son
with a backhander to the face. Eormenric hit the ﬂoor
before having a chance to say more.
‘What art thou doing?’ Vanora rushed over to see if
the young man was alright.
‘So sorry, Lady, but he knows better than to speak
out of turn.’ Ossa looked down on his son, spread-eagled
on the ground before him.
‘Well, why wast he so alarmed?’ She held his face
gently to look it over.
‘Do not look into the cauldron. It be a trap,’
Eormenric mumbled, bleary-eyed.
Vanora was bemused. ‘I cannot understand him.’
Ossa went down on one knee by his son. ‘He said
not to bother thyself, Lady. He doth not wish to keep
thee from thy business.’

‘Oh.’ Vanora leant back on her haunches.
Eormenric was frustrated; what was his father telling
her? ‘No, I think he lies!’
With an explanation already brewing in his mind,
Ossa thumped Eormenric out cold. ‘Take him outside,’
he instructed the other men.
‘I do not understand.’ Vanora backed up, fearful and
suspicious. ‘What did he do to warrant such cruelty?
What did he say?’
‘Do not concern thyself, Lady. He be nothing
but a Saxon and a traitor. We art in the process of
reforming him, but I dare say he needs a few
more years in prison before he can truly be of any use to
our community. I would rather not repeat what he said
to thee . . . it would be better if thou did not know.’
‘Oh.’ Vanora felt rather rattled after the scene. His
explanation seemed as though it could be truthful. ‘I do
apologise to thee. I misunderstood.’
‘It be I who should apologise to thee for any
unpleasantness taking place in thy home.’ Ossa
smiled sweetly.
Vanora turned her attention to the large obstruction
in the middle of her room and circled it once before
reaching for the handle. ‘What dost thou think might
be inside?’ she questioned playfully, raising the lid to
peek underneath.
‘Some old memories perhaps?’ Ossa grinned with
satisfaction as a tremendous rumble resounded deep in
the belly of the pot.
The lid suddenly shot from Vanora’s hand and was
cast across the room. From within the seething misty

haze of the cauldron sprang long, spindly arms that were
transparent and red in colour.
‘Release me,’ demanded a voice of beastly strain.
The maid was stunned speechless, until the gangly
hands reached out and took hold of her head. As they
pulled her toward the pot’s churning red centre, Vanora
screamed in terror and resisted with all her might.
‘Remember me!’ the feral voice from within the
cauldron taunted.
‘Help me, please!’ Vanora looked to Ossa in a ﬁnal
plea. ‘Just replace the lid.’
But the warlord looked away, blocking out her
screams for assistance.
He allowed the beast to draw her in.

4

RUINATION

B

ryce and Rhun reached the border earlier than
expected, so they hunted up a couple of pheasant
for dinner and made camp before sunset.
They discussed their plans for the next day whilst
they ate, and placed bets as to how long it would take to
reach the said destination — Rhun’s estimation being
the more optimistic of the two.
Afterwards, with their bellies and minds ﬁlled to
overﬂowing, they lay next to the small campﬁre in
relative silence. It was nice laying out under the stars for
a change; they hadn’t done so in years. Still, tonight it
was altogether more exhilarating, as this time they
really were on a mission.
Bryce emerged from his contemplation and
glanced across to Rhun, whose sight was entranced

by the firelight as he held the braid of the Lady
Bridgit in his hand. His friend’s expression wasn’t that
of a man reflecting on a fair maiden; he was for some
unknown reason, deeply grieved and concerned.
‘Bad news?’
‘Sorry?’ Rhun snapped out of his daze.
‘The maiden.’ Bryce motioned to the lock of hair in
Rhun’s hand. ‘Be something amiss with her?’
‘Nay,’ Rhun smiled, his thoughts wandering again. ‘I
cannot seem to concentrate . . . my mind keeps being
distracted by something else.’
‘What?’
‘I do not know, I cannot see it . . . it be a little hard
to explain.’ Rhun brought his attention to the fore to
try and clarify. ‘These abilities I have extend from the
Otherworld, but they also extend into it . . . that be how
I am granted the information I seek.’
Bryce gave a nod to acknowledge he was following.
‘Yet sometimes I perceive information I have not
asked for and, as I do not know anything about it, I
must ask the right questions before I can draw any
meaning from it.’ Rhun looked perplexed.
‘So what hast thou seen that disturbs thee so?’
‘In this case it was felt, and again, it be rather
difﬁcult to verbalise.’ He didn’t want to unduly alarm
his companion, but Bryce motioned him on. ‘I feel a
great unease within the Otherworld, and when I asked
what wast causing this . . .’ Rhun shrugged, ‘all I felt was
an icy chill. All I saw was a great darkness.’
‘That doth not sound very promising,’ Bryce
conceded. ‘And nothing on the girl?’

‘Nay.’ Rhun tucked the braid gently back into his
shirt. ‘It be difﬁcult to access answers when the spirits
art so disgruntled.’
Bryce exhausted his powers of reason trying to ﬁgure
out what it could mean, but as he was not very
knowledgeable about such matters he lay back against
the base of the tree behind him to rest. ‘Well, let me
know if anything comes to thee.’
‘I shall,’ Rhun assured him with a smile, before his
sights were drawn back to the lapping ﬂames.
Eormenric was seeing stars when he woke, thousands
and thousands of stars. One side of his face ached with a
vengeance, and, as he managed to raise himself to his
elbows, he realised he was in the back of a cart.
It took a moment to recall exactly where he was as
he didn’t recognise anything at ﬁrst glance, but as he
spied the cottage upon its peaceful aspect overlooking
the ocean he remembered the maiden and the sum of
her woes.
What hast happened! He leapt from the cart, his
ailing head catching up with the rest of his body when
his feet hit the ground. Even though all appeared calm
and well, Eormenric ran to the doorway and burst into
the room.
‘Do not argue with me. I must go alone,’ Vanora
told his father in Eormenric’s own tongue as he
stumbled through the door. She glanced to the
intruder, not really paying him much mind. ‘Half of
Gwynedd knowing of thy involvement be the last
thing we need.’

The maiden’s demeanour seemed to have changed
somewhat. Suddenly it was not so hard to believe the
stories Ossa had told about her. What have we done?
‘But I want to be there to see it,’ Ossa grumbled,
obviously disappointed.
‘Believe me . . .’ she smiled in a cold, calculating
fashion, ‘thou shalt be able to see it from quite a distance.’
‘See what?’ Eormenric demanded.
Ossa turned in his seat to acknowledge his son’s
presence. ‘So. Thou hast ﬁnally come to thy senses. I
still pack a fair punch, ay?’
Surprisingly, his father seemed rather cheery.
Eormenric had felt sure Ossa would have him hung as a
traitor for what he’d done.
Ossa grunted. ‘Well, I hope I knocked some sense
into thee.’
Vanora rose and slowly approached Eormenric,
seeming so amiable that she near took his breath away.
‘So this be the one who tried to save me.’ She giggled,
amused by the notion. ‘What be wrong, Eormenric?’
She circled him, running a hand across his broad
shoulders. ‘Dost thou not like me this way?’
The chilly atmosphere of the curse that was upon
him suddenly became cooler and he shuddered. Vanora’s
ﬁngers felt like ice against his skin and as beautiful as
she was, her face had lost all its lustre. She smiled, yet
her huge, dark eyes were devoid of all emotion, as if
she’d died inside. ‘Dost thou like thyself this way?’ he
said, ﬁnally.
‘Of course I do. Dost thou think I enjoyed living
in the isolation of this place? I have been a prisoner

here for twenty years!’ she informed him, as if he were
some kind of idiot. ‘I wast brainwashed and robbed of
my kingdom.’
‘Forgive me, I had not considered . . .’
‘Indeed.’ She brushed off his apology. ‘So, from now
on, do not try and do me any favours.’
She looked away before Eormenric could respond.
The poor woman dost not even control her own will
anymore. Much to his horror, Vanora cast a cool glare
back in his direction.
‘Oh aye, I do. And tomorrow eve, thou shalt see for
thyself just how much control and willpower I have.’
Come dawn, Bryce and Rhun ate the leftovers from the
night before and then rode as hard as they could
through the land of their foe — stopping only twice to
answer nature’s call.
The errand had taken on a whole new meaning for
the young Britons, for they could hardly believe the
devastation that surrounded them; the farmland looked
more like marshland. The Goddess had been right in
saying these people needed help.
Rhun set a deadly pace over the precarious terrain,
but they didn’t enter the outskirts of Londinium till just
after dark. Bryce considered that they must have set
some sort of record. Needless to say, Rhun won their
bet, as they reached their destination before midnight.
At the gate to Ossa’s fortress, the pair were removed
from their horses and searched. As they bore a
dispatch and were unarmed, bar a bow and knife for

hunting, they were permitted entry. A guard of ten
soldiers led them to Ossa’s council chambers, where
they were left with four guards both in and outside
the door.
‘Well, we art still alive.’ Rhun gave Bryce a slap on
the shoulder to lighten the sombre atmosphere that
hung in the room.
Bryce looked to his companion, rather dumbfounded
by his jovial mood. ‘Only because they have yet to think
of a good reason to kill us.’
Rhun laughed out loud. ‘Then we shall not give
them one.’
They turned as the door opened. Much to their
surprise and delight it was not Ossa who entered, nor
one of his sons, but a beautiful young maiden who was
still half asleep.
She looked at the guards. ‘Where be Ongen?’ she
questioned one of them.
‘We art still searching for him, lady. Hopefully, he
will not be long.’
The maid seemed a mite perturbed by the absence
of her associate, but maintained a good mood as she
addressed the messengers. ‘I am Aella, daughter of Ossa.
My brother, Ongen, shall join us presently.’ She
motioned politely for them to be seated. ‘What can we
do for ye, gentlemen?’
Rhun bowed as a messenger would to a lady of
Aella’s stature. ‘We bear thee a cable from the council
of united kingdoms of Britain.’ Rhun looked to Bryce to
produce the dispatch, but his friend’s attention seemed
somewhat preoccupied with their hostess.

After a nudge, Bryce realised that he’d missed his
cue. He stepped forward, to present the scroll bearing
the Dragon’s seal to her, bowing as he did so.
She couldn’t help but smile at their antics, as she
graciously accepted the dispatch. Were these men a
typical example of her supposed foe?
Though Bryce didn’t want to appear rude, he
couldn’t take his eyes off the girl. How could such a
fragile little angel be Ossa’s daughter?
‘Be this some kind of joke?’ Aella didn’t
sound angry, but rather, stunned, and a smile swept
her face.
‘Nay, lady.’ Rhun smiled warmly. ‘I swear to thee.
The united kingdoms want nothing more than to see
the whole of this land prosper in peace. Thus, we
cannot sit by and watch half of it forced into penury by
the cursed weather.’
She very much liked how relaxed and conﬁdent
these men were and tended to believe their intent was
of a completely innocent nature. Nevertheless, she was
fairly sure her brother would not take the same view.
‘Thou art very ﬂuent in our language, sir.’
Rhun bowed his head to accept her compliment. ‘It
be my job to possess such skills.’
‘I wish I could return the consideration and thank
ye in thine own tongue, but I have scarce seen any of
the native people, let alone spoken with them.’ She
smiled at Bryce, who still appeared rather overawed by
her presence.
‘Then I hope thy ﬁrst impression of the Britons be a
pleasant surprise, lady.’

‘Aye,’ she conﬁrmed, before her attention skipped
back to Rhun and the cable in her hand. ‘But thou
must realise this; thy kind offer be so timely and well
needed, it seems almost too good to be true. I dare
say my brother shall not be so willing to believe
the sincerity of it.’ As she heard a group of men
approaching, she added quickly, ‘Please have patience,
he shall see reason in the end.’
Bryce, Rhun, and Aella looked to the door as
Ongen entered. He was the oldest son of Ossa, and thus
it was he who had charge of the affairs of state in his
father’s absence.
Ongen, tall and top-heavy, as his father had been in
his younger days, stopped just inside the door and
looked to the messengers of the council. ‘Arrest them,’
he ordered without blinking an eye.
Bryce looked to Rhun, hoping he hadn’t understood
Ongen correctly.
‘Now we art in trouble.’ Rhun conﬁrmed his friend’s
fears.
‘Nay! Warn him of Britain’s intent if the council do
not hear from us,’ Bryce implored Rhun as the soldiers
took hold of them.
Aella spoke up. ‘Ongen, they have brought a peace
offering. The Britons wish to supply us with food
enough for the winter.’
‘Aella, thou art so gullible!’ Ongen scolded. ‘Can
thou not see it be naught but a trick?’
‘Look, I hate to interrupt . . .’ Rhun sounded awfully
calm as he was escorted past Ongen, ‘but the council
will retaliate if we do not return.’

Ongen smacked Rhun fair in the jaw. ‘Let them.’
Bryce broke free of his captors to catch his friend
before he hit the ﬂoor.
‘Ouch!’ Rhun mumbled, as Bryce set him back on his
feet and threw an arm around his back to walk Rhun out
of the room. ‘Perhaps we should not have mentioned it.’
‘Just let them return home,’ Aella pleaded. ‘We
cannot afford to go to war!’
‘Quiet!’ Ongen thrust her to the ﬂoor, just a little
too roughly for Bryce’s liking. Bryce left Rhun to his
own devices and barged through the guard toward the
lady’s assailant.
When Ongen turned back to view the disturbance,
all he saw was the bottom of Bryce’s boot as it
encountered his face.
As the Saxon leader hit the ﬂoor, blood streaming
from his nose, Bryce held a hand down to help Aella to
her feet.
Her large blue eyes gazed up at him in awe; such
gallantry expended on a female was unknown to her. ‘I
am indebted to thee, sir.’ She smiled and held out her
hand to place it in his, but her brother’s soldiers dragged
him away.
The tower of Ossa’s fortification in Londinium, if
nothing else, did afford a splendid view of the city
below. Even at this time of night, fires and torches
were blazing for as far as the eye could see.
‘Londinium be bigger than I imagined.’ Bryce
peered through one of the many long, slender slits
in the wall.

These windows were designed to be wide enough to
shoot an arrow from, yet too narrow for even a young
child to squeeze through.
‘I wonder if all their women art as fair as Aella?’
Rhun’s thoughts were back in Ossa’s room of court
also, only with Ongen. ‘Let them.’ Rhun mused over
the warrior’s final words to him. ‘He sounded pretty
confident, considering their state of affairs. I dare say,
I would not be inviting a war in the same
circumstance.’ Rhun looked to Bryce, who was not
listening to him.
‘Did thou see her hair? Straight and fair, just like thy
mother’s. It near touched the ﬂoor.’
Rhun couldn’t believe it. Bryce was seldom
preoccupied with those of the fairer sex — bar the High
Queen, of course. What a time for Bryce to go soft on
him. ‘Forget the girl. Show me thy boot.’
‘What?’
‘The one thee struck Ongen with.’ Rhun beckoned
with his ﬁngers for Bryce to comply.
Bryce rested his foot on the bench by Rhun,
appearing puzzled.
‘Ah-huh!’
‘What?’
Rhun wiped his ﬁngers across the leather and held
them up triumphant. ‘Blood. Ongen’s blood.’ He smiled.
‘Aye.’ Bryce grinned. ‘I got him good.’
This was not what Rhun had meant, however. He
considered that even though Ongen had asked for the
belting, it was not the most diplomatic course of action
to have taken — but, hopefully, it would serve them

now. ‘Go back to thy vision, friend. I have need to
concentrate.’
‘Dost thou think thou may be able to learn
something of Ongen?’
Rhun rubbed the tips of his ﬁngers against each
other, getting a feel of the individual from whose body
the blood had ﬂowed. ‘Perhaps.’ He closed his eyes to
focus. ‘Let me be awhile.’
Bryce moved away to the windows, though his eyes
remained glued on his friend. Rhun was peaceful a few
moments, then he began to quiver violently. ‘Goddess
preserve us!’ His eyes shot open. ‘They art going to
release Mahaud.’ He rushed to a puddle of water on
the stone floor by the windows to scrub the blood from
his hands.
‘Holy mother! We must stop them.’ Bryce raced for
the stairs.
‘Hold on.’ Rhun recommended a little restraint. ‘I
have an idea, but I need total silence. So please, just sit.’
Rhun walked into the centre of the round room and
took a seat, assuming the lotus position. It was a long
time since he’d tried to bethink his mother thus, and
never had he attempted it from such a distance. But
still, as Taliesin said, it be only a matter of will; time
and space art an illusion.
Vanora entered the inner bailey courtyard at Aberffraw
sometime around noon. So many maids wandered in
and out in the course of a day, going about the duties of
the house, that the guards let them pass without
questioning every one as to her errand. As Vanora

appeared well-kept and was alone, she passed right
though the guards without either one batting an eyelid.
She awaited the midnight hour by the sundial,
which was located amongst the extensive gardens in
the huge courtyard of the High King’s manor. When
the waxing moon was high in the sky, marking a time
of new beginnings, Vanora emerged from her hiding
place. The silvery light from above shed scatterings of
light upon the area she approached. This sundial
marked the sacred site through which Mahaud had
been banished, hence it was from here that she must
be released.
Vanora set down the utensils for summoning the
evil spirit of her mentor in their respective places
around the sundial. Mahaud’s crooked old wand was laid
in a southerly position to summon the element of ﬁre. A
smaller cauldron, used by the old witch for such
purposes as this, was placed to the west to invoke the
element of water. A large hunk of crystal, black as night
in colour, sat to the north to summon the element of
earth. Vanora placed the sword of Vortigern, archtraitor of Britain, in the easterly position. The sword of
Vortigern was a memento of one of Mahaud’s past
encounters: she had been known to advise the warlord
on occasion, and, ever since his death, the witch had
found his weapon most effective for conjuring up the
more mischievous elementals in the air.
When all was placed as it should be, Vanora stood
just outside the circle and directed her energies into the
centre. She focused herself a moment, the better to
concentrate on her summons.

Vanora chanted her verse three times over, in
accordance with the law of three requests:
‘O ﬁre of demons, water of drought,
I call on thee to draw her out.
The one who hast served thee
and granted thee power,
release from her prison
in this midnight hour.
Air of suffocation, darkest side of mother earth,
Thy combined force can give her birth.
The one who wast banished here
and cast from this plane,
grant her the means
to be born again.’
Upon her ﬁrst utterance, the ground within the centre
of the circle began to glow red with a throbbing motion.
Upon her second recitation, the ground beneath the
sundial began to rumble and break up.
As Vanora neared the end of her third and ﬁnal
rendition, guards began to ﬂood the grounds, but they
were too late.
The sundial crumbled into the earth as the ground
beneath it split apart. A thick stream of glowing red and
black gas shot into the air, forming one glowing mass of
energy that covered the sky as it extended itself over
the manor.
The witch’s advocate screeched with exultant
laughter as an electrical storm erupted, the like of
which none had ever witnessed before. It appeared as if

the sky was on ﬁre and red bolts of lightning tore
through the rumbling clouds. All of Mahaud’s sacred
implements were sucked into the raging torrent of
energy, whereby Vanora calmly turned and walked
toward the closed inner bailey portcullis.
Guards pursued her, only to be struck down in
ﬂames by the lightning from above. The large, iron
portcullis, deeply inset into the stone walls of the house,
was blasted from its foundations. The guards could do
naught but watch as the culprit walked out through the
gaping hole left in the wake of the explosion.
The High Queen had barely slept since her son’s
departure. Not that she really needed much rest.
Immortality did have its advantages — or drawbacks, as
these past two nights had seemed endless to her.
Tory remained motionless and silent in the
darkened room, her thoughts roaming the Otherworld
in search of some news of her Masters. The strange
thing was, the spirits seemed deathly silent. All she was
able to perceive was a great expanse of blackness that
accompanied an eerie chill.
Please Goddess, help me, she pleaded, feeling a
sudden sense of urgency. A glimpse of them is all I ask.
From within the blackness behind her eyes, the
image of her boy took form.
Mother. Hear me, please.
I hear thee, Rhun, she assured, relieved beyond all
belief. Where art thou? How fares thy mission? She was
proud that he’d attempted to make contact with her thus.
She would have had great difﬁculty ﬁnding him otherwise.

Never mind about that, we have far greater problems.
Rhun was fairly conﬁdent he could get Bryce and
himself safely out of their predicament on his own, so
he mustered the most positive sense-of-being that he
could, to prevent his mother being distracted from the
more important task.
Ossa intends to release Mahaud, and she hast given him
the means to do it. He left near a week ago with the witch’s
cauldron, of the mind to seek out Vanora.
That explains the great blackness. Tory considered
the possibilities. He must have cast a shielding spell
over their party, or we surely would have known of
this sooner.
Indeed, Rhun conﬁrmed.
But what of thee? A huge disturbance, formed of a
red ﬂare of light, engulfed her vision of Rhun. When it
passed, he was gone. Rhun. Rhun! But there was no
response. Her etheric sight perceived naught but the
dark, cold silence.
Damn it. Tory sat back in her chair, pausing to think
a moment. I need to speak with Taliesin at once.
No sooner had she decided this than Taliesin passed
right through the wall of her room to speak with her.
‘Majesty. I fear something loathsome hast happened.
Did thou feel it?’
‘Aye I did,’ she was sorry to admit. ‘And,
unfortunately, Rhun had just got through informing me
that Ossa planned to release Mahaud. Hence, I suspect
he hast succeeded.’
Taliesin’s solemn expression became even more so.
‘Then it be worse than we thought.’

‘How so?’ Maelgwn inquired, as he approached
them. He was belting on his trousers, having just woken
from a deep sleep.
‘Ossa can only release the witch from the place she
was banished.’
Tory and Maelgwn looked to each other, horriﬁed.
‘Aberffraw!’

5

BETRAYAL

T

he royal house at Aberffraw shook furiously and
the walls had begun to crumble by the time Sir
Tiernan and Ione reached the doorway to the
courtyard. They were scarce able to believe the
apocalyptic scene that awaited them there.
Ione drew her sword, her anger mounting with every
rumble of the earth and every ﬂash of deadly lightning.
She was more than ready to challenge those responsible,
though amid the chaos of the disaster who could tell
friend from foe.
‘Nay!’ Tiernan urged her over the din. ‘We cannot
ﬁght this. We must get everybody out.’
Ione nodded in conﬁrmation, replacing her sword in
its scabbard as she quickly made for the maidens’
quarters.

Javotte, daughter of Sir Angus and Lady Alma, had
already started directing the younger noblewomen out
one of the windows that led to the courtyard when Ione
ﬂung the door open.
‘Javotte, get out quickly!’ She urged the young
warrioress to follow the others out the window. ‘The
building be about to fold.’
‘Nay.’ Javotte ran in Ione’s direction. ‘I must ﬁnd my
parents.’
The ceiling of the room collapsed behind her and
Javotte barely made it into the hallway where Ione
awaited her.
‘I shall make thee pay for that,’ Ione told her with
a smile.
Javotte was her prize student and had as much gall
as the best of the male warriors. She was rumoured to
become the next to be initiated into the circle of
twelve.
‘Let us go, now.’ Ione sprinted toward the west
tower. She held little hope of them making it out
through the house to the main door, thus they would
have to risk the secret passage. At low tide, the tunnel
from the west tower granted one an escape onto the
beach via the cliff face — if, of course, the passage
hadn’t collapsed.
Sir Angus and his wife, Alma, raced out of the house
and through the courtyard, the ground between them
beginning to break up.
‘Angus!’ Alma fell to her knees to prevent herself
diving into the gaping cavern that had erupted before her.

‘Goddess be merciful!’ Angus neared the everexpanding edge of the chasm between himself and his
wife. ‘Jump, I shall catch thee.’
The ground to the other side of her began to fall
away. In a few moments, she would ﬁnd herself on an
island of ﬂimsy soil that would simply crumble beneath
her. Alma, as virile as she was, knew she could not make
the jump her husband was asking her to attempt. ‘I love
thee, Angus,’ she vowed, as the earth rumbled again.
‘Damn thee, Alma!’ The tears rolled down his
cheeks as he, too, realised that the jump would surely
kill her. ‘There must be a way. Thou must try.’
They’d just about reached the west tower, when Javotte
stopped to approach one of the large windows that
afforded a view of the courtyard. From here, she
witnessed her parent’s sad circumstance.
Her father was on his knees, his arms outstretched
towards her mother, when the tiny piece of earth on
which Alma sat crumbled into the abyss that
separated them.
‘Mother!’ Javotte cried, smashing her ﬁsts against
the window.
As the glass shattered, Ione grabbed Javotte around
the waist and hauled her into the tower. Somehow, she
managed to avoid the falling debris from above, for
even the stone towers were starting to collapse. Ione set
the girl on her feet and pushed her down through the
trapdoor. ‘Run!’
Ione closed the door behind them and scampered
down the ladder after Javotte. The heavy stone from the

tower walls crashed down onto the trapdoor overhead,
which threatened to collapse on top of them at any
moment. As Ione’s feet hit the ground she dived for the
entrance of the tunnel that led to the beach, taking
Javotte with her. The wooden ﬂoor above ﬁnally gave
way and a mound of rubble showered down to block
their place of entry.
Ione rose, brushing the dust from her face. ‘Well, we
art not getting out that way.’ She turned her sights to
the darkened cavern on her other side.
Javotte raised herself to a seated position, and then
burst into tears.
Lady Alma had been a close friend of Ione’s for
many years and she would grieve her loss, but this was
neither the time, nor place, to lament. The tremors
were intensifying. Ione dragged Javotte to her feet. ‘Cry
on thy own time, soldier.’ She thrust Javotte off in the
right direction.
Yet the girl stopped abruptly, still stricken with grief.
‘Thou hast no heart,’ she sobbed.
‘And thou hast no sense.’ Ione grabbed her by the
wrist and took off down the tunnel, dragging her
reluctant student along behind her.
Although Maelgwn had never gone so far as to learn how
to teleport his physical body from one place to another
(although he had mastered the art with his etheric form),
between Tory and Taliesin they managed to transfer all
three of them to Aberffraw without too much delay.
The storm and tremors had passed by the time they
materialized on the beach facing the house. Only now,

there was no house; every last one of its foundations had
been engulfed by the earth.
‘This be Mahaud’s work alright!’ Maelgwn’s rage and
hatred consumed him; this house had belonged to his
family for hundreds of years.
That explains what happened to the mythical city of
Aberffraw, Tory concluded with regret. Back home, in
the twentieth century, they were still trying to decide
whether or not it had ever existed, and looking at the
demolition job the witch had done on the place it
wasn’t hard to see why.
‘Why did we not foresee this?’ The High King
directed his query at Taliesin, but didn’t wait for an
answer. He’d caught sight of Ione running up the
beach toward them and strode down to meet
her halfway.
‘Majesty, praise the Goddess thou art here.’ Ione
reached him pufﬁng and panting from her lengthy
sprint across the sand. Javotte was not far behind her.
‘What happened, Ione?’
‘The house starting shaking, Majesty, and the sky
turned blood red.’ She paused for a breath. ‘Fire shot
like lightning from the —’
‘Did thee see any Saxon troops?’
Ione’s eyes opened wide as she realised she had no
idea who their foe had been. ‘Nay, Majesty, nor any
other.’ She hung her head in shame.
‘Well, with all hell breaking loose I suppose it was a
bit difﬁcult to assess the enemy.’
Sir Angus came up to them, and the King calmed
himself as he witnessed Javotte collapse into her father’s

arms, both of them in tears. ‘How many have been
injured, Ione?’
Ione looked to Angus and Javotte. ‘Alma wast
killed. How many others I do not know.’
‘I see.’ Maelgwn withheld his emotions.
‘Will thou excuse me, Highness? I wish to seek out
Tiernan’s whereabouts.’
‘Of course.’ The King prayed his champion had not
perished in the disaster. ‘Send him to see me when thou
hast found him,’ he called after her.
Maelgwn walked back to Tory; she was so mortiﬁed
by the sight of the void that had once been their home
that she still hadn’t moved from the spot where they’d
ﬁrst materialized. He approached his wife from behind,
wrapping his arms about her shoulders. ‘I promise not to
take it badly if thee will, too.’
‘Oh, Maelgwn.’ She breathed a heavy sigh. ‘Every
memory of home I had wast in that house.’ All, except
one pair of jeans, her old steel-capped boots and a Tshirt that were in her luggage at Arwystli. One of her
three saxophones had also been saved, as it had made
the trip to the council meeting with her.
‘It could have been worse.’ The King accepted the
loss. ‘We nearly left Rhun here.’
Despite her tears, Tory let out half a laugh as she
turned and kissed him. He was right; she still had her
son and her husband. Anything else, she could bear.
‘Majesty, thou asked to see me?’ Maelgwn turned to
see Tiernan’s beaming face.
‘Thou art safe.’ Maelgwn took hold of his champion
by both shoulders.

‘Of course I am.’ He shrugged off the experience
light-heartedly, before his manner became more serious.
‘Believe it or not our casualties art fewer than one
would expect.’
‘But?’ The King released him; Tiernan always told
him the good news before he delivered the sting.
‘I have been unable to locate either Sir Rhys or
Jenovefa. Their wing was the ﬁrst to go, Majesty. I
sincerely hope I am wrong . . .’
The King placed a hand on Tiernan’s shoulder and
patted it, though his eyes looked to the ocean. ‘I hope
so, too.’
Late on the second night of their imprisonment,
Rhun and Bryce were honoured by a visit from Aella.
She entered and ascended the stairs of the tower so
quietly that neither of the men were aware of her
presence. It was only the light of her candle that gave
her away.
‘Aella.’ Bryce stood and bowed, feeling himself go
weak in the knees, but it was Rhun that approached to
speak with her.
‘My lady, what art thou doing here?’
‘Shh,’ she whispered. ‘We have no time to waste.
Follow me.’
After checking that the corridor was devoid of life,
she led the pair out of the tower and escorted them into
Ossa’s library across the hall.
Rhun was turning circles at the enormous expanse
of literature. ‘Just imprison me here for the next
twenty years.’

Bryce was hot on Aella’s heels; he didn’t care if she
was leading them to death’s door, he was happy to
follow her anywhere. She approached the back wall of
the huge room and called to Rhun, who’d stopped in
front of a book lying open on a bench. ‘Please, we
must hurry.’
Aella pushed one of the thousands of knots that ran
down both sides of the large bookcase, which rotated to
reveal a passageway.
‘What a woman,’ Bryce commented as Rhun caught
them up. ‘Ask her why the tower wast unguarded.’
Rhun did this and she explained as they descended
the long, stone staircase.
‘I gave them leave to go up to the roof to witness my
father’s homecoming. My brother hast gone to meet
him at the gates of the city, which be the cause of our
haste . . . ye must leave before he arrives.’
Rhun conveyed her response to his friend.
‘Art thou aware of what his mission hast been?’
Bryce pulled her to a stop when they reached the
bottom, and Rhun again translated for her.
‘Just a few silly rumours, really.’ She seemed to shy
away from the question.
‘If these tales have been of an evil, all-powerful
witch, they art not false. Her name be Mahaud and she
be travelling with thy father as we speak. Hence thou art
in grave danger, lady.’ He nodded to Rhun to tell her.
‘Please, sir,’ she urged Rhun. ‘Tell thy friend that his
safety be a far greater concern at present. We must keep
moving.’ She strode off ahead before Rhun could relay
the message.

When they emerged from the tunnel into the open
air, the moon shed its light over a large expanse of land;
Aella had obviously led them all the way to the
Common. Their horses grazed before them and were
suited up and ready to ride.
‘Excellent.’
Rhun mounted his stead, but Bryce was not
prepared to leave the maiden to Mahaud’s discretion.
‘Come with us,’ Bryce pleaded. ‘Rhun, tell her it be
not safe for her to stay here now.’
‘Bryce, we cannot take her. Ossa shall think we
have abducted her.’
‘And what shall he do when he discovers she hast
let us go? Please tell her.’
Rhun was growing impatient, but gave in to his
friend’s wish so they might depart before sunrise. ‘Lady,
Bryce asks that thou come with us.’
‘Nay, I could not!’ She looked to Bryce, thankful for
his concern. ‘If this witch be as evil as ye say, I must stay
and try to prevent any harm befalling my family.’
Rhun rubbed his forehead. ‘Thou doth not
understand. If thy kin have come into contact with the
crone already, there will be nothing thou can do to save
them. Mahaud changes people, so much so that thine
own father would betray thee before he crosses her. At
least if my lady comes with us, the Goddess may be able
to offer thee some protection.’
Aella shook her head. ‘Again, many thanks for thy
warning, sir . . .’ She raised herself on her toes and
kissed Bryce on his cheek, ‘but my place be here.’ She
darted back into the darkened tunnel and was gone.

‘Bryce,’ Rhun cautioned him in regard to going after
her. ‘We have her answer, now let us make ourselves
absent.’ He dug his heels in and took off across the ﬁeld.
The knight was torn only a second. Then he was on
his horse and in hot pursuit of the Prince; his ﬁrst duty
was always to the Goddess.
A few hours later Ossa and his party entered his room of
court, weary from their travels, yet exalted by their
victory. A feast had been prepared in advance and only
the warlord’s two sons and Vanora were permitted to stay.
Eormenric was relieved to ﬁnd his health and
appetite restored, for Vanora had excused the icy
presence that shielded their party as soon as they’d
cleared allied Britain.
Demons disperse into the air
and spread thy dis-ease elsewhere.
Converge upon the Dragon and his kin,
and lead them into darkest sin.
This simple verse had seemed to work and, he
wondered, as he watched Vanora across the table, if
there was a rhyme that would release her from her
bewitchment as easily.
She raised her dark sights to glare at him and he
feared for a moment that she would voice his mind to
his father, but she did not.
‘So where be Mahaud?’ Ossa raised his glass to
Vanora. ‘I wish to thank her for the wondrous spectacle
we have witnessed.’

‘I am right here, Warlord.’
Ossa turned in his seat to ﬁnd a hooded ﬁgure that
had yet to assume a full physical form. She ﬂoated a few
feet off the ground behind him, the bottom of her robe
tapering off into nothingness. The crone’s eyes glowed
red within the dark hood, yet her face was well
shadowed and could not be seen.
‘Thou hast served us well, Mahaud.’
She laughed. ‘That! . . . ’Twas nothing. The fun hast
only just begun.’
‘Thou speaks as if thou hast already a scheme in
mind . . . do share,’ he urged.
‘Next shall be a simultaneous attack on Powys and
Gwynedd that we shall not even have to leave Londinium
to execute.’ She suddenly became distracted by something
far more interesting. ‘King Brockwell’s eldest son and the
son of the Dragon have been in this room just recently.’
All sights looked to Ongen, who near choked on
his mead at the news. ‘The council of the Goddess did
send two messengers, who claimed they were here to
offer us support.’
‘Support!’ As outrageous as it sounded, after
meeting some of the Britons Eormenric didn’t entirely
doubt the possibility.
‘Aye,’ Ongen laughed. ‘They maintained they
wished to supply us with enough food to survive the
cold seasons.’
Ossa burst into laughter.
If the Goddess and her kin were responsible for the
sad state of our lands, why then offer us assistance?
Eormenric wondered.

‘A trick,’ Mahaud explained to him, causing
Eormenric to shrink in his seat. ‘Where art they now?’
The crone turned her evil eyes to Ongen.
‘I had them locked in the tower, of course.’
‘Good.’ There was a smile in her voice. ‘Bring them
before me at once.’
They’d reached the outskirts of the city when Rhun,
who often went into a trance state when he rode,
brought his horse to a stop.
‘What be wrong?’ Bryce pulled up alongside him.
‘Damn it!’ Rhun hesitated. For although he felt
obliged to inform his friend of what he’d foreseen, it
went against his better judgement. ‘Mahaud hast
informed Ossa and his sons of our true identity.
Thus, when they find us missing, it shall not take the
witch very long to disclose who it was that aided
our escape.’
‘I must help her.’ Bryce begged Rhun’s leave.
‘And I must return to Gwynedd.’ Rhun let Bryce
know that he would be on his own. ‘For I believe there
be evil afoot and I must help defend against it, if
I can.’
‘I understand. I shan’t be far behind thee.’
‘I wish thee luck then.’ Rhun clasped hold of his
friend’s hand. ‘May the Goddess guide and protect
thee, Bryce.’
‘And thee.’ Bryce slapped his shoulder. ‘Till next
we meet.’
The two parted company to go their separate ways —
one to face the witch and the other her wrath.

Upon discovery of the Prince’s escape, Ongen had his
sister dragged before their father for questioning at
Mahaud’s request. The girl had no need to confess the
part she’d played in the affair, for Mahaud conﬁrmed
her deceit as soon as she laid eyes on her.
‘Kill her, Warlord. She be the one who hast
betrayed us,’ the witch announced with conﬁdence.
‘Father, have mercy,’ Aella sobbed, terriﬁed of the
foul-smelling apparition that was advising her father. ‘I
wast not to know who they were. The Britons planned
to attack us if their messengers did not return. I believed
I wast sparing us from a war.’
Ossa was considering her plea until the crone crushed
it. ‘She lies. She holds feelings for the son of Brockwell.
This be why she set him free and for no other reason.’
‘Aye, Father,’ Ongen conﬁrmed. ‘This gash on my
face wast incurred when one of the Britons came to
Aella’s defense.’
Ossa was outraged by the news; no daughter of his
would give her heart to one of his enemy. ‘This be treason,
girl! How could thou betray me in such a fashion?’
‘Thou art the one who hast betrayed thy people.’
Aella knew her fate was sealed; thus she found the
courage to speak her mind. ‘We could have had peace
and plenty, but now thee and thy witch shall plunge us
into war.’
‘Silence!’ Ossa roared. ‘Thy every utterance tightens
the noose around thy neck.’
‘Hanging be too good for her, Warlord,’ Mahaud
commented. ‘What I have in mind shall be far more
beﬁtting, and shall help our cause at the same time.’

Eormenric could hardly believe his ears. Aella had
always been his father’s pride and joy — nothing was to
good for her. Yet now, he was considering handing her
over to this foul beast to do with as she saw ﬁt.
‘Hold on one moment.’ Eormenric could not keep
silent. ‘She be but a child, Father . . . and if
Brockwell’s son be as charming as his father wast said
to be, be it not likely he hast just drawn her in to suit
his own purposes?’
Ossa looked to Mahaud for her opinion. ‘Nay, she
betrayed thee of her own free will, as I believe her
defender will, given time.’
Ossa looked to Eormenric. ‘Be this true?’
‘Nay, Father, I would never betray thee. But, the
witch I do not trust and she knows it. Already she
would have thee kill one who loves thee dearly.’
Eormenric motioned to his sister. ‘Doth thou plan to do
away with us all thus?’ he put to the witch.
‘It was not I who released the hostages, Eormenric.’
Mahaud was not too worried about the boy; he fancied
Vanora, and could be seduced. But this girl, Aella, had
the purest of souls. It would be easier to do away with
her than to waste the time it would take to break her
spirit. ‘I have, however, done all I said I would do for
thee. What further proof of my loyalty dost thou need?’
Eormenric hung his head; no matter what he said,
the witch would have a comeback.
As his son had seemingly given up on Aella’s
defense, Ossa’s stern sights returned to her. ‘Dost thou
have anything else to say for thyself, before I have thee
taken to the tower?’

Aella looked to her father, unable to believe how
callous he’d become. The Britons had been right
about the crone; she should have listened to them. ‘I
love thee, Father,’ she sobbed as his guards took hold
of her. ‘And if thou cannot see that, then I can only
hope that the Goddess will prevail and bring thee to
thy senses.’
Ossa stood, outraged by the very mention of that
name. ‘Get her out of my sight!’
Ossa turned to the crone beside him as Aella was
led from the room, his eyes ablaze with fury. ‘Make them
pay for this . . . make them pay dearly.’
‘Aye, my lord, that I shall.’
After salvaging the little they could from the remains at
Aberffraw and relocating the local villagers to other
estates within the kingdom, the High King, his Queen,
Taliesin and their chief advisers made for Degannwy on
the mainland.
Sadly, the Goddess had lost two members of her
circle in the disaster, Sir Rhys and Lady Alma, and she
needed to replace them as quickly as possible. The
position of ﬁnancial adviser to the King would be
offered to Gawain, Rhys’ son, who’d been groomed by
his father to succeed him in ofﬁce. Lady Alma’s position
as trainer to the children of the kingdom would be ﬁlled
by her daughter, Javotte, if she proved herself worthy to
become one of the ‘circle of twelve’.
King Maelgwn had been coping quite well with the
disaster, but an unexpected gift was about to turn his
whole world upside down . . .

In the evening after everyone had eaten, they lay about
the dining room at Degannwy engrossed in conversation,
games, music and the like. Maelgwn had been left to his
own thoughts, as Tory was across the room discussing
metaphysical matters with Taliesin. It was then that a
young maiden of the house approached the King.
‘Majesty.’ She bowed and crouched beside him so
that none might notice her.
‘Can I help thee, child?’ He smiled; my, but she was
a pretty little thing.
‘I know thou hast lost much in these past few days,
Highness, thus I brought thee a gift.’ She held out her
offering, wrapped up in silk of deepest red.
‘Well, now . . .’ He thought her sentiment rather
sweet and so humoured her. ‘What could it be?’
As Maelgwn accepted the present the atmosphere
surrounding him became icy cold, so much so that it
sent chills down his spine. ‘Be there a draught in here?’
he commented, looking around for the source.
‘Nay, Majesty,’ she replied, wide-eyed with
anticipation.
He shrugged off the observation and unfolded the
silken material to disclose what he thought was a mirror,
till he discovered he could see straight through it.
‘It be a looking-glass, Majesty,’ she said, with
excitement. ‘But it be very special . . . for it shall allow
thee to see things most other people cannot.’
Maelgwn held up the large, golden-framed piece of
glass, and at ﬁrst glance all appeared as normal. ‘What
kind of things?’ He looked down to question her further,
but the girl had vanished.

Strange. The King shrugged; perhaps he’d frightened
her. He raised the looking-glass again and viewed the
room from end to end, ﬁnally noting something was
indeed amiss.
Across the room he viewed his wife, but she looked
no older than the day he’d married her. Now this came
as no great shock to Maelgwn; he’d known for some
time that Taliesin had given her an immortality potion
which saved her life at the battle of Arwystli. Beside
her sat the Merlin, who the King had always perceived
to look as old as time itself. Yet the man he viewed
through the looking-glass, holding hands and
consoling his beloved so intimately, appeared not
much older than Rhun and just as handsome.
Be this how Tory sees him? The voice of jealousy
niggled away at his peace of mind. Surely in twenty years
of marriage she would have mentioned it? Tory had sworn
to him when he found out about her immortality that
they’d keep no more secrets from each other.
But she might have ﬁgured that I would never have
permitted Taliesin to train her, if I had known he appeared
thus to her, Maelgwn reasoned, angering himself further.
Please Goddess, do not let it be so.
Taliesin had served his family for generations, yet,
strangely enough, the notion that the Merlin was an
immortal had never really occurred to Maelgwn.
Perhaps it was the old age that had thrown him, as an
immortal was usually construed as ever-young.
So why, when the Merlin had been saving this
immortality potion for eons, did he suddenly decide to spare
Tory’s life with it?

At the time, Maelgwn had needed a miracle to
save his love. When that miracle came about, he’d not
questioned the why and wherefore. Now that he
considered that Taliesin may have had ulterior motives
for saving the Queen, a hidden agenda of a personal
nature, Maelgwn’s heart grew heavy with suspicion
and loathing.
Bryce re-entered Ossa’s fortiﬁcation in Londinium the
same way he’d left it. The long passageway was pitch dark
and rather slippery, so he was forced to proceed slowly.
When he ﬁnally reached the top of the stone
staircase, he realised he had no idea how to open the
trapdoor from this side. He fumbled around the wall in
the darkness and came across a lever.
As it was mid-afternoon, not the best time to
execute a rescue, Bryce took a seat on the ﬂoor to rest
and await a more suitable hour. He knew Mahaud was
in the same building and, in the hope of shielding
himself from her perception, he imagined himself
surrounded by white light. His sensei had said this once
assisted her to trick the crone when they’d banished her
from the earth plane all that time ago.
In the dark silence, time did seem an illusion. He
drifted in and out of sleep with no concept of how long
he’d been there, though his stomach indicated it had
been quite a while.
He raised himself and again found the lever, which
he only lowered far enough to peek inside the library.
As the room appeared free of inhabitants, he slipped
through the opening and crept across the room. He

came to a standstill at the door that led to the corridor
and, opening it to a crack, he spied two guards at the
post outside the tower.
If they have a guard on the tower and we art no longer
in it, who art they guarding now? he wondered. One way
to ﬁnd out. He closed the door quietly then knocked on
it a couple of times.
One of the guards moved from his post to
investigate, and as he entered the room the door
slammed closed behind him.
All was silent a few moments before the knocking
was repeated.
The second guard drew his sword and approached
the door, swinging it wide open in front of him. As he
saw no one, including his comrade, he entered. The
soldier slowly turned a full circle, spying a shadow of
someone concealed behind the door. He quietly edged
round and thrust his sword into the trickster. The door
swung closed as the wounded man collapsed in a heap
on the ﬂoor. To the guard’s great dismay, it was his
partner who lay dying before him.
‘Huh?’ The soldier moved to turn, aware of a
presence behind him. He was not fast enough, however,
and joined his comrade on the ﬂoor.
Bryce took the key to the tower and a sword before
checking that the corridor was deserted.
In the tower’s prison cell he found Aella huddled
in the middle of the room, her head in her hands as
she wept.
She believed it was her father’s soldiers coming to
lead her to the crone and her demise, but as she raised

her tear-stained face she discovered it was the British
prince who stood before her.
‘Thou came back for me?’
Bryce held out his hand and helped her to her feet,
whereby she fell sobbing in his arms. ‘Shh.’ He
comforted her in a universal language. When she
calmed a little, Bryce motioned her to the exit.
Aella wiped her face, nodded, and smiled . . . ‘I
shan’t argue this time.’

6

HISTORY’S REPRISE

T

he High King had Taliesin summoned to his
room of court. It was not unusual for Maelgwn to
work straight through till morning, as sleep had
never come easily to him. As the Merlin approached
the court room, he noted four guards posted outside the
door, which was a rather curious thing.
There had been a time, not too far gone, when
Taliesin knew of every decision quite some time before
it was made manifest. Yet, as the course of British
history changed for the better, the future was becoming
harder to predict. Take this imbalance in their
homeland, for example. Taliesin couldn’t believe he’d
failed to foresee it, or to guess Mahaud’s involvement.
He now recognised the crone as a karmic force coming
round to kick him in the butt.

Tory had been absolutely correct to want to aid the
Saxons and befriend them, only this resolution had come
about ten years too late. How foolish he was to have
thought he could concentrate so much positive energy on
just one half of the country and not upset the balance.
For, although bringing Tory back to the Dark Age to
guide and train the native Britons had served him well,
turning a blind eye to the foreigners had allowed Mahaud
all the space she needed to manifest herself again. He
considered Mahaud to be history’s slap on the wrist for
his attempt to cheat it.
The guards opened the doors for the Merlin, then
left him alone in the room with the High King.
Maelgwn stood at the far end of the long table of
court with his back to Taliesin, his hand resting upon
one of the two dragons that were carved into the high
back of his chair.
The Merlin noted how distressed his King appeared
as he turned to face him. ‘Hast something happened
that I am not aware of? What ails thee so?’
‘Oh, thou art aware of it alright.’ Maelgwn would
have laughed at the query, had he not been so irate. He
looked away from the old man and took a deep breath
to contain his brewing hatred.
Maelgwn’s feeling of betrayal radiated across the
room in waves, and the Merlin noted the looking-glass
stuck through his King’s belt. When perceived
clairvoyantly, the piece was shrouded in dark shadow.
‘I would ask thee, High Merlin, to assume the same
form thou dost take with my wife.’ The King’s dark
sights returned to Taliesin to catch his reaction.

‘Who gave thee the looking-glass, Majesty?’
‘Never mind who gave it to me. Just do as I bid
thee.’
With little choice, the Merlin bowed his head and
complied.
The years began to fall away from him, until a man
near half the King’s age stood before him. ‘Why,
Taliesin?’ Maelgwn shivered from the cold and agony
that gripped his heart. ‘Why have ye deceived me so?’
‘Tory had nothing to do with it.’ The Merlin noted
the ye in the King’s accusation and wanted to clear that
misunderstanding up straight away. ‘I chose for her to
see my true form from the day we met, so she hast never
seen me any different.’
This was not entirely true, for although he and Tory
had met at various times in history after he’d obtained
immortality, Taliesin had also known her in most of the
incarnations he’d had before this.
‘But she never saw ﬁt to mention it, either!’
Maelgwn’s jaw was clenched. ‘It hast been thy little
secret all this time.’
The Merlin’s brow became drawn. ‘I chose for thee
to see me as old, because I wanted to avoid thy father’s
jealous streak, which thou hast quite obviously
inherited.’
‘Do not lie to me anymore!’ Maelgwn thumped the
table with both ﬁsts and began to pace. ‘Dost thou think
I have not worked it out!’
‘Sorry?’ Taliesin was concerned. ‘Exactly what
twisted, dark scenario hast Mahaud implanted in thy
mind, Maelgwn?’

Maelgwn stopped his pacing and slowly shook his
head, unable to fathom why he’d ever believed a single
word that left this man’s mouth. ‘I defy thee to deny thy
love for Tory!’
‘I love all I serve.’ Taliesin remained calm.
‘But it was not everyone that thou decided to give
everlasting life to, Merlin. Why did thou choose
my wife?’
Now even Taliesin was battling to stay civil. It be the
work of the crone that compels him. Do not allow her any
pleasure. For how could he snap the King out of his
bewitchment, if he didn’t stay in control himself. If
things turn ugly, I know what must be done. ‘Tory saved
my life once. I was just repaying the favour . . . the
potion wast the only means I had. If I could have spared
her without cheating her of part of her spiritual
evolution, I would have done so.’
‘When did this take place, exactly?’ Maelgwn
sounded sceptical. ‘That she saved thy life.’
‘It wast in a past incarnation of mine, Majesty, long
before I wast reborn of the Goddess Keridwen.’ Taliesin
tried not to sound as hesitant as he felt in broaching the
subject and prayed that Maelgwn took it no further.
The Merlin didn’t want to lie to his patron, yet the
truth would surely condemn them all.
He was hiding something more, the King could
sense it. ‘Alright then . . .’ he challenged. ‘Assume the
form thou held at that time.’
‘I am not sure if I . . .’
‘Be that so?’ Maelgwn pulled the looking-glass from
his belt to view the Merlin through it.

Once again, the man before him began to change
form. His fair skin, silvery hair and violet eyes darkened.
His skin took on a reddish tinge; his hair and eyes
turned as black as night. His tall, slender body
shortened, and muscles erupted across every inch of the
warrior’s stocky form.
The King didn’t even have to wait for the image to
fully transform to realise it was Teo; they’d met during
Maelgwn’s brief visit to the twentieth century some
twenty years ago. This half-caste native American had
been Tory’s sensei for many years and, as far as the King
knew, Teo was the only other man Tory had ever taken
to her bed.
‘Damn thee.’ Maelgwn shook as he lowered the
mirror, his worst and only fear realised. ‘Damn ye both!’
‘Maelgwn, it be not as Mahaud would have thee
believe . . .’
‘Mahaud! Huh!’ Maelgwn backed away from the
magician, incensed by his discovery. ‘All the forces of
the underworld could not deﬁle me as thou hast. How
could thou bestow such a beauteous favour upon me . . .
when thy true intention wast to covet her at every
given opportunity?’
‘In the name of the Goddess, Maelgwn.’ Taliesin
was losing his patience. All he’d ever wanted was the
King’s greatest happiness and that which was best for
Britain. ‘If that wast truly the way of it, why would I
have bothered at all?’
‘Because thou needed Tory to lead Britain, thus
thou had to marry her to one of royal blood.’ The King
stormed from one side of the room to the other, as a

complete scenario took form in his mind. ‘It did not
matter who thou chose — he would die eventually —
and as thou art both immortal now, the time before thee
could have her to thyself would be relatively short. Aye,
now I see it!’
Taliesin shook his head. The destruction of
everything they’d worked so hard to achieve was staring
him in the face, and it had taken Mahaud all of a week
to achieve it. ‘Please, Maelgwn . . . deep in thy heart
thou must know I could never do what thou art
suggesting. And if not I, surely thou must realise Tory
would never betray thy wedding vow . . . she loves thee
beyond life.’
The King returned to his chair and took a seat.
‘And how easy that must be to say, when she hast no
fear of losing it.’
Taliesin was at a loss, the King must see reason.
‘There will be no advising thee, Maelgwn, if thou dost
not listen to me now. Dost thou not see the witch at
work here, twisting the truth for her own end?’
Maelgwn thought a moment. ‘Aye, that I do.’ He
leaned back in his seat. ‘Thus it is that I banish thee
from this kingdom, Taliesin . . . and all those lands
within the alliance.’
‘Be reasonable, think about . . .’
‘And if thou ever . . .’ Maelgwn stood, spurred forth
by his hatred, ‘ever, go so far as to even think of my wife
again, I shall seek out the services of Mahaud myself, to
wipe thee from existence.’
The darkness Taliesin perceived, surrounding the
looking-glass, suddenly exploded to envelope the King

and its force was so overwhelming that even Taliesin
could not avoid it. The Merlin hadn’t felt such undiluted
evil since his days as Gwion Bach, his former self, before
Keridwen transformed him. A sense of deep unrest
rushed through his being, for he realised all his years of
careful planning had amounted to naught. As his anger
built, his form rose into the air, expanding as it decreased
in density. Taliesin wailed like a man possessed, and his
voice was like thunder to the King’s ears:
‘This vengeance shall be the end
of all that we have built.
And if common sense shall allow it,
then heed this warning.
If thou dost persist in banishing me,
the Otherworld shall damn thee,
Maelgwn Gwynedd.’
When the Merlin had vanished, he left Maelgwn
maddened and confused. The King knew Taliesin had
never uttered truer words than those of his prophecy, for
this incident would be their undoing.
Their escape had been almost too easy for Bryce’s liking,
yet after riding through the night he’d seen no sign of
anyone pursuing them.
The sun rose over the wide, open plains and stole
away their cover. They had half a day ahead in the
saddle to reach the British border and Aella was
falling asleep in Bryce’s arms. If they rested, it would
give the Saxons a chance to catch them up. Still, if

they could hide out till nightfall, darkness would
increase their chances of making it to the safety of his
father’s kingdom unseen. ‘That will do nicely.’ Bryce
spied an abandoned property, and headed them off
towards it.
There were many such places here, in the no-man’s
land that separated Saxony from Britain. People from
both races had tried to claim the land to farm it, only to
be driven out by the opposition. The farmhouse on this
property was in a crumbled state of disrepair, but the
large barn still appeared to be quite structurally sound.
Bryce climbed from his mount, helping Aella down
after him, and drew his sword before leading her and his
horse inside.
A few birds had made a home in the rafters, but
apart from that the place appeared devoid of life.
‘We can rest here awhile,’ Bryce told her, placing his
two hands together at one side of his face and closing
his eyes. ‘Sleep?’
Aella smiled and nodded her understanding,
wishing she spoke just a little of his tongue. Thou hast
risked thy life for me twice now, I have never known a man
like thee. She watched Bryce get himself comfortable
against a pile of straw, then walked over to where he lay
and sat herself down. The Prince didn’t stir or open his
eyes. Aella hesitated but a moment, before timidly
lowering her head to rest on his chest, hoping he would
not think her common for wanting to be so close to
him. After a moment, his arm moved around her back
to cradle her. Aella felt safe here and closed her eyes to
sleep, lulled by the sound of his heartbeat.

‘Aella.’
She woke to the sound of her name whispered, and
was startled when Eormenric went ﬂying over the top of
her. Bryce had taken hold of him with his free hand and
now had her brother pinned to the ground with a blade
at his throat.
‘Aella, tell him I come in peace,’ Eormenric called
to her desperately.
Aella was on her feet now, and in a ﬂuster. ‘I do not
speak his tongue.’
Bryce raised Eormenric to his feet and thrust him
hard against the wall.
‘Aella?’ Eormenric groaned. ‘Do something!’
She paced, perplexed by her brother’s sudden
appearance. ‘What art thou doing here? How do I know
I should trust thee? This could be one of the witch’s
tricks. Thou hast been close to her.’
‘Please, Aella,’ Eormenric managed to squeeze out
as Bryce’s elbow pressed hard against his throat, the
Prince’s blade gleaming before his eyes. ‘If I wast
coming to fetch thee back, why would I be alone
and unarmed?’
Aella strode to the barn door to validate what he
said. Only his horse grazed outside and there didn’t
appear to be another living soul for miles around. She
returned to where the men were poised, awaiting her
word, and stared at Eormenric sternly. He did try to
defend me against the crone, I suppose.
‘My lord.’ She resolved to give her brother the beneﬁt
of the doubt, placing a hand on Bryce’s shoulder. Bryce
eased off, allowing her to take the blade from his hand.

The warrior prince took a few paces back and
Eormenric slid down the wall, relieved.
‘Now explain thyself, before I have him run thee
through,’ Aella ordered. From now on, she would trust
none bar her protector.
As Eormenric raised himself, Bryce took hold of
Aella gently and urged her closer to him.
‘I am not here to harm thee,’ Eormenric emphasised.
‘When I spied the two of thee escaping, I wast glad! I
told no one. I followed thee because I thought thy friend
may know of a way I might dispel the witch from our
midst, and release Vanora from her domination.’
‘I see.’ Aella wasn’t sure whether to believe him, or
how she would convey his explanation to her guardian.
She turned to Bryce who was still observing the intruder
very closely. ‘Eormenric,’ she pointed to her brother,
‘wishes to kill . . .’ She passed the blade in her hand by
her throat, ‘Mahaud.’
Bryce looked to Eormenric surprised, and Aella
smiled; he understood.
The Prince strode forward and gripped hold of
Eormenric’s head, staring deep into his eyes a moment.
‘What be he doing?’ Eormenric stared back at him,
a little wary of the warrior’s great strength and
forthright manner.
Aella found this rather curious, too. ‘I am not sure . . .
perhaps he be trying to work out if thou art telling the
truth, so try not to resist.’
‘How can he tell that by looking at me?’
Aella smiled, observing the Prince’s focus. ‘Who
knows . . . he be a wondrous soul.’

Finally, Bryce let him go and smiled with a nod to
verify her brother’s claim.
‘It would seem he believes thee.’ She still sounded
sceptical.
Eormenric looked to the Briton, who stood staring
at him with his hands outstretched as he focused once
again. ‘What be he doing now?’
Aella shook her head and shrugged, enchanted by
his ways. ‘I wish I knew.’
Bryce imagined the white shield of light, already
surrounding Aella and himself, expanding to encompass
Eormenric as well.
Though he couldn’t perceive the man’s intent,
Eormenric was suddenly swept by a feeling of calm and
strength. He’d feared for his life for so many days now,
yet suddenly he was not afraid anymore.
Tory awoke with a start, and a strong feeling of
foreboding.
‘Tory.’ Taliesin sought her attention, and her head
shot up to view him. ‘You must come with me at once.
Our work here has been brought an end.’
‘What?’ Tory was immediately angered. She did hate
it when the Merlin didn’t bother to clarify himself.
‘Would you mind ex—’
‘Maelgwn has accepted a gift from Mahaud, and she
has gained control of him. He knows of how I appear to
thee, and has discovered I was once Teo. Needless to
say, I have been banished . . . and you are next,’ Taliesin
informed her, without so much as a compassionate
pause. ‘Make haste before he sends a guard for thee.’

‘But if I leave with thee, Maelgwn will surely
presume we have run off together.’
‘Never mind what he will think! Mahaud has hold
of him now; hence he is bound to think the worst no
matter what happens.’
‘I will not leave him and those in our service to
Mahaud. Taliesin, please tell me thou art not really
planning to forsake Britain like this?’
‘This period of history is beyond even my help; the
human race is already too twisted and confused. Twice
now I have attempted to cleanse the world, using the
sixth century as my base in time, and both times I have
failed miserably. I believe I must go back further if I
expect to have any success.’
Tory pulled on a wrap and climbed out of bed. ‘But,
I have already seen the future we’ve created, and it was
far more wonderful than the twentieth century reality
from which I stemmed originally.’
‘You’re referring to a reality that we fostered twenty
years ago, Tory. But following what has taken place this
night, you would ﬁnd the state of the twentieth century
just as reprehensible, if not worse, than the one you ﬁrst
left.’ His voice expressed his deep regret. ‘Thus I plan to
take myself elsewhere and see what I can do about it.
Are you coming?’
Tory could hardly speak. She didn’t want Taliesin to
leave without her; she would surely lose track of him
within the complexity of the time–space continuum,
and without him she had no vehicle to travel backwards
or forwards in time. She’d only just mastered the art of
physical teleportation. Time travel was quite a different

matter. One needed knowledge of the earth’s natural
energy ﬁelds and the cycles of the stars — things Tory
knew very little about.
‘You know I would love to, Taliesin, but I cannot,’
she resolved. ‘I love him.’
‘But if you stay, you will be condemned by him, then
where will you be?’
All the same, Tory would not sway from her
decision. ‘Shall I never see you again?’ The thought
ﬁlled her eyes with tears.
‘Not whilst Maelgwn Gwynedd still lives and breathes
on this earth,’ he stated, making his aversion to Maelgwn
plain. ‘And thou can tell him I have foreseen his end:
It was drawn from four winds
and travels great distances in silence.
It was created from
the darkness of the moon,
the stillness of the air,
the rotting depths of the earth,
the thirst of great drought.
Readied from the worst
in all living things,
Its wrath will descend upon
Maelgwn Gwynedd!’
‘Taliesin, wait!’ Tory moved to grab hold of him, but
the Merlin had gone. ‘What do you mean?’ she
mumbled, as her knees gave way and she collapsed to
the ﬂoor. ‘Damn you, Taliesin, come back. You got me
into this, you can’t just leave me here alone now . . .’

After sobbing uncontrollably for some time, her
thoughts turned to how she was going to deal with her
unfortunate circumstances.
I’d best dress and ready myself. She could not face the
crone in this sorry state.
When Sir Tiernan, accompanied by a half dozen soldiers,
came for the Queen, the knight instructed the guard to
wait outside and entered the Queen’s chamber alone.
He wasn’t really surprised to find her fully dressed
and awaiting him, yet she was not wearing her
queenly attire.
Tory was dressed as she was the day she walked into
Maelgwn’s life. Only now she wore a different jacket
over her T-shirt and jeans; she’d given King Brockwell
the original leather jacket she arrived in.
‘My Queen.’ Tiernan came forward reluctantly,
ﬁghting back the tears as he executed his chore. ‘I am
required to ask thee to —’
‘I know . . .’ Tory whispered away the knight’s rather
difﬁcult predicament.
‘I am sorry, Sensei,’ he assured her, knowing that
now she was well aware of her fate. ‘I do not believe a
word of it. Hast the king lost his mind!’ He fell on his
knees before her. ‘What shall become of us once thou
hast gone? Please, Goddess, tell me what I must do.’
‘Dear Sir Tiernan. I do promise thee that I am not
going anywhere. Dost thou think that even banishment
could keep me away?’
He looked up to her, more hopeful.
‘I can take care of myself, have no doubt of that.’

She motioned him to rise and approach, and grasped
him ﬁrmly by both shoulders. ‘Do as thy King hast bid,
and speak no more of treason against him.’ As Tiernan
opened his mouth to contradict her, she added ﬁrmly, ‘It
not be Maelgwn thou art reasoning with at present, but
Mahaud. We must play along with her until I can ﬁgure
a way to expel her from our King.’
Tiernan was most relieved by her explanation;
leading an uprising against his king was the last thing in
the world he wanted to do, but he would have done so
to spare the Queen from this needless ridicule.
‘Thou must stay and watch my love, Tiernan . . .
surround thyself with white light and be alert. The
crone cannot affect thee unless thou dost give in to her
anger, hatred, greed and so on. Thy state of mind upon
entering this room shows how easily she can cause
conﬂict and dis-ease.’
Tiernan held his head. He felt ashamed in retrospect.
‘Do not feel bad. I fear even Taliesin hast been
taken in by her cunning. But we shall not. Feel only
love and the purest of thoughts, and she cannot
mislead thee.’
‘I understand, Sensei . . . and I shall not fail thee
in this.’
‘I know.’ She smiled and embraced him tightly.
‘Thou art a true champion, my friend.’
Besides the clothes on her back and a saxophone,
Tory hadn’t a possession left to her name. Still, she
considered that she was leaving this place a far richer
person. She had no plan, just a gut feeling that said
she needed to make herself distant from this house.

The crone’s madness seemed to be spreading
itself rapidly across Gwynedd; she must escape
Mahaud’s reaches if she was to have any chance of
outsmarting her.
After one last look around their chamber, Tory
calmly and voluntarily accompanied Sir Tiernan to the
room of court to face sentencing.
Rhun rode into the courtyard at Degannwy and was met
by Sir Angus and Javotte.
‘Praise the Goddess.’ Angus was beside himself with
grief.
‘Sir Angus. Javotte.’ Rhun dismounted with haste. ‘I
heard what happened to Lady Alma. I am so sorry.’
‘I thank thee, Highness.’ Angus struggled to keep
his wits about him. ‘But another tragedy be about to
befall us, if thou dost not make for thy father’s room of
court at once.’
‘The King be banishing thy mother.’ Javotte told
Rhun as much as was needed to send him racing off
through the fort to the aid of his parents.
‘Stop!’ Rhun slammed open the doors of court and
stormed through the gathering, determined to get to
the bottom of this outrage. ‘What be the meaning of
this?’ He looked to his father for an explanation, to
find none was needed; he at once noted the dark
presence that overshadowed Maelgwn. Nay please, not
my father!
I am afraid so. Tory bethought her son without
looking to him. Do not mention to Maelgwn what thou

hast seen. It would be better if the dark forces remain
ignorant as to the full extent of thy expertise.
‘Thy mother hast been proven guilty of treason,’
Maelgwn informed his son with regret. ‘The details of
her deceit, I would rather not discuss with thee in my
present mood.’
‘But Father . . .’
‘But Father nothing! As I can neither contain her,
nor execute her for her treachery, she hast been
banished. From this moment forth, to speak or look
upon her be punishable by death.’
Rhun’s jaw clenched.
Calm thyself, his mother instructed. Do not allow the
crone any control over thee.
But the common folk art going to interpret this as their
King casting the Goddess from the land . . . there will be a
rebellion for sure!
I have already been through all this with him, it be no
use, trust me.
After a deep breath, Rhun raised his sights to view
his father. ‘I have an urgent message from King
Brockwell . . . something frightful hast happened.
Queen Katren, Prince Blain, Prince Owen and Prince
Cai have all mysteriously vanished.’
‘What?’ Tory couldn’t believe her ears, and the
concerned faces of all in the room looked to her son.
‘I expected thou would still be at Arwystli and so I
went there ﬁrst.’ Rhun pretended to ignore his mother’s
plight, as ordered, which appeared to please his father
no end. ‘King Brockwell asked that I beg the High
Merlin and the High Queen to go to Powys at once.’

Good lad. Tory silently congratulated her son for
delivering his message so diplomatically.
‘Well, as Britain no longer possesses a High Queen
or a High Merlin . . .’ Maelgwn’s tone was so nonchalant,
he near incited the whole room to a riot, ‘it would seem
the King of Powys shall have to deal with his family
dilemmas on his own.’
‘Be he refusing to aid an ally?’
Rhun heard King Catulus’ representative whisper
behind him. This be madness, suicide!
The young Prince of Gwynedd was again forced to
calm himself before responding. ‘Aye, Majesty, I
suppose so.’
‘Well, why art thou still here?’ Maelgwn cast his
cold sights to Tory, who was desperately trying to refrain
from bursting into tears. She knew there was no point
in confronting Mahaud now, as tempting as it was. The
witch would not have the last laugh, she would see to
that personally.
‘Be gone from my sight,’ the King demanded,
outraged.
‘As be thy wish, Majesty.’ She bowed her head.
Avoid thy father if thou can, Rhun . . . And if at all
possible, meet me at Arwystli.’
That I will. Tears welled in his eyes. Rhun couldn’t
bear to stand by and watch his mother shunned in
such a fashion. Still, this was obviously not an easy
task for any of those present. The Prince thought
Ione would explode at any moment, and probably
would have, had her husband not been present to
subdue her.

Do not be sad, the Goddess will prevail, I swear it. If
thou hast need of me, at any time, thou hast only to call.
I always have need of thee. Rhun couldn’t refrain any
longer and turned to view her, but his mother had
vanished. The Prince looked to his father, trying as best
he could not to despise him for his treatment of the
Queen, when suddenly the room began to shake and
Taliesin’s voice thundered from above.
‘Primary chief poet am I to Elfﬁn.
And my native country is the place
of the Summer Stars.
John the Divine called me Merlin,
But all future kings shall call me Taliesin.’
Rhun found himself mouthing the words to the prophecy,
for he recognised it. He’d come across this piece in one of
his mother’s books and had made a point of memorising
it, for it was said Taliesin had made the address to
his father.
‘I am the instructor
Of the whole universe.
I shall be till judgement
On the face of the earth.
I continue to revolve
Between the elements.
There’s not a marvel in the world
I cannot reveal . . .’

This was where the prophecy had ended in the book,
and Rhun was rather alarmed to learn what followed.
Taliesin warned of a loathsome beast, with inﬂamed
skin and glazed eyes that were a ghastly shade of yellow.
‘This vile presence will come to haunt the Kingdom of
Gwynned,’ claimed the Merlin. ‘It will spell doom for
Maelgwn, High King of the Britons, and all those who
still keep his company.’
The courtroom was thrown into an uproar upon
the announcement.
The King stormed from the room, angered that the
Merlin had cursed him.
‘Wonderful!’ Tadgh, the King’s squire, commented
as he passed Rhun in pursuit of his master. ‘What was
all that supposed to mean?’
‘Trouble,’ predicted Rhun.

7

THE GRIFFIN’S
VOW

W

ith the whole of her consciousness focused on
King Brockwell, Tory soon found herself in
the sitting room at Arwystli. The King was
seated by the ﬁre, unaware of her arrival, his ﬁsts clenched
in front of his face as he bit at both his thumbnails.
‘Calin?’ she whispered, so as not to startle him.
Upon sighting her, Brockwell felt all the tension
rush from his body. ‘What took thee so long?’ He raised
himself to greet her.
She hugged him tightly for some time, feeling both of
them needed the momentary comfort of the embrace.
‘My deepest apologies.’ Tory drew herself away to look
him in the eyes. ‘I wast busy being banished.’

‘What?’ He tightened the grip he had on her arms.
‘Taliesin hast been banished also,’ she informed him
with regret, moving to take a seat by the ﬁre. ‘And he
hast sworn that he shall not return whilst Maelgwn
lives.’ The Queen lowered herself onto the lounge and
burst into tears.
‘Tory . . .’ Brockwell came to sit beside her, placing
one arm around her shoulder to console her, his free
hand resting upon her own. ‘Tell me, what hast
happened?’
‘Mahaud,’ Tory snifﬂed, endeavouring to regain
some control. ‘I have a few confessions to make.’ She
looked to Brockwell, a mite ashamed to admit so.
‘As do I.’
He sounded as sorry as she did. Had Tory not been
so emotionally distraught herself, she would have
foreseen his sorry state of affairs. But as her mind was
awhirl with a million other problems, she remained
blissfully unaware.
Brockwell insisted Tory begin, as he was not yet
ready to divulge his own situation. He poured the mead,
listening intently whilst Tory conveyed all that had
befallen since they’d parted company.
‘But I swear to thee: since I married Maelgwn I have
neither desired nor needed any other as a lover,’ Tory
appealed to him in conclusion. ‘And certainly not
Taliesin . . .’
‘Nay, not he,’ Brockwell agreed, appearing
somewhat puzzled by her story.
‘No, not anyone,’ Tory said, wondering why he didn’t
seem to believe her. ‘What? Dost thou think I am lying?’

‘Nay, I believe thee. If thou wast going to take a
lover, thee would naturally have chosen me.’
He joked, or so Tory thought, and she smiled.
‘Anyway, enough of my problems . . .’
‘Our problems.’ Brockwell corrected. ‘These events
concern us all.’
‘Tell me of Katren and thy kin. Dost thou have any
clues as to what may have become of them?’
‘Some . . .’ Brockwell dithered.
‘Dost thou suspect Mahaud could have been
involved?’
‘Maybe . . .’ He was awfully vague about it.
‘Calin, please. I know thou art worried about them
and in shock at this time, but I cannot help thee if thou
dost not tell me all the facts . . . I am too weary to guess.’
Calin couldn’t work out if she was playing him for
sport or not, so he thought it best to start at the
beginning. ‘Dost thou recall how I came to be at the
battle of Arwystli?’
Tory’s brow became drawn, she was losing patience
with him. ‘Well, I wast being damned by Mahaud at the
time, but it was said that thou arrived upon a grifﬁn.’
She didn’t understand why he was bringing this up now.
‘Aye, ’tis true.’ He was saddened by the fact. ‘And in
return for that passage, I made the grifﬁn a vow.’ The
King’s lips parted to reveal it, when he choked on his
guilt and fell silent.
Tory’s hands moved to her mouth to cover the look
of horror that swept her face.
‘Oh, his request seemed simple enough at the time, I
was young and madly in love . . . And I do love Katren,

still, after all these years, despite . . .’ His conscience
smothered him to secrecy again and he looked to the
ﬁre, every muscle in his face battling to conceal
his dread.
‘Despite what, Calin?’ Tory’s tone now boarded on
accusation. ‘What did thee promise that Otherworldly
creature?’
‘That I would remain beholden to Katren alone, for
as long as we both doth live?’ He admitted rather
begrudgingly.
‘Or?’
‘Or the grifﬁn would claim her and all our offspring,
and I would never lay eyes on them again.’
The tears ran silently down his face, and her heart
went out to him as she could truly sympathise with how
he felt. ‘But how could this have befallen, unless thou
hast —’
‘Coveted another.’ Brockwell’s eyes darted up to
catch her reaction.
‘Calin, thou did not!’ Tory begged him, as she stood
up. ‘How could thee do such a thing to Katren?’ she
scolded; hadn’t he learned?
Calin was shocked, speechless, as he watched Tory
begin to pace out her frustration with him. ‘But Tory,
’twas thee I did forsake her with,’ he announced, halting
the High Queen in her tracks.
‘Come again?’
‘The desire thou doth stir in me, I did try to deny.’
He rose, his eyes afﬁxed upon her as he neared. ‘Katren
subdued it for a time, a long time . . . but over the years,
more and more, thou hast been a distraction to me.’

‘Calin, what art thou saying?’ Tory was horriﬁed.
‘Surely thou dost not believe it was really I that thee
took to thy bed? I just got through telling thee I have
slept with none bar Maelgwn.’
‘Thou art denying it?’ Brockwell was becoming
annoyed and confused.
‘Aye, I am denying it!’ Tory stated with conviction.
‘I swear to thee, Calin, ’twas not I!’
Calin stopped still to think; by his memory there
was no mistaking her, for the room had been candlelit.
‘Perhaps Mahaud bewitched thee, and thus thou hast no
memory of the event.’
Tory’s heart was pounding in her chest. Please,
Goddess, don’t let him be right.
It was not that Calin Brockwell was not an
attractive man. He was well admired by many women,
both young and old. It was more that he was a past life
incarnation of Tory’s brother, Brian, and she’d always
regarded him as such.
‘When did this . . . episode take place, Calin?’
‘Last night, just after sundown.’
Tory breathed a sigh of relief. ‘I was discussing
matters with Taliesin till well after midnight.’
‘Then who was in my bed?’ Brockwell became
somewhat nauseous at the dwindling possibilities. ‘Not
Mahaud, please . . . not that foul creature.’
‘Well, Taliesin mentioned Vanora also possessed
skills of transformation,’ Tory put forward.
Brockwell had to sit down before he fell down, his
face was as white as his shirt. ‘Be that supposed to make
me feel better?’

‘I suppose not . . . but it was thy choice, Calin.’
‘Please.’ He held up his hand; he didn’t need
a lecture.
‘Damn her!’ Tory wanted to hit something. ‘That
hag hast managed to expose the weakness in every one
of us.’
‘The question being, what art we going to do about
it?’ Brockwell shook his head. What hope did they have
against such trickery? ‘What can we do?’
‘Well, ﬁrstly, we had best see to the rescue of thy
clan.’ Tory’s mind shifted into gear. ‘And, I dare say, as
we shan’t be able to rely on Taliesin to aid us, I had best
seek out the whereabouts of Selwyn.’
‘But no one hast seen the hermit for years?’
‘Fear not,’ the Queen assured him with a smile. ‘We
still keep in touch. It be my guess that Selwyn already
knows of all that hast befallen, and shall be hard at
work on a solution by now.’
‘Let us hope thou art right.’
In the wake of his father’s disastrous resolve,
Rhun pacified their subjects. He proposed that the
only way they would overcome the problems that
overshadowed them was to have patience and
stick together.
Tiernan supported the young Prince, claiming that
he believed the king had been temporarily overcome by
the stress of his troubles and this was affecting his
decision-making. Yet he assured the subjects of the
High King that the Goddess was aware of this and was
dealing with the matter personally.

‘So, until such time as we art instructed otherwise,
we must adhere to our King’s word and speak no treason
against him. This be the will of the Goddess.’
‘So be it.’ The gathering seemed reluctant to agree.
‘Thou had best not be lying to us, Sir Tiernan. We
art talking about disastrous consequences if thou art
making this up to save face.’ Sir Guillym, King Catulus’
representative, bowed and took his leave.
The rest of the nobles, knights and advisers exited
the room after him, mumbling their concerns amongst
themselves.
‘Well put,’ Rhun assured his father’s champion.
‘Now I need thee to help me persuade my father to let
me go to King Brockwell’s aid. Mother hast asked that I
meet her at Arwystli.’
Tiernan rolled his eyes knowing how difﬁcult the King
was to reason with at present, but he would to give it a try.
Before they entered his father’s chambers, Rhun
paused to instruct: ‘Now, no matter what happens, we
art not allowed to be angry with him, understand? That
will only give the dark forces more power.’
Tiernan nodded, mentally preparing himself for the
challenge.
‘Nor should we anger him, if we can avoid it . . .
save he starts throwing the death sentence about.’
‘Aye,’ Tiernan rolled his head around to relieve the
tension in his neck. ‘I am ready.’
Expecting to ﬁnd the High King alone and
brooding, Rhun knocked and entered. He strutted into
the room to confront his father and was taken aback to
ﬁnd him in bed, with a maiden near half his age. If not

for Tiernan clasping a hand over his mouth in
constraint, Rhun’s fury would have thwarted him.
‘Forgive the intrusion, Majesty.’ Tiernan made it
sound as if nothing were amiss. ‘But we have an urgent
need to speak with thee.’
‘Now what?’ Maelgwn raised himself and the maid
moved around to sit behind him, watching the intruders
over the King’s shoulder with playful delight.
Tiernan had let go of Rhun, but the Prince’s voice
quivered as he struggled to contain his contempt. ‘I
think I should go to Sir Brockwell’s aid. It dost not look
good for us to be abandoning our allies.’
The King laughed at this, turning his head to view
the girl behind him. ‘What dost thou think. Should I let
him go?’
The girl toyed with him a moment, giggling now
and then as she pondered. ‘Nay,’ she decided, wrapping
her legs and arms around the King’s body. ‘Keep him
close to us,’ she urged, in a whisper that was loud
enough for Rhun to hear.
This didn’t make sense. Rhun knew this girl; he’d
pursued her himself for a time. Strange that he’d found
the maiden far too chaste to warrant any real interest.
Rhun calmed himself enough to focus on her and, sure
enough, the evil that shrouded her was even stronger
than the forces that had beset his father. They art
purposely trying to disgust me, and be damned if I shall
stand about playing word games for their amusement.
‘Well, there be thy answer.’ His father’s gaze was still
caught up in the girl. ‘Arianwen wants thee here, thus
here thou shalt stay.’

‘Of course.’ Rhun forced a smile, realising any
attempt to reason with his father was going to prove
completely futile. ‘I am sure that Arianwen hast
Britain’s best interests at heart.’ The Prince made
for the door before he said something he would
truly regret.
‘And best assets at hand . . .’ the girl giggled as they
returned to their mischief.
Tiernan slammed the door closed behind them,
then searched frantically for something he could plough
his ﬁst into.
‘Tiernan, calm thyself.’ Rhun prevented him from
belting a solid oak door. ‘I think I have an alternative
means to our end.’
A vague image of a forest took form and then
manifested in brilliant colour. Wind rustled through
the tree branches above, stirring up the local bird life.
Water from the mountains babbled down over the
rocks of a small waterfall close by, and the ﬁltered rays
of sunlight felt warm against his skin.
‘Rhun?’
He turned his head to spy his mother.
‘What art thou doing here?’ There was a proud kind
of laughter in her voice.
‘Am I here?’ He shufﬂed his hands up and down
himself, feeling a little light-headed from the experience.
‘Indeed thou art, Highness. Well done.’ Selwyn’s
face beamed.
‘Mother, I am so sorry.’ Rhun near ﬂew to embrace
Tory.

‘Sorry? For what?’ Tory couldn’t tear him away
from her.
‘Everything!’ He calmed a little as he absorbed his
mother’s healing energy; Mahaud’s forces had him
wound up like a coil. ‘Father hast . . .’
‘I know.’ Tory hushed him to a more serene state.
The whole sordid confrontation was ablaze in his mind.
It was not necessary to make him speak of it.
‘Vanora set a curse loose in Gwynedd, and hast
instructed it to wreak havoc on thy father,’ Selwyn
enlightened him. ‘They art both merely pawns on the
crone’s chessboard of deceit.’
The Prince ﬁnally let go of his mother, feeling his
strength returning. ‘How did thou ﬁnd out about this,
Selwyn, when the Otherworld hast been in such chaos?’
‘Why, the trees, of course.’ Selwyn looked around at
the surrounding forest with considerable admiration.
‘They saw Ossa draw upon the four elements to cast the
curse and Vanora direct it toward thy kingdom.’
‘It was drawn from four winds and travels great
distances in silence,’ Tory uttered in recognition. ‘That
was something Taliesin said after he told me he had
foreseen Maelgwn’s end.’
‘Aye,’ Rhun added. ‘And after thou left Degannwy,
Taliesin returned to voice a prophecy concerning a
yellow monster.’
‘A yellow monster now?’ Tory turned her fear-ridden
visage to Selwyn. ‘After the destruction of my home,
the loss of my mentor, a divorce, banishment and two
affairs I never had, not to mention the dear friends I
have lost through death or disappearance . . .’ Tory

paused from her raving and, took a deep breath to stop
herself from completely losing her mind. ‘Why did he
do it, Selwyn? Taliesin knew Mahaud’s evil forces had
hold of Maelgwn. How could he just abandon him in
this fashion and then curse him to boot?’
‘I believe it was more a prophecy, Majesty, as Rhun
said. Perhaps the High Merlin was just trying to warn the
King away from disaster.’ The bard’s sweet, open face
conﬁrmed that he shared Tory’s pain and confusion.
‘Then again, Mahaud may have outsmarted even Taliesin
in this case. I mean, what if some of the accusations the
High King made against him were not so far from the
truth? This would have struck at the part of Taliesin that
remains mortal. He said to me once that Gwion Bach
still lived within him and worked his own mischief.’
Selwyn’s unwrinkled brow became drawn. ‘To learn that
he was not so infallible, not so perfect, would surely have
angered Taliesin. After all, if he’d been in the right, he
would never have lost his patience with the King, for he
knew it could only grant the witch more power.’
Dear Goddess, what if she has infected him too?
Selwyn could feel Tory’s mounting panic. ‘Mahaud
seeks to overwhelm and confuse thee, to make thee
scatter thy energies. But do not allow her to convince
thee that we have lost before we have even taken the
ﬁeld. We still have a couple of tricks up our sleeve . .
.never fear.’ He took her hand to encourage her strength.
‘I suggest we concentrate on one problem at a time.’
Selwyn sat Tory and Rhun down by the brook with
some food and water. This particular place in the forest

was empowered with positive earth energies that helped
to protect them from the crone’s evil eyes and ears.
There was nothing they could do about Aberffraw
now or about those who had been lost in the disaster. It
worried them all that the High King was surrounded by
such evil, but as far as they could surmise he wasn’t in
any immediate danger. Thus their ﬁrst priority was to
see to the rescue of Queen Katren and her sons, and
warn their allies of the impending danger that the witch
posed to Britain.
‘Rhun, dost thou feel conﬁdent enough with
teleportation to reach each of the kingdoms within the
alliance?’ Selwyn enquired. ‘They will adhere to thy
word faster than a scrolled directive sent via a
messenger, which may not reach them at all.’
‘Aye, Merlin. If it be only a matter of will, as it was
to ﬁnd thee, my conviction be plentiful at present.’
‘Good.’ Selwyn reached into the pocket of his robe
and pulled out several little pouches which he handed to
Rhun. ‘Take these, one for thyself and one for each ruler.’
‘What art they?’ Rhun gave them a sniff and inhaled
the pleasant aroma of many a different herb and ﬂower.
‘Amulets. They contain small carvings of symbols
that ward off disease, mischief and evil spirits. They
shall repel all negative vibrations and will enhance
one’s psychic energy, so that our allies shall be better
able to separate fact from ﬁction.’
‘Excellent!’ Rhun slung the long leather strap of one
around his neck and tucked the pouch inside his shirt,
feeling the braid of the Lady Bridgit in his pocket. ‘Dost
thou have a spare?’

‘I have only enchanted exactly as many as we require.’
‘Never mind,’ Rhun resolved with a smile. ‘I shall
meet ye back at Arwystli presently.’ Rhun kissed his
mother’s cheek and closed his eyes to concentrate.
‘Goddess speed.’ Selwyn smiled proudly as the
young prince disappeared.
The Queen seemed dazed after her son’s departure.
‘He shall be ﬁne, Majesty.’ Selwyn placed an amulet
around her neck, and she smiled faintly at its pleasing
energy.
‘Let us be gone, also.’ Tory took hold of Selwyn’s
hand and squeezed it. ‘King Brockwell shall be beside
himself by now.’
Rhun made straight for Dunadd, in the most distant
kingdom of Dalriada. Fergus MacErc had only just
arrived home from Arwystli to be informed that his
brothers, Loarn and Aengus, were besieged by Pictish
raiders along their bordering estates.
Rhun promised to see what he could do about
sending some legions to their aid, but after informing
the ruler of the dreadful state of affairs he’d just left in
Gwynedd, thankfully, Fergus realised how difﬁcult that
might be.
The leader of the Scotti accepted the merlin’s magic
charm, stating he could use all the help he could get. As
he reckoned, it was not as if he’d never had to deal with
the Pictish before. In parting, Fergus swore his
everlasting allegiance to the Goddess, stating he was
conﬁdent she would see them through the darkness that
had descended over Britain.

Rhun left for Dumnonia to address King Catulus,
more conﬁdent that the alliance would hold ﬁrm
through this peril; perhaps the witch was not as
powerful as he’d ﬁrst feared.
Unfortunately, the Prince arrived to ﬁnd that the
same scenario had erupted in both Dumnonia and
Gwent Is Coed, only it was the Angles who plagued
their borders. Therefore, Rhun had to conclude that the
Saxons had already begun to raid along the borders of
Powys and Gwynedd. It seemed Ossa had been forming
a few alliances of his own.
Once the amulet had been placed around the neck
of each leader, Rhun found them very easy to reason
with. They all stated their allegiance to the treaty and
to the cause of the common good, each willing to do
whatever he must to restore the peace and rule of
the Goddess.
It was not long after Bryce had entered the sitting room
at Arwystli to greet his father, with the son and
daughter of Ossa in tow, that Tory and Selwyn
materialized in the middle of the room.
Naturally, Eormenric and Aella were rather startled,
and then even more so when Selwyn approached to
greet them in their own tongue.
‘Eormenric, Aella. So pleased to make thy
acquaintance.’ The young Saxon warrior was
speechless as this strange, yet intriguing individual
grasped hold of his hand and shook it firmly. ‘I have
been expecting thee.’
‘Really?’ Eormenric smiled, wide-eyed.

‘Sensei.’ Bryce rushed to Tory and bowed quickly,
before giving her a hug. ‘Father hast just ﬁnished telling
me of thy woes. How dost thou fare?’
She squeezed him tightly to alleviate his anxiety,
feeling that another in the room strongly envied her
position. ‘Now that thou hast been returned safely to us,
I am ﬁne.’
‘I shall never leave thee again.’ The young prince
took a step back. ‘As Ione can no longer watch over
thee for fear of the death sentence, I shall.’
‘That be not —’
‘I want no argument on the subject. It be done.’
Aella was jealous of the obvious devotion Bryce
held for this woman. Who was she?
‘Eormenric. I am Selwyn, a merlin to the Druids of
Britain.’ He led the young Saxon leader to where Tory
stood. ‘And it gives me great pleasure to introduce thee
to our High Queen.’
‘The Goddess,’ Eormenric gasped, as he bowed
deeply before her, overcome to meet the legend at last.
‘It be an honour, lady.’
‘The honour be all mine, Eormenric.’ Tory placed
both hands on his shoulders, urging him to rise.
‘Nay.’ He could not look her in the eye, feeling
guilt-ridden. ‘It wast I who caused thee all this grief,
some of which can never be righted.’
Tory smiled faintly; he was not much older than her
own son, and too young to carry such a burden. ‘But
now thou hast come to seek me out, there be a real
chance for peace and trust between our nations that
may never have arisen if this had not all come to pass.’

Eormenric ﬁnally looked to her, his eyes wide at the
wisdom of her words.
‘We all have lessons to learn from this experience,’
the High Queen assured him. ‘Thus there be no blame
to be laid, just a challenge to be faced.’
Bryce slapped Eormenric’s shoulder with a wink, to
loosen him up a little.
‘And Aella.’
The Queen approached and embraced her warmly,
to the maiden’s great surprise.
‘I want to thank thee for the deliverance of my
Masters from the tower of Londinium. Thou art a brave
soul indeed and most welcome in my kingdoms.’
‘I thank thee.’ The girl curtsied. ‘But no thanks be
required, it was the just thing to do.’
Tory smiled, looking back to Bryce. ‘No wonder
thou brought her home.’
The Queen spoke in Bryce’s tongue, which Aella
didn’t comprehend. The young prince blushed all the
same — he never could hide anything from his
patroness.
‘Well, then, let us get down to business.’ Selwyn
rubbed his hands together and took a seat. ‘Let us start
with the rescue of thy good Queen.’ He cast his sights to
Brockwell and Bryce near had a ﬁt.
‘Hast something happened to mother?’
‘Thou hast not told him?’ Tory appealed to
Brockwell, who cringed at the thought of doing so.
‘I wast just getting to that, when ye arrived.’ The
King stood and looked to Bryce, who was poised and
ready to hit something. ‘Could we have a moment?’

Tory took Eormenric and Aella to the dining room
to be fed, whilst Selwyn stayed to ensure Bryce
remained civil; this sad news would not be an easy thing
for the Prince to hear.
It was in the wee hours of the morning that Rhun
ﬁnished speaking with Vortipor in his court at Castle
Dwyran in Dyfed.
As this kingdom was protected from the threat of
land raids, being bordered by Gwent Is Coed and Powys
on each side and water on the other, Vortipor
immediately ordered troops to both his neighbouring
kingdoms to help secure their position. The Protector of
Dyfed then kindly offered the young prince a bed for
the night, as he was obviously weary from all his travels,
trials and lack of sleep.
Although Rhun was grateful, he declined, stating he
could not rest until he had rejoined his mother and
been updated with their state of affairs. The Prince felt
that Vortipor was relieved to hear this. The memory of
Bridgit, in the throes of a heated kiss with such a
notorious womaniser as Rhun, still bothered her father
greatly.
Even so, Rhun could not bring himself to leave
Dyfed without at least seeing her. For as much as he
hated to admit it, Bridgit’s kiss had lingered long in his
memory. Upon disappearing from Vortipor’s sight, the
Prince found himself beholding a vision that was more
enchanting and perfect than a scene from a fairytale.
The maiden lay sleeping in a huge, canopied bed of
pure white. The blueish light of the moon streaming

through the open window reﬂected off the covers,
giving the impression that the whole bed was aglow.
As the Prince took a seat beside her sleeping form,
Bridgit stirred and opened her eyes.
Outlined against the moonlight, he appeared like an
angel. She was not frightened, knowing at once who it
was; Rhun had ﬁlled her dreams so many days now, that
every inch of his ﬁne, vigorous form had been clearly
committed to memory. ‘Am I dreaming?’
‘Nay, Bridgit, I am truly here.’
‘Oh Goddess!’ She raised herself to hold him fast. ‘I
was so worried.’
The Prince found the lady’s energy so potent, so
virtuous and true, that it shamed him to think he could
have contemplated toying with her affections as he had.
She was not some common whore looking for the favours
of a man well-positioned in society. Bridgit was a welleducated lady of royal breeding and hence a treasure to
be savoured, not squandered. In fact, he even felt a mite
guilty relishing the sensation of her body pressed so hard
against his, and so eased her away from him a little.
‘I have something for thee.’ He lifted the amulet
from around his neck. ‘It will protect thee in the midst
of this chaos.’
Bridgit smiled broadly as the Prince placed the
charm around her neck. ‘With all that hast been taking
place in the world, thou art worried about me?’
Oh my, but she was adorable this maiden, and
clever. ‘There be none more surprised than I,’ the
Prince admitted, but with a remnant of cynicism; he’d
no intention of committing himself to but one woman

just yet. Still, if he didn’t claim this bounty soon,
another man, most likely one of his best friends, would.
Bridgit knew he was only pretending to be aloof
with her now. ‘I thank thee, with all my heart,’ she
whispered, pressing her lips against his. For a moment,
the Prince felt pleasantly obliged toward her advance.
She was so trusting of him and quite willing to take her
passion further.
‘Stop that.’ He found himself on the defensive, and
standing in the middle of the room. ‘Hast thou no idea
what a volatile lover I am.’
‘Aye,’ she said with a sultry smile. ‘But I am fairly
conﬁdent I could persuade thee to come back.’
‘Thou dost not have to persuade me to come back,
Bridgit.’ Rhun became, for some reason, annoyed with
her. ‘Be that not obvious by my presence here.’
‘Oh, Goddess.’ Bridgit sounded rather embarrassed
as she shrank back to hide inside her bed. ‘Thou dost
not want me.’
‘Nay!’ He climbed on to the bed after her. ‘Bridgit, I
do.’
‘Then please, Majesty, have mercy.’ She leant
towards him. ‘I have spent the last four and ten years in
a convent.’
Rhun laughed, she certainly wasn’t backward in
coming forward.
‘What?’ She tried not to laugh herself. ‘Look, I am
inexperienced, I know . . .’ she caused the Prince to
laugh even harder, ‘but I am very eager to learn.’
‘Thou art way too eager for a lady of thy stature.
Face it, Bridgit, thou art the marrying kind.’

‘Oh great!’ She pushed him away. ‘If I must wait
until such time as thou art ready to marry, I shall die an
old spinster. We art on the brink of war, I know it. I saw
Father dispersing his troops. What if something should
happen to thee?’
‘Never fear, I am a fast healer.’ He joked to ease her
alarm. ‘Ask anyone.’
‘I do not ﬁnd that at all funny,’ she scolded him.
‘Dost thou not know how worried I have been?’ Her
tears forced her words to falter. ‘And thou can make a
mockery of my love, Rhun, but it will not be swayed,
not ever.’
‘My lady . . .’ Rhun’s heart sank; surely not even in
the Otherworld would he find a maiden so fair as
the one before him now. ‘I am sincerely honoured and
flattered, but I cannot take thee like this. Thy
father would have me killed for starters, and then
we would have precious little hope of ever being
properly wed.’
This made Bridgit smile, for although he still hadn’t
said he loved her, she was at least steering him in the
right direction.
‘I have to go.’ Rhun reversed off the bed. ‘But I shall
be back, I swear.’ He held a hand to his heart and
disappeared.
This stunned Bridgit a moment, as such feats were
unheard of by any outside the Druid circle. Maybe this
was a dream after all? Bridgit ﬁshed for the charm Rhun
had given her and kissed it as she lay back down,
comforted by its presence. ‘I believe you will be,
Highness . . . make it soon.’

Once Eormenric’s belly was ﬁlled with yet another free
meal supplied by the Britons, he decided he must clear
his conscience and tell the Goddess all he knew.
‘Though I know it not be by her own will,’
Eormenric was saddened to tell, ‘it be Vanora, in the
body of another, who seduces thy husband, lady.’
His words snapped Tory from her silent daze.
‘But it was Mahaud who gave him the lookingglass,’ he explained. ‘It was also she who assumed thy
form to trick King Brockwell.’
Tory held her head and let out a deep breath. ‘Well,
best not tell King Brockwell that.’ She forced a grin as
she paused to consider. ‘Dost thou know how the spell
over the High King might be broken?’
‘Aye, lady.’ Eormenric hesitated a moment, then
said in a whisper. ‘It be said that thou hast only to get
the King to destroy the gift he accepted.’
‘I see.’ Tory imagined this would be easier said than
done. ‘Did Mahaud say anything to thee of a yellow
monster?’
Aella’s eyes parted wide at the question, though
Eormenric shook his head. ‘Not that I recall.’
The High Merlin’s prophecy was slowly driving Tory
insane. She knew the answer to this riddle; she’d
studied Taliesin’s works back home in the twentieth
century and yet the meaning continued to elude her.
The frustrating thing was that she was certain an
explanation lay within the pages of her reference books,
now buried beneath the rubble at Aberffraw.

8

JUDGEMENT

W

ith the new day there dawned new hope. All
those endeavouring to solve the dilemmas
that confronted Britain met in the King’s
room of court at Arwystli come ﬁrst light. Even Bryce
seemed to have calmed a little, though he’d yet to speak
a word to his father.
After presenting Bryce, Eormenric and Aella with
their amulets, Selwyn instructed them that they must
stay at Arwystli whilst he, King Brockwell and Tory saw
to the rescue of Queen Katren and her sons.
Of course, Bryce did not take such instruction
willingly, but as he was the only other member of his kin
who remained he was ﬁnally persuaded to see reason.
Rhun was given the task of trying to convince his
father to destroy the looking-glass.

‘Thy amulet shall grant thee additional inﬂuence
over the King,’ the merlin advised him, ‘and the
strength to ignore the inﬂuence of the demons who
have beset thy father.’
‘Good.’ Rhun nodded, not mentioning that he’d
already relinquished his charm to defend another. He
felt well-equipped to handle the situation on his own,
and so decided that none need ﬁnd out about his little
oversight. ‘I shall return as soon as I can.’ He closed his
eyes and disappeared from their midst.
‘Great wonders!’ Eormenric voiced the mind of
both he and his sister. ‘Doth everyone in Britain
travel thus?’
‘Not everyone,’ Tory said, standing to join hands
with King Brockwell and Selwyn, the three of them
vanishing also.
Eormenric shook his head, dumbfounded. ‘I am on
their side,’ he commented to his sister. ‘I think Father
had good reason to live in awe of these people.’
‘Aye,’ Aella agreed.
The court room doors opened wide, a knight
entered and bowed before Bryce. ‘Sensei.’
‘Speak, Sir Lucas.’
‘We art besieged,’ he explained, his sights turning to
the Prince’s guests, ‘by Saxons.’
Bryce and Eormenric raced to the window to behold
the war party massing in the distance. A weird electrical
storm gathered above the enemy, the like of which
Eormenric had only ever seen at Aberffraw.
‘Mahaud.’ Eormenric stated, whereby Bryce turned
and regarded him suspiciously. Eormenric backed up,

shaking his head. ‘I did not know, I swear! Tell
him, Aella.’
‘How do I know that.’ Aella came to stand beside
the Prince. ‘All that information thou so willingly
offered, hast seemed to have made everyone absent but
us. How convenient.’
‘We should take him prisoner, Highness,’ Lucas
advised, ‘for bargaining power. The girl, too.’ As the
Prince appeared angered by this, the knight quickly
emphasised: ‘For her own protection.’
‘I shall worry about the Lady Aella.’
‘But Sensei, there art more impor—’
‘And Eormenric shall stay with me,’ Bryce ordered
over the top of him. ‘I shall need all the help I can
get.’ Bryce turned to the Saxon beside him and held
out his hand.
Though he understood naught of the conversation,
Eormenric did catch the gist of it. He was overwhelmed
that the Prince would choose to trust one of the known
enemy, despite being advised to the contrary. Thus he
took hold of Bryce’s hand with both his own, shaking it
ﬁrmly. ‘I wish I could tell thee, thou wilt not regret this.’
Aella was still dubious; perhaps her gallant warrior
was too trusting. ‘If I live to regret this, Eormenric, I
shall kill thee myself.’
Maelgwn woke from a deep slumber, still weary enough
to sleep longer. He rolled onto his back, allowing his
sight to drift around the dim room. To his alarm, there
was his son, down on one knee by the pile of clothes the
King had worn the day before. Rhun held a shirt in his

hand and his eyes were closed in concentration. This
seemed rather curious, as to the best of the King’s
knowledge the door and all the shutters on the windows
were locked. The Merlin’s prophecy had scared him into
complete seclusion.
‘What art thou doing?’ Maelgwn’s agitated tone
woke the maid beside him.
‘I am trying to discern if thou dost retain any love
for me at all.’ The Prince looked to his father, who
didn’t appear at all well. The room was stuffy and the
smell of death hung heavy in the stagnant air.
‘How sweet.’ The girl cuddled up to the King, but
he cast her aside to sit upright.
‘Rhun, thou hast done nothing to lose my favour.’
Maelgwn couldn’t believe his son was serious about
his enquiry. ‘I do not hold thy mother’s offences
against thee.’
‘Then, as thy son, I wish to ask a favour . . . which
hast nothing to do with Mother,’ he added quickly
before his father jumped to any conclusions.
‘In that case, ask.’
‘Nay, my love.’ The girl was seeming a might edgy,
but the King’s attention was ﬁrmly focused on his son.
‘The looking-glass?’ Rhun asked after its whereabouts.
‘Aye, I have it.’ His father pulled his treasure from
under his pillow.
Rhun smiled broadly, looking to the maid.
‘Nay!’ she objected. What was his game? He seemed
way too smug.
‘I would ask that thou view thy lover through it,
Father.’

Maelgwn considered this a simple enough request,
though he ﬁrst viewed his son.
Rhun rolled his eyes, knowing his father would ﬁnd
nothing amiss with him. ‘Come, come, dost thou not
even trust me?’
‘I cannot be sure who to trust.’ The King swung
around quickly to view the girl.
‘Damn thee!’ she shrilled, as her outer identity
peeled away to reveal the face of Vanora.
Maelgwn jumped clear into the middle of the room,
the looking-glass ﬁrmly clenched in his ﬁst. The
maiden’s eyes closed as she collapsed onto the bed
unconscious, quivering like a leaf in the breeze.
‘I cannot believe it.’ Maelgwn was horriﬁed. ‘Be
there no end to the deceit?’
‘That not be the worst of it.’ Rhun retrieved a
mirror that was hanging on the wall and, facing it away
from himself, he approached his father. ‘Now I would
ask thee to view thyself through it.’
‘Nay, please.’ The King’s eyes ﬁlled with tears, and
he appeared too weary from the betrayal to even raise
the looking-glass.
‘Do it!’
The King lifted his enchanted gift to view himself,
his eyes widening as his facial features contorted into
those of a hideous beast with eyes, hair and teeth of
yellow. ‘Nay,’ he cried in dread, casting the lookingglass to the stone ﬂoor, where it smashed into a
hundred pieces. ‘What have I done!’ Maelgwn’s
remorse drove him to his knees and he began to weep
bitterly. ‘Tory. Tory!’

A wave of fever rushed over the King and every
muscle in his body began to ache. ‘Help me.’ He raised
his head to view Rhun, but the strain proved too great
and he dropped to the hard stone ﬂoor.
The young merlin had brought them to one of the
hundreds of hallways to be found within Taliesin’s
maze of a house. In front of them lay a door that was
in every way identical to the others that lined the
corridor, yet Selwyn seemed confident that this was
the right one.
‘How can thou tell?’ Brockwell couldn’t, and he’d
been there before. ‘If I open this door to ﬁnd a dragon,
demon or the like, we art in big trouble.’ There was no
telling what kind of company the High Merlin kept
hidden within these walls.
‘Have no fear.’ Selwyn turned the knob and entered.
‘I have wandered this labyrinth for near twenty years. I
know my way around it near as well as the High
Merlin.’
‘Dost thou think Taliesin could still be here
somewhere?’ Tory wondered out loud as she followed
Selwyn inside.
‘I doubt it. The Chariot of Arianrod be missing . . . I
checked. I dare say Taliesin be residing in another
millennium by now.’
Once inside, Brockwell recognised the dark, rocky
terrain and headed down the torchlit stairs ahead of his
companions.
‘Oh dear.’ Selwyn paused, and closed his eyes to
consider the information he was perceiving.

‘What now?’ Tory came to a stop beside him. The
Queen was far too consumed by the events taking place
in the material world to perceive any wisdom from the
Otherworld at present.
Selwyn waved it off. ‘Nothing, Majesty. We must
make haste.’ He hurried off after the King.
‘Nothing, Majesty. We must make haste,’ Tory
repeated with scepticism. ‘Now why do I not believe
thee?’
Brockwell reached the large plateau of rock that
dropped off to a bottomless cavern on the far side;
amidst the shadows there stood two ﬁgures. The King
slowly approached these to ﬁnd Blain and Owen frozen
motionless in a prism of quartz.
‘Nay, damn thee!’ Brockwell hammered the
hardened stone with both ﬁsts. ‘Let them free!’
‘Father!’ Cai came running at him from the
shadows. ‘Thee must not be angry or the beast will
surely turn thee to stone as well.’ He jumped up on
Brockwell and held onto him for dear life.
‘Thou art safe.’ Brockwell felt partly relieved. ‘And
what of thy mother?’
‘I am here, Calin.’
Katren came forth out of the shadows some distance
from him, yet even in the poor light he could not fail to
notice how harrowed she appeared. Brockwell put the
boy down, but Cai still clung to his waist, not prepared
to let go.
‘Tell me it not be true, Calin . . . look at our sons
and then tell me the griffin lies. For I would
rather live out my days in this wretched place,

than spend them with a man who hast willingly
betrayed me.’
‘It wast a trick, Katren.’ Tory attempted to allay her
friend’s pain.
‘Thou hast some nerve, Highness, showing thy face
here,’ Katren shot back at her. ‘When thou wast the
other half of this conspiracy.’
The deep resentment her friend felt towards her
plunged like a dagger into Tory’s heart.
‘I saw the two of thee. The grifﬁn showed me in his
magic pool.’
‘Nay, Katren, ’twas Mahaud.’ Brockwell moved to
approach her, when the screech of the huge beast was
heard from above and the griffin came to land
between them.
‘Be nice,’ Cai quietly told his father, as Tory
drew him back out of the way. ‘I am not ready to be
a King.’
One did not expect to see thee, warrior. Be gone before
thou dost anger me, the huge half-lion, half-eagle
creature bethought the King. Thou hast bequeathed thy
kin to me, fair and square.
‘Nay, ’twas not fair!’ Brockwell protested strongly.
‘I was bewitched, and thus my decision was not
my own.’
A minor detail, the grifﬁn scoffed.
‘I do not think the Goddess would agree with thee.’
Selwyn took a stand beside Brockwell. ‘Shall we
summon her and ﬁnd out?’
Ha, ha, ha! the creature squawked with laughter.
The Goddess hast no time for the unfaithful.

‘We shall see . . .’ Selwyn raised his arms into the air.
‘Merlin, wait.’ Brockwell delayed him, recalling how
he’d induced the creature to aid him in the ﬁrst place. ‘I
got myself into this mess, I shall get myself out.’
‘As be thy wish, Majesty.’ Selwyn politely bowed out
of the argument.
Good! The beast didn’t like being threatened, it
made him angry.
Brockwell looked to his wife, who seemed
bewildered, then to Cai, near frightened out of his wits.
His sights drifted to Owen and Blain, destined to spend
eternity entombed in stone whilst remaining completely
aware of their surroundings. Tears welled in the King’s
eyes, as the horror of what he’d done consumed him,
and for the ﬁrst time in a long while Brockwell allowed
himself to feel his pain, his regret, his loss.
Oh no, please . . . The grifﬁn began to snifﬂe.
As Calin reminisced on the excitement and
passion he’d experienced the first time he and Katren
made love, tears began to flood down his cheeks. The
joy he’d felt at the birth of his sons enveloped his soul,
as he relived each event in his mind. But it was the
little things his sons had achieved over the years that
really set his emotions whirling: the day Bryce had
become a Master; the first time Blain split a piece of
wood with his bare hand; Owen’s first kiss; Cai’s recital
on the harp at only four years of age. ‘I shall pay for my
own mistakes, if thee please,’ the King said. ‘I implore
thee not to punish my family for my imperfections.’
The grifﬁn was howling now; he could barely
breathe for his emotions. So be it, he blubbered, and the

stone surrounding Blain and Owen disappeared. Take
thy family and leave this place. The great, huge beast
crawled away to where it could lament in peace.
The King closed his eyes and said a silent prayer of
thanks, as he embraced all his sons at once.
‘Quickly, Majesty,’ Selwyn urged, although he hated
to disrupt such a heart-warming scene. ‘Arwystli be
under attack.’
‘What!’ Brockwell was ﬂoored by the news. ‘Why
did thou not tell me sooner?’
‘Well, despite how gallant thou art, Majesty, thou
can still only handle one catastrophe at a time,’ Selwyn
told him.
‘But surely Tory and thyself cannot transport so
many of us back to Arwystli.’
‘Fear not.’ Selwyn remained a calming force. ‘I do
believe Taliesin keeps a gadget around here somewhere
that should serve that purpose nicely. Go ahead of us
with the High Queen, and I shall see to transporting thy
family when the situation be more stable.’
‘Father.’ Blain delayed the King. ‘I want to help.’
‘Then guard thy mother and thy brothers until I
send for thee.’ As Blain appeared rather disappointed,
Brockwell added, ‘It be a treasure I hold more sacred
than my own life that I place in thy hands, Blain.’
His son nodded his understanding, his conviction
plain in his eyes.
Katren came forth to stand behind their sons, her
arms outstretched to encompass them all. ‘May the
Goddess protect thee.’ Her sights drifted from her
husband to the High Queen, who smiled.

‘May she protect us all, Katren.’ Tory motioned
Brockwell after her as she took off up the stairs.
‘Where art thou going?’ the King asked as he
pursued her.
‘I need a weapon.’
Tory burst through the door that led back into the
High Merlin’s labyrinth, quickly eyeing the models of
warriors that stood between each of the doorways in the
corridor. Taliesin had been collecting this wild array of
armour and battledress amid his comings and goings
through time, and there was not a ﬁner armoury to be
found anywhere in history.
Though Tory had mastered the art of wielding a
broadsword, she spied another weapon that better suited
her ﬁghting style. She approached the ominous exhibit
of a warrior’s guise and retrieved a long, steel shaft,
bladed at each end, which looked as though it might
have belonged to someone like Genghis Khan.
‘Now this, I recognise.’ Brockwell lifted Dyrnwyn,
the ﬁery sword of Rhydderch, from another of the
exhibits. ‘Come to thy master.’ He relished the feeling
of again holding one of the thirteen treasures
of Britain.
‘Now that seems to me just a bit too coincidental,’
Tory shouted down the empty hallway. She looked to
Brockwell with a smug grin on her face. ‘Dost thou
think the High Merlin could have had this much
foresight, or did he never leave?’
Tory joined her comrade, equipped to depart.
‘Seems like old times, ay.’ Brockwell took hold of
the Queen’s hand.

‘Goddess forbid.’ She rolled her eyes before closing
them, her thoughts turning to war-torn Arwystli.
After leaving Aella in the room of court, in the care of
her brother and a half dozen guards, Bryce made haste
to join the battle that had erupted on the roof. The
Saxon ﬁghters had begun to scale the walls in their
attempt to penetrate the fortress’s outer defenses and
raise the portcullis.
‘Bryce, wait up.’
His sensei’s voice brought the Prince to a standstill,
and he turned to ﬁnd the High Queen and his father
bounding up the stairs to join him.
‘What of Mother?’ The Prince seemed panicked by
their presence.
‘She be safe,’ his father assured him.
‘Then I am glad to see thee.’ Bryce directed his
address to Tory; it was clear he still hadn’t forgiven his
father for his impiety. ‘A storm be on our doorstep, the
like of which destroyed Aberffraw.’
Tory raised her eyebrows and ﬂung open the hatch
that led to the roof, momentarily startled by the
enormity and power of the ﬁery disturbance that was
now almost directly overhead.
‘Holy shit!’ She could only mouth the words, as
Bryce and Brockwell bounded out past her and
straight into combat. ‘Where art thou when I really
need thee, Taliesin?’
Tory couldn’t imagine how she was going to deal
with the abomination, but, as enemy soldiers made to
engage her in battle, there was no time to contemplate

the issue. She addressed the onslaught with gusto,
throwing caution to the wind.
‘I shall honor the Goddess who gave me the stability
of the earth as my strength.’ She lashed out at the ﬁrst
of her attackers, killing him with one fatal stroke and
booting him out of her path. ‘The passion of ﬁre as my
driving force.’ She sprang into the air using her long,
slender weapon as a support and planted both feet into
her opponent’s face, sending him hurtling backwards off
the roof. ‘The air that I breathe for endurance.’ She
decapitated the next in line then stabbed his
companion, bringing him to his knees. ‘And the depth
of water for clarity and right action.’ She swung around
360 degrees to ﬁnish him off with a kick to the side of
the head. ‘For I am forsworn!’ Every Briton within
earshot shouted in unison with her.
As King Brockwell’s clan followed Selwyn through the
High Merlin’s labyrinth, they were all struck speechless
by the huge, warlike ﬁgures that lined the corridors and
the staircases.
The merlin had conveyed to Queen Katren the
whole sordid story of what had taken place in her
absence by the time they reached the corridor that led
to Taliesin’s room of hexagons.
‘I can scarce believe it.’ Katren was sick with
remorse. ‘How hurt must the High Queen feel already,
and then I go and accuse her of adultery?’
‘The witch’s effects have been far-reaching,
Majesty.’ The merlin took hold of both her hands to
calm her. ‘It just goes to show how one’s deepest fear

can be one’s greatest enemy.’ Selwyn held out a hand
before him, and the two huge doors at the end of the
passage parted wide.
‘No more fear then.’ Katren raised herself up tall,
but with her husband, son, and kingdom in such peril, it
was hard to ﬁght the rising dread.
‘Wow!’ Owen emphasised his wonder as he entered
the room of hexagons; not in his wildest dreams would
he have imagined such a place existed.
‘What are all these strange devices, merlin?’ Blain
was a bit more wary than his younger brothers, and kept
a good distance between himself and the strange objects
in the room.
‘All the apparatus around the walls be known as
processors. They control all the different hexagons in
the centre here, via these.’ He pointed out the various
terminals scattered about the room.
‘But what does it all do?’ Cai couldn’t begin to
imagine; it all looked so amazing, with its ﬂashing lights
and strange monotone sounds.
‘Well, they all have different functions. Which one
would thou like to learn about ﬁrst?’ Selwyn put it to
the princes and they all immediately pointed to the
largest of the hexagons, which stood from ﬂoor to
ceiling in the middle of the room.
‘’Twas my choice, too.’ The merlin laughed as he
made his way to a smaller hexagon, positioned close by
the one in question, only this was more the size and
height of a pulpit. As with the base of its larger afﬁliate,
the hexagon Selwyn stood behind was covered with
chips of black onyx. Embedded in the middle of the top

was a large round dome, glowing in mottled shades of
red as Selwyn passed his hand over it.
All eyes looked to the hexagon. Its solid, black onyx
base only rose about one quarter of its height, then large
glass screens extended to the roof. From within the
blackness of the base, inside the glass casing, rose a
holographic image of a city in full colour — complete in
every detail.
The boys eyes near left their sockets at the sight,
and Owen cried out: ‘That looks like —’
‘Arwystli.’ Blain moved closer as he noticed a battle
taking place. ‘From what I would guess to be a bird’s eye
view at present.’
‘Why be the sky such a strange colour?’ Cai drew
everyone’s attention to it.
‘I do not know.’ Selwyn came down from behind the
control panel to take a closer look.
‘It looks like it’s on ﬁre,’ Owen added, a little fearful.
‘Indeed it does.’ Selwyn rushed over to one of the
computer terminals and took a seat, limbering up his
ﬁngers to type. ‘And one should always ﬁght ﬁre with
water, I say.’
‘Art thou going to make a storm?’ Cai ran to
observe the merlin’s movements, his brothers right
behind him.
‘Why not?’ Selwyn punched a few instructions
into the computer to bring up a map of Britain on the
display screen. Once he’d acquired the exact
co-ordinates for the city of Arwystli, he turned in his
seat and smiled broadly. ‘Gentlemen, we have the
technology.’

The heat from the air above was stiﬂing, and ﬁghters
from both sides were starting to tire due to the extreme
temperature. The Britons had lost many men to the ﬁery
lightning that lashed at random from overhead, and the
bodies of its victims lay smouldering all across the city.
‘’Tis becoming unbearable, Sensei,’ Bryce
commented over his shoulder to Tory, who was covering
his back.
‘Then . . .’ she panted for breath, fending off an
attacker’s sword, ‘just think about winter solstice, and
thou shalt appreciate the warmth.’
The sky above began to rumble louder, as if it was
battling to win its own war. With a deafening clap of
thunder, a huge, dark cloud burst through the middle of
the hell above them and it began to rain.
‘Yee-hah!’ they all cried, indulging in the sweet,
cooling relief of the shower.
‘Thou art right, the power of imagination be an
amazing thing,’ Bryce observed during a brief pause in
the action. ‘I feel much better.’
‘They have raised the gate!’ Brockwell went racing
past, heading back into the house with a company of
soldiers in tow.
‘Oh-oh . . . Aella.’ Bryce took off to her defense,
motioning Tory after him. ‘Come on.’
It was a race to the room of court, for Ossa knew
well enough where it was.
‘Bryce, I have to get something.’ Tory darted off
down the hallway in the opposite direction.
‘But, Sensei?’ Bryce had a sudden conﬂict of
priorities.

‘Art thou daft.’ Tory became frustrated with him.
‘Save the girl. Run!’ she urged, disappearing round
the corner.
‘I want to see how my husband fares.’ Katren regretted
that she’d not even held him before his departure. ‘Can
any of this . . . apparatus grant me that?’
‘We could search for him, I suppose.’ Selwyn took
up position behind the large hexagon’s control panel.
As the merlin passed his hand over the dome, it
changed in colour to a mottled purple and the tone of
the machine rose in pitch. The holograph inside the
hexagon ﬂipped up to a two-dimensional format, each
of its six screens showing a different aerial view of the
city below.
‘Holy mother!’ Owen held his head.
‘Amazing!’ Bryce seconded his wonder.
‘Here we go.’ Selwyn took the image on the screens
zooming towards the action.
In through the outer bailey portcullis they soared,
and over the havoc left in the wake of the ﬁghting
there.
‘This feels weird.’ Cai was viewing the screen that
awarded a view of behind. It seemed as if he were ﬂying
backwards.
They passed straight underneath the inner bailey
gate, across the courtyard and into the entrance hall.
As King Brockwell made haste down the stairs that led
to the large entrance hall of the house, he spied Ossa
amongst the din below.

‘Right, Warlord. Thee and me.’ He jumped over the
banister to challenge his adversary, landing but a couple
of feet away, and activated his ﬁery blade.
‘King Brockwell, old son, so glad thou could make
it.’ Ossa bowed as he drew a blade of the crone’s design
with currents of blue energy, like lightning, zapping over
it. ‘I heard thou wast having a few family problems.’
‘Indeed.’ Brockwell was angered until he paused to
consider. ‘But they do seem relatively insigniﬁcant
compared with thine own.’
The rest of the ﬁghting waned as the opposing
energies of their leaders’ swords clashed, showering
sparks everywhere.
Ongen recruited a small group of soldiers and used
the distraction to ﬁght his way up the stairs that led to
the room of court, in search of his treacherous kin. The
witch had told Ossa and himself everything. Ongen
could well conceive of Aella falling in love with a
prince who was their enemy. What was harder to
believe was that Eormenric had turned renegade.
Bryce had only just arrived in the room of court when
Ongen and his men came barging through the doors.
‘Kill them all,’ he ordered, as he stormed forth to
challenge Bryce, who hovered in front of Aella. Yet
before his sword made contact with the Briton’s, it was
blocked by Eormenric’s.
‘Get her out of here!’ He barged Bryce aside,
motioning with his head for them to ﬂee.
‘Traitor!’ Ongen cried, thrusting Eormenric
backwards. ‘Thou calls thyself a Saxon?’

‘That I do.’ Eormenric regained his balance and stood
fast. ‘I shall not be the tool of some cursed witch, who
would turn brother against brother . . . kingdom against
kingdom. I shall not.’ He placed the sword in its scabbard.
‘Then die.’ Ongen swung at him repeatedly, but
Eormenric would not engage him. He just kept darting
out of the way, which made Ongen furious. ‘Fight,
damn it!’
‘Why?! Thou art my brother, I have no desire to kill
thee.’
‘Well, I want to kill thee,’ Ongen assured him, ‘and
shall, with or without opposition.’
‘This way.’ Bryce turned a corner. Aella was near tripping
over her skirts as she battled to keep up with him.
‘Going somewhere?’
The pair froze at the sound of Mahaud’s evil voice,
and although Aella and Bryce spoke different languages,
it seemed they both understood her perfectly. They
slowly turned to ﬁnd the apparition of the crone ﬂoating
about ten foot behind them.
‘I do believe thou hast something that belongs to
me, young prince . . . and I would like her back.’
Bryce had heard the tales of how horriﬁc the sight
of Mahaud could be, but there were no words to
describe the evil of her presence, nor the foul odour.
‘For in order to be the daughter of Ossa,’ she
explained with delight, ‘I must ﬁrst have her corpse
to inhabit.’
‘Nay!’ Aella appealed to her champion, gripping his
arm tightly.

The prince hid the terriﬁed girl behind him. ‘Thou
shalt have to come through me to take her.’
‘Oh, come, come, my pretty. Thou can have thy way
with her presently.’
The witch sickened him with her suggestive
inﬂection, and beneath her hood she ran her greyish
tongue around her wrinkled, disease-infested lips.
‘If thou art anything like thy father, I do fancy thou
art well equipped to render a girl a good serve of earthly
pleasure.’ She screeched with laughter. ‘And imagine
me, a virgin!’
‘I think not.’
Bryce and Aella swung round to ﬁnd Tory at the
opposing end of the corridor, her weapon strapped to
her back, her saxophone in hand.
‘Thou hast but three seconds to withdraw, Mahaud,
before I turn thee into fairy food.’ Tory raised the
saxophone to her lips, but before she’d even begun to
play the witch had vanished.
‘Hast she gone?’ the Prince dared to ask the
question.
‘I seriously doubt it.’ Tory picked up the pile of idle
torches she’d collected, and ran to hand the load to
Bryce. ‘Best stick with me, ay?’
He didn’t understand; what had her threat to the
witch meant? ‘But, what . . .?’
‘It’s the Pan call she fears,’ Tory explained as she got
them moving. ‘Unfortunately, geologically speaking, I
do not have the required energy patterns to contain her
long enough to banish her. All I can do right now be to
scare her off.’

‘Sorry I asked.’ Bryce was conﬁdent that she knew
what she was doing. ‘Where art we going then?’
‘To the roof.’
‘Why? There be nothing happening up there now.’
‘Oh, do come on,’ Tory urged, eager to be done with
it. ‘We art going to clean house.’
The rooftop was deserted, except for charred and
bloody corpses; all the ﬁghting had moved to ground
level. The rain shower, which had now eased to
nothing more than a light spray, thankfully subdued
the smell.
‘These had better still work.’ Tory pulled a packet of
matches from her pocket. ‘I have a little bag of tricks I
keep for emergencies . . . I believe this situation
qualiﬁes.’
When she struck the tiny match to light a torch,
the Prince near dropped dead.
‘Waterproof, windproof . . . beautiful,’ she explained
with a wink, as the material bound at the end of the
wooden pole burst into ﬂame.
‘Thou truly art a Goddess.’ Aella looked to the High
Queen in awe.
Tory was amused. ‘Just wait a moment or two.’
The four torches were lit and Tory used her compass
to place them in the northern, southern, eastern and
western positions on the rooftop, where many mounds
for torches already existed. She stood in the centre of
the circle she’d cast, and took three deep yoga breaths
to calm and focus her mind. Please, Goddess, hear me
now. She raised her saxophone to her lips to blast out
the four note sequence that was the Pan call.

This tune had successfully swept the witch from
their midst once before. Arwystli was not marked as a
sacred ley-line crossing as Aberffraw had been, but there
was still hope that the healing forces of nature would
come to their aid.
As the High Queen repeated her musical summons
over and over, a mist, green in colour, began to
converge on the city.
‘Sensei, I believe it be working!’ Bryce yelled in
encouragement. The Prince squeezed his lady fair to
reassure her, for he could already sense the remedial
force behind the impending haze of light and energy.
The mist rolled over the house and then in through
every available crevice. It carried a fragrance that was
sweeter than the forest in springtime, and its millions of
tiny, green spectres enchanted every soldier to calm as
they ﬂitted around in droves.
Ongen stood with his sword poised at his brother’s
chest, having ﬁnally cornered him.
‘Do not do this,’ Eormenric begged, though he could
see Mahaud’s evil inﬂuence in his brother’s face. ‘Do not
place the fate of Saxony in the hands of that witch.’
‘I would never . . .’ Ongen protested.
‘Really?’ Eormenric ventured, pretty sure that his
end had come. ‘So thou dost truly believe Father
controls her . . . Look at what she hast done to us!’ His
eyes motioned to the sword poised at his throat. ‘I only
sought out the Britons to ﬁnd a way to be rid of her.’
‘Dost thou expect me to believe that?’ Ongen
scoffed as he spied the strange lights, ﬂoating in through

every opening in the room. ‘What on earth?’ His sword
dropped from his hand as the spectacular vision moved
over him, ﬁlling him with a sense of peace, love and
wonder. ‘For once in thy life, little brother, I believe
thou hast done the right thing.’ Ongen reached out and
took hold of Eormenric around the neck, his eyes never
leaving the magic phenomena that now encircled them.
He drew Eormenric in close. ‘I near killed thee of mine
own hand.’ The huge warrior began to cry, as a conﬂict
of positive and negative energies took place within him.
‘I forgive thee, Ongen,’ Eormenric insisted lightheartedly, though inwardly he was still recovering
from the shock of his near-death. ‘Mahaud hast drawn
us all in.’
‘Except thee.’ Ongen was proud of him.
‘Nay, me too. I shall not be so quick to pass
judgement on others in future, I assure thee. For I have
come to learn that leadership be not about the amount
of power one possesses, or how much land one owns, it
be about people . . . guiding, protecting, and watching
out for the best interests of those under thy rule. The
Goddess said we all had a lesson to learn from this, and
I believe I have seen the light.’
‘Aye,’ Ongen conﬁrmed with a smile, still
spellbound by the fairy lights. ‘I just hope Father hast.’
As the sparkling green haze enshrouded the two great
leaders, the witch’s enchantment departed from Ossa’s
sword. However, completely ignoring the amazing
occurrence that was talking place around him, he still
continued to ﬁght on like a man possessed.

‘Give it up, Warlord,’ Brockwell advised, having
fought him all the way up the stairs. ‘The witch be
gone, she hast fled. What thou can see around us be
the Pan Ray. Mahaud cannot exist in the presence of
such harmony.’
‘Want to bet?’ Ossa coaxed Brockwell into the room
of court.
‘Do not make me kill thee.’ Brockwell gave a ﬁnal
warning. ‘Stop now, and walk away.’
‘It was thou who challenged me, remember?’ Ossa
strode into the middle of the huge room, limbering up
his sword arm. ‘And I never walk away from a
challenge.’ He turned and grinned, his weapon poised,
ready to do combat. ‘So let us ﬁnish this.’
‘Finish what, Father?’ Eormenric queried. ‘These
people have done nothing to us.’
‘This city should have been mine, boy!’ Ossa cried,
his rage causing him to quiver. ‘If not for that damned
Goddess . . .’
‘Who? Me?’ Tory entered and took a stand beside
Brockwell, hoping she could call Ossa’s bluff. For
although the divine was not upon her, as the last time
they’d met, chances were Ossa would recognise her as
the face of the Goddess.
‘Aye.’ Ossa was dubious; something was different,
she looked more human somehow. ‘But thou art not
ﬂoating today.’
Tory served Brockwell a sideways glance before
vanishing into thin air.
‘Oi!’
Ossa swung round to ﬁnd the High Queen behind him.

‘If thou dost not yield, sir, thou art going to die . . .
believe it.’ Tory raised both her eyebrows and folded her
arms, approaching the warlord conﬁdently. ‘So, give up
the witch.’
Ossa abruptly began to choke, gripping the sword in
his hand tightly.
‘O Goddess!’ Tory watched the huge warrior drop to
his knees. ‘He be having a heart attack.’ She knelt
down to try and help him, her mind a blank in the
panic of the moment.
Ongen and Eormenric rushed to his aid.
‘Please, Goddess, do not kill him,’ Eormenric
begged. ‘He was not always like this. I swear to thee.’
‘I am not doing this.’ Tory fumbled with Ossa’s
armour in an attempt to remove it. ‘I only meant to
scare him. Damn it!’ She became frustrated, he was
fading fast. ‘Get this off!’
His two boys obliged her at once, and Tory rolled up
her jacket to place it behind his neck. She tried mouth
to mouth, she tried heart massage, but nothing worked.
The warlord had one last gasp at air then stopped
breathing.
‘Father!’ Aella rushed over and ﬂung herself down
beside him in a ﬁt of tears.
‘I am so sorry.’ Tory moved back out of the way.
Ongen looked to the High Queen, his anger
returning now that the mist had passed. ‘I should kill
thee . . .’
‘Nay!’ Eormenric put his foot down. ‘No more
killing. No more!’ He held Ongen tightly until he was
able to reason with him. ‘Let us take our father home.’

Ossa’s death was the worst thing that could have
possibly happened, as Eormenric again viewed the High
Queen and her whole race with dubious eyes.
‘Please believe this was the last thing I wanted.’
Tory tried to reassure him, but Eormenric only gave a
slight nod.
‘Art thou alright?’ Brockwell embraced his friend in
the wake of their ordeal, as he thought she would break
down at any moment.
The Saxon leader was raised to his feet by his sons as
Aella looked on, grief-stricken. Suddenly, her father’s
eyes parted wide, glowing red like a demon’s. The maiden
screamed as Ossa lunged forward and plunged his sword
straight through Brockwell and into the High Queen.
Goddess no! Tory dropped to the ﬂoor beside the
King. As she reached out to him, it seemed as if time
were suspended. ‘Not Calin, please!’ She didn’t even
feel her pain. She was in shock, and by the time it
passed she would have healed. However, her friend was
losing an ounce of blood a second.
Next thing Tory knew, Ossa wast leaning over her.
He raised her by the shirt till she found herself staring
into the eyes of the crone.
‘I may not be able to hurt thee, but I can hurt those
around thee,’ she hissed. ‘And no matter where thou
dost run to, in the whole of time and space, I will follow
thee. And just when thou dost believe thou art rid of
me, I shall come back to haunt . . .’
The warrior’s head suddenly parted from his
shoulders. Bryce stood behind the carcass as it slumped
to the ﬂoor.

‘Calin, my love!’
Tory glanced back to ﬁnd Katren raising her dying
husband’s head onto her lap. She stroked his face,
hysterical with grief.
‘Nay, please, do not leave me,’ she sobbed, tilting
her head back brieﬂy so that she might be able to view
him through her tears.
‘Do not cry, Katren.’ He took hold of her hand then
turned to view Tory, reaching out and taking hold of her
hand also. ‘We shall all meet again . . . in another life.’
With that, the warrior’s spirit took ﬂight into the
Otherworld.
‘The King be dead!’ Katren cried aloud for all to
hear as she slumped over his body, weeping
uncontrollably.
Bryce was on his knees beside his sensei, looking at
Blain as he approached them through the crowd. ‘Long
live the King.’
Blain stared back at his brother, appearing distressed
by the announcement; he’d not expected his time
would come so soon. His father’s advisers already
hovered around him to whisper their instruction, and
Blain’s fear overwhelmed him. Tears escaped the young
prince’s eyes as he looked back to his older brother to
implore him in a whisper, ‘Help me.’

9

THE YELLOW
MONSTER

M

uch confusion followed the tragic incident at
Arwystli. Tory gripped hold of Bryce, feeling
that someone must assume control of the
situation. ‘Have the court room cleared, bar thine own
kin and Ossa’s.’ She remained curled up in the foetal
position so none would see that her wound had already
healed over. ‘And have the bodies of the dead removed.’
As Bryce went about the High Queen’s instruction,
Katren left the dead body of her love to tend her friend.
‘Please, Tory, hold on,’ she wept, pulling her
exhausted form across the ﬂoor to hold hands with her.
‘I did not mean the things I said . . . I could not bear it if
I lost thee, too.’

‘Shh, Katren.’ Tory smiled meekly. ‘I am not going
anywhere just yet.’
Up until now none here had known of Tory’s
immortal condition, except Maelgwn, Brockwell, and
Taliesin, though she suspected her son knew.
Bryce closed the huge doors when only those
needed remained present. Silence fell in the huge room
as the High Queen stood of her own accord. She
displayed a gaping bloody hole through the centre of
her attire, and as she turned to make her way to
Brockwell’s throne, it was clear that Ossa’s sword had
passed right through her, though no wound or scar
could be seen on her skin.
‘Goddess!’ Katren gasped.
‘Ongen, Eormenric. I should like to speak with ye
ﬁrst.’ Tory motioned them to approach as she took a
seat. Hold it together, she urged herself, for her eyes ﬁlled
with tears as they met with the bloody pool left on the
ﬂoor in the wake of her dear friend’s life.
‘Highness.’ Eormenric was a little shaky as he came
forward to kneel before the High Queen, urging his
brother to do the same.
‘Dost either of ye still believe it was I who murdered
thy father?’ The High Queen’s voice was stable and calm.
Eormenric had a few quiet words with his brother.
Ongen shook his head ﬁrmly and lowered his sights to
the ﬂoor.
‘Nay, Highness, we do not.’ Eormenric bowed his
head.
‘Then, in thy mind, be there any cause for dispute
between our two nations?’

They again huddled in intense conversation before
Eormenric offered their verdict.
‘Nay Highness, only that we art back to our original
problem of a poor harvest. Which,’ he added politely,
‘we now realise was not of thy making.’
Tory breathed a quiet sigh of relief; this had not all
been for naught after all. ‘Then I have a proposition for
ye, gentlemen, that should solve quite a few of our
dilemmas, and hopefully prevent any incident, the like
of this, from ever occurring again.’
In return for the cessation of all attacks on allied
Britain, the kingdoms under the rule of the Goddess
would provide aid to those kingdoms that had been
warring on behalf of Ossa. Those kingdoms that were
not yet part of the alliance would then be expected to
sign the pact of peace.
As a further token of good faith, Tory was prepared
to train Eormenric in the ways of the Goddess, and he
could then become the Saxon representative in her
‘circle of twelve’. She explained her choice to Ongen,
stating that he would now have his father’s huge
responsibility facing him, and thus very little time to
devote to such an intensive training program. But, if he
so desired, she would grant Eormenric permission to
train others from Saxony, Ongen included, in the
warmer seasons.
The two young men seemed very pleased with the
arrangement, especially Eormenric, and thus it was agreed.
‘There be one other thing.’ Tory cocked an eye. ‘Tell
me, where be Vanora?’

Ongen had forgotten about her. ‘She should be
awaiting us just outside the walls of the city.’
‘Please have her brought to me.’
Ongen left the room to see to the High Queen’s
wish.
‘Now . . . Bryce, Aella.’ Tory motioned for them to
come before her. Eormenric moved to depart. ‘Please.
Stay,’ she bade him, and he complied.
The maiden came to a stop beside Bryce, and they
bowed before the High Queen. As they were standing
quite close together, Aella reached across and very
discreetly took hold of the Prince’s hand.
‘I have but one question to ask of ye both,’ Tory stated
in Aella’s tongue and then in Bryce’s, to ensure they were
both following her. ‘Bear in mind, Mahaud still be at large
and may come after any one of us, at any time.’
When they had both nodded to conﬁrm their
understanding, Tory looked to Aella. ‘Aella, would thou
take this man to be thy husband?’
The maiden was wide-eyed a second, before she
smiled and nodded.
‘Hold on a moment,’ Eormenric broke in with a
laugh in his voice. ‘I do not know if Ongen would agree
to that.’
‘Hush up, Eormenric.’ Tory waved him off. ‘I shall
come to thee, presently.’
Eormenric held his hands out before him in truce,
stepping back with a grin on his face from ear to ear.
‘Bryce.’ The High Queen’s mischievous sights
turned to the young prince, who was looking a tad
confused. ‘Would thou take this maiden to be thy wife?’

Aella guessed the question the Queen had asked the
Prince and thus gazed up at Bryce, praying he felt as she
believed he did.
‘I have thought of little else since I met her,’ he had
no qualm in confessing. ‘Dost thou really think it could
ever be thus?’
‘What did he say?’ both Aella and Eormenric at
once entreated the Queen.
Tory burst into laughter for the ﬁrst time in ages;
this situation was completely ridiculous. ‘I can see I
shall have to start teaching a lot more language around
here. Now, Eormenric . . .’ she looked to him, ‘thy true
motivation for seeking me out was to release Vanora
from the witch’s spell. True?’
‘Oh, I see where this be heading.’ Eormenric
avoided her question a moment, wandering a small way
away from her, his grin ever-present as he mulled over
her suggestion. ‘And . . . aye,’ he announced with
conviction as he moved back towards the Queen. ‘I do
wholeheartedly agree, if she doth.’
Aella had to refrain from clapping her hands, she
felt so excited suddenly; how wonderful that such good
could come from such evil.
‘One of ours, for one of thine . . . very good.’
Eormenric was impressed — till the doors parted and
Ongen escorted Vanora to the High Queen.
‘She claims she had no control, Majesty,’ Ongen
reported.
He thrust her forward, towards the High Queen.
Vanora fell to her knees, exhausted and bewildered by
her ordeal. ‘Please, Ongen . . .’ Tory noted both

Eormenric and Bryce becoming disgruntled by his
treatment of the woman. ‘I see no need for that . . . now,
or at any time.’
‘Sorry.’ He noted the scolding expressions of all
those present. ‘I got carried away.’
Vanora bowed low to the ground, burdened with
the memories of what she’d done. ‘Goddess . . . I have
no words to describe my shame, or my remorse.’ She
tried to refrain from sobbing, but the tears just wouldn’t
stop. ‘I have hurt thy family most grievously and wish
only to die.’
This was the maiden Eormenric had ﬁrst met, and
he was overjoyed to see her safely returned to her
senses. ‘Nay, ’twas not thy fault,’ he assured, as he
moved to console her. ‘It wast my father who did it, and
he hast paid for his bad judgement.’
‘Indeed,’ Tory conﬁrmed. ‘But Eormenric here hast
offered to marry thee, Vanora . . . thou might want to
consider that over a death sentence.’ The Queen made
light of Vanora’s woes; the poor girl had known enough
torment in one lifetime.
‘But why? I am so old.’ Her sobbing subsided as she
looked to Eormenric, ashamed. ‘And I am anything but
virtuous.’
Eormenric slapped himself in the head. Now that
Vanora had returned to normal, her dialect was again
that of a native Briton thus he hadn’t understood
a word.
‘Dost thou want me to translate?’ Tory suppressed a
laugh.
‘Nay. I think I can clear up any confusion.’

As Eormenric bequeathed a kiss from the maiden,
his brother was bafﬂed.
‘Did I miss something? What be the meaning of this?’
‘A double wedding,’ Aella was delighted to inform
him, as she turned to bestow a kiss on her saviour.
‘Be everybody happy now?’ Tory slapped her hands
together and rose.
‘Nay, Majesty.’ Blain came forward.
‘Ah, Blain, just the man I wanted to see.’ She threw
an arm over his shoulder and gave him a squeeze of
encouragement. ‘Thou had best pack.’
‘Pack, Majesty?’ His spirits lifted somewhat.
‘Well, the way I see it, thou shalt have to become a
Master before thy inauguration.’
‘Really?’ Blain hadn’t considered this, but he
became very excited by the news.
The truth of the matter was that, once Blain had
been crowned, his advisers would want him to marry.
The obvious choice for a bride, in Blain’s eyes, would
be Bridgit, and Tory was fairly conﬁdent that this
particular maiden’s heart had already been stolen. The
Queen had another in mind, who was closer to his age
and far more suited to his requirements. She decided
she must take the young King-to-be back to Degannwy
with her.
Tory looked back to Eormenric and Vanora, who
now stood in huddled conversation with Bryce and
Aella, desperately trying to understand each other.
‘Thou may as well come with us, Eormenric, and I shall
swear all three initiates in at once.’
‘Three?’ Blain became curious. ‘Who be the third?’

‘Majesty.’ Selwyn near startled Tory to death when
he suddenly appeared beside her.
‘Damn it, Selwyn! Hast there not been enough
attempts on my life today?’
‘Forgive me, Highness. I have more bad news.’
‘But I thought we had addressed everything!’ Tory
racked her brain; what had she neglected? ‘Did
Maelgwn not destroy the looking-glass? Hast something
happened to Rhun . . .?’
‘Please, Majesty, allow me to finish.’ Selwyn
clasped both her hands firmly, his huge, blue eyes
filled with empathic feeling. ‘The High King hast
come to his senses and smashed the cursed gift. But
since then, he hast taken very ill . . .’ He paused. ‘And
that be not the worst of it.’
They took a deep breath together.
‘Go on.’
‘The girl, whom the King took to his bed, hast
come down with the same strange sickness,’ the
merlin explained, adding hesitantly, ‘I fear it could
be plague.’
The answer to Taliesin’s riddle was now staring Tory in
the face. She gazed down upon her sleeping husband,
who was obviously running a temperature, and she
wondered what it was that prevented her from
collapsing into a hysterical mess.
The answer was simple; if there was a way to save
Maelgwn, she was the only one who stood a chance of
ﬁnding it. If she fell apart now, her love and many
others would surely perish.

‘It be yellow plague.’ She conﬁrmed Selwyn’s fears
rather calmly, considering the implications of what
it meant.
One did not have to be a doctor to diagnose this
disease, for the High King’s skin was literally turning
yellow. This plague was how Maelgwn had reputedly
died, according to the history books of the time–space
continuum from which Tory had originally stemmed.
Legend had it that after falling out of Maelgwn’s favour
and being banished from Gwynedd, Taliesin had
predicted the King’s death. This was, of course, exactly
what had come to pass, though up until a couple of
weeks ago, Tory would never have imagined it could.
‘It would seem history hast ﬁnally caught up with
us.’ Tory proceeded to open up all the shuttered
windows to get some fresh air circulating round the
musty room. ‘Cover thy mouth with thy robe, Selwyn.
Thee can catch this plague by simply breathing the
same air as one of the sufferers.’
‘Dost thou know something of this sickness then,
Majesty?’ He raised his sleeve to cover his nose
and mouth.
‘I tried to ﬁnd out a little about it during my last
visit to the future, but as I was talking about a disease
that was fourteen hundred years old, no one could really
tell me much.’ She wrung out a piece of cloth in a bowl
of warm water and returned to Maelgwn’s bedside to
wipe his brow. ‘I know it was one of the most
destructive of all the ancient plagues. It will ravage a
path across the continent for the rest of this century,
and the next, if we do not contain it now.’

‘Goodness!’ Selwyn looked back to the King, more
fearful. ‘I had no idea.’
‘Who else hast been in contact with the King?’ she
enquired, as her patient began to stir from his long sleep.
‘Only Sir Tiernan, Rhun and Tadgh, his squire, so I
believe . . . Oh, and the girl, of course. But I would not
worry too much about thy son. His talisman should
have shielded him from infection.’
‘Even so, they art all to be quarantined to separate
quarters, and art forbidden to see anyone until I ﬁnd
they art safe from infecting others. That includes
thyself, Selwyn. I shall persevere in ﬁnding any others
who have come into contact with it . . . and pray to the
Otherworld that I cannot carry it.’
‘Tory.’ Maelgwn smiled, barely able to part his
eyelids; still, the sight of her face made his pain seem
one hundred times less. ‘I can hardly believe thou hast
come to my aid after all I put thee through,’ he
whispered, his voice husky and weak. ‘But then, thou
hast never ceased to amaze me.’
‘Hush now.’ Tory helped him take a drink of water.
‘Forget this month past, it hast been naught but a bad
dream. Thou must concentrate on getting better.’
The King gave half a laugh as his head collapsed
back onto the pillow. ‘There shall be no recovery for
me, Tory. I have resigned myself to the fact that this be
what I deserve.’
‘I strongly beg to differ.’ Now she was angry with
him. ‘Thy jealousy and guilt be the cause of this damn
disease, Maelgwn, and if thou dost not give it up and
forgive thyself, as I have, thou art going to wipe out our

whole kingdom!’ She took hold of his face to will him
to ﬁght. ‘Please . . . I beg thee, do not let Mahaud win.’
Maelgwn smiled faintly once more, closing his eyes.
‘Dear, sweet, Tory . . . if only I could be as strong and fair
as she.’
His words brought tears to her eyes. ‘Thou art not
going to give up on me, damn it. I love thee, Maelgwn.
I have never, and will never, love anybody else.’
‘Truly?’ He opened one eye to view her.
‘Oooh!’ Tory raised herself from the bed, enraged.
‘What do I have to do, huh? What will it take —?’
‘Just teasing.’
He appeared rather amused with himself, which
Tory saw as an encouraging sign. ‘Then thou shalt ﬁght
this thing with me?’
The king held out his hand, and Tory rushed over to
take hold of it.
‘That be the story of our life,’ he replied.
There was so much Tory needed to do and so little
time to do it in. She had no idea how long it would take
for this disease to inﬂict its ultimate toll upon the King.
The only indication she really had was the young
maiden, who had also been beset by the disease. The
girl, though severely weakened, had yet to pass away,
and she was far more fragile than Maelgwn.
Though Tiernan, Rhun and Tadgh all seemed
unaffected by their contact with the disease, they were
quarantined as ordered. Sir Tiernan’s wife, Ione, and a
couple of the housemaids that had been tending
the sick girl, were also conﬁned to separate quarters
for observation.

It proved useless trying to isolate Selwyn, however,
for he kept teleporting himself to the King’s chamber to
soothe his King’s discomfort with the melodious strains
of his harp. As Maelgwn was most grateful for the
enchanting distraction, and Selwyn was careful to keep
his distance, Tory allowed it. What choice did she have?
All the guards and walls in Gwynedd would not sway
such loyalty.
With the King bedridden, and Tiernan, Ione, Rhun
and Selwyn all in isolation, the responsibility of keeping
the peace had fallen upon the shoulders of young Sir
Gawain and Sir Angus. Since the banishment of the
Goddess, and all the looting that had befallen Gwynedd
since that time, the people of the land had threatened
an uprising if something wasn’t done. Apparently, the
Saxon retreat couldn’t have been more timely. Tory sent
out messengers to the four corners of the kingdom to
advise one and all of the Goddess’s return.
A small contingent of men arrived from Powys late
the following evening, to present their soon-to-be King
to the High Queen for his swearing in to her group of
masters. Eormenric accompanied the Prince’s party as
requested, and despite the language barrier he didn’t
feel at all uncomfortable travelling with the group of
Britons. One of Blain’s advisers that did speak AngloSaxon had been acting as a translator for him, so
Eormenric was starting to pick up a few words of the
native tongue here and there.
The party was fed in the court dining room, before
being shown to their allocated rooms within the citadel.
The two initiates were advised that their audience with

the High Queen would take place the following
morning after the Masters had completed kata at
sunrise. Blain was invited to join the High Queen for
this exercise, and Eormenric was welcome to observe.
The young Saxon warrior was still rather drowsy as
he followed Prince Blain to the great room of court.
They entered to ﬁnd the Goddess and two of her
Masters executing a series of slow, graceful movements
in the middle of the huge room. Each position of their
routine perfectly mimicked that of each other, and was
in complete harmony and time with the group as
a whole.
The Briton’s referred to this exercise as kata.
Eormenric found this quite extraordinary indeed, and as
he watched what he was about to learn, his entire being
tingled with expectation.
Blain, familiar with the exercise, quietly approached
the group and joined in; the thrill of training with the
Goddess was so great that it very nearly broke his
concentration. But after just a moment or two, his deep
breaths calmed his thoughts and his movements began to
ﬂow along with the others in the same graceful manner.
As Eormenric was engrossed with the mesmerising
exhibition, he hadn’t noted someone else entering.
When he spied a ﬁgure out of the corner of his eye
standing beside him, he near jumped out of his skin.
This girl was quite akin to the Goddess, appearing
very warrior-like as opposed to the more feminine
women he was accustomed to.
She suppressed a giggle upon noting his stunned
expression, and wandered over to join the others.

Once their exercise had drawn to a close, the High
Queen approached her two new arrivals to welcome
them. ‘What dost thou think so far?’ she inquired
of Eormenric.
‘I think I have much to learn.’
‘Blain.’ Tory motioned Javotte to join them. ‘Dost
thou remember, Javotte?’
‘We have met before, Majesty,’ the maiden informed
her. ‘It hast been a long time though.’ Her sights shifted
from Tory to Blain. ‘How fares thy eye?’
Though the Queen did not understand what was
obviously a private joke between the two, Blain gave a
chuckle of recognition.
‘Long healed,’ he assured. ‘I do swear to thee, I did
not mean to kill thy cat. At the time I had yet to
perfect the art of wielding a slingshot.’
Javotte smiled at this, placing a hand on her hip and
slouching in her stance. ‘Well, I would hope thy aim
hast improved since then.’ She couldn’t resist the
chance to have a dig.
Blain didn’t mind too much, as he did sort of
deserve it. ‘And I would hope thy aim hast not.’
‘Indeed.’ Tory interrupted; my, this was going to
work out well. ‘Javotte shall be thy new sparring partner,’
she announced with glee, astonishing them both.
‘What!’
‘But Javotte be a woman!’ Blain protested.
‘Brilliant observation,’ Javotte taunted, insulted by
his attitude.
‘I am a woman.’ The High Queen pointed out.
‘But . . . but . . .’

‘Sorry, Highness?’ Javotte goaded him further.
‘I cannot understand thee with that foot in thy
mouth.’
All present had a chuckle at the young prince’s
expense.
‘Let us give it a try, shall we,’ Tory suggested. ‘If by
the end of the day thou dost not feel Javotte a sufﬁcient
challenge, then I shall rethink the circle. Fair enough?’
‘Aye.’ Blain seemed paciﬁed by the suggestion.
‘Fine with me,’ Javotte agreed. ‘But a word of
warning, I hit much harder these days.’ She wandered
off to get prepared.
Blain roused half a smile. ‘Great.’
After a workout to warm up, a brief sparring match
between Blain and his proposed partner proved the
High Queen’s judgement quite sound.
‘I concede I was severely mistaken about thee,’
Blain mumbled, delirious, spread-eagled on the ﬂoor
after his third knock-out punch from Javotte.
By the Goddess she was good, perhaps even better
than Ione, but then the Prince had yet to see how well
Javotte wielded a broadsword — the thought was
rather frightening.
‘Oh, come on, Majesty . . . I wast just getting
started.’ Javotte very courteously lent him a hand to get
to his feet.
‘Well, I am quite ﬁnished, thanks all the same.’
Blain was a little woozy once vertical, and Javotte
steadied him. ‘I think thee might be right.’
‘I am pleased she be thy partner, Highness,’ Eormenric
commented after witnessing the slaughter.

‘I thought thy partner should be Bryce,’ Tory
advised Eormenric. ‘But for the time being, thy training
shall be handled by Sir Gawain.’
‘Majesty, I am not sure if that would be wise.’
Gawain was sporting a look that could kill.
‘Why ever not?’ Tory enquired, well aware of the
reason, though she wanted him to be out with it, so that
it might be resolved before it festered into a problem.
Gawain was hesitant to admit his resentment
towards the Saxon’s presence, yet he stared at Eormenric
undaunted. ‘I lost both my parents at Aberffraw and my
want of revenge dost run deep, Sensei.’
As Tory translated her knight’s woes to Eormenric,
he recalled the sight of the holocaust of which they
spoke; he was not proud of what he’d allowed to
happen, not even at the time. ‘I lost my father in all of
this, too.’
Tory had no need to convey the response as Gawain
spoke Eormenric’s tongue as proﬁciently as Rhun did,
but she translated for the beneﬁt of the others present
who did not.
‘As did I.’ Blain’s brain began to function again. ‘But
creating more trouble shall not bring my father back,
nor will it help the future of this ﬁne land of ours.’
‘Spoken like a true Master,’ Tory commended the
young prince. ‘Thou shalt make a formidable king.’
Blain bowed his head to accept her compliment. ‘I
hope so.’
‘Dost thou see the sense of it, Gawain?’ Tory
beseeched him, but he was still none too willing to
submit.

‘For goodness’ sake, Gawain . . . what be wrong with
thee?’ Javotte approached to snap him out of it. ‘My
mother died at Aberffraw, too. If thou dost not stop this
foolishness, thy hatred shall make thee sick.’
‘I know, but . . .’
‘But, nothing! We have all been through a lot lately,
but we must work together.’ She grabbed hold of him by
the shirt. ‘It be the only way to prevent the witch’s
return. If thou dares provide a channel for her, I shall
kill thee myself.’
‘Alright! I shall do it.’ He surrendered, nearly
cracking a smile. ‘I just thought I should make my
feelings known.’
‘And rightly so,’ Tory agreed. ‘But Javotte be right . .
. revenge be not the way of the Goddess, Gawain, it be
the way of the witch. It be thine own decision, but thou
must choose between us. For one cannot walk two
entirely different paths, not even for a short while.’
Suddenly it was clear to the young knight why his
sensei had given him the assignment, and as he did
honour her judgement above all others, he walked over
to Eormenric and held out his hand. ‘Then I choose to
forgive thee,’ he conveyed in Anglo-Saxon, which
seemed to excite their visitor no end; Gawain had to
admit he did seem a likeable enough character.
‘I do thank thee, Sir Gawain, and am most gratiﬁed
to be able to tell thee so.’ Eormenric grasped hold of the
knight’s outstretched hand and shook it ﬁrmly.
‘Then it be settled.’ Tory was proud of them;
hopefully the children would not make the same
mistakes their parents had. ‘Sir Angus shall begin

thy training in my absence.’ She looked to Blain
and Javotte.
‘Where art thou going?’ Blain was disappointed;
he’d ﬁnally got to train under the Goddess and now she
was going away.
‘Do not fear, I shall not be gone very long,’ she stated
with a smile, praying on the quiet that she was right.
‘How long be not long?’
‘A few hours, a few days . . . I cannot say.’ Any
longer and she might lose her love. ‘But I promise, thou
shalt not have enough time to even notice me missing.’
‘I shall see to that,’ Angus assured the Prince.
Following a short meditation that concluded a
rather eventful morning, Tory ran her new initiates over
the laws and pledges of the Masters. Each of them swore
to uphold and respect the ways of the Goddess. They
vowed to act in a manner reﬂective of the divine and to
disclose nothing of their training to any other living
soul without ﬁrst obtaining the High Queen’s
permission. For this was the worst crime a Master could
commit, and it carried a sentence of death.
Eormenric, Blain and Aella were presented with
their Master’s attire, bearing the emblem of the dragon
on the back; one uniform of white to wear during their
training, and one suit of black for when they trained
others in the name of the Goddess.
‘On behalf of myself . . .’ Tory began, with Gawain
repeating her words in Saxon for Eormenric’s beneﬁt,
‘Maelgwn, the High King of Gwynedd; Vortipor, the
Protector of Dyfed; Prince Rhun of Gwynedd; Prince
Bryce of Powys; Sir Gawain of Din Lligwy; Sir Angus of

Caernarvon; Sir Tiernan . . . champion to the King; and
my champion, the Lady Ione, I do welcome thee to our
circle.’ The beaming faces of her newest students ﬁlled
the Queen with fresh hope. ‘In doing so, remember that
thou art a teacher, a protector, and a representative of
Britain, the Goddess and her mysteries. I want thee to
consider those aforementioned, and those who stand
beside thee now, to be more sacred to thee than thy life.
Regard them at all times with the same respect thou
would want for thyself. This be the will and the way of
the Goddess.’
‘So be it,’ Javotte and Blain said with great
enthusiasm.
Eormenric echoed their resolve, as it seemed the
thing to do, and his two new comrades hugged him and
each other in turn. Their time to prove themselves as
one of the elite had ﬁnally come.
By the midnight hour of that same evening Tory
had addressed all the pressing affairs of state and settled
in her new initiates. She’d left strict instructions with
the head maidservant at Degannwy of the precautions
to be observed when attending to those conﬁned to
quarantine. Tory then went to visit each of those in
question, before her departure, leaving Rhun and
Maelgwn till last.
Her son, to her surprise, was still wide awake,
reading a book by candlelight.
‘Praise the Goddess. I thought thou would never
come.’ He rose to embrace his mother. ‘How fares the
King?’
‘He be holding on, Rhun.’

His mother seemed downhearted, which was not
like her at all. ‘The girl hast died then?’
It was times like these that Tory was thankful she
was not forced to explain herself, as maintaining a
positive outlook was becoming increasingly difﬁcult.
‘Aye, moments ago. Thus, the time I have remaining to
ﬁnd a cure seems to have been considerably lessened.’
‘Time be an illusion, Mother.’ He smiled, giving her
a nudge in encouragement. ‘Thou, better than anyone,
should know that.’
‘Indeed. But, unfortunately, it be an illusion I do not
fully understand.’
‘Mother, please.’ Rhun sat her down. ‘I can stand to
see anybody else this unsure, but not thee. If thou dost
lose hope there be no chance for the King.’
‘I know, I know.’ Tory thought this rather unfair; she
was as emotionally vulnerable as the next person, why
was she the only one never allowed to admit when she
was frightened or upset. ‘I am ﬁne, really.’ She smiled to
reassure him. ‘I just wanted to see that thou still fared
well before I left.’
‘I am as ﬁt as a ﬁddle,’ he announced, though he did
feel a mite lethargic from laying around all day.
‘Well, then, I should depart and see Maelgwn before
I leave.’ She stood and embraced him again.
‘Take me with thee,’ Rhun begged; he couldn’t
imagine what life would be like if she never found her
way back to them.
‘Too dangerous,’ she announced, pulling back to
view him. ‘I could end up with grandchildren from one
end of time to the other.’ She slapped his shoulder with

a wink, before becoming more serious. ‘But should
something happen and I am unsuccessful . . .’
‘I know what should be done.’ Rhun didn’t even
want to consider the possibility. ‘But thou shall not fail.
Thou never hast.’
‘Of course.’ She took a deep breath and made for
the door.
‘I love thee,’ he pledged, with a good serve of
sentiment.
‘And I love thee tenfold that.’ She blew him a kiss,
closing the door behind her.
Selwyn was still keeping his vigil at the King’s side and
was softly strumming a tune on his harp when Tory
entered.
‘How fares our patient?’ she enquired of the merlin
in a whisper, closing the door.
‘I wish I could say.’ He placed the harp aside. ‘He
hath been sleeping a great deal.’
Tory said nothing in response. She stood staring at
her ailing husband from a distance, her thoughts
seemingly elsewhere.
‘Art thou ready to leave?’
‘Aye, I suppose so.’ She appeared none too happy
about it.
‘Where art thou going?’ Maelgwn questioned,
startling both his wife and the merlin.
Tory knelt down beside the bed and took hold of
his hand. ‘Only the Otherworld knows.’ She smiled at
him. ‘Wherever I must, to ﬁnd a cure.’ It was obviously
a battle for him just to keep his eyes open, but

Maelgwn squeezed her hand with what strength he
had left.
‘Then take my sword.’ His eyes drifted across to
where the fine steel weapon lay resting against the
wall in its sheath. Vortipor had given the King this
sword as a wedding gift. ‘I know thou art a fine
warrior, but I shall rest easier knowing thou bears a
decent weapon.’
‘As be thy wish, but thou hast no need to worry . . .’
‘I know.’ He squeezed her hand once more. He still
couldn’t help feeling a little concerned. ‘What I would
not give to make love to thee just one more time.’
‘Thou hast a one-track mind, my love.’ She patted
his hand. ‘Thou shalt have plenty of opportunities to
fulﬁl thy wish when I return.’
‘Promise?’
‘I do.’ Her eyes moistened, as the fear of her own
doubt consumed her. ‘So rest now, and I shall return in
time to greet thee when thou dost awaken.’ She leant up
and kissed his forehead. ‘Remember how much I love
thee, and all shall be well.’ She moved to stand, but
Maelgwn gripped hold of her hand to prevent her leaving.
‘Please, just stay until I fall asleep.’
Tory climbed onto the bed beside him and resting
his head upon her breast, she gently stroked his hair
until he’d returned to a peaceful slumber.
‘Watch over him, Selwyn,’ she instructed, strapping
on the belt that harnessed the huge sword about her waist.
‘Have no fear of that, Majesty.’ The merlin was
rather teary-eyed himself. ‘It be thyself that worries me
more . . . do take care.’

‘Fear not.’ She felt her determination and
conﬁdence returning. ‘I do solemnly swear that I shall
walk back through that door before the next sunset.’
She hugged him to draw strength, and vanished before
another word could be said.

10

DIVINE
INTERVENTION

B

y the light of the full moon, Llyn Cerrig Bach
was a hauntingly beautiful place. The soft, blue
light ﬁltered down through the canopy of huge
trees overhead, falling in shadowy wisps across the
temple ruins.
Tory had no idea why she’d decided to start her
search here. But then, deep down, she still suspected
Taliesin hadn’t really abandoned them — or was it more
wishful thinking?
Surely the High Merlin couldn’t have truly meant
what he’d said about Maelgwn; the King had always
been like a son to him, his prize student before she had
come into the picture.

Upon ascending the stone stairs, Tory entered the
inner sanctuary of the Goddess. Here, a circle of statues
that represented the nine muses of metaphysical law
watched over the stone altar in the centre surrounded
by the overgrown exterior foundations.
Although Tory was not a great believer in ritual
worship, she approached the altar reverently. The
nature of the powerful energies that surrounded this
place had remained outside the realms of her
understanding — and the understanding of all mankind
for that matter. Not to mention the type of phenomena
that the earth’s natural energy grid spat forth at times.
She did realise that the place where she stood was a leyline crossing, and that the local people believed Llyn
Cerrig Bach to be a doorway to the Otherworld. Yet the
full purpose of such sites remained a mystery. Therefore,
it made good sense to exercise a little caution.
‘Taliesin?’ Tory took a stand on top of the stone
altar, as she’d done many times before. ‘Taliesin, are you
there?’
Her voice seemed to shatter the eerie silence,
although she’d not spoken very loudly. It was as if every
living thing in the vicinity had suddenly stopped what
it was doing to hear what she had to say — even the
breeze was taking a silent pause.
‘Please, Taliesin! If you are still here, I implore you
to make yourself known . . . don’t just watch me from
the shadows.’ She was losing hope. ‘I really need your
help now!’
‘He hast gone,’ a woman’s voice, soft and sweet,
advised her.

Tory spun around, trying to peer into the shadows
that seemed to be leering at her. ‘Who speaks?’ she
demanded. ‘Show yourself.’ Her right hand was poised
on the hilt of the sword that hung on her hip.
‘You have no need of your weapon with me, Tory
Alexander.’
The statue that stood in the central position behind
the altar began to glow with a soft purple hue.
‘Don’t you know me?’ the voice questioned with a
delighted strain.
A face and then the torso of a woman, who
appeared the very image of herself, took form and
emerged out of the solid stone.
‘What . . . who? . . . I don’t understand?’ Tory
managed to stammer.
‘Well, we have never met face to face before,’ she
explained with a smile of greeting.
‘Sorcha?’ Tory chanced a guess.
Maelgwn’s mother, the Queen of the late King
Caswallon, had been killed long before Tory had
arrived in the Dark Age. It was true that they had
never met. Yet, on more than one occasion, the late
Queen had assumed wilful control over Tory’s body to
execute certain deeds in the physical world. The
prophetic dreams and gentle guidance Tory had
received from her since the time of those events had
also proven invaluable. They had had a fair amount of
contact in the years past, and Tory had sensed that
Sorcha was never far away, especially in a time of crisis.
She had been told many times of the striking
resemblance she bore to the late Queen, and viewing

Sorcha with her own eyes even Tory found the likeness
hard to believe.
‘Indeed.’ Sorcha’s full form now ﬂoated completely
independent of the statue from which she’d emerged.
Her long, silvery hair and her glittering, mauve robes
ﬂowed about her gracefully, though there was still not a
hint of breeze to be felt. ‘But I have become so much
more these days.’
Tory thought Sorcha’s choice of words rather
curious. ‘How so?’
‘Well, in perfect synchronicity with thou obtaining
thy immortal state of being, I have become more than
just a past life manifestation of thyself. I am again part
of our total consciousness. You might know me better as
thy Higher Self. In fact, every different manifestation of
thyself that ever was or will be, be one with us.’
‘How awful for you all . . .’ Tory felt guilt-ridden by
the news. ‘I am so sorry.’
‘Do not be sorry, my sweet,’ Sorcha chuckled. ‘I do
not mourn physical existence. To tell you the truth, I
much prefer the role of guide. I am more than happy to
leave the physical experience to thee.’
Tory couldn’t understand this at all. ‘But don’t you
miss Caswallon, and . . . you know . . .’ she took a
modest pause, ‘sex?’
‘We experience and learn through thee,’ Sorcha
explained with an echo of laughter in her words. ‘And
Taliesin was right, thou art the ﬁnest physical incarnation
of us all, and thus the best equipped for the job.’
Tory was starting to feel uncomfortable about all of
this. ‘But Maelgwn is your son?’

‘Yes, and my husband, and my father, and in the
long run myself, too.’
‘But how can that be?’ Tory was perplexed. ‘Are you
saying that a soul-mind can split apart and coexist
within the same time, space and dimension?’ Tory had a
sudden burst of awareness and began to pace as she
thought. ‘Well, why not?’ She answered herself. ‘If time
is simultaneous, and we shall all be part of the one
divine consciousness some day, then that has to be the
case.’ Tory looked to Sorcha, who appeared very pleased
with her resolve.
‘I think we should aid her. I believe she be ready,’
Sorcha announced to the circle of nine.
Before Tory knew what was happening, all nine of
the statues began to glow a different pastel shade in a
whole spectrum of colours.
‘I agree.’ The maid in blue, who had the appearance
of Katren, voiced her view.
Then, in an anti-clockwise sequence around the
circle, the women lay their blessings upon her: Cara,
Alma, Jenovefa, Ione, Aella, her Aunt Rose and Tory’s
mother, Helen.
The poor girl was overwhelmed to see so many she
had lost throughout time. But then she realised she
hadn’t really lost them at all, they were all just an
extension of herself. She began to tremble uncontrollably
and tears ﬂowed down her cheeks as she felt the awesome
power of the force that was bearing down upon her.
Suddenly the nine women merged to become three.
They seemed more deﬁned now, one dressed in white,
one in red, and the other, the eldest, in black.

The triple goddess! What is going on?
‘Do not be alarmed, child,’ said the tiny woman in
black.
She was of unusual appearance; young of face, her
hair long and silver, like Taliesin’s. Her features were
somewhat pixie-like, as her ears were small and pointed,
and her eyes were large, yet slanted.
Could this be Keridwen, the dispenser of the Old
Truths?
‘Thy instinct serves thee well.’ She appraised the
subject before her. ‘I am just a further extension of thy
universal mind.’
Tory’s eyes broadened. ‘I see the truth of it.’ She
paused but a moment, to gather her thoughts. ‘Maelgwn
is dying . . .’
‘We know thou dost seek a cure, but we cannot
supply this to thee directly,’ the woman in red, the
warrioress, told her.
This woman, named Rhiannon in local mythology,
appeared very much like Tory in build and height, but
her hair sat in long, fiery waves. In her capacity within
the triple Goddess, she had charge of justice and the
airing of the truth.
‘We can, however, grant thee passage to a place
where such cures abound,’ the lady in white, Branwen,
added with a smile.
This beautiful young maiden was the teacher
of truth and the guardian of righteousness. Her
skin was fair, though it did have a slightly golden
hue. Her eyes were dark as night, as was her long,
straight hair.

‘Fair enough.’ Tory submitted to the suggestion, not
sounding incredibly thrilled; she worried for her love
and her people, time was wasting.
‘It is all just an illusion in the end, my child. The
object be experience, and then to learn from that
experience. Thee too must master, and trust in, the
universal process.’ Keridwen approached her mentally
and emotionally-exhausted pupil. ‘The ability to save a
human life is a powerful thing, and cannot be placed
into the hands of an amateur. It must be learned and
mastered, the same as everything else. As for ﬁnding a
miracle cure, thou might get lucky, who knows? But thou
must seek thy own solutions. I am not here to give them
to thee . . . for what could be learned from such an act?’
‘Is that what you told Taliesin?’ Tory snifﬂed, feeling
very put in her place.
‘It be exactly what I told him.’
Tory was silent a moment. ‘So where be this place?’
Keridwen shook her head. Tory’s mind was indeed
bleary or she would surely have known. ‘Mankind did
know a Golden Age of civilization, back in the Old
Land . . .’
‘Atlantis.’ Tory became excited; this was surely
where Taliesin had gone. ‘You can send me there?’
‘If thou dost wish it.’ Branwen conﬁrmed.
‘I do.’ Tory swore wholeheartedly.
‘Now, be warned . . .’ Rhiannon moved closer. ‘All
the rest shall be up to thee . . . we shall offer thee no
more aid beyond this point.’
‘For, although we owe thee much, for all thou hast
done for our cause, and the cause of mankind . . .’

Branwen admitted, ‘even this favour be somewhat out
of line with Cosmic Law.’
‘I understand.’ Tory stood tall, not to be swayed. She
tried not to think about problems before they arose, so
as not to jinx herself.
‘Well, then,’ Keridwen motioned her two associates
closer, her eyes still ﬁxed on Tory, ‘as thou hast acted as
a channel for us so often, allow us to act as a channel
for thee.’
The three women began to merge into one angelic
being that had no deﬁnable shape. Their combined
manifestation appeared as a glowing green haze that
spoke with the voices of all three Goddesses.
‘Be guided, Tory Alexander, for thou hast still much
to learn . . . and much to teach.’
The powerful green mass began to approach her and
Tory froze, speechless and terriﬁed beyond all reason.
In a flare of light, love and energy, all fear
departed from the divine’s over-awed subject, and she
was swept out of the Dark Age into one that promised
great enlightenment.

part 11

the
universe

Characters of Atlantis
Shu Sar (supreme King):
Absalom (father of peace)
Shar (prince, 1st born):
Alaric (noble ruler)
Shar (prince, 2nd born):
Turan (bond of heaven)
Shar (prince, 3rd born):
Xavier (bright)
Shar (prince, 4th born):
Gaspard (treasure master)
Shar (prince, 5th born):
Zadoc (just)
Shar (prince, 6th born):
Diccon (ﬁrm ruler)
Shar (prince, 7th born):
Seth (appointed prophet)
Shar (prince, 8th born):
Lazarus (helper, seer)
Shar (prince, 9th born):
Jerram (war raven)
Shar (prince, 10th born):
Adelgar (noble spear)
Nin (lady, 1st wife of Shu Sar):
Melcah (queen)
Nin (lady, 2nd wife of Shu Sar): Orphelia (clever)
Nin (lady, 3rd wife of Shu Sar): Salome (peaceful)
Nin (lady, 4th wife of Shu Sar): Kila (earth seer)
Nin (lady, 5th wife of Shu Sar): Mahar (woman of red)
Chief High Priest/Magi (healers): Shu - Asa (healer)
High Preistess:
Nin - Bau (lady who
brings dead back to
life)
Head Truth Seer:
Nin - Sibyl
(prophetess)
Lord High Guardian (Sciences): En - Seba (eminant)
Chief of the Mind sciences:
En - Norbert (bright
metaphysician)
Chief of the Body sciences:
En - Darius (preservar)
High Magi, The Orders of Passage: Shu - Micah (godlike)
Head Healer of Kheit-Sin:
Nin - Lilith (clever)
Head Healer of Khe-Ta:
Nin - Tabitha (gazelle)
Head Healer of Danuih:
Nin - Anthea (lady
ﬂower)

Head Preist of Akhantuith: En - Cato (cautious)
Head Preist of Ta-Khu:
En - Durand (lasting)
Atlantean name for Taliesin: En - Razu (shining wise lord)
Atlantean name for Tory:
Lamamu (divine master of
love
& war)
Shar Alaric’s Wife:
Antonia (precious)
Chief of the Annunnaki:
Anu (he of heaven)
Wife of Chief Anu:
Keturah (incense)
Son of Anu:
Calisto (most beautiful)
Banished Head of Mind Sciences: Keeldar (battle)
Antillian name for Keeldar: Engur (Lord of the Rockets)
Chief of Antillia:
Zutar (leader)
Son of Zutar:
Rastus (staunch)
Rastus’ Girl:
Lana (light)
Zutar’s Atlantean Prisoner: Mahala (sweet singer)
Jerram & Adelgar’s Scout:
Thais (gift from the divine)

11

A HEALING PLACE

T

aliesin hurried up the marble stairs into the Shiim-ti temple, his bare feet preventing any sound
as he made his way to the healing chambers of
Shu Sar Absalom.
Attending the Sar in his sanctuary for rejuvenation
was the Lord High Magi of the Healing Orders, Shu Asa,
and En Darius, Chief Magi of the Body Sciences. Shar
Turan, the second-born son of the Shu Sar and Head of
Technologists, was present to assist with the operation.
It was the young Shar Turan who moved to greet
Taliesin as he entered. En Razu.
This was the name the Merlin had been given here;
it meant ‘shining wise lord’. It was, coincidentally, the
same name the Britons of the Dark Age had given him;
Taliesin meant ‘shining brow’.

I am sorry I am late. Taliesin slowed and calmed
himself to greet his colleagues. En Durand and En Cato
detained me with their comments on the extraordinary
energies disturbing the circuits of time at present.
So they have felt it then? Turan appeared vaguely
pleased with himself.
You have been alerted to it, too? This was intriguing.
Of course. Turan was very matter-of-fact about it. I
have felt a huge build-up of feminine energy within the
continuum.
That’s a highly unusual observation for you, my Shar.
Taliesin nearly dragged a smile out of his friend, who
was far too serious.
Will you all stop discussing science for a moment, and
come and do something about this beastly headache of mine!
the normally good-natured Sar Absalom entreated his
subjects impatiently.
A thousand apologies, Highness. Taliesin approached
the thick, marble healing tablet upon which the Shu
Sar lay. We shall not delay another moment.
Under normal circumstances, there were several
healing processes a patient was required to go through
before the healing of the physical body took place; the
etheric and mental state of being of the patient needed
to be balanced and cleansed ﬁrst. Though, in the Sar’s
case, because his pain was so unbearable, he was
undergoing a kind of emergency surgery. When he was
more at ease to be receptive to the rest of his treatment,
his etheric and mental bodies would be addressed.
Shu Asa and En Darius, the two ﬁnest healers in the
known world, assisted their Sar to a comfortable,

workable position. En Darius then placed a large
emerald jewel upon the forehead of their patient.
Breathe steadily, my Sar, Taliesin instructed with his
sweet, tranquillizing voice. He then moved to the end
of the marble tablet and took hold of Absalom’s feet,
sending healing energy up through his body.
Shar Turan, who had taken up a position beside
the psychokinetically-operated control panel, opened
and adjusted a porthole in the domed ceiling to align
the sun’s rays with the healing stone on his father’s
forehead. A beam of sunlight crept across the white
marble floor as it honed in on its designated position.
It was mid-morning, so when the light met with the
stone it shone in at a sixty degree angle from behind
the Sar’s head.
The stone began to glow as it absorbed the sun’s
healing energy, and after a moment or two the Sar gave
a great sigh of relief. That feels wonderful!
But no sooner had Absalom thought so than the
thin beam of light ﬂared to a blinding green ﬂash.
The sudden phenomena took Taliesin off guard and
he was ﬂung backwards to the ﬂoor.
‘DANUIH!’ the Sar cried. This was the name of the
Earth Goddess, the divine mother of creation.
When all present had had a moment for their eyes
to re-adjust after the ﬂash of light, they beheld a young
woman resting comfortably against their patient.
Oh my. Absalom didn’t quite know what to think as
the lovely young girl in his arms began to stir.
‘What happened?’ Tory raised herself, feeling
awfully groggy.

She is armed. Shar Turan raised a hand to claim the
weapon from her, but Taliesin prevented it.
No, it’s alright . . . He stared at Tory, rather amazed
she’d found him again. I know this girl.
As Tory peeked out from underneath her drowsy
eyelids, her sights came to focus on Renford, her
father. ‘Dad?’
What did she call me? Sar Absalom wanted to know.
‘It means father or pa,’ the Merlin explained.
‘Taliesin?’ Tory’s head shot around upon hearing his
voice. Yet the sight of Maelgwn, ﬂoating beside the
Merlin, was too much for her and she passed out cold
on the ﬂoor.
I don’t care what anyone has to say about it, Sar Absalom
insisted, as he passed through the lovely gardens in the
courtyard of the Shi-im-ti temple with En Darius in tow.
But my dear Sar . . .
No, I do not want to hear another word. The Sar
stopped by the fountain to pick a few of the rainbowcoloured ﬂowers that grew by it. I had the stone of the
Goddess Danuih upon my forehead at the time, and I saw
her divine presence with my own eyes! Then the girl’s ﬁrst
word to me turns out to mean father . . . you were there, you
heard her. What further proof do you need?! the Sar asked.
But if I could just run a few simple tests to conﬁrm . . .
Do whatever tests you like. My view shall not change.
The Sar strutted merrily through the entrance that
led to the part of the temple where his new child had
been taken to rest; he was feeling much improved
since her arrival.

The Shu Sar entered the recovery room to ﬁnd his dear
adviser, En Razu, still watching over their mysterious
visitor and his son, Turan, observing her with a kind of
clinical interest.
How fares the dear child? The Sar passed his small
bouquet to a temple novice to put in water; the junior
orders of the priesthood were easily deﬁnable by their
pale green garments.
She is resting peacefully, Highness. Taliesin rose to
address the Sar.
Absalom approached the healing cubicle were Tory
lay sleeping, gazing upon her with considerable pride.
Typical, is it not, that my ﬁrst child not born of a mortal
woman is neither male, nor a twin?
The Shu Sar had taken ﬁve wives in his desire for
children, for every woman was only allowed by law to
give birth once. Each of these ﬁne women had borne
him twin sons. After the ﬁfth set, the Sar had given up
all hope of ever having a daughter.
What do you think of your little sister, Turan?
As his father appeared in such wonderful spirits,
Turan didn’t wish to dampen his mood. She appears as
ﬁne as any other of her gender.
The ﬁnest! Absalom corrected him with glee, before
frowning slightly. Though she is rather short. But never-tomind, he shrugged off the observation. Her good looks and
ﬁne form make up for that . . . wouldn’t you say, En Razu?
Indeed, Majesty. Taliesin had to smile. You have no idea.
Yes, well . . . Absalom looked back to his divine
little girl, dressed in unusual attire, complete with
weapon and all. What are we going to name her?

Taliesin released a slight chuckle at the notion. I
have a fair idea. But he waved off suggesting it. I think
you should wait for her Rights of Passage. Let En Micah and
his council decide what is suitable.
The ceremony of which Taliesin spoke was usually
held when a child reached three years of age. At this
time, the Priests of the Orders of Passage would measure
the individual’s sonic, particle and auric frequencies.
This enabled the child in question to be guided into the
areas of study for which his, or in this case her, talents
were best suited. A name appropriate to each
individual’s destiny was also given at this time.
You’re right, of course, Absalom conceded with a
beaming smile on his face. I am just so excited . . . you
understand.
Rightly so. Taliesin humoured him..
Well, I must be off. The Sar headed for the door. But
you will send for me when she wakes. The leader paused in
his tracks and turned back to seek conﬁrmation.
Of course, Highness. Taliesin bowed slightly, as did
Turan, and the Shu Sar took his leave of them.
I have never heard anything more ridiculous in my life!
Turan was pleased to be ﬁnally able to voice his mind.
Do you think my father is ﬁnally going senile on us?
No comment. But I do suspect both your science and
the priesthood are going to have a hard time disproving
his claim.
Taliesin considered that if Shar Turan felt his
father’s idea preposterous, he’d best not mention to him
that Turan had probably been married to the girl in
more than one lifetime. For Turan, whose name meant

in the bond of the divine, spent most of his time
studying the mind sciences and had precious little time
for anything as trivial as the opposite sex. Besides, the
young Shar had managed to raise his personal vibratory
rate to such a level that it was akin to the mental plane
of thought. Hence, his body lacked the required density
for any physical relations to occur.
Taliesin had learned to do the same thing himself,
but he maintained his physical existence most of the
time as only it held the key to true experience. Turan,
on the other hand, clung to his higher consciousness,
for as long as he maintained his semi-physical state he
did not age and he could not die, feel pain, or any other
emotion for that matter, but he could study, create,
theorise and explore the universe all he liked.
Well, Turan began his analysis, if she is truly of the
divine Mother, explain to me how her emotional and mental
state became such a mess?
Turan could readily assess this, as he was perceiving
Tory from an etheric level.
I mean just look at her heart chakra. It has a dark patch
covering it the size of a melon! And . . .
Taliesin politely motioned the Shar to pause, as he
noted Tory stirring from her coma. ‘Lady?’ He sat
himself down on a chair that was right next to her
healing chamber; this was all going to be a little strange.
Her eyes wavered open, just long enough to
determine who addressed her. ‘Taliesin.’ She smiled, still
very sedate. ‘I found you, thank goodness.’
‘Indeed you have.’ He reached into the solid
amethyst cubicle and took hold of her hand.

Tory’s eyes ventured to part again, and she cast her
sights around the strange, walled bed in which she lay.
The smooth, purple stone exuded the most potent
calming energy, and positively glowed with a splendid
radiance that was in no way hurtful to view. ‘Is this
crystal?’ She sounded enchanted as she reached out
with her spare hand to touch it.
‘Yes it is.’ Taliesin gently took hold of her chin,
guiding her sights back towards him. ‘You’ll ﬁnd this
interesting,’ he commented, as he eyed her face over.
‘Your eyes have changed colour since last we met.’
‘They have?’ She rolled them around in her head a
second, as if trying to view them for herself. ‘What
colour are they now?’
‘Violet, like mine . . . that will serve you well here.’
Tory let out a half laugh and waved it off; there were
other matters more pressing on her mind. ‘Why did you
leave me, Taliesin?’ She squeezed his hand tight. ‘I
really could have used your help.’
‘Why . . .’ Taliesin’s brow became drawn. ‘Because
you instructed it, Lady. You said I was to seek out
Keridwen, so she could send me back to Atlantis to
learn the sacred mysteries from the Old Ones.’
Tory held her head as she sat upright. ‘Oh . . . ?
You’re that Taliesin.’
This was not a past life incarnation of the Merlin, this
was his younger self. Tory had sought him out during a
visit to the twentieth century, for she’d been told by
Taliesin’s older self that she would. For the Merlin’s
travels, backwards and forwards through earth’s history,
had been rather extensive, and thus at any given time one

could never be sure which evolutionary stage of Taliesin’s
self one was addressing. He didn’t appear any different to
the Taliesin who’d abandoned her so abruptly in the Dark
Age. Though one could surmise by his manner that this
soul hadn’t been in existence for anywhere near as long as
the Taliesin more familiar to her. At this stage of his
growth, he was more naive and humble.
‘Have I forsaken you in some way?’ The Merlin was
deeply concerned.
‘No, no.’ Tory didn’t see any point in pursuing it
further at this time. ‘I am sure I have just misunderstood.’
You two seem to know each other well. Turan made
both his curiosity and his presence known.
‘Maelgwn!’ She gasped faintly under her breath.
He was easily seven foot tall this man, and a band of
silver was bound around his forehead. His straight,
plum-black hair was much longer than Maelgwn had
ever worn his, as it fell to his waist. His eyes were not
brown, as her love’s had been, but a grey-violet colour
that was completely mesmerizing. The long robe of pure
white he wore was bound at the waist with a royal blue
sash that was entwined with another of purple. On his
left hand he wore a ring that bore a large sapphire, but
set in the ring on his right hand was an amethyst.
Tory’s heart skipped a beat as she noted that his legs
just disappeared into the solid crystal bed on which she
sat. ‘Is he a . . . ghost?’ she quizzed the Merlin, more
than a little uneasy.
‘Nay, Lady.’ He assured with a laugh. ‘Shar Turan
maintains a very high vibratory rate, that is all.’
‘Shar Turan?’ Tory repeated in an inquiring fashion.

‘Indeed. The second son of the Shu Sar, the
Supreme Ruler, or High King, if you like.’
The Shar bowed slightly to conﬁrm his status, and
Tory managed half a smile. ‘I see.’
So the sleeper has awakened. En Darius entered. A
white, marble tablet ﬂoated silently in behind him,
carrying his instruments.
Holy moley, it’s Rhys! Tory felt a wave of panic pass
over her, realising that he hadn’t moved his mouth
when she heard him speak. It must be telepathy!
‘Indeed.’ Taliesin conﬁrmed her thought.
‘Is there anyone here I don’t know?’ Tory wondered
out loud.
‘I doubt it.’ Taliesin said simply.
‘Well how . . .’ Tory paused, deciding to rephrase her
question. ‘What is he planning to do with all that?’ She
motioned to the ﬂoating table of utensils.
I am just going to examine you. En Darius bethought
her, wearing a smile of reassurance.
‘Over my dead body!’
Tory absolutely hated doctors and believed very little of
what they had to say. She knew sickness was all in the
mind, and unaware that this was also what the doctors here
believed she wasn’t about to let him anywhere near her.
‘Tory please.’ Taliesin attempted to calm her. ‘Your
spirit is in great need of cleansing, thus En Darius needs
to measure your sonic, particle and auric frequencies.’
‘Will it hurt?’ She still observed all the strange
equipment warily.
‘Not in the least,’ he emphasised. ‘I shall stay, if it
will make you more comfortable.’

‘Yes do.’ She glanced at Turan, then at Darius, for
although in the Dark Age she had known them both
well, they were total strangers to her now.
Tory marvelled at their style of doctoring, which
was more akin to body reading sciences of the twentieth
century than the accredited medical profession.
En Darius checked her eyes and the palms of her
hands very closely, then carefully measured her hands
and the size of her head. The frequency tests were
carried out with different hand-held devices that, as
they were passed over her body, made a variety of
amusing sounds whilst registering her vital statistics. He
took both a skin and a blood sample, utilising two other
strange little devices that felt as if they’d barely made
contact with her body.
The Head Healer of the Body Sciences made notes
as he continued his examination, grunting now and
then when he made an interesting observation. He was
attired in much the same fashion as Turan, though his
sash of royal blue was entwined with one of dark green.
The headband Darius wore was of a strange pinkishgold substance. On his left hand was a ring that
featured a sapphire, and the ring on his right hand bore
an emerald.
Taliesin was attired in exactly the same fashion as
Darius, barring the headband, as the Merlin’s appeared
to be made of solid gold.
When Tory enquired as to the signiﬁcance of the
use of colour, metal and jewels in their attire, Taliesin
explained it was just a practical way of identifying who
was who.

For example, the white robe told you that the
wearer belonged to one of the High Orders of the
Priesthood or Sciences. The different sashes and rings
identified what Deity’s doctrines one had studied. The
Goddess Philaeia for example, whose Orders were
those of philosophy, science and architecture, was
connected to the colour of deep blue, hence her sacred
stone was that of a sapphire. The Earth Goddess,
Danuih, was naturally associated with dark green,
hence her stone was emerald, and so on. Headbands,
however, were special awards. A gold headband told
you when someone was in the service of the Shu Sar,
whereas a band of silver indicated a healer specialising
in the field of mental or psychological research. The
strange pinkish-gold metal En Darius wore was
orichalchum and signified a healer of physical
medicine and surgery.
When En Darius had taken his utensils and gone
back to his laboratory, a small ball of light entered in his
wake. It ﬂashed the three primary colours, in due
sequence, until it came to encompass Taliesin’s head
and turned white.
‘What is it?’ Tory gaped at the phenomena; it
looked just like the cosmic anomaly scientists of the
twentieth century referred to as ‘earth lights’.
A message. Turan obliged her with an explanation.
From the Shu Sar, I imagine.
‘Oh . . .’ She implied her understanding, even
though she couldn’t really fathom the idea.
Taliesin’s eyes were closed as he perceived the
instruction.

Absalom voiced his regret that he could not make
himself present to greet his daughter, as he’d been
detained at the palace with a problem of a political
nature, and as En Darius refused to let her leave the
Shi-im-ti Temple before she’d been fully cleansed, their
meeting would have to wait a few days. But he
instructed that the girl was to be treated in his own
personal healing chambers and extended every possible
comfort as beﬁtting a child of Shu Sar.
Hence the Merlin guided Tory to the Sar’s private
sanctuary, explaining that she would probably be
spending the next few days there.
Tory was about to protest when she beheld the
luxurious abode, and decided that she might never want
to leave.
The walls of the large, round room were made of a
shiny, smooth substance the like of marble, only it
appeared to illuminate its own gentle light. The ﬂoor
was made entirely from amethyst, as was one of the two
pools of water that steamed with a heavenly scent and a
healing cubicle the same as the one in the room Tory
had just left. The other pool was of fresh stream water
that ﬂowed underneath the Shi-im-ti temple, its
purifying waters being an essential tool to the Orders of
Healing. All manner of plant, both ﬂowering and nonﬂowering, thrived in the powerful healing energy of the
tranquil chamber.
‘The Gods?’ Tory motioned to eight large, gold
statues that stood round the walls. These ﬁgures, all
roughly seven foot in height, were akin to Turan’s
proportionate stature.

‘Indeed. The Shining Ones, as they are known
here.’ Taliesin bequeathed a long robe and towel, pale
pink in colour, from the wall beside the door. ‘I shall
leave you to bathe, ﬁrst in the stream, and then in the
pool. Afterwards, you shall be required to wear this.’
‘Oh not pink . . . please!’ Tory screwed up her nose.
‘I hate pink’
‘Exactly!’ Taliesin emphasised, handing the bundle
to her. ‘So no arguments. One of the priests will be sent
to speak with you presently.’ Taliesin headed for the
door. ‘So please try to accommodate him, and we shall
see if we can’t get you out of here within a week.’
‘A week!’ Tory objected, but the Merlin had gone.
Her attention turned to the glistening pools of water
that awaited her. ‘Ah well . . . I’ll just have to make to
most of it, I guess.’ The suggestion made her smile.

12

TO DELVE BEYOND

T

ory ﬂoated on the surface of the crystal clear
spring that had water the colour of brilliant blue.
This pool was somehow lit from beneath, and
appeared to go to a depth far beyond that which she
cared to investigate at present.
A large, round window in the domed roof allowed
the afternoon sun to stream in upon her naked body,
soothing her being with energising rays. The earth’s
solar orb lacked the golden hue Tory had come to
associate with sunlight; its rays were much whiter here.
Still, the water on her skin acted like a conductor for
the pure energy, and Tory imagined the experience was
like how it might feel to be set adrift on the astral plane.
As she ﬂoated into a shady area she opened her eyes.
The roof of this delightful dwelling was made from the

extraordinarily beautiful metal they called orichalchum.
Like polished gold, this pinkish counterpart to the latter
was very reﬂective.
Tory observed her slightly obscured reﬂection in the
dome above, marking how tiny she appeared in the
huge space, whereupon she spied two other reﬂections
entering on the other side of the room. Tory moved
immediately into a tuck position. Thanks so much for the
warning guys.
She recognised Turan at once as he ﬂoated his way
towards her. But she did not identify straightaway the
other young man, who walked on his own two feet.
Come, come. There was a mocking tone in Turan’s
thoughts and gestures. We are your brothers.
‘I beg your pardon?’ Tory nearly choked.
Have you not heard? Turan came to a stop beside the
pool, his hands interlocked comfortably in front of him
as he gazed down upon her. Our Father, the Shu Sar,
thinks you’re his daughter. . . . begotten from the divine
Mother, Danuih.
‘But that’s ridiculous.’
That’s what I said.
Tory was rather insulted that Turan was so quick to
agree. ‘Well, let’s hear your theory then?’ She tried to be
modest as she made for her towel. Turan was making her
uncomfortable with his probing eyes; she felt like a bug
under a microscope.
No, let’s hear yours, he suggested ﬁrmly.
Tory reached the pool stairs that led up to her towel,
but she still had the problem of how to get to it. ‘Would
you please do me the courtesy?’

Whatever for? Turan made it sound as if she were
being childish. I certainly have no physical interest
in you.
‘Then you won’t mind turning around.’ She forced
a smile.
Allow me. The other young man bethought her, a
little appalled by his brother’s behaviour. He made haste
to fetch her towel. He turned his sights away from her
as he walked down the stairs and into the water, holding
the sheet of fabric out like a screen.
Once she was safely wrapped up, Tory looked up to
the man to thank him. ‘Tha . . . Cai?’ She was taken
aback. It was him, only he was much older, not to
mention taller. ‘Look at you!’ She had to smile. ‘You’re
all grown up.’
Yes, Nin. For several hundred years now.
Tory’s jaw nearly hit the ﬂoor. ‘Come again?’
Isn’t that funny. His expression changed to one of
wonder. I do feel I know you, too.
That’s
wonderful.
Turan
interrupted
the
heartwarming scene. Then you’ll have lots to talk about.
He waved to them as he ﬂoated towards the door. I will
expect a full report. He turned to view his brother, then
disappeared through the wall.
‘Your brother gives me the creeps,’ Tory
commented, as she trudged up the stairs.
‘He’s very clever.’
Though there was a fondness in his voice, Tory nearly
jumped out of her skin; he was the ﬁrst person, apart from
Taliesin, who’d used his voice to communicate with her.
‘You speak English?’

‘No.’ His tone was rather comical. ‘You just think I
do.’ As Tory appeared perplexed by the notion, he
explained: ‘It’s still a form of thought projection, only
you’re perceiving the image of me moving my mouth
and words coming out . . . because that’s what you feel
comfortable with, and I want you to be relaxed. Now,
Turan on the other hand . . .’ He took a seat on the side
of the pool. ‘He’s what you might call an intellectual.’
‘Yeah, no shit.’ Tory grinned.
‘But he does not realise he is intimidating you . . .
he’s blissfully unaware of human emotion. He perceives
only thought.’
‘Why?’
‘Because there are fewer distractions between
himself and the divine. Turan’s perception of
information is more attuned to the common good . . .
the big picture, you understand.’ He shrugged with a
smile, and a sigh. ‘I wish I could be so disciplined.’
‘So what do they call you?’ Tory motioned him to
turn around, so that she could put on her robe.
He swivelled himself round to face the opposite
direction. ‘My name is Lazarus. It means helper, or seer,
because that is my calling. I investigate that which is
ailing people, and then help those people realise and
release their dis-ease . . . on an etheric level, that is.
Their are others who specialize in the mental and
physical levels of sickness.’
‘Are you saying I’m sick?’ Tory pulled on the
weightless garment that felt absolutely wonderful
against her skin.
‘Quite obviously so, I’m afraid.’

‘But that’s impossible.’ She came to sit beside him.
Then, thinking twice about disclosing her secret at
present, she corrected herself. ‘I mean it’s silly . . . I
feel fine.’
‘That’s because physically, you’re in wonderful
shape. But emotionally and mentally,’ he shook his head
slowly, ‘you’re a mess.’
Tory hadn’t considered that, although her immortal
state of being prevented her from any physical ailments,
her subtle bodies could still be prone to dis-ease. ‘How
can you tell?’
‘Your aura and your energy centres say it all,’
he informed. ‘You have a huge blockage over your
heart, another that encompasses both your root
and spleen chakras and a small obstruction over your
third eye.’
‘Really?’ Tory was fascinated.
‘Yes, and until all these have been worked through
and cleansed, you cannot be permitted to leave this
temple.’
Oh dear, Tory mused. How on earth was she going
to clear these blockages without giving too much away?
Shar Turan had been requested by En Darius to meet
with the other members of the High Order of the Shiim-ti temple.
He arrived in the room of conference to ﬁnd only
Taliesin, En Darius, and Shu Micah, High Magi of the
Orders of Passage, in attendance.
Turan thought it unusual for Shu Micah to be
interested in what was to be discussed this afternoon,

for what possible interest could he have in the girl at
this early stage?
Ah . . . Shar Turan. The magi grinned broadly,
peering out from under his large hood. Lovely day, isn’t it?
I suppose . . . Turan shrugged, rather impartial. This
seemed to amuse the old magi somewhat, for he began
to chuckle aloud.
Gentlemen, it’s amazing! En Cato announced as he
entered with En Durand. The girl is going to have a
profound effect on this planet.
Durand expanded on his colleague’s statement. Yes.
According to her chart, her destiny is so immense that it could
only be compared to that of En Razu, or yourself, Shu Micah.
I couldn’t agree more. Darius sat back on the large,
round conference lounge, its base moulded out of the
ﬂoor of amethyst.
Surely there is some mistake? Turan interjected. She is
fully human, I’ll grant, but there is nothing at all exceptional
about her.
You think so? Darius broke into laughter, Shu Micah
along with him.
Here, take a look for yourself. En Durand handed
Turan the charts, walking down the stairs to take a seat
in the circle with En Cato.
Has anyone found out about her origins yet? Darius was
interested in knowing.
I know a little. Taliesin spoke up, immediately
gaining the attention of all in the room. I met her once,
in the twentieth century . . . that’s about fourteen thousand
Earth orbits from now. That’s where she was originally
born, so I believe.

Are you sure? En Darius sounded rather sceptical.
My good man. Taliesin seemed surprised by the
question. What have you discovered?
En Darius did not respond. His eyes were focused on
the doorway, and he stood as Shu Asa entered.
Everyone present followed suit once they were
alerted to the arrival of their Chief High Magi, barring
old Shu Micah who merely bowed his head slightly to
greet him.
Relax gentlemen. Shu Asa motioned them all to sit as
he descended the stairs and seated himself beside Shu
Micah. You must be very excited.
The old magi nodded, smiling broadly, and Turan
had to wonder what on earth had everyone so worked
up. He moved down into the conference area to take up
a position beside his current instructor, En Durand, and
ﬂoated cross-legged a couple of inches above the
cushioned seat.
Well, now we are all present, will you please put us out
of our suspense, En Durand implored the Chief Healer of
the Body Sciences.
Yes, Taliesin added. Why do you doubt my story of the
girl’s origins?
Darius raised his eyebrows, rather perplexed.
Because her physical make-up would seem to indicate that
she does stem from our Shu Sar’s gene pool.
Most of the men where taken aback by the
statement, especially Turan.
What! No, no, no, there must be . . .
That’s not the all of it, Darius advised. Hear me out.
Now, I must admit, some of her genes are of an unknown

origin to us, but I can safely conﬁrm that this girl is only
second generation from Shu Micah’s gene pool as well.
With this, everyone in the room was thrown into
confusion. For Shu Micah was a direct descendant of
‘the Shining Ones’. Micah was one of the few of his
people who had mastered existence on the earth plane.
Still, due to the discomfort and danger of physically
manifesting himself on a planet that had an atmosphere
so vastly different from his home, he usually employed a
subtle form.
En Darius, that’s impossible! Turan hated to state the
obvious. My father is not even as closely related to the
Shining Ones.
You’re not listening, my friend. Darius could feel the
young Shar’s resistance. I said she comes from your father’s
gene pool . . . but not directly.
So you believe she belongs to the fourth great race
of mankind, as opposed to the ﬁfth that inhabited the
earth by the twentieth century. Taliesin showed his
understanding.
Perhaps both . . . En Darius tried to continue.
That would mean that the Shu Sar’s bloodline is still
existent some fourteen thousand years from now! Durand
could not readily accept this. I’m afraid I ﬁnd that very
hard to believe.
Please gentlemen. Darius was getting tired of being
interrupted. Do let me ﬁnish. He cast his sights toward
the Head Priest in the ﬁeld of Chaos. Now, as for
agreeing with your calculations regarding her destiny, En
Cato, the cell activity of the skin sample I took from her is
proving rather interesting, in that . . . he paused to take a

breath, the cells are still reproducing themselves upon
separation from the subject’s life force.
Taliesin’s eyes parted wide. But that would mean . . .
Indeed, Shu Micah conﬁrmed with a smile.
Immortality. Like you, En Razu, she has been touched by
the divine. We suspect her to be the second of the ‘Chosen
Ones’ to be sent to us for instruction.
Shu Asa stood to resolve. And thus the prophecy
unfolds, gentlemen.
Lazarus spent an hour or so running through the
possible causes behind the particular blockages that
Tory’s etheric body was experiencing.
He’d started with the largest blockage located over
her heart chakra, advising her that this indicated she
was pining for a loved one.
Maelgwn, Tory surmised. Or was it mourning
Brockwell that had caused it?
Lazarus went on to suggest that perhaps somebody
that she’d loved and trusted had let her down; broke her
heart so to speak.
This seemed to suggest that Taliesin might have
been at least partly the cause of the problem. Lazarus
had seemed to hit the nail right on the head with all of
his guesses, thus Tory had to consider that he was rather
good at his given profession.
He said the blockage over her spleen chakra that
extended down to her root chakra, usually pointed to
either sexual repression and guilt, or stiﬂed creativity.
This had been a bit of a puzzle to her. Tory had
never really been very artistic, though she did express

herself through music. She certainly couldn’t recall a
time when she’d ever felt sexually repressed or guilty,
but then she remembered Miles.
Like Turan, Miles was another earthly incarnation
of Maelgwn. Tory had met him in the twentieth
century about twenty years before, and although she’d
willingly admitted to loving him she refused to
become intimately involved with Miles whilst she was
still married to Maelgwn. She’d felt at the time that
an affair would only confuse the issue, but Tory still
hoped she would see Miles again at some point in
the future.
The dark patch that penetrated Tory’s third eye area
did so only on the left side of her forehead.
‘I would say,’ Lazarus summed up. ‘That you are
allowing some pretty negative force to play on your
psyche.’
‘Mahaud,’ Tory concluded most assuredly.
No matter where thou dost run to, in the whole of time
and space, I will follow thee. The witch’s last words came
back to haunt her.
‘Yuk.’ Tory shivered. The thought of the witch made
her skin crawl.
‘Who is Mahaud?’ Lazarus enquired, perceiving the
dark patch on his patient’s forehead expand upon the
mention of the name.
‘An evil sorceress you don’t wish to know about, let
me assure you.’ Tory shook off the memory.
‘Evil?’
‘You know . . . harmful, destructive, morally
abusive . . .’ Tory attempted to make herself clear.

‘No,’ Lazarus appeared rather perplexed. ‘I do not
understand these words.
O-oh. If these people literally didn’t understand the
meaning of the word evil, that left them wide open for
attack from the likes of the witch. Tory prayed to the
Goddess that Mahaud had not followed her here.
‘Well, I guess you’d see her as a very negative
person,’ Tory began again, ‘only she’s spirit mostly . . .
like Turan but completely opposite in her intent.’
‘Oh, I see.’ Lazarus smiled broadly, though when he
realised the implications of what this meant, his
expression collapsed into a frown. ‘That’s not good.’
‘Excuse me.’
Tory and Lazarus turned to see who had entered.
Rhun. Tory’s heart leapt to see him.
‘Xavier.’ Lazarus rose to greet him. ‘Tory, allow me
to introduce one of our older brothers. He is Head of
Research here in the Shi-im-ti temple.’
‘That’s wonderful . . .’ Tory was in shock, and
didn’t quite know what to say. ‘I am pleased to meet
you, Xavier.’
‘Likewise. I have already heard so much about you.’
Turan had had Xavier summoned to the meeting in
the conference room to be briefed before attending
their subject. She was, as it turned out, proving to be a
woman of major historical signiﬁcance.
‘Lazarus, Turan wishes to see you. I’ll take over from
here.’
The beaming smile on his brother’s face puzzled
Lazarus. Xavier was known to be of a cheery disposition,
but he appeared completely ecstatic about something.

‘Am I healed then?’ Tory was disappointed that
Lazarus was leaving; she was just starting to feel really
comfortable with him.
‘I was just here to help you realise the cause of your
blockages. Now I will leave you in Xavier’s very capable
hands.’ He smiled as he began to depart. ‘I’ll see you
when you get out of here.’
Tory waved after him then looked to Xavier.
He was dressed just as Darius had been, in a robe of
white, a sash of royal blue and one of green. The rings on
his ﬁngers were those appropriate to these orders and his
headband was made of orichalchum. His hair was long,
straight, and as dark as Turan’s, but Xavier wore his back
off his face in one tidy braid that fell the length of his
spine. She noted his eyes were violet, as was the case with
everyone else she’d met thus far, and he was about seven
foot in height. ‘So what does your name mean . . . giant?’
As he gazed down upon her, Xavier had to chuckle.
‘No, Nin, it means bright.’
‘Please, call me Tory . . . nobody else does.’ In fact
not one person had even bothered to ask what her
name was.
‘What does that mean?’
‘I have no idea.’ She shrugged. ‘I don’t think it
means anything.’
‘Well, it’s totally unsuitable then. En Micah shall
give you a proper name, no doubt.’
‘What do you mean it’s unsuitable.’ Tory let out half
a laugh. ‘It’s my name.’
Xavier turned her around and walked her towards
the steaming, scented pool made of amethyst, massaging

her shoulders gently. ‘But one’s name should be attuned
to one’s own sonic frequency to enhance one’s personal
potential . . . reinforce it.’
‘I suppose,’ Tory murmured, not really catching his
drift, or even caring to. The energy Xavier was
channelling into her body was so tranquillizing she
could barely walk.
‘Now into the tub.’ He directed her to the steaming
pool.
She was so sedate that she automatically followed
his instruction and began to untie her robe. ‘Hold on a
minute.’ Tory ﬁnally acknowledged her actions and tied
the belt back up. ‘While you’re here?’
‘Well I’m going to have a lot of trouble trying to
cleanse you from outside the room.’ He seemed amused
by her protest. ‘Trust me . . .’
‘If you say, I’m a doctor, I’ll hit you.’
‘Well, no . . .’ Xavier took a serious pause. ‘I’m the
best, is more what I had in mind.’
He seemed quite serious about the claim, and Tory
reached the conclusion that Xavier was every bit as
cocky and impressed with himself as her son had
been. Needless to say, she felt all the more
uncomfortable about disrobing in his presence, Rhun
being the philanderer he was. ‘Aren’t there any
women around here?’
‘Yes, indeed, I treat several of them every day. But
there are none in my profession, if that’s what you
mean. If being naked around me bothers you, I can
remove my —’
‘No, really . . .’ Tory insisted. ‘It’s ﬁne.’

‘Well, then.’ Xavier raised his eyebrows, as he again
motioned her to the pool. ‘Let us get you cleansed?’
Tory wouldn’t have thought twice about undressing
for a masseur or a doctor, and as neither Lazarus or
Turan seemed even mildly interested in her feminine
attributes, Tory ﬁgured why should Xavier prove any
different. Hence she dropped her robe and descended
the stairs into the steamy pool.
Holy Mother! Xavier could hardly believe his eyes.
‘I heard that,’ Tory warned, gliding along the surface
of the scented water that felt kind of silky against her skin.
‘I do apologise.’ The Shar gave half a laugh,
surprised by his own lack of professionalism. ‘It’s just
that I have never seen a woman with such a muscular
physique . . . though art truly a warrior.’
‘Have you been speaking to Taliesin?’
‘No, Nin . . . not he.’
‘Who then?’
‘That is not your concern at present.’ Xavier
wandered over to the steps of the pool and took a seat
in the water, still fully robed. ‘Come.’ He motioned her
to sit before him.
‘Why?’ She hesitated.
‘Because otherwise I’ll have to come to you, and I
don’t feel like a swim at present.’ He again motioned her
closer. As she cautiously approached, the Shar turned her
around so that her back was to him. He supported her
torso between his knees, placing one hand over her third
eye and the other palm upwards towards the sunlight.
Tory was forced to close her eyes at this point, his
calming energy was so intense. ‘That feels unbelievable.’

‘Yes, well . . . there is some work involved for you,
too.’ Rhun spoke ever so softly now. ‘I want you to turn
your attention to where my hand is placed. Breathe
deeply with me, feeling your breath rushing through and
cleansing this area on the inhale . . . and as the blockage
is released on the exhale, I ask you to envisage the
darkness dispersing through your ﬁngers and toes into
the water.’
‘To prevent you from absorbing it.’ Tory had
experienced Reike healing before, and this seemed quite
similar.
‘Indeed.’ Xavier was surprised that she knew. ‘Now,
as you do this, I want you to think of what has caused
this blockage.’
‘But then you shall know.’ Tory ruled that if they
could pick up on each other’s thoughts from the other
side of the room, Xavier would surely know everything,
holding her as he was.
‘Yes, but I am not permitted to discuss your case
with anyone without your consent.’ He could feel her
tensing up. ‘You must trust me, Nin. You shall never get
out of the Shi-im-ti temple until we work through this.’
She drew a deep breath in resolve. ‘Alright . . .’ She
let go of the fear; at least it wasn’t Turan treating her.
‘But just remember, you asked for it.’ She got
comfortable again.
‘I think I can handle it,’ he assured, still blissfully
unaware of the complicated history of his patient.
After the conference had adjourned, Shar Turan
accompanied En Durand to the Temple of Dur-nu-ga.

This was the main astrological observatory in the
city of Chailidocean, and was located across the canal
from the circular central island that housed the citadel.
All the temples of the Higher Orders were located on
the ﬁrst of the ring of islands that encompassed the
royal city, along with the abodes of those who studied
there. This meant there was little cause for the scholars
and priests to venture far from their well-isolated inner
sanctum of learning, and most liked it that way.
As Turan entered the temple, he was pondering
the Elders’ peculiar behaviour towards him during
their meeting this afternoon; what had been amusing
them so?
What has this girl to do with me? the Shar inquired of
his mentor.
Durand came to a complete standstill, stunned by
Turan’s art for getting straight to the heart of the matter.
He tried to be just as straightforward in his retort. I have
been advised not to discuss that with you at present. But,
believe me when I say, you are smart enough to work it out
for yourself. Durand was thinking that if the Elders did
not want Turan to know of his destiny in this affair,
then they should not have been so obvious when vexing
him about it.
Could you possibly be a bit more speciﬁc? What’s come
over everyone today? Turan continued towards the
observatory.
You’re going the wrong way, Durand hinted,
glancing around the large foyer to make sure there was
no-one to overhear him. If it’s answers you seek, try the
Hall of Records.

Why? What am I looking for exactly? Turan returned
to Durand’s side, and the priest thought hard before
resolving to take action. Follow me.
Durand spread Tory’s chart out on one of the huge
study benches, whilst Turan entered one of the many
long rows where the astrological charts where ﬁled
systematically for easy reference.
Why am I looking for my birth chart? Turan willed the
old scroll from its place on the shelf, then directed it
towards En Darius. The scroll ﬂoated towards the study
table and came to rest gently upon it.
All shall be made clear, Durand assured, as he pinned
the last corner of Tory’s chart down securely. Now, it has
been decided by En Micah, En Cato, Shu Asa and myself,
that this girl’s name shall be Lamamu . . . guess why?
Divine master of love and war, Turan surmised,
looking to the girl’s chart. Well, ‘divine master’ comes
from what we have already learned of her. Turan motioned
to the chart. And as both the planet of war and the planet
of love are positioned in her ﬁrst house, I would gather this is
where the rest of her name was derived. The ﬁrst house in
one’s chart pertained to one’s self.
Indeed, Durand conﬁrmed. Now take a look at where
these planets are positioned on your chart.
The seventh house — which normally pertains to
one’s business partners, lovers and marriage partners. So,
it’s just a strange coincidence. Turan shrugged.
Yes, but her birth sign is the virgin, Durand pointed
out, which also occupies your seventh house.
Another coincidence. Turan was sounding a little
uneasy now.

Yes, well, that’s what I thought, but take a look at what
sign occupies her seventh house.
Turan looked closer. Oh no.
It was the sign of the Goat, which was the Shar’s
birth sign.
But you may be right. Durand assured his pupil. It
may not mean anything.
How on earth did you discover this? Did you go through
everyone’s chart, or just mine? Turan sounded a tad
annoyed, which was very unlike him as he rarely
showed any sort of emotion at all.
Just after the girl arrived, En Razu came to give me her
details, so that a chart could be drawn, Durand confessed.
He was the one who suggested I might want to compare it
with yours. I asked him why, but he only explained that he
guessed I might ﬁnd it interesting.
Is that so, Turan pondered. It would seem his
friend knew more about this girl than he was letting
on. But surely many of the same planets feature in
Alaric’s chart.
Alaric was Turan’s elder twin brother.
No, as he was born earlier, his chart is quite different.
Of course. Turan wanted to hit himself. He knew
this had to be the case. So, you have obviously told the
Elders of this.
Not as such, Durand was hesitant to admit. You know
they have their own avenues to source information. En Micah
has always preferred psychic hypothesis over scientiﬁc fact.
This thought served to bother Turan even more;
what kind of ludicrous scenario were they all dreaming
up about him?

It was quite late by the time Xavier had heard
Tory’s whole sordid tale. They had finished in the
pool hours ago, and when Tory was robed she had
felt comfortable to sit and chat. The healer’s
mind boggled at what this poor girl had been through
just prior to her arrival in their midst, not to mention
the silent anguish she must have felt since
landing here, recognising everyone and knowing noone. Not even En Razu was truly who she thought
he was.
‘Wow.’ Xavier sat back and poured himself a glass of
water.
‘I warned you, didn’t I.’ Tory bit into a piece of
melon that was a strange purple colour and tasted rather
like passionfruit. She felt absolutely fabulous to have
gotten the whole tale off her chest. ‘So, what would you
advise I do now?’
‘Well.’ He let out a heavy exhale. ‘All things
considered, that’s quite a question. Your two main
problems would seem to be ﬁnding a cure for your
husband and getting back to him without causing a shift
in dimension.’
‘They didn’t call you bright for no reason.’ Tory gave
him a gentle nudge of encouragement.
‘Why, thank you, Mother.’ He made jest of her
claim that he would be her son in a little over twelve
thousand years from now.
‘Don’t laugh,’ Tory cautioned. ‘You sound just like
him.’ She placed aside the rind of the fruit and washed
her ﬁngers in the bowl of water provided. ‘So, can you
help me?’

‘Not I, I’m afraid.’ Xavier sat upright. ‘But there are
quite a few men here that could.’ He paused to consider.
‘On the healing side of things . . . Shu Asa, En Darius,
or even En Razu.’
‘Taliesin, good.’ Tory’s mind ticked over.
‘En Durand and my brother, Turan, are the highest
authority on the time–space continuum.’
‘Great.’
She sounded discouraged. Xavier wondered why.
‘Do you feel anything for Turan . . . knowing he will be
your husband some day?’
Tory shrugged, a little overwhelmed by the question.
‘Do you feel any differently towards him, knowing he
will be your father?’
‘Sorry.’ He could tell by her tone that she felt his
question rather personal. ‘I shouldn’t have asked.’
She shrugged again. ‘The truth is, no . . . I don’t
think so. Mind you, that’s what I said about Miles.’
Xavier.
Tory and the Xavier were both startled by Turan’s
voice, and looked to the entrance of the chamber to
ﬁnd his upper body protruding through the door.
Time to let our patient get some rest, don’t you think?
‘Indeed.’ Xavier raised himself, helping Tory to her
feet as he did. He paused to look at her . . . ‘Well, it’s
been a real education.’ He gave her a hug of reassurance.
‘I shall come back tomorrow, and we shall talk again.’
‘I’d like that.’ Tory observed him fondly as he left.
‘Sweet dreams.’ He pressed the button that opened
the door and it slid aside so fast and so silently that one
would have thought it had merely disappeared. ‘You’re

safe here.’ Xavier closed the entrance behind him,
turning to his brother who waited in the corridor.
‘Fascinating woman,’ he commented to Turan as he
began to walk off.
Why did you imply I would be her husband one day?
‘You know I can’t discuss a patient’s case with you.’
Xavier seemed to revel in the fact. ‘That would be
unethical.’
I feel these are extenuating circumstances.
Xavier laughed. ‘I don’t see why? Do you have some
special interest in our sister?’
What do you mean?
‘Well, she is a very attractive woman . . . intelligent,
strong, and forthright to boot.’
So?
‘So!’ Xavier shook his head. ‘Sometimes I feel very
sorry for you, my friend.’ He walked away from the
conversation, enjoying having one over on his brother
for a change.
Likewise, I’m sure. Turan let him go, as he was
obviously not going to be of any help. If he was going
to ﬁnd out anything at all, En Razu was the man to
speak with.

13

THREE WISE MEN

F

or two days, Tory did nothing but swim, sunbake,
eat tropical fruit and drink her ﬁll of fresh spring
water; doctor’s orders. This was their customary
way of cleansing the body, along with the hands-on
healing and counselling she received from Xavier.
The Shar had successfully calmed her state of being
to the point where nothing seemed to bother her. For,
as he’d pointed out, time wasn’t imposing itself upon
her any longer. At this perspective point in history, the
Dark Age wasn’t going to happen for thousands of years,
thus there seemed little point in rushing back there. He
advised she could learn much here that would aid her in
the future, wherever it may lead her.
Tory had been mulling over the nature of time a
good deal lately. By her reckoning she could live a whole

lifetime here in Atlantis, which according to Xavier
averaged around a couple of thousand years, and still
pick up in the Dark Age where she’d left off. This was
provided she didn’t meddle too much with history. Still,
Xavier had said his people could ﬁgure out a way around
even this problem.
All the answers she was seeking were here, along
with a few she didn’t even have the questions for yet,
thus she felt at ease to relax and enjoy herself.
On the eve of Tory’s third day in the Shu-im-ti
temple, when she’d ﬁnished with Xavier for the day and
it was still too early for bed, she sat herself down by the
pool and dangled her feet in the cool water, staring up
at the night sky beyond the domed ceiling. What was it
like out there, she wondered? The peace and isolation
of this chamber were wonderful of course, but she
yearned to get out there and explore.
‘My, but they have done a good job with you,’
Taliesin exclaimed upon sighting her. ‘You are the very
picture of health and radiance, Nin.’ He took up her
hand and kissed it.
‘I feel much improved.’ A smile beamed upon her
face; she was pleased to see him.
‘Sorry I’ve been away so long.’ He picked up on her
relief as he sat himself down. ‘I’ve been in conference
with the High Priests of the Shu Sar for days . . .
deciding what’s to become of you.’
‘Of me?’
‘Well, don’t sound so surprised,’ Taliesin laughed.
‘It’s not every day that an immortal warrioress from the
future drops out of inner space and into the family of

the Shu Sar.’ He tamed his amusement somewhat. ‘The
island hasn’t seen this kind of event since, say, the day
I arrived.’
Tory giggled; Taliesin was more charming this way,
more human. ‘They’re going to make me a goddess or
something, aren’t they?’
‘Something to that effect . . .’ He raised his
eyebrows. ‘It certainly makes one wonder where some of
the old Greek legends came from, that’s for sure.’
‘So what did you all decide?’
‘Well, that’s a rather good question. According to
your chart you have such a varied array of potential that
I dare say the ﬁnal decision shall be left up to you. You
see, the rite of judgement usually takes place at the age
of three; thus the child is simply guided by the High
Priests to study that which will help fulﬁl his or her
karmic debt. However, as you are immortal . . .’ He
paused and smiled; she had not told him this, nor how
she’d become thus.
‘So you know.’ Tory had already considered that,
with the level of technology they had here, it wouldn’t
take them long to ﬁgure it out.
‘It’s something I hope we can discuss one day.’ He
smiled, acknowledging his curiosity. ‘But not today.
Now, as I was saying . . . as you are immortal, your
tests and chart encompass all your karma, making it
very hard to decide what field would serve you best.
For only you know what purpose you are here for. So,
some of the members of the council would like to
meet with you in the morning to discuss your options,
if that suits you?’

‘Well, I’ll have to check my schedule . . .’ Tory
joked, but then became more serious. ‘Are you
kidding me? That would be wonderful.’ She seemed
overawed.
‘What’s the matter?’
Tory shook her head and gave a shrug. ‘Everyone is
so helpful here, so extremely hospitable.’
‘Oh yes,’ he assured her with all sincerity. ‘The city
of the golden gates is a most splendid place . . .
especially for scholars, like ourselves.’
‘I imagine it’s beautiful.’ An air of fascination came
over her as she looked again to the starlit sky out the
window.
‘Splendiferous, in fact.’ He spoke like a true patriot.
‘Take your scenario of beauty, times it by ten, and you
might come close to the serene majesty of Chailidocean.
But I shall not spoil it for you.’ He patted her knee and
stood up.
‘Are you going?’ She was disappointed.
‘Regrettably, I must.’ He bent down and took up her
hand to kiss it. ‘You should get some rest. You’ll need
your wits about you tomorrow.’
‘Taliesin, I’m immortal. I don’t need to sleep . . .
don’t you ﬁnd that?’
‘Ah!’ His eyes parted wide as he pointed out. ‘Rest
and sleep are not the same thing now, are they? That’s
why you’ve been in the Shi-im-ti temple so long.’
Tory rolled her eyes; she’d walked right into that
one. ‘Alright.’ She dismissed him with a shrug.
‘Learn to relax!’ He emphasised on his way out.
‘Will you be present tomorrow?’

‘You can count on it.’ He closed the door and
was gone.
Tory leaned back onto her elbows, smiling broadly
with satisfaction. ‘Excellent!’ She voiced her enthusiasm
softly. ‘I couldn’t have planned it better myself.’
En Razu.
Taliesin paused on the temple stairs to wait for
Turan to catch him up; he’d anticipated that the Shar
would be seeking an audience with him by now.
Where have you been? I’ve been looking for you for
days! Shar Turan stated in a way that demanded an
explanation.
I’m so sorry, Taliesin began, carefully considering his
response. But I’ve been in conference with Nin Bau, Shu
Micah, Shu Asa, Nin Sibyl and En Seba.
Holy smoke! Turan was taken aback by the
prestigious list. What could have prompted such a gathering?
He ﬁshed for information, but Taliesin wasn’t biting. He
merely laughed and continued on his way towards the
main promenade that led to the citadel bridge.
Those ripples in the continuum since the girl’s arrival?
Turan had caught up to Taliesin; he wasn’t about to let
him get away without getting some kind of a clue as to
what was going on.
What about them?
They wouldn’t have anything to do with all this?
Oh! . . . Most certainly!
How so? Turan pushed his luck.
My dear Shar . . . En Razu paused, as smug with his
hidden knowledge as Xavier had been. You are the expert

on the time–space continuum . . . we were hoping you’d tell
us. The merlin suppressed a laugh and walked away
before he said anything too clever and gave the whole
scheme away.
Not you, too! Turan was disappointed; he’d felt sure
that En Razu would enlighten him a little, but it would
seem everyone was in on the conspiracy.
After her morning swim and a breakfast of fresh fruit
and water, Tory waited impatiently for the imminent
arrival of her distinguished visitors in the Shu Sar’s
healing chamber.
I wonder if I’ll know them? she speculated, wandering
slowly to and fro.
Tory stilled herself, as the sound of her door
vanishing alerted her to company.
‘Tory, good morning.’ Taliesin strode in ahead of
everyone to do the introductions. He took hold of her
hand and led her to the lounge by the door where his
associates were waiting to be seated. ‘These are the
three gentlemen I was telling you about.’
Tory almost froze in her tracks when she spied the face
of the hooded man in the middle, who seemed to be the
shortest of the three, though perhaps that was because he
was rather stooped. His features were like Keridwen’s, only
he appeared to be mortal. His huge, long, slanted eyes
nearly wrapped around his enlarged head to meet with his
temples and were grey-green in colour, as was his skin. He
had barely any nose at all and a tiny little mouth, but
despite his strange features he was rather beautiful in that
he was emitting the most lovely energy.

Do not be afraid, child. He smiled as he addressed
her, bowing slightly.
‘I am not,’ Tory assured him politely. ‘Just a little . . .
astonished.’ She looked to Taliesin; he could have given
her some kind of warning.
‘This is Shu Micah,’ Taliesin merely smiled as he
picked up on her annoyance. ‘He is the Chief Magi of
The Orders of Passage here in Chailidocean.’
Tory bowed slightly to the holy man; deciding to
seek an explanation later. ‘I am pleased to meet you,
Shu Micah, sorry if I seemed rude.’
Not at all . . . it is to be expected. He raised what
would have been his eyebrows if he’d had any, having
an amusing thought. You should have seen the look on En
Razu’s face the ﬁrst time he laid eyes on me.
All the men present chuckled at the recollection.
Tory’s sights were drawn to the man furthest from her,
for she recognised him.
Yes, well. Taliesin sounded quite embarrassed. That
was a long time ago. He conveniently directed his
colleagues attention back to their meeting. As Tory
was staring at En Durand, Taliesin decided to
introduce him next. ‘This is En Durand, who is in
charge of the Orders of Time, Space and Etheric
Frequency study.’
Durand was one of the men Xavier had named as
being useful for her to know. Xavier had also named
him as Turan’s mentor, so Tory was not surprised to ﬁnd
the scientist was in fact Sir Tiernan.
I am honoured to meet you. Durand bowed politely to
the putative daughter of the Shu Sar.

‘And I am pleased to meet you, sir.’ Tory emphasised
the fact.
‘And this is Shu Asa. He is the Chief High Magi of
the Healing Orders, both animal and mineral.’
Another of the men Xavier had told her to look out
for, but this man she did not recognise. He did rather
remind Tory of the stereotypical image of the prophet
Noah, as he’d been depicted in the storybooks she’d
read as a girl. His hair, beard and moustache were snowy
white, though he did not appear so old for his hair to
warrant such a colour. His eyes were bright blue and
light seemed to shine from them, as was the case with
his whole being.
‘I am very pleased to meet you too, sir.’ Tory bowed
her head as the Magi took hold of her hands and guided
her to a seat beside him.
The pleasure is all mine, child. Shu Asa assured, as the
rest of the men were seated. Xavier has told me you are
doing splendidly, and in his opinion, you are ready to be
socially activated.
‘Yes, Taliesin mentioned I would be allowed to study
here.’
Indeed, Shu Asa conﬁrmed. And that is why we are
here . . . to explain the different Orders you may enter and
help you choose the one that will suit you best.
‘Only one?’ This was most disappointing; from what
Xavier had told Tory, she needed access to at least two.
Well, this is usually the case, as it is unwise to scatter
one’s energy and concentration. But, he emphasised, as
you are more spiritually mature than the average novice, we
might just make an exception.

There were eight major deities one could choose to
serve, pertaining to the eight golden statues that stood
around the chamber. Three of these were mainly
associated with the Orders of Healing, whilst there were
three that encompassed the Orders of Science. The two
deities remaining dealt with the Orders of Passage,
where both healing and science fused.
The Orders of Passage that were afﬁliated with the
solar deities Helio and Heliona, were Shu Micah’s
department. His initiates saw to the sacred rites of birth,
judgement, maturation, union, and the passing of the
spirit. He was responsible for the prophets cum advisers,
in the service of the Shu Sar and indeed all the truth
seers in the community.
En Durand explained that the Orders of Science
were under the guidance of one En Seba, who could
not be present due to other business. The deities
concerned with the Sciences were the Orders of
Akhantuih, where one could study Astrology,
Astronomy and the principles of Chaos. Or there was
the Order of Philaeia if one was more interested in the
subjects of Philosophy, Humanist Science, Technology
and Architecture. And lastly there was the Order of
Ta-Khu, where the time–space continuum and etheric
frequencies were studied.
The Orders of Healing, headed by Shu Asa, were
more extensive and diverse than the other orders and
encompassed many things. He made it clear that,
although the orders had their different deities to
appease, they all intertwined and depended on each
other in many ways. The Orders of Danuih were

dedicated to healing the human body or healing the
earth. The Order of Khe-Ta studied the healing of
domestic animals, but also encompassed those who
studied the arts. In the Orders of Kheit-Sin one could
learn how to heal or train wild animals. Those who
wished to serve in the Courts of Justice and study law, or
those who wanted to learn the warrior arts, would also
enter the Order of Kheit-Sin.
When the three learned men had departed, Tory
meandered around in a daze, feeling as if she would
burst with joy. ‘Can you believe this?’
Taliesin smiled broadly, understanding her
excitement.
‘This is the kind of university I’ve always wanted to
attend.’ Tory threw her arms in the air, spinning round,
before coming to a complete halt. ‘Trouble was, it didn’t
exist.’ She had a laugh. ‘I love my life.’
‘That is why you’ve been given so much of it.’
Taliesin thought he’d best endeavour to calm her
down. ‘Now let us talk about what you shall do with it,
shall we?’ He took her by the arm and sat her on the
lounge again.
‘But I already know exactly who I wish to study
under . . . Shu Asa and En Seba.’ Her decision was
resolute. ‘But I would like to talk to you about why I’m
here, as I believe you should know.’ She would leave out
the part about him abandoning her, and just stick to the
quest at hand.
‘Well, I’m happy to listen.’ He offered politely. The
Merlin couldn’t let on that she’d told him before as Tory

would want to know when, and this he was not allowed
to tell her just yet.
‘Well, in that case,’ Taliesin commented when the
saga was over, ‘Shu Asa and En Seba are sound choices,
and what’s more, I will get to see you quite often.’
‘So you will help me?’
‘Of course!’ He could hardly believe she’d even felt
she had to ask. ‘Everyone here will be happy to help.
But ah . . .’ Taliesin scratched his head. ‘I think it best
not speak of Maelgwn to Turan.’
‘I had no intention of it . . . though Xavier knows
about the connection.’
Taliesin waved off that concern. ‘Xavier is very tightlipped, he shall say nothing without your permission.’
The thought of Xavier reminded Tory of a
question. ‘Taliesin, why is it that I recognise practically
everyone here?’
‘Well, as everyone lives for thousands of years these
days, there are more souls incarnate than in the
following epochs, where the normal lifespan was
considerably shorter. Thus, the greater probability of
bumping into those you’ve known, know or will
know again.’
It made sense. ‘So what happens now?’ Tory was
eager to get on with her quest.
‘Tonight you will be taken to the Great Temple of
Chailidocean, where all the High Priests and Priestesses
shall give you their blessing. They will present you with
the colours of your chosen Orders, and pronounce to
you your given name.’
‘Which is?’

‘You’ll ﬁnd out tonight,’ he teased. ‘Then afterwards,
I’ve heard that the Shu Sar is giving a huge feast in your
honour.’
‘Good Lord!’ It all sounded a bit awesome. ‘You
could have told me sooner.’
‘Why? There is no need for you to prepare. As I
said, this rite is usually performed when one is three
years of age . . . ergo, a child could do it.’ He mocked
her dismay.
‘But what am I to wear to this hullabaloo?’ Tory
motioned to the rather sheer pink robe she wore at
present. ‘I am not leaving this room wearing this.’
Taliesin burst into laughter. ‘No, no, no. You shall
be brought a robe the like of mine, only it will be of
pale blue. The High Priests all decided that you are a bit
too experienced to be considered a novice, and not yet
experienced enough for the white garment of the High
Order. Thus, yours shall be the garment of the middle
orders.’
‘Hold on, if Turan has hardly ever lived in the
physical world, how experienced could he be?’ She
didn’t understand how the system worked.
‘Well, Turan’s rank was earned through spiritual
attainment and technological advancement. For in
these, his chosen ﬁelds of study, he has excelled beyond
even his mentors.’
‘So I would be considered of the High Order of
Kheit-Sin, if the warrior arts were one of the ﬁelds I
had chosen.’
Taliesin nodded to concede. ‘As I have heard that
you are a ﬁne warrior, I suppose so.’

Tory forgot this Taliesin didn’t know her as well as
his older self. ‘I don’t suppose there is much call for that
sort of talent here.’
‘Not in this city. But in Keriophis to the north, and
Kudra to the South, there is a growing need.’
Tory was interested to learn this, but Taliesin rose to
prevent further enquiry.
‘Anyway . . . I can’t sit around chatting all day, I
have much to do before tonight.’
‘You will be there,’ she beseeched him with a smile.
‘To hold my hand.’
‘I shall always be there, Nin.’ He was very sincere
about the pledge. ‘I hope you don’t mind . . .’ his tone
became more humorous, ‘but I am assuming the role of
one of your parents, along with the Shu Sar. You may
remember seeing him brieﬂy when you ﬁrst arrived.’
Tory shook her head with a perplexed look on her
face. ‘I do not recall anything before waking up with you.’
‘Ah . . .!’ He sighed light-heartedly. ‘It sounds so
lovely when you put it that way.’
Tory could have sworn he was ﬂirting with her,
and she could feel herself blushing. ‘You know what I
mean . . .’ She smiled coyly before frowning again.
‘Though I do recall having a dream about my father.’
‘That would be he.’ The Merlin clicked his ﬁngers.
‘What? Are you saying my father . . .’
‘A past life incarnation of,’ Taliesin corrected.
‘Is the supreme ruler of Atlantis!’ Tory couldn’t
believe it. ‘All these sons are his!’
‘Yes, ten in all.’
‘Ten!’ Tory held her head. ‘His poor wife.’

‘Wives, the Shu Sar has ﬁve.’
‘Five!’
‘Melcah, Orphelia, Salome, Kila, and Mahar — in
that order. They bore him one set of twin sons each.’
‘Just like Plato’s legend of Poseidon.’
‘Just,’ he agreed. ‘Now I really do have to go,’ he
implored her. ‘I shall arrive before sunset, so don’t worry
about a thing.’
‘Hold on.’ Tory wasn’t quite ﬁnished with him yet.
‘Shu Micah?’ She paused to consider how to phrase the
question. ‘Is he an . . . extra-terrestrial, or a fairy, or . . .
what is he, exactly?’
‘Well, it all means the same thing . . . and yes, he is.’
He waved on his way to the door; he did hate being
late, and he was fast becoming so.
‘Are there a lot of beings like him here?’ She went
after the Merlin.
‘No, not any more. He’s what you might call a
missionary. But he is in touch with his race.’ Taliesin
took hold of her shoulders. ‘There is nothing for you to
fear here.’
Tory gave a mild nod to conﬁrm she trusted in his
word, then he departed. She had much food for
thought; the enigmas of Atlantis were really starting to
get interesting.

14

NIGHT OF THE SOUL

A

t sunset, when the liturgy was due to begin,
Taliesin arrived to escort Tory to the temple.
He found her standing in the middle of the
chamber, her arms outstretched, gaping at the garment
on her body.
‘I feel like a monk,’ she laughed, raising the large
hood up over her head and crossing her arms deep
inside the huge sleeves.
He humoured her. ‘It’s just for tonight. We’ll see to
your fashion preferences tomorrow. Besides, I think it’s
rather becoming.’
‘You’re too kind.’ She rolled her eyes.
But he wasn’t joking. She was tanned and vibrant
from her rest, and the pale blue of the robe only
enhanced the colour of her lovely, violet eyes. Her long,

fair hair was in brilliant contrast to the golden colour of
her skin as it hung softly round her shoulders before
disappearing inside the hood.
‘Are you ready, Nin?’ He held out his hand to her.
‘As ready as I’ll ever be.’ She interlocked her arm in
his, expectation beaming from every ﬁbre of her being.
They moved into the beautiful hallway of the
Shu-im-ti Temple. Consistent with the rest of the
structure was the amethyst ﬂoor and the luminous walls
of white marble. The roof was curved, and featured
large windows, so you could stare straight up at the
stars. Off to one side of them was a long window seat,
where patients and staff could sit and look out over the
garden courtyard. Featured on the sill of the long
window were small domed objects, metallic in colour.
Tory slowed down to observe a temple novice drawing
back the metal sheath to uncover a glowing blue ball.
‘Solar-charged crystal,’ Taliesin explained. ‘Now you
can’t get cleaner energy than that. They will light this
whole area come nightfall.’
Between the doorways on the other side of the
rather wide corridor stood beautiful crystal and marble
sculptures of the human body. There were fountains
here and there, each featuring a different kind of stone:
quartz, rose-quartz and aquamarine among others.
They turned a corner to descend the wide staircase
that led to the foyer, when Tory spied Xavier speaking
with a young woman on a lounge close by.
Upon sighting his sister, the Shar excused himself
and approached Tory. ‘I wanted to wish you luck.’ He
gave her a ﬂower. ‘You’ve done very well.’

‘You’re the one who’s done well.’ She gave him a
squeeze, which he returned with fervour. ‘Thanks so
much, for everything.’
‘Do come on, Tory.’ Taliesin urged from the bottom
of the stairs. ‘We’ll be late.’
‘I’ll see you at the celebration afterwards.’ Xavier
watched Tory make haste down the stairs.
‘Please do.’ She waved back at him.
The Merlin guided her across the grand foyer where
they bumped into Lazarus, who also gave her a ﬂower
and wished her luck.
‘Must we address all your brothers before we get
there?’ Taliesin ushered her outside.
‘Oh my!’ Tory came to a halt, the sight of the sun
setting over the city was absolutely glorious.
Hundreds of exquisite temples and majestic buildings
were laid out before her, mainly white in colour. The
streets were beautifully paved in white sandstone, and
the entire place looked immaculately clean. Lamps in
the mode of the solar ones inside the healing temple
were being turned on throughout the city, only they
were long and thin in structure. These shed a bluish
light that was quite like that of the moon, only brighter.
‘Is it real?’ she asked, frozen to the spot, her eyes
glued to the mountain peaks on the horizon.
‘I’ve asked myself that same question every day since
I arrived.’ Taliesin caught her sense of wonder and paused
to appreciate the moment. The breeze was warm and
sweet with the scent of gardens, which were everywhere,
and, in the distance, Tory could hear the sound of voices
chanting to the sound of pounding drums.

‘Where’s the music coming from?’ She felt drawn to
it and descended the stairs to seek it out.
‘It’s coming from the temple.’
Tory came to a standstill, deciding to wait for her
escort. ‘That’s funny . . . I feel like . . .’
‘Like they’re calling you,’ Taliesin said. ‘They are.
The composition has been speciﬁcally written to attune
to your personal sonic.’
He guided the wonderstruck girl by the hand down
the main promenade to the citadel bridge, which was
guarded by eight huge men all dressed in red and gold.
As Tory and the Merlin approached, the large
golden gates were opened and the guards moved aside.
All eight men bowed deeply to them, granting them
passage without question. Tory felt rather like she was
in the land of the giants, as they all stood at least a
foot and a half taller than she.
In the middle of the canal bridge, Tory paused to
look back at the ringed island from which they’d come,
then to the circular central city that they approached.
‘Plato was right again.’
‘Yes, indeed.’ Taliesin guided her away from
her sightseeing. ‘But your observations can wait
until tomorrow. Let’s not keep those on the High
Council waiting.’
At the far side of the bridge was another guard of
eight, who parted the large, golden gates at their end
and bowed as the Shu Sar’s adviser led the young
initiate into the royal city.
‘Taliesin . . .’ Tory gaped at the road before them. ‘It
looks as if it has been paved with gold.’

‘All the way up to the temple.’ He winked at her.
‘So just follow the yellow brick road.’ He skipped down
it with her, which made Tory laugh.
The chanting and the drums were louder now. Tory
could hear tambourines and other percussion
instruments. There was also some sort of tightly-strung
string instrument with a very high pitch, weaving a
melody over the rhythms.
When they’d passed through the large outer
buildings of the royal island, they came to an
extensive garden. The golden pathway continued
through the lovely park and in the centre, at the
top of a large mound, stood the Great Temple
silhouetted against a backdrop of stars. Torches
burned brightly down either side of the path that led
to the temple stairs, where the musicians and choir
were playing.
Butterﬂies began to ﬂutter in Tory’s stomach,
though she did not waver from her course; as a Queen
of twenty years, she was well used to pomp and
pageantry. The music consumed her, heightening her
senses and calming her mind.
The structure that lay before them was completely
circular, as all the buildings appeared to be. Marble
stairs spiralled their way round the huge mound
towards the plateau upon which the temple had been
constructed.
The temple itself was octagonal. Taliesin explained
that the structures here were all of a rounded shape
because sharp angles were not harmonious to the
human spirit — or any spirit for that matter.

They ascended the stairs to the shrine, and with one
ﬁnal pound from the drums, the music stopped and all
was silent.
Tory looked to her escort, curious as to the delay. He
was smiling at her, one eye cocked in anticipation.
A woman’s voice that was stronger and more
compelling than a tenor, yet sweeter than any soprano,
rung out in the night. Again Tory felt the hypnotic
allure of the chant tugging at her heart, alleviating her
fear as it beckoned her forth.
Upon reaching the summit they passed under the giant
marble pillars trimmed with gold, and came to two huge
doors made of orichalchum that were already parted
wide to grant them entry.
The floor of the inner sanctum was solid gold, and
the silver tiles that covered the walls sparkled in the
flaming light of the torches and candles. In fact,
everything within sight glittered, as it was all made of
one precious metal or another. The foundations that
supported the roof were set with jewels, some as large
as your average soccer ball; not in all of Tory’s travels,
nor her wildest dreams, had she ever seen anything
like this.
In the centre of the shrine was a raised platform,
about thirty foot round. This platform sat directly
underneath the centre of the dome overhead and was
only the height of a couple of stairs. The area that was
located in the semi-circular apse at the opposing end,
however, was raised much higher, as it housed the altar.
The holy symbol hanging in pride of place in the apse

was three entwined rings. The central ring at the top
was of orichalchum and it passed through the lower two
rings of gold and silver. Tory guessed this represented
either mind, body and spirit or the triple Goddess, or
maybe both.
The Shu Sar, Shu Micah, Shu Asa and Turan
awaited her on the central platform along with one
other man she hadn’t met, and two women whose faces
were completely veiled.
One of the women was dressed entirely in
shimmering silver from head to toe, though her veil
was of a sheerer material than the rest of her attire.
Around her head was a band of platinum that featured
a large pink diamond in the centre. The other woman
was the one chanting, and she stood in the middle of
the semi-circle. Tory guessed her to be the High
Priestess for her head-dress was rather ornate and
strikingly similar to those worn by the pharaohs of
ancient Egypt. Her veil glittered white, and her dress
glistened with the colour of the sky on a clear day. This
woman’s voice ﬁlled the space inside the house of
worship, empowering the atmosphere within it to the
point that Tory thought her feet would leave the
ground and she would simply ﬂoat away.
Taliesin brought Tory to a stop before the council.
The Shu Sar came to stand to one side of her, or at least
she was presuming he was the Shu Sar.
Daughter, he acknowledged with a smile as he lifted
the hood that shrouded her face.
Father. She nodded slightly, ﬂashing a smile as she
took his hand. This felt completely natural to Tory, as,

apart from the extravagant attire, he appeared the very
image her father.
This made the old ruler very happy indeed. She’d
already accepted him and thus he felt a lot more
comfortable with his parental claim.
The High Priestess ﬁnished her summons and the
temple fell silent.
‘I, High Priestess to Chailidocean, Nin Bau,
welcome this initiate into our midst. May the divine
bless her, on this her day of judgement.’
‘So be it,’ all present replied aloud and in unison.
Nin Bau was handed a headband from Shu Micah,
which she placed around Tory’s head. ‘Yours will be a
band of silver, gold, and orichalchum, as your destiny
encompasses every aspect of our culture. Let it be
known from this day forth that your name shall be
Lamamu, the Divine Master of Love and War.’
‘So be it,’ they all responded again.
The High Priestess then directed Tory’s attention to
Shu Asa, who held a green sash and an emerald ring in
his hands.
‘I welcome you, Nin Lamamu, into the Orders of
Healing.’ The Magi slipped the ring onto the ring ﬁnger
of her left hand and presented her with the sash of his
Order. ‘During your service to Danuih, I have assigned
you to En Razu for instruction, though my time and
knowledge shall always be at your disposal.’ He kissed
both her cheeks then stepped back into formation with
the others, a huge beaming smile on his face.
‘I thank you, Shu Asa, you are most kind.’ Tory felt
overwhelmed.

The High Priestess then motioned to the man Tory
had not yet met. He stepped forward and politely
introduced himself.
‘My name is En Seba . . . and I do welcome you, Nin
Lamamu, to the Orders of Science.’ He placed an
amethyst ring on the ring ﬁnger of her right hand, and
presented her with a purple sash. ‘During your time in
the service of Ta-Khu, I have assigned you to the
instruction of Shar Turan. However, I too make myself
available to you at any time.’ He kissed both her cheeks
before returning to his spot.
‘I do thank you, En Seba. I very much look forward
to the opportunity of studying the doctrines of your
Order.’ Tory bowed in gratitude.
‘Oh, mighty forces, guardians of time and space,’
Nin Bau beseeched the heavens. ‘I ask you to vest this
dear soul with your wisdom and virtues, so that she may
have the spirit to complete her karmic destiny.’
‘So be it.’
‘Stay put,’ Taliesin whispered, as everyone else
turned and departed from the platform. ‘Good luck.’
The Merlin smiled, as he too abandoned her.
‘Good luck for what?’ She whispered after him.
‘Where’s everybody going?’
The sound of moving metal drew Tory’s attention
upwards, where she saw the huge dome above partially
open outwards with the ease of a camera shutter. A
bright light beamed down onto the platform, blinding
everyone and everything from Tory’s view. Nin Bau
resumed her chant, and Tory began to feel very sedate.
Because she trusted Taliesin, she opened herself

completely to the experience and stood inhaling deeply,
her mind focused on the Priestess’s voice. Before long
her whole body began to tingle, until it reached the
stage where it felt comfortably numb. By this time, all
fear had left her body and, although Tory was relaxed, it
was no effort to support herself for it felt as if the energy
of the light force was lifting her. In fact, it rather felt as
if she were ﬂoating, and looking down Tory could no
longer see the golden ﬂoor beneath her feet — just
light, light everywhere. With the return of her fear, she
stopped rising and began to twirl.
Goddess give me strength! She didn’t want to be
afraid. Nothing can hurt me, Tory assured herself,
whereupon she stopped spinning and again started to
rise.
She felt as if she had soared beyond the height of
the temple when she ﬁnally became stationary. Through
the light Tory perceived beings with features like Shu
Micah peering back at her, only they were glowing
white in colour and thus barely deﬁnable from the lustre
of the great energy source. Strangely enough, this did
not alarm her, she felt completely safe, surrounded by
love and goodwill. The Shining Ones?
The beings encircled her, their smiling faces
conveying their kind sentiment. One by one they
touched her forehead, before transforming into a ball
of light.
These tiny spectres gravitated around her and Tory
allowed herself to spin inside the whirling vortex they
created, being empowered and exhilarated by the
ecstatic experience.

For a moment, she lost herself completely.
By the time Tory realised she’d stopped spinning she
was kneeling down on the golden ﬂoor of the temple.
Her eyes caught sight of the shimmering silver-blue
dress before her, and she looked up to the veiled face of
the High Priestess.
‘You are truly one of the chosen,’ she advised.
As the initiate appeared to be in a state of shock
following the event, the Shu Sar had her taken back
to the palace where she could rest awhile before
the feast.
Tory bathed, then dressed herself in the clothes
that had been laid out for her, too dazed to
acknowledge the grandeur of her chamber or the
beauty of her attire.
The sound of the door disappearing registered in her
brain, and a voice from Tory’s distant past brought her
attention to the fore.
So this is Lamamu, the divine child of the Shu Sar. The
woman gave half a laugh.
Tory turned to see four women had entered. Three
of them Tory did not recognise, but the woman who had
spoken was her mother, Helen.
‘Who are you?’
Well, quite obviously, no-one.
There was a deep resentment in her voice. Helen
had been known to adopt such a tone when everything
wasn’t going her way.
‘If you have a gripe with me, feel free to voice it.’
Tory folded her arms, deﬁant. She felt rather powerful at

present and wasn’t about to take this kind of shit from
anyone, least of all an incarnation of her mother.
It’s just that our husband, the Shu Sar, is making such a
fuss over you, explained the woman who appeared the
youngest and fairest of the four.
Fuss! Helen scoffed at the understatement. You’d
think the Goddess Danuih herself was coming to dinner.
She is rather short for a daughter of the divine, wouldn’t
you say? A woman with long dark hair posed this
question to the others, who chuckled.
‘Do I detect a hint of jealousy in the air?’ Tory
harassed them in turn and the young, fair woman
suppressed a laugh.
Helen’s bright blue eyes, a stunning contrast to her
fair skin and ﬂaming auburn hair, ﬂared wide. ‘How dare
you . . .’
‘No! How dare you!’ Tory stated emphatically.
‘What right have you to judge me, or blame me for your
own shortcomings?’
As Tory approached them, she appeared to grow
larger and began to glow like an angel.
This mystical quality had been a gift from the
Goddess many years ago for services rendered. Tory
hadn’t had just provocation to use it in many a year, but
these women obviously needed a wake-up call.
‘You create your own reality, Melcah.’ This was just
a good guess on Tory’s part. She recalled Taliesin
naming the Shu Sar’s wives to her and, as her mother
was so outspoken, Tory ﬁgured her to be the Shu Sar’s
ﬁrst wife. ‘If you’re unhappy with your lot, I feel quite
sure that I am not to blame.’

The women backed up towards the door — all
except the youngest.
I shall give that some consideration. Nin Melcah and
the other two women made a hasty retreat, closing the
door behind them.
‘Well done.’ The woman who remained applauded
her while Tory resumed her normal appearance. ‘I am
Kila, fourth wife of the Shu Sar, and mother of Seth
and Lazarus.’
‘I have met Lazarus.’ Tory took hold of her
outstretched hand.
‘Yes, I know. He’s told me all he was permitted to
about you.’ Kila smiled. ‘My son is very much in awe of
you, Lamamu, as indeed everyone who has met you
seems to be . . . well, almost everyone.’ She gave a
chuckle in the wake of Nin Melcah’s performance.
‘Ignore her, she’s a self-centred old hag at times.’
Tory boggled at her words, for none of the women
really appeared much older than herself. ‘It takes quite a
bit to faze me.’ Tory assured Kila.
‘I can see that.’ Kila held out a jewelled pouch made
of purple velvet.
‘What is this?’ Tory smiled broadly as it was dropped
into her hands.
‘Why it’s a present, of course.’ Kila sounded eager
for her to open it, her beautiful, soft blue eyes beaming
with anticipation.
Two bands of silver were inside the offering. Kila
explained these were worn around the top of the arms,
as she put them on Tory. Kila thought the gift
appropriate, as all the ﬁnest warriors wore them.

‘They suit you very well.’ Kila stepped back to take a
look then frowned. ‘Allow me to ﬁx your attire.’
Kila removed the white tasselled scarf that was
bound around Tory’s waist. She folded it slightly short
of center, corner to corner, so the tassels hung in tiers,
then wrapped it around Tory so that it crossed in the
front and tied at the side in the proper fashion.
‘There,’ said Kila and directed Tory to look into
the mirror.
This outﬁt was both unusual and comfortable.
Entirely white and of a soft hemp-like ﬁbre, the top sat
off the shoulder. The sleeves ﬂared wide, then gathered
at the bottom, and were slit from the shoulders to her
wrist; thus the silver armbands were well exposed. The
body dropped straight into harem pants, which also had
a slit down both sides from her waist to her ankles. The
large waist scarf, now properly bound, made the outﬁt
more modest. Tassels the same as the scarf, some made
of ﬁbre and some of feather, were repeated around the
neck of the garment giving the whole outﬁt a rather
ratty appearance which Tory very much fancied. The
best thing of all, though, was that now that she
belonged to the Orders she was expected to go barefoot,
as they all did.
The door vanished and Taliesin entered. ‘Ah, Tory.
You appear much improved.’
‘En Razu.’ She near lost her temper at the sight of
him. ‘Just the man I wanted to see. Would you mind?’
Tory looked to Kila.
‘Of course not.’ She backed up a couple of paces and
gave a slight bow. ‘I shall see you downstairs, Lamamu.’

Kila left them gracefully, acknowledging Taliesin with a
slight nod as she passed him on her way out.
Tory waited until the door had closed to voice her
mind, yet, as it turned out, she was not given the
chance to say a word.
‘I just want to say in my own defence . . .’ Taliesin
became very sincere in a cocky kind of way, ‘that I knew
from my own experience that you would have panicked
if I’d told you.’
Tory stood stunned for a moment, her fury
preventing her from commenting. ‘You knew I was to be
hoisted up inside an alien spacecraft and you didn’t see
ﬁt to let me know?! Why do I trust you?’
She was becoming hysterical. The Merlin grabbed
hold of both her wrists. ‘Tory, listen to me. In the
universe there are no aliens. We are all one,’ he stressed.
‘And besides, your body never left the ground.’
‘What?’ She stopped struggling, though she still
trembled.
‘That’s right. Only your subtle bodies ascended to
the etheric level. At no time were you in danger.’
Tory was overwhelmed. ‘Astral projection.’ She’d
never experienced it before. ‘It felt so real.’
‘As real as the earth plane.’ He let her go. ‘Forget
the alien abductions you remember from the twentieth
century, Tory . . . as with the human beings of that time,
other beings will also become inﬂuenced by negative
forces. But the beings you are dealing with here are a
race apart, I assure you. We have them to thank for the
hospitable conditions of this planet, and for the physical
and intellectual advancement of our race.’

Tory held her head, this was all too much. ‘Taliesin,
I really don’t think I could cope with a party right now.’
‘Now, don’t be like that. The hard part is over —
now it’s time to enjoy yourself.’
‘But what did it all mean?’
‘We can talk of it tomorrow. But tonight,’ he took
up both her hands, ‘is for celebration!’
The palace dining room was a real sight to behold with
its mottled mauve and white marbled ﬂoors and pillars,
set against marble walls of pure white. Tory imagined
the roof was probably domed, but as it was opened wide
to expose the starry sky above she could not say from
what material it was made. Large candelabras, holding
tens of candles each, burnt brightly around the
perimeter of the room. Other candles ﬂoated amongst
the water-lilies in a little pond in the centre of the
table, both of which were circular. This was positioned
in the middle of the huge round room, and instead of
chairs there was one large, round velvet lounge that
encircled the banquet table, where everyone lay about
feasting. Feet to the outside, the guests picked from the
array of food in the centre; this was rather more
informal than Tory was accustomed to. Still she quite
liked the idea.
Not everyone was at the table, however. Novices
stood around the walls, keeping an eye on the
proceedings at the table. They ducked over to ﬁll a glass
here and there, or to take an empty platter away and
replace it with another. They were so merry as they
went about their duty, talking amongst themselves,

having a nibble here and there or a drink, that one
could hardly consider them servants.
‘Dear Daughter!’ the Shu Sar exclaimed with
delight as he slid off the couch to greet her. ‘Come sit
by me.’
‘Yes, do,’ Xavier, who sat to one side of his father,
encouraged as he rose. ‘We’ve been saving a spot for you.’
‘Well, it looks like I’m outnumbered.’ Taliesin gave
her a wink as she was led to her seat by the royals.
The Merlin went and took up a place by his friend,
Shar Turan, who was seated at the other side of the
table from Tory. Turan did not eat; he just came to
dinner for the conversation.
Ah. En Razu. Turan called to him through the
music and conversation. His father had insisted that
everyone talk aloud in his daughter’s presence so she
wouldn’t become confused or feel uncomfortable.
Hence Turan could barely hear himself think. The other
poor soul who has to lead her around by the hand. The Shar
sounded none too pleased about En Seba’s decision.
‘Believe me,’ Taliesin assured, ‘leading Nin Lamamu
around by the hand gives me the greatest pleasure. I
think you shall ﬁnd she is full of surprises.’ Taliesin
knelt down between the Shar and En Durand.
But, why me?! I have study to do, projects of my own I
am working on. I just don’t need this right now.
Taliesin and Durand were rather amused by his
frustration.
‘I cannot say I’d mind.’ Durand looked to the tiny
warrioress directly across the table from them, sitting
cross-legged between the Shu Sar and Xavier.

Then you do it, Turan suggested.
‘I’m afraid En Seba has spoken. I’m sure he had his
reasons.’ Durand sidestepped his plea. ‘Perhaps because
she’s from the future —’
‘I have seen glimpses of the distant future,’ Turan
interjected, ‘and none of it is good.’
‘Then you didn’t go far enough,’ Taliesin
commented. ‘What goes around comes around. I should
like to seek out that utopia one day, for I feel sure it does
exist. But right now, I am quite happy here in this one.’
‘Me too.’ Durand ﬂopped onto his back, pleasantly
sedated by the spicy elixir he was drinking.
Well, I’m not. Turan appeared perplexed, looking
across the table to the cause of his woes.
Tory had been left with Xavier, as the Shu Sar had been
called away from the feast. Thus far, the Shar had been
explaining the dietary laws to her, which varied
according to one’s calling. Red meat of any kind was
strictly forbidden. In fact, to kill any animal was a legal
offence. Seafood or pheasant was partaken by the
common folk, but to those in the priesthood this was
also prohibited. Only fruit, vegetables and some dairy
foods were allowed.
‘Well, it looks like I’ve just become a vegetarian.’
Tory stared at the fresh king prawns with relish.
‘I am sure that tonight the High Orders would make
an exception.’ Xavier offered the seafood platter to her.
‘No, no,’ Tory insisted. ‘A law is a law.’
As she sipped the heady brew from a silver goblet,
Tory noted the antagonistic look Turan was serving her

across the table. ‘I don’t think Turan very much likes
that I have been put in his charge.’
‘Oh don’t worry about him.’ Xavier waved it off.
‘He’s got a natural aversion to anything female.’
Tory lay on her stomach to question him more
intimately. ‘How long has he felt that way?’
‘Most of his life. See, Turan and his twin brother,
Alaric, fell in love with the same woman about a
hundred years before I was even born. She’s Alaric’s
wife now.’
‘I see.’ Tory thought the tale rather sad. ‘Do they
still get along then . . . Turan and Alaric?’
‘Oh yes. Now that they have both found their own
niches in life.’
As she gazed around the table there were several
faces Tory recognised: Bryce, Blain, Gawain, and her
dear old friend, Selwyn. She got to wondering which of
them was the oldest son of the Shu Sar. ‘Point Alaric
out to me.’
‘I can’t, he’s not here yet.’ Xavier ﬁlled her glass
again. ‘But over there,’ he motioned to Gawain, ‘is my
twin brother, Gaspard. He’s Treasure Master here in
Chailidocean.’
Tory considered that made sense; in the Dark Age
Gawain and Rhun had often been mistaken for brothers.
‘That’s our mother, Orphelia.’
The Shar pointed to the dark-haired woman who
had vexed Tory earlier about her height.
‘Her name means clever, which she is. Zadoc over
there, is head of the Courts of Justice.’ Xavier drew her
attention to Bryce and then to Blain. ‘And Diccon, his

twin, has charge of the Kingdom of Cintrala, but our
elder brother, Alaric, governs the actual capital of
Chailidocean.’
‘I follow, I think?’ Tory raised her brow. ‘But tell me,
who might that be, strumming on the lyre over there.’
Tory pointed Selwyn out.
‘That’s Seth, Lazarus’s older twin. He heads the
creative arts of Khe-Ta.’
How apt, Tory thought; art, poetry, music and dance
were all right up Selwyn’s alley.
‘Hey, there’s Alaric and Antonia now.’ Xavier’s eyes
were ﬁxed on the doorway where Tory witnessed
Caradoc and Vanora enter.
Back in the Dark Age, Caradoc had been Maelgwn’s
younger brother. He’d not been content to wait his turn
for the throne of Gwynedd, and with Vanora’s aid, he’d
tried unsuccessfully to take the kingdom by force; this
act of treachery had eventually been the death of him.
‘Oh dear.’ Two of her greatest adversaries together
again, and even allowing for their entirely different set
of circumstances, Tory couldn’t feel comfortable about
their presence.

15

CITY OF THE
GOLDEN GATES

A

s the ﬁrst rays of dawn streamed through the
large circular window of her room, Tory lay wide
awake in her huge round bed, which was sunk
into a staired platform that rose out of the marble ﬂoor.
She was admiring the silver dome that hung overhead,
from which a large, sheer net dropped to encircle her.
She hadn’t lasted long at the banquet after Alaric
and Antonia’s arrival; with all those faces from her past,
it was just too weird. But she’d remained long enough to
be formally introduced to all her brothers, bar the
youngest set of twins — Jerram and Adelgar — who
were not in the city at present.

Xavier had informed her that these two had been
born of a native red-skinned woman, Nin Mahar, and
thus they were looked down upon by some in the royal
city. The Shu Sar had wanted to ally his central kingdom,
Cintrala, with the native kingdoms of Portea to the
north and Usiqua to the south. For although Absalom
ruled these kingdoms, appointing one of his own race to
govern had proved most unwise, as they didn’t
understand the native ways. So, once Jerram and Adelgar
had grown, Absalom sent Jerram to rule in Kudra, the
capital of the cooler, mountainous land to the south, and
Adelgar to Keriophis, the hot, tropical capital of the
kingdom to the north. The Shu Sar prized his two
youngest boys dearly, for they’d managed to bring peace
to all the people of his nation. And, up until the recent
raids of foreign tribes, all had been very harmonious.
Tory wrapped herself in the silken sheet and crawled
out from under the netting to look out over the city.
From the height of her window, she could make out
three rings of water channels that separated one circular
island from the other. The narrowest ringed island was
also the closest. It was here that all the temples of
learning stood, but on the larger ringed island that lay
beyond the second circular canal was what appeared to
be a stadium and a track. Further beyond was another
waterway. The bridge across this waterway lead to the
outer city markets, mountains, harbour and to a wider
channel that led out to sea.
Incredible!
The sound of bells chiming ﬁlled the air and below
her in the city people began to ﬂood into the streets.

They all carried little mats, which they placed on the
ground facing the sunrise. They then knelt upon them
with their forehead and palms to the ground. After a
moment, and in perfect time with each other, everyone
raised their faces and palms towards the sun.
‘It is lovely, no?’
Taliesin startled Tory, near causing her to drop her
sheet. ‘I wasn’t expecting to see anyone up this early.’
She secured the piece of fabric around her, somewhat
discomforted by the handsome young Merlin’s alluring
smile.
‘Well, as you can see, everyone is up this early.’ He
came to gaze out the window beside her. ‘What you’re
witnessing below is known as the bringing down of
the sun.’
‘It’s lovely.’ Tory noted everyone below change
position, crossing their arms at their chest and bowing
their heads.
‘They are requesting guidance and blessing from
Helio and Heliona. And see the people in the parks and
gardens; they have their palms to the ground . . . this is
so Danuih partakes of their essence, adds to her own
energies, and then returns them to the healer with her
thanks and blessing. These are the Earth Healers of her
Order, and they are the reason that the plant life here
ﬂourishes so.’
Tory was staring at Taliesin now; he had such a
beautiful understanding.
‘Well . . .’ he snapped out of it, ‘as the Dance to
the Rising Sun is the official start of the day, you’d
best get dressed and we’ll be off.’ He walked over to

the wall and pressed a button to reveal a large walkin wardrobe.
‘That was solid marble.’ Tory rushed over to
investigate. ‘How does it do that?’
‘It’s a simple form of particle control.’ He eyed
over the garments in the wardrobe. ‘How do you
think the pyramids get built?’ He emerged with a
loose-fitting, sleeveless garment of pale blue. ‘How
about this? It’s of a very light fabric, and it does get
very hot come midday.’
‘It’s a bit short.’ Tory cringed. ‘Where are my clothes?’
‘Here.’ Taliesin pulled them from the shelf, rolling
his eyes. ‘They’ve just about had their day.’
‘Rubbish! I’ll just cut the legs off my jeans and
they’ll be right.’ She gave him the thumbs up. ‘Have
you got a pair of scissors?’
Taliesin dug into his pocket and handed her what
appeared to be a small metal torch. ‘It’s a laser knife . . .
here, I’d better do it.’ He took the pants and knife away
from her.
‘So what’s the plan?’ Tory slipped the garment
Taliesin had selected over her head. As with most of the
daytime attire here, this garment had a large hood to
shade one’s face from the sun.
‘I thought I might take you to see En Darius this
morning, in reference to the cure you seek. Then, after
lunch, I am to deliver you to Shar Turan for the
afternoon.’ As Tory became discomforted by the
thought, he added, ‘. . . which will be the perfect
opportunity, if I may say, to ﬁgure out how you are going
to get back to Maelgwn and avoid a time warp.’

The research laboratories of the Shi-im-ti Temple were
rather remarkable, as they were far more orderly than
those of the twentieth century. Most of the work was
carried out on a form of computer, yet this equipment
was far superior to anything Tory had ever seen. There
were no keyboards, but there were screens — liquid
crystal, perhaps?
All the strange devices that Darius had tested Tory
with were plugged straight into the hardware where the
information was sorted and made ready for observation
and diagnosis. The command centre was of a
psychokinetic variety, and quite similar to the
apparatus in Taliesin’s room of hexagons, which the
merlin claimed to have acquired in the years beyond
3000 AD. Yet the machinery before her was not as
cumbersome as Taliesin’s paraphernalia, being more
slimline and quiet. It seemed that mankind in the
thirtieth century had still to better their achievements
here in the Old Land.
Another very pleasing difference, Tory discovered,
was that there was no animal testing here. Taliesin
explained that not only would this be considered
ridiculous, as the human system functioned entirely
differently, but criminal as well.
En Darius was most curious to see En Razu and his
new pupil, and took time out from his heavy workload
to take tea (of the herbal variety) with them in the
serenity of the temple garden’s courtyard.
Before Tory would say a word, she made En Darius
swear an oath of secrecy; Mahaud’s vow seemed reason
enough to exercise a little caution.

The scientist laughed at this, explaining his Order’s
code of ethics ensured complete conﬁdentiality.
Darius was like Rhys; perhaps a bit less self-centred
and chauvinistic, but a man of honour. Thus, for the
third time since she’d arrived, Tory retold the calamity
of her life to date, with Taliesin clarifying things here
and there, as he’d heard the tale twice before.
As busy as he was, Darius was so enthralled that
morning tea turned into lunch. ‘But how did you
become immortal?’ He had to ask, for it seemed the only
question she’d left unanswered.
‘Yes, how did that come about?’ Taliesin’s brow
became drawn as he leant his elbow on the table,
placing his head in his hand as he looked to her.
Tory smiled. ‘No comment.’
‘For the sake of science?’ Darius implored her.
Tory shook her head. ‘So, can you do it?’
‘Well, I certainly could, if you’d answer my
question . . . or let me run some more tests on you.’
When again she motioned strongly to the negative,
Darius gave in and resigned himself to the matter at
hand. ‘In that case, the answer is no.’
‘No!’ Tory couldn’t believe with all the technology
to be had here that they couldn’t solve this.
‘Not without some samples, anyway.’ He sat back
in his chair, having finished his fruit salad topped
with honey yogurt. ‘If you can figure a way to get
back to your husband, I shall teach you how to use my
devices to retrieve what information I need . . . that’s
the best I can do.’ He shrugged, wiping his hands
with a napkin.

Tory looked to Taliesin to see if they were still
hopeful, and as he was smiling she ﬁgured they were.
‘Thank you, En Darius, that would be wonderful.’
‘My pleasure.’ He looked to the sky noting the
position of the sun. ‘Good heavens, is that the time? I
must go.’ He rose, as did his companions.
‘Indeed.’ Taliesin hadn’t realised it was so late. ‘We
must get you to Shar Turan.’
As Taliesin led the way to the Temple of Dur-nu-ga
(astrology & astronomy), where he’d arranged to meet
the Shar, the bells of the citadel tolled and once again
people ﬂooded into the street.
‘What’s going on?’ Tory asked, as the Merlin pulled
her off to the side of the walkway and bowed his head.
As before, everyone lay their mats on the ground.
Their arms were crossed at their chest and their heads
were bowed low. All ﬂung their arms open wide, tilting
back their heads as far as they would go, their eyes
closed in silent prayer. After a time, their heads lowered
as they knelt and placed their palms on the ground.
As one by one they rose and went back about their
business, Taliesin took off down the promenade to make
their appointment.
‘Dance to the High Sun?’ Tory caught him up.
‘Close . . . Hymn to the High Sun.’ He raced up the
stairs of the Dur-nu-ga temple, striding two stairs at
a time.
They found the Shar impatiently awaiting their
arrival in the foyer of the Astrological Centre.
A thousand apologies, Shar Turan. Taliesin bowed.
The time just got away.

Never-to-mind, we’re late. Turan motioned Tory to
follow as he turned and ﬂoated off down a corridor.
Tory gave a shrug and a wave to bid Taliesin
farewell.
‘I shall come for you later,’ he assured in parting.
Tory bolted after Turan, excited by the prospect of
somewhere new to explore.
Please don’t run. Turan paused to look at her. It’s
considered the height of bad manners. He assumed
his course.
‘So sorry.’ Tory forced a posh accent.
And must you talk aloud all the time? He frowned in
disgust. It’s very disturbing to those trying to concentrate on
anything other than what you have to say. He walked
through the door in front of them, leaving Tory to press
the button and enter of her own accord.
What a sweetheart this guy is turning out to be. Tory
entered a huge lecture hall where En Seba was giving a
lesson, and upon noting that it was already well in
progress she quickly sat herself down.
The large black and white mottled marble stairs
descended in a circular fashion all the way down to the
central platform where En Seba was giving his address.
These stairs served as seating for those attending the
lecture. The room’s large, domed roof served the
function of a screen, depicting the movements of the
planets against the stars of the night sky. En Seba stood
behind a holographic image of the solar system that
tracked in fast motion the movements of the planets
around the sun. She was surprised to note a couple of
smaller planets that had never been on any map of the

solar system that she’d ever seen, one of which had an
orbit that was in complete contradiction to every other
planet in the twentieth century system.
This must all seem very primitive to you, Nin Lamamu.
Tory looked to discover En Durand beside her. No,
not at all! Quite the contrary really.
So the future is as bad as they say?
The distant future. Tory speciﬁed. But who knows
what lay beyond that. She smiled.
She is supposed to be listening.
Tory and Durand turned to ﬁnd Turan frowning
down at them.
She’ll never pick this up without some prepping. Durand
looked from Turan to Tory. Come on. He took up her
hand, serving the Shar a scornful look. Allow me to show
you around.
Where do you think you’re going with my ﬂedgling?
Turan followed them out into the corridor.
Well . . . Durand paused and looked back to his
associate, I think a cup of iced tea might be a good start.
Then I could explain what goes on here, before I show our
new recruit where everything is. Durand’s tone implied
that this was what should have been done in the ﬁrst
place. He considered that he might have made an error
himself. Perhaps if he hadn’t pointed out his
observations concerning the birth charts to the Shar,
Turan would not be so wary of the girl.
They sipped their tea as Durand gave Tory the guided
tour at a very leisurely pace. This drove Turan nuts, as
he neither drank tea, nor went about anything at this

speed. Turan had tagged along on the premise that his
sister was his responsibility, but Durand suspected an
ulterior motive.
This is the main observatory. Durand activated the door.
Holy smoke! Tory wandered into the large circular
room, awed by the magnitude of the operations here.
Above the dome was a giant screen, like the one
she’d seen in the lecture hall only much, much larger.
Light beams of different colours extended across the
map of the heavens above her. Durand explained the
beams were tracking movements and collecting data.
Psychokinetic computers were positioned by the
study tables and chairs in the centre of the room,
and around the perimeters stood what looked to
be periscopes.
Durand invited Tory to have a look through one,
and although it was still daylight outside she could
distinguish the constellations above as clearly as if it
were night; Durand accredited this to certain ﬁlters
they’d developed.
How do you harness enough solar power to run all this
equipment?
Set in the sun temple — the Great Temple of Ap-su —
is a very powerful crystal, Durand explained, as their
party wandered back into the corridor to continue the
tour. The concentration of the sun’s rays through this prism
creates a tremendous amount of power, that is, in turn,
distributed throughout the city.
But how? I’ve seen no wires or —
Wires! Durand chuckled, somewhat amused by the
concept. No, no . . . via waves.

Oh, I see . . . clever, she conceded with a nod.
Tory was treated to an insight into her birth chart,
though neither Durand nor Turan mentioned the
coincidences they’d noted on their last visit to the
hall of records. Durand noticed how on edge his
associate seemed to be while they were in the
charting room, thus he did not linger there.
So tell me, Nin Lamamu. Durand sought permission
to pry. Why did you choose to serve in the Orders of
Ta-Khu?
Tory looked down the corridor both ways to ensure
they were alone. If the truth be known, I’m on what you
might call a mission.
A mission. For whom? Turan was most interested to
know.
As a couple of novices were walking past them
down the hallway, Tory hesitated to answer.
In here. Durand directed Tory into a small
conference room, sealing the door behind them. Feel
free to speak your mind, no one can hear us in here.
A mission for who? Turan persisted with his
interrogation.
Tory was tempted to say, Yourself, but refrained
when she recalled Taliesin’s caution about mentioning
Maelgwn to the Shar. For the Goddess, who is the
guardian spirit of my adopted homeland. Tory seated
herself and looked to Turan. You see, a great King, or
Shu Sar as you might call him, is dying . . . from a disease he was tricked into catching. I am here to seek
a cure.
Turan didn’t understand. So what’s the big secret?

Ah! Tory raised her eyebrows. The negative force that
victimised the King, and many others, would very much like
to stop me.
What’s it like, this negative force? Turan moved closer
to her, his curiosity struck. Could you imagine it for me?
What on earth for?! Tory was repulsed by the thought.
The Shar has been having visions of something that
might be perceived as negative, Durand explained. I’d say
he’s just interested in making a comparison.
You have? This was a worry. What do you want me
to do?
Just place your arms so, Turan demonstrated, resting his
elbows close together on the table, his forearms, palms
and ﬁngers touching in a horizontal position before him.
Alright. Tory complied. Now what?
Just concentrate on an image of the force of which
you spoke.
It has many images.
Well, please, don’t hesitate to include them all. He
walked through the table to get closer to her, then
kneeled down in the middle of the solid marble bench,
placing his elbows parallel to either side of hers.
Slowly he closed the gap, his forearms enveloping her
own. Tory’s eyes grew wide at the sensation.
Concentrate, he advised.
But she could not. Tory could sense Maelgwn’s
personal essence ﬂowing through Turan, which brought
with it so many sweet recollections of their intimacy
that all she could think of was making love to him.
She quickly withdrew from Turan’s reach. Could we
do this some other time?

Alright.
He sounded a bit fazed, which led Tory to wonder
what he’d made of her reluctance.
Durand, who’d been quietly observing their
interaction with some interest, decided to pursue the
other matter. So you still haven’t explained why you wanted
to join the orders of Ta-Khu. Durand took a seat beside
her. How can we help you in this quest? I would think En
Darius was your man.
Well, I spoke to En Darius this morning, and he needs
samples from the King to have any chance of giving a
diagnosis or ﬁguring a cure. Thus, I’m needing to get back to
the same interdimensional reality that I left . . . Is that
possible? She aimed the question at Durand.
He, in turn, looked over at Turan, who was the real
expert.
I doubt it, the Shar mused. From this point in time
and space, anyway. You’ve already been here a week
or so. You may have already done something to effect
causality.
But! What if we could take her back in time, Durand
speculated. To, say, before she arrived, and then send her
forth to the King?
Turan nodded, interested by the notion.
Theoretically, that could work . . . but how would we do it?
The council might be persuaded to utilize the power of
the Shining Ones. Durand looked to the Shar in hope.
Or there is always your project.
Forget it. Turan refused to even consider the
possibility. It is nowhere near complete . . . and anyway,
the energy source involved would kill her.

Ah . . . I hate to state the obvious to two such learned
men as yourselves, Tory grinned, but you can’t kill someone
who’s immortal.
That’s right. Durand was excited.
True, but with the oscillation of wave frequencies
involved there is a risk of psychological fragmentation.
Turan dampened everyone’s spirits again. It wouldn’t
be much fun being an immortal vegetable, I can
assure you.
Could I take a look, in any case, Tory appealed to
him. I’d be most inter—
Heavens no! Turan protested. It’s not ready to be viewed.
Look, I promise I won’t touch a thing. She knew what
Maelgwn was like about his study area; he hated it when
something wasn’t where he’d left it.
The Shar was staring at her with a stunned look on
his face; she’d seen right through him — metaphorically
speaking.
Alright, he resolved, ﬁnally.
This rather amazed Durand, as every time he’d
requested admittance the Shar had ﬂatly refused. Turan
never let anyone see anything he was working on until
he was quite sure he could make it work. And as he’d
made many astounding discoveries if left in peace, his
peers questioned him little.
They entered a completely white room. A desk, a lamp
and a computer were the only furniture Tory could see.
There was a large round window at the far end of the
room that looked out over the channel towards the
citadel. Many strange-looking tools were lying about

the place, and bits of scrap metal were neatly stacked
around the walls.
In the centre of the room stood an object, the size of
a small car, covered by a glittering golden cloth; Tory
experienced deja-vu as she observed it. She looked at
Turan, who was intently watching her with no
expression whatsoever on his face. His eyes motioned
her back to his project, and, with a thought, he raised
the veil from it.
‘Oh my god!’ Tory cried out loud, slapping her hands
together. ‘You’re building the chariot of Arianrod!’
The what? Turan was quite confused by her
hysterical outburst.
‘Well, that’s what they called it back where I come
from.’ She circled it, feeling a sense of ease following
the discovery. ‘It takes one quickly to the place of one’s
desire.’ She recited the legend. Looking back to Durand
and Turan, Tory realised they weren’t following her line
of thought. ‘Don’t you get it! I’ve used this to move
through time already . . . I know you make it work.’
Really! You have? I do!
As the Shar was sounding much more
accommodating, Durand quietly left them to it.
Tory told Turan of her adventures involving the chariot.
And, as she was so intimate with its function, Turan felt
obliged to explain the setbacks he’d encountered since
its conception.
Quantum mechanics had never really been one
of Tory’s stronger interests. Even so, she sat and
listened to him speak of it for hours, although not

comprehending even half of what he said. She learned
that the particle manipulation function of the doors
here and the psychokinetic control panel employed
to run the computers, had both been Turan’s projects.
She understood that he sought to combine these two
inventions in the hope of being able to manipulate
matter at will for the purpose of interdimensional
teleportation.
No wonder you resent having to drag me around. Tory
sympathized with his predicament. You’ve obviously got
enough to cope —
I don’t resent it, he politely interjected. I’m just not
sure I am the best choice of instructor, having so little regard
for the physical condition and you being eternally so.
Well, what you lack in sentiment, you make up for with
focus. She grinned.
I must say . . . Taliesin stood in the doorway, his
sights whirling around in an attempt to take in
everything in the room at once; he’d obviously never
been granted admittance to the Shar’s private lab either.
I am surprised to ﬁnd you in here.
‘Taliesin, look!’ Tory excitedly motioned to the
chariot.
‘Yes, that is impressive.’ He folded his arms. ‘What is
it?’
‘Oh. Never mind!’ She rolled her eyes; would she
never cease to confuse Taliesin with his older self? At
this stage of the Merlin’s evolution he’d probably never
even heard about the chariot, let alone seen it. ‘It shall,
one day, be one of the thirteen treasures of Britain.’ She
sighed, eyeing it over fondly.

‘The thirteen treasures? That Myrddin boasted he
had collected and hidden away?’ Taliesin inquired.
‘Indeed!’ She was pleased to learn he had some
knowledge of it, as this conﬁrmed her story to Turan.
‘Myrddin was my father.’
The Merlin’s jaw near hit the ground.
I thought my father was supposed to be your father?
Turan found her confession rather curious.
‘He’s an incarnation of my father’s physical self,
where Myrddin is the manifestation of my father’s
immortal selves.’
Taliesin looked as if his brain was going to explode
and he held his head to prevent it. ‘Of course! That
would explain the roots of your unusual gene pool, as
Myrddin’s father was said to be of the Otherworld,’ he
mumbled aloud, though neither Tory nor Turan were
really following his line of thought. ‘That still doesn’t
explain how you got the Shu Sar’s genes though.’ He
scratched his head.
‘Earth to Taliesin,’ she jested. ‘What are you talking
about?’ She shrugged to emphasise her lack of
comprehension.
‘Not to worry. Are you ready to leave? I am sure
you’ll want to refresh yourself before dinner. The Shu
Sar is expecting you.’
‘Not another feast, please!’
‘No, no. Just you and the Shu Sar, so I believe.’
‘When do I get time to do the things I want to do?’
She faked a moan, taking hold of Taliesin’s outstretched
hands. ‘You said we could talk today, and you were going
to show me some of the city.’

‘Well, I could come and speak with you after dinner,
then I could show you some of the city tomorrow
morning.’ He gave her a hug. ‘How about that?’
They were made for each other, these two
travellers from the future, Turan thought. He’d never
seen En Razu so enchanted with anyone of the female
persuasion before. In Turan’s opinion, it was En
Razu’s birth chart they should be matching up with the
girl’s, not his. Watching them laughing and toying
with each other filled the Shar with a rather
unpleasant emptiness.
I shall see you tomorrow then, he directed, dismissing
his student for the day. On time, preferably. Turan
directed this comment to En Razu, giving a mild wave
as he watched them depart.
On the way back to the citadel Tory witnessed the
last solar rite for the day, which Taliesin named as the
Prayer to the Setting Sun.
As the bell tolled, the sun was low on the horizon.
The people in the streets all faced the golden orb. They
kneeled upon their mats, their arms outstretched before
them and their palms upright as if accepting a gift.
Then, as with the other rites she’d seen, each bowed
low, head and palms pressed ﬁrmly to the ground. A few
moments later, everyone kissed the earth beneath them,
before rising and returning to their normal routine.
The next morning, Tory rose and dressed to practise
Kata before Taliesin arrived to fetch her; just because
there was no call for her skills here, it was no excuse to
be lax in discipline.

Dinner with her father had been lovely. Absalom
had apologised profusely that he’d not had more time to
spend with her, but the eight-day Festival of Air and the
Divine Ancestor, Ta-Khu, was less than a week away.
The theme of this celebration was communication;
hence it was also a time of conference for the leaders of
his lands. Absalom seemed pleased to inform Tory that
he expected his youngest two sons, Jerram and Adelgar,
any day now. He so looked forward to their visits, as
they brought gifts of all manner of wild beast to honour
Chailidocean’s stadium and law courts. Tory understood
what wild animals might be doing in a stadium, but in a
court of law? Apparently, the larger varieties of the cat
family were specially trained to be the jurors in cases
where the truth was in question, for the big cats could
always sense the fear that accompanied a lie. The cats’
reaction, either positive or negative to the person in
question, would determine their innocence or guilt.
Unfortunately, Jerram and Adelgar would also bring
news of the raids on their lands. Tory had wanted to
talk more of this, but Absalom insisted that he had ten
sons to take care of such problems. And, as he was
obviously unaccustomed to discussing such matters with
females, she didn’t push the issue.
Her stroll with Taliesin through the extensive
gardens of the palace after dinner had also proven to be
rather enlightening. They’d walked the length of the
Shu Sar’s swimming pool, which wound its way
throughout the entire garden. They talked of Tory’s
close encounter during her rites of passage, which
Taliesin explained was nothing more than going to visit

her grandparents really. It occurred to Tory that her
father had never really spoken about his parents or his
childhood, and she resolved that if she ever did make it
back to the twentieth century she’d have to question
him about it.
And the Merlin had drawn her attention to
something about the Old Land that she’d failed to
notice; there was no moon. Earth had known another
smaller moon many eons ago. The smaller moon had
eventually been drawn down out of its orbit around the
planet; this catastrophe had ended the great
civilisations of Mu and Lemuria around the end of the
last Scorpionic age. Taliesin had then pointed out a star
twinkling brightly in the night sky, stating this would
one day be the moon she’d known at birth. When this
tiny planet was eventually cast into the earth’s orbit, it
would cause the earth to tilt on its axis and all this
would cease to exist. However, they were currently in
the Virgoan Age, and this particular catastrophe was
not expected until late in the Cancerian Age, which
was over three thousand years away.
Tory had ﬁnished her exercise by the time the
Dance to the Rising Sun commenced, and Taliesin
arrived on cue to collect her.
There seemed to be a lot going on in the city this
morning, and as they made their way over the second
canal bridge Tory could have sworn she heard
an elephant.
‘Is the circus in town?’ She’d always been wary of
animals.

‘Something like that,’ he answered, his sights ﬁxed
on something ahead.
A woman approached, unlike any other Tory had
seen here. Her skin was red, her eyes ebony. Her long,
thick hair, jet black in colour, fell straight down her
back to her knees. The woman was no taller than Tory
in height. She wore a band of gold around her forehead,
in the centre of which was a large ruby. Her dress was a
simple robe-like garment of deep-toned red, trimmed
with gold and bound at the waist by a sash of the same
colour. This guise was of a soft fabric that ﬂowed about
her as she walked. She did not employ the large hood of
the garment, though she did cool her face with a ﬂat,
woven fan.
She waved to Taliesin when she spotted him and
excused herself from her entourage. ‘En Razu. How
lovely to see you.’
‘Nin Mahar, how magniﬁcent you look.’ He kissed
her hand. ‘I am so pleased you could grace us with your
presence at the festival this year.’
‘You’re good for my spirit.’ She gave a laugh. ‘Who
is your young friend?’ She served him a wink, motioning
to Tory.
‘Nin Lamamu, daughter of the Shu Sar.’
‘So you’re the one.’ Her smile ﬁlled with warmth, as
she took a step back to view Tory. ‘You’d best keep her
away from my boys, En Razu.’ Her eyes skipped back to
her party a second. ‘I should keep moving.’ Mahar
looked to Taliesin with regret.
‘Then I shall look forward to your company this
evening.’ He bowed to her.

‘Most certainly.’ She looked at Tory with a smile,
before resuming her walk to the palace, her entourage
falling in behind her.
Taliesin looked to Tory, who hadn’t said a word.
‘She spoke English aloud. Are the native folk
trained in the art of thought projection?’ Her eyes were
still ﬁxed on Nin Mahar’s party.
Taliesin was amused. ‘No. I taught Nin Mahar and
both her sons to speak English.’ The recollection was
pleasing to him. ‘And now I can speak, read and
write Lemurian.’
‘But wasn’t Lemuria destroyed thousands of years
ago?’
Taliesin threw an arm over her shoulder and
they resumed their course. ‘Aye, but Mahar’s people
must have migrated sometime before the island
continent sank.’
When they passed through the golden gates, Tory
could hardly believe her eyes; it appeared things got a
little wilder out here on the third island ring.
People of varied hue, red, black, and white mainly,
intermingled with each other, and as everybody spoke
aloud it was much noisier. Elephants, horses, wildcats
and other livestock added to the commotion. Directly
in front of them was a large racing stadium, about the
width of a football field, that ran full circle around the
island. Large walkways passed over the arena and led
to extensive gardens on the far side. The colleges of
veterinary and botanical studies, and the school of the
warrior arts, which encompassed sport, were found
here also.

The walkway offered a splendid view of the stadium,
and Tory observed the athletes working out below her
with relish.
‘You might be interested to know,’ Taliesin directed
her attention to a huge building ahead of them on their
left, ‘that we have a gymnasium.’
‘A gym . . . really!’ She was prompted to race off
towards it.
En Razu.
Tory halted in her tracks to another voice from the
past. She turned to ﬁnd Ione giving Taliesin a wave as
she made haste to greet him.
What drags you out here? She shook his hand.
I came out to see how you were. He sounded
sympathetic. You must be having a ﬁne time this morning.
It’s the same every year. I do wish the natives would get
over their fear of our hovercraft, or think up some better way
of transporting these animals . . . three days in a crate across
country wouldn’t do anything much good.
Nin Lamamu . . . Taliesin held his hand out to Tory.
Come and met Nin Lilith. She is in charge of the healing of
wild animals here in Chailidocean.
I’m pleased to meet you. Tory was most sincere in her
feelings. Ione was one of her dearest friends and they’d
been through much together.
Ah, Nin Lamamu, the warrioress. Ione shook her
hand ﬁrmly. I should like to see you compete sometime.
It would be a pleasure. Tory noted how ﬁt the woman
was, wondering at the same time if Nin Lilith had ever
met En Durand; Ione and Tiernan had been happily
married for seventeen years in the Dark Age.

As Nin Lilith continued to tell Taliesin of her woes,
Tory’s attention was distracted by something going on
in the stadium below. Next time Taliesin turned around,
Tory was gone.
She was here a moment ago. He spied her heading
down the stairs towards the arena, where some animals
were being unloaded after their long voyage. Oh my.
You might get to see our young warrioress ﬁght a bit sooner
than planned, Nin Lilith.
Tory was experiencing the strangest pull on her
mind and body.
Only once before in her life had she ever felt any
real afﬁnity with an animal. This had been an
Otherworldly creature, a unicorn, that had visited her
at a time when she’d badly needed reassurance. From
the walkway, she’d recognised the beautiful white beast
as it was unloaded out of a crate. It was putting up a hell
of a ﬁght, and the two native men who had hold of
ropes tied around the animal’s neck were pulling in
opposite directions.
Tory’s heart pounded in her chest and she felt as if
she would choke as she ran across the field as fast as
her legs would carry her. ‘Stop it.’ She surprised one of
the men as she barged into him, snatching the rope
from his hands as he was cast aside. She then ran to
boot the other man out of the way, claiming the
second rope. At once, Tory stopped choking and
leaned forward to catch her breath; as she calmed the
animal did also. She gave the handsome creature a
reassuring hug around the neck, and turned to seek an
explanation for such handling. ‘You were choking this

animal; such treatment is an offence.’ Her eyes met
with Brockwell as he raised himself, brushing off
the humiliation.
‘We were not!’ he insisted, sounding pretty angry
until he got a good look at his assailant.
‘But I felt it . . .’ Tory mumbled. Her fury departed;
she’d missed Calin so since his death. Her sights drifted
to the second man she’d accosted, who was also back on
his feet. Teo!
Like Nin Mahar, these two men were Tory’s height,
although they were not as dark-skinned as their mother.
The dark eyes and long, straight, dark hair were the same
in both Jerram and Adelgar, and, besides the odd braid
here and there, they wore the bulk of their hair loose.
Their garments of red were shorter than those of the other
males Tory had met, and this was obviously more practical
for their line of work; it seemed that most of the people
who frequented this third island employed shorter attire.
‘I do believe we have found our new sister.’ Teo
noted her headband; there was no other like it.
‘Most impressive. I thought she’d be a baby.’
Brockwell seemed pleased that this was not the case, as
both he and his brother closed in on her.
‘Then you must be Jerram and Adelgar,’ Tory
managed to stammer.
‘And you must be the Divine Master of Love and
War, Lamamu.’ Teo said her name with fervour, licking
his lips.
It was becoming apparent to Tory that the natives of
this island had a healthy interest in pursuits of a more
primal nature.

‘Lovely indeed.’ Brockwell ran his hand over her
behind. ‘My size and all.’
Tory clenched hold of Brockwell’s wrist and
twisted it quickly around, holding the Shar in a
position that threatened to break his arm. ‘You’d best
believe the war part, too,’ she warned, as he groaned
for mercy.
Teo surprised Tory from behind, grabbing hold of
her around the neck so she was forced to let go of
Brockwell. She reached back and bore her fingertips
into the pressure points in Teo’s upper arm. His grip on
her loosened and she flung him over herself to
the ground.
‘Well, raise my ancestors! . . . This girl really can
ﬁght.’ Brockwell gave a laugh as he nursed his ailing arm.
‘You don’t say.’ Teo looked up to his brother from
the ground.
‘Well, you shouldn’t gang up on people like that.’
Tory held a hand down to help Teo up. ‘You could get
hurt.’ She suppressed a laugh. Teo batted away her hand
and rose of his own accord.
‘Teach me to do what you just did, and I’ll give
you this beast.’ Brockwell motioned to the unicorn.
‘Helio knows you’re the only one who’s been able to
control it.’
‘Can I do with it as I please?’ Tory inquired.
‘Of course.’
‘Then you’ve got a deal.’ She shook on it. ‘Now, I
want you to take my payment back to wherever it was
that you found it and let it go.’
‘What!’ both brothers exclaimed at once.

‘Which word didn’t you understand?’ Tory placed
her hands on her hips deﬁantly.
‘Have you got any idea what we went through to
catch this beast?’ Brockwell protested.
‘Well, the only task worth doing is the one you do
for the sake of it.’
‘You’ve met Jerram and Adelgar, I see.’ Taliesin
ﬁnally reached the scene.
‘I still don’t know which one’s which . . . No, let me
guess.’ Tory stopped the Merlin before he enlightened
her. ‘What does the name Jerram mean?’
‘War raven,’ Taliesin advised. ‘And Adelgar means
noble spear.’
‘I see.’ She grinned, as did both her brothers,
amused by the game.
‘You are Jerram.’ She pointed to Teo with both her
index ﬁngers, and then to Brockwell: ‘And you are
Adelgar.’
‘How do you know that?’ Adelgar entreated her.
Tory could tell by the stunned expression on their
faces that she’d guessed right. ‘I know everything
about you,’ she teased, ‘so just watch yourselves.’
Actually, she’d recalled that Adelgar ruled in the hot
region; thus Adelgar was obviously the one with the
better tan.
Nin Lilith was beckoning Taliesin from the walkway
above, and rather than be left alone with these two Tory
headed off across the ﬁeld after the Merlin.
‘Hey!’ Adelgar called after her. ‘What about my
lesson?’
‘How long are you here?’ she stopped to ask.

‘Twelve days.’
Tory shrugged. ‘Come see me before you leave.’ She
turned and took off in pursuit of Taliesin again.
The suggestion brought a smile to Adelgar’s lips. ‘If
you insist.’

16

THE MORTAL VIEW

T

he rest of the morning had been pleasantly spent
in the wild animal nursery. Nin Lilith showed off
her new babies, the pride of which was the ﬁrstborn of the elephant calves. Personally, Tory thought
the lion cubs were the cutest.
Taliesin dragged her out of the animal sanctuary
before the midday solar rite took place; today of all days,
he didn’t want to be late in delivering her to Turan.
Tory was disappointed that they hadn’t had the
chance to check out the gym, but there was always
tomorrow.
The Merlin walked faster than usual on the way to
the Temple of Dur-nu-ga, his mind preoccupied.
‘Is something the matter?’ Tory picked up on his
strange mood.

‘Not at all.’ He was quick to respond, coming to a
stop at the bottom of the stairs.
‘Aren’t you coming up?’
‘Not today. You run along. Turan will be awaiting
you.’ He moved to walk off.
‘Are you meeting me afterwards?’ He certainly was
in a hurry, and her question seemed to catch him
off guard.
‘Ah . . . yes.’ He smiled in an odd fashion, as he
strode off down the promenade.
The afternoon hours flew by. Shar Turan taught Tory
how to use his tools so that he didn’t have to compute
and phychokinetically control equipment at the same
time. Tory enjoyed the hands-on aspect of the manual
labour, as it was giving her a good insight into how
the chariot would function. Surprisingly enough,
she was enjoying Turan’s instruction, but then she’d
worked well with Maelgwn and Miles before him; thus
it seemed to her that they were predestined to
get along.
‘I’m sorry to disturb you, Turan,’ Durand’s voice
came through the intercom, ‘but Nin Bau is requesting
an audience with you at once.’
Is something the matter? This was rather unusual, Nin
Bau hardly saw anybody these days.
‘She wants you to bring Nin Lamamu with you.’
Turan looked to Tory, concerned by the request.
Alright. You can tell the High Priestess we’re on our way.
What do you think she wants? Tory removed her
protective clothing.

I’m sure your guess would be better than mine. The
Shar’s lovely mood disappeared, and again he seemed
wary and distant.
She followed the Shar to the High Temple of
Chailidocean, up the stairs, under the pillars and into
the entrance foyer. Here Turan turned and came to an
old-fashioned door of solid gold, which he passed
through. As Tory reached for the handle the door swung
wide open before her. Stairs led down to what was a
whole community unto itself existing within the huge
mound supporting the high temple. A great number of
the populace here were female, though Tory didn’t
recognise any faces as the women were veiled.
Tory was asked to wait outside another door, and
Turan entered the council chamber of the High
Priestess alone.
The Shar was most alarmed to ﬁnd En Razu, Shu
Micah, Shu Asa and En Seba also present in the room.
My dear nephew, do not be alarmed. Nin Bau
motioned him closer from her seat in the middle of the
gathering. I have need to ask you a favour.
Anything, he declared, going down on one knee
before her.
Best that you hear my request before agreeing to it, she
advised. I shall understand if you wish to refuse.
Turan stood, nodding for her to continue. He’d
pondered for too many days what the council had been
scheming; it was high time he was enlightened as to
their intent.
We have decided to utilize the powers that be to aid
Nin Lamamu in her quest. I believe she must return to the

time she arrived here, before attempting to retrace her
steps further.
Yes, Nin Bau, if this will work at all, that has to be the
case, Turan agreed.
Then, as the council will have to be rallied at Mount
Dur-an-ki upon her arrival in our past, it is the wish of this
council that you accompany her for the ﬁrst leg of her trip.
But that would mean . . . Turan paused as the
thought horriﬁed him.
That you would have to allow yourself to reconstitute
into your physical form, the High Priestess decreed from
behind her veil.
Could I not just meet her there?
We don’t want to risk the two of you becoming
separated, En Seba explained.
Please, Turan, Nin Bau beseeched him. I know it is a
lot to ask, but it would only be for a few days.
No. I will not, the Shar protested very strongly.
Nin Bau sympathized with how he felt. She knew
the affair with Antonia and Alaric still haunted him,
though Turan hid it well. Hundreds of years had passed
since then, and his isolation didn’t seem to be healing
the wound. Dear boy, tell me what you fear?
What does any mortal man fear? Turan questioned
rather boldly. Why me?
Because when she came back, you were with her, En
Razu informed him, in no uncertain terms.
Turan looked to his friend, wide-eyed now. So that is
the secret you’ve all been keeping from me, not that . . .
The Shar cut himself short, not wishing to voice his
misunderstanding.

Why, of course it is, Taliesin stressed his words. What
did you think?
The situation made more sense now. Why would En
Razu be trying to match him with a woman he so
obviously fancied himself. Turan waved off an
explanation. If it will please the council, I will do as you ask.
Splendid! Nin Bau sounded most relieved. We would
be very much in your debt.
Patience had never really been one of Tory’s stronger
virtues; it seemed as if Turan had been hours in there. A
veiled woman was seated on a chair by the door, but she
wasn’t saying much. This could have been the silver
woman Tory had seen in the Temple on her night of
judgement. Her hair was the same, hanging in long,
thick masses of brown curls, but as the women’s entire
face had been masked on both occasions, who could
tell?
Why do you all cover your faces? Tory’s curiosity got the
better of her. Have you all been horribly disﬁgured? Or —
The woman suppressed a chuckle, as the door at last
opened and Taliesin, Shar Turan, En Seba, Shu Asa and
Shu Micah emerged.
‘What’s going on?’ It seemed that she’d asked that
question a lot lately.
‘Grand news, little one.’ Shu Asa placed both hands
on her shoulders.
Tory looked to Turan, who actually smiled at her
which made her all the more wary.
‘Nin Bau shall tell you all about it.’ The Magi
ushered her into the room, closing the door behind her.

The round chamber was dimly lit and cosy to the
senses. Most of the furnishings had a very rustic quality
about them, dyed in dusky shades of red, brown, green
and blue. Nin Bau was seated in the middle of the room
on a large throne-like chair, carved from timber and
lined with fur.
Come, take my hand, child. The Priestess bade Tory in
a tender voice, so compelling that Tory nearly ran to
oblige her. Tory knelt down at the feet of Nin Bau and
took hold of the holy woman’s hand, looking up to her
veiled face. You are a brave girl . . . I know all about you,
you know?
Really. How? Taliesin?
No. The Priestess’s tone tickled with laughter. You
told me, the day you arrived.
Tory was puzzled by her words; she could not recall
this.
The council decided to aid you in your quest before you
even woke from your journey from Gwynedd . . . How do I
know this?
Tory’s eyes parted wide as she understood. Because if
I do successfully go back in time to when I ﬁrst got here, in
your reality it must have already happened.
Nin Bau patted her hand to conﬁrm Tory’s guess.
You brought me a message that I wrote to myself in
explanation, that I shall again give to you to give to me at the
appointed time.
Which will be?
On the feast day of Ta-Khu, the Lord of Time and
Space, which is in the middle of the eight-day Festival of Air,
seven days from now.

That’s wonderful! Tory was overjoyed. Thank you
so much.
Do not thank me child, thank Turan. He’s the one who
will organize it. For it was my nephew who ﬁrst brought you
to me, and it was he who rallied the council on your behalf.
Does he know this? Tory sounded doubtful, as Turan
certainly hadn’t seemed that disposed towards her an
hour ago.
The Priestess was amused by Tory’s perception.
Turan has already agreed to accompany you, even though it
means returning to a physical state of being for a time.
He can do that?
Oh yes, Nin Bau stated with certainty. Though as you
might imagine, with his lack of physical experience, this does
leave him very vulnerable to be hurt . . . in every sense of
the word.
Yes, it would. Tory was rather amazed he would do
this for her.
So you must be very patient with him, for, although he
has the mind of a genius, he has the emotional understanding
of a novice.
After Antonia married his brother, Nin Bau had
guided Turan toward the Mind Sciences as he’d needed
something to absorb him. The Priestess hadn’t foreseen
just how absorbed he would eventually become until it
was too late. Yet, when Turan entered her chambers
almost a week ago to plead Lamamu’s case, for the ﬁrst
time in hundreds of years Nin Bau saw a glimmer of
hope for him to achieve happiness; she saw an avenue
that might deliver her nephew from his spiritual
isolation back to the land of the living.

During the days leading up to the festival, Tory spent
her mornings in the Shi-im-ti temple with En Darius,
learning the idiosyncrasies of his devices.
In the afternoons, as Turan was in isolation to
reconstitute, Tory was assigned to En Durand, who’d been
instructing her in the use of etheric vision and hearing.
He explained the etheric world as being all of
invisible space. Etheric world atoms, vibrating at
varying rates, formed seven different layers of energy
that each had a distinct characteristic and function,
though they interpenetrated each other.
Tory had learnt about the seven different planes of
existence back in the twentieth century. The ﬁrst was
the earth plane (experience), then the astral plane
(love), the mental plane (thought), the buddhic plane
(wisdom), the spiritual plane (will), monadic plane
(involution), and totality (perfection or godconsciousness).
Her instructor went on to explain that the etheric
world was made up of four essential kinds of vibrational
frequencies: warmth ether, light ether, chemical ether
and life force ether, which combined to form the
differing planes. Once one learned to exercise etheric
sight and hearing properly, one could perceive and
communicate with creatures of a non-human nature
that lived just outside the normal range of vision. The
music of the spheres, beautiful, indescribable sounds,
were forever there for one’s leisure, if one knew how to
access them.
But the thing that intrigued Tory the most was that
one could tune into the auric ﬁeld of any physical

object, living or no, and understand all its counterparts
in the etheric realm. This was accomplished by staring
at the object in question until the object disappeared
and one perceived only the astral counterpart. She
deemed this ability could come in very handy when
seeking out Mahaud, for it also enabled one to deﬁne
any undesirable beings that might be clinging to a
particular physical form.
Thus, by the eve of the festival of Ta-Khu, after a
long meditation, Durand had Tory sitting in the gardens
across from the astrological centre, staring in wonder at
the fauna’s brightly-coloured auric energy.
When she ﬁnally looked from the tree and ﬂower
bed to her instructor beside her, she nearly jumped out
of her skin. For a brief moment, Durand appeared to be
wearing Tiernan’s guise — the very image of her
husband’s champion was smiling back at her.
‘Is something the matter, Lamamu?’ Durand
wondered why he’d startled her.
‘I knew you,’ she confessed, ‘in another time.’
Durand appeared intrigued, stunned and quite
delighted all at once.
‘The dying King I spoke of. You are his champion
and most trusted adviser.’
‘Really?’ He gave a chuckle. ‘Fancy that.’
Tory nodded with a smile. ‘En Darius, En Razu, the
Shu Sar, and all my brothers, I recognise as others who
are connected to the King in one way or another.’
‘How awfully strange that must be,’ Durand
sympathized. ‘And this King, have you seen him here?’
Tory stared at him a moment then nodded.

Durand could feel her sudden resistance to his line
of questioning, thus he was all the more compelled to
pursue it. ‘May I ask who he is?’ As her large, violet eyes
appeared to ﬁll with dismay, he swore, ‘If you wish to
tell me, Nin, it shall go with me undisclosed to the next
life, I assure you.’
Durand was very much like his sixth century
counterpart; although Tiernan had been Maelgwn’s
champion, he had always been one of Tory’s closest
conﬁdants. ‘Shar Turan.’
Durand was thoughtful a moment. ‘Then it makes
perfect sense that he should aid you, if the quest is to
save himself.’
‘I suppose so.’ Her mood lightened.
‘So what was your relationship to the King . . . if you
don’t mind me asking?’
That was the horror question, and Tory guessed that
this was probably made plain by her expression.
‘I am sorry.’ En Durand stated with great sincerity. ‘I
shouldn’t pry.’
‘No, that’s alright.’ She let go of her fear. ‘I trust you,
Durand. Truth be known, I was his wife. Of twenty years,
in fact . . . which in that day and age was half a lifetime.’
‘I shouldn’t have asked.’ Durand felt for her.
‘Please don’t feel bad, I’m ﬁne about it, really I am.’
She sounded quite convincing. ‘I’ve had this problem
before.’
‘My, but you must have led a wondrous existence,’
Durand philosophised, as he lay back on the grass.
‘But still, in all, I have not lived even one tenth of
the time you have.’

‘Don’t rub it in.’ Durand gave a chuckle at her gall,
purposefully confusing the innocent intent of her
comment.
He was very handsome when he laughed, which
made Tory wonder about his marital status. ‘Well, now
you know all about me, how about you tell me about
you? Do you have a lady, Durand?’
The scientist looked rather fazed by the question.
‘There’s nothing to tell.’
‘I don’t believe you.’
‘No, really.’ He sat upright. ‘People here tend to
couple with others of their given profession, and there
are no women in my chosen ﬁeld.’ He shrugged. ‘I really
don’t have that much time to spare on a relationship,
though I suppose I could make the time if the right
woman came along.’
A cheeky smiled formed on Tory’s lips, she couldn’t
prevent it.
‘What?’
‘I don’t know if you really want to know.’ Tory
hesitated, still frightfully amused.
Durand cocked an eye. ‘Can you give me a hint?’
‘Do you ever get out to the third island ring much?’
‘No, why?’
‘Because a few days ago, I met the woman you
married in the age from which I came.’ Tory watched
his interest snowball.
‘On the third island ring?’ He never would have
thought to look there. ‘Who?’
‘I thought you’d want to know. She’s the Head
Healer of Kheit-Sin.’

‘Nin Lilith!’ he exclaimed, sounding both bemused
and enchanted.
‘You know her then?’
‘Yes, I tutored her in etheric sight when she was a
mere novice,’ he informed her in an abstract manner,
caught up in recollection. ‘That was hundreds of years
ago now. She is a graduate of the warrior arts. What
could she and I possibly have in common?’
‘I am a warrior,’ Tory reminded him. ‘And we don’t
seem to lack for conversation.’
‘Your name does suit you.’ Durand gave a chuckle as
he stood. ‘I think the reason we have so much to discuss
is because you’re a time traveller.’
‘As are we all.’ Tory stood up. ‘It’s just that I
consciously remember my travels. If you could, sir, your
view might be quite different.’
‘But who’s to say it’s meant to be, this time round?’
He began the walk back through the gardens to the
temple. ‘You loved your King in one life, yet you claim
to feel nothing for his counterpart in this one. Why
should we be any different?’
The scientist had her there. ‘I didn’t say I didn’t feel
anything for him. Perhaps if I wasn’t still bound by a
wedding vow I made to the King, and Turan was even
slightly interested in me, things might be different.’
‘Sorry?’ Durand stopped in his tracks to look at her.
‘Do you realise how ludicrous that sounds?’
‘That’s my life for you.’ She shrugged.
‘No, seriously,’ Durand appealed in all earnest. ‘You
would deny your love for him here, because you loved
him there? I can’t see how that could be good for you . . .

or right, for that matter.’ He continued to walk at a very
leisurely pace.
‘Do you really think so?’ Tory caught him up,
fascinated by his view. Indeed, he was the second person
to offer that opinion on the matter. Rhun had also
thought this when she’d told him about Miles. ‘I ﬁgured
I was better off just trying to live one life at a time.’
‘But you’re not living one life at a time.’ He turned
to face her as they reached the promenade, where they
were to part ways.
‘That’s a good point,’ Tory conceded. ‘I shall bear that
in mind should the situation ever arise.’ She tried not to
grin, as her intended pun seemed to embarrass him.
‘All I’m saying,’ Durand summed up, ‘is that you
should keep yourself open to the will of the universe.’
‘That sounds like good advice for both of us.’
On the third evening of the festival holiday, the Shu
Sar threw a huge feast to honour his two youngest sons.
As the whole family would be there, Tory decided not
to attend. She wasn’t sure she could handle all her
brothers and their mothers at once, so she ate alone in
her room and had a long hot bath ahead of a cool swim.
As it was a rather warm night she lay naked under
her silken sheet, feeling fresh and cool in the wake of
her dip. Her mind’s eye was picturing images of those
that had helped her in her quest thus far; they’d all been
so incredibly good to her and she wished there was some
way she could repay their kindness. Her thoughts then
turned to tomorrow, and the four different trips she was
to make through the time–space continuum. The initial

trip would take her back to her ﬁrst day here, and Turan
would accompany her for this leg. The second part of
her journey would take her back to Llyn Cerrig Bach.
From there, she would teleport herself to Maelgwn’s side
(though she’d not mentioned this ability to anyone
here) and take the samples required. She would then
return to the temple in the valley to rendezvous with
the channel created by the council of the Old Ones.
This would bring her back to the point in time when
she’d ﬁrst arrived in the Old Land, where she would
meet up with Turan. The ﬁnal leg would hopefully bring
Turan and herself back to the present, to complete the
time loop.
Impossible? The council, who’d already witnessed
the whole event, didn’t seem to think so.
The door of her room opened and someone entered.
In the darkness, Tory couldn’t tell who it was, she saw
only a silhouette before the door closed.
‘There you are.’ The intruder moved through the
shadows towards her. ‘Why were you not at our feast?’
Well, it’s Jerram or Adelgar. Adelgar was her guess.
She wrapped the sheet ﬁrmly around her and sat
upright to confront him, as he crawled through the part
in the netting that surrounded her bed. ‘What are you
doing here?’
‘I’m here for your tutorial.’
Dark as it was, she saw his grin as he stretched out
on the bed to face her.
‘I could teach you how to kill a man, one-handed.’
She smiled sweetly. ‘And I’ll use you to demonstrate.’
She backed as far away from him as she could, but there

was little chance of escape. The netting surrounding her
was ﬁrmly attached to the ﬂoor and only had one place
of entry, which Adelgar now lay across. She could try
and rip through the netting with her bare hands, but
there was the distinct possibility that she could lose the
ﬂimsy silk sheet bound round her in the process.
‘Now don’t be like that.’ He took hold of her around
the ankle and dragged her towards him, the silken sheet
beneath her aiding his cause somewhat.
‘Let go.’ Tory kicked herself away from him, using
his stomach muscles as a springboard as she clung to the
sheet around herself with both hands. ‘What are you
doing? I’m your sister!’
‘No, you’re not.’ He reached for her again, only he
raised himself this time, sliding her into position and
pinning her beneath his body weight. ‘You’re only my
half-sister.’
‘Damn it.’ Her legs were ﬁrmly trapped, thus she
attempted a one-handed strike which Adelgar blocked.
Before she had the chance to retaliate, he had both her
wrists clamped down to the bed. ‘Shit.’ She resigned
herself to the fact that she couldn’t break free, it would
seem Adelgar had Brockwell’s strength too. This was
her cue to teleport herself elsewhere, if she could just
concentrate long enough to do so.
‘Now we can do this the hard way, or we can do this
the easy way.’ Adelgar leant forward and took hold of
the sheet with his teeth, slowly drawing it down.
‘You’re going to regret this,’ she cautioned,
expanding her chest to ﬁll the fabric and hindering his
attempt to expose her breasts.

‘Not fair,’ Adelgar joked, but the next thing he knew
he was airborne. ‘Put me down,’ he demanded, ﬂoating
just high enough for Tory to be beyond his reach.
‘I’m not doing it.’ She laughed, bundling up her
sheet and escaping through the net.
‘Get back here!’ Adelgar was losing his good humour.
Well, well, well, if it’s not my little brother . . . Turan
came forth out of the darkness and turned Adelgar’s
ﬂoating form around to address him face to face.
‘Put me down, Turan,’ Adelgar snarled. ‘Or I’ll break
every bone in your body.’
‘You’re the one who’s going to need medical
attention,’ Tory commented, having thrown on her
clothes.
Turan guided his captive out from under the netting
and into the room. What would you like me to do with him?
Tory smiled at the question, staring up at her
assailant. ‘Well, I think he needs cooling down, what do
you think?’
I think you might be right.
Tory’s window opened and Adelgar began to ﬂoat
towards it, kicking and yelling in protest.
‘What are you doing?! . . . I’ll kill you, Turan, I swear
it.’ Adelgar tried to cling on to the window frame, but
his brother’s will was too strong.
As he disappeared outside, Tory rushed to the
window. ‘Don’t hurt him,’ she pleaded, once the warrior
was out of earshot.
I won’t. Turan let his hold over his prisoner lapse,
and Adelgar dropped into the canal. Someone will ﬁsh
him out, sooner or later.

Since justice was served, Tory had to chuckle.
‘Lucky you came by, I . . .’ Tory paused as she noted the
tears in Turan’s eyes. ‘Is something wrong?’ She
approached him, but the Shar backed up.
‘I think I’ve had a nightmare,’ he confessed, then
forced a smile. ‘It’s so long since I’ve had to sleep, I’d
forgotten how real dreams can feel at times.’ He wiped
the tears from his face. ‘I wouldn’t have disturbed you,
but I wondered if the negative entity you spoke of might
be the same detrimental force I’ve seen in the visions
that plague my sleep.’
Tory’s jaw dropped, for he spoke aloud. He did not
ﬂoat as she’d known him to, but walked. ‘Turan.’ She
moved nearer to him, and reached out her hand to
make contact with his. ‘You’re real!’ She near choked
on the words as she held his huge hand in her own.
‘I always have been,’ he informed, withdrawing from
her touch. ‘Will you help me with this, or not?’
The Shar’s moods were quite obviously all over the
place; hence Tory thought him in no state to be
introduced to Mahaud. ‘Turan,’ she released a heavy
sigh, ‘please, come sit down.’ She took a few steps
toward the lounge, holding her hand out to him, but he
was hesitant. ‘Come on.’
He allowed to her take up his hand and lead him to
a seat.
Tory leant over and pulled back the metal sheath of
the solar lamp, to shed a little light on the subject,
which caused them both to squint.
‘Ouch!’ Turan rubbed his eyes as they adjusted.
‘Pain,’ he explained. ‘I’d forgotten.’

‘I’m so sorry.’ She closed the cover three-quarters.
‘That’s ﬁne.’ He assured, his eyes wavering open.
‘Really. Let’s just . . . proceed.’
‘Before we do . . .’ Tory stalled, getting herself
comfortable, ‘I want you to tell me how you’re feeling?’
‘You sound like Darius . . . I feel ﬁne!’ He became
annoyed and rose to depart.
‘Well, if you feel ﬁne . . .’ Tory stood also, remaining
very calm, ‘why are you getting so angry?’
‘Because I fear Chailidocean could be in great
danger, and you’re not helping me any,’ Turan snapped.
‘Well, why don’t you tell me what you’ve seen, and I
might be able to help!’ Now Tory was losing her cool.
‘All I want from you is a picture, that’s all!’ He
stressed the point. ‘If you would be so kind!’ The lash in
his voice made her jump; even when Maelgwn had
divorced her his words had not seemed so cutting.
‘Alright,’ she decided, clenching her jaw to control her
urge to thump him. ‘If that’s what you want, then that’s
what you shall get.’ She plonked herself down on the
lounge, holding her arms together as required, and
closing her eyes to concentrate. ‘Come on . . .’ she
urged, ‘while I’m still in the mood.’
Turan sat, clasping her hands between his own, and
closed his eyes.
Tory focused on her memories of Mahaud from the
ﬁrst time they’d met at Arwystli, where the witch had
terminated the life of her ﬁrst unborn child, to the
ordeal the crone had put her through with Teo in the
twentieth century. Next came the apocalypse she’d
witnessed at Arwystli just recently, where Mahaud had

made a threat of vengeance against her on the deathbed
of Calin Brockwell.
‘Dear Gods! I am so sorry.’ Turan let go, the tears
streaming down his face now. ‘I had no idea.’ He was
ashamed of the demands he’d made on her.
Tory suddenly felt a mite guilty herself. She’d
known Turan was in no emotional state for such a
shock and now she’d hurt him through her impatience;
this was the one thing she’d promised Nin Bau she
wouldn’t do.
‘Was I any help?’ The damage was done, best to try
and make amends.
‘It’s hard to say.’ He tried to gather his thoughts.
‘Maybe. The many images you put forward are different
to what I have seen, but as you’ve said, this force
assumes many different forms.’ He paused to consider
then shook his head and stood, frustrated.
‘Maybe,’ Tory rose, taking a ﬁrm hold of both his
arms, ‘you should relax. Remember that . . . relaxation?’
She smiled as she felt his tension ease.
‘Perhaps you’re right,’ he conceded. ‘I do apologise
for my irrational behaviour.’
‘It’s not irrational to be afraid for those you care
about, Turan. I just think it might be best to talk about
this in the morning, when you’ve rested a little. Okay?’
‘Yes, of course.’ He made a move for the door.
‘Ah . . .’ She called after him. ‘Thanks for coming to
my rescue, both tonight and tomorrow. I know this
whole affair has been very difﬁcult for you, and I just
wanted you to know I appreciate everything you’re
doing for me, really I do.’

This made him smile. ‘Well, what is family for after
all?’
He left her in peace, via an open door for a change,
and Tory closed and locked it behind him.
‘What a night!’ She picked up her sheet on route to
bed, and collapsed onto it.
It was hard for Tory to conceive that Mahaud
could manifest herself here in such a positive
environment. She’d met no one thus far that was evil
enough for the crone to latch onto, nor had she even
felt an inkling of her presence. Still, she would talk to
Turan in the morning and find out exactly what he
had envisioned.
What did he mean Chailidocean might be in danger?
What kind of danger? Tomorrow . . . She encouraged
herself to rest, as the day ahead was shaping up to be a
long one.
As usual Tory didn’t get much sleep. Since she was up
and about so early, she wandered down to the
kitchens to investigate what she could rustle up for
breakfast.
Upon ﬁlling a tray with fruits, a large bowl of
yogurt, fruit juice, water, sweet breads and herbal tea,
Tory inquired after the whereabouts of Shar Turan’s
chambers and headed off in that direction.
‘For me?’
She passed Xavier on the stairs, who tried to take
the tray from her.
‘If you’d told me you were coming, I would have
stayed in bed.’ He grinned.

‘What is it with you lot?’ She jested, steering well
away from him. ‘I think you need more women
around here.’
‘Whatever do you mean?’ He seemed intrigued. ‘You
wouldn’t know anything about Adelgar’s little swim
round the citadel last night, perchance?’
‘Well, it was a nice night for it.’ She grinned.
‘I see, no comment.’ Xavier motioned to the
breakfast tray set for two. ‘So, if this is not for me, who’s
the lucky recipient?’
‘Never you mind who it’s for.’ Tory made haste to
depart.
‘In other words, Turan.’ He chuckled. ‘You know it’s
painfully obvious to me, that you are not the slightest
bit interested in him.’ He made jest of her previous
claim, as he strolled off down the stairs.
‘It’s not what you think,’ she called after him.
Xavier turned back to look at her, faking a serious
stance. ‘I’m sure I believe you.’
‘Think what you like then.’ She decided to ignore
him. ‘I am in perfect control,’ Tory stated, but just who
was she trying to convince?
Turan was awake when she entered. He sat quiet and
still on the seat of the large, rounded bay window,
gazing out over the city below.
His room was much like her own, though by her
understanding Turan didn’t stay in the palace very
often. It was said he preferred his quarters in the Durnu-ga Temple, away from the disruptions of family life,
where he could study in peace.

‘Hey partner, how are you feeling?’ She spoke and
moved quietly, so as not to alarm him, placing the tray
on the seat at his feet as she sat herself down.
‘This was nice of you.’ He looked to her offering and
selected a piece of fruit. ‘I’m famished.’
‘All we need now is the Sunday paper,’ she amused
herself, and although Turan didn’t understand the joke,
he smiled anyway. ‘You seem in much better spirits
today.’ His smile broadened. This was too much!
‘You handled me very well last night, I apprec—’
‘Please!’ She appealed. ‘You handled Adelgar very
well, so let’s call it even.’ Tory took up her tea and got
comfortable. ‘Instead, why don’t you tell me about your
nightmares?’
‘There’s not that much to them really.’ He shrugged.
‘But for what it’s worth, I’ll tell you what I’ve seen.’
He told of an old mentor of his, Keeldar, who’d been a
pioneer in the ﬁeld of identifying, manipulating and
transporting matter via sonic frequency and
psychokinesis. Keeldar got himself banished from the
continent by the council for what Turan would only
describe as sedition. Before this, he’d held a high position
in the mineral department of the Order of Danuih, as well
as holding En Norbert’s position as the Head of the Mind
Sciences. Still, the way the Shar envisioned Keeldar now,
he was not at all the man of science he remembered.
‘He appears kind of . . .’ Turan searched for the right
word, ‘feral. But then the world outside our lovely
continent would tend to have that effect on you.’
‘So how does this Keeldar place Chailidocean in
danger?’

Turan seemed slightly vexed by the question. ‘I wish
I knew. In my visions he’s laughing, but there’s a distinct
echo of insanity about his presence. Then there’s this
huge explosion, ten times the brightness of the sun . . .
heat upon heat, upon heat. When I snap out of the
trance, I’m left with a distinct sense of dread.’ He
poured them both some juice. ‘Keeldar was an
accomplished telepathist; in fact, he taught me the art.
So, if these images are sent from him, my perception of
them is quite purposeful.’
‘When did the visions start?’
‘A couple of years before you arrived . . . around the
time the raids began in Portea and Usiqua.’
‘So you think Keeldar could be behind the attacks?’
Turan drank his juice down in a few gulps and
shrugged. ‘It’s as much a possibility as it could be a
coincidence, I guess.’
Tory was contemplative. Surely Mahaud couldn’t be
behind this if it had been going on since before she’d
even arrived. ‘The council knows?’
‘Oh yes, and they are mindful of developments,’ he
informed her, sounding not too thrilled by their
seemingly complacent ruling on the matter.
Tory looked to the door as the sound of the
particle manipulation function alerted them both
to company.
Turan’s mother, Nin Melcah, stood in the doorway,
tray in hand, wearing the most astonished look on her
face upon spying her son and the daughter of Danuih
having breakfast together in his room. ‘It would seem
you’ve already been indulged.’

Tory burst into laughter at the misguided accusation
behind her words. When she saw Turan’s horriﬁed
reaction, she laughed even more so.
‘Surely you don’t think that we . . .’
The Shar, too, was forced to laugh, which, although
Tory found it rather insulting, she had to admit was
wonderful to see.
‘Lamamu and myself are working on a project today,
which we were just discussing over breakfast.’ Turan
motioned his mother to approach. ‘But we can discuss it
later, do join us.’
‘We are in the middle of a festival. I’ve not got time
to be sitting around.’ She seemed put out. ‘No, if you
have eaten already, then I shall go.’
‘No.’ Tory stood. ‘I shall go. I’m sure you don’t get
enough time alone with your son to pass up an
opportunity.’ Tory smiled as she passed the stunned
woman, and reaching the door she looked back to
Turan. ‘How about lunch at the Shi-im-ti?’
‘That would be fine.’ Turan replied; Darius would
want to see them both before they faced the circuits
of time.

17

TIME LOOP

T

he Festival of the Air was the second seasonal
rite of the year and was held at the time of the
equinox. It was one of four solar festivals that
took place at each quarter of the Atlantean year,
which was Sothic (based on the star Sirius), as would
be the later Egyptian calendar — a year consisting of
360 days.
For the first four days of the festival the leaders of
the land had been in council. The principal members
of the council were: the Shu Sar, supreme ruler of the
continent; Shar Alaric, ruler of the city of
Chailidocean; Shar Diccon, ruler of the state of
Cintrala; Shar Adelgar, ruler of the state of Portea;
and Shar Jerram, ruler of the state of Usiqua. The Shu
Sar’s advisers were also present, including En Razu,

plus the rulers of the other major cities like Mentis to
the east, and Menocea to the north-east. Yet, aside
from communication on a physical level, this festival
also encompassed communication with the cosmos
and its divinities; hence the leader’s parleying would
cease before sunset to allow the celebration to
truly commence.
The ceremonial rite to Ta-Khu was always held in
a high place, and performed on the fourth day of the
eight-day festival. The priests of Ta-Khu held
ceremonies high in the mountains outside the city for
the common folk. These commenced at sunrise and
continued until just after dark, so one was at leisure to
attend at any time and could stay for as long as one
chose. This pilgrimage was to offer gifts to the divine
ancestor, which had been made by one’s own hand,
and were blessed by the priests and kept in the
temples to be given later to those in need. The High
Priests of the order performed a special service for the
Shu Sar and his subjects in the High Temple of
Chailidocean after sundown. A great feast was held
afterwards, and the four days that followed were for
games, rest, and recreation.
Taliesin briefed Turan and Tory over lunch with En
Darius in the courtyard of the healing temple.
He advised that just before midnight, the
members of the High Council would meet them at the
site on the Mount Dur-an-ki plateau. This was in the
mountain range to the east of the city, but there was
an underground passage that ran from the High

Temple. Turan knew the way and would accompany
Tory there at the appointed time. Should anyone need
an excuse to leave the feast, they were to say that
Nin Bau had summoned them; no one questioned the
High Priestess’ will. If all went to plan, they would
be back at the celebrations before anyone even
missed them.
En Darius handed over a fully-equipped belt of the
apparatus that Tory was to take with her. Everything
was strapped in good and tight, fully loaded, and ready
to use. As Darius would not be present on Mount Duran-ki tonight, he wished Tory well in her quest. He
was confident that tomorrow they would start work on
the cure.
Come evening, Tory dressed herself in the long, pale
blue robe of the middle orders, and was escorted by En
Razu to the Great Temple for the service of Ta-Khu.
She carried a beautiful bouquet of mixed ﬂora, in
various shades of purple, to offer to the divinity of time
and space on his feast day.
Along with the family of the Shu Sar, everyone of
the Higher Orders of learning was present for the rite.
Tory gathered this from seeing all the white attire, for
most had their hoods drawn well over their heads to
concentrate on the ceremony.
Nin Bau lead the liturgy, most of which was sung in a
language foreign to Tory’s ears, that in an aesthetic sense
was very inspiring. There was music throughout the entire
service that went for a little under a couple of hours, upon
which time everyone adjourned to the banquet.

The dining room was adorned with ﬂowers, candles and
stones of purple, the colour of Ta-Khu. This room was
open to the stars and the extensive gardens; musicians,
dancers, and guests alike spread themselves throughout.
Tory had wandered down along one side of the pool
to where the ﬁrst of its seven crystal fountains were
positioned. There she stood admiring her old friend
Selwyn (Shar Seth), as he strummed out a tune on a
lyre, when she felt the warmth of someone’s hand
taking hold of her own.
‘Adelgar.’ She was surprised to ﬁnd it was he,
especially after last night’s episode, and she withdrew
her hand abruptly.
‘I want to apologise . . .’ he began, but Tory was
already way ahead of him.
‘Why? So you can try your luck again as soon as you
get me alone? Oh no.’
The young warrior was rather stunned that she
could know him so well, as she turned and made for
somewhere more crowded.
‘I shall formally ask the council for their consent if I
must.’ Adelgar came after her, unaware Turan was
within earshot.
His older brother and Durand were seated just to
the other side of the tall hedge, by which Tory and
himself passed, and Turan politely motioned Durand to
quiet so that they could listen.
‘For their consent to what?’ Tory was curious
enough to stop and inquire.
‘Why . . . to join with you, of course.’ He took hold
of her hands.

‘Join with me!’ she echoed, unable to believe how
casual he was about it. ‘I’m not joining with anyone,’
she instructed him as she freed herself.
Shouldn’t we do something? Durand bethought his
associate.
Presently. There was mischief in Turan’s smile.
Durand had never seen Shar Turan behave so, not
in many a hundred years, so he played along just for the
entertainment value.
‘But you’ll have to sooner or later. Every woman is
required to give birth once,’ Adelgar informed Tory.
‘And Turan is not so inclined towards breeding as I, if
that’s what you’re hoping.’
Let’s face it. Turan conveyed his view to his
companion on the quiet. No man alive is as inclined
towards breeding so well as he. Durand near burst out
laughing at the comment. But Turan anticipated the
event and clasped a hand over his friend’s mouth before
he gave them away.
‘Look Adelgar, I hate to tell you this, but I have
already had a child, to a man I am very much in love
with.’
Durand looked to Turan who appeared to be of
mixed emotions about the news. Turan was, in fact,
wondering if En Razu knew.
‘No, that can’t be.’ Adelgar didn’t understand.
‘I’m sorry, but it’s true. They’re both waiting for me
back in the future.’
The young Shar was at a loss for words, wandering
to and fro in a daze. ‘So you’re not planning to stay
long.’ He sounded so disheartened. ‘I wanted you to

teach me your way of defense . . . I wanted to show you
Portea, and . . . and . . .’
‘As much as I would dearly love to stay awhile, I have
to get back.’ She placed a hand on his shoulder. ‘Someone
of great historical signiﬁcance shall die if I don’t.’
‘I could change your mind, I know it.’ He pulled her
close to maul her neck.
‘Goddamn you, Adelgar.’ Tory attempted to push
away, but he wasn’t letting go. She dug her ﬁngers deep
into the vital points in both his shoulders.
‘Aw!’ Adelgar again found himself airborne. ‘Turan!’
he yelled in vengeance.
Tory grinned at this, looking round to spy Turan and
Durand come walking through a gap in the hedge
up ahead.
‘Don’t you dare,’ Adelgar warned, as he ﬂoated over
the swimming pool.
‘Are you alright?’ Durand was amused that she’d not
really needed their help to control the situation.
‘Whoever said history never repeats was an idiot!’
Tory shook her head. ‘But that’s another story.’
‘Now I thought I’d warned you about accosting
our little sister,’ Turan teased his brother from the
side of the pool, lowering and raising Adelgar above
the water.
‘Turan don’t!’ Tory implored him, noting they were
drawing a crowd. ‘Put him down on the ground.’ As he
seemed surprised by the request, she added, ‘Please.’
Turan gently set Adelgar down on the far side of the
pool, as it was quite a hike either way round to reach
them again.

Adelgar stomped off on his trek, mumbling curses in
the native dialect.
‘Can I be of assistance.’ Nin Lilith, who’d noted the
goings on, approached to investigate.
‘Ah, a healer of wild beasts . . . just what we need.’
Tory welcomed her warmly, turning back to serve Durand
a wink as she walked over to meet Lilith halfway.
The scientist felt himself blush at her inference, and
thanked Ta-Khu for the poor light.
Tory made sure everybody knew each other before
she announced her departure. Her date with destiny was
drawing closer, and she needed to change.
‘I’d best keep an eye on her,’ Turan explained, as he
took his leave of them also.
‘Well, then . . .’ Durand looked to the lovely lady
beside him, not too sure what to say to her.
She smiled at his dilemma. ‘Could I tempt you to a
stroll, perhaps?’ Lilith suggested.
‘Nothing would please me more.’ Durand resolved
with a smile, interlocking her arm in his.
The old jeans, which were now shorts, T-shirt, jacket,
and steel-capped boots were pulled out of the closet for
the expedition.
Tory wrapped her hair in a tight bun, strapped on
Maelgwn’s sword, then slung Darius’ tool belt over her
head and shoulder. ‘Ta-da!’
She let Turan know it was safe to look; however,
he’d been quietly observing her reﬂection in the
window for some time. When he turned she had her
arms parted wide.

‘Well, I think I’m prepared for just about anything.’
She placed her hands on her hips when she got tired of
waiting for his opinion. ‘Shall we go then?’
The Shar was just staring at her, appearing somewhat
overawed. ‘You’re not afraid of anything, are you?’
‘Should I be?’
Turan refrained from answering, then smiled
meekly. ‘No. Our ﬂight is in the best of hands.’
The Shar led Tory through the golden door in the foyer
of the Great Temple and ascended the long staircase to
the communal dwellings underneath. There was hardly
anyone about, due to the hour, thus their passage to
Nin Bau’s council chambers was swift.
As they approached the throne of the High
Priestess, Tory noted that the large marble block at the
base of the chair had been moved forward to reveal a
staircase hidden underneath. This led to a dimly-lit
tunnel that was tubular in shape.
As the passageway seemed to go on forever, Tory
made conversation whilst they walked. ‘So what does
Dur-an-ki translate to?’
‘The meeting place of heaven and earth.’
‘Whoa, really?’ Her thoughts were in motion. ‘So
your name must mean something similar.’
Turan smiled at her interest. ‘In the bond of the
divine, or heaven.’
Tory chuckled at this, and Turan looked mildly
offended until she explained. ‘And I am the divine
master of love and war . . . is it any wonder you got
lumbered with me?’

This connection hadn’t occurred to Turan, but he
smiled as he conceded she might be right.
‘What’s that?’ Tory referred to the beautiful
purple-pink light beyond where the tunnel ended, and
began to run towards it. ‘Sorry.’ She slowed down,
recalling how Turan disliked boisterous behaviour.
‘We’ve reached the mountain.’ He sounded, on the
contrary, delighted by her excitement.
‘Good heavens . . . just look at this!’ Tory’s eyes
scanned the expansive underground deposits of
crystals; they were everywhere. Large stalactites of
quartz, rose quartz, and amethyst hung like icicles
from the roof of the cavern. Stalagmites rose
like daggers from the floor, occasionally uniting
with the stalactites overhead to form one splendid,
long column.
‘It’s beautiful.’ She stepped out of the tunnel and
onto a pathway that wound upwards between the
glittering clusters of stone, to an exit at the top of the
mountain.
‘Come on, we’re nearly there.’ Turan headed off up
the pathway ahead of her.
This place was just one marvel after another. ‘Can I
take one?’ Tory spotted a large amethyst wand laying by
the side of the path.
‘Feel free.’ He’d reached the stairs that disappeared
into an opening in the wall.
Tory placed the wand in her pocket and made haste
to catch up.
From a high vantage point the cavern below
appeared rather like a huge power conductor, and

upon mulling this notion around for a moment or two
she considered that this might not be so far from
the truth.
As they scaled the narrow stairway inside the
mountain, Tory became aware of the strong energy
currents that pulsated around her. A ley crossing, she
surmised as a warm breeze swept over her; they must be
close to the top.
A door opened onto a large marble plateau that
must have been one hundred and ﬁfty foot round. Upon
this was a stone circle, that consisted of nine of the
largest hunks of polished crystal Tory had ever seen.
Positioned just in front of her, in the same proximity to
the stone circle as, say, the King Stone at the Rollright
site would have been, was a box the size of an alter that
was made of pure gold.
The symbol of Caduceus (a winged rod with two
serpents entwining it in opposing directions) was
engraved upon all sides of the golden feature. The
serpents represented negative (the chaotic principle)
and positive (the orderly principle). The wings of the
rod personiﬁed the transpersonal self, suggesting that
the mind is capable of bringing these opposing forces
into balance.
‘The guest of honour.’ Taliesin approached to
welcome Tory. ‘Fascinating, isn’t it?’ he commented,
noting her preoccupation with the glistening golden
box. ‘I bet you’ll never guess what it is.’
As there was a distinct ring of challenge in his tone,
Tory cocked an eye and had a guess. ‘It’s a control
mechanism of some kind.’

‘It’s not just a control mechanism. It’s the control
mechanism . . . does the Ark of the Covenant ring
any bells?’
‘What?’ Tory was confused. ‘Wasn’t that the
box Moses was supposed to have stored the ten
commandments in?’
‘Hardly. Though the Bible was right in so far as it
was a means of communication between worlds. Inside
this golden shell are many crystals, but they are not of
this world. They come from a place that is within the
fourth dimension, a region of anti-matter, or chaos if
you will. Unlike crystalline structures more well-known
to us, these stones are pentagonal and therefore have a
ﬁvefold symmetry.’ As Tory appeared to have totally lost
track of the conversation, the Merlin clariﬁed: ‘In other
words, they give off a charge of anti-matter necessary for
the gravity control needed to create a doorway into the
time–space continuum, along with the natural earth
energies of this site and the crystal conductors that are
required to harness the vortex.’
‘So what’s it doing here?’
It’s my means of transport to and from home. Shu
Micah joined them. It was only after I got here to your
third-dimensional concept of time, that I realised I could not
only dimension shift using this form of gravity control, but
time travel as well. For where I come from, there is no time.
‘If you don’t mind me asking, Shu Micah . . .’ she
couldn’t pass up the perfect opportunity to inquire,
‘where do you come from?’
From within the region of Nibiru, the brightest star in
the night sky. He pointed it out.

‘You might know it better as the binary star, Sirius,’
Taliesin whispered.
Tory wanted to ask what Shu Micah had meant by
‘in the region of’, but Nin Bau summoned everyone to
take their places for the operation.
‘I’d wish you luck, but I already know you don’t
need it.’ Taliesin turned her to face the centre of the
stone circle where Turan was already in position, and
gently encouraged her to head that way.
Turan was a feeling a little edgy as he’d never
travelled the circuits of time in a physical form before,
and what was worse, somebody else was manning
the controls.
‘Well, here we are.’ Tory came to a stop in front of
the Shar, marking how perturbed he appeared. ‘There’s
nothing to worry about . . . I’ve done this lots of times,
even before I became immortal.’
Nothing to worry about! he thought to himself.
She obviously had no notion of the potential danger
of becoming trapped in a time warp, which could
involve being in a limbo of spiritual isolation for
centuries of earth time.
If only I could be so blissfully naive. Turan smiled and
took up her hands.
‘Oh dear!’ Tory panicked suddenly. ‘The letter from
Nin Bau.’ She went to run off, but Turan prevented her.
‘I have it,’ he informed her, looking to the key
mechanism for the site around which Nin Bau, En Seba,
Shu Asa, Shu Micah, and En Razu were gathered.
Out of the golden base of the control panel rose a
cylindrical dome of a shiny metallic colour. All the

members of the council placed their hands on the
conductor, as Nin Bau began chanting her summons.
A turbulent cloud erupted in the sky overhead, its
core alive with electromagnetic activity. A bolt of
lightning lashed down to make contact with the dome
and a glowing white mist began to rise from the centre
of the stones where Tory and Turan stood.
‘Don’t let go.’ Tory tightened her grip on him.
‘I’ve got you,’ he vowed, as a great whirlpool of light
engulfed them.
When Tory next became aware of the world around
her, she was standing in the middle of the Dur-an-ki
plateau. She wasn’t holding Turan’s hands any longer;
rather, her arms were wrapped tightly around his huge
form and her head was pressed against his chest.
As Turan came to realise he was embracing his
companion, he ceased to do so at once. ‘Ah . . . I do
believe we’re here,’ he announced, looking around the
darkened site that was completely abandoned.
Having lost her means of support, Tory staggered
about readjusting to the gravitational pull. ‘So, where to
from here?’
‘Nin Bau.’ He ﬁshed the scroll from his pocket. ‘We
shall ﬁnd her in her council chambers.’
Taliesin was in the chart room of the Dur-nu-ga Temple,
informing En Durand of the exact time Tory had
appeared during the Shu Sar’s healing session. He’d left
their sleeping visitor with Shar Turan watching over
her. The girl was in a deep sleep state and the Merlin
did not expect she would awaken for some time yet.

What does Shar Turan have to do with our mysterious
guest? En Durand wanted to know.
Taliesin did not feel at liberty to say. I just think if
you compared their charts, you might ﬁnd some interesting
analogies, he advised with a grin.
A thought form floated into the room and
settled upon Taliesin’s shoulders. Durand watched En
Razu absorbing the message, curious as to the sender.
As the transmission vanished, the recipient
appeared rather astonished. Is something amiss?
Durand enquired.
Quite the contrary. Taliesin broke from his thoughts
to look to Durand. It would seem there is much afoot.
Did anyone else note it? En Cato hurried into the room,
carrying a handheld device from the bioelectronics lab.
What was going on today? Chaos reigned supreme.
I’m sorry? Note what? Durand questioned his excited
associate.
The latest ripple in the continuum. En Cato passed
Durand the device so that he could view the relevant
information for himself. But as you may note, this charge
was completely polarized.
My apologies gentlemen, but I must go. Taliesin took
his leave. Nin Bau seldom called an impromptu meeting
of the High Council, and curiosity alone would not
allow him to delay.
En Cato appeared most disappointed. But I wanted
to discuss the implications of this.
Taliesin politely shrugged. Tomorrow perhaps. Right
now, however, Nin Bau is awaiting my presence.
Nin Bau?! Both Cato and Durand exclaimed in unison.

Relax gentlemen, the Merlin advised. I’m sure she
wishes only to know of our guest. Deep down, however,
Taliesin expected different, and made haste to
find out.
Upon entering the council chamber of the High
Priestess, Taliesin found En Seba, Shu Asa, and Shu
Micah already in attendance. The Merlin noticed that
the large stone tablet underneath Nin Bau’s throne was
in a forwardly position, meaning the trapdoor that led
to Mount Dur-an-ki was open.
You sent for me, Nin. He bowed to her. A matter of
some urgency, you said?
Yes, indeed, dearest adviser, she sounded absolutely
delighted to announce. Early this morning, there was
another interesting development with our young visitor from the
future. She motioned to behind her where Tory and Turan
emerged on cue from the tunnel hidden by her seat.
Taliesin’s jaw near hit the ﬂoor. ‘When did you
awaken?’ He could hardly believe Tory could have
recovered already, and even if she had, she should still
be in quarantine.
‘About two weeks ago.’ She informed, gratiﬁed to
have the chance to confuse him for a change.
‘Pardon?’ Taliesin baulked.
‘This cable . . .’ the High Priestess handed the scroll to
him, ‘written in my own hand, is fairly self-explanatory.’
The Merlin unrolled the message and read it. The
situation was brieﬂy explained prior to the instruction
on how to proceed, which was not to be questioned.
‘When?’ the Merlin quizzed, as he continued to read.
‘Late tonight,’ Nin Bau answered.

Taliesin looked to Tory, whom he’d only once had
the pleasure of consciously addressing. As that
conversation had changed the entire course of his
existence and, most likely, the course of history for the
better, he ﬁgured he owed her a favour or two. ‘I shall be
more than glad to help.’
‘Thank you, my friend.’ Tory smiled at him warmly.
‘I knew I could count on you.’
‘Well, now that we are all together, do ﬁll us in on
your quest, child, and how you came to be in our midst.’
Nin Bau requested from behind her veil.
Tory took a deep breath; this was absolutely the last
time she was going to tell the tale of her trials. Again
she was careful not to mention that Taliesin had
abandoned her, but rather said that he was elsewhere in
time at the time of her departure.
The members of the council left at mid-afternoon to go
about their normal routine, so that none might be alerted
to their unexpected task. They would meet late tonight
to execute Nin Bau’s instruction as per her letter.
The High Priestess had a large tray of food
brought to her council chamber and left Turan and
Tory alone to eat and relax awhile before this night’s
episode took place.
They ate in silence for a time. Tory’s mind was
focused on her trip home. Turan, however, was mulling
over the tale of her origins; he’d learnt much from her
most recent version of it.
‘You didn’t mention before that you were wed to
this King, whose life you seek to save.’

‘It didn’t seem that important,’ she replied. ‘The
reasons I gave for my quest were not false, so what
difference does it make?’ She threw the ball back in his
court, as she bit into a very large apple.
‘None,’ he was quick to concede. ‘En Razu obviously
knows . . .’ The Shar voiced his train of thought, as he
gave a shrug.
‘He’s known since the moment I met him. In fact, if
it wasn’t for Taliesin’s intervention I never would have
met my husband at all.’
‘That’s odd.’ The Shar was bafﬂed. ‘It just seemed to
me that En Razu was very fond of you.’
‘Well he is, and I of he.’ She melted into a smile as
the memories ﬂooded back. ‘We’ve been through chaos
and back, he and I. And we’ve found paradise a couple
of times, too. He’s like my godfather, a guardian through
time and space . . .’ She paused and her expression
suddenly saddened. ‘Or at least he used to be.’
‘Used to be?’
She took a deep breath and let it out again, her heart
heavy with the secret. ‘He was present when Mahaud
broke loose to wreak havoc on Gwynedd.’ Her eyes ﬁlled
with tears. ‘Only Xavier knows about this, and I want
you to swear not to say anything to En Razu . . . as I
haven’t quite decided if I should tell him yet.’
‘Well, maybe I can advise?’ Turan lay on his side,
propping his head up on his hand to listen.
This was just as Maelgwn used to do.
Tory closed her eyes a moment, not wanting to see
her husband in the man before her, and focused on her
anecdote instead.

The more the Shar came to learn of the daughter of
Danuih, the more he admired her. For although he was
well-learned, he couldn’t even dream of surviving some
of the trials this girl had been through. The tiny
amount of emotional hurt he’d felt when Antonia
married his brother all those years ago seemed a mere
triﬂe in comparison.
‘Well . . .’ Turan voiced how he perceived the
situation. ‘If you tell En Razu what has happened, you
could arrange for things to unfold that way . . . and then
there would be no question in your mind as to why
he left.’
‘That’s interesting.’ Tory smiled. ‘After all, I did
come through it okay . . . and who’s to say that
Brockwell might have been spared had Taliesin stayed.’
She gave a heavy sigh in mourning.
‘Well, that would depend on if the event of your
friend’s death was time-asymmetric — irreversible. Or
time-symmetric — reversible.’
‘Oh dear.’ Tory gave a thought to the history books
of the twentieth century, all of which clearly stated that
Maelgwn had died of yellow plague. ‘What if my
husband’s death is asymmetrical? Correct me if I’m
wrong, but that would mean that no matter what I do,
something will prevent me from saving him?’
Turan sat up and placed a hand on Tory’s shoulder
for reassurance. ‘There’s only one way you’ll ever know,
isn’t there?’
Nin Bau had entered so quietly that neither Tory
nor Turan had realised she was present. She watched
the two of them having a picnic on the floor of her

chambers from the doorway. Her nephew had not
looked upon a woman thus for hundreds of years, and
it seemed the gods had answered her prayers by
sending this girl their way. The Priestess silently
took her leave without disturbing them, for such a
miracle was not to be disturbed; she would speak with
their time traveller later, for indeed, they had much
to discuss.
That night, the council gathered in secret and called on
their allies in the fourth dimension to send Tory back
through the continuum to Llyn Cerrig Bach.
Tory stood on top of the alter stone in the temple,
barely able to believe she was home. Everything was just
as she remembered, not a stone was out of place.
‘Alright!’ She readied herself for phase three,
immediately focusing on the bedside of the High
King. For here in the Dark Age there was no time
to waste; Maelgwn’s biological clock was ticking
away rapidly.
Tory was surprised to ﬁnd Maelgwn alone when she
arrived in their bedroom at Degannwy; she’d thought at
least Selwyn would be with him. But this made her task
easier in a way; thus she removed Darius’ belt from her
person and took the samples from Maelgwn as the Head
Healer had instructed her to.
Once this was done and the devices were strapped
back in the belt for cartage, Tory kissed the forehead of
her love, placing the amethyst wand still glowing with
healing energy in his hands.

‘Tory,’ he mumbled, having barely enough energy to
smile.
‘Yes, my lover, it is I,’ she whispered with adoration.
‘You look so lovely in this light.’
He must have been delirious; his eyes were closed
and it was dark out. She was going to inquire as to what
he referred, but the sound of several people hurriedly
approaching up the corridor outside caused her to make
a quick departure.
‘Hang on, my dearest.’ She kissed Maelgwn and
made her leave.
‘Wait!’
Tory heard a voice cry, and strangely enough it
sounded quite like her own.
She stood on the alter stone at Llyn Cerrig Bach,
debating whether or not she should return to Degannwy
to investigate the matter, when the light mist that was
her ticket back to the Old Land began to rise from out
of the cross engraved at her feet.
‘Too late now.’ The decision was made for
her. And as she took one last sweeping look
around the familiar place, her eyes met with a
horrible sight.
Mahaud, no! Tory protested, as the light of the
vortex consumed her.
Turan had been pacing up and down since Tory’s
departure.
Taliesin had been watching the Shar’s private
turmoil with some amusement. You’re going to wear a

hole in the ground if you keep that up, he commented to
his friend in jest.
It’s not funny, it’s been too long. Turan looked to
Nin Bau who had her hands resting on the dome
of the site’s control mechanism and was deep
in concentration.
Taliesin had a quiet chuckle at this. Lamamu has
only been gone a few moments. Give her time.
The Shar didn’t share his friend’s chirpy view, and
walked away to where he could pace in peace.
Again the Merlin chuckled, amused by the thought
that in less than two weeks Turan would change so
much; this was going to be fun to watch.
‘Gentlemen.’ Nin Bau summoned them to take
their stations by her.
Turan stood just outside the circle to catch Tory
should she faint upon arrival; her molecular structure
had been transposed so many times in such a short
period of time, it would be surprising if she had the
faintest idea where she was.
A cloud mass burst forth out of the night sky and
lightning shot from within to make contact with the
key. The centre of the circle glowed, as mist swirled out
of the ground and up to meet with the swirling vortex
above. The claps of thunder were almost deafening,
and anyone who didn’t know better would have
thought half the continent would know what they were
up to.
But, thinking back to this night two weeks ago,
Turan recalled the quietest of evenings. He’d observed
Tory sleep most of the day, all that night, and into the

following morning. He’d certainly not suspected all this
was taking place, proving all etheric occurrences are
directional phenomena and are, therefore, experienced
only by those intended to perceive them. For not even
the Shu Sar knew what took place on the sacred
mountain half the time.
The disturbance died away and Tory’s tiny form was
left trembling in the middle of the plateau. Turan
rushed to support her, and she murmured as her eyes
rolled round in her head.
‘She . . . she saw me.’ Terror had a ﬁrm grip on her
being, she was hyperventilating and in shock. Must stay
awake, must tell them. Her vision was hazy.
Must tell them what? Turan perceived her thought
before she blacked out and he caught her up in his arms.

18

THE MATING GAME

W

hen consciousness took hold once more,
Tory found herself moving through the
crystal cavern beneath Mount Dur-an-ki. It
was Turan who carried her, and they were alone.
‘When are we?’ She was seized by panic.
‘Everything is ﬁne. We’re back in the present. It’s
over,’ he was happy to announce, and was surprised
when Tory sprang from his arms to land on her feet.
‘No, it isn’t. This is very bad.’ She stumbled to and
fro. ‘Damn it! If I’d told them back then, Nin Bau never
would have permitted the time loop to take place and
she wouldn’t know.’
Tory near collapsed again, but Turan was quick to
intercept her fall. ‘You’re not making any sense, you
realise.’ He swept her back up into his arms, and

resumed their course. ‘We have the samples and are on
the way to the Shi-im-ti to give them to Darius. Our
quest has been successful, what more —’
‘Mahaud!’ Tory explained in a word. ‘On my way
back, she saw me.’
‘So.’ Turan was very casual about the news. ‘That
doesn’t mean she knew where you were going, or that
she could get here if she did.’
‘But I know she must have a means of transporting
herself through time. She’s done it before,’ she
postulated.
‘I think you need to relax,’ Turan commanded. ‘Let
us get you to the Shi-im-ti Temple. You’ll think more
clearly given time to rejuvenate.’
The Sun was rising in the morning sky by the time the
Shar left Tory in the Shu Sar’s healing chamber to
bathe and relax. Turan roused up Xavier to check on
their sister’s state of being, and then sought out Darius
as requested.
‘What on earth happened to you!’ Xavier exclaimed
upon sighting Tory. For a dark patch of negative energy
had attached itself to her third eye area, near covering
one side of her head.
‘Thank goodness you’re here. I’ve got the most
splitting headache.’ She sat with her feet in the heated
spa pool, supporting her head in her hands.
‘Well, I’m not surprised.’ He made light of her
ailment, knowing he’d soon have it cured. ‘Come on
then, clothes off, and into the water.’

He spurred her to action, but although she was
eager to be rid of the pain, her limbs were slow to
respond. Tory couldn’t understand how she, as an
immortal being, could feel so drained.
Xavier assisted her to release the negative force back
into the universe and replenished it with a more
constructive energy.
‘I have to say, Lamamu, if you don’t stop
giving this entity so much power, you shall never be
rid of it.’ Xavier bathed his hands and arms after
the session.
‘I know, I know!’ She tried not to be cross with
herself as she pulled on a robe of purple — the colour
that pertained to the third eye area. ‘She took me by
surprise . . . I didn’t expect it.’
‘No excuse.’ He was ﬁrm with her. ‘Remember that
every emotion or feeling you have, or pick up, is only
energy particles on loan to you from the cosmos. Hence,
the energy you employ and promote is entirely of your
own choosing.’
‘But I don’t want to be afraid of her,’ Tory insisted.
‘Then don’t be.’ Xavier came to sit beside her at the
pool.
‘I don’t fear for me,’ she spoke up in her own
defense. ‘I know Mahaud can do me no harm, and she
knows it too. It’s those around me that are more
the concern.’
‘Don’t you dare give me that,’ he scolded. ‘Don’t you
see . . . by fearing for those you love, you’re assisting to
place them in peril, which is just what this entity wants
you to do.’

Tory’s brow became drawn in defeat; she understood
what he meant, but it was human nature to want to
protect those you cared about.
‘Look . . .’ He decided to continue. ‘Any thought is
composed of highly complex energy particles that draw
their reality from that energy. Therefore, if you think
clearly fearful thoughts you are transmitting to the
cosmos a well-deﬁned signal that you expect the worst . . .
and believe me the universe shall be swift to oblige.
Creation does not question, it merely processes our
instructions.’ As she was becoming a little more
receptive, Xavier advised further: ‘So, if you really want
to thwart your opponent, you’ll believe she has no idea
where you are, or what you’re doing, and leave it at that.’
‘That’s more or less what Turan said.’ Could she dare
to believe the resolution of the problem was so simple.
‘Turan’s a smart man.’ Xavier stood; the sun was
swiftly making its way towards the midday rite and he
had many other patients to see today. However, when
the door opened before him and Adelgar stood poised in
the doorway with a huge bunch of ﬂowers in hand,
Xavier postponed his leave. ‘I’m sorry Adelgar, but I
can’t permit you in here. Nin Lamamu needs to rest.’
‘Please, Doc. Just for a little while. Adelgar and I do
have a thing or two to discuss.’ She gazed up at him
with her large soulful eyes.
‘Oh, alright. Till midday.’ Xavier advised his brother
sternly on his way out.
Adelgar was more cheery upon discovering he was
welcomed, and strode over to present the ﬂowers to
their intended recipient. ‘I was sorry to hear you were

feeling poorly . . . what are you in for?’ He crouched
beside her.
She accepted the bright bouquet from him with a
smile, and breathed the many different scents contained
therein. ‘I’ve contracted a horrible sexually-transmitted
disease,’ she stated, very matter of fact.
Adelgar appeared horriﬁed. ‘You’re joking!’
‘Yes, I am.’ She laughed at the expression on his
face. ‘The truth is, I had a headache.’
‘Phew . . .’ He grinned at her folly. ‘I suppose you
think you’re clever.’
He took the same position Brian or Brockwell
would have when tricked, and she saw both of these
other selves in the one confronting her.
‘I am clever,’ she told him surely, placing the ﬂowers
aside. ‘And I have a great need to tell you something.’
Adelgar seated himself properly to listen.
‘Has anyone told you where I’m from?’
He shrugged. ‘It is said you are from many different
lands in time.’
‘That’s right. Good . . .’ She paused to consider her
approach. ‘Now, many of the people I have met here,
are people I have known in these other lives.’
‘Are you trying to say we’ve met before?’ Adelgar
made it sound as if this was quite an obvious assumption
to reach.
‘That’s exactly what I’m trying to say.’ This was
easier than Tory expected.
‘We were joined, no?’ He posed with conﬁdence.
‘No.’ She broke it to him gently. ‘You were my one
and only brother.’

‘No!’ he protested, springing up to stand over her.
‘Why me?’
‘I don’t know.’ Tory shrunk from him.
‘In all these lives or just one?’
‘Just the one I was born into.’
‘Damn it!’
‘But, listen to me,’ she rose, imploring him. ‘I know
for a fact I am not the woman you seek. You’ve joined
with the same girl in both the lives I’ve known you in,
and I can assure you, it wasn’t me.’
This news seemed to capture his attention, and his
mood took a swing for the better. ‘Who then?’
‘Well . . .’ Tory was hesitant. ‘I’d know her if I saw her.’
‘Aw.’ He waved her off, disappointed.
‘Look I’m sure she’s here.’ Tory pleaded for his
patience. ‘Everybody else is.’
Adelgar waved his head about, ﬁnding it difﬁcult to
accept her view. ‘What if she isn’t?’
‘She will be, I know it.’
Adelgar didn’t have the patience for such a quest as
true love, especially when there was a perfectly
adequate substitute right here in front of him. ‘She’d
want to be really exceptional this girl.’
Tory grinned, conﬁdent he would think so. ‘She’s
managed to keep you faithful to her and her alone, for
two lifetimes. You be the judge.’
Adelgar dwelt on the claim. ‘You must help me look
then. And don’t forget you owe me that lesson.’
‘I promise. If you agree to no more visits in the
middle of the night . . . or any form of sneak attack upon
my person.’

Again he paused to consider. ‘Alright.’ He shook on
it. ‘You’re on.’
After delivering the samples and being given the physical
‘all clear’ by Darius, Turan made for his quarters in the
Dur-nu-ga Temple in the hope of avoiding questions from
his family about his whereabouts last night. For, in
addition to his unexplained return to a physical form,
both Lamamu and himself had disappeared from the feast
at approximately the same time; hence, he had a fair idea
of what all those in the palace would be thinking.
There was something about this scenario that made
him smile, and Turan considered it must be that good
old ego kicking in. If he didn’t work on resuming his
etheric form soon, chances were the desires of this
physical body would make it increasingly difﬁcult.
The Shar bathed and changed before retiring to the
Temple dining room. He spotted Durand seated in a
corner on his own, reviewing his students’ assignments.
Can I join you? Turan enquired, taking a seat in any
case.
Where have you been? Durand was in a most jovial
mood. You’re the talk of the town this morning. He chuckled.
I can imagine.
The Shar tucked into the tray of food before him,
and Durand couldn’t help but stare; it was so strange to
see him eat.
So why are you here working, instead of at the games?
I’m just ﬁnishing these last two papers, then I’m off . . .
I’m meeting Nin Lilith. Durand smiled. Afterwards she’s
treating me to dinner at the Temple of Kheit-Sin.

Turan stared at his mentor a moment, a smile frozen
on his lips. Well, it couldn’t happen to a nicer chap. He
shook his hand. Congratulations.
Well, let’s not get ahead of ourselves. Durand tried to
down play his excitement; seven hundred years was a
long time to live alone. Tell me about you then?
Turan’s good mood evaporated and he went back to
his food. Nin Lamamu and I were just working on a project.
You’re not being straight with me, Durand insisted. It
was quite obvious to him how Turan felt about the girl.
I am. His voice shrunk to a whisper. I’m not supposed
to tell anyone, but we performed the time loop and it
worked. You were right.
That explained why Turan had reconstituted. So
why wasn’t I told. I am Head of Time and Space studies,
you know.
Because you weren’t involved originally. Only the High
Priests of the council and Nin Bau knew, for only they were
required to perform the task.
I suspected something was going on.
Turan shrugged in resolve. What’s done is done.
Darius has what he requires to aid Lamamu’s husband, and
I suspect once she has the cure she seeks, she will return
from whence she came and all shall get back to normal
around here.
You sound as if you won’t be sorry to see her go?
She should be with the one she loves. Just as you
should. Turan attempted cheer. Leave the damn papers.
Go, have fun.
Durand could hardly believe these words were
coming out of Turan’s mouth; Lamamu had had a

profound effect on him. He so wanted to tell
Turan that Lamamu’s King and the Shar’s good self
were one and the same person, but he’d vowed he
would not.
You know, it was only because Lamamu mentioned to
me that she’d known me in another life, that I even
considered Nin Lilith and myself might be compatible.
Durand thought he might be able to drop a hint
somehow. She told me we’d been happily married
once before.
Did she now? How fortunate. The Shar seemed more
interested in his meal.
Durand tried to make his clues more pointed. She’s
known lots of us before, she told me.
What are you trying to say, Durand?
I can’t say. I promised I wouldn’t tell you.
I see. Turan was rather amused by this game. Well,
it would seem to me that you’re inferring that she’s known
me before.
Could be. Durand raised his eyebrows. I gather from
what you’ve said that Lamamu has already told you she’s
married to this King Maelgwn of Gwynedd.
Did you say, Maelgwn?’
Indeed I did. Durand was hopeful they’d had a
breakthrough.
That’s what Lamamu called me, the ﬁrst time she laid
eyes on me. Turan pondered the implications of this.
Funny about that, Durand commented, as he quickly
gathered up his things.
Are you saying . . . Turan’s words were seized by a
burst of joy that near choked him.

I’m not saying anything. Durand was very
noncommittal, though he winked at Turan in parting. I
shall see you later.
Tory was doing laps in the sunlit pool, having ﬁnally
persuaded Adelgar to leave, when it came to her
attention that she was not alone. She brought her
exercise to a halt as the sound of sweet laughter reached
her ears.
The veiled form of the High Priestess stood
poolside. I thought the idea was to relax.
‘Nin Bau, this is a surprise.’ Tory hurried from the
water to dry herself and greet the holy woman.
Take your time, child. There is no hurry. The Priestess
sat herself down on the lounge. How are you feeling in
the wake of your little adventure?
‘Much improved after seeing Xavier.’ Tory pulled on
her robe as she took a seat beside Nin Bau. Is that why
you’re here?
No . . . She paused a moment.
Tory couldn’t see the Priestess’ facial expression, but
she had an air of great anticipation about her.
I wanted to ask you about the one called Myrddin.
What was he like?
This was the last thing Tory was expecting her to
ask, though the inquiry warmed her heart and made her
smile. ‘I know he was very wise, both in his mortal and
immortal state. But En Razu is probably more of an
expert on the Merlin’s greatest historical achievements.’
Where and when was he born? Nin Bau seemed most
eager to know.

‘Well, let me see.’ Tory had to think about that one,
it had been a long time since she’d studied British
history. ‘It was said Myrddin was born and raised in the
British town of Carmarthen, at around the middle of
the ﬁfth century AD. In other words, about a hundred
years prior to the time you have just sent me to, but the
same country.’
And his parents? What was said of them?
Tory was becoming most curious about this line of
questioning, but obliged the Priestess with what she
knew. ‘Legend had it that Myrddin’s father was of the
Otherworld, an etheric being you might say.’
Yes, yes, go on, Nin Bau urged, excited.
‘However, his mother was said to have been a nun, a
woman dedicated to the pursuit of the higher mysteries,
much like yourself.’
Then it was as Darius claimed; Nin Bau could
hardly contain her excitement. You have made me very
happy, child.
‘I don’t understand.’
The Priestess rose with her back to Tory as she
pondered whether or not to tell her what was now, in her
mind, conﬁrmed. Nin Bau set her veil back over her head.
Do you recognise me, Lamamu? She turned to face Tory.
The Priestess had skin as white as snow, with cheeks
ﬂushed red like a young girl. Her hair was black as
night, though two patches of pure white sprung from
her temples, and her eyes were violet.
With her appearance being as breathtaking as it was,
Tory felt she would surely have remembered if they’d
met before. I’m sorry, Highness, but I can’t say I do.

Wait, Nin Bau instructed, as she slowly began to age
her physical appearance. And now?
As the lines and wrinkles beset the Priestess’ face,
Tory’s eyes grew wide. ‘Aunt Rose, Lady Gladys,’ she
exclaimed. ‘So that’s why you wanted to know about my
father . . . in the twentieth century, you were his sister.
Yet . . .’ Tory paused, considering what she’d learnt of
her father over the years, ‘there is increasing evidence
to suggest that he may have been adopted in that time,
rather than actually being born there.’
I suspect you might be right. Nin Bau smiled broadly,
as if withholding information. She returned to her
younger self and took a seat.
‘What makes you say that?’
I am with child, she beamed, though I have not joined
with any mortal man.
Tory could feel her jaw drooping. ‘Are . . . you
saying, you’re carrying my father!’
The Priestess nodded, amused by Tory’s
ﬂabbergasted expression. According to Darius, that is
correct. For he has shown me the genetic proof that I am
indeed, your grandmother.
‘That explains how I ended up with the Shu Sar’s
genes,’ Tory mused out loud. ‘But how did you come to
be in ﬁfth century Britain, then?’
Nin Bau gave half a laugh. Only time will tell. But
what you have told me complies with what I have already
foreseen. In his mortal form, your father appears much like
my brother, no?
‘That he does.’ Tory nodded; there truly were no
coincidences. ‘So my grandfather is from the fourth

dimension.’ She raised her brow. ‘That news should
knock my brother on his ar. . . sorry.’ Tory remembered
the rank of the woman in her presence.
You must not tell anyone here of this. Nin Bau was
deadly serious. Only En Darius knows and, for the present,
I feel it wise to keep it that way.
The Priestess was very mysterious about her reasons.
She would only say that this was as her head truth seer
had advised, for she’d been so elated by the news that
she’d had trouble thinking with any clarity on the
matter.
Tory swore by the elements she would not tell a
soul. ‘Your secret is safe with me.’ She couldn’t help but
grin. ‘Grandmother.’
Nin Bau laughed at this; she hadn’t even become
acquainted with the title of mother yet.
Tory was dying to ask about the conception of the
Priestess’ babe, but she refrained from prying; sometimes
her curiosity went too far and, fortunately, she
recognised that this could be one of those times. If Nin
Bau wished to speak of it, she would.
Later that afternoon, Xavier gave Tory the all clear to
leave the Shi-im-ti temple, but while she was in the
building she thought she’d duck round to see how
Darius was going with her miracle cure.
As soon as I have a breakthrough, I’ll let you know.
He became quite testy at being disturbed. Until then,
go and enjoy the festivities of the holiday. Darius looked
back into the microscope that interfaced with
his computer.

I’m sorry I’m making you miss the celebrations. Tory
thought that perhaps this was why he seemed on edge.
My other half shall tell me all about it, no doubt. He
rolled his eyes at the thought. I ﬁnd this far more
interesting, truly.
I didn’t know you were wed? Tory wondered if
perchance his wife would turn out to be the woman
she’d known as Jenovefa.
Long time. He seemed proud of the fact. Her name is
Anthea. We went through the university of Danuih together,
she heads the Earth Healers here.
‘Anthea,’ Tory echoed. ‘Pretty name.’
It means ‘woman of ﬂowers’ and that’s no understatement.
Believe me, you ought to see our home. He chuckled.
Their conversation ended there, for Adelgar had
managed to track Tory down to start the hunt for
his intended.
They exited the Shi-im-ti to ﬁnd Shar Jerram awaiting
them on the stairs. Adelgar explained that he’d told his
brother of their quest, and Jerram had asked to come
along on the off-chance Tory could match him up with
his perfect partner.
‘I should start charging.’ She didn’t sound too
thrilled, for the only woman Tory knew that Jerram (as
Teo) had truly been serious about was herself.
‘Although I have known you before, Jerram, I wasn’t
associated with you long enough to discover whom you
eventually wed.’
‘I see.’ He sounded rather nonchalant about it. ‘Well,
tell me — if Adelgar was your brother, what was I?’

Tory grinned as the three of them slowly made their
way out to the third island, where most of the festivities
were taking place. ‘You were my sensei, my instructor . . .
it was you who taught me how to ﬁght.’ She gave him a
nudge on the shoulder as if to say ‘Good on you.’
‘Was that all I taught you?’
There was a sultry connotation in his tone; did
Jerram already know he’d been her first love? Again
she grinned, remaining as calm as she could with
those large brown eyes seducing her. ‘You didn’t like
to mix business with pleasure.’ This was not a lie;
she’d just failed to mention that he’d made an
exception her case.
Jerram smiled, cocking an eye. ‘But the inclination
was there?’
‘Hey!’ Adelgar pulled Tory away from his brother.
‘Stop ﬂirting with my sister.’
‘Well, someone’s got to do it.’
Tory laughed; this whole scenario was like a mad
case of deja-vu. ‘Oh, listen.’ She had suddenly
remembered something. ‘Do you know En Darius’ wife?’
‘Nin Anthea? Yes,’ Adelgar conﬁrmed.
‘I want you to point her out to me if you see her. I
ﬁgure if she is the same woman Darius matched with
where I came from, then that will substantiate my
theory concerning you,’ she put to Adelgar, who gave a
ﬁrm nod to second her reasoning.
An hour or two into their search, Adelgar spotted
Nin Anthea. Despite being fearful of his own
expectations, he directed Tory’s attention to a fairhaired woman seated not far from the Shu Sar, who was

in his private stalls watching the javelin throwing
competition taking place in the stadium below.
‘That’s her alright.’ Tory was excited for Adelgar,
and they resumed the search with renewed enthusiasm.
They passed over one of the stadium bridges to start
combing the gardens on the far side, when one of
Adelgar’s novices came racing up to him in a panic.
‘My Shar,’ he bowed. ‘I’m sorry to disturb you, but . . .
it’s the panther. She’s going to have her cubs.’
‘Well, have you notiﬁed Nin Lilith?’ Both Adelgar
and Jerram appeared concerned.
‘Yes, my Shar.’ The young man humbled himself
before conveying the bad news. ‘But as one of
her elephants is having a breach birth, Nin Lilith and
most of her chief students have their hands full already.’
‘Damn it!’ Adelgar began to pace. ‘So who’s the
head of Domestic Veterinary since En Demetrius’
passing last year?’
‘Nin Tabitha,’ advised his pupil. ‘Nin Lilith highly
recommends her.’
‘I seriously doubt she is qualiﬁed for this,’ Jerram
scoffed.
‘Well, what choice have we got?’ Adelgar entreated
his twin. ‘Fetch her, quickly.’ He motioned to his novice
to do this. ‘We will meet you down there.’
Adelgar led the way to the animal stalls underneath
the stadium. The beasts were only conﬁned to these
quarters for the duration of the games, or in this case,
labour, as there were large natural wildlife sanctuaries
just outside the city limits.

They came to a stop outside a sandstone cell, and
through the barred window Tory could see the panther
laying on her side, panting through her pain. The dim
light and coolness of the holding chamber must have
seemed a blessing to the animal.
Without the slightest hesitation or fear, Adelgar
entered the cell and closed the door behind him.
The panther half-raised itself and snarled, as if
threatening an attack, and Tory gripped hold of the bars
on the window, afraid for her brother. Adelgar halted
and let out the same snarling roar, which astounded her
somewhat. Good God! Could he have the ability to
converse with such a beast?
‘Now, Selina,’ he cautioned the big black cat. ‘You
just behave yourself. It’s not my fault you’re in this mess,
now is it?’
Tory couldn’t believe her eyes when the beast sank
back to the ground, appearing all sorry for itself.
‘That’s better.’ Adelgar rang out a rag in the pool of
water and sat himself beside the cat to wash and cool its
head.
‘Did somebody call for a vet?’ The novice had
returned with Nin Tabitha.
It’s her! It was Katren.
‘What a big pussy cat,’ Nin Tabitha remarked with a
smile, as she entered the cell.
Adelgar stood, but near fell on his butt again upon
his sighting of her. ‘You must be Nin Tabitha?’ He gazed
upon the lovely woman, who, like himself, appeared to
be a half-caste; a mixture of the red and white races of
the continent.

‘And this must be Selina.’ Her attention
immediately focused on her subject, and she crouched
down beside the huge cat to check its vital signs.
‘Thank you for coming.’ Adelgar squatted close by
her, contentedly watching every move she made.
‘It’s my pleasure,’ she assured the beast as she
stroked its swollen belly. ‘Its not often I get to treat one
as exotic as yourself.’ Her beaming face turned to
Adelgar, who suddenly looked tamed.
Perfect. Tory delighted in watching them together;
what a lovely way to meet.
Four hours later, two cubs and a new romance had
been born.
Nin Tabitha left them with little protest from
Adelgar, for he was meeting her later to check their new
panther family.
As Adelgar exited the cell, leaving mother and cubs
in peace, he and Tory looked straight at each other.
‘That’s her.’ They laughed together.
As the festivities would continue well into the night
out at the stadium, there was no official feast to be
held in the palace this evening. Hence, Tory, having
had more than a full day already, decided to spend a
quiet night in her room. Yet, before her evening meal
had arrived, Shar Turan fronted in for a visit.
‘You’ve been living up to your name, I hear . . .
we have romances blooming all over the place.
In fact, I believe Xavier is now seeking to
employ your services.’ He seemed to be conspicuously
joyful.

‘I’ve been looking for you.’ Tory broke from the kata
she was performing.
‘Well, you’ve found me.’ He smiled broadly. ‘Have
you eaten?’
‘Well, no. I —’
‘Good.’ He took her by the arm. ‘Allow me to
introduce you to the Temple of E-hulhul.’
She smiled, noting how playful his manner was.
‘What does E-hulhul stand for?’
‘Temple of Joy. It’s the recreational centre here in
Chailidocean,’ he enlightened her, as he led her out the
door. ‘There’s aroma tubes, ﬂotation pools, anti-gravity
chambers . . . you’ll love it, trust me.’
Over the course of dinner, Turan proved to be such
captivating company that Tory didn’t know what to
make of this sudden swing in his attitude. Had he not
been so like Maelgwn there wouldn’t have been a
problem, but she was a sucker for his smile, his voice,
his manner. Tory was very tempted to tell the Shar what
she was feeling and why, especially after her talk with
Durand about being open to the will of the universe,
but then, to do so seemed a rather selﬁsh act. She would
be leaving here soon, and from her understanding of
what Nin Bau had said, the last thing Turan needed was
more heartache.
‘So, how was your husband faring when you saw
him?’ the Shar enquired politely as he poured them
both a cup of herbal tea.
The question ﬂoored her. Please don’t let him be
reading my mind. She didn’t think she was projecting her

thoughts, but Tory wasn’t that perfect at the craft for
her to be sure.
‘As well as could be expected, I suppose.’ She was a
bit disheartened about it. ‘But I left with him the crystal
wand that I took from the cavern. Hopefully, it will give
him a little more staying power.’ She grinned, forcing
herself to better spirits.
‘My apologies. I shouldn’t have brought it up.’ That’s
what I get for trying to be clever. He was rueful; they’d
been having a wonderful time and now he’d spoilt it.
‘I just miss him.’
‘He must be a truly remarkable man to warrant such
devotion.’ There was that ego again. The Shar just
couldn’t help himself.
‘Yes, he is.’ She stared at Turan a moment, feeling that
this could be said of every incarnation of his that she’d
had the pleasure of knowing. She gave half a laugh. ‘You
and he would see eye-to-eye on most things, I’m sure.’
Her comment amused the Shar. He didn’t have to
read her mind to know how she felt about him. The
energy around her heart chakra had increased fourfold
during the course of the evening, and now encompassed
all her lower chakras. Should he be straight with her
and tell her what he knew? Not here. ‘So, are we
ﬁnished?’ Turan motioned to the almost empty platter.
Tory nodded. ‘I couldn’t even look at another piece
of food.’
‘Then let us go. I have a surprise for you.’
Turan moved his eyebrows up and down a few times,
sporting the same cheeky expression Maelgwn did when
he was up to mischief.

He led her down one of the four long corridors that
shot out in different directions from the central chamber
of the temple, where the dining room was located.
‘This is it.’ Turan came to a stop and activated the
door in front of them.
They entered a circular room that was entirely
composed of polished black marble. Four stairs rose out
of the ﬂoor in the centre to form a mound-like structure,
atop of which was a round platform about ﬁfteen feet
wide. There was a lounge and table of white to one side
of the room, and a small spa pool to the other.
After closing the door, Turan placed his hand on
the control panel beside the mound.
A beam of light, not much smaller than the
platform itself, began to glow in a cylindrical form
between the ceiling and the mound.
‘Excellent!’ Tory greatly approved. ‘What does it do?’
‘Step into it and ﬁnd out. It’s perfectly safe.’
But Tory was already halfway up the stairs. She
reached into the glowing beam and her arms
disappeared before her, feeling as if they’d been
liberated of all stress. A little braver, Tory jumped
straight into the huge beam and was immediately swept
upwards. ‘Whoa . . .!’ She settled to a stable ﬂoating
position about four feet from the ground, and could thus
tumble, twirl, or just relax and drift. This was very like
her experience in the High Temple on the night of her
judgement, but in this case she was positive her physical
form was still with her. ‘This is fantastic!’
Turan was pleased. ‘Not everyone is susceptible to
it, but I had a feeling you might be.’

‘I love it!’ she cried out, and screeched with laughter.
Tory certainly sounded as if she was having a good
time in there. Turan, employing etheric sight, perceived
a clear image of Tory moving about gracefully in the
void. Her golden hair ﬂowing around her added to the
lustre of his vision. Leave, he cautioned himself.
‘So,’ Tory called out to him, daring to be so bold.
‘Do they build these things for two?’
Could that be construed as a proposition? he wondered,
stepping up to enter the anti-gravity beam to ﬁnd out.
‘They have been known to accommodate more than
one person.’
Tory regretted her rash invitation as soon as Turan
entered the light-ﬁeld. She watched him ﬂoat upwards to
take a position opposite her, deciding it was time to level
with him. ‘I have a confession to make. You see —’
‘I know about us,’ he admitted. ‘I know your
husband and myself are one and the same.’
Hearing his confession, a tear escaped her eye. ‘I
can’t promise —’
Turan silenced her with a kiss, soft and long. ‘No
promises required. This is unconditional,’ he whispered,
admiring the one he would take as his concubine. ‘You
look so lovely in this light.’
‘What did you say?’ She held herself apart from him,
stunned by the statement.
Turan smiled. Unused to paying another such
intimate ﬂattery he felt embarrassed by the query. ‘I
said, you look so —’
‘That’s what I thought.’ She spared him from
repeating it all, staring at him in wonder. At this

moment Maelgwn could see her, she knew it.
Perhaps her husband’s ailment had brought him
closer to his source and he had thus become in
tune with simultaneous time and his other earthly
manifestations.
‘Sorry. Was I too forward?’ As Turan hadn’t had much
experience with women, he was afraid he’d upset her.
‘Not at all.’ She wrapped her arms around his neck
and her legs about his waist to reassure him. ‘You’re the
best friend I ever had. And no matter what may become
of us throughout the whole of time and space, just
remember that I love you — always have, always will.’
As she pleasured him with a kiss, Turan assumed a
crossed-legged position to cradle her body against his
own. He became so caught up in the sensation of
physical arousal that he failed to notice that they’d
come to rest in a seated position on the ground.
‘I’m very sorry, Turan, I presumed you were alone
in here.’
Turan was roused from his state of ecstasy to ﬁnd the
light beam off and his brother in the doorway. ‘Alaric.’
He stood, lifting Tory with him and placing her on her
feet. ‘Why should you be seeking me out at this hour on
a holiday?’
‘Well, actually . . .’ Alaric had to grin at the
question. ‘I wanted to ask if you knew where Lamamu
could be found . . . and as I can see, you do.’
Tory was still wary of Alaric, as her memories of
Caradoc were not pleasant ones. Still, he seemed a far
more obliging character in this lifetime. ‘Why are you
seeking me, sir?’

‘The Shu Sar is requesting an audience with you at
once.’ He became more solemn. ‘If you would be so kind
as to follow me.’
Tory gripped hold of Turan’s hand.
‘I think Alaric meant alone.’
‘You may come, Turan,’ Alaric added. ‘It looks as if
this may concern you, too.’

19

CALL OF THE
UNKNOWN

T

he holiday tradition of complete recreation was
broken on account of a communication from
Atlantis’ warring neighbours, the Antillians.
The island continent of Antillia lay beyond a few
small islands off the west coast of Atlantis, and was
almost as large as the continent it had been waging war
upon these last few years. Its people were tall with dark
red-brown skin. A primitive people, of a precariously
wild nature, most Antillians were a good foot taller
than those of the white Atlantean race, making them at
least eight foot in height.
Zutar, supreme ruler of Antillia, had finally
agreed to meet with the representatives of Shu Sar

Absalom to discuss peace and trade between the two
great nations.
‘That is wonderful news, father,’ Turan allowed,
standing before the governing body of Atlantis. ‘But
how does this concern Nin Lamamu?’
There was a long pause before the Shu Sar
informed. ‘Zutar will only negotiate with her.’
‘But how does he even know of her?’ Turan voiced
his concern. Keeldar perhaps? But how would he know?
Not Mahaud, Tory pleaded with the cosmos on the
quiet. Xavier promised if I didn’t conceive of her presence
she couldn’t ﬁnd me. Tory had broken into a sweat when
it occurred to her that she could be being tested. After
all, she had no proof of Mahaud’s involvement, so why
feed the fear by thinking such thoughts.
The Shu Sar’s advisers were not at all happy to
admit that they could only speculate as to how Zutar
had learned of Lamamu, for they knew very little about
the ways of the Antillian people.
‘It is irrelevant how they know.’ Tory interrupted all
the conjecture. ‘I am well used to dealing with those of
a hostile nature, and, as I cannot be permanently
harmed, then I am the perfect candidate for the job in
any case.’
‘I don’t think you understand, child.’ Absalom was
concerned for her. ‘These people are not civilized like
the native races of our colonies. They are barbarians
who commit unspeakable acts of cruelty and deﬁlement
to obtain what they desire. I shall not have you exposed
to such danger.’
‘I agree.’ Turan seconded his father’s view.

Jerram stood. ‘It is alright for you to protest, living
all the way over here in Cintrala, but this truce is very
important to the people of my kingdoms.’
‘Here, here.’ Adelgar voiced with conviction. ‘Besides,
Jerram and myself shall not let any harm befall her.’
‘Really?’ Turan forced himself to contain his
amusement. ‘And who shall protect her from you? If she
goes, I go.’
‘I think not.’ Jerram was cool, yet ﬁrm in his
objection.
‘I just got through saying it is out of the question!’
The Shu Sar pulled them both up rather bluntly.
‘Excuse me, gentlemen . . .’ Tory was beginning to
fume, ‘but I believe the decision is mine.’
Absalom looked to her, a little surprised, as,
normally, nobody overruled his judgement. ‘My dear
girl, you don’t —’
‘No, father, with all due respect, it is you who does
not understand,’ and she faded from sight.
Psychokinetic teleportation. Turan was so stunned he
could only smile; he never would have guessed her to be
so accomplished.
‘Good heavens! Where’s she gone?’ the Shu Sar
questioned. His astonished colleagues looked around for
her. ‘Did you know she could do that?’ Absalom aimed
his query at Taliesin this time.
‘I had no idea, my Sar,’ Taliesin confessed, as they
became aware of Tory’s laughter.
‘There’s lots you don’t know about me.’ She
appeared in front of her father. ‘Like how good I am at
taking care of myself.’ Absalom moved to speak, but

Tory cut him short. ‘You’ve all been so good to me since
I arrived, now this is something I can do in return . . .
please, father,’ she pleaded, going down on one knee
before him. ‘I shall make you proud, I swear.’
Absalom gave a heavy sigh as he gazed down upon
his daughter. ‘I was under the impression I’d had a little
girl,’ he grumbled, ‘but this is just like having another
son! Oh . . . alright,’ he resolved in a huff. But he soon
lost his bad mood when Tory hugged him, excited by
the prospect of venturing outside the city.
‘Yes!’ Jerram was pleased.
‘I am going with her,’ Turan insisted.
‘No.’ Jerram was most displeased. ‘You’ve never left
the inner sanctum of this city, Turan. I will not be held
accountable for you.’
‘The day I need your aid, Jerram, I shall gladly
surrender my life.’ Turan expressed himself with a cool,
cutting edge to his tone.
‘Please.’ The Shu Sar stood to ﬁnish their quarrel.
‘What is wrong with all of you?’
‘Father, he’s not qualiﬁed.’ Jerram put forward his case.
‘Jerram is quite right,’ Absalom admitted. ‘If our
problem was with another dimension, I would honour
your involvement.’
Turan tried to appeal: ‘But what if Keeldar —’
‘Keeldar is, more than likely, dead,’ Jerram
contested. ‘We have no reason to believe he is in any
way connected to this affair. This is a diplomatic
mission, not a scientiﬁc one.’
‘En Razu.’ Turan looked to his friend in the hope he
would take his side; he knew about the visions he’d had.

‘Jerram is right in that we have no proof of a
connection,’ Taliesin was sorry to concede. ‘And, even
if we did, to send you to deal with him in your current
state, may only serve to make the situation worse.’
‘Thank you very much.’ Turan was overwhelmed by
their conﬁdence in him, or rather their lack thereof. ‘I
fail to see how my constitutional status has any bearing
on my capabilities in this affair.’
Alaric had to laugh at this. ‘I do. I’ve never known
you to be so irrational.’
‘Irrational!’ Turan neared Alaric to quietly ask him:
‘Let us send Antonia to face Zutar and see how rational
you are?’
‘Enough, Turan.’ His father gave a last warning.
‘What says the rest of this council?’ Absalom looked to
Shar Diccon and Shar Adelgar, who both shook their
heads to make the decision unanimous. ‘Then it is ﬁnal.
You stay. If you don’t trust Lamamu in the care of
Jerram and Adelgar, I shall send Alaric —’
‘No!’ Tory interjected rather abruptly, quickly
rationalising her outburst. ‘There’s no need to risk your
heir on my account.’
Turan was surprised by this. ‘Lamamu, you don’t
know these two —’
‘Yes, I do.’ Adelgar and Jerram appeared most
impressed with themselves, as Tory insisted: ‘Well
enough to know that they would never purposefully
cause me harm, and would ﬁght to the death at my side.’
Tory choked on the memory of Brockwell’s lifeless form,
but resolved with a smile: ‘I shall be ﬁne in their charge.’
‘So be it.’ The Shu Sar concluded.

Turan was excused from the conference, and Tory
remained to be briefed by the council.
Both Jerram and Adelgar spoke every native tongue
in the known world, hence they would act as her
translators. The Shu Sar ran through what they were
permitted to agree to, which, basically, wasn’t much until
such time as the whole council had heard Zutar’s terms.
The meeting adjourned with roughly three hours
remaining till dawn, when they were scheduled to
depart. Tory had been hoping to ﬁnd Turan waiting for
her outside the conference room, but, alas, he was
nowhere to be seen.
‘Well, it looks like I get my wish after all.’ Adelgar
snapped his sister out of her daze with a whack on the
back. ‘Two days from now we’ll be in Portea . . . the
most beautiful place on earth.’
‘You wish,’ Jerram interrupted. ‘Usiqua is far more
breathtaking.’
‘It’s cold, is what it is,’ Adelgar scoffed.
‘Guys!’ Tory had heard enough disputes for one
night, even if it was in fun. ‘I’ll see you later.’
She made for her quarters to prepare for the
journey, but Jerram pursued her. ‘Lamamu . . .’ He
pulled her up. ‘I’m sorry about Turan. I realise you and
he have become good friends. It’s just that I wouldn’t
function at my best with him along. He has this way of
using up my energy.’
Tory nodded with a smile of understanding. ‘I know
what you mean. But he’s a good man underneath, as are
you. I just wish the two of you could see each other as I
see you.’

Maelgwn and Teo never got along either and Tory
had always believed she was the cause. That was
obviously not the case in this scenario, however, which
she would investigate further at a more apt moment.
‘Well, Rome wasn’t built in a day.’ Tory put an end
to the silence, for Jerram had gone rather quiet.
‘How do you see me, Lamamu?’ The young Shar was
suddenly rather serious. ‘Does my colour repulse you?’
Tory found the question almost offensive. ‘Is a
panther any less magniﬁcent than a lion? Of course not!
The beauty in any man is found within. And, just for the
record, I happen to ﬁnd coloured men very attractive.’
Jerram smiled. ‘You are truly extraordinary for a
female of your breed.’
‘Oh come on . . .’ Tory faked a modest tone as she
departed down the hall to escape a sticky situation.
‘I’m just extraordinary, period.’ She laughed and waved
him goodbye.
On the way back to her chamber Tory called in to
see if Turan was in his palace quarters, and ﬁnding the
room empty she assumed he’d gone to the Dur-nu-ga.
He’s not mad with me, she convinced herself as she
entered her darkened chamber, though she felt quite
sure Turan would be wondering why she hadn’t insisted
he go with her to Antillia.
The truth was, she had to agree with Taliesin’s
remark concerning Turan’s present state of being.
Although the Shar could still psychokinetically control
his physical surroundings without the aid of any
machinery, he was exceptionally vulnerable to
emotional confusion and blackmail. Tory ﬁgured that

the further apart from the situation Turan was, the more
help he would be.
She withdrew the metal sheath of the solar lamp on
the table to ﬁnd Turan silently watching her from a
position by the window on the other side of the room.
‘You’ll be leaving at dawn, I presume.’ He sounded
hurt by the notion.
‘I’m so sorry this happened now.’ She did not
approach, but rather waited for him to close the
distance between them. ‘I’m not like you, Turan, I’m a
born adventurer. How could I possibly say no to the
chance to explore the ancient world beyond these
walls? And besides, diplomatic relations are my forte.
Please don’t be mad at me because I want to help.’
‘But it’s an obvious trap, can’t you see that?’ Turan
neared. ‘There are negative forces at work here, I can
feel it.’
Tory rose up tall in her stance. ‘Well, then, I’ll just
stay here, huddled in a corner in fear and wait for them
to come to us, shall I?’
‘Oooh, you are so stubborn.’ Turan was frustrated.
‘That’s why you love me,’ she interjected with glee,
and his anger was immediately appeased.
‘Yes, I believe I do.’
The sincerity behind his confession moved her
deeply. ‘Then don’t fear for me. If anything disastrous
should happen, I promise I shall be back here in less
than the blink of an eye.’
Turan could feel himself succumbing to her will, and
he lifted Tory up to stand on a small table, so that she
was more his height. ‘Will you visit me?’

‘Name the hour and I shall be there,’ she vowed in
a suggestive fashion, interlocking her hands behind
his neck.
‘Midnight,’ he elected. ‘Every night. Then I will
know all goes well with you, but if you do not show —’
Tory kissed him before he could conceive of the worst.
‘Excuse I.’ En Razu sounded most uncomfortable
interrupting. ‘I am sorry, but the council of the High
Priestess would like to see Nin Lamamu in the High
Temple before she departs.’
‘Of course they would!’ Turan was annoyed; could
they not have even a few moments alone without
somebody requiring her presence. ‘How did this
continent ever function before you got here?’
Tory shrugged, as reluctant to comply as he. ‘Would
you go and see En Darius for me? Explain my situation
and . . .’
‘I know.’ The prospect of what would happen if
Darius found the cure Lamamu sought disturbed Turan
more than this voyage she insisted upon making.
‘I’ll meet you in your quarters in the Dur-nu-ga
before I leave.’ Tory stepped down off the table to join
Taliesin.
Turan gave a slight shrug, then a nod in
conﬁrmation. ‘I’ll be there.’
In the presence of the great elders, Tory was presented
with the white robes of the High Order; evidently Taliesin
had spoken to the council about her incident of
teleportation in the conference room earlier and they’d
decided she was more advanced than previously imagined.

As she was going to be representing her father in
this affair, Shu Micah also presented Tory with a band
of gold that clamped around her waist, to distinguish
her rank.
Tory was blessed and thanked for her courage, for no
female of their race had ever undertaken such a calling.
This was not because political vocation was forbidden
to Atlantean women, but it was considered one of the
warrior arts and women usually found other avenues to
be more beneﬁcial to their karmic purpose.
Tory changed into her new whites, choosing to wear
harem pants and a sleeveless, hooded robe that fell past
her thighs, feeling this to be both modest and sensible
travelling attire.
By the time she’d made it to the Temple of Dur-nu-ga,
the sun was shedding its ﬁrst rays across the darkened sky
on the horizon. The bells of the citadel would toll before
long, calling all to perform the ﬁrst solar rite of the day.
Upon entering the entrance foyer Tory realised
she’d never been to Turan’s private quarters in the Durnu-ga, only to his work station. Luckily a few keen
novices were already up and about and she was able to
ask directions.
She found the door open, and was about to enter
when she spied Nin Melcah in the room beyond. Tory
ducked to the other side of the doorway, curious as to
why the ﬁrst lady would be up and about so early.
Alaric found you together, that’s what he said. Nin
Melcah seemed quite irate.
I thought that you would be happy for me. Turan was
both surprised and annoyed with her. Isn’t this what you

all wanted?! . . . For me to come down to earth, meet a
nice girl . . .
Yes, a nice girl. Melcah’s inﬂection was very harsh.
Not this, this . . . abomination! She’s already twisted your
father around her little ﬁnger, and now you . . .
Melcah was heard to weep, though Tory felt her
performance less than convincing.
Don’t you see . . . Melcah expanded upon her
melodramatic drivel, sounding every bit the concerned
mother. She’s just toying with you . . .
Mother, I don’t want to hear any more of this.
Well, you must hear it. It’s not just you she’s bewitched;
it’s every male she’s come into contact with. Xavier,
Lazarus, Adelgar, Jerram, your father, even En Razu! Am I
the only one who sees?
Tory was dumbfounded and quite hurt. She could
barely believe this woman, who in some distant lifetime
would be her mother, could think such malicious
thoughts about her.
Out. Turan advised rather sternly.
Tory dashed for the inset of the next doorway up,
ﬂattening herself up hard against the door.
Listen to me. There’s something not right about her, I
believe she’s much more powerful than she lets on, Melcah
persisted as she was shown the door.
Goodbye, mother.
Tory heard the door close. After waiting a moment,
she chanced a peek. Nin Melcah was briskly making her
way down the corridor in the opposite direction.
‘Such hostility.’ Tory attempted to make light of it,
but she couldn’t deny that the ill-will bothered her.

‘Knock, knock.’ Tory entered the Shar’s chamber,
which was much smaller than his palace quarters.
‘Stop right there.’ Turan bade her from his window
seat.
This request startled her in the light of what she’d
overheard, but she complied all the same. ‘What’s
wrong?’
‘Nothing.’ He gazed at her, all dressed in white,
with silver bands around her arms, and gold bands
around her forehead and waist. ‘You are a vision,’ he
explained, sounding far-away. He motioned for her
to approach.
‘I’m sorry it took me so long to get here. I’ve left us
a little short on time.’
‘You overheard her, didn’t you?’ He sensed the
awkwardness in Tory’s manner.
Tory dropped the carefree front, she wouldn’t insult
his intelligence by playing games. ‘I didn’t realise it was
a crime to get along with people. I have made female
friends here, too.’
Turan laughed as he reached out to take hold of her
hands. ‘I do realise that. The trouble with my mother is
her mind is too idle. She has to create these little
dramas every once in a while to keep her life
interesting. I’m sorry if she hurt you.’ He hugged her
tightly, ‘She’s just a bit over-protective at times.’
Tory gave half a laugh at this, as her mother, Helen
had been no different. ‘Tell me . . .’ Tory cradled his
head against her chest, stroking his long, dark hair. ‘Do
you perceive anything unusual hanging around in Nin
Melcah’s energy ﬁeld?’

Turan was bothered by her query and pulled back.
‘She has a few shady patches here and there . . . but
everyone gets a bit that way at festival time. It’s nothing
that a few days in the Shu-im-ti won’t ﬁx.’
All the same, Tory was starting to feel uneasy about
leaving Chailidocean; there was trouble brewing.
‘I will personally see to it that my mother is
cleansed within the next couple of days.’ Turan noted
how doubtful Tory still appeared. ‘It’s nothing to worry
about, I assure you.’
She knew she would be meeting with the Shar
every night and he would let her know if anything out
of the ordinary took place. It seemed more important
that she got to the bottom of how and why Zutar had
sought her out.
The bells of the city tolled and the Dance to the
Rising Sun commenced. Turan and Tory were out of
time; the royal party’s departure was imminent.
‘Come on then.’ The Shar was reluctant. ‘I’ll walk
you down.’
As they made their way to muster on the forth island
ring, Turan ﬁlled Tory in on what was happening on the
cure front.
Darius had said that her husband’s tests showed an
excess of yellow bile pigment in his blood, hence the
appearance of the yellow staining in his skin and the
whites of his eyes. This meant that the virus was
probably attacking his liver cells, leaving them unable
to cope with the normal amounts of pigment from red
cell destruction.

Tory raised her eyebrows, none the wiser. ‘How does
one treat that?’
‘Well normally one couldn’t, not without having
the patient here, yet Darius believes he may have
another solution. He hopes to have more of an idea in a
couple of days.’
‘I see.’ Tory struggled to stay positive. ‘Do thank him
for me, won’t you? I know he’s been working very hard.’
‘It looks very promising, that’s what he said.’ Turan
stopped Tory and turned her to face him. ‘So don’t be
distracted by negative thoughts. Stay focused on the
desired outcome of your actions . . . your well-being is
more the concern at present.’
‘How nice of you to join us.’ Jerram called out to
them through the golden bars of the gate ahead.
‘Would you please . . . before somebody changes
their mind.’
As Jerram didn’t wait for a response, Tory looked
back to Turan. He appeared to have a bad taste in his
mouth, as he watched his brother disappear into the
commotion up ahead.
‘What is it with you two?’ She had to know.
‘You’d better go. I’ll see you tonight.’ Turan made a
move back towards the citadel.
‘Oi!’
The Shar turned to ﬁnd Tory appearing rather
surprised at him. The morning breeze played with the
golden wisps of hair around her face and as the sun was
rising in the sky behind her, her auric ﬁeld sparkled with
a greater lustre than ever before.
I love you. She projected with all her might.

Turan found himself unable to maintain his bad
mood. ‘It shows.’
‘Good.’ She nodded assuredly, wanting so much to
embrace him. But as the Shar was quite obviously not
the exhibitionist her husband had been, she watched
him depart without incident.
‘Nin Lamamu!’ It was Adelgar that hounded her
this time. ‘Will you please get your politic presence
out here.’
As was usual for this time of year, there was not a cloud to
be seen in the clear blue expanse of sky above. Even at
this early hour, the harbour port of Chailidocean was alive
with the hustle and bustle of trade.
Hundreds of seagoing craft, entering and exiting
through the canal that lead to the sea, crowded the great
waterway. Native men loaded and unloaded merchandise
from vessels already docked, and market stalls lined the
streets to barter the wares fresh in from abroad with those
grown, mined and made locally.
The large animals strapped to carts, that were used for
heavy lugging and transportation, were a vast contrast to
the streamlined and near silent hovercraft that congested
the streets.
Tory wandered past the street vendors, not realising
that females of the city did most of the bargaining here.
There were short red skinned men and women jabbering
at her in one dialect, and extremely tall, lean men of a
deep brown complexion raving to her in another.
‘Amelu du!’ Adelgar’s voice dispersed the crowd,
but not without much complaining from the locals.

‘Shar lil,’ he warned those who were resisting, and
they ﬂed from him.
The Shar chuckled at this, and turned to Tory.
‘What is that?’ He referred to the sword and scabbard
strapped to the gold band around her waist.
‘Why, it’s a sword.’ Tory explained, and drew the
mighty steel weapon to display it.
In the blink of an eye, tens of the native soldiers
had surrounded them.
Oh shit. Tory froze.
‘Shar lil du, munuz din gaz.’ Adelgar set them at
ease, shaking his head; her naivety did amuse him at
times. ‘That’s not a sword.’
Adelgar reached for a hand-sized cylindrical object
of metallic colour that was clipped to his belt and
pressed a button on the side. A long thin laser,
ultraviolet in colour and roughly the same length of her
blade, extended from it. ‘This is a sword.’
The sword of Rhydderch. Tory considered as she
viewed the weapon, greatly in awe of it. This is where
Myrddin acquired it.
‘Igi, du!’ Jerram demanded, motioning the soldiers
to return to their stations by the convoy that was
preparing to leave. ‘It would be good to get moving
sometime today.’
‘You have got to be kidding.’ Tory gaped at the
elephants before her, with canopied carriages strapped
atop of their backs. ‘I’m not expected to handle one of
those things on my own!’
‘Hardly.’ Jerram informed with a grin. ‘Mother is
travelling with Adelgar, therefore you will ride with me.’

Tory looked to Adelgar, who shrugged. ‘This way,
I’m bound to behave myself.’
She forced a laugh. ‘That’s very comforting.’
After a few last words of wisdom from their father,
Jerram stepped onto the trunk of his elephant and it
elevated him up onto its shoulders.
‘Do take care.’ Taliesin approached to assist Tory up,
for she was looking rather wary of going anywhere near
the huge creature.
‘You know what a cautious person I am.’ She obliged
him with a bleak smile, as she got a foothold on the
animal and it raised her up to Jerram’s reach. ‘Piece of
cake,’ she assured, climbing into the shaded basket
behind her travelling companion.
Jerram had charge of the expedition, and so
remained seated on the elephant’s shoulders outside the
sheltered enclosure. ‘Igi e-ri Portea, du.’ At his word the
caravan started to move.
‘Whoa!’ Caught off-guard, Tory was ﬂung back into
the scatter cushions on the perfectly level ﬂoor of the
transport. ‘Good grief.’ She got herself more
comfortable, and watched out of the drawn ﬂaps on
both sides of her as they slowly made their way towards
the lands north-west of the city.
Tory thought the terrain and weather conditions of the
continent they crossed were very reminiscent of
Australia, the land of her birth.
This central region, Cintrala, was comparable to
northern New South Wales, in that the landscape was

more mountainous towards the coast and ﬂattened
out as you moved further inland. The vegetation was
lush — rolling green hills separated huge expanses of
forest, that gave way to rainforest as you neared the
more tropical conditions in the north. In the hot
season, temperatures normally peeked at over thirty
degrees in Cintrala. Though north-west in Portea it was
not uncommon for the temperature to hit the forty
degree mark.
At the coolest time of year temperatures would drop
to a pleasant twenty degrees in Portea, ten degrees in
Cintrala, but south in Usiqua, minus ﬁve degrees was the
average low in the highlands. Taliesin had previously
suggested that Tory may know these ice capped
mountain ranges better as the Azores. If this was true, at
sometime in years to come, the Earth would indeed tilt
severely on its axis. For back in the twentieth century
these islands were located in the northern hemisphere,
off the coast of Portugal, yet the continent they were on
was deﬁnitely located south of the equator.
They passed over a wide stretch of rolling green
ﬁelds, which had only small pockets of forest to
negotiate around. As this was a very leisurely leg of their
journey, Jerram left his post to join Tory in the carriage.
‘This is not so bad now, is it?’ The Shar reclined
alongside her, at which time she immediately sat
upright.
‘No. It’s quite pleasant really.’ Tory tried not to
sound as uneasy as she felt. ‘Once you get unaccustomed
to the swaying motion.’ She cautiously assumed a
crossed-leg position, facing Jerram.

He grinned at her discomfort, reaching out to
retrieve a piece of fruit from a pouch that was strapped
to one of the wooden supports of the canopy. ‘So, what
shall we do with the day?’
‘Let’s talk.’ She let him know she was intent on
doing so, though Jerram didn’t seem overly thrilled by
the suggestion.
He gathered his long dark hair and tossed it
backwards, taking a huge bite out of the apple in his
hand. ‘About what?’
‘Um?’ Tory rolled her eyes around and gave a shrug,
as if picking a topic at random. ‘Why don’t you tell me
about you and Turan?’ She raised her eyebrows, eager
to hear.
Jerram sat upright, disgruntled by the subject. ‘I’d
rather not. We just don’t like each other . . . end
of story.’
‘But you’re so much alike.’ She ventured an opinion
that Jerram quite obviously didn’t agree with. His eyes,
as dark as a raven’s, bore into her own. But as the
animal beneath them suddenly came to a halt, Jerram
refrained from commenting and moved out front to ﬁnd
out why they’d stopped.
Next thing Tory knew, Adelgar had climbed up to
join her. ‘I’ve got a surprise for you.’ He motioned her to
follow him outside.
‘Adelgar!’ Jerram protested, as he watched his
brother help Tory down from her transport.
‘This won’t take long, I swear.’ Adelgar quickly
withdrew towards the back of the caravan, with Tory
in tow.

Five elephants back in the train, they came to one
that was pulling a large wooden crate. As Adelgar led
Tory to the back of the container, the doors were ﬂung
wide as soldiers set a ramp in place.
‘Never let it be said that I am not a man of my
word.’ The Shar swung her round to ﬁnd the unicorn.
‘We are setting it free!’ Tory became high-spirited at
the notion and when Adelgar nodded to conﬁrm, she
squeezed him tight before she raced up the ramp to
encourage the animal to come out.
As she did, she discovered the magniﬁcent animal
knew well enough what was happening; it must have
sensed her excitement. Good luck, my friend. It allowed
her to approach and stroke it. Steer clear of my brothers in
future . . . and when Noah asks you to get on the ark, do it.
She kissed its muzzle.
The unicorn reared up a few paces, making a couple
of grunting sounds as it seemed to nod. Then, backing
up to the back wall of the large container, the beast
began to charge for the door.
Tory reached out and ran her hand down the body
of the animal as it passed. With an almighty bound, it
leapt clear over the ramp, straight into the ﬁeld beyond.
Tory raced to the opening to watch its departure.
When it had reached a safe distance, the unicorn
stopped to look back at them.
‘He says, thank you,’ Tory announced, her sights
still ﬁxed upon it as it began to frolic about in a cheeky
fashion.
‘Get going, go on,’ Adelgar encouraged it to ﬂee,
‘before I change my mind.’

Tory jumped out of the trailer to join the Shar on
the ground. ‘Aw, it was a lovely thought.’ She nudged
his shoulder with hers, before lightly kissing his cheek.
‘Bless you.’
‘Well, you still owe me that lesson, don’t forget,’
Adelgar grumbled, as he felt himself blush.
‘Tonight, I promise . . . you deserve it.’ Tory threw
an arm about his shoulder, proud of him, as they
watched the unicorn ﬂee into the safety of the outlying
forest.
The party travelled for the remainder of the day until
just prior to sunset, when they stopped and set up camp
for the night. A tent was raised to accommodate Nin
Mahar, Tory, and the other women in the royal
entourage. Jerram and Adelgar chose to sleep out under
the stars with their troops.
After they’d eaten and all were being entertained by
the native musicians, Tory took Adelgar and a portable
solar lamp further down the clearing to commence his
long-awaited lesson.
She began his instruction by running him through
the vital points (kyusho) along the meridians of the
body, explaining that when these were struck correctly
it could inﬂict severe pain, loss of consciousness, or
even death. She then ran through the different parts of
the body considered as weapons, then the different
strikes, explaining which were most effective to use on
which kyusho and why.
‘See . . . now that’s the trouble with our culture!’
Adelgar emphasised his woes. ‘I learnt all of those vital

points and which parts of the body are most resilient
during my time in the Order of Kheit-Sin. But our
instruction was purely from a healing perspective. No
one even suggested that they might also be used to
inﬂict pain.’
This statement shamed Tory somewhat. ‘No,
Adelgar, that’s not the trouble with your culture. That’s
the beauty of it.’
‘I disagree,’ he put forward light-heartedly, before
assuming a more serious tone. ‘We are dealing with a
hostile enemy now. The centuries of peace we once
enjoyed are gone! We, too, must strengthen our resolve,
or we shall lose this fair land.’
Tory didn’t want to agree with him, though the
history books did. ‘War begets war, peace begets peace.’
She had to smile, remembering she’d had this same
conversation with Brockwell not so long ago.
‘How can you say that when you have been to war?
You have seen the debauched acts men are capable of.
They shall destroy us . . .’
‘Perhaps. But by thinking thus you’re assisting
them.’ Tory decided to remain true to her beliefs. ‘If
there’s one thing I’ve learned here, it’s the power of
attitude. For heaven’s sake, you’re supposed to be on a
peace mission . . . you don’t know what might be
achieved. Have a little faith in yourself.’
Adelgar felt his negativity dropping away and
grinned. ‘I do very much like your attitude, Lamamu . . .
you do your mentors proud.’
‘As do you, sir.’ She gave a slight bow. ‘Now. I
immobilised Jerram, the ﬁrst time we met, with a move

known as a major hip throw. Would you like a
demonstration?’
‘Most certainly.’ He was eager, until he found out
she intended to use him as her victim. Still, Adelgar
was enticed by the prospect of being so close to her.
Concentrating more on her body than her words, Tory’s
demonstration took him off guard. Before the Shar
knew what had happened, he was ﬂat on his back with
the wind knocked out of him.
‘You could have warned me.’ His voice was strained,
due to the lack of air in his lungs.
‘I asked if you were ready.’ She placed her hands on
her hips and shook her head; he obviously hadn’t heard
a word she’d just said. ‘Shall I run through it again?’
Adelgar peeled his body off the ground. ‘Ah, I’ll
give it a miss.’
The sound of laughter was heard coming from the
vicinity of the forest. Tory spied the culprit as he came
forth from the shadows and nearly fainted as she was
awarded a clear view of him. For he had the head and
torso of a splendid native man, but the body of a black
stallion.
‘Adelgar.’ Tory whispered, as she backed up nice and
easy.
‘Oh no,’ Adelgar gasped, making fun of her alarm.
‘It’s . . . it’s, Thais.’ The Shar broke into a huge smile
and approached his friend to greet him.
Tory had always presumed that centaurs were
mythological creatures, rather than a species that
actually existed. But then, she’d seen a dragon, a grifﬁn
and a unicorn in her time, so why not a centaur?

‘And who might this stunning piece of anatomy be.’
Thais voiced Tory’s very thought as he circled around
her once, admiring her form.
Adelgar came to stand beside her to do the
introductions. ‘This is my sister, Lamamu.’
‘Unlucky!’ Thais teased.
Adelgar responded with a glare, then informed his
bedazzled sister: ‘This is Thais, the best scout on the
island . . . the smartest, too.’
‘At your service.’ He bowed in a very gallant
fashion, which delighted Tory.
She was quietly admiring the creature’s dexterity,
wondering how on earth he managed to control all four
of his legs with such apparent ease.
‘Well, you must have impressed her. She’s never
been this quiet.’ Adelgar’s words jogged Tory out of her
daze.
‘I’m so sorry.’ She realised how rude she must seem.
‘I am delighted to meet you, Thais.’
‘The pleasure is all mine,’ he insisted.
Although her ﬁrst sight of Thais had been a shock,
ten minutes in his presence and he felt like a dear old
friend. To say he was smart was an understatement; he
was downright wise. It was little wonder really, for he’d
been around longer than he could recall. By Tory’s
understanding of the ageing process, however, the
centaur looked to be in his prime — say, early thirties.
That’s when Adelgar pointed out that Thais and Tory
had something in common; they were both immortal.
This information led Tory to wonder why centaurs
were virtually unknown in the years beyond the birth of

Christ. She did not voice an inquiry, but was obliged
with an answer just the same.
‘We were there, though my kind did not much like
that period of evolution. Luckily it was short-lived.’ He
smiled at the bemused expression on the querist’s face; so
many questions whirled inside her head that she couldn’t
decide which one to ask ﬁrst. ‘Surely, as an immortal, you
realise that we can assume any form we please. As a scout
and a protector of wildlife, the form I was born with suits
me best here. Around the time of your origin, however,
to appear thus would have seen us hunted. We assumed a
human form to set up sanctuaries and take action against
the senseless slaughter of the animal kingdom.’
‘So you’ve obviously time-travelled?’ Tory put
forward.
Thais gave a laugh at the notion. ‘No offence, but
you’re really not very well informed, are you?’
Tory endeavoured not to be offended, as Adelgar
broke into laughter. ‘How do you mean?’
‘Well,’ Thais inquired coyly, ‘if you don’t mind me
saying so, it seems that, although your physical body is
attuned to a higher state of consciousness, your mental
bodies are not. I don’t understand how that could be,
for I have always been led to believe that one went
hand in hand with the other.’
Tory found his observation very interesting and as
Thais obviously knew much that she did not, she
decided to confess. She told of the events leading up to
what should have been her death, and of the
immortality potion Taliesin had given her. The fact that
she hadn’t had to reach a higher plane of consciousness

to achieve her everlasting state probably explained why
she lacked the spiritual awareness usually possessed by
those who had taken the proper evolutionary channels
to obtain immortality. ‘So, in other words,’ she
concluded, ‘I am a cosmic accident. I have not the
slightest idea of my true purpose . . . or, indeed, if I have
one at all.’
Again Thais was amused. ‘I know your purpose. But
ﬁrst, let me assure you that every tiny particle in every
universe exists for a reason, and in creation there are no
accidents. If you have obtained an immortal state, it’s
because you are worthy and it was meant.’
‘Really?’ Tory found his view comforting.
He nodded. ‘As for your purpose, dear Lamamu . . .’
He was rather surprised she hadn’t guessed. ‘You are a
protector of mankind . . . a creator of peace and destroyer
of those who resist it. For you breathe ﬁre and courage
into the hearts of men and encourage warriors to
gentleness. You are the perfect afﬁrmation that there is
no limit to what a human being can do with intellect
and willpower.’
Tears had welled in Tory’s eyes, she was so
overwhelmed by his words. ‘How can you say that? We’ve
only just met.’
‘I perceive information from a level of awareness
beyond the time, space and causational elements of this
third-dimensional reality,’ Thais modestly enlightened
her. ‘You have only skimmed the surface of the
knowledge available to you in the fourth dimension and
beyond. In time, you too will learn to fully utilize the
planes above the one on which you exist.

‘How about that?’ Adelgar slapped her on the
shoulder, naively pleased for her. He gazed up at the
night sky. ‘It’s getting late.’
‘Oh, my stars! What time is it?’ Tory was thrown
into panic.
Adelgar shrugged. ‘Close to midnight, I guess?’
‘I have to go.’ She turned to Thais. ‘I wish we could
talk more. Are you staying with us long?’
He shook his head. ‘We’ll meet again. Our cosmic
paths run parallel.’ Thais extended his two arms out in
front of him to illustrate. Tory took hold of both his hands.
‘Well, I look forward to that time,’ she pronounced.
‘It has been both an honour and an education. Any last
words of advice before I face Zutar?’
Thais grinned. ‘I cannot advise you on your quest.
The outcome will depend on how the preceding
situations are handled. But the trials ahead may not be
quite as they seem, so it will be best not to be too
judgemental. That which you ﬁnd hurtful, may be a gift
of love. That which might seem generous, may be given
out of greed. View each instance through the eyes of
those concerned, and the truth will make itself known.’
‘Thank you, Thais. I shall remember that.’ Tory
withdrew a short distance.
‘Hold on, where do you think you’re going?’ Adelgar
protested, as she began to fade from view.
‘I’ll see you on the morrow.’ She disappeared
completely.
‘Lamamu, wait!’ The Shar thumped his foot down
hard, throwing his arms into the air. ‘That’s just great.
How am I going to explain this to Jerram?’

20

WORTH KILLING
FOR

T

uran’s room in the Dur-na-ga Temple took form
and materialized around her. Tory had been
looking forward to their secret rendezvous all
day; time alone when no one would disturb them.
‘You’re late.’
She turned to ﬁnd Turan behind her, though he did
not appear as annoyed as his voice implied. ‘I still know
nothing of astronomy, so I’m hopeless at telling the
time here.’
Turan burst into a huge smile. ‘You’ll never believe
what happened today.’
‘You got Nin Melcah to the Shi-im-ti.’
Turan frowned. ‘Well, no, I got distracted.’

‘Darius found the cure!’
‘No, no, that’s not it.’ Turan calmed her. ‘But this is
almost as good.’
‘What then? Tell me?’ The suspense was killing her.
Turan’s excitement returned, but just as he was about
to let the cat out of the bag he refrained. ‘Come with me.’
When they entered the Shar’s work station, Tory had a
better idea of what had Turan so excited.
‘You got it working.’ Tory knew she was right. ‘You
solved the power problem, didn’t you?’
He raised his eyebrows, and a cheeky smile of
conﬁdence beamed on his face. ‘I believe so. But I can’t
take all of the credit, it was Shu Micah who was the
catalyst for the breakthrough. This morning, after you
left, he brought me a crystal . . .’
‘Of course!’ Tory couldn’t believe they hadn’t
considered this before now. ‘The like of the ones in the
control panel on Mount Dur-an-ki . . . the crystals from
the fourth dimension with the chaotic symmetry.’
‘Exactly.’ Turan took a seat behind his computer.
‘I’ve already installed the stone. However . . . as you
know, to do away with the need for fourth dimensional
interaction to accomplish time travel, we have
synthesized their particle manipulation process, at least
in part, with man-made circuitry. We are also dealing
with a previously unknown power source that is
expected to produce indeterminable amounts of
electromagnetic energy . . .’
‘What you are trying to say is, you haven’t tested it
yet and you need a guinea pig.’

‘No, I don’t think so.’ Turan, unsure of what a
guinea pig was, guessed she spoke of some sort of critter.
‘Animal testing is forbidden, you know that. What I
really need, is some generous immortal to test it for me.’
Tory was amused by the misunderstanding, although
adjusting the particle manipulation function on a timemachine was not really how she’d envisaged they’d
spend this time alone together. Still, it obviously meant
a lot to Turan, so she volunteered. ‘Where shall we
start?’ She climbed on board the silver transport, placing
her hands upon the psychokinetic control panel.
The following hours passed quickly and as the ﬁrst few
tests took Tory minutes or hours into the future, time
for her literally disappeared.
‘It didn’t work.’ Tory climbed out of the chariot,
most dissatisﬁed, after the ﬁrst attempt at a time span
longer than a few minutes.
‘What do you mean?’ Turan grabbed hold of Tory to
squeeze her tight, hysterically happy. ‘You were gone so
long, I started to worry.’ He laughed at his folly now.
‘How do you feel? Are you alright?’
‘I didn’t feel a thing!’ She was stunned. ‘Truly, I
didn’t think I’d left.’ She tightened her embrace on
him. ‘Congratulations, the ride is as smooth as silk.’
They stayed as they were, wrapped round each
other, until they were calmer.
‘You know, this wasn’t what I had planned for
tonight,’ Turan admitted.
Tory cocked an eye, looking up into his. ‘So what
was the alternative?’

His grin broadened. ‘Well, if I could persuade you to
accompany me back to my quarters, I shall be more
than happy to demonstrate.’
She raised her eyebrows, most agreeable to the
proposition, though she was a tad surprised. ‘Before we
even test the time reversal function?’
‘Could we?’ He was inspired by her suggestion, not
realising it was in jest. Turan left her to resume his seat
behind the monitor. ‘You’re right, it won’t take long.’
Me and my big mouth. Tory wanted to hit herself.
‘Who could we send you to see to conﬁrm the test
for us?’ Turan pondered. ‘It should be someone who
shall be in no way interested in what we’re doing, but
reliable all the same.’
‘What about Xavier?’ Tory mused. ‘He seems to be
able to keep a secret.’
‘Perfect. Xavier it is.’
They nominated the previous night as her desired
destination, and with that suggestion implanted ﬁrmly
in her brain Tory concentrated on Xavier.
The room was rather dark until Tory’s eyes adjusted to
the light, at which time she moved to identify the
sleeping ﬁgure in the bed.
‘Xavier.’ She sat beside him, giving him a gentle
nudge. ‘Wake up.’
‘Lamamu?’ He whispered in surprise, as he raised
himself onto his elbows. ‘I thought you’d left . . . I’ve
been looking for you.’
‘Yes, you were, weren’t you. Turan did mention
that.’ Tory smiled meekly. ‘I can’t really help you, I’m

afraid. I haven’t seen hide nor hair of the girl
you seek.’
‘But, in your son’s life, there was someone special?’
Tory smiled. ‘I believe so.’
Xavier was most relieved to hear this. ‘What was
she like, was she beautiful, intelligent?’
‘You’ll have to judge for yourself.’ Tory was hesitant
to put any preconceived ideas into his head.
‘But you would let me know if you saw her here in
Atlantis, wouldn’t you?’ He rubbed one eye with his
hand and gave a yawn, still half asleep.
‘If you want me to, yes. But now I need to ask a
favour of you.’
‘Name it.’ His eyes wavered closed. She took
Xavier’s head between her hands in the hope that her
instruction would sink in. ‘Before dawn tomorrow, I
want you to meet me in Turan’s lab in the Dur-na-ga . . .
have you got that?’
‘Meet you in Turan’s lab, tomorrow before dawn,’ he
mumbled in response.
Not completely conﬁdent that he would remember,
Tory added a little incentive. ‘If you do this for me,
Xavier, I promise you I’ll ﬁnd your lady love.’
His eyes parted wide, as consciousness got a grip.
‘Dur-na-ga, tomorrow, before dawn . . . count on it.’
‘I am.’ She rose and disappeared into the shadows.
‘Sweet dreams.’
Upon returning the chariot to the lab, Tory found
Turan hunched over his desk fast asleep.
The poor Shar hadn’t closed his eyes in days, and
was exhausted. As he wasn’t used to such physical

fatigue she decided to leave him to rest; they would
see each other tonight.
Xavier arrived to keep his appointment, thereby
conﬁrming the test had been successful. ‘I thought I
must have been dreaming.’ He was rather confused to
ﬁnd Tory present, knowing she’d left Chailidocean the
previous morning.
As dawn rapidly approached, Tory had no time for
explanations. She thanked Xavier for his participation,
explaining he was free to go.
This puzzled him, for surely in return for the
woman of his dreams a task of some kind was
expected of him. But when Tory insisted that his
presence was all she’d required, and that the promise
she’d made him would be kept, Xavier left in the best
of spirits, warmed by the knowledge that his mission
had been accomplished.
Tory recorded a note in the computer to inform
Turan of her ﬁndings when he awoke. She also left him
a note of a more personal nature, in anticipation of
their next meeting.
She took one last look at the chariot before
departing, and a wonderful sense of reassurance
accompanied the realisation that she now had
the means to return to her husband, son and kin,
at will.
‘You have truly outdone yourself this time, my love,’
she whispered, kissing Turan’s forehead ever so lightly.
‘Until tonight then.’ She stood clear of him, focusing
her thoughts on Jerram and Adelgar.

There was a young lady of sight,
Who could travel faster than light,
She set off on a quest,
Her intentions the best,
To meet with a terrible fright.
Her love — a man of grace,
Was trapped in a physical space,
His desire so great,
It sealed her fate,
And she was wiped from the human race.
Lamamu! Turan woke abruptly in a cold sweat, the
riddle of his banished mentor still ringing in his brain.
Another nightmare. He supported his ailing head with
both his hands.
When he ﬁnally raised his sights and spied the
chariot returned, he checked the computer to ﬁnd
Tory’s notes. Naturally, he was pleased their directive
had been achieved, but the message of love she’d left
him caused him to grieve.
How selﬁsh I have been. How stupid! he scolded
himself. The rightful action to take in this matter was
plain. I will need help.
The journey to Portea proved an interesting one to say
the least. Shar Jerram was furious about Tory’s
unauthorized departure from the party the night before,
and hadn’t spoken to her all day.
It wasn’t just that she’d deﬁed Jerram’s command
that had him so riled. The incident had bruised his ego
in more ways than one. Only yesterday afternoon Tory

had avoided Jerram’s ardent advances, stating she was
still bound to her husband and the wedding vow she’d
made him. The Shar respected her feelings; thus he’d
politely ceased his pursuit of her favours.
Unfortunately, Jerram had a nose like a bloodhound;
upon her reappearance at camp this morning he could
smell Turan’s scent all over her. Jerram was enraged
beyond reason and refused to accept Tory’s claim that
she’d been working on a project with Turan all night; in
the heat of the moment he’d called her a liar and a cheat.
Although Tory was aware Jerram knew nothing of the
connection between Turan and Maelgwn, she was
offended all the same. Thus, she told Jerram that he could
think what he liked, but as he had no need of her between
the hours of midnight and dawn, and she had projects
elsewhere that did, she would continue to make use of this
time as she saw ﬁt and challenged the Shar to stop her.
How very diplomatic. Tory regretted that she’d
succumbed to her anger, but she did hate being
chastised for something she hadn’t done. Admittedly, if
she’d had her way, Turan would have been her lover by
now. I should’ve just told Jerram the truth, and I would
have, if he hadn’t been so quick to condemn me.
‘Lamamu, come see.’ Adelgar entered the sheltered
transport in which she lay. ‘We are approaching my city,
Keriophis.’
‘That’s good news.’ She gave a bleak smile, trying to
sound enthusiastic.
The excitement he felt was dampened by her mood.
‘You’re not still brooding over that argument with
Jerram, are you?’ He sat himself down, concerned for her.

‘I’m sure my brother has long forgotten it by now . . . he
never holds a grudge for very long.’
‘You believe me, don’t you?’ Tory righted herself to a
seated position.
‘Well . . .’ He shrugged, not sure.
‘Smell.’ Tory held the palms of her hands under his
nose.
‘Xavier?’ He frowned, not understanding.
‘That’s right,’ Tory conﬁrmed. ‘So if I was making
love to Turan all night, how did I get Xavier’s scent on
my hands?’
‘I don’t know. How?’
‘Because we were working on a project, just like I
said!’ She was losing patience again.
‘I believe you.’ Adelgar held both his hands out
before him in supplication. ‘It’s Jerram you should be
confronting with this, not I.’
‘I’m sorry, Adelgar.’ She rubbed his shoulder fondly.
‘I’m just mad because I handled the situation so badly.’
She sank away from him, disappointed in herself.
‘Hey . . .’ He moved closer. ‘I’m sure Jerram feels
exactly the same way. When we reach the city, go and
speak with him. I’m sure you’ll ﬁnd he’s most apologetic.’
Perhaps he was right, and this could be resolved
amicably without further dispute. For if their quest was
as dangerous as they imagined, they couldn’t afford to
be divided over such petty matters — her own
experience had taught her that.
Although Portea was nowhere near as grand as
Chailidocean to look at, it had a profound natural

beauty about it, as it had been built in the midst of a
great rainforest. Now Tory understood Adelgar’s
eagerness for her to see it.
Only the local temples of the city and the royal
house were built out of marble. These striking examples
of Atlantean architecture sat upon large, round mounds
to prevent them from being ﬂooded in the rainy season.
But the majority of the abodes in Portea, still of a round
structure, were built high upon stilts and were made
from the more abundant materials to be found in the
rainforest. Hence the village was in perfect harmony
with its lush surroundings — a little cultural oasis, deep
in the forest.
The local people, male and female alike, wore little
more than elongated loincloths due to the extreme
heat, and were as warm as the weather in temperament.
Tory’s blonde hair, violet eyes and fair complexion was
somewhat of a rarity to the red-skinned natives, who
weren’t shy when it came to satisfying their curiosity.
They gathered around to touch Tory’s skin, or take up a
piece of her hair, as if making sure that she was real.
Akin to the native Indians of the Americas, these were
a goodlooking, gentle people, whose attentions she
found in no way threatening.
With a small child rested upon each hip, Tory was
accompanied to the palace stairs by half the village. It
delighted Adelgar to see her thus, and he chanced a
glance in Jerram’s direction to note that even his
brother’s frown had momentarily lifted.
It was their mother, Nin Mahar, who eventually
assisted Tory to bid farewell to her admirers, before

leading her away to a room inside the palace where
Tory could bathe and change in the wake of her two
days of travel.
A cool, freshwater stream channelled into a huge pool
inside the palace brought welcome relief from the heat
for Tory, Nin Mahar and the ladies in her service.
The native women awaiting their emergence from
the water chatted and giggled amongst themselves as
they observed Tory’s unusual appearance. This didn’t
bother her as she was well used to being the odd one out.
As Nin Mahar had been travelling with Jerram all
day, Tory swam over to do a little snooping. ‘Jerram’s
still mad with me, isn’t he?’
The petite woman’s large brown eyes ﬁlled with
empathy as she smiled. ‘Turan is the thorn in his side,
child, not you.’
‘But why?’ Tory waited breathlessly for an answer.
Nin Mahar looked saddened a moment, though the
smile never left her face. ‘Some at the palace never
really approved of my union with Absalom, despite all
the good that came of it. They wanted to keep the Shu
Sar’s gene pool pure.’
‘Turan is one of those?’ Tory couldn’t believe it;
Maelgwn had never been a racist.
‘It’s not his fault. He was inﬂuenced by his mother
and Absalom’s other wives. All except Kila that is, she’s
always been very sweet to us. I have to confess, I could
hardly wait for my boys to come of age, so I could escape
from Chailidocean . . . I do believe Jerram felt the same.’
Nin Mahar mounted the stairs to leave the pool, her

long, dark hair near touching the ﬂoor. ‘The animosity
never bothered Adelgar. Most of it was beyond his
understanding, and he’s so rough and tumble he’d
bounce back from anything.’ She smiled as two native
women draped a large piece of cloth about her
shoulders. ‘But Jerram took to heart every little sideways
glance, every taunting comment.’
‘I get the picture.’ Tory knew what Jerram must be
thinking; that she favoured Turan because of his colour,
but nothing could be further from the truth.
One of the women in attendance approached Nin
Mahar coyly, motioning to Tory as she uttered a few
words.
‘What did she say?’ Tory stepped out of the pool,
wringing all the water from her hair.
‘She wants to know if you would like her to braid
your hair.’
Many of the men and women wore their hair in
tiny braids, weighted at the end with ornate silver
beads, as their long masses of hair were easier to
maintain this way.
The offer was very tempting indeed. Tory’s hair,
when loose, was like a blanket, and in midday heat it
had just about driven her nuts. ‘How long would it
take?’ She had to meet Turan at midnight, and if what
Nin Mahar said of him was true, it would be interesting
to see how he’d react to her new hairstyle.
The native girl assured her that, with a few of the
other women helping her, it would be done before the
moon was high, thus, Tory agreed.
Nin Mahar instructed that food from the banquet be

brought up to her. Tory’s absence from the feast tonight
would give Jerram a little more time to cool off.
As it turned out, Jerram didn’t front up at the dinner
either, on the premise that he had much to organize
before their departure at dawn.
Adelgar, disappointed that neither his brother nor
his sister had shown, caused one hell of an uproar when
he invaded the ladies chambers to speak with Tory. As
he was the ruler of Portea he could get away with this,
and the female elders granted him permission to stay.
Fortunately, Tory was dressed. Her attire, in much
the same style and colour as what she’d worn before,
was of a lighter fabric. Fine tassels fell from the sleeves
at the shoulder, and more of the same trimmed the hood
and around the bottom of the shirt.
Tory explained to Adelgar that she hadn’t wanted to
ruin his banquet by creating another scene, upon which
he settled down beside her and was quite pleasant
company. She inquired after what tomorrow had in
store and Adelgar advised that, with any luck, they’d
make it to the Annunnaki Islands that stood between
Antillia and Portea. On the west coast boats were
waiting to take them across the A-zu Strait, a short ride
from Keriophis. The inhabitants of the Annunnaki
Islands were a mixture of the native races of both the
bordering continents. Adelgar warned that their
appearance was more warlike than his people, for they
were accustomed to Antillian attacks. But the Shar
assured Tory that there was no need for her to fear, as
the Annunnaki people were allied to Atlantis.

Tory manifested in Turan’s quarters at the appointed time.
‘I like what you’ve done with your hair,’ Taliesin said.
Tory swung round, surprised to ﬁnd him there.
‘Thank you . . . Where is Turan?’
‘Now, don’t be alarmed,’ Taliesin advised. ‘He asked
that I meet you in his stead.’
‘Why, what has happened?’ She rushed to the
Merlin’s side.
Taliesin took a deep breath. What he had to impart
wasn’t going to be easy. ‘Another nightmare,’ he simply
explained.
‘Is he alright?!’
‘Yes, he’s ﬁne.’ Taliesin took hold of her hands and
led her to a seat.
‘So, where is he then?’
‘My dear Nin. If you would be so kind as to allow
me, I shall tell you.’ He was not thrilled by the task the
Shar had assigned him. ‘In Turan’s dream last night,
Keeldar indicated that you might be in danger.’
‘But surely Turan knows that is quite impossible. It
could have been his subconscious playing tricks on him.’
‘That is exactly what I said. But the Shar has
decided to return to his etheric form, all the same.’
‘What?’ Tory felt her heart split in two. ‘Surely not.’
She reﬂected on the last time she’d seen Turan, then stood
frustrated. ‘Where is he, Taliesin? Let me talk to him.’
Taliesin closed his eyes a moment; he’d anticipated
this reaction. ‘The Shar left strict instructions that no
one was to disturb him . . . not even you,’ he added
ﬁrmly. ‘For the truth is, nothing you could say would
make the slightest difference now.’

‘Why do you say that?’ The tears began to well in
her eyes, and she sank back into her seat.
Taliesin took up her hands once more, wanting to
soothe her hurt. ‘The attraction Shar Turan felt for you
was proving too strong to permit him to transcend back
to his higher state of awareness.’
‘Yes. And . . .?’
‘Under hypnosis this morning, the Shar had all
intimate memory of you erased. He asked only to be
able to recall that, as his novice, he is bound to do all
within his capabilities to protect you.’
This news came as a real shock. ‘So we just go back
to the way we were before the time loop?’ She brushed
away her tears, suppressing her hurt and
disappointment. ‘Who is this Keeldar, Taliesin? What
did he do to warrant banishment?’
The Merlin stood, not at all disposed toward
enlightening her. But he continued nevertheless. ‘For
the sake of science, Keeldar disobeyed a direct order
from the Shu Sar . . . therefore he was exiled for
sedition.’ He moved to pour himself a glass of water.
‘Yes, but what did he do?’
‘Why, he was the greatest authority in the ﬁeld of
identifying, manipulating, and transporting matter using
sonic frequency and psychokinesis.’ Taliesin eluded the
issue, taking a sip from the goblet.
‘Tell me something I don’t know.’ Tory became
annoyed; Taliesin was seeming more and more like his
old self all the time. ‘If this man has nominated himself
as my adversary, it would be nice to know a little bit
more about him.’

‘It is not you he seeks vengeance on, it’s Turan.’
Taliesin spoke bluntly. ‘And in my personal opinion, if
Keeldar did make such a threat, he is blufﬁng. He’s just
trying to sabotage, ﬁrstly, these peace talks with
Antillia, and secondly, any chance Turan might have
for happiness. Thus Keeldar gets his revenge on both
Chailidocean and the trusted pupil who, in his mind,
betrayed him.’
‘Betrayed him how? What the hell happened?’ If she
had to ask again she would explode.
The Merlin’s brow became drawn as he considered
whether or not he should divulge such information. For
unlike most here, Tory would fully understand the
dangerous implications of Keeldar’s act of treason.
‘Think back to the twentieth century,’ he began. ‘Do
you recall a place known as the Bermuda Triangle?’
The question brought a perplexed look to her face,
as she failed to see what bearing this could have on her
query. ‘Yes, I do. Like the Dragon’s Triangle, it was a
site renowned for unexplained disappearances,
electromagnetic anomalies, mysterious weather
conditions, even UFO sightings. The Bermuda
Triangle was located in the Atlantic Ocean, between
Bermuda, Miami, San Juan and a small part of the
Gulf of Mexico.’
‘Indeed. And for at least a thousand years prior to the
twenty-ﬁrst century, many a vessel went missing in that
area. Some of these were destroyed by the strange
electromagnetic phenomena in the region and sank to
the bottom of the ocean, but others passed through the
thin veil in the time–space continuum to be dumped

randomly at differing points in earth’s history, both past
and future.’
‘Are you trying to tell me some of these vessels were
deposited here?’ Tory’s eyes were wide with fascination.
‘In the waters far west of here, yes, as this is where
the Bermuda Triangle is located.’
Though the Merlin’s tone was light, the implication
in what he said was like a sharp slap across the face.
‘Oh, my god. Keeldar found himself some relic of the
nuclear variety, didn’t he?’
‘As interesting as the discovery was, I was obliged to
advise the Shu Sar against allowing any such antiquities
to be brought onto the continent for examination. Ergo,
Absalom denied Keeldar permission to do so.’
‘But Keeldar disobeyed.’
‘He brought a fully-functional nuclear warhead into
our capital city!’ Taliesin was annoyed by the stupidity
of the act. ‘But Turan found out about it, thank
goodness, and the council took the aforementioned
action against Keeldar and his research.’
‘So where is the warhead now?’ The prospect of its
existence made her edgy.
‘Dismantled, and hidden in a safe place,’ he
reassured before changing the subject. ‘But all is not
completely grim in wonderland. I do have some good
news for you.’
‘Be out with it, then.’ She gave a sigh. ‘I could sure
use some.’
‘Darius is waiting to speak with you in his lab,’ he
announced, watching Tory’s face light up in anticipation.
‘He has found the cure?’

‘So he says.’ The Merlin grinned, pleased to have
raised her spirits. ‘Shall we go see him?’
‘Is there really any need to ask?’
En Darius was impatiently awaiting their arrival in his
laboratory in the Shi-im-ti, and strangely enough he
appeared rather stressed.
‘Come in, come in,’ he bade them, as if their
meeting was a matter of some urgency, and checked the
corridor outside. ‘Does anyone else know you’re here?’
Taliesin had never seen the scientist behave so. ‘No.
Is something bothering you, Darius? You don’t appear at
all well.’
‘I am not surprised.’ He motioned them to take a seat.
‘Is it true, you’ve found a cure?’ Tory complied with
his wish, seating herself.
Darius looked a little put out by the question. ‘Well,
yes and no.’ He plastered his hair back off his sweaty
brow. ‘You see . . . as Turan probably explained, your
husband’s illness could have been caused by one of three
different defects: either malfunctioning liver cells, red
blood cell destruction or a blockage in his bile duct.
Each one of these ailments has a different treatment,
therefore I cannot safely diagnose or treat him without
having him physically present.’
‘So what’s the big breakthrough?’ Tory couldn’t
imagine.
Darius raised his eyebrows, releasing a heavy sigh.
‘Well, my dear Lamamu, the answer to our dilemma lies
with you.’
Tory’s eyes opened wide. ‘Me! How?’

Darius checked the corridor outside to ensure they
were alone, and even when convinced they were, he
still spoke in a whisper. ‘Remember the tests I ran on
you the ﬁrst day you arrived?’
Tory nodded.
‘Well . . . upon re-examination they proved rather
interesting.’ He smiled, rather smitten by his own
brilliance. ‘I know how you became immortal.’
‘Come again?’ Tory was sceptical; how could he
possibly know that?
‘It was an elixir of sorts, was it not?’ Darius
decided the amazed expression on her face was
enough of an answer. ‘There are traces of it still in
your blood,’ he explained. ‘This formula caused a
mutation of your genetic code at a molecular level,
thus causing the atoms in your body to resonate at a
higher vibrational frequency than is possible in this
physical plane.’
En Razu seemed to be following, though Tory
looked a little hazy.
‘The ability of mundane material to return to its
original shape after being deformed is possible, because
molecules have a memory.’
‘DNA,’ Taliesin added for Tory’s information.
‘Minor injuries to the human body heal without a
trace, thanks to our molecular memory . . . but in your
case, this process is speeded up. Not to mention the
virtual impossibility of any virus being able to penetrate
your immune system.’
‘Well, that’s very comforting, but how is this going
to help Maelgwn?’

No sooner had Tory asked the question, than both
Taliesin and herself grasped the answer.
‘No!’ Taliesin stressed, happy and horriﬁed all at
once. ‘You haven’t.’
‘I have,’ Darius confessed, fearing their wrath. ‘I
isolated and synthesized the chemical formula that
mutated the strand . . . and here it is.’ He handed Tory a
small bottle and smiled. ‘That is the only sample I shall
make and once you have safely departed with it, I
intend to destroy all my notes and tests pertaining to
this affair . . . I do not have the desire, nor the nerve, to
play god in this fashion.’
‘This shall make Maelgwn an immortal like myself.’
Tory’s voice faltered in reverence at the miracle she
held in her hand. ‘How does one express thanks for a
gift such as this?’ She was nearly moved to tears.
‘There is just one thing I would like to know.’
Darius sought permission to pry in return for his labour.
‘Where did you obtain this work of biological genius?’
Still overcome by what had been achieved, the
question startled Tory. Her sights darted from the bottle
in her hand to Taliesin, and although she desperately
wanted to retract the glance, it was too late. The Merlin
knew. ‘Shit,’ Tory scolded herself.
‘That’s why you wouldn’t tell us when we asked you
before.’ Taliesin voiced what he had already suspected.
‘Because I gave it to you.’
This revelation made Darius even more wary of his
discovery. ‘Then where did you get it?’
‘Good question.’ Taliesin referred it back to Tory,
who shrugged.

‘You never said.’
They all stared blankly at each other as they
pondered the paradox, until Taliesin ﬁnally voiced what
they were all thinking.
‘So what came ﬁrst . . . the chicken or the egg?’
Tory was concerned. ‘One thing’s sure. Even here
in Chailidocean there must be those who would kill to
be immortal.’
‘I dare say you are right.’ Darius’ new knowledge
played on his conscience like a curse. ‘No offence,
but the sooner I see you safely depart with that, the
easier I’ll rest. Until that time, I have a safe place
to store it, but not a word of this must leave this
room. Agreed?’
Taliesin and Tory nodded in accord. ‘Agreed.’
At muster the next morning, Jerram kept himself
preoccupied organizing their departure, so Tory didn’t
disturb him; she would have opportunity enough to
make her peace with him throughout the day.
In a way, Tory regretted having committed herself
to this mission, now she knew that she possessed the
cure for Maelgwn and the means to get it to him.
Still, she did owe these people something for all their
help. What was a few more days, when she had the
whole of eternity to be with the man she loved?
Adelgar was well pleased to find his sister’s spirits
improved. Lamamu was far more receptive to tales
about his kingdom, admiring the beauty of the lush
terrain along their route to the A-zu strait. In her
absence the night before, there had been a huge storm

in Keriophis; the landscape sparkled in the early
morning sunlight and its inhabitants were lively.
By midday, however, there was not a cloud to be
seen in the strip of sky above the rainforest canopy. The
temperature that Tory imagined had hit the thirty
degree mark raised the humidity factor to nearly
unbearable proportions, and she thanked the merciful
heavens for her new hairdo.
All at once, there came a great cry from the ranks of
soldiers and the native men escorting the party on foot
began running to the front of the caravan.
What’s going on? Tory wondered as she observed the
commotion to each side of her.
‘Lamamu.’ Adelgar called to her from his seated
position between the elephant’s shoulders. ‘Come see.’
Tory raised herself to her knees, crawling forward to
ﬁnd out what all the fuss was about. Adelgar pointed to
where the jungle parted up ahead to expose the bright
aquamarine of the Strait.
‘Paradise,’ Tory enthused, as Adelgar helped her
down from the elephant onto the ﬁne, white sand of the
long beach. Off in the distance, she could see the little
sea port where their transport was docked offshore. Most
of the native soldiers had taken to the water to swim the
distance remaining, some heading towards the village
and the rest towards where the tall ship was anchored.
‘Fancy a dip?’ Adelgar scooped her up over one
shoulder and made for the water with her.
With the ﬂood of water came sweet relief from the
heat exhaustion, and Tory sprang to the surface
revitalized. ‘Fantastic.’ She spread her arms wide, tilting

her head back to welcome the warm rays of sunshine
against her skin.
After his swim, Jerram stood on the water’s edge
observing her. How lovely she was, so much more akin
to his tribe than Turan’s; Lamamu belonged in the wild.
It was amusing to watch his brother attempt to ﬂip Tory
off-balance; he wasn’t having much success. It was clear
that Adelgar no longer lusted after the daughter of
Danuih. Nin Tabitha, Lamamu’s match for him, had
won his brother’s heart swiftly and completely. ‘Keep
moving.’ Jerram motioned the pair towards their
destination, heading off in that direction himself.
The inhabitants of the seaside village, a mixed bag
of races, hailed the two youngest sons of the Shu Sar. To
these people, Jerram and Adelgar were gods — the last
bastion between their life of freedom, and a life of
servitude and victimization. The two young Shars didn’t
seem at all affected by all the adoration. They carried
out the duties of their birthright not for the glory it
brought them, but to ensure the continued prosperity of
their race and those who were their allies.
Tory followed her brothers through the commotion
on the waterfront to where the royal party’s supplies
were being unloaded onto boats and taken to the
mother ship.
She was enjoying this leg of the trip immensely; the
scenery was just magniﬁcent. The deep green of the
jungle, the white sand, the aqua-blue of the water, and the
azure sky above were all in brilliant contrast to each other.
All the healthy, well-tanned, half-naked men carousing
about her added to the already intoxicating surroundings.

Once on board the tall ship, Tory found herself a
position in the ship’s bow, out of the crew’s way, and
settled herself to await their departure. Suddenly, she
wasn’t in such a hurry to get back to the formidable
British weather. Tory had missed her sunny Australia,
and she found the conditions here even more
favourable.
‘So, how are you ﬁnding the wilderness?’ Jerram
took a seat beside her as the boat took to sea, casting his
sights over the crystal clear tropical waters abundant
with marine life. ‘Do you miss civilization?’ He looked
directly at her.
Jerram cast spells with those dark hypnotic eyes of
his, thought Tory. She imagined that many an
unsuspecting maiden had succumbed to the siren
presence that beckoned from behind the cool facade.
‘Your allegiance is what I miss . . . and surely we can’t
afford to be divided when we face Zutar.’
‘I am the last person on earth who would want that.’
His tone was serious, though one half of his mouth
curved to a smile. ‘I was wrong to judge you. I do not see
through your eyes.’
‘I wish you could.’ She smiled brieﬂy before her
sights were conveniently drawn away to a huge school
of dolphins keeping pace with their craft. ‘Good
heavens, just look at all of them.’ Tory sprang to her
feet, enchanted.
Jerram, who’d risen behind her, turned Tory back
around to look him in the eye. ‘No, look at me. You’re
in love with Turan, aren’t you?’
‘No.’ Her voice was resolute.

But her eyes slid from his as she pulled away, which
led Jerram to suspect another lie.
She decided to come clean: ‘I’m in love with a future
incarnation of him. Maelgwn of Gwynedd, my husband.
And yes, I probably would have fallen in love with
Turan, too, had circumstances not been as they are.’
‘How do you mean?’ Jerram quizzed, for she and
Turan had seemed to be getting along well enough the
last time he’d seen them together.
‘Shar Turan is resuming his subtle form. All feelings
he may have held for me have been eradicated from his
memory,’ she was a little sad to say.
‘I always knew he was mad.’ Jerram thought the
news was too good to be true and couldn’t keep the
smile from his face.
She served him a look of objection. ‘I think it’s more
that Turan is afraid he won’t be able to protect me.’
This was a curious statement, considering her
everlasting state. ‘Protect you. From what?’
Tory shrugged. ‘Keeldar? Zutar? I don’t know.’
Jerram shook his head. ‘In all my travels and
dealings with neighbouring lands, no one has seen or
heard from Keeldar since before I was born. He was just
a crazy old scientist, who is more than likely dead by
now. As for Zutar, I think Adelgar, all these guards, and
myself should prove to be sufﬁcient protection.’
‘From what I understand, Keeldar was rather
proﬁcient in the mind sciences.’ She questioned his logic,
politely. ‘This man was capable of building a whole
temple by the power of thought; thus I seriously doubt he
would perish in any manner of climate or circumstance.’

Jerram looked slightly perturbed, but as he was
being summoned to the stern of the boat by one of his
men he waved off her fears. ‘No, think positive . . .
he’s dead.’
Though Jerram was taking a happy-go-lucky stance,
Tory could tell the notion worried him. She decided she
must know more about Keeldar, and as Turan was
indisposed and Taliesin had told her all he was going to,
Nin Bau seemed the logical answer. Tonight, after she’d
met with Taliesin to conﬁrm all was well, Tory would
seek an audience with the High Priestess, for at the very
least a little advice from someone so wise could never
go astray.

21

THE QUIET ART OF
DECEIT

N

in Melcah silently made her way through the
E-abzu Temple, which was dedicated to the
study of the Mind Sciences and the goddess,
Philaeia. In one of the isolation rooms contained
therein, Turan was resuming his divine state. A smile
graced Melcah’s lips, for she was most gratiﬁed by her
son’s decision to emotionally detach himself from the
daughter of Danuih.
The large hood of Melcah’s plain, white robe was
pulled well over her head, making her unidentiﬁable
from any of the Order’s elders as she headed for the
laboratory that had once been her mentor’s workplace.
It was located at the end of a long, curved corridor that

gradually spiralled downward, in a wing of the temple
that had long since been locked up and abandoned by
the Order. Melcah proceeded as silently as possible,
checking behind her often to ensure that her passage
hadn’t been noted. Inaccessible as this area was to most,
being the ﬁrst wife of the Shu Sar did have its
advantages. The door opened immediately upon
scanning her hand print. She entered, securing the door
behind her.
Underneath the large solid bench in this chamber
lay a passage that led to another laboratory deep
beneath the temple. Once inside the tunnel that only a
few people knew about, Melcah felt more at ease. She
dropped her hood to rest about her shoulders and
activated the solar torch to see her way down the
slightly curved tunnel.
Keeldar? She opened the door to the lab. I must
speak with you at once. When there came no response,
Melcah added: Your riddle worked like a charm on Turan,
just as you said it would.
Was there ever any doubt?
Melcah spun around, bursting into a huge smile
when she found Keeldar’s ghostly image behind her.
No, she granted, marking how drained of energy her
accomplice appeared; his image grew a little fainter
each time they met. I trust the task was not too
taxing, Keeldar.
I do not count the cost of your will, Nin Melcah. He
bowed his head to her. I live only to serve it.
She was charmed by his enduring devotion to her.
And how fares the other half of our scheme?

Everything is in place, Highness. Lamamu shall not be a
concern to you much longer.
Splendid. Her eyes narrowed as she pondered their
plan. And you are quite sure that none of the seers will
foresee this?
Quite sure. He grinned. And as long as you wear the
charm I gave you next to your skin, none shall gain any
insight from you. Nin Melcah seemed relieved, so
Keeldar politely inquired: Now then, there was another
matter?
Yes. Something has come to my attention, that I would
very much like you to investigate.
Of course, Majesty. He was eager to learn what had
been so important as to risk an impromptu meeting.
Even though Melcah was sure they were alone, she
took the extra precaution of closing the door before she
disclosed her mind. It has been suggested that En Darius
may have discovered the secret to immortality, and I need
you to get inside his head to ﬁnd out if there is any truth in
the rumour.
Keeldar appeared a little sceptical; Darius was not
the kind of man to boast about a discovery like that.
Forgive my reserve, Nin Melcah, but who told you this?
Her smiled broadened, as she felt her source a
reliable one. Nin Anthea, his wife. It would seem her dear
husband, of whom she loves to boast, talks in his sleep when
something is troubling him. Melcah was very nonchalant
as she explained. Apparently the ability to play god weighs
heavy on his conscience. She smiled conﬁdently.
Is that so? Keeldar was inspired by the possibilities
this presented.

If this elixir does exist, I shall reward you handsomely
for it. Melcah was not getting any younger; she had
perhaps a hundred years of life remaining and this was
not enough. Darius will have hidden such a treasure well;
thus I need you to locate it for me.
As you wish, Majesty. Keeldar bowed as he departed.
Consider it found.
As evening fell, the main island of the Annunnaki
people was in sight off the starboard bow of their craft.
A mist hung like a mysterious veil over their
destination; only the peaks of the lush green mountains
could be seen amidst the haze, and an eerie silence
came over the crew as their vessel approached.
The anchor was dropped just short of entering the
fog. Jerram and Adelgar stood on the bow, their eyes
scanning the misty waters ahead.
‘What are we waiting for?’ Tory felt obliged to
whisper her inquiry and Jerram nodded to his point of
focus out front. Long, ornately-carved canoes began to
silently emerge from the haze in a bright red glow due to
torches to the rear of their vessels.
Jerram smiled, unconcerned. ‘A welcoming party.
To set foot on these shores unannounced is considered
an act of war. See there?’
Jerram motioned to a young man who sat upon a
large throne-like chair built into the stern of the closest
boat. A large spear rested in his hand, its arrowhead
pointed towards the sky. He was easily deﬁned as the
leader of the party by the beaded breast-plate and other
jewellery he wore. His long, dark hair, shaved down

both sides of his head, was plaited back in a long braid
that fell down his bare back. The warrior’s face and
torso were painted, as were all the Annunnaki in the
half a dozen large canoes that converged upon their
ship. The design of their bright facial make-up was not
warlike; it suggested more a celebration — as did the
pandemonium that arose from the greeting party upon
sighting Tory’s brothers on the ship’s bow.
‘That is Calisto, the son of the elders of this island,
Chief Anu, and his concubine, Keturah. So be nice,’
Jerram advised Tory, before moving to greet his consort.
Both her brothers seemed to be welcomed by the
island’s ofﬁcials as they chatted excitedly with them in
the native tongue.
‘Come, Lamamu.’ Jerram motioned her to approach.
‘Only the three of us need go ashore. Calisto’s party
shall take us.’
Adelgar had already lowered himself into the main
canoe, and as Tory joined him there, he introduced her
to the Chief’s son and others of signiﬁcance.
Calisto, who was taller and darker than either of her
brothers, eyed Tory over with proper reserve, but was
delighted. He conveyed his mind to Adelgar, who
smiled and shook his head.
‘Lamamu kin gu Shu Sar, Zutar en lil.’
‘What are you saying?’ Tory quizzed, for Calisto
looked disappointed by the Shar’s response.
‘Calisto offered me ten of his women for you,’ Adelgar
informed, sounding as if he were passing up a bargain. ‘But
I told him that you are the great messenger of the Shu Sar,
and that Zutar insists on dealing with you.’

Calisto made additional comment, which Adelgar
conveyed.
‘Calisto said he can see why.’
Tory bowed her head to the Chief’s son and served
him with a gracious smile for the compliment, whereby
he reached out with his free hand and rested it against
her cheek.
‘Sa shu nu,’ he stated, motioning to the darkening
sky above. ‘Ra sag munuz.’
‘Oh, brother!’ Adelgar rolled his eyes, obliged to
translate Calisto’s words. ‘I’m not going to tell her that,’
but when Tory and Calisto both protested with a glare
of warning, he obliged them. ‘He says . . . your beauty
lights up the night sky, and that you are a shining
example of a woman.’
‘Alright, that’s enough of that.’ Jerram guided Tory
away from Calisto, jesting with his friend in the native
language.
Whatever words passed between them, Calisto
found them hilariously funny and sat back in his seat to
enjoy his amusement.
After Jerram had seated Tory safely in front of
him, she had to ask, ‘What did you say to him that
was so funny?’
‘I told him you were mine, and thus he didn’t stand
a chance.’ Jerram wrapped his arms about her shoulders,
urging her to lean back against him, and considering
the tale he’d spun about them she complied.
‘What is so amusing about that?’
‘Well,’ he gave her a slight squeeze, ‘either he
considers me little competition, or he finds it rather

unbelievable that I would claim any one woman as a
permanent concubine . . . Calisto has known me a
long time.’
‘Oh.’ She considered the latter was more like the
truth, for two reasons. One, because Teo had also been
such a free spirit when it came to women, and two,
Jerram looked every bit a warrior to be reckoned with,
despite his height.
About twenty yards from shore they penetrated the
island’s misty shield. In the last rays of daylight, Tory
beheld a huge mountainous island of dense tropical
terrain ahead. The beach was alight with torches, as more
of the Annunnaki people waited to escort the
representatives of the Shu Sar to Chief Anu and Keturah.
Jerram stayed very close to Tory as they
disembarked, watching her like a hawk, for her
colouring and vigour would make her somewhat of a
prize in these parts.
The native women showered their visitors with
brightly-coloured leis, which they placed around their
necks. The party was then accompanied up a jungle
path, the sweet scent from the ﬂowers they wore ﬁlling
their senses with a heavenly aroma.
Tory glanced back towards the beach, unable to see
their ship beyond the misty veil. ‘How is it that the mist
cover doesn’t engulf the land?’ she whispered to Jerram.
‘The Annunnaki ﬁnd it a necessary defense these
days,’ he shrugged, ‘with all the Antillian raids.’
‘You mean they manipulate it?!’ Tory was stunned;
how did such a seemingly primitive race manage what
much more scientiﬁcally advanced civilizations had not?

Jerram nodded to conﬁrm. ‘These people keep in
close contact with the earth and her elementals, and
utilize that alliance to their mutual advantage.’
‘Brilliant!’ Tory conceded.
She had learned to do this herself to a degree, with
the Pan Ray, but she’d not conceived what could be
sought from the deva kingdoms beyond this.
‘But how did they know we were here, if they
couldn’t see us coming?’
‘Keturah, Calisto’s mother, sees everything.’ He
smiled a knowing smile. ‘You shall understand well
enough once you’ve met her.’
They followed the pathway through the rainforest,
and came to a set of stone stairs which had been carved
into the rock face of the mountain. Upon scaling these
for some distance, they came to a large plateau.
‘Holy smoke.’ Tory came to a standstill, observing a
huge construction dominated by a large ziggurat at the
far end.
‘Pretty impressive, huh?’ Adelgar commented,
admiring the city that illuminated the darkness with
hundreds of torches ablaze throughout.
The architectural design behind the structure
before them, was indicative of those ruins to be found
in the twentieth century at places like Teotihuacan
in Mexico or Machu Picchu in Peru. A long pathway,
paved in stone, led to stairs that ascended all the
way up to the huge, three-tiered ziggurat at the end.
Other staircases branched off the long walkway,
granting access to temples, shrines, plazas, dwellings
and workshops.

‘It is beyond my wildest expectations,’ she mumbled,
in awe of the great feat of engineering, for its situation
would make it virtually impenetrable to raiders.
They passed through a large, stone doorway into the
large mound, where the pathway began to slope
downwards. Carved into the walls and roof were all
manner of hieroglyphics, similar to those of the Egyptians.
Calisto noted her interest and spoke to her: ‘Ru la
ab, du en si.’
Tory looked to Adelgar for translation.
‘These walls tell the story of Calisto’s ancestors,
from their ﬁrst settlement through to now.’
‘He must be very proud to have inherited such a
beautiful culture.’ She addressed Calisto directly. ‘I
am envious.’
Adelgar conveyed the message to Calisto, who
laughed as he voiced his reply. Jerram lashed out at
Calisto for his words, though it was only in jest.
‘What?’ Tory hated to be left out of the joke.
Jerram grinned as he watched Calisto resume his
course. ‘He said that, any time you like, he’d be more
than happy to make you a part of it.’
‘Sure am glad I left my woman at home,’ Adelgar
chuckled, as he fell in behind their guide.
Up ahead, two large doors parted wide to reveal the
enormous central chamber of the structure, where a
lavish feast was taking place. Long tables, no higher
than your average coffee table, were set up in a square
formation, leaving a huge entertainment area in the
centre where native musicians and dancers were
performing. Calisto led them to the prominent table,

situated on a platform that rose above the other tables,
at the far end of the room.
The old man seated in the centre was adorned in
jewellery and paint that was even more opulent than
Calisto’s. Tory guessed this must be Chief Anu. The
elder clapped his hands and all the entertainers ceased
their activities, moving aside as the Shu Sar’s party were
brought forth.
Jerram and Adelgar were greeted warmly by Chief
Anu as, thanks to Keturah, he was already well aware of
their mission and was most thankful for their attempt to
make peace with the waring Antillians. Calisto
introduced Tory as daughter and messenger of the Shu
Sar and Jerram’s concubine. He seated Tory between her
supposed lover and Keturah, as the Chief’s wife was
most interested in her.
Both Chief Anu and his wife appeared older than
any Tory had met in this time zone thus far. Keturah,
though red-skinned and dark haired like the rest of her
people, had the eyes of an albino, white within white.
The merriment of the feasting resumed and Tory
was enjoying the musical spectacle immensely. Yet the
pearly gaze of their hostess, which had been remained
intent on her, was becoming a little off-putting. Still,
Tory smiled politely at the wise old woman’s
attentions, sure that she didn’t mean to make her feel
so uncomfortable.
When most of the food, fruit and seafood had been
cleared from their table, Chief Anu motioned to the
native who attended him. At his word, a large pipe was
brought forth. The Chief lit this, using a long stick

which he ignited from a torch close by, and after having
a few puffs he passed the smoking pipe to Adelgar, who
accepted it graciously. From here it was passed to
Keturah, who indulged in the smoke before handing it
over to Tory.
Tory forced a smile as she took possession of the
pipe, looking to Jerram. ‘I don’t smoke.’
‘You do now,’ he instructed ﬁrmly. ‘To refuse will not
only insult our hosts, but their gods as well.’
‘Oh.’ She forced a smile once more, raising the pipe
to the Chief and his wife before lifting it to her lips. ‘In
that case, cheers.’ She inhaled the smoke deeply, as the
others had, exhaling it out her nose. ‘Good grief, that’s
not tobacco, that’s hemp.’ She suppressed the tickle in
her throat that was urging her to cough.
Jerram smiled, knowing the effect it would have on
her. ‘They smoke this to promote communication with
the great spirit.’
‘That’s not surprising.’ Tory raised her brow. The
smoke tasted strong enough to induce an out-of-body
experience.
‘Du, du.’ The Chief smiled, urging her to have more.
It wasn’t too long before the effect of the dope took
hold. In her euphoric state, Tory’s mind drifted from
thought to thought without anxiety or care.
Keturah took hold of her hand. ‘Keturah la he na,
Lamamu.’
Jerram was quick to right himself from his relaxed
position across the cushions beside Tory to translate.
‘Keturah said she can see much confusion arising
around you.’

‘Bad pa.’ Keturah added for Jerram’s information,
whereby he looked to Tory a mite concerned.
‘The source of which is your father.’
‘What?’ Tory didn’t understand. ‘Does she refer to
Shu Sar Absalom?’
Jerram inquired for her, and conveyed her response.
‘She would suppose so.’
‘Antillia ap nu nun, Engur, igi gi pa, gaz.’
The Shar near turned white with Keturah’s words.
‘In Antillia, there is a dark lord who watches your father
and wishes him dead . . . the Antillian’s call him Engur,
meaning, Lord of the Rockets.’
Tory’s eyes opened wide, her euphoric state quickly
departing. ‘Keeldar . . . so Turan was right after all.’
‘We don’t know that.’ Jerram tried to calm her.
‘Well, who else would it be?’ Tory challenged him,
but when he did not answer she composed herself.
‘Please, thank Keturah for the warning, and ask if she
knows of anything else that may aid us in our mission.’
Tory paused breathless as Jerram imparted her words to
the wise woman, praying to god no mention of
Mahaud arose.
Keturah smiled broadly as she spoke her mind to
Jerram, who seemed delighted by her words. ‘That is all
she sees on that subject, but she urges you not to worry,
as the righteous ones shall overcome. On a more
personal level, however, she said that coming into
contact with your ﬁrst love has disconcerted you. But
Keturah advises you not to fret, for true love awaits him
elsewhere,’ Jerram was pleased to announce. ‘I told you
Turan wasn’t for you.’

Tory had to smile at this. She knew it was not Turan,
or Maelgwn, of whom Keturah spoke, for it was Jerram,
as Teo, who had been her ﬁrst love. ‘Please thank
Keturah for that knowledge. I shall bear it in mind.’
As the hour approached for Tory to check in with
Taliesin, she urged Jerram to ﬁnd out where she was
supposed to be sleeping this night.
One of the native servants escorted her and Jerram
to a private chamber. The Shar thanked the servant of
the Chief, before lowering the curtain behind them.
‘I’ll be ﬁne now, there’s no need for you to stay,’ Tory
assured Jerram, who was gazing at her with desire.
‘Oh, but there is,’ he corrected, with an amorous
smile. ‘As your alleged lover, I have my reputation to
think about. Besides, if I am here, you won’t have to
worry about any unexpected visits in the middle of the
night.’ Jerram took up both her hands, kissing one and
then the other.
‘Please, don’t.’ She took a step away, but the Shar
grasped her hands ﬁrmly and wasn’t about to let go.
‘I have never longed for any woman, as I long for
you.’ His dark eyes were intense. ‘How happy I must
have been as your instructor.’ He closed the gap
between them, letting go of her hands to take hold of
her face, of the mind to kiss her.
‘I have a confession to make.’ She pulled away
before he could. ‘Turan, or rather Maelgwn, was not my
ﬁrst love . . . you were.’
The Shar, though pleased by the news, was not inclined
to believe it. ‘Then why did you not tell me before?’

‘Because I was afraid something like this would
happen, and I didn’t want to falsely encourage you.’
She wasn’t really sure if she should be telling him this
now, either.
‘So, you are saying . . .’ He eased his way closer to
her, backing her up against the large hammock that was
stretched out between four posts in their room, ‘that
you feel nothing for me any more.’
‘Yes.’ She had no choice but to climb over the
unstable obstruction to escape his advance. ‘That’s
absolutely right.’
‘Is that so?’ He grabbed hold of the arm supporting
most of her weight and pulled it towards him, collapsing
her into the hammock beside him. ‘Then why should it
bother you to be this close to me?’ Jerram gently
caressed her face with his hand, feeling her whole body
tremble at his touch.
‘You heard what Keturah said, I’m not the one for
you.’ She stopped his hand before it encountered
her breast.
‘I don’t believe that any more than you do.’ His lips
pressed lovingly against her neck.
‘But I do believe it,’ she said, becoming aware of
how wonderful his touch made her feel. ‘Really I do.’
She forgot for a moment what they were
talking about. But, as his hand passed over the dip in
her waist to rest upon her thigh, gently encouraging
her body to press against his own, a surge of
awareness came over her and she leapt out of the
hammock. ‘No.’
‘What do you mean, no?’ Jerram sat upright.

‘We’ve been through this before, and it doesn’t work.’
She stressed. ‘I will not make the same mistake twice.’
Though he didn’t understand her reaction, he was
not angered by it. ‘How could something that feels so
right be a mistake?’
‘It’s hard to believe, I know!’ She was frustrated by
her own good sense. ‘But you must trust me. A love
affair will completely crucify our friendship, and that
really means something to me.’
‘Me too, but this is a whole different set of
circumstances.’ He made a move to pursue her, but she
held out her hand motioning him to stay put.
‘No, not so different.’ She shook her head, before
closing her eyes and centering all her concentration
on Taliesin.
When Jerram realised what she was doing, he
clambered off the hammock to stop her. ‘Wait,
Lamamu. Please!’ But he was not swift enough to reach
her, she’d gone. ‘Curse this other incarnation of mine,
for whatever he did to make you so fearful of me.’ His
aggravation dissolved into a new sense of purpose. ‘But I
shall make you see, it can work between us.’
After meeting with Taliesin to let him know all went
well with her, Tory teleported herself inside the
underground dwelling of the Great Temple of
Chailidocean to seek Nin Bau.
On her approach to the council chambers of the
High Priestess Tory encountered Nin Sibyl. She was
veiled as always, but her long, thick masses of soft,
brown curls gave her away.

Nin Lamamu, what are you doing here at this hour?
She sounded most surprised to see her. I thought you were
on a diplomatic errand for the Shu Sar.
‘That I am.’ She conﬁrmed with a smile. ‘But I have
need to speak with Nin Bau. Could you please tell her I
am here?’
You should have let us know. Her voice implied she
was sorry to have to tell her: Nin Bau is not here.
‘Where is she then? It is most important that I speak
with her.’
I am not at liberty to say. Perhaps tomorrow night . . .
‘But tomorrow may be too late. I need to see her
tonight.’ Tory was beginning to panic.
What is the matter? Nin Sibyl was concerned for her.
Perhaps I can help.
‘No, I don’t think so.’ Tory took a seat,
disheartened. ‘Not unless you know anything about
Keeldar.’
I am afraid not. The veiled woman sat down beside
her. He was banished before I was born.
This statement made Tory rather curious. ‘So you
could not be very old then?’
Nin Sibyl shook her head. I have been alive barely
three hundred years.
Tory guessed this made her about the same age as
Jerram and Adelgar. ‘Oh. Well then, comparatively
you’re just a baby. Do forgive me, but it’s hard to tell
when I’ve only ever seen you veiled. You never did tell
me why that is?’
It is to shield me from the eyes of men and any lustful
intent they might have that would lead me astray from my said

vocation. There was a time when the female seers of our order
went unmasked, but they were too easily distracted from
pursuing the inner sight by male suitors, union and children.
‘And you do not desire these things?’
Nin Sibyl forced a laugh. As I am to succeed Nin Bau
one day, such things are not an option for me.
Tory drew her brow, rather annoyed. ‘That’s
ludicrous! Surely everyone has the right to choose in
such matters. Anyway I can’t see that loving someone
should make you any less of a seer than you are.’
Nin Sibyl shrugged. I am not beautiful as you are,
Lamamu.
‘I don’t believe that for a second, and neither should
you.’ Tory stated in no uncertain terms. ‘Why don’t you
lift your veil and let me see your face —’
No, I could not. She stood, alarmed by the notion. It
is strictly forbidden.
‘But I am no threat to your vows, and after all, I
have even seen the face of Nin Bau herself,’ Tory
boasted, in the hope of setting her at ease.
You have? Sibyl questioned in disbelief. For in all her
years of studying under the High Priestess, she’d never
glimpsed her face. Not used to the prospect of mischief,
the young priestess was excited by it. She closed the
door to the small waiting room outside Nin Bau’s
council chambers. You must promise not to tell a living soul
of this.
‘I do.’ Tory crossed her ﬁngers behind her back, just
in case.
Sibyl hesitated again before lifting her veil. Now,
you will be perfectly honest with me, won’t you? You

wouldn’t tell I am beautiful, if I am not. I assure you, it will
not bother me either way. A priestess knows no such vanity.
It was becoming increasingly obvious as the
conversation progressed that this poor girl was simply
screaming for some attention. ‘Have no fear of that. I
am renowned for being frank.’
Alright. The girl took a deep breath, lifting the veil
from her face.
I knew I recognised that hair, Tory thought to herself,
as she beheld the face of Bridgit. At least now Tory
knew she could fulﬁl her promise to Xavier, for all the
good it would do him. ‘You may rest assured, my friend.
Had you not been veiled all your life, you would have
more suitors than you would know what to do with.’
Really! Do you think so? Sibyl tried to be modest.
‘I know so.’ Tory smiled, unable to resist the
question. ‘Tell me, do you know of the Shu Sar’s son,
the one they call Xavier?’
Oh dear Heliona, it does show on my face! The girl
was thrown into a state of panic and fell on her knees
before Tory. I only ever saw him once, and I do swear to
you, I have tried to put him from my mind.
‘Calm down. It’s alright. It doesn’t show, Sibyl . . .
it was merely a guess.’ The girl stopped being
hysterical, looking up at Tory with a stunned
expression on her face. ‘Really . . . I just thought you’d
make a handsome couple.’
You do? Sibyl burst into tears.
Oh dear. Tory had not expected such a strong
reaction; when was she going to learn to keep her big
mouth shut. ‘Have you told Nin Bau how you feel?’

Heavens, no! The girl sobbed. After all the years she
has invested in my training, I could not disappoint her so.
Tory gave half a laugh at this. ‘I doubt that anything
that would bring about your ultimate happiness would
be a disappointment to her. For, if you truly feel
something for the Shar, to continue this masquerade is
ultimately only deceiving yourself . . . after all, you can’t
hide from the universe, or escape the inevitable.’
Oh please, don’t say that. Sibyl rose, weary from her
outpouring of emotion. What would I know of love . . . I
have barely even met the man. He may be nothing like I
imagine.
‘Kind, gentle, clever, discreet, understanding, loyal . . .’
Tory paused to smile, ‘not to mention extremely goodlooking. And available. Funnily enough, Shar Xavier just
hasn’t found the right woman.’
Stop it! Sibyl could take no more. I shall not listen to
another word. I must go. She lowered her veil to cover
her face once more. And so must you. She opened the
door for Tory to leave.
‘Alright, if that is your wish.’ Tory stood.
It is. The young priestess sniffed, lowering her head.
I cannot change what is predestined.
‘A truer word was never said.’
Sibyl gasped at Tory’s retort, but when she raised her
sights to ask what she meant, the daughter of Danuih
had gone.
What to do? Tory paced up and down inside her palace
quarters. Should she mind her own business? Of course
not! she resolved; she never had before. Besides, she was

the divine master of love and war; it was her duty
to interfere.
As Xavier slept peacefully, Tory came to sit beside
him. She observed him in silence a moment, fondly
brushing the long strands of dark hair from his face; she
did miss her son terribly.
‘Sweet prince,’ she whispered. ‘I have found your
lady fair.’
He roused himself from his dreams, and was
somewhat hazy as he addressed her. ‘Lamamu?’ He
squinted to make out her face. ‘We have to stop
meeting like this. People will talk.’
‘I found her,’ Tory repeated, rather impressed with
herself.
‘Dear gods! . . . Who is she?’ He sat upright, eager to
learn.
That’s when Tory enthusiasm waned. ‘I fear you are
not going to like it.’
‘Why?’ Xavier was wide awake now. ‘Is she bound to
someone else, deformed . . . what?’ he appealed,
grabbing Tory’s shoulders.
‘Much worse.’ Tory released a heavy sigh. ‘She is
Nin Bau’s novice.’
‘Nin Sibyl!’ He let go of his sister to grip his
forehead. ‘No. This cannot be!’
‘Well, it is. And you’ll never guess what else . . .
she’s got a crush on you.’ Tory gave his shoulder a
gentle nudge.
Xavier stared blankly at her, ﬁnding her words
confusing. ‘Is that good?’
‘Let me put it this way.’ Her impish grin grew.

‘It would seem the Priestess has been a silent
admirer of yours for some time.’
‘Who told you this?’ He smiled; he’d never had a
secret admirer before.
‘I got it straight from the horse’s mouth.’
‘Sorry?’
Tory rolled her eyes. ‘Nin Sibyl told me herself, this
very night.’ She didn’t feel she could put it any plainer.
‘I did swear to her that I wouldn’t tell another living
soul, so I am afraid I’ll have to kill you.’
‘What?’
‘Just kidding . . . but you didn’t hear this from me,
understand?’ Tory moved to climb from the bed, but
Xavier gripped her wrist to prevent it.
‘You have seen her face?’
He inquired so meekly she felt compelled to
respond. ‘She appears exactly as I remember her . . . a
bit taller, of course.’
‘I know how tall she is, Lamamu! What I want to
know is the colour of her eyes? Does she have strong
features or ﬁne? What is her nature?’ The questions
tumbled from him.
‘Okay.’ She held a ﬁnger to his lips to silence him. ‘I
get the picture.’ She got herself comfortable. ‘Exquisite
was the word you used when you described her to me.
The face of an angel, you said, and she has eyes like
amber jewels.’
This was enough. Xavier appeared mind-blown as
he lay back on his pillows. ‘Wow.’
‘Now, I don’t know how you plan to get around the
small obstacle of her vows . . .’

‘Oh, I’ll get around that alright.’ He was
determined. ‘Have no fear of that.’
‘Yes, well, you didn’t hear any of this from me. I was
not here.’ She bowed her head and vanished from sight.
‘Lamamu!’ He sat erect, bemused by her
disappearance. She’d not even given him the chance to
say thank you.
In the early hours of the morning when Tory returned
to Annunnaki, she was surprised to ﬁnd that Jerram
wasn’t at all annoyed with her. In fact, he never
mentioned the incident of the previous night, nor did
he inquire as to where she’d disappeared to. He did,
however, seem to be in particularly good spirits, so she
didn’t question him for fear of pushing her luck.
She considered it a great shame to be leaving the
Annunnaki people before she’d really had the chance
to learn more about their ways and culture. Tory
promised herself that at some future time, when she
found herself at leisure (if indeed she ever did), she
would return to this fascinating period and investigate
all the wonders that she’d not had the chance to
explore this time around.
‘I do believe that, one day, I shall write the memoirs
of my travels,’ Tory commented to Adelgar, as they
stood on the bow of the ship watching Calisto and his
men disappear into the mist from whence they’d come.
‘It will be a deﬁnitive guide to history, and I shall
thoroughly recommend this place as the ideal spiritual
retreat.’ She raised her face to absorb the warm rays of
early morning sunshine.

‘These islands are not always this tranquil.’ Adelgar
cocked an eye. ‘I think you’d best wait for the outcome
of this meeting with Zutar before you go drawing any
conclusions like that.’
As the Annunnaki Islands were situated closer to Antillia
than the Atlantean continent, it was shortly after noon
when the coast of the great land mass was within sight.
‘Are you ready for this?’ Jerram didn’t sound quite
sure that he was.
‘My dear Shar, I was born ready.’ Tory grinned in a
cocky fashion to boost his conﬁdence.
The shoreline of Antillia was rocky and bordered by
huge cliffs, making it too treacherous to approach at any
random point. But down the coast a way, the huge cliffs
parted to grant seagoing vessels access to the harbour of
the main port.
As their ship sailed through the heads, horns
sounded to either side of them alerting all on shore to
the Atlanteans’ pending arrival.
Once inside the large harbour, the land gradually
sloped downward to meet with the sea and all around
them the Antillian people began to pound upon drums
as they observed the passage of the craft from their
vantage point.
Holy shit. Tory cast her eyes along the ridges either
side of them. ‘There are a lot of them, aren’t there?’
These people appeared much like the African
traders Tory had encountered in Chailidocean, though
they were taller and more primitive in appearance. This
race, like the Annunnaki, painted their bodies and

faces, and wore little besides the beaded jewellery and
ornate head-dress to distinguish rank and nobility.
Up ahead, long, thin canoes were guided into the
water by the eight or so natives that manned each
of them.
‘Here they come.’ Jerram turned to Tory with a look
of warning. ‘Stay close.’
When the smaller local craft reached the ship, the
Antillian welcoming committee didn’t wait politely to
be invited aboard as the Annunnaki had. They scaled
the ship using any means available, gibbering and
howling in their frenzy to embark.
‘They’re just trying to unnerve us,’ Jerram advised,
staying perfectly still as he watched several of the
Antillians clambering up the ship’s rigging.
‘Yeah, well, it’s working,’ Tory remarked, just before
one of the natives dropped from the rigging above to
land right in front of her. The eight foot tall warrior
gave her quite a start, but as Jerram quickly came to
stand between them, he smiled and said, ‘Do not be
afraid, Lamamu. I am Rastus, son of Zutar. I bid you,
and the youngest sons of Shu Sar Absalom, welcome.’
All three of the Shu Sar’s representatives near fell
over backwards.
‘You speak English,’ Tory noted. ‘But how?’
‘We have our ways.’ Rastus’ smile broadened,
accentuating the dimples in his cheeks, and the dark
features of his face beamed with the warmth of sunshine.
His dark hair fell in dreadlocks past his shoulders
and Rastus’ build, tall and slim, was nowhere near as
solid as Jerram or Adelgar. His demeanour was so easy-

going and friendly that Tory could scarce credit him to
be one of the ferocious enemy she’d heard so much
about. Her ﬁrst impression of anyone was usually spot
on and, in this case, she felt immediately relaxed and
trusting in the presence of this stranger.
‘Allow me to accompany you and your colleagues
ashore.’ Rastus addressed Tory directly, motioning her to
the canoes gathered around the ship.
‘Alright,’ Tory replied in a diplomatic fashion. ‘But I
would ask that your men withdraw from this craft with
us.’ She didn’t want to be so trusting as to leave the
guard and crew to perhaps be murdered in their absence.
‘As you wish.’ The laughter in his voice made it
sound as if she was being unduly cautious. Rastus turned
and yelled instructions to his party in their tongue,
whereby they all leapt from wherever they were into the
warm, clear water of the harbour. He then looked back
to Tory to seek her approval. ‘Shall we go?’
‘Yes,’ Jerram intervened, not liking the way the son
of his enemy was viewing her. ‘Let’s.’ He led Tory to
where they boarded the awaiting craft.
On shore, their party was adorned with beaded leis
by the tall, dark women of the tribe.
‘I feel like a midget.’ Adelgar discussed his
uneasiness with Tory quietly. ‘They never seemed this
big in battle.’
‘I know what you mean,’ she whispered,
interlocking her arm in his. ‘But remember — the taller
one is, the greater the fall.’
‘Good point.’ The notion seemed to please him and
he relaxed a little.

The village through which they were led featured
primitive huts like those found in Portea — though
they were not raised, as the area must not have been as
prone to ﬂooding. Off in the distance, however, there
seemed to be some major construction going up,
involving huge chucks of stone that were not
characteristic of any other dwelling within eyeshot.
Tory gave Jerram a nudge, referring him to it.
‘Yes.’ His raven eyes scanned from left to right,
taking everything in. ‘I noticed.’
At the end of the main thoroughfare, they came to
a dwelling that was much larger and grander than the
others.
‘My father awaits us inside,’ Rastus informed them.
‘He has been very much looking forward to making your
acquaintance.’
He spoke English very well, Tory considered, and
his accent was delightful. ‘If you don’t mind me
asking, Rastus . . .’ she delayed him from his course,
employing a little charm. ‘How did you learn of me in
the first place?’
‘We have our ways.’ He gave the exact same reply
that he had to her last question, and went out of his way
to accentuate the fact.
His smile was so genuine it seemed to her that he
was hinting at something. Perhaps the source of his
knowledge of English had been the same source that
had advised Zutar of her presence?
‘You didn’t really expect him to answer that?’
Jerram muttered, as they resumed their ascent of
the stairs.

‘But he did.’ Tory informed, her eyes still intent on
her likely ally. ‘I suspect we’ll hear that phrase quite
often.’ She followed Rastus inside.
Zutar was every bit as formidable in appearance as Tory
envisaged he’d be, and he exhibited none of his son’s
genuine warmth. The Antillian leader’s head was
shaved to be completely bald, and an ornate head-dress
of brightly coloured feathers and beads sat high upon his
crown. A large gold ring pierced his nose, and several
strings of beads were strung from this to join the six gold
rings through his left ear lobe. His eyes were like empty
black pools that gave nothing away, and looking past his
physical form with her etheric sight, Tory was amazed to
ﬁnd that not even the smallest dark patch could been
seen in his aura.
After their introduction and some polite
conversation, Tory attempted to get the peace talks
underway, but Zutar wouldn’t hear of it. He insisted
that, as his guests, they must rest this day; the
formalities could commence on the morrow. Tory found
this most frustrating, wanting to complete her mission
as quickly as possible so that she could go home. Still, as
there wasn’t a thing she could do about it, she sat back
and enjoyed the entertainment provided for their
beneﬁt, all the while keeping a watchful eye on every
movement their hosts made.
One thing she noted was that Rastus had not
spoken a word of English whilst in his father’s presence.
He left Jerram and Adelgar to do the translating, even
when he addressed Tory directly, and though this

scenario did not go unnoticed by any of the three, none
of them questioned this in front of the Chief.
Something else that had piqued her curiosity was a
pouch that hung from a piece of leather around Zutar’s
neck, which looked quite like a talisman. The reason it
drew her attention was that no one else wore one, and
it was unlike any of the other beaded chains Zutar wore.
The sun had yet to set and already they’d had their ﬁll
of food and drink, so Zutar summoned forth a young girl
to sing for them.
This girl was not Antillian; she was tiny and redskinned like the females of the Atlantean native races.
Adelgar, though surprised, did not seem anywhere near
as infuriated as Jerram did upon sighting her. This
fragile little creature, whose voice was stronger and
sweeter than any the Shar had heard, was obviously a
prisoner of war. Her song, as beautifully sung as it was,
seemed to Jerram to reﬂect the sadness and shame that
was so prominent in her face.
A huge grin beset Zutar’s lips as he shifted his dark
sights to view both her brothers’ reaction, and even
though her etheric sight told her differently, Tory could
see the evil intent behind Zutar’s little presentation.
After some contemplation, the leader aimed a question
at Jerram, and as her brother appeared as if he might
explode at any moment she demanded to know what
the leader had said.
‘Her name is Mahala, which means, sweet singer.
He considers her to be quite a catch, for she has brought
them all much pleasure.’ Jerram strained to control his

anger, his jaw clenched. ‘He wants to know if I, too, ﬁnd
her pleasing.’
This was an awkward situation, and Tory felt for
him, but it was as plain as the nose on her face that
Zutar was testing him, perhaps to see how short his fuse.
‘Be diplomatic,’ she cautioned in a whisper.
The Shar forced a smile before confirming to their
host that his treasure was most easy on the eye and
the ear.
Zutar gave a hardy laugh, voicing his retort as he
motioned to the girl in question. Jerram seemed somewhat
stunned as he turned to Tory to ﬁll her in. ‘As a sign of
goodwill he is returning her to me . . . she is a gift.’
‘How very generous.’ Tory’s tone became rather dry,
and her glare of disapproval bore into the evil source
beyond the blackness in Zutar’s eyes.
‘Be diplomatic.’ Jerram whispered a reminder, before
graciously accepting the gift of their host.
Tory’s patience was tested even further when Zutar
had Mahala taken to Jerram’s sleeping quarters for the
night. The leader then motioned one of the local
women to come before them, looking to Adelgar to seek
his opinion of her.
A good two feet taller than Adelgar, the girl was an
extraordinary beauty. Slender and graceful, her hair fell
in long black curls to her waist. She knelt before the
Shar to whom she was being offered and raised her
large, deep brown eyes to his, offering him a ﬂower as
she stated her name was Lana.
I don’t believe this. Tory wanted to protest, but bit her
tongue for the sake of the mission. She glanced to Rastus

to see what he made of all this. He was still smiling
broadly and as he caught her eye he winked at her.
They’re all bastards, she resolved, maintaining her silence.
Adelgar told Zutar that his hospitality was far too
generous and that he couldn’t possibly accept. His host
merely laughed at this, urging Adelgar to his feet so that
Lana could show him to his quarters.
The Shar glanced back to Tory with a perplexed
look on his face. ‘We don’t have to mention this to Nin
Tabitha, do we?’
‘That’s for your own conscience to decide,’ she told
him; did none of these men have any scruples?
A couple of the native women encouraged Jerram to
rise so they could escort him to his sleeping quarters.
‘What about Lamamu?’ he questioned Zutar in the
leader’s own language.
Rastus came forward to explain that he would show
her around a little before seeing her safely to bed.
‘Not without me.’ Jerram wouldn’t budge.
Though Tory did not understand a word that passed
between them, she got the general gist of the
conversation. The idea of getting Rastus alone so that
they might talk freely appealed greatly to her. ‘Jerram, I
can take care of myself,’ she assured him. ‘Which is
more than I can say for the poor girl who awaits you.’
He glared at her a moment, both insulted by her
inference and jealous of her eagerness to be left alone
with Rastus. ‘I have never had to force myself upon
any woman.’
This was true, he never had. ‘Just checking.’ She
smiled. ‘Go on then . . . and don’t worry about me.’

‘You watch yourself.’ His cool glare shifted from
Tory to Rastus, before he bowed to their host and was
led away.
As proposed, Tory accompanied Rastus through the
village and onto a path that wound its way up to the
headland, overlooking the ocean.
‘Alright.’ Tory came to a standstill about halfway
up. ‘I think it’s about time you told me what’s going on.’
For the ﬁrst time since they’d met, the smile slipped
from the young warrior’s face. ‘I fear we are all in great
danger, so I shall be brief.’ He placed an arm about her
shoulder and urged her to keep walking. ‘Some time
ago, when I was very young, a man came to these
shores, a white man.’
‘The one you call Engur.’ Tory kept her voice low,
and he seemed astounded that she knew of whom
he spoke.
‘Yes.’
‘I know his history, so just tell me your woes.’
Rastus seemed suddenly ﬂustered, at a loss as to
what to tell her, for he wasn’t too sure of the full story
himself. ‘I suspect so much, Lamamu, but Engur is very
smart and hides his true intent well. When he ﬁrst
arrived here, the feats he could perform were so amazing
to us that we thought him surely one of the gods . . . and
for a time, he was a good friend of mine and served my
father well.’
‘So, that’s when you learned to speak English, yes?’
Rastus shook his head. ‘Engur taught me the art of
thought projection, so that I might understand and

communicate in any language. But I think he is sorry he
did now.’
‘I see’ Tory raised her eyebrows. ‘Well, back to your
story, what happened to change your friendship?’
A frown beset his face. It was difﬁcult for him to
pinpoint the exact incident. ‘Somewhere along the way
everything got twisted around, and instead of serving us,
we ended up serving him. We are a plentiful nation, and
my father would never have declared war on our
neighbouring lands had Engur not ﬁlled him with
greed.’
‘That little pouch your father wears on the piece of
leather around his neck,’ she inquired. ‘Did Engur give
it to him at about the same time as the situation here
turned sour?’
‘Yes! He did.’ The coincidence only just occurred to
Rastus. ‘What does it mean?’
‘I’m not sure.’ She pondered on it, almost convinced
that Mahaud was behind their dilemma. ‘But it’s my bet
that if we removed it from his person, your father would
return to his senses.’ Then, recalling the spell that the
witch had cast over Maelgwn and how it had left him
ill, she added: ‘But I cannot promise that if Zutar was
separated from the charm, it would leave him
unharmed. It may already be too late to save him.’
‘Do you think he may have caught Engur’s madness?’
‘Engur’s madness?’ Tory frowned. ‘What do you
mean?’
‘Lately, Engur has not been so well. He cannot keep
his food down, and his head ails him with pain and
dizziness, which leaves him very weak.’

Hmm. Sounds rather like radiation poisoning, Tory
hypothesized to herself. ‘I gather it was Engur’s idea to
lure me here.’ She jumped straight to the heart of the
matter. ‘Do you know why?’
Rastus shook his head. ‘I know only that he wanted
to get you away from Chailidocean.’
To what end? Tory mused. They came to the end of
the trail to behold the moonlit waters of the Strait laid
out before them. ‘What is all that construction going on
behind the village?’
Rastus turned to view it from their vantage point.
‘Engur said he would build my father a palace, but
much of the structure has been designed for Engur’s
own purposes.’
‘Like the storage and study of rockets, perhaps?’ she
suggested.
‘Indeed.’ Rastus was again astonished by her
foresight. ‘But I have never seen any, as Engur does
not trust me any more and has kept me well away
from the building. He suspects that I resent the
influence he now holds over my father; hence my
safety is as doubtful as your own. It is only a matter of
time before he finds me too much of a threat and I
mysteriously die or disappear, as have so many of my
father’s trusted advisers.’
Now, a clearer picture was starting to take form. ‘So
why has Engur left you alone with me? Surely he realises
we shall talk.’
Rastus shrugged. ‘Who knows, for it was Engur who
suggested that I get to know you. I do believe my father
is under the impression that we should wed.’

Now she was really confused. What was Keeldar
playing at? Perhaps he was trying to set Rastus up. ‘I need
to get inside that rocket base and take a look around.’
‘I did anticipate this,’ Rastus advised. ‘You have
been allocated quarters within the new structure at my
father’s request, so he can keep a close eye on you.
However, I have arranged a diversion that will hopefully
keep my father’s guards occupied, so we can investigate
the matter for ourselves.’
‘Well done.’ Her mind ticked over. As Keeldar
wanted so desperately to keep her away from
Chailidocean, she must check in with Taliesin at
midnight and pass on a caution. She would also attempt
an audience with Nin Bau again, to ﬁnd out all she
could about their foe. ‘Let us make our move when the
moon reaches this point in the sky.’ She motioned to
the position it would hold at about two o’clock in the
morning, as this would give her time to get to
Chailidocean and back.
‘Agreed.’ Rastus placed a hand on her shoulder,
pleased to have an ally whose knowledge could aid him.
‘But I warn you, this could be dangerous. Engur is no
fool, and may be onto us already.’
‘That’s been the story of my life.’ Tory did love a bit
of adventure.
The smile return to grace Rastus’ face. ‘Then let me
ﬁll you in on what I have arranged.’

22

GENOCIDE

O

nly Tory had been allocated sleeping quarters in
the new palace; Jerram and Adelgar were
accommodated in separate huts in the village.
Adelgar, blissfully unaware that anything suspicious
was going on, was more concerned with how he was
going to decline this lovely young woman’s favours
without offending her, or his host.
Alone now, Lana extinguished the torches that lit
the dwelling and lay down on the fur-covered bed on
the ﬂoor, motioning the Shar to join her.
‘I don’t know how to say this . . .’ Adelgar stalled. ‘I
mean, you are very lovely and all, but . . .’
‘Shh.’ She raised herself to take hold of his hand
and guide him to a seat beside her. She gently kissed his
neck, then whispered in his ear. ‘I have a message for

you from Rastus.’ She slid her ﬁngers along his jaw,
encouraging him to look her in the eye before she kissed
him passionately.
‘Well, it’s all in the delivery.’ His head was awhirl, as
she forced him to a horizontal position and climbed on
top of him.
‘You are in great danger.’ She uttered so quietly that
he wasn’t sure he’d heard her right.
‘What!’ Adelgar moved to raise himself, but she
thrust him back down to murmur an additional
warning.
‘We are being watched, so make it look good.’ She
smothered him with affection. ‘I am under instruction
to hide you. Under the furs you will ﬁnd a trapdoor and
some rope. You are to tie me up and then disappear
down the tunnel that you will ﬁnd beyond.’ She giggled,
slipping under the furs and motioning him after her.
Although stunned by the announcement, Adelgar
put on a playful demeanour for the voyeurs and followed
her underneath.
She groaned with pleasure as he bound her, uttering
her instruction between breaths. ‘Halfway along the
passage you will ﬁnd another trapdoor. This leads to the
hut where your brother has been taken. You must get
him and Mahala out without being seen, then wait in
the passage until Rastus sends word that it is safe.’
‘What about my sister?’
‘She is residing in the new palace.’ She moaned,
wriggling around to make her performance convincing.
‘Rastus will use your disappearance to distract the
guards and get her out.’

Adelgar slid his upper body under the trapdoor to
brieﬂy view the tunnel underneath.
‘How did you arrange all this so quickly?’
‘The tunnel has been in existence for years although
it was never intended for this purpose. For you see, I am
no one of great consequence . . . it was the only way
Rastus and I could see each other.’ Her tone was
melancholy a moment. ‘Now gag me and go, quickly.’
He did as he was instructed, taking her head
between his hands before departing. ‘I shall not forget
this, Lana.’ He kissed her forehead and disappeared.
As Tory followed Rastus inside the new palace, she felt
comforted in the knowledge that her brothers would
both be safe from whatever trouble she stirred up this
night. Mind you, she was a little concerned about how
Jerram would react to being hidden away, knowing how
stubborn he could be at times.
Zutar obviously had no intention of resolving the
trouble between their two nations, and as he’d insisted
on starting the peace talks tomorrow it seemed
reasonable to assume that whatever he was up to must
be scheduled to take place tonight.
She entered her chamber behind Rastus, who
wanted to make sure that nothing was amiss.
The ﬁrst thing they noted was that, unlike any
other room in the palace that Rastus had seen, the walls
of this chamber were made of a grey material, that
looked conspicuously like steel, or perhaps lead.
A bit worried about containing me, hey? she amused
herself as she viewed the metal walls, knowing that no

substance on earth could contain her. The chamber was
square in shape, which also seemed rather strange, and
looking up to the ceiling above the door there were
windows that looked out to the night sky. How could
that be? she wondered, sensing that they were being
watched. She said nothing as she accompanied Rastus
to the door. Only when they were both out of view from
the windows did she say, ‘I was under the impression
that there was another ﬂoor above this.’ She motioned
to the windows above the door with her eyes.
She was right, there was. Rastus nodded silently to
conﬁrm that he would investigate. ‘Goodnight,
Lamamu. Sleep well.’
As she closed the door behind him, her heart began
to pound in her chest. Something about this room didn’t
feel right — the sooner she got of out of here the better.
Tory climbed onto the bed of soft furs, but as she lay
down to focus her energies on Taliesin she became
aware of a great force bearing down upon her.
Concentrate, she scolded herself, as she struggled to ﬁnd
her centre.
Tory, expecting to ﬁnd herself in Turan’s quarters,
opened her eyes to discover she hadn’t moved. What’s
going on? Even her eyes were constrained from
movement.
Her sights were ﬁxed on the ceiling directly above
her where a panel was opening and a long metal arm,
attached to the largest needle that Tory had ever seen,
extended towards her.
Anything but this! Injections made her squeamish at
the best of times.

The thin, red laser light, that guided the
mechanism, zeroed in on her third eye area. The needle
locked into position only inches from her brow, and
seconds later the needle had penetrated her skull and
thrust itself deep into her brain.
Is something the matter, Lamamu? The sinister voice
was very clear in her mind, as was the laughter — both
of which Tory presumed belonged to Keeldar. You
weren’t planning on leaving us so soon? He tormented her
further: Because, I have to tell you, gravity is against you.
So that’s what this great force was. It felt as if she
were pinned underneath a great concrete slab and the
pressure, combined with her nauseating predicament,
was tempting her to pass out.
You see, gravity distorts all time and space in its vicinity.
If the gravitational ﬁeld is strong enough, time effectively
stands still. In other words, my young warrioress, you are
trapped in what is commonly referred to as a time warp. To
try and resist is pointless, for even if you possess the
concentration and will-power to transport yourself beyond
these walls, the amount of time dilation that has already
occurred within them means you would take inﬁnitely longer
to reach the world outside and manifest. Well, so much for
the science lesson. His tone lightened in amusement. I bet
you thought yourself infallible, didn’t you? But I ask you to
consider this paradox. What would become of you, if, say,
your father was eliminated before he was even born, hmm?
He chuckled maliciously. I fear, my dear Lamamu, you
would cease to exist. He contained his delight. Now,
before I put you into complete stasis, let us ponder upon
where Darius has hidden this immortality potion of yours.

Rastus pressed himself into the annex of a doorway near
to the room he guessed was located above Lamamu’s,
watching Engur exit and close the door. The scientist
seemed rather bothered about something as he made
haste down the stairs, and it was Rastus’ guess that
Engur was going to report to Zutar.
As soon as his foe was out of sight, Rastus crept
towards the room in question and pressed the button on
the control panel to grant him access.
Inside, he was confronted by a huge panel of
buttons and levers that were far beyond his
comprehension. Above the board of complex
technology, windows awarded a view of the room below.
There, frozen motionless, was Lamamu connected to a
great steel device that extended from the roof and was
attached to a thin steel rod that penetrated her
forehead.
‘Goddess, no,’ he uttered desperately. His eyes
rapidly scanned the panel before him, but he feared she
was already dead.
Resting on a chair close by, he spied a small,
unusual-looking metal head-dress. Rastus lifted this and,
after examining it, placed it on his head. The two
padded pieces on either side of the curved metal band
rested on his ears. The steel rod that extended from the
headpiece was padded at the end. He positioned it in
front of his mouth.
‘Lamamu? Can you hear me?’ There was no
response. ‘Please hear me,’ he begged. He began to
panic and took off the head-dress to look at it again.
On one of the earpieces was a switch, which he flicked

to its opposite position, returning the device to his
head. ‘Lamamu?’
Rastus, is that you? If you can hear me, help me out of
this, please!
He breathed a sigh of relief; she was still alive. ‘I
will, I promise . . . but I shall need help. Try and stay
calm, I shall be back soon.’
Hurry, Rastus, she pleaded. We must stop Keeldar.
Halfway down the stairs, on his way to confront Engur
in his father’s chambers, Rastus came to a stop. Hold
on. If there was an observation room above Lamamu’s
chamber, chances were there would also be one above
his father’s. A wide smile spread across his face as the
young warrior turned and swiftly made his way
back upstairs.
On the ﬂoor above, in the vicinity of his father’s
room, Rastus entered another room with large windows
where one could observe the chamber below. This
lacked most of the technology of the observation room
above Lamamu’s quarters; it must have been speciﬁcally
designed for her. However, this chamber had the same
headset, which Rastus placed upon his head after
checking the switch was in the right position.
His father sat in a large chair before Engur, who was
hypnotizing him into a relaxed state.
‘That’s it.’ Engur backed away from the Chief, who
was now unconscious.
Rastus couldn’t understand this. He’d felt so sure
Engur wanted to convey some news to Zutar, so what
was the point of putting him to sleep?

Zutar began to tremble as the features of his face
contorted into a creature no longer resembling himself.
When the beast’s eyelids burst open, its eyes blazed with
the colour of burning hot coals. ‘You have restrained the
girl?’ he questioned Engur in a gruff, harsh voice that
was not his own.
‘It is done.’ Engur bowed to the creature, holding his
head as he did so — it was obviously ailing him again.
‘And what did you learn?’
‘She does not know where the potion is hidden.’
Engur humbled himself to impart the bad news. ‘Only
Darius knows of its whereabouts.’
The apparition growled with annoyance. ‘Never
mind. When phase two of our plan has been set in
place, we shall persuade Darius to lead us to it.’
‘My very thought, O powerful one,’ Engur agreed,
still half-bowed over.
‘Now, remember, you must ensure that all exits are
blocked once the warhead has been placed inside the
Great Temple . . . Nin Bau must not escape before it is
detonated.’ The creature rubbed its misshapen hands
together, well pleased at the thought of ridding the
universe of Myrddin. ‘I have a few loose ends to tie up
here, so when you report back to me that all is well, we
shall take care of the other matter together. Set the
timer for dawn. That should give us more than enough
time.’ As it paused to consider whether everything had
been taken into account, the beast’s breathing
resounded like the purr of a wild cat, but with a tone far
more ominous. ‘I hope you have destroyed the manuals
you found in that pile of twentieth century

technological crap you ﬁshed out of the ocean? I
wouldn’t want that smart little student of yours ﬁguring
out how to disarm our surprise.’
‘I have. Everything has been committed to memory.
And you’ve no need to worry about Turan. He’s in
isolation.’ Engur raised a quivering hand to his head as
he forced a grin. ‘It will all be over by the time he
realises anything has happened.’ He turned to more
immediate matters. ‘Now, what about Lamamu’s
companions, and Rastus?’
‘I have already given the order to arrest them. They
shall all be dead by the time you return.’ The beast
glowered with malign delight. ‘Now, be about my
bidding and do not disappoint me, Keeldar.’
‘Have I ever.’ He bowed and vanished.
Rastus threw down the headset and raced from the
room. He had to get to Jerram and Adelgar before this
creature did.
When Tory was two hours late to meet him, Taliesin
became so concerned that he was obliged to disturb
Shar Turan. The Shar was in meditation at the E-abzu
temple.
Not pausing to seek permission to enter, Taliesin
found the Shar’s free-ﬂoating form awaiting him. My
Shar! He was surprised to ﬁnd that Turan had fully
resumed his etheric form in only a few days. Your skill
never ceases to amaze me.
Turan raised his eyebrows. Hopefully, our foe shall be
just as unsuspecting.
Our foe?

Indeed. Lamamu has failed to meet you this night, has
she not? Turan knew, for it was the only reason for which
he was to be disturbed.
That is correct, but . . .
Then I must go to her, Turan announced in a tone
that implied there was to be no argument. Go to my
father and advise him of what has happened. Tell him to be
alert. I shall return with news as soon as I am able.
The Shar faded into nothingness, leaving Taliesin a
mite perplexed. Advise him as to what has happened? He
wondered what Turan meant. Be alert for what?
‘I don’t like this one bit,’ Jerram grumbled, pacing up
and down the earthen tunnel. ‘Our sister could be in
real danger and we’re hiding down here! How do we
know this isn’t a trap?’
Adelgar merely shrugged, tired of his brother’s
constant complaints. ‘We don’t. But I trust —’
‘You’d trust any female who spread her legs for you.’
Adelgar rose to contest Jerram’s inference, when
Mahala intervened. ‘I trust Rastus and Lana, too.’ Her
soft voice paciﬁed the brothers. ‘They have both been
very good to me.’
Jerram backed off, turning to pace and ponder some
more. ‘Well, what if Rastus has —’
‘Shh!’ Adelgar hushed him to silence as a
commotion erupted overhead, in the room that
Jerram and Mahala had occupied. ‘Quick.’ Adelgar
motioned his companions to follow as he hurried
towards the trapdoor that led to the room where he’d
left Lana.

A scufﬂe had erupted. When the guards had found
Lana bound and gagged there was much shouting. It
sounded as if they were turning the hut upside down as
they sought the whereabouts of their prisoner, and
ﬁnding no trace of him, their attentions again turned
to Lana.
It was obvious they weren’t believing her story,
despite her convincing account of what had happened.
Her cries of agony, as Zutar’s men attempted to torture
the truth out of her, tormented Adelgar till he could
take no more. ‘I have to help her.’
Jerram grabbed hold of his brother’s belt and heaved
him off the ladder. ‘Are you insane?’
‘Let her go.’
The voice of Rastus silenced the commotion above,
at which time Adelgar breathed a sigh of relief. But the
calm was short-lived. For the next thing they knew,
Zutar’s men were accusing Rastus of treason and a ﬁght
broke out as they attempted to apprehend him.
‘If Zutar’s men are accusing Rastus of treachery,
wouldn’t that seem to indicate that he’s on our side?’
Adelgar surmised.
‘So what are we waiting for?’ Jerram prompted,
turning back to address Mahala. ‘Stay here till I come
for you.’
She nodded, reaching out to touch his arm a
second. ‘Do be careful.’ Her soft, brown eyes besought
him.
On impulse, Jerram chanced a kiss that met with no
resistance from Mahala. ‘I shall return.’ He smiled a
cheeky smile and followed his brother up the ladder.

Adelgar liberated the laser sword that was clipped to
his belt, as Jerram did at his, and silently counting off
three on their ﬁngers, they thrust open the trapdoor with
such force that all the furs on top were ﬂung backwards.
The two Atlantean warriors charged from their
hiding place, shooting bursts of coloured energy from
the cylindrical objects in their hands. The local
weaponry of the Antillian’s proved no match for the
lasers, and within seconds only Rastus, Lana, Jerram and
Adelgar remained conscious in the hut.
‘They’ll come round by morning.’ Adelgar waved off
Rastus’ fear that all his men had been killed.
‘What took you so long?’ Jerram asked, replacing his
weapon on his belt.
‘My father has been possessed by some sort of
demon,’ Rastus explained. ‘And Lamamu has been
imprisoned by a device of Engur’s design. I am at a loss
as to how to free her.’
‘What did I tell you?’ Jerram was enraged by the
news; Lamamu was his responsibility. ‘Where is she?’
They left Lana in hiding with Mahala. Rastus fronted
up to the palace entrance with Jerram and Adelgar,
their hands bound loosely behind their backs.
The two guards in attendance seemed confused by
this development and crossed their spears to block
his passage.
Rastus explained that he was bringing the two
prisoners to Zutar to prove his innocence on the charge
of treason. As the two guards were both good friends of
his they moved aside, giving him the beneﬁt of the

doubt. They did insist on escorting Rastus to Zutar’s
chambers, however. As the guards followed the party
inside, one of them locking the doors in their wake,
Jerram and Adelgar turned and blasted them into an
unconscious state.
‘This way.’ Rastus made for the large stone stairs
that led to the next level.
The sad circumstance in which they found their sister
brought tears to their eyes.
‘Is she alive?’ Adelgar’s voice was hoarse, due to the
lump that had welled in his throat.
‘Yes, you can speak to her.’ Rastus held the headset
out to him.
‘Lamamu?’ Adelgar’s voice was unsteady with the
fear that she would not respond; she certainly looked
dead from this perspective.
Adelgar? . . . Please say that’s you.
‘The one and only.’ He nearly choked with relief.
‘Is she alright?’ Jerram demanded, and Adelgar
nodded in the afﬁrmative.
‘We should never have left her alone!’ Jerram got
back on his high horse.
‘We are so sorry about this,’ Adelgar snifﬂed. The
thought of being in the same predicament made him
nauseous.
Don’t be sorry . . . just ﬁgure out how to get me out of
this. Nin Bau, Darius, and heaven knows who else, are
in great danger.
Adelgar ripped off the headset, eyeing the control
panel before him with complete disbelief. ‘Any ideas?’

He looked to Jerram, who’d been examining the
panel closely. ‘None,’ he confessed, wanting to punch
something. ‘Curse it! The person we need is Turan and I
insisted he shouldn’t come!’
So I was right and you were wrong. What’s new?
Turan’s droll tones came from behind them.
Despite their differences, Jerram had never been so
glad to see him in all his life. ‘Indeed,’ he agreed with a
smile. ‘And I do gladly admit it.’
Well, then, what seems to be the problem?
Once Tory was liberated from the time warp and had
regained control of her limbs, Rastus told of all he had
seen and heard during her incapacitation.
‘It’s Mahaud alright, no doubt about it. That
explains Keeldar’s interest in my family tree.’ Tory held
her forehead where Keeldar’s device had penetrated
her skull. The wound had already healed over without
a trace. ‘You see, Nin Bau is carrying a boy child, who
shall one day be my father. If she perishes before she
gives birth, then I shall never happen and will cease
to exist!’
Now let’s not get hysterical, Turan calmly advised.
This situation is salvageable.
‘You’re right.’ Tory quickly pulled herself together.
‘We must get back to Chailidocean immediately.’
No, we shouldn’t . . . not just yet anyway. We have no
way of containing Keeldar there, only here. Turan
motioned to the chamber they had just released Tory
from, before looking to Rastus. Keeldar is going to report
back to Zutar, you said.

‘That is what they agreed.’
‘But what about the warhead?’ Tory asked in panic.
Well, it seems pointless to attempt to disarm it if Keeldar
is still at liberty to rearm it. If it has been set to go off at
dawn, that gives us some time. I say we contain those forces
working against us, ﬁnd out exactly what we are dealing
with, then we can defuse the situation in Chailidocean
unhindered.
Turan made good sense as always. Tory was now
thankful that he’d resumed his etheric form, for he
could view the situation logically without becoming
emotionally involved. ‘Aren’t you forgetting about
Mahaud? I know of no means to contain her . . .
though I could probably make her flee with the help of
one of those wooden flutes the musicians were playing
on last night.’
Good enough, Turan grinned, a rare occurrence.
Then this is what I propose.
‘Where the hell have you been?’ the creature in the
guise of Zutar roared, as Keeldar’s presence manifested
before it.
The scientist trembled, perhaps from fear, perhaps
exhaustion. ‘Why, I was carrying out your —’
‘Oh, shut up!’ The beast had little patience left.
‘Those pathetic excuses for soldiers have yet to bring me
any corpses. Why?’
‘Because I have freed the prisoners.’ Rastus stood in
the open doorway. ‘They are long gone. You shall not
ﬁnd them now.’ He marched into the room to confront
the creature, projecting a dauntless countenance.

‘My dear son.’ The ﬂaming red eyes of Zutar sized up
his prey.
‘You are not my father,’ Rastus contested, and the
creature gave a hearty laugh at this.
‘You only just worked that out, did you?’ Zutar’s
form swung quickly around to address Keeldar. ‘Go and
check on the girl!’
Keeldar humbled himself. ‘He couldn’t possibly
have —’
‘Go!’ it demanded, almost blasting its subject out of
the room with the order.
‘Yes, at once.’ The scientist raised himself and ﬂed
from the room.
‘Now . . .’ The beast’s evil sights came to rest on
Rastus. ‘How should one punish one’s own ﬂesh and
blood for such treason?’ It raised its misshapen hands
and its ﬁngertips began to glow red. ‘I think . . . death.’
With a growl, the creature shot a ball of ﬂame from
its ﬁngertips which engulfed the young warrior. Rastus
fell to the ﬂoor in a blaze. The creature delighted in the
sight of the burning carcass for a moment, before
returning to Zutar’s throne to ponder its next move.
‘Think again, Mahaud.’
The creature turned to see Tory resume her usual
form. It was stunned by a blast from the laser in
Tory’s hand.
‘Piece of cake.’ Tory raised herself and walked over
to take a stand before her victim. ‘It doesn’t look like
you’ll be going anywhere in this body tonight.’
The pouch, strung on a piece of leather around his
neck, dropped into the Chief’s lap, and a mixture of

red and black gas began to exude from Zutar’s ears,
nose and mouth. Freed from the influence of the evil
entity, the Chief resumed his normal form and slept
peacefully on his throne. The gaseous substance rose
high above its previous host, continuing to boil and
billow like an animated cloud that glowed like
embers. This mass then contorted into the shape of a
black, hooded figure with its arms folded. The
apparition was completely featureless, except for its
eyes of glowing red. ‘No matter,’ it said, ‘there are
others just as gullible.’
Tory pulled a small, wooden ﬂute from her belt to
discourage any thought of vengeance her foe may have
had. As she lifted it to her lips, the dark ﬁgure hovering
above waved her off.
‘Don’t waste your breath.’ It spun into a whirlwind
and vanished.
No! It’s not possible. Keeldar held his thumping head
between his quivering hands, viewing the empty
chamber below him.
The communication mechanism was still engaged,
as was the gravity function, so where was she?
It must be some sort of visual illusion, he reasoned, but
the thunder in his head made it hard to concentrate.
Yes, that must be it . . . she’s trying to trick me.
Keeldar turned everything off and ran downstairs as
fast as he was able. It would take her some time to
recover her faculties; thus, if he felt her body present he
could still re-trap her in the time warp before she could
depart or retaliate.

Mindful of his captive’s capabilities, Keeldar
cautiously entered the chamber. The witch had been
obliged to tell him a tale or two of Lamamu’s cunning,
so that he could design a cell that would contain the
immortal warrioress.
As he passed his hand over the bed, it met with
nothing. ‘She’s not here.’ He was completely horriﬁed
by the realization; Mahaud would fry him for this. ‘But
she must be.’ He climbed onto the furs for one last
desperate search, when the door to the chamber
slammed closed and the force of his own creation began
to bear down upon him. ‘No!’ He tried to will himself
elsewhere, but his body collapsed ﬂat onto the bed
under the strain of the gravity ﬁeld.
The steel tentacle from the communication device
re-positioned itself above its inventor’s brow before
entering his brain.
There was an old fool named Keeldar,
Whose intent was quite sinister.
His student, quite bright.
thus had the foresight,
to trap him in time warp, forever.
Many happy returns, friend. Turan goaded
triumphantly, turning to Jerram who’d been manning
the controls under his guidance. Good job . . . we’ll make
a technologist of you yet.
But whilst Turan, Jerram, and Adelgar were all still
congratulating each other, Keeldar imploded. He
splattered across every surface of the room below.

‘Oh, gross!’ Adelgar jumped back from the gutsplattered window.
Turan scratched his head in thought. This would lead
me to believe that only an immortal can withstand the pressure.
Jerram looked at his older brother, exhibiting a
similar complacency. Damned shame we didn’t consider
that beforehand really.
‘Did we get him?’ Tory came rushing through the
doorway with Rastus right behind her, but they both
came to a grinding halt when they spotted the carnage
dripping from the window.
‘You could say that, yes,’ Jerram informed her coolly.
‘Though I think he’ll have to pull himself together
before he will be of any use to us.’ He smothered a
chuckle.
‘What the hell happened?’ She became annoyed
with them; they were certainly not going to get any
information out of Keeldar now.
He just couldn’t take the pressure, Turan explained in
all seriousness, but Jerram and Adelgar found the
statement hilarious and doubled over with laughter.
‘This is not funny.’ She placed her hands on her
hips. ‘What do you suggest we do now?’
Let’s go and have a look inside that rocket base, Turan
proposed. It may tell us a thing or two.
They took a path along the observation level, venturing
deeper into the palace.
Rastus had never seen the fabled rockets or the
room Engur had built for their storage, but he had a fair
idea where it was located, for there was an area that had

been deemed out of bounds to all bar Engur and his
father. Rastus led his new allies in that direction.
After knocking out the guards with lasers, the ﬁve
of them entered an observation room that overlooked a
huge containment area that had walls of solid lead.
There, larger than life, was a twentieth century Soviet
submarine.
‘Holy smoke! Would you look at the size of that
thing!’ Adelgar could barely believe his eyes.
‘The vessel is not our worry.’ Tory’s horriﬁed sights
rested on the eight or so missiles lined up around the
walls, which she pointed out for the beneﬁt of her
comrades. ‘There is probably enough explosives in those
cylinders to destroy the whole of the known world.’
‘Whoa . . .’ was all Jerram could say.
‘Come on, Turan, let’s have a closer look.’ Tory
motioned him after her.
‘I am coming with you.’ Jerram moved to follow them.
‘No.’ Tory opposed the idea strongly. ‘I have reason
to believe Keeldar might have been suffering from
radiation poisoning. If the core of one of the reactors
has been damaged and there is a leak, neither Turan nor
I will be affected. But, to you, a dose of radiation would
be lethal,’ she explained. ‘So please, stay here. We won’t
be long.’ She smiled.
Jerram nodded reluctantly. ‘Be careful.’
None of the missiles that lined the walls appeared to
have been tampered with. Neither did the six
warheads laid out on a large bench before them. Tory
retrieved a solar torch from the scientist’s work bench

and motioned to the submarine. ‘I’m going to take a
look inside.’
As she climbed the ladder that gave access to the
hatch on the top of the vessel, she noted a large pile of
human bones in the far corner of the room.
‘Well, at least I won’t come across any nasty surprises.’
She forced a grin, as she stepped inside the open hatch
and began her descent into the belly of the sub.
‘What is taking her so long?’ Jerram stood with his
forehead pressed against the window. ‘She’s been ages in
there?’
‘Look.’ Rastus nudged the Shar as Tory appeared
waving around some papers she held in her hand.
She climbed down from the vessel and bounded
over to converse with Turan, before they both made
haste from the room.
‘What is it?’ Jerram besought her as she entered the
observation chamber. ‘What did you ﬁnd?’
‘This is not as good as the manuals for the warheads,
which Keeldar must have destroyed, but it’s the next
best thing.’ She took a seat. ‘At least this little piece of
propaganda tells us what we are dealing with.’ She
opened a leaﬂet and asked Turan to translate.
‘This is a Soviet Golf II Class Attack Submarine. It
carries ballistic missiles, and nuclear warheads of eight
hundred kiloton nominal yield, and seven MIRV
warheads each of which has a one hundred kiloton
nominal yield.’
‘Holy shit, that’s a phenomenal amount of explosive
potential.’ It blew Tory’s mind.

‘Each one of these MIRV warheads can be
independently detonated,’ Turan advised.
Tory cast her sights over the bench in the
chamber below. ‘There’s one missing.’ She looked at
Turan, bewildered. ‘So how the hell are we going to
defuse something like this without any knowledge of
its workings?’
We had best get to Chailidocean, he advised calmly.
We’ll worry about what to do after we’ve had a look at
Keeldar’s handiwork, hey?
Tory nodded, though the situation seemed hopeless.
Where there’s a will, there’s a way. Turan attempted to
perk up her spirits.
‘I hope you’re right.’ She stood to leave.
‘Wait.’ Adelgar rushed to her side. ‘I have this awful
feeling I shan’t see you again.’
He was probably right, for even if she did manage to
salvage the situation in Chailidocean, she would be
returning to Gwynedd immediately afterwards.
‘My mission here is over.’ She held a hand to his
cheek. ‘But I shall miss you, more than you could ever
know.’
He embraced her suddenly, as if he would never let
her go. ‘I did love having a sister. I won’t forget all
you’ve done for us . . . for me.’ After one last squeeze, he
let her go and took a step away. ‘May the Shining Ones
guide and protect you, always.’
‘Likewise.’ She smiled through the tears that had
begun to roll down her cheeks, then looked at Rastus.
‘Thank you for being so forthright and courageous. We
would surely have been doomed without your help.’

His sunny smile made his face beam. ‘I could say the
same of you, Lamamu.’ He bowed his head to her.
‘Antillia is forever in your debt.’
Lastly, she looked at Jerram, who was doing his best
to look unaffected by her imminent departure. ‘Goodbye,
my friend,’ she said, as she reached for his hand.
‘I shall see you again,’ he stated with certainty,
taking hold of her around the back of her neck. ‘So let
us just say . . . see you later.’ He kissed her as he’d
wanted to ever since they’d ﬁrst met.
Quite a few moments later, Turan was obliged to
interrupt. Dawn will wait for no-one.
‘Of course.’ She backed up reluctantly to view her
pals one last time. ‘I shall treasure every moment of the
time we spent together . . . I am beholden to you all.
She bowed deeply to them as she and Turan vanished.
‘Kheit-Sin knows, I miss her already.’ Adelgar
slumped into a seat, all melancholy.
Jerram slapped his shoulder to reassure him. ‘She’ll
be back.’
All in Chailidocean was quiet at this early hour. In fact
nobody seemed to have been alerted to the impending
disaster. Tory and Turan sought out Taliesin and found
him in the palace’s room of court in conference with
the Shu Sar.
‘Thank Helio!’ Absalom exclaimed, as his children
entered. ‘At last. Now, would you mind telling us what
the big emergency is?’
‘The warhead Keeldar brought into the city . . .’ Tory
began, ‘the one that is dismantled and in a safe place —’

‘Yes, yes.’ The Shu Sar grew impatient, having had
very little sleep. ‘What of it?’
‘Keeldar has planted it in the Great Temple and it is
set to go off at dawn,’ she advised the Sar, handing
Taliesin the papers she had taken from the sub.
‘What!’ Absalom didn’t seem to believe her. ‘Where
did you —?’
‘Father, it’s a very long and twisted story, which we
can explain later, but right now I think we had best
address the problem.’ She looked to Taliesin as he
browsed over the information in his hand. ‘I don’t
suppose you know how to deactivate a MIRV warhead?’
‘I’m afraid not —’
‘Shit!’ She didn’t even give him a chance to ﬁnish.
‘Well, we can’t just stand around here and wait for the
damn thing to go off. Let’s get to the temple and see
what we can do.’
They did intend to take the conventional entrance
leading to the dwellings below the great temple, but
the doorway was blocked by a huge chunk of rock
over four feet thick. Turan made an attempt at
moving it psychokinetically, but the great boulder
wouldn’t budge.
‘Keeldar must have changed its composition
somehow,’ the Shar surmised.
Instead, Taliesin, Turan and Tory teleported
themselves inside to ﬁnd the inhabitants in a state of
complete dismay.
Thank heavens! Nin Sibyl approached them. We
thought nobody knew we’d been trapped.

‘Keep calm. Everything will be alright,’ Tory
instructed. ‘Tell me . . . you haven’t spied anything
unusual hanging around?’ She didn’t want to panic the
women any more than they already were.
Yes, indeed. Shu Micah and Shar Xavier are looking at
it now. It’s in Nin Bau’s council chambers. She led them
off in that direction.
Shar Xavier. What is he doing here? Tory wondered
with a smile, as if she didn’t know. ‘What about the
passage to Mount Dur-an-ki? Could we get these women
out that way?’
I thought of that, Sibyl told her, but unfortunately, it
too has been blocked.
‘Turan, thank goodness you’re here.’ Xavier got to
his feet as Nin Sibyl escorted the others into the room.
‘I’m no expert, but I think we’ve got a real problem on
our hands.’ He motioned to the warhead.
Tory rushed to view the timer. ‘We’ve got just a
little over an hour remaining,’ she informed them.
Turan scrutinized the device. ‘Can you defuse it?’
It would take time . . . probably more than we have. He
analysed their situation calmly.
Tory was about to abuse him for being so
nonchalant about the whole thing, when something
else claimed her attention. ‘Hold on. Where is Nin
Bau?’
We do not know. Shu Micah answered sadly. Nobody
has seen her for days.
‘Holy smoke!’ She gripped her head in both her
hands. ‘What if Mahaud has got her? I must ﬁnd her.
My life depends on it.’

Now you don’t know that that beast has got her. Turan
was ﬁrm with her. Why choose to think such a thing?
‘He’s right.’ Xavier backed up his brother. ‘Have I
taught you nothing?’
‘Well, help me out here, guys!’ She felt as if she was
losing her mind. The city of the Golden Gates was
about to be destroyed three thousand years before its
time, and it was all her fault. Not to mention the
probability that she was going to be wiped from
existence. ‘Turan you’re smart . . . can’t you think
of something.’
Turan pondered their options before speaking.
Lamamu, I feel it’s time you told Taliesin what really
happened back in Gwynedd.
‘What, now?’ She felt the suggestion rather
inappropriate.
Turan nodded in response. There’s no time like the
present . . . create your own reality, he added with a wink.
The revelation hit her like a brick. ‘Yes, I see.’ Her
amazed look drifted to the Merlin.
‘What?’ Taliesin was wary. ‘What are you talking
about?’
‘I lied to you, my friend.’ Tory placed a hand upon
his shoulder. ‘You were in Gwynedd when everything
went to hell . . . but now I realise why you left.’
‘Pardon?’ The Merlin drew in his brow. ‘I don’t follow.’
‘Alright.’ Tory drew a deep breath. ‘Listen very
carefully. The reason no one has seen Nin Bau for days
is because you left Gwynedd in the chariot and came
back here, say two days ago, to take her safely to ﬁfth
century Britain. There is a nunnery in the town of

Carmarthen, were she will be safe until she gives birth
to my father, Myrddin.’ That explained how Nin Bau
had ended up in the Dark Age. ‘From there, you must
travel to the year nineteen-eighty and learn how to
defuse this warhead, before returning here. The make
and model is outlined in that paper in your hand.’ She
drew a deep breath in conclusion.
Very good. Turan was most impressed.
Poor Taliesin, on the other hand, was very
perplexed. ‘I shall do as you say, of course.’ He gazed at
the leaﬂet blankly, uneasy that the fate of the city now
rested in his hands.
‘But how can I be sure it will work?’ Tory asked.
‘I believe I can set your mind at ease in that
department.’
Tory looked to the door. There stood the
Merlin. ‘Taliesin! My Taliesin!’ She overpowered him
with a hug. ‘I knew you wouldn’t abandon us. I knew
it! Oh dear . . .’ Taliesin’s younger self had passed
out cold.
‘Nin Bau is safe, as is her babe . . . and you.’ The
older Taliesin smiled at the soul he treasured above all
others.
‘And the warhead?’ Tory was simply beaming for joy
now.
‘I shall take care of it. But ﬁrst, I want you to take
the chariot and Maelgwn’s cure, and get out of here . . .
just in case.’ He went on before she could protest:
‘Turan, would you be so kind as to see Tory, or rather
Lamamu, safely to her transport.’
It would be my pleasure.

‘When Turan reports back to me to say you are
safely away, I shall defuse the warhead.’
‘But —’
‘No buts,’ he cautioned her. ‘The procedure will
take all of ﬁve minutes, thus we have plenty of time. I
shall meet you back in Gwynedd presently, and we’ll
have a good laugh about this whole mess.’
‘What of Mahaud?’
‘She will follow you out of here, have no fear of
that. We shall deal with her together upon my return to
Degannwy.’
‘Alright then.’ Tory’s expression was just short of a
pout. ‘If that’s to be the way of it, I will go.’
‘Wait!’ Both Xavier and Sibyl cried at once.
‘We just wanted to thank you for making us aware of
each other.’ Xavier took Sibyl’s hand in his own. ‘We have
spoken to Shu Micah and we have his permission to court.’
‘That’s wonderful news. I am so happy for you both.’
She kissed Xavier’s cheek and raised Sibyl’s veil to kiss
her cheek.
‘Tory?’ Taliesin ushered her along.
‘Alright, I’m going!’ She was frustrated by the need
for a hasty departure. There were so many people she
wanted to thank and say goodbye to, but time would
not permit it.
Lamamu. Shu Micah came forward. The evil ones will
eventually succumb to the Shining Ones and the Chosen like
yourself who are hiding within the circuits of time. This will
bring about a new age of awareness, whereupon you will
realise that your righteous acts, hard work, and suffering has
not all been for naught.

She smiled at the extraordinary being that addressed
her. ‘I shall see you at the Gathering, then.’
He bowed his head to her. ‘That you will, Lamamu,
that you will.’
When Darius could not be found in his abode, Turan
and Tory made straight for the Shi-im-ti to seek him
there. However, much to their surprise and dismay, he
was not in his laboratory either.
‘Goddamn it!’ Tory was working herself into a tizz.
‘Where is he?’
Please, Lamamu, Turan besought her. There is a very
simple answer to this problem.
‘And what might that be?’ The Shar’s smug attitude
was beginning to drive her nuts.
If we just close our eyes and concentrate on Darius, we
shall go directly to him.
‘Good call.’ Tory’s spirits lifted.
They found themselves on the lowest level
underneath the Shi-im-ti Temple, and as Tory made to
move she stumbled over Darius’ unconscious form on
the ﬂoor.
‘Oh no . . . what’s happened?’ She crouched beside
him to see if she could bring him round. ‘Darius. Can
you hear me?’
Turan spied Nin Melcah slouched against the wall.
‘Mother?’
‘Oh, Turan, what have I done?’ She wept bitterly,
too ashamed to look her son in the face.
‘I don’t know.’ His voice was sympathetic. ‘Why
don’t you tell me?’

She shook her head. ‘I can’t. I don’t remember.’
She raised the little pouch she had worn around her
neck at Keeldar’s request. ‘The past few weeks are a
complete blank.’ She covered her face with her hands
and sobbed.
‘Lamamu.’ Turan called her over, motioning to the
pouch his mother was clutching.
‘Oh shit.’ Tory grabbed it from her. ‘Where did
you get this?’ As Melcah was almost hysterical with
grief, Tory had to shake a reply out of her. ‘Answer
me!’
‘Keeldar.’ She blurted out her confession. ‘I wanted
you away from my son. He said if I wore this charm, no
one would suspect my deep-seated dislike of you.’
‘Oh, mother, you’ve done some low things in your
time . . .’ Tory was furious with her, ‘but this takes the
cake.’ Melcah stopped her sobbing and stared at Tory,
a look of horror on her face. ‘That’s right. Like it or
lump it, in some distant future you shall give birth
to me.’
Melcah gasped, unsure of how she felt about it, for
her nerves and wits had been shot to pieces. ‘Please,
forgive me?’ Her sights drifted from Tory to her son.
‘That would be easier said than done.’ Tory stared
down at her, most displeased.
‘What happened?’ Darius mumbled as he began to
come round.
‘That’s what I’d like to know.’ Tory moved to give
him a hand to sit up.
‘Oh my god!’ he cried suddenly, near startling Tory
to death. ‘Where is that creature?’

Mahaud was here. Tory wanted to kick herself. She
should have known. ‘The witch has ﬂed. But I have a
better question. Where’s the potion?’
‘It’s in . . .’ He raised his eyes to ﬁnd the secret
compartment in the wall was open. He raised himself
quickly to search inside it. ‘The potion has gone.’
‘Did you see the creature take it?’ Tory tried not to
jump to any rash conclusions.
‘No. It knocked me out as soon as I told it where the
potion was.’ He held his throbbing head, ﬁlled with
remorse. ‘I had no choice. It threatened to do horrible
things to Anthea if I didn’t.’
‘It’s alright.’ Tory knew how persuasive the witch
could be. ‘Well, that’s it then . . . it’s all been for
naught.’ She looked to Turan, defeated, and gave a sigh.
‘Maelgwn will surely die now, and if Mahaud has the
means to become immortal, he’s probably better off.’
‘Please don’t say that.’ Darius felt terrible; he’d
saved his own wife at the cost of Lamamu’s husband. ‘I
could make another dose.’
Tory’s eyes lit up. ‘How long would it take?’
‘Only a day or so.’
‘No good.’ Her hope dwindled again. ‘I have to be
out of here within the hour.’
No matter. Turan was encouraging. There is another way.
Back in the laboratory Turan supplied Tory with a metal
detector that was set to detect orichalchum, the strongest
material in Atlantis, unknown in future ages. The plan
was to wrap the potion in a shell of orichalchum and bury
it on the highest mountain in the Usiqua ranges that

would one day be known as the Azores. All Tory had to
do was ﬁnd it and dig it up.
There was a possibility that the Azores were still
submerged in the depths of the Atlantic Ocean
in the sixth century. Also, in that time period, there
wasa lack of equipment and transport that would
be required to complete such a quest, so Tory had a
change of destination; she would now detour to the
twentieth century before heading home to Gwynedd.
‘I won’t let you down,’ Darius assured her in parting,
and he went to work on synthesizing the cure at once.
With her detector and map in hand, Tory
accompanied Turan to his workstation in the Dur-nuga, where her chariot awaited. ‘Let Taliesin know what
has happened. Tell him I shall meet him as planned . . .
with the chariot I shall be able to cheat time.’
‘You may rely on it, Nin.’ Turan pressed the button
that granted entry to his lab.
‘Well, partner, I guess this is goodbye.’ Tory looked
to him after taking her position behind the controls.
‘How do I say thank you for all you’ve done?’
You can’t, he shrugged, seemingly indifferent to the
emotion of the moment.
Tory forced a grin. His etheric state made this goodbye
much easier than expected. ‘I know you don’t remember
anything that passed between us when you were in a
physical form, but I just want you to know that I shall not
forget any of it.’ She blew him a kiss, and then smiled,
turning her thoughts to her twentieth century home.
Turan did not lower his emotionless facade until
he’d witnessed her gone. Nor shall I . . . ever.

part 111

&

everything

23

AN ECHO IN TIME

T

he last time Tory saw her true kin was at Dinas
Emrys, near Beddgelert in Gwynedd. Here they’d
uncovered the lost cave of Myrddin, where the
Chariot of Arianrod and the other twelve treasures of
Britain had been hidden for eons. Her family had made the
trip from their home in Oxfordshire to see Tory and the
chariot depart safely to the Dark Age. Though Tory had
pledged she would return to the twentieth century, the
time–space continuum permitting, it had been plain that
none, bar her father, truly believed she would make it back.
This ought to blow their minds, Tory mused, as she
traipsed through the forest at the base of the mountain.
She’d decided against manifesting inside the
Merlin’s cave, fearing an encounter with herself not
yet departed.

But I didn’t run into myself back then . . . therefore, I
would not run into myself now, she reasoned, shivering
from the chill of the breeze. ‘I do wish I’d thought of
that before.’
But the truth was that she wasn’t really thinking
straight, period. Time travel always wiped her out to some
degree, much as an extreme case of jet lag would. Yet, by
the same token, it was exhilarating to have made it home
to her roots. She could hardly wait to see the look on
everyone’s faces when they saw her dressed as she was.
As Tory approached the clearing where one passed
through an opening in the rock face into the Merlin’s
cave, she took cover in the bushes to view a
disturbance beyond.
‘But I half-suspected you were coming with me . . .
what about your vow to Taliesin?’ she heard herself say.
Professor Renford, or Myrddin as he was known by
those of closer acquaintance, wrapped his arm around
her shoulder as they strolled towards the mountain. ‘Oh
good heavens, no . . .’ he exclaimed as they disappeared
into the earthen mound, followed closely by Teo, Miles
and Aunt Rose. Her brother, Brian, and his ﬁancee,
Naomi, were the last to enter.
This is interesting. Tory sank slowly to take a seat on
an upturned tree, feeling suddenly rather faint. To think,
all that time ago, I was here in the bushes waiting for myself
to depart.
A deep breath helped to relieve the anxiety that had
welled within her and Tory took comfort in the
knowledge that at least she knew she’d made it to the
right place.

What are they doing in there? Tory paced, rubbing her
arms briskly to dispel the cold. I don’t recall it taking this
long to say goodbye.
Brian and Miles had their eyes to the ground as they
emerged from the cave and into the daylight. They were
accompanied by Teo. Tory came to a standstill as her
heart leapt into her throat upon sighting them.
‘No way . . .!’ Teo exclaimed, thumping his two
companions on the shoulder. Brian and Miles looked up
to ﬁnd Tory smiling at them.
‘Did you miss me?’ She broke into laughter at the
mystiﬁed expression on their faces.
Brian and Teo rushed to greet her at once. Miles
appeared too stunned to move.
‘Jesus! Tory, is that really you?’ Brian looked highly
amused by her clothing and hairstyle.
‘It really is.’
‘Your eyes . . .’ He passed both hands over her brow,
brushing the beaded braids aside to view her pupils
clearly. ‘They’ve changed colour!’
‘Cool, hey.’ She shrugged off the phenomena, and
hugged both Brian and Teo at once. ‘I missed you all
so much.’
Teo took a step backward, cocking an eye. ‘You
don’t really expect us to believe you went anywhere.’
He hadn’t recalled most of what had occurred
during Tory’s last visit to the twentieth century, as
Mahaud had gained conscious control of him before
Tory even arrived. Tory and Brian had attempted to
fill in the blanks in Teo’s memory, once he had been
freed from the crone’s hold. However, most of their

story had sounded way too absurd for him to
readily believe.
‘Excuse me.’ Tory found his lack of faith disturbing.
‘But I’ve been working on this body for twenty years!
Don’t tell me it doesn’t show.’
Teo raised his eyebrows as he examined her, and was
rather puzzled to note that her build had developed
somewhat.
‘Twenty years!’ Brian burst into a grin, knowing she
spoke the truth. ‘So Rhun must be . . .’
‘Twenty-one years old.’ Tory conﬁrmed.
Brian gripped his head in his hands as he slowly
shook it. ‘That’s completely mad.’
‘I told you she’d be right back.’ Myrddin stole his
daughter’s attention with a chuckle.
‘Father!’ She launched herself into his arms. ‘I’m so
glad to see you’re still here.’ Tory squeezed him tight.
‘Well, I wasn’t planing on going anywhere.’
Tory pulled away to grip both his arms, near to
bursting with excitement. ‘I have been to Atlantis! I
met our grandmother . . . your mother, when you were
still in her womb.’
‘It’s a small cosmos.’ Her father smiled.
‘What are you talking about?’ Brian burst into the
middle of their conversation. ‘That’s impossible! Isn’t
it?’ He was suddenly unsure — having kept Tory’s
company these last two years, impossible seemed rather
a redundant word.
‘Nin Bau was her name.’ Tory placed an arm around
Brian’s shoulders. ‘High Priestess of Chailidocean . . .

which is now better known as the City of the Golden
Gates.’
‘Plato’s City of the Golden Gates?’ Miles suddenly
got a grip on the conversation.
‘None other.’ Tory looked to him. ‘After all that’s
come to pass, Professor, you’re not still a sceptic,
I hope.’
His grin grew larger, half because he was overjoyed
she’d come back to him and half because it was his nature
to be sceptical. ‘But I was under the impression that
Myrddin was born in Carmarthen in the ﬁfth century.’
‘He was,’ Tory grinned, ‘because Nin Bau ﬂed
Chailidocean for the ﬁfth century to save a run in with
Mahaud. The witch intended to destroy the High
Priestess’ babe before he was even born, thus wiping me
from existence in the bargain.’
‘And me.’ Brian was suddenly very alarmed. ‘I
thought we destroyed Mahaud.’
‘She was one step ahead of us, I’m afraid. Before she
followed me here to the future, she left the means by
which to summon her back in the sixth century. She
tricked Ossa, warlord of the Saxons, into freeing her. I
have been fending her off ever since.’
‘She’s not coming back is she?’ Naomi had a look of
horror on her face as she moved closer to Brian. ‘I
couldn’t go through that again.’
‘Be calm,’ Tory advised before anyone got too excited.
‘I didn’t even realise I was coming here until the last
minute, so I doubt very much that she will ﬁnd me here.’
Suddenly everyone had a million questions, but her
aunt spared Tory an inquisition.

‘Back off you lot,’ Rose insisted. ‘The poor girl must
be exhausted . . . and cold.’ She ripped the jacket from
Brian’s body to place it around her niece.
‘How did you get back here? The chariot . . .’
Myrddin guessed.
‘Aye. I need your help, in both an advisory and
ﬁnancial capacity,’ Tory beseeched her father with a
look of desperation on her face.
‘Fear not, child, I shall assist in any way I can. But
first things first. Let us get the chariot returned to the
safety of the cave and get you home, then we
can talk.’
Miles accompanied Tory and Myrddin to retrieve
the Atlantean transport from the bushes where Tory
had hidden it.
When Myrddin disappeared to place the treasure
alongside his others, Miles was rather gratiﬁed to ﬁnd
himself alone with his mysterious friend. ‘I had hoped
that this time you’d be staying for good.’
In the turmoil of the past few days, Tory hadn’t
really had time to consider how Miles might feel about
her premature return. ‘I wish it was as you expected,
Miles, but . . .’ An apology seemed rather inadequate
after all she’d dragged him through. ‘Believe it or not,
I’ve discovered that there actually are some things
beyond my control.’
Those large violet eyes of hers were completely
captivating, and Miles felt himself more besotted
than ever before. ‘Are you still married to me,
back there?’
She nodded. ‘Twenty years now.’

He drew in a deep breath as he backed up a few
paces, looking anywhere but at her. ‘Goddamn it, Tory.’
Miles paced to compose himself. ‘What about us? When
does our time begin?’ He folded his arms across his
chest, indignant.
Her expression turned sombre, as did her mood.
‘He’s dying, Miles.’
‘Well, it’s about bloody time.’
‘How can you say that, when he is you?’
‘Well, you don’t regard me as such, so why the hell
should I?’
Their eyes met, and the sudden animosity they felt
towards each other forced them both to turn away in
silence.
He’s right, Tory resolved, brooding on his argument
a moment. She suddenly turned and gave him a long,
steamy kiss.
This took Miles totally off guard, for it was the ﬁrst
time in their year-long relationship that Tory had ever
wooed him.
When their lips parted, Tory’s eyes were still lulled
closed; he even kissed as Maelgwn did. ‘I have learnt
a great many lessons in the past few years.’ She smiled
wholeheartedly, her eyes parting wide. ‘I take life as
it comes these days . . . no more procrastinating,
I promise.’
‘I suppose I could learn to live with that,’ Miles
decided with a smile.
‘Are you still here?’ Myrddin wandered out of the
bushes and down the moist earthen track towards
them. ‘I have something for you.’ He tossed his

daughter a large, cut diamond. ‘That ought to get you
whatever you need.’
‘I can’t accept this.’ She scrutinized the jewel in her
hand, in awe of its beauty and size. ‘It must be worth
a fortune!’
Myrddin waved it off, continuing on his way. ‘I have
a hundred more just like it . . . they prove a good
currency in practically any age.’
Tory sighed as she watched her father disappear
down the forest trail ahead of them. ‘You’ve just got to
love my family.’
‘Yes,’ Miles gave her a squeeze, ‘you do.’

24

THE HUNT

E

veryone was accommodated on Mon that night.
Miles invited Tory’s entire entourage to his
cottage, where he and Aunt Rose cooked up
a feast.
Over the lavish roast dinner, Tory told of the events
that had led her back to this century ahead of schedule.
Miles was seeming a little discomﬁted by her tale, thus
she didn’t mention that the cure intended for Maelgwn
was in fact an immortality potion. ‘So, I headed here to
retrieve it, safe in the knowledge that I was already
acquainted with someone in the know.’ Tory’s sights
came to rest on Miles, and she smiled sweetly.
The professor slouched forward on the table,
supporting his head in both hands. He felt she was
taking an awful lot for granted, expecting him to come

to her aid, as she’d be gone again as soon as they’d
found her potion. ‘Tell me, what is this orichalchum
you mentioned? And where is the device you’re to find
it with?’
‘Orichalchum is a pinkish metal, which is rather
like gold, only much, much stronger,’ Myrddin
replied, as his daughter went to fetch the device from
a pouch strapped to her belt. ‘In fact, it’s probably
stronger than any metal we know today . . . it would
survive anything.’
Miles leant back in his chair, still feeling rather
miffed. ‘If that is the case, then how come we have yet
to dig up any of this amazing metal?’
Myrddin grinned. ‘Perhaps you’re digging in the
wrong places. You know as well as I, that the deeper
depths of the Atlantic Ocean have yet to be explored.’
‘Ask and thou shalt receive.’ Tory placed a rolled-up
map and a long, rounded device in front of Miles on the
table. Made of a shiny metallic substance, the
instrument was ﬂattened so that it was easy to hold.
‘Don’t ask me how you set it . . . En Darius programmed
it before I left.’
‘How does one switch it on?’ Miles asked; all he
could see were seven tiny circles embossed in the top of
the object on one side. There were no switches, no
buttons, no inlet for a cord or batteries — nothing.
‘It’s psychokinetic.’ Tory suppressed a smile,
knowing how absurd Miles would think her answer.
‘You just will it on.’
‘Oh please!’ Miles placed it back on the table; now
she was surely playing him for sport.

‘You of all people should believe me,’ Tory stated,
amused, remembering that in some distant incarnation
Miles had been Turan. ‘The chariot functions in the
same way. Nearly everything of Atlantean origin is
operated by the power of the mind.’ A technology you
perfected! she wanted to say, but refrained.
As the professor was still hesitant to believe her,
Teo thought he’d draw a little of Tory’s attention his
way. ‘I’ll give it a try.’ He took the detector in hand.
‘What do I have to do?’
‘Just place it in your palm . . . so.’ She positioned it
correctly. ‘And will away.’
On!
The seven tiny circles, arranged in an arc across the
face of the instrument, ﬂashed with one colour of the
spectrum before settling so that only the ﬁrst of the tiny
light indicators shone red.
‘Alright!’ Teo was amazed by his feat.
‘There you go!’ Tory gave him a nudge, impressed.
‘The closer you are to the substance you seek, the more
colours in the spectrum that light up. When the last of
the seven, purple, lights up, bingo! You’re right on top of
it.’ She reclaimed the detector from him and switched it
off before offering it to Miles, who waved it away.
‘Tory . . . you do realise the mountain ranges you’re
talking about have probably changed dramatically in the
last fourteen thousand years.’ Miles spread her map out on
the table before him, a frown of frustration on his face.
But he soon changed his tune when he saw how intricate
in detail it was. ‘Maybe not . . .’ He held up a ﬁnger as he
paused to think, then made haste into his study.

At the invitation of a fellow archaeologist, who was
testing the latest in deep salvage and surveying equipment
for the Institute of Oceanography, Miles had visited the
island of Faial in the Azores just a little over a year ago.
The scientiﬁc researchers had discovered an old Spanish
galleon, in the waters near the islands, completely intact.
This had proven alluring enough to coax Miles out to the
remote location in the Atlantic, a journey that turned out
to have more legs than a centipede.
Miles returned unfolding a current map of the
Azores to use as a reference. Aunt Rose and Naomi
cleared the dinner dishes out of the way so that he
could spread the charts alongside each other. The rest of
the family gathered around.
‘Alright, then.’ Miles checked one against the
other, mumbling calculations to himself. ‘The way I
see it . . .’ he looked to Tory, ‘the place you seek is
above sea level . . . about six hundred feet above,
actually.’ He grinned, marking the spot on his map.
‘Here, on the Isle of Pico.’
Tory planted a huge kiss on his cheek. ‘Miles, you’re
a godsend.’
‘If you say so.’ He played down her adulation,
looking back to the priceless information that had just
been thrown in his lap. If this map was for real, he
might well have the means to locate Plato’s illusive city.
Though he noted it was, at present, sitting at a depth of
around ten thousand feet somewhere off the coast of
Spain, in the north-eastern Atlantic Ocean.
‘Pico, hey?’ Tory perused the map. ‘Then that’s
where I have to go.’

‘We,’ Miles added, more disposed towards
investigating her claim.
Tory smiled, pleased to have him on board; his
expertise would not go astray.
‘You can count me in.’ Teo stated, not prepared to
miss out on the adventure, or to leave Tory alone with
another man.
‘Us too.’ Brian included Naomi and himself in the
equation, though Naomi regretfully declined.
‘No.’ She placed a hand on her belly, yet to
show any trace of her pregnancy. ‘Not the way I feel
at present. But you go,’ she urged him. ‘I don’t
mind, truly.’
‘Look, I really don’t think it’s necessary for all of us
to go.’ Miles felt he deserved a little time alone with the
woman he loved.
‘Then you stay.’ Teo was rather belligerent.
Great. Miles rolled his eyes. I’ve just got through
fending off her brother, and now I have to contend with the
ex-boyfriend. ‘I know the area, and have contacts on the
islands should we need any heavy equipment.’
‘Actually Miles . . .’ Tory intervened before it
erupted into a full-blown argument. ‘There is a chance
Teo might be useful. Back in Atlantis he was the ruler
in those parts.’
‘No shit.’ Teo was intrigued to learn. ‘You met me
back there?’
‘Yes. You and Brian were brothers, the youngest set
of sons of the Shu Sar.’
‘Hey, bro!’ Brian held out the palm of his hand,
which Teo slapped in accord.

‘Oh Tory, please!’ Miles cringed. ‘Not the Neptune
myth . . . are you going to tell me that he really did have
ﬁve sets of twin sons? You read too many fables.’
‘His Atlantean name was Absalom, and he did
have five sets of twin sons to five different wives.’
There was a good deal of conviction behind her
statement. ‘You, my friend, being the second-born of
the Shu Sar’s first wife, Melcah.’
‘Me!’ Miles gave half a laugh. ‘And where did I
rule?’
‘In the science lab.’ She gained the professor’s fullest
consideration with her retort. ‘You were head of the
technologists at the Dur-na-ga temple, in Chailidocean.’
It all sounded too wonderful, and Miles went to
laugh it off.
‘It was you who created this.’ Tory waved the
tracking device at him with a hint of irony in her tone.
‘And the chariot!’ Bugger. She bit her tongue. I had no
intention of going into this.
‘Tory . . .’ Miles didn’t know how to say it, ‘I just
can’t comprehend all of this right now.’
‘What’s so hard to believe?’ Teo challenged. ‘Brian
and I would be great rulers . . . Brian’s already been a
king!’
‘That’s right.’ Brian seconded his friend’s reasoning
with zeal.
‘Look.’ Miles sucked in his cheeks to keep the
condescending grin from his face. ‘It’s been a long day . . .’
‘Quite right.’ Myrddin helped the professor out. ‘We
can discuss the ﬁner details of this expedition
tomorrow.’

As the cottage was not equipped to accommodate so
many, and Myrddin was already staying with Miles and
Tory, Teo was ﬁnally persuaded to go with Naomi,
Brian, and Aunt Rose to Naomi’s father’s house to sleep
the night.
‘Ah . . . alone at last.’ Myrddin sighed, as he
watched the car pull out of the driveway, looking to
Miles and Tory with a grin. ‘I’ll see you both on the
morrow then.’ He turned and moved towards the back
wall of the house and disappeared straight through it.
‘I do adore that man.’ Miles relaxed into a better
mood, reaching out to draw Tory closer.
She couldn’t help but grin at the prospect of spending
the night alone with him, yet she shied from his
advances. ‘Miles, I know to you it was only this morning
when last we met . . . but for me, it’s been twenty years.’
‘That didn’t seem to bother you this afternoon.’ He
pursued her through the lounge room.
‘Nor does it now really . . .’ She was amused by his
siren mood, as he swung her around and drew her body
to his own. ‘I just need a little time to adjust.’
‘How much time?’
‘Enough time to take a bath,’ she proposed. ‘Believe
me, I have been to hell and back in the last forty-eight
hours . . . it would be for the best.’
He smiled broadly at this, allowing her to slip from
his grasp. ‘If you need any help . . .’
‘I’ll let you know.’ She withdrew graciously.
‘Are you alright in there?’ Miles inquired through the
closed door.

Tory lay motionless in the steamy water, her head
rested over the end of the large tub as her eyelids
drooped. ‘Oh . . . I can handle it.’
‘I thought you must have drowned.’ He turned and
slouched against the doorway, in the hope of luring
her out.
‘I can’t drown, Miles, I’m immortal.’
‘So you are, silly me.’ He raised his brows, pondering
what to say next. ‘Tell me something . . . did you think
about me much in the last twenty years? Me meaning
me, that is, not Maelgwn or the son of Neptune.’
‘I did.’ Tory raised herself from her watery haven
and wrapped herself in a towel. ‘Can I borrow this robe
on the back of the door?’
‘Be my guest,’ Miles offered, happy to have succeeded
in his purpose. ‘Was I remembered fondly then?’
‘Of course you were. So much so, in fact, that when
I arrived in Atlantis the priests at the healing temple
told me that I’d made myself sick pining over the issue.’
Miles was ﬂattered. ‘So, what did they advise?’
‘They said . . .’ She opened the door to lean opposite
him in the doorway, lit only by the soft light from the
candles burning in the bathroom, ‘that in such
situations, I’d do better to follow my instinct.’
‘Excellent diagnosis.’ He leant forward and lightly
skimmed his mouth over hers.
Tory was aroused by the gentle caress, and seduced
him into a kiss altogether deeper. She took hold of his
hands, guiding them inside the robe she wore.
Miles revelled in the discovery of each perfectly
rounded contour that met with his touch. The seed of

his own desire was stirring in him now; thus his timid
delving became more amorous and Tory’s bathrobe fell
open to expose her fully naked form. ‘Oh, my . . .’ Miles’
voice went hoarse with longing. His sporadic breathing
matched the panting motion of her chest. He reached
down to trail his ﬁngers over the subtle ridges of her
stomach, across her hip, and down her taut thigh. He
felt the ﬁrm muscles of her upper legs tense as his hand
moved between them, and thus refrained from
advancing further.
‘Sorry . . . force of habit.’ Tory reassured him with a
kiss, parting her legs to grant him passage.
As his ﬁngers resumed their ascent to meet with the
warm moistness he’d induced, a soft sigh of yearning
escaped her lips and Miles thought he would burst from
the happiness he felt.
Her back arched to favour his kisses moving
downward through her cleavage and towards her navel.
‘I was wrong to have denied you this so long.’ Her
ﬁngers began to massage his long dark head of hair,
encouraging his descending lips.
Miles sank to his knees, stripping the shirt from
his body and casting it aside. He drew her naked body
against him, as he raised his deep brown eyes to vow:
‘It will be my distinct pleasure to prove you right
about that.’
In the wee hours of the morning, the fridge was raided
and a bottle of red wine opened. Miles stoked the ﬁre to
its former raging glory, then sat back to quietly admire
the object of his adoration.

She was wrapped up in his feather-down quilt,
partaking of the fruity red as she gazed into the open ﬂames.
‘You look so lovely in this light,’ he felt compelled
to state, and was surprised when she appeared startled
by the comment.
‘Deja vu,’ she clariﬁed, wide-eyed.
‘I’ve told you that before?’
‘Twice.’ Half her mouth curved in a wry smile as
Turan came to mind. But the sweet memory was quickly
swept aside as the last glimpse she’d had of her ailing
husband ﬁlled her with sorrow.
‘And I’ll say it again, no doubt.’ Miles dragged
himself nearer to her, detecting the sudden swing in her
mood. ‘You look lovely in any light.’
Though Tory smiled in acceptance of his
compliment, anguish consumed her. ‘How soon can we
leave for Pico?’ She topped up her glass and took a long
sip, in the hope of dulling the stress.
‘I won’t know until I make some phone calls. But I
promise . . .’ he hastened to add, already aware of her
mind, ‘I shall get us there as fast as I possibly can.’ He
smiled as he recalled all the trouble he’d had with
connecting ﬂights and boat services on his last visit to
the Azores; with any luck, he thought, it could take
them near a week to reach their said destination.
‘Money is no object,’ she emphasised, as he came
and entwined his body around hers.
‘I realise that, I did see the size of that rock your
father gave you.’
Miles drew her face around to taste the red wine on her
lips, when Tory was suddenly struck by a thought. ‘Wait a

minute!’ She sprang to her feet, still clutching the quilt to
her person. ‘Do you have a picture of the isle of Pico?’
Miles was a little browned-off by her preoccupation
with her quest. ‘Well, I took some shots of it from Faial,
which is about seven kilometres away.’
‘Perfect.’ Tory smiled sweetly. With a notable lack of
enthusiasm, Miles rose to go look for the photos.
‘Would you mind if I raided your wardrobe?’
‘Be my guest.’ He motioned towards the bedroom,
not even wanting to know what she had in mind.
Tory rolled up Miles’ jeans, which were way too long
for her, and a bit large around the waist. She pulled
them in to fit with the aid of a belt. The back pocket
housed the detector rather nicely, and it was hidden
from view by the jumper that she tied around her
waist. She found a shirt that was pretty close to her
size, but there was no chance on earth that any of
his shoes were going to fit; bare feet would have to
suffice for now.
She sat closely scrutinizing one of the several
photographs of the island Miles had dug out for her,
whilst he watched in silence from the lounge opposite.
Why do this now? He gave a heavy sigh at the
thought. It’s ﬁve o’clock in the morning. What could she
possibly hope to accomplish at this hour?
Tory closed her eyes, raising the picture to her brow,
and within moments her physical form had faded from
the room. ‘Tory?’ Miles stood to take a look around.
‘Tory!’ he called louder, running to check the other
rooms in the house.

‘Goddamn it, don’t do this to me!’
‘Do what?’
Her voice sent the professor rocketing back into the
lounge room, where he found her returned. ‘How did
you do that? Where did you go?’ He took hold of her,
both amazed and angered by what she’d done.
‘I went to Faial, the fastest possible way.’ She
grinned. ‘Here, get dressed.’ She threw the rest of his
clothes at him, and waited whilst he got them on. ‘Have
you got your wallet?’
‘Well . . . yes.’ He pulled it from the pocket of his
jacket. ‘But I don’t understand . . .’
She held a ﬁnger to his lips. ‘A picture is worth a
thousand words.’ Tory took up both his hands.
‘Oh no.’ Miles went to back up.
‘Shh.’ She whispered. ‘Just close your eyes and relax.’
Tory made her proposal sound so inviting that Miles
decided to co-operate. But as he stood there, eyes closed
in blind faith, he was having trouble taking to the
suggestion of physical teleportation. We are not going
anywhere. He resigned himself to the fact. Yet when he
opened his eyes to tell Tory this, he found he was
seriously mistaken.
The room was a blur of bright blue-white
light, which gave the appearance of viewing it in
the negative. Sweet Jesus, Tory. He squeezed his
eyelids closed once more and tightened his hold
on her.
Teo and Brian arrived at the cottage bright and early
the next morning, keen to ﬁnalise the details of their

trip. But when Myrddin informed them that Tory and
Miles had already departed, the pair were ropeable.
‘Well, let’s go,’ Teo urged, halfway to the door.
‘Maybe we can catch them up at the airport.’
‘That’s not the way they went,’ Myrddin
announced, stopping both men in their tracks.
‘What do you mean?’ Brian cocked an eye, sporting
a ferocious look as he approached his father.
‘These photos are what gave their passage away.’
Myrddin held the blank side of one up to view, which
had the words Pico Alto from Faial scribbled on the back.
‘So?’ Teo grabbed the picture from the Merlin to
take a look at their destination.
Myrddin raised his eyebrows to put forward his
theory. ‘I believe the extent of Tory’s learning in the last
twenty years goes way beyond how to wield a sword and
ride a horse. For, according to my sources, she is already
on the island from whence this photograph was taken.’
‘What!’ both his mystiﬁed listeners exclaimed at once.
‘But that’s impossible!’ Brian sank into the lounge
beside his father.
‘Oh, do stop saying that,’ Myrddin insisted. ‘If one has
mastered physical teleportation, it is very possible. I’ll
grant it is difﬁcult if one has never been to one’s desired
destination, and has no idea of what it looks like.’
Brian grabbed the photos off the table, and noticed as
he ﬂicked through that they all featured the same place. ‘So
you think Tory used these to form an accurate picture?’
‘It would seem so, yes.’ Myrddin looked rather
concerned. ‘She was gone before I returned this
morning.’

‘Returned from where?’ Teo demanded, outraged by
the statement. ‘You left her alone with him?’
‘I needed to consult with the spirits about Tory’s
quest,’ Myrddin advised calmly, as Teo had begun
to pace.
‘And what did they predict?’ Brian chose to ignore
his friend’s tormented state.
‘Much confusion and treachery.’
‘It’s Miles.’ Teo ceased his striding around. ‘I never
did trust that guy.’
‘Even though he helped save your life?’ Myrddin
raised his steely green eyes to the lad.
‘Only at Tory’s bidding,’ Teo defended.
‘I don’t think Miles would ever consciously betray
her.’ Brian shook his head.
‘Oh yeah,’ Teo challenged. ‘Sure about that, are you?’
Brian frowned and pondered; Miles had lied to her
before. ‘I would feel a whole lot surer if I were there.’
‘I can arrange that,’ Myrddin advised. ‘But, as
guardian of Britain, my place is here in the mother
country, so once I get you to Faial you’ll be on your own.’
‘Fine with me. Where’s that map.’ Teo spotted it
still spread out on the dining room table and folded it so
it would ﬁt neatly in his back pocket. ‘Let’s go.’
‘I did take some pictures of the main port here in
Faial. You could have asked me for one of those and
saved us the hike,’ Miles grumbled. He felt cheated as
they’d nearly reached the Isle of Pico already, and at
this rate their time together would be over by
tomorrow night.

‘Oh, stop complaining. It’s good exercise and the
scenery is magniﬁcent.’ She paused in her stride down
the side of the road and drew a deep breath.
The sun had begun to rise over the ocean, igniting
the colours of the fertile valley that descended from a
large volcanic crater to a town by the seaside. It was
little wonder Faial was sometimes referred to as the Blue
Island, for an abundant amount of hydrangeas grew wild
here and blanketed the slopes in places.
‘I’ve seen it all before, remember.’ Miles motioned
around him . . . ‘This valley is known as Falmengos. It
peaks at the Caldeira Crater and runs down towards the
town of Horta.’ He pointed to the seaside port off in the
distance. ‘We should be able to catch a boat to Pico from
there.’
Tory hadn’t had a chance to view the ominous
volcanic cone of Pico Alto as yet. For when they’d
arrived at the spot near the top of the Caldeira Crater
where Miles had taken most of the photos from, the sun
had yet to rise, and the mount they now descended
blocked their view of Pico off to the south-east.
They soon reached the upper town, where they
came to an old church and a cemetery.
‘There it is,’ Miles announced, looking to the large
triangular peak that was Pico Alto rising out of the sea.
But Tory’s eyes had already been drawn to the
magniﬁcent mountain, shrouded in mist. ‘It’s beautiful,’
she gasped, in awe of it.
Miles scoffed at this comment, continuing down the
road towards Horta. ‘Let’s see if you still think so once
you’ve climbed it.’

Although it was early morning when Tory and Miles
arrived, Horta was already a hive of activity. For this
was the finest harbour the islands of the Azores had to
offer, protected by headlands to the north and south
and a breakwater seven hundred and fifty metres long.
This had been a major port of call between Europe,
America and the Orient for as long as ships had been
making such journeys; this explained why the place
was so alluring to salvors and archaeologists. Horta was
also a big fishing community and many trawlers were
already returning with their early catch. Once famous
for sperm whale fishing, which Tory was pleased to
learn had been banned in recent times, the waters here
gave host to rising numbers of the gentle giants; thus,
Horta was home for many a marine biologist as well.
The town itself had a gay atmosphere about it;
although Horta had no buildings of notable grandeur, the
houses were brightly coloured and had large balconies
where many in residence were taking breakfast.
‘I’m starving,’ Miles decided, as the smell of food
wafted through the air. ‘Before we do anything else,
please let me buy us something to eat.’
‘Fair enough.’ Tory shrugged.
‘Miles Thurlow?’
At the sound of his name, Miles and Tory did an
about-face.
‘Pearce!’ Miles exclaimed, as he approached his
colleague and shook his hand ﬁrmly. ‘I was hoping I’d
ﬁnd you here.’
‘Naturally. As long as I can manage to get my
licence to explore these waters extended, here I shall

stay,’ he was pleased to explain. ‘But what brings you
back to this part of the world, Professor?’
‘A friend of mine.’ Miles turned to introduce Tory,
who appeared rather taken with his friend. ‘This is Tory
Alexander . . . Tory, Doctor John Pearce, from the
Institute of Oceanography.’
En Darius, she resolved on the quiet, coming
forward to make his acquaintance. ‘It’s nice to meet you,
Doctor Pearce.’
‘John,’ he insisted. ‘And the pleasure is all mine. So,
what’s your ﬁeld, Tory. Anything I can help with?’ he
inquired politely. Miles burst into a huge smile.
‘Oh, it’s more just an interest really . . . in Atlantis,’
Tory put forward in all seriousness.
‘Atlantis!’ John repeated with a laugh. ‘Well, I
personally haven’t found any evidence of that
civilization here, so I can’t really help you I’m afraid.’
He turned his attention back to Miles. ‘I have, however,
recovered something you might ﬁnd interesting.’ He
opened up his folder and scribbled down some details,
which he gave to Miles. ‘If you get a moment, give me a
call. I’d like to get your opinion.’
‘I’ll do that,’ Miles assured his colleague.
‘And, hey, good luck with your search.’ The doctor
gave half a laugh as he turned and headed dockside.
‘Now I know where your cynicism stems from.’ Tory
folded her arms; she did hate being patronised.
‘Well, you’ll just have to be patient with us mere
mortals,’ Miles suggested, as he steered Tory towards a
teahouse. ‘We don’t all have the wealth of your
experience.’

Breakfast was being served on the upstairs balcony to
make the most of the morning sunshine and the light
sea breeze that blew in off the harbour. As everything
seemed to move at a very leisurely pace here, Tory
allowed herself to be charmed by the good cheer and
hospitality of the local people.
The young woman waiting tables at the teahouse
addressed Miles by name, as this was a favourite haunt
for most of the island’s visiting scholars and he’d
frequented it often on his last visit.
‘Muito prazer, Senhor Thurlow.’
The waitress smiled warmly, and for a split second
Tory felt there was something altogether familiar about
her. Though recognising people she’d never met was a
common occurrence for Tory, in this instance, she was
unable to place the face.
‘Muito prazer, Donna,’ Miles replied, and as he had a
ﬁrm grasp of the local lingo, he ordered and translated for
Tory. Whilst they waited for their meal, Miles took the
liberty of teaching her some of the basic vocabulary. This
she found a most enjoyable exercise. Tory had studied
several languages in the past and did enjoy the challenge
of a new one.
‘Ask about the boat to Pico,’ Tory urged, as the empty
plates were being cleared from the table.
‘Por favor, Donna . . .’ Miles distracted her from
her task. ‘Informa me, pode indicar o caminho para
Pico?’
Tory listened to the girl’s detailed response, not
following a word of it.

‘Obrigado.’ Miles thanked her as she departed to the
kitchen.
‘What did she say?’
‘Well, she confirmed that there is a daily service
to the island from here.’ Miles sat back in his seat,
finding it difficult to keep the smile from his face.
‘Though unfortunately, it left about a half an
hour ago.’
‘Damn it.’ Tory looked to the headlands, annoyed;
they could have been halfway there by now.
Her sights drifted back to Miles and he was quick to
ﬂatten her unspoken accusation. ‘I didn’t know, I swear.’
Miles held a hand to his heart, but his confession
was far too cheery for Tory’s liking. ‘You wouldn’t lie to
me, Miles?’
‘Hardly.’ His smile broadened. ‘That would be a
futile endeavour, wouldn’t it?’
‘Good morning all.’ Brian pulled up a seat and sat
down, obviously impressed to have stunned his sister for
a change.
‘No, I believe it’s bom dia.’ Teo played along,
pulling up a chair and settling himself between Miles
and Tory. ‘Do go on . . . you were saying something
about Miles lying to you?’
‘No.’ Miles’ tone was rather cutting. ‘We were
saying that we’d just missed the boat to Pico.’
‘I could have told you that.’ Teo remained cheery.
‘We’ve been waiting where it boards for the last
twenty minutes, expecting you to show. But when you
didn’t . . .’ He shrugged. ‘We thought we’d better come
find you.’

‘Great.’ Tory rolled her eyes, quietly thankful that
her father had sent Teo and her brother to her aid;
perhaps now she could stay on track.
As Donna approached to take an order from the
new arrivals, Miles turned to Teo to ever-so-nicely
enquire, ‘Do you speak Portuguese?’
‘No . . . but I’m beginning to wish I did. Bom dia,
Senorita.’ Teo sized up the local beauty with a smile,
which Donna returned.
‘Then allow me.’ Miles gave Donna the order, and
as he did she struggled to repress her amusement.
‘I am sorry, Senhor Thurlow.’ She was unable to
keep up her front, and spoke in English for the beneﬁt
of the two young men for whom Miles was ordering.
‘Flaming pig-balls are not on the menu.’
‘What?’ Teo became alarmed, but as all present were
reduced to laughter, he smiled as he ordered. ‘Just
bacon, eggs, and juice, thanks.’
‘Same again,’ Brian added, turning to his sister,
who’d once again begun to brood. ‘So, as we’ve missed
the one and only transport to Pico, what are we going
to do for the rest of the day?’
As Donna departed, Tory voiced her mind. ‘There
must be a picture or a postcard around here somewhere
that was taken on the face of Pico Alto?’
‘Can’t you just project yourself . . . I mean, it’s only over
there.’ Brian waved a ﬁnger in the island’s general direction.
‘No, it doesn’t work that way.’ Tory sat back,
disheartened by the query. ‘I have to be able to visualise
either the immediate landscape of my desired
destination, or a person that I know will be there.’

‘Tory. If you’d told us that before, Brian or I could
have gone.’ Teo shook his head.
‘I know.’ She realised her error. ‘I’m sorry I left
without you.’
Tory placed her hand on Teo’s and Miles began to
fume.
‘What was I thinking, leaving without my team.’
She reached out to take hold of her brother’s hand also,
furnishing him with a huge smile.
‘Never mind. We’re here now.’ Teo patted her hand
and rose, looking out to the harbour as he thought a
moment. He looked back to Tory and Brian with a grin
growing on his face. ‘You know, I saw that stretch of
water from the top of the town, and it couldn’t be any
more than seven kilometres wide . . . I reckon we could
swim it easy.’
‘Hey . . .’ Tory’s eyes lit up.
‘Forget it!’ Miles interjected. ‘It may look like a
peaceful stretch of water from here, but these islands are a
major crossroads of currents and winds . . . you could end
up anywhere from Africa to the Arctic Circle. Not to
mention the marine life you’d have to contend with . . .
try getting out of the way of a moving sperm whale.’
‘Alright!’ Tory frowned. ‘Point taken. I’ll have to go
alone then.’
‘No way.’ All three of her male companions
protested at once.
‘Look, nothing can happen to me,’ Tory insisted.
Yet, recalling that the last time she’d thought thus,
she’d wound up trapped in a time warp with a steel pin
rammed through her brain, her decision altered

dramatically. ‘Okay, you’re right . . . I’ll be patient.’
‘No more running off without us.’ Teo made her
promise, before Miles got the chance to.
‘No more.’ Her resolve was absolute, and she
reclined to make herself comfortable where she
was. ‘If I missed the boat, it was meant to be. Perhaps
this is the universe’s way of telling me to go with
the ﬂow.’

25

CONFLICTING
INTERESTS

A

t the bottom of the four hundred metre crater
looming over the town of Horta, was a lake
bounded by lush green forest. When Brian was
informed of this, he suggested taking a hike to the lake
in preparation for the greater climb they had ahead of
them tomorrow.
Teo and Tory were well-disposed towards the idea,
but Miles had already seen the sights and so declined. He
said he’d arrange a couple of rooms at the hotel near the
harbour whilst they were gone. As it was once the old
fort of Santa Cruz, built in the sixteenth century, Miles
assured them that the hotel would be easy to identify.

And so it was. With tired limbs and their lust for
adventure satisﬁed, Teo, Brian and Tory trudged into
the hotel. The reception desk had one room, with two
single beds, reserved in Brian’s name and Tory was given
a separate key.
‘That key wouldn’t be to Professor Thurlow’s room,
now would it?’ Teo inquired of Tory and the gentleman
behind the desk.
‘It is as Senhor Thurlow requested.’ The man was
polite.
‘I see.’ His raven eyes looked to Tory, who disappeared
upstairs to avoid comment.
‘This is not good.’ Teo entered the room, too distracted
to notice how charming it was. ‘If Miles hurts her, he’s a
dead man.’
‘Look, you promised,’ Brian warned, not prepared to
listen to his friend’s jealous ravings for the duration of
their trip. ‘I’ve learnt better than to judge such
situations, so take my advice and leave it alone.’
By the inﬂection in his tone, Teo knew exactly what
Brian was thinking — but this time he was wrong. Teo
had no delusions of winning Tory back; he’d accepted that
she’d married another, and sincerely believed that he only
wanted to protect her. ‘I know you think I’m biased . . .’
‘Think?’ Brian scoffed, opening the shutters to
check out the view. ‘You are.’
‘Okay, I am. But I still have a seriously bad feeling
about the guy.’
As Brian found himself caught in the middle of this
weird love triangle against his own better judgement,

his predicament was awkward. ‘There was a time when I
had some pretty serious doubts about Miles myself. But I
was proven wrong about him. So I’d proceed with
caution, if I were you.’
How nonchalant Brian seemed about the whole
situation. ‘After what your father said, aren’t you even
mildly concerned that she’s having an affair with . . .’
‘An affair!’ Brian gave half a laugh. ‘Miles is the
same guy she’s married to, thus it could hardly be
construed . . .’
‘No! Not the same. Can you honestly say Miles has
the same tendencies, the same line of reasoning, or the
same interests Maelgwn does?’ He put it to Brian, who
fell silent. ‘I think not. That’s the mistake Tory’s making.
I have to talk to her.’ Teo made for the corridor.
‘Oi,’ Brian cautioned. ‘Go easy.’
Miles lingered in the shade of the palm trees that ran
along the avenue by the sea. He’d spoken to his
associate, Dr Pearce, and had arranged to meet him
before dinner just across the road from where the
project’s ofﬁces were located.
He didn’t much mind the wait, for it gave him a
moment alone to just sit and think. The last time Miles
had gazed out at the Atlantic from this shore, he’d
entertained a very different viewpoint of life on earth.
The events of the year that had passed since then were
like a bizarre dream that he was not sure if he wanted to
wake from or not. Tory wove an enchanting spell and it
was hard to imagine what life would be like without a
miracle a minute.

‘Hope I haven’t kept you waiting long.’
Miles was startled to ﬁnd John standing beside him.
‘Had a bit of engine trouble. You’d think with all
this technology, we could at least get the damn boat to
go.’ He gave a laugh as the professor got to his feet. ‘I
must say I’m a bit disappointed — where’s that exotic
friend of yours?’
Miles smiled at the term, exotic, coming from a man
who’d explored just about every place on earth that was
humanly reachable. ‘Tory’s trekking the crater. She’s
rather keen on strenuous physical exercise, in case you
didn’t notice.’
‘Lucky you,’ John grinned, strolling off across the road.
‘So. What have you dug up this time, Doctor?’ Miles
dared John to impress him.
‘Actually, I was rather hoping you might tell me.’
John swung open the door to his building, motioning
Miles in after him.
‘Now, do I have your strictest conﬁdence on this?’
John closed the ofﬁce door behind them, looking to
Miles for conﬁrmation.
‘I’m not even going to answer that.’
‘Sorry, old man.’ John rushed to his desk and began
to search through the ﬁles strewn across it. ‘You’ll
understand us wanting to keep this quiet, once you’ve
seen it.’
‘Seen what?’
‘This.’ John handed him a photograph taken soon
after the ﬁnd had been ﬁshed from the sea.
Miles began to laugh as he viewed the image. ‘Let
me guess. It’s either an old helmet that’s been at the

bottom of the ocean for centuries, or it’s an outstanding
mass of sea fungus.’
‘You know, we very nearly disregarded it as such.’
The doctor took Miles’ mocking with good cheer, and
went over to punch a code into a wall panel. ‘But, as
you’ll see, Professor . . . it polished up rather nicely.’ The
numerical sequence switched off the alarm and unlocked
the door to the room where the ﬁnd was being housed.
Miles’ heart began to pound as he crept closer to the
storage room. Please don’t let it be . . . And there it was,
encased in glass and surrounded by state-of-the-art
security; a metallic ball, pinkish gold in colour.
‘If you don’t recognise the mineral, I’m not
surprised, it’s unknown.’ John made a professional boast.
‘We can only speculate as to its origin, but the
inscription on top here, Lamamu, translates as ‘divine
master of love and war’ in Sumerian, so that’s a possibility.
We’re in the process of having it dated at present, so we
should know more soon.’
Miles had to grin as he took Tory’s line of reasoning
for a change. ‘The Atlantic Ocean seems an unusual
place to be ﬁnding Sumerian artefacts, don’t you think?’
John cocked an eye, seeming rather surprised. ‘Your
beautiful friend has had quite an inﬂuence on you,
hasn’t she?’
‘Oh yes.’ Miles certainly couldn’t deny that. ‘And it
seems to me that this capsule is made of orichalchum, a
metal fabled to have been prized in the Atlantean
Empire because of its beauty, strength and durability.’
‘Capsule you say?’ John was curious to hear him
refer to it thus. ‘So you think it could contain . . .’

‘Not as such . . . just a slip of the tongue, really.’
Miles tried to erase the notion from his colleague’s
mind. ‘What are you calling it?’
John gave a shrug, thinking the answer was obvious.
‘Lamamu.’
‘Tory?’ Teo entered her room, ﬁnding most of her
clothes discarded on the bed. The sound of running
water was drowning out his call; he decided to enter
anyway.
The bathroom door was ajar, and against his natural
impulse he decided to avoid that area. Instead, he
approached the bed, where the pouch containing the
detector lay in clear view. Teo slipped the metal device
from the pouch, holding it as Tory had shown him. On.
The seven colours of the spectrum ﬂashed across the
tiny light indicators. When the reading stabilised, ﬁve
of the circles glowed the colour blue.
Jesus! We’re real close, Teo observed, commanding
the device off and putting it away as the sound of water
was silenced. ‘Tory?’ he called out.
‘Teo!’ She sat bolt upright in the tub.
‘Relax . . . I’m not seeking extra-marital favours or
anything . . . I just need to have a word.’
‘About Miles?’ Tory submerged herself once more.
‘No lectures, Teo, please!’ She awaited his witty retort,
but all was silent. ‘Teo?’
‘I wouldn’t lecture you, Tory. I know I have no claim
on you any more.’
He sounded rather exasperated and a little hurt as
well; Tory could have hit herself for being so insensitive.

‘Oh . . . don’t say it like that.’ She raised herself and
reached for a towel, unable to continue the
conversation through a wall.
‘Sorry . . . but to me, it’s only been a couple of years
since we split up . . . most of which I don’t remember.’
He looked at her as she entered the room wearing
Miles’ shirt. ‘I didn’t end it because I didn’t love you,
Tory . . . the friendship was at risk. I was going to lose
both you and Brian.’
‘You did the right thing.’ She came to sit beside him
and took hold of his hand. ‘You have to believe there is
someone else you’re meant to be with.’
The face of the sweet singer who’d had Jerram so
enchanted at Zutar’s court came to mind, and Tory
suddenly recalled where she’d seen Donna before.
Teo didn’t seem too sure about her suggestion;
thus Tory took hold of his face in both her hands
and stared deep into the black pools of his eyes. ‘I
know I’m right about this, my friend. I still love you. I
miss times like today as much as you do . . . the three
of us, off on some mad adventure. I wish it happened
all the time, but . . . Brian’s got a child on the way,
and I’m here, there and everywhere trying to
rearrange the universe.’ Teo smiled at her joke, but
Tory knew that underneath he was terrified of the
idea of the three of them drifting apart. ‘What I’m
trying to say is this . . . you, me and Brian, we’re a
sometime thing, and I’ll always be grateful for those
sometimes. But you need to let go of the memory of
us, so you can be free to find your all-time thing . . .
do you understand?’

Teo only nodded in response, as the words wouldn’t
come, and he embraced her to endure the realisation
that swept over him. ‘It’s just so hard to let go, to trust
that it’s all for the best.’
‘I know it is.’ She squeezed him tighter, a tear
slipping from her eye in sympathy. ‘But just remember —
we are all of the same soul mind and can never be truly
parted. Amidst time and space, we will invariably be
drawn together, so there is always another adventure to
look forward to.’
Teo pulled back to look in her eyes, brushing the
long, braided strands from her face. ‘I shall always be
here for you, no matter what.’
‘And I for you,’ she vowed in return.
‘I don’t believe this.’ Miles dropped his parcels in
the doorway, turned abruptly and left.
‘No, Miles, wait!’ Tory chased him into the hallway.
‘Just . . . save it,’ he advised, making haste down
the stairs, when suddenly he felt obliged to tell her
what he knew. Miles paused from his sprint to
contemplate this, but his anger compelled him not to.
‘I want out of this equation. From now on, you’re on
your own.’
‘But it’s not what you think.’ Tory’s plea fell on deaf
ears, as Miles gained speed and was gone.
Teo caught her up, and was as dumbfounded and
bewildered as she by what had happened. ‘I’m real sorry
about this.’
‘It’s not your fault.’ She waved his apology off.
‘Unfortunately, jealous rages are the one thing Miles
and Maelgwn do have in common.’

Tory picked up the parcels in the doorway and
wandered back into the room, to discover that
Miles had been shopping for her. In the bags she
found new jeans, trekking boots, a waterproof,windproof jacket and a dress to wear to dinner. There
was also a large bunch of flowers, complete with a
very eloquent note.
‘Oh damn it, Teo,’ she sobbed, reading Miles’
written words of devotion. ‘Why do I keep hurting him?
I don’t mean to.’
‘Hey, sunshine . . . don’t cry.’ Teo was almost too
paranoid to hold her in case Miles walked in and got the
wrong impression again. ‘Why don’t you get dressed for
dinner, hey? Then we’ll ﬁnd Miles and sort out this mess.’
Teo could hardly believe what he was saying — an
hour ago he’d wanted to thwart the relationship, and
now here he was conspiring to save it. Life really sucks,
sometimes.
The long, black halter-neck dress ﬁtted Tory perfectly
and lent itself well to bare feet.
The professor glimpsed her out of the corner of his
eye as she made an appearance at the top of the stairs in
the teahouse, looking every bit as splendid in his
selection as he’d imagined she would. Spellbound by her
presence, as were most who were dining in the
restaurant, his heart sank as he spied Teo with her.
Donna led them to a table across the room from
Miles, who was either completely ignoring them or
oblivious to the fact that they’d entered. ‘Maybe I should
talk to him,’ Tory suggested, before they were seated.

‘No, no.’ Teo sat her down, having hyped himself up
for the task. ‘Senorita.’ He looked over to Donna, who
was waiting to attend them. ‘I’ll have a double of the
strongest spirit you have, por favor.’ He left before
another word could be said.
Tory didn’t like the sound of this; be damned if
Teo was going to drink himself into oblivion over her
again. ‘Cancel that order. He’ll have a juice,’ she
corrected, as she watched him take a seat at
Miles’ table.
‘And what would you like, Senorita Alexander?’
Donna sensed the drama unfolding before her.
‘A few less men in my life might be helpful.’ Tory
gave a heavy sigh, ahead of half a smile. ‘Are you
attached, perchance?’ she enquired, noting Donna
didn’t wear a ring.
‘That entirely depends on what’s offering,’ she
grinned, turning her large, dark eyes to view the table
where Teo and Miles sat conversing.
Teo returned before the drinks did. ‘Off you go. All is
forgiven.’ He took a seat opposite Tory.
‘What did you say to him?’ She could barely believe
the discussion hadn’t ended in a punch-up.
‘Never you mind.’ He motioned her up as she
seemed reluctant to leave him on his own. ‘Go, go . . .
I’ll see you in the morning.’
‘Thanks for this.’ She moved to kiss him, but he
reached out and shook her hand instead.
‘Let’s not push our luck.’ He smiled, again
motioning with his head for her to go.

He turned and watched her walk away from him, his
heart growing heavier with every step she took. She
waited for Miles to invite her to be seated and, with a
kiss, she was reconciled with him. As he’d tortured
himself enough, Teo looked back to the table where his
elaborately decorated drink was being placed. ‘Cheers.’
He looked to Donna brieﬂy, before whipping the straw
from the glass and taking a long gulp.
‘It would seem you’re quite a matchmaker, senhor.’
Donna noted how Tory and Miles were doting upon
each other.
He appeared unimpressed with his achievement, as
he raised his eyebrows to question: ‘Is juice really the
strongest thing you have?’
‘The senorita changed your order,’ Donna advised
with an apologetic look.
‘That ﬁgures,’ he grumbled, reaching for the menu.
‘Well, I’m changing it again, plus . . .’
‘I’m sorry, senhor,’ Donna interjected politely, as she
removed her apron. ‘The senora will take your order.’
She motioned to a chubby woman, twice her age, who
was across the room serving food. ‘My shift should have
ﬁnished an hour ago.’
‘So what are you doing now?’ Teo was quick to
inquire before she’d had the chance to depart. ‘Could I
buy you dinner, perhaps?’
Donna smiled, slowly shaking her head. ‘That’s very
kind of you, but . . . I’ve been in this place since daybreak.’
‘I understand.’ Teo sank back into his seat,
accepting her refusal graciously. ‘It would seem I am
destined to dine alone tonight.’

‘Well . . .’ Donna stammered, to suggest with a shrug
and a smile, ‘I can cook.’
The evening’s promise of being a rather sombre
occasion was suddenly contested. ‘What a coincidence,
senorita. So can I.’ Teo was straight to his feet, and at
his charming best. ‘Between the two of us, I’m sure we
can create a connoisseur’s delight.’ He gestured for her
to lead the way, his smile beaming with the sudden
anticipation he felt.
‘Don’t tell me,’ she playfully commented. ‘You’re
great with dessert.’
‘With dessert . . . as dessert,’ he muttered under his
breath, trailing her through the crowded restaurant and
down the stairs.
Throughout the whole of dinner, Miles had been
meaning to tell Tory that John Pearce had found her
capsule, whereupon he expected she’d ﬂy into action to
retrieve it and vanish from his life. She might return,
perhaps, in less time than it took to notice her missing,
but how much would she have changed in her absence
this time? How many more bizarre experiences would
she have lived through?
Not yet ready to run the risk of her becoming lost in,
or embittered by, time, Miles avoided the subject. Tory
was so completely attentive — surely she would not be
too furious if the information slipped his mind until
morning. On second thought, he’d experienced her wrath
if lied to. But, on the other hand, surely she would be so
pleased that he’d found her treasure all would be forgiven?
Then again, Tory had seemingly perfected many of her

psychic talents since they’d last met; maybe she would
perceive his deception before morning, which would
certainly not reﬂect his true intention in a very good light.
Goddamn it, you’ll just have to tell her. If she leaves,
she leaves. Miles inwardly cursed this resolution as he
unlocked the door to their room.
Tory entered ahead of him, switching on the lights
only long enough to light the candles therein. ‘I much
prefer candlelight to any other.’ She smiled, observing
the room in the softer light.
As she approached him, sporting an ardent look,
Miles’ conscience won out. ‘There’s something I’ve got
to tell you.’
The pending confession appeared to disturb him so
much that Tory feared another argument was at hand.
‘It can wait.’ She drew his lips close to hers and took a
long, loving taste.
‘My, you do make things difﬁcult at times.’ Miles
picked her up to lay her on the bed, yet wavered from
his course halfway and placed her on her feet again.
‘No, this can’t wait.’
‘Alright then, if you insist.’ Tory thrust him back
onto the bed. As he gazed up at her, stunned, she
unfastened her dress and let it drop to the ﬂoor. ‘Tell
me, Professor . . . what’s on your mind?’
God help me. Miles raised himself to welcome her
naked body, as she straddled her legs to sit in his lap. I’ll
tell her ﬁrst thing in the morning, I swear it.
As Miles hadn’t closed his eyes in at least seventy-two
hours, he proved rather impossible to wake. So, Tory

left him a note and went to meet Brian at the
reception desk.
‘Where’s Teo?’ she wondered out loud, ﬁnding her
brother alone.
‘He didn’t come back here last night. I presumed he
was with you.’ Brian was bafﬂed to ﬁnd he was mistaken.
‘Where’s Miles?’
Tory tried not to smile. ‘He’s exhausted, poor guy. I
don’t think he’s slept for quite a few days. Oh, god . . .’
Tory gripped her brother’s hands, as her thoughts turned
to Teo’s mysterious absence and his woeful mood when
last seen. ‘You don’t think Teo’s done anything rash,
do you?’
‘Nah.’ Brian tried to reassure her, not fully
convinced himself. ‘He’s probably waiting for us down
at the boat.’
‘Good call.’ Tory gave him a slap on the shoulder, as
they both bolted out of the hotel and down to
the marina.
Ten minutes before their boat was due to depart, there
was still no sign of him.
‘I’ll just have to delay this another day.’ Tory
resigned herself to the fact. ‘I can’t leave here without
knowing he’s alright.’
‘No.’ Brian put his foot down. ‘You go. I’ll stay and . . .
wait a minute.’ His eyes became ﬁxed on the road leading
down to the water. ‘Here he comes. Ah-ha.’
Tory couldn’t see the observation Brian had made at
a glance. ‘What?’
‘I know that walk. That’s Teo’s “I just got laid” stride.’

‘Really?’ Tory was interested to learn this, and looked
to Teo to note the added bounce in the way he moved.
‘Sorry I’m late.’ He bounded up the dock, doing a
quick somersault and landing ﬁrmly on two feet before
them. ‘I didn’t get much sleep.’
‘It seems nobody did, except me.’ Brian was rather
miffed.
‘I think I’ve found, what could possibly, eventually,
turn out to be . . . an all-time thing.’ Teo’s cheeks
ﬂushed red as he burst into a huge smile. ‘At least I
hope so, anyway.’
‘That’s great news.’ Tory went all teary-eyed suddenly.
Now who was having trouble letting go? ‘I’m sincerely
happy for you.’ She overwhelmed him with a hug.
‘I’m sincerely happy for me, too . . .’ He was surprised
to realise how inwardly upset the announcement had
made her. ‘All this female attention, I can’t cope.’
‘That’ll be the day.’ Brian rolled his eyes and moved
to board.
‘Why don’t you stay here, then?’ Tory pulled away
from Teo to suggest.
‘No, I don’t think so . . .’
‘Brian and I can handle this,’ she insisted, smiling.
‘And as I’ve had to leave Miles asleep, he won’t be half
as annoyed to ﬁnd I’ve gone without him if you’ve
stayed behind too. Please?’
‘Well . . .’ He shrugged, a grin growing on his face.
‘When you put it that way, it does seem to make sense.’
‘It’s settled then. We’ll see you sometime tomorrow.’
She moved to join Brian on board their transport, but
Teo grabbed her arm.

‘I am going to see you again, aren’t I?’
‘Cross my heart,’ she motioned, and blew him a kiss
in leaving.
Seated in the bow of the boat, Tory and Brian basked in
the sunshine as they witnessed the stately green pyramid
of Pico Alto growing nearer. A fresh breeze skimmed
across the surface of the crystal clear water and kept the
temperature down to a pleasant twenty-ﬁve degrees.
There was only one other person nearby and he
sat, facing Tory and Brian, on one of the benches
near the bow of the boat. This man radiated a lovely
energy that was strong enough to inadvertently draw
Tory’s attention.
Of bronze complexion, as the local people were, he
appeared much taller and leaner than most. The hat and
sunglasses he was wearing, whilst reading a newspaper,
made it difﬁcult for Tory to get a good look at him.
She’d not been studying him long, when he looked
up and held her gaze. Behind his dark glasses, his
expression remained very cool.
Lamamu?
She heard the name so clearly, it made her jump.
‘What?’ Brian barked, annoyed that she’d startled
him.
‘Nothing . . . sorry,’ she murmured, looking back to
the man in question.
I told you we’d meet again. He smiled, lowering his
glasses.
No. It couldn’t be . . . Tory’s eyes opened wide as his
identity dawned on her. ‘Thais?’

‘Your memory serves you well, Nin.’
She rose, thrilled beyond reason to ﬁnd a fellow
immortal here in the twentieth century. ‘But you’ve
become . . .’ she admired how ﬁne he looked with two
human legs, instead of four hooves, ‘more compact since
last we met.’
‘And you, my dear Lamamu, have become even
more beautiful.’ He met her halfway, taking up her hand
to kiss it.
‘What’s going on?’ Brian was distrustful of this
stranger showering affection on his sister. ‘You know
this guy?’
‘Adelgar?’ Thais laughed at seeing his old friend in the
fair-skinned, blonde-haired, blue-eyed youth before him.
‘Almost.’ Tory was tickled by the observation. ‘This
is my brother, Brian.’
‘Isn’t life interesting,’ Thais commented to Tory as
he shook Brian’s hand. ‘I’m very pleased to make your
acquaintance, Brian.’
‘Thais, is it?’ Brian queried, still not too sure how he
felt about the tall foreigner.
‘I go by the name of Thomas, or Tom, these days.’
He spoke courteously, as they all seated themselves
once more. ‘So, what brings you back to my dominion,
Lamamu?’
‘Why do you . . .’ Brian looked at Tom, then
changed his mind and addressed Tory instead. ‘Why
does he keep calling you that?’
‘Lamamu was the name the Atlantean’s gave me.
It means divine master of love and war.’ Tory
chuckled at how apt the name seemed when one

considered all the romances and disputes she’d had a
hand in of late.
Brian roused half a smile at this, his eyebrows poised
high in disbelief. ‘Are you saying, you two met in
Atlantis?’
Tory and Thomas both nodded in the afﬁrmative, at
which point Brian seemed to go into a state of shock.
‘To answer your question, Tom . . .’ Tory regained
control of the conversation. ‘I’ve come in search of
something En Darius and Shar Turan buried here for me.’
Thomas’ eyes glazed over a second, and he smiled at
a distant memory. ‘Now there’s a couple of names I
haven’t heard in a very long time.’
‘You might be surprised to know that both the soul
minds in question are presently on Faial.’ Tory
motioned back to the island from whence they’d come.
‘So you’ve met Professor Thurlow and the illustrious
Doctor Pearce?’ Thomas was amused to hear this. ‘I
must say, I found both men more agreeable in the Age
of Absalom.’
‘That was an exceptional era for all mankind,’ Tory
conceded. ‘So how do you know them, Thomas? And
why are you headed for Pico?’
‘I work for the IFAW . . . the International Fund for
Animal Welfare,’ he explained. ‘I keep an eye on the
wildlife here. I do feasibility studies, environmental
impact reports, and so on.’
‘Still!’ Tory had to shake her head at his resilience.
‘That’s amazing.’
‘But Doctor Pearce and I do not always see eye to
eye on where the riches found through his salvaging

should go: to scholars for scientiﬁc study, as he would
have it, or sold to the antiquities markets and private
collections, where the money can aid the Azorean
economy and conservation work.’
‘But then the treasure will be dispersed around the
world, and the Azores shall lose it forever.’ Tory could
see the other side of the argument.
‘Knowing the precise date of a jewel, where it came
from and who made it, will not feed the people here or
save the local wildlife.’ He seemed rather passionate
about his convictions. ‘It’s history.’
‘I see your point,’ Tory granted him.
Thomas turned and looked toward the misty
mountain-top that lay ahead. ‘I’m hiking up the crater
to do a little whale watching . . . the heights of Pico
Alto award a splendid view of the surrounding waters.’
‘Was it you who got the harpooning banned?’ Tory
grinned, already knowing the answer.
‘I had a small hand in it, yes. So tell me, Lamamu.
Do you plan to make the climb up Pico?’
‘I believe that will be called for.’ The thought
became an increasingly daunting one, as the peak
loomed higher with every minute that passed.
‘Well . . .’ Tom held out his palms and shrugged, as if
it were a done deal, ‘you are obliged to have a guide, and
as you are already aware, I come highly recommended.’
‘By whom, exactly?’ Brian was most curious to learn.
His sister and the stranger both looked his way.
‘By yourself, in fact. Thais is the best scout on the
island, you said . . . the smartest, too.’ Tory and Thomas
had a laugh at his expense, but she contained her

amusement. ‘So I thank you kindly for offering, Tom.
We might just have to take you up on that.’
For the remainder of the crossing, Thomas graced
his new travelling companions with a brief history of
the islands. He told how the Azores had been devoid
of human inhabitants since the great apocalypse, and
had only been populated in the last four hundred
years after being discovered by a Portuguese
navigator. The first discoverers named the
archipelago after the buzzards they saw soaring in the
sky above the islands — Portuguese acores. However,
the names of individual islands derived from a variety
of sources. Santa Maria, Sao Miguel and Sao Jorge
were named after saints. Terceira was so called
because it was the third island to be discovered. Faial
and Flores were named after their respective plant
life, Corvo after its bird life and Graciosa and Pico
from their ominous appearance.
Thomas spoke highly of their destination, claiming
Pico was an island of bewitching charm. Its dark, lava
landscapes, created by eruptions and covered in dense
wood, were called Mysterios, or Mysteries. The island’s
haunting beauty was enhanced by the excellent local
wine, a bottle of which Thomas would purchase to have
with dinner. Once they’d reached the little rock-bound
port of Madalena, they could catch a taxi for the ﬁrst
ten kilometres up the mountain — the rest of the hike
was on foot. If they kept a good pace they could reach
the summit, or thereabouts, by nightfall. There were
mountain huts where one could spend the night, to save
making the descent in the same day.

Miles rose in a ﬂuster when he found Tory gone, and her
note only served to intensify his panic. She’ll kill me.
She’s going to make that great hike for nothing! Shit!
He raked on his clothes, of the mind to catch her up;
perhaps Pearce could arrange passage across the strait.
Hold on . . . Miles pulled himself up. She doesn’t
know, I know what I know. If she returns empty-handed,
she won’t think it my fault. She will just assume the capsule
has been lost over time.
This made him wonder what Tory planned to do in
the event of never ﬁnding it? ‘Don’t even think it!’ he
scolded himself, but he couldn’t block out the little
voice in his head . . . What if you didn’t tell her? Maybe
she’d ﬁnd the capsule on her own . . . maybe she wouldn’t.
‘I’m not listening.’ Miles snapped himself out of his
little daydream to get on with the task of ﬁnding her.
As he made haste across the Rua Conselheiro
Medeiros, the main street of Horta, his inner voice
persuaded him to stray from his course long enough to
have a cup of coffee and think seriously about what he
planned to do.
The next hour found Miles still seated in the
sunshine of the teahouse balcony, mind-numbed from
trying to reason with himself.
LA-MA-MU.
He’d written the name in large letters on a napkin,
and pondered its meaning as he drank his third cup
of coffee.
Divine master of love and war.
Did this refer to Tory? The ancients of Atlantis were
obviously every bit as scientiﬁcally, technologically and

spiritually advanced as the mystics claimed they were;
had they, too, considered Tory to be a Goddess as the
early Britons had?
I hardly revere her with the esteem a Goddess deserves.
Miles was quite suddenly overawed by all the great
feats he’d seen Tory accomplish; she truly was the
essence of what gods and legends were made of. It
seemed pure idiocy to doubt her when the enlightened
all through the ages had seen fit to aid her, and hail
her as divine.
But her touch kindled the marrow of life in his soul
and making love to her was the closest the professor had
ever come to a religious experience. I should rather die
than live without her. If there is a God, please don’t let my
hesitation cost me her love.
‘What does it mean . . . Lamamu?’ Teo startled Miles
as he took a seat opposite him.
‘Divine master of love and war.’ Miles screwed up
the napkin and tossed it on his empty breakfast plate.
Teo gave half a laugh at this. ‘I assume you were
thinking about Tory.’
‘Why aren’t you with her?’
Teo was confused to note that Miles sounded most
annoyed. ‘She didn’t want you to go jumping to any more
conclusions about us, so she asked that I stay behind.’
‘Your coffee, senhor.’ Donna placed the cup and
saucer on the table before Teo, then gave him a short,
but ardent kiss before going back to her duties.
‘The service here is great, don’t you think?’
‘You don’t waste any time, do you?’ Miles couldn’t
help but be delighted by the development.

‘For most of us, time is a precious commodity.’ Teo
shrugged. ‘Why waste it on regrets.’
Miles pondered these words a moment, before
rising. ‘You know, you’re absolutely right.’
‘Well, I usually am,’ Teo boasted, as he observed the
professor, curious as to his mind.
‘If I do something now, I may lose . . .’ he murmured,
not making any sense. ‘But if I don’t, I surely will.’
Miles’ expression turned grave as he hurried towards the
stairs.
‘Anything I can do?’ Teo stood, alarmed by his
strange behaviour. ‘Miles?’
As the professor disappeared down the stairs, Teo
rushed to the balcony and waited for him to exit out the
front door.
‘What’s going on, Thurlow?’ he demanded. Miles
powered on, not even looking back.
Teo smelt a rat; perhaps he’d been right about Miles
all along.

26

LOST AND
FOUND . . . OUT

W

hile Thomas picked up supplies and
equipment, Tory checked the detector to get
a reading on how close they were to the
canister. Four of the tiny light indicators shone yellow,
so Tory ﬁgured they were on the right track.
As their taxi wound its way around the great
mountain, the detector displayed ﬁve blue lights. By the
time they reached the drop-off point, six of the lights
were tending towards a shade of indigo.
Tory tried to appreciate the local fauna and ﬂora
that Thomas pointed out to her during their trek, but
the thrill of the hunt was far too absorbing; she was so
close and getting closer.

Her excitement drove her on, until all of the seven
light indicators ﬁnally lit up with the colour purple.
‘That’s great,’ Brian commented as he chanced a
glance over the edge of the cliff before them, ﬁnding a
sheer drop of a few hundred feet.
‘We must be right on top of it.’ Tory became
frustrated by her limitations. ‘There must be an opening
or a cave of some kind down there.’ She strained to see,
but the rock face jutted out to hinder her view.
‘I’ll investigate.’ Thomas off-loaded the gear he was
carrying and stripped off his hat, sunglasses, shirt and
jacket. With his arms outstretched, he took a ﬂying
jump towards the edge of the great chasm.
‘Thomas, no!’ He near startled his two companions
to death, but then a metamorphosis took place before
their eyes.
His large muscular body transmuted into that of a
fully-grown hawk, his clothes falling to the ground in
his wake. His arms became his wings, his legs became
talons and tail and he took flight, soaring on the
evening breeze.
‘Jesus! That was amazing!’ Brian couldn’t believe his
own eyes. ‘Did you see that?’
‘Yes, I saw it,’ Tory conﬁrmed with a smile of
admiration, her eyes still following the ﬂight of her
friend. ‘It is known as shape-shifting. I have heard of
such feats, but I have never before witnessed the
practice.’
As the hawk ﬂew in, alighting on the grassy outcrop
beside them, his form began to expand, and Tory turned
away to give Tom a chance to dress.

Brian, however, was far too intrigued to be so polite.
He just stared in wonder as the man moved to retrieve
his clothes.
‘There is an opening, about ten feet below us. I have
gear that will get us down there.’
‘Wow.’ Brian’s legs failed him, and he sank to a seat
on the ground. ‘Can you change into anything, or do
you just do birds?’
‘Anything that lives and breathes . . . and some
objects.’ Tom shrugged, as if it were commonplace, and
fastened up his trousers. ‘But nothing with mechanical
moving parts, you understand.’
‘Unbelievable!’
‘Why so? Have you not seen your sister do the same?’
‘You can do that?’ Brian was shocked by the
statement.
‘Not with animals . . . as far as I’m aware, anyway.’
She remained with her back to them.
Thomas gave a hearty laugh, turning Tory to face
him. ‘Still not very well informed, are you, little
goddess? You have only to will it and the mental plane
will comply . . . as is really true of most things. Mind
you, in such states, one lives the reality of the animal
form chosen, so I wouldn’t go leaping off any cliffs until
you’ve had a chance to test your wings.’
Tory contemplated the implications of what he’d
said, as she moved to the edge to view the long drop
down. ‘Don’t worry, I won’t.’
As the power boat belonging to Dr Pearce sped them
across the strait to Pico, Miles was feeling rather proud

of himself. If Tory needed to complete this one last
quest before they could settle down to a life of their
own, so be it; he would do everything in his power to
help her.
Yet, just as they’d reached the halfway mark of their
voyage, the engine suddenly started to splutter, and
smoke billowed out as it packed up and died.
‘Jesus christ!’ Pearce roared. ‘Not again! I thought
we’d ﬁxed this?’
He looked to his skipper, who shrugged. ‘I’m sorry,
Doctor Pearce, but I’m going to have to wire Horta and
get her towed back.’
‘Back!’ Miles protested, despairingly. ‘But we need
to go that way.’ He motioned to Pico, so close and yet
so far.
‘I have no choice, Professor,’ the skipper advised as
delicately as he could, knowing the impromptu trip was
a mercy errand of some kind. ‘It’s out of my hands.’ He
turned and took up the radio receiver to get Horta on
the line.
Miles sank into his seat and, against his better
judgement, was of half a mind to swim the rest of the
way. He contemplated a moment what Tory would do in
the same situation.
She would trust in the universe, he decided. If the boat
has broken down, there is a reason. I must trust this is
meant to be, for whatever unknown end.
Brian was the last to lower himself down to the mouth
of the cave, and he was barely able to breathe for the
exhilaration of executing the dangerous exercise.

‘The things I do for you?’ he grumbled, as his footing
disappeared and Brian was forced to allow his legs to
dangle, whilst his arms took his entire body weight as he
clung to the rope with his hands.
‘Aw . . . you love it.’ Tory grabbed hold of his legs,
and with help from Thomas guided Brian safely to the
ﬂoor of the cavern.
As soon as he felt ground beneath his feet they
ceased to tingle. ‘It’s alright for you two. You’re both
immortal.’ He breathed through his fear until it passed.
‘And you’re not?’ Thomas looked at him, rather
amazed.
‘Hardly.’ Brian displayed the grazes on his hands
that he’d sustained during his descent.
‘It’s not like you to make a mistake like that,
Thomas.’ Tory was intrigued. ‘Don’t you perceive
information from a level of awareness beyond this
earthly plane?
‘Yes.’ Tom shrugged, unable to explain his misconception. ‘My sincere apologies, Brian. If I’d realised
this before, I certainly would’ve rigged you up to a
proper harness.’
Brian forced a laugh, as the magnitude of the risk
he’d just taken dawned on him. ‘That’s comforting,
Thomas, thanks.’
‘You’re welcome.’ Tom dug a torch from his
pack and bounced the beam around the inside
walls of the cavern, which were covered by hardened
black lava.
‘What’s that?’ Tory spied a sparkle in the darkness
ahead, and moved to investigate.

The cave narrowed as they ventured deeper. They
passed through a thin opening at the end, and entered
what appeared to have once been an enclosed circular
room. Part of the roof had caved in and lay in large
chunks on the ﬂoor. Most of the chamber was lined
with the dark lava coating, but the chunks of the
domed ceiling on the ground divulged that the secret
structure had once been entirely constructed of
orichalchum.
‘Looks like this place fell victim to an eruption,
quite some time ago,’ Thomas surmised, closely
observing the solidiﬁed lava.
‘But the capsule has to be here somewhere.’ Tory
searched frantically, praying to the Goddess it was not
now encased under the hardened lava somewhere.
‘Why is this mound here?’ Brian circled the
structure that rose out of the ﬂoor in the middle of
the room.
Thomas had already considered this. ‘It is my
guess . . .’ He squatted to chip away a piece of the
congealed coating, to disclose the orichalchum
underneath, ‘that this was built to accommodate your
capsule. But when the explosion blasted through the
back wall, the capsule was most probably shot from its
mount.’ He cast his sights towards to opening through
which they’d entered
‘Shot where?’ Tory urged, but he only shrugged.
‘That would depend on the force of the blast . . .
these islands have known eruptions that could ﬁre such
an object clear into the Atlantic.’ Thomas looked to
Tory, clearly not wanting to be the bearer of bad news.

‘But if the metal walls could not withstand the
explosion, the chances of ﬁnding the capsule still here
and intact are minimal, I’m afraid.’
The news was devastating; Tory had to sit down. ‘So
what do I do now?’ She raised her teary sights to
Thomas. ‘This can’t be the end, it can’t be . . . I refuse
to just let him die.’
This was a precarious situation; Thomas took a seat
on the boulder beside Tory and placed an arm around
her shoulder. ‘Has it ever occurred to you, that maybe
you’re meant to let this man go?’
‘No!’ She stood and backed away from Tom,
enraged by the suggestion. ‘The divine mother herself
helped to speed me on this quest. Do you think for a
moment she would have done so, if he was not meant
to live?’
He could feel Tory’s pain, her confusion, yet
Thomas could not bring himself to lie to her. ‘Perhaps
the quest was for your beneﬁt, rather than . . .’
‘Stop it!’ she demanded. ‘I’ve heard enough.’ She
approached Brian and took hold of his hand. ‘I thank
you kindly for your help and advice, Thomas, but I have
to go now. Say goodbye, Brian.’
‘See ya, Tom.’ Brian complied, considering his
sister’s mood. ‘It’s been a real blast . . .’ The pair faded
from sight.
Thomas shook his head at being misunderstood, as
he so often was these days. Never listen, human beings.
He stood to make his leave. ‘Still, I hope with all my
heart that you prove me wrong, little goddess . . .
though I believe that time shall prove me right.’

The sun set on the horizon in a blaze of colour.
Teo witnessed the spectacular vision from Donna’s
balcony, with a cool drink in his hand and his girl
snuggled comfortably under his arm. In the stillness of
the moment, Teo felt a sense of belonging and peace the
like of which he’d never experienced before.
The identity of his parents was unknown to him;
thus his ancestry had remained a mystery. A whole
lifetime he’d spent wandering the earth in search of that
instinctive feeling of origin, and though he’d only been
on Faial a few days, this was the only place that had
ever felt like home.
‘Shall we go in?’ Donna prompted, ‘before the
dinner is spoiled.’
‘One moment longer.’ He cuddled her, wanting to
savour the extraordinary recognition he felt.
Although Donna could appreciate the beauty of the
scene, she was starving. ‘If you meant what you said last
night,’ she directed him to look her in the eye, ‘you can
watch the sunset from here, every night, for the rest of
your life.’
‘I meant it alright.’ He smiled and reinforced his
pledge with a kiss.
‘Ah . . . hmm!’ Tory cleared her throat to get their
attention, startling the unsuspecting lovers out of
their wits.
‘Tory!’ Teo swung round to ﬁnd her and Brian.
‘How . . .?’ Donna drew in her brow as she tried to
ﬁgure their sudden appearance.
‘Sorry to intrude like this.’ Tory spluttered out an
apology. She hadn’t realised, when she’d willed herself

to Teo’s location, that she would ﬁnd herself in such an
awkward predicament.
‘Did you ﬁnd it?’ Teo wanted to know.
The question pained her. ‘No. We found where it
was once housed, but that place has long since been
destroyed.’
‘I’m so sorry.’ He placed a hand on her shoulder,
seeing how upset she was.
‘What’s going on?’ Donna wasn’t following a word of
this. ‘What is it you’re looking for?’
‘Hope.’ Tory roused half a smile, before her features
were again shadowed by grief. ‘I suppose I should ﬁnd
Miles and tell him, though I don’t believe he’ll be too
happy to hear that I intend to keep looking.’
‘The good professor was behaving rather strangely
when I saw him today,’ Teo recalled. ‘He was pondering
some ancient word . . . something to do with the
goddess of love and war.’
‘The divine master of love and war?’ Tory corrected,
her spirits lifting.
‘Yeah, that’s it. La-ma-mu, I think it was.’
Please Goddess, don’t let him know of this. Tory went
ghostly white, as she looked to Brian to advise: ‘I never
told Miles my Atlantean name. So, how then, has he
learnt of it?’
Brian was very perturbed, recalling his father’s
prophecy of confusion and treachery. ‘There’s something
ﬁshy going on here.’
‘I’d second that hunch.’ Teo’s mood darkened, also
recollecting the Merlin’s caution. ‘Have you still got the
detector with you?’

‘I do.’ Tory pulled the device from her jacket pocket,
and Teo took it from her.
‘What colour did the lights indicate when you ﬁrst
set foot on Pico?’ he enquired. Donna observed the
device over his shoulder, curious as to its purpose.
Tory thought this a rather peculiar query. ‘Four of
yellow, why?’
‘That’s interesting, isn’t it?’ Teo turned the device
around to show his companions the current reading,
that was ﬁve of blue.’
‘But, that would mean . . .’ Tory’s excitement
mounted as she realised, ‘we’re closer to it here, on Faial.’
Teo winked at this, obviously rather impressed with
himself. ‘You got it, sister.’
Subsequent to an afternoon of hellish torment, Miles
made it back to Horta just after sundown and joined Dr
Pearce in his ofﬁce for a much needed cup of coffee.
‘I’m sorry I wasn’t able to be of more help.’ John felt
awful about what had happened. He’d never seen his
colleague so despondent.
Miles accepted the steaming mug from his friend,
attempting to make light of the way he felt. ‘Hey, we
tried, right?’
‘Miles!’
When he heard his name echoing down the
corridor, Miles knew at once who sought him. ‘Tory!’
He placed the mug aside and rose to open the door, yet
it was ﬂung open before he reached it.
‘Surprise, surprise.’ Brian strolled through the door
ahead of his sister, who had her head down marking the

light indicators change from indigo to purple as she
entered the room.
‘What is the meaning of this?’ Dr Pearce demanded,
as Brian closed the door and took a ﬁrm hold of him.
‘I’d say it’s behind this door.’ Tory looked to John.
‘Open it.’
‘Tory, please.’ Miles softly beseeched her, but Tory
turned abruptly and gripped his throat.
‘Don’t say a word.’ She stared him down into a seat,
before turning her attention back to the man held
captive by her brother. ‘What is the code, John?’ She
held his face between her hands, glaring deep into his
eyes, and even though the doctor was determined to
remain tight-lipped, Tory smiled as she stepped away
from him. ‘Thank you for playing.’ She conﬁdently
approached the panel and punched a code in.
This pleased Pearce, because if one punched in an
incorrect sequence it would set off the alarm. The
doctor was left somewhat bemused as the door unlocked
and opened. ‘Who are you people? Do you work for
the government?’
‘Guess again,’ Brian suggested. ‘Let’s go.’ He motioned
Miles in after Tory, then followed with his hostage.
As Tory viewed the treasure, the adrenalin began to
surge through her veins. ‘How long has he known about
this?’ She directed the question at John, quickly
covering Miles’ mouth with her hand to prevent him
from responding.
‘Why, I . . .’ John looked to Miles for the right
answer, but Brian tightened his grip and he resolved to
tell the truth, ‘told him only yesterday afternoon.’

Tory gasped in horror as she drew away from
Miles. ‘You weren’t going to tell me, were you?’ She
held up her hand in warning; she would not tolerate
any more of his lies. ‘No, don’t answer . . . it was a
rhetorical question,’ she was saddened to admit. She
backed up to the capsule, turned and placed both her
hands on it.
‘So you’re nothing but common thieves.’ Dr
Pearce exaggerated his observation in a mocking
fashion. ‘Well, the two of you will never move that
thing. It weighs a tonne.’ He laughed at their folly.
‘There is nothing common about me, Doctor,’ Tory
advised, as she vanished from the room, the capsule
along with her.
John froze in horror. ‘Who in hell’s name are you
people?’
‘Look, Brian.’ Miles had to make him see. ‘I tried to
reach you today and let you know, but the boat broke
down halfway there.’
‘Tell it to the judge.’ Brian’s cool glare conveyed
his indifferent view perfectly. ‘She’ll be back,
presently.’
Tory materialized back at Donna’s place with the
capsule, where Teo was waiting to assist her to retrieve
the antidote from the metal casing.
‘I’ve been told a thing or two about you during your
absence.’ Donna gave a shy smile as she watched Tory,
down on her knees, positioning the large metallic ball.
‘And I don’t think I would’ve believed a word of it, if I
hadn’t seen this for myself.’

While politely listening to Donna, Tory turned the
detector upside down and placed it on top of the
capsule. Retrieve, she commanded.
Two long, thin metal prongs ejected from the
device, startling all present as they penetrated the metal
case with a thud, and split it down the centre. Inside
was another orichalchum ball, much smaller than the
ﬁrst. This had a latch, which she opened to ﬁnd the tiny
crystal container housing the cure she sought.
‘Wow!’ Donna was thrilled, as she’d been told that
this was what Tory had been in search of. ‘It makes you
want to run off on some crazy adventure, doesn’t it?’
‘Hey,’ Teo cautioned in jest. ‘Don’t tempt fate. Tory
here is renowned for dragging anyone who’s willing to
the ends of the earth on such quests.’
‘Any time,’ Donna assured her.
‘Ignore that comment.’ Teo overruled Donna’s
enthusiasm. ‘We’re settling down to the quiet life.’
Tory smiled as she observed the adoration that
passed between Teo and the new love of his life; she’d
never thought she would see him observe anyone else in
such a way, and it wounded her a little more than
expected. ‘So you’ve decided to stay?’
‘Yes, indeed.’ He hugged his girl closer.
‘Well, I must say I’m not really surprised. These
islands were once your dominion, and so will they be
again.’ Tory stood to kiss his cheek, then Donna’s. ‘I’m
overjoyed for you both. In the eyes of the universe you
are meant to be together.’ She looked back to the
severed metal ball on the ﬂoor before her. ‘Here, give
me a hand with this.’ Teo assisted her to push the two

halves back together, whilst Tory held the device above
them. Seal, she instructed, and so it was done.
‘Well, then.’ Teo leaned back on his haunches,
looking from their completed task to Tory. ‘This is
goodbye, isn’t it?’
‘Let’s just say . . . Ate logo.’ Which in Portuguese
means goodbye, but for a short time only.
‘Ate logo,’ he echoed, his voice wavering from the
sadness he felt. He gripped hold of Tory and gave her
one of his big bear hugs. ‘Thank you, for everything. I
never would have found this place if not for you.’
When he pulled away, Teo was teary-eyed and Tory
was fast becoming rather melancholy herself. So she
placed her hands on the heavy orichalchum ball to
avoid a drawn-out goodbye. ‘Best wishes to you both. I
shall not forget all you’ve done.’
‘Don’t be a stranger now, you hear?’ Teo reached
out to brush his fingers against her cheek, but before
he could make contact she had vanished. He searched
the empty space that was left in her wake, his hands
clenching into fists as he realised the adventure was
over and their last moment together had come
and gone.
‘Don’t be sad.’ Donna knelt beside him, gently
smoothing the frown from his face. ‘Where one door
closes, another always opens.’
Her smile was as contagious as it was uplifting, and
Teo’s fear of loss subsided to that warm cosy feeling of
coming home. ‘I do like the sound of that.’ Teo guided
her to a seat on his lap, and as their lips met he realised
that the adventure was only just beginning.

Dr Pearce was slowly driving Brian insane with his
questions, and no threat seemed to subdue his curiosity.
‘Look, we’re not CIA, FBI, British secret service,
thieves of any calibre, terrorists, or extra-terrestrials!
Okay,’ Brian impressed on the doctor, gripping hold of
his shirt as he backed him up across the room.
John looked to Miles, who seemed completely
oblivious to what was going on. ‘Professor? This might
be a good time for you to intervene.’
Miles turned and looked at Pearce blankly, not even
ﬂinching from where he stood.
‘Wonderful,’ John protested, despite Brian’s ﬁst
poised in front of his face. ‘You’re part of all this, I
suppose? You’ll be held responsible for the loss of that
piece, and mark my words, there will be hell to pay for
betraying a professional conﬁdence . . . ah!’
Brian slammed the doctor straight between the eyes,
and lowered him to the ground unconscious.
‘Thank you.’ Miles drew a deep breath, grateful for
the peace.
‘My pleasure.’
Brian knelt to check his victim’s vital signs as Tory’s
presence became manifest, returning the orichalchum
jewel to its place of display.
‘Thank god you’re back.’ Miles moved to greet her,
but Tory avoided him and made straight for Brian.
‘Yes. I’ve returned your precious relic.’
‘That’s not what I meant.’ The tone of Miles’ voice
entreated her to hear him out. He took hold of her arm.
‘And it’s not what I hold precious. If you’d just grant me
ﬁve minutes grace to explain . . .’

‘You had ample chance to explain yesterday.’
As she turned and glared at him there were daggers
in her eyes, and Miles’ hopes of redeeming himself
dwindled dramatically. ‘I tried tell you yesterday —
twice in fact.’
‘Oh, and you were so insistent, weren’t you?’ She
pushed him away from her, sickened by how gullible
she was. ‘Damn you to hell for this, Miles.’ Her
emotions burst forth to ﬂood her eyes. ‘If the situation
had been reversed, Maelgwn would never have done
this to you . . . he would have done everything within
his power to help me save you.’
‘I am not Maelgwn!’ Miles was fed up with having
to live up to her expectations of him.
‘No, you’re not.’ She backed up a few paces. ‘Not by
a long shot. I loved you, Miles, I really did . . . but if you
think that I could ever trust you again, you’re even
more misled than I thought.’ She reached out her hand
to her brother, who took hold. ‘Adieu, Professor. We
shan’t meet again.’
‘That’s where you’re wrong,’ he pledged. ‘If I have
to go to hell and back to explain myself, I fully intend to
do so!’ The level of his voice raised as he watched Tory
and her brother fade away. ‘Goddamn it, woman!’
He wanted to scream and wail in the aftermath of
his stupidity, but what good would it do him — by now
she would be back in Britain. Think. He persuaded
himself against having an emotional meltdown, given
his present circumstances.
With the capsule returned to its place of storage, it
appeared as if nothing at all had taken place. So Miles

closed the door to the storage room, poured his cold cup
of coffee all over himself, and dragged John to the
lounge in his ofﬁce before reviving him.
‘Pearce? Are you alright?’ Miles slapped him about
the cheeks.
‘Ouch!’ Pearce came to, urging the professor away as
he held his throbbing head in both hands.
‘That was quite a knock.’ Miles offered him a glass
of water.
But as Pearce raised himself to accept it, he was
seized by panic. ‘Are they still here!’ He sat bolt
upright, scanning the room for the intruders.
‘Sorry, John?’ Miles frowned. ‘To whom do you refer?’
‘That wild friend of yours, and that gladiator she
brought with her.’ Pearce raised himself quickly and
made for the storage facility. ‘They came to steal
Lamamu . . . just disappeared into thin air with it. Well,
you know. You were there!’
‘I was?’ Miles gave a harsh laugh. ‘You did hit the
cabinet hard. Perhaps we should get you to a doctor, hey?’
‘I am a doctor,’ he insisted. ‘And I know what I saw.’
John punched the combination into the panel, but on
attempting to open the door he found it locked. ‘Damn,
it’s stuck.’ He began to panic and punched in the code
once more — whereby it opened.
As Pearce scanned the room, ﬁnding all as it should
be, Miles just had to say it. ‘I really think you need to
lie down.’
‘But it was so real.’ Pearce sank as if he would pass
out again, so Miles grabbed him up and escorted him
back to the lounge.

‘It was real for me, too. When your head collided
with the ﬁling cabinet, I copped my hot coffee in my
lap.’ Miles directed his friend’s attention to the large
wet stain on his shirt and trousers.
‘Oh . . .’ Pearce’s eyes rolled around as he probed his
brain trying to recall if it was as Thurlow said. After all,
his own scenario did seem a bit far-fetched. ‘I do
apologise, Professor, this must seem an awful bother.’
‘Not at all.’ Miles assured him with a smile. ‘You’ve
put up with worse from me today.’
‘We’ll call it even then.’ Pearce agreed.
Back at the cottage on Anglesey, Tory was gathering her
things together. She left the large diamond her father
had given her wrapped in a note on Miles’ bed, to pay
for any expenses he’d incurred on her behalf.
Brian watched his sister bustling about with
growing concern. During the time that Tory was absent
from Dr Pearce’s ofﬁces, John had conﬁrmed Miles’
attempt to reach them on Pico. Brian, quite frankly,
believed their story.
Stay out of it. He heeded his own advice.
Still, he’d become rather fond of Miles during the
course of their association, and it did seem as if the
professor was once again getting the blunt end of the
stick.
‘When you told Miles you wouldn’t meet him again,
do I take that to mean you don’t plan on coming back
here at all?’
‘I don’t know,’ Tory snapped, then calmed herself
when she realised she was expending her anger on the

wrong person. ‘I’m sorry, Brian . . . I just need some time
to think.’ She approached and gave him a hug. ‘Surely
you realise I could never be parted from you for any
great length of time.’
‘That’s good.’ He presumed this meant no. ‘Because
I’m naming you as my child’s guardian.’
‘I’ll try and make it back before the birth then.’ She
ﬂung the sports bag, containing all the trinkets she’d
collected in her travels, including Maelgwn’s sword, its
hilt protruding from the end, over her shoulder.
‘But the birth is over six months from now. Why
stay away so long?’ Brian inquired, as if he didn’t know.
‘I want to give Miles some time to think. I’m not so
sure we’re supposed to be lovers in every lifetime.’
‘Now hold on.’ Brian pulled her up as she made for
the door. ‘Why would it be true for everyone else you’ve
ever known, but not for you two?’
Tory’s eyes widened in horror. ‘Oh, Brian.’ She
sounded disappointed in him. ‘Don’t tell me you
actually believe Miles was going to tell me about the
capsule? Please. Just spare me.’ She made for the front
door with greater haste, her hands over her ears.
‘Well, if you’d just calm down for two seconds . . .’
Brian raised his voice to combat her resistance, ‘you’d
see he only did it because he’s crazy about you. And I
don’t think for a second that Maelgwn would have found
it easy to aid you in the same predicament; not if he
knew it meant losing you for an indeterminate duration.’
‘Enough!’ Tory’s emotions welled up inside her,
setting her tears ﬂowing again. She thrust Brian away
with both hands.

‘Aw, Tory . . . I’m sorry, I thought . . .’
‘Just . . . stop! . . . And back up.’
Brian stopped, at a loss for what else to do. I
distinctly remember telling me to stay out of this.
‘Forget the lift,’ she snifﬂed, ﬁnally. ‘I know the way.’
‘Don’t you dare disappear on me . . . Tory!’ She was
gone before he’d ﬁnished the sentence. ‘You’re making a
mistake!’ he shouted into the void with all the
conviction he could muster, before collapsing onto the
lounge exhausted. ‘Women!!!’
In the quiet solitude of the secret cavern at Dinas
Emrys, Tory calmed herself to a rational state. Perhaps I
am being too harsh on Miles? She shook her head to
disagree with herself, spying her ride back to the sixth
century just across the room. ‘There are other more
pressing matters to worry about.’
‘No wonder the ancients named you Lamamu.’ Tory
stopped mid-stride, turning quickly to ﬁnd Myrddin
approaching.
‘You seem to leave conﬂict and romance ﬂourishing,
wherever you go.’ Her father gave a short laugh, though
his inﬂection conveyed disappointment. Tory didn’t
understand this at all, what was wrong with everybody?
‘I’ve caused no major wars here that I’m aware of. I just
did what I came to do, and now I’m going.’ She turned
to do so.
‘Yes, you got what you wanted alright, but at what
price?’ The sardonic strain of his voice taunted his
daughter to a slow her pace. ‘Never mind the lover you
intend to leave in torment for the rest of his days, or

the brother you didn’t even bother to say goodbye or
thank you to.’
It had been a long, long time since Tory had been
lectured, and in her present mood she wasn’t really
ﬁnding it to her liking. ‘Don’t you start. I’m sure they’ll
both get over it. Besides, I’ll be back soon enough.’ She
stepped into the chariot in the hope of departing before
this debate got out of hand.
‘If you choose to be so hard, Tory, you will be
broken,’ he warned.
‘Miles lied to me. I’m not the bad guy in this
scenario.’
‘Then why, Tory, are you acting like you are?’ He
raised his dark, bushy eyebrows in question. ‘If you want
retribution for your betrayal, I’m telling you, you shall
get it. Besides, there are certain things you haven’t told
Miles either. I know that’s an immortality potion you’ve
got in your hand. If Maelgwn is to be immortal, why on
earth would you come back to Miles? Perhaps this little
dispute is just one of convenience?’
Though it was a struggle for Tory to stay civil at this
point, she thought it might be nice to depart with at
least one person still talking to her. ‘Dad, I love you
dearly . . . but I think my love life is really my own affair.
I can’t even bear to think of that man at the moment,
let alone discuss him with you. Give us all a little time
to calm down, then we’ll talk.’ She looked to him for
his blessing to leave.
‘It’s your choice, of course.’ Myrddin took a step
away, neither subscribing to, nor condemning her line
of reasoning.

‘Damn it, Dad. I have to go.’ She begged his leave.
‘I’ve come this close to ending this thing before, and I
screwed it up. I won’t run that risk again. I can’t.’ Not
to be swayed or diverted from her task, she now placed
her hands upon the chariot and envisaged the entrance
room to Taliesin’s labyrinth, as it had been on the day of
her departure.
‘Don’t allow yourself to be guided by your emotions.
Listen to your instincts. Consider the facts and . . .’
Myrddin hastily conveyed these last words of advice, as
he watched Tory and the chariot disappear once again,
‘trust yourself.’

27

TRUSTING THE SELF

I

n the grand Romanesque entrance room, ﬁlled to
capacity with Taliesin’s favourite artefacts, Tory
expected to ﬁnd the Merlin awaiting her. Although
she could not sense his presence, she called for him
several times. When no response was forthcoming, she
decided go on to Degannwy alone. She left the chariot
in the safety of Taliesin’s otherworldly abode; if Taliesin
turned up it would announce her return to this time.
‘Majesty?’ Selwyn whispered in delight upon sighting
Tory, conscious of not disturbing the ailing King. ‘Could
thou be back already?’
As Tory’s body caught up to her spirit, she came to
focus on the young bard. ‘Selwyn.’ She hugged him
excitedly; it felt like an eternity had passed since they

last spoke. ‘Where hast thou been?’ She held her dear
friend at arm’s length to view him.
Though Selwyn thought her a bit confused, he
answered all the same. ‘I have not left the King’s side for
the entire time thou hast been gone.’
That’s strange? Then how could I have found Maelgwn
alone when I came to collect the samples for En Darius?
‘How long have I been gone?’ She noted it was
dark outside.
‘The sun hast yet to rise on the day thou left.’
When Selwyn saw how happy this made her, he added
with glee: ‘I thought thou must have forgotten
something, but then I saw thy hair. And thine eyes . . .’
He gasped as he realised her pupils had changed colour.
‘I can hardly wait to hear the tales of thy quest,
Highness, but . . .’ he was a little shy in asking. ‘Did thy
efforts prove fruitful?’
Tory ﬁshed the orichalchum locket from the pocket
of her jacket, smiling broadly as she opened it to
disclose the crystal bottle. ‘I would not have returned
without it.’ Her sights drifted to the bed where
Maelgwn lay sleeping, and she was drawn to his side.
‘You shall never know this suffering again, my love.’ She
pulled the stopper from the bottle and lowered it to rest
on the side of the King’s mouth.
The wails of a distraught woman, becoming ever
louder in the corridor outside, forced Tory to refrain
from administering the life-giving liquid. The woman
howled out her grief amidst incoherent babble, as she
pounded on the door of the King’s chamber.
‘No soul is to know I am here yet.’

‘Of course.’ Selwyn moved to discover the meaning
of the disturbance, only opening the door far enough to
converse with the culprit.
Though the woman’s sobs could still be heard, Tory
could not hear a word that passed between her and the
bard.
When Selwyn ﬁnally closed the door, he leant his
forehead against it. ‘I don’t understand,’ he mumbled,
disappointed in himself.
‘What is it?’ Tory replaced the stopper on the bottle,
afraid she might spill some of the precious brew.
‘Oh, Majesty, I have failed thee, miserably.’ He
turned to face her, his large, soulful eyes ﬁlling with
tears. ‘The Prince is showing symptoms of the plague.’
Selwyn bowed his head in shame; his amulet had not
protected him.
The news swept through Tory’s body like a shock
wave from hell; every inch of her being screamed in
pain. ‘Nay!’ she cried, racing for the door, but she
staggered and fell short of it. ‘You can’t do this. Not my
son.’ She cast her eyes to the heavens as she got back to
her feet. ‘He will not be one of Mahaud’s casualties,’ she
announced, as if warning the powers that be against
defying her will. ‘Come Selwyn, I need thee to be strong
for me now.’ Tory held out her hand to him, and the
bard clasped it ﬁrmly as they hurried towards the room
where the Prince had been quarantined.
The fever had ﬁrm hold of Rhun and the young Prince
was well aware of the suffering that lay in store. Yet the
worst was not that he would die, but that he had failed

Gwynedd. That was far more agonising than the swelling
in his loins or the heat that pulsed through his body.
‘Oh, sweet prince.’ Tory cradled him in her arms as
she used to do when he was little. His head rested
gently against her breast as she wiped his brow with a
cool, damp cloth. She forced herself not to think of the
implications of this development, for even in his
weakened state Rhun would pick up on anything she
thought or felt. ‘Do not fear. Thou art well aware what a
clever mother thou hast. I shall resolve this dilemma
just as I have those before it. You shall not suffer long, I
promise thee.’
‘I deserve to suffer . . . this ailment be the result of
my own stupidity.’ Rhun looked to Selwyn, who was
seated beside the bed where he and his mother lay.
‘Forgive me, wise merlin, I did not heed thy word. I
assumed to think I knew better than thee, and gave my
talisman to the Lady Bridgit.’
So, it had not been his own failing after all; Selwyn
didn’t know whether to laugh or cry. ‘But my dear
prince, the Lady Bridgit be in no danger. I would have
seen to her protection if this had been the case.’
Tory’s heart was too heavy to be angry with her boy,
and she knew a scolding wouldn’t help. ‘These things
were sent to try us.’ She lowered Rhun’s head back onto
the pillow.
‘Please do not leave me, Mother. I know thou art
angered and disappointed, but . . .’ Tears of disgrace
streamed down the drawn features of Rhun’s yellowtinged face, ‘I have never felt so afraid in all my
born days.’

‘Shhh.’ She placed her ﬁngers over his lips. ‘Just
believe and trust in me, as thou always hast. I shan’t be
defeated unless thou art.’
‘Never.’ He forced a smile.
‘I am warning thee, Rhun,’ Tory cautioned, sensing
doubt. ‘Do not assume to know better than I. One
negative suggestion from that brain of thine and I shall
kill thee myself. Clear?’ She smiled, sensing he was now
more disposed towards her plea. ‘Now, I have to go. I do
not wish to leave thy father alone too long . . . alone!’ She
looked at Selwyn, stunned by a revelation. ‘He be alone,
so I must be with him now! Quick, we have to catch me
before I go back.’ Tory leapt for the door, leaving Selwyn
none the wiser as to why his Queen was so excited.
Tory raced down the corridor at a deadly pace. If she
could get to the King’s chamber before she returned to
Atlantis, she could tell herself she needed two doses of
the antidote and the problem would be solved.
‘Wait!’ she yelled before she’d even reached the
door, but upon bursting it open she found no one but
the sleeping King in the room. I could be wrong, of
course, but as she approached Maelgwn, she spied the
large amethyst wand in his hands. ‘Goddamn it!’ she
cursed in a whisper.
‘Majesty?’ Selwyn slipped into the room in a timid
fashion, afraid his poor Queen was losing her mind.
‘Something else ails thee?’
‘Oh, Selwyn. I am sorry.’ She drew a deep breath. ‘I
suppose I’m not making much sense.’ Her gaze shifted to
Maelgwn, her thoughts on their son. So the choice is
mine. To one I can give immortal life, and the other . . .

‘Where art thou going, Majesty?’ Selwyn watched
her wander past him on her way to the door.
‘I need a moment alone to ponder my next move. I
shall be in the room of court, if I am required for
any reason.’
‘Yes, Majesty.’ He bowed and stood tall to watch her
depart. How could the Goddess be so cruel to one so loyal?
He shed a tear for her, and the choice she was being
forced to make.
It is impossible to be calm and reason with oneself
when, with every second that passes, the two people you
care about most are being tortured to death.
‘Oh, great Mother. I know thou said thou would aid
me no further, but I beseech thee . . .’ Tory fell to her
knees before the throne of Gwynedd, ‘I do not have the
strength for this. Please, tell me what I should do?’
The trials she now faced were too great and too
many to combat on her own. Where was Taliesin?
Where was Sorcha, Keridwen, Don?
‘Somebody?’ she cried. ‘Anybody? Please, help me.’
Tory lowered her head and began to weep bitterly.
‘God helps those who help themselves.’
That voice, Tory gulped, her crying subsiding into
spasmodic breaths.
‘Come on, don’t be chicken . . . you can look at me.’
Tory raised her eyes to view the throne. There sat a
woman who was the very image of herself, although it
was deﬁnitely not Sorcha who addressed her this time.
Her eyes were like ice, though her skin was of a dark
copper colour. Her snowy white hair, as long as Tory’s

own, was shaved on both sides of her head in a
Mohican style, and was laced with feathers, beads and
braids. She wore jeans with black leather chaps, much
like a cowboy. Her singlet, fringed vest and steel-capped
boots were all black. Curiously enough, the gold, silver
and orichalchum headband was upon her brow. She also
wore the silver armbands and the gold waistband.
‘G’day, mate.’ She winked at Tory, throwing a leg
over the armrest of the King’s throne and reclining to a
more comfortable position.
‘Who . . . are you?’ Tory managed to stammer a
query.
‘I’ll give you one guess.’ She grinned, raising her
brows as she awaited a response.
‘No, you couldn’t mean . . .’ The woman nodded as
Tory slowly got to her feet. ‘But you can’t be me, I
promised myself I’d never do this.’
‘Hey, shit happens.’ She shrugged. ‘I had to come,
for two reasons. One, because I was told to. And two,
because I remember being in your predicament and me
showing up to advise you. I know it’s a little awkward,
but when you’re me you’ll do the same for you.’
This scenario seemed somewhat suspicious to Tory;
what if this was Mahaud? Still, she had to admit she
could not sense nor espy any evil presence. ‘But how did
you get here? Where’s the chariot?’
The outrageous character before her began to roar
with laughter. ‘I do not require that cumbersome manmade nightmare to time travel any more! I traded it in
eons ago for a more ideal and reliable means of
transport.’ She motioned to her brain.

‘What year did you come from then?’ Tory was most
curious about her attire.
‘These are not the questions I came to answer.’ Her
future self sat upright in the chair, more serious now.
‘You are wanting to know whether you should give the
potion to Maelgwn or Rhun?’
‘Yes.’ Tory became anxious once again, not really
wanting to hear the response.
‘The answer is . . .’ Her other self smiled, ‘neither.’
‘What?!’ Tory backed up, disenchanted.
‘Hear me out.’ She remained so calm that Tory felt
compelled to listen. ‘Maelgwn is one of the Chosen.
You know that. Right?’
Tory nodded, still fearful.
‘As such, he is destined to be present at the
Gathering, as indeed you are. Yet, as two perfect halves
of the whole, you have different roles to fulﬁl as far as
the Gathering is concerned.’
‘Tell me about the Gathering.’ Tory was intrigued.
‘Don’t interrupt . . . I am not telling you any more
than you need to know.’ She took a deep breath to
recall what she still needed to explain. ‘As a guardian
and a leader of men, you are pretty much bound to this
earth. Though you are, of course, free to explore the
etheric realms, and fairly soon you shall do so. Ah!’
She held a warning ﬁnger up, not giving Tory to
chance to enquire further. ‘Now Maelgwn, on the other
hand, has done all he can here. It is time for him to
move on to a place where he shall beneﬁt from new
learning experiences.’
‘Don’t tell me I must let him die.’ Tory began to fret.

‘Come on . . . do you really think that I would let
that gorgeous hunk of a man of ours be fed to the
worms, or the ﬂame? I think not.’
‘Well, what then? I don’t understand.’
‘You will.’ She stood and descended the stairs to
confront herself head on. ‘Take Maelgwn and lay him
on the alter stone at Lynn Cerrig Bach. All shall be
made clear thereupon.’
Tory wasn’t liking the answers too much. It could be
a trick, to delay me saving Maelgwn until it’s too late. ‘You
said you were sent here. By whom, may I ask?’
Her future self placed her hands on her hips and
wore a cool smile. ‘Maelgwn sent me.’ She nodded
firmly, Tory being struck speechless. ‘And the man
I spoke with was much enlightened for his experience.
He told me to tell you that you’re doing the
right thing.’
Tory raised a hand to support her brain as it
exploded with possibilities, questions and doubts. ‘So,
why then, do I not give the cure to Rhun?’
‘Because you don’t have to. Rhun inherited his
immortality from you.’
‘But, he injures and heals like a mortal does,’ Tory
argued, despite wanting to believe the claim. ‘He’s
ailing as we speak . . .’
‘I know that!’ The future Tory raised both hands to
her mouth to calmly consider how she might convey
this most aptly. ‘Listen to me, Tory. I am going to ask
you to do something now, and if you refuse, Rhun will
suffer, as will many others.’
‘Go on.’ Tory agreed to keep an open mind.

‘Like you, Rhun, too, must experience physical
death before his immortality kicks in. So, you have
three choices here, and I’m warning you, the last time
round you chose wrong.’
‘You want me to kill him?’ Tory was mortiﬁed by the
suggestion. She did not recall her alleged death, so how
could she trust that the process was as she was being told.
‘Either that, or he suffers through the course of the
virus, whereby its lingering presence will cause an
epidemic. But, end it quickly, and Gwynedd will be
spared much death and suffering.’
‘Or I could just give him the potion.’ Tory was both
cynical and determined in her retort.
‘That would be a complete waste of a precious
resource,’ she was ﬁrmly advised. ‘In the future you
shall be very grateful if you heed this warning and
conserve it . . . for it is meant for somebody else.’
‘Who?’ Tory couldn’t think of anyone she’d risk
Rhun’s life for.
‘Look, I’m not getting into this with you.’ She held
up the palms of her hands as she retraced her steps to
the throne.
‘Prove to me that you’re me!’ Tory challenged, as
she watched this wilder version of herself take a seat
once again.
‘I don’t have to.’ She was very casual about it. ‘This
time round I have a back-up plan to ensure you do the
right thing.’ She held up two ﬁngers to make the peace
sign, and vanished.
‘No, don’t go!’ Tory’s nerves were in tatters as she
made off up the stairs after herself. ‘I wouldn’t leave me

this unsure!’ The large double doors at the opposite end
of the room opened, and Tory swung round to witness
Taliesin breeze in with Selwyn hot on his heels. Praise
the universe. She collapsed into the vacated throne.
‘Where have you been? You won’t believe what’s just
taken place in here.’
‘So, you’ve received your instruction? Splendid! We
thought it would sound better coming from yourself.’ He
stopped at the bottom of the stairs and bowed to her.
Tory shook her head vigorously, completely ﬂoored
by his remark. ‘You know about it then?’
‘Indeed . . .’
‘And who is we?’ She sat up straight.
‘Why, myself, you and Maelgwn, of course. I’ve been
to the future, that’s why I’m late,’ Taliesin stated, as if
making perfect sense. ‘There are some serious strategies
being formulated there, part of which was your visit to
yourself. I am now here to second what you told
yourself, in case you’re still unsure.
Either Mahaud is very clever, or I am, she mused on
the quiet.
‘You did die at Arwystli,’ the Merlin announced.
‘Ask Sir Tiernan if you don’t believe me, for you died in
his arms after I’d given you the potion. Now, I know for
a fact that the potion you are holding will one day be
needed to save another who is very dear to you, so
please don’t waste it unnecessarily.’
‘But Taliesin, what of Mahaud? How can I be sure
she’s not behind this? The original cure Darius made for
Maelgwn was stolen from his lab, before I —’
‘I know, I know,’ the Merlin confessed. ‘I stole it.’

‘You stole it!’ She was incensed when she thought of
what she’d been through as a result.
‘Well, not exactly, no. En Razu, my younger self,
did. See, when you told me it was I who had made you
immortal, I couldn’t think of where else I’d acquire such
a potion. Thus I stole it, in the knowledge that Darius
could make you another. Mind you, I had no idea you
would be forced to leave in such a hurry.’
‘So it was already missing when Mahaud took
Darius to fetch it.’ Tory held up to view the bottle
containing the brew that had caused so much trouble.
‘Well, that’s kind of a blessing, I suppose.’
‘Indeed.’ Taliesin was glad she chose to see the upside.
‘And that answers the question of where you got it.’
‘Exactly. Now, as much as I would love to stand
around and reminisce, we have much to do . . . starting
with young Rhun.’
‘Now just wait a goddamn minute!’ Tory planted
both feet ﬁrmly on the ground and took a stand. ‘I
refuse to be bamboozled into murdering my son. Can’t
you see how this looks from my point of view?’
Taliesin made up the stairs to take hold of her. ‘I know
you fear Mahaud, Tory, but we’re back on Gwynedd time
now. With every second that passes our chances of
avoiding a disaster grow less and less. Look into my eyes,
my soul, and tell me if you see the crone there?’
With a deep breath, Tory took a step away and
focused her sight upon him.
Beyond his physical being the whirling, coloured
vortexes of his chakras empowered his aura with energy

and lustre, without so much as a hint of a shadow to
blemish the clarity and brilliance of it.
‘I see nothing that would suggest the inﬂuence of
such a presence,’ she announced. ‘You look like an
angel.’
‘Then please, believe it is I, Taliesin Pen Beridd,
who appeals to you now. We must do this, Tory, and can
waste no more time procrastinating. Are you with me,
or not?’
Tory looked to Selwyn, who gave a slight nod in
encouragement. ‘Goddess forgive me if I am wrong
about this,’ she consented ﬁnally. ‘But, we must let
Rhun decide how it will be done.’
‘Agreed.’ Taliesin didn’t like it any more than she
did, but it was high time to make amends for this mess.
Considering the severity of his circumstance, Rhun
handled the news of his imminent murder with
apparent ease; instant deliverance would be a blessing
compared with the agonising and drawn-out death he
would suffer at the hands of this plague.
‘Well then . . . I have always thought I should like to
die by the sword,’ he told them plainly.
‘Oh, Rhun, why not poison or something?’ Tory
implored, as she sat on the bed beside him wiping his
brow. ‘There be not a swordsman in the whole of
Gwynedd who could ﬁnd it in his heart to run thee
through.’
‘Nay, Mother. I want thee to do it.’ He gripped
Tory’s hand to stop her fussing. ‘Thou art strong, and
thy aim be true . . . I trust thee.’

Both her hands went to her mouth to hide her
dismay. She so wanted to say that she could never . . . yet
propriety prevented it; she could not deny her son his
last mortal request. ‘So be it then.’ She summoned what
strength she had left, determined to believe with all her
heart, mind, and soul that Rhun’s resurrection was only a
matter of course. She held out both her hands, willing
Maelgwn’s sword to manifest there, which it did.
Impressive. Taliesin raised an eyebrow. Her travels
have worked wonders. He looked on in silence as she
drew the sword from its scabbard.
‘Be brave, my prince,’ she gasped to hold back the
tears. If she didn’t think about it, the deed would be
done before she lost face. ‘I shall see thee on the other
side, where there is no pain.’
‘I look forward to it.’ He relaxed to make himself
comfortable. ‘No fear; promise me?’
‘I do.’ She reached down and gently drew his eyelids
closed. I must not waver. She stood, gripping the sword
ﬁrmly with both hands, and closed her eyes to centre
herself. She raised the weapon and poised its razor-sharp
tip above Rhun’s heart.
‘Stop!’ Sir Tiernan froze in the doorway, shaken by
the scene he was witnessing.
‘Damn it.’ Taliesin cursed the interruption and
waved a ﬁnger in the general direction of the door,
whereby it slammed shut in the knight’s face, locking
him out. ‘Be done with it!’ He encouraged, shouting
over Tiernan’s pounding and yells of protest.
Tory re-positioned herself and drew a deep breath.
‘I . . . love . . . you.’ Her voice went hoarse as she

plunged the sword right through his body. ‘No!’ she
cried out, as if the blade had penetrated her heart
instead of his. There was not so much as a murmur from
her boy, however, even as she withdrew the blade.
‘Forgive me.’ She threw the weapon aside, falling to her
knees and holding him fast.
‘Thy aim be true,’ he whispered as the last breath of
air slipped from his body.
‘Taliesin?’ Tory stared into her boy’s lifeless face.
‘Give it a moment.’ He encouraged her to be patient.
‘I command thee, in the name of King Maelgwn, to
open this door!’ Tiernan roared, kicking it repeatedly
and damn near breaking the bolt with every thud.
‘Open it!’
‘Taliesin?’ Tory began to despair, her forlorn
expression near breaking the Merlin’s heart.
‘I am right about this, Tory.’
The Merlin’s sweet smile reassured her and she
looked back to her son with renewed hope, noting the
wound in his chest was closing. ‘Come on, Rhun.’ She
slapped him lightly around the cheeks. ‘Come on back
to us.’ As the Prince’s empty carcass suddenly ﬁlled with
the breath of life, Tory burst into laughter and tears; this
seemed the only sound decision she’d made in the last
twenty-four hours. ‘How do you feel?’ She gently
stroked the feeling back into his face.
‘Much better.’ He lowered his groggy sights to view
where the sword had passed through him, to ﬁnd no
trace of the wound, bar the stain on his shirt. ‘What,
not even a scar for my troubles?’ he whinged, reaching
between his thighs to ﬁnd the swelling gone.

Tory giggled, overwhelmed with happiness to see
him alive and well. ‘That’s exactly what I said.’
‘From whence comes that pounding?’ Rhun cringed,
thinking it might be in his brain.
‘Let me . . .’ The hinges and bolt ﬁnally gave way
and the door fell ﬂat on the ﬂoor with Sir Tiernan on
top of it, ‘. . . in!’
‘Be there a problem, Tiernan?’ Tory made light of
his exhausted state. ‘I distinctly recall conﬁning thee
to quarantine.’
‘I do not have any symptoms,’ he grumbled as he
got to his feet. ‘But when I heard that the Prince did,
I . . .’
‘Thou thought thou might come and get it from
him,’ Tory concluded. ‘I see.’
‘Sorry, Majesty.’ Tiernan acknowledged his mistake
as he witnessed the Prince rise to a seated position,
appearing perfectly well.
‘Well, as it turns out,’ Tory looked to her son, well
pleased, ‘he doesn’t have the plague after all, so there’s
nothing for thee to fret about.’
‘Very good, Highness.’ Tiernan backed out of the
room, confused and unsure about what he thought he’d
seen. ‘Be the emergency over then?’
‘Almost.’ Tory’s heart lost its buoyancy. ‘Dress
thyself, quickly.’ She instructed Rhun. ‘It be high time
we put an end to thy father’s suffering.’
Taliesin, Rhun, and Tory gathered in the King’s
chamber, and transported Maelgwn to the altar stone at
Llyn Cerrig Bach.

‘It shall be over before daybreak, I promise thee.’
Taliesin endeavoured to put Tory’s fears to rest. Her
energy levels were greatly diminished, and she needed
this burden to be lifted from her shoulders before they
could even attempt to tackle the crone.
‘Maelgwn.’ She gripped his hands, which were crossed
over his chest, staring at his face that was near
unrecognisable from the bloating and discolouring effects
of the disease. ‘Thou art going to be ﬁne . . . thou told me
so. I love thee, more than life . . .’ She wiped her tears away
quickly. ‘If we could trade places, I would . . . in a second.’
‘Tory.’ Taliesin encouraged her to back away,
looking to the darkened sky beyond the roofless
temple.
A large, dark cloud unfolded there, ablaze with light
and brilliant colour. Tory had seen many a strange light
phenomena before, but this one was a mystery. ‘What is
it?’ she asked over the booming sound it emitted and
the turbulent winds it stirred up.
‘One could say it’s Maelgwn’s connecting ﬂight.’
The Merlin grinned, his eyes never leaving the
spectacular display.
A single beam of light, blue-white in colour, burst
through the glittering cloud cover to where lay the
dying King.
‘I don’t know about this.’ Tory took a step closer, but
Taliesin clutched her arm.
‘It be time to let go,’ he told her, as Maelgwn sat
upright and beckoned Rhun to him.
‘Father?’ The Prince ran straight into the light,
jumping up onto the altar stone to embrace Maelgwn.

Tory held back so that they might have a moment
alone together. How sad it was that their son would
inherit the huge responsibility of King at the tender age
of twenty-one.
Once Maelgwn had passed on his last words of
advice, Rhun conﬁrmed his understanding with a nod,
and with one long last gaze at each other Rhun slid
from the altar and motioned Tory to approach.
Maelgwn stood as she ran to join him on top of the
stone platform, and he held her fast as they rocked to
and fro in a long embrace.
‘We strangely met, like not so many, yet still my
love be true as any. In the Old One’s choice, my soul
dost rejoice, and no gift could express the love for thee,
I do possess.’ Maelgwn recited the poem he’d written for
her on the day of their wedding, and Tory snifﬂed as she
recalled the rest.
‘So love her in thy heart, whose forever joy thou art.
And our love will know no end, my dear and sweetest
friend.’ She kissed him for all she was worth. When they
parted and she gazed into those large, dark eyes of his, he
was calm and accepting of his situation, not at all
apprehensive about the journey he was about to embark
upon. ‘Dost thou know where thou art going?’
‘Aye. All through my fever I have seen visions of
what lay ahead.’ He smiled at having foreseen this very
moment. ‘You look so lovely in this light.’
She melted to a smile, though she’d never felt more
miserable.
Maelgwn looked to the explosion of colour in the
sky above them, lured by the promise of the unknown.

‘I shall miss thee, Tory Alexander.’ He wished he could
ﬁnd the words that would reassure her, though he knew
he never could. ‘We shall meet again.’ He wiped the
tears from her cheeks.
‘I know it.’ She stole one last ﬂeeting kiss before he
ascended into the heavens. Goddess protect him. Her
knees went weak and Tory sank to the ground to
witness both her love and the disturbance vanish.

28

FUN AND GAMES

A

s day gradually shed light upon the vast
expanse of sky, Tory stirred from her long
trance. She’d passed beyond hysteria to a
drained state of feeling absolutely nothing. ‘In what year
will I ﬁnd him again?’ She directed the question at
Taliesin, who was seated on the crumbled stairs of the
ruin, absorbing the early morning rays that ﬁltered
down through the forest.
‘Only time will tell for it be not my place to say.
Besides,’ he opened his eyes and looked at her, ‘you
have much to do and learn before that time.’
‘But what is there for me without him here?’ She
gave a heavy sigh. ‘All the plans we’ve made for
Gwynedd and Britain. They have no meaning without
Maelgwn at my side.’

‘That be why we must see to Rhun’s inauguration
and wedding. Once things have settled under his rule,
thou art free to go.’
‘Go where, High Merlin?’ Tory beseeched him,
jumping from the altar stone as Taliesin stood and
brushed his hands over his robes to straighten them.
‘Wherever life leads thee.’
‘Name the year.’ She thought she deserved to know
that much.
‘Nineteen ninety-six,’ Taliesin announced with glee.
‘But that be the year I just came from?’
‘Funny about that.’ He raised both eyebrows in a
cocky fashion. ‘But I have the strangest premonition
you’ll be wanting to go back there . . . though Maelgwn,
as such, be not the reason.’
‘Did I hear my name and the word “wedding”
mentioned in the same sentence?’ Rhun barged into the
middle of the moderately-heated conversation, having
returned from answering nature’s call in the woods.
‘Shush!’ Tory scolded him, determined to get to the
bottom of Taliesin’s smugness; it seemed as if he knew
something she did not. ‘If Maelgwn shall not be in the
twentieth century, then why on earth would I be in any
drastic hurry to go back there?’
‘Because . . .’ He smiled broadly as he placed a
hand upon her shoulder and shook his head, ‘thou
really hast no idea, hast thou?’ The Merlin couldn’t
refrain from being amused by her blissful ignorance.
‘Well, I suppose it be a bit soon for it to have come to
thy attention?’
‘Taliesin!’ She was going to throttle him . . .

‘Thou art with child.’ The Merlin watched as Tory’s
rage lost all momentum.
‘That be fantastic,’ Rhun cheered.
‘Please, Taliesin, thou art joking?’ Tory ignored her
boy’s excitement, feeling rather faint.
The Merlin only winked, delighted by the notion.
‘But surely I am too old,’ she protested.
He shook his head. ‘Never too old, Tory. Not thee.’
‘Well, that hardly be fair.’ She began to pace,
throwing her arms up in the air. ‘What am I . . . some
kind of inter-continuum incubator?’
‘I am ﬁnally going to get a little brother,’ Rhun
chanted, rubbing the palms of his hands together
briskly, absolutely ecstatic about the news.
‘A little sister, actually.’ Taliesin corrected, to draw
both Tory’s and Rhun’s fullest attention.
‘Thou art already aware of the sex?’ The way Tory
saw it, the conception couldn’t have taken place more
than a few days ago.
‘Of course.’ The Merlin beamed with satisfaction,
observing how Tory’s energy levels had already
begun to increase. ‘I’ve been to the future, remember?
I could even tell thee her name, if thou desires?’
‘Please.’ Tory waved off the offer. ‘I would like to
think I have some say in that.’ She really didn’t know
how to feel, but despite all she’d been put through
since Lughnasa, Tory couldn’t keep the smile from
spreading across her face. Like the mythical phoenix
that consumes itself in fire to arise from its own ashes,
something wonderful had been born amidst all the
loss and destruction.

‘Will she be like Rhun . . . immortal, I mean?’
‘Of course she will.’ Rhun had snuck up from
behind to give his mother a squeeze. ‘We have the same
parents, after all.’
Well, almost, she thought, before she could stop
herself.
‘What dost thou mean, almost?’ Rhun turned his
mother around to answer him. ‘Please tell me that thou
hast not been unfaithful to my father.’
‘Oh, do calm down.’ Taliesin grabbed the Prince by
the scruff of the neck, and guided him to a seat on a
fallen column. ‘The man in question thou called Father
for the ﬁrst year of thy life.’
‘So he did.’ Tory smiled as she recalled the sweet
isolation and anonymity the three of them had known
that year.
‘Professor Miles Thurlow be thy father’s twentieth
century incarnation,’ the Merlin advised, ‘although he
be not as genetically or metaphysically advanced as thy
father was. Even so, this child be as important in the
great scheme of things as thou art, Rhun. A warrior, like
her mother before her, this girl be destined for greatness.
I expect thee to guide and protect her.’
‘But once I am King, Mother plans to leave. I heard
thou say so, just now . . . I shall never even know her,’
Rhun said indignantly, disappointed by the hand he’d
been dealt.
‘Hello?’ Taliesin tapped on his brain. ‘Thou art
immortal. In the fullness of time thy rule here shall
come to an end and thou shall be free to seek out the
others, who like thyself, are everlasting and have been

strewn throughout history. Thy sister will be one of
the greatest of these immortal activists and I know
for a fact that one of her greatest influences was thy
good self.’
The Prince very much liked the picture the Merlin
painted, but it all seemed so far away. Even if Rhun
could catch up with his mother and sister sometime in
the future, right now he was to be King. His mother
was, and always had been, the only person on this
planet that he truly related to. Thus Rhun was none too
eager to grant her right to leave. ‘Thou must stay until
the birth then,’ he demanded. ‘Please allow me to see
my sister before we art separated.’
‘Oh Rhun . . .’ Tory took up both his hands,
knowing that in reality it was the idea of being
abandoned that bothered him most. ‘I shall not leave
Gwynedd until such time as thou art well established in
thy own right . . . however long it takes. Once thou art
married and all hast settled —’
‘Whoa there!’ He stood and backed away, palms
raised in defense. ‘What if I do not want to get married
yet?’
Tory rolled her eyes at this, thinking it comical. ‘Art
thou saying that thou risked thy life for a girl thou art
not even in love with?’
‘Love be a very strong word, Mother. I was just
trying to be gallant. I hardly know the girl.’
‘I see.’ Tory glanced at Taliesin, and replied tonguein-cheek. ‘Well, Bridgit be of too ﬁne a stock to risk
losing her to some impropriety, so I guess we shall just
have to marry her off to Blain.’

‘Splendid idea, Majesty!’ Taliesin played along. ‘Her
father shall probably prefer it thus, anyway.’
‘Thou would not,’ Rhun appealed, most unwilling to
forfeit his bachelor ways to prevent the match.
‘Try me,’ Tory challenged, before melting into a
smile that was more reassuring. ‘Oh, come on, Rhun.
Thou cannot hide thy true feelings from me.’ She
placed an arm around his waist. ‘Marriage be like a
partnership, and thou shall need all the support thou
can get when thou art King. It won’t be so bad, thou
shall see.’
‘That be easy for thou to say. Thou dost not have to
ask Vortipor for her hand.’
‘Just leave everything to me.’ She kissed his
forehead. ‘I have a real knack for this sort of thing.’
An impromptu meeting of the alliance was called at
Degannwy to inform all the respective leaders of the
High King’s passing, and to nominate a replacement to
head the council in his stead.
Though the peculiar details of his departure from
this earth were not discussed, everyone present knew
Maelgwn had been marked as one of the Chosen at his
inauguration. Thus, the mysterious absence of his body
was easily explained as having been taken to the
Otherworld — as the Druids foretold would happen to
all the Chosen.
As the soon-to-be monarchs of Powys and
Gwynedd, Blain and Rhun were permitted to attend the
meeting and vote for the new head of the council of
Britain. Old King Catulus sent his right-hand man, Sir

Guillym, to place his ballot. Vortipor cast a vote for
Dyfed, and also for Gwent Is Coed, for the young
grandson of the late Aurelius Caninus was not yet old
enough to be entrusted with such decisions. Fergus
MacErc of Dalriada was the only other person to have a
say in the decision. As the Saxons had yet to sign the
pact they were not allowed a vote, but Eormenric was
invited to sit in on the proceedings — as were all the
current members of the circle of twelve, and Queen
Katren of Powys.
Once all the secret ballots had been received and
noted, it was Tory’s distinct pleasure to announce
Vortipor as the new Head of the British alliance.
Vortipor humbly accepted, though he still mourned
his departed colleagues far too deeply to be excited by
the appointment. The ﬁrst suggestion he put to the
council, as their leader, was that a memorial service
should be held at Degannwy the following day. This was
to pay tribute to all those souls who had been so
abruptly stolen from them: King Maelgwn, King
Brockwell and Sir Rhys amongst them. This motion was
seconded by every person in the room.
It was Taliesin who addressed the gathering next,
advising that the inauguration ceremonies of both
Prince Rhun and Prince Blain would take place two
days hence. Rhun’s initiation would be held at Llyn
Cerrig Bach in Gwynedd, according to the tradition
of his forefathers, and Taliesin would preside over
these proceedings. Blain would be inaugurated at
Maen Llia in Powys, in accordance with the sacred
rites of his kingdom, where Selwyn would preside as

Master of Ceremonies. When each had executed the
task set for them by the Goddess, they would be
crowned in their respective kingdoms the day
following their return.
‘So be it!’ replied all in court. The Merlin took his
seat, and Tory rose to conclude the conference.
‘In closing, I have a couple of announcements to
make. Firstly, with the departure of King Maelgwn from
this world, I have appointed the son of Sir Tiernan and
the Lady Ione, Sir Gareth, to take his place in the circle
of twelve.’ A brief round of applause broke out in
approval. ‘As my partner in the circle be no longer with
us . . .’ She spoke up over the din, ‘I bequeath my
position to Sir Bryce’s prize student, Sir Lucus.’ Her
audience seemed to change their tune somewhat,
voicing strong protest at her announcement.
‘Thou cannot resign.’ Vortipor stood outraged.
‘I shall still be overseeing the training of the Masters,’
she stated calmly, ‘but I need more teachers, and Sir
Lucus shall be a far better match for Sir Gareth than I.’
‘Thou art right, Mother . . . Sir Gareth would be
lucky to last a week with thee,’ Rhun exaggerated, to
the amusement of everyone present.
‘Now to the last thing on the agenda. Two weeks
hence, Bryce, Prince of Powys and Duke of Penmon,
shall wed the Lady Aella at Arwystli. And to double the
celebration value, Eormenric, Son of Ossa, and Vanora,
Princess of Powys, will wed on this day also.’
‘Oh . . .’ Another round of applause was forthcoming.
‘There could be a few more couples to add to that
list before then.’ Her gaze drifted towards Blain and

Rhun, who both shrank from the suggestion. ‘We shall
keep ye all informed.’
‘So be it!’
The arrangements for a multiple wedding were just
what Katren needed to put Calin’s death to the
back of her mind — she enjoyed pomp and pageantry,
and playing hostess was her forte. Tory had other
things to worry about, like keeping Mahaud at bay
long enough to get the two young princes betrothed
and crowned.
Directly following the conference, when everyone
else headed to the great dining room and the feast that
awaited there, Tory and Katren slipped away to the
library to discuss who should wed young Blain.
Food and mead awaited them by the ﬁre, where they
kicked off their shoes and relaxed. As they both
understood the other’s recent widowhood, they did not
speak about the loss of their husbands. Tomorrow was
the memorial service, where such grief could be
expressed. Today was for planning a brighter future.
‘The last time we saw such upheaval, it was the two
of us who got wed.’ Katren gazed into the ﬁre, her lips
poised upon the rim of her goblet as she marvelled at a
string of memories. Then she smiled. ‘How bold we
were, how passionate.’
‘I think Javotte,’ Tory stated ﬁrmly.
‘Alma’s daughter?’ Katren didn’t sound as
convinced. ‘She was rather a wild one when last I saw
her. I think Blain needs someone more sensitive,’ she
appealed, ﬁnally taking a sip of her drink.

‘Rubbish,’ Tory scoffed. ‘Blain needs someone who
will be strong for him. Javotte is smart, attractive, and . . .
she be his sparring partner.’
‘Say no more.’ Katren waved a hand, realising it was
fate; there wasn’t a male-female match made in the
Dragon’s circle that hadn’t ended up in marriage. ‘How
does Blain feel about her?’
‘Oh, Blain be not the problem,’ Tory reckoned. ‘It
be more how Javotte will react that concerns me.’
There was a knock on the door and Vortipor
entered. ‘Alright, you two. I know what this be about.’
He observed the pair huddled in a mischievous fashion
on the lounge, and closed the door behind him. ‘Which
Prince does thou propose to marry my daughter off to?’
‘Why, the one she be in love with, of course.’ Tory
stood to offer him a goblet of mead.
‘All well and good.’ He accepted her hospitality and
took a seat opposite them. ‘Until my girl discovers her
husband be not in love with her.’
‘I believe thou art much mistaken there.’ Tory took
a seat beside her old friend. ‘Thou knows my son and I
art connected emotionally, and he hast never felt for
any woman as he does for Bridgit.’
‘Thou sees what thou wishes to see, as the boy’s
mother. Do not get me wrong, Highness, I loved his
father dearly, and nothing would make me happier than
to link our clans thus. But thou would be horriﬁed to
know how many women he hast ravished in his relatively
short career.’ He shook his head at the stories he’d heard.
‘How many women had thou known at the same
age, Vortipor?’ Katren was most interested to know.

‘Was Calin, Tiernan or Maelgwn any more notorious
when single than young Rhun be today?’
‘That was different!’ he objected, evading the
question. ‘We had no special powers to manipulate the
minds and hearts of the women we wooed.’
‘Huh?’ Katren nearly choked in her drink. ‘That be
news to me.’
‘Look.’ Tory stood. ‘My son more than loves thy
daughter. He reveres her,’ she stressed, to get the point
across, as Vortipor rolled his eyes preparing to differ. ‘If
he did not, her virtue would already be his. Bridgit hast
vowed her pleasures to him, married or no . . . I know
this for a fact.’
‘So,’ Katren summed up their argument, ‘if we do
not pair them off, we shall have a scandal on our hands.’
The leader conceded defeat, looking from one
Queen to the other. ‘I never had a hope, did I?’
He smiled, consoled by a thought. ‘Once Rhun hast
been crowned, he may ask me for the hand of my
daughter.’ He chuckled to himself. ‘How does that
sound?’
‘Precarious.’ Tory voiced what she knew would be
her son’s view, as she turned to a knock at the door.
‘Ah, Sir Angus.’ Katren greeted him warmly. ‘Just
the man we wanted to see.’
‘Thou art in for it now,’ Vortipor warned the knight
in jest, as he rose to escape.
‘Prince Rhun sent me to see what was detaining ye
all.’ Angus couldn’t understand why he was in trouble.
‘Little bugger,’ Tory mumbled under her breath. He’s
been listening in the whole time.

‘Thanks for doing this,’ Blain whispered, not wanting to
disturb Rhun’s concentration. ‘What art they saying now?
‘Shhh! Mother knows we art listening.’ Rhun
clenched his skull tighter to maintain concentration. ‘I
told thee sending Javotte’s father up there would be a
dead giveaway.’
Rhun’s bedroom door opened, and to Blain’s horror
Javotte entered. ‘What art thou doing here?’ He rushed
across the room to escort her out.
‘Ye art both wanted downstairs?’ Javotte informed
them, more interested in Rhun’s curious conduct. ‘Dost
he have a headache?’
‘Ah . . . aye.’ Blain attempted to turn her around
and get her out of there.
‘What art thou up to?’
‘Thou hast to leave,’ Blain implored.
She dug her heels in. ‘Be that an order, Highness.’
She stared him down.
‘Aye,’ Blain ventured.
‘Thou art not King yet.’ She shoved him away and
walked around him. ‘Thou shalt have to make me.’
‘I cannot concentrate!’ Rhun stood to roar. ‘If thou
wants to play with her, for Goddess’ sakes, take her in
the next room.’ He immediately sat to resume their
mission.
‘Play with me!’ Javotte protested, outraged, but
Blain had her over his shoulder and out the door before
she had a chance to retaliate.
‘Put me down!’ She gave his kidneys a good punch for
the third time.

‘Ouch!’ Blain gladly off-loaded her onto his bed,
exhausted. He backed up to close the door.
‘I want to know what be going on?’ she demanded,
ﬂinging her shoulder-length blonde curls back off her
face as she got to her knees.
‘Shhh!’ Blain urged, leaning against the door as he
caught his breath. ‘I do not think we art supposed to
know anything yet.’
‘What? About how they plan to marry us off?’ She
gave him a wink, her eyes of pale blue twinkling with
amusement.
‘How could thou know? My mother only conceived
of it moments ago.’ He moved to sit on the edge of the
bed, where Javotte was more than an arm’s length away.
‘I realised days ago,’ she boasted. ‘Did thou not even
suspect it when our sensei made us sparring partners?’
‘Nay.’ Blain hadn’t a clue what she was on about. ‘I
cannot say that I did.’
‘Whenever the opposite sex be paired in the
Dragon’s Circle, they art paired for life. Hast thou not
noticed?’ She giggled at his naivety.
‘Thou art right,’ he admitted, having thought about
it. ‘And this dost not bother thee?!’
She shrugged in a casual fashion. ‘My marriage
options art limited. Thou art the pick of a bad bunch . .
. and thou shalt make me a Queen — which be to thy
favour, of course.’
‘That be very ﬂattering.’ He couldn’t believe she
was actually for the idea. ‘Thy passion overwhelms me.’
‘Oh . . . there’s nothing to worry about in that regard
for at least another year.’ She leant back on her elbows,

assuming a provocative pose. ‘My father won’t allow
them to wed us off until I come of age.’
‘Really?’ Blain questioned, unsure if this was good
news or bad.
‘Well, it be ofﬁcial.’ Rhun entered to inform the
lucky couple. ‘They have agreed to the match.’
‘What?’ Javotte got to her feet. ‘No conditions?’ She
couldn’t understand it.
‘Ah well, there was one. If ye both agree, they
intend to marry ye at the same time as Bryce and
Eormenric, but . . . they do not intend to let ye
consummate the marriage until Javotte hast turned
eight and ten.’ Rhun grinned at his young friend’s
misfortune.
‘What!’ Blain objected; this was far worse than
postponing the wedding a year. He could have no lover
at all.
‘I told thee.’ Javotte suppressed her amusement as
she slipped from the room. ‘Happy hunting, chaps.’
‘I shall not agree!’ Blain protested more adamantly
once they were alone. ‘Where be my father when I need
him. He would never have stood for this!’
‘Calm down,’ Rhun advised. ‘Once thou art married
to Javotte and crowned King of Powys, what can they
do?’ He gave Blain a whack on the back, and a wink of
encouragement.
‘Indeed.’ Blain was appeased somewhat.
‘Now thou hast only to worry about what Javotte
will do to thee.’ Rhun could only just beat her in armto-arm combat, and he was years more experienced than
his young friend.

‘Aye,’ Blain whined, already pondering how he
might get around her. ‘I shall just have to provoke her.’
‘Have I taught thee nothing? Thou means persuade.’
Rhun corrected.
‘Nay.’ Blain smiled. ‘I mean, provoke.’
The memorial service was held at dawn and although
Taliesin gave a beautiful liturgy, Tory could not bring
herself to mourn. Maelgwn was not dead. He was off on
an incredible adventure, and in fact, she couldn’t help but
be envious. Tory was just beginning to put the deaths of
Brockwell, Alma, Rhys and Jenovefa behind her, having
lived with their other incarnations for months. She’d seen
Brockwell in Adelgar and Brian; she’d seen Rhys in
Darius and John Pearce. No one really died. Death was
one phase of the journey, a graceful pause; a chance for a
new start in an entirely different time and circumstance.
Fortunately, by the end of the service, Taliesin had
urged everyone to the same mind:
‘So if I should go before thee
break not a ﬂower, nor engrave a stone.
Do not speak in reserved voices,
but be the good selves I have known.
For I preside in the Otherworld,
where the sun dost not rise nor set,
So if thou wilt, remember,
and if thou wilt, forget.’
Tory looked across to Katren with her four boys
standing dutifully beside her, each one so like Calin in

different respects. I do miss him. She gave a sigh, and
snifﬂed back a tear.
The younger folk seemed to be coping with their losses
rather well. Although they had been most reverent
during the service, once the memorial was over and the
wake was well under way they begged their parents
leave, having made plans of their own.
Tomorrow Rhun and Blain would face inauguration;
they would not see too many more carefree days such as
this again, so Tory let them have their way.
‘We won’t go far,’ Rhun vowed as he kissed his
mother’s cheek, and headed for the stables after the
others.
‘Should we send Selwyn with them?’ Katren could
just imagine what they might get up to unsupervised.
‘Nay, let them go.’ Tory took her friend’s hand and
patted it. ‘We have to start trusting them sooner or later.
They shall be running the country before long.’ She was
conﬁdent and trusting on the outside, but as Rhun could
spy on her movements so could she spy on his.
Javotte pursued the gaggle of boys out into the hallway.
‘Where art thou going?’
‘For a ride,’ Blain answered.
‘Can I come?’
‘Nay,’ young Cai yelled back, pacing along beside
Rhun. ‘Girls have to stay here. Be that not right?’ He
gazed up at his hero, who patted his head.
‘That’s right!’ Rhun seconded, as all disappeared out
the door.

Javotte had grown up with many of these boys, and
they’d never excluded her before. ‘Thou cannot stop
me! It be a free kingdom!’ she yelled after them.
Javotte caught up with them at the stable, where
Gareth, Gawain, Eormenric, Rhun and the four princes
of Powys had mounted their horses.
‘Why won’t thou let me come? Where art thou
going?’ She questioned Blain in what he construed to be
a rather stubborn and unbecoming fashion. ‘Thou dost
not want to know, little girl,’ he teased her with a
cavalier smile, much to his comrades amusement.
‘Get down off that horse. I shall show thee who be the
little girl.’ She challenged, feeling awkward and left out.
‘Oooh!’ They all jeered at her proposal.
‘Be that a promise?’ Blain raised both eyebrows in a
suggestive fashion.
‘It be a threat.’ Her hands clenched into ﬁsts.
‘Not the answer we were looking for.’ Blain made
light of her vexation. ‘Better luck next time.’ He took
off on his steed, the others right behind him.
‘This not be fair,’ she yelled once they’d gone.
‘Curse womanhood, curse it!’ She spun round in circles
a moment, at a loss for what to do. ‘They art not kings
yet.’ She collected her riding gear and headed off down
through the stables to where her horse was housed.
Rhun led the party a small way into the mountains, to
where a large, grassy ﬁeld overlooked the citadel and
the river below. Here, in this idyllic, isolated setting,
they found seven lovely maidens on a large blanket,
laying out a picnic ﬁt for a king.

‘Surprise.’ Rhun sprang to the ground. ‘Please meet
Eva, Gwendaline, Andrea, Lily, Rebecca, Catalina and
Margarette.’ He grinned at the delighted confusion his
companions’ could not hide as they dismounted. ‘This
be my way of ensuring that we see out our bachelorhood
with a bang.’
‘How very thoughtful. And though I have no
intention of getting wed,’ Gareth thumped Rhun on the
shoulder in appreciation, ‘I shall accept all the same.’
‘Where did thou ﬁnd such divine creatures.’ Blain
wandered aimlessly towards the splendid vision
of paradise.
Gawain placed an arm over Rhun’s shoulder. ‘This
be awfully sporting of thee, I must say. It appears thou
hast completely outdone thyself this time, my lad.’ He
staggered to the closest female and fell to the
ground, his head landing comfortably in her lap. ‘Ah,
much better.’
‘Rhun . . . thou art going to get us all in strife.’ Bryce
hated to be the voice of reason.
‘It be only a picnic,’ Rhun countered, playing
innocent.
‘And what a feast.’ Owen made a move to dive right
in, when Bryce caught him up by the collar.
‘Thou art not old enough for this.’
‘I beg to differ,’ Owen appealed. ‘Father wast my age
when thou wast conceived.’ He reclaimed his person
from his older brother and moved to ﬁnd himself a
willing maid.
‘Thou said no girls,’ Cai protested; this wasn’t going
to be any fun at all.

‘Nay, I said no girls were coming with us,’ Rhun
corrected. ‘These girls were already here.’
‘Cai most certainly be under-age.’ Bryce felt he had
to draw the line somewhere.
‘Yeah . . . what am I going to do?’
Rhun gave them both a knowing smile as he
reached into his saddle bag and pulled out a silkwrapped package, which he handed to Cai. ‘The
complete works of Aristotle, from my father’s private
collection.’
‘No kidding?’ Cai peeled back the silken cloth to
view the priceless work. ‘Wow, this be amazing.’ He
wandered off to ﬁnd a quiet spot to read, his eyes
already glued to the text.
‘There. Everybody’s happy,’ Rhun exclaimed, noting
Bryce didn’t seem any more appreciative. ‘Oh, come on.
Indulge while you still can,’ the Prince urged his friend.
‘There be nothing wrong with a good orgy . . . thou
taught me that.’ He gave Bryce a nudge as he moved to
join the party.
‘Worst mistake I ever made, introducing thee to
women.’ Bryce resigned himself to humouring his
friend — but only to a point.
A bonﬁre was stacked and set alight to combat the
evening chill; thus all the lads and lasses took time to
watch the stars come out.
‘Surely, not even in the Otherworld, do things get
better than this.’ Owen snuggled between the exposed
breasts of the maid beneath him; her skin felt softer
than down against his cheek.

‘Ah . . . the Otherworld.’ Rhun stared up at the huge,
dark expanse overhead, trying to imagine what his father
was doing at this instant. ‘I propose a toast.’ He sat
upright, working around the girl still straddled over his
lap to pour a drink. ‘To the warriors of the Goddess, past
and future. May the Otherworld ever grant them glory.’
‘To the warriors!’ all voiced with conviction, and
drank.
‘No offence, Rhun.’ Blain sat up. ‘But although the
High King wast a great warrior, I believe my father wast
greater still.’
‘Nay,’ Bryce corrected, throwing on his shirt in the
wake of a long shoulder massage; he didn’t feel he could
be chastised for that. ‘Calin Brockwell was the greatest
warrior that ever was, or ever will be.’
Rhun reﬁlled his goblet quickly, accidentally spilling
mead down Catalina’s cleavage and sipping it away. ‘To
King Brockwell, a warrior beyond compare.’
‘To King Brockwell!’ they cried, and drank again.
‘What was the greatest thing thy father ever did,
Eormenric?’ Rhun enquired of him, reﬁlling both their
glasses.
Eormenric laughed at this. ‘I think, ﬁghting Britons
and living to tell of it.’
Rhun translated his response for those who didn’t
speak Saxon, whereby they all fell about laughing.
‘What about thee, Gawain? Do tell us; What was Sir
Rhys’ ﬁnest achievement?’
‘My father’s ﬁnest achievement?’ Gawain propped
his head up on his hand and grinned. ‘Well, quite
obviously, that must have been me.’

‘Obviously!’ The maid at his back gave him a
squeeze and a kiss.
‘And thou, my prince,’ Catalina quizzed Rhun in
her exotic foreign accent, still entertaining his fullyerect member underneath her skirts. ‘What wast the
greatest thing thy father ever did?’ Her hips thrust
forward to distract him.
‘Oh.’ Rhun considered the question, then his
expression lost all its frivolity. ‘Wedding my mother
wast the best thing my father ever did.’ The Prince gave
a thought to his intended, feeling a twinge of guilt. He
withdrew from Catalina abruptly, doing up his trousers
and lifting her from his lap.
‘I would marry thy mother,’ said Cai, having
wandered back from his secluded reading nook to be by
the ﬁre.
‘In a heartbeat,’ Bryce agreed, taking Cai under his
arm as he came to sit beside him. Bryce watched Rhun
get to his feet, seemingly perplexed. ‘Art thou going
somewhere?’
‘Indeed.’ Rhun took up both of Catalina’s hands,
kissing them in turn. ‘I must pay my betrothed a visit . . .
but I do urge thou all to stay and enjoy.’ He took one
last swig of mead, and with a hiccup, vanished.
‘Holy mother! Where did he go?’ Blain staggered to
his feet to look for him, as did most of the others.
‘What a show-off.’ Bryce rolled his eyes, grinning
broadly. But his amusement dwindled as he noted the
sound of a horse approaching, and turned to espy the
rider. ‘Sir Tiernan!’ Bryce announced in a loud voice to
alert the others. ‘What art thou doing here?’

Everybody froze as the warrior dismounted and
approached. He wore a look upon his face that spelt
ruination for those before him, as he cast his sights over
the scene.
‘Well, I hope ye all enjoyed thyselves.’ His tone
hinted at their doom. ‘This little stunt could cost the
alliance dearly.’
Bryce’s eyes narrowed. ‘What dost thou mean?’
‘Javotte saw ye all!’ Tiernan scolded them for their
stupidity. ‘She told the other maidens, and now all
marriages are off!’
‘All marriages?’ Bryce near died from the shock of it.
‘All!’ Tiernan repeated harshly. ‘Where be Prince
Rhun?’
‘He disappeared,’ Blain advised, with a good serve of
accusation behind the statement.
‘Gawain, Gareth. See these women safely back to
the village. The rest of ye — mount up . . . now!’
Tiernan shouted to snap them to action. ‘Ladies.’ The
knight bowed to the stunned females, and took his
leave with the disgraced princes of Prydyn.

29

THE DRAGON’S
SEED

P

rince Rhun stirred to an annoying stabbing pain
in his side, which he tried to prevent with a wave
of his a hand.
‘Rhun.’ Tory poked him harder. ‘Some friend thou
art. And look at thee!’ She stood to get an overall view.
‘Mother?’ he croaked, shielding his eyes from the
light to get a look at her.
She smiled in a mocking fashion, crouching beside
him to whisper her wrath that built to a deafening
crescendo. ‘Wake up and smell the roses, sweetheart.
Thou art in deep shit!’ She stood and began to pace.
Rhun held onto his head as her voice vibrated
through it, managing to get to a seated position. He was

in a forest by a stream, though he did not recognise the
place. ‘Where am I?’ he dared to ask.
‘We art in Powys, somewhere,’ Tory stopped still
long enough to tell him. ‘Apparently, thou vanished
from the orgy last night to see Bridgit in Dyfed. Luckily
thou never made it that far.’
‘Thou dost know about the picnic then?’ He cringed.
‘If thou can see into my private affairs, art thou so
bold as to think I could not do the same? Of course I
know! Everybody knows!’ Tory could barely constrain
her urge to wring his neck, and so returned to pacing
out her frustration.
Rhun stood up to vent his annoyance, but had to
fall back on the support of a tree. ‘Thou betrayed us to
everyone?’
Tory stopped still and glared at him. ‘Javotte saw
thee. She saw her husband-to-be ravishing another on
the eve of their engagement. How dost thou think she
feels right now?’
Rhun looked away, unable to answer. His mind was
foggy and it throbbed with a vengeance.
‘Aella be not speaking with Bryce, nor Vanora with
Eormenric. And need I tell thee what Vortipor thinks of
thee marrying his daughter?’ Tory was almost enjoying
rubbing salt into his wounds. ‘What it hast taken us
twenty years to build, my son, thou hast destroyed in
one day.’
‘I did not mean for this to happen.’
He sounded very sorry for himself, so Tory decided
that a bit of understanding might be of more help at
this stage. ‘What wast thou thinking? I cannot believe

thou really thought I would not know. Thou art just
not that stupid.’
‘I knew thee would ﬁnd out. I thought it might prove
me too irresponsible to be left to rule a kingdom . . . which,
I guess, I have pretty much established.’ He paused, having
a bitter taste in his mouth. ‘But I knew thee would not tell
anyone else about it. Thus it just seemed like a bit of fun
with the lads before we all settle down. I truly did not
intend to get anyone into trouble, bar myself.’
Her heart broke upon hearing his explanation, yet
her exterior appearance remained unaffected. ‘And
what wast thy intent in visiting Bridgit, still reeking of
another woman?’
‘I wast not even going to wake her,’ he swore. ‘I just
wanted to watch her sleep.’
‘Well, unless a miracle happens, thou can kiss
goodbye any hope of ever doing that.’
‘I have to get back to Degannwy.’ The Prince knelt
by the river to splash water on his face.
‘Thou shall ﬁnd all concerned in the room of court,
being rebuked by Sir Tiernan,’ Tory forewarned him.
‘This would have taken place last night, but they were
all too drunk to stand.’
Rhun nodded, accepting the fact that he was not
going to be well received upon arrival.
‘Boy . . .’ Tory neared him. ‘Thou could never
convince me that thou art unﬁt to be a king. For I know
otherwise.’
‘Then it must be so.’ He smiled, grimly. ‘I shall
justify thy faith.’ He kissed her forehead and thought
of his friends.

‘Well, thank thee so much for joining us. Majesty!’
Bryce had a hold of Rhun before he’d even realised
he was there. ‘My lady refuses to see me.’ He belted his
king-to-be clear across the room.
Holy smoke. Rhun shook his head as he recovered. It
be a good thing I am immortal. Gawain and Eormenric
restrained the Prince of Powys, whilst the Prince of
Gwynedd dragged himself back to his feet to assure
Bryce: ‘I have an eyewitness who can testify thou got no
more than a back rub and a free feed.’
‘Who? Javotte!’ Bryce seethed, unable to break free
from his fellow masters. ‘She be so distraught, she would
swear Cai had been involved!’
‘Nay, my mother,’ Rhun shot back at him. ‘She saw
the whole thing through my eyes.’ His tone weakened
as he confessed.
‘The whole thing!’ Owen turned white.
‘And what about Javotte?’ Blain came forward with
his gripe.
‘Look, I shall talk to her . . .’ Rhun put forward.
‘Talk to her!’ Blain grabbed hold of Rhun by the shirt.
‘She saw me making love to another woman. No amount
of talk be going to wipe that image from her mind.’
The two princes glared at each other a moment, but
it was Rhun who broke the silence. ‘I did not force thee
to take pleasure with another, Blain. That wast thine
own choice.’
‘Damn thee!’ Blain threw a punch, which Rhun
managed to avoid.
‘Enough!’ Tiernan couldn’t take any more of this
infantile display. ‘Sit down . . . the lot of ye!’ He shoved

those still standing into chairs. ‘If you think it will be so
easy to ﬁll the shoes of thy fathers . . . think again! The
goddess herself shall sit in judgement on thee this night.’
He looked from Rhun to Blain. ‘And so help me . . .
thou had better have thy wits about thee by then.’
Taliesin and Selwyn came forward from where
they’d been quietly observing the goings-on. ‘Rhun,
come with me.’ Taliesin spoke briskly. ‘It would seem we
have much work to do before nightfall. Tiernan, I shall
met thee and the rest of the initiation party at Llyn
Cerrig Bach this evening.’
Tiernan bowed his head.
‘Blain, thou shall go with Selwyn. The rest of thy
party shall catch thee up by dusk.’ As the two Princes
moved silently to obey, Taliesin advised: ‘We shall
resolve the rest of this matter upon thy return to thy
respective cities for inauguration.’
The High Merlin was concerned, to say the very least.
When Maelgwn had faced the Goddess before his
inauguration, he’d fasted and meditated for two whole
days and nights beforehand. Here Rhun was, less than
half a day away from the test, hung-over, emotionally
stressed and physically exhausted. Taliesin was of half a
mind to postpone the initiation, but he felt this course
of action would be too risky. Mahaud would be gestating
somewhere, on the lookout for a negative soul to latch
onto. Everyone who had any power in Britain was
protected from her at present, so her chances of
thwarting them in the near future were considerably
lessened. Still, he wasn’t prepared to take any chances.

They needed a ruler on the throne of Gwynedd and
Powys just in case all hell broke loose again.
The Prince trailed Taliesin through his labyrinth,
wondering what kind of gruelling preparation the
Merlin had planned for him. He wanted to live up to
the legend that his father had begun, though he
couldn’t imagine how he would. It was hard to feel like
a great hero when you’d just placed your homeland’s
future in jeopardy, and all your friends and subjects
despised you for it. He eyed over battledress of past
and future warriors that seemed to be looming over
him in judgement as he passed them by in the corridor.
He knew these different characters were the key to
finding the way around the Merlin’s labyrinth.
However, he had been here many times before and
every time he thought he’d seen it all, he would
discover another doorway, corridor or stairwell that
he’d never seen before — like the passageway they
proceeded down at present.
Although the doors in the corridor appeared to be
no more than two horse lengths apart, the Merlin led
him into a room that was the size of a large cathedral.
Rhun was intrigued to ﬁnd that this held a huge
sandstone pool of steamy water. Large, white marble
columns towered upwards to meet ornately-carved
arches, depicting heroes, lovers, gods and goddesses.
‘Space be an illusion.’ Rhun came to a stop beside the
Merlin at the pool’s edge.
‘Indeed.’ Taliesin turned his sights to his pupil
and thrust him, clothes and all, into the water.
‘Now bathe.’

Rhun stiffened, having been caught off-guard,
but as he plunged downward through the warm,
aerated pool he relaxed to enjoy the sensation.
He surfaced, ripping the soiled clothes from his
body, so as to float on his back in unrestricted bliss.
‘Ah . . .’
Clear thy mind.
Taliesin’s voice echoed through his brain.
Nothing external matters here . . . for the battle of the
spiritual warrior be always with the self. The ability to rise
above setbacks in life be one of the three main prerequisites
of a King. Forget the insigniﬁcant details of ordinary life and
embrace a broader vision . . .
The Merlin spoke of the great leaders who’d gone
before him, of their fears and doubts before inauguration
and of the legendary feats they’d gone on to achieve. He
told of the Dragon of Keridwen, who had been his
father’s Otherworld afﬁliate. The descendant of this
animal had been spawn at about the same time Rhun
himself had been conceived.
Rhun would have to summon forth a beast to guard
of the gateway to the Otherworld, so that his spirit
might travel through it unharmed. If the Otherworld
still favoured the young Prince the offspring of the
Dragon of Keridwen was the creature the Goddess
would send to his aid.
The Merlin reviewed the nine metaphysical laws,
especially the laws of Rebound, Challenge and Equality,
for if the crone should try to obstruct the Prince in
his quest, these were the laws that needed to be
foremost in his mind.

Though Rhun knew the attributes and functions of
all the gods and goddesses of the Otherworld backwards,
Taliesin deﬁned those that were involved in the
initiation process. Gwydion, the deity of science, light,
and music would set the task required of the Prince. But
as the dispenser of the old truths, it was the crone,
Keridwen, who would announce it. Taliesin’s role was to
record what took place during Rhun’s ﬂight into the
Otherworld, so that his story could be imparted to
future inaugurates.
Once he’d crammed the Prince’s brain with more
information and words of wisdom than he could possibly
ingest in one sitting, Taliesin supplied Rhun with a clean
pair of trousers and led him to a meditation chamber.
As the Prince entered the room, which was round
and of a moderate size, he was confronted by an image
of himself in a large mirror situated on the wall directly
opposite the door. The ﬂoor beneath his feet was of
padded white leather which sank into a pit ﬁlled with
pillows. The timber-lined walls scented the interior
with the pleasant smell of cedarwood; combined with
the dim lighting, this was most soothing to the senses.
Taliesin motioned the Prince to the pit in the
centre of the room, and once Rhun was seated
comfortably therein the Merlin conjured up a golden
goblet and offered it to his initiate. ‘Drink.’
As Rhun accepted the chalice and raised it to his
lips, he caught a whiff of the brew and hesitated. ‘Must
I?’ Taliesin, who’d been regarding him with the same
austere gaze all day, nodded.

‘It be the elixir of Kings.’ The High Merlin couldn’t
help but smile as he recalled Maelgwyn’s impression of
the mild hallucinogen. ‘Thy father highly recommends
it.’ Upon hearing this, the young prince gave a shrug
and gulped down the brew. ‘From the cauldron of
inspiration, it shall heighten the senses and aid the ease
of separation of the spirit from thy body.’
‘Whoo . . .’ Rhun thumbed his chest with his ﬁst to
endure the tingling, burning sensation of the potent
mixture as passed down into his innards. ‘’Tis as harsh as
it smells.’ He handed the goblet back, whereby it
vanished and the Merlin made for the door.
‘I shall return for thee when thy time hast come.’
He paused before exiting. ‘Until then, I suggest thou be
still and let the elixir take effect. Block out everything
external, and no matter what thy seven senses tell thee,
do not break from thy meditation to heed them . . .
understood?’
Rhun nodded, assuming the lotus position. He
closed his eyes to seek the muse.
Most of the men had departed to attend one initiation
or the other, when Katren came to visit Tory in her
chambers. As she’d had no success in reasoning with
the no longer brides-to-be, the Queen of Powys was a
complete nervous wreck.
‘If those boys were hares on the mountainside, I
swear those girls would grab a bow and go a-hunting,’
she mumbled through her tears, wiping them away with
a handkerchief. ‘Powys shall be without a Queen, and
therefore infertile and barren . . . that will be how the

general populace shall see it.’ Katren collapsed into
tears again.
‘Right.’ Tory had had enough of the fun and games;
time to put a stop to this nonsense before it got out of
hand.
‘What art thou going to do?’ Katren was relieved to
see her friend looking so determined, and hurried after
her to bear witness to the proceedings.
The girls in question were gathered in the sewing
room, where all work had ceased on the bridal gowns.
Aella and Vanora were still consoling young Javotte,
cursing men for their thoughtless acts and absence
of heart.
‘Sensei.’ Javotte spotted Tory poised in the doorway,
whereby all three girls rose and bowed their heads
dutifully.
‘Be at ease, ladies.’ She motioned them all to take a
seat, a little annoyed by their harsh view of the opposite
sex. ‘Javotte, I want thee to forget everything Aella and
Vanora just said to thee . . . men art wonderful creatures
when understood and handled properly. Lest we forget,’
Tory’s voice rose upon sensing their resistance, ‘if not
for the brave deeds of these men, who thou art so quick
to condemn and dismiss, we would all be living a
nightmare right now.’ Katren repeated the conversation
for the Saxon lass’s beneﬁt. When Tory turned to
address Aella, she and Katren switched languages.
‘After all young Prince Bryce went through for thee . . .’
She shook her head, as if disappointed with the girl.
‘Thou would throw away such a treasure, because he
wast massaged by another woman?’

‘What?’ Aella’s eyes opened wide.
‘That was the extent of his involvement. Prince
Rhun and I have a mental link. As he can perceive my
affairs through my eyes, so can I view his.’
‘’Tis true,’ Katren conﬁrmed.
‘Make no mistake, Aella, Bryce loves thee, and hast
done nothing to warrant thy disfavour. I am sure if Javotte
thinks hard enough, she shall recall it was as I say.’
Although the recollection of the scene ﬁlled
Javotte’s eyes with tears, after a moment the girl nodded
to conﬁrm her sensei spoke the truth.
‘There,’ Tory put to Aella, who still seemed a little
hesitant to reconsider. ‘So be warned. If thou art foolish
enough to relinquish a lover so true, I might just have
to wed him myself.’
The girl was rather taken aback by the suggestion,
knowing her intended did hold deep feelings for the
once High Queen — despite the age difference. ‘I am
no fool, Highness.’ The girl resolved, much to Katren’s
relief. ‘I shall wed as planned.’
‘Thy faith shall be rewarded, I promise thee,’ the
Queen assured. Looking to the next on her hit list she
again changed her dialect. ‘Now Vanora . . . I know what
Eormenric did wast wrong. But, in asking that thou ﬁnd
it in thy heart to forgive him, I request no more than he
did for thee. After all, thine own conduct hast not always
been exemplary, and he did risk much to save thee from
Mahaud. My son can be very persuasive at times, and
Eormenric, being the outsider, wants so desperately to be
accepted by his new companions that . . .’ Tory shrugged,
hoping she’d understand.

Vanora inhaled deeply as her feelings and emotions
did battle. ‘Perhaps I am being a little harsh on him . . .
but that be not to say that I won’t make him suffer for
his thoughtless act.’
‘By all means do,’ Tory agreed. ‘But to walk away
from him now, I truly believe, would be a mistake . . .
everybody deserves at least one chance.’
‘Well, as thou hast given me two such opportunities
in the past . . .’ She felt strangely warmed by the notion
of forgiving her love instead of chastising him. ‘I too
shall wed as planned.’ Vanora melted to a smile,
inwardly elated by her decision.
‘Thou shall not regret it,’ Tory pledged, wellpleased.
As her sensei’s sights drifted her way, Javotte stood
to protest. ‘Please do not say I must still marry him,
Sensei . . . I could not!’
‘I would never make thee do anything thee did not
want to, Javotte.’ Tory neared her, and took hold of her
hands to urge her to a calmer state. ‘But, if thou shalt
not wed him, I ask that thou tell Blain so, to his face.’
‘Nay, I beg thee.’ Javotte was aghast. ‘I could not.’
‘And why not?’ Tory ruthlessly pursued the issue.
‘Because thou still carries a torch for him, perhaps? As
thou hast done for years?’
‘Alright! Aye, I admit it!’
The girl began to weep and Katren moved to
comfort her, yet Tory motioned her friend to stay
where she was. ‘I never thought I would see the day
when thou gave up anything thee desired without a
fight, Javotte.’

‘He doth not love me!’ the young warrioress
snapped at her superior, having reached her wits’ end.
‘I suspected thee thought as much.’ Tory eased off
on her interrogation. ‘But what if thou wast to discover
that exactly the opposite was true?’
‘Nothing could convince me of that now, Sensei.’
Javotte calmed a little, drained of emotion.
Tory approached to hold her, and the girl did not
resist. ‘What if I was to tell thee that, at present, Prince
Blain be under the inﬂuence of the elixir of kings,
which be a brew of inspiration, and . . . a truth serum of
sorts.’ The girl looked up at her, obviously curious to
hear more. ‘If I were to take thee to him now, thou
could ask Prince Blain any question, and he could not
lie to thee. Art thou up to it?’ Tory raised her brow to
await an answer, whereby Javotte agreed.
Katren looked to Tory amazed, and mouthed the
words, ‘Bless thee.’
Selwyn was tutoring the young king-to-be in a forest
glen by the edge of a lake, not too far from Maen Llia.
Blain too, had been swimming to get his wits about
him, and having taken some of the elixir was absorbing
nature’s elements from a rock in the sunshine.
While he listened to the holy man’s counsel, the
Prince’s sights wandered up the hillside were he spied
the Queen of Gwynedd descending with Javotte.
‘Merlin, I think I am hallucinating.’ He motioned to
their visitors.
Selwyn laughed once he’d viewed their company.
‘Nay, I think not.’

‘She be really here?’ Blain rose, in a rush to get to
her, before re-seating himself in an anxious fashion.
‘May I be excused?’
‘That thee may.’ Selwyn was more than happy to
grant him leave.
‘Greetings, Sensei.’ Blain bowed as he raced past,
heading up the hill to where Javotte awaited him.
‘I am so glad thou got her here,’ Selwyn said as he
reached Tory. ‘It has been near impossible to get him to
focus on anything else.’
‘I thought that might be the case.’ She took her
friend’s arm to stroll a way with him.
‘Javotte.’ Blain scampered up the steep incline on all
fours. ‘I am so thankful thou art here. I have not been
able to think of anyone else all day.’
The Prince came to a stop before her, dressed only
in a pair of trousers. His long, dark curls were
still damp from his dip, and they dripped water down
over the well-developed muscles of his smooth
upper body.
‘Pity that wast not the case yesterday.’ Her voice
projected disbelief.
‘But I wast thinking of thee.’ He spoke with passion.
‘I wast thinking of thee the whole time.’
‘Blain Brockwell!’ She placed her hands on her hips,
furious with him. ‘Thou art coming very close to a
beating.’
‘I know I am . . . but it be the truth.’ His words were
full of ﬁre. ‘She rather looked like thee,’ he said
guilelessly. ‘Though her body hardly did thine justice.’

‘Blain!’ Javotte fought off his advances, unsure as to
whether she should be ﬂattered or horriﬁed. ‘What art
thou saying to me?’
‘I am saying that I worship thee.’ Blain clutched hold
of her wrists. ‘Thou art a goddess in thine own right. I
never told thee so before, because I wast too afraid thou
would belt me. Maybe it be the elixir, but I . . .
I . . . I love thee, Javotte.’ His eyes, bluer than the
sky above, were alive with vigour as he confessed his
ardour. ‘So do what thou wilt, but my feelings shall
remain unchanged.’
He could not be ﬁbbing, Sensei said so. She stared
back at him blankly a moment, then grabbed his head
between her hands and kissed him long and hard.
‘That be because I love thee, too.’ She held her
dazed victim at arm’s length before landing a spirited
punch to his abdomen and watching with great pleasure
as he keeled over on his knees. ‘And that be for not
telling me sooner.’
He gasped under his breath, winded from the blow.
‘So dost this mean thou will marry me?’ He wobbled
back to his feet. ‘Even if I must wait a year to claim
thee, I still want to . . . if thou will have me.’
‘No fear!’ she protested strongly. ‘That would just be
asking for trouble.’ She placed both her arms around his
neck. ‘I shall be thine on our wedding night, or there
shall be no wedding.’ She revelled in the look of relief
on his face, before grabbing hold of a clump of his hair
and pulling it taut. ‘But, I tell thee this — if thou dost
ever so much as look at another woman thou will not
live to make the same mistake again.’

‘Ah, ah . . . I understand,’ he conceded, gently freeing
her ﬁngers from his hair. ‘Thou art more than gracious.’
‘Just thou remember it,’ she warned with a kiss,
thrusting him backwards as she headed off down the
hillside to rendezvous with her lift home. ‘Long live the
King!’ Javotte turned back to him brieﬂy to shout,
raising her powerful arms into the air as she did.
Blain smiled, holding up a hand in response, the
joyous expression upon the face of his betrothed ﬁlling
him with renewed hope and determination.
Hours later, Taliesin entered the meditation chamber
fully expecting to ﬁnd the Prince painted from head to
toe with the artwork of the Otherworldly folk. Rhun’s
father had been blessed thus by the Tylwyth Teg before
initiation; there had scarce been a bare patch of skin on
his body that had not been adorned by their artwork.
But, to the Merlin’s profound horror, Rhun appeared
exactly as he’d left him, his ivory skin clean. I do not
understand. I know he be one of the Chosen. He stared at
the lad, still cross-legged in the pit before him. The
Tylwyth Teg grant him ease of mobility through their realms,
so why then have they not claimed him?
‘Be something the matter, High Merlin?’ Rhun was
bemused by the Merlin’s perplexed stance.
‘Not at all.’ Taliesin motioned him to his feet.
Maybe the boy’s foolish stunt had cost them more dearly
than he’d expected; the support of the folk meant the
difference between a prosperous reign and famine. The
men that had been at Maelgwn’s inauguration would
notice the absence of the markings at once. Surely the

folk would not judge him so harshly for one simple mistake.
On the whole, Rhun’s behaviour and ability has always
proven exemplary. The Merlin moved to follow the
Prince from the room, beholding on Rhun’s back that
which he thought was missing.
‘Caduceus!’ The Merlin announced, both shocked
and excited. ‘I have never seen this depicted on any
initiate before.’
‘Pardon?’ Rhun frowned, as the Merlin dragged him
over to the mirror to see for himself. ‘Unbelievable! I
did not feel a thing.’ He marvelled at the picture of the
winged rod, extending all the way up his spine with
serpents entwining it. ‘What doth it mean?’
‘This be the age-old emblem of the Lord of Time
and Space. In ancient times it was worn by those who
had earned the right to hold a royal ofﬁce. The serpents
represent polarity, good and evil, order and chaos, that
are brought into balance under the wings of
transpersonal consciousness.’ The Merlin was simply
delighted by the implications of this. ‘It would seem the
Goddess’ folk have high expectations of thee. This be a
very good sign for thy rule.’
‘Art thou saying the Tylwyth Teg put this here?’
Rhun sounded a little sceptical, having never met with
any evidence of the fabled folk of the mists.
‘Ha-ha!’ The Merlin chuckled. ‘Thou art in for an
eye-opening experience this evening.’ Then, placing his
hands on Rhun’s shoulders, he told him in earnest: ‘But
no matter what transpires, remember all who gather
here tonight, do so in thy honour and support. There be
nothing, and no one, for thou to fear here.’

‘I am not afraid, High Merlin,’ Rhun advised, raring
to go.
Taliesin’s brow raised at this boast and his smile
broadened. ‘Nay, but thou might well be.’
Back in the real world, the turbulent clouds in the night
sky were alive with electrical activity. Torches encircled
the perimeter of the initiation site, and despite the
spectacular commotion overhead, the atmosphere in
the valley was still and calm.
The nobles of Gwynedd, and their guests, were
gathered in a circle in the clearing outside the temple
— Sir Tiernan, Vortipor, Fergus MacErc, Sir Guillym,
Sir Gawain and Sir Gareth amongst them. All were
decorated with body paint in accordance with the old
tradition, and seated around a cauldron that simmered
away furiously over an open ﬁre.
The drums pounded and the thunder boomed as
Taliesin led Rhun from the temple to his place before
his subjects, who all appeared a mite bafﬂed by his
spotless appearance.
The young prince bowed to them all, raising his
arms to ﬂex the well-rounded muscles of his upper body
as he turned to display the symbolic caduceus that ran
the length of his spine — its wings extending across his
broad shoulders.
Praise the Goddess, Sir Tiernan thought, most
relieved to see the blessing of the folk.
As the High Merlin began the ceremony, a goblet
was dipped into the elixir that brewed inside the
cauldron and each of the men present took a sip.

As Rhun consumed another whole cup of the liquid,
the sensation of separation between his body and his
spirit increased. The pounding drums numbed his
physical form, so that it felt weighted to the ground, yet
Rhun’s subtle body seemed to be hovering just slightly
out of alignment with his earthy presence as it prepared
to take ﬂight.
‘I am the one who heartens the soul,
to the glory of the spirits.
It is mine to exalt the hero;
to persuade the unadvised;
to awaken the silent beholder . . .
the bold illuminator of Kings!’
At the Merlin’s words, the storm above became
more agitated. The dulcet tones of the ancient’s bell
tolled, whipping up a wind that began to howl around
the peaceful glen. In the distance, behind the temple
ruins where the valley rose to its greatest height, there
was a great burst of light. After the initial blinding ﬂash,
this settled to a seething lustrous ball that spewed mist
into the valley below.
The haze rolled over the assembly, bringing with it
all the aroma of a spring day, as voices, sweeter than any
the Prince had ever heard, raised in song. The Tylwyth
Teg? He could scarce believe it.
‘The Otherworldly realm hast opened to the
initiate. Summon forth the beast who shall guard the
gateway,’ Taliesin intoned, and silently prayed as he
watched the young prince close his eyes to focus.

After a moment or two, a great rumbling sound was
heard. The men who’d not borne witness to King
Maelgwn’s rites, looked to each other fearfully.
A deafening screech followed, as a great winged
beast burst forth from the blazing vortex of light on the
mountain peak.
Not weighty and cumbersome as King Maelgwn’s
Otherworld afﬁliate had been, this beast was slender,
agile and far more ferocious in appearance.
‘It be the legend!’ Tiernan stood and looked to the
red creature as it hovered above, spewing ﬂames into the
stormy night sky between screeches. ‘It be the pet of the
goddess Keridwen herself.’ He laughed in exultation.
There was a time when the knight would have been as
fearful of this phenomena as the rest of those present
were, but experience had taught him better.
The dragon alighted behind the young Prince,
looking down upon the earthling he’d been assigned to
protect. The Goddess awaits thee. Go to her, knowing thy
return to the Middle Kingdom be assured by Archimedes,
spawn of Rufus, the new guardian of this land.
Rhun opened his eyes to behold a miraculous sight
before him — himself! He sat informing his men that he’d
taken leave of his physical form. Now what? he wondered.
‘Son.’
A familiar voice sought his attention from behind,
and the Prince turned to ﬁnd Maelgwn awaiting him.
‘Father! Praise the Goddess thou art here! But how art
thou here?’
‘The Otherworld be a universal place,’ his father
informed with a smile. ‘But it be not just I who have

come to greet thee.’ Maelgwn motioned to the forest
surrounding emanating brilliant colour.
Hundreds of tiny beings of light twirled their way
through the air; others hovered in and around the
foliage of the forest. Strange hairless beings, of all sizes,
with heads and bodies much larger than their skinny
little limbs, watched him through large, black slanted
eyes. Dwarfed men, and breathtaking nymphs emerged
from trees, rocks, and ﬂowerbeds. Strange, indescribable
creatures crawled, slithered, ﬂew and burrowed around
him everywhere.
‘The . . . folk?’ He gaped at the wild array.
‘Indeed.’ Maelgwn motioned to his son to close his
dropping jaw. ‘But it be not polite to stare.’
Rhun followed his father to the temple, that now
appeared as if it had just been erected. Inside he found
that the large altar stone had been moved aside, to
reveal what appeared to be a bottomless pit.
‘Come.’ Maelgwn urged him to follow, as he jumped
into the void and disappeared into the darkened depths.
‘Father?’ Rhun called for reassurance, but when
there came no response he closed his eyes and leapt into
the void.
He fell — no, he ﬂoated, or perhaps he wasn’t
moving at all.
‘Rhun?’ Maelgwn urged him to open his eyes.
The young Prince complied to behold a landscape so
fair that no earthly place could possibly compare to it.
The earth was greener than the Snowdon ranges in
spring, the ﬂowers more beauteous and abundant than
those that had once grown in the inner bailey gardens

at Aberffraw. Stately fountains spouted water in the
middle of large pools that glistened like crystal jewels.
In the sky above not a cloud could been seen, and
astonishingly enough, that source of earthly light and
warmth, the sun, was not present either — for
everything here emitted its own light.
Not far across the grounds in front of them was a
small round marble gazebo, with stairs that led up to the
central platform. As Rhun approached alongside his
father, he couldn’t help but notice the two lovely
maidens that lazed against a pillar to each side of the
stairs, watching his approach.
The dainty, dark-haired woman was dressed all in
white. But the other, who had ﬁery auburn locks and a
physique that could only compare with his mother’s,
was attired entirely in red.
Maelgwn came to a stop at the bottom of the stairs.
‘This be as far as I may go. I wish thee success in thy
quest, though I know thou will not fail.’ He bowed his
head and faded from sight.
‘Father!’ Rhun had not expected him to leave so
abruptly.
‘Thou art the Dragon of the Island now.’ The petite
maiden in white came down the stairs and took hold of his
hands. ‘Thus we call on thee to defend the Chair.’
Branwen backed up, leading him up the stairs. ‘All the
pleasures of this world shall be thine, if thou succeeds.’ She
stopped halfway to run her hands over the well-deﬁned
ridges of his stomach, up over his pectorals and across his
broad shoulders, admiring every inch of the journey.
‘Passion and desire beyond thy wildest aspirations.’

Rhun was so captivated by her sultry promises, he
had not even noticed the warrioress come to stand at
his other side.
‘There be a menace in our midst.’ Rhiannon
directed his attention to herself, pressing her body
against his. ‘The elements of its nature, drawn from the
darkest depths of creation.’
‘Mahaud?’ Rhun guessed at her meaning.
‘Ahh . . .’ She smiled, slinking away from him, as
she backed up with the other maiden to the plateau,
where a third woman, dressed all in black, stood with
her back to him.
‘Correct.’ The tiny, silver-haired crone turned her
huge green-grey eyes to view him.
Keridwen. Rhun scaled the stairs to kneel before her.
The three women merged to become the one
glowing green being, known as Don. The divine mother
spoke with the voices of the maiden, the warrioress and
the crone. ‘As we draw our power from the realms above
the earthly plane, the said abomination draws its power
from those below it. The earth, as a polarised entity,
hast places where positive or negative power might be
drawn from it, depending upon thy intent. Find the
select location from whence Mahaud draws her life
force, when not doing so from human beings, and
destroy it . . . then she shall plague thy nation no more.’
‘I understand.’ Rhun bowed his head in reverence,
as the three women separated.
‘Gwydion hast decreed that thou must go as thou art
to Ongen, son of Ossa, in Londinium.’ Keridwen
advised. ‘In the dungeon of the Saxon stronghold, thou

shall ﬁnd the four implements belonging to Mahaud, by
which she was summoned back from the lower etheric
realms. Her wand of Fire thou must take to the
southern-most tip of Britain, where the land of Lyonesse
once stood. Here the wand must be broken and burnt,
until nothing but ash remains. The sword of the
archtraitor, Vortigern, must be taken to the easternmost tip of Anglia, where thou shall ﬁnd a tiny seaside
town and a blind smithy, who answers to the name of
Morda. Take him this sword, and he shall melt it down
to use as scrap metal. Both the large and small cauldrons
of the witch must be taken beyond the western shore of
Britain, over the sea, to where thou shall ﬁnd an island
with a mountain of ﬁre. Drop the cauldrons into this
and they shall be lost forever. Lastly, take the black
crystal to the Isle of Orkney, off the northern tip of
Alban, and there thou shall ﬁnd a large ring of stones.
Place the black crystal in the ground in the middle of
the site; the positive energies there will shatter the evil
stone into a thousand pieces. Archimedes knows thy
designated voyage, and shall accompany thee
throughout. For this be the will of the Great House of
Don and Llyr.’
‘So be it,’ his subjects cried in unison.
Thus it was that Rhun opened his eyes to ﬁnd
himself returned to their company.

30

OPPOSING
ELEMENTS

O

ngen was roused from his bed, somewhat
sceptical of his soldiers’ claim that a dragon had
landed in the courtyard of his stronghold.
‘Heaven forbid.’ The leader grabbed the closest
sword upon confronting the creature.
‘Fear not.’ Rhun slid from his ﬂight position near
the neck of the beast, thoroughly impressed by his own
entrance. ‘It be only I.’
‘Prince Rhun Of Gwynedd?!’ Ongen was most
relieved to see him, motioning to his men to lower their
weapons. ‘Doth this creature belong to thee?’
‘Nay. Archimedes be here of his own accord. We art
on a mission from the Goddess, and require assistance.’

‘Well, anything I can do to help. I am more than
happy to oblige.’ The Saxon warlord motioned him
inside, with his eyes still ﬁxed on the wondrous beast.’
‘Oh . . . and I would advise thy men not to taunt my
transport,’ Rhun told him as he accompanied Ongen
into his fortress. ‘Archimedes hast a very short temper.’
The warlord raised both brows at this. ‘I can
well imagine.’
When Ongen heard the Prince’s plan to rid them of the
witch’s implements, he was overjoyed.
He showed Rhun to the dungeon where the
implements were being stored. They radiated the foulest
energy and odour.
‘Thou can see why I desire to have them removed.’
Ongen held his nose to stop himself from feeling
nauseous.
‘Aye.’ Rhun eyed over the pieces for disposal,
bearing in mind what the triple Goddess had told him.
This could not be where the witch was energizing
herself — it being a man-made structure. ‘Tell me,
where did Ossa ﬁnd these?’ The Prince leaned over the
lid of the larger cauldron, wondering about the two
bulging circular features upon it. When they opened to
reveal two living eyeballs underneath, glowing red like
the witch’s own, Rhun jumped back.
‘I am watching thee, little Dragon.’
Her laughter echoed around the chilly chamber.
‘Oh yeah?’ Rhun grabbed up her evil sword. ‘Not for
long.’ He thrust the blade into one of the exposed
pupils, whereby it excreted copious amounts of a pus-

like substance, and with a shrill shriek the iron lid of
the other eye closed.
‘Good heavens!’ Ongen’s stomach turned. ‘Hast
thou no fear?’
‘Fear be the air this foul hag breathes.’ Rhun
emphasised his disgust. ‘Mahaud shall get no such
satisfaction from me.’
‘But I know what drives thee, boy.’ The cauldron’s
one good eye opened again. ‘Destroy that which I hold
dear, and I shall show thee the same courtesy.’
Rhun forced a smile, knowing better than to
believe anything the witch said. ‘Eat me.’ He grabbed
his private parts in one hand, and with the other
thrust the point of Vortigern’s sword into the
remaining pupil.
‘Oh god.’ Ongen saw all the festering ooze that
resulted, and exited from the room to throw up.
‘Ongen?’ Rhun went after him. ‘Could thou instruct
thy men to move these to the inner bailey?’ He patted
the warlord’s back, as the man’s stomach rejected
everything in it.
The Saxon nodded at this, too preoccupied to
verbally respond.
‘Meanwhile, when thou art ready,’ the Prince
commented, unable to believe any man could hold so
much liquid, ‘thou can ﬁll me in on where thy father
dug this up, ay?’
‘One moment,’ Ongen mumbled, waving him away.
Once enlightened as to the original burial place of the
implements, Rhun hit himself in the head.

‘Of course! How could I not have thought of it
before! It be the elder tree that be her source.’
The Prince couldn’t count the amount of times he’d
been told the story of his twentieth century birth. Of
how his father had been forced to leave his mother
during labour to rendezvous with the doorway created
by Taliesin at the stones, on the night of the summer
solstice. His father had seen the witch festering in the
tree, just prior to his departure from the future, and in
Rhun’s mind, this was conﬁrmation enough.
‘But ﬁrst, the implements.’ The Prince resolved.
It was no use destroying the witch, if the means by
which to summon her back were still intact.
Flight on the dragon was an exhilarating experience,
and proved a much faster mode of transport than the
Prince had ﬁrst imagined.
Archimedes climbed through the clouds to soar
above them. The air was freezing cold and thin at this
altitude, but as these conditions were hardly going to
kill him, Rhun focused on the other more thrilling
aspects of the adventure. Like the full moon, out in
front, which was so large and so bright, it seemed he
could almost reach out and touch it. As they
approached their destination, the dragon went into a
death dive and Rhun clung on to endure the adrenalin
rush as they plummeted downwards through the haze.
Then, wings ﬂapping in the opposite direction,
Archimedes swung his huge lower body forward, and his
large, clawed feet made contact with the ground to set
them down to a perfect landing.

It was still dark at land’s end in the south. Very
little light penetrated the cloud cover and despite a
mild sea-breeze the cliff face was shrouded by a
heavy mist.
Rhun approached the ledge cautiously, all the while
suspecting the witch was looming in the shadows to
ambush his quest at the ﬁrst opportunity. He held her
wand out before him in both hands, every sound, every
movement being noted. ‘Denizens of ﬁre, the bringers of
love and elders of life, rejoice! I free thee from the
selﬁsh inﬂuence of this darkness, in the name of the
Goddess and all those who serve her in pursuit of truth,
wisdom, and love.’
So be it, Archimedes snorted, hoping to move the
proceedings along.
Without further ado, Rhun snapped the wand over
his knee and cast it to the ground. Archimedes ﬁnished
the job, reducing the evil twig to ash with one exhale.
Sparks ﬂew from beneath, as the dragon pounded the
ﬁre to dust under foot. The embers that escaped rose,
their orange lustre intensifying as they swirled and
danced upwards through the mist.
Dawn broke over the sea, as the cloud cover beneath
them thinned to reveal the tiny seaside town that
marked the eastern-most tip of the land.
The blind smithy proved easy enough to find, as
he was the only soul lurking in the nameless place.
Morda had been expecting the Prince, and led him
straight to his forge. The huge, rotund craftsman, with
eyelids permanently sealed closed, had been keeping

his furnace blazing at full heat so they could carry out
the instruction of the Goddess without delay.
‘Beings of the Air, givers of knowledge, mobility,
and birth, take heart!’ Rhun placed the sword of the
archtraitor Vortigern into the vat of molten metal. ‘I
liberate thee from this instrument of destruction, in the
name of the Goddess, from whence all life comes.’ The
weapon burst into ﬂame and bubbled as it slid into the
glowing orange-yellow mixture.
A steady stream of air seeped from the centre of the
large, glowing pot. It swept past them in the form of a
warm breeze, as it rushed once around the room and was
gone out the door.
Morda grinned at this, exposing his near-toothless
gums. ‘Thy job here be done, young master.’
The Prince was far more conﬁdent of success
now, having reached the halfway mark of his journey —
and still no sign of the witch. Not that he was even
too sure what form Mahaud would take, for Rhun
had never dealt with the evil crone directly. With
no human soul to milk, maybe Mahaud was weaker
then he’d imagined? Perhaps she’d been forced to
fake her threat to him, in the hope that he would
losehis focus and deviate from his purpose? For
surely, if she was at all able, the witch would be doing
everything within her power to save her lifegiving paraphernalia.
With three of the marriages back on, Katren and all the
brides had departed Degannwy to await the return of
Prince Blain at Arwystli.

Thus, peace reigned supreme for all of one morning,
until Rhun’s initiation party arrived back from Llyn
Cerrig Bach to await his return and crowning.
‘Vortipor?’ Tory stuck her head around the door of
his quarters and gave a knock as she entered. ‘May I
speak with thee?’
‘If it be about this damn wedding, there be nothing
to discuss.’ He motioned her in, all the same. He knew
young Prince Rhun was an exceptional man, and would
make a ﬁne ruler. But a ﬁne husband? That was quite a
different matter. ‘However.’ Vortipor motioned her to
be seated. ‘Thy son did his father proud last night.’
‘I knew he would,’ she stated, not mentioning the
fact that she’d been watching the whole time. Initiation
was a male affair, thus Tory didn’t feel her spying would
be appreciated. ‘But I am not here to pry into last
night’s goings on. The mist hast settled over the land,
thus I presume all went well. What I really came to do
was apologise . . . what resulted the day of the memorial
service was largely my fault.’
‘Thy fault!’ Vortipor scowled. ‘I can hardly see . . .’
‘Please, let me ﬁnish.’ She stood, and began to pace
slowly as she chose her words. ‘Rhun did what he did in
an attempt to keep me here.’
‘Art thou planning on taking up residence in
another city, Majesty?’ Vortipor enquired lightheartedly.
‘Nay . . . in another time zone,’ she confessed,
looking at Vortipor to catch a look of horror. Before he
could dispute this, she added: ‘I am with child,
conceived of a future incarnation of Maelgwn, whom, as
thou might recall, I met in the twentieth century.’

Vortipor had been present at the stones, some
twenty years past, when Maelgwn and herself had made
their ﬁrst journey to the future. He knew of the man to
whom she referred.
She bowed her head slightly, hoping he would not
look poorly on the indiscretion. ‘The father be unaware
of this, as I only just learned of it myself. But I could no
sooner raise this child in this century, any more than I
could have raised Rhun in the future . . . she be not of
this time. It wast not meant.’
‘And Rhun knows of this?’ Vortipor was getting a
clearer picture.
‘Aye.’ She sat once again. ‘Rhun hoped that I
would think him too irresponsible to entrust with
Gwynedd, and expected no one but I would learn of
the picnic incident.’
‘Whereby, he hoped thou would postpone thy
departure,’ Vortipor concluded on her behalf.
‘Please do not hold this silly act against him.’ She
placed a hand upon his to seek his understanding. ‘I
know in my heart Rhun loves Bridgit, though foremost
be his love for me . . . that be why he took such a stupid
risk, and for no other reason.’
‘When dost thou plan to leave?’ he questioned,
feeling a little twinge of remorse at his acceptance of
the situation.
‘Soon after the birth. I promised Rhun he could see
his sister before I return her to her father.’
This was sad news, indeed. ‘The united kingdoms
will greatly mourn thee, Goddess . . . my daughter shall
prove no substitute.’

‘I think thou art selling her short.’ Tory smiled, as
she recalled Nin Sybil. ‘I have met Bridgit in another
age, where she wast a truth-seer of the Goddess of very
high repute. Oh, I know right now she be young and in
love . . . but given time, and Taliesin’s instruction,
Bridgit shall be every bit as good a Queen as I. And
when one thinks about it, she be much better qualiﬁed
than I ever was.’
Vortipor gave half a laugh as he considered her
statement. ‘Well, I suppose if the Goddess’ quest doth
not kill him ﬁrst . . .’
‘Which it will not.’ Tory was quite sure about that.
‘We might reappraise the situation.’ Vortipor gave
in at last.
‘Oh, bless thee.’ Tory threw herself into his lap,
giving him a hug.
‘Whoa there.’ The leader delighted in her affection.
‘Art thou not already in enough trouble?’
Tory laughed. ‘Aye. But thou must promise to keep
it our little secret for now.’
‘I will. On the condition that thou must say
goodbye to me before departing. Agreed?’
This seemed a reasonable enough bargain. ‘Agreed.’
With the sun at their back for this leg, Archimedes
made for the western coast and beyond. Once over the
ocean, where they were safe from human sight, they
dropped below the cloud, and the great body of water
thereunder just seemed to go on and on forevermore.
However, just as the Prince was losing hope of ever
seeing the fabled ﬁery mountain, the overcast

conditions cleared to a sunny day. The green-grey sea
below turned bright blue against the sky, and billowing
black smoke was spotted on the horizon.
This huge rocky crater, that rose only a small way
above sea level, was host to an exploding pool of liquid
ﬁre, the magnitude of which the Prince had never seen.
The dragon made a pass at their target from a good
height above it, for the smoking mound spat ﬂaming
chunks towards the sky and into the ocean that
pounded at its cliffs.
‘Spirits of water, granters of depth and quiet age,
give praise!’ The Prince untied the rope that bound the
two cauldrons to the neck of his beast. ‘I offer thee
liberty from the negative forces of creation that have
been brewed within these vessels, in the name of the
Goddess, for whom all good deeds art done.’
As their offering dropped into the ﬁery pit below, a
great rumbling was heard deep within the mountain.
The dragon didn’t stop to hover until they were some
distance away.
In a burst of ﬁre and smoke, the walls of the crater
began to collapse inward on themselves. The earthen
mound, bombarded by the surrounding sea, disappeared
beneath the waves that spouted water high into the air
as they claimed the small land mass.
One more to go.
By afternoon they’d found the Isle of Orkney. In the
centre of the ring of stones he found there, Rhun
gouged a hole in which to place his offering. ‘Dwellers
of the Earth, dispensers of prosperity and eternal peace,

unite!’ Rhun secured the crystal, pinnacle upright, in
the hole and backed beyond the circle’s perimeters. ‘I
release thee from the opposing duress of this stone to
embrace thy true mother, the guardian of this land.’
The crystal began to tremble as it turned from black
to red, and shattered to the four winds in a fountain-like
spray of sparks.
The Prince awaited a sign of success, as had been
forthcoming when the previous three pieces had been
destroyed. Where the crystal splinters had fallen in the
ﬁeld inside the ring, new green shoots reached for the
sky. These budded and bloomed whilst he watched, into
ﬂowers of every colour imaginable.
The Prince picked a large bunch of these, binding
them together with the stem of another. ‘These ought
to impress the little woman.’ He had a whiff of their
aroma, which sent his senses swimming. ‘Very good!’
Thou art counting thy dragons before they art hatched,
Archimedes warned. We still have one last duty to perform
before thou contemplates the seduction of thy intended.
‘I am aware of that.’ Rhun was reluctant to part with
the ﬁrst pleasurable thought he’d had all day, but did so
in the hope it would become a reality all the sooner.
Dusk approached as they arrived at the ring of stones
standing beside the tree suspected to be Mahaud’s
haven. The overcast conditions caused a light mist to
drift over the site, and although visibility was not the
best the witch was nowhere within eye-shot.
‘Alright, Archimedes.’ Rhun observed the elder
tree. ‘Torch this thing, so we can go home.’

At the Prince’s word, the dragon reared up to
comply.
‘Not so fast.’
Rhun recognised the sinister voice. When he turned
to confront the hag, he was horriﬁed to ﬁnd she had
Bridgit in her clutches.
‘If that tree burns, so dost thy bride,’ she threatened,
hidden behind her large, black hood.
But this be impossible. What happened to the talisman?
The Prince backed into the stone circle to fortify it with
his own positive energy; thus all her negativity could
not penetrate to read or manipulate his thoughts.
Good lad.
Tory’s voice came to him, clear as a bell. Mother? I
knew thee would be watching. What should I do?.
I think she be blufﬁng. Just stall her a moment, and I
shall prove it.
Hence, with a shrug, Rhun attempted to strike up a
conversation. ‘Look Mahaud, thou knows as well as I
that thy days art numbered, so why not —’
‘It be thy kingdom’s days that art numbered, pretty
boy.’ The tone of her voice was so cutting, it made the
hairs on the back of his neck stand on end. ‘I, too, have
access to a dimension of timelessness, far below this
earthly plane. I can retrieve those implements faster than
thou disposed of them. Thou shall never be rid of me!’
She laughed at his futile attempt. ‘Thy effort this day hast
been naught but a waste of energy.’ She raised her glowing
red ﬁngertips to scorch the skin on Bridgit’s neck.
‘Ahhh . . .!’ The maiden shrank away. ‘Rhun,
please!’

‘Alright, alright!’ He urged everyone to keep their
cool. ‘I am sure we can work something out here.’
Mother! What art thou doing? he bethought.
Rhun, I am in Dyfed. Tory enlightened him. Bridgit
be here in front of me, perfectly safe. I told thee she was
blufﬁng . . . fry the bitch.
The Prince smiled as he was granted the upper
hand. ‘Archimedes.’ He looked from the dragon to the
crone. ‘Proceed.’ He casually motioned to the elder tree,
whereby the creature ignited it with its ﬁery breath.
‘Curse on thee, Rhun of Gwynedd, and all thy kin,’
the witch screeched, as the image of Bridgit faded from
view, and Mahaud began to chant out phrases in a
language the Prince did not recognise.
The sky rumbled and ﬂashed in fury, bringing a
sudden downpour of rain that smothered the ﬁre the
beast had started.
Two can play at that game. The Prince felt he’d
earned a bit of support from the elements this day, and
so turned to the south to seek their support. ‘Come to
my aid ye of Fire, the ﬁre that ﬁrst gave me life.’ He
turned to the east, raising his voice to be heard over the
crone’s shrieking. ‘Hear my plea ye of Air, the breath of
life that set me free.’ He faced west. ‘I seek thy comfort
ye of Water, purge me and bring me clarity.’ And lastly,
he revolved to face north. ‘Be my support ye of Earth,
the mother that hast always nurtured me.’
He raised his sights to witness the storm clouds
parting, to see the stars in the night sky beyond. Yet, as
the witch continued her chanting, the hole began to
close just as quickly.

‘Nay.’ Rhun focused harder on his summons.
‘I am the voice of this land,
the devoted servant of the Goddess,
and eyes of the dragon on this earthly plane.’
Rhun turned his back on the crone, holding his
arms outstretched to taunt her with the mark of the folk
upon his back.
‘I am the master of my reality.
and no will be stronger than my own.
I alone advise the four winds
and their elements,
that were the source of my creation.
Disperse this storm
that threatens the great mother,
in the name of my illustrious
forefathers and the great houses
Don and Llyr!’
The clouds were forced apart in all four directions,
forming a large expanding diamond ﬁlled with stars.
Tiny, red glowing beings, like the embers the Prince
had freed at land’s end, came rushing down through the
opening overhead on the back of a warm breeze. This
dazzling dance of light began circling the elder tree,
drying its bark and leaves in a matter of moments.
The witch began to shrill as the rain stopped and
the young Prince looked to her, empowered by his
victory and his new-found allies.

‘Time to meet thy maker,’ Rhun cued the beast, who
bombarded the tree with a constant stream of ﬂame.
The witch began to wither, transmuting into one
hideous form after another, mumbling curses through
her cries of agony.
Archimedes, impatient to be done with it, ripped
the burning tree from the ground, roots and all, then
pounded it to ashes.
With this the crone shrivelled into nothingness,
and her black hooded robe fell to the ground.
As the Prince retrieved it, tossing it onto what was
left of the smouldering tree, he couldn’t help but feel
sorry for the witch. ‘Misled fool. All that power and
knowledge wasted.’ He shook his head slowly, watching
the last remnant of the hag disintegrate.
Well, don’t just stand there philosophising, Archimedes
chided, when thou hast a woman waiting to be wooed.
‘Indeed.’ Rhun snapped to it. ‘To Dyfed then.’ He
climbed upon the dragon’s shoulders. ‘And do not spare
the horses.’
From the balcony of her room, Bridgit watched the wall
of cloud roll back to disclose a universe full of stars. This
be his doing, she smiled with a sigh.
The Queen of Gwynedd had left her to await Prince
Rhun. He was safe and would be King, that was all his
mother would tell her.
‘He be going to ask for my hand.’ Bridgit clutched
her maid’s hands tightly. ‘I just know it!’ The
mischievous smile on the High Queen’s face had said it
all. ‘The Dragon of the Isle be coming for me.’ Bridgit

strolled back inside to peruse her appearance in the
mirror, elevated to a dreamlike state by the romance of
it all.
‘I think thou art right, lady.’ Her maid, who was still
on the balcony, stared at the clear night sky, frozen
with fear.
Bridgit bundled up her skirts as she ran to see the
dragon come to land in the courtyard. This was not the
ﬁrst time such a creature had alighted there — the last
Prince of Gwynedd to be inaugurated had also visited
Dyfed thus. ‘Be he not the most audacious and
wondrous man alive?’
‘Aye, lady, that he be.’ The maid was still
spellbound, yet Bridgit was rushing around her room in
a ﬂuster.
‘Do I look beautiful?’ She tugged down her dress to
give her cleavage maximum exposure, and toyed with
the ringlets around her face.
‘Like a Queen, my lady,’ the maid assured, preparing
to take her leave so that the young lovers could speak
alone. ‘Behave thyself now, or thy father shall have my
head for this.’
‘Have no fear.’ Bridgit thought her concern a bore.
‘My Prince seems to insist on it.’
‘Well, such a ﬁne catch should not be allowed to
slip through thy net before thou hast well and truly got
him on board.’ The maid gave her a wink on the way
out the door.
‘Many thanks, my friend.’
Bridgit heard Rhun’s voice coming from her
balcony, and approached the open doors to be

confronted by the half-naked warrior’s back. The
artwork depicted there sent chills through her body.
This symbol was a very sacred one, yet she could not
understand how she knew this. ‘Caduceus.’
He swung round abruptly to see her looking every
bit the fairytale Princess in her silken gown of palest
pink. ‘Quite correct. How did thou know?’ But the girl
just stared blankly at him, appearing dazed.
‘What?’ she uttered.
Once she’d mistaken Rhun for an angel, but at this
moment he looked more like a god. His strong,
muscular torso held her gaze; how she longed to take
that body to her bed.
‘Thou shalt have to marry me ﬁrst,’ Rhun grinned,
knowing her mind.
The lady was embarrassed and inclined to be angry
with him, but as the Prince presented her with a large
bunch of the most exquisite ﬂowers all was forgiven.
‘Name the year?’ She doubted the sincerity of his
proposal, luring him further inside to where she could
get a better look at him.
‘Four days from now,’ he suggested, delighted by the
stunned look on her face. ‘At Arwystli, along with Bryce
and Aella, Eormenric and Vanora, and Blain and Javotte.’
‘Thou art serious!’ She was bursting with joy as she
rushed to embrace him and smother him with kisses.
‘I presume this means thou art in favour,’ he
managed to say, between her bursts of affection.
‘Oh, aye!’ She beamed. ‘If thou dost love me truly, I
do agree.’ The Prince seemed bothered suddenly, and put
her at arm’s length. ‘What be wrong?’ This unnerved her;

maybe he was only wedding her because it was what the
High Council wanted.
‘It be my past, Bridgit.’ He prepared to do a lot of
confessing. ‘People art going to have horrible stories to
tell of my escapades and, unfortunately, most of them
will be true.’
‘I certainly hope so.’ She stated enthusiastically.
‘Thy romantic exploits art the reason I sought thee out
in the ﬁrst place . . . I too want to know such pleasure.’
She drew him into a long and tender kiss.
‘But a recent incident . . .’ He attempted to enlighten
her, when her ﬁngers on his lips put a stop to it.
‘Shhh . . . It matters not. All that will change once
we art wed,’ Bridgit explained in a voice that brooked
no contradiction. ‘I intend to keep thee so occupied,
even thy Kingdom shall scarce get a look in.’
Her demeanour became all amiable again, and
Rhun thought he’d best get out of there before he did
something he’d regret. ‘I shall see thee at Arwystli in
four days then.’ He claimed one more kiss for the road,
and stepped away. ‘I do love thee, Bridgit. Thou art my
joy, my passion and my treasure. My peace, my dreams,
my hope and my pleasure art all embodied in thee.’
Bridgit stood speechless long after the Prince had
faded from sight. His words lingering in her mind were
more eloquent than any she’d imagined he’d say. How
did he just come and go as he pleased, like a merlin
would, and enchant otherworldly creatures to his aid?
I must learn the ways of the Otherworld, if I am to keep
him intrigued, she decided. I want to be the only Goddess
in his eyes.

31

LOVE, BIRTH, LIFE
AND DEATH

A

wedding celebration the like of that being
staged at Arwystli was unprecedented in
Britain. Leaders from all four corners of the
land would be attending.
For it had been young Prince Blain’s quest to invite
the leader of the Pictish to take up a place on the High
Council. An honour Cailtram, their leader, was a little
wary to accept. The High Council’s inﬂuence extended
the whole breadth and length of the land, and a
position therein made more sense than trying to oppose
them. But after centuries of bloodshed between his
people and the Scots, Cailtram was not too sure how he
and Fergus MacErc would exist together in an alliance.

However, as Ongen and Eormenric of Mercia had
signed the treaty after centuries of warring with the
Britons, Cailtram agreed to attend the celebration and
discuss the issue.
Both Rhun and Blain were crowned in their
respective capital cities the day after their return. The
people who had attended Rhun’s ceremony left
Degannwy the day after it to attend the wedding of the
century in Arwystli.
Any ill-will the lads had borne one another faded
in the midst of an excited exchange of stories and pats
on the back. Rhun disappeared to the dining hall to
feast with his friends the moment they arrived in the
host city.
Katren had accommodated all the brides in the
large tower room for the night. This resulted in their
husbands-to-be, who were a little worse for mead,
serenading them with sonnets and songs from the
courtyard in the middle of the night. Which, in the
end, was broken up by Sir Tiernan and Sir Angus, in
the hope that those staying at the household might get
some sleep prior to the four days of celebration that
were to follow.
The morning of the wedding was as fresh, clear, and
warm as any could have hoped.
Tory was up at the crack of dawn, assisting Katren to
prepare the girls, the banquet room, and the courtyard
where the wedding was taking place.
The mingling smells of all the food cooking in the
kitchen made Tory’s stomach turn, and she had to pause

a moment to control the nausea. And so it begins. She
breathed the fresh air wafting through the servants’
door that led to the herb and vegetable garden.
‘Art thou alright?’ Katren backed up a few paces to
check on her friend.
‘I am ﬁne.’ Tory forced a smile. She’d not
experienced any morning sickness last time round, and
on today of all days this was most inconvenient.
The Queen of Gwynedd’s face had gone as white as
a sheet. As Katren had given birth to three children
herself, this was a look she recognised all too well.
‘Thou art pregnant,’ she gasped, holding a hand over
her mouth.
Everyone was bound to ﬁnd out sometime, so Tory
nodded to confess that this was indeed true.
‘Oh Tory, thou must be overjoyed!’ Katren was
excited for her, though she kept her voice to a discreet
level.
‘Oh, I am thrilled.’ The unrest in her stomach
subsided; thus Tory moved out of the draught from the
open door.
‘And where dost thou think thou art going?’ Katren
demanded to know in a concerned fashion.
‘To get on with . . .’
‘Oh no, thou will not . . . thou should be resting.’
Katren pulled her up.
‘Do not start with me,’ Tory warned.
Katren kissed her cheek and gave her a squeeze to
subdue her. ‘If thou wants to do something useful, go
and see how our boys art faring. I shall take care of
everything else.’

As this task was well away from the food, Tory was
persuaded to comply with Katren’s wish.
Tory had thought the four brides, all in their different
gowns of pure white, a sight to behold. But viewing the
four grooms, clean-shaven and dressed in their best, was
even more of a novelty. Here they stood, Britain’s ﬁnest,
at their ﬁnest; she was so very proud of them all. As the
four lads had each other to lean on for support, lastminute marriage jitters were kept to a minimum and all
were keen to proceed.
Tory accompanied her four masters to the ﬂoweradorned altar, where Taliesin awaited to perform the
ceremony. All the guests had gathered in the courtyard,
creating a great gaggle of rowdy goodwill. The Queen
of Gwynedd, after kissing all her lads for good luck,
took up her place behind them.
Rhun had asked Blain to be his best man, and viceversa. So, too, were Bryce and Eormenric fulﬁlling this
role for each other. Hence they all stood about
reassuring one another, until the crowd hushed and all
eyes turned to the huge entrance doors.
Katren sneaked up beside Tory, gripping hold of her
hand, as Selwyn and Cai began to strum at their harp
strings and the doors parted wide.
Vortipor led his daughter down the aisle ﬁrst,
followed by Angus and Javotte, then Ongen and Aella.
But it was young Prince Owen who led Vanora to her
betrothed, being her oldest living male relative who was
not getting wed. One by one they kissed the girls
goodbye, handing them over to their intended.

Vortipor, the ﬁrst in line, gave Rhun a stern glare as
he did so, whereas Owen, the last, was happy just to
score a free kiss.
Selwyn and Cai assisted Taliesin during the service,
which had been written by the High Merlin especially for
the occasion. Katren was reduced to tears, of course. She
clung to Owen whom she knew she would also lose thus
before too long. As Vortipor and Angus were also a mite
teary-eyed at parting with their only daughters, Tory
stood between them gripping their hands in her own.
Only half of the original masters still dwelt in the
land of the living, but a whole new generation of leaders
and warriors had been born.
As Tory cast her sights over the gathering, Pict
beside Scot, Saxon beside Briton, she realised this was
what they’d all fought so hard for. This had been the
vision of that ﬁrst circle of twelve, and today that dream
had become a reality.
Once the hullabaloo of the wedding had died down,
and all had returned to their respective kingdoms and
estates, the isle of Britain resumed some normality.
Eormenric and Vanora returned with Ongen to
Londinium with abundant supplies to see them through
the cold seasons. Cailtram, having signed the pact, left
in the company of his sworn enemy, Fergus MacErc,
whose troops were helping to lug and herd the Pict’s
winter stores the great distance back to Alban. Sir
Angus and Sir Lucus remained at Arwystli, in the
service of King Blain and his Queen, Javotte. As Sir
Bryce had won the quest for Gwynedd’s champion at the

wedding, he and his bride settled at Degannwy. Here
Bryce ﬁnally assumed his father’s old position at the side
of Gwynedd’s King, Rhun. In addition, as Prince Bryce
was clearly the ﬁnest warrior in Britain, and who in all
probability would never be King, Tory nominated him to
assume her role of sensei to the circle of twelve, once she
had departed for the twentieth century.
Come winter, all of the twelve masters gathered at
Degannwy to perfect their art, as they did every year.
This was the last time this assembly would be overseen
by the sensei who had begun the circle of twelve. Thus
they worked hard and played little; still, a good time
was had by all.
Tory’s belly expanded with every passing month, but
she was not alone. By the time the masters disbanded to
resume their normal duties, all four of the newly-wed
women were with child. And, not to be outdone, Rhun
and Bridgit’s babe was the ﬁrst due.
Hence, even after the birth of her own child, Rhun
managed to keep Tory around a while longer to see her
ﬁrst grandchild into the world.
Her daughter, whom Tory had aptly named
Rhiannon after the War Goddess, was not at all the
placid, obliging baby Rhun had been; she was full of ﬁre
and energy. But, by the same token, she was a happy
soul, and everyone, especially Rhun, adored her.
Rhiannon was dark-haired and darker-eyed, like her
brother, with beautiful ivory skin. She had her mother’s
looks, however, and was just as sensitive to Tory’s moods
as Rhun was.

A month rolled by before they greeted a new heir to
the throne of Gwynedd, whom Rhun named Cadwell,
meaning war-defense. He was of fairer hair than his
father, and his eyes a pale shade of golden brown.
Tory wished, in retrospect, that she’d left before
the new prince had been born. It broke her heart to
think she’d miss him growing up — and all the other
babes not yet born. Still, all the affairs of state had
been seen to, Mahaud had been destroyed, and the
leaders of the land were united and at peace. The time
when Tory must leave the Dark Age for good, drew
ever nearer.
It was clearly understood by one and all that Tory would
not be making a dramatic exit. In fact she’d already said
most of her goodbyes.
Katren had been up to visit as soon as Rhiannon
had been born, but had returned to Arwystli to await
the birth of Javotte’s child soon after. This farewell
had not been an easy one; their friendship spanned
two decades and had seen some phenomenal events.
Yet the Queen Mother of Powys had two
grandchildren on the way. Tory felt sure she would
barely have time to notice her missing. Katren had
sworn blind, through her tears, that this would never
be the case.
All Tory’s masters had been prepared for her
departure for months. She would just slip into the
shadows, as Maelgwn had, no sad farewells, no tears.
Tory did pop down to see Vortipor, as promised, to
drink one last toast of ﬁne Roman wine in honour of

their grandson and old times. She decided she was
leaving the alliance in good hands; they didn’t call him
the Protector for no reason.
Bryce had threatened suicide if Tory didn’t see him
before she left. Thus it was that late on the day of her
departure, before she confronted her son, Tory sent Sir
Tiernan to fetch Bryce to her chambers.
‘It be time.’ Bryce knew it before he’d even looked
at her. ‘Nay, please tell me I am wrong.’
Tory had never seen Bryce weep before, not even at
his father’s funeral. Yet he did so now, down before her
on one knee, begging her not to go.
‘Bryce . . . Bryce, listen to me.’ She encouraged him
to look her in the eye. ‘This be thy destiny, my friend . . .
thou hast sought it, and thou hast found it.’
‘Nay,’ he pleaded. ‘I cannot stand that I shall not see
thee again.’
‘But Bryce, thou will.’ She crouched beside him. ‘I
shall go on and on, and thou shall reincarnate. And
even though thou may not recognise me, I shall know
thee . . . and I will ﬁnd thee again, I swear it.’ Tory
crossed her heart and held up her hand in promise.
As the knight calmed, he startled Tory with a kiss.
‘What was that for?’ she laughed in the after-shock.
‘I have wanted to do that since the day I met thee.’
He shrugged coyly. ‘I ﬁgured it was now or never.’
‘Oh Bryce!’ She smothered him with a huge hug.
‘Thou art good for my ego.’
‘Thou art not going yet, surely!’ Rhun stormed into
the room, slamming the door closed. ‘Rhiannon be not
old enough for time travel.’

‘Really, Rhun.’ She brushed off his argument with a
steely gaze. ‘It will not hurt her.’
‘But I am not —’
‘Oh, hush up, and come here.’ Tory was determined
there was not going to be a scene. ‘I have something for
thee.’ She wandered over to the bed to retrieve
Maelgwn’s sword and scabbard. ‘I think thy father would
have wanted thee to have this.’
‘Nay!’ Rhun protested. ‘Father wanted thee to have
it, for protection.’
‘Well, then.’ She smiled, handing it to him all the
same. ‘Thou can bring it to me when thou comes.’
He admired the mighty weapon, as he had many
times when it had hung at his father’s side. ‘Oh,
Mother.’ He embraced her suddenly. ‘I long for that
time so much . . . promise me I shall ﬁnd thee. Promise
me Rhiannon and thee will wait.’
‘I promise, thee . . . sweet prince.’ She kissed his
forehead, her voice faltering as she suppressed tears. ‘But
thou art a King now,’ she snifﬂed, holding him at arm’s
length and forcing a smile. ‘And what a ﬁne King thou
dost make.’ She moved to collect the basket in which
Rhiannon lay, that had once served as Rhun’s time
capsule many years ago. ‘Be wise, my beloved. Be safe, be
strong, be truthful and be just. But most of all . . . be
happy.’ Tory blew them both a kiss and vanished in a
ﬂood of tears.
She materialized in the entrance foyer of Taliesin’s
labyrinth, where her chariot awaited, to ﬁnd Taliesin
and Selwyn in attendance.

‘Damn it!’ Tory cursed out loud. ‘Why did thou
have to be here! I cannot say goodbye to thee!’ She was
on the verge of collapsing into an emotional mess.
‘Then let us just say . . . ate logo,’ Taliesin suggested
with a huge beaming smile, that made Tory catch her
breath. ‘After all, where dost goodbye end and hello
begin? It be all just an illusion anyway.’
She set down the basket beside her and ran to
embrace him. ‘I do love thee, Taliesin. Only the
Goddess knows how I shall miss thee. Catch us up
quickly.’ She closed her eyes as she squeezed him,
absorbing his lovely energy for the last time in a long
time.
‘Majesty?’ Selwyn politely called for her attention.
‘This be a little something I wrote for thee.’ He
presented her with a scrolled parchment, sealed with
wax. ‘I would like thee to read it, once thou art settled
in thy new home.’ The lump in Selwyn’s throat was
near choking him, and the tears were streaming down
his face. ‘I owe thee more than . . .’ The rest wouldn’t
come, and he was thankful when Tory held him and put
an end to his fruitless search for words.
‘It be I who owes thee, Selwyn. What would I have
done without thee?’ She rocked him in her arms a
moment; she was the only one who’d ever comforted
him thus. ‘Cry if thou must for parting is hell. But life
still goes on, so party as well.’ She let him go, and gave
him a nudge and a wink of encouragement.
‘Aye, Majesty, I will.’ He melted to a smile, chin up.
Tory took a deep breath, ﬁnding herself at a
poignant moment.

‘Now then. I took the liberty of giving thy transport
the once-over,’ Taliesin advised as he walked her to the
chariot. It was parked right beside its future self which
he’d brought back with him from his travels. ‘And I
note that the crystal that operates the thought
ampliﬁcation drive be cracked. Thou really should not
try to operate complex machinery when thou art
emotionally distraught.’
Tory rolled her eyes at this; when wasn’t she
emotionally distraught lately? ‘Well . . .’ She placed
Rhiannon’s basket inside their vehicle. ‘As far as I am
concerned, it only need make one more trip.’
‘Indeed.’ The High Merlin smiled a peculiar smile.
‘Best get Myrddin to take a closer look at the other end,
ay? Just to be safe.’ He winked. ‘Nothing must happen
to this treasure, or all that I have just done will not be
possible. Thou and Rhun will be trapped in the
twentieth century, and Maelgwn and myself shall fall
into a bitter feud.’
Tory motioned him to hush; she got the picture. ‘It
sounds as if thou hast lived it all before.’
‘Another time, another place, another dimension.’
He was rather pleased about that. ‘So, will thou be
heading for the day thou left?’
‘Heavens no!’ Tory had to laugh. ‘I think that
meeting his babe two days after conception, might be a
bit much for Miles to cope with.’ She jumped into the
pilot’s seat, making sure Rhiannon was comfortable and
secure. ‘I shall aim for the birth of Brian’s child, and see
how we go from there.’
‘Well, it be thy choice, of course.’

As the Merlin took a step backwards, there was that
odd smile again. Tory was tempted to enquire after its
meaning, but she knew that would only prove a waste of
time. ‘I leave the kindred in thy very capable hands,
gentlemen.’ Tory’s mind focused on the future, yet her
sights remained ﬁxed on the two merlins until their
forms became obscured by the ethers of her ﬂight.
Tory arrived in Myrddin’s cave at Dinas Emrys in a
shower of sparks. She was quick to get Rhiannon to a
safe distance, as the short-circuiting drive mechanism
shot electrical currents over the nose cone of
the vehicle.
When all the activity had died down, leaving smoke
billowing from the transport’s casing, Tory opened up
the hatch of the chariot to take a closer look. On this
trip, the emotional stress had proved too much; the
crystal that was the nucleus of the drive system had
been completely shattered. ‘Dad is going to be pissed.’
She gave a heavy sigh.
Actually, she was rather surprised that Myrddin was
not here to meet them. But, no matter, she would ﬁnd
him soon enough.
‘Come on.’ She retrieved the basket containing her
sleeping babe. ‘Let us ﬁrst ﬁnd thy father.’
No sooner had Tory conjured up a picture of the cottage
that stood where the house at Aberffraw once had, than
she was standing before it.
‘What?’ She couldn’t believe what she was seeing;
the cottage was up for sale. ‘Miles would never sell this

place . . .’ Tory strode towards the front door in a daze.
‘It’s belonged to his family for centuries.’
After knocking several times at both the front and
back doors, Tory accepted the fact that the place was
deserted. ‘We’d best ﬁnd thy uncle,’ she commented to
Rhiannon. ‘Maybe he can shed some light on this.’
Naomi answered the door, bearing a tiny bundle
perched over her shoulder. ‘Tory! You . . . you’re back.’
She gaped at her sister-in-law, overawed to see her.
The tiny bundle in Naomi’s arms held Tory’s gaze,
and she moved closer to get a better look. ‘My god, is
this . . .’
‘Daniel Alexander.’ Naomi relaxed a little as she
showed off her prize, who was not yet four days old.’
‘Look at you.’ The little dimple on his chin brought
tears to her eyes. He was as fair as his father, this one,
and as his eyelids ventured to part they revealed pupils
of piercing blue. ‘He looks so much like Brian,’ Tory
mumbled, in tears again; Daniel was, in fact, the
splitting image of Cai.
Naomi nodded, reduced to tears also. ‘Where are
my manners?’ she sniffled, pulling herself together and
assuming a more light-hearted approach. ‘Come in, sit
down. Brian should be back any minute, he’s just
popped down to the shop.’ Naomi guided her inside to
the lounge room. She so desperately wanted to ask
about the child Tory had with her, but hesitated to do
so in case the subject of Miles came up. ‘I shall make
us a cup of tea.’ She forced a smile, escaping into
the kitchen.

Tory sat gazing about the room, not really taking in
the decor. Naomi’s behaviour seemed somewhat odd, and
something told her that there was more to her sister-inlaw’s emotional state than a case of post-natal depression.
‘Honey, I’m home!’ Brian’s chirpy self cruised through
the front door, his arms loaded with bags of groceries.
Tory stood as her brother wandered past the lounge
room door, en route to the kitchen. She presumed he’d
not spotted her, but then he backed up to take a second
look. ‘Hello,’ she said softly, uncertain whether to
approach him, for he too looked sadly stunned by her
presence.
‘So, you ﬁnally decided to come back, did you?’ His
chirpy mood turned icy, as he off-loaded the groceries
onto the closest chair.
‘Well, yes . . . things were kind of hectic.’
‘What happened to six months?’ He demanded an
answer. ‘Before the baby was born, that’s what you said!’
‘Brian?’ Her tears were welling again. ‘What is the
matter with you?’
‘What is the matter with me!’ he roared, completely
and utterly enraged. ‘I’ll tell you what the matter with
me is . . . I had faith in you, that’s what! Six months I
told him, tops! But, oh no, you had to make him suffer.’
‘Who suffer? What are you talking about?’
‘Miles, Tory, I’m talking about Miles!’ Brian
observed the dismay spread across her face. ‘I watched
him wither away, month by month by month.’
Tory felt his words clutch hold of her heart and
wrench it out. ‘Are you saying Miles is . . . dead?’ She
sank to a seat.

Brian leaned closer to taunt her. ‘If he could not be
with you in this life, he said he’d ﬁnd you in the next.
Miles went to his grave, every bit as heartbroken and
remorseful as you could have wanted him to be.’
‘How can you stand there and torture me this way? I
loved him, Brian.’
‘Yeah!’ He backed up. ‘Well, you have a real shitty
way of showing it.’
‘That’s enough!’ Naomi stood in the doorway, teatray in hand, appalled by her husband’s relentless and
heartless attack.
‘No, Naomi. I fear it’s not nearly enough. All this
goddess rubbish has gone to her head! You are not
god, Tory! And despite what you may believe,
mankind was not put on this earth to live up to your
expectations!’
The sound of a child crying broke Brian’s train of
thought. Curious, he pursued the source to ﬁnd the
basket tucked up beside the lounge. He gulped. ‘Miles?’
Tory nodded. ‘That’s why I waited so long . . . I
thought the shock would kill . . .’ She stopped before
she said it, covering her mouth with her hands as if she
would be sick.
‘Aw, sis. I’m sorry.’ Brian joined her on the lounge,
wishing he could take back every word. ‘I was way off
the mark . . .’
‘No, you were right.’ She stood and backed away.
‘At the time I left, I did want to hurt him. Father
advised me to stay and resolve the situation, but I
wouldn’t listen. I just used him for my own selﬁsh
purposes and left him for dead.’

‘No, you didn’t.’ Brian insisted, standing to attempt
an embrace. ‘Don’t listen to me, what do I know?’
Tory submitted wholeheartedly, thankful for the
support. ‘What will I do now?’ she mumbled into his
shirt, as she gripped it tight.
‘Well,’ Brian searched for a constructive solution.
‘You could always go back and change it?’
Tory shook her head, recalling the mess she’d left
the chariot in. ‘That’s impossible now,’ she sobbed,
trying to breathe normally and regain her composure.
‘Pardon?’ Brian held her at arm’s length. ‘I didn’t
think that word was in your vocabulary.’
With her head bowed low, Tory could not even
bring herself to explain; it all seemed so hopeless.
I don’t require that cumbersome man-made nightmare to
time travel any more! I traded it in eons ago for a more ideal
and reliable means of transport.
The image of her future self motioning to her brain
brought a smile to her face, and Tory’s head shot up.
‘Where is Dad?’
Brian shrugged. ‘Hanging around somewhere? You
know what he’s like.’
‘I have to ﬁnd him!’ Tory kissed Brian’s cheek in
gratitude. ‘I’ll see you six months ago.’ She collected her
child and was gone in the blink of an eye.
‘She really is weird, isn’t she?’ Brian looked to
Naomi, who nodded, giving a sigh of relief.
‘Praise the universe for that.’
With the thought of her father, Tory found herself back
in his cavern of treasures. The merlin was attempting to

get all the crystal splinters out of the chariot’s body with
the aid of a mini-vac, and seemed none too pleased
about the state she’d left it in.
‘Can you ﬁx it?’ Tory hesitated to ask.
The merlin was startled to a standing position,
plunging one hand into the large pocket of his robe.
‘There you are?’ His demeanour was now as cool as a
cucumber. ‘You have made a ﬁne mess of it, I fear.’
Tory sighed at this, though she had known the
answer before she’d even asked the question. This was
her punishment for being so cruel; now she must make
it back to Miles of her own accord. ‘Have you ever time
travelled using only the power of the mind?’
‘No, not I.’ Myrddin raised his brow. ‘But then I
have never really had just cause to try.’
‘So you think it might be possible, then?’
The merlin smiled broadly. ‘Anything is possible.’
‘But do you think I could do it?’ She hounded him
for some positive reinforcement.
Myrddin shrugged casually. ‘The question is more,
do you believe you can do it?’
‘Oh!’ she whined, wanting to feel strong and
conﬁdent; where was all her faith when she needed it
for herself?
‘Tory, dearest . . . let me put it to you this way.’ He
took her under his arm to muse: ‘This machine does
naught but amplify thy will, and therefore, it is my
theory . . . that, if your desire be strong enough, the
universe must comply.’
‘Will you help me?’ She gripped hold of both his
hands, inspired by his reasoning.

‘I can point you in the right direction, if that’s what
you mean?’
‘Yes, yes . . . do.’ She urged, seating herself on the
ground and placing Rhiannon’s basket in her lap.
The merlin crouched to view his grand-daughter,
tickling her under the chin.
‘Yes, I know my dear Rhiannon. Your mummy is a
very silly girl, isn’t she, yes. But I think she has learned
her lesson now.’ He smiled at Tory. ‘Am I always right,
or am I always right?’
‘You’re always right.’ She humoured her father with
a kiss.
‘Absolutely correct . . . and I say you are going to
make it.’ He gave her a wink of encouragement. ‘Now,
there is only one way to truly pinpoint where you are in
relation to the time and space of this third dimensional
reality. Can you guess what that might be?’
Tory stared back at her father blankly, not even
understanding the question. ‘Is this a test?’
‘Astronomy, my darling.’ His tone became
patronising. ‘Did they teach you nothing back in the
Old Land?’
Myrddin rolled his eyes, then directed her to the
earthen floor where he began mapping out the solar
system in the dirt with his finger.
‘It takes two hundred million years for our solar
system to make the trip around the galactic centre of
the Milky Way. This gives us much scope in which to
place ourselves. This is how the planets were placed
around the time you seek.’ Off to the side of his solar
system the merlin drew the spiralling arms of the

Milky Way. ‘At present the solar system is located
here, at the edge of the Orion spiral arm.’
Tory’s eyes ran over the composition, considering
how it looked rather like a crop-circle formation.
‘Have you committed the coordinates to memory.’
Her father emptied the crystal splinters from his minivac into a little pouch, and then placed the pouch in
her hand.
‘I think so.’
‘Good. Close your eyes.’ He urged them shut with
his ﬁngers. ‘See it still?’
She nodded.
‘Then let it form.’ The merlin began lugging large
quartz crystals from his piles of treasure, which he
placed in a circle around his daughter, to contain the
vortex they were conjuring.
‘Float out into the cosmos and see its vast body
stretched out before you. The planets and their moons,
the stars and the sun . . . asteroids, meteorites,
heavenly bodies, all twirling round the spiralling arms
of the galaxy!’ He let loose a laugh, inspired by the
splendour of the mighty vision. ‘That’s it . . .’ The
merlin looked to Tory, noting that the pouch in her
hand was glowing and she had begun to fade. ‘Ah-ha!’
He clapped his hands, proud of her. ‘What do you
know, it does work.’
Once she had gone he pulled a crystal from his
pocket, just like the one his daughter had demolished
in the chariot, and kissed it. ‘Finally! I was wondering
when I was going to get it back.’ He looked at the
chariot, impressed with himself.

When Tory’s vision of the galaxy was exactly as her
father had drawn it, she found herself speeding towards
the earth. She soared past the moon, down through
the coloured ethers of the atmosphere, the cloud cover
and over a large body of land. An ocean appeared on
the horizon, when suddenly everything came to
a standstill.
Her sights came to focus on a man standing some
distance away, hands sunk deep in pockets as he gazed
out to sea. After checking on Rhiannon, who’d
obviously slept through the whole thing, Tory came to
realise she was standing out the back of the cottage at
Aberffraw, and that the man before her was Miles.
‘What are you thinking about?’
Her voice sent shivers down his spine, but he did
not bother with a response; his imagination played him
for the fool quite often these days.
‘The strong, silent type, hey?’ She laughed as he
spun round to face her.
‘I’m so sorry.’ He realised his mistake, and was so
completely stupeﬁed to see her that he didn’t know
what to say ﬁrst. ‘In fact, I’m sorry about everything. I
was a fool . . .’
‘Please, Miles, forget it.’ Tory waved it off with her
free hand. ‘I have.’
‘Hello?’ His voice landed on a low note, as he
realised what she was holding. ‘Maelgwn’s?’ he
questioned timidly.
‘Nope,’ she teased. ‘Guess again?’
Miles staggered back a few paces, a smile
threatening to form on his lips. ‘No.’

‘Yes . . .!’ Tory mocked him, setting down the basket
and lifting Rhiannon from it. ‘Miles, I’d like you to
meet your daughter.’
‘Daughter!’ He took a giant step forward, drawn in
by the strange excitement of sudden fatherhood.
‘I hope you don’t mind . . .’ Tory bundled the babe
into his arms. ‘But I took the liberty of naming
her Rhiannon.’
‘The war goddess.’ He admired their handiwork. ‘Oh
goody, another one.’
As Tory watched Miles with Rhiannon, she suddenly
saw the Maelgwn in him — the calm, accepting side of
his nature that he’d kept hidden most of the time.
‘I told you we’d meet again.’ Miles winked, ﬂashing
a brilliant smile.
Yet Tory had the strangest feeling that Maelgwn was
lurking behind that conﬁdent grin. Or, then again,
perhaps it was just her imagination? That thou did, she
conceded as she obliged him with a kiss. ‘That you did.’
As requested, Tory waited until she was settled in her
new life to break the seal on the scroll Selwyn had
given her in parting.
With a cup of tea in her hand, and husband and
baby settled comfortably in her lap, she read . . .
A short life hast mine been,
wondrous and blithe.
I have learned of many a legend.
But who wast the greatest?
I reply . . .

It was she who tamed the Dragon.
It was she who united this land.
It was she who shaped my future,
the Goddess’ right hand.
The head-wind of a storm, wast she,
with more radiance than the sun.
The heart of a warrior, had she,
who fought until she won.
I am proud to say I knew her,
for she wast my truest friend.
The years we had together,
art the happiest I shall spend.
Departed now, for some future age,
and mourned by all who knew her,
I shall recount her deeds until
I draw my ﬁnal breath,
Her name? . . . Tory Alexander.

The end
and the beginning were always there.
Before the beginning and after the end.
T.S. Eliot

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bede, Ecclesiastical History of the English People,
Penguin, London, 1990.
Berliitz, Charles, The Dragon’s Triangle, Wynwood
Press, 1989.
Berresford-Ellis, Peter, Dictionary of Celtic Mythology,
Constable & Co, London, 1992.
Bletzer, June G, Encyclopedic Psychic Dictionary,
Donning Co, Virginia, 1986.
Davies, Paul, The Cosmic Blueprint, Unwin Hyman,
London, 1989.
Devereux, Paul, Secrets of Ancient and Sacred Places,
Blandford Press, London, 1992.
Frederic, Louis, Dictionary of the Martial Arts,
Athlone Press, France, 1991.
Hope, Murry, Practical Atlantean Magic: Atlantis
Myth or Reality, Aquarian, London, 1991.
Hope, Murry. Time: The Ultimate Energy, Element
Books, Shaftesbury, 1991.
Maclean, Fitzroy, A Concise History of Scotland,
Thames & Hudson, London, 1970.
Matthews, Caitlin, Mabon and the Mysteries of
Britain, Penguin Arkana, London, 1987.
Matthews, John, The Song of Taliesin, Aquarian,
London, 1991.
Matthews, John, Taliesin, Aquarian, London, 1991.
Matthews, John, A Celtic Reader, Aquarian,
London, 1991.

Geoffrey of Monmouth, The History of the Kings of
Britain, Penguin Classics, London, 1966.
Nennius, Historia Brittonum, British American
Books, California. (no year given)
Plato, Timaeus & Critias, [Desmond Lee (trans)],
London, Penguin Books, 1977.
Roberts, Anthony, Atlantean Traditions in Ancient
Britain, Rider & Co, London, 1977.
Sitchin, Zecharia, The 12th Planet, Avon Books,
N.Y., 1976.

References
The author gratefully acknowledges the use of the
following quotations.
The extract in Part I, page 101, is taken from
Taliesin: Shamanism and the Bardic Mysteries in Britain
and Ireland by John Matthews and is reproduced
with the kind permission of HarperCollinsPublishers,
London.
The extract in Part III, page 611, is taken
from Practical Celtic Magic by Murry Hope and
is reproduced with the kind permission of
HarperCollinsPublishers, London.
The poems on pages 89 and 95 are adapted from
The Song of Taliesin by John Matthews with his
kind permission.

Acknowledgements
First of all I would like to thank all the lads and lasses who
purchased The Ancient Future: the Dark Age, especially those
who took time to write; your kind words were most
encouraging.
My gratitude to my editor, Sue Moran, for the ﬁne job
she did on this manuscript, as always, and to Lisa Herrick and
Karen Johnson for their enthusiasm and comments that
helped the story along.
I would also like to acknowledge the creative genius of
my husband, David Harding, for the amazing cover artwork;
again, it was exactly as I imagined. For his hard work,
persistence, and faith in me, I love him dearly.
I am deeply indebted to Caiseal Mor for all his advice
and guidance over the past year. It has proved invaluable.
I praise the universe for my three fairy godmothers, Toni
Ludgate, Lynny Rainbow and Selwa Anthony for continuing
to weave their magic around me.
My heartfelt thanks also go to Gill Moran and my father,
Terry Ludgate, for their ongoing support — and buying out
my ﬁrst print run.
But most of all, I would like recognised the efforts of
everyone at HarperCollins who worked so hard to make The
Ancient Future: the Dark Age a success — a wonderful job was
done by all.

PERFECTBOUND SPECIAL FEATURE:
GODS AND GODDESSES OF ATLANTIS
HELIO
Male aspect of the solar deity
Sacred stone: White diamond
Colour: Gold
Symbol: Winged Disk
Totem Animal: Falcon
Orders: Masculine Orders of Passage; Males in the
service of the Shu Sar
Temples & Universities: The Great Temple Of
Chalidocean; E-nun (the Royal House); Dur-an-ki
(Cylindrical Dome atop of a platform that kept Earth in
communication with Sirius)
HELIONA
Female aspect of the solar deity
Sacred stone: Blue diamond.
Colour: Azure Blue or Silver
Symbol: Uraeus
Totem animal: Serpent or Dragon
Orders: Feminine Orders of Passage; Females in the
service of the Shu Sar
Temples & Universities: Same as Helio
TA-KHU
(Pronounced Tar-Koo) The Lord of Time and Space
Sacred stone: Amethyst
Colour: Purple

Symbol: Caduceus
Totem animal: Dolphin
Order: Time, Space & E.T. frequency study
Temples & Universities: Ki-ur (Communications
Centre); Dur-na-ga (Astrology & Astronomy)
AKHANTUIH
(Pronounced Ar-knan-too-ee) Negotiator of Chaos
Sacred stone: Topaz
Colour: Yellow
Symbol: Crystal torch
Totem animal: Black Panther
Orders: Astrology, Astronomy & Chaos Studies
Temples & Universities: Dur-na-ga (Astrology &
Astronomy)
PHILAEIA
(Pronounced Phil-ay-ee-ar) Goddess of wisdom,
philosophy, science and architecture
Sacred stone: Sapphire
Colour: Royal Blue
Symbol: Masonic Compass
Totem animal: Parrot
Orders: Mind Sciences, Architecture
Temples & Universities: E-abzu (Mind Sciences); Kiur (Communications Centre)
KHE-TA
(Pronounced Kay-Tar) Feline divinity of music, art,
poetry and dance
Sacred stone: Aquamarine

Colour: Turquoise
Symbol: Sistrum
Totem animal: Cat
Orders: Healing of Domestic Animals; Music, Art,
Poetry and Dance
Temples & Universities: E-hulhul (Recreation); The
Second Island Ring, Stadium & University
DANUIH
(Pronounced Da-noo-ee) Earth Goddess
Sacred stone: Emerald.
Colour: Jade or Deep green.
Symbol: Tree and Equidistant cross
Totem animal: Horse
Orders: Healing of Human Beings; Earth Healing &
Studies
Temples & Universities: Shi-im-ti (Healing); E-lum
(Germinating Vegetation)
KHIET-SIN
(Pronounced Khee-et Sheen) Leonine goddess of
protection and retribution. Dispenser of Cosmic Justice
Sacred stone: Ruby
Colour: Orange or Red
Symbol: Flaming orb
Totem animal: Lioness
Orders: Healing of Wild Animals; Training of Wild
Animals; Warrior Arts; Legal studies
Temples & Universities: Courts of Justice; The Second
Island ring where the Stadium and Animals are housed

About the Author
Traci Harding lives on a quiet acre of bushland on the
Hawkesbury River, with her exceedingly talented husband,
David, and their beautiful daughter, Sarah.
Book One of the Trilogy, The Ancient Future: the Dark
Age was published in 1996; Book Two, An Echo In Time:
Atlantis was published in 1997; and Book Three, Masters of
Reality: the Gathering in 1998. A stand-alone book, The
Alchemist’s Key, was released in 1999. Her next trilogy was
The Celestial Triad: Chronicle of Ages, Tablet of Destinies and
The Cosmic Logos.
In 2002 HarperCollins Australia created a new Traci
Harding website and Traci visits the message board in the
community section daily, to discuss the greater mysteries with
her readers. At the website there are glossaries of the terms
used in Traci’s books and author notes for those interested in
delving deeper into different esoteric and historic aspects of
this author’s work. You’ll ﬁnd Traci’s new website and message
board at: www.voyageronline.com.au/traciharding
Feel free to write to Traci Harding at the following
email address: hardingd@ozemail.com.au.

For information about Traci Harding and her
books, plus all the latest science ﬁction news, visit:
Voyager Online: www.voyageronline.com.au
the website for lovers of science ﬁction and fantasy.

Credits
Cover and internal design by Darian Causby, HarperCollins
Design Studio, Australia
Cover illustration by David Harding

This is a work of ﬁction. Names, characters, places and
incidents either are the products of the author’s imagination
or are used ﬁctitiously. Any resemblance to actual events,
locales, organizations, or persons, living or dead, is entirely
coincidental and beyond the intent of either the author or
the publisher.
AN ECHO IN TIME: ATLANTIS Copyright © 1997 by
Traci Harding All rights reserved under International and
Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book
on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or
stored in or introduced into any information storage and
retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether
electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of
PerfectBound™.
PerfectBound™ and the PerfectBound™ logo are trademarks
of HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader 07/2003 eISBN 0-7322-7851-1
Print edition ﬁrst published in 1997 by HarperCollins
Publishers, Inc.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About
the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty Ltd, 25 Ryde Road
(PO Box 321), Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.perfectbound.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers (Canada) Ltd
Hazelton Lanes, 55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900, Toronto,
Ontario,
M5R 3L2 and 1995 Markham Road, Scarborough, Ontario,
M1B 5M8, Canada
http://www.perfectbound.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand), 31 View Road,
Glenﬁeld, Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd, 77-85 Fulham Palace Road,
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.ﬁreandwater.com/perfectbound
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc., 10 East 53rd Street, New
York, NY 10022, United States
http://www.perfectbound.com

