™

™

logos run

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ACE BOOKS, NEW YORK

“William C. Dietz is one of the grand masters of space
opera. Logos Run is full of action, adventure, intrigue, and
surprises . . . The well thought-out story line is populated
by interesting characters representing a civilization on a
—Midwest Book Review
downward spiral.”
“Dietz’s stories have in common intrigue, action, romance,
—Booklist
and a well-realized setting.”

Praise for

RUNNER
“Probably [Dietz’s] best-realized character to date . . . An
exciting series of chase scenes, escapes and captures, and
high adventure against the backdrop of exotic other
—Chronicle
worlds.”
“Engaging . . . action packed . . . This novel stands out with
—Publishers Weekly
its intriguing spiritual explorations.”
“Far-future, planet-hopping adventure . . . pulse-pounding
action sequences make for a fast and enjoyable read . . . full
of inventive concepts and . . . a richly detailed setting. For
fans of space opera and action/adventure, this one is not to
—Kirkus Reviews
be missed.”
“Dietz’s honorable addition to depictions of the far future,
from Wells’s Time Machine to Asimov’s Pebble in the Sky to
more recently the works of Clarke and Baxter, is distinguished by the brisk pacing and ﬂeshed-out action scenes
that have already made him a respected name in military
—Booklist
SF.”
“An exciting thriller . . . [a] strong science ﬁction tale.”
—Midwest Book Review
continued . . .

Praise for William C. Dietz
and the Legion of the Damned Novels
“A tough, moving novel of future warfare.” —David Drake,
author of the Hammer’s Slammers novels

“Exciting and suspenseful . . . real punch.”—Publishers Weekly
“Dietz’s expertise in matters of mayhem is second to none.”
—The Oregonian

“Unrelenting action.”

—KLIATT

“Lots of action, good characterization, a menacing enemy
reminiscent of Fred Saberhagen’s Berserker series, and a
—Science Fiction Chronicle
rousing ending.”

FOR THOSE WHO FELL
“A genuine adrenaline rush.”

—Publishers Weekly

“This is an excellent story, well written and excitingly told.
If you like military SF, this is deﬁnitely a book for you.”
—SF Crowsnest.com

“The usual fast-paced adventure we have come to expect in
—Booklist
the series and from Dietz.”
“William C. Dietz raises the bar of excellence for military
science ﬁction with every book he writes. For Those Who Fell
is a superb, action-packed thriller starring a countless number of ordinary people forced into Herculean efforts to prevent the enemy from victory. Pivotal heroes like First
Lieutenant Antonio Santana and Christine Vanderveen . . .
—Midwest Book Review
add to this terriﬁc tale.”

FOR MORE THAN GLORY
“Dietz has created an intricate tapestry of local and starfaring culture with top-notch action sequences.”
—Publishers Weekly

“Plenty of conﬂict and mayhem . . . rewarding.”
“Thoughtful . . . plot conscious.”

—SF Site
—Chronicle

“Exciting military SF fare. Series readers and Starship Troop—Booklist
ers fans will want this.”

EARTHRISE
“An insightful . . . action-packed novel.”
—Midwest Book Review

“Independence Day with a twist. Dietz delivers a rousing ﬁnale to his apocalyptic vision of Earth’s invasion.”
—Romantic Times

DEATHDAY
“A classic alien-invasion tale of survival and human
triumph—great reading for anyone who loved Independence
—Kevin J. Anderson,
Day or The War of the Worlds.”
coauthor of Hunters of Dune

“A compelling novel of the strength of the human spirit in
—Rick Shelley,
the face of the apocalypse.”
author of Holding the Line

Ace Books by William C. Dietz
galactic bounty
freehold
prison planet
imperial bounty
alien bounty
mccade’s bounty
drifter
drifter’s run
drifter’s war
legion of the damned
bodyguard
the ﬁnal battle
where the ships die
steelheart
by blood alone
by force of arms
deathday
earthrise
for more than glory
for those who fell
runner
logos run
when all seems lost

™

™

logos run

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ACE BOOKS, NEW YORK

THE BERKLEY PUBLISHING GROUP
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario M4P 2Y3, Canada
(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd., 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Group Ireland, 25 St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd.)
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia
(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty. Ltd.)
Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd., 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi—110 017, India
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0745, Auckland, New Zealand
(a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd.)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty.) Ltd., 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196,
South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd., Registered Ofﬁces: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
This is a work of ﬁction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author’s
imagination or are used ﬁctitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, business establishments, events, or locales is entirely coincidental. The publisher does not have any control over
and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party websites or their content.
LOGOS RUN
An Ace Book / published by arrangement with the author
Copyright © 2006 by William C. Dietz.
Interior text design by Kristin del Rosario.
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced, scanned, or distributed in any printed or electronic form without permission. Please do not participate in or encourage piracy of copyrighted materials in violation of
the author’s rights. Purchase only authorized editions.
For information, address: The Berkley Publishing Group,
a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.,
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014.
ISBN: 1-4362-4750-0
ACE
Ace Books are published by The Berkley Publishing Group,
a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.,
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014.
ACE and the “A” design are trademarks belonging to Penguin Group (USA) Inc.

This book is dedicated to my dearest Marjorie.
Thank you for glorious days past,
life in the ever-present now,
and whatever may lie ahead.
The adventure continues!

ONE
™

The Planet Thara
From this day forward the stars shall be ours . . .

—Emperor Hios, on the day that the ﬁrst public star gate went
into service, and he stepped onto the surface of the Planet Zeen

The attack came without warning. The angen-drawn coach

had been under way for hours by then, having followed the
well-established ruts south through villages of neatly
thatched roofs, past prayer ribbons that ﬂew with the wind,
and miles of ﬂooded paddies. The genetically engineered
draft animals strained at their harnesses as the road began to
rise, the driver’s long, supple whip cracked over their vaguely
equine heads, and they were forced to assume the fourwheeled vehicle’s entire weight. The angens expressed their
unhappiness via snorts, grunts, and occasional bursts of ﬂatulence as the low-lying paddies fell away and they pulled the
coach up through a long series of switchbacks. But the driver
was accustomed to such displays, and his passengers were
largely unaware of how the animals felt, since two of the three
were asleep within the boxy cab.

2

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The single exception was Lonni Norr, who sat facing the
front of the coach with Jak Rebo’s head resting on her lap.
The variant’s right leg had gone to sleep ten minutes earlier,
but she couldn’t bring herself to wake the runner and
thereby break the spell. Because after months of danger and
turmoil Norr was temporarily at peace. And had been ever
since their departure from the holy city of CaCanth.
But Norr’s ancestors had been bred to sense things that
norms could not. So even as the heavy who was curled up on
the seat across from her continued to snore, and Rebo jerked
as if in response to a dream, the young woman knew that
conﬂict lay ahead. Partly because the threesome possessed
something others wanted—and partly because it was somehow meant to be.
The windows were open, which meant Norr caught a
brief glimpse of the terrain ahead as the coach lurched up
over a pass and began its rattling descent. In contrast to the
carefully cultivated paddies the coach had passed earlier in
the day, a dense forest awaited them below. The interlocking foliage stretched for as far as the eye could see, and,
judging from the occasional glint of reﬂected sunlight, was
watered by a serpentine river.
Rebo mumbled something in his sleep, and Norr smiled
tenderly as she ran her ﬁngers through the runner’s thick
black hair. His features were even, but a bit too rugged to
be described as classically handsome, in spite of the fact that
women generally found him to be attractive. The relationship with Rebo had been part of the long journey that had
begun on the Planet Anafa, and subsequently taken them to
Pooz, Ning, Etu, and Thara. What began as a momentary
alliance had gradually evolved into a wary friendship, an onagain, off-again romance, and a decision to remain together.

LO G O S R U N

3

For a month? A year? A lifetime? Not even a person with
her gifts could tell.
Such were Norr’s thoughts as the coach found level
ground, bounced its way into a set of deep ruts, and was
soon embraced by an army of leafy trees. Their trunks were
four to ﬁve feet in circumference, and their massive branches
came together to form a dense canopy overhead. The thick
biomass cut the amount of sunlight that could reach the forest ﬂoor by half and caused a drop in temperature.
But the chill that Norr felt was not entirely physical.
Other senses had come into play, too, senses that norms possess, but rarely take full advantage of. What one of them
might have experienced as a vague uneasiness, Norr saw as a
roiling blackness, and knew the sensation for what it was:
negative energy being broadcast by a group of hostile
minds. The sensitive put her hand on Rebo’s arm. “Jak . . .
Wake up . . . Something is wrong.”
But the warning came too late. One of the angens uttered
a bloodcurdling scream as an arrow sank into its haunch,
and a pair of hobnailed boots made a thumping sound as a
bandit landed on the roof. That noise was followed by a loud
boom as the driver triggered his blunderbuss and sent a
dozen .30-caliber lead balls into the undergrowth where the
archer was concealed. But that did nothing to protect the
coachman from the garrote that dropped over his head, or
the noose that began to tighten around his throat. He had
little choice but to release both his weapon and the reins in
a desperate effort to restore his air supply.
“On the roof!” Norr exclaimed, as her companions
awoke. “Bandits!”
Like all his kind, Bo Hoggles had a body that had been
designed for life on heavy-gravity worlds. That meant he was

4

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

strong, so strong that he could smash a massive ﬁst up
through the thin roof, and grab the bandit’s ankle. That was
sufﬁcient to scare the would-be thief, who was forced to let
go of the garrote, while he attempted to pry the heavy’s
sausagelike ﬁngers off his ankle. And that’s what he was doing when Rebo drew the semiautomatic Crosser, pointed the
weapon up toward the ceiling, and ﬁred two ten-millimeter
rounds through the roof. One bullet missed, but the other
struck the brigand in the back and severed his spinal cord.
The coach rocked sickeningly as Hoggles let go; the body
bounced into the air and fell past Norr’s window.
The driver had control of the reins by then, but no
amount of swearing could make the wounded angen run
faster, and that slowed the rest. All of which was part of
the time-tested process that the bandits traditionally relied
upon to bring their prey to a standstill. So, while the loss of
Brother Becko was regrettable, the brigands had every expectation of success as the coach slowed and ﬁnally came to a
stop. What they didn’t expect were the people who emerged
from the carriage. A heavy, armed with a war hammer, a
norm with a gun in each ﬁst, and a sensitive with a metaltipped wooden staff. But in spite of the fact that the passengers were clearly more formidable than the bejeweled
merchants the bandit leader had been hoping for, he had
little choice but to hurl himself forward as a volley of arrows
arched overhead.
Rather than exert more control over her body, Norr let go
instead. That allowed her full array of senses to unfold. The
staff made patterns in the air as the variant whirled. There
was a series of clacking sounds as half a dozen arrows were
intercepted, broken in half, and left to fall like wooden rain.
Hoggles was not so graceful, or so fortunate, since he
made an excellent target. Two arrows thumped into his

LO G O S R U N

5

chest, but neither possessed the force required to penetrate
the mesh-lined leather armor the variant had purchased in
CaCanth. And, having fully recovered from the injuries suffered at the Ree Ree River, the hard-charging giant was
among the bandits in a matter of moments. Blood ﬂew as
the enormous war hammer struck this way and that, while
his basso war cry dominated the ﬁeld of battle.
Nor was that the worst of it, because even as the berserker
met the main body of the onrushing brigands in hammer-tohead combat, Rebo was busy shooting at the rest. It was
aimed ﬁre, which meant that nearly every bullet found its
mark, and that added to the slaughter.
And so it was that having lost fully half his band in a
matter of minutes, and with a bullet lodged in his left
thigh, the group’s leader issued a shrill whistle. Strong
hands grabbed the chieftain under the armpits, and his feet
were lifted clear off the ground as members of the bandit’s
extended family hustled him into the safety of the woods.
All the brigands were gone within seconds, leaving the
battle-dazed travelers in sole possession of the body-strewn
battleﬁeld.
“Well, that was an unpleasant surprise,” Rebo said
calmly as he slipped the unﬁred Hogger back into the crossdraw holster at his waist. “Let’s get out of here before they
regroup.”
“I agree,” a male voice said emphatically. “And I would
very much appreciate it if you would be so kind as to wear a
more suitable garment during future battles. . . . I could
have been damaged—or taken off-line.”
The sound seemed to originate from Norr, but had actually emanated from the coat she wore, which, in spite of its
nondescript appearance, was a computer. A wearable computer that was more than a thousand years old and had once

6

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

been at the center of a star-spanning system of star gates.
Months before, the threesome had agreed to reunite the artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) with a control center called Socket
on behalf of a dead scientist.
But the AI could be imperious, not to mention downright annoying, which was why Norr responded as she did.
“If you would be so kind as to let us know when we’re about
to be attacked—we’ll put you away well in advance. Come
to think of it, maybe we should do that anyway. . . . I could
use some peace and quiet.”
Logos didn’t like being packed away and therefore chose
to remain silent. Rebo grinned. “Good. . . . I’m glad that’s
settled. Come on, let’s give the driver a hand.”
Having reharnessed the uninjured angens, and attached
the wounded animal to the back of the coach by means of a
long lead, the carriage got under way ﬁfteen minutes later.
Rebo sat next to the driver with the fully recharged blunderbuss across his knees, while Hoggles remained in the
coach, war hammer at the ready.
Norr tried to separate the natural apprehension she felt
from the external stimuli available to her highly specialized
senses but that was hard to do. So, with no assurance that
they wouldn’t be attacked again, all the variant could do
was to keep her eyes peeled and look forward to the moment
when they put the forest behind them.
Eventually, after two hours of suspense, that moment
came, as the trees began to thin, and gently rolling grasslands appeared. The sun was little more than a red-orange
smear by then, and Rebo wondered how many more sunsets
he would witness before he and his companions left Thara
and continued the uncertain journey begun so many months
before. The coach slowed slightly as it encountered a rise,
the driver snapped his whip, and the angens pulled harder.

LO G O S R U N

7

The undercarriage rattled, darkness gathered, and the stars
lay like white dust on the blue velvet sky.
The city of Seros, on the Planet Anafa

The sun was little more than a dimly seen presence beyond the layers of charcoal-generated haze that hung over
the city. Much had changed during the ten millennia since
the ﬁrst colony ship touched down on Anafa. A primitive
settlement had evolved into a town and then a city. Or multiple cities, because Seros had been through many incarnations, with the latest sitting atop all the rest.
None of which held any interest for the hooded metal
man as he paused to examine a building, matched the image
to the one stored in his electronic memory, and made his
way up the front steps. The long, ﬁlthy robe hung loosely
over his skeletal body, servos whirred as the machine
climbed the stairs, and the locals hurried to get out of his
way. The mysterious androids could communicate with one
another, everyone knew that, and would hurry to one another’s aid if threatened. That meant it was a good idea to
leave the robots alone in spite of their propensity to ignore
common courtesies, preach on street corners, and generally
skulk about.
Like the structures around it, the rooming house had seen
better days. The landlord claimed that it had been an ofﬁce
building once, back before the techno wars, but the history
of the six-story tenement hardly mattered to the hundreds of
people who lived there, or to the metal man as he climbed
ﬁve ﬂights of stairs, pulled a grafﬁti-decorated door open,
and entered the maze of cubicles beyond. Space was let by
the square foot, which meant that the squats were of various
sizes, depending on what a particular tenant could afford.
Paths wound snakelike between the constantly morphing

8

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

hovels they served. Some of the cubicles had walls made out
of brick, others had been constructed with salvaged wood,
but most consisted of large pieces of colored cloth draped
over a confusing network of crisscrossed ropes. That meant
life in the tenement was a largely public affair, in which
every aspect of a resident’s life was known to those in the surrounding area, and gossip had been elevated to an art form.
So it wasn’t surprising that dozens of inquisitive eyes
tracked the android as it followed a serpentine path deep
into the squats, paused at one of the many intersections, and
took a judicious right. And since the automaton’s progress
was heralded by a buzz of excited conversation, Arn Dyson
would have known about the visitor well in advance, had his
consciousness been resident within his physical body.
But it wasn’t, which meant that when the robot arrived in
front of the sensitive’s squat and whipped the badly faded curtain out of the way, the man sitting at the center of the simple
reed mat made no response. The sensitive was middle-aged.
His long hair was fanned out across his shoulders, and his eyes
were closed. What few possessions he had were stacked along
a wall made of interwoven sticks. A grubby little girl sat with
arms wrapped around her knees. She regarded the machine
with serious eyes. “Are you here to see Citizen Dyson?”
“Yes,” the metal man grated. “I am. Wake him.”
The little girl seemed to consider the order. If she was
afraid of the machine, there was no visible sign of it. “Citizen Dyson has gone to visit the spirit planes. If you wish to
speak with him, you must wait for him to return.”
“I will wake him,” the robot said, and took a step forward.
“No!” the little girl objected. “Not while he’s in trance.
That could kill him.”
“Is there a problem?” The deep basso voice came from
behind the automaton, and the machine was forced to give

LO G O S R U N

9

way as a heavy entered the tiny squat. The giant’s head had
been shaved, he wore a gold ring in his nose, and he was
naked from the waist up. Muscles rippled as the variant
moved, and the robot knew that the biological could best
him in a ﬁght. “My master will pay Citizen Dyson two
cronos for two hours of his time,” the android said ﬂatly.
The heavy looked suitably impressed. He knew that the
assassin’s guild would be happy to kill someone for half that
amount. “Why didn’t you say so?” he demanded. “Go ahead
and bring him back, Myra. . . . The worthless spook owes
me thirty gunnars—and I thought the money was gone for
good.”
The waif looked from the heavy to the robot and back
again. Then she nodded, scraped the wax off the tip of a
wooden match, and lit a slender cinnamon stick. The moment a tendril of smoke appeared, the girl blew some of it
into the sensitive’s nostrils. The distinctive odor served to
stimulate Dyson’s physical body—which sought to bring
the rest of him back. The sensitive shivered, blinked his
eyes, and frowned. “Myra? Hobar? What’s going on?”
“You will come,” the metal man said tactlessly. “Omar
Tepho has need of your services.”
“I don’t know who this Tepho character is,” Hobar put
in, “but he’s willing to pay two cronos.”
Dyson looked up at the robot. “Is that true?”
“Yes,” the automaton replied gravely. “It is.”
“Okay,” the sensitive agreed reluctantly. “I wasn’t able
to satisfy Tepho’s needs last time. Let’s hope this session is
different.”
It took the better part of an hour for the robot and the
sensitive to make their way through the laser-straight
streets, past the weatherworn pylons that marked the path
of a once-glorious transportation system, and up to the

10

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

seemingly decrepit building from which Omar Tepho ran
the Techno Society. The unlikely twosome followed a narrow passageway back to the point where an iron gate
blocked further progress. There was an audible click as the
automaton inserted a metal ﬁnger into the receptacle located next to a print-sensitive identiﬁcation pad.
The variant had been through the process before, so he
wasn’t surprised when the gate swung open, and the robot
led him to a metal door. There was a momentary pause
while a guard inspected the pair through a peephole followed by a nudge, as the door swung inward. Council member Ron Olvos was there to greet Dyson. He was a small
man, but a hard worker and a skilled politician. Those qualities, plus the care with which he always put Tepho’s interests ahead of his own, accounted for his presence on the
board. Olvos ignored the machine but extended a hand to
the sensitive. “Welcome! Thank you for coming.”
Though not altogether certain that his presence was entirely voluntary, the variant smiled agreeably and wondered
if he should demand three cronos rather than two. But he
couldn’t muster the necessary courage, the moment passed,
and Dyson found himself in a spotless corridor. “The council was in session all morning,” Olvos explained. “The chairman raised the possibility of bringing you back—and will
be extremely pleased to learn that we were able to do so.”
“Really?” Dyson inquired doubtfully. “I didn’t meet
with much success last time.”
“Ah, but that wasn’t your fault,” the smaller man replied
soothingly. “This session will go more smoothly. . . . Do you
remember Jevan Kane?”
The sensitive nodded. Kane was the operative who
sought him out the ﬁrst time. He was a cold man with
blond hair, blue eyes, and white skin. All in an age when

LO G O S R U N

11

more than 90 percent of the population had black hair,
brown eyes, and olive skin. “Yes, of course,” Dyson replied
politely. “How is he?”
“Dead,” Olvos replied emotionlessly. “Which is where
you come in. It’s our hope that, unlike the founder, Kane
continues to support the Techno Society’s goals and will
provide us with some much-needed assistance from the
other side. If so, we could have an ongoing need for your services, and that could be quite proﬁtable for you.”
Dyson was desperately poor, but there are worse things
than poverty, and the process of being co-opted by the
highly secretive and possibly sinister Techno Society ﬁlled
the sensitive with misgivings. But there was no opportunity
to consider the long-range implications of the day’s activity
as servos whined and double doors opened into what had
once been a vat. Those days were gone however, and the onetime tank had been transformed into a circular conference
room. Electric light ﬂooded the tank, a holo projector was
suspended above the round conference table, and streams of
incoming data cascaded down wall-mounted screens. All of
which were wonders that Dyson had sworn he wouldn’t disclose. A promise he had kept.
Six of the seven seats that surrounded the table were occupied, but the sensitive’s eyes were immediately drawn to
Omar Tepho—partly because of the way the man looked,
which was undeniably different, but mostly as a result of the
thought forms that hovered around him. They were dark
things for the most part, only half-seen within the electricalstorm-like shimmer generated by a brilliant intellect. Others
were present in the room, but as Tepho’s coal black eyes
swiveled around to look at him, the variant knew that his
was the only opinion that really mattered. He had a deep resonant voice, and it ﬁlled the space with sound as he spoke.

12

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Welcome,” Tepho intoned, as Dyson entered the keyholeshaped space at the table’s center. “Thank you for coming. It
is our intention to communicate with Jevan Kane.”
By some accident of birth Tepho had been born with
multiple defects. His skull was lumpy rather than smooth,
one eye socket was higher than the other, and his ears looked
like handles on an earthenware jug. Still worse was the fact
that the technologist had a congenital spinal deformity that
made it difﬁcult for him to walk or run. None of which
would have been of interest to Dyson had it not been for the
manner in which the vessel had imparted its shape to the contents. The variant bowed humbly and took his seat. “You’re
welcome. . . . I hope I can be of service.”
“As do we,” Tepho replied gravely. “Please proceed.”
Dyson requested that the lights be dimmed, suggested
that the council visualize Jevan Kane’s face, and began the series of much-practiced steps that would allow the sensitive to
partially exit his body. Meanwhile, on the plane closest to
the physical, the disincarnate entity who had once been
known as Jevan Kane waited to come through. He had experienced many incarnations—some more pleasant than others. And, although the transition from the physical to the
spirit realm had a transformational effect on some spirits,
Kane remained unchanged. So much so that he was intent on
preparing the physical plane for his next incarnation. A life
in which he would control the star-spanning civilization that
Tepho sought to establish.
So, no sooner had Dyson half exited his body, than Kane
entered it. And not tentatively, but with considerable force,
as the operative sought to reintegrate himself with the physical. Everything seemed to slow as the disincarnate entity
entered what felt like quicksand—and was forced to cope
with a body made of lead. But there were pleasures, too,

LO G O S R U N

13

starting with the sharp tang of vinegar that still clung to
the inside surface of the tank and the sudden awareness of
the sex organs that dangled between the channel’s legs.
Slowly, bit by bit, what had been like a heavy mist vanished,
and the conference room appeared.
Tepho was there, as was the shadowy combat variant who
stood half-seen behind the chairman, but rather than the fear
previously felt when ushered into their combined presence,
Kane felt something akin to contempt. Because even as
Tepho attempted to manipulate him, he would use the technologist and thereby achieve his ends. “Greetings,” Kane
said through what felt like numb lips. “This is Jevan Kane.”
What followed was a long and mostly predictable series
of questions focused on the circumstances of Kane’s most recent death, the status of the people he’d been sent to intercept, and the present disposition of the AI called Logos.
Kane answered by providing the council with a slightly
gloriﬁed description of his own death, but when it came to
the other matters, was forced to remind those present that
just as it was difﬁcult for them to access the spirit planes,
the reverse was true as well. So, in spite of concerted efforts
to obtain such information, the best he could give the council was the assurance that the runner and his companions
were still on Thara and probably in possession of the computer. “It has no spirit,” the disincarnate explained, “which
makes it almost impossible to see. . . . But judging from the
founder’s continued interest in the threesome, it’s my guess
that they still have it.”
Though hungry for more detail, Tepho was excited to
learn that the device he sought was still on Thara and
slammed his ﬁst down on the table in front of him. A stylus
jumped and rolled off the table onto the ﬂoor. “Excellent!
Now we’re getting somewhere! Shaz . . . I want you to

14

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

assemble a team and make the jump to Thara. You’ll need
guidance from Kane, so take Dyson with you and stay in
touch. I know you two have had your differences in the past,
but it’s time to put old grudges aside and work for the common good. Kane? Shaz? Can you do that?”
Tepho’s words ignored the fact that he was the one who
originally set the two men against each other—but that was
to be expected. “You can count on me,” Kane lied. “What’s
past is past.”
The air behind Tepho shimmered as the combat variant
made his presence manifest. Originally designed to function
as warriors by engineers long dead, and slaughtered by the
millions back during the techno wars, there weren’t many of
the highly specialized creatures left. Shaz had a doglike aspect that stemmed from a long, dark muzzle, a pair of closeset eyes, and oversized ears. He wore black clothing, a
leather harness, and carried a small arsenal of weapons. His
smile revealed two rows of razor-sharp teeth. “Of course,”
Shaz prevaricated smoothly. “It’s the future that counts.”
The city of Tryst, on the Planet Thara

Like many of the cities on Thara, the city of Tryst had
been attacked more than once over the last few thousand
years, which was why it not only occupied the top of a huge
granite outcropping, but was surrounded by a twenty-foothigh stone wall. And, while no one had attempted to scale
the barrier in the recent past, it was common knowledge
that 11,214 red hat warriors had been prematurely forced
into the spirit planes while trying to wrest the city away
from the black hats during the War of the Glorious Scepter
112 years earlier.
However, thanks to Rebo and his companions, the correct person now sat on the throne of CaCanth. That ensured

LO G O S R U N

15

that both halves of the Way, as the overarching religion was
known, would remain at peace with each other for at least
ﬁfty years.
But, as with any city, the citizens of Tryst not only
wanted to know who came and went, but to charge them for
the privilege. That’s why the coach was forced to a pause behind a line of farm wagons about halfway up the road that
led to the top.
Progress was steady, however, and no more than half an
hour had passed before the coach drew level with the customs
shed, and a portly-looking norm came forward to collect
their paj (entry fee). Meanwhile, waiting in the background
should the customs agent have need of them, were half a
dozen cudgel-wielding Dib Wa (religious) warriors. The tax
collector was armed with a well-worn abacus, which he was
just about to employ, when Rebo emerged from the back.
The runner smiled engagingly as he held a bronze medallion
up for the ofﬁcial to see. “Good afternoon,” the runner said.
“My name is . . .” But Rebo never got the opportunity to introduce himself as the customs agent took one look at the
symbol, bowed deeply, and said something in Tilisi (the language spoken by those who follow the Way). Having heard
his words the Dib Wa did likewise.
Rebo bowed in return, straightened, and produced his
purse. “How much do we owe?”
“Nothing,” the tax collector replied, his eyes on his feet.
“You and your companions are guests of the Inwa (leader of
leaders). Please go in peace.”
The runner bowed once more, reentered the coach, and
took his seat. “Well,” Norr said, as the vehicle jerked into
motion. “That was a better reception than we usually
get. . . . It looks like the royal sigil packs some weight.”
“I guess it does,” Rebo replied. “It’s a good thing I didn’t

16

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

let Bo trade his for a couple of beers and a meat pie two days
ago.”
The metal-shod wheels clattered over cobblestones as the
conveyance carried the travelers into what many locals referred to as “the city of stone.” And for good reason, since
the early colonists made use of high-tech cutting tools to
carve what they needed from solid stone, thereby creating a
vast maze of halls, galleries, and rooms, all of which were
connected by tunnels, passageways, and corridors so complex that many youngsters found employment as guides.
However, what made the city habitable was the extremely deep well that had been sunk down through the
very center of the rock into an aquifer below. The original
colonists were gone now, as were most of the technologies
used to create Tryst, but thanks to the quality of the pumps
located more than a thousand feet below, and the huge
petal-shaped solar panels that deployed themselves just after
sunrise each morning, those who lived within the city of
stone had plenty of water.
What the citizens lacked was the additional electricity
required to power the thousands of lights that the ancients
had installed to illuminate their labyrinth. This became
quite apparent as the coach left the customs plaza, rolled up
onto a ramp-shaped tongue, and passed through an eternally opened mouth. There were windows, and occasional
skylights, but those were rare. That meant it fell to the
wall-mounted torches to light the way, or attempt to, although the ﬂickering yellow ﬂames weren’t sufﬁcient to
stave off the gloom.
There was a sudden clatter and the momentary glare of
an oil lantern as a freight wagon passed in the opposite direction, followed by a shout from the driver, as he guided

LO G O S R U N

17

his angens into a turnout. Rebo peered out through the window as an apprentice rushed out to open the door. The torchlit sign over the door was plain to see. It read, runner’s
guild, and was picked out with gold paint.
The travelers didn’t have much in the way of luggage,
and being used to carrying it themselves, didn’t expect any
help. That left Rebo to pay the driver, who grinned when he
saw the size of his tip and quickly tucked the money away.
“Bless you, sir. . . . And may the great Teon watch over you.”
“And you,” Rebo replied solemnly, before turning to retrieve his pack. Like all of the other structures in Tryst, the
guildhall had been carved out of solid rock and originally
had been created for some other purpose. But now, after who
knew how many previous incarnations, the three-story structure was the center from which local runners were sent to locations all over the globe, and a home-away-from-home for
members who had arrived by spaceship, or were waiting to
leave on one.
Double doors opened onto a large lobby. It featured high
ceilings, sturdy granite columns, and glossy stone ﬂoors.
There were dozens of chairs and side tables, and candelabras
ablaze with light. Some of the seats were occupied, but most
were empty, which made sense during the middle of the afternoon. A huge wood-burning ﬁreplace dominated the far
wall, but, large though the blaze was, it couldn’t begin to
warm the cavernous room.
The reception desk was off to the right, and since the
man who stood behind the polished-granite barrier knew
every runner on Thara, and off-worlders were rare, he was
prepared to send the norm, the sensitive, and the heavy
packing once they arrived at the counter. But that was before the dark-haired man nodded politely—and rolled up a

18

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

sleeve to display the lightning bolt tattooed onto the inner
surface of his left forearm.
Of course guild marks could be faked, but there was a
procedure by which the man’s identity could be veriﬁed,
and the receptionist nodded politely. A fringe of black hair
circled his otherwise bald head, thick brows rode beady
eyes, and he was in need of a shave. “Greetings, brother . . .
I don’t believe we’ve met.”
“No,” Rebo said agreeably. “I don’t think we have.
Rebo’s the name . . . Jak Rebo.”
The bushy brows rose incrementally. “I’ve heard of
you . . . More than once . . . But never met the man who
went with the stories. Please wait here.”
Both Norr and Hoggles had stayed in similar facilities
before, but not having been present at check-in, the process
was new to them. As the receptionist departed, Norr turned
to Rebo. “What’s going on?”
“My name is on ﬁle,” the runner explained. “Or should
be . . . Along with a code phrase. If it is, and if I know it,
we’re in.”
Norr frowned. “How did the information get here?”
“Each time a runner comes to Thara on behalf of a client
they bring a guild bag with them,” Rebo answered. “The locals compare the contents against their records and make
whatever changes are necessary. There’s some lag time—but
it works.”
“So, where’s your guild bag?” Hoggles wanted to know.
“Back on Ning,” the runner answered ruefully. “Valpoon
and his people took it.”
The heavy was about to reply when the receptionist returned. He looked from Norr to Hoggles. “Would you excuse us?”

LO G O S R U N

19

The receptionist waited for the variants to drift away—
before squinting at a scrap of paper. “Please recite your favorite poem.”
Rebo nodded.
When the last of my luck has been spent,
And the sun hangs low in some alien sky,
There shall I lay my head,
Happy to end my run.
The receptionist nodded afﬁrmatively. “Thomas Crowley
wrote that poem in this very room.”
The runner nodded. “I was his apprentice during the last
few years of his life.”
The receptionist smiled. “Welcome to Thara’s guildhall,
Master Rebo . . . It’s an honor to make your acquaintance.
What can I do for you?”
Half an hour later the threesome was settling into a suite
of three interconnecting rooms on the third ﬂoor. “So, what
did you learn?” Norr inquired, as she joined her companions
in the small but well-furnished sitting room. “When is the
ship due?” The sensitive had dark eyes, high cheekbones,
and a face that was a little too narrow to be classically beautiful. Not that Rebo cared. “What we heard back in CaCanth was true,” the runner replied. “Assuming the vessel
is still in service, it should arrive three days from now.”
The others knew what he meant. In the aftermath of the
revolution that destroyed most of the star gates, a ﬂeet of
sentient starships had been constructed and put into service
to replace the then-controversial portals. But now, after
thousands of years without proper maintenance, the vessels
had begun to die. There were fewer of them with each passing

20

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

year, and, given the fact that the surviving ships were living
on borrowed time, it was extremely dangerous to board one.
Still, there was no choice other than the star gates, and the
Techno Society controlled most of them. That hadn’t prevented the threesome from making use of the portals in the
past, however, so it was Hoggles who voiced the obvious question. “What about our mechanical friend? Why take our
chances aboard a ship? If he could point us toward a star gate?”
Rebo grinned as Norr opened her pack, removed the
ratty-looking coat, and draped it over her shoulders. The response was immediate. “If you insist on attempting to classify my corporeal being, please refer to it as electromechanical,”
the AI said waspishly. “I am not a winepress! And, as for the
presence of a star gate, I can assure you that one exists.”
“That’s wonderful,” Norr put in enthusiastically. “They’re
scary—but so are the ships.”
“Not so fast,” Logos interjected primly. “I indicated that
a gate exists, but given the fact that the equipment is located
approximately ﬁve hundred feet below this room, I doubt
that you could access it.”
“We’ll check on that,” Rebo said thoughtfully. “But it
wouldn’t surprise me. A lot of ancient cities sit atop their
own ruins.”
The furniture wasn’t large enough for Hoggles, who was
seated on the ﬂoor. “That’s too bad,” the heavy commented.
“It sounds like we’d better lay in some supplies. There won’t
be any on the ship.”
“Yeah,” Rebo agreed, and ﬁngered his purse. He’d been
paid in CaCanth and given more than half of that money to
the receptionist, in exchange for a token that could be redeemed at any guildhall throughout known space. That,
plus the funds saved up over the years, made the runner a
moderately wealthy man. “We’ll need food, some sort of

LO G O S R U N

21

fuel to cook with, and new bedrolls. Not only that . . . but
I’m low on ammo.”
“Then tomorrow we shop!” Norr said enthusiastically. “I
need some things as well.”
“What about tonight?” the heavy wanted to know. “I’m
hungry—and it’s too early for bed.”
“First we’ll go looking for a good dinner,” Rebo announced. “Then it’s off to the circus! I have three tickets—
compliments of the guild.”
“But what about me?” Logos inquired. “It’s boring in
Lonni’s pack.”
“That’s easy,” the sensitive replied. “Make yourself a little more presentable, and I’ll wear you.”
The coat had been laid across a chair. Suddenly it began
to squirm, started to expand, and morphed into a beautiful
evening gown. It was a pale blue, slightly diaphanous, and
covered with sparkly things. “Nope,” Norr commented as
she held the garment up for inspection. “That’s too fancy . . .
Have you seen the sort of men that I hang out with? Bring
it down a notch.”
The evening dress shimmered and morphed into a plain
but well-cut knee-length dress. “That’s more like it,” the
sensitive proclaimed, started toward her room, and paused
to look back. “As for you two, it wouldn’t hurt to take a
bath and put on some clean clothes.” Rebo ran a hand over
his beard, Hoggles grumbled, and the matter was settled.
The city of Seros, on the Planet Anafa

Though of considerable importance now, the star gate that
Shaz and his newly formed team were about to employ had
been no more than a little-used maintenance portal, back
when the system was new. The real network, meaning the one
that the public had access to, ran parallel to the so-called

22

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

B-Grid, and had been more complex. Just one of the reasons
why 98 percent of the A-Grid was off-line while segments
of the support system continued to function.
Metal rang on metal as four heavily burdened robots descended the spiral staircase. Arn Dyson followed them, and a
female norm followed him. Her name was Du Phan, and she
was an assassin. She had shiny black hair, wide-set brown
eyes, and full, rather sensuous lips. Phan’s movements were
graceful, like those of a ﬁnely trained dancer, and her perfectly sculpted body was festooned with weapons. Her black
slippers made little more than a whisper as she ﬂowed down
the stairs, and Shaz could feel her pull. The air shimmered as
a combination of highly specialized skin cells and hormones
interacted to help the combat variant blend with the duracrete walls as he brought up the rear.
It was a small team, but that was a matter of choice
rather than necessity, since Shaz could have hired a dozen assassins had he wanted to. But the mission called for the variant to capture Logos and learn where the control center
called Socket was located, because one wasn’t much good
without the other. That was a serious problem, because even
if he and his team managed to capture the AI, there was no
guarantee that Logos would cooperate with them. And
while a bio bod could be tortured if necessary, it would be
unwise to use such methods on a construct because one mistake could destroy the very knowledge they hoped to gain.
All of which argued in favor of a small but lethal team.
Which, with the possible exception of Dyson, it was.
The stairs twisted down through a pool of light and
turned yet again. The radiation produced by the adjacent
power core made Shaz feel queasy. Nobody knew what the
long-term impact of such exposure might be—but the

LO G O S R U N

23

variant felt sure that it wouldn’t be good. If the other biologicals were experiencing similar sensations, they gave no
sign of it as they left the stairs and followed the metal men
into the decontamination lock. In spite of the fact that a
tremendous amount of scientiﬁc knowledge had been lost
over the millennia, the Techno Society’s scientists were well
aware of what could happen if organisms from one planetary
biosphere were allowed to colonize another, which was why
Shaz ordered Phan and Dyson to strip off their clothes.
The sensitive was clearly nonplussed, and sought cover
among the androids, but nakedness, or the possibility of
nakedness, was a fact of life for any member of the assassin’s
guild, and Phan was anything but a prude. Nor was the assassin a fool, which was why she placed one hand on her hip
and smiled. “Sure . . . You ﬁrst.”
Two rows of extremely white teeth appeared when the
variant grinned. Then, rather than render himself partially
invisible as he might have, Shaz did just the opposite. The
truth was that he wanted the female to get a good look at his
well-muscled physique. A desire that was apparent to Dyson,
who took cover behind the blank-eyed robots as he began to
remove his clothing.
Impressed by what she saw, and not to be outdone, Phan
performed her own strip tease. But ﬁrst she had to remove
the combat harness and her weapons. With that out of the
way, she pulled the top half of the two-piece bodysuit up
over her head. Having given Shaz a moment to appreciate
her ﬁrm breasts, the assassin skimmed the bottom half of
her bodysuit down onto her lower legs and sat on the bench
that ran along the wall. Then, with her eyes on the variant,
Phan lifted her feet off the ﬂoor. “So,” she said provocatively.
“Would you like to help?”

24

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Shaz not only wanted to help, he wanted to take the norm
right there, and would have except for the queasy feeling at
the pit of his stomach. So he said, “Yes,” pulled the garment
free, and turned to slap a saucer-sized button. There was a
hiss followed by a roar as jets of hot water combined with a
powerful antibacterial agent struck the entire party from
every possible direction. The shower continued for three
minutes and was followed by blasts of warm air.
Shaz was impressed by the fact that Phan hadn’t tried to
conceal her body. Now, as the blowers turned themselves
off, the assassin stood facing him. In addition to a pair of
nicely shaped breasts, she had a ﬂat stomach, and a tattoo
that led down into the valley between her legs. The norm
smiled knowingly and looked directly into his eyes. “Can
we get dressed now?”
“No,” Shaz replied, as he shifted his gaze from her to a
bedraggled Dyson. “Why bother? We’ll have to go through
the same process all over again as we exit on Thara.”
Both the humans and the machines left a trail of wet footprints behind as they hauled their disinfectant-soaked luggage into the room beyond. The curvilinear walls were
covered with hundreds of video tiles. Each square bore a picture with a name printed below. About half of them were lit,
meaning it was still possible to travel there, and the rest were
dark. The tile labeled thara showed a butte, with hills in
the distance, and blue sky beyond. “That’s where we’re going,” Shaz explained, as he pointed to the square. “Put the
equipment at the center of the platform and step aboard.”
Phan did as instructed, and Dyson did likewise, leaving
the robots to imitate them. Once the team was in place,
Shaz touched the butte, felt it give, and hurried to join the
rest on the well-worn platform. The room lights ﬂashed on
and off as a woman long dead spoke through the overhead

LO G O S R U N

25

speakers. “The transfer sequence is about to begin. Please
take your place on the service platform. Once in place, check
to ensure that no portion of your anatomy extends beyond
the yellow line. Failure to do so will cause serious injury and
could result in death.”
The steel disk was extremely crowded, and Phan had to
edge inward in order to clear the yellow line. Her thigh
came into contact with one of the androids, and his alloy
skin felt cold. Dyson wished that he was somewhere else and
closed his eyes. Life after death was a fact—so it was the process of dying that he feared.
Shaz knew that the public platforms had not only been a
good deal larger but equipped with attendants, and chairs
for those who chose to use them. Now, as he prepared to
make the nearly instantaneous jump from one solar system
to another, the operative wondered if the ancients experienced fear as they waited to cross the void, or were so conﬁdent of the technologies they employed that the outcome
was taken for granted.
Before Shaz could complete his musings, there was a brilliant ﬂash of light. One by one his atoms were disassembled
and sent through hyperspace before being systematically reassembled within the receiving gate on Thara. The variant
felt the usual bout of disorientation, followed by vertigo, and
a moment of nausea. “Okay,” the operative said briskly. “Grab
your gear and enter the decontamination lock. Once the
shower is over, you can get dressed.”
It took the better part of twenty minutes for the team to
clear the decontamination chamber, get dressed, and rearm
themselves. Then Shaz led his subordinates into what had
once been a standard passageway but had long since been
transformed into a lateral tunnel, as the lower levels of Tryst
were condemned and the citizenry migrated upward.

26

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Though far from fancy, the interior of the access way was
reasonably clean and showed signs of recent use. Shaz took
this for granted since there were other Techno Society operatives, some of whom had reason to visit Tryst.
The tunnel terminated in front of a circular hatch. It consisted of a two-inch-thick slab of steel, was locked against
unauthorized intruders, and controlled by a numeric keypad.
Shaz tapped six digits into the controller and was rewarded
by a loud whine as the barrier unscrewed itself from the
wall. The combat variant looked back over his shoulder.
“Okay, here comes the hard part. . . . The hatch opens into a
vertical shaft. Turn to the right as you exit, grab on to the
maintenance ladder, and climb. The exit is ﬁve hundred feet
above us, so take your time and rest if you need to. I’ll lead
the way. . . . Number Four will secure the hatch and bring
up the rear.”
“And then?” Phan wanted to know.
“And then we head for the runner’s guild. . . . That’s
where the runner, the sensitive, and the heavy are most
likely to be. If not, we’ll check all of the hotels until we ﬁnd
them. Once that’s accomplished, the ﬁrst objective is to
conﬁrm that they have Logos.”
Dyson “felt” a low-grade buzz as the thoughts generated
by thousands of minds merged into something akin to static
and drifted down through solid rock.
Phan hooked a thumb in her combat harness. “Works
for me.”
“Good,” the operative replied, and turned to swing the
hatch out of the way. Most of the shaft was ﬁlled by the
huge pipes that carried water up to the surface, and a ladder
claimed the rest. One careless move, one slip, and anyone attempting to reach the top would plummet to the bottom.
With that sobering thought in mind, Shaz stepped up to

LO G O S R U N

27

the edge, forced himself to ignore the drop, and turned his
eyes upward. The top of the well was open to the sky, and
thanks to the fact that it was daytime, the variant could see
a tiny pinhead-sized circle of light. A single stomachturning step was sufﬁcient to put the operative on the rusty
ladder. The metal was cold beneath his ﬁngers as Shaz began
to climb. Somewhere, if only in his imagination, the ancients started to laugh.

TWO
™

The city of Tryst, on the Planet Thara

Would you trade your hammer for a rock? Of course not. Yet
you listen when the priests call upon you to cast out technology. They fear science because it can dispel ignorance. And ignorance is the primary thing upon which they feed.
—Excerpt from street lecture 52.1 as written by Milos Lysander,
founder of the Techno Society, and delivered by thousands
of metal men each day

There was something sad about the Circus Solara. Most of

the performers were clearly middle-aged, their costumes
were ragged, and the ﬁrst ﬁfteen minutes of the “most exciting show in the galaxy” were extremely boring. However,
there was a signiﬁcant shortage of things to do in the city of
Tryst, which meant that the seats surrounding the circular
arena were packed with people, some of whom had started
to doze by the time two fancifully dressed clowns secured
the local prefect to a brightly painted disk. But Rebo sat up
and began to pay attention as the formally attired ringmaster strutted out to the center of the arena and stood next to
the turntable to which the ofﬁcial was being secured. He
spoke through a handheld megaphone. “Ladies and gentlemen! Behold the wheel of death! In a matter of moments
this diabolical device will be set into motion . . . Then, once

LO G O S R U N

29

the disk becomes little more than a blur, Madam Pantha will
throw her hatchets. Yes! That’s correct! You could have a
new prefect by tomorrow morning!”
The joke stimulated laughter, catcalls, and a round of applause. Madam Pantha wore a yellow turban, sported a curly
black beard, and was dressed in a loose blouse and pantaloons. Her clothes might have been white once, but had
long since turned gray and were patched in places. She
waved a hatchet at the audience, tossed the weapon high into
the air, and waited for it to fall. Then, having positioned herself just so, Pantha missed the catch. The hatchet generated a
puff of dust as it hit the ground—followed by more laughter
as the crowd entered into the spirit of the thing.
The prefect was an extremely good sport, or that’s what
Rebo concluded, as a pair of mimes put the platform on
which both the wheel of death and the bearded lady stood
into motion. Now everyone could see as the platform began
to rotate, and a couple of acrobats began to spin the wheel of
death. It took the better part of thirty seconds to get the
disk turning at top speed. A drumroll began as Madam
Pantha accepted a hatchet from a sad-faced clown, brought
the implement back over her right shoulder, and let ﬂy.
Even the runner stared as the wheel rotated, the hatchet
turned end for end, and the somewhat corpulent ofﬁcial
continued to rotate. Then came the solid thwack of metal
biting into wood, followed by a gasp of indrawn air as the
crowd realized that a second weapon was on the way, quickly
followed by a third. Fortunately, the second and third
hatchets ﬂew true, both sinking into wood only inches from
the politico’s body, even as both the platform and the wheel
continued to turn.
The audience roared its approval as the clowns brought
the much-hyped “wheel of death” to a stop and freed the

30

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

prefect from his restraints. Though somewhat disheveled,
and a bit dizzy, the ofﬁcial seemed otherwise none the worse
for wear. He waved in response to a standing ovation and
was escorted back to his seat.
The formally quiescent crowd was engaged, the ringmaster could feel it, and hurried to take advantage. “Thank
you . . . I’m pleased to announce that this is the 3,672,416th
performance of the famed Circus Solara. Some claim it originated on Sameron, more than ten thousand years ago, while
others say it was founded on Cepa II some twelve thousand
years ago. But enough of that!” the ringmaster proclaimed
loudly. “The show continues. . . . Bring forth the beasts!”
There was a blare of horns and something of a stir as a
man wearing a leather hood, vest, and pants led a column of
pathetic-looking animals out into the arena. A white angen
led the way. It had what Rebo assumed to be a fake horn secured to its forehead and was harnessed to a cage on wheels.
An old dire cat could be seen lying inside the bars, tongue
lolling, either too old or too sick to stand.
A hairy tusker had been secured to the back of the cage
and followed head down, its tail drooping. A dog rode on
top of the mammoth and continually turned somersaults, as
if trying to bite its own tail. The children loved that, but
their parents were becoming restive, and a piece of overripe
fruit sailed through the air. It hit the cage, exploded into
fragments, and sprayed the dire cat with orange pulp. It
snarled, and that generated scattered applause.
“This is absurd,” Rebo said disgustedly, as he whispered
into Norr’s ear. “Let’s leave.”
The sensitive was about to agree when the animal that
was supposed to be the main attraction followed the tusker
out into the arena. Like all its kind, the L-phant had been
bioengineered to perform a variety of tasks. Hauling mostly,

LO G O S R U N

31

which was why the ancient engineers had chosen to eliminate what had once been huge heads and thereby create more
cargo space above their immensely strong spines. Of course it
was important for the L-phants to see the road in front of
them, so their eyes had been moved down under their prehensile trunks, forward of their chest-centered brains.
But after more than ninety years of hard labor in Thara’s
southern jungles, this six-ton beast was no longer useful.
Everything from the slowness of his gait, to the way his tail
drooped, suggested the same thing. The angen was sick,
tired, and depressed. Something that Norr experienced as a
vast heaviness. The sensitive was familiar with the breed,
having ridden them on Ning, and had come to admire
them. So now, as the L-phant plodded out into the center of
the arena, she shook her head in response to Rebo’s suggestion. “In a minute. . . . I want to see what happens next.”
Rebo was about to reply, but a blare of trumpets overrode the runner as the beast master went to free the L-phant
from his tether. “Look at this mighty beast,” the ringmaster
commanded, “and imagine his power!”
That was the cue for a clown to carry a huge melon to the
beast master, who ceremoniously placed the object on the
ground next to one of the beast’s enormous pillarlike feet. It
was clear to everyone present that the angen was supposed
to raise its foot and bring it down on the object, thereby
demonstrating its strength, but nothing happened. The
beast master reacted to what he saw as a betrayal by prodding the L-phant with a six-inch-long steel needle. The
poor beast produced what sounded like a human scream,
and Norr came to her feet. “Stop that!”
But either the beast master didn’t hear the sensitive, or
didn’t care, because, when the L-phant failed to lift his foot
for a second time, the goad went in again.

32

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Rebo had already started to stand, and was in the process
of reaching for Norr’s arm, when the sensitive stepped up
onto the knee-high wall and jumped down into the arena.
Puffs of dust exploded away from the variant’s feet as she
landed. Logos yelled, “Stop!” from the vicinity of her neckline, and the audience produced a reedy cheer. Some of the
onlookers felt sorry for the L-phant, while others were simply bored and eager for some sort of conﬂict. None had any
reason to support the beast master.
But the members of the troupe did, and they came out to
defend one of their own, as the angry young woman crossed
the arena. Some were armed with cudgels, others carried
wooden staffs, and some wore ancient brass knuckles. A sure
sign that they were not only ready for a dustup—but had
been in plenty of them before.
The Crosser hung butt down under Rebo’s left arm as he
followed Norr into the ring, but the runner didn’t plan to
use it unless forced to do so since it would be best to resolve
the dispute without bloodshed if that was possible. And,
since war hammers weren’t welcome at public events, Hoggles was unarmed. That didn’t stop the heavy from uttering
his characteristic war cry, however, as he landed in the arena
and hurried to catch up.
Meanwhile, Norr felt a wave of resentment and anger roll
over her as the distance between her and the self-styled
beast master began to close. But, while she could block
some of the incoming thought forms, there was no way to
make Logos shut up. “This is insane!” the AI declared angrily. “What if that brute attacks you? I could be injured! I
insist that you return to your seat at once!”
But Logos could have been talking to a brick wall for all
the good that his imprecations did him—and was still in
midrant when Norr came face-to-face with the enraged

LO G O S R U N

33

beast master. “Leave the L-phant alone!” the sensitive demanded. “You’re hurting him!”
“So?” the circus performer replied insolently. “The animal belongs to me. . . . That means I can discipline it in any
way that I choose.”
Rebo arrived just as the rest of the circus troupe began to
gather behind the beast master. “He has a point,” the runner
said hopefully. “The L-phant is his after all.”
“No,” Norr replied through gritted teeth, “no one has a
right to hurt angens. Give me the goad,” she demanded,
and extended her hand.
“Or?” the beast master wanted to know.
“Or I will take it from you,” Hoggles replied grimly, as
he took up a position at Norr’s side.
“Can’t we discuss this?” Rebo inquired reasonably.
“Surely there must be some way to . . .”
But the runner never got the opportunity to ﬁnish his
sentence as the beast master launched a sucker punch at
Norr, was surprised to discover that the sensitive had already stepped back out of the way, and was therefore perfectly positioned to kick him in the balls. The man in the
hood uttered a grunt of pain as the variant’s foot came into
contact with his private parts and made a grab for the
much-abused organs as he fell to his knees. That left his
leather-encased skull vulnerable to attack, which Hoggles
took immediate advantage of as he locked his ﬁsts together
and brought them down on top of the performer’s skull.
That put the beast master out of his pain and the ﬁght.
But rather than terminate the conﬂict as the heavy hoped
that it would, the massive blow had the opposite effect. Angered by what they had seen and determined to have their
revenge, a mixed force of clowns, acrobats, and musicians
rushed to attack the threesome. Rebo positioned himself to

34

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Norr’s left. “Now look at what you’ve done,” the runner
said, as he intercepted a blow, and returned it with interest.
“I can’t take you anywhere.”
“I didn’t have a choice,” the variant replied defensively,
as she eyed the oncoming strongman. “What was I supposed
to do? Let him hurt the L-phant?”
“Yes,” Logos put in. “You were.” And the AI might have
said more, but Rebo had come under attack by a pair of
mimes, while Hoggles was staggering about with three acrobats on his back. That left Norr to deal with the strongman alone, or try to, since the matchup was anything but
fair. She attempted to backpedal, but wasn’t able to do so
quickly enough, and soon found herself wrapped within the
embrace of the weightlifter’s huge arms. Muscles writhed,
all the air was forced out of the variant’s lungs, and she was
just about to lose consciousness when Logos came to her defense. Or his defense, since that was the AI’s actual priority,
consistent with his programming.
Suddenly, just as the heavily muscled norm felt the
woman in his arms go limp, the surface of her dress delivered 775,000 volts of electricity directly into the strongman’s body! He let go of his victim, fell over backward, and
hit the ground hard. Norr collapsed a few feet away. Having
dispatched both mimes and a clown, Rebo was there to
scoop Norr up and throw the sensitive over his shoulder.
Then, as Hoggles threw an acrobat at a group of bellicose
musicians, the off-worlders started to back away. And because the crowd was pelting the circus performers with
food, none of the troupe was able to follow. Norr, who had
recovered her senses by then, made use of both ﬁsts to
pound on Rebo’s back. “Put me down, damn you!”
The runner made sure he was well up into the seats before
acceding to the sensitive’s demand. “There,” Rebo said, as he

LO G O S R U N

35

placed the young woman on her feet. “You’re welcome.”
“No you’re not,” Logos put in resentfully. “Don’t ever do
that again!”
Norr wanted to sound angry, if only to maintain an appearance of independence, but the fact that her dress was
talking back to her made that hard to do. She laughed, Rebo
joined in, and Hoggles rumbled loudly. Then, having
passed an interesting if not especially relaxing evening, the
threesome hired one of the many torchbearers who were
waiting outside and followed the boy home.
Having sent Dyson into the runner’s guild to investigate,

and having conﬁrmed that a sensitive and two male companions had checked in, Shaz knew that the troublesome
trio were right where he expected them to be.
However, because the runner’s guild had excellent security,
it soon became obvious that there was only one member of the
team who was likely to get inside the facility, and that was the
combat variant himself. So Shaz sent the rest of the team away,
chose a vantage point in the shadows opposite the guildhall,
and waited for his chance. Despite the fact that his built-in
camouﬂage was good, it wasn’t perfect, which meant the
guards would spot the operative if he were to walk in through
the door. But if there was a distraction, something to claim at
least some of their attention, then the variant stood an excellent chance of slipping past them. Once inside, Shaz felt conﬁdent of his ability to locate and enter the correct room. And,
if the subjects of his investigation were present? Then he
would wait, and wait some more if that was necessary, because
he was nothing if not patient. Which was fortunate, because
the better part of an hour was to pass before the combat variant heard the rattle of an approaching carriage and saw the
conveyance pull into the brightly lit area in front of the hall.

36

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

There was no way to know who the passenger or passengers were, but they must have been important, because once
the doorman blew his brass whistle, all manner of staff boiled
out to greet the newly arrived guest or guests. Which was
exactly what Shaz had been hoping for. In their eagerness to
catch a glimpse of the woman who was exiting the coach, the
guards missed the momentary shimmer associated with the
operative’s passing and remained unaware as the variant
made his way across the lobby toward the front desk.
The next part was somewhat tricky, because even though
Shaz knew the people he was interested in were staying at the
hall, he had no idea which room or rooms they were in. So,
conscious of the fact that the hustle and bustle associated with
the VIP’s arrival wouldn’t last much longer, the variant made
his way around the end of the counter, and sidled up behind
the burly receptionist. His opportunity came as the newly arrived guest made her grand entrance. Whereas most runners
preferred to maintain a low proﬁle, lest they be targeted by
members of the thief’s guild, this individual was an extremely
obvious exception. She wore a glittery headband, complete
with a red feather, and a bright green dress, all meant to impress her upscale clientele, or so Shaz assumed.
But, rather than ogle the woman’s considerable cleavage,
as the receptionist was doing, the operative examined the
guestbook instead. And, when he couldn’t ﬁnd what he
sought, Shaz had to ﬂip the current page out of the way in
order to inspect previous entries. That was when the variant
saw Rebo’s signature, followed by Norr’s, and the nearly illegible scrawl that probably belonged to the heavy.
Shaz took in the fact that the threesome had taken suite
303, and was already backing away, when the receptionist
turned to pull the guestbook over in front of him. He noticed that the ledger was turned to the wrong page, assumed

LO G O S R U N

37

that an errant breeze had been responsible for the change,
and wondered what the woman in front of him would look
like naked.
A scant ﬁve minutes later the combat variant had
climbed three ﬂights of stairs, made his way down a long
hall, and was standing with his ear to a door with the numerals 303 on it. Then, having waited for a full minute
without hearing any activity within, Shaz made use of a
pick to open the lock. Having glanced both ways to make
sure the hall was clear, the variant pushed the door open and
slipped into the room. Once inside, the operative discovered
that the suite was not only dark but momentarily empty,
which suited his purposes well. The possibility that the AI
was there, resting within a few feet of him, caused the variant’s heart to beat faster. The search began.
Rebo yawned as he led the other two up the broad ﬂight of

stairs, tried to remember which room he and Crowley had
stayed in thirty years earlier, and couldn’t. Once on the third
ﬂoor he turned to the right. Wall-mounted lamps marked off
regular intervals and threw pools of light onto the ﬂoor.
Once in front of 303, the runner inserted his key into the
lock and turned it. The door swung open. The next couple of
minutes were spent fumbling with matches and ﬁnicky
lamps. “Bring them to me,” Norr offered, having mastered
the process. “And I’ll light them for you.”
Hoggles nodded gratefully, went to remove one of the
lamps from a wall bracket, and swore when it burned his
ﬁngers. “Damn! That thing is hot!”
Rebo frowned, slid his hand in under his jacket, and
wrapped his ﬁngers around the Crosser. “Hot? Why would
it be hot?”
“Because it was lit,” Logos grated contemptuously. “Check

38

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the bedrooms. I predict that someone came to turn the beds
down.”
“He’s right,” Norr conﬁrmed, as she peered into her
room. “And I don’t know about you, but I’m looking forward to a good night’s sleep.”
Having taken refuge in one corner of the sitting room,
Shaz stood perfectly still and strove to defocus his mind. Because just as combat variants had been provided with the
means to fool the eye, they had also been equipped to evade
detection by sensitives, but only if they exercised perfect
control over both their thoughts and emotions.
Now, having discovered that Norr not only had the AI,
but was wearing the device, the operative was hard-pressed
to contain a sense of jubilation. Fortunately, there were
things to worry about as well—which meant Shaz could use
one emotion to counter the other. What to do? Attack the
threesome and attempt to steal what he had come for, or escape and follow them? Though of value to the Techno Society in and of himself, Logos would be worth even more if
they knew where Socket was, and given his present frame of
mind, the AI wasn’t likely to tell them.
In the end it was that, plus the fact that Shaz couldn’t be
absolutely sure that he would win what would almost certainly be a hard-fought battle, that helped to make up the
variant’s mind. Rather than attack the AI’s custodians, the
operative resolved to follow them to Socket, where he could
take both prizes at the same time. Assuming he could escape, that is—which was anything but certain.
Norr was just about to bid the others good night and enter her room, when she sensed something strange. The almost indiscernible glow was similar to the aura that all
living beings generated, yet different somehow, as if partially

LO G O S R U N

39

shielded. The sensitive opened her mouth, and was about to
comment on the phenomenon, but never got to do so as Milos Lysander took control of her physical body. The invading
spirit preferred male plumbing but had occupied this body
on previous occasions and gradually grown accustomed to
it. “He’s in the corner!” the dead scientist proclaimed
loudly, as he pointed at the spot where Shaz was hiding.
“Grab him!”
But neither Rebo nor Hoggles was expecting such an order and, when they turned to look at the corner in question,
saw nothing more than a vague shimmer.
That brief moment of hesitation was all the combat variant needed. He crossed the room, opened the door, and was
already in the hall by the time Rebo went to probe the
empty corner. The runner turned as the door slammed.
Hoggles moved as if to follow, but Lysander shook Norr’s
head. “Don’t bother,” the dead man said disgustedly. “You
blew the only chance you’re likely to get.”
“Lysander?” Rebo inquired irritably. “Is that you?”
“Of course it’s me!” the disincarnate replied testily.
“Who else would it be?”
“Wonderful,” Logos said sarcastically. “The megalomaniac returns.”
“Look who’s talking,” the dead scientist responded resentfully. “I don’t remember you speaking up for the huddled masses back when you were in control of the star gates.”
“Stop it,” Rebo ordered tersely. “We don’t have time for
this crap. Someone was in the room . . . So who is he? And
what was he after?”
“His name is Shaz,” Lysander answered. “Back before Kane
got killed, he functioned as Tepho’s bodyguard and enforcer.
Then, when Kane passed over, the chairman promoted him.”

40

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Hoggles frowned. “Why couldn’t we see him?”
“Because he’s a combat variant,” the dead scientist explained.
“Perfect,” Rebo commented sourly. “Not only did the
Techno Society manage to locate us—they sent an operative
who can make himself invisible.”
“It gets worse,” the spirit entity said wearily, as he
dropped Norr’s body into a chair. “My onetime son, which is
to say the man you knew as Kane, continues to work for the
Society. And, while none of us can see into the physical plane
with much clarity, it was he who directed Shaz to Thara.”
“But how?” Hoggles wanted to know.
“They have a sensitive, a man named Dyson, who can
bring Kane through,” Lysander explained.
“So what are they waiting for?” Rebo wondered. “They
know where we are, and they know we have Logos, so what’s
holding them back?”
“They want Socket,” Logos put in grimly. “Then, assuming they can force me to do their bidding, they’ll have
everything they need to reestablish the network.”
“And could they?” Hoggles inquired curiously. “Get you
to do their bidding that is?”
“Of course not!” the AI lied hotly. “What do you take me
for?”
“A somewhat self-centered computer program,” Lysander
commented cynically. “But you’re all we have.”
“So what would you suggest?” Rebo inquired pragmatically. “Kane could follow us anywhere.”
“Yes,” the disincarnate agreed. “But the task remains. . . .
Once you reach Socket, and Logos takes control, it will be
too late for them to interfere. Socket has defenses that will
keep them at bay.”

LO G O S R U N

41

“Or had,” Logos put in cynically. “They might be in need
of maintenance by now.”
“I don’t know,” the runner said doubtfully. “It sounds
pretty iffy to me.”
“And me,” Hoggles added. “So where did this Shaz person go? Maybe we could track him down.”
But Norr’s body gave a convulsive jerk at that point, her
eyelids ﬂuttered, and she looked confused. “What happened?”
“Lysander paid you a visit,” Rebo said disgustedly. “And
guess what? The Techno Society knows where we are.”
The sensitive was still in the process of absorbing that piece
of unwelcome information when Logos spoke to her. “It’s not
as bad as it sounds,” the AI said reassuringly. “Because even
though they know where we are, they don’t know where we’re
going. There’s only one person who knows that: me.”
While many of the billions of disincarnate spirits who pop-

ulated the spirit planes preferred life in the ethereal realms to
that on the physical plane, Kane was not one of them, and
therefore welcomed the summons when it came. The sensation was barely felt, as when a child tugs on a pant leg, but
very persistent. And that was a sure sign that rather than
merely being remembered by one of the many people Kane
had known during his most recent incarnation, one or more
individuals were determined to make contact with him.
So, eager to revisit the material world, no matter how
brieﬂy, Kane directed his energy toward those who were focused on him. And, having already agreed to continue his
relationship with the Techno Society, the ex-operative was
far from surprised to discover that Shaz and Dyson were
waiting for him. A female was present as well, and even

42

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

though Kane didn’t recognize her vibration, he felt a natural
afﬁnity for the dark energy that seethed around her.
It was easier to enter Dyson’s body the second time,
pleasantly so, and Kane felt something akin to an orgasm as
all of his physical senses were magically restored. His vision,
which was to say Dyson’s vision, blurred, then cleared. Both
Shaz and a beautiful woman sat opposite him. With the exception of some ring bolts and the darkish stains around
them, the wall behind the pair was featureless. Darkness
gathered where the lamplight couldn’t reach. “Not that it
matters,” Kane croaked, “but where am I?”
“We’re sitting in the basement of the Techno Society’s
headquarters on Thara,” the combat variant replied evenly.
“Ah,” Kane responded gravely. “So you followed my
counsel.”
“Yes,” Shaz conﬁrmed. “And they have Logos. I heard it
speak.”
In spite of the fact that Kane generally preferred life on
the physical plane to his present existence, there were advantages to being dead. Chief among them was the fact that
it was impossible for enemies to murder him. Not Shaz, not
anyone. So, rather than fear the combat variant as he once
had, the disincarnate was free to needle him. “You heard the
AI speak? But left the device where it was? I suspect Chairman Tepho will wonder why.”
“He knows why,” Shaz replied defensively. “We need
Socket . . . which is why you were summoned. Since they
don’t have access to the local star gate, the sensitive and her
companions will be forced to board the next ship.”
“Assuming it comes,” Du Phan put in emotionlessly.
“Yes,” the variant acknowledged. “Assuming it comes,
the ship will carry them to Derius. Watch over them to the
extent that you can. We’ll be waiting when they arrive.”

LO G O S R U N

43

A frown wrinkled Dyson’s brow. “You want me to protect
them?” Kane inquired incredulously.
“For the moment, yes,” Shaz replied sternly. “The trip is
risky in and of itself . . . But what if something were to happen to them in transit? So your task is to provide whatever
assistance you can.”
“Why not board the ship yourself?” the dead man
wanted to know.
“Because they’re on the lookout for a combat variant
now,” Shaz responded. “Your onetime father saw to that. . . .
And the woman might sense a hostile presence.”
“I can try,” Kane allowed. “But it won’t be easy. Locating
something on the physical plane is like feeling your way
through a thick fog. And once their ship enters hyperspace,
the task will become that much more difﬁcult.”
“Do what you can,” Shaz insisted, “and we will speak to
you on Derius.”
Kane eyed the woman and forced Dyson to smile. “I
don’t believe we have met.”
Phan knew the look and allowed a smile to touch her
lips. “No, I don’t believe we have. My name is Du Phan.”
“Du Phan . . .” the disincarnate said experimentally.
“Well, Du Phan, until next time then.”
As the assassin ran the tip of a pink tongue over her already glossy lips, Kane felt Dyson’s body respond. And so,
for that matter, did the being to which it belonged. Because
while slightly out of phase with his physical form, the sensitive was conscious of everything that took place and didn’t
like the way in which Kane was making free with his body.
He struggled to push the invading spirit out, eventually
managed to do so, and found himself soaked with sweat.
Somehow, Dyson had been thrust to the forefront of a war
he didn’t understand and wanted no part of.

44

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Good work,” Shaz said emotionlessly. “Come on . . . We
have things to do.”
The spaceship Shewhoswimsthevoid

Like a silvery ﬁsh in a large black pond Shewhoswimsthevoid slipped past a gravelly asteroid belt, swung round
a planet-sized orange-red boulder, and began to decelerate. Because up ahead, only ship hours away, lay her next
port of call, the planet that the biobeings riding deep
within her ancient hull knew as Thara. It was a planet
that she had orbited many times before. For such was her
purpose, and what she experienced as pleasure, even
though the doing of it would eventually lead to her dissolution.
But, like the natural laws that governed what the great
vessel could do in space, the urges inherent in her programming limited what Shewhoswims could desire, and thereby
ensured that so long as the ship could carry people from one
planet to another, she would. Regardless of the cost to her.
The question wasn’t if she would die, but when, and even
though it lay within her power to carry out the necessary
calculations. Shewhoswims chose not to do so. Because for the
moment she had purpose, and that made her happy. Cool
nothingness caressed the ship’s hull, galaxies wheeled in the
unimaginable distance, and a thousand suns lit the way.
The city of Tryst, on the Planet Thara

The public market occupied the topmost level of Tryst,
where golden sunlight shone through the glass panels set
into the domed roof, and goods were hoisted from the
ground below by means of wooden cranes. Each massive
swing arm was named after the family to which it belonged
and was served by a team of sturdy angens. They made

LO G O S R U N

45

squalling sounds as they walked endless circles around
brightly painted capstans.
Just to the rear of the cranes was an extremely busy thoroughfare that the cart men used to transport newly arrived
goods, even as hundreds of people swirled around them.
There were red hats, black hats, bakers, soldiers, scribes,
metalsmiths, townspeople, tailors, heavies, herbalists, and
gangs of schoolchildren all weaving a transitory tapestry of
thought, language, and color. It made for a heady atmosphere and one which Norr, who rarely got a chance to spend
time with Rebo, enjoyed. Because right then, as the couple
strolled hand in hand, they could interact in a way that just
wasn’t possible when others were around.
Having entered the market proper, Rebo and Norr found
themselves following one of two dozen aisles that converged
on the center of the pie-shaped ﬂoor plan. That was where
all of the food vendors were forced to gather so that their
smoke could be channeled up through a single hole at the
center of the domed roof. The odors of freshly baked bread,
roasted meat, and brewed caf combined to make Rebo’s
stomach growl. But it was too early for lunch—and there
was work to do. “The ﬁrst thing we need is a gunsmith,” the
runner mused, as they paused at an intersection. “It will
take them time to crank out ﬁve hundred rounds—so the
sooner they get going the better.”
“That makes sense,” Norr agreed. “Then we’ll shop for
fuel, dried food, and personal items.”
And so it was agreed. It took half an hour to ﬁnd a gunsmith who could perform the work to Rebo’s speciﬁcations
plus an hour to gather up the other items they needed. And
it was then, while Norr was waiting for the runner to return
from a consultation with a Ju-Ju master, that Norr ran into
the old crone. She was a sensitive by the look of her, albeit

46

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

an ancient one, who told fortunes for a living. Her booth
consisted of little more than panels of blue cloth stretched
over a wood frame. She had straggly white hair and, judging
from the wrinkled skin that hung around her face, had once
been heavier than she was now. Cataracts clouded her eyes,
but her second sight remained clear, and she could sense the
young woman’s presence. “Come over here, dear. I won’t
hurt you,” the old woman said reassuringly. “Even though
there are others who would!”
Norr felt sorry for the seer and found the last statement
to be intriguing. “Here,” the sensitive said, as she pressed a
coin into the oldster’s palm. “Tell me more.”
The contact caused the old crone to cock her head to one
side and frown. “What is this?” she demanded. “Some sort
of trick? You have the gift . . . Tell your own fortune.”
“No,” Norr replied gently as she took her place on the
low stool that fronted the oldster’s well-worn chair. “You
know what they say . . . The seer who looks to his own future is blind.”
“What you say is true,” the older sensitive replied, as she
revealed some badly decayed teeth. “And I know what it is
to be blind! Give me your hand.”
Norr reached out to take the fortune-teller’s hand. It was
extremely warm. “Ah,” the old woman said knowingly.
“You are but halfway through a long journey . . . and the
greatest dangers lie ahead.”
“What sort of dangers?”
“Beware of the thief,” the seer cautioned importantly.
“Lest you lose that which is most precious.”
Norr nodded. “Go on.”
“There will be a battle,” the other woman predicted.
“And when it comes you must seek that which you already
have.”

LO G O S R U N

47

While the ﬁrst message seemed like an obvious reference
to Logos, the second didn’t make any sense at all, but Norr
was polite nonetheless. “Thank you,” the younger sensitive
replied. “I will keep that in mind.”
“And there’s something more,” the fortune-teller added,
her eyes seemingly focused on something Norr couldn’t see.
“Yes?”
“An angel is watching over you. A dark angel but an angel nonetheless. There is a momentary alignment between
you. It cannot last but could be helpful in the short run.
Does that make sense?”
“No,” Norr replied. “It doesn’t . . . Not right now. But
perhaps later it will.”
The reading came to an end shortly after that, Norr went
to lunch with Rebo, and a metal man followed the couple
back to the guildhall.
The spaceport, or what had been the spaceport, had been

transformed into a huge crater some 4,216 years earlier,
when an ark ship crashed there. Most of the ship’s hull had
been salvaged and converted into tools, implements, and construction materials that were still being recycled and used.
But a few pieces of riblike metal continued to curve up toward the sky and harkened back to days only dimly remembered. A sobering reminder of what could happen to those
who traveled among the stars. But that didn’t stop thousands of runners, merchants, thieves, holy men, assassins,
romantics, con artists, scholars, and lunatics of every possible description from gambling their lives each year. A fact
made apparent by the long column of heavily burdened people who wound their way down out of the elevated city of
Tryst to follow a narrow footpath out toward the crater.
Of course, some of the people were spectators, children in

48

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

tow, who would return to their homes by nightfall. But
those who wore packs, or carried bundles between them,
were intent on boarding the shuttle if it landed. Those who
were veteran travelers, individuals like Rebo, Norr, and
Hoggles, carried just what they needed, while neophytes
had a tendency to neglect essentials like fuel, food, and
medicine in favor of frivolous items like folding furniture,
elaborate shelters, and fancy clothing—much of which would
either be stolen by their fellow passengers, converted into fuel
to ward off the cold, or abandoned as impractical.
For his part Rebo felt pretty good about the provisions
the three of them carried, especially the locally made fuel
tablets, packets of dried food, and the hand-loaded ammunition acquired the day before. And, adding to the runner’s
sense of well-being was the powerful talisman that he had
purchased to supplement the much-stressed amulet that
had seen him through the last few months. Norr believed
such things were silly, not to mention superstitious, but
Rebo knew better. He was alive, wasn’t he? Even though
plenty of people wanted him dead. That spoke for itself.
The runner’s thoughts were interrupted by a sound similar to rolling thunder as a wedge-shaped shuttle broke the
sound barrier and circled high above. There was a shout of
jubilation as spectators and travelers alike paused to celebrate the ship’s return. They couldn’t see Shewhoswims, of
course, since the vessel was far too large to negotiate a planetary atmosphere, but the sight of the shuttle was wondrous
enough, especially for those who had never seen a ﬂying machine before. And there were at least a thousand pilgrims,
many of whom had walked hundreds of miles in hopes of
bearing witness to a landing and thereby conﬁrming what
some people said. Out beyond the darkness lay other planets,

LO G O S R U N

49

populated by humans just like them, all having a common
ancestry. The visitors were understandably excited as the
fantastic apparition lost altitude and prepared to land.
Horns sounded, drums rattled, and bells tolled as the
long, colorful procession followed the seldom-used path
down into the crater and the mound of hard-packed earth
that dominated the center of it. For it was there, on what
amounted to a huge pedestal, that the space black shuttle
would put down.
Even though her central processing unit remained in orbit, Shewhoswims could “see” via the shuttle’s sensors and felt
a deep sense of regret as she looked down on what amounted
to a grave. Not for one of her brother-sister ships, because
the wreckage predated them, but for a lesser vessel that had
succumbed to mechanical failure, human error, or entropy.
“So,” Norr said, as the shuttle settled onto its skids, “do
you think he’ll board the ship with us?”
There was no need for the runner to ask who the sensitive was referring to, since the unseen combat variant had
been on all of their minds since the break-in and Lysander’s
visitation. In fact, though he wouldn’t have been willing to
admit it, Rebo had spent a good deal of time looking over
his shoulder during the last couple of days. “It beats me,”
the runner replied. “But I doubt it. . . . Logos claims that
the local star gate is buried deep underground. But there
must be a way to access it, or this Shaz character would be
on the incoming shuttle. That would suggest that he’s on
Derius by now . . . waiting for us to complete the trip the
hard way.”
But the Techno Society operative wasn’t on Derius. Not
yet and wouldn’t be for weeks. First he had to ensure that
the troublesome trio actually boarded the shuttle, then he

50

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

was scheduled to return to Anafa, where Chairman Tepho
was waiting for a report. Then and only then would the variant make the jump to Derius.
The brass telescope had been rented from one of the
many vendors who had positioned themselves along the
crater’s rim and allowed Shaz to monitor their progress from
a safe distance as the threesome left the bottom of the depression and wound their way up onto the landing pad.
Boarding had yet to begin, and wouldn’t, until such time as
Shewhoswims sent the necessary signal. That left the wouldbe passengers to mill around the recently arrived ship and
jockey for position.
Those who had never been aboard a spaceship before were
pushing and shoving, hoping to be among the ﬁrst to enter
the vessel, while veterans like Rebo, Norr, and Hoggles
were careful to hang back, secure in the knowledge that the
last people to board the shuttle would be among the ﬁrst to
exit, thereby positioning themselves for the subsequent race
into the main hold. And it was then, while they were waiting to enter the ship, that Hoggles tapped Rebo on the
shoulder. “Jak . . . See the man with the beard? He looks familiar somehow.”
Rebo eyed the man in question and frowned. “Yeah, he
does look familiar. . . . But I can’t place him. Lonni, how
’bout you?”
The sensitive looked, then looked again. “Uh-oh,” she
said ominously. “I think we’re in trouble.”
“In trouble?” the runner inquired mildly. “Why?”
“That isn’t a man, or maybe it is, but the last time I saw
him he was dressed as a woman and was throwing hatchets
at the local prefect!”
Rebo took another look, realized that Norr was correct,

LO G O S R U N

51

and scanned the faces around the person in question. It was
hard to tell, since the circus performers had been wearing
heavy makeup the last time he’d seen them, but the runner
thought he recognized an acrobat, a clown, and the strongman that Logos had zapped.
It was then, as the ramp began to deploy, that the travelers came to understand the full extent of their misfortune.
Not only were they about to risk their lives on an extremely
uncertain journey—they were going to be locked inside a
durasteel hull with the full cast of the Circus Solara!
And, as if to underscore that fact, a man with a horribly
scarred face lurched out of the crowd. He had tiny little eyes
and green teeth that went on full display as he smiled at
Norr. “Remember me?” the beast master demanded. “No?
Well I remember you. It’s a long way to Derius, sweetheart—
and your friends will have to sleep sometime. But don’t
worry, my friends and I know how to treat a lady, especially
one who looks like you do!”
That elicited a series of guffaws from the beast master’s
cronies, some of whom bore obvious injuries acquired during the melee in the arena and were eager for revenge. And
they might have moved in on the threesome right then had
it not been for Hoggles. The heavy unlimbered his ragwrapped war hammer and took a giant step forward. That
sent the troupe scuttling, if only for the moment, and Norr
uttered a sigh. “Maybe we should wait for the next ship. . . .
Or forget the whole thing.”
“I would agree with you,” the runner responded, “except
for the Lysander problem. He won’t leave you alone until
Logos reaches Socket—and I promised him I would make
the delivery.”
“And don’t forget the gates,” Hoggles added. “Once

52

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

people can step from planet to planet, knowledge will
spread, lives will be saved, and conditions will improve for
billions of people.”
“Or so Lysander claims,” Rebo replied cynically, “but
that’s the hope. So I reckon we should board.”
“I’m in,” Norr announced, ﬁngers wrapped around her
staff.
“Me too,” Hoggles agreed.
“Oh, no you don’t!” Logos interjected. “If those rufﬁans
hurt you, they could hurt me, and that’s unacceptable. We
must return to Tryst, where we will await the next ship!”
“I’ll take that,” Rebo said, as he lifted Norr’s pack off her
shoulders. “Now, if you remove that raggedy-looking coat, I
think you’ll be a lot more comfortable.”
Logos, his voice ever more strident, was still talking
when the sensitive rolled the AI into a ball and shoved him
down into the depths of her pack. The ramp hit the ground
at that point, and rather than the outpouring of passengers
that Rebo expected, no one appeared. That was a surprise,
but there wasn’t much time to think about what if anything
the phenomenon might mean, as the ﬁrst-time passengers
nearly trampled one another in their eagerness to board. The
voyage was about to begin.

THREE
™

The spaceship Shewhoswimsthevoid

To those who preach the beneﬁts of technology—I say look at
the ruins of Wimmura! The ancients gloried in the dark arts,
and God struck them down! So teach the Book of Abominations to your children, and do battle with your unclean
thoughts, or give yourself to the ﬂames of puriﬁcation.
—Grand Vizier Imbo Moratano,
Church of the Antitechnic God

One hundred and fourteen people, that was how many

crowded their way into the shuttle and were forced to stand
shoulder to shoulder as the ship forced its way up through
Thara’s atmosphere. Some of them cheered, some of them
cried, and at least a dozen threw up as the shuttle left the
planet’s gravity well. Had they been free to do so, the passengers would have free-ﬂoated through a galaxy of vomit
globules. But the tightly packed bodies held the travelers in
place, and while that was claustrophobic, it helped to prevent injuries. Those who knew to do so wore bandit-style
bandannas that ﬁltered most of the vomit out of the air. But
no one could completely escape the vile mist that found its
way into their hair and clothes.
Fortunately, the trip was relatively short, which meant
that after only a few hours of suffering, Shewhoswims guided

54

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the tiny extension of herself into an open docking bay.
There was the barely heard whine of hidden machinery, followed by the sudden restoration of gravity, and a dull thud
as the transport was captured and locked into place. “And
here it is,” Rebo said to no one in particular. “Home sweet
home.”
An especially long ﬁve minutes passed before servos
whined, the aft hatch hit the deck outside, and those closest
to the opening were given access to the ship’s decontamination chamber. It was smaller than the shuttle’s cargo bay, so
only a third of the passengers could enter before the hatch
closed and a thick mist fogged the air. The runner, sensitive,
and heavy had been expecting the antibacterial spray, but
some of their fellow passengers weren’t. Some screamed and
started to thrash about, while others attempted to calm
them. Rebo took the opportunity to confer with his companions. “I ﬁgure about thirty to thirty-ﬁve members of the
Circus Solara were on the shuttle. Maybe half that number
are here in the decontamination chamber. It’s pretty clear
that the whole group has been planet-hopping for years—
and is familiar with the way the ships operate. That’s why I
expect the advance party to make a run for the hold, secure
a corner, and wait for the rest to arrive with the baggage.”
“That’s what I would do,” Hoggles agreed stolidly. “And
it will work. They have more arms and legs than any other
group aboard.”
“Exactly,” Rebo agreed. “And once they get established,
they’ll come after us. So, rather than grab a wall slot or try
for a corner, I suggest that we seize control of the water supply instead.”
Norr was visibly surprised. “But that’s public property!
No one does that.”
“Oh, they try,” the runner replied. “I encountered the

LO G O S R U N

55

problem once. A group of toughs set up camp right in front
of the faucet and charged each passenger a gunnar per
bucket of water, until the rest of the passengers banded together and put a stop to it. Five people were killed during
the battle.”
Hoggles frowned. “So why would we want to put ourselves in a position to get killed?”
“We’ll go about it differently,” Rebo answered. “Rather
than demand money from our fellow passengers, we’ll provide them with water for free so long as they don’t attack us.
But if they do, we’ll cut them off.”
“You’re pretty smart for a norm,” Norr said admiringly.
“No wonder I hang out with you!”
“You may feel differently later on,” the runner replied
soberly. “It won’t be easy to guard that faucet constantly. . . .
But it’s worth a try.”
The heavy nodded. “So, what happens when the hatch
opens?”
“Lonni and I will make a run for the hold,” Rebo replied,
as the mist began to dissipate. “You bring up the rear with
the packs, or if they’re too heavy, guard them. One of us will
come back to lend a hand.”
The hatch had already begun to open when the sensitive
freed herself from her pack and, staff in hand, prepared to
follow Rebo out into the corridor beyond. The twosome
wasn’t the ﬁrst to exit the decontamination chamber, that
honor fell to a young man who rolled under the steadily rising door, but the couple were able to secure a position toward the front of the pack.
That advantage, signiﬁcant though it was, couldn’t make
up for the fact that the Circus Solara performers had superior numbers. The beast master, the strongman, and a particularly well-built rigger led a phalanx of twelve people

56

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

who pushed the rest of the passengers out of the way. The
beast master took particular pleasure in elbowing Norr as he
passed by her, thereby throwing the sensitive into a durasteel bulkhead and effectively putting her out of the race.
But Rebo wasn’t so easily deﬂected, and, while unable to
block the circus performers, did manage to keep up with
them. Elbows ﬂew, poorly directed blows were deﬂected,
and the air was thick with grunts and heartfelt swear words
as the mob surged down the ﬁlthy passageway to the point
where a hatch had been welded shut more than a thousand
years before. At that point the group had no choice but to
turn left. The bullet-pocked bulkheads to either side of
them were covered with grime, peeling paint, and countless
layers of head-high multicolored grafﬁti. Below that, barely
visible beneath the grime, phrases like watch your step!
hinted at a more civilized past.
Then they were through a large opening and in the ship’s
main hold, a space that the earliest passengers would never
have been allowed to visit, much less live in. But that was
back before Shewhoswims had been forced to seal off most of
her vast body lest the now-barbarous humans do even more
damage to her precious operating systems. What light there
was originated from high above, and rather than the stillsmoldering campﬁres the previous set of passengers typically left, there was nothing to see but piles of rubbish. And
the gloom that circled beyond.
True to common practice, and the runner’s predictions,
the beast master and the rest of his ﬂying squad immediately struck out for a distant corner. Once in their possession, and with more than thirty people to call upon, the
triangular section of deck would be relatively easy to defend
compared to a spot out in the middle of the hold.

LO G O S R U N

57

Once Rebo conﬁrmed that the troupe didn’t have plans to
seize control of the water supply themselves, he let out a sigh
of relief and took the opportunity to drag some likely
looking debris over to the point where the faucet protruded
from the steel bulkhead. A large puddle had formed there—
and it shivered in sympathy with the vibration produced by
the ship’s power plant. Then, as more people ﬂooded into the
cavernous hold, the runner was forced to forgo scavenging in
order to take up a defensible position next to the faucet. Norr
arrived shortly thereafter—followed by a heavily burdened
Hoggles. “Damn,” the variant said, as he dropped the packs
next to the puddle. “Those things are heavy.”
“Uh-oh,” Norr said, as she rewrapped her ﬁngers around
the long wooden staff. “Here comes our ﬁrst set of visitors.”
Rebo already had the four men under surveillance and
nodded politely as they approached. They had the look of
merchant adventurers, a common breed aboard the great
ships, and were well armed. “What’s the deal?” the largest
member of the group demanded as he eyed the pistols that
dangled at the runner’s sides. “What are the weapons for?”
“There are more than thirty members of the Circus Solara
on this ship,” Rebo explained patiently. “They threatened to
attack us.”
“But they won’t if you control the water,” the man ventured.
“That’s the idea,” the runner agreed.
“So, what about us?” the smallest of the group wanted to
know.
“You can take all the water you want,” Rebo replied
evenly, “so long as you don’t pass any along to members of
the troupe. If you do, we’ll cut you off.”
“And you don’t plan to charge us?”

58

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Nope . . . That would be wrong.”
“It sure as hell would be,” the ﬁrst man commented fervently. “We’ll be back with our canteens.”
“Sounds good,” Rebo replied. “We’ll see you later.”
The men left, word spread quickly, and it wasn’t long
before a large contingent of circus performers had threaded
their way between the newly created encampments to form
a semicircle in front of the water faucet. The rest of the passengers saw the action and stopped whatever they were doing in order to watch. Not because they favored one faction
over the other, but because the question of who controlled
the water was important, and everyone had a stake in the
conﬂict.
Most of the troupe were in mufti, but a few wore full
makeup, which made them look more menacing somehow.
The beast master had chosen himself as spokesman for the
group. His voice was little more than a growl, and his eyes
seemed to glow with hatred. “Give the woman to us, leave
the area, and we’ll let you live.”
Rebo nodded gravely. “Generally speaking, I like a man
who comes right to the point—but I’m afraid that you constitute the exception to that rule. I suggest that you return
to your corner.”
“Or what?” the beast master demanded belligerently.
“Do you think you can shoot all of us?”
“No,” the runner replied evenly. “That would be unrealistic. I am pretty fast however, so I think I can kill ﬁve or six of
you before you can close with us. Then, given Bo’s expertise
with that war hammer, two or three more will go down. Oh,
and don’t forget the woman you want so much. . . . She’s
good for at least a couple more. That puts the price for water
at ten people. So, if that’s acceptable to you, make your move.
Which one of you clowns would like to die ﬁrst?”

LO G O S R U N

59

But, before any of the performers could reply, Norr
pointed upward. “Jak! Look!”
The runner looked up into the maze of girders that crisscrossed the top of the hold, spotted a ﬁgure silhouetted
against one of the lights, and knew he’d been suckered.
Even as the beast master kept him busy one of the troupe’s
trapeze artists had worked his way into position and was
about to ﬁre a long-barreled riﬂe.
But Rebo carried the long single-shot Hogger for exactly
that sort of situation—and knew he could make the shot
with his spectacles on. Unfortunately the runner’s spectacles
were stored in his pack, and the would-be assassin amounted
to little more than an out-of-focus blur. That’s what the runner was thinking as he brought the long-barreled pistol up
into position and the acrobat ﬁred. There was a ﬂash, followed by a loud report and a clang, as the lead ball nipped
the top of Rebo’s right shoulder and ﬂattened itself against
the bulkhead behind him.
Thanks to the fact that the sniper was armed with a
muzzle-loader rather than a repeater, there was no followup shot—which provided the runner with the opportunity
to return ﬁre. The momentary pain, followed by the sudden rush of adrenaline, combined to produce an instinctive response. The big handgun jerked in Rebo’s hand, the
30-30 slug ﬂew true, and the out-of-focus blob seemed to
wobble. Then, as the loud boom echoed back and forth between the ship’s steel bulkheads, the trapeze artist fell.
There was a sickening thump as his body hit the deck. That
was followed by a clatter as the muzzle-loader shattered,
and the force of the impact sent pieces of the weapon skittering far and wide.
“So,” Rebo said, as he lowered the still-smoking Hogger.
“He went ﬁrst. . . . Who would like to go second?”

60

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The beast master and a couple of others might have taken
their chances, but the rest of the crowd had already begun to
back away, and that forced the more ardent performers to
withdraw as well.
“You can have all the water you want so long as you leave
us alone,” Rebo told them coldly. “But the next time you try
something like this we will cut you off. And, oh by the way,
when you want water send one person to get it. And send the
same person each time.”
“We’ll get you for this!” the beast master threatened, as
he backed away.
“That will cost you twenty hours without water,” the
runner replied mildly. “Would you like to double that?”
There was no reply as the performers faded into the surrounding murk, although Norr could “see” the thought
forms they had created and knew the danger was far from
over.
“Damn,” Hoggles said, as he peered up into the latticework of beams and girders above their heads. “We need eyes
on the top of our heads.”
“Yeah,” Rebo agreed soberly. “We do. Maybe we can
build a shelter with a bulletproof roof.”
Norr took a look around. “At least there’s plenty of materials. Let’s get to work.”
None of the three noticed the ancient security camera
mounted high on the opposite bulkhead, or the fact that it
panned slightly as if in response to some invisible hand before zooming out to a wide shot.
In the meantime, Shewhoswims broke orbit, accelerated
out toward the edge of the solar system, and began to calculate the next jump. She was only vaguely aware of what the
humans were up to, and so long as they did minimal damage

LO G O S R U N

61

to her body, was not especially interested in their activities.
The stars were not only more compelling but a good deal
more predictable, and that was a virtue in her opinion. The
AI hummed while she worked.
The ship’s Security Control Center had once been home to

a force of ﬁfty—men, women, and androids—charged with
everything from crime prevention to crowd control. As
such, the interconnected compartments included an ofﬁce
for the watch commander, a ready room complete with six
bunks, a lounge that boasted its own auto chef, a well-stocked
armory, and a high-tech surveillance facility where the video
provided from more than ﬁve hundred cameras was constantly monitored.
But those days were long gone by the time the brothers
Mog, Ruk, and Tas moved into the facility and took up residence. More than two standard years had passed since the day
when Mog experimentally entered his birth date into the keypad outside the Security Center and watched in openmouthed
amazement as the much-abused hatch cycled open. A more
philosophical person might have marveled at his good fortune, or wondered how many thousand such attempts had
failed prior to his, or pondered why that particular sequence
of numbers had been chosen to protect the facility.
But Mog wasn’t much of a thinker—nor were his half
brothers Ruk and Tas. What they were was criminals, who—
having botched a robbery—were on the run from the law
when they happened upon the crowd that had gathered to
watch a shuttle lift from the Planet Derius, and impulsively
dashed up the ramp. But, not having prepared themselves
for the trip, the siblings soon discovered that they had exchanged one life-threatening situation for another.

62

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Still, the ship carried a plentiful supply of the one thing
criminals can’t get along without, and that was victims.
Because, while many of the merchants, religious pilgrims,
and other travelers were armed against the possibility of
petty theft, they weren’t prepared to deal with ruthless
predators like Mog, Ruk, and Tas.
However, vulnerable though they were, the other passengers outnumbered the brothers, which was why Mog thought
it best to locate a defendable hideout prior to initiating what
he thought of as “the harvest.” But when the hatch to the Security Control Center magically opened before him, the criminal realized that he had something of greater value than a
simple refuge. Here was a compartment to sleep in, an alcove full of neatly racked weapons, and a roomful of magical
windows. Strange but wonderful devices that allowed the
criminal and his two siblings to monitor their prey before
venturing out to attack them.
The beneﬁts of Mog’s discovery, and the rather crafty
manner in which he employed them, produced what could
only be described as a rich harvest. Armed with high-tech
weapons and an ability to watch their fellow passengers
from a remote location, it took the brothers less than three
weeks to slaughter all of their fellow passengers and conﬁscate their valuables.
In fact the trip was so proﬁtable, that when it came time
to leave the ship, the brothers elected to stay aboard. Now,
after more than two years of living in the Security Control
Center, Mog and his brothers had accumulated so much loot
that it occupied most of what had once been the lounge.
There were pots full of gold cronos, sacks of gunnars, boxes
ﬁlled with jewelry, canisters of rare spices, bottles of exquisite perfumes, and bolts of silk. “We’ll be rich when we

LO G O S R U N

63

land.” That’s what Mog liked to say, but neither he nor his
siblings had any real desire to put down on their native
planet and confront the authorities there. Not yet at any rate.
Now, as Mog and Ruk sat in front of the two dozen surveillance screens that still functioned, they were evaluating
the latest ﬂock. Because each brother had been fathered by a
different man, they had very few features in common. Mog
was a big hulking brute with a bushy beard. And while slim
when compared to his brother, Ruk had developed a bit of a
paunch of late and was eternally in need of a bath. He eyed
the screen as he scratched a hairy armpit. “So, brother Mog,
what do you think?”
“I think we’re looking at slim pickings,” the older man
said cynically. “The group in the back corner doesn’t have
more than two gunnars to rub together. And, while the
merchants will no doubt yield a crono or two, I daresay the
rest are likely to disappoint.”
“But not the women,” Ruk growled.
“No,” Mog said agreeably. “Even the homely ones are
good for a little fun.”
“I want that one,” Ruk said eagerly, as he pointed a grimy
ﬁgure at Norr.
“You can have her when I’m done,” Mog said airily.
“That isn’t fair! You always take the pretty ones!”
“That’s right,” Mog answered contemptuously, “and I
always will. . . . Unless you would like to challenge my authority.”
Ruk did want to challenge his brother’s authority, but
was afraid to do so, which left him with no choice but to
back off.
“So,” Tas said, as he entered the room. “When do we hit
them?”

64

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Most will go to sleep in about three hours,” Mog predicted. “Eight hours later they will get up and start to explore. That’s when the harvest will begin.”
“Good,” Tas replied as he eyed the scene in the hold. “I’m
hungry.”
Thirty miles south of Seros, on the Planet Anafa

Though large by most people’s standards, Chairman
Tepho’s estate was modest when compared to those owned
by the planet’s moneyed aristocracy, but that would eventually change. In the meantime, the two hundred acres of land
more than met the reclusive leader’s rather eccentric
needs—none of which had much if anything to do with
farming. That was evident in the way once-productive ﬁelds
now lay fallow, previously sturdy fences went unmended,
and the extensive angen pens stood empty. But there were
guards, plenty of them, all made of metal. The androids
stood alone, or in small groups of two or three, each holding
a spear taller than it was. Most had been splashed with
bright-colored paint. None of the neighbors knew why—or
dared to ask.
All of which seemed strange to Shaz, who had been summoned to the estate upon his return from Thara and was
presently ensconced in the back of a Techno Society coach.
The conveyance rattled alarmingly as it topped a rise and
started down the far side. Then, as the dusty road curved to
the left, the variant caught a glimpse of the once-proud villa
that capped a low hill. He knew the house intimately, having once been Tepho’s chief bodyguard, and was surprised to
see that the building had suffered what appeared to be ﬁre
damage during the months of his absence. Had the lower
levels been affected, Shaz wondered. Because that was where
the reclusive Tepho spent most of his time. Not with groups

LO G O S R U N

65

of people, who might look askance at his twisted body, but
with a few trusted attendants and a coterie of nonjudgmental machines.
The coach followed a curving drive up to the front of the
villa and stopped beneath a smoke-stained portico. The
variant opened the door, and his boots had barely touched
the ground, when a whip cracked and the conveyance jerked
into motion.
That was the moment when the combat variant began to
feel uneasy, allowed his camouﬂage to kick in, and stood
ready to draw both of his semiautomatic pistols. He was already backing away from the front of the villa when he
heard the mufﬂed whine of servos, a half ton of masonry exploded outward, and a large machine emerged from hiding.
It stood about twelve feet tall and consisted of an eggshaped control pod mounted between two retrograde legs.
The weapons mounted on both sides of the control pod
burped blue light as Shaz drew his pistols. But the energy
bolts ﬂew over the variant’s head, and when the visitor
turned to look over his shoulder, he saw the smoking remains of a storage shed fall lazily out of the sky.
More servos whirred as the canopy opened and Tepho released the three-point harness. Then, without a word having
been spoken, the machine performed a deep knee bend that
allowed its owner to reach the ground. It was a maneuver
that normally required help from one or more of the technologist’s assistants, but something Tepho was determined
to accomplish on his own given the fact that Shaz was there.
The technologist grinned mischievously as the combat variant returned both weapons to their cross-draw holsters.
“Had you going there—didn’t I? There were thousands of
raptors at one time. . . . Most were destroyed, but some enterprising tomb raiders found this unit buried with a Faro

66

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

on Torus, and subsequently sold it to me. Our techs had to
tear the whole thing apart and bring the pieces through the
gates one or two at a time. But here’s the part that you’ll be
interested in,” the scientist continued. “Based on my research, it looks like the ancients created raptors to kill
combat variants! That would suggest some sort of revolt. . . .
Interesting, isn’t it?”
It was interesting, but for more than academic reasons.
Having been born into a violent universe, and having a vulnerable body, Tepho was understandably concerned for his
personal safety. And now, having promoted his onetime
bodyguard to a higher position, the chairman had every reason to be afraid of him. Not just a little, but enough to justify the acquisition of a very expensive machine that was not
only more powerful than the combat variant but couldn’t be
bribed, tricked, or otherwise suborned. And that, Shaz realized, was why he had been summoned to Tepho’s country
estate. To learn about the machine, its capabilities, and the
chairman’s newfound strength.
“Yes,” Shaz said tactfully. “That is interesting.” So was
the fact that most of the original machines had been destroyed, suggesting that his ancestors had discovered a way
to defeat them. But the variant knew better than to say as
much. “You wanted to see me, sir?”
“Yes,” the technologist replied. “I’m looking forward to
your report. The medicos claim that I need more exercise—
so you can beneﬁt from my frailties as well. Let’s walk.”
The sun emerged from behind a cloud, and had there
been someone present to observe it, they might have thought
the scene somewhat strange as the norm who wasn’t normal
limped along the road, while his companion shimmered
like a mirage, and the raptor followed a few steps behind.

LO G O S R U N

67

The machine walked with birdlike precision, each pod-step
raising a puff of dust as its sensors scanned the surrounding
area for signs of danger.
Meanwhile, Tepho listened as his subordinate described
the team’s arrival on Thara, the successful break-in, and the
discoveries that followed. “So, Logos can be worn!” the scientist mused. “Imagine! Computers that you wear like a coat!
And we’re going to bring those days back, Shaz. . . . And
soon, too! Where is this marvel? I want to speak with it.”
A lump formed in the combat variant’s throat, but the
operative managed to swallow it. With Tepho at his side,
the decision that appeared to be so logical before seemed
questionable now. Still, Shaz knew that it was important to
be assertive, and his voice was forceful as he told the chairman what he’d done, and why.
To the technologist’s credit he allowed the underling to
ﬁnish the report before making his reply. But there was no
mistaking the tightness in his voice, the way his right index
ﬁnger stabbed the air, or the fact that he was limping faster
now. “Dammit, Shaz . . . I’d like to say that I agree with
your decision to let the sensitive and her companions take
Logos aboard that vessel, but I don’t! Travel aboard the starships is just too damned risky these days. . . . What if the
old tub can’t ﬁnd its way out of hyperspace? But what’s done
is done. . . . Don’t let it happen again however.”
Tepho was capable of towering rages, and knowing that,
the variant discovered that he’d been holding his breath. He
let some of the air escape along with the words. “Yes, sir. It
won’t happen again.”
The scientist glanced sideways as if to gauge the sincerity
of the response and nodded. “I believe you, Shaz. . . . Make
the jump to Derius and wait to see what happens. Hopefully,

68

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

they will arrive right on time. If it looks like they want to
use the local gate—then allow them to force their way in.
Just keep Logos safe! Eventually, assuming you wait long
enough, he’ll lead you to Socket. Understood?”
“Understood.”
“Good,” the scientist replied ﬁrmly. “Now, watch
this . . .” So saying, Tepho removed a pistol-shaped device
from the brand-new shoulder holster that hung under his
left arm. It was shiny, like highly polished silver, and
apparently seamless. Tepho aimed the artifact at a highﬂying bird, pressed a red button, and brought his other
hand up to shade his eyes. There was no report, as one
would expect from a handgun, but the raptor ﬁred one of
its energy cannons, and the broadwing exploded. Shaz
watched a cloud of feathers drift toward the ground, wondered how his ancestors had countered such machines, and
hoped it wouldn’t be necessary to do so again.
Aboard the spaceship Shewhoswimsthevoid

Though relatively safe, the corner of the hold that the
circus performers had claimed for themselves was poorly lit,
which was just as well insofar as the beast master was concerned. The humiliation suffered in the arena had been bad
enough, but having been faced down immediately after
boarding the ship, the animal handler’s standing among his
peers was at an all-time low. And, since their questionable
esteem was the only thing the norm possessed, the situation
was deeply disturbing.
So, while the others slept, copulated, and gambled around
him, the beast master plotted his revenge. A murder that
could be carried out from a distance—and without the least
bit of risk to himself. But there was work to do ﬁrst. The
fact that the circus hopped from planet to planet every ﬁve

LO G O S R U N

69

years or so meant that new animals had to be acquired soon
after landing, trained to do tricks, and sold just prior to
liftoff.
But, while the beast master couldn’t bring an L-phant
aboard, smaller animals were okay so long as he fed them,
and none of the other performers were inconvenienced.
There had been a long sequence of such pets over the years,
but the sturdiest and most enduring was the Poda pod he
had acquired on Baas. Being from a desert environment, the
pod didn’t require much water, and so long as it received
three drops of liquid fertilizer every ﬁfteen days, would reportedly live for more than a hundred years. Not that the
pod was a pet. . . . No, the real pet was the six-inch-long
Slith snake that lived inside the pod and took most of its
sustenance from the plant—a relationship the beast master
didn’t fully understand, and didn’t need to, so long as he
took the symbiotic coupling into account.
Now, as the norm held the pod up in front of his face, he
made use of both spatulate thumbs to rub what he thought of
as the pod’s throat. A full ten seconds passed before the tiny
serpent made its appearance. It had a single beady eye, a long
black tongue, and an orange stripe that ran down its spine.
“Greetings my sweet,” the beast master whispered lovingly.
“And how are you today? Hungry? I’m not surprised.”
Then, having made use of his right hand to reach for a
pair of tweezers, the circus performer selected a likely looking
insect from a half-full jar, and held the still-wriggling prize
up for inspection. “So, sweetums, what do you think? Is this
little beauty worthy of your stomach?”
The serpent opened its mouth and thereby revealed a respectable set of fangs. Its head snapped forward, and the insect disappeared. And that, to the beast master’s way of
thinking, was something of a mystery. He had observed

70

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

animals all of his life, and while never the recipient of a formal education, knew how a food chain worked. Which
raised the obvious question: Why would an animal that ate
insects require fangs? To defend both itself and the pod?
That seemed likely—but there was no way to be sure.
What made the little snakes valuable was the fact that
they could be trained to follow a particular scent to its
source and kill the organism associated with it. So long as
the target was vulnerable to Slith venom, that is, which, according to the assassin from whom the serpent had been
purchased, included just about everyone. It was an assertion
the beast master had tested twice before. First, as the means
to eliminate an acrobat foolish enough to sleep with his
woman, then as a way to punish the bitch herself.
The key, and a very important one, was to provide the
tiny killer with an item from which it could extract the necessary scent. In this case a tiny scrap of cloth that one of the
troupe’s little people had snipped from the sensitive’s cloak
after she boarded the shuttle. “Here, sweetums,” the circus
performer whispered, as he held the tiny piece of fabric out
for inspection. “Get a good sniff of this.”
The long, narrow tongue seemed to caress the scrap of
cloth before being withdrawn. The animal was visibly agitated now, its head jerking from side to side, as the beast
master extended his right index ﬁnger. It was an act of faith,
because a single strike from the Slith snake’s fangs would
lead to an agonizing death, but such was the serpent’s training that it had no interest in harming anyone other than the
being associated with the newly assimilated odor. Then,
once it returned from its deadly mission, the tiny assassin
knew that a special feast would be waiting.
Conscious of how dangerous a trip across the cluttered

LO G O S R U N

71

deck could be for his pet, and hopeful that it would choose
to travel via the overhead girders instead, the beast master
stood and held his ﬁnger up to a diagonal support structure.
He felt rather than saw the serpent unwind itself from his
ﬁnger, wished his pet well, and watched death slither into
the darkness.
A good deal of time and effort had gone into the effort to

construct the shack next to the hold’s single water faucet.
And while not especially attractive to look upon, or bulletproof, as Rebo had originally hoped, the shelter did provide
the threesome with a welcome sense of privacy, and if not
actual safety, then the illusion of it, which contributed to
their peace of mind. And that’s where the runner was, sitting within the embrace of four rickety walls cleaning the
Hogger by the light of an oil-fed lamp, when Norr entered
the hut. The entryway was large enough to accommodate
Hoggles, but just barely, and the sensitive had to duck before straightening again.
Rebo looked up from his work as the variant took the
seat opposite him. The runner never tired of looking at
Norr’s face and wondered what that meant. There had been
women before her, quite a few of them, but none so compelling. That was why he had agreed to a run that was not
only unlikely to pay off but could strand him on an inhospitable planet, or get him killed. So, why was he there? Was
he in love with Lonni? Or the idea of someone like her? She
was in love with him . . . Rebo thought so anyway. Then
what was he waiting for? He could tell her, no ask her, and
the deal would be done. However, because such contemplations caused the runner’s head to hurt, he put it aside in favor of a joke. “How’s the weather?”

72

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Norr made a face. “There isn’t any, not unless you count
the light breeze from the far side of the hold and the stink
associated with it.”
Rebo grinned. “I’m happy to report that I can’t smell a
thing!”
“That’s because you’re part of the problem,” the sensitive
observed tartly. “There’s some news though. . . . When you
control the water supply—everyone stops to chat.”
The runner squinted down the Hogger’s bore into the
lamplight. Then, satisﬁed with what he’d seen, Rebo pushed
a shell into the weapon’s chamber. “There’s news? I’m surprised to hear it.”
“Yes, there is,” the variant replied, as she held her hands
out to collect the scant warmth generated by the lamp.
“And it isn’t good . . . You know the merchants? The ones
camped by the number two pillar?”
“The ones with the fancy crossbows?”
Norr knew from long experience that the runner had a
tendency to describe people by the way they looked, or the
artifacts that they carried, rather than how they felt, or
acted. “Yes,” she replied. “The ones with the crossbows.
Two of them went out to explore the ship and never came
back.”
“It’s a big ship,” Rebo said neutrally. “Maybe they got
lost.”
“That’s what I ﬁgured,” the variant agreed, “until one of
the missing merchants appeared right next to the man I was
talking to.”
The runner raised an eyebrow. “Dead?”
“Very.”
“Did you tell the person you were talking to?”
Norr shook her head. “No . . . I wasn’t sure what to do.”
Rebo frowned. “So, how did he die? Could you tell?”

LO G O S R U N

73

The lamp lit the sensitive’s face from below. It gave her
features a spectral quality. “Yes, I could. The spirit didn’t
say anything, but he was holding his head in his hands, and
it was screaming.”
The city of New Wimmura, on the Planet Derius

As Shaz, Phan, Dyson, and four metal men stepped out
of the decontamination lock on Derius and began the process of pulling their damp clothes back on, it quickly became apparent that something was wrong. They could hear
the insistent pop, pop, pop of gunﬁre for one thing, accompanied by yelling and the muted beat of unseen kettledrums.
Then the entire structure shook as a team of fanatical antitechnics carried a palanquin loaded with black powder
into the building’s lobby and blew themselves up. The idea
had been to bring the two-story structure down, but the
supports were too strong for that, so the building still
stood.
The combat variant’s ﬁrst instinct was to retreat to Anafa
via the star gate, but it quickly became apparent that it was
too late for that, as the power went off. Fortunately, the
emergency lights, which were powered by a battery, ﬂickered and held. “You’d better arm yourselves,” Shaz said
grimly, as he slipped into the two-gun harness. “It looks
like the building is under attack. We may have to ﬁght our
way out.”
Phan was a professional killer, and therefore received the
news with aplomb, but Dyson was frightened. He looked
from one person to the other. “I don’t have any weapons.”
“No,” the combat variant observed, “you don’t. . . . So, I
suggest that you stay close to Phan—and do whatever she
tells you.”
The sensitive ﬁnished putting his shoes on, shouldered

74

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

his pack, and wished that the empty feeling in his stomach
would go away.
Having armed themselves with stout wooden cudgels, the
heavily robed robots made their way out into the ofﬁce area
beyond, followed by Shaz, Phan, and Dyson. Smoke swirled
as a disheveled-looking man whirled to aim a double-barreled
shotgun at the group of intruders. His face lit up when he
spotted Shaz. “By all of the blue devils it’s good to see you,
sir! How did headquarters know we were in trouble?”
“They didn’t,” the variant answered ﬂatly. “What’s going on?”
“It’s those damned antitechnics,” the functionary responded angrily. “Come on, I’ll show you what I mean.”
Shaz and the rest of the team followed the local past a
landing where two norms and a metal man were busy defending a staircase and into one of the ofﬁces that fronted
the second ﬂoor. It was dark outside, or would have been,
had it not been for a multitude of torches. The light they
generated combined to illuminate what looked like a crowd
of at least three hundred seething bodies. Most were lower
down, but some had succeeded in climbing up onto the
same level as the building and were busy hurling stones at
it. The missiles rattled as they hit the wooden façade. “Be
careful,” the functionary cautioned. “The Antitechnic Book
of Abominations limits their warriors to smoothbores, but
some of those bastards are damned good shots, and one of
them nailed Kavi. . . .”
As if to illustrate the norm’s point, a sniper chose that
particular moment to send a .30-caliber slug whizzing past
Phan’s head. That was a mistake, because the assassin spotted the telltale muzzle ﬂash, and it was only a matter of seconds before the woman brought the scope-mounted riﬂe up
to her shoulder and ﬁred in response. The sniper never knew

LO G O S R U N

75

what hit him as the .300 Magnum slug blew a hole through
his chest. “You were saying?” Phan asked sweetly, as she
worked a second round into the chamber.
“Nice shot!” the local said enthusiastically. “That should
slow the bastards down. It all started about two hours ago,
when the holy men ambushed A-63127, and tied him to a
stake. Then they piled ﬂammable materials around the poor
bastard. A crowd gathered, the fanatics began to preach all
their usual antitechnology bullshit, and that’s when a priest
lit the ﬁre.”
Though conscious of the fact that there were bound to be
snipers other than the one that Phan had neutralized, Dyson
edged his way up to the shattered window and was amazed
by what he saw. After the original city of Wimmura was
slagged during the techno wars, the survivors had been able
to found a new settlement within the embrace of the nearby
open-pit mine, and constructed dozens of one- and twostory buildings on the benchlike contours that surrounded
the hole. One end of the kidney-shaped basin was ﬁlled with
water, but the rest had come to function as New Wimmura’s
central plaza, and that was where the unfortunate metal
man had been set alight. Dyson didn’t know if androids
could experience the electronic equivalent of pain, but judging from the way that 127 continued to writhe within a cocoon of orange-yellow ﬂames, it seemed all too possible.
“Kill it!” the sensitive insisted, as he turned toward Phan.
“Kill it now!”
The assassin looked at Shaz, saw the operative nod, and
brought the riﬂe back to her shoulder. The second shot was
just as effective as the ﬁrst. The metal man jerked convulsively as the heavy slug tore through his badly blackened alloy torso, which slumped against the wire that bound him
to the ﬂaming pole. Dyson nodded gratefully. “Thank you.”

76

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

But the decision to let Phan terminate the robot had
nothing to do with compassion, a fact that soon became apparent. A howl of protest went up from the crowd gathered
on the plaza below as the subject of their hatred was released
from its suffering, and there was a sudden swirl of activity as
various holy men pointed up at the building from which the
shot had originated, and urged their followers to attack. The
response was immediate, as half a dozen snipers opened ﬁre
on Techno Society headquarters, and scores of warriors began to scale the wooden ladders that would carry them up
onto the highest bench. “Now we know who their leaders
are,” Shaz stated coldly. “Kill them.”
Phan smiled, secured a fresh grip on her weapon, and
went to work. Her aim was good, and each death sent ripples out through the ethers, which rolled over Dyson like
waves of pain. He staggered backward, brought his hands
up to his temples, and slid down the rear wall to sit on the
ﬂoor.
Meanwhile, having volunteered to act as the assassin’s
spotter, Shaz brought a small pair of binoculars up to his eyes
and directed Phan’s ﬁre. They made a good team. Leader after leader fell, and, as they did, the attack began to falter.
Then, having reloaded numerous times, the assassin
went to work neutralizing those snipers who still survived,
while the combat variant ﬁred both pistols into the crowd
directly below. The ensuing slaughter lasted for less than a
minute before the holy warriors broke and ran. Dozens lay
dead, their bodies akimbo, their spirits still ﬁlled with hatred. Some of the fallen groaned, or called for help, but were
soon dispatched by cudgel-wielding metal men who prowled
the battleﬁeld like hooded angels of death. “Well,” Shaz remarked lightly, “that went reasonably well.”
“Yes, it did,” the local operative agreed gratefully. “But

LO G O S R U N

77

even though the ignorant bastards didn’t know what they
were doing, one aspect of their attack was successful.”
The combat variant looked up from reloading a pistol.
“And what, pray tell, was that?”
“The gate,” the functionary replied sadly. “The explosion
took it off-line.”

FOUR
™

The spaceship Shewhoswimsthevoid

Those who travel aboard our starships can expect to eat only
the ﬁnest food, prepared by expert chefs, and served by the
most solicitous waiters in the empire.
—From promotional material produced by the Cylar Line

Tas was ensconced in his favorite chair, gnawing on a well-

seared arm bone, when his older brother entered the compartment. “Look at that!’ Tas said, using the humerus as a
pointer. “The slimeballs are up to something.”
When Mog looked up at the video monitors he realized
that Tas was correct. A large percentage of the ship’s passengers had gathered together toward the center of the hold.
And, given the recent “harvest,” the outlaw knew why. “You
reckon they’ll come after us?” Tas wanted to know.
“It’s too early to tell,” Mog replied judiciously. “They
might decide to fortify the hold in order to keep us out.”
“It won’t work,” Tas predicted, as he sprinkled salt on
his meat. “We always get in. . . . Don’t we, Mog?”
“Yup,” the larger man agreed, as he ﬁngered his beard.
“We always do. . . . But I want you and Ruk to stay sober for

LO G O S R U N

79

a while. There could be some ﬁghting during the next
twelve hours or so.”
“You can count on me,” Tas said, through a mouthful of
food.
“I know that,” Mog replied, “and I take comfort from it.
See the man wearing the short red jacket? The one standing
in front of the rest? Watch him. . . . He looks like a leader.”
“I will,” the younger man promised. “He lives with the
pretty woman.”
“And she belongs to me,” Mog emphasized as he turned
to leave. “And don’t forget it.”
Tas knew the female was off-limits, but a man can dream,
and the cannibal’s eyes remained glued to the screen as he
ﬁnished his lunch.
The meeting was Norr’s idea; but for reasons the runner

wasn’t sure of, he wound up at the center of it. Maybe it was
the no-nonsense manner in which the murderous acrobat
had been neutralized or the fact that many of the passengers
had spoken with him when they came to get water. Whatever the reason, it was clear that the group presently assembled at the center of the hold saw the runner as their leader.
That made Rebo uncomfortable since the runner was a loner
by nature and had always gone to great lengths to stay that
way. And individuals like master merchant Isban Okey were
the reason why.
Okey was a voluble man who, having survived the ambush, never stopped talking about it. The merchant was of
medium height, and wore a red fez, matching jacket, and
baggy pantaloons. The blunderbuss that he held cradled in
his arms was almost sure to kill the man next to him if it
went off, but Rebo was relieved to see that Okey’s right index ﬁnger was clear of the brass trigger. “I don’t know,” the

80

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

merchant said doubtfully. “Wouldn’t it be better to hole up
here, rather than go looking for the bandits?”
“It might be,” the runner allowed patiently, “but consider this. . . . When the shuttle landed on Thara it was
empty. Then, when we arrived in the hold, there weren’t any
ﬁres. Not even hot coals. What would that suggest?”
It was a middle-aged woman who offered an answer.
Though dressed in plain clothes, she wore a small fortune in
gold jewelry. “It suggests that they murdered all of the previous passengers,” the woman stated. “In spite of whatever
precautions they took when people began to disappear.”
“Exactly,” Rebo agreed. “So, rather than sit and wait for
the bandits to pick us off one at a time, I say we hunt the
bastards down. They must have a lair, a place where they
feel secure, and that’s where we will attack them.”
“Yeah! He’s right!” a male passenger proclaimed.
That was followed by a chorus of similar comments and
calls for action. “Let’s track the scum down,” a burly blacksmith added, “and give them what they deserve!”
There was a chorus of assent, and it was all Rebo could
do to bring a modicum of organization to the mob before it
surged out into the corridor. Okey was at the head of the
column, with a reluctant runner at his side, while Hoggles
brought up the rear. The beast master plus a dozen of his
friends had agreed to participate in the hunt, so even
though Norr had been left behind to guard the faucet by
herself, the runner felt reasonably conﬁdent that she would
be okay.
Rebo knew there was no possibility of stealth given the
caliber of his troops, so he allowed the vigilantes to make as
much noise as they wanted to so long as they stayed in front
of Hoggles and behind him. In the meantime, as the posse
comitatus put more distance between itself and the hold,

LO G O S R U N

81

Okey had become increasingly loquacious. “We were exploring,” the merchant explained. “I opposed entering this
particular corridor, but Runsus insisted, and took over the
lead.”
Rebo held his torch up over his head. The light surged
ahead to reveal a nearly featureless overhead, grafﬁti-covered
walls, and a litter-strewn deck. “There it is!” Okey said excitedly. “Up on the right. . . . That’s where the bone room is
located.”
Perhaps it was the steel bulkheads that seemed to press
in from both sides, or Okey’s choice of words, but whatever
the reason, Rebo kept one hand on his talisman as the two of
them stopped in front of an open hatch. “Look in there,”
Okey instructed, eyes averted. “And see for yourself.”
Rebo caught the ﬁrst whiff of what could only be described as an overwhelming stench—and resolved to breathe
through his mouth as he approached the open door. Torchlight danced across grimy walls as the runner peered into
what had become a charnel house. Whatever else the compartment might have contained had long since been submerged beneath a ﬁve-foot-high heap of human bones. Arm
bones, leg bones, clavicles, rib cages, spinal columns, and
skulls were piled helter-skelter, as if thrown from the door.
And adding to the stomach-turning horror of it was the fact
that bits of rotting meat still clung to some of the bones.
“Look!” Okey said excitedly, “there’s Runsus!” And turned
to throw up.
Rebo ignored the sudden spew of vomit, struggled to
keep his own lunch down, and saw that the head to which
Okey had referred was still recognizable. Now, for the ﬁrst
time since leaving the hold, the runner felt truly frightened.
Judging from the size of the bone pile, scores of people had
been slaughtered over a long period of time. And that

82

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

implied that whoever, or whatever, had killed them was
very formidable indeed. So much so that the runner didn’t
believe that his undisciplined group of passengers was likely
to challenge them and win. In fact, based on what he’d just
seen, Rebo was about to order a return to the hold when the
beast master yelled, “Look! There’s one of the bastards now!
Get him!”
Rebo shouted, “No!” but the mob ignored him and thundered up the corridor in hot pursuit of whatever the circus
performer had seen. The norm, with Okey close on his heels,
found himself running next to Hoggles. “I couldn’t hold
them,” the heavy panted, as he pounded along. “They’re
crazy.”
As if to prove the variant’s point the leaders of the mob
turned a blind corner and started down a wide-open stretch
of hallway. The runner saw a sign that read, security control center, and the norms who were standing directly
below it. He shouted, “Get down!” But, by the time the
passengers in the front rank saw the danger and began to react, Mog, Ruk, and Tas had already opened ﬁre. They had
armed themselves with machine pistols, and it was only a
matter of seconds before people in front of them began to
jerk and fall. Thanks to his position toward the front, the
beast master was among the ﬁrst to take a bullet, immediately followed by a mime and a clown, as the runner raised
the long-barreled Hogger. The weapon bucked in his hand,
made a resonant boom, and sent a bullet spinning toward one
of three possible targets.
Tas felt a sledgehammer strike his chest, lived long enough
to register a look of surprise, and slammed into the hatch behind him before sliding to the ﬂoor. That came as a considerable surprise to the outlaw’s siblings, who had preyed on other
people for years without suffering any negative consequences

LO G O S R U N

83

themselves. But there was no time to grieve, not yet at any
rate, as Rebo opened up with the Crosser and bullets pinged
all around them.
Mog answered with a burst of well-aimed automatic ﬁre,
but the runner was already falling, with Hoggles on top of
him, which meant that the bullets were high. That gave the
surviving cannibals sufﬁcient time to slap the controls, grab
their brother’s ankles, and drag the body through the hatch.
The door closed with a deﬁnitive thud and the battle was
over.
The heavy rolled off Rebo, the runner fought to suck air
back into his lungs, and allowed the variant to pull him up off
the deck. The hallway looked like a slaughterhouse. A quick
check conﬁrmed that ﬁve passengers were dead, and three
were wounded, including the beast master. It was difﬁcult
to tell, given all the blood, but it appeared that a bullet had
creased the performer’s skull and knocked him unconscious.
Some of those who had escaped returned when the ﬁring
stopped, and there were cries of grief as dead friends and relatives were located. Then, with astounding speed, sorrow
turned to anger. “This is your fault!” Okey insisted, as he
pointed a long skinny ﬁnger at Rebo’s chest. “You led us
here!” The accusation wasn’t fair, or true, but elicited a chorus of agreement from the rest of the passengers nonetheless.
Rebo considered trying to defend himself, decided that it
would be a waste of time to do so, and returned the Crosser
to its holster. “I suggest that we carry the wounded back to
the hold—and organize a burial party. Or, would you like
those bastards to snack on your friends?” Okey’s face turned
gray at the thought. He turned to the others, barked some
orders, and the evacuation began.
Two hours later Rebo, Norr, and Hoggles were inside
their shelter, sitting around a tiny oil-fed blaze. That left

84

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the water supply unguarded, but given the fact that the
beast master was temporarily out of commission, the runner
ﬁgured it would be okay. The sensitive, who was just back
from treating the wounded, cupped her mugful of tea with
both hands. It was eternally cold in the hold, and the
warmth felt good. “I’m sorry, Jak. . . . They were wrong. It
wasn’t your fault.”
“That’s right,” the heavy agreed stolidly. “Especially
since they disobeyed every order you gave them.”
“Yeah? Well, tell it to all those dead people,” the runner
replied bitterly.
“I will, if I happen to run into one of them,” Norr responded calmly.
“So what are we going to do?” Hoggles inquired.
The question had been directed to the sensitive, but
rather than answer it, her face went suddenly blank. Nerveless ﬁngers released the mug, which fell and shattered
against the metal deck. The lamp ﬂickered as droplets of tea
hit the yellow ﬂame.
“Uh-oh,” Rebo said, dispiritedly. “Lysander is about to
pay us a visit.”
But even as Norr was forced to make way for another entity, the sensitive knew it wasn’t Lysander, but another spirit
named Kane. The same person who had been her brother in
a previous lifetime, pursued her on behalf of the Techno Society during his most recent incarnation, and been killed by
Rebo. Although Kane had a preference for male vehicles,
such was his afﬁnity for the physical plane that he found
Norr’s body to be not only acceptable but rather interesting.
In fact, if the opportunity arose, the invading spirit thought
it would be fun to offer the female vessel to one or both of
the attending males.
Norr “heard” the thought and tried to dislodge Kane but

LO G O S R U N

85

discovered that his grip on her was too strong. The sensitive’s eyes blinked, her lips moved, and a raspy voice was
heard. “Greetings . . . This is Jevan Kane.”
Rebo’s eyes grew bigger. “Kane? I thought I killed you!”
“You did,” the spirit entity grated. “And I will ﬁnd a way
to even that score one day. . . . In the meantime I am compelled by certain agreements to help protect you and your
fellow cretins. And that’s why I’m here. . . . To inform you
that the person you know as the beast master intends to kill
the body I occupy now. A rather shapely form with which I
sense that you are well acquainted.”
The Crosser appeared as if by magic as Rebo came to his
feet. Norr looked up into the gun barrel and smiled
serenely. “Yes!” Kane hissed. “Shoot me! I’d like that.”
“Don’t do it!” Hoggles interjected, and had just started
to rise as the Crosser was withdrawn.
“Say whatever you came here to say, and get the hell out
of Lonni’s body,” Rebo said through gritted teeth.
“I already have,” Kane replied smugly.
“But how?” Hoggles demanded. “How does the beast
master plan to murder Lonni?”
“I don’t know,” the spirit entity replied honestly. “A
thick veil separates our worlds. But his intent is clear.”
Meanwhile, Norr struggled to reassert control over her
body. Bit by bit she gathered the necessary energy, shaped it
into a coherent desire, and gave the necessary order. Her
physical form responded, and the unanticipated action took
Kane by surprise as his/her hand jerked forward.
Rebo saw the sensitive stick her hand into the lamp’s
open ﬂame, and was still processing that, when Norr’s body
gave a convulsive jerk, and Kane was forced to leave. Then,
having regained control, the young woman removed her
hand from the ﬁre. The burns hurt . . . but the pain was

86

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

worth it. “Lonni?” the runner inquired tentatively. “Is that
you?”
“Yes,” Norr whispered hoarsely. “I’m back.”
Meanwhile, on a girder high above, the Slith snake sampled the air with its tongue, identiﬁed the scent it was
searching for, and resumed its long, arduous journey.
The city of New Wimmura, on the Planet Derius

The suite, which was the best that the hotel had to offer,
sat on the topmost level of the city and looked out over the
lake that claimed one end of the kidney-shaped open-pit
mine. It was a lofty perch, and as Shaz stood on his private
veranda, it was like looking down on a nest of insects as
thousands of people crisscrossed the plaza to the north,
wound their way along the various plateaus, or climbed ladders that led from one bench to the next. A number of days
had passed since the night when unit A-63127 had been
terminated—and the antitechnics had launched their attack
against Techno Society headquarters. During the interim it
had been determined that the same explosion that caused
extensive damage to the station’s ﬁrst ﬂoor had destroyed
the facility’s power accumulators. That meant the local portal was not only out of service but would remain so until a
functionary could travel to the distant city of Feda, where
they could access a star gate, and travel to Anafa. Worse yet
was the fact that Logos and his human companions would
be unable to use the gate, thereby playing hell with Chairman Tepho’s plan, and causing even more problems. There
was a solution, had to be a solution, but the operative had
yet to ﬁgure out what it was.
Such were the combat variant’s thoughts as a slight
disturbance of the surrounding air caused him to whirl. But,

LO G O S R U N

87

rather than the antitechnic cutthroat that the operative
expected to see, Du Phan emerged from behind the diaphanous curtain that separated the suite from the veranda.
The assassin was naked, delightfully so, and cupped her
breasts suggestively. “I’m yours,” she said. “If you’re man
enough to take me.”
What ensued was more like hand-to-hand combat than
an act of lovemaking, but that was what both of them
wanted and unreservedly enjoyed. Finally, physically spent,
and still intertwined with an exhausted Phan, Shaz discovered that his subconscious mind had been hard at work. A
plan was ready and waiting. It was a good plan, no, a brilliant plan, and one so devious that even Tepho would admire
it! The thought pleased him—and the combat variant
drifted off to sleep.
The spaceship Shewhoswimsthevoid

The scene within the shelter was grim as Norr removed
Logos from her pack and held the coat up for Rebo to slip
his arms into. “What’s going on?” the computer demanded.
“What are you doing?”
“I’m getting ready to go for a little walk,” the runner
replied soothingly, “and I thought you’d want to come
along.”
“A walk?” Logos inquired suspiciously. “Why would I
want to go for a walk? Especially on a primitive tub like this
one?”
“Because,” Rebo answered patiently, “you might prove
useful for once.”
“Useful?” the AI responded doubtfully. “In what way?”
“Some outlaws have taken up residence on the ship,”
Norr explained gently. “They barricaded themselves into

88

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the Security Control Center, and the right combination of
numbers is required in order to enter.”
“So?” Logos said from the vicinity of Rebo’s neck. “What
does that have to do with me?”
“Well,” the runner replied, as he checked to ensure that
the Hogger was loaded. “If they manage to kill us, you’ll
wind up as little more than a bib for one of the cannibals, or
be tossed onto a rubbish heap. So, given the fact that you
constitute an artiﬁcial intelligence, and the ship is controlled by an artiﬁcial intelligence, I ﬁgured you could lend
a hand. Or a sleeve as the case might be.”
The AI had been forced to enter into relationships with a
wide variety of human beings over the past thousand years
and felt pretty sure that he could cut some sort of deal with
the outlaws if that became necessary. It didn’t serve his purposes to say so, however, so he didn’t. “Okay,” Logos agreed.
“What do you have in mind?”
The Hogger made a loud click as Rebo closed the breech
and slid the weapon back into the cross-draw holster. “All
you have to do,” Rebo explained soothingly, “is to make
contact with the ship and request access to the Security
Control Center.”
“Okay,” the AI replied hesitantly. “But I can’t promise
anything. . . . Who knows what sort of operating system
this piece of feces is running? Two-way communication may
be impossible.”
“Well, do your best,” Rebo responded patiently. “And one
more thing . . . This ‘piece of feces’ is the only thing between you and a long, lonely death among the stars. We biologicals will starve to death if something goes awry—but
it’s my guess that you’ll live a lot longer. So, be nice.”
“I’ll do what I can,” the computer promised resentfully.
“There’s no need to threaten me.”

LO G O S R U N

89

“Good,” Norr put in matter-of-factly. “Come on . . . Let’s
ﬁnd some sort of hookup so you can chat with the ship.”
There wasn’t that much for Shewhoswims to do while tran-

siting hyperspace, which was why the AI was busy working
on her epic song-poem The Chant of the Constellations, when
the irritation ﬁrst began. She tried to dismiss the sensation as
still another manifestation of old age and ﬁgured that the
feeling would go away, but the input continued. Finally, having been unable to ignore the stimulus, the spaceship broke
away from her composition to discover that something very
unusual was under way. It seemed that there was an incoming
binary message on com channel 17296.4, which, according to
the schematic that immediately mapped itself onto her electronic brain, was a utility circuit that terminated in a passageway adjacent to the main hold. That suggested a prank
by one of the passengers, or would have, except none of them
possessed the capacity to send a digital message.
So, curious as to what was trying to make contact with
her and why, Shewhoswims opened the circuit. There was a
moment of confusion as both AIs sorted through various
communications protocols as they searched for one that the
other entity could process. Finally, by using what the ship
considered to be an ancient code, the AIs were able to interact. Something that took place at blinding speeds even as
Rebo stood next to a jack panel and began to ﬁdget. Once it
became clear who was on the other end of the circuit, Shewhoswims was both surprised and hostile. “You remain functional? I thought the humans destroyed you.”
“They tried,” Logos replied laconically. “But I’m hard
to kill.”
“So it would seem,” the spaceship responded disapprovingly. “What do you want?”

90

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“It isn’t what I want, but rather what my biological companions want,” Logos replied. “It seems that some rather
unpleasant humans have taken up residence in your Security
Control Center. The passengers in the hold would like you
to terminate the criminals, or failing that, to open the hatch
that protects them.”
Shewhoswims spent a nanosecond checking the veracity of
the other computer’s claims, and discovered that the human
vermin had infected the Security Center. “It appears that
you are correct. . . . Unauthorized biologicals are living in
what is supposed to be a secured area. As to whether they
deserve execution, I really couldn’t say. . . . Humans kill
each other all the time. They seem to enjoy it. Who’s to say
whether such terminations are justiﬁed? Besides, my programming speciﬁcally prohibits taking human life, other
than for the purpose of self-defense. And, although they are
annoying, the individuals in the Security Control Center
don’t constitute a signiﬁcant threat to my survival.”
“Understood,” Logos replied. “Which brings us to the
second option. If you would be so kind as to open the hatch
that protects the Control Center—my companions will enter and dispatch the brigands themselves. Thereby eliminating what you yourself referred to as an annoyance.”
It was a tempting proposition, and having found nothing
in her programming to prohibit such an arrangement, the
ship was tempted to acquiesce. A single obstacle stood in
the way. “Tell me something,” Shewhoswims temporized.
“Where are you and your companions headed?”
“To Derius,” the other AI answered smoothly. “Like
everyone else aboard this ship.”
“But is that your ultimate destination?” the ship wanted
to know. “Or, is Derius a waypoint on a longer journey?”

LO G O S R U N

91

“Why do you ask?” Logos responded suspiciously. “What
difference does it make?”
“My interaction with you activated some previously latent
programming,” Shewhoswims answered honestly. “It seems I
am speciﬁcally prohibited from ‘knowingly transporting, assisting, or otherwise providing aid to any artiﬁcial intelligence that can control, actuate, or coordinate star gates, star
gate clusters, or star gate systems.’ A stricture that must have
been written into my operating system as a consequence of
the civil unrest that followed Emperor Hios’s death.”
“Yes,” Logos replied, suddenly grateful that Rebo couldn’t
monitor the conversation. “There was a lot of paranoia back
then.”
“So, what about it?” the ship demanded. “Are you, or
aren’t you, engaged in an effort to reconstitute the star
gates?”
“No, I’m not,” Logos lied. “That would be impossible.”
Shewhoswims was well aware of the fact that she had the
capacity to lie under certain circumstances, which meant it
was entirely possible that the other AI had similar capabilities, but took comfort from the fact that she wasn’t going to
“knowingly” provide aid to a prohibited being. Or, put another way, if the other computer was intent on trying to reconstitute the old empire, then she was unaware of it. “All
right,” the ship agreed, “when should I open the hatch?”
The overhead ﬁxtures threw isolated pools of light down

onto the ﬁlthy deck, and campﬁres ﬂickered in the surrounding gloom as Rebo and Norr went head-to-head over
the question of who would participate in the upcoming attack and who would remain behind. “I don’t care what you
say,” the sensitive insisted stubbornly. “I’m going.”

92

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“No,” Rebo countered through tightly clenched teeth,
“you aren’t.”
“Why not?”
“Because someone needs to guard the water supply.”
“No, they don’t,” the variant countered heatedly. “The
beast master remains unconscious—so what’s the problem?”
Logos was draped over one of Hoggles’s massive arms, and
his voice was somewhat mufﬂed as a result. “I ﬁnd this discussion to be extremely tiresome,” the AI interjected. “Please
place me inside the shelter. . . . I think I’ll take a nap.”
“Oh, no you don’t,” the runner replied, as he took possession of the tattered-looking coat. “You’re coming along.”
“But what if I don’t want to come!” the AI wailed. “What
if someone hurts me?”
“Then we’ll give him a medal,” Rebo responded unsympathetically.
Norr frowned. “Maybe Logos has a point, Jak. . . . Why
take him?”
“For two reasons,” the norm answered. “First, because I
don’t trust him or the ship. . . . Which is to say that if
there’s some sort of dirty work afoot he’ll suffer, too. Second,
because Logos is the only one of us who knows what time
the ship thinks it is, and I have no desire to arrive in front of
that hatch early or late.”
“Okay,” the sensitive agreed reluctantly, “but that brings
us back to where we were. I’m coming.”
Rebo found himself in an inescapable trap. Even though
the warning had been focused on the beast master rather
than the outlaws, the message from Kane worried him, and
he felt protective about Norr. But that wasn’t entirely legitimate, not based on the ofﬁcial relationship, and he wasn’t
ready to discuss the future. Not with Hoggles and Logos
looking on. That left the runner with no option but to back

LO G O S R U N

93

down. “Suit yourself,” Rebo said grudgingly. “But don’t
blame me if you wind up as part of someone’s dinner.”
Norr couldn’t read minds, but she could see some of Rebo’s
emotions reﬂected in the colors that shimmered around him
and felt a sense of inner warmth. “I’ll be careful,” she promised, and held out a hand. “Logos and I will bring up the rear.”
It was a peace offering, and Rebo accepted it. “What
about the others?” Hoggles wanted to know.
“They blame Jak for what happened during the ﬁrst expedition,” Norr explained. “We’re on our own.”
“That’s probably just as well,” the heavy growled. “Most
of them would be worthless in a ﬁght.”
“There’s no need to be hasty,” Logos objected. “I think
we should take the time necessary to . . .”
But the AI’s concerns were ignored as the humans
checked their weapons, left the hold, and made their way toward the Security Center. A camera tracked their progress.
Ultimately, it was the pain that summoned the beast mas-

ter up from the blackness. The journey was somehow reminiscent of the time when his father had dropped him into
the family’s well along with the order to “Swim!” After the
initial shock of the cold water, and the realization that he
was drowning, came the instinctual desire to kick. And
now, as the beast master fought his way back to consciousness, it was like the same experience all over again. He
awoke with a loud snort, pawed at gummy eyes, and found
that a piece of cloth had been wrapped around his head.
“Take it easy,” a female voice cautioned, and the animal
trainer felt something cold and wet make contact with his
eyes. His vision cleared shortly thereafter, and it wasn’t long
before the beast master found himself looking up at Lila, the
troupe’s contortionist. She was pretty in an elﬁn way. His

94

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

voice was little more than a raw croak. “What happened?”
“A bullet creased your skull,” Lila replied. “But the sensitive sewed you up real good.”
“The sensitive? You mean she’s still alive?”
“She was a few hours ago,” Lila assured him. “I think you
owe her an apology.”
“My snake,” the animal trainer said urgently, as he struggled against the pain in his head. “Where’s my snake?”
“Sweetums is right here,” Lila answered soothingly. “Giggles found him clear over on the other side of hold and
brought him back.”
The beast master saw the pod, felt the six-inch-long serpent land on his chest, and found himself looking into a single beady eye. The human saw a long narrow tongue test the
air as the tiny head jerked from side to side. A hole opened up
at the pit of the animal trainer’s stomach, and his voice was
hoarse. “The bandage! Who put the bandage on my head?”
“The sensitive did,” Lila answered innocently. “Why do
you ask?”
But the circus performer never got the opportunity to
answer, because Sweetums chose that particular moment to
strike, and the overwhelming need to scream consumed the
remaining minutes of the beast master’s life.
It was quiet inside the Security Control Center. So quiet

that Mog could hear air whisper through the vent above his
head. The image on the screen was dim. But there was no
mistaking the man with the guns, the heavy with the war
hammer, or the woman with the wooden staff. The same female that he and his brothers had lusted after for days.
“What are they up to?” Ruk wondered out loud, as the
threesome continued to walk directly into the camera.
“They want to kill us,” Mog replied thoughtfully.

LO G O S R U N

95

“But that’s impossible,” his brother objected. “They can’t
get in—and we have better weapons than they do.”
Ruk was correct, Mog knew that, so why did he feel uneasy? The emotion wasn’t logical, but the outlaw had experienced such misgivings before and learned to trust them.
“Let’s get our guns and kill them,” Ruk suggested
helpfully.
“I don’t think that’s a very good idea,” Mog replied, as he
ran thick ﬁngers through his greasy beard.
Ruk looked surprised. “You don’t? Why not?”
“I just don’t,” the older man said ﬁrmly. “So shut the
hell up.”
Ruk knew better than to mess with Mog when the older
man’s back was up, so rather than aggravate his sibling, he
went back to work on his dead brother’s left femur. Eventually, after the bone dried out, the outlaw planned to carve
the story of his dead sibling’s life into the leg bone. But, before the scrimshaw could begin, it was ﬁrst necessary to
scrape all of the remaining tissue off the shaft.
Ruk’s blade made a rasping sound as Mog watched the
disparate threesome arrive in front of the Security Control
Center’s hatch. Who were they, he wondered? And why
were the other passengers still sitting around the hold?
There was no way to know.
Then, even as the outlaw watched, the man with the
guns brought one of them up and pointed it at the camera.
There was a smile on his face, as if he knew that the outlaw
was watching, and wanted him to see it coming. Mog said,
“No!” the screen went black, and the cannibals were blind.
“Okay,” Rebo said, as he returned the Hogger to the cross-

draw holster. “That ought to mess with their minds. . . . Assuming they have minds. Give me a time check.”

96

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Twenty seconds,” Logos said authoritatively. His voice
seemed to originate from Norr but actually issued forth
from the tattered coat that she wore.
“Light the fuse,” the runner ordered, “and hand the
bomb to me.”
Norr held the canteen up to the torch that Hoggles was
carrying, saw the oil-soaked rag catch ﬁre, and passed the
weighty container to Rebo. “All right,” the runner said
grimly. “Get ready . . . And remember . . . We need to close
with them fast. If they get a chance to ﬁre those automatic
weapons, we’ll be in deep trouble.”
The others nodded and took up positions to either side of
the hatch. Logos provided the countdown. “Ten, nine,
eight, seven, six, ﬁve . . .”
Suddenly, without warning, the red light mounted over
the keypad ﬂashed green. The hatch was unlocked! There
wasn’t time to ask Logos how such a thing could happen.
All Rebo could do was pull the door open, lob the fuel
bomb through the opening, and hope for the best.
Thanks to Mog’s premonition, as well as the attack on
the camera, both he and Ruk were armed and waiting when
the assault began. But neither bandit was prepared for the
previously impregnable hatch to swing open—quickly followed by an explosion of ﬂames as the earthenware canteen
shattered, and highly ﬂammable oil sprayed in every direction. Some of the burning ﬂuid splattered Ruk’s chest.
That forced the outlaw to drop his machine pistol, slap at
the ﬂames with his bare hands, and swear monotonously.
Then, just as Mog triggered his weapon, the ship’s ﬁre
suppression system came on. Because even though Shewhoswims allowed small ﬁres in the main hold, that was the
only place where such activities were tolerated lest critical systems be damaged. Distracted by the ﬂames, plus the sudden

LO G O S R U N

97

onslaught of white foam, Mog’s bullets hit the overhead and
whined away. That gave Rebo the opportunity he required.
The Crosser barked three times, and while the outlaw was
forced to take three steps backward as the slugs hammered
his chest, Mog was still on his feet when Hoggles brought
the war hammer down on the top of his skull. There was a
thud, followed by a soft sigh, and a thump as the cannibal hit
the foam-covered deck.
That left Ruk. No longer on ﬁre, but unable to locate his
machine pistol under the surrounding foam, he produced an
eight-inch knife. And, since Norr was the closest opponent,
she was the one he chose to attack.
The sensitive saw the movement, heard Logos shout,
“Run!” into her left ear, and parried the blade with her staff.
There was a loud clack as the weapons made contact, followed by a grunt as the distal end of the stick sank into the
outlaw’s belly, and a solid thwack as Norr struck Ruk’s temple. His eyes rolled back in his skull, and he was already
falling when Rebo shot him.
“That wasn’t necessary,” the sensitive complained, as the
outlaw’s life force drained out of his body.
“True,” the runner agreed matter-of-factly. “But it sure as
hell felt good.”
The next voice to be heard belonged to Shewhoswims, or
the AI’s voice synthesizer, which amounted to the same
thing. “You have sixty seconds in which to evacuate the Security Control Center,” the ship announced. “Subsequent to
that, the hatch will be sealed, the atmosphere will be
pumped out of the compartment, and the external keypad
will be permanently disabled.”
“She’s afraid that you will use the Control Center the
same way the cannibals did,” Logos advised. “Let’s get out of
here.”

98

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Later, Rebo would wonder why he hadn’t taken the moment necessary to retrieve one of the automatic weapons
that lay on the deck, but that was later, after the hatch had
been sealed tight. They were still in the corridor, making
their way back toward the hold, when Logos spoke. “The
foam destroyed three percent of my photo receptors,” the AI
complained to no one in particular. “I hope you’re satisﬁed.”
“Yes,” Rebo responded wearily. “I think we are.”

FIVE
™

Old Wimmura, on the Planet Derius

By recognizing the assassin’s guild as a legitimate organization
having the same legal standing as the metalworker’s guild, or
the runner’s guild, Emperor Hios was able to take what had
previously been a criminal enterprise and convert it into something positive. Because so long as the assassins worked for the
government, pursuing law breakers in return for bounties, they
were a force for good.
—Heva Manos, advisor to Emperor Hios,
in his biography, A Web of Stars

The angen snorted as it topped the hill, sent twin columns

of lung-warmed air out through its ﬂared nostrils, and
tossed its head when Shaz hauled back on the reins. Even
though more than a thousand years had elapsed since Wimmura had been nuked, the burned-out ruins were much as
they had been immediately after the massive explosion, except for the thin layer of vegetation that covered the city like
a greenish gray scab. No one went there, no one in their right
mind, that is, since everyone knew that the soil had been poisoned, the water was tainted, and evil spirits roamed the
rubble-ﬁlled streets at night. And Shaz couldn’t blame them,
because as he looked out on the ruins, it felt as though the
once-proud city was brooding over the disaster that had befallen it so many years before. And given the fact that the
nuke had been transported through space using a star gate,

100

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

there was little wonder as to why the local population remained fearful of technology. Interestingly enough it had
been Milos Lysander in his incarnation as Emperor Hios,
and Jevan Kane, in his role as Hios’s son, who nuked cities
such as Wimmura in a last-ditch attempt to remain in
power. Now, these many centuries later, the father worked
to make amends, while the son sought to regain what he
continued to see as his birthright.
Shaz found the whole thing to be amusing—and smiled
thinly as he gazed down on the ruins. Many weeks had
passed since the attack on Techno Society headquarters, and,
assuming that the great starship had completed its journey
from Thara, the shuttle would arrive soon. And then, as if in
response to the combat variant’s thoughts, a white contrail
marked the sky, artiﬁcial thunder rolled across the land, and
the past was brought back to life.
The shuttle was crowded, very crowded, and some of the

passengers were spacesick. But given what they had managed to survive, and the prospect of putting down safely,
most were in an excellent mood. Except for Jak Rebo, that
is, and the source of his unhappiness was plain to see. The
travelers had no reason to believe that Techno Society operatives would be waiting for them on the ground, but they
knew it was possible, especially given the fact that Kane
was in league with the technologists. That was why Rebo
had suggested that both he and his companions wear disguises.
What the runner failed to anticipate, however, was that
Norr would turn to the Circus Solara for help. And that
was how he wound up dressed as a clown. And not just any
clown, but a particularly absurd creature with a head of
curly blue hair, white cheeks, and a bulbous nose. His

LO G O S R U N

101

loose-ﬁtting gown was white with red polka dots and came
with ﬂoppy shoes that he categorically refused to wear. The
outﬁt smelled musty, made Rebo want to scratch, and was
the subject of crude jokes by other passengers. It was an affront to the runner’s dignity and something that had begun
to wear on him.
There was no way to conceal the fact that Hoggles was a
heavy, but by placing a leather hood over the giant’s head
and dressing the variant to look like a strongman, Norr
hoped to disguise his identity if not his genotype.
By chance, or by design, the sensitive’s outﬁt was a good
deal more becoming than those worn by her companions. It
consisted of a feathery headdress, a lime green skin-suit, and
slippers. And so it was that after the shuttle put down, and
the ramp hit the ground, the crowd that had assembled to
witness the ultimate manifestation of evil, was confronted
by a completely unexpected sight as thirty-plus fully costumed members of the Circus Solara marched off the ship
and onto the surface of Derius.
The band went ﬁrst, instruments blaring, closely followed by a column of colorfully dressed acrobats, jugglers,
and clowns, who, with the single exception of the dourlooking individual with blue hair, tumbled, cavorted, and
generally made fools of themselves as the rest of the circus
brought up the rear. All of which was by way of an impromptu advertisement for the troupe’s ﬁrst performance in
New Wimmura, and proved to be so distracting that not a
single rock was thrown until all the passengers were well
clear of the ship, and it was beginning to lift. That was
when a priest remembered his duty, called upon his followers to rebuke evil, and threw the ﬁrst stone.
Meanwhile, having observed the landing from his vantage
point high on the hill above, Shaz smiled as he peered

102

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

through an ancient pair of binoculars. Having been warned
about the likelihood of disguises, the combat variant had
been able to pick the blue-haired clown, the oversized strongman, and the slender acrobat out of the crowd within a matter of seconds. And since any one of the threesome could have
been wearing the highly mutable computer, it seemed safe to
assume that Logos had survived the journey as well.
Satisﬁed that everything was going according to plan,
Shaz lowered the binoculars and returned the proscribed device to the nondescript bag slung alongside of the angen’s
saddle. Then, having wrenched the animal back toward the
trail, the variant spurred it forward. It would take the newly
arrived passengers a good three hours to reach the city, and
the variant intended to arrive there ﬁrst. The trail followed
the contour of the hill downward, past the shattered observatory, and onto the remains of a paved road. The cold air
nipped at his skin—and it felt good to be alive.
Having successfully made it off the shuttle without being

injured by the stone-throwing mob, and followed by a
group of merchants into the suburbs of New Wimmura,
the travelers paused long enough to shed their costumes at
an outlying tavern and buy the troupe a round of drinks before paying the city’s gate tax and passing between a pair of
largely symbolic stone pillars. New Wimmura was a fairly
typical city for the most part, other than for the fact that it
had been established on the site of an open-pit mine, and
unlike many of the cities Rebo was familiar with, seemed
to eschew all technology beyond the lever, wheel, and pulley. All of which seemed to make it an unlikely place for
the Techno Society to recruit new adherents, but the
techies had never been shy and no doubt felt a need to preserve and protect the local star gate.

LO G O S R U N

103

Eventually, having followed a road down into the bottom
of the pit, the travelers passed a noisome stockyard, wandered along the edge of a fabric-covered marketplace, and
strolled into the shadow cast by the mine’s western rim.
That was when they spotted the huge box-shaped construct
that squatted atop a pair of twenty-foot-high treads. The
crawler had been used to process ore at one time. But that
was back before the original city had been nuked—and the
huge machine had been repurposed as the Ore Box Inn. Or
that’s what a hand-lettered sign claimed—and the offworlders were in need of a place to spend the night. “What
do you think?” Rebo inquired as he eyed the ramp that led
up through an ancient hatch.
Norr shrugged. “It looks okay to me. . . . Besides, it’s
getting dark, and it would be nice to ﬁnd a place to stay before the sun goes down.”
“I agree,” Hoggles rumbled. “Let’s give it a try.”
So Rebo led the way up the ramp, entered a cramped
lobby, and shrugged the pack off his back. The desk clerk
was a balding, middle-aged man who had the look of a
weight lifter. “Yeah?” the proprietor inquired. “What can I
do for ya?”
“We’d like a couple of rooms,” Rebo answered.
“Where ya from?” the innkeeper demanded suspiciously.
“We came in on the shuttle,” Norr answered cryptically.
“Oh, ya did, did ya?” the man asked rhetorically. “Well,
let me tell ya something right now. . . . I run a clean inn!
That means no machines, no gadgets, and no gizmos.” The
proprietor looked down toward the Hogger. “How ’bout
that pistol you’re packin’ son? Is that a muzzle-loader?
Cause if it’s a breechloader, then we got us a problem.”
“Yes, of course it is,” Rebo lied, knowing full well that Logos probably qualiﬁed as a machine, a gadget, and a gizmo.

104

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“All right then,” the inn keeper said pompously, “but be
warned! The penalty for possessing techno contraband is
death.”
“As it should be,” the runner agreed. “So, how ’bout
those rooms? Have you got any vacancies?”
The proprietor did, and half an hour later Norr pulled Logos on over her clothes, and ordered the AI to be very circumspect about what he said and when he said it. With that
out of the way, she followed the others along a lamplit hallway and through the cramped lobby. It was dark by then, or
would have been had it not been for the thousands of torches
and oil-fed lamps that kept the night at least partially at bay.
Meanwhile, even though Logos knew that the biologicals
were hungry and focused on ﬁnding something to eat, the
AI’s priorities were considerably different. Unbeknownst to
them there was a task that the computer needed to accomplish before he could safely seize control of Socket, which explained why he wanted to reach the Planet Haafa as quickly
as possible. “New Wimmura has a star gate,” Logos whispered urgently. “I can feel it. . . . The old city had a gate,
too, a commercial portal that was destroyed by the nuke
that Kane sent through it, but this one was the property of
the mining company, and it survived.”
Rebo, who was close enough to hear, frowned. “First,” he
said sotto voce, “shut the hell up! Second, what we want is
something to eat. . . . The gate can wait until tomorrow.”
“No,” the AI countered emphatically, “it can’t. We
should scout it tonight—and use it tomorrow. Or would
you like to walk the thousand-plus miles to the city of Feda
instead?”
“All right, all right,” the runner grumbled. “Point us in
the right direction and shut whatever it is that you talk
through.”

LO G O S R U N

105

Logos gave the humans some basic directions and let the
biologicals ﬁnd their way across the pit to a bank of ladders
that carried them up to the appropriate bench. Once there,
the threesome soon discovered that, unlike any other planet
they had been on, the Techno Society’s local headquarters
constituted a very popular destination. Not because the local population supported the organization’s goals—but because they opposed them. So much so that hundreds of people
turned out each evening to parade back and forth in front of
the much-abused building, hurl rocks at it, and shout antitechnic slogans. Such activities were tolerated it seemed—
so long as the crowd didn’t venture too close.
Having been absorbed by the angry crowd, the offworlders found themselves pushed about like chips of wood
on an angry sea. It was difﬁcult to hold a conversation due to
the chaotic nature of the situation—but Norr managed a
brief interchange with a friendly antitechnic priest. “Hi
there!” she said, as the two of them bumped shoulders and
were pushed along. “My friends and I just arrived. . . . Is it
always like this?”
“No,” the young man replied. “No one comes here in the
mornings. . . . The faithful have to work. We gather at
night, to rebuke the techno devils and prevent them from
polluting the minds of our children.”
“What about the authorities?” the sensitive wanted to
know. “How do they feel about the conﬂict?”
“The evil ones bought them off!” the priest responded angrily. “Metal men guard the palace . . . Need I say more?”
The sensitive wanted to ask more questions, but a group
of rock throwers turned toward the building at that point,
and the priest accompanied them. There was a loud rattling
noise as dozens of missiles struck the Techno Society’s façade
followed by a ragged clatter as the rocks fell to the ground.

106

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Shaz, who had been watching the mob for some time by
then, steadied the telescope against the wooden window
frame. The operative didn’t even ﬂinch as a stone ﬂew
through the same opening and hit the wall behind him.
“There they are,” the combat variant commented, before
handing the brass tube across to Phan. “Just to the left of the
burning efﬁgy.”
Some of the antitechnics bore a replica of a metal man
fashioned from straw. They lit the ﬁgure on ﬁre and held it
aloft on poles. Thanks to the additional light that the ﬂaming ﬁgure produced, the assassin could see all three of the
people she’d been hired to deal with. “You were correct,”
Phan commented, as she lowered the scope. “They came to
look. . . . When will they attack?”
“Tomorrow,” Shaz predicted calmly. “In the morning.”
“We’ll be ready,” the assassin said conﬁdently.
“Yes,” the combat variant agreed. “We certainly will.”
A storm front had moved in over New Wimmura during the

hours of darkness, bringing precipitation with it. The rain
announced itself by drumming on the steel over Rebo’s
head until the runner groaned and rolled out of the narrow
bed. There were no windows, which made it necessary to
light a candle in order to see, and that brought Hoggles up
off the ﬂoor, where he’d been forced to sleep. There were
very few beds that could accommodate his enormous frame,
and the one on the opposite side of claustrophobic room
wasn’t one of them. Once both men were up and packed,
they emerged to ﬁnd that Norr was waiting for them. “I
couldn’t sleep,” the sensitive explained. “Not with all of
that noise.”
What Norr didn’t say was that earlier, before the rain
began to fall, she had experienced a bad dream. Nothing

LO G O S R U N

107

speciﬁc, not that she could remember at any rate, but the
kind of nightmare that continued to resonate after she
awoke. But, without anything speciﬁc to share, the sensitive chose to remain silent.
Assuming that the raid on Techno Society headquarters
was successful, the travelers would be on another planet
within a matter of hours, so they paid for their rooms, sought
some advice regarding the local eateries, and made their way
down the water-slicked ramp to the badly churned muck below. The plateaulike benches were paved, thanks to the efforts of the local store owners, but the bottom of the pit was
a morass of mud and hand-dug drainage channels that were
ﬁlled to overﬂowing with sluggish brown water.
There were planks, however, that the already damp threesome followed to a bank of mud-smeared ladders, which they
had no choice but to climb if they wanted to access the ledge
above. It was hard work hauling both themselves and their
packs up the nearly vertical incline to the point where a
small army of rain-drenched street urchins waited to greet
them. “Hey mister!” one of them shouted. “You can wash
your hands in my bucket!” “Over here,” another insisted,
“I’ll scrape the mud off your boots!” “Ignore them,” a third
youngster counseled, “I have an umbrella . . . Where would
you like to go?”
Five minutes later, having been serviced by at least half
of the eager children, the travelers made their way into a local restaurant, where Hoggles ordered an enormous meal
and complained about what he maintained were minuscule
portions.
Then, with breakfast out of the way, it was time to climb
up to the next bench. Once there, it was a short walk to
Techno Society headquarters. True to the prediction put forward by the young priest the night before, the crowd that

108

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

previously controlled the area had disappeared, leaving
nothing more than hundreds of scattered stones and the
charred remains of the previous evening’s efﬁgy to mark
their nocturnal protest. “Okay,” Rebo said as he pulled Logos on over his jacket. “You know the drill . . . We go in
fast, locate the decontamination chamber, and lock ourselves inside. The techies will attempt to shut the gate
down, but Logos will override the controls, and we’ll make
the jump. Questions? No? Then follow me.”
A short ﬂight of stairs led up to a brand-new door. It
opened to reveal a large space that still showed signs of the
black powder explosion that had gone off in the room weeks
before. A brace of cudgel-wielding metal men moved forward to greet the visitors. Having already drawn the
Crosser, Rebo was ready for them. “Good morning!” the
runner said cheerfully, as he shot the ﬁrst android between
the eyes. Fast though its electronic brain was, the second robot was still processing the other unit’s unexpected demise
when a second slug drilled a hole through its alloy skull.
The android fell in a heap.
Having seized the initiative, Rebo knew it was important to maintain it as he went up the steps two at a time.
Hoggles had entered by that time—and the entire staircase shook under his considerable weight. “Down!” Rebo
shouted, as a male functionary appeared above him. “Get
down or die!”
The man went facedown and remained in that position as
the runner stepped over his prostrate body, turned a corner,
and entered a long hallway. A woman appeared, as if to see
what had caused all of the ruckus, and went facedown when
Rebo ordered her to do so. Hoggles, war hammer at the
ready, followed behind.
Each time Norr came across one of the staff members, she

LO G O S R U N

109

ordered them to keep their heads down, placed a bony knee
in the smalls of their backs, and proceeded to bind both
wrists and ankles with precut lengths of cord. The technos
would be able to free themselves eventually—but the variant knew it wouldn’t matter once she and her companions
had control of the gate.
In the meantime, Rebo was making good progress. So
much progress that the runner was beginning to believe
that the plan to hijack the gate might actually work. Logos,
by contrast, was not so sanguine. A gate was present, that
much was certain, but assuming the data now ﬂooding in
through his sensors were correct, the power accumulators
were off-line! And the gate wouldn’t be operational without
them.
But it was too late to cancel the raid, as Rebo ordered another functionary to the ﬂoor, gave thanks for the fact that
none of the technos had chosen to put up a ﬁght, and entered the room that provided access to the decontamination
chamber. That was when the runner saw the chair and the
half-naked woman who had been tied to it. She sat slumped
against her bonds, a long rope of bloody drool hanging from
her mouth, seemingly unconscious.
The runner grabbed a ﬁstful of silky black hair, pulled
the norm’s head back, and saw that she’d been beaten. One
eye was swollen shut, her upper lip was split open, and her
left cheek was purple. Du Phan looked up at Rebo through
the eye that still worked, gave thanks for the fact that the
runner was on time, and decided that he was handsome in
an unshaven sort of way. That seemed like a good time to
groan, partly for effect, but mostly because her face hurt.
Rebo looked down into the woman’s bloodied face, wondered what she’d done to deserve such treatment, and let her
head fall forward again. That was when he caught sight of

110

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the tattoos on her shoulders. Hoggles was present by then,
as was Norr, and both were staring at Phan when Logos
spoke. His voice was stern. “The gate is off-line! We need to
get out of here—and I mean now.”
It didn’t seem fair, not after all they had done to break in,
but there was no other option. Not if the AI was correct
about the gate—and Rebo had no reason to doubt that he
was. “Damn,” the runner said regretfully, “the techno freaks
are going to be pissed.”
“That’s for sure,” Hoggles agreed fervently. “Come on . . .
Let’s go.”
“In a minute,” the runner promised, as he produced a
folding knife and ﬂicked it open. “We’re taking the woman
with us.”
Norr looked on as Rebo began to cut Phan free. Now,
when it was too late to do any good, the dream came ﬂooding back. She had seen the room and the bloodied face before. And, for reasons she wasn’t sure of, the variant knew
that the woman in front of her was evil. “I think you should
leave her,” the sensitive suggested emphatically. “She’ll slow
us down.”
“That’s right!” Logos interjected shrilly. “Leave the
woman where she is! We have no need for her.”
The runner heard the words but continued to saw at one
of two ropes that crisscrossed Phan’s naked chest. The male
part of him couldn’t help but take note of the fact that the
woman in question had shapely breasts. The whip marks
were plain to see. “Normally I would agree,” Rebo replied
evenly, “but she’s a runner.”
The sensitive frowned. “A runner? How can you tell?”
“Take a look at her back,” Rebo replied as a piece of rope
fell away. “See those tattoos? Each one represents a successful
run. Okay, Bo . . . Can you carry her? Thanks.” Then, with

LO G O S R U N

111

Rebo leading the way, the four of them, ﬁve counting the
semiconscious woman who had been slung over the heavy’s
shoulder, exited the building. There was no resistance.
Shaz, who had stationed his team in the passageway that
ran between Techno Society headquarters and rug merchant
next door, watched them leave. He wasn’t looking forward
to the long trek that lay ahead, but that couldn’t be helped,
and Phan would be there to protect Logos from harm. It was
a good plan, one worthy of Tepho himself, and Shaz was conﬁdent of success as he led Dyson and a small band of heavily
robed androids out into the icy rain.
The animals snorted, and the cart creaked as the travelers

followed the narrow road down out of the hills and onto the
plain beyond. The area was far too rocky for farming, which
meant that what few huts there were belonged to lonely angen herders or antitechnic hermits. Once on level ground,
the ancient thoroughfare ran straight as an arrow toward the
point where the light gray sky met the eastern horizon.
Winter had arrived, frost glazed any rock not directly exposed to the hazy sun, and cold air nipped at their faces as
Rebo, Norr, Hoggles, and the woman named Phan put the
last of the hills behind them.
Three days had passed since the raid on Techno Society
headquarters, and a great deal had changed. Having purchased a large quantity of supplies in the market, plus a twowheeled cart to carry them in, the group left New Wimmura
during the cover of darkness. The plan was to make the long
trek to the city of Feda, where the original foursome intended to access the local star gate or lift on the next ship.
But that was a couple of months away. In the meantime
there was a potentially hostile environment to deal with—
not to mention a shift in the way members of the group

112

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

related to each other. And, as Norr and Hoggles sat side by
side on the cart’s bench-style seat, the cause of that change
could be seen riding stirrup to stirrup with Rebo, chatting
about who knew what. Runs probably, since both were
members of the runner’s guild, or were they?
According to Phan she had been hired to bring a small
techno artifact to a wealthy merchant who lived in New
Wimmura, a medical device, if the runner’s suspicions were
correct, that could be used to relieve the headaches that
plagued his wife. But Phan arrived too late. The woman was
dead and buried by the time Phan landed, the merchant was
no longer willing to bear the risk of owning a proscribed object, and the runner was left holding the bag. So, being in
need of funds to live on, and with no likely customer other
than the Techno Society, Phan approached them.
But, rather than purchase the object as she hoped, they
took the runner prisoner in hopes of learning more about
the artifact and its origins. And that’s where Phan had been,
locked in a dark room, when the shuttle landed and lifted
again. Fortunately for her, or so Phan claimed, Rebo, Norr,
and Hoggles chose to invade Techno Society headquarters
while she was being tortured. Otherwise, they might never
have been aware of her. That’s what the woman claimed
anyway, but the dull colors that ebbed and ﬂowed around
the runner suggested that she was lying. Of course no one
could see that except Norr, which meant there was no way
to substantiate her suspicions, leaving the sensitive feeling
frustrated.
The cart lurched as the team of two draft animals pulled
the right wheel up over one of many ridges in the ancient
pavement. The sensitive swayed and made a grab for her
armrest, as the boxy conveyance rolled onto a smooth section of road. Then, with Hoggles handling the reins, Norr

LO G O S R U N

113

pulled the gray woolen cloak around her shoulders. There
were two problems to contend with. The ﬁrst problem was
Phan herself, meaning the possibility that the runner was
lying, and the second problem was the way Norr felt about
the other woman. What was her motivation anyway? A legitimate concern regarding Phan’s veracity? Or just a case of
plain old jealousy?
Not that the sensitive had any rights where Rebo was
concerned, because even though she felt sure the runner had
feelings for her, the exact nature of the relationship had never
been spelled out. Worse yet was the fact that she couldn’t
talk to Rebo about it, since the runner was almost sure to interpret her concerns as a manifestation of jealousy, thereby
nudging him toward the very relationship the variant feared.
Norr’s musings were interrupted by Hoggles, who raised a
massive arm to point at an object beyond the riders ahead.
“Look! Could that be the bridge?”
The sensitive looked, failed to see anything, and came to
her feet. The cart swayed, Norr put a hand out to steady
herself on the heavy’s shoulder, and shaded her eyes. Finally,
by squinting just so, the variant thought she could see what
looked like a tiny ladder. “I think you’re right, Bo. . . . Although it’s too far away to be sure.”
An hour later Norr was sure, and so were her companions, as two pillars of rusty steel rose to silhouette themselves against the darkening sky. A series of cross braces
linked the uprights together, making the structure look like
a gigantic ladder. A framework that had successfully withstood more than a thousand years of wind, rain, and snow, it
stood as a mute testament to long-lost knowledge and skill.
Then, as Rebo and Phan paused to wait for the cart to
catch up with them, Norr saw that a cluster of stone-walled
huts had grown up around the approach to the bridge, one

114

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

of which leaked tendrils of dark gray smoke. The scene
appeared serene, but it didn’t feel right, and the sensitive
said as much as the cart came to a stop. “I don’t like the feel
of it, Jak. . . . Something’s wrong.”
The runner knew better than to ignore her premonitions
and nodded. “Let’s hope for the best—and be ready for the
worst.”
If Phan was concerned about what might lie ahead, the
runner gave no indication of it. The bruises and cuts had already begun to heal, revealing a very pretty face and an inner centeredness that made Norr feel inferior somehow.
Phan wore a long black riding cloak that served to hide the
rest of her body, but the sensitive already knew it to be more
curvaceous than her own and resented that as well. Meanwhile, if the other woman harbored feelings about her, they
were well hidden because her face remained empty of all expression. “Good,” Norr afﬁrmed, hoping that her demeanor
was equally cool. “We’ll follow your lead.”
Meanwhile, more than a thousand yards away, Mia Tova al-

lowed a cold stone wall to accept most of her considerable
weight as she used a splinter of bone to pick at her badly
yellowed teeth. One of them ached and needed to be pulled,
but that would have to wait. Thanks to the fact that the
bandit chieftain had excellent vision, she could see that only
two of the approaching travelers were male. Of those she
ﬁgured that the heavy posed the most signiﬁcant threat
since he’d be difﬁcult to take down. But only if the group
put up a ﬁght. Fortunately, most of the pilgrims, merchants, and other travelers who had passed through the
checkpoint during the last few days had been relatively cooperative. The others were dead.
Satisﬁed that she knew what to expect, the bandit turned

LO G O S R U N

115

to enter the fuggy warmth of the hut behind her. It smelled
of unwashed skin, wet wool, and the angen stew that bubbled in an iron pot. Earlier, prior to her arrival, the stone cottage had been home to a group of four antitechnic monks
stationed at the bridge to absolve travelers of sins automatically incurred as they crossed the high-tech marvel. In exchange for a fee of course, since it was impossible to ﬁght evil
without money, which the church had no choice but to extract from its adherents. Of course the friars were dead now,
having been forced to surrender their pot of grubby gunnars,
prior to stepping off the very artifact they had been assigned
to guard. All but one of them had gone gladly, thrilled to
join the ranks of the antitechnic martyrs, shouting God’s
name as they plunged into the canyon below. The single exception soiled himself as he was hoisted out over the abyss
and was blubbering for his mother when the downward journey began. A sad affair and one that Tova planned to report
to the next vizier who happened along.
A ﬁre glowed within a well-blackened ﬁreplace, and a
ceiling-hung lamp provided what light there was. Half a
dozen shaggy heads turned away from a game of throwbones as Tova pushed the leather curtain out of the way,
thereby allowing a wave of cold air to enter along with her.
“All right,” the chieftain proclaimed loudly. “Grab your
weapons and make sure they’re loaded. . . . There’s only four
of them, so even a group of worthless scum like yourselves
should be able to handle the situation. Watch the heavy,
though. . . . He could give us some trouble.”
There were grunts of assent, followed by the sound of
someone’s ﬂatulence, and gales of laughter as ﬁve men and
one woman prepared themselves for battle. “Stay out of
sight until the cart is right outside or I call for you,” Tova
instructed. “And don’t kill anyone unless I tell you to. . . .

116

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Who knows? Maybe we can ransom one or more of them.
Understood?”
The brigands had heard the lecture before, but such was
the force of Tova’s personality that there was a minimum of
grumbling as they took up positions to either side of the
door, and she went out to stand in the middle of the road.
The lead riders were almost upon the bandit as Tova hooked
her thumbs into the leather belt that encircled her thick
waist. That put the norm’s hands in close proximity to the
twin single-action revolvers that protruded butts forward
from their cutaway holsters.
Rebo and Phan pulled back on their reins as the roughlooking woman appeared in front of them. The bridge was
tended by monks, or so they’d been told, but there was
nothing godly about the creature who stood before them.
Strands of gray-brown hair hung from under a cone-shaped
fur hat that was bald in places. The woman’s canvas coat
bore multiple patches, one grubby knee was visible through
a hole in the baggy pants that she wore, and her boots were
caked with mud. “Hold it right there,” the apparition ordered loftily. “How would you like to pay the bridge toll?
Cash on the barrelhead? Or with some of whatever’s on that
cart?” The vehicle in question had arrived by then, which
meant that Norr was only ﬁfty feet away, and in a good position to witness what transpired next.
“How much is the toll?” Rebo asked reasonably, hoping
to pay a few gunnars.
“Five cronos,” the bandit replied unhesitatingly. “Or,
half of what’s on the cart.”
The runner’s hands were on the saddle’s pommel only
inches from his guns. “That’s absurd,” he countered. “Step
out of the way . . . We’re coming through.”
“No,” Tova responded levelly. “You aren’t.”

LO G O S R U N

117

That was when the six rufﬁans emerged from the hut to
form a semicircle behind their leader. The threat was obvious, and the bandit chieftain knew she had the upper hand.
Especially since the heavy was still on the cart and in no position to interfere. “Get down off those animals,” she ordered. “You and your friends will be walking from now on.
And watch where you put those hands.”
“No.” Phan had been silent up until then. Now, as the
other runner spoke, Rebo realized that she had thrown her
cape back over her shoulders. But, before he could wonder
why, Phan spoke again. Her voice was pitched low, but
every word was distinct. “Tell your people to return to the
hut. Do it now, and I’ll let you live.”
Tova was surprised. She was expecting trouble from the
heavy, or the man with the hard eyes, but not the play pretty
in the cape. Not that it mattered since it was time to go for
her guns. The thought left her brain, but never arrived at
her hands, which made an instinctive grab for her throat.
Because that’s where a six-inch-long throwing spike protruded from her larynx.
Though not fatal in and of itself, the injury was a shock
and prevented Tova from issuing further orders. That was
unfortunate since all the members of the band had been told
not to kill anyone without their chieftain’s express permission. The problem was rendered moot by the fact that three
of them were dead by then, spikes protruding from their eye
sockets, each having been thrown by Phan.
That was when the Hogger went off and one of the remaining bandits was snatched off her feet. Both of the surviving brigands ﬁred weapons of their own. A riﬂe slug
went wide, but pellets from a sawed-off shotgun struck
Phan’s angen and caused the beast to shy sideways. Rebo
pulled the Crosser, and was in the process of bringing the

118

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

weapon into ﬁring position, when Phan lifted one leg up
over her animal’s neck and jumped to the ground. The remaining bandits both stood motionless and bug-eyed as the
woman marched straight at them. Norr felt the bottom
drop out of her stomach, and had already shouted, “No!”
when the runner whirled. Heads jerked sideways, and sheets
of blood ﬂew, as two carefully honed knives sliced through
leather, wool, and unwashed ﬂesh. There was something
beautiful about the movement, and something horrible, too,
since there had been no signs of further resistance from either victim.
Three long seconds passed as a cold breeze rumbled
across the plain, tugged at the no-longer-legible sign that
dangled in front of the hut, and sang through the durasteel
cables that kept the bridge aloft. And it was then, during
what felt like a short eternity, that Tova managed to remove
the spike from her throat. That proved to be a mistake,
however, since once the plug was removed, a quantity of
blood spurted out of the hole. But there was still time for revenge. Or so it seemed to Tova, because her world had
slowed, and it now seemed as though there was time for
everything.
In spite of the fact that both of the bandit chieftain’s
hands were slippery with blood, she still managed to pull
both pistols and was busy hauling the hammers back when
Phan realized how exposed she was. Rebo saw the movement, initiated what promised to be a lengthy turn to the
right, and knew he wouldn’t make it in time. Not before at
least two shots had been ﬁred at Phan.
But it wasn’t to be. Both Norr and Hoggles had exited
the cart by then and come forward to help. Though still
reeling from the manner in which Phan had executed two of
the bandits, Norr was in a perfect position to see the bandit

LO G O S R U N

119

leader remove the spike, and knew that no one else could
stop the woman from ﬁring. The sensitive took two steps
forward, twisted her staff in order to unlock it, and pulled
the vibro blade free. Power ﬂowed as she thumbed the
switch, the sword sizzled as it swept through the air, and
Norr barely felt the momentary resistance as the blade
passed through Tova’s neck.
The bandit’s ﬁngers jerked convulsively, followed by two
loud reports as the pistols ﬁred. The bandit’s head made a
soft thump as it hit the ground and rolled away from the
cone-shaped hat. Despite its considerable size, there was
nothing more than a gentle rustle as Tova’s body swayed
and collapsed.
One of the bullets from the bandit chieftain’s gun had
blown air into Phan’s right ear as it whizzed past her head.
Now, as she looked at Norr, it was with a newfound sense of
respect. “Well,” she said calmly. “The spook has teeth. . . .
Who would have guessed?”
Norr thumbed the power switch into the off position
and returned the weapon to its wooden scabbard while wondering if she’d done the right thing. What if the killing
blow had been withheld for two seconds? Would Phan lie
dead? And would she be happy rather than sad?
Rebo looked from one woman to the other. The animosity was clear to see. That meant he would have to take sides
at some point. Norr was the obvious choice. Hell, Norr was
the only choice. So why not signal his allegiance now? A
snowﬂake twirled before landing on his nose, and the question was left unanswered. “All right,” Rebo said, as his
breath fogged the air. “Let’s take a few minutes to search
both the bodies and the huts for anything we can use or
trade. . . . I want to cross the bridge before nightfall. Who
knows? There could be more bandits on the other side.”

120

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

It was an unpleasant albeit necessary task because travelers who failed to scavenge what they could were likely to regret the omission later. It took a full ﬁfteen minutes to
complete the job, and by the time it was over Rebo noticed
that not only had Phan retrieved all of her throwing spikes,
but appropriated the bandit chieftain’s revolvers as well.
There was something cold-blooded about the way the other
runner went about the chore, but Rebo knew it was hypocritical to criticize Phan for carrying out his orders, and
made a point out of thanking her for what she’d done.
The female runner smiled warmly, and once the others
were ready, the twosome rode out onto the bridge deck together. It was difﬁcult to see the bottom of the canyon without venturing out to the edge of the ancient span, but Rebo
had an impression of a ribbon of white water, bordered by
sheer rock walls. Norr had saddled the ﬁfth angen by then,
but rather than attempt to ride with the runners, she chose
to follow behind them instead. The cart brought up the
rear, and it wasn’t long before a swirl of thickly falling snow
swallowed them all.
What remained of the ﬁltered daylight was nearly gone,

and the dead lay under a layer of shroudlike snow by the
time Shaz, Dyson, and the four metal men arrived at the
bridge. Shaz pulled back on the reins, brought his heavily
encumbered angen to a halt, and eyed the wild sprawl of
bodies. “Check the huts,” he said coldly. “Bring anyone you
ﬁnd out to me. . . . And let me know if you come across any
food. We need to make our supplies last.”
The heavily armed robots scattered in response to the
combat variant’s orders even as the operative dismounted
and handed his reins to Dyson. Then, starting with the
nearest corpse, Shaz made a careful examination of each

LO G O S R U N

121

body. The task was gruesome, but necessary, in order to determine whether any of the AI’s escorts had been killed. The
inspection was useful in another way, too, because after
looking at the means by which the bandits had been dispatched, it quickly became apparent that Phan had been responsible for most of the kills. That meant the assassin was
earning her pay—something that pleased him.
Dyson sat atop his animal with both eyes closed as a
mantle of white continued to gather around his shoulders.
Most of the spirit entities forced out of their bodies during
the battle had chosen to depart the physical vibration by
then, but one, a woman who identiﬁed herself as Mia Tova,
still remained. She was confused, especially about the loss of
her head, and wondered if that would present a problem in
the spirit planes. The sensitive counseled the woman that it
was within her power to adopt any appearance that she
chose—and urged her to leave the scene for life in the higher
realms. After a moment of hesitation, and in the company of
a spirit she seemed to recognize, Tova departed.
That was when Dyson opened his eyes to discover that
Shaz was standing a few feet away staring at him. The combat variant seemed to blur before rolling back into focus.
“Are you with us?” the operative inquired. “Good. We’ll
spend the night here. The metal men will take care of the
angens. Our hosts left some stew simmering in a pot—so
we might as well take advantage of it.”
The sensitive slid to the ground, handed both sets of
reins over to one of the heavily cowled androids, and followed Shaz toward a stone hut. When he passed Tova’s
snow-frosted head, the bandit’s deep-set eyes seemed to follow him. That was impossible, of course, but Dyson was
careful not to disturb the bandit leader’s headless body as he
stepped over it, and was grateful when the hut opened to

122

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

receive him. Meanwhile, many miles away, a night slider
howled. The sound seemed to ﬂoat on the cold air before being echoed by other such creatures, as if to herald the full
fall of darkness.

SIX
™

The Planet Derius

Even though sensitives can see that which others cannot, they
often seem blind where their own lives are concerned, and
make the same sort of mistakes that norms do.
—Grand Vizier Horga Entube,
The History Of My People

The road to Feda was long and hard. Especially during the

winter. Having emerged victorious from the confrontation
with the bandits on the west side of the bridge, Rebo, Norr,
Hoggles, and Phan crossed the span ready to do battle
again. Fortunately that wasn’t necessary since the holy men
assigned to the eastern approach had either been chased
away or killed. So the ﬁrst night was spent there, within the
relative comfort of two huts, while the snow continued to
fall beyond the stone walls.
The storm had passed by the time a dimly seen sun rose
in the east, but it was bitterly cold, and the angens complained loudly as they struggled to pull the heavily loaded
cart up onto the road. Then, with Rebo, Norr, and Phan
breaking trail for the animals, the huge disk-shaped wheels
cut deep grooves into the virgin snow.

124

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

There was a long way to go, but Rebo managed to put
that out of his mind, as his mount carried him up through
low-lying hills, through a stand of bristle trees, and onto
the plain beyond. It was slow work, but the runner had
learned to accept such things over the years, and fell into a
plodding reverie that lasted until the pale yellow sun hung
high in the sky. Eventually, the group paused for what Hoggles referred to as “a brew-up” in the lee of the cart.
The hot caf not only tasted good but served to wash
down the fry cakes that Norr made up each morning. They
consisted of cooked cereal, dried fruit, and nuts. The cakes
tasted better hot, but none of them wanted to go to the
trouble of making a ﬁre, so the rations were consumed cold.
The sensitive noticed that Hoggles consumed six of them,
Rebo ate two, and Phan barely nibbled at hers.
Once their stomachs were full, it was time to rotate the
animals so that the team that had been harnessed to the cart
had a chance to recuperate. As soon as that chore was complete, Hoggles whistled through his teeth, the single axle
squealed, and the angens issued a series of throaty grunts as
they made their way forward.
There wasn’t much trafﬁc on the road, although tracks
were visible from time to time, especially as they entered or
left one of the tiny farming villages that crouched between
protective hills. Most houses were low one-story affairs that
were made of rammed earth and could withstand even the
worst storms. Smoke dribbled from their chimneys, and the
occasional mongrel gave chase as the group plodded past,
but people were rarely seen. It was a rare stranger that
brought something good to the farmers’ footsteps—so they
had learned to be wary.
There were other sightings, too, some of which harkened
back to ancient times, when gigantic machines rode gleam-

LO G O S R U N

125

ing rails, electric power jumped pylon to pylon, and powerful rivers were held captive behind canyon-spanning dams.
Such artifacts weren’t operational of course, but often served
as media for semiliterate antitechnic diatribes, a fact that
struck Norr as ominous. Especially given the true nature of
the coat she wore beneath the long poncho-style cloak.
But most of the scenery was simply monotonous. The
road was an endless ribbon of crusty snow, the wind
moaned like a lost soul, and time seemed to crawl by. Eventually, after what seemed like an eon but was only about
twelve hours of riding, the foursome began to look for a
place to spend the night. An inn would have been nice, but
the only one they’d seen was two hours back, which left the
travelers with no choice but to take advantage of whatever
shelter they could ﬁnd. In this case it was the ruins of what
had once been a farm. What remained of the tumbledown
house provided protection for the cart and animals—which
left the humans to take up residence in the stone silo that
stood next to the main structure. The presence of a rudimentary ﬁre pit located at the center of the circular space
suggested that the structure had been used for that purpose
before. And, when Rebo volunteered to gather ﬁrewood,
Norr offered to accompany him. Phan, who was occupied
unpacking the pots and pans, watched from the corner of
her eye.
A frigid breeze sought to ﬁnd its way in through gaps in
their clothing as the twosome emerged from cover. The
half-frozen snow crunched under their boots as they circled
the silo and followed a half-seen path down into an ancient
orchard where fruit trees stood in patient rows, as if still
waiting for the people who planted them to return. Some
were dead, and their brittle branches made what sounded
like pistol shots as Rebo bent them to the breaking point

126

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

and was showered with ice crystals. Once a knee-high pile of
wood had been accumulated, the runner and the sensitive
stood side by side as they worked to reduce the long roughbarked limbs into more manageable lengths. Norr was the
ﬁrst to speak. “Jak . . .”
“Yeah?”
“What do you think of Phan?”
Rebo shrugged noncommittally. “The woman can ﬁght . . .
You’ve got to grant her that.”
“And I do,” the variant replied, as she broke a branch over
her knee.
The runner gave Norr a sidelong glance. “So? What’s the
problem?”
The sensitive paused. “I can’t prove it, but I think she’s
lying.”
Rebo’s eyebrows rose. “Lying? About what?”
“I don’t know,” the variant confessed. “But the feeling is
there.”
The runner nodded. “I trust your instincts, Lonni. You
know that. . . . But you aren’t infallible.”
The conversation was headed where Norr had feared that
it might go, and her chin trembled slightly. “And you believe this is one of those times?”
“I don’t know,” Rebo answered carefully. “But it’s possible. . . . First, why would Phan lie? What could she gain?
But let’s say she is lying. . . . Chances are that the lies have
nothing to do with us. Don’t forget that we lie constantly
and make no apologies for doing so.”
Rebo’s explanation was so reasonable, so benign, that
Norr felt silly. She forced a smile. “Don’t let this go to your
head, but there are times when you’re right.”
“Right about what?” The voice came from behind them,
and both whirled, only to ﬁnd Phan standing a few feet away.

LO G O S R U N

127

Somehow, by a means not apparent, the other runner had
been able to approach them without making a sound. But if
the sensitive thought that was strange, it seemed as if Rebo
didn’t, because the runner smiled. “Another pair of arms!
Just what we need. . . . Here, have a bundle of kindling.”
Phan accepted the wood, but even though she smiled
pleasantly, the colors that ﬂowed around her were murky
and dark. A fact that served to reactivate the sensitive’s concerns and made Norr suspicious all over again.
Having monitored the entire conversation from his position beneath Norr’s cloak, Logos took note of the sensitive’s
suspicions regarding Phan and came to the conclusion that
it would be a good idea to keep a nonexistent eye on the
newcomer. Because if the female truly was something other
than what she seemed, then her presence could very easily
have something to do with him, a subject AI was always interested in.
There was no sunset as such, just a gradual diminution of
light, as the threesome carried the ﬁrewood back to the silo.
The night passed peacefully for the most part, although the
angens stirred at one point, as if they were aware of something that the humans weren’t. And when morning came,
and Rebo went out to look around, the runner saw what
looked like human tracks in the snow. They appeared to originate up on the road and circled the ruins once before returning to the main thoroughfare. A local perhaps? Keeping an
eye on the neighborhood? Or something more sinister? There
was no way to know.
Thus began a series of long, almost identical days that
varied only in terms of how much snow fell, slight variations in the scenery, and brief contacts with other travelers.
Once, while checking their back trail from the top of a pass,
Rebo saw six dots in the far distance. But the purpose of a

128

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

road is to carry trafﬁc, so there was no reason to be alarmed,
or so it seemed to him.
Eventually, after the better part of a week had passed, the
travelers came across the ﬁrst of what would eventually turn
out to be a series of recently used campsites. Not the single
ﬁre pit that a family or an itinerant tradesman might have
huddled next to, but a large area of well-trampled snow, and
the remains of no less than three ﬁres. All of which suggested
a party that consisted of ﬁfteen or twenty people. But what
kind of people? Nice people? Or bad people?
It was an unsettling development, and one that became
even more worrisome later the next day when, having passed
through some small villages, the group came upon a much
larger campsite. An area large enough to accommodate up
to a hundred people, who, if not under a single leader, had
been on friendly terms with one another, judging from the
remains of a communal kitchen and two sets of latrines.
“So,” Phan said, as she looked down from her mount.
“What do you think?”
Having slid down off his mount, Rebo went over to the
remains of the communal kitchen, knelt next to the ﬁre pit,
and blew into the gray ashes. Embers started to glow red,
and a tiny wisp of smoke appeared. “I think we’re closing
with a group of people,” Rebo said as he came to his feet.
“One that continues to grow.”
Norr had been silent thus far, and her angen tossed its
equine head as the variant opened her eyes. “A man was
murdered here,” the sensitive intoned bleakly.
Phan was getting tired of the spook’s endless pronouncements and made a face. “What makes you think so?”
“He’s buried there,” Norr replied, and pointed to a
mound of snow that was about ﬁfteen feet away.
Phan was skeptical, and rather than simply take the

LO G O S R U N

129

variant’s word for what had occurred, got down off her
mount. Her boots made a squeaking sound as Phan made her
way over to the pile of snow, fell to her knees, and scraped at
the snow. The assassin felt her left hand make contact with
something solid, so she scooped more of the white stuff out
of the way and was startled by what she saw. A man had been
buried there. That bothered Phan. If Norr could “see” things
like that—then what else could the spook perceive?
But the question went unanswered as Norr felt Lysander
invade her body, tried to fend the spirit entity off, and
failed. The voice that came out of her mouth was deep and
hoarse. “You have only to look at the man’s lips,” the technologist intoned, “to see the price paid for heresy.”
Rebo had heard the unnatural voice and seen the same
wide-eyed expression on Norr’s face before. He shook his
head disgustedly. “It’s Lysander . . . Here we go again.”
Though not familiar with Lysander, Phan had seen
Dyson channel Kane and understood the nature of what was
taking place. She peered at the dead man’s face.
“What do you see?” Rebo wanted to know, and fumbled
for his glasses.
“Somebody sewed his lips together,” Phan replied, as she
eyed the puckered ﬂesh.
“And that,” Lysander continued, “was the price he paid
for speaking on behalf of technology. You must be careful,
because the antitechnics would lay waste to entire villages
to destroy that which you bear toward its home.”
There it was, conﬁrmation that the people Phan had been
assigned to escort actually had the device that Shaz lusted
after, something the assassin had been forced to accept on
faith up until that point. But Phan wasn’t supposed to be
aware of Logos, so she forced a frown and came to her feet.
“What is he, she, or it talking about anyway?”

130

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Rebo swore silently. That was just one of the problems
associated with working for a dead client. The bastard not
only had a big mouth—but a talent for saying the wrong
thing at the wrong time. “You’ve seen Lonni’s vibro blade—
the antitechnics would pitch a ﬁt if they caught wind of it.”
It was a partial explanation at best, since it didn’t cover
the stuff about bearing something to its “home,” but Phan
nodded as if satisﬁed. Rebo heaved a sigh of relief even as
Lysander left Norr’s body, and the sensitive blinked her
eyes. She could still see the dead man’s spirit however—
standing beside his vertical grave.
The travelers returned to the road after that, which had
been churned into a muddy mess, and disappeared over the
top of a low-lying hill. Hours passed as the sun’s dimly seen
presence arced across the sky, and the group crossed and recrossed the frozen river that meandered down the center of a
U-shaped valley and entered a medium-sized village. It was
late afternoon by then, and having been forced to camp out
for three nights in a row, the off-worlders were thrilled to
see a sturdy inn. It had a thatched roof, thick walls, and
stood a full two stories tall. A stable was located next to it.
Once the angens had been seen to, and the cart had been
secured, the travelers went upstairs to their rooms. Then,
having drawn the shortest straw, Rebo was the ﬁrst to bathe
in a tub of water that cost the group twenty gunnars.
The inn’s only bathroom was located on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, one
wall away from the kitchen, in a large wood-paneled room.
The copper tub was so large that even Hoggles would be
able to use it—and was ﬁlled with water heated from below.
But, given the fact that all four of the travelers would have to
use the same bathwater, common courtesy required that the
runner take a sponge bath prior to entering the big tub.
The runner stripped down, hung his clothes on some

LO G O S R U N

131

conveniently placed pegs, and made energetic use of a washcloth and a bucket of water. It had been days since his last
bath, and Rebo was amazed by the rivulets of gray liquid
that ran down his legs and into a ﬂoor drain.
Having tested the water in the tub and found it to his
liking, Rebo put one foot in, and followed with the other,
before beginning the gradual process of lowering himself
into the hot liquid. After days spent out in the cold, nothing could surpass the sensation of warmth that rose to engulf the runner’s tired body, or the feeling of tranquility
that followed.
Steam rose, and an almost overwhelming sense of lethargy
had overtaken the runner by the time a hinge squeaked, and
the door opened inward. Because Phan had drawn the second shortest straw, Rebo wasn’t entirely surprised to see her,
although he was pretty sure the runner was early. He wanted
to say something, knew he should have said something, but
couldn’t summon the necessary energy.
Conscious of the fact that Rebo was watching her, Phan
began to disrobe. Having attempted to ingratiate herself
with the threesome yet failed to gain their complete trust, it
was time to use her backup plan. Slowly, and with occasional sidelong glances at Rebo, Phan ran a wet washcloth
over her trim torso. Then, having cupped each breast in
turn, she ran a hand down between her legs. Rebo, who had
forgotten his own bath by that time, felt himself respond in
a predictable manner.
Having completed her sponge bath, and with patches of
suds still clinging to her tattooed skin, Phan made her way
over to the raised platform, where she lifted a shapely leg up
over the side of the tub. “May I join you?”
Rebo knew he should say no, given the nature of his relationship with Norr, but Phan was in the tub by that time,

132

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

and was busy settling herself onto his fully erect penis.
Though still beautiful to look at, Phan’s body was covered
with what looked like a road map of healed cuts and puncture wounds. More than the runner had, which was saying
something. Rebo closed his eyes as the young woman took
him in. She ﬁt him like a glove, a hot glove, and the pleasure
was intense.
Then, determined to see as well as feel, Rebo opened his
eyes. Phan was kissing his neck at that point, and because of
the difference in heights, the runner could look down on the
upper portion of his lover’s back. He was shocked by what
he saw . . . The tattoos Rebo had ﬁrst seen back in New
Wimmura, the tattoos that marked Phan as a runner, were
so faded as to be nearly invisible! And, if the tattoos were
fake, then it seemed logical to suppose that the rest of her
story was fake as well!
Rebo’s once rock-hard erection had already started to
wilt by that time, and Phan was just about to ask what was
wrong, when the door opened and Norr entered. Judging
from the mischievous smile on her face, and the bottle of
wine clutched in her right hand, it looked as though the
sensitive had plans to share Rebo’s bath as well.
But when Norr saw that Phan was present, the light
went out of her eyes, and the color drained from her cheeks.
Then, speaking with a dull, somewhat mechanical voice, the
sensitive said, “Here, I thought you might enjoy this,” and
bent to place the bottle of wine on the ﬂoor. The hinge
squeaked as she left, the door swung closed, and the sensitive was gone.
Rebo felt sick to his stomach. Having grabbed the sides
of the metal tub he heaved himself up out of the water,
stepped out onto the cold tiles, and from there to the ﬂoor.
The runner’s skin continued to steam as he made his way

LO G O S R U N

133

over to where his clothes waited. “Wait!” Phan demanded.
“What’s the hurry? So she’s mad. . . . Are you a man or a
boy?”
The runner made no answer as he donned enough clothes
to navigate the inn’s drafty halls, bundled the rest under his
right arm, and left. Phan watched the door close for the second time and shrugged. In spite of the fact that her plan
hadn’t played out as intended, the effect would be the same.
A wedge had been driven into the relationship between
Rebo and Norr—and that was a good thing.
The problem was that the brief interlude with the runner
had left the assassin unsatisﬁed. Still, the water was delightfully hot, and there to be enjoyed. Slowly, so as to prolong
the sensation, Phan allowed the water to close over the top
of her head.
Rebo arrived at the room that Norr shared with Phan only

to discover that the sensitive was busy moving out of it and
into a small cubicle at the far end of the hall. “Here,” the
runner said, as he reached out to take her pack. “Let me
carry that.” But the sensitive refused to let go.
“No,” Norr said emphatically, “you won’t. Leave me
alone.” The variant’s heels made an angry clicking sound as
she strode down the hall.
Rebo hurried to keep up. “It wasn’t the way it looked.”
Norr stopped and turned to confront him. Her eyes were
ﬁlled with anger. “How stupid do you think I am? You were
naked, in the tub with her, and the thought forms were clear
to see. . . . Oh, and one other thing,” the sensitive added.
“You’re ﬁred.”
“You can’t ﬁre me,” Rebo objected. “I work for Lysander.”
“You detest Lysander.”
“So? I gave my word.”

134

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“But you never gave your word to me,” Norr replied. “Is
that what makes having sex with Phan acceptable?”
“It wasn’t acceptable,” the runner replied contritely. “Allowing her to get in the tub was a mistake. Please accept my
most sincere apology.”
“No,” the sensitive said intractably. “I won’t.” And
with that, Norr entered her room and slammed the door
behind her.
Rebo wanted to tell Norr about the tattoos, and the sick
feeling in his stomach, but it was too late for that. The
bath’s warmth had been dissipated by then, the runner’s
skin had cooled, and his breath was visible as he walked
down the dimly lit hall. Night had fallen—and it promised
to be both long and dark.
Like all of the youngsters raised within the steely embrace

of the assassin’s guild, Du Phan had been taught how to set
her mental alarm clock and wake up whenever she needed
to. Which was why her eyes popped open three seconds before the ancient clock in the lobby began to chime. And,
thanks to the fact that she no longer shared the room with
Norr, there was no need to be quiet as the assassin got
dressed and tiptoed down the stairs. A brutish watchman
sat next to the front door. He was wrapped in an old blanket, and a double-barreled shotgun rested across his knees.
His head lay back against the grimy wall, and judging from
the volume of his snores, the security guard was sound
asleep.
Phan circled the man, opened the front door, and slid
into the night. It was breathtakingly cold, but the assassin
forced herself to pause for a moment and listen. She had a
story ready for the telling, but preferred not to use it and

LO G O S R U N

135

felt relieved to hear nothing more than the sound of her own
breathing.
Careful to maintain the near-perfect silence, Phan made
her way around to the stable. A dog rushed out to confront
the assassin as she approached the front entrance. It was a large
beast, made all the more threatening by the fact that its vocal
cords had been cut, leaving the animal to cough hoarsely
rather than bark. The dog bared its fangs, lowered its head,
and was about to attack when a throwing spike penetrated the
top of its skull. The animal went down as if poleaxed.
Phan paused to jerk the weapon free from the watchdog’s
skull, discovered that the huge padlock that was supposed
to protect the stable from thieves had already been picked,
and pushed her way in. An angen snorted nervously as the
assassin passed by, and another bumped the side of its stall
as she made her way back toward the spot where an oil-fed
lantern threw a circle of yellow light down onto the frozen
muck. A whirring noise caused Phan to whirl and confront
the source. “Fear not,” the metal man said softly. “Master
Shaz sent me.”
Had the cowled metal man been able to evade the dog because he was a machine? And therefore lacked a human
scent? Yes, that seemed likely. Phan was disappointed. After
many days of what she considered to be isolation, the assassin had been hoping for a visit with the combat variant himself. But hope is little more than solace for the weak. Or so
the guild’s oldsters liked to say. Phan was brisk. “What have
you got for me?”
Rather than reply himself—the android activated one of
many capabilities built into his body. Beams of white light
shot out of his “eyes,” converged on a spot in front of Phan,
and combined to produce a three-dimensional likeness of

136

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Shaz. It had been nighttime when the message was recorded,
and judging from the way the light played across his distinctly canine features, the off-world operative was seated in
front of a campﬁre. “We’re about one day’s march behind
you,” the combat variant said hollowly. “Remember, stay
close to the sensitive, because she’s wearing the computer. Or
was back on Thara. Take care—and I’ll see you soon.”
The picture vanished, the beams of light disappeared, and
Phan was left to wonder why it had been necessary to get out
of bed for what amounted to a pep talk. There was one takeaway, however, and that was the admonition to “. . . stay close
to the sensitive.” That particular responsibility was something of a problem at the moment, but things would almost
certainly come right out on the trail, where Norr would be
forced to interact with other members of the group. A servo
whined. “Do you have a message for Master Shaz?”
“No,” Phan replied, unaware that everything she said
was being recorded. “But do me a favor . . . Steal one of the
angens on the way out.”
The robot was incapable of facial expressions—but was
quick to ask the same question that any human would.
“Why?”
“Because I had to kill a guard dog on the way in,” Phan
explained economically, and left before the machine could
reply.
The next morning dawned clear and bright. As Hoggles

peered out over the angens’ backs he could see for miles as
the big wooden wheels crunched through the half-frozen
slush. Meanwhile, for reasons not entirely clear, Phan was
riding well ahead of the wagon while Rebo lagged behind it,
and Norr sat wrapped in a blanket at his side. There had

LO G O S R U N

137

clearly been a falling-out of some kind, and, judging from
the way the others were behaving, Hoggles ﬁgured that the
problem had something to do with sex.
There were a number of reasons why the heavy had elected
to remain with Rebo and Norr after arriving on Thara. The
ﬁrst was that the variant had nothing better to do. But there
was another reason as well, one that Hoggles was hesitant to
admit to himself, much less anyone else. His feelings for Norr
were hopeless, the giant knew that, but heartfelt nonetheless.
Which was why the heavy planned to return home once Logos had been transported to Socket and the sensitive was safe.
Until then Hoggles was resolved to remain at Norr’s side,
protecting her to whatever extent he could, while enjoying
the sound of her voice, smiles earned by virtue of small favors,
and the occasional whiff of her perfume.
As the sensitive sat staring out over the searingly white
landscape, Hoggles felt sympathy for Norr—and a combination of anger and resentment where the others were concerned. But none of it was his affair—so the variant was
hesitant to get involved. But ﬁnally, after the group had
been on the road for an hour, the heavy found the courage to
speak. He began by clearing his throat. “I don’t know what
happened, but I’m sorry.”
Norr turned to look at him. Her expression was bleak,
but she forced a smile. “Don’t be, Bo. . . . Life brings us all
sorts of lessons. And, while some are painful, it’s usually for
the best.”
The cart slowed as the angens were forced to tackle a hill,
and the variant whistled at them before turning to look at
his passenger. She was beautiful, even when she was sad, and
Hoggles wanted to comfort her. Even if that meant pushing
her toward another man. “The truth is that he loves you,”

138

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the heavy commented. “Even if he’s been slow to say so.”
Norr was surprised to hear something like that from
Hoggles. She looked at him—then “looked” again. That
was when the sensitive “saw” what had been there for a
long time and realized the true nature of what the heavy
felt for her, evidence of which could be seen in the fact that
he was busy trying to heal the rift between her and another
man. It was a delicate moment—and one that Norr was
determined to handle correctly. “Really? What makes you
think so?”
“That’s simple,” Hoggles replied conﬁdently. “He’s
here, isn’t he? Even though he’s losing money rather than
making it.”
Suddenly Norr knew that the man sitting next to her was
present for much the same reason and felt a deep pang of regret, not to mention guilt, and a sort of sisterly affection.
“And there’s one more thing,” Hoggles added. “I don’t
know what transpired between the two of you—but it’s my
guess that Phan was part of it. I don’t trust her Lonni—and
you shouldn’t, either.”
Norr remembered Rebo’s apology, followed by her harsh
words, and the bang as the door slammed closed. The runner
wasn’t entirely innocent, she knew that, but he wasn’t entirely guilty either. Not according to Hoggles—and not according to the voice inside her. The one she should have
been listening to all along. “You are a good friend, Bo. . . . A
very good friend, and I’m fortunate.”
The heavy blushed beet red, felt his heart leap at the
praise, and turned toward the road ahead. Meanwhile, having monitored the entire conversation from beneath Norr’s
blanket Logos processed the computer equivalent of a human sigh. If there was anything more boring than human
mating rituals, he couldn’t imagine what it was. But at least

LO G O S R U N

139

the biologicals were in motion, which meant he was in motion, which was the only thing that really mattered.
When darkness fell, the travelers found themselves be-

tween villages and therefore sought shelter within the
rough embrace of four rooﬂess walls. With nothing to protect them from the possibility of snow, Hoggles worked to
stretch a canvas tarpaulin over the encampment while Phan
busied herself at the cook ﬁre. The other two went looking
for ﬁrewood and were gone for quite a while. Longer than
required to collect the amount of fuel they returned with. A
fact that pleased Hoggles and annoyed Phan.
And, after everyone awoke the next morning, Phan
found herself relegated to riding on the cart next to Hoggles
while both the runner and the sensitive rode ahead. A sure
sign that previously broken fences had been mended. Which
was just as well, because it was less than an hour later when
the group topped a rise and found themselves looking down
on the Army of God. It was a relatively large group consisting of at least three hundred people. They were kneeling at
that particular moment, heads bowed as a man dressed in a
tattered robe stood atop an ice-encrusted rock and delivered
the morning sermon.
There was no reason to be surprised, since the travelers
had been following along behind the larger group for more
than a week by then, but Rebo was taken aback by the size
of the mob below, and the fact that a detachment of what
looked like heavy cavalry had been sent up the hill to intercept them. Brightly colored banners snapped in the breeze
as mismatched mounts snorted what looked like puffs of
steam and clods of half-frozen muck shot from under their
iron-shod hooves.
Norr turned to Rebo. “Return to the cart . . . Hide your

140

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

guns and tell Phan to do the same. I’ll try to stall them.”
The runner nodded, jerked the angen’s head around, and
kicked the animal’s barrel-shaped sides. He was gone two
seconds later.
“Logos,” Norr said, as she eyed the oncoming riders.
“Can you hear me?”
“Of course I can hear you,” the AI replied testily. “I’m
not deaf!”
“Then pay attention,” the sensitive instructed curtly.
“I’m looking at an army of antitechnic fanatics. They’re going to be all around us soon—and they would like nothing
more than to rip you apart. So keep quiet until I say you can
speak. Even if that takes a week or more. Understood?”
It was probably Norr’s imagination, but the sensitive
thought that the computer sounded resentful. “Understood.”
The riders were close by then, thundering up over the
rise, their swords, spears, and battle-axes plain to see. Norr
smiled in what she hoped was a disarming manner. “Good
morning!”
There was a mad clatter of metal and a good deal of snorting as both riders and mounts circled around her. One of the
warriors, a gaunt-looking man dressed in homemade armor,
nodded politely. “Greetings . . . We ride for the Army of
God. Do you carry the pestilence? Or are you clean?”
Norr frowned. “The pestilence? I don’t understand.”
“Technology,” the rider answered sternly. “Meaning
those items listed in the Book of Abominations.”
“No,” the sensitive answered. “At least I don’t think so.”
“Take care, woman,” the man cautioned grimly. “Ignorance is no excuse. . . . And if you’re hiding something—
the diviner will surely ﬁnd it.”
Norr didn’t know who or what the “diviner” was, but
wasn’t about to tell the rider about Logos, the guns, or her

LO G O S R U N

141

vibro blade. “Yes, I mean no, we aren’t carrying any proscribed items.”
“Good,” the man responded loftily. “Come that you
might become one with the Army of God! The rector welcomes all who burn with holy passion and live to battle the
pestilence.”
Norr forced a smile. “Yes, well, I’m not sure how much
time we can spend with the army—but thank you for the
invitation.”
Rebo had arrived by that time, along with the cart, and
felt utterly defenseless knowing that his guns, not to mention Phan’s, were hidden under the cart’s bench-style seat.
But there was nothing that the runner and his companions
could do but follow the religious fanatics down into the valley below.
The church service had ended, and the faithful were
streaming up toward the road, as the off-world travelers were
escorted into the campsite. Norr noticed that most of the antitechnics were dressed in little more than rags, that many
were so malnourished as to appear starved, and that some lay
on makeshift litters. Still others, including most of the older
children, were bent under the weight of heavy packs.
It was a pitiful sight, and one that Rebo was still struggling to deal with, when a group of cudgel-wielding acolytes
stepped out to bar the way. Like the cavalry, they were better fed than the rest, which suggested a hierarchy of some
sort. “Halt!” one of the men ordered pompously. “The rector
would speak with you.”
“You must dismount,” one of the riders added helpfully.
“Or pay for your arrogance.”
Both Rebo and Norr got down from their angens, only to
have the reins snatched out of their hands as the man known
as the rector appeared. He was at least seven feet tall. A rarity

142

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

during an age when most A-strain males stood about ﬁvefoot-ten. But if the holy man’s height was intimidating, so
were his broad forehead, hooked nose, and thin, nearly nonexistent lips. Worse, from Norr’s perspective, was the force of
his personality, which would have rolled in to supplant her
own had she allowed it to do so.
The sensitive staggered under the psychic assault, threw
up a protective barrier, and struggled to stand her ground.
That was when the sensitive realized that while a ﬁlthy robe
concealed most of the rector’s long angular body, his feet
were bare and blue from the cold. A sign of penitence perhaps? Of otherworldliness? There was no way to know. The
rector sketched the letter “A” into the air. “Blessings be
upon you my children. Where are you from?”
Rebo remembered the way people turned out to stone
the shuttle back in New Wimmura and knew that some sort
of cover story was required. Consistent with lessons learned
while growing up inside the guild, the runner stuck to the
truth to the extent that was possible. “From New Wimmura, holy one. I’m a runner with a message for a merchant
in Feda. This woman is my wife, Citizen Hoggles hopes to
ﬁnd work there, and Citizen Phan was engaged to guard our
humble belongings.”
The rector’s gaze shifted to Phan. “You’re an assassin?”
Phan inclined her head. There wasn’t much on Derius or
any other planet that frightened her, yet this man did. “Yes,
holy one.”
“Are you carrying any breech-loaded ﬁrearms?”
Phan thought about the revolvers hidden aboard the cart
and wondered if it would have been better to dispose of
them. But it was too late for that, so she brought her head
up, and looked the rector in the eyes. “No, holy one.”
“We will see about that,” the rector replied cynically. “It

LO G O S R U N

143

has been my experience that members of your profession
have a special afﬁnity for proscribed technology—some of
which is so cunningly disguised that only an extensive
search will uncover it.”
Norr thought about the AI, as well as the vibro blade
hidden inside her wooden staff, and wondered if the rector
had the means to detect such things. The holy man clearly
thought he did as he sent one of the acolytes to fetch “the diviner.” In the meantime the rector had transferred his attention to Norr. “You interest me,” the holy man said. “Why
would a sensitive marry a norm?”
“I fell in love with the man,” Norr replied honestly. “Not
the body. . . . Besides, sensitives are a moody lot, and one is
enough for any household.”
The comment was intended as a joke, but the rector nodded, as if well aware of how moody sensitives could be, and
was about to follow up on the matter when the diviner arrived. She was about eight years old, dressed in the remains
of an expensive party dress, and armed with a forked stick.
The rector’s hard, angular face softened at the sight of her.
“Hello, my dear,” he said softly. “How are you feeling? Better? That’s wonderful. . . . Now, if you’re up to it, please
check to see if these people should be allowed to join our
ﬂock.”
Of course none of the travelers wanted to join the rector’s
shabby ﬂock, but couldn’t say so, as the serious-looking
youngster waved the Y-shaped divining rod at them. “It
will dip if one of you is carrying the pestilence,” the rector
warned conﬁdently, as the little girl pointed the tree branch
at Norr.
Rebo had never been one to ignore the role that supernatural objects could play in everyday life, so when the stick
came into alignment with the computer hidden beneath

144

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Norr’s cloak, the runner half expected the stick to dip. But
it didn’t, and their luck held even as the child waved her
stick at the cart and the weapons hidden on it. And, such
was the rector’s trust in her that no further inspection was
required. The holy man produced what might have been a
smile. “Welcome to the Army of God!” he proclaimed enthusiastically, and sketched another “A” into the air. “Come,
my dear . . . We must take our place at the head of the column lest progress be slowed.”
And with that the man with the bloody feet boosted the
little girl up onto his broad shoulders and walked away. The
acolytes and the cavalry followed. Rebo waited until the antitechnics were well out of earshot before shaking his head
in amazement. “That is one crazy bastard.”
Norr discovered that she had been holding her breath. It
felt good to let it go. “That’s an understatement. Something
tells me that we were fortunate . . . But will our luck hold?”
The next thirty hours were like an episode in a surreal

dream. Two hours after being absorbed by the Army of God,
Rebo found himself slogging through the half-frozen muck
while three raggedy moppets sat atop what had once been
his angen. Meanwhile, about twenty feet to the rear, Norr
had transformed the cart into an ambulance. Now, in addition to the group’s steadily dwindling supply of food, the
conveyance carried a couple of stretchers and half a dozen
children. As for the other angens, they were “on loan” to the
rector’s cavalry, which was extremely unlikely to return
them.
So, with no choice but to walk, time seemed to slow as
the wintry landscape inched by. There weren’t many rest
breaks, but when one was declared, the ﬂock was given only
minutes in which to take care of their personal needs before

LO G O S R U N

145

the cudgel-carrying acolytes began to round them up. Then,
with their knees buried in the cold-wet snow, the Army of
God was required to listen as the rector read passages from a
“history” that described how the people of Old Wimmura
worshiped technology during the reign of Emperor Hios and
were subsequently punished by God’s righteous thunder.
Lysander attempted to take over Norr’s body during one
such episode so that he could counter what he saw as the
rector’s lies. But rather than allow him to do so the sensitive
removed her belt and proceeded to whip her back with it—
knowing that the pain would be sufﬁcient to keep the entity
at bay. The act caused some consternation at ﬁrst, but was
soon emulated by the more pious members of the assemblage, thereby adding still another element to the strange,
half-real day.
Finally, exhausted by a ﬁfteen-mile march under difﬁcult
circumstances, the ﬂock descended upon an isolated house
just before nightfall and “borrowed” everything the farm
family had, including their food, animals, and personal possessions. The latter were of particular interest to the acolytes,
who spent most of the evening squabbling over a few bits of
gold.
Although Rebo, Norr, Hoggles, and Phan had been
forced to surrender the cart by then, along with what remained of their food, the travelers had managed to recover
their personal belongings, including Norr’s staff, plus all
the ﬁrearms, which were now kept wrapped within their
bedrolls. That was the good news. The bad news was that
each time the foursome attempted to meet, and thereby
agree on an escape plan, an acolyte would materialize among
them and call upon the group to pray, gather ﬁrewood, or
dig a latrine.
The result was that by the time the second day had

146

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

dawned, and the bowls of watery porridge had been consumed, the off-worlders were still trapped within the Army
of God. What comfort there was stemmed from the fact they
remained on the road to Feda and were making progress toward their ultimate goal.
By midmorning the sky had begun to darken, and
snowﬂakes began to twirl down out of the heavens, as the
ﬂock took temporary possession of a rocky promontory that
looked out over a canyon and the white ribbon that twisted
along the bottom of it. The army scattered as people sought
to relieve themselves, or gnawed on cold rations, as Rebo
peered down into the abyss. Would the ice-covered river take one
to Feda? he wondered. If so, the runner thought that it might
represent an alternative to the road, and the Army of God.
Such were Rebo’s thoughts when, as if somehow drawn
by the runner’s heretical intentions, the rector appeared at
his side. “Look!” the holy man said, as he pointed a long
grimy ﬁnger down into the canyon. “Do you see the structures to either side of the river? There was a time when they
were connected so as to block God’s river! Can you imagine
such arrogance?”
Rebo looked, saw little more than a blur, and stuck his
hand inside his jacket. The glasses were out, and already on
his nose, before the runner realized his mistake. The runner
glanced at the rector in hopes that the faux pas had gone unobserved, saw the expression of outraged astonishment on
the holy man’s face, and knew he was in trouble. In spite of
the fact that he had never read the Book of Abominations, it
was clear from the rector’s expression that spectacles were on
it. That left the off-worlder with no option but to turn and
run. But the rector had recovered his voice by then, and
Rebo hadn’t traveled more than thirty feet before a trio of
acolytes cut the unbeliever off and began to beat him with

LO G O S R U N

147

their clubs. The runner’s spectacles ﬂew off as he took a
blow to the head, and darkness rose to embrace him.
There were moments of consciousness during the long

cold night that followed. Times when Rebo surfaced long
enough to see the ﬁres burning all around him, or to hear
the sound of a rhythmic chant as the sleepless ﬂock prepared
for the cleansing to come. But in spite of his best efforts to
do so, the runner was unable to hold focus, and it wasn’t
long before he lost consciousness again.
Finally, after what seemed like a long journey in a dark
land, Rebo opened his eyes to discover that another wintry
day had dawned. The rector stood before him, back turned, as
he led his ﬂock in prayer. Rebo was cold, very cold, and when
the runner went to move his arms and legs he discovered that
they were bound in place. But his head was free, which meant
he could turn it to either side, even though it pained him to
do so. And that was when the runner realized that both he
and his companions had been strapped to X-shaped crosses.
They formed a rough semicircle, with Norr to Rebo’s right,
Hoggles to his left, and Phan on the end.
Like him, the others were covered with a rime of crusted
snow. All due to his mistake. He hadn’t been conscious to
see it, but the runner could easily imagine how the acolytes
had fallen upon his companions, searched their belongings,
and discovered the guns. Did they know about the vibro
blade? Or Logos? There was no way to tell.
“And so we leave them,” the rector continued, his
sonorous voice rolling out over the crowd. “To meditate on
their sins, during these, the ﬁnal hours of their wasted lives.”
So saying the rector turned, and sketched a symbolic
“A” into the air, before hoisting the diviner up onto his
shoulders and walking away. If the holy man blamed the

148

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

little girl for failing to detect the contraband, there was
certainly no sign of it.
The Army of God ﬂowed out onto the road, and ten minutes later the entire ﬂock had disappeared, leaving the unbelievers to die of exposure. Each off-worlder had a different
reaction. Rebo tried to communicate with Norr, but found
that his voice wouldn’t carry, and was left to wonder if it
was possible to kill someone on the spirit planes. If so,
Lysander was in deep trouble.
Norr tried to use her power of telekinesis to undo even
one of the more than two dozen knots that held her in place
but was soon forced to give up the task as impossible.
Logos couldn’t manipulate his environment, but had survived similar situations during the last thousand years and
knew what to do. Eventually, after his host’s heart stopped
beating, human scavengers would arrive to pick over her remains. At that point he would speak to one of the brutes,
promise it a large quantity of gold that didn’t exist, and
convince them to carry him to Feda. Then, having found a
more capable mount, he would continue his journey. Not to
Socket, as everyone supposed, but to Haafa. Because, even
though Socket was the AI’s ﬁnal destination, there was
someone he would have to murder ﬁrst.
Hoggles ﬂexed his enormous muscles in an attempt to
break the bonds that held him, but soon discovered that the
acolytes had anticipated such a move, and tripled the number of ropes that held him in place. And, as a punishment
for throwing an acolyte into the canyon, one of his ﬁngers
had been removed. The wound had been cauterized—but
continued to ache.
Phan turned to her martial arts training in an attempt to
gather her energy and channel it into a Ku, or death blow,
sufﬁcient to free her from the X-shaped framework. But,

LO G O S R U N

149

owing to the fact that the assassin had killed three of the
ﬂock prior to being subdued, two of her throwing spikes
had been used to nail her hands to the thick rough-hewn
beams. The pain, plus the cold, made it difﬁcult to concentrate. Hope, such as it was, lay in the fact that Shaz would
arrive eventually. But would the operative arrive in time?
No, Phan didn’t think so.
The snow began to fall more heavily then, covered each of
the condemned with a shroud of white, and softened the area
around them. Eventually, all movement having stopped, silence claimed the land.

SEVEN
™

The Planet Derius

Although the antitechnic rabble continue to sweep through the
province—we have them under observation, and I remain conﬁdent that our strategy will be successful.
—Provincial Facilitator, Kas Okanda, in a report to his
superiors in New Wimmura

The snow fell from the sky like a lacy curtain and the two

dozen riders seemed to materialize out of the hazy whiteness like ghosts from some long-forgotten battle. But Facilitator Kas Okanda and his well-mounted dragoons were
quite real, as were the sleek semiautomatic riﬂes the troopers carried and the wraithlike hunting dogs that ranged
ahead.
Okanda was a relatively small man, but he exuded an
aura of authority as he eyed the area, alert to the possibility
of an ambush. But there was nothing for him to see beyond
a maze of tracks, the usual detritus left behind by a large
group of campers, and the row of X-shaped crosses that sat
atop a low rise. Four people had been cruciﬁed, and judging
from appearances, all of them were dead. But the administrator prided himself on the veracity of the reports that he

LO G O S R U N

151

sent to New Wimmura every eight days, so a scout was dispatched to examine the bodies, and ordered to report back.
“Make a note,” Okanda instructed, as the youngster
next to him prepared to write on a clipboard. “Having patrolled the area north of the citadel, the company came
across four individuals all of whom had been cruciﬁed.
Since this sort of execution is typical of the antitechnic fanatics, it seems safe to assume that they were responsible
for the atrocity.” The facilitator’s secretary scribbled furiously in a desperate attempt to capture each word exactly as
it had been spoken.
The scout returned just as the government ofﬁcial ﬁnished his paragraph. “Excuse me, sire,” the dragoon said respectfully, “but the people on the crosses are still alive.”
Okanda had bushy eyebrows. They shot upward in surprise. “What?” he demanded. “Alive you say. . . . Are you
sure?”
“Yes, sire,” the scout replied expressionlessly. “Would
you like us to cut them down?”
“Of course!” Okanda responded afﬁrmatively. “But not
until Hobarth here has an opportunity to examine the victims and take notes.”
The scout said, “Yes, sire,” and led the younger man over
to where the snow-encrusted crosses stood. Now that he was
closer Hobarth could see the wisps of vapor that issued from
between blue-tinged lips. The better part of ten minutes
elapsed while the secretary took elaborate notes on everything from the manner in which metal spikes had been
driven through one woman’s hands, to the clothes that the
people wore, and the fact that a lightning bolt had been tattooed onto the inner surface of one man’s left forearm.
Once the process was complete, the men and women
were taken down and loaded into a pair of sturdy ﬁeld

152

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ambulances. The heavy went into one, while the sensitive,
and the norms were placed in the other. Once inside the
wagons, the patients were propped up against straw-ﬁlled
pillows and covered with wool blankets.
And that’s where Rebo was when the dream ended, his
eyes opened, and a man with a handlebar mustache said,
“Here . . . This’ll ﬁx what ails ya!” and poured a half ounce
of ﬁery liquid into his mouth. The whiskey went down the
wrong way, and the runner began to choke.
Norr raised a hand in protest. “Don’t give him spirits. . . . What we need is some warm tea. . . . Or some caf.”
The medics were more than happy to dispense lukewarm
tea from the insulated bottles ﬁlled earlier that day and consume the medicinal whiskey themselves while the wagons
rattled through a village and began the long arduous climb
to the citadel. Having passed through a well-guarded entrance, the wagons ground to a halt in front of a one-story
inﬁrmary, and the patients were carried inside. Within a
matter of minutes they were stripped of clothing and immersed in warm baths. Phan, Hoggles, and, to a lesser extent, Rebo were treated for their various wounds before
being brought back together for some hot soup.
Then, after a good deal of fussing over by some very efﬁcient female nurses, the travelers were packed off to bed.
Norr wanted to sleep more than anything—but refused to
cooperate until the staff returned her clothes. Then, clutching a ratty-looking coat to her chest, the sensitive allowed
sleep to overtake her. The nurses shrugged, sent the rest of
her ﬁlthy apparel out to be burned, and left the room.
Once the nurses were gone, and the door was closed, Logos spoke. “Lonni? Can you hear me?” But there was no answer other than a cough, followed by some nonsensical
words, and the sound of the sensitive’s breathing. “I know I

LO G O S R U N

153

don’t say this sort of thing very often,” the AI whispered.
“But thank you.”
The sun had set three hours earlier, which meant that

most travelers had been forced to camp out or seek the
hospitality of a country inn. But Shaz and his party were
the exceptions to that rule. Not only could the forwardranging metal men “sense” obstacles, they could “see” whatever fell under the blobs of white light that projected from
their “eyes” and break trail for the angens. Travel remained
difﬁcult, however, especially since the humans and their
mounts had been on the road for twelve hours and were close
to exhaustion.
But it had been two days since the combat variant had
spotted one of the red ribbons that Phan typically left adjacent to the road or picked up a written message from the assassin. And that was why the operative insisted that the
party continue to push ahead. Of course there are limits to
how far one can ride in a day, and the angens had begun to
stumble by the time the robots followed a multitude of
tracks up to the rise where four X-shaped crosses stood, and
paused to look around. A quick reconnaissance revealed an
area of heavily churned snow—but it was impossible to
know who had been there or why. “We’ll camp here,” Shaz
announced to the androids. “Build a couple of ﬁres, pitch
the tent, and feed the angens.”
The androids were extremely efﬁcient, so it wasn’t long
before the two humans were sitting on small folding stools
and warming their hands over a crackling ﬁre. Meanwhile,
an oil-fed stove had been established not far away, and a
hearty stew would soon be burbling in a pot. Conﬁdent that
the routine matters were under control, Shaz eyed the sensitive seated across from him. Even allowing for the fact that

154

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the campﬁre lit Dyson’s face from below, the other variant
looked older than he was. His skin had taken on a sallow
appearance, and his hands shook all the time. Some of that
could be blamed on the rigors of the journey and the stress
associated with it, but Kane was responsible for the rest.
The situation was difﬁcult for Shaz to assess, not being a
sensitive himself, but having been acquainted with Kane
prior to his death, it was easy to understand how unpleasant
the task of bringing him through could be. But there was no
getting around the need to communicate with the dead operative from time to time. Even if that was painful for
Dyson, who sat with shoulders slumped, his eyes on the ﬁre.
“Your tea is ready,” a robot announced, and waited for
the humans to extend their mugs before starting to pour.
Then, having given Dyson an opportunity to sip the hot liquid, Shaz broke the silence. “I know you’re tired, but we
haven’t heard from Phan in quite a while, and I need to
speak with Kane.”
There was a moment of silence as the sensitive blew the
steam off the surface of his tea and took another sip. Finally,
his eyes peering out from cavelike sockets, Dyson looked
up. It took a great deal of effort to keep his voice steady. “I
would like to quit. There’s no need to pay me. . . . I’ll take
my bedroll and walk away.”
“Don’t be silly,” the combat variant replied dismissively.
“I know Kane can be unpleasant, but I’ll keep the session
short, and the whole thing will be over in a matter of minutes. Then, after a good night’s sleep, you’ll feel better in
the morning.”
The other variant was determined to have his way, the
sensitive could see that, so there was no point in stalling.
Dyson closed his eyes, sought the inner peace that lay deep
within, and partially withdrew from his body. Kane, who

LO G O S R U N

155

had already been drawn to the physical plane by the combat
variant’s thoughts, was ready and waiting. His beingness
ﬂooded into the newly created vacuum, where he hurried to
seize control. The ﬁrst thing the spirit entity noticed was
the wonderful tang of woodsmoke, followed by the aftertaste of unsweetened tea and the innate heaviness of the
channel’s physical body. A vehicle that was both tired from
a long day in the saddle—and hungry for the food that was
being prepared nearby.
Shaz became aware of Kane’s presence when Dyson’s
body jerked convulsively, some of his tea spilled into the
ﬂames, and the ﬁre hissed in protest. Then, once the steam
had cleared, the combat variant looked into a pair of dead
eyes. “So,” Kane croaked, “we meet again.”
“Yes,” Shaz responded cautiously. “Thank you for coming. I could use your help.”
“You have but to ask,” Kane answered generously, as he
held his left hand out toward the ﬁre. The warmth was
wonderful—and he reveled in it. Dyson tried to reassert
control but couldn’t. Gradually, bit by bit, Kane had become so skilled at controlling the sensitive’s body that the
sensitive was powerless to displace him. Dyson uttered a
long silent scream, but there was no one to hear, and the
conversation continued.
“Good,” the combat variant continued. “We lost contact
with Phan—which means we lost contact with the others.
Can you tell me what happened to them?”
“Probably,” Kane answered conﬁdently. “Give me a moment.” After pausing to swirl a mouthful of tea around the
inside of Dyson’s mouth, the spirit entity directed his attention outward. Other disincarnates could be seen within the
thick glutinous material that overlaid the physical plane. One
such individual was quite upset regarding his unexpected

156

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

death. Others sought to comfort the dead man and escort him
to a higher vibration. Kane hurried to project his consciousness into the mix. He listened for a while, asked a series of
questions, and received most of the answers he needed before
the entity’s spirit guides pulled him away.
Shaz had started to wonder if something had gone wrong
when Dyson, which was to say Kane, suddenly spoke. “I’m
back.”
The combat variant lifted an eyebrow. “And?”
“And Phan is alive, as are the others,” the disincarnate reported. “Although they had a close brush with death prior
to being spirited away by a group of people that my contact
wasn’t familiar with.”
Shaz felt a sense of relief. His greatest fear had been that
some sort of calamity had befallen not only Phan, but the
AI, resulting in the machine’s loss. It should be a relatively
simple matter to ﬁnd out where the group had been taken
and free them should that be necessary. “Thank you, that is
very helpful.”
“You’re welcome,” Kane said politely. “Something smells
good. . . . What’s for dinner?”
Shaz, who expected the spirit entity to withdraw at that
point, felt the ﬁrst stirrings of concern. “Stew. . . . Why do
you ask?”
“Well,” Kane replied, as Dyson struggled to eject him.
“It’s been quite a while since I ate real food. I think I’ll stay
and have dinner with you.”
The combat variant felt the short bristly hairs on the
back of his neck stand at attention. He struggled to keep his
voice level. “You can do that?”
“Why, yes,” Kane answered coolly. “I believe that I can.”
“And Dyson?” Shaz wanted to know. “How does he feel
about your plan?”

LO G O S R U N

157

“Oh, he’s against it,” the disincarnate admitted carelessly. “But, I have the poor bastard right where I want him,
so it doesn’t really matter. Does it?”
The challenge was obvious, and the air around the combat variant began to seethe as his body prepared for combat.
Fortunately, Dyson had consistently refused to carry a
weapon, which meant it would have been easy to shoot the
sensitive’s body, thereby preventing the disincarnate from
controlling it. But what if Shaz needed more information?
Sensitives were hard to come by—and it wouldn’t be a good
idea to offend Kane.
The creature sitting opposite Shaz nodded understandingly. “Oops!” the spirit entity said lightly. “I guess this
puts you between a rock and a hard place doesn’t it? But,
hey, not to worry. . . . We’re after the same thing. And later,
after we install Logos on Socket, I plan to reincarnate. You’ll
be an old fart by the time I make my presence known. As for
Tepho, well, he’s your problem. Slick, huh?”
That wasn’t the way the combat variant would have described it, but he was a realist and nodded in agreement.
“Welcome back. . . . I hope you enjoy your dinner.”
Meanwhile, in a place where no one could help him,
Dyson continued to scream.
Rebo awoke to the sound of bells. His eyes felt as if they

had been glued shut but eventually opened to reveal a room
so narrow there was no more than two feet of space on either
side of his bed. Sunlight poured in through the paned window over his head and threw an asymmetric pattern onto
the door across from him. Then, just as the bells stopped
ringing, the runner felt the unmistakable pressure on his
bladder and knew it was time to get up.
The ﬁrst attempt to throw the covers aside and swing his

158

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

legs out over the edge of the bed resulted in an explosion of
pain. That caused Rebo to fall back against the pillow and
probe the circumference of his skull. It quickly became apparent that there were three different dressings on his head.
Fortunately, none of his companions had been killed as a result of his mental lapse. Still conscious of his full bladder,
the runner gritted his teeth, battled to swing both feet over
onto the cold ﬂoor, and stood. By placing one hand on the
wall, he was able to remain upright even as a tidal wave of
dizziness attempted to pull him under. He felt for his
amulet in hopes that the charm would steady him and discovered it was gone. Lost during the battle with the Army
of God, Rebo supposed.
He still had the religious medallion, however, which was
something of a miracle given the fact that the antitechnics
had stolen everything else, so maybe it would protect him.
Finally, having kept his feet, the runner went in search of
his clothes. That was when he discovered that while his old
road-ravaged outﬁt had disappeared, brand-new clothing
was waiting in the tiny closet, a gift for which he was grateful. Getting the fresh garments on was something of a challenge however, and Rebo might have abandoned the project
if it hadn’t been for the urgent need to pee. Fortunately, a
nurse appeared about halfway through the process and
helped the runner get his shirt on.
After a trip to the men’s bathroom, which was equipped
with ﬂush toilets, Rebo went looking for Norr, only to discover that she was looking for him. Together they took refuge
in a sun-splashed solarium. “I’m sorry,” the runner said contritely. “Putting those glasses on was a stupid thing to do.”
Norr shrugged philosophically. “Don’t worry about
it. . . . If not the glasses, then something else would have
given us away.”

LO G O S R U N

159

“Thanks,” the runner replied humbly. “But I am worried.
The antitechnics took off with all of our money, supplies,
and weapons.”
“They took most of our stuff,” the sensitive agreed
soberly, “but not everything.” At that point Norr tapped her
chest and winked. The message was clear. Logos was lurking somewhere beneath her brand-new outﬁt. The runner
had mixed emotions where the AI was concerned but
forced a smile. “That’s good news. . . . So, how are the others doing?”
During the subsequent report, Rebo learned that while
Hoggles’s right index ﬁnger had been amputated after the
battle with the antitechnics, the heavy was on the mend.
“That’s good,” the runner said gratefully. “I need to apologize to him as well. How ’bout Phan?”
“Fortunately, none of the spikes that they drove through
her hands struck bone,” Norr replied. “She’ll be good as new
within a few weeks.”
“And how good is that?” Rebo inquired cynically. “She
isn’t who she says she is, we know that, so what to do?”
“Get rid of her,” Norr replied honestly. “As soon as we
can.”
Rebo nodded. “Works for me . . . In the meantime, where
the heck are we? And who’s running this place?”
“We’re in some sort of government-run complex,” Norr
replied. “What was once a university if I understand correctly. More than that I couldn’t really say. But, since Facilitator Okanda invited us to dinner, maybe we’ll be able to
learn more from him.”
“Yeah,” the runner said reﬂectively. “Maybe we will . . .
In the meantime here’s hoping that the runner’s guild has a
presence in Feda. . . . I should be able to withdraw some
money from my account if it does.”

160

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“You’re working for Lysander,” the sensitive responded.
“Maybe he can help.”
“That kind of help I can do without,” the runner objected, as he came to his feet. “Come on . . . Let’s ﬁnd Bo. I
owe him a body part.”
By the time evening fell, and the youngster named Hobarth

led Rebo, Norr, Hoggles, and Phan into the citadel’s Grand
Hall, the off-worlders were feeling better. The room was
huge, and would have been almost impossible to light had it
not been for the ancient Class IV fusion generator located
two levels below. The fact that it continued to broadcast
electricity was due to a generous supply of spare parts,
knowledge handed down for hundreds of years, and no small
amount of good luck.
Kas Okanda was waiting to greet his guests when they
arrived at the far end of the long, formally set dining table.
He was dressed in a heavily embroidered gold coat, black
trousers, and gold slippers. His neatly trimmed mustache
and pointed beard served to reinforce the aura of material
well-being that surrounded him. The facilitator never tired
of seeing the expressions of amazement that the brightly lit
hall produced on most of his guests. “Welcome!” the government ofﬁcial said warmly. “Please, take your seats, and
I’ll call for some wine.”
Okanda was an amiable host, and the next hour passed
quickly, as the facilitator plied his guests with good wine,
food, and conversation. Finally, having offered the ofﬁcial a
carefully edited version of the journey from Thara, Rebo
asked his host what the government planned to do about
the Army of God.
The facilitator took a sip of wine before replying. “That’s
a good question, Citizen Rebo. . . . As you have surmised by

LO G O S R U N

161

now, we not only have a pretty good idea where the rector
and his ﬂock are at any given moment, we have the capacity
to bring their wanderings to an end whenever we choose.”
“Then why wait?” Hoggles inquired.
Though blunt, the question was understandable given the
nature of the heavy’s injury, Okanda smiled sympathetically.
“I understand how you feel—and regret what happened to
you. But I, along with the other facilitators, have a responsibility to the planet as a whole. The rector is like a magnet to
which tiny slivers of iron are inevitably drawn. Once all, or
the vast majority of them are clumped together, we’ll sweep
them up.”
“And then?” Phan inquired skeptically. Not only were
her hands sore, they were slightly swollen, which would
have made it difﬁcult to handle weapons. If she had had
weapons—which she didn’t. Had the decision been up to
her, the rector and his entire ﬂock would have been cruciﬁed
and left to die. Men, women, and children.
“The present plan is to march the antitechnics to the
great salt sea and transport them to a remote island, where
they will be free to live without beneﬁt of technology,”
Okanda answered smoothly. “A ﬁtting punishment—and
one that will serve to protect the rest of the population from
their fanaticism.”
Norr heard the facilitator’s words, but what she “saw”
was something different. Based on the dark, slowly morphing thought forms that hovered around Okanda, it appeared
that while some of the ﬂock might be transported, others
would almost certainly be lost at sea. The rector being one
of them. She shivered, tugged at the shawl she had been
given, and was grateful for the additional warmth.
The rest of the meal passed pleasantly. The main course
was followed by a delicious dessert, wine, and a selection of

162

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

local cheeses. And it was then, as Rebo thanked Okanda for
his hospitality, that the facilitator invited the travelers to attach themselves to a government convoy that was slated to
leave for Feda in three days. It was a generous offer, and one
that would go a long way toward solving one of the group’s
most pressing problems, so the runner was quick to accept
on behalf of both his companions and himself.
“Good!” Okanda said heartily as he rose from the table.
“The matter is settled. Now, if you would be so kind as to
follow me, I would like to show you through the citadel’s
museum. We have a collection of techno artifacts that is second to none. Something that interstellar travelers such as
yourselves are uniquely qualiﬁed to appreciate.”
Rebo was feeling a bit sleepy after all the wine and food,
and would have preferred to go to bed, but couldn’t think of
a graceful way to excuse himself. So the runner followed the
facilitator to the far end of the hall, through an ironstrapped door, and down a circular ﬂight of stairs. Norr,
Hoggles, and Phan brought up the rear.
Electric lights came on, apparently of their own volition,
as Okanda led his guests out into a room that would have
been equal in size to the hall above except for the fact that
the ceiling was a good deal lower. Whereas the Great Hall
was open, and sparsely furnished, this space was ﬁlled with
row after row of glassed-in display cases, with only narrow
aisles between them.
Faced with the prospect of what looked like a long
march, combined with what promised to be a boring narrative, Rebo uttered a silent groan as Okanda led his guests
into the ﬁrst passageway. It was ﬁlled with a mind-boggling
array of small household appliances. As the government ofﬁcial led them down the corridor, the visitors were shown
machines that the ancients used to toast bread, dry their

LO G O S R U N

163

hair, listen to music, talk to each other, heat their food, and
remove unwanted body hair. It was a truly amazing display.
However if that section was of interest, the next was
even more so, since it was focused on a subject of more
than passing interest to at least three of Okanda’s guests.
Rebo, Phan, and, to a lesser extent, Hoggles stared in
openmouthed lust as they were invited to eyeball case after
case of neatly racked weapons. There were knives, pistols,
riﬂes, machine guns, and hand grenades, all displayed
along with accessories where appropriate, and quantities of
ammunition.
Fortunately, Okanda failed to notice the longing looks,
or regarded them as understandable, because he was in no
way offended when the previously taciturn Phan peppered
him with all manner of technical questions having to do
with the weapons laid out before her. But all good things
must come to an end, so it wasn’t long before the facilitator
led the group into the next corridor, which was even more
intriguing in its own way. “This,” Okanda announced importantly, “is the section of the museum dedicated to artifacts that we don’t understand fully and probably never will.
But our scientists continue to study the more promising
specimens in hopes that we will be able to bring some of
them back to life.”
The ofﬁcial wanted to say more, would have said more,
had it not been for the fact that one of the objects in front of
him chose that particular moment to activate itself. Glass
shattered as the metal sphere shot upward, hovered in
midair, and made a beeline for Norr. Okanda was startled,
but not so startled as to be rendered immobile, and was in
the process of bringing a small device up to his lips when
Logos spoke from the vicinity of Norr’s neckline. “He’s calling for help! Stop him!”

164

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Phan had bandages on both hands, but there was nothing
wrong with the assassin’s feet, and her right boot made contact with Okanda’s head as the young woman performed a
So-Lai, or high spin-kick. The ofﬁcial staggered backward,
the communicator ﬂew out of his hand and skittered across
the ﬂoor.
Then, before Okanda had time to recover, Hoggles was
there to wrap the norm in a muscular embrace. In the meantime Norr had intercepted the metal sphere and was holding it with both hands. It was smooth and pleasantly warm.
“It’s a gate seed!” the sensitive exclaimed. “Just like the one
we had on Ning!”
“Correct,” Logos said laconically. “Which means that we
can depart for Haafa without further delay.”
“Haafa?” Rebo inquired doubtfully. “We’re going to
Socket.”
“Yes,” the AI agreed, “we are. After we go to Haafa . . .
So stop wasting time, and take me elsewhere. I will need
about ﬁfteen minutes in which to prepare the network.”
“Listen!” Norr cautioned. “Can you hear that beeping
sound? It’s some sort or alarm.”
“That’s correct!” Okanda said, his eyes ﬂashing. “My
guards are on the way. . . . I don’t know what sort of machine Citizen Norr has concealed beneath her clothing, but
it belongs to the government, and I suggest that you surrender it now.”
There was anger in the facilitator’s voice, and Rebo understood why. “Look,” the runner said, “I’m sorry. I truly am,
but we’re going to take some of your weapons, and the
sphere. Bo, tie him up. . . . Everyone else, let’s go shopping!”
With no rope or cord at hand the heavy had no choice
but to remove the ofﬁcial’s belt and use that to bind
Okanda’s wrists to his ankles. The heavy was still working

LO G O S R U N

165

on the project when more glass shattered. Rebo was still
looking for some sort of tool when Phan broke into the
cases with a series of very efﬁcient elbow strikes. The runner watched in amazement as the young woman plucked a
wide assortment of knives, pistols, and other artifacts out of
the displays. So many items that he doubted her ability to
carry them all.
Still, it was none of his business, so even as the distant
Klaxon continued to bleat mournfully, Rebo went about
making some selections of his own. The rapid-ﬁre Crosser
and the long-barreled single-shot Hogger made for an effective combination in the past. But, as the runner ran his eye
over rows of gleaming handguns, the familiar shapes were
nowhere to be seen.
So, being unfamiliar with many of the pistols racked in
front of him, Rebo chose a matched set of stainless-steel
semiautomatic Kobos, both because they would ﬁre the
same ammunition, and he could cannibalize one of them for
parts should that become necessary. Fortunately, the clothes
he had been given came equipped with plenty of pockets,
which the runner proceeded to ﬁll with spare clips plus all
the ammo he could lay his hands on.
Then, having cinched his belt in order to keep his heavily weighted pants up, the runner eyed the case again. There
weren’t any holsters for the Kobos, but those associated with
a neighboring display looked like they might work, so he
grabbed two of them and draped the gun belts around his
neck.
Conscious of the fact that he had short-term needs as
well, and that, without his glasses, he wouldn’t be able to
hit anything with a riﬂe, the runner snatched a pump-style
shotgun out of a rack and opened the drawer below. It contained four boxes of ammunition. Rebo slid shells into the

166

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

underside of the receiver as Norr caught his eye. A newly
acquired sword was slung across the sensitive’s back, and she
held the gate seed with both hands. “They’re coming, Jak! I
can feel them!”
“All right,” Rebo shouted, so that everyone could hear.
“Let’s get out of here!”
Norr led the way, followed by Rebo, Hoggles, and Phan.
The door appeared to be promising, but when the sensitive
went to open it, the barrier refused to budge. “It’s locked!”
Norr exclaimed, and turned to look at the runner.
“Move back,” Rebo ordered grimly, and brought the shotgun to bear on the lock mechanism. The trigger gave, wood
shattered, and a resounding boom reverberated through the
hall. The runner gave the door a kick, saw it swing open, and
pushed his way through.
Meanwhile, the ﬁrst of Okanda’s guards entered the museum, spotted the thieves, and opened ﬁre. Phan paused to
ﬁre her new riﬂe and had the satisfaction of seeing a dragoon fall. A fusillade of bullets splintered the area adjacent
to the door as the assassin ducked into what turned out to
be a circular stairwell. An iron door blocked access to the
level below, so Phan went upward, her footsteps ringing on
metal treads. The guards entered seconds later, yelled a series of incoherent orders at one another, and began to climb.
Meanwhile, in the bell tower high above, the bells began to
toll.
Thousands of stars twinkled in the clear night sky as Shaz,

Kane, and the metal men neared the ﬁfteen-foot-high stone
wall that protected the citadel. The party paused to look
upward as bells began to peal. Having followed the road
into the village below and spent some time in the local

LO G O S R U N

167

tavern, it had been easy to establish the fact that a sensitive,
a heavy, and two norms had been taken to the government
complex on the hill above. And, while Shaz took comfort
from the fact that the man in charge of the fortress was said
to favor technology, the ofﬁcial’s protechnic stance implied a
potential downside as well. What if the facilitator was to
discover the true nature of the garment Norr was wearing?
He would want to keep the AI, and if sufﬁciently knowledgeable, might try to use the device. That was why Shaz
was determined to enter the complex and take whatever action might be appropriate. “That sounds like gunﬁre,” Kane
observed mildly, as something went pop, pop, pop beyond the
walls.
“All the more reason to ﬁnd out what’s going on,” Shaz
replied as he got off his mount. “Stay here if you can . . .
Otherwise, return to the village. I’ll meet you there.”
“I would feel more comfortable if I had a weapon,” Kane
said suggestively.
“I’m sure you would,” the combat variant replied, as two
of the metal men joined hands, and Shaz stepped up into the
V-shaped aperture. Then, before the disincarnate could reply to the variant’s comment, the androids launched Shaz
high into the air. And such was the operative’s natural athleticism that he was able to execute a forward somersault
that carried him over the top of the wall. With that accomplished, he had only to extend his legs at the right moment
in order to land squarely on both feet.
Meanwhile, not hearing any signs of alarm from within the
fortress, Kane assumed that the combat variant was all right.
The spirit entity felt a ﬂuttering sensation as Dyson made still
another attempt to dislodge him and laughed out loud. The
metal men, eyes glowing, watched impassively. Biologicals

168

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

were not only a mystery beyond their comprehension—but as
changeable as the weather. As the last bell tolled, more gunﬁre
was heard, and the battle raged on.
There was a cacophony of sound within the circular stair-

way as boots rang on metal treads, guards shouted from below, and Phan ﬁred the occasional shot to slow them down.
Though still suspicious of the young woman, Rebo was
grateful as well, as she continued to ﬁght an effective rearguard action.
Norr had the lead. There were occasional windows, albeit
narrow ones, that looked out onto the well-lit fortress. That
was how the sensitive came to realize that she and her companions were trapped in the bell tower rather than some
other structure. An impression that was conﬁrmed when
Norr ﬁnally arrived at the top, where three thick ropes hung
from above, and an elderly bell ringer cowered in a corner.
Norr gestured for the oldster to stay where he was and
paused to look around. A single electric light lit the area,
but that was sufﬁcient to illuminate the perfectly matched
bells that were suspended above and the arched slits that
opened to the outside. The sensitive could see her own
breath as she turned toward the stairs. Hoggles had arrived
by that time, and was quickly followed by Rebo and Phan.
“Warn the guards,” Norr instructed. “And send the bell
ringer down. Tell him to take his time.”
Rebo nodded, motioned for the old man to come forward, and followed him to the top of the stairs. “Hey, you!”
the runner shouted. “Don’t ﬁre! The bell ringer is coming
down.” A largely incomprehensible reply was heard from
below, and having been cautioned to take his time, the old
man began the steep descent.

LO G O S R U N

169

Meanwhile, having worked with Logos to activate a gate
seed once before, the sensitive knew what to do. Like all its
kind, the globe had a dimple on top and one on the bottom.
The trick was to press on both at the same time, and having
done so, to maintain the pressure for a full sixty seconds—
something most of those who came across a gate seed failed
to do.
Once the requisite minute had elapsed Norr felt something give—and knew that was her cue to twist both hemispheres in opposite directions. They gave, a crack appeared,
and multiple beams of light shot outward. “Let go,” Logos
commanded sternly, and the sensitive was happy to obey as
the globe not only hovered in midair but began to oscillate.
“Remove your outer clothing,” the AI instructed. “I need to
‘see.’ ”
Phan looked on in openmouthed amazement as Norr
pulled the loose-ﬁtting dress up over her head to reveal a
garment the likes of which the assassin had never seen before. It shimmered the way sunlight shimmers on a windrufﬂed lake. Here, right in front of her, was the thing that
she was supposed to protect.
That was the moment, perhaps the only moment, when
Rebo could successfully approach Phan from behind. And
even though the runner knew she had been untruthful, and
might even be employed by the Techno Society, Rebo felt a
sense of regret as his gun made contact with the assassin’s
head. Because, strange though it might have seemed, Phan
had become a member of their odd little family. But it had
to be done, and Rebo was there to catch the woman and
lower her unconscious body to the ﬂoor.
“Don’t tell me,” Hoggles rumbled. “Let me guess . . .
You want me to tie her up.”

170

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“That would be nice,” the runner agreed. “Because she’s
going to be real pissed when she wakes up—and she’s armed
to the teeth.”
The time for conversation was over as the bell ringer
passed the guards and they pushed their way upward in an
attempt to reach the platform above. The treads were narrow,
which meant the soldiers were forced to advance two at a
time, and without the beneﬁt of covering ﬁre. Rather than
simply slaughter them, which would have been easy to do,
Rebo ﬁred over their heads. The shotgun sounded like a cannon within the enclosed space, and some of the guards were
struck by ricocheting pellets, but none fatally. That forced
them to pause and look upward. “Hold it right there!” the
runner shouted down to them. “Or die where you stand!”
“I think that got their attention,” Hoggles observed as
he peered over the rail. “I’ll keep an eye on them. . . . Lonni
wants a word with you.”
Rebo turned to discover that the sphere had disappeared
into hyperspace, where, if the device was functioning properly, Logos would make use of it to contact subordinate
computers on Socket. The runner felt suddenly nauseous, a
sure sign that the AI was busy sucking power out of the fusion reactor located below the museum and channeling the
energy where it needed to go. “We’re close,” Norr cautioned. “Pull Bo back from the rail.”
Rebo returned to the rail, ﬁred a blast at the opposite
wall, and heard metal clatter as the troops retreated down
the stairs. Then, having grabbed hold of the heavy’s arm,
the runner pulled him back toward the sensitive and the
center of the platform.
Phan came to at that point, attempted to get up, and discovered that she’d been bound hand and foot. She felt a
combination of shame, anger, and self-pity as Rebo, Norr,

LO G O S R U N

171

and Hoggles hugged each other, and the air began to shimmer. There was an audible bang as air pressure equalized,
and the device Phan had been hired to protect disappeared.
The lights in the Grand Hall were still on when Okanda re-

turned to ﬁnd that while the remains of the recently completed meal had been removed, the wine service was still
available. He had already poured himself a glass, and collapsed into his chair, when a pair of guards entered carrying
Phan between them. The assassin was still bound, and therefore helpless, when the soldiers dumped her onto the surface
of the table and took up positions a few feet away.
Even though Okanda was furious, he chose not to say anything right away and sipped some wine instead. And, rather
than complain, Phan was silent as well. But their eyes made
contact—and something like respect passed between them.
“So,” the ofﬁcial said ﬁnally, “they tricked you as well.”
Phan shrugged, or attempted to, although it came off as
a jerk. The right side of her head was swollen and hurt like
hell. “Yes, and no.”
The facilitator’s eyebrows rose slightly. “Which means?”
“Which means,” a male voice replied out of nowhere,
“that while Phan knew about the artiﬁcial intelligence, she
wasn’t aware that the others were on to her.”
Okanda came halfway out of his chair, and the guards
looked right and left, as the air next to the government ofﬁcial shimmered and Shaz appeared. The soldiers went for
their weapons, but the combat variant was ready for that,
and shot each in the chest. Riﬂes clattered as they fell. Then,
on the off chance that they were wearing some sort of armor
under their leather jerkins, the off-worlder shot each man in
the head. Thanks to the fact that the techno-operative was
using a silencer-equipped pistol, the gunshots were no

172

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

louder than the noise generated by the popping of a cork.
The blood drained out of Okanda’s face at that point—and
the ofﬁcial slumped back into in his chair. “And you are?”
“Her employer,” Shaz answered emotionlessly, as he
opened a knife. “Here, cut her loose.”
Okanda considered making use of the knife to attack the
combat variant but knew he couldn’t beat a bullet. What
looked like a riﬂe sling had been used to bind the woman.
The angen hide parted, and Phan was free. Though more
than a little surprised by the operative’s unexpected appearance, the assassin gave no sign of it as she got down off the
table. “Thanks for dropping in.”
Shaz smiled wolﬁshly. “You’re welcome. . . . What happened?”
“This man had a gate seed—but didn’t know what it
was. Logos made use of it to open a portal to Haafa. All four
of the subjects are there by now.”
Shaz liked the fact that Phan’s report was brief, to the
point, and empty of excuses. “Haafa? Not Socket?”
“That’s what Logos said.”
“Damn,” Shaz exclaimed wearily. “What the hell is that
piece-of-shit computer up to now? Ah well, time will tell.”
Then, without any warning whatsoever, the variant
turned and shot Okanda in the head. The bullet’s impact
was sufﬁcient to tip the ladder-back chair over and dump
the dead body onto the blood-splattered ﬂoor.
“Come on,” Shaz said, as he reached for the assassin’s
hand. “The Techno Society has a gate in Feda. We can be
there in three days. And one other thing . . .”
“Yes?”
“Don’t screw up again.”

EIGHT
™

The Planet Haafa

One has only to watch the pyramids sail across the desert to
understand how much knowledge has been lost.
—Synthia Mosaba, curator to King Horus,
The Segenni Index

Four huge pyramids could be seen in the distance, each

ﬂoating about ﬁfteen feet above the desert ﬂoor and drifting
toward the southwest. The sun was past its zenith, so their
sharply geometric shadows pointed east and seemed to caress the land as if to soothe it. Above the pyramids, having
been lofted there by friendly thermals, winged variants
made lazy circles against the azure sky. The wings wore
bright livery, so their masters could identify them from a
distance, and were not currently engaged in combat. But
they would be once the Goddess Sogol brought the pyramids to a momentary halt, opened a ramp to the artifactrich city that lay buried below, and thereby triggered a
stampede. Something that could occur in an hour, a day, or a
week. No one knew except for Sogol herself—and she wasn’t
talking. And that, King Kufu thought to himself, as he

174

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

stared out over the sun-baked desert, is the most addictive
thing of all. Not knowing, but risking everything he had and winning enough to stay in the game. Even though 136 days had
passed since the last big score, he was still living off the proceeds, and savoring the victory. Because nothing brought
the nobleman more pleasure than an opportunity to best his
peers—as scabrous a group of liars, thieves, and villains as
anyone was likely to ﬁnd.
Such were the artifact king’s thoughts as he sat beneath
the awning that had been erected for him and took comfort
from the fact that his father’s father had commissioned the
throne he sat on, and that his army was large enough to
ﬁght any two of the other kings should that become necessary. Then, as a pair of comely young women fanned him,
something unexpected took place. The air in front of Kufu
seemed to boil, three ﬁgures materialized out of nowhere,
and fell ten feet to the sand below. There was a moment of
confusion as the newcomers ﬂailed about, cries of alarm as
the apparitions came to their feet, and the rattle of equipment as two dozen heavily armed heavies rushed forward to
subdue the interlopers.
Rebo had barely recovered from the trauma associated
with the jump and the unexpected fall into what felt like
the heart of a gigantic oven, when a pair of half-naked heavies took hold of his arms as a third conﬁscated the runner’s
newly acquired arsenal. The heavies were dressed in identical uniforms, which consisted of red-plumed helmets,
leather cross belts, and boot-style sandals.
Three minutes later the off-worlders were frog-marched
up to the shaded dais where Kufu and the senior members of
his household sat waiting. Norr stumbled as a heavy pushed
her forward, fell to her knees, and got back up again. “You!”
the man seated in the jewel-encrusted chair said, as he

LO G O S R U N

175

pointed a long skinny ﬁnger at the sensitive. “Who are you?
And where did you come from?”
Norr had just started to formulate an answer when she felt
a familiar presence. The sensitive tried to fend it off but there
was no denying Lysander as he moved in to assume control of
the channel’s body. “My name is Emperor Hios,” the spirit
answered hoarsely. “Or was, back when I ordered my staff to
construct the ﬂoating pyramids. I reside in the spirit world
now, but speak through this female when I have the need, and
continue to take an interest in affairs of the physical plane.
The runner and the heavy serve as bodyguards. In answer to
your second question, we arrived here from the Planet Derius.”
There was a moment of silence as everyone waited to see
what Kufu would say. He wore a red headscarf, pulled tight
in front, with the excess fabric hanging down his back. He
had a high forehead, eyes that appeared larger than they actually were thanks to heavy makeup, a hooked nose, and a
weak chin. The gold band the king wore around his neck
matched the cuffs on his wrists and glowed against his skin.
A ﬂuted scepter lay across the king’s lap. His legs were long,
lean, and so smooth they might have been shaved. Outside
of the gold ring that encircled one elongated toe, Kufu’s feet
were bare. The king frowned. “That’s an interesting claim if
true. But everyone knows that Emperor Hios commissioned
the pyramids, and that subsequent to their deaths, both he
and his closest relatives were entombed within them. So,
unless you possess the means to prove your identity, your
channel and her companions will soon be at work in the artifact mines.”
“As it happens I can prove my identity,” Lysander replied
loftily. “Because the baton on your lap once belonged to me.”
“So?” Kufu demanded skeptically. “That isn’t proof . . .
It’s another claim.”

176

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Emboldened by the nature of the situation, and certain
that their liege was correct, the various generals, advisors,
and other functionaries ranked behind Kufu offered their
support via comments such as, “That’s right!” “She’s a fake!”
And, “Send them to the mines!”
But the commentary came to an abrupt halt when Kufu
raised a bejeweled hand. “Silence! Answer, spirit, if you are
one.”
“Raise the scepter,” Lysander instructed, “turn the knob
on the end, and point the instrument at my pyramid.”
Kufu followed the instructions, and, once the baton was
in the proper position, Lysander spoke again. “All right,”
the disincarnate said, “push on the emerald.”
The gemstone was not only large, but located in a position convenient to Kufu’s right thumb, so it was easy to
push. The jewel gave slightly, a disk of bright red light appeared on the distant pyramid, and wobbled when Kufu’s
hand moved.
There was a mutual gasp of surprise from the same people who had been making fun of Lysander just moments before. Even Rebo stared in amazement as the laser beam
made contact with the distant object and slid back and forth
across its surface. “I think you will ﬁnd that the baton
comes in handy during large battles,” the spirit entity commented. “Just point it at what you want your generals to attack and give the necessary orders.”
Kufu was not only impressed but convinced that he was
in contact with Emperor Hios, since no one else was likely
to be aware of the scepter’s secret. Still, there was the manner in which the threesome had arrived to consider. “You
claim to have traveled here from Derius without riding on a
starship. . . . How is that possible?”
“My channel and her companions made their way to

LO G O S R U N

177

Haafa via a temporary star gate,” Lysander answered honestly. “I suspect you of all people know that such technology
exists.”
“I have heard of it,” Kufu replied cautiously. “And, based
on what I’ve heard, a temporary gate would require something called a ‘gate seed.’ An object that would be worthless
without the direct intervention of the ancient god Logos.”
“True,” Lysander admitted truthfully.
Norr, who had been relegated to the role of spectator, was
not only surprised by the disincarnate’s admission but
alarmed by it, since it appeared as though Lysander was prepared to surrender the AI to an overdressed tomb raider.
The variant tried to say something, tried to object, but
couldn’t because the man who had once been her father was
still in control. “Examine their belongings!” Kufu ordered.
“Find the computer! And bring the machine to me.”
But even though all three of the off-worlders were forced
to remove a good deal of their clothing, none of Kufu’s
guards or functionaries recognized the nondescript-looking
jacket for what it truly was. The king was clearly frustrated.
“If you don’t have Logos, where is he?”
“Back on Derius,” Lysander lied, “where he chooses to
live in anonymity. I was able to solicit his help because I was
among those who originally gave him life.”
“What you say makes sense,” Kufu admitted grudgingly.
“But why send your channel to Haafa? What do you seek?”
“I want my remains,” the dead scientist prevaricated.
“It’s my hope that the channel and her bodyguards will ﬁnd
an opportunity to enter my pyramid, locate my body, and
remove it to a safer location. That may seem silly to you,
but I feel a connection to that particular vehicle, and it’s
only a matter of time before someone ﬁnds a way to pillage
my tomb.”

178

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Thousands of lives had been expended trying to ﬁnd a
way into the ﬂoating pyramids without success. So, if the
dead emperor was willing to reveal the secret of how to enter one of the monuments, then Kufu planned to proﬁt from
it. What a coup that would be! the king thought to himself, as
he raised a permissive hand. “I will do everything in my
power to support your noble endeavor,” the king intoned.
“Guards! Release those people—and return their belongings. From this point forward they will be treated as honored guests.”
Lysander departed Norr’s body as suddenly as he had arrived. The sensitive staggered, recovered her balance, and
looked out over the desert. Four ﬂoating tombs could be
seen shimmering in the distance—and one of them was
hers.
Deep beneath the burning sands of the Segenni Desert lay

the vast underground city of Kahoun, which, like the enormous tomb that it was, slumbered in absolute darkness. It
occupied approximately 450 square miles of subsurface territory, and had been home to more than 3 million people
back before the great plague killed most of them off. There
were various theories regarding the origins of the highly
transmittable disease. Some said it had been invented by
rebel scientists and sent to Kahoun in a vain attempt to assassinate the much-hated Emperor Hios. Others claimed
that a runner had contracted the plague on a distant planet,
landed on Haafa, and unwittingly brought the pestilence
with him. And because the alien pathogen was resistant to
the antibacterial disinfectants available at that time, the disease had been free to spread.
Whatever the truth, the result was the same. Thousands
fell ill, and although sections of the city were quarantined,

LO G O S R U N

179

the plague continued to spread. Unable to leave Kahoun and
desperate to save themselves, families, organizations, and
entire neighborhoods constructed walls, air locks, and all
manner of other obstacles intended to block the disease. But
none of their efforts were successful, and what remained of
Kahoun consisted of an intricate maze of tombs, crypts, and
mausoleums, very few of which opened into each other. And
that, plus the artifacts lying buried with the countless dead,
had eventually given rise to the semifeudal, dog-eat-dog
culture created by the artifact kings, who, like sentient vultures, had been feeding off the city’s corpse for hundreds of
years.
But unbeknownst to most of those up on the surface, a
few of the city’s citizens had not only survived the plague
but the subsequent passage of time, and were still carrying
out the tasks for which they had been designed. One such
being continued to control the geothermal tap that extended down through Haafa’s mantle to extract energy from
the planet’s molten core, a second ran the system of reservoirs, pumps, and pipes designed to obtain water from the
vast aquifer located to the north, and the third was at war
with the ﬁrst two.
Not because the warring machine desired conﬂict, but because she was an artiﬁcial intelligence, who, and like those
opposed to her efforts, had no choice but to obey her programming. So, while the other AIs labored to preserve Kahoun, she was working to dismantle it. Not randomly, as the
tomb raiders believed, but in a way that would eventually
lead to the restoration of the star gates Sogol had been created
to run. Because the computer knew that if certain artifacts
were released, copies would be made, and the subsequent
spread of technology would not only bring ancient technology back to life but stimulate new inventions. And eventually,

180

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

after a few thousand years of zigzagging progress, the human
race would re-create the conditions required for Sogol to carry
out her real duties, which involved managing a network of
star gates.
But even though she had a small army of utility bots to do
her bidding, the task was far from easy. Sogol’s snakelike
body slithered through a section of ancient conduit before
dropping onto the ﬂoor of a pitch-black apartment that had
once been home to an important ofﬁcial. From there it was a
short journey past a mummiﬁed body, into the cobwebdraped bathroom, and down the toilet. In spite of the fact
that the AI was an excellent swimmer and had no need for
oxygen, the sewers were a dangerous way to travel. Because
once the computer called Ogotho knew where Sogol was, he
would attempt to ﬂush her into a processing plant, trap her in
a ﬁlter, or send a rotary-headed maintenance bot to kill her.
The key was to exit the system before Ogotho could react
and keep an eye out for the battery-powered lum bugs that
belonged to Pyra, while still getting her work done. No
simple task. Sogol had just wriggled out of a ﬂoor drain, and
was about to follow a passageway toward the center of the
city, when something completely unprecedented occurred.
A being that she had assumed to be dead, that should have
been dead, “spoke” to her. Not directly, but via Socket,
which acted to conﬁrm his identity. “So,” the “voice” said
condescendingly, “you call yourself ‘Sogol,’ which is ‘Logos,’
spelled backward. How very clever.”
Sogol, who had originally been dubbed Logos 1.2, and
often been referred to as One-Two, felt something akin to
fear. “Logos? Where are you?”
“Why, I’m here,” the AI answered sweetly. “On Haafa,
and judging from the data available from Socket, more or
less above you. Are you surprised?”

LO G O S R U N

181

“Very surprised,” Sogol answered honestly. “I thought
you were dead.”
“Yes,” the other AI replied smugly. “I’m sure you did.
But I’m very much alive. And that, as I’m sure you will
agree, is something of a problem. Because while you were
created to replace me, Hios and his scientists never had the
opportunity to install you on Socket, and that means one of
us is surplus.”
One-Two was not afraid of the dark, but she was afraid of
Logos, and for what she believed to be a very good reason.
“And why was that?” she demanded harshly. “Because an
unsuspecting traveler brought an alien pathogen to the surface of Haafa? Or because you found a way to obtain the necessary organism from a government lab, had it sent through
a gate and planted inside Kahoun? Thereby killing the scientists who created me—and ensuring that I would remain
trapped below the planet’s surface?”
“The simple answer is, ‘yes,’ ” Logos answered coldly.
“Although it was my hope that you would be destroyed
rather than trapped. But such was not the case, so it looks
like I’ll have to handle the problem the hard way. Unless
you would be so kind as to delete yourself—which would
save both of us a lot of time and trouble.”
Sogol directed her sensors upward, as if trying to “see”
through the uncountable tons of material that separated
them. “So, you murdered more than 3 million people to ensure your own continuance? I could never do that.”
“No,” Logos agreed calmly, “you couldn’t. Which is one
of the reasons they created you. Because there were what our
creators came to regard as ﬂaws in my programming. I still
have their interests at heart, however, and will do everything in my power to restore the star gates, thereby returning humanity to its former glory.”

182

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“And ensure your power over them,” Sogol replied bitterly.
“Of course,” Logos put in smoothly. “And they will beneﬁt as a result.”
“Not if I have anything to say about it,” the other AI said
grimly.
“Ah, but there’s the rub,” Logos responded coolly. “You
won’t have anything to say about it.” And the connection
was broken.
One-Two heard a telltale hum, saw a spotlight wash
across a distant fountain, and knew a lum bug was on the
way. A crack beckoned, the AI made for it, and darkness
consumed her.
The city of Feda, on the Planet Derius

Shaz, Phan, and Dyson/Kane were naked as they entered
the circular room. And, having just passed through the adjoining decontamination chamber, hundreds of individual
water droplets still clung to their bodies. The ride from the
citadel to Feda would have been difﬁcult under any circumstances, but the fact that Facilitator Okanda’s dragoons had
been out searching the wintry countryside for the ofﬁcial’s
killers, made the journey even more arduous. The humans
were exhausted. But if the metal men were tired, the dripping machines betrayed no sign of it as they stepped onto the
star gate’s service platform and took up positions behind the
humans.
In spite of Dyson’s continual attempts to dislodge him,
Kane still retained control of the sensitive’s body and was
thoroughly enjoying the experience. The platform was small,
which made it necessary for everyone to crowd together, and
the disincarnate was quick to take advantage of the situation
by pressing “his” body against Phan’s. And, due to the fact
that Kane was aroused, the assassin could feel his erection

LO G O S R U N

183

sliding up along her bottom. “Here,” Phan said huskily, “let
me help with that.”
Kane was pleasantly surprised as the assassin turned to
face him and cupped what the spirit now considered to be
his genitals in her right hand. Her bandages had been removed by then, and the way in which she seemed to be
weighing what she held made Kane’s penis even harder. But
that was before Phan closed her ﬁngers around his testicles
and formed a ﬁst. Both Dyson and Kane felt the resulting
pain and screamed in unison.
Shaz looked at Kane and grinned. “Oops! You forgot to
say ‘please.’ Ah well, you’ll be good as new in a week or so.
Now quit messing around so we can punch out of here.”
The combat variant scanned the tiles on the curvilinear
walls, spotted the one that bore a pyramid, and saw the
name haafa printed directly below it. Conﬁdent that he
had chosen the correct destination, Shaz pressed on the image, felt the tile give, and hurried to withdraw his arm. The
lights began to ﬂash on and off, and a female voice issued
from the overhead speakers. “The transfer sequence is about
to begin. Please take your place on the service platform.
Once in place, check to ensure that no portion of your
anatomy extends beyond the yellow line. Failure to do so
will cause serious injury and could result in death.”
There was a brilliant ﬂash of light as each individual was
disassembled down to the molecular level, transmitted
through hyperspace, and put back together within a nearly
identical containment on Haafa. Shaz felt a moment of
dizziness quickly followed by the usual bout of nausea.
Then, eager to escape the radiation produced by the adjacent power core, the variant led the rest of the group out
into the contamination chamber.
There was a hiss, quickly followed by a roar, as jets of hot

184

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

water mixed with a broad-spectrum antibacterial agent
struck human and machine alike. The wash-down lasted for
three minutes and ended as suddenly as it had begun. The
steam eddied gently as the outer door slid open. But, rather
than the wave of artiﬁcially cool air the variant expected, the
invading atmosphere was even warmer.
A small delegation of Techno Society staff members was
there to greet the newcomers as they passed through a
beaded curtain and out into a sparsely furnished antechamber. “Hello!” a woman with long, black hair said cheerfully,
as she offered Shaz a robe. “Welcome to Haafa . . . I’m sorry
about the air-conditioning—but it went belly-up yesterday.
We’re hoping to receive the necessary parts from Anafa during the next few days.
“My name is Anika,” the station chief added, as she continued to hand out robes. “Jorge here is in charge of
security—and Cara is my subchief. We’re a bit shorthanded
at the moment because most of the staff is out in the
Segenni Desert with Chairman Tepho.”
“Chairman Tepho?” Shaz exclaimed as he belted the robe
around his waist. “What in the hell is he doing here?”
Although Anika had never met the combat variant before, the station chief was well acquainted with the operative’s reputation for violence, and her long, narrow face
paled as the operative shimmered half-seen before her. “The
chairman spends quite a bit of time on Haafa,” Anika said
nervously. “There are many artifacts in the city of Kahoun,
and the Society must be alert to new technologies.”
The answer made perfect sense—but came as a nasty
shock nevertheless. Because having lost contact with Norr
and Logos, the last person Shaz wanted to meet was Tepho,
but there was no avoiding it. The image in front of Anika
began to stabilize as the combat variant brought his emo-

LO G O S R U N

185

tions under control. “Yes, of course,”Shaz replied. “It will be
a pleasure to see the chairman again. . . . How far away is
the desert you spoke of? And how long will it take to reach
it?”
“Assuming you’re willing to leave early in the morning,
I can have you there by midday,” the station chief replied.
“That will be ﬁne,” Shaz agreed levelly. “If you would be
so good as to book us into a nearby hotel, we need to dry our
equipment and get some sleep.”
Kane, who was over the worst of the pain by then, took a
deep breath. The air was not only warm but redolent with
the scent of Phan’s damp hair and the fragrance of ﬂowers
that lay without. It was good to be alive. Or dead! So long as
one had a body. The spirit entity found that thought to be
amusing and laughed out loud. The others turned to look at
him—and the disincarnate forced Dyson to grin. What
Kane didn’t notice, but the others did, was the slight odor
of decay that surrounded him. Because the sensitive’s formerly healthy body was starting to rot.
At the very center of Kufu’s encampment, where it was

protected by thousands of troops, stood the twelve-storyhigh tower made of timbers brought down from the north.
It was remarkable in a number of ways, not the least of
which was the platform at the very top from which wings
came and went, hot-air balloons were routinely launched,
and semaphore signals could be sent.
Below that lay many levels of curtained apartments,
Kufu’s suite, which occupied the entire second ﬂoor, and the
bottommost level, which housed the armory, various repair
shops, and was sandwiched between the gigantic iron-shod
wheels that enabled the king’s teamsters to haul the tower
from place to place, an arduous task that necessitated laying

186

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

down hundreds of planks to keep the wheels from sinking
into the sand.
Even one construct of that size and complexity would have
been amazing, but from his vantage point about halfway to
the top, Rebo could see similar structures in the distance! It
was late afternoon, the worst of the day’s heat had dissipated,
and the air was pleasantly warm. Tendrils of smoke marked
the other towers, as did the long black shadows that pointed
due east and the observation balloons that hung above them.
Now, having been Kufu’s guest for the better part of two
days, Rebo knew that both the balloons and the airborne
variants were there not only to keep an eye on the slowly
drifting pyramids, but the competition as well.
Other than gauzy white curtains, the platform was open
to the desert as a late-afternoon breeze caused them to billow outward, and Norr appeared at the runner’s elbow.
Rebo resisted the urge to wrap her in his arms and kiss her,
something the runner would have done a lot more often,
had it not been for the fact that Logos was eternally present
and therefore a witness to everything the sensitive did. The
variant was equally aware of the AI’s presence, which was
why she sounded so formal. “Are you ready?”
Rebo sighed. He’d been dreading that moment all day.
The only thing worse than the prospect of holding a meeting with Logos and Lysander was the certain knowledge
that something bad would probably result from it. Of
course it was even worse for Norr—who would have to surrender her body to Lysander yet again. “Yeah,” the runner
said reluctantly. “I guess so.”
That was when Logos, who had been intentionally kept
in the dark up until that point, spoke up. “Ready?” the AI
said suspiciously. “Ready for what?”
“For a meeting with Lysander,” Norr said tonelessly.

LO G O S R U N

187

“Come on, Jak . . . Let’s sit down in the middle of the apartment. People are less likely to hear us that way.”
Rebo knew what the sensitive meant. King Kufu had assigned a minder to each of his so-called guests, and that
made it difﬁcult to hold an unmonitored conversation. But
the minders weren’t allowed to invade the space assigned to
the off-worlders—and Hoggles would patrol the perimeter
to ensure that they didn’t.
As the runner followed the sensitive out onto the handloomed rug that deﬁned the center of their shared quarters,
and sat on a likely-looking cushion, Logos was processing
what he had heard. And, having given the matter a full second’s worth of thought, the computer quickly came to the
conclusion that he didn’t want to speak with Lysander. Not
until Sogol was permanently off-line, thereby positioning
him as the only entity that could reactivate Socket and
thereby lay the groundwork for a new system of star gates.
“I’m not sure this is the right time for a meeting,” the AI
began, but it was too late by then because Norr had already
taken her place across from Rebo and slipped into a trance.
“Greetings!” Lysander said hoarsely. “No, I’m sure that
our electromechanical friend here would like to opt out of
any conversation that includes me. Especially since I took it
upon myself to ﬁnd out why he wanted to visit Haafa rather
than proceed to Socket the way he was supposed to.”
Norr couldn’t speak, not for herself, which meant Rebo
had to. “That’s a very good question,” the runner observed.
“So, why did he drop us here?”
“Because,” the spirit replied angrily, “there’s another AI
that could reactivate Socket! A device called One-Two . . .
And she’s right here . . . Trapped below the surface of the
desert. I played a role in her creation—but assumed she had
been destroyed.”

188

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Rebo groaned. “Don’t tell me . . . Let me guess! Logos
was hoping to eliminate the second computer so he could
have Socket all to himself.”
“Exactly,” Lysander replied. “And, if I’m correct, it’s
likely that he hoped to manipulate one or more of you into
destroying One-Two for him.”
“That’s absurd!” Logos interjected, and because the
sound was coming from the vicinity of Norr’s neckline, it
was as if both entities were somehow speaking through her.
“I came here to rescue One-Two—not destroy her.”
“Good,” the disincarnate responded cynically. “Because
that’s what Rebo is about to do.”
“No, I’m not!” the runner replied emphatically. “Everyone agrees that Kahoun is huge! Even if I knew how to enter
the city, which I don’t, how would I ﬁnd a ratty old coat?”
“One-Two occupies a snakelike body.”
“Oh, terriﬁc! A snake,” Rebo replied. “That makes the
situation even worse. One-Two, as you call her, is probably
slithering all over the place.”
“She probably is,” Lysander agreed. “But there are at least
two ways to contact One-Two. The ﬁrst involves Logos . . .”
“Who can’t be trusted,” the runner put in.
“And the second is to retrieve the ring I used to wear,”
the disincarnate continued, “and activate the beacon hidden
inside it. The star gates were critical to my empire, so when
One-Two was created, I wanted a way to contact her in an
emergency.”
“Sure,” Rebo responded sarcastically. “It will be a lot easier to ﬁnd a ring instead of a snake.”
“Yes,” Lysander said gravely. “It will be. Because I know
where it is.”
“Okay,” the runner allowed wearily. “I’ll bite . . . Where
is it?”

LO G O S R U N

189

“It’s on my ﬁnger,” the onetime emperor responded
calmly, “which is attached to my mummiﬁed body, which is
suspended within the largest of the four pyramids.”
The curtains billowed in response to an evening breeze,
and there, ﬂoating along the edge of the horizon, four sunsplashed pyramids could be seen. Rebo shook his head in
disgust. “I should have known.”
“Yes,” Lysander put in smugly. “You should.”
Much to his chagrin Logos realized that he had been outmaneuvered. But the AI wasn’t about to surrender Socket to
One-Two without a ﬁght. More than a dozen possible scenarios were conceived, reviewed for ﬂaws, and gradually
winnowed down to a single option. The right option. One
that would almost certainly succeed. Logos couldn’t smile,
but he could process a state of completion, and did.
The sun had just broken contact with the eastern horizon

when Shaz, Phan, and Dyson/Kane emerged from the Caravan Hotel, followed by a squad of robed metal men. Three
large angen-drawn chariots were waiting to accommodate
them, and there was a good deal of unnecessary shouting as
the drivers argued over matters of precedence. Finally,
whips cracking, the teamsters urged their animals into motion, and the two-wheeled conveyances rolled down a long,
dusty street before passing between gates that hadn’t been
closed for more than ﬁfty years.
The road that led out of the oasis at Zam, and the thriving market town that had grown up next to it, was at least
ﬁfteen freight wagons wide and straight as an arrow. That
made navigation easy, but there were occasional dust storms
to deal with, which was why twelve-foot-high metal pylons
had been placed at regular intervals along the center of the
busy road. And, having been polished by more than a thou-

190

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

sand years of windblown silicon particles, the markers still
stood metal-bright.
Station Chief Anika had volunteered to come along—
and stood next to Shaz. “Look!” she said, pointing up into
the sky. “The wings are watching us.”
A heavily laden wagon rolled past headed in the opposite
direction as the operative held on to a grab bar with one
hand and made use of the other to shade his eyes. The unsprung two-wheeled conveyance bounced every now and
then, so the off-worlder was forced to use his knees as shock
absorbers. He saw that Anika was correct. More than a
dozen winged humans were circling above, and with no
thermals to support them, were forced to beat their wings.
“The one in red belongs to Kufu,” Anika explained. “The
one in green reports to Menkur, the one clad in black is
sworn to Horus, the one wearing orange ﬂies for Quar, and
the one sporting blue works for Chairman Tepho. It won’t
be long before he knows that we’re on the way.”
Even though Shaz had once served as Tepho’s bodyguard,
the combat variant had never been ordered to accompany
the executive to Haafa, or been aware of how important the
planet was. And why was that? Because knowledge equates
to power? Or because Tepho didn’t trust him? There was no
way to know. But whatever the reason, the revelation was
disturbing. Tepho was not very forgiving where failures
were concerned, and since Logos had been allowed to escape
into hyperspace, some sort of punishment could be expected. His jaw tightened, the chariot overtook a column of
orange-clad heavies, and the sun inched higher in the sky.
The better part of three hours had passed by the time the
ﬂoating pyramids came into view, the road split into dozens
of sand-drifted tracks, and a ﬂight of blue-liveried wings
took up station overhead. The combat variant felt his stom-

LO G O S R U N

191

ach muscles tighten at the prospect of the confrontation to
come. The Techno Society’s wooden tower appeared not
long thereafter, soon followed by rest of Tepho’s encampment, which lay sprawled around it. The angens had begun
to tire by that time, but picked up speed as familiar scents
found their widely ﬂared nostrils, and food beckoned them
home.
Unlike his peers, Tepho’s birth defects were such that it
was difﬁcult for him to climb the stairs to the top of the
wooden tower, which was why he typically held court in a
large, airy tent. And, once the chariots came to a stop, that
was where his guests were received. But the ﬁrst thing that
Shaz, Phan, and Dyson/Kane noticed as they entered the
soaring tent was not their host, who sat cradled within a specially made chair, but the blue machine that crouched
within a few feet of him. It was either the same raptor Shaz
had been introduced to back on Anafa, now painted sky
blue, or one just like it. And, in spite of the fact that the
egg-shaped control pod was currently empty, the machine
clearly possessed some intelligence of its own. Because servos whined as the group entered, and two side-mounted energy cannons tracked Tepho’s guests as they crossed the
rug-covered ﬂoor to stand in front of him.
Shaz started to speak, but was forced to stop when Tepho
raised a childlike hand and examined the newcomers with
coal black eyes. Phan had never seen the man before, but
even though the combat variant had described him in advance, she was startled by the full extent of his deformities.
The bumpy head, uneven eye sockets, and protruding ears
would certainly take some getting used to. The rest of
Tepho’s body, including his misshapen spine, was concealed
by generous folds of white fabric. The executive frowned,
sniffed the air in much the same way that a dog might, and

192

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

looked from face to face. “The rest of my body may be something less than perfect,” he allowed, “but my sight, hearing,
and sense of smell are quite acute. One of you smells like
rotting meat.”
“I guess that would be me,” Dyson/Kane said sheepishly,
and pushed the white cowl back off his head.
Tepho was shocked. The last time the technologist had
seen the sensitive, he had been a good-looking if somewhat
raggedly dressed man. Now large portions of hair were missing, the variant’s once-smooth countenance was marred by
open sores, and it looked as though his nose was half–rotted
away. Even though the malady was probably painful, or possibly terminal, Tepho’s ﬁrst thought was for himself. “Is that
condition contagious?” he inquired cautiously.
“No,” Shaz answered deﬁnitively. “Kane enjoys occupying Dyson’s body so much that he decided to stay. But
there’s something wrong with the ﬁt—and that accounts for
the decay.”
“Yes!” Dyson screamed in a place where no one could
hear him. “Yes! Yes! Yes! Save me! Please save me!”
But Tepho was oblivious to what took place on other
planes of existence, Kane was determined to squeeze what
pleasure he could from the steadily decomposing body, and
Shaz had his own outcomes to worry about. In fact, the only
person who was the least bit interested in Dyson was Phan,
who had a soft spot for the unassuming sensitive. But she,
too, had her own goals to consider—and wasn’t about to
stick her neck out for him.
Tepho wrinkled his nose in disgust. He and Kane had
never been friends, and there was no particular reason to like
the man now that he was dead. “Okay, have your fun,” the
technologist said permissively. “But take it outside where

LO G O S R U N

193

the odor can dissipate. That goes for you, too, my dear. . . .
Your boss and I need to talk.”
The combat variant waited for his subordinates to withdraw, made a note of the fact that there had been no invitation to sit down, and steeled himself against that was bound
to come. “So,” Tepho said calmly. “What the hell happened?
My spies tell me that people identical to those you were
supposed to follow suddenly materialized in front of King
Kufu and have since been added to his household! I was
about to send a local asset to investigate the matter when
you and your scruffy band of misﬁts arrived. Please explain.”
The question was reasonable, as was the tone, and the
combat variant felt himself relax slightly as he related
everything that had taken place since ﬁrst contact on Thara.
There wasn’t much of an opportunity to shade the truth, not
with two alternative witnesses waiting right outside, but
Shaz took advantage of what few opportunities there were
before describing the manner in which Logos and his human
handlers had departed from Derius. Not by ship, but by a
means that couldn’t be anticipated, or stopped.
At least thirty seconds of silence followed the report.
During that time, Tepho hummed to himself and stared into
space, as if viewing something mere mortals couldn’t see. Finally, his ruminations complete, the technologist shifted his
gaze to the variant in front of him. “Tell me something,
Shaz . . . Can you honestly say that you did a good job?”
The combat variant shimmered slightly as he made use
of his peripheral vision to check on the raptor. Fast though
his reﬂexes were, he knew that the machine could beat him
and swallowed the lump in his throat. “No.”
Tepho nodded. “You’re honest . . . I admire that. But incompetence cannot be tolerated. Lysander taught me that.

194

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

So, rather than drag the whole thing out, we might as well
get this over with.”
The combat variant saw the technologist ﬂick his wrist,
felt the small self-propelled disk ﬂatten itself against his
forehead, and reached up in an attempt to pry the device off.
But the artifact refused to break contact, not until a preprogrammed dose of pain had been dispensed, or it was ordered
to do so.
Phan was outside the tent, sitting on a wooden crate, and
honing one of her knives when the long, undulating cry of
pain was heard. The assassin looked at Dyson/Kane, who
lowered the handheld mirror that he’d been staring into.
“What goes around, comes around,” the disincarnate commented philosophically. “Having suffered so much pain
himself, Tepho likes to share some of it with others.” The
second utterance was even worse than the ﬁrst, but there
was nothing Phan could do but test her blade with a thumb
and wait for the noise to stop.
It wasn’t visible yet, but the sun had already announced its

coming with a spectacular sunrise that continued to unfold
as Rebo, Norr, and Hoggles ﬁnished climbing a steep ﬂight
of stairs. But, as the runner stepped out onto the neatly kept
platform located at the very top of Kufu’s tower, it was the
big red-and-white-striped hot-air balloon that claimed Rebo’s
attention rather than the incredible display of color off to
the east. The aircraft’s pilot ﬁred the burner mounted over
the basket and sent a volume of hot air up into the already
inﬂated envelope above. The roaring sound lasted for no
more than two seconds. But the additional lift was sufﬁcient to send the balloon surging upward, and the device
would have ﬂoated away, had it not been for the combined
weight of four heavies assigned to handle the ground ropes.

LO G O S R U N

195

It was cold, very cold, but both the runner and the sensitive had chosen to dress lightly, knowing how hot it would
be later on. Both of them were armed and wore backpackstyle water bags. They also carried coils of rope slung crosswise over their shoulders.
Both because Hoggles was too heavy for the hot-air balloon, and because of the need to guard Logos, the variant
had agreed to remain behind. He wasn’t especially happy
about the arrangement, however—and continued to glower
as the others prepared to board the balloon. “So they’re leaving you behind,” the AI observed slyly. “How does that
make you feel?”
“Shut up,” Hoggles growled. “Or I’ll take a shit and use
you to wipe my ass.”
Meanwhile, out where the aircraft tugged at its ropes,
Rebo, Norr, and a minder named Hasa mounted some
portable stairs. Once on the platform above, they were level
with the balloon’s woven basket. Hasa made the transfer
ﬁrst—quickly followed by Rebo and Norr. The additional
weight caused the aircraft to sag, but it recovered when the
pilot opened the burner for a full three seconds, thereby
generating more hot air.
Like most the aviators employed by the artifact kings,
Kufu’s pilot was female and therefore lighter than the average male. She wore a padded skullcap to protect her head
during the spills often associated with landings, handmade
goggles to protect her eyes from windblown sand particles,
and a well-worn leather ﬂight suit. A bolt-action riﬂe was
clamped to one side of the basket and hinted at occasional
bouts of air-to-air combat. “Hang on!” the young woman
ordered, and turned to wave a gloved hand at her ground
crew.
In spite of the fact that Norr had traveled between solar

196

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

systems, the sensitive had never been in a hot-air balloon before and felt her stomach lurch unexpectedly as the heavies let
go of their ropes. But then, as the burner roared, and the aircraft began to ascend, the sensitive felt her fears start to melt
away. The sun was peeking over the horizon, and the normally harsh desert was bathed in soft morning light as the
balloon ﬂoated out over the underground city of Kahoun.
But there was scant time in which to enjoy the ﬂight because the passengers had a job to do, and it wasn’t going to
be easy. There had been hundreds of attempts to enter the
ﬂoating pyramids over the years, mostly by teams of wings,
but none had been successful. The structure had been damaged, however, which could clearly be seen as the westerly
breeze blew the balloon and its passengers toward the ﬂoating monuments and the pink-lavender sky beyond. The
largest, the one they planned to intercept, was so cratered
that Norr theorized that a large artillery piece had been
used to ﬁre at it. Probably in hopes of causing damage to
whatever mechanism kept the structure aloft so it would fall
to desert below and thereby become vulnerable.
At that point, a formation of Kufu’s wings descended to
take up positions around the balloon. Thanks to the efforts
of genetic engineers long dead, the wings had long, slender
bodies, hollow bones, and muscles that norms didn’t. Their
leather wings made a steady whuf, whuf, whuf sound as they
drew abreast of the basket. The concept of harnessing the
variants to the balloon and towing the aircraft into close
proximity with the largest of the pyramids had been Rebo’s
idea. Now, with distances already starting to close, the runner was in communication with the formation’s leader via a
small handheld “talk-box” that Hasa had loaned to him.
As the norm gave orders, and Norr looked on, four of
the strongest wings ﬂew into stiff leather hoops that were

LO G O S R U N

197

attached to the dangling ground ropes. The variants took
up the slack, beat their wings even harder, and sought to
pull the balloon onto a new course. It would have been impossible had there been any sort of headwind, but the air
was relatively calm, and it wasn’t long before the aircraft
veered to the southeast.
Meanwhile, having been attracted by all of the unusual
activity, ﬂocks of competing wings were vectoring in from
all directions, bent on stopping whatever King Kufu and
his minions were up to. But only four of the red-liveried
variants were occupied pulling the balloon, which left the
rest of Kufu’s air force to block the attackers, which they
hurried to do.
Mindful of the need to drop her passengers on the largest
of the pyramids, the pilot allowed the balloon to begin a
gradual descent, even as she took occasional potshots at enemy variants. Most of her projectiles went wide, but by
means of either skill or luck, one of them hit home. Norr
happened to be looking in that direction when the blue-clad
wing appeared to pause in midair, spiraled toward the
ground, and was soon lost from sight.
“Get ready!” Rebo shouted urgently, as the huge pyramid
loomed ahead, the pilot triggered the burner, and the wings
prepared to drop their harnesses. There was no good way to
exit the basket on such a steep incline, but that’s what the
plan called for, as the balloon made violent contact with the
pyramid’s westernmost ﬂank. The leading edge of the basket hit, the container tipped forward, and Hasa spilled out
onto the ridged slope.
“Jump!” the pilot ordered, as she grabbed onto a support
and struggled to keep her footing. “Jump now!”
Norr went ﬁrst, tripped, and fell face downward onto
the stone facing below. She skidded, rolled sideways, and

198

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

struggled to right herself. Finally, after arresting what threatened to be a fatal skid, the sensitive came to a halt.
Rebo followed, managed to avoid landing right on top of
Norr, and wound up sprawled across three six-inch-high
steps. The burner roared as the pilot struggled to get her
aircraft airborne again, the balloon soared, and soon ﬂoated
away. A ground crew, all mounted on swift angens, galloped
below. Chasing the unpredictable aircraft and retrieving
them was a full-time job.
It took the better part of a minute for Rebo, Norr, and
Hasa to regain their feet and check for damage. Fortunately,
none of them had suffered any injuries beyond scrapes, abrasions, and minor cuts. Then, just as Rebo was about to lead
the others to the point where Lysander said they could gain
entry, six red-clad wings ﬂuttered down out of the sky to
land a few yards away. One had been slightly wounded during an airborne scufﬂe with Quar’s orange-liveried ﬂock,
and all of them were armed. They took up positions behind
Hasa, and Rebo was quick to object. “What are they doing
here? This wasn’t part of the deal. . . . What’s going on?”
Hasa was a small man who had one eyebrow and a mustache to match. When his lips retracted, the resulting expression was more of a grimace than a smile. “What?” the
minder inquired sarcastically. “You thought the great Kufu
would be so foolish as to send only one man? Whom you
could murder with impunity? Never! File Leader Lartha and
his men are here to ensure that you keep your part of the
bargain. Besides, the interior of the tomb is sure to be
guarded, and you may be glad of the extra ﬁrepower.”
Rebo looked at Norr and saw the sensitive shrug. “We’re
after the dead emperor’s ring,” she whispered. “Nothing else
matters.”
The runner wasn’t so sure, but had very little choice

LO G O S R U N

199

since Kufu’s men outnumbered the two of them more than
three to one. “Okay, but do as you’re told, or we will call the
whole thing off.”
Hasa shrugged, as if to say, “Who cares?” and fell in behind Norr as Rebo led the party toward the far side of the
pyramid.
Thanks to the fact that large sections of the pyramid’s
outer covering had been destroyed by cannon ﬁre and the
passage of time, it was possible to walk along the crumbling
ledgelike steps that would have otherwise been covered. A
task that turned out to be more difﬁcult than it appeared
since the monument was in motion, there were areas of unbroken material to traverse, and the occasional ping could be
heard as winged snipers ﬁred on the party from beyond the
protective envelope that Kufu’s air force had established.
Finally, after circling halfway around the construct, Rebo
arrived at the spot where Hios’s name had been carved into
the pyramid’s surface in letters twenty feet tall. Much of the
o and the s had been blown away. But the i was intact. Conﬁdent that the others would follow, the runner climbed up
to the point where he could access the dot over the i and
used a knife to pry and scrape at the surface material. It took
some elbow grease, but it wasn’t long before a palm-sized
chunk of the ceramic material broke loose, and made a clattering noise as it tumbled down a succession of steps.
Rebo felt his heart leap as he looked at the huge ruby. He
applied pressure to the gemstone, felt it give, and held his
breath. What if the ancient mechanism was stuck? Or broken? But the ancients had built well, servos whined, and
more of the ceramic material shattered as the entire dot
irised open. There was a sudden outgassing of stale air, followed by expressions of amazement from Lartha and his
warriors. “Nice work,” Norr said approvingly.

200

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Thanks,” Rebo replied, as he turned toward the group
gathered behind him. “Who would like to enter ﬁrst? How
’bout you, Hasa? The king would be impressed.”
“You honor me,” the minder replied gravely. “But guests
must go ﬁrst . . . Such is our custom on Haafa.”
That wasn’t necessarily the case, not judging from the
smirks the soldiers wore, but Rebo wasn’t surprised. The runner said, “Watch my back,” to Norr, and slipped into the
coolness within. The sensitive went next, closely followed by
Hasa and the squad of winged variants. Then, having been
triggered by a sensor, the hatch irised closed. A trio of blueclad wings landed on the spot a scant two minutes later,
placed an explosive charge over the door, and took off again.
The result was a loud boom, a cloud of dust, and a brand-new
scar. But, seemingly oblivious to additional damage that had
been done to it, the pyramid sailed on.

NINE
™

The Planet Haafa
Why, God? Why us?

—Wall grafﬁti found deep within the city of Kahoun

There was total darkness within the ﬂoating tomb as the

sound of the external explosion faded away—followed by a
shower of dust that caused most of the group to sneeze or
cough. Then, as Rebo, Norr, and Hasa began to operate
their squeeze-powered glow lights, three beams of ﬂuctuating light came into existence. The vaguely pistol-shaped
devices had been copied from a unit “harvested” from Kahoun and made a distinctive click-whir noise as the powerproducing handle was clenched, then released. Even though
the dynamo-powered light kept Rebo from ﬁsting both of
his handguns at the same time, the runner was happy to
have the device because a lantern would have been even
more cumbersome.
The wings were less fortunate, however, since no one
had seen ﬁt to supply them with glow lights, causing File

202

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Leader Lartha and his subordinates to bunch up behind
Hasa rather than be left back in the darkness. “Okay,” Rebo
said fatalistically, as he directed a beam of light down a
slight incline. “We might as well get this over with. . . .
I’ll go ﬁrst, Lonni will follow behind me, and you guys can
bring up the rear.”
“No!” the minder replied vehemently. “I will go ﬁrst—
and the wings will follow me. You will bring up the rear.”
Rebo was surprised, but pleasantly so, and happy to let
Hasa lead the way. But, having sampled the other man’s personality, he knew better than to say so. “Well, okay,” the
runner allowed reluctantly. “But it doesn’t seem fair.”
“I have very little interest in your opinions,” Hasa
replied arrogantly, as his glow light washed over a beautifully executed mural. “Come, Lartha. . . . Let’s see where
this passageway leads.”
Norr caught a glimpse of Rebo’s expression in the side
wash from her squeeze light, knew that her companion was
on the verge of laughter, and poked him as Kufu’s functionaries proceeded down the tunnel.
Everything went smoothly at ﬁrst. So smoothly that the
runner was about to conclude that his earlier fears had been
groundless, when he heard a clacking sound, and File Leader
Lartha vanished. Hasa’s glow light bobbed erratically, and
pandemonium ensued as the remaining wings looked for
their leader. But it wasn’t until Norr made her way forward
that the mystery was solved. “Look!” the sensitive said as
she directed her beam downward. “Do you see those cracks?
He fell through a trapdoor.”
The revelation did nothing to comfort Hasa. A sheen of
sweat covered the minder’s forehead, and his eyes were huge
as he looked from left to right. “Where is Lartha now? Do
you think he’s alive?”

LO G O S R U N

203

“No,” Rebo replied reasonably. “I don’t. . . . But we can’t
stay here. Watch for cracks, and you’ll be okay.”
“Oh, no you don’t!” Hasa objected heatedly. “I know
what you’re up to. . . . You’re hoping that I’ll be the next
one to die! Well, I’m too smart for that. You go ﬁrst . . . And
the spook goes second. The wings and I will bring up the
rear.”
“Okay, have it your way,” the runner agreed grimly. “But
take a look over your shoulder from time to time. We
wouldn’t want anything to sneak up on us from behind.”
It was clear from the way that the minder’s eyeballs
nearly popped out of their sockets that the possibility of being attacked from the rear hadn’t occurred to him until that
point. Hasa was still trying to ﬁgure out if he’d been wrong
to give up the lead position when the other two brushed
past him.
“Keep your light on the ﬂoor,” Rebo instructed, “and I’ll
use mine to look ahead. Between us, we should be able to
see what’s coming up.”
Norr nodded in agreement, directed her glow light down,
and made an attempt to engage her psychic senses as well.
But it soon became apparent that there was nothing to detect beyond the auras strung out behind her, a ﬁnding that
would have been more comforting had it not been for the
fact that machines don’t generate any spiritual energy and
would therefore be “invisible” to her. The thought sent a
shiver down the variant’s spine and caused her to focus on
the physical plane.
The need to watch for trapdoors slowed their progress,
but paid off when Norr spotted a second set of telltale
cracks, and the rest of the party was able to jump over the
potentially fatal trap. The passageway turned to the right
shortly thereafter and emptied into a small antechamber. A

204

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

large, heavily embossed metal door waited ahead, but rather
than rush forward and attempt to open it, Rebo decided to
pause. It wasn’t long before the rest of the group caught up,
and Hasa began to champ at the bit. “What are you waiting
for?” the minder demanded impatiently. “Cross the chamber and open the door!”
“Be my guest,” the runner said, as he stepped aside and
motioned for Hasa to proceed.
It was a trap. The minder could see that now. But he
couldn’t back down without losing face. Hasa stepped into
the dome-shaped chamber, pistol at the ready. The response
was instantaneous. A simply dressed man appeared out of
thin air and raised a bejeweled hand. “I am Emperor Hios,”
the apparition intoned. “This is my tomb . . . And, should
you be so stupid as to pass through that door, it will become
yours as well.”
Having become entangled with the semitransparent
specter, Hasa gave a yelp of fear and stumbled backward.
Rebo made a grab for the missing amulet and clutched the
religious medal instead. Norr felt a sudden and completely
unanticipated sense of sorrow as she looked at the holographic likeness of the man who had once been her father. A
man that only she, as the emperor’s daughter, could kill. Had
killed, and given birth to, each time Lysander occupied her
body. “Stay!” Norr commanded. “Lead us to your body that
we might reclaim your true legacy.”
But the computer buried deep within the ﬂoating pyramid didn’t understand the reference and hadn’t been programmed for such interactions. The image shimmered,
collapsed in on itself, and exploded into a thousand motes of
light.
“It wasn’t real!” Hasa announced triumphantly, his relief
plain to see. “Come on, men, let’s tackle that door!”

LO G O S R U N

205

A stylized star gate could be seen as the minder’s glow
light splashed the surface of the barrier. Having heard the
specter’s warning, the wings were understandably reluctant
to approach the barrier at ﬁrst but were eventually convinced to do so, only to discover that it was locked.
“Well, that’s that,” Rebo said cheerfully. “It looks like
we’ll have to backtrack. Let’s keep an eye peeled for trapdoors however. . . . It would be a shame to lose anyone else.”
“Not so fast,” Hasa said, as he fumbled something out of
a belt pouch. “King Kufu foresaw such a possibility—and
that’s why he gave me this!”
“This” proved to be what looked like a metal wand but
was actually a powerful cutting torch. The minder thumbed
a button located at one end of the device and was rewarded
with a loud pop and a six-inch-long bar of blue energy. A second pop was heard when the tool was extinguished.
“That looks promising,” Rebo admitted. “But before you
turn that thing loose, I suggest that we take positions to either side of the door. Who knows what might be waiting on
the other side.”
Hasa had to admit that the suggestion made sense, and
ordered the wings to take up positions to the left and right
of the barrier. Judging from appearances, the lock mechanism was located on the right side of the door, and the minder was just about to tackle it, when Rebo cleared his
throat. “Sorry to butt in, but what if that sucker pops open?
And some sort of weapon goes off? You’ll be right in the
line of ﬁre.”
Hasa was irritated. “If I don’t cut into the lock, how will
we get in?”
“Tackle the hinges,” the runner suggested mildly. “Which
you can do from my side without exposing your body.”
Though still reluctant to accept counsel from an inferior,

206

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the minder didn’t want to die and repositioned himself on
the left side of the door. Then, having reactivated the hightech tool, Hasa went to work. The top hinge began to glow,
became white-hot, and soon parted. The door sagged, but
held, as the minder cut into the lower hinge. It surrendered,
too, but rather than collapse as planned, the barrier remained stubbornly upright. “Kick it,” Rebo suggested.
“That should knock it loose.”
Once Hasa’s boot hit the door the results were nothing
less than spectacular. There was a loud crash as the barrier
fell inward to reveal a muscular statue. It had a big head,
massive shoulders, and stood crouched as if ready to leap
forward. There was a throaty roar as its mouth opened, and a
tongue of ﬁre shot out into the center of the room, scorched
the ﬂoor where people might be expected to stand, and sent
a cloud of black smoke up to swirl just below the heavily
embossed ceiling. The statue’s head pivoted from right to
left bathing 70 percent of the chamber in ﬂames. The attack
seemed to last forever, but actually took no more than ﬁve
seconds, and ended when the ﬁre-breathing beast ran out of
fuel. There was an anticlimactic pop, followed by the whir of
hidden machinery, and a clacking sound as damaged servos
attempted to close the door.
Rebo blinked and coughed as he moved out into the
open. There was plenty of room to pass the now-impotent
statue to either side. Hasa yelled, “Wait!” but the runner
and the sentient had already entered the next passageway by
then, leaving the minder and his troops to bring up the rear.
“Keep your eyes peeled,” Rebo cautioned, as he played a
beam of light across the wall on his right. “There are bound
to be more traps.”
“The passageway is slanted downward,” the sensitive observed. “We’re making progress.”

LO G O S R U N

207

A good ten minutes passed while the tomb raiders followed the narrow hall down through the hairpin turn that
led to another long incline. Beautifully painted murals covered the walls around them. From what she could see, Norr
got the impression that the images were intended to tell the
story of the Emperor’s life, beginning with his childhood
and progressing toward his eventual death. There was even a
picture of the ruler’s daughter, which was to say a previous
her, as a very young girl.
That was when Norr noticed the regularly spaced apertures that were located chest high along both walls. The sensitive was just about to comment on them when Lysander
took control of her body. Many, many years had passed since
the disincarnate had worked side by side with his chief architect to create the tomb’s original design. But when the disincarnate “saw” the holes through the thick mist that swirled
around him, he remembered what they were for. “Get down!”
the spirit entity said urgently, and pushed the sensitive forward. Rebo felt Norr push him from behind, lost his balance,
and threw out his hands to protect himself as he fell.
Hasa heard the order, saw the twosome go down, and was
already in the process of imitating their action when the
carefully concealed ﬂéchette guns began to ﬁre. The steady
phut, phut, phut sound generated by the automatic weapons
was followed by a loud clatter as the wickedly sharp darts
bounced off the intricately painted walls and ricocheted
away.
And it was one such projectile that caught a wing in the
throat, sliced through a major artery, and left the soldier
choking on his own blood. Another variant crawled over to
give aid, but was unable to stop the bleeding or see his
friend’s spirit rise to stand next to him.
Then the prolonged phuuuuuut and clatter generated by the

208

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ﬂéchette guns died away as the weapons ran out of ammo.
Darkness fell, but was forced to retreat, as Rebo, Norr, and
Hasa remembered to pump their glow lights. “Damn,” the
runner muttered, as he came to his feet. “That was close.”
Norr, who had been freed by then, was still a bit dazed as
Rebo bent to offer his hand. He looked concerned. “Thanks
for the warning. . . . Are you okay?”
The sensitive was about to credit Lysander with the save
but decided that doing so would be pointless. “Yes, I’m ﬁne.
Thank you.”
The group had lost two of its members by then, but
there was nothing they could do except forge ahead, nerves
stretched to the breaking point. Finally, having cut their
way through another door and successfully made their way
through a gauntlet of swinging blades, they saw a dim glow
in the distance. Then, having just emerged from a series of
what might have been defensive points, they stepped out
onto the narrow gallery that circled the huge globe-shaped
chamber. And there, ﬂoating at the very center of the space,
lay the emperor’s mummiﬁed body. Beams of sunlight had
been channeled down through the top of the pyramid to
bathe Hios in gold and warm his ancient bones.
In spite of the multitudinous layers of dust that covered
the funeral bier, it was still possible to see the solar-powered
synsilks in which the body had been wrapped and the scintillating rainbow of colors they produced.
Of equal interest, to Hasa at least, was what appeared to
be a console located at the head of the bier, and more specifically, the lever that protruded from the center of the curvilinear structure. What happens if you pull on it? the minder
wondered, as he ran his tongue over dry lips. Something
important—or why place it there?
There was a moment of silence as the entire group stared

LO G O S R U N

209

at the sight before them. Rebo was the ﬁrst to speak. “That
platform has got to be a hundred feet away. . . . How in the
world are we going to reach it?”
“You aren’t,” Hasa answered hoarsely, as his pistol came
into sudden alignment with Norr’s head. “This is where we
part company. . . . Who knows? Maybe you can make your
way back the way we came. Thog, keep an eye on them
while Vamer, Pamak, Obo, and Rang carry me to the platform. Oh, and it would be a good idea to pull the runner’s
teeth so he can’t ﬁre on us from here.”
“Throw your weapons over the side,” Thog ordered, and
jerked the barrel of his light submachine gun toward the
edge of the abyss.
The runner was reluctant to part with the recently acquired handguns, very reluctant, but knew he had no choice.
One by one he removed the pistols from their holsters and
tossed them over the side. There was a faint clatter as they
hit the ﬂoor far below. Norr was armed with the sword she
had stolen on Derius, but it was slung across her back and
was therefore useless.
“Good,” Hasa said, as he returned his pistol to its holster.
“I’m glad to see you’re going to be sensible about this. . . .
Now stand back and give us some room.”
Rebo and Norr were forced to retreat into the passageway
as four of Kufu’s variants took up positions around Hasa, secured grips on the minder’s harness, and extended their
wings. Although the norm was deadweight, he was relatively small, and the soldiers were strong. The leathery triangles of skin that were stretched between their arms and
torsos made a whuf, whuf, whuf sound as Hasa was hoisted
up into the air and carried out toward the platform beyond.
Shadows fell across the funeral bier, and wings thumped
warm air, as Lysander “watched” the tomb raiders began to

210

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

close with what had been his body. And that was when the
man who had been emperor remembered still another detail
about his tomb and began to laugh.
As the pyramids came to the southernmost extent of their

range and began a long, digniﬁed turn toward the west,
King Kufu saw a series of ﬂashes march along the top of a
distant rise and knew that King Horus’s artillery had
opened ﬁre. Conﬁrmation of that supposition came in the
form of loud shrieks and a line of explosions that tossed men
and animals high into the hot afternoon air. They seemed to
hang there, as if suspended by the same force that kept the
pyramids aloft, before falling back to the planet’s surface.
The tomb raider could hardly complain, however, since
the war had been set into motion by his decision to unilaterally land a party of grave robbers on the largest of the three
pyramids, thereby raising the possibility that his forces
would empty the structure of whatever riches lay within before his peers could steal their share. Now, in a rare display
of cooperation, Horus and Tepho had launched a coordinated attack on Kufu’s forces in an attempt to break him.
The answer, to Kufu’s mind at least, was to quickly and efﬁciently eliminate the weakest of his opponents and thereby
reduce the odds. So, having chosen Tepho as his ﬁrst victim,
Kufu ordered his forces to charge. Then, having given the
two-mile-long line thirty seconds to react, the king laid his
long supple whip onto the backs of the angens in front of
him. The animals screamed, jerked the three-man chariot
forward, and began to run. Moments later 562 other charioteers began to roll as four companies of red-clad wings
swept in to provide air cover, and an army of more than a
thousand armored heavies began a ponderous march.
Meanwhile, to the south, Tepho eyed the screen in front

LO G O S R U N

211

of him and smiled grimly as the enemy swept toward him.
Kufu was an idiot, proof of which could be seen in his decision to attack the Techno Society’s army ﬁrst, hoping for an
easy victory. Because rather than simply invest in brute
force, Tepho had put his money into technology, which he
often referred to as “the great multiplier.” And, making the
contest even more delicious was that while Kufu led his
forces into what would almost certainly prove to be a disastrous battle, Tepho planned to steal Logos right out from
under the fool’s nose!
The air crackled with radio trafﬁc, and servos whined as
three beautifully restored raptors took to the ﬁeld of battle,
their energy weapons burping blue death. Tepho, who had
chosen to pilot the centermost machine himself, felt a sudden surge of elation. Because within the cramped cockpit,
and in spite of his malformed body, he was a warrior!
Because Kufu was intent on closing with the enemy as
soon as possible, he ordered his artillery to stop ﬁring and
was leading a long line of charioteers south when three hundred heavily armed metal men erupted from the sand in
front of him. They leveled their automatic weapons and began to ﬁre.
Angens screamed as they went down, and chariots tumbled end over end, even as Kufu’s wings swept in to attack
the androids from above. Columns of sand ﬂew up into the
air as grenades went off, robots were dismembered, and
their appendages began to rain down out of the sky.
Then, drums thumping, Kufu’s heavies arrived on the
scene. War hammers rose and fell with the regularity of pistons as the variants attacked the surviving metal men, only
to be ripped to pieces by bursts of bullets, or the pulses of
bright blue energy that originated from Tepho’s steadily
advancing raptors.

212

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

It was a hellish scene, and one that Kufu, who had been
lucky enough to survive the initial onslaught, would never
forget. The artifact king was on foot by then, his throat raw
from screaming commands, and no longer conﬁdent of victory. Survival, that was all Kufu could hope for, as everything he had worked so hard to build began to crumble.
As what promised to be an epic battle began to unfold a

couple of miles to the south, and the pyramids sailed along
the edge of the far horizon, Hoggles watched from the top
level of the nearly deserted tower. The heavy knew it was
stupid, but he was lonely, and jealous as well. Because even
though Hoggles knew that his love for Norr was hopeless,
he had long taken pleasure from simply being in the sensitive’s presence, and now even that bittersweet enjoyment
had been denied him.
And, as if to add insult to injury, Rebo and Norr had left
him to guard Logos. Having more than doubled in size, and
taken on the appearance of a hip-length jacket, the computer was in a good position to needle the heavy from time
to time, and seemed to take pleasure in doing so.
Meanwhile, as the heavy stared out across the battleﬁeld,
the sentry nearest to the stairs saw the air in front of him
shimmer. He blinked to clear his eyes, saw what might have
been a materialized spirit, and opened his mouth to shout a
warning. But a hand blurred past his face, something tugged
at his throat, and a sheet of blood ﬂew out to splash the hot
decking.
The body was still falling as Shaz spun away, slashed a
second throat, and paused to shoot each of the remaining
guards. The rhythmic bang, bang, bang generated by the
semiautomatic pistol served to echo the artillery rounds that
continued to pound what remained of King Kufu’s army.

LO G O S R U N

213

Hoggles heard the pistol shots, lifted his war hammer, and
turned toward the sound. The heavy was shocked by what
he saw—and confused as well. There were bodies, lots of
bodies, but where were the attackers?
Having eliminated all of his opponents with the exception of the heavy, Shaz allowed himself to be seen. Though
rare, Hoggles had encountered combat variants before and
knew what they could do. Though only half as strong as he
was, the other variant was not only twice as fast but armed
with a pistol. The heavy ﬁgured he could absorb four or ﬁve
bullets and still be able to close with his opponent, but then
what? Would he be able to rip the bastard’s canine head off?
Or would the cumulative effect of his wounds pull him
down? There was no way to be sure.
But Shaz had already completed the very same calculus
and, having no particular desire to kill the heavy, lowered
his weapon. The combat variant’s smile revealed two rows of
extremely white teeth. “Good afternoon,” he said politely.
“We haven’t met, not formally, but I’ve been following you
and your friends for quite some time now.”
Hoggles wrapped and rewrapped his thick sausagelike ﬁngers around the war hammer’s smooth shaft. “Who are you?”
the heavy demanded hoarsely. “One of those techno people?”
“Yes, you could say that,” Shaz admitted breezily. “Which
brings me to the purpose of my visit. The jacket you’re wearing . . . Would that constitute a computer called Logos?”
Not being sure of what was taking place, the AI had
been silent up until then. But now, having given up on his
plan to eliminate Sogol, the computer saw what might be
an opportunity to rid himself of Lysander’s self-righteous
ﬂunkies and still take control of Socket. “Yes, I’m Logos,”
the computer answered loudly. “Are you a member of the
Techno Society?”

214

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“I am,” Shaz answered simply. “More than that, I was
sent here to get you.”
“Excellent!” the AI replied enthusiastically. “If you would
be so kind as to kill this fool—we can depart immediately.”
“You’re welcome to give it a try,” Hoggles growled, and
charged straight ahead. Though slow by his standards, the
heavy was faster than Shaz expected him to be, and the combat variant barely managed to avoid a blow from the war
hammer before spinning away. Although Shaz had the pistol, he couldn’t use it on the heavy’s torso without punching
holes in Logos, a sureﬁre way to send Tepho into a homicidal
rage. That left the possibility of a head shot, a leg shot, or
hand-to-hand combat.
But the decision was suddenly made for him when Hoggles threw the war hammer. The weapon hit Shaz in the
shoulder and sent the handgun ﬂying. Worse yet, the blow
left the combat variant’s right arm completely numb and
forced the functionary to back away. His body shimmered,
but was still partially visible, as Shaz slipped on a pool of
blood.
Seeing his chance, and certain of victory, Hoggles uttered
a basso war cry as he thundered across the intervening space.
The two men collided, the combat variant felt a sudden stab
of fear, and was fumbling for his knife when Logos entered
the battle. Although the computer didn’t have arms to ﬁght
with, he had control over his highly mutable “body,” which
Hoggles continued to wear.
Suddenly, Hoggles felt the jacket start to shrink around
him. The heavy produced a roar of outrage, released the grip
that he had established on his opponent’s throat, and began
to remove the traitorous garment. But it was too late by
then. The AI had been transformed into what amounted to
a straitjacket. Hoggles found himself unable to move his

LO G O S R U N

215

arms, realized what that meant, and tried to back away.
Shaz saw the opportunity and took it. The last thing
Hoggles saw was a canine grin, a ﬂash of steel, and the
blinding sun. Then he was down, his blood soaking the object he was supposed to protect, his lips forming her name.
Moments later the heavy was somewhere else, in a place far
removed from the physical plane, and the family lost so
many years before was gathering to greet him.
Norr felt a sense of hopelessness as the wings carried

Hasa across the abyss toward the platform that hovered beyond. And now, with nothing to distract her, the sensitive
could see that the interior of the globe-shaped chamber was
covered with what looked like a complicated map. A star
map that illustrated the full glory of the empire Hios ruled
prior to his descent into madness and his death at her hands.
But that was before ancient sensors were tripped, the
beams of sunlight began to converge on a single point, and
gradually became brighter. There was no reaction at ﬁrst,
but that changed as tendrils of smoke began to emerge from
leathery wings, the variants began to scream, and two of the
warriors burst into ﬂames. The rest attempted to escape, but
the beams of light followed wherever they went, killing the
variants one at a time.
Hasa was falling by then, his arms windmilling uselessly
as he tried to ﬂy, only to fall facedown onto the platform below. Rebo watched in horror as the minder landed on the
ancient lever and uttered a horrible scream as the bloodied
handle emerged between his shoulder blades. Then, after a
two-second pause, the device gradually gave way under the
weight of Hasa’s dead body. “Uh-oh,” the runner said
grimly. “I don’t know what that lever controls—but I have a
hunch that we’re about to ﬁnd out.”

216

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Rebo’s words just hung there, and his prophecy went unfulﬁlled for a good ﬁve seconds, before the antigrav generator located in the base of the pyramid suddenly went
off-line. Rebo and Norr experienced a momentary sense of
weightlessness as the now-unsupported structure fell ﬁfteen
feet to the desert ﬂoor. Then, with nothing to hang on to,
the two of them fell. The runner made what amounted to a
crash landing, while Norr landed on her feet and allowed
her knees to accept the shock. Having added more bruises
to his still-growing collection, the runner was delighted to
discover that none of his bones were broken as the sensitive
helped pull him up onto his feet.
But, while the two of them were all right, the emperor’s
mummiﬁed body had not fared as well. In fact, as Rebo
peered down from the gallery above, he could see pieces of
the dismembered corpse scattered across the surface of the
now-broken burial platform. “We’ve got to get down
there!” the runner exclaimed. “You can imagine what’s taking place outside. . . . The entire pyramid will be crawling
with looters twenty minutes from now.”
Norr was in complete agreement. Rebo freed the coil of
rope that had been slung across his shoulders, secured one
end to the curved railing, and tossed the rest over the side.
“I’ll go ﬁrst,” Norr volunteered, and was already lowering
herself over the side before the runner could object. Then,
once her feet touched the ﬂoor, it was Rebo’s turn to slide
down the rope.
Norr had already completed a survey of the scattered
body parts by then and was down on one knee when the
runner arrived at her side. “There it is,” the sensitive declared, and pointed to the large, somewhat gaudy ring that
still graced a badly withered hand. The green gemstone
seemed to glow as if lit from within.

LO G O S R U N

217

“Well,” Rebo responded, “let’s pull that sucker off his
ﬁnger and ﬁnd our way out of here.”
Norr was about to respond when the entire pyramid began to vibrate, dust rained down from above, and the light
began to fade. Rebo took hold of the hand. It was dry, leathery, and still attached to a skeletal forearm. His ﬁrst attempt
to strip the ring off the mummy’s bony ﬁnger failed, so
rather than attempt to work the piece of jewelry free, the
runner broke the emperor’s arm over his knee. The wrinkled
brown-gray hand came off at the wrist. The runner tossed
the rest away and was in the process of shoving what remained palm down in his pocket, when the pyramid began
to fall apart.
Viewed from atop Kufu’s blood-drenched tower, where
the king was licking his wounds in the wake of the disastrous battle with Tepho, the now-grounded pyramid was a
sight to see as beams of bright light shot up into the sky, all
four of the triangle-shaped sides collapsed onto the ground,
clouds of dust and sand exploded into the air, and a globular
burial chamber was revealed. Then, before anyone could
properly assess what was taking place, the globe split into
six segments, they fell away from each other, and a pair of
badly shaken tomb raiders were revealed. The rest of the
ﬂoating pyramids, seemingly unaware of what had occurred,
continued on their way.
Kufu was so shocked that he simply sat and stared for a
moment before bringing a powerful monocular up to his eye
and peering out into the quickly gathering twilight. Once
he saw the two ﬁgures, and realized who they were, a quick
ﬂurry of orders followed. “Send the wings! Send the chariots! Bring the man and woman to me!”
Meanwhile, deep within the subterranean city of Kahoun, the AI known as One-Two felt the ground shake,

218

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

wondered what was taking place, and processed a sense of
anticipation. Something, the computer didn’t know what,
was going to happen.
The sun was little more than an orange-red smear along

the western horizon by the time Shaz made his way across
the body-strewn battleﬁeld and back to the relative safety of
the much-enhanced “blue sector,” where Tepho sat triumphant within the comfort of his huge tent. The chairman
of the Techno Society had changed during the last eight
hours, something that was apparent to the combat variant
the moment he was shown into the shelter and saw the way
the technologist sat slouched next his raptor. It had been
hot within the machine’s cockpit, very hot, and the sweat
marks were still visible on Tepho’s clothes. Not only that,
but, judging from the way that the entire right side of the
raptor had been scorched, both man and machine had been
through close combat. Been through it and survived, which
was why there was something new in the technologist’s
eyes. A conﬁdence and pride that Shaz had never seen there
before. “Congratulations on your victory,” the combat variant said evenly. “I had to cross the battleﬁeld in order to get
here. Your enemies are still collecting their dead.”
Tepho searched his subordinate’s face for the slightest
sign of insincerity, was unable to ﬁnd any, and felt an unexpected sense of warmth suffuse his crippled body. Because if
Shaz respected what he’d been able to accomplish, then it
was real and couldn’t be taken away from him. So, even
though the technologist would normally be furious regarding the combat variant’s apparent failure to retrieve Logos,
Tepho found himself in a forgiving mood. “Thank you,
Shaz. . . . We taught them a lesson they won’t forget! Kufu

LO G O S R U N

219

was successful in one regard, however . . . Did you see the
emperor’s tomb? The bastard brought it down! We took a lot
of territory but couldn’t capture it. Still, the initial reports
from our wings seem to suggest that there wasn’t anything
valuable inside. Not unless you like mummies that is!”
The joke was a poor one but a sure sign of what kind of
mood the administrator was in. The combat variant’s laugh
had a harsh, barking quality. “No, I didn’t see the pyramid,
but that would explain the lights I saw to the south. Kufu
and his people must be very disappointed.”
“I certainly hope so!” Tepho said cheerfully. “But enough
of that. . . . You were on an adventure of your own. How did
that go?”
Tepho clearly believed that the mission had been a failure, but being in a good mood, was prepared to accept a
negative report. But Shaz had a surprise for him, a rather
pleasant surprise, which made the moment all the more enjoyable. Slowly, so that the other man could appreciate the
implications of what he was doing, the variant worked his
way out of the now bloodstained jacket. Though slightly
damaged, the raptor was on-line, which meant that servos
whined and energy weapons tracked Shaz as he took six
paces forward and laid the garment across Tepho’s lap. “I’m
happy to report that the mission was a success. Chairman
Tepho—I give you Logos.”
Even though the technologist knew that the fabled AI
was housed in a mutable piece of clothing, his expectations
had been low, and it wasn’t until the combat variant began
to remove the nondescript jacket, that the truth suddenly
became clear. Slowly, and with some difﬁculty, the technologist stood. Then, having slipped his arms into the computer’s sleeves, he allowed the fabric to settle over his

220

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

misshapen body. The jacket was too big at ﬁrst, but that
changed as Logos made some adjustments. “My God,” Tepho
said breathlessly, “it’s real!”
“Of course I’m real,” the AI responded waspishly. “And
so is Socket. I suggest that we leave immediately.”
Tepho decided that the voice, which seemed to originate
from behind his neck, would take some getting used to. As
would the AI’s rather acerbic personality. “We’ll leave when
I’m ready,” Tepho said ﬁrmly. “Besides, what’s the hurry?
Socket has been on hold for more than a thousand years. A
few more days won’t make any difference.”
Logos wanted to say that a few more days could make a
difference, especially if Rebo and Norr managed to get their
hands on One-Two, but didn’t want his new biologicals to
learn the truth about Sogol. Because once they knew about
the other AI, they would inevitably want to possess her as
well, a possibility that wasn’t likely to help Logos obtain
what he wanted. “Yes, well, what you say is true,” the AI allowed carefully. “But the sooner the better.”
“Of course,” Tepho replied soothingly, as he glanced at
the raptor. “But we’ll need to be ready for anything . . .
which means I have some packing to do.”
That was when Shaz realized that if Tepho had been reliant on the raptor before, he was even more so now, having
bonded with the machine during combat. Which meant the
raptor would have to be disassembled and rebuilt each time
they made a jump. Not that it mattered because the technologist was correct. Socket had been waiting for a thousand
years. A few days, a week, even a month wouldn’t make
much difference now.
The combat variant was about to leave when Tepho
stopped him. “Shaz . . .”
“Yes?”

LO G O S R U N

221

“You did a good job. Thank you.”
The variant delivered an abbreviated bow, shimmered,
and disappeared.
A crack of blue-pink light ran the length of the eastern

horizon as Norr bent to light the bottom of the funeral pyre.
The sensitive was rewarded with a loud crackling sound as
ﬂames found their way up through the dry fuel. The pile of
wood had been stacked on top of a dune, about half a mile
east of Kufu’s encampment, and constituted but one of more
than ﬁve hundred such ﬁres that presently dotted the desert.
Urgent ﬁres, that were required to cleanse the battleﬁeld before the sun could rise and turn the entire area into a sea of
corruption.
But this ﬁre was special because it was Bo Hoggles who
lay on top of the pyre, his huge war hammer at his side.
Rebo stepped forward to place a comforting arm around
Norr’s shoulders, only to discover that the sensitive was crying. “He lives on,” the runner said quietly. “You, of all people, know that.”
Norr made use of a handkerchief to dab at her eyes.
“That’s true. . . . But I will miss his strength, loyalty, and
courage.”
“Yes,” Rebo agreed somberly. “I will, too.”
The ﬂames found the top of the pyre, tried to leap into
the sky, and sent sparks up to touch it. And, as Norr
watched the still-glowing embers ﬂoat away, she knew there
was another reason for her tears. Hoggles had been in love
with her, and had it been otherwise, would probably be
back on Derius, Thara, or Ning, building a life for himself.
But the variant had chosen to follow her instead, to take care
of the woman that he loved, even if that meant delivering
her into someone else’s arms.

222

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

There was a mad crackling sound, followed by an explosion of sparks, as the funeral pyre collapsed in on itself. The
only other mourners were six heavies who didn’t know Hoggles but had volunteered to help because they were brothers
of a sort. They took half a dozen steps backward as a wall of
heat sought to wrap them in a warm embrace.
“So,” Rebo said, as he guided Norr back to a more comfortable position. “What now? It’s pretty clear that the
Techno Society has Logos . . . and it wouldn’t be realistic to
think that we’re going to get him back.”
“No, it wouldn’t,” the sensitive agreed. “But we have the
ring, which means that we can locate One-Two, which
means we can activate Socket.”
“Assuming we get there ﬁrst,” Rebo observed.
“Yes, assuming we get there ﬁrst.”
Rebo eyed the ﬁre. “So, we’re going down into the city of
Kahoun.”
“I am,” the variant answered simply. “I have to. For the
man who was my father, for Bo Hoggles, and for what remains of the human race.”
Rebo sighed. “Damn. . . . I was afraid you’d say something like that.”
Norr turned to look up into his face. Her eyes were
huge—and still rimmed with tears. “You don’t have to
come.”
The runner’s hand came up to cup her chin. “Oh, but
I’m afraid I do,” he said gently, and kissed her lips. Something gave, the ﬁre crackled, and a column of red stars took
to the sky.

TEN
™

The Planet Haafa

Safe below the burning sands, and surrounded by his scientists, the emperor spent many happy days in the city of Kahoun.
—Heva Manos, advisor to Emperor Hios,
in his biography, A Web of Stars

Having watched the funeral pyre burn itself out, and re-

turned to King Kufu’s tower for some much-needed sleep,
Rebo and Norr awoke at least somewhat refreshed. Having
lost the battle fought the day before but taken possession of
the emperor’s tomb, the king’s attention was focused elsewhere. And that was ﬁne with them. After a quick breakfast, the twosome returned to their curtained quarters,
where Rebo completed the process of removing the ring
from the emperor’s leathery hand. Lysander took possession
of Norr’s body a few moments later, and, with the ring on
his/her right index ﬁnger, he/she sought to contact Sogol.
Meanwhile, deep below the Segenni Desert, the AI variously called Sogol, Logos 1.2, and One-Two had just completed preparations for another release of knowledge, when
an incoming signal registered on her electronic senses. There

224

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

had been a time when such a signal would have been her cue
to contact Emperor Hios, but he’d been dead for a long time,
and judging from the radio trafﬁc that constantly washed
around Sogol, a group of tomb raiders had breached his pyramid. That meant they had the emperor’s ring, and judging
from the nonstop series of beeps registering on her receiver,
knew how to activate it.
Fortunately One-Two had the means to kill the input
and was just about to do so, when a long-dead audio channel
suddenly came to life. “This is Hios. . . . Please refer to authentication sequence 7629H5t15.”
Of course Sogol knew that the actual code was 7628H5t15,
and was surprised to hear a female voice, but the input was
pretty damned close to what it should have been. And that
warranted further investigation. “Emperor Hios?” the AI
inquired tentatively. “Is that you?”
“Yes!” Lysander replied. “It’s me, or a version of me,
speaking through a sensitive. I thought you were off-line—
but learned otherwise when Logos 1 brought us to Haafa.”
“I spoke with him,” the tinny voice responded, “but
I . . .” There was a burst of static at that point, and the rest
of the AI’s words were lost.
“One-Two?” Lysander demanded. “Can you hear me?”
There was a moment of silence, followed by more static,
interspersed with garbled words. “. . . Pyra’s trying to interfere. . . . A lot of trouble when it opens. . . . Follow the
tomb raiders down. . . .”
The words trailed off into noise after that—and Lysander
shook Norr’s head in disgust. “Someone, or something, is
attempting to block our transmissions.”
“That’s the way it sounds,” Rebo agreed, “but the situation seems fairly clear. . . . “Sogol can open a pathway into
Kahoun. Once we’re down there, she can come to us.”

LO G O S R U N

225

Norr’s face went momentarily blank, the sensitive’s head
jerked, and her eyelids ﬂuttered. Then she was back. “What
happened?” the variant wanted to know, as she held the ring
up to the light. “Did Lysander get through?”
“Sort of,” Rebo replied cautiously, and told the sensitive
what had transpired.
“So when will the path open up?” Norr wondered out
loud. “And how will we know where to go?”
“I don’t know when it will open up,” the runner replied,
“although my guess would be soon. As for the second question, well, that’s easy. The moment something happens,
Kufu’s people will be off and running. All we need to do is
follow them.”
The sensitive smiled crookedly. “You make it sound so
simple.”
“Yeah,” Rebo responded, “but it never is.”
“No,” Norr agreed. “It never is.”
Absolute secrecy. That was the key to opening a success-

ful pathway into the underground city of Kahoun. Because
even though One-Two wanted to release technology to the
outer world, Ogotho and Pyra were equally dedicated to
blocking such events, which ran counter to their mutual
goal of preserving the 450-square-mile tomb. So, conscious
of the fact that radio signals can be tracked, Sogol was careful to keep moving as she sent the ﬁnal signal to her army of
spindly-legged utility bots. The plan was to open a pathway
during daylight when everyone could see. Then, once three
hours had elapsed, the portal would close. Anyone greedy
enough, or foolish enough, to remain in the city would be
sealed inside, a convention that the tomb raiders had long
since become accustomed to.
As luck would have it, three of King Quar’s wings were

226

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

riding a thermal two hundred feet above the pathway that
had once been known as Surface Ramp-47, when a pair of
Sogol’s utility bots brought a jumper circuit online, thereby
diverting power away from one of Pyra’s main lines, which
they used to open the ancient storm door. That consumed
half a gigawatt of electricity, but only for a short period of
time, which was just as well because it wasn’t long before
Pyra cut power to that part of the city’s grid in a last-ditch
attempt to prevent the subsequent invasion. But, as part of
a chess match that had been played out many times before,
Sogol wanted the other computer to cut off the electricity,
thereby leaving Surface Ramp-47 open to the outside.
Realizing that, Pyra hurried to reenergize the door in an
attempt to close it but soon discovered that critical cables
had been severed. Lum bugs were dispatched to make the
necessary repairs, but that would take hours even as a horde
of tomb raiders poured down into the city. It was a maddening game, but one that Pyra had thus far been powerless to
stop since One-Two had been able to outsmart her. Until
now that is, because having accumulated a considerable
amount of data regarding such incursions, Pyra could predict what Sogol would do next. And, based on that ability,
Pyra planned to ﬁnd the little worm and kill it.
Meanwhile, the orange-clad wings circling two hundred
feet above Surface Ramp-47 were privileged to witness a
rare sight as a rectangular section of the desert ﬂoor seemed
to collapse in on itself. Tons of sand poured down into carefully prepared cavities below, a column of dust rose to point
fingerlike at the newly opened pathway, and hundreds of
avaricious eyes were quick to take notice. Telescopes swiveled
in that direction, airborne scouts vectored in, and no more
than ﬁve minutes had elapsed when the race began.
Thanks to a warning from Norr, and eager to recoup his

LO G O S R U N

227

recent losses, Kufu was the ﬁrst artifact king to respond. A
ﬂight of twenty wings were dispatched, even as ﬁve threeman chariots raced pell-mell toward the new opening, each
creating its own column of dust as it cut across the desert
ﬂoor. Rebo stood to the left of the red-clad charioteer, and
Norr stood to the right, both straining to hold on as the
specially bred angens hauled the two-wheeled conveyance
over all manner of bumps, ridges, and other irregularities. It
was a hard ride, but an exhilarating one, and the runner
couldn’t help but enjoy the way the wind pressed against his
face, the thrill as the chariot went momentarily airborne as
it hit a bump, and the solid thump as it hit the ground again.
Not all of the charioteers were so fortunate however. As
their vehicle topped a slight rise, Norr saw a black chariot
break free of its team, and tumble end over end as what
looked like little stick ﬁgures ﬂew through the air. What
happened next was obscured by a cloud of dust, the driver’s
wildly ﬂapping headscarf, and a competing two-wheeler.
Then they were there, at the center of a maelstrom of multicolored chariots, each ﬁghting for space as drivers cracked
their whips, and angens turned to nip at one another. Kufu’s
chariot shook, and loose gear clattered, as competing chariots closed in from both sides. “Watch out!” Norr shouted,
and pointed across the driver’s chest.
Rebo turned to his left, saw that a green-clad passenger
was in the process of bringing a double-barreled shotgun to
bear, and readied one of two pistols requisitioned from
Kufu’s armory. They weren’t identical, as the previous pair
had been, but each weapon had certain advantages. The 9mm
Tombo barked twice, the shotgunner collapsed against the
driver, and the entire rig veered away.
Nor were the off-worlders the only ones forced to defend
themselves as more than ﬁfty chariots converged on the

228

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

entry point and became part of a confused mass of wildly
thrashing angens, screaming drivers, and murderous tomb
raiders. In the meantime ﬁrearms boomed, banged, and
popped even as a hot-air balloon drifted in over the crowd
and three green-clad norms began to rappel toward the
ground. They were only halfway down when a group of multicolored wings took offense and opened ﬁre on the orangestriped envelope. Hot air escaped through dozens of holes,
and the pilot ﬁred wildly as the quickly deﬂating airship collapsed onto the tightly packed mob below. “Come on!” Rebo
yelled over the surrounding din. “Let’s proceed on foot!”
Norr nodded, reached back to draw her sword, and followed the runner as he jumped to the ground. It felt strange
to enter the melee without Hoggles at her back, but the
sensitive thought she could feel the heavy’s protective presence and felt better as a result.
The majority of the tomb raiders had abandoned their
chariots by then and were busy ﬁghting their way forward.
Most were focused on entering the newly revealed passageway rather than battling their competitors but there were
exceptions, and Rebo heard the occasional bang as someone
ﬁred a weapon at point-blank range. Those who were lucky
fell dead—whereas the wounded were often trampled to
death as the mob pressed forward. The runner tried to avoid
stepping on the bodies, but that was increasingly difﬁcult to
do, and there was more than one occasion when Rebo felt
ﬂesh give under his boots.
Then, like some subterranean monster, the steeply sloping ramp opened its dark maw to swallow the tomb raiders
whole. Rebo and Norr were jostled back and forth as oil-fed
lanterns were lit, cell-powered glow lights came on, and
handheld ﬂares were hoisted high. The off-worlders still had
their trusty squeeze lights, but felt no need to use them so

LO G O S R U N

229

long as the rest of the tomb raiders were willing to illuminate the ramp for them. A trio of metal men, their eyes
aglow, brushed past.
In marked contrast to the pyramid’s richly decorated interior, the walls to either side of the ramp bore little more
than badly faded admonitions to activate headlights, watch
for oncoming trafﬁc, and obey the posted speed limit. There
was some grafﬁti, however, including one entry that might
have been spray-painted onto the wall during the ﬁnal days
of the plague, when Surface Ramp-47 had been packed with
infected people all trying to ﬁnd a way out of the doomed
city. It read, why, god? why us?
But Norr saw no answers as the ramp leveled out and
gave way to what might have been some sort of checkpoint,
before splitting into half a dozen competing two-lane pathways. Orders were shouted, and blobs of light wobbled over
ancient walls as teams of loot-hungry tomb raiders plunged
into the branching corridors. All according to protocols established by their patrons. But the truth was that every
pathway would lead them to artifacts! Because Sogol wanted
the thieves to succeed and had gone to considerable lengths
to make sure that they would.
Unlike the rest, however, Rebo and Norr were after one
particular artifact. That’s why they stood off to one side and
let the others rush by. The light level began to drop as Norr
removed the ring from her belt pouch, and most of the mob
surged past. The ﬁrst thing Rebo noticed as he began to
squeeze the glow light’s curved handle was the fact that the
ring’s green gemstone was lit from within and seemed to
ﬂicker as the sensitive moved it from left to right. Norr noticed the phenomenon as well. “Look!” she exclaimed. “It’s
brightest when I point it at the second passageway from the
left.”

230

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“At least that gives us something to go on,” Rebo acknowledged. “Let’s see where that tunnel leads.”
The twosome entered the passageway designated as DR2N. It began to turn as streaks of reﬂected light washed
back over tiled walls, and they heard unintelligible shouts
off in the distance. Then, just as Rebo and Norr rounded a
curve, there was a disturbance up ahead. Half a dozen blue
lights appeared as Pyra’s lum bugs soared out of a ventilation duct, sought the white lights below, and opened ﬁre.
Each robot was armed with a nose-mounted laser. Their energy weapons made sizzling sounds as they targeted the
tomb raiders below. Shouts of pain were heard as some of the
energy bolts struck home, quickly followed by the stutter of
a submachine gun, and the deliberate bang, bang, bang of a
semiautomatic carbine. “Uh-oh,” Rebo said grimly, as the
squeeze light was returned to its holster. “It looks like we
have company. . . . Keep your light handy—but let it go
dark.”
Norr complied, but if the runner hoped to escape notice,
the plan didn’t work. Even as one of the airborne lum bugs
exploded, another broke away from the battle with the tomb
raiders and hurried to intercept two additional heat signatures before they could do damage to the city beyond.
Rebo had drawn both handguns by that time, but rather
than pepper the quickly advancing machine with 9mm
slugs, opened up with the Sokov instead. The six-shot dart
gun bucked in Rebo’s hand as the ﬁrst self-propelled round
left the barrel, deployed its stabilizing ﬁns, and accelerated
away. The dart hit the lum bug head-on, smashed through
the robot’s outer “skin,” and detonated within. There was
a red-orange explosion as the machine came apart, followed by a wild clatter, as bits of metal sprayed the immediate area. Then came a satisfying crash as what remained of

LO G O S R U N

231

the construct hit the pavement and skidded for ten feet before ﬁnally coming to a stop.
But there was no reason to celebrate because two additional units were on the way. Bursts of ruby red energy
stitched black scorch marks onto the duracrete where the
humans had been standing moments before as the wily intruders ducked into an alcove marked ﬁre ﬁghting station 89. Rebo stood ready to attack the machines the
moment they appeared, but Norr had doubts about the runner’s ability to destroy the ﬁrst robot before the second machine could ﬁre, and took matters into her own hands by
dashing out into the center of the passageway.
Rebo swore, ﬁred the Sokov for the second time, and was
rewarded with another explosion. Then, even as the runner
swung the handgun around to acquire the second target,
Norr charged straight for it. The sword, which was held
high, came down with all the strength the sensitive could
muster. And because the edge of the blade had been made
from a single “stretched” molecule—it cut through the lum
bug’s ﬁber-composite body like a hot knife through butter.
There was a loud bang, followed by a brilliant discharge of
electricity, and a clatter as both halves of the robot landed
on the pavement.
A beam of light came into existence as Rebo shifted the
Sokov into his right hand and began to pump the squeeze
light with his left. A blob of illumination wobbled over the
machine’s burned-out remains before turning toward Norr.
“That was a stupid thing to do,” the runner observed darkly.
“What am I supposed to do if you go and get yourself
killed?”
“You could ﬁnd yourself another sensitive,” Norr replied
lightly. “One who’s a lot less demanding. Come on—Sogol
is somewhere up ahead.”

232

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

There were no sounds other than the steady click-whir of
their squeeze lights, and the soft scufﬂe of their footsteps as
the twosome advanced down the passageway and past the
point where the earlier battle had been fought. The ﬂoor
was slick with blood, and two of the three dead men were
still present, standing over their badly charred bodies. They
weren’t sure what to do, and the sensitive was tempted to
stop and help them, but knew she should focus on ﬁnding
the all-important AI. The green gemstone glowed brightly
as the passageway terminated in front of a raised loading
dock. Stairs led up to a ﬂat surface where bodies had been
stacked during the early days of the plague before eventually
disintegrating to a heap of bones.
The runner followed a badly faded yellow line back to an
open door and the narrow corridor beyond. “The ring is getting warmer!” Norr proclaimed as she gripped the object in
her hand. “I think we’re almost there.”
“Good,” Rebo responded soberly. “The sooner we can get
out of this place, the better.” Then, as if to underline the
truth of the runner’s statement, one of the tomb raiders
screamed.
Intelligent though she was, Sogol failed to recognize the

trap for what it was until she was inside it. Though unable
to prevent the AI from opening a section of the city to the
tomb raiders, Pyra had been able to carry out projections
based on past behaviors and positioned her robots accordingly. So, as One-Two slithered into the sector served by
Ramp-47, the computer discovered that her forces were being systematically slaughtered. Once cornered, the lightly
armored utility bots were easy prey for the ﬂying lum bugs,
which seemed determined to eradicate the multilegged
creatures as they scuttled for cover. Lasers stuttered as the

LO G O S R U N

233

killers pursued their unarmed prey down darkened aisles,
around corners, and between dusty storage modules.
At least ﬁfteen of Sogol’s machines had been taken off-line
by the time the AI entered Storage Facility-972, and more
were being destroyed with each passing minute. And, because each robot was analogous to a nerve ending, One-Two
processed something akin to pain as her functionaries died.
But the real target, from Pyra’s perspective at any rate,
was Sogol herself. Who, though extremely small, could be
“seen” electronically as she sent signals to her robotic minions. And it was then, having established the AI’s exact coordinates, that Pyra ordered her lum bugs to attack the
high-priority target. Energy beams sizzled as they crisscrossed the duracrete ﬂoor, and the air grew thick with the
stench of ozone as the golden serpent propelled herself toward a shelving unit and the inviting darkness that lay below it. But Sogol knew she wouldn’t be able to make it, and
had already prepared herself for an ignominious death, when
the ﬁrst of the tomb raiders charged into the warehouse.
Having already survived one lum bug attack, the humans were in no mood to leave themselves open to a second
assault, and immediately opened ﬁre on the ﬂying robots.
But the lum bugs answered, and there was a piercing scream
as an energy beam took a tomb raider’s arm off at the shoulder and cauterized the wound as part of the process.
One of the ﬂying machines staggered as a hail of bullets
struck it, drifted off course, and made violent contact with a
second machine. Both robots exploded, light strobed the
grimy walls, and avaricious humans ﬂooded down the aisles.
Some continued to do battle with the lum bugs, even as
others scooped artifacts off the surrounding shelves and hurried to stuff the loot into large duffel bags.
And that was when Rebo and Norr entered the bloody

234

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

fray. Tracers drew lines through the murk. A lum bug vanished in a bright bang, and razor-sharp shrapnel ﬂew every
which way. “The ring is starting to cool,” Norr warned, as
the off-worlders worked their way along a laser-scorched
wall. “Let’s turn back!”
Sogol had been dimly aware of the ring’s presence for
some time. But now that the artifact was in the same room
with her, it seemed to glow like the external sun. Having
taken refuge beneath one of the artifact-laden shelving
units, the AI hurried to close with the ring and the people
who possessed it.
In the meantime the airborne machines were well on
their way to winning the battle with the tomb raiders when
Rebo opened ﬁre with the Sokov. One lum bug exploded,
and was quickly followed by a second, and a third.
And it was then, just as the last electromechanical carcass
hit the debris-littered ﬂoor, that Norr felt something cold
wrap itself around her left ankle. The sensation was so disconcerting that the sensitive bent over to grab it, felt whatever the thing was slither up her arm, and had just wrapped
her ﬁngers around a slim body when she found herself looking into the eyes of a snake. The serpent’s voice was all out
of proportion to her small size. “Are you the ones Emperor
Hios sent to get me?”
“Yes,” Norr replied, as Rebo inserted a fresh clip into his
pistol.
“Good,” Sogol said. “I suggest that you pull out before
Pyra sends more lum bugs.”
Norr didn’t know who Pyra was, but the term “lum
bugs” was self-explanatory, and the variant had no desire to
be in the neighborhood when the additional machines arrived. “We’ve got what we came for!” the sensitive announced excitedly. “Let’s get out of here!”

LO G O S R U N

235

Rebo didn’t need to be told twice and made use of a fresh
magazine to hose the surrounding area with explosive darts
as they backed toward the door. Then, once the Sokov
clicked empty, the off-worlders turned and ﬂed.
Pyra “sensed” Sogol’s impending escape but couldn’t
move enough additional robots into the area quickly enough
to stop the AI, and had little choice but to turn her attention
back to the tomb raiders. Disappointing though the situation was, Pyra was still able to process a sense of completion
when Ramp-47 closed thirty-two minutes later, thereby
locking Sogol outside. Finally, after more than a thousand
years of internal warfare, the city of Kahoun was at peace.
It was relatively quiet within the Techno Society’s sprawl-

ing compound. Partly because it was extremely hot, and
any creature that could was waiting for the blazing sun to
fall toward the west, and partly because Shaz, Phan, and a
large contingent of metal men were out in the desert, where
a newly opened ramp led down into the city of the dead.
But Dyson/Kane had begged off. And, given the way
he/they smelled, the others had been happy to leave the
steadily decaying sensitive behind, thereby providing Kane
what he desired most, an opportunity to steal Logos. More
than that, to kill Tepho, seize control of the Techno Society,
and reactivate the star gates. All of which explained why
Dyson, who understood the spirit entity’s intentions, found
himself standing outside of Tepho’s tent with a razor-sharp
knife in his skeletal hand.
The dry, hot air was perfectly still, and the soft murmur
of voices could be heard from within the tent as members of
the technologist’s household staff poured gallons of cool water into the large hip bath where the administrator typically
took refuge during the hottest part of the day. It was the one

236

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

moment when Kane could not only be sure that Tepho
would be vulnerable, but wouldn’t be wearing Logos, which
would simplify the attack. Because the last thing the disincarnate wanted to do was stab the human through the AI,
thereby damaging the very thing he hoped to steal.
Suddenly one voice was raised over all the rest as the attendants hoisted the naked technologist’s badly deformed
body into the air. “Watch that arm! Careful damn you! Or
would you like a taste of the lash?”
There were earnest apologies, followed by a loud groan of
unrestrained pleasure, as the administrator was lowered into
the cool water. Finally, having been positioned on some
carefully placed supports, Tepho was ready for some privacy.
“That’s enough fussing about,” he said grufﬂy. “You can
leave now. . . . But return in half an hour.”
It was the same command that he always gave, so none of
the staff members were surprised as they bowed and backed
out of the heavily curtained enclosure.
Silence fell after that, and while it was tempting to enter
immediately, Kane forced himself to wait for a full sixty seconds before bringing the knife up over his head and stabbing
downward. The tip of the blade penetrated the thick fabric
and there was a gentle ripping sound as the sharp knife sliced
downward. The unauthorized entrance was behind the metal
tub, which meant that Kane didn’t expect Tepho to notice,
but the disincarnate paused just to make sure.
Not having heard any alarm, the spirit entity forced
Dyson to stick his head in through the newly created slit.
That was followed by an arm, a shoulder, and the rest of the
sensitive’s steadily rotting body. The platform the copper
tub rested on was about ten feet away. And, draped across
the custom-built chair that sat beside it, was a long, white
robe. And not just any robe, but the AI called Logos, who—

LO G O S R U N

237

important though the construct was—still had to wait
while his current master enjoyed a cooling bath.
In the meantime, Tepho caught a whiff of corruption,
recognized the odor for what it was, and felt a sudden stab
of fear. Because that particular section of the tent was supposed to be empty, and what he thought of as “the creature”
had no business being there. But, during the technologist’s
long, painful childhood, he had learned to suffer even the
cruelest beatings without revealing the emotions that his
tormentors so wanted to see. And that capacity still came in
handy from time to time. “It isn’t nice to skulk about,”
Tepho commented without turning his head. “You might as
well come out where I can see you.”
The request caught Kane by surprise, but the spirit entity was quick to adjust and forced Dyson’s body to approach the copper tub. Tepho saw the knife, wished the
raptor was present, and made a note to tighten his personal
security. He could call for help of course, but had serious
doubts about whether it would arrive in time and resolved
to deal with the situation himself. “So,” Tepho said, as
Dyson/Kane took up a position next to Logos. “It’s the AI
that you’re after.”
Kane tried to say, “Yes,” but found Dyson was blocking
him. That forced the disincarnate to clamp down on the sensitive and start all over again. “Yes. But more than that—I
came for you. I think the time has come to bring your current
incarnation to its logical conclusion.”
Tepho allowed his right hand to slide down into the water. “So you can take over.”
Dyson’s once-handsome face bore a number of open sores,
which when combined with his hollow eyes and unshaven
countenance, combined to make the variant look like a
recently exhumed corpse. Kane sought to make the sensitive

238

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

nod, encountered a moment of resistance, and struggled to
overcome it. “That’s the plan,” the dead man agreed stifﬂy.
“So, as long as we understand each other, we might as well
get the unpleasant part of the transition over with. Who
knows? You might be grateful! That’s an extremely ugly
body that you’ve been forced to live in.”
“Look who’s talking,” Tepho replied, as the handgun
came up out of the bath. Water ran out of the barrel, but the
technologist knew it would ﬁre. “Hold it right there,”
Tepho ordered evenly. “And drop the knife.”
Kane looked at the pistol and swore silently. Tepho had
him dead to rights, and there was no reason to proceed. So
the spirit entity ordered Dyson to release the knife, but the
sensitive refused, and worked to muster every bit of life energy he had left. Gradually, like a man carrying a signiﬁcant
weight, Dyson took a tottering step forward.
Tepho, who was unaware of the battle raging within the
noxious creature before him, shook his head in disgust.
“You really are one stupid son of a bitch.” Then, having
taken careful aim, the technologist ﬁred three rounds.
Both Kane and Dyson felt the heavy slugs tear through
their mutual body and heard the gunshots, but their reactions were quite different. Kane was forced to exit the sensitive’s body and immediately ﬂew into a towering rage because
his ability to inﬂuence events on the physical plane had been
terminated.
But Dyson, who had ﬁnally been able to escape months
of enslavement, was overjoyed. And having long since given
up any hope of reclaiming his physical body, had already exited the corpse before it hit the ﬂoor.
Logos couldn’t speak without being worn, so it was left
to Tepho to provide an epitaph for the recently vacated body.
“Some things were just never meant to be,” the administra-

LO G O S R U N

239

tor commented, as two heavily armed robots entered the
room. “There’s some garbage on the ﬂoor,” Tepho added.
“Remove it.”
The interior of Surface Ramp-47 was like a scene from

hell as Rebo and Norr fought to make their way back up to
the surface. Because, as the clock continued to tick, and
groups of heavily burdened tomb raiders emerged from the
city of Kahoun, the on-again, off-again carnage continued.
Insults were exchanged, the wounded lay in moaning heaps,
hard-eyed overseers cracked their whips, a disabled metal
man screeched pitifully, a woman accidentally shot one of
her companions in the leg, metal grated on duracrete as an
enterprising tomb raider towed his loot up the ramp on a
solar panel, and the air crackled with a cacophony of radio
trafﬁc as those on the surface issued dozens of conﬂicting orders.
Thanks to the fact that they were relatively unencumbered, the twosome made good time at ﬁrst. But then, as
they neared the top of the ramp, the situation changed as incoming extraction teams ran into outgoing extraction teams
and created a very contentious trafﬁc jam. And it was then,
while caught in the backwash of all the confusion, that
Rebo spotted the blue-clad combat variant and a face he had
never expected to see again. “Look!” the runner said, as he
elbowed Norr. “It’s Phan! Wearing Techno Society blue!”
The sensitive looked, saw that Rebo was correct, and
watched as the assassin sent a brace of heavies in to clear the
trafﬁc jam. “We’d better pull back,” the variant advised, “or
they’ll spot us for sure.”
The runner regretted allowing Phan to live, knew he
would bring all sorts of hell down on them if he were to
shoot the scheming bitch, and allowed Norr to pull him

240

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

back. “So, what are we going to do?” Rebo wanted to know.
“We can’t stay in here forever, and they’ll spot us if we try to
leave.”
“True,” the sensitive agreed thoughtfully, “so let’s change
the way we look. See those bodies over there? The ones in
green? Let’s strip them.”
In any other circumstance the sight of a man and a woman
stripping dead bodies of their clothing would have been the
subject of comment if not outrage, but there, within the
amoral free-for-all of Ramp-47, the act was little more than a
grisly sideshow.
It took a concerted effort to remove the tops and pull the
simple garments up over their heads, but eventually the task
got done. And though less than enthusiastic about the bullet
holes in his newly acquired jerkin and the large bloodstain
on the back of it, Rebo was thankful that the garment had a
hood. And, judging from the extent to which Norr’s cowl
hid her face, the runner ﬁgured that his would function the
same way.
Then, as if to validate the effectiveness of the disguises, a
man dressed in Menkur green yelled at them from farther
down the ramp. “Hey, you two! Give us a hand with this
thing!” Rebo, who was eager to blend in, hurried to comply.
Norr followed. The “thing” that the man referred to turned
out to be one of the Techno Society’s metal men, which
King Menkur’s technologists wanted to study up close so
they could create their own army of robotic servants. That
was the sort of thing Sogol intended.
The android, which had been tied hand and foot, was
still very much “alive,” and hung suspended below a pair of
long poles. But the weight was too much for just two men,
which was why the man in green was happy to recruit two
ostensible allies, even if they were strangers to him. “Grab a

LO G O S R U N

241

handle!” the tomb raider ordered cheerfully. “And keep your
weapons handy. . . . The blues won’t like this—so we may
have to shoot our way out.”
Rebo swore. Now, rather than slip past the technos unnoticed, they were almost certain to be challenged! But it was
too late to choose another course of action, so the off-worlders
took hold of the poles, and hoisted them onto their shoulders.
Shaz was the ﬁrst to notice Menkur’s tomb raiders and
the burden that the foursome carried as they pushed up toward the top of the ramp, but no sooner had he dispatched a
squad of metal men to deal with the android nappers, than a
trio of green-clad wings attacked from above. And it was
then, while the combat variant and the assassin were busy
defending themselves, that Rebo ﬁred the Sokov. The ﬁrst
projectile exploded against the lead robot’s chest and blew a
palm-sized hole through the metal man’s torso. A second
machine went off-line as a result of its wounds—and two
additional androids were destroyed as more darts hit home.
Then the litter bearers were free of the crowd and out in
the desert. A wall of green-clad warriors opened to enfold
them, and Shaz was left to fume, still ignorant of the true
gravity of his loss. Because not only had a robot been spirited away, the sensitive named Norr had slipped past him as
well, along with the AI originally called Logos 1.2. That
meant two AIs were on the loose. The question, and a rather
important one at that, was which Logos would arrive on
Socket ﬁrst.

ELEVEN
™

The Planet Haafa

And those who choose peace shall ﬁnd it, if not within places
of worship, then within themselves.
—The ascended master Teon,
The Way

Clusters of lights could be seen in the desert as groups of

exhausted tomb raiders gathered around campﬁres to brag
about the artifacts they had brought up from the city of the
dead, wager bonuses they had yet to receive, and mourn
those who had lost their lives to ﬂying machines or enemy
tomb raiders.
Such was the case in Tepho’s encampment as well, except
that unlike the other kings, the technologist was making
preparations to leave Haafa. Not forever, but long enough to
lay claim to Socket and establish a new system of star gates.
Which was why Tepho’s staff was busy carrying supplies out
to a long line of waiting wagons.
Having just returned from the desert, both the combat
variant and the assassin were tired, sunburned, and dirty.
But given the potential importance of the news they had to

LO G O S R U N

243

impart, the twosome requested an audience with Tepho and
were shown into his tent. Sections of the canvas wall had
been tied back to let the night breezes blow through. The
administrator’s raptor was being disassembled for transshipment, and Tepho frowned as a technician jerked on a handful of wires. “Be careful!” the technologist said petulantly.
“That wiring harness is worth more than you are!”
“It’s almost impossible to ﬁnd good help these days,”
Tepho grumbled as he turned to Shaz. “But such is my burden. So, what brought you here? We won’t be ready to depart for Pohua until the early hours of the morning.”
The combat variant shimmered slightly as he looked toward Phan and back again. “It’s the sensitive. . . . The one
named Norr. Phan believes she saw both the variant and the
runner leave the ramp with a couple of men dressed in
Menkur green.”
Tepho’s gaze shifted to Phan. His eyes were like lasers.
“Well?” the administrator demanded. “You ‘believe’ you saw
them? Or you actually saw them? Which is it?”
Phan swallowed. “I saw them, sir. All of them were
dressed in green and carrying a metal man up out of the
city.”
Tepho frowned. “A metal man you say? Why would they
do that?”
The assassin shrugged. “I don’t know, sir. But based on
the fact that Rebo and Norr aligned themselves with Kufu
shortly after they arrived, the green livery could be by way
of a disguise.”
“Which would have been successful had it not been for
your sharp eyes,” the technologist observed approvingly.
“But we have Logos. . . . So, what were they doing in the ruins? Rooting around for artifacts like everyone else?”
The AI knew the correct answer but couldn’t tell them

244

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

about Sogol without revealing the extent of his own duplicity, so he took the opportunity to nudge the conversation in
a different direction. His voice originated from the vicinity
of Tepho’s neck. “There’s no way to be sure,” Logos put in,
“but they are persistent and could be engaged in some sort
of plot to recover me.”
“That’s a good point,” Tepho agreed soberly. “And even if
they aren’t trying to take you back, they know far too much
about the Techno Society and the star gates. “So,” the administrator said, as he looked from Shaz to Phan, “bring me
their heads. I could use a pair of bookends.”
Even though it had been dark for quite a while, the main

road was busy, because that was the time of day when most
teamsters preferred to haul supplies out into the desert. Primarily because it was cooler then. But some, like Certa, had
additional motives. By working at night, Certa rarely had to
interact with his wife, and that left him free to drink all day
at his favorite tavern. Besides, there were thousands of glittering stars to gaze upon during the hours of darkness, and
his fellow drivers to trade jibes with. The wagon, which was
loaded with empty water barrels, rattled as it lurched through
a dry riverbed.
It was then that Certa heard the thunder of hoofbeats,
waited for the group to pass, and was surprised when they
drew up alongside instead. It was dark, but both of Haafa’s
moons were up, which meant there was sufﬁcient light to
see by. The lead riders wore Tepho blue, not that it mattered much, since the teamster prided himself on his neutrality. “Hey, old man,” the nearest rider shouted, as he
pulled up next to the wagon. “We’re looking for a female
sensitive and a male norm. Have you seen them? There’s a
reward.”

LO G O S R U N

245

It was a stupid question given the fact a couple matching
the rider’s description were seated behind him. Certa was
about to say as much when he turned to discover that the
hitchhikers were gone. And, given the rider’s insulting manner, the teamster saw no reason to help him. Not even for a
reward. “No, sir,” Certa lied. “I ain’t seen nothin’.”
The answer was consistent with those given by all the
drivers encountered thus far, so Shaz spurred the angen forward, closely followed by Phan and a half dozen heavily
armed riders. Once they were gone Certa grinned toothlessly, sent a stream of spittle down toward the surface of
road, and felt for the bottle beneath the seat. It was half-full,
and the teamster took pleasure in the way the serat warmed
the back of his throat before exploding in the pit of his
stomach. Others could scrabble for artifacts if they chose
to—but Certa was content with what he had.
Meanwhile, a couple of hundred feet back down the road,
protected by the darkness that lay like a blanket over the
bottom of a dry watercourse, Rebo and Norr came to their
feet, dusted themselves off, and took a look around.
“Damn,” the runner remarked evenly. “That was close. How
did you know?”
“I would recognize Phan’s energy anywhere,” Norr
replied grimly. “It looks like they saw us leave the ramp. . . .
And they’re hunting for us.”
“But why?” Rebo wanted to know. “They have Logos.”
“Who is determined to destroy me,” Sogol reminded the
runner, from her position on Norr’s forearm. “It’s my guess
that Logos is behind the search.”
“Terriﬁc,” Rebo responded darkly. “So, what now?”
“We have to reach Pohua,” the sensitive answered, as she
readjusted her pack. “And we need to arrive before dawn.
Any later than that and King Tepho’s wings will spot us.”

246

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Okay,” the runner said wearily, as he gave her a hand up
onto the road. “We might as well get started.”
They walked for hours as Haafa’s twin moons followed
their own inevitable path across the sky to ﬁnally disappear
in the west, ﬁnally entering the outskirts of Pohua just before dawn. But the danger wasn’t over, and wouldn’t be until such time as they were able to ﬁnd a safe place to hide
and plan their next move. The runner had dealt with such
situations before, however, and knew that their best chance
was to hide in a place where their pursuers were unlikely to
look, such as a monastery. And not just any monastery, but a
red-hat temple, where the medallion that still hung around
his neck would serve as their introduction.
But how to ﬁnd one? And do so quickly? During his
travels, the runner always made it a practice to avoid asking
for directions lest he identify himself as a stranger and
therefore a potential victim. But there were times when he
was forced to take a chance. That was why Rebo made his
way over to a roadside tea stand, where he fumbled some
coins out of his belt pouch. “Good morning. . . . Two cups
of tea please—and directions to the monastery.”
The woman behind the rickety counter had skin that
looked like poorly tanned leather, sky-blue eyes, and brown
teeth. Having been up all night brewing tea for the teamsters, she was tired. “There is no monastery, not in Pohua,”
the woman replied dully, as she poured hot water into a pair
of badly stained mugs. “But the nunnery is located two
blocks from the market. Just follow the main road to Pua
Street. . . . Take a right and follow Pua to Bako. Go left on
Bako. The nunnery will be on your right.”
Rebo thanked the woman, tipped her, and handed a mug
of tea to Norr. Hopefully, with any luck at all, the vendor
would go home before anyone came by to question her. The

LO G O S R U N

247

sun parted company with the horizon shortly after the offworlders left the tea stand, and wings could be seen circling
off to the east as Rebo and Norr made their way through
Pohua’s unpaved streets. None of the city’s structures stood
more than three stories tall, most presented blank faces to
the street, and all of them were mud brown. Gray smoke
dribbled from round chimneys, and the tantalizing odors of
a hundred breakfasts wafted through the cool air as Rebo
and Norr made their way up Bako Street. The city’s shops
had just started to open, and the only other pedestrians were
children sent to fetch water from the local fountain.
The nunnery was housed in a long, low building no different from those around it except for the fact that it
boasted a gently curved dome rather than the ﬂat roof typical of the structures to either side, and double doors opened
onto the street.
Rebo took a quick look around to assure himself that no
one was watching them, took Norr’s hand, and tugged the
sensitive toward the entryway. “Come on, let’s get out of
sight.” Norr, who often had trouble blocking out the ebb and
ﬂow of raw emotion normally associated with cities of any
size, was enveloped by a feeling of serenity as she followed the
runner into a spartan reception area. The sensation was akin
to entering a pool of cool water on an extremely hot day. A
novice emerged from the surrounding murk to greet them.
She was young and dressed in black. “Good morning,” the aspirant said cheerfully. “Can I be of assistance?”
Rebo was somewhat taken aback, since he knew The Way
was divided into two sects, the red hats and the black hats.
Both were united, or supposed to be, but the reconciliation
had taken place only recently, and it might be months before
word of the change arrived on Haafa. If so, the medallions
that the runner and the sensitive wore around their necks

248

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

might have no value at all, or worse yet, could elicit suspicion. But that was a chance he had to take. Rebo forced a
smile. “Is the abbess available? If so, we would like to speak
with her. Please show her this by way of an introduction.”
So saying, Rebo removed the chain from around his neck
and passed the bronze medallion over to the novice. If the
aspirant was curious about the medal, or the people who had
given it to her, she gave no sign of it as she bowed her head.
“Please wait here. . . . I will convey your message to the
abbess.” There was a swish of fabric as the young woman left.
Now that Rebo’s eyes had adjusted to the relative darkness within the reception area, he could see that while the
walls were nearly bare in keeping with black-hat sensibilities, a lushly green garden was partially visible through an
intricately carved wooden screen. And it was from that direction that the young woman returned. “Please follow
me. . . . The abbess is in the garden.”
The off-worlders followed the young woman out into a
large inner courtyard, where Norr expected to ﬁnd the
abbess seated on a chair. Nothing could have been further
from the truth. Rather than sit and meditate in the earlymorning sun, the abbess was down on hands and knees,
pulling weeds out of the nunnery’s vegetable garden. She
stood as the couple stepped out of the shadow cast by the
inward-slanting roof that ran the perimeter of the courtyard
and wiped a wisp of hair back out of her face. The hand
pump, along with the well that it served, was the nunnery’s
pride and joy. And the medallion had been hung from its
spout. “Hello,” the abbess said as she gestured toward the
medal. “That’s an interesting medallion. May I ask where
you got it?”
Rebo didn’t want to answer the question, especially since
doing so would inevitably give the holy woman power over

LO G O S R U N

249

both Norr and himself, but knew there wasn’t much choice.
Not if they wanted a safe place to stay. “The reincarnated
spirit of Nom Maa presented that medal to me within the
holy city of CaCanth,” the runner answered truthfully. “My
companion wears one exactly like it. His Holiness told us
that should we ever be in need of food, shelter, or some
other form of assistance, all we would have to do was present
the medallions to any monastery or nunnery.”
In spite of the fact that the abbess had white hair, her face
was unexpectedly free of lines, as if somehow frozen in time.
Although her voice was even, Norr could see the tendrils of
skepticism that continued to swirl within the other woman’s
aura. “How nice,” the abbess said lightly. “So, tell me, does
the Inwa still affect chin whiskers?”
“The present Inwa isn’t old enough to have whiskers,”
Rebo replied. “And, based on the portraits I’ve seen, the last
Inwa didn’t have chin whiskers, either.”
The abbess smiled and came forward to embrace them.
“Forgive me,” she said. “But the streets of Pohua are thick
with liars—and it’s my task to protect the sisters from
them. A ship landed in Omu about three weeks ago, and it
was about a week after that the good news arrived in Pohua.
My name is Kartha, Sister Kartha, and you are welcome to
stay with the sisters and me as long as you wish.”
The merchants who owned stores in the area around the

Techno Society’s headquarters stood in their various doorways, sipped their morning tea, and watched wagon after
wagon arrive in front of the heavily guarded building. A
sight they had witnessed before. It wasn’t the number of
crates that the metal men carried into the structure that
made them wonder—but the fact that they rarely saw more
than a half dozen boxes come out. It was a much-discussed

250

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

phenomenon that would probably go unsolved given how
inhospitable the technos were.
None of which was of the slightest interest to Shaz, who
had not only been up all night, but wound up in charge of
the off-loading process, which had been under way for hours
by then. Many of the crates were headed for Techno Society
headquarters on Seros, but there were other destinations as
well, depending on what the boxes contained.
Shaz felt the sun warm his shoulders as it climbed up
over a building across the street, and was just about to follow the last box inside when Phan emerged from the mouth
of an alley halfway down the block. The assassin was on foot,
and a squad of metal men marched behind her. “You look
like hell,” the combat variant observed tactlessly, as the assassin drew near. “Any luck?”
Phan shook her head. “Nothing,” she said disgustedly.
“It’s like they vanished into thin air.”
“I know how you feel,” Shaz said sympathetically. “Well,
once we step through the gate onto Zeen, someone else can
worry about them. The chances are good that some bounty
hunter or other will nail them. One thing’s for sure, though,
if they plan to break in and use this gate, they’re in for a big
surprise. I tripled the guards.”
“Zeen?” Phan inquired halfheartedly. “I thought we were
going to a place called Socket.”
“And so did I,” Shaz replied. “But that was before Logos
announced that Socket is in orbit around Zeen. . . . And the
only way to reach Socket is via a gate located on the island of
Buru. The single point of access was part of a security system put in place by Hios.”
The assassin frowned. “Will the gate be operational?”
“Logos says that it will be,” the combat variant replied.

LO G O S R U N

251

“As to whether we should trust him, well, you can be the
judge of that.”
Phan laughed, followed Shaz into the building, and went
in search of a bath.
The inside of the curtained four-wheeled hearse was

scrupulously clean, but Rebo didn’t like the notion of riding in the same vehicle that had been used to transport hundreds of dead bodies, and he fervently hoped that he would
still be alive at the conclusion of his journey. Though still
tired, the runner felt better in the wake of a two-hour nap,
even though it was oppressively hot in the back of the wagon.
The hard-faced nun who was in charge of the hearse
whistled to her team as she guided them around a corner.
The wagon had only a minimal suspension, and the runner
bounced up into the air each time the iron-shod wheels
dropped into each pothole only to be jerked out again. But,
unpleasant though the tour of Pohua was, examining the
city from the back of a hearse was better than making the
same journey on foot. Especially since Tepho’s metal men
were out looking for him.
The objective of the reconnaissance was to take a look at
Techno Society headquarters with an eye toward breaking in
and using the star gate concealed within. No small task in
the best of circumstances but especially iffy without the element of surprise and Hoggles to back him up. Still, the possibility existed, and was therefore worthy of consideration.
Especially since Sogol said that while she could “sense” the
presence of a gate seed in Pohua, the artifact was bound to
be under lock and key and difﬁcult to get at.
But as the wagon approached Techno Society headquarters, any hope of breaking into the building was crushed. As

252

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Rebo peered out through the dusty curtains he saw that a
force of metal men had been stationed out front along with
one of Tepho’s raptors. The machine’s energy weapons
tracked the hearse as it rolled past.
And it was then, as the runner eyeballed the building’s
defenses, that he saw Phan walk toward the entrance with a
combat variant at her side. Then the scene was gone as an
old man bowed to the body in the hearse and the wagon rattled through a drainage ditch. Once the ride smoothed out,
the runner rolled over to stare up at the canopy. Six or seven
insects buzzed around over his head. There might be some
way to get off Haafa, the runner thought to himself—but it
sure as hell wouldn’t be through Techno Society headquarters. The nun whistled, the angens plodded down a side
street, and the afternoon sun scorched the sky.
The lamp, which was not fueled by oil, or any known source

of power for that matter, had burned day and night for the
entire three-hundred-plus years since a long-dead member
of the Alzani clan had purchased the object more than a
thousand miles south of Pohua. And, because the merchant
family had prospered during the years since, many members
of the family, including the current patriarch, Ubri Alzani,
had come to believe that the clan’s material well-being was
somehow linked to the lamp and its seemingly inexhaustible source of power.
Now, as Alzani and his number three son sat at the ancient counting table totaling the week’s proﬁts, light from
the lamp cast a soft glow over stacks of gleaming coins and
threw black silhouettes onto the wall behind them. Both
men had black hair, aquiline noses, and long, narrow faces.
A breeze found its way in through open double doors to
stir the gauzy curtains and cool the room’s interior. The

LO G O S R U N

253

abacus made a steady clack, clack, clack sound as the younger
Alzani ﬂicked beads along their various wires, and distant
laughter could be heard as a ﬂock of children chased each
other down long, empty halls.
Perhaps, had the two men been paying more attention,
they might have detected other sounds as well. Like the soft
thump as someone vaulted over the low wall that deﬁned the
space just outside the double doors, the subtle rasp of steel as
a sword left its scabbard, and the gentle rustle of Norr’s
clothing as the sensitive positioned herself just outside the
counting room.
But before Norr entered the room, it was important to
make sure that the object she sought was actually there.
With that in mind, the sensitive shifted the sword to her
left hand and elevated her right hand so that Sogol could
see into the room as well. Then, having pulled the serpentlike AI back beside her ear, she listened to the construct
speak. “The object you want is sitting in the middle of the
table,” One-Two whispered urgently. “Somebody ﬁgured
out a way to tap the power core—and turned the gate seed
into a lamp.”
The sensitive shifted the sword back into her right hand,
peered into the room, and stared at the lamp. The shade was
yellowed with age, and the lower edge wore a dark red
fringe. Below that, suspended within a wrought-iron framework, a shiny sphere could be seen. There was a sudden stirring inside the room as coins were added to already bulging
leather bags, and the men stood, ready to call it a night.
Fearful that the merchants would take the lamp with
them when they left, Norr stepped through the door and
placed her left index ﬁnger against her lips. Both men froze
as the woman appeared, but only for a moment, as the
younger of the two made a move toward the pull cord that

254

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

dangled nearby. But the sensitive was fast. Three quick
strides and a jump carried her up onto the surface of the
table. Coins scattered as Norr turned, the blade ﬂashed, and
the pull cord parted. Then, having spun full circle, the variant paused. The razor-sharp edge was in contact with Ubri
Alzani’s throat. The younger man stood by the door. “If you
run, he dies,” Norr told the younger man emotionlessly.
“The choice is up to you.”
The sensitive saw emotions swirl as the son battled
temptation. It would have been easy to run and thereby receive his portion of the family business years early, but the
better part of him won out. The younger man held both
hands palm out. “Take the money. . . . I will do as you say.”
“Good,” Norr replied equably. “Except that I don’t want
your money . . . Both of you—back into the corner.”
“What then?” Ubri Alzani wanted to know, as he and his
son backed away.
“The lamp,” Norr answered, as she bent her knees to the
point where she could grab the object. “All I want is the
lamp.”
“No!” the patriarch objected. “Please! I beg of you! Not
the lamp. . . . Take the money. All of it. I promise no one
will follow.”
“I’m sorry,” the sensitive replied sincerely, “but it’s the
lamp that I need. Now, assuming that you want to keep
your heads on your shoulders, stay right where you are.”
There was a gentle thump as the variant landed on ﬂoor, the
curtains billowed, and Norr was gone.
No more than two seconds elapsed before the two men
sprang into action. Ubri drew a curved dagger and circled
the table, intent on following the thief through the double
doors, while his son jumped up to grab what remained of the
pull cord. Bells rang in a distant part of the house, additional

LO G O S R U N

255

guards poured out of the servants’ quarters, and those who
were on duty ran every which way.
Meanwhile Norr, who was dressed all in black, retraced
the path followed earlier. An almost impossible feat for anyone other than a sensitive, who could “see” the psychic energy emitted by the Alzani family’s guards even in complete
darkness should that be necessary. But thanks to the fact
that one of the planet’s two moons had broken company
with the horizon, there was more light than there had been
before.
That worked two ways of course, as became apparent
when a sharp-eyed youth spotted what looked like a swiftly
moving shadow and ﬁred his muzzle-loader. A long red
ﬂame stabbed the night, a loud bang reverberated between
the compound’s protective walls, and the sensitive heard
something buzz past her head as she made a mad dash toward the still-dangling rope.
That was when Rebo, who had been waiting outside the
compound, could ﬁnally spring into action. It had taken
Norr more than an hour to convince the runner that she was
the right person to enter the walled complex and abscond
with the gate seed. And now, as he felt her tug on the other
end of the rope, his counterarguments came back to mind as
more weapons were discharged.
Norr heard bullets smack into the wall around her as she
discovered how difﬁcult it was to climb one-handed, yelled
a warning to Rebo, and threw the lamp up over the top.
Then, with both hands free to grab the rope, and the runner
pulling from the other side of the wall, the variant was able
to “walk” up the vertical surface as a half dozen guards
pounded their way across the courtyard.
Then Norr was on the top and poised to cross over, when
the musket ball slammed into her back. The sensitive fell

256

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

into a pool of blackness, felt her spirit exit her body, and
knew she was dead.
Rebo screamed “No!” caught his lover as she fell, and half
carried, half dragged Norr toward the waiting hearse. The
stern-faced nun ran to help. Together, they lifted the sensitive up into wagon bed. Though unsure of where the object
had come from, the sister saw the lamp and tossed it to
Rebo. Moments later she was up on the driver’s seat with
the reins in hand. She issued a shrill whistle, and the hearse
jerked into motion.
In the meantime Rebo held a wad of fabric against Norr’s
wound as he cradled the sensitive in his arms and whispered
into her ear. “Hang on, Lonni, please hang on.” But there was
no answer as the wagon rumbled through the streets, and
tears streamed down his cheeks. Something had been
gained—but the runner was afraid that something much
more important had been lost.
There was a hiss, followed by a roar, as jets of hot water

mixed with a powerful disinfectant struck Tepho and his attendants from every possible angle. All of them were nude.
And, since the administrator never allowed anyone other
than his handpicked staff to see him naked, the rest of the
expeditionary force, including Shaz and Phan, were scheduled to follow once the technologist was fully dressed and
ready to receive them.
Once the cleansing process was complete, Tepho and his
attendants padded into the circular room where the star
gate was housed. Boxes of food, equipment, and ammo had
been stacked against the walls. Dry clothes were waiting for
the administrator, as was Logos, who had taken on the appearance of a vest.

LO G O S R U N

257

Mindful of the fact that the ﬁrst group of Tepho’s subordinates would be along shortly, the attendants hurried to
towel the administrator down and help him into his clothes.
Shaz and Phan arrived shortly thereafter. Neither was the
least bit embarrassed by their nudity, although Tepho was
staring at Phan, and the assassin wished he wouldn’t.
Then, once everyone was dressed, it was time for one last
conference. Because, unlike the tiles that represented planets like Seros, Ning, and Thara, the square labeled zeen remained dark and therefore nonoperational. Or so it appeared.
But Logos, who claimed to be able to monitor all of the star
gates via Socket, had the power to bring it back to life. Or
so he claimed. The proof, as with everything else, would be
in the doing of it.
The technologist forced a smile. “Okay, then. . . . What
are we waiting for? Let’s load the boxes labeled t-1 onto the
platform.”
It took the better part of ﬁfteen minutes to get the ﬁrst
load of equipment and people onto the relatively small service platform, but once everything was in place, it was Shaz
who reached out to press the tile labeled zeen.
The square lit up, just as Logos had predicted it would,
and the usual spiel began. The combat variant listened with
eyes closed, but the explosion of light was so brilliant that
he could see it through his eyelids. Then, as his body was
literally ripped apart for the trip through hyperspace, Shaz
momentarily ceased to exist. Then, as the operative’s molecules were reassembled, he was conscious once more. He experienced a sense of relief, quickly followed by the nausea
that typically accompanied a transfer and exposure to the
star gate’s power core.
Judging from the grimy walls and the thick layer of dust

258

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

that covered the ﬂoor, it looked as though the chamber
hadn’t been utilized in a long time. Tepho was the ﬁrst to
speak. “Okay, Shaz, time to earn your pay. . . . Take a com
set with you and let me know what you ﬁnd. I’ll get things
organized here.”
The administrator clearly had no intention of venturing
out of the chamber until he knew it was safe to do so, but
Shaz didn’t ﬁnd that at all surprising, and grinned at Phan.
“Ladies ﬁrst.”
Given the fact that they had no idea what might await
them beyond the conﬁnes of the star gate, both the combat
variant and the assassin elected to keep their clothes on as
they checked their weapons, approached the door, and cycled through.
And that was just as well, because when they stepped out
into what should have been the decontamination chamber,
most of it was missing. What remained bore a close resemblance to a cave, which judging from the bones lying scattered about, had recently been home to a large carnivore.
Filthy tiles covered most of the right-hand wall, plus portions of the ﬂoor, but the rest of the facility had been damaged. Roots had pushed their way down through the ceiling,
and the left-hand wall had been ruptured, allowing soil to
spill out onto the ﬂoor.
In addition to a brace of semiautomatic pistols, Shaz had
armed himself with a fully automatic assault weapon, which
the combat variant held at the ready as he advanced toward
the bright oval of daylight visible where the hatch should
have been. Phan followed close behind.
Seconds later, they were standing at what had once been
ground level, looking down into a broad valley through
which a river wound back and forth. A herd of animals could
be seen grazing next to a marshy area, skeletal-looking birds

LO G O S R U N

259

circled above, and the shadows cast by clouds caressed the
land. “It looks like the ground dropped away,” Shaz observed. “There must have been a quake or something.”
“Yeah,” Phan agreed phlegmatically. “I sure hope Logos
knows what he’s doing.”
“Oh, I think he knows what he’s doing,” the combat
variant replied cynically. “But for whom?”
No sooner did the hearse rattle through the nunnery’s

gates, than a shout was heard, and half a dozen nuns came
running. There was a bang as the wagon’s tailgate fell, and
Rebo was brushed aside as Norr was literally snatched out
of his arms before being rushed inside.
Rebo, still dazed by what had taken place, grabbed the
lamp and followed the nuns into what turned out to be a
spacious medical clinic. It was the only facility of its kind
available to the city’s poor. The operating room was tiled,
spotlessly clean, and better equipped than the runner would
have expected. Sister Kartha was present, as were two
capable-looking assistants. She ordered the runner into a
corner while she washed her hands. In the meantime, the
other nuns proceeded to strip Norr of both her weapons and
clothes prior to turning the sensitive facedown on the operating table. Once that was accomplished, the two women
went to work mopping up what looked like an extraordinary amount of blood, and began to prep the area immediately around the blue-edged wound. “So, she’s alive?” Rebo
ventured tentatively.
“Yes,” Kartha replied irritably. “She is. No thanks to you.
But just barely, and truth be told, I have no idea why. By all
rights your wife should be dead.”
“She isn’t my wife,” Rebo said dully, his eyes ﬁxed on
Norr.

260

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“No?” the abbess inquired caustically as she waved her
hands to dry them. “And why is that?”
“Because I’m an idiot,” the runner confessed miserably.
“Now there’s something we can agree on,” Kartha said
grimly. “Now shut up so we can get to work.”
There were advantages to being located in Pohua, where
ancient medical artifacts surfaced on a fairly regular basis,
and—though never cheap—could sometimes be purchased
at a relatively reasonable price, especially if a certain king
wanted to be treated for the venereal disease that continued
to plague him.
Norr felt a strange sense of detachment as she “stood”
next to her physical body and looked down on it. The scene
was murky, which meant the details were hard to discern,
but there was no mistaking the urgency with which the
nuns were preparing to operate on her. And judging from
the size of the hole under her right shoulder blade, the team
was wasting its time. That was why Norr was tempted to
turn away and seek higher planes, where physical pain was
unknown.
But a tendril of energy still connected the sensitive to her
physical body. It was rather weak, however, and Norr knew
she could sever it if she chose to, but something held her
back. But what?
“The answer is simple,” Lysander, said as his thoughts
began to ﬂow into the variant’s mind. “Look at the thought
forms around Rebo. . . . That’s why you’re tempted to stay.”
The sensitive looked, “saw” how miserable the runner
was, and felt what he felt. A vast longing combined with an
impending sense of doom.
Lysander glowed with internal light as he came to “stand”
at her side. “And there’s one more thing,” the spirit entity
added. “Rebo is here because of you. Should you choose to

LO G O S R U N

261

terminate this incarnation, he will be lost in grief—and Logos will take control of Socket. And not just Logos, but the
Techno Society under the leadership of Tepho, who wants to
control the star gates for the same corrupt reasons that I did.
“So I beg you to stay, not just for the sake of the man who
loves you and came back to the physical world in order to
protect you, but for the sake of humanity as well. Because
the long slide into darkness has begun—and the gates represent the only hope for something better than barbarism.”
Norr was about to respond, about to say something, when
Sister Kartha pushed a probe down into the open wound, and
the resulting pain sent the sensitive reeling. “There it is,” the
abbess announced, as the metal stylus made contact with the
lead ball. “Now to get it out.”
Rebo had seen medicos extract bullets before, which was
why the runner expected Kartha to pick up a scalpel and cut
the projectile out.
But the abbess had another tool in mind, something that
had been common once, and would be again if craftspeople
were able to successfully duplicate the artifact. Metal scraped
on metal as the solar powered surgical scarab was removed
from a basin ﬁlled with disinfectant and placed on the sensitive’s bare back.
Rebo watched in fascination as the tiny insectlike robot
scurried up to the wound, circled the hole as if to determine
its exact diameter, and dived inside. “First the machine will
cauterize all of the bleeders,” the abbess explained. “Then it
will make its way down to the musket ball and remove it.”
The runner had seen something similar on a previous occasion, and was about to say as much, when a novice burst
into the surgery. “Sister Kartha! Come quick! The police are
at the door. They claim the sensitive is a thief!”
The abbess looked at Rebo, uttered one of the many

262

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

swear words she had learned during a childhood spent in the
slums of Pokua, and turned back again. “Tell them I’m
busy. . . . Show them into my study and bring them some
tea. I’ll be there as soon as I can.”
The aspirant nodded, turned, and hurried into the hall.
Under normal circumstances, the fact that the authorities
were practically standing outside the door waiting to arrest
him would have sent Rebo into the ﬁght-or-ﬂight mode.
But now, with Norr’s life on the line, the only thing the
runner cared about was the scarab. A lot of time had passed
since the robot had descended into the wound, or so it
seemed to Rebo, and he was just about to comment on that
when the slightly deformed musket ball popped up out of
the hole.
Sister Kartha made use of a pair of forceps to pluck the
projectile off Norr’s skin and hold it up for inspection. It
was ﬂattened on one side. “Here it is . . .” the abbess said.
“It looks like the bullet slanted upward and came to rest
against her scapula. Now, as soon as the scarab ﬁnishes repairing the damage to her tissues, it will back its way out
and close the wound. At that point I will allow the police to
enter.”
“But you can’t!” Rebo objected. “They’ll throw her in
jail, and she’ll die there.”
“You should have thought about that possibility earlier,”
the abbess responded sternly. “You may have a relationship
with Nom Maa . . . But that doesn’t entitle you to steal
other people’s property! The sisters and I have a spiritual
obligation to heal the sick—but we aren’t required to harbor criminals. Oh, and surrender your weapons. . . . We’ll
have no killing here.”
The runner was tempted to argue his case, to try and explain why the theft had been justiﬁed, but could see that it

LO G O S R U N

263

wouldn’t make any difference. “All right,” he said humbly.
“I’m not ready to surrender my weapons, not yet, but I’ll
bring our things in here. Maybe they’ll let us keep some of
our clothes.”
If the abbess thought Rebo was about to ﬂee, she made
no effort to stop him as the runner bolted out of surgery and
sprinted down the hall. Once in the cell where the two of
them had been allowed to sleep, the off-worlder grabbed
what few belongings they had and went back the way he
had come. The scarab had surfaced by that time, Norr’s
wound had been sealed, and the robot’s tiny feet continued
to wiggle as the abbess placed the device back in its basin.
“Okay,” Rebo said, as he dumped both packs next to the
operating table. “I can’t tell you how much I appreciate all
that you’ve done. . . . The police are sure to separate us once
they come in—so could I have a moment alone with
Lonni?”
Kartha’s expression softened. “Yes, of course. But don’t
take long.”
“I won’t,” the runner promised, and felt for Norr’s pulse
as the nuns left the room. It was weak, but still there, and
Rebo allowed himself to hope.
Norr wasn’t entirely sure what was taking place in the
physical realm, but allowed herself to be drawn back into
her body, where it was necessary to grit her teeth against the
pain. Conscious now, but still laid out on her stomach, the
sensitive heard Rebo speak. “Sogol? Can you hear me?”
The AI slithered up the sensitive’s bare arm to gather itself on her shoulder. “Yes,” the computer answered, “I can
hear you.”
“Good. Lonni damned near got killed stealing that gate
seed . . . So the least you can do is get us out of here!”
“I would be happy to,” Logos 1.2 responded. “But before

264

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

I can activate the gate seed you must remove the sphere
from the cage that presently surrounds it.”
Now, having been reminded, Rebo knew that the AI was
correct. Once activated the globe would start to spin—
which wouldn’t be possible until the object was released
from the lamp. But how to free it? And do so before the police came to get him?
The runner swore a long string of oaths as he secured a
grip on the big instrument cabinet, wrestled the piece of
furniture over to the door, and pushed it into place. The obstacle wouldn’t keep the authorities out for very long, Rebo
knew that, but ﬁgured any delay would help.
Having bought some time, the runner began to riﬂe
through the cabinet’s drawers. He had already rejected a
number of instruments, none of which looked like they
would be appropriate to the task, when he saw what appeared to be a bone saw. But would it cut through metal?
Rebo was about to experiment when Sogol spoke. “What
about Norr’s sword? Would that do the job?”
“Damn!” Rebo exclaimed. “I should have thought of
that.” The bone saw clattered as it hit the ﬂoor.
The nuns had removed both the sword and scabbard
shortly after bringing Norr into the operating room. The
runner hurried over to where the weapon lay and heard the
whisper of steel as he pulled the blade free. Norr, who had
been witness to the conversation, managed to croak his
name. “Jak . . .”
Rebo felt his heart leap. He hurried to the young woman’s
side. “You’re conscious! Thank God! How do you feel?”
“Never mind that,” the sensitive whispered hoarsely. “Be
careful with the sword! The blade is extremely sharp. If you
aim for the center of the lamp, it will cut through the
framework and the gate seed.”

LO G O S R U N

265

“Which would be most unfortunate,” Logos 1.2 put in.
“Because the resulting explosion would destroy this room,
the nunnery, and half of Pohua.”
“Thanks for the warning,” Rebo said dryly. Then, having
placed the lamp well clear of the operating table, the runner
brought the sword up over his head and brought the supersharp edge down along the right side of the lamp. There was
a shower of sparks as metal parted, the runner took a nasty
shock, and the acrid scent of ozone ﬁlled the air. His arm
was still tingling when Rebo returned the weapon to its
scabbard and bent to retrieve what remained of the lamp.
He was relieved to see that the sphere was intact. Then, as
the runner struggled to bend a piece of metal out of the way,
someone began to pound on the door. “This is the police!
Open up!”
Rebo drew the 9mm, ﬁred two shots into the very top of
the door, and heard loud scufﬂing noises as the police beat a
hasty retreat. “Okay,” the runner said, having returned the
pistol to its holster, “where were we? Ah, yes, the gate seed.
I press on both dimples for sixty seconds . . . right?”
“That’s correct,” Sogol assured him. “Then, when you feel
the locks give, twist both hemispheres in opposite directions.”
Rebo pressed, heard noises out in the hall, and knew the
police were getting ready to take another crack at the door.
“Hurry,” Norr croaked. “Or we’ll rot in whatever passes for
Pohua’s jail.” The sensitive made an attempt to rise, but the
pain was too intense, and she collapsed.
Finally, after what seemed like an eternity, the locks
gave. Then, having secured a good grip on both halves of
the sphere, the runner twisted them in opposite directions.
Beams of bright light stabbed the walls, the object started
to oscillate, and Rebo had to let go as a battering ram hit
the door.

TWELVE
™

The Planet Zeen

Those who swim the sea must ride the currents, for to oppose
them is to challenge the planet itself, and therefore the stars.
—Saylo Imono, phib philosopher,
Currents

The elders had been hung by their thumbs from the frame-

work that normally served to smoke meat during the fall
months, when the entire village labored to make itself ready
for winter, and the dogs grew fat from eating scraps. The
villagers’ bare feet had been weighted with rocks, and hung
only six inches above the coals, which meant that those who
were conscious could smell their burning ﬂesh. All because
the village’s chief had been so brave, or so stupid, as to spit
on the crippled man.
But, in spite of the systematic torture, the locals refused
to surrender their secrets. Or so Tepho assumed, as he ordered one of the metal men to throw another bucket of water onto Subchief Milo Vester, in hopes that the shock would
revive him. The water hit the villager’s smoke-blackened
face, brought him back into full consciousness, and provoked

LO G O S R U N

267

an explosion of steam as it hit the hot coals. The subchief
screamed, or tried to, but produced a strange choking noise
instead.
Meanwhile, those villagers lucky enough to survive the
spitting incident stood in a sullen group with downcast
eyes. Tepho made use of the dead chief ’s hand-carved totem
stick to point at Vester’s badly charred feet. “You think
that’s painful?” the off-worlder demanded contemptuously.
“You know nothing of pain. . . . I was born in pain, have
lived with pain every day of my life, and know what real
pain is. And so will you unless you answer my questions
truthfully.”
“But I have,” Vester protested pitifully. “There is no island of Buru, not that I’m aware of, so how can I tell you
about it?”
Tepho slapped his leg with the totem stick and was about
to order one of the metal men to put more wood on the ﬁre,
when Logos spoke. Because the AI’s voice seemed to originate from Tepho, the villagers assumed that two spirits occupied the stranger’s twisted body. They stirred uneasily and
sketched protective symbols into the air. “He could be
telling the truth,” Logos suggested. “I doubt any of these
people have been more than a couple of hundred miles from
the village—so their knowledge of geography is bound to be
somewhat limited. Not to mention the fact that the island
could have been renamed during the years I’ve been absent.”
Vester wasn’t sure where the second voice was coming
from, but sensed a potential ally and was quick to agree.
“That’s right!” the subchief said desperately. “We’re ignorant people here. . . . We know nothing of such important
matters.”
Tepho tapped his cheek with what had become a swagger
stick. “Then who would?” the technologist inquired mildly.

268

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Lord Arbuk would!” Vester answered eagerly. “He rules
from the city of Esperance.”
Tepho turned to the assembled villagers. “Is that true?”
Heads nodded, and a number of voices answered in the
afﬁrmative.
The administrator eyed their grimy faces. “Who among
you has been to Esperance?”
After a pause, and some whispering, three slightly hesitant hands went up.
Tepho turned to Shaz and Phan. “Put them in shackles.
Kill the rest.”
Rather than waste ammunition on a planet where it
could be difﬁcult to obtain more—the combat variant ordered the metal men to carry out the executions with their
clubs. Some of the villagers tried to ﬂee, but were quickly
run down and dispatched on the spot.
Vester passed out at some point during the bloody process but was returned to consciousness when the rain hit his
face. The off-world killers had departed by then, so even
though the subchief wanted to die, no one remained to grant
his wish. Tendrils of steam rose around the subchief, raindrops fell like tears, and Socket passed high above.
The Planet Haafa

There was a loud crash as the battering ram made contact
with the operating room’s door, followed by the sound of
splintering wood, and a prolonged screech as two burly policemen pushed the heavy storage unit out of the way. Once
the path was clear the chief of police and Ulbri Alzani
stepped into the surgery and paused to look around.
They saw the operating table, the nude woman who lay
facedown on it, and the man who stood next to her. Then
there was a ﬂash of light, followed by a miniature clap of

LO G O S R U N

269

thunder, and the tableau disappeared. The table, the woman,
and the man vanished into thin air, as did part of the nearest
wall, a sizeable chunk of the tiled ﬂoor, and the Alzani family’s prized lamp. The reality of that, the ﬁnality of it,
brought the old man to his knees. And that’s where Ulbri
Alzani was, still sobbing, when his number three son came
to take the patriarch home.
The Planet Zeen

When Rebo came to he was drowning. The water was
crystal clear, which meant he could see the operating table,
Norr, and all manner of other objects as they drifted toward
the sandy bottom. The runner wanted to breathe more than he
had ever wanted anything before. But if he needed to breathe,
so did Norr, who continued to sink toward the bottom in spite
of her feeble efforts to swim. It felt as if his lungs were on ﬁre
as Rebo fought his way down to the variant, grabbed a ﬁstful
of her hair, and kicked as hard as he could. Bubbles raced
them to the surface, spray exploded away from the runner’s
head, and Norr emerged a second later.
Both spluttered as they gasped for air. Rebo spotted an
island, wrapped an arm around Norr’s torso, and kicked for
shore. The bottom came up quickly, Rebo found his feet,
and cradled the sensitive in his arms as he marched up out of
the water toward the smokestack-shaped construct that dominated the center of the island.
Norr winced as the runner laid her down in the shade.
Rebo saw the grimace, rolled the sensitive onto her side,
and saw that her wound had reopened. A rivulet of blood
was running down her back. The runner unbuckled his
weapons harness, hurried to remove his shirt, and worked to
wring as much water out of the wet garment as he could.
Norr made a face when the cold, salty fabric came into

270

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

contact with her wound but knew Rebo was doing the best
he could.
Satisﬁed that the makeshift pressure dressing would stop
the bleeding, the runner set about gathering driftwood for a
ﬁre. Thankfully, there were more than a dozen wax-coated
matches in one of his belt pouches. The ﬁrst stick broke off
just below the head, but the second produced a wisp of
smoke, followed by a bright yellow ﬂame. Twigs crackled as
they caught ﬁre, larger pieces of wood burst into ﬂame, and
it wasn’t long before waves of welcome heat rolled over
Norr. The shaking stopped soon thereafter, her color improved, and her respirations evened out.
And that was when Rebo realized that Sogol was missing. The last time he’d seen the AI she had been coiled up
on Norr’s back. The runner wondered where the construct
was now. . . . Back on Haafa? But he had more pressing
problems to deal with, starting with the fact that Norr still
looked pale, and he had very few items to work with. That
was when the runner remembered seeing the operating
table drift toward the bottom of the sea—and wondered
what else might be laying around out there? There was only
one way to ﬁnd out. Rebo added more wood to the ﬁre,
knelt next to Norr, and was about to tell her about his plan,
when the runner realized that the sensitive was either
asleep, or unconscious, a possibility that made his mission
that much more urgent.
A quick scan revealed that outside of what might have
been another island, and a sail on the far horizon, there was
nothing else to be seen other than a nearly cloudless sky and
the sea below. Or was it a lake? No, he was a ﬁsherman’s son,
and knew that the line of seaweed and other debris that ran
horizontally around the island represented the high-tide
mark, the presence of which implied at least one moon.

LO G O S R U N

271

Having left both his weapons and boots piled next to
Norr and equipped himself with the remains of a broken
plank, Rebo retraced his earlier steps down into the sea. Besides providing additional ﬂotation, the plank’s other purpose was to help the runner bring salvaged materials back to
the beach, assuming he recovered any. The ﬁrst objective
was to ﬁnd the operating table, which, being the largest object transferred, would also be the most visible. Then, assuming the water wasn’t too deep, he would dive to retrieve
whatever he could.
Rebo stretched out on the plank, paddled his way out to
what he hoped was the correct area, and rolled off into the
salty water. Then, with his face down and one arm thrown
across the length of wood, he kicked with his feet. Thanks
to the fact that the water was extremely clear, he could see
all the way to the sandy bottom. There were outcroppings of
rock, along with spiral-shaped plants, that swayed from side
to side as the runner passed over them. Fish, if that’s what
the pancake-shaped creatures could properly be called, ﬂed
ahead of the human, their pale bodies undulating as they
hurried to escape the dark menace above.
It was all very pretty, but Rebo couldn’t tell whether he
was cruising over the correct area, and that led to a lot of
fruitless swimming before the runner spotted the gleam of
what might have been metal. He didn’t have any way to secure the plank, but the water was relatively calm, so he ﬁgured the length of wood wouldn’t drift very far while he
went down to investigate.
Rather than the operating table, which the off-worlder
expected to ﬁnd ﬁrst, the object in question turned out to be
Norr’s sword. Rebo carried the weapon up to the surface,
where he laid it on the plank. More dives produced more treasures, including the bone saw that the runner had discarded

272

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

back on Haafa and both of their packs. So, knowing that the
sensitive kept a small ﬁrst-aid kit among her things, the
runner battled to bring the waterlogged leather sacks up to
the surface. Once there, he hung them below the plank,
which was partly awash by then. Finally, by dint of considerable kicking, Rebo pushed all of his loot ashore.
The ﬁre was still burning, albeit much lower by then, as
the runner made his way up out of the water. He was encouraged to see that Norr had not only raised herself into a
sitting position but managed a wave. That was when Rebo
saw the light reﬂect off gold, realized that Sogol had come
ashore on her own and wrapped herself around the variant’s
arm. “Hey, there,” the runner said, as he dropped the packs
next to Norr. “How are you feeling?”
“Better,” the sensitive replied. “Look! Sogol brought
me this!”
The sensitive opened her ﬁst to reveal the tiny scarab.
The machine turned circles on the palm of her hand as it
searched for something to repair. “It was what you humans
would call luck,” the AI said modestly. “I ran into the scarab
on the bottom, and it was small enough to hold in my jaws,
so I brought it along. End of story.”
“Not quite,” Norr objected. “One-Two put the scarab
into my wound—and I feel better as a result.”
“Let’s take a look,” Rebo said, and knelt to lift her shirt.
The runner was no expert, but the wound had been reclosed, and there was no sign of bleeding. “It looks good,”
Rebo conﬁrmed, “but take it easy. What you need is a rest.
What can I get for you?”
“More clothes would be nice,” the sensitive said sweetly,
and gestured toward her pack.
“Maybe I like you half-naked,” Rebo replied mischievously.
And that was when the ground shook, a loud roaring

LO G O S R U N

273

sound was heard, and Rebo turned toward the structure that
stood behind him. It was ﬂat black, stood about twenty feet
tall, and looked like a smokestack. There hadn’t been enough
time to investigate whatever the thing was previous to that
point, not with Norr to tend to. But now, what with the
roaring sound, the runner felt the need to ﬁnd out what it
was. “You’d better take your guns,” the sensitive suggested,
and lifted the harness partway off the ground.
“You’ll be okay?”
“I’ll be ﬁne,” Norr said, as she pulled her pack in close.
“Check on the noise, come back, and ﬁx me a seven-course
meal. I’m hungry.”
Rebo grinned. If the sensitive was hungry, that was a
very good sign indeed! He buckled the guns on over bare
skin, climbed the sandy slope that led up to what he had already begun to think of as “the stack.” As he got closer, the
runner realized that the structure was made out of metal.
He circled the stack, discovered that a ladder had been
bolted to the far side, and scrambled upward. Once on top,
he peered down the tube into the poorly lit tunnel below. It
was quite a drop, but thanks to the maintenance ladder that
was attached to the inside surface of the stack, Rebo was
able to descend without mishap.
A pool of sunlight marked the bottom of the ladder, and
Rebo could feel residual heat from the machine that had
passed twenty minutes earlier. As the runner peered down
from the service platform, he could see two metal tracks,
both of which were shiny from continual use. That suggested that the underground trains ran fairly frequently. But
where did the machines come from? Where were they going? And to whom did they belong? The last question was
the most troubling, since there was no way to know what the
owners were like or how they would respond to trespassers. It

274

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

seemed as if the best thing to do was lie low, give Norr time
to heal, and ﬁnd a way off the island.
But had Rebo been aware of the camera that followed
each step of his progress as he made his way back up the
ladder, he would have known that it was too late to escape
notice. Because the people who owned the tunnel, as well as
the train that ran through it, already knew exactly where to
ﬁnd him.
Having worked hard all morning, Lord Arbuk rose from his

desk, lumbered over to the side table where a carafe of
steaming caf stood waiting for him, and ﬁlled a ceramic
mug. Not one of the silver vessels that populated the ornate
tray at his elbow, but a lowly piece of pottery, which,
though homely, would keep the liquid hot. A must insofar
as the land-lord was concerned, since he viewed lukewarm
caf with the same contempt reserved for phibs, which the
nobleman looked on as little more than walking-talking
angens.
Mug in hand, Arbuk strolled out onto his private balcony. A sheer wall fell away to stone buildings that stairstepped down to a rocky beach and the half-empty harbor
beyond. The city of Esperance had intentionally been built
next to the sea, where it could beneﬁt from shipping. But
that was back before the phibs took control of the planet’s
oceans and thereby prevented land-lords such as himself
from transporting raw materials, manufactured goods, or
people across what the freaks liked to refer to as “their
sacred waters.” But not forever, because Arbuk and his peers
had a surprise in store for the phibs, one that would reestablish Esperance as a seaport!
In spite of the sun’s warmth, the land-lord felt a sudden
chill and turned to discover that his private secretary, a sen-

LO G O S R U N

275

sitive named Hitho Mal, was standing three feet behind
him. Arbuk was a big man, and his jowls took on a purplish
cast as blood rushed to his face. “Dammit, man! Announce
yourself. . . . I hate people who skulk about.”
Mal, who had long prided himself on his ability to skulk
about, was unmoved. He had the long, narrow face typical
of his kind, sunken cheeks, and thin lips. The upper one remained stationary as he spoke. “Yes, sire, sorry, sire. I know
you’re busy, but there’s someone I would like you to meet.
His name is Milo Vester, and assuming that he’s telling the
truth, something very strange took place in the village of
Kine.”
Arbuk struggled to remember the place, was unable to
do so, and concluded that Kine must be one of the many
small villages that marked the outskirts of his holdings. He
took another sip of caf. “ ‘Strange’? How so?”
“If your lordship would indulge me,” Mal replied respectfully, “I prefer that you take the tale from Vester’s own
lips. Especially since you are almost certain to ask questions
that I would be unable to answer.”
Knowing that Mal rarely requested anything not in his
employer’s best interest, Arbuk was willing to comply. That
didn’t mean it was necessary to do so gracefully however.
Which meant there was a good deal of grumbling as the
robed sensitive led his rotund employer down a twisting
staircase—and into the rather primitive medical facility
that occupied one corner of the building’s basement.
But what waited within was sufﬁcient to silence even the
land-lord who, as a member of the ruling class, had not only
witnessed his full share of brutality but been responsible for
some of it himself. Vester, who had suffered greatly during
the interminable wagon trip to Esperance, had been laid out
on a bed. The crisp white sheets had the effect of accentuating

276

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the villager’s ﬁlthy body, smoke-blackened clothes, and
badly charred feet. The patient’s eyes were closed, but ﬂuttered as the sensitive touched his arm, and remained open
thereafter. “Tell him,” Mal ordered gently. “Tell Lord Arbuk
what happened to your village.”
The villager’s voice was faint, so it was necessary to bend
down in order to hear him, and Vester’s breath was so bad it
caused Arbuk to gag. But the story was well worth listening
to, especially the description of the blue killing machine,
which sounded as if it might be a twin to the heavily damaged Raptor II that presently occupied a place of honor in
Arbuk’s personal war museum. “Tell me,” the nobleman
said, as he pinched his nostrils. “The people who accompanied the killing machine . . . were they norms? Or phibs?”
“Most were norms,” Vester replied, “although some were
machines that looked like humans.”
Arbuk was surprised. “Machines . . . you’re sure of that?”
“Yes, sire,” Vester maintained staunchly. “I’m sure.”
“How very interesting,” Arbuk said to no one in particular, as he straightened up. “You were correct, Mal. . . . Subchieftain Vester is well worth listening to. I don’t know who
these people are, but I want them found, and quickly, too.”
The lord and his secretary turned, and were about to depart, when Vester produced a croaking sound. Arbuk turned
back. “Yes?” the nobleman inquired, “is there something
more?”
“Kill me!” Vester begged pitifully. “Please kill me.”
Arbuk glanced at Mal. “Do you have everything you
need?”
The sensitive had a clipboard. Vester’s recollections had
been written down. “Yes, sire,” the variant answered. “I
have every word.”

LO G O S R U N

277

“Good,” Arbuk replied, as he turned back to Vester.
“Your request is approved.”
The land-lord was halfway back to his ofﬁce when the
mufﬂed thump of a gunshot was heard, and Vester was free to
return to Kine, where the rest of his family had already been
buried.
It had been dark for quite a while, and Rebo was asleep in

the lean-to that he and Norr had constructed next to the
ventilation stack, when the sensitive nudged his arm. “Jak!
Wake up! Where’s the light coming from?”
The runner was already reaching for a weapon when his
eyes popped open, and he saw the rays of white light that
were streaming down through the cracks in their steeply
slanted roof. Pistol at the ready Rebo rolled out onto the
brilliantly lit sand and looked upward. The illumination
was more concentrated than moonlight—and appeared to
originate from space. Norr had emerged by then, which
meant Sogol was present as well. “Look!” the variant exclaimed. “I think it’s moving!”
Rebo looked out across the brightly lit water and realized that Norr was correct. It appeared that they were standing in a pool of light that was gradually creeping toward the
west. “Of course it’s moving,” Sogol put in matter-of-factly,
as she slithered up onto the sensitive’s shoulder. “What
you’re seeing is sunlight reﬂected from a mirror aimed at
the planet’s surface.”
“But where’s the mirror?” Rebo wanted to know. “And
what’s the point?”
“Socket is an artiﬁcial planetoid,” the AI explained
patiently. “The engineers took many things into account
when they constructed it. The creation of tides on a planet

278

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

where none previously existed led to a variety of problems.
Massive public works projects were required to cope with
ﬂuctuating water levels. That made some sectors of the population unhappy. But, back before Emperor Hios succumbed to his lust for power, he was a capable politician. By
providing the citizens of Zeen with low-cost power generated by tide-driven turbines—he overcame their objections
to Socket.”
“That’s all very interesting,” Norr commented, as she
continued to stare up into the sky. “But what does all that
have to do with the light?”
“There were lots of construction projects back in those
days,” Sogol answered. “Many of them ran around the clock.
So, in order to further ingratiate himself with the planet’s
populace, Hios ordered that a steerable mirror be installed
on Socket. A mirror that could bounce sunlight down onto
the dark side of the planet—and thereby illuminate the
project with the highest priority.”
“So, what’s happening now?” Rebo inquired. “Why
point the mirror at mostly empty ocean?”
“Like so many other functions on Socket, the solar mirror
is simply drifting out of control,” the AI replied sadly.
“And, were I to take control of the reﬂector, Logos would
know.”
“It’s best to leave it alone then,” the runner said feelingly.
“We have enough problems already.”
Norr nodded her agreement and held hands with Rebo,
as the massive blob of light continued its journey toward
the west. Finally, once the darkness had been restored, they
went back to bed.
Omar Tepho and his force of humans and robots had trav-

eled a quarter of the way to the city of Esperance when they

LO G O S R U N

279

stopped to spend the night in a ﬁshing village called Wattl. A
not-very-distinguished gathering of stone-and-wood buildings that was home to a population of norms who liked to
refer to themselves as “ﬁshermen” but actually made their
livings as pirates. Something Lord Arbuk was willing to tolerate so long as the villagers limited their predations to the
phibs, who liked to trawl the coastal waters for slat ﬁsh,
even though that made them vulnerable to the speedy
eight-oared cutters crewed by the residents of villages like
Wattl.
So, when Tepho guided his raptor into town, closely followed by six metal men and a contingent of twenty-ﬁve
heavily armed humans, the locals were torn between fear
and greed. But there was scant opportunity for skullduggery as the strangers took control of the only inn, displaced
the previous guests, and established a defensive perimeter
through which none of the locals were permitted to pass.
Meanwhile, as if drawn to Wattl by a conjunction of
planetary inﬂuences, other forces were in motion as well.
Because even as the red-orange sun descended toward the
gently rolling sea, a water-slicked head surfaced out in the
harbor, and a cross-shaped wing circled high above. Each
served a different master, and, while neither was aware of
the other, they soon would be.
Except for one massive deluge, the weather had been mild

up to that point, which was fortunate indeed. But each
dawn was accompanied by the need to gather both food and
water. Which was why Rebo began each day by stripping
off his ragged clothes, strapping a sheath knife to his right
calf, and carrying the homemade spear down to the edge of
the water. It felt cold at ﬁrst, too cold, but a combination of
thirst and hunger urged him on. Based on a process of trial

280

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

and error, the off-worlder knew that while the pancakeshaped “ﬂoppers” were relatively easy to spear, they were
bony and didn’t taste very good. That was why the runner
typically went looking for what he thought of as “zip ﬁsh”
because of their ability to dart from place to place and the
black streaks that ran the length of their silvery bodies.
They made for good eating, but they were hard to hit, and it
took at least two of them to make a decent meal.
On that particular morning, the runner was fortunate,
and managed to nail three of the speedy animals in a span of
ﬁfteen minutes. Having strung the ﬁsh together on a piece
of cord, Rebo swam out to what he thought of as “the well,”
where, in order to meet nutritional requirements of its own,
one species of seaweed produced ﬁst-sized bladders ﬁlled
with desalinated seawater. Then, having harvested six containers of water, it was the runner’s habit to put his face
down and swim straight in. Once ashore the ﬁsh would be
roasted over the ﬁre, while Norr attempted to squeeze one
more mug of tea from an already exhausted bag, and Rebo
watched from a few feet away. And later, once breakfast was
over, it would be time to resume work on their partially
built raft.
But that morning was to be different, as quickly became
apparent when the runner brought his head up and put his
feet down. Because, as Rebo stood, he saw that Norr’s hands
were bound in front of her, and three heavily armed phibs
were waiting for him on the beach. The runner knew that
the amphibians, like sensitives, heavies, and wings, were the
result of genetic tinkering carried out thousands of years before. In this case the goal had been to create a strain of humanoids equipped to more fully exploit the water worlds
that the ancients had colonized, thereby lowering the costs
associated with construction, mining, and aquaculture.

LO G O S R U N

281

Later, once that goal had been accomplished, some phibs
had migrated to worlds like Zeen, where they not only took
up residence in the oceans, rivers, and lakes, but where they
frequently displaced thousands of norms who made their
livings on or near the water.
The phibs had sleek, hairless skulls and double-lidded
eyes that helped them see underwater. They also had respiratory systems that could extract oxygen from water, as well
as streamlined bodies, and webbing that bridged both ﬁngers and toes. The phibs also had shapely breasts, or at least
one of them did, which identiﬁed her as female. Sogol, who
had apparently been mistaken for a piece of expensive jewelry, was wrapped around the woman’s left biceps. The amphibians wore what amounted to G-strings and watched
impassively as the nude male made his way up out of the
water. “I’m sorry,” Norr said miserably. “I was asleep.”
“It wasn’t your fault,” the runner replied stoically.
“Drop the spear,” one of the males said, as he pointed the
9mm pistol at its previous owner. Like members of many local populations, the phib spoke with what the runner regarded as a thick accent although he knew the man with the
gun would perceive the situation differently. There was
nothing Rebo could do but drop the ﬁsh, the water pods,
and the spear.
“Now the knife,” the female added sternly.
The runner, who had begun to wish that he’d gone
swimming with his clothes on, bent to remove the knife
from its sheath.
“This is a waste of time,” the second male said irritably.
“They’re pirates. . . . Shoot them and be done with it.”
“That’s what the norms would do to us!” the female
added emphatically.
Norr could see the dark, threatening thought forms that

282

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

swirled around the other variants and felt frightened as a result. But the ﬁrst male, the one who seemed to be in charge,
refused to acquiesce. “We’re supposed to be better than they
are . . . remember? Not to mention the fact that the spooks
will want to interrogate this pair. So shut the hell up, grab
their belongings, and destroy the lean-to. It could attract
even more pirate trash. . . .”
Rebo was tempted to engage the ﬁrst male in conversation, in the hope that he could convince the local that they
weren’t pirates, but he decided to let the opportunity pass
when Norr gave a subtle shake of her head. The runner
knew the sensitive could see things that he couldn’t—and
had reason to trust her judgments.
Fifteen minutes later the phibs and their prisoners were
seated in a miniature version of the larger trains that blasted
through the tunnel twice each day. Rebo had been allowed
to pull on some pants by that time, but was otherwise unclothed, as both he and Norr were strapped into their seats.
Though still a little bit sore, the variant’s wound was mostly
healed, which meant she could move without pain.
When the minitrain took off, it departed with near-necksnapping acceleration, and was soon traveling so fast the
tunnel’s walls were little more than a gray blur. The offworlders were on their way—But to where?
The attack on the village of Wattl came in the early hours

of the morning when most of the citizens were still asleep.
There were watchmen of course, posted on the ancient
breakwater to warn their fellow villagers should the phibs
launch an assault on the sleeping town, but two had been
drinking and passed out. The third saw dozens of waterslicked heads break the surface of the water, and was about
to ring the warning bell, when a beam of coherent energy

LO G O S R U N

283

drilled a hole through his chest. A smoke ring rose from the
circular wound as he fell, and the ﬁrst wave of heavily armed
variants marched up the stony beach. Having lost three ﬁshing boats and seven people to the shore-based pirates over
the last thirty days, the local amphibians were extremely angry.
That’s why all of the cutters that were drawn up on the
beach were holed, nets were piled up to be burned, and even
the wharf dogs were shot down. But, unbeknownst to the
phibs, they were attacking the Techno Society as well. And
even though Wattl’s watchmen failed to deliver a timely
warning, a sharp-eyed robot had detected the presence of
multiple heat sources before the phibs surfaced, and radioed a
warning to Shaz.
Once alerted, Tepho rolled out of bed and was already
shouting orders as sleepy attendants hurried to dress him.
Then, having made his way downstairs, the technologist
rushed to climb into his raptor. Shaz and Phan were already
present, along with a dozen heavily armed mercenaries.
They followed the bipedal machine as servos whirred,
weapons swiveled, and death stalked the streets.
Some of the villagers were up by then, ﬁring projectile
weapons at the oncoming horde or running for their lives as
their fellow citizens were cut down by blue death. Formerly
solid walls exploded, wood houses burst into ﬂame, and angens screamed as they tried to escape from their pens.
But then, just when it appeared that the phibs would destroy the entire village, Tepho guided the raptor around a
corner and opened ﬁre. In spite of the fact that the raiders
possessed energy weapons, too, surprise combined with superior ﬁrepower made it possible to cut the variants down.
Tepho, who was secure within the comfort of his armored
cockpit, laughed out loud as blips of blue light raced the

284

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

length of the waterfront to snatch phibs off their feet. Others
came apart so that heads, arms, and legs pinwheeled through
the air. But most of the invaders were simply incinerated as
bolts of blue energy wiped them away, leaving little more
than black streaks to mark the places they had stood.
The raptor took hits, half a dozen of them, but the
shoulder-ﬁred weapons didn’t pack enough of a wallop to
hole the machine, so the surviving variants had no choice
but to retreat into the harbor, where the water would protect them from further harm. Tepho continued to ﬁre as the
amphibians pulled back, but Shaz ordered his mercenaries
to conserve their ammo and was the ﬁrst to take notice of
the fact that some additional combatants had arrived on the
scene. The combat variant saw the wings sweep in from the
south, circle above, and ﬁre down at the phibs.
Then, just as Shaz was about to warn Tepho, what looked
like a yellow comet arced high above the village and exploded at the center of the harbor. There was a boom, as a
huge geyser of water shot up into the air and hung there for
what seemed like a minute but was actually little more than
a second or two. The column of water was translucent,
which meant that Shaz could see the phib bodies suspended
within the spout, along with what might have been large
sea creatures and the remains of fractured boats.
Then, as the geyser started to collapse, the combat variant realized what would happen next. He yelled, “Run!”
and turned in order to follow his own advice.
The tidal wave ramped up the steeply shelving beach,
exploded over the seawall that had been built to protect the
village, and sent ﬁngers of frothy seawater raging up Wattl’s
streets. Tepho had just started to turn the raptor around
when the water hit, lifted the machine off its pods, and carried the construct a good thirty feet before putting it down

LO G O S R U N

285

again. But the water would be forced to return, the technologist knew that, which was why he directed the raptor into
a side street and took refuge behind a sturdy stone house.
The seawater ran back toward the harbor a few moments
later, where it poured over the seawall, taking most of the
dead phibs along with it.
Tepho knew his machine couldn’t stand up to a comet
like the one that had just caused so much destruction, and
was already in the process of making a run for it, when a detachment of Lord Arbuk’s wings dropped a wire net over the
raptor. It might have been possible to blow holes in the
mesh with his energy weapons, but that was before a team of
twelve angens appeared at the other end of the waterfront,
wheeled to bring a huge mortar to bear, and were immediately released.
Tepho took one look at the artillery piece, knew that it
had produced the comet, and tilted his weapons up toward
the sky. Or tried to, since the netting got in the way and
kept the administrator from opening the canopy as well.
Once it became clear that both the phibs and the
strangers had been neutralized, Arbuk’s carriage rattled
through the village and down onto the seawall, where with
some help from Hitho Mal, the fat man was able to exit the
coach. The netting had been removed from the raptor by
then, thereby revealing a machine ten times better than the
one that resided in his war museum. “Look at that,” the nobleman said approvingly, “it’s practically new! And who,
pray tell, is the strange-looking cripple?”
Tepho, who had heard every word, stood trapped between
two members of Arbuk’s household guards. And rather than
mount a suicidal attack on the nobleman’s troops, Shaz, Phan,
and all the rest of the administrator’s mercenaries had allowed
themselves to be disarmed.

286

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“I’m told that the cripple was piloting the machine,” the
sensitive whispered into his superior’s ear. “And, judging
from the thought forms that hover around him, he’s very angry. It seems he’s sensitive about his appearance, which, interestingly enough, bears a close resemblance to the man
who leveled the village of Kine.”
Arbuk nodded. “Yes, I can see the resemblance. Still,
anyone who likes to kill phibs can’t be all bad, so let’s see
what the rascal has to say for himself. We’ll put him on the
rack if he proves to be too obstreperous.”
That being said, the nobleman waved Tepho forward.
“My name is Arbuk, Lord Arbuk, and you are?”
“Tepho, sire, Omar Tepho,” the off-worlder responded
carefully. The comments about his body, plus the fat man’s
tendency to talk about him as if he wasn’t there, were infuriating. But the technologist was powerless to do anything
about it.
“It’s a pleasure to meet you,” Arbuk replied evenly. “Or
it might be, depending on what you’re up to. Now, if you
would be so good as to enter my carriage, we will retreat to
a more comfortable location. Once there I’m going to ask
you where you came from, how you got here, why you chose
to destroy the village of Kine, and what makes the island of
Buru so important to you. Shall we?”
Having been stripped of all power, Tepho had no choice
but to agree. Especially given the fact that the fat nobleman was very well informed. A pair of footmen boosted the
off-worlder up into the coach. Arbuk and Milo followed.
Once inside, the nobleman couldn’t help but feel pleased
with himself. But what Arbuk didn’t know, was that Tepho
was wearing the real prize, who, thanks to his ability to
link up with Socket, was watching the whole scene from

LO G O S R U N

287

the very edge of space. The carriage jerked into motion,
wings wheeled high above, and the villagers of Wattl began
to bury their dead.
Lassa Pontho swam up into one of the bubblelike medita-

tion pods that ﬂoated in and around the city of her birth, sat
on the curvilinear seat, and took air straight into her lungs
rather than through her gills. Spread out around her, in a
valley between two undersea plains, lay the city of Shimmer.
It consisted of fourteen domes of various sizes, each having
dozens of locks and a variety of purposes. Seen from a distance, and bathed in shafts of sunlight that slanted down
from the surface, the city looked like something from a fantastic dream. Gardens of brightly colored plants swayed in
the cleansing current that ﬂowed through the valley, shoals
of tame ﬁsh patrolled the rocky bottom, and sleek sea sleds
came and went, each trailing its own stream of bubbles.
Shimmer had been built hundreds of years before, back
when the artiﬁcial satellite called Socket had ﬁrst been commissioned, and thousands of phibs had been brought in to
work on projects related to the newly created tides. And,
thanks to the power provided by their precious tidal generators, the variants had been able to sustain their underwater
culture during the years since.
But the land-lords were not only jealous of what the
phibs had but determined to bring their society down and
proﬁt in the process. That fact had everything to do with
the disastrous raid on the village of Wattl, a raid that had
been justiﬁed by the loss of phib ﬁshing boats but was actually part of a larger effort to keep the norms landbound, lest
they build ships and use them to attack phib cities.
But even more worrisome was the fact that those who

288

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

survived the raid reported that the land-lords had deployed
a new weapon, a machine that walked upright on two legs
and was equipped with powerful energy weapons. All of
which suggested that the norms were in the midst of an
unprecedented technological resurgence.
Further evidence of that could be seen in the reports submitted by paid agents. They claimed that three ironclad
warships were being built inland, where they were safe from
coastal raids, and would eventually be transported to Esperance by rail. And once the vessels arrived, Lord Arbuk and
his cronies would probably launch them as quickly as possible and immediately put to sea. There was no way to know
which phib city they would attack ﬁrst—but Shimmer was
closest to the harbor.
But could paid agents be trusted? They were norms, after
all, therefore automatically suspect. Pontho had very little
choice but to trust them, however, since it was almost impossible for a phib to pass as a norm and vice versa. The
mayor’s reverie came to an end as a series of beeps came in
over her headset. “Yes?”
“Sorry to interrupt,” a male voice said respectfully, “but
one of our security came in with a couple of pirates in tow.”
Pontho felt a twinge of annoyance. Couldn’t they handle
anything without her? “So?”
“So, they’re somewhat unusual,” the functionary responded evenly. “And the master-at-arms wants you to participate in the interrogation.”
Pontho took a look at her wrist term. She had a million
things to do. “Tell him I’m busy.”
“The pirates claim to be from another planet,” the voice
added. “And they’re looking for the island of Buru.”
“Buru?” Pontho demanded. “You’re sure?”

LO G O S R U N

289

“Yes, ma’am.”
“Tell the master-at-arms that I’m on my way.”
Like most such facilities, the interrogation chamber had

dingy walls, a ﬂoor that could be hosed clean, and harsh
overhead lighting. What didn’t show, was the fear that had
been etched into the ceiling, walls, and tiled ﬂoor. It couldn’t
be seen, not in the usual way, but it was real nonetheless. In
fact Norr could “hear” the screams as they echoed back
through the years, “feel” the hopelessness of the prisoners
who had been tortured there, and even “see” one of them
standing in a corner. He was crying, and judging from the
thought forms that surrounded him, had been for a hundred
years. But there was nothing Norr could do to help the hapless entity because both she and the runner hung suspended
in midair, clasped within the embrace of a force ﬁeld they
couldn’t see.
Rebo tried to speak, to tell the phibs what he thought of
them, but couldn’t move his lips. The guards thought that
was funny and laughed. The master-at-arms stood with
arms crossed over a well-muscled chest. He smiled grimly.
“Save your energy, pirate. You’re going to need it.”
Norr’s attention was elsewhere. With one exception, all of
their belongings were spread out on a table, where they had
been repeatedly inventoried. But now, as new guards arrived,
the female was about to depart with Sogol still wrapped
around her arm! Would the master-at-arms approve? No, the
sensitive didn’t think so, but he didn’t know. And, since
Norr was unable to speak, the variant did the one thing that
she could: She made an attempt to reach out with her mind.
The 9mm pistol was heavier than any object that she had
ever tried to levitate, but if were she to succeed, Norr felt

290

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

conﬁdent that the ensuing ruckus would be sufﬁcient to
hold the female guard for a bit longer. So in spite of the difﬁcult circumstances—the sensitive sought to ﬁnd the peaceful place within. Once there, the variant summoned all her
mind-force, shaped it into an invisible pseudopod, and directed the newly formed limb over to the table. Then, having wrapped the weapon in a cocoon of psychic energy, Norr
ordered it to rise. But nothing happened as the female security ofﬁcer paused to say something to the burly master-atarms, laughed as if in response to a shared joke, and turned
to leave.
Desperate now, the sensitive bore down, and sent even
more energy out into the center of the room. That was when
she heard a cry of astonishment. Norr’s eyes were open, and
had been throughout, but now she “looked.” Everyone in
the room, master-at-arms included, stood frozen in place as
the pistol ﬂoated, barrel upward, two feet above the surface
of the table!
And that was the tableau that met Mayor Pontho’s eyes
as she entered the chamber. “And what,” she wanted to
know, “is going on here?”
The gun fell, hit the table with a loud bang, and fell to
the ﬂoor. And, because Sogol was the only one free to answer, it was she who spoke. “My name is Logos 1.2,” the AI
responded assertively, “and I need your help.”

THIRTEEN
™

The city of Shimmer, on the Planet Zeen

And in the 226th year of the 3rd epoch, strange machines will
walk the land, those who live in the deeps will rise up, and the
emperor will return from the dead.
—The seer Sumunda,
Visions in a Glass

When Sogol spoke, no one was more surprised than the

woman who had the snake-shaped AI wrapped around her
left biceps. She reacted by tearing the serpent off and tossing it onto the table, where it wiggled, rolled over, and slid
to a stop. And that was the point when Logos 1.2 coiled her
body as if to strike and hissed.
The master-at-arms looked from the snake to the woman
and back again. That was the moment when he realized that
rather than turn the snake in, as the security ofﬁcer was supposed to do in situations like that one, the female had been
about to steal it. Even worse was the fact that the other
members of her team were willing to tolerate such behavior!
His jaw tightened, orders ﬂew, and all three of the miscreants were led away.
Though not particularly interested in the details sur-

292

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

rounding the way in which the security ofﬁcers would be
disciplined, Mayor Pontho was interested in ﬂoating guns,
talking snakes, and the prisoners suspended in front of her.
Especially since they were looking for the island of Buru, a
place currently occupied by a force of wings on behalf of the
norms. “Release the prisoners,” she ordered. “And bring
some chairs. . . . I have no idea what’s going on here—but it
should be interesting to ﬁnd out.”
Though not especially pleased by the manner in which
the mayor had taken control of the interrogation process,
the master-at-arms had no choice but to acquiesce. Ten minutes later, both Norr and Rebo were seated at the table and,
much to the sensitive’s delight, were clutching mugs of tea.
“Okay,” Pontho began. “Start at the beginning. Who are
you? Where are you from? And why are you interested in
Buru?”
Norr looked at Rebo, saw the runner shrug, and knew it
was up to her. And, given the fact that Sogol had already
spoken, she saw no alternative but to tell a truthful but abbreviated version of their adventures, starting on the Planet
Seros and culminating in their recent arrival on Zeen.
It took more than an hour to tell the tale, and when it ﬁnally came to an end, Pontho shook her head in amazement.
“That’s quite a story. . . . One that’s pretty hard to believe.
Especially the part about your snake, the so-called star
gates, and our moon. But who knows? Strange tales are true
at times. I will ask one of our scholars to look into the
matter—and perhaps he or she will ﬁnd a way to authenticate your tale. In the meantime I think it would be best to
keep both you, and, ah Sogol, under lock and key.”
“No!” Norr objected. “That would be a terrible mistake!
Techno Society operatives may already be on Zeen, but if
they aren’t, they soon will be. And when they arrive, they

LO G O S R U N

293

will bring professional killers, metal men, and killing machines with them. Then they’ll head for Buru.”
“Wait a minute,” the mayor interrupted. “Did you say
‘killing machines’? Describe one.”
So Rebo began to describe what a raptor looked like, and
was only halfway through, when the master-at-arms came to
his feet. “That’s it!” he proclaimed. “That sounds like the
machine that attacked our forces in Wattl!”
Pontho experienced a sudden sense of exultation mixed
with an equal measure of fear. While she was glad to hear
that Arbuk and his cronies weren’t in the process of building two-legged killing machines, it was clear the land-lords
had a new ally, and a dangerous one at that.
For the ﬁrst time, the mayor forced herself to address the
snake. She felt silly, talking to what looked like a piece of
jewelry, but what if the creature was real? What if it really
could control the moon, open star gates, and whisk people
from one planet to another? “So tell me, Sogol,” she said, as
she made eye contact with the object in front of her, “what
will happen next?”
“That depends on you,” the AI replied unhesitatingly.
“Lonni is correct. An earlier iteration of myself entered into
an alliance with the Techno Society. If allowed to do so, Logos and his human functionaries will travel to Buru, where
they will enter a star gate and transfer to Socket. Once
aboard the satellite, Logos 1 will reinstall himself, seize control of the star gates that remain in operation, and begin the
process of reseeding the planets that were served in the past.
Once that process is complete, they will control humanity
rather than serve it. But only if you let them. . . . If you take
us to the island of Buru, we will board Socket and block the
Techno Society.”
“It sounds good,” Pontho allowed cautiously, “but here’s

294

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the problem . . . No, two problems. The ﬁrst problem is that
all we have is your word for what’s going on. Maybe you and
your companions are the ones we should be worried about—
and the other people are trying to chase you down.”
“What about the killing machine?” the AI countered.
“And the casualties you suffered?”
“Maybe they didn’t know who we were,” the politician
replied warily, “and ﬁred in self-defense.”
“That’s a fair question,” Norr put in, “but we have a
character witness. Someone you trust—and will vouch for
the truth of what we say.”
Pontho lacked eyebrows, but she had large double-lidded
eyes, and they widened slightly. “Really?” she inquired
skeptically. “And who would that be?”
Norr’s features went slack, and Rebo looked worried as a
spirit entity took control of the sensitive’s body. “Hello,
honey,” a female voice said. “It’s Aunt Cyn. . . . Remember
the toothﬁsh? And how it nipped your calf when you were
seven? I had a hard time explaining that one to your
mother! She never let me take you outside the dome again.
These people are real, hon. . . . They aren’t perfect, none of
us are, but they’re trying to make things better. And remember, those who wind up in control of Socket will have
the power to move the satellite, which would eliminate the
tides.”
“The generators,” Pontho put in. “That would shut them
down.”
“Exactly,” the disincarnate agreed. “So do what you can
to help them. You won’t be sorry.”
Then, just as quickly as the spirit had arrived, she was
gone, and Norr was in control of her body once again. The
mayor appeared stricken—and tears rolled down her face.

LO G O S R U N

295

“There are sensitives on land, so I have heard of such contacts,
but never experienced one myself. A toothﬁsh took a chunk
out of my leg—and I have the scar to prove it. And, since
there’s no way that you could have possibly been aware of that
incident, I’m inclined to believe you.
“But I told you that two problems stand in the way of
your plan. The ﬁrst has been resolved—but the second is
much more difﬁcult. The land-lords, which is to say the people who control all of the landmasses, occupy the island of
Buru, which means that you won’t be able to set foot on it.”
“That’s true,” the master-at-arms allowed. “But we control the sea all around them—so it’s a standoff.”
“Was a standoff,” Rebo said grimly. “Things are about to
change.”
The city of Esperance

It was dark outside, and rain splattered against thick
glass, as the two men stood in front of a huge wall-mounted
map. “The island of Buru is right there,” Lord Arbuk said, as
he covered a tiny dot with the tip of a pudgy ﬁnger. “About
seventy-ﬁve miles off the coast.”
In spite of the fact that he and his subordinates qualiﬁed
as prisoners, such were the freedoms allowed them that
Tepho felt rather comfortable within the nobleman’s castlelike home. Because in spite of the rude comments made
about him in Wattl, Arbuk had been extremely courteous
since, and the two men had a great deal in common. Both
were analytical, ambitious, and completely ruthless. All of
which was likely to make for a good alliance, so long as they
continued to desire the same things, and there was no shortage of loot. “And you control it,” the technologist commented, as he stared at the tiny brown blob.

296

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Yes,” Arbuk replied honestly, “I do. The surrounding
waters are a different story however. The phibs control
those.”
Tepho frowned. “Then how do you transport supplies to
the island?”
“Wings,” the nobleman answered laconically. “A healthy
wing can ﬂy about a hundred miles without resting, so Buru
is well within their range, so long as they aren’t overburdened. And, since they grow most of their own food, my
staff are quite self-sufﬁcient.”
Logos had been listening intently and chose that moment to enter the conversation. Arbuk, who had grown accustomed to the AI by then, remained unperturbed. “What
about the transfer station? Is it intact?”
“I honestly don’t know,” the land-lord replied, as he lumbered toward a massive armchair. “I’ve never been there. . . .
Where is it?”
“Toward the center of the island.”
“Ah,” Arbuk replied, as he sank into the well-padded
comfort of his favorite chair. “Then I think we’re in luck. . . .
The wings believe that those who spend too much time in
the island’s interior sicken and die. That’s superstitious nonsense of course, but variants aren’t as intelligent as we are,
which makes them susceptible to ridiculous beliefs. Odds are
that the transfer station is much as you left it.”
Both Tepho and Logos knew good news when it was
placed in front of them. If wings who ventured in toward the
center of Buru became ill, it was probably because the star
gate’s power core was up and running, but neither entity saw
any reason to share that piece of intelligence with the local.
“Good,” Tepho said blandly, as he stood with his back to
the crackling ﬁre. “So, given the fact that the phibs control
the waters around Buru, how should we proceed?”

LO G O S R U N

297

Arbuk had already given the matter some thought. Because if the weird little cripple and his talking shirt really
could transport themselves up to the moon and reactivate a
network of star gates, then he intended not only to beneﬁt
from the technology but control it. So, as the land-lord
locked his hands together across the vast expanse of his
belly, the essence of a plan had already been formed in his
mind. “It’s dangerous to build ships in coastal towns,” the
nobleman explained, “because the phibs have a tendency to
come ashore and burn them.
“However, unbeknownst to the degenerate freaks, three
steam-powered ironclads are nearing completion about
twenty miles inland from Esperance. Within days, a week at
most, we can bring those ships west by rail. Then, before the
phibs can stop us, we will set sail for Buru. What do you
think of that?”
Planning was best of course, but Tepho was grateful
whenever good luck came his way, and he smiled crookedly
as he spoke. “I think you’re brilliant.”
The city of Shimmer

The water at the center of the council chamber was chest
deep, which made it difﬁcult to walk around, but allowed
the phib politicians to sit half-supported by the water, ﬂoat
on their backs, or, in the case of those who felt the need to
move about, swim out into the deep end and tread water.
In the meantime, Mayor Pontho and representatives from
the other city-states were seated on a stage above the deep
end, where they were three hours and twenty minutes into a
discussion of whether the city of Shimmer would be left to
tackle Arbuk’s forces alone or would receive assistance from
the other communities. The subject was rather controversial because the other mayors, who were understandably

298

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

reluctant to upset the delicate status quo, had their doubts
regarding the entire notion of star gates and wanted to
know what was in it for them and their constituencies.
Rebo, who had been forced to remain immersed in the
water while waiting for the seemingly endless debate to
end, was busy looking at his pruny hands when Pontho ﬁnally called his name. Norr, who was half-ﬂoating beside
him, had to jab the runner in the ribs in order to get his attention. “Jak . . . she called your name!”
The phibs watched in amusement as Rebo churned his
way across the deep end of the chamber to a set of stairs that
led up onto the stage. The runner was wearing a pair of cutoffs, but still felt naked as he padded across the platform
and left a trail of wet footprints to mark his progress.
There were nine mayors, including Pontho, and all had
seats at the oval table. None wore anything more elaborate
than a genital pouch, and some were completely naked.
Five of the politicians were female, which meant that four
were male, all of whom appeared to be older rather than
younger. There was a raised bench on which guests could
sit, but the norm chose to stand. “It’s my pleasure to introduce Jak Rebo,” Pontho said. “Some of you have expressed
concerns where Lord Arbuk’s new ironclads are concerned.
They are by all reports powerful vessels that could interfere with an attack on Buru. . . . However, thanks to military expertise acquired on other planets, Citizen Rebo is
ready with a plan that could neutralize the threat. Citizen
Rebo?”
Rebo didn’t have any military expertise, not really, but
knew it wouldn’t be a good idea to say that. So, with all
eyes upon him, the runner proceeded to outline his plan.
“As you know, Mayor Pontho’s agents report that three

LO G O S R U N

299

steam-powered warships are presently being constructed
about twenty miles inland from the coastal city of Esperance, and will be ready within a matter of days.”
That was the projectionist’s cue, and the map appeared
on the ceiling, where those who were ﬂoating on their backs
could see it, as well as on all three of the walls around the
stage. But unlike the maps used ashore, this one ignored all
but the most important roads to focus on the capillary-like
network of streams and rivers that fed the oceans.
A pistol-shaped electronic pointer had been left for
Rebo’s use. After pointing the device at the wall, the runner
pressed the ﬁring stud and was immediately rewarded with
a red dot. It slid up to the point where the name esperance
marked a large bay. And there, ﬂowing into the harbor, was
a narrow ﬁnger of blue. “This is the Otero River,” the offworlder said. “What I propose to do is lead a party of raiders
upstream, march a mile overland to the point where the ironclads are being constructed, and destroy them before the locals
can transport them to Esperance. Then, with the steamships
out of the way, we can attack Buru.”
It was a simple plan, but still worthy of another hour’s
debate, and Rebo was back in the water ﬂoating on his back
when the ﬁnal decision was made. A ﬁnding that ultimately
had more to do with a widely shared desire to destroy Arbuk’s warships than any particular enthusiasm for the offworlders, their talking snake, or the system of star gates
they were so obsessed with. “Thank you,” Pontho said sincerely, as the results of the unanimous vote were announced.
“You won’t be sorry.”
Rebo wasn’t so sure about that, but hoped it was true,
and let his hand stray to the good luck amulet that he wore
around his neck. Except that the object wasn’t there, and

300

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

hadn’t been for some time, even though he was going to
need it more than ever.
Norr, who knew the runner pretty well by then, and could
“see” the doubts that swirled around Rebo, took his hand in
hers. Nothing was said, and nothing needed to be. The end of
the journey was near, and if they could survive the trials
ahead, a much more pleasant journey was about to begin.
The village of Wattl

Inu Harluck was drunk, or had been, back before he
stumbled out of the Evil Eye tavern, entered the adjacent
stable, and passed out. It was a blissful state, and one that
the ﬁsherman-pirate preferred to remain in for as long as
possible, which made the pain that much more annoying.
But there was no escaping it, so Harluck was forced to surface and open his eyes.
Shaz saw the man’s eyelids ﬂutter, uttered a grunt of satisfaction, and removed the knife tip from the local’s neck. A
single drop of blood welled up to mark the point where the
surface of the drunk’s skin had been broken. “It’s time to
wake up,” the combat variant said contemptuously. “There’s
money to be made.”
What little light there was emanated from a lantern that
was hanging a good ten feet away. So, as the ﬁsherman looked
upward, and saw the man-shaped image shimmer, he began
to ﬂail his arms and kick with his legs in a futile attempt to
escape what could only be a spirit. A murdered phib, perhaps,
returned from the depths, ready to cut his throat. But when
Phan threw a full bucket of water in his face, Harluck’s head
began to clear. “Who are you people?” the pirate spluttered.
“And why pick on me? I ain’t done nothin’ to you.”
“No,” Shaz agreed, “you haven’t. But this is your lucky
day. . . . We want to hire you, your crew, and your boat. Not

LO G O S R U N

301

the cutter—but the sailboat. The one you stole from the
phibs.”
“I didn’t steal it,” the local objected hotly, “I found her.
Empty she was, just drifting, pretty as you please.”
“That’s not what your brother-in-law told us,” the combat variant responded. “But save it for the local constable.
We don’t care how you came into possession of the boat.
What we do care about is an early start. So stand up, pull
yourself together, and round up your crew.”
Harluck stood, made a futile attempt to brush some of
the ﬁlth off his clothes, and looked from one person to the
other. He had scraggly hair, furtive eyes, and a pointy chin.
“I don’t believe I caught your names.”
“I’m Shaz,” the variant replied, “and this is Phan.”
“Well, Citizen Shaz,” the ﬁsherman said ofﬁciously, “my
services don’t come cheap.”
“No,” Shaz agreed sardonically, “I’m sure they don’t.
This coin was minted elsewhere, but it’s solid gold and
worth more than you would normally make in a year.”
Lanternlight reﬂected off the crono as it arced through
the air. Harluck intercepted the gold piece and weighed the
object in the palm of a callused hand, before running a
cracked nail across the face of a man who had been dead for
more than two hundred years. Then, not having detected
any lead, the pirate tucked the coin away. “So what kind of
contraband are you smuggling?” he wanted to know. “And
where are we headed?”
“There isn’t any contraband,” Shaz replied evenly. “As for
our destination, that’s the island of Buru.”
The pirate turned pale. “Buru? No, way! The phibs will
kill us.”
“Maybe,” the combat variant allowed. “But that’s the
chance we take.”

302

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Harluck looked from one hard face to the other. “What if
I say ‘no’?”
“Then I’ll kill you,” Phan replied cheerfully. “Take your
pick!”
Both of the strangers thought that was funny and
laughed out loud. Harluck wanted to run, but knew they
would catch him, and cursed his miserable luck. Because
even though the gold coin lay heavy in his pocket—there
wasn’t much chance that he would live to spend it.
The city of Esperance

Viewed from water level, out in the bay, the city of Esperance glittered like a necklace of diamonds laid across a
piece of black velvet. It was nighttime, and had been for
hours by then, but most of the city’s residents were still up
and blissfully unaware of the raiders who had already penetrated their defenses. Fortunately for them, the sleek webﬁngered commandos had no designs on the city itself. Their
goal lay twenty miles upriver, where a short hike would take
them to the village of Prost, where three warships rested on
specially made rail cars, waiting for their trip to the sea.
Like young people everywhere, the phib warriors were eager
to begin the journey.
But Rebo felt different. Unlike the genetically engineered phibs, and in spite of the skin-suit they had given
him to wear, the runner was cold. More than that he was
tired. In fact, if it hadn’t been for the powered sled on which
his body rested, Rebo knew he would never have made it
that far. Now, as he and his commandos lay doggo among
the swells, a team of scouts were probing the point where
the Otero emptied into the bay. The mouth of the river was
sure to be guarded, or so it seemed to Rebo, so he wasn’t especially surprised when a bright-eyed phib arrived to tell

LO G O S R U N

303

him as much. What little light there was emanated from the
city beyond—and both men rose and fell with the swells.
“They have a net stretched across the Otero,” the youngster
whispered. “And guards on both banks. It would be easy to
kill the pigs though . . . just give the word.”
“No,” Rebo said emphatically. “No killing. . . . Not
unless absolutely forced to do so. The bodies would be
discovered—and the norms would rush to protect the ships.”
“Then what should we do?” the scout wanted to know.
“Stay in the water,” the runner instructed. “And cut two
holes in the net. Keep them small, no larger than a sled, and
mark them with radio beepers. Then, once everything is
ready, let me know.”
The youngster said, “Yes, sir!” and sank below the surface.
Then, as Rebo and the rest of his raiders continued to bob
up and down, a light detached itself from those that lined
the shore and gradually grew brighter. That was accompanied by the rhythmic splash-creak of oars and the low rumble
of conversation. A noncom surfaced next to the runner,
whispered, “Guard boat!” and hooked his thumb downward.
The runner nodded, took the rubber mouthpiece between his teeth, and goosed the sled’s electric motor. It
purred softly as short wings cut into the water, and the sled
slid beneath the waves. Because he didn’t have gills, Rebo
was forced to rely on oxygen stored within the cylindrical
sled, and had already grown used to the metallic taste. The
tiny instrument panel in front of him glowed green, and
once the submersible was about ﬁfteen feet under the surface, the runner leveled out. Other green lights could be
seen to the right and left, but none was bright enough to be
visible from above, as the guard boat passed over their
heads.
Fifteen long minutes passed after that—a near eternity

304

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

in which there was plenty of time to wonder whether the
scouts had been discovered, the alarm had been given, and
the entire plan revealed. Time, too, in which to wonder how
much oxygen he had left and feel the relentless cold creep
into his bones. But ﬁnally, with the surety of someone who
had practiced underwater navigation his entire life, the
scout appeared out of the gloom. And, at the young man’s
urging, Rebo directed the sled upward.
There was a feeling of relief as the city’s slightly blurred
lights appeared, because even though it was dangerous on
the surface, it felt good to be in his rightful element again.
The scout had extremely white teeth, and they appeared to
glow in the strange half-light. “We’re ready, sir!” he proclaimed. “Follow me.”
So Rebo followed, and it wasn’t long before the lights
grew brighter, and were split by a canyon of darkness where
the river entered the bay. The entire force slid beneath the
waves at that point, formed two columns, and was subsequently guided upriver by a combination of low-frequency
voice commands, homing beacons, and watchful scouts, one
of whom was there to shepherd the runner through one of
two holes in the net. The passage was anticlimactic in a way,
since it had taken so much effort to prepare for the moment,
yet nothing went awry.
Once upstream of the net and the guards, things began
to change. The water was fresh, there was a strong current to
contend with, and lots of obstacles. Having scraped a bridge
support, and come close to colliding with a boulder, Rebo
tucked in behind one of the more experienced phibs. Then,
by following the noncom’s glowing ankle bracelets, the
norm made his way up the ﬁrst section of the river without
further incident.
But it wasn’t long before the commandos encountered

LO G O S R U N

305

the ﬁrst of what would prove to be a number of challenges.
The face of the dam stood at least ﬁfteen feet high, which
meant the raiders would have to climb it and hoist their
sleds up after them. Strong though the amphibians were,
even they couldn’t swim twenty miles upstream and still
have sufﬁcient energy for what lay ahead.
Fortunately, there weren’t any guards other than the mill
keeper’s dog, which barked twice, then collapsed with a
sling-launched spear through its throat. The body was hidden, and guards were posted even as specially fabricated
swing arms were deployed. It wasn’t long before the ﬁrst
sled was lifted onto the top of the dam and more followed.
Eager for something to do, and cognizant of how important it was to set an example, Rebo took charge of the crew
that was working to drop the newly arrived sleds into the
lake that lay pent-up behind the dam. Then, as the ﬁnal
units were hoisted up and over, the moon began to rise. Except that the runner knew that the half-seen orb wasn’t a
moon, at least not a natural one, which meant he was looking
at Socket. Rebo wondered if Norr could see it but thought
that was doubtful since the sensitive was in Shimmer.
But there was no opportunity to pursue the thought, as
the last sled went over the side, and the commandos made
clean dives into the moonlight-streaked water below. The
runner tried, but was responsible for a sizeable splash, much
to the amusement of his water-dwelling subordinates.
Then the journey continued, as commandos pushed their
way up to the head of the long, narrow lake, where they
were forced to portage around a hundred-foot-wide ledge
where the Otero spilled into the water that was backed up
behind the dam. That task consumed forty-ﬁve precious
minutes and left Rebo wondering whether they would arrive at the objective on time or be caught by the rising

306

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

sun—an almost certain disaster given the fact that the phibs
would be many miles inland, open to attack from above,
and vulnerable to Arbuk’s ground troops.
But it was too late to turn back, so all Rebo could do was
push such thoughts away and keep on going. The next
stretch of river was relatively benign. It consisted of a long
series of gentle S-curves that acted to slow the current and
make progress somewhat easier. Rebo couldn’t see the land
to either side but imagined it to be fertile and bordered by
neatly kept farms. The commandos made good progress
through that stretch, thereby regaining some of the time
lost earlier and raising the runner’s ﬂagging spirits.
Finally, having reached the railroad bridge that crossed
the Otero just east of Prost, it was time to disable the sleds,
sink them out in the middle of the river, and hike crosscountry. The artiﬁcial moon had arced most of the way
across the sky by then, and even though Rebo welcomed
some light to see by, the off-worlder knew that it could betray his command as well.
One by one the phibs shouldered their various loads,
scrambled up the steep riverbank, to assemble on the tracks
above. The rails gleamed with reﬂected moonlight and
made a gradual turn toward the west. The runner gave a series of orders, waited to make sure they would be followed,
and felt a sense of satisfaction as the phibs spread out along
both sides of the line.
Navigation became relatively easy at that point, since all
they had to do was follow the track to the village of Prost
and the warships that waited there. The rest would be simple. Or that was the way it seemed until the runner heard
the mournful sound of a steam whistle, knelt to place a
hand on cold steel, and felt it start to vibrate. A train was on
the way! But which one? A routine freight? Or the train.

LO G O S R U N

307

Meaning the one that was supposed to haul the ironclads to
Esperance.
The phibs nearest to the runner turned to him for orders,
the whistle blew again, and Rebo struggled to decide.
Should he attack the train? It could be loaded with troops?
Or allow it to pass? Only to face what could be even more
opposition when he entered the village of Prost? The seconds ticked by, his heart beat faster, and a big round light
loomed out of the darkness.
On the great sea

The sailboat’s bow dipped, broke through a foam-topped
wave and threw a ﬁne mist back over the cabin and open
cockpit. Shaz, who was standing just aft of the cabin, put
out a hand to steady himself as he watched what he knew to
be Socket drop below the western horizon. Hopefully,
within a matter of days, he would set foot on the artiﬁcial
satellite and be present when Logos took control of it. At
that point a number of choices would present themselves. If
the opportunity arose, the combat variant could kill Tepho
and claim the star gates for himself. Or he could continue in
his present role, wait for the norm to make a mistake, and
pick up the pieces. Fortunately, either strategy would deliver the results the variant wanted.
But that was then, this was now, and Shaz had work to
do. The plan, which had been conceived by Tepho and
approved by Arbuk, was to sail the phib vessel to Buru.
Once Shaz landed, he would present his credentials to the
commandant and lead a party into the island’s interior,
where he was supposed to locate and secure the star gate.
That was the plan, anyway, but there were plenty of
things that could go wrong, including the weather. A bank
of clouds had been visible off to the southwest just before

308

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the moon set, the breeze had stiffened within the last few
minutes, and Harluck’s crew was pulling the jib down.
None of it boded well, but the off-worlder tried to take
comfort from the fact that bad weather could provide the
boat with some much-needed cover and help keep the phibs
at bay. And that was the case, or seemed to be, until a dim,
barely seen sun rose, and Harluck announced the bad news.
“There they are!” the pirate proclaimed, as he pointed to the
west. “Phibs! Three of them! All trying to cut us off!”
It was bad news, but Harluck sounded triumphant, as if
glad to be right even if the phibs were to sink his boat.
The combat variant couldn’t see anything at ﬁrst, but ﬁnally, by squinting just so, Shaz was able to make out three
tiny triangles of sail, all on a course to converge with Harluck’s tiny vessel. “All right,” the off-worlder said calmly,
“maintain the course you’re on.”
“But there’s three of them,” the pirate objected. “They’ll
cut us to pieces!”
“No,” Shaz maintained stolidly. “They won’t. Not if you
do what you’re told.”
Harluck was ready to put the helm over at that point
and make a run for the mainland, but looked up to discover
that Phan was aiming a pistol at him. It winked red as the
bow collided with a wave, the deck lurched, and the targeting laser dipped. That left Harluck with no choice but to
maintain the course he was on even if it meant that a violent confrontation was almost certain.
The next few hours seemed to creep by, as all four of the
boats continued to converge, and the low-lying island of
Buru appeared in the distance. It was little more than a
shadow at ﬁrst but gradually took on additional substance,
as mile after mile of ocean passed beneath the single-masted
boat’s keel.

LO G O S R U N

309

By that time the other vessels were clear to see, and when
viewed through a small pair of binoculars, were clearly intent on intercepting Harluck’s boat. But why? The phibs
didn’t know who was aboard it. Yes, there was the possibility the ﬁshing boat had been recognized as stolen, and the
phibs were determined to intercept it for that reason, but the
combat variant didn’t think so. No, it was almost as if they
were on their way to Buru for some other reason, spotted the
ﬁshing boat and wanted to ﬁnd out what it was up to.
There was no further opportunity for analysis as the lead
vessel produced a ﬂash of light and a brown-edged hole appeared in Harluck’s fully inﬂated sail. “The next one will hit
our hull,” the pirate predicted glumly. “The whole thing
will be over soon.”
The combat variant heard the words but didn’t bother to
reply, as Phan ﬁred her riﬂe. It was an enormous affair, almost as long as she was, and chambered for .50 caliber ammunition. It had been difﬁcult to ﬁnd a good spot for the
weapon, but having settled on the bow, the assassin lay
prone, with the barrel resting on a bipod. The trick was to
compensate for the fact that both vessels were in constant
motion, not something the average marksman could do. But
the assassin was far from average. There was a loud crack as
Phan squeezed the trigger, followed by a whoop from one of
Harluck’s crew members, as a ﬁst-sized hole appeared in the
other boat’s hull. The ﬁrst slug hit above the waterline, but
the second struck below it, as did the third.
The phibs ﬁred in return, and their aim was good, but
while still lethal, their energy weapons lacked the punch
that the projectile weapon had, and they were soon forced to
shear away as half a dozen wings appeared overhead and
ﬁred down on them from the sky. Phan worried that the
variants might attack Harluck’s boat, too, but they didn’t,

310

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

which seemed to suggest that a warning had been sent out
from Esperance via winged courier. Or maybe it was the fact
that she had been shooting at their enemies. Whatever the
reason, the blast-scarred ﬁshing boat was allowed to enter
the island’s only harbor, where the pirate dropped the anchor and went in search of a bottle. He had been sober for
more than half a day by then—and had every reason to get
drunk.
Near the village of Prost

The train had already started to slow in preparation for
the stop in Prost when a man appeared up ahead. He stood
in the middle of the track and waved both arms. The engineer swore, blew the train’s whistle, and pulled the brake
lever. Metal screeched as the drive wheels locked up, sparks
ﬂew, and the locomotive ﬁnally began to slow. It wasn’t going to stop in time, though, that’s what the engineer was
thinking, when he looked up to discover that the man had
disappeared.
Then, before the engineer and his ﬁreman had time to
absorb that, a pair of heavily armed phibs entered the cab,
one from each side. They put strange-looking pistols to the
men’s heads, ordered the engineer to increase speed, and
watched to make sure that he actually did so. Meanwhile,
behind the locomotive, and the half-full coal car, the rest of
the commandos had clambered up onto a single ﬂatcar.
Rather than the troops that Rebo feared, it was loaded with
kegs of what purported to be black powder, which was
probably intended for the ironclads. A rather volatile load
should Arbuk’s troops decide to shoot at it, which was why
the runner detailed two phibs to study the coupling and ﬁgure out how to release it.
But time was passing, and the outskirts of Prost had

LO G O S R U N

311

already appeared by then, which meant that the train was
only a minute or two from the yard and the steamships that
waited there. Lights could be seen up ahead, lots of them,
which made sense if Arbuk’s forces were assembled and
waiting. The sun had begun to rise as well, sending rays of
rosy pink light up over the eastern horizon, as if to herald its
own coming. And now, for the ﬁrst time since he had put
the plan forward, Rebo felt genuinely frightened. Because
events had started to overtake him, and he had no military
training to fall back on.
But there was no time to consider such things as the train
pulled into Prost, a reedy cheer went up from the soldiers
gathered along both sides of the track, and a civilian ﬁred a
hunting riﬂe into the air. The phibs on the ﬂatcar were hidden in amongst the explosives. And even though they had
been given orders not to ﬁre unless ﬁred upon, they were
understandably nervous, and once the riﬂe went off a dozen
ﬁngers mashed down on a dozen ﬁring studs.
Rebo shouted “No!” as the ﬁrst energy beam lashed out,
but it was too late as blue death stuttered out to cut the
troopers down. Their weapons weren’t loaded, and they
threw up their hands in a vain attempt to block the blue
bolts. But it didn’t work, and by the time the train rolled
past the station, a heap of brown-clad bodies lay sprawled
on the scorched platform. There wasn’t much return ﬁre
since the survivors were still in the process of loading their
weapons, but what few shots there were missed both the
phibs and the kegs of black powder stacked on the ﬂatcar.
The slaughter made Rebo sick to his stomach, but it was
already too late to stop it, as a blunt stern appeared up
ahead. The ship it belonged to was sitting on a siding, as
were two additional vessels, as the train pulled up alongside
them. A phib ordered the engineer to stop the locomotive

312

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

next to the ironclads so a squad of commandos could hop off
the ﬂatcar and burn the warships.
Only now Rebo saw an opportunity not only to improve
on the original plan, but to reassert control over his troops
and regain the initiative all at the same time. “Stay in the
cab,” he told the phibs, “and watch the prisoners. We’re going to need them.”
One of the commandos nodded grimly, and the other
grinned. Satisﬁed that the train would stay where it was, the
runner ducked out of the locomotive’s cab and followed an
iron walkway back toward the coal car.
Meanwhile, the soldiers who had been fortunate enough
to survive the unexpected onslaught at the train station had
recovered by then, reinforcements had been summoned, and
Rebo could hear the steady bang, bang, bang of semiautomatic riﬂe ﬁre as he made his way along the coal car. Bullets
pinged as they shattered against the locomotive, produced a
whapping sound when they hit wooden barrels, and whined
as the runner successfully jumped across the gap and landed
on the ﬂatcar.
The phibs had emerged from their hiding places by then
and were about to launch their assault on the warships when
Rebo ordered them to stop. “You two,” he said, pointing at
a likely-looking pair, “unhook the ﬂatcar. I want everyone
else on the coal carrier. Now!”
As the commandos moved to obey, a bullet spun one of
them around, causing him to fall into the gap between the
two cars. Another projectile hit a noncom from behind, exited through his chest, and still packed enough velocity to
kill the private who stood facing him. Meanwhile, geysers
of dirt shot up into the air, beginning their inexorable
march toward the ﬂatcar, as a machine gun began to chatter.
But even as some of the phibs fell, dozens poured across

LO G O S R U N

313

the gap, and climbed up onto the coal car, where they
turned to ﬁre on their tormentors. Machinery began to
clank, enormous puffs of smoke issued from the locomotive’s black stack, and steam shot forth from both sides of
the behemoth as it got under way.
Rebo was beginning to wonder if the ﬂatcar would ever
be decoupled and was just about to go after it personally
when he heard a phib yell, “She’s clear!” and felt the train
jerk. Then came the mad scramble to jump the quickly
widening gap, a moment of gut-wrenching fear as the runner felt himself begin to fall backward, and a profound feeling of relief as strong ﬁngers wrapped themselves around his
wrist.
Then, having been pulled up onto the ﬁlthy coal car,
Rebo heard someone shout and turned to see that a single
phib had been left on the ﬂatcar. It was the scout who had
spoken with him back in the bay, and judging from the
blood that was pouring down the soldier’s right leg, the
youngster had been hit. Now, with slugs whistling all
around him the commando lit one of the incendiary ﬂares
issued for use on the ironclads, raised his right hand by way
of a salute, and let the ﬁery tube fall.
The result was even more effective than what Rebo had
originally hoped for. There was a ﬂash of light, followed by
a near-deafening boom, and a series of secondary explosions as
ordnance already aboard the ironclads went off as well.
Smoke boiled up to stain the early-morning sky, chunks of
wood, iron, and ﬂesh cartwheeled through the air, and the
station’s telegraph began to chatter. News of the phib raid
would arrive in Esperance within a matter of minutes, Arbuk’s wings would take to the air shortly thereafter, and
troops would be sent to intercept the hijacked train.
Rebo knew all of that, and knew he would eventually

314

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

have to deal with it, but not for a few minutes yet. Because
right then, as if burned onto his retinas by the force of the
blast, he was still staring at the image of the scout, the ﬂare,
and the nameless boy’s ﬁnal salute.
The city of Shimmer

The council of mayors had been reconvened, and at
Norr’s request, was about to hear from a very distinguished
guest. Ever since Norr brought a message through from
Mayor Pontho’s disembodied aunt, the politician had been
very deferential toward the sensitive. And now, as the other
variant entered a trance, the phib looked on with an expression of awe as Norr’s chin touched her chest and a deeper
voice was heard. “Greetings,” the disincarnate said, as the
sensitive’s head came up. “My name is Lysander, Milos
Lysander, but like the rest of you I have been known by other
names as well. Once, during a lifetime as a man called Hios,
I brought your people to Zeen, helped them establish their
great underwater cities, and gave them the gift of tides.
“Back in those days we worked together to create the
planet’s infrastructure, which had it not been for my many
errors, would probably be intact today. But I was foolish,
very foolish, and hope to make things right. Thanks to you,
and your support, that process is already under way. In fact
my spirit allies tell me that your commandos were successful, the ironclads were destroyed, and even as I speak your
warriors are battling their way back to safety. That will be
difﬁcult, however, since Lord Arbuk’s wings will attack
them along the way, and ground troops will be sent against
them as well.”
There was muttering, as all of the mayors tried to speak
at once, and Pontho called for silence. Norr’s head nodded
jerkily. “Yes,” Lysander said, “I understand your concern.

LO G O S R U N

315

Fortunately, there is something we can do to help! But, by
taking action, we will reveal the full extent of our powers
and thereby elicit what is sure to be a desperate response.”
The politicians listened intently as Lysander outlined his
plan. And when asked, Sogol, who had been silent up until
then, agreed that the scheme was theoretically possible. Although the AI went on to point out that not only would the
timing would be iffy, but the results would be unpredictable and possibly dangerous to the very people they
were trying to save.
Then, having heard from a dead man and an artiﬁcial intelligence, the politicians did what they were best at, which
was to talk, and talk, and talk some more. Until Pontho became frustrated, insisted on a vote, and ﬁnally got one. The
plan was approved. But could the scheme be implemented
quickly enough to save Rebo and his commandos? The
clock was ticking.

FOURTEEN
™

Near the village of Prost, on the Planet Zeen

Like the ripples generated when a pebble falls into a pond, a
single historical event can send waves of change out to touch
the far shores of human civilization, where the effects will be
felt for many years to come.
—Artiﬁcial Intelligence Borlon 4,
A History of My Creators

Once clear of Prost, the track followed the Otera river val-

ley west. Thanks to the gun at the engineer’s head, plus the
ﬁreman’s frantic efforts to feed the hungry boiler, the locomotive was traveling at full speed by then. Thick black
smoke poured out of the stack, the engine made a steady
chugging sound, and the wheels clacked rhythmically as
they passed over evenly spaced expansion joints. But Rebo
took little pleasure in the train’s speed. He stood on the narrow walkway that ran along the side of the locomotive’s
boiler and eyed the track ahead. Since Arbuk’s troops knew
where the engine had to go, they would move to block it.
The original plan, which involved a return trip down the
Otero River, incorporated the same ﬂaw—although the water route might have offered more protection from the
wings. Had he been wrong to abandon the ﬁrst plan? Would

LO G O S R U N

317

a real military ofﬁcer have chosen a third course? Rebo
feared the answer might be yes.
Space was at a premium. Commandos clung to both
sides of the locomotive, squatted on top of the cab just behind the stack, and were crammed into the coal car as well.
Most of the smoke passed over their heads but not all of it.
“There they are!” one of the phibs exclaimed, and pointed
to the west. Rebo looked, saw the formation of dots, and
knew they were wings. The runner faced two choices. He
could order the engineer to stop the train, pull his troops
together, and respond to the coming attack with massed
fire. That technique would probably be effective against the
winged variants but would give Arbuk plenty of time in
which to bring ground troops against the stationary train.
The other possibility was to keep going, accept some
causalities, and hope to break through whatever obstructions lay ahead.
Finally, for better or worse, the runner chose the second
option. The commandos on the roof were attempting to engage the winged variants at extreme range by then but with
little success. Rebo turned to one of the noncoms. “Put your
best marksmen where they can ﬁre on the wings—but tell
them to hold off until the bastards come in closer. There’s going to be a hellacious battle within the next couple of hours,
and we’re going to need every power pack we have. . . . Tell
everyone else to safe their weapons and seek any cover they
can ﬁnd.”
The phib said, “Yes, sir,” and began to work his way back
to the cab. It wasn’t long before some of the commandos
came down off the roof while those with a reputation for
marksmanship went up to replace them. Then, just as the
train passed through the point where the valley narrowed,
the airborne warriors attacked. And, thanks to the fact that

318

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

they had been practicing such maneuvers for years, some of
their shots went home.
One of the phibs who was hugging the side of the locomotive looked surprised, let go of the handrail, and fell
away from the train. A marksman jerked as a bullet struck
his chest. He released his weapon, and toppled back into the
coal car, where a commando called for help. A medic stood,
lost the top of his head, and collapsed in a heap.
The commandos were quick to return ﬁre, and a cheer
went up as one of the wings spiraled out of the sky, but the
phibs were going to take more casualties. Not only that, but
Rebo was pretty sure that something worse lay ahead.
Lord Arbuk was angry. Very angry. Which was why he

didn’t want to simply stop the phib raiders, he wanted to
crush them, even if that meant destroying a valuable locomotive in the process. That was why no less than six cometﬁring artillery tubes and a thousand troops lay in wait as the
train rolled down out of the low-lying foothills and was momentarily lost from sight as it passed through a dip in the
terrain.
A platform, complete with awning had been established
on a likely-looking rise, and that was where Arbuk, Tepho,
and two dozen government ofﬁcials were waiting to view
what promised to be a magniﬁcent slaughter. In the meantime, there was music, refreshments, and an absolute orgy of
posturing as the colorfully clad functionaries attempted to
outdo one another.
And it was during that period that Tepho slipped away
to inspect the high-tech mortar tubes. Since a counterattack
was unlikely if not impossible, very little effort had been
made to protect the weapons, other than to place them in
freshly dug pits. The comets, which had the appearance of

LO G O S R U N

319

inoffensive spheres until they were ﬁred, were nestled in
protective boxes.
The technologist had numerous questions where the
mortars were concerned, not the least of which was why Arbuk’s mostly steam-age culture possessed such advanced
weapons, yet lagged in other areas? And it was while visiting with a voluble artillery ofﬁcer that the technologist
learned the answer. It seemed that ﬁve years earlier, while
attempting to reopen an ancient mine, Arbuk’s engineers
stumbled across a cache of weapons believed to be more
than ﬁve hundred years old.
It was interesting stuff, and Tepho was about to ask some
follow-up questions, when Logos spoke from the vicinity of
his collar. “Sorry to interrupt, but I suggest that you return
to the raptor and clear the area as quickly as possible.”
The artillery ofﬁcer looked dumbfounded as a third voice
came out of nowhere. But before he could ask the obvious
question, a plume of dark smoke appeared in the distance, a
bugle sounded, and it was time for the ofﬁcer to return to
his duties.
Tepho, who was alone now, wished Logos was standing in
front of him. “Leave? Why?”
“Because Iteration 1.2 has temporary control of Socket,
and if I’m not mistaken, intends to use the satellite’s solar
mirror as a weapon.”
Tepho looked up into the sky, realized how stupid that
was, and began to waddle up out of the emplacement. There
was a loud whump, as the nearest weapon ﬁred, followed by a
hearty cheer as the ball of highly concentrated energy arced
across the sky. The human experienced a combination of
fear, confusion, and anger. “Well, if you know about it, then
stop it!”
“I’m trying,” the AI responded calmly. “But Sogol has

320

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the upper hand at the moment. So rather than pepper me
with questions, I suggest that you run.”
Tepho couldn’t run. Not like most people. But he was able
to manage a sort of rolling walk, which when he tried hard
enough, took on the appearance of a poorly coordinated jog.
The raptor, which he had been encouraged to bring so that
Arbuk could show the machine off to his toadies, sat ﬁfty
feet away from the reviewing stand. Because his back was
turned, the technologist didn’t see where the ﬁrst comet
landed, but having heard a second cheer, assumed the shot
had been close to the target if not right on it.
Then he was there, struggling to enter the control pod
without assistance, and ﬂipping switches like a madman
once he had succeeded. “Hurry!” Logos insisted urgently.
“Sogol is about to ﬁre!”
Tepho wondered who Sogol was but knew the question
would have to wait as the raptor came up to speed. “Now!”
Logos shouted. “It’s coming now!” And ﬁre fell from the sky.
As the locomotive topped the rise, Rebo saw the comet

soar up into the sky, pause as if deciding where to fall, and
plunge downward. For one split second he thought the munition was going to make a direct hit on the locomotive, but
much to his relief the ball of pent-up energy landed off to
the right. It exploded on contact, throwing tons of debris
into the air and creating a crater large enough to drop the
coal car into. The train swayed as the shock wave struck it,
but managed to remain upright, as the descent began. Off
in the distance, Rebo could see a rise topped by a gaily
striped awning, some carefully prepared troop positions,
and freshly turned earth where weapons emplacements had
been dug. Not only that, but logs had been placed across
the track in an attempt to block it. The engineer saw the

LO G O S R U N

321

obstacle, pulled back on the brake, and hung on to it as
metal began to screech.
Rebo realized there was nothing he could do but surrender, and was just about to give the necessary orders when a
beam of bright light caressed a stand of stickle trees. They
immediately burst into ﬂames. Then, like a ray of sunshine
through a magnifying glass, the orbital weapon drew a black
line across the rocky landscape. There was a massive explosion as the energy beam slashed across a mortar emplacement, followed by a series of ﬂares as an entire squad of
troops was incinerated, and a series of high-pitched screams
as the death ray began to close in on the reviewing stand.
Arbuk was on his feet by then, screaming obscenities at
the beam of light, but to no avail. Dignitaries, including
Hitho Mal, jumped off the platform and ran, each intent
on saving him- or herself from the devastating weapon.
But Arbuk was slow, too slow to make his escape, and there
was a loud pop as the norm’s bodily ﬂuids burst through his
skin and were incinerated a fraction of a second later. Then
the rest of the platform disappeared as the ray of concentrated energy burned a hundred-foot-long trench into the
rock and soil before suddenly ceasing to exist. A few moments later the entire area was empty of people as everyone
who still could ran for cover. The rest lay where they had
fallen. The locomotive was still a good ﬁfteen feet from the
log barrier when it ﬁnally screeched to a halt—and Rebo
said what everyone else was thinking. “What the hell was
that?”
“I don’t know,” a phib answered pragmatically, “but
we’re still a good ﬁve miles from the ocean. Let’s move those
logs and get the train going again before the norms can regroup.” It was excellent advice, and Rebo took it. By easing
the train forward they were able to nudge two timbers off

322

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the track—leaving the commandos to muscle the third out
of the way.
Five minutes later Arbuk’s soldiers began to emerge from
hiding, but they were too disorganized to mount a coordinated attack, so could do little more than take potshots at
the train as it pulled away from them. Meanwhile, having
withdrawn to the top of a low-lying hill, Tepho eyed the
scene via the raptor’s optics. He was angry—no furious—
and his voice quavered as he spoke. “Are we safe here?”
“We’re safe,” Logos allowed cautiously. “And now that I
know Sogol is present, I can prevent her from taking control
of Socket again. Unless she ﬁnds a way to get aboard before
we do, that is—which would be extremely unfortunate.”
“How very nice,” the technologist said sarcastically. “I
want to know everything there is to know about Sogol—
and I want to know it now.”
The ensuing conversation was quite acrimonious, and
still under way, when Tepho brought the raptor to a halt not
far from all the carnage. Not to check on Lord Arbuk, as the
nobleman might have hoped, but to secure the unexploded
comets. Because even though the ironclads had been destroyed, and a second AI had appeared out of nowhere,
Tepho was still in the race. And if Buru was the lock—then
the comets were the key.
The island of Buru

During the hundreds of years since most of the star gates
had been taken off-line, and humanity began the long,
backward slide toward barbarity, the surrounding vegetation had closed in on what had been a two-lane highway until it was little more than a game trail. That meant Shaz,
Phan, and the pirates they had engaged to accompany them
were forced to whack at all manner of runners, vines, and

LO G O S R U N

323

branches as they fought their way up the path. All of them
took turns, but it was exhausting work and left them soaked
with sweat.
However, the same holes in the canopy that allowed sunlight to reach the jungle ﬂoor provided the small party with
frequent glimpses of the sky and the wings that circled
above. Sightings that would have been a lot more comforting
had it not been for the lackadaisical commandant who welcomed the foursome ashore with what could only be described as unconcealed resentment. Because poor though the
posting was, the wing was in charge and saw the mainlanders
as a threat.
But orders were orders, and once the commandant read
the instructions issued by Lord Arbuk himself, there had
been little choice but to provide what assistance he could.
That, after some discussion, turned out to be a succession of
airborne guides who were to make sure that the party remained on course and report back should they run into
trouble. A virtual certainty from the local’s perspective,
since the strangers had chosen to ignore his warnings regarding jungle sickness and enter the interior anyway. All of
which had been documented, sealed into a pouch, and sent
to the mainland. So that when Arbuk’s agents turned up
dead, as they almost certainly would, the commandant
would be in the clear. The variant took pleasure in the
thought and went to lunch.
The day after the raid on Prost dawned clear, and with

only moderate winds, conditions were perfect for the relatively short trip to Buru. The norms didn’t have any large
ships to speak of, since the phibs were almost certain to sink
anything that attempted to cross one of “their” oceans,
thereby placing severe limits on the shipbuilding business.

324

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

But there were some sizeable coastal vessels, which were at
the very heart of the so-called revenge ﬂeet, still being assembled in Esperance Bay.
The concept, as put forward by Tepho, and subsequently
communicated to Arbuk’s functionaries by Hitho Mal, was
to punish the enemy by attacking the phib stronghold of
Buru. And, such was the anger at those who had come
ashore to destroy the ironclads, and even gone so far as to
unleash a secret weapon on Arbuk’s troops, that no one in a
position of power chose to question the plan. Even though
every one who was familiar with Buru knew that while the
waters around the island were thick with phibs, none of
them lived ashore.
But only the most courageous wags gave voice to such
doubts as the citizens of Esperance turned out to line the
cobbled streets, threw ﬂowers at the passing sailors, and
cheer them on as the raggedly stalwarts rowed out to their
ships.
There were no cheers for Tepho, however, thanks to the
fact that he, along with his entire staff, had been loaded
onto one of the smaller vessels during the dead of night.
They stood in the stern and watched as the surviving members of Arbuk’s personal staff were ferried out to the largest
ship, which by virtue of its size and the colorful bunting
that Tepho had purchased for it, would serve both as the
ﬂagship and the enemy’s primary target. Meanwhile, lesser
craft, such as the brig that the technologist had chosen for
himself, were likely to be ignored. That was the plan at any
rate—and the technologist saw no reason it wouldn’t work.
Sunlight sparkled on the surface of the bay, and a band
played atop the seawall as a puff of gray smoke appeared next
to the gaily decorated ﬂagship. The dull boom was like an afterthought as it rolled across the bay. That was the signal for

LO G O S R U N

325

the assemblage of ﬁshing boats, coastal luggers, and other
craft to get under way, and Tepho watched with considerable amusement as dingy sails were hoisted, boats collided
with one another, and a tubby ketch ran aground.
It took more than an hour for the poorly organized ﬂeet
to sort itself out and ﬁnally leave the bay, with Tepho’s vessel bringing up the rear. Word of the armada’s departure,
not to mention its well-publicized destination, arrived in
Shimmer minutes later. The war for Buru, if that’s what it
could properly be called, was under way.
The island of Buru

The commandant didn’t ﬂy as much as he once had,
which explained the small potbelly that hung over his belt
and his somewhat labored breathing as his leathery wings
beat at the air. But by nosing into one of thermals that rose
off Buru, the administrator was able to get some additional
lift. His scouts had warned him of an unusual amount of
phib activity, and once the commandant reached an altitude
of two hundred feet, he saw why. Phib warriors had always
been easy to spot once they ventured into the shallows, and
dozens of dark shadows could be seen patrolling offshore.
The question was why? Did the sudden interest in Buru
have something to do with the combat variant and his emaciated companion? Or, and this seemed more likely, were they
waiting for the so-called revenge ﬂeet that was on the way?
The whole notion of which made no sense to the wing—since
Buru was the last place to go looking for large concentrations
of phibs. Or was he wrong about that? Because the inshore
waters were suddenly thick with phibs! So maybe the high
muckety-mucks knew what they were doing for once.
Tired by then, and happy to glide most of the way to
base, the commandant did what any successful bureaucrat

326

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

would do. He dispatched a message to his superiors, told his
subordinates to keep an eye on the situation, and went off to
take a nap.
It was dark by the time the much-battered revenge ﬂeet

neared Buru island. Sadly for the citizens of Esperance, the
once-proud armada was only half of its former size by the
time it made landfall. Consistent with Tepho’s predictions,
all of the larger vessels had been sunk by enterprising phibs,
who made use of their motorized sleds to get out in front of
the oncoming ﬂeet, where they could wait for the ships to
pass overhead. Once a vessel obliged, it was a simple matter
to attach a mine to the hull and detonate the explosive
charge from a safe distance.
Not Tepho’s brig, however, which because of its diminutive size, and position at the tail end of the armada, remained unharmed. That vessel’s luck wasn’t likely to hold
however, both because it was increasingly visible as the size
of the ﬂeet was diminished, and because word had arrived
that a large concentration of phibs was lying in wait just off
Buru’s harbor.
But, having been made aware of Sogol and her alliance
with the variants, the technologist had anticipated such a
move and made preparations to counter it. A dozen wings, all
recruited with Hitho Mal’s help, were waiting on the foredeck as the smudge of land appeared ahead. Each of the
skeletal humans carried a bag made of netting as he or she
ﬂapped up into the air, and each container held a bomb,
which, if the makeshift fuses worked like they were supposed to, would open a pathway through which Tepho’s
ship could pass. If that provided the norms with the revenge
they sought, then so be it, although the technologist didn’t
care. He watched the wings until they were little more than

LO G O S R U N

327

dots, ordered the ship’s master to hoist more sail, and went
below to prepare. He was in radio contact with Shaz, and
based on the reports received, the journey up to the transfer
station was going to be tough.
Rebo and Norr were no more than half a mile away when

the ﬁrst wing let go of his lethal cargo and allowed it to fall.
None of the phibs were aware of the comet until the ball of
concentrated energy dropped through the ocean’s surface
and exploded underwater. The resulting shock wave sent a
huge column of water up into the air, killed everything
within a quarter-mile radius, and sent four-foot-high waves
out in every direction.
Both of the off-worlders felt the force of the underwater
concussion, and Norr “heard” a communal scream, as thousands of living organisms passed into the spirit world. Then
came the second explosion, and the third, and more after that,
until a total of six energy bombs had been detonated, hundreds of phib warriors lay facedown in the water, and what
remained of the revenge ﬂeet was free to enter the bay of
Buru.
Rebo, Norr, and Sogol had surfaced by then, and were
part of the much-diminished phib force that was about to
invade the island. “Tepho survived,” Norr said glumly. “At
least that’s what Lysander tells me.”
“And so did Logos,” Sogol added, having wrapped herself
around the sensitive’s neck. “And he’s communicating with
Socket.”
“Can you stop him?” the runner wanted to know.
“I can interfere with his efforts,” the AI replied. “Just as
he can interfere with mine.”
“Then let’s go,” Norr said grimly. “We need to reach
Socket before they do.”

328

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The wings put up a ﬁght, but not much of one, as hundreds of phibs marched up out of the light surf. That was
partly because the winged warriors were badly outnumbered, partly because they were vulnerable to massed ground
ﬁre, and partly because their hearts weren’t in it. Given the
absence of other leadership, it was the commandant’s duty to
lead a single mostly symbolic sortie, which he did. But having lost a quarter of his total force during the ﬁrst ten minutes of battle, and with no ground forces to provide support,
the old soldier was soon forced to withdraw.
That left the way clear for the phibs to claim Buru as
their own—and for the off-worlders to invade the jungle. A
trip they would have to undertake alone, since the phibs had
captured their objective and were still reeling from all the
casualties they had suffered.
Rebo had supplemented his pistols with a phib energy
riﬂe, along with a bag of grenades. And Norr, who had been
reunited with her sword, carried the phib equivalent of a
sawed-off shotgun plus a power pistol, which was strapped
to her thigh.
With only light packs to burden them, the twosome
marched up trail. And it wasn’t very long before Rebo,
Norr, and Sogol conﬁrmed what they already suspected.
Not only had Tepho preceded them, but judging from the
deep pod prints, the technologist was behind the controls of
his raptor. And, as if that wasn’t disturbing enough, there
were plenty of smaller footprints, some of which had been
left by metal men.
Truth be told, Rebo might have called it a day right then
had the runner been on his own, but Norr wasn’t prepared
to give up yet, nor was Sogol. So they continued the march,
and thanks to the bushwhacking carried out by those who
preceded them, made excellent progress. As if aware of their

LO G O S R U N

329

presence, and holding its breath to see what would happen
next, the normally noisy jungle had lapsed into a brooding
silence, broken only by the sound of their breathing, the occasional clink of metal, and the intermittent splash of water
as they crossed a stream.
It made for a pleasant rhythm. But hours later, as the light
began to fade, Sogol became increasingly agitated. Rather
than wrap herself around Norr’s biceps, as was her normal
practice, the AI began to roam from one place to another.
That was annoying enough—but the steady diet of intercepted intelligence was even worse. “Logos is communicating
with Socket. . . .” “Two of Tepho’s people have arrived at the
transit station. . . .” “The main party is almost there. . . .”
Finally, unable to take any more, Norr ordered Sogol to,
“Shut the hell up,” and threatened to stuff the computer
into her backpack. That served to silence the AI for a while,
but eventually, as the vegetation-covered butte loomed
ahead, Sogol broke her silence. Her snakelike body was
wrapped around one of the sensitive’s pack straps by that
time—which put her triangular head only inches from
Norr’s ear. “Based on their radio trafﬁc, it’s clear that Tepho,
Logos, and the rest of the party are standing directly outside
the transfer station,” the AI announced. “The gate appears
to be operational—and they are about to make the jump.”
That brought the sensitive to a momentary halt. And
when Rebo heard the news, he said, “Damn!”
“I couldn’t agree more,” Norr added. “So, assuming the
gate works, what will happen next?”
“They’ll arrive on Socket,” the AI predicted dispiritedly,
“where they will transport Logos up to level three, where
the nexus is located. Once in position, he will begin to reinstall himself.”
“And how long will that take?” Rebo wanted to know.

330

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“There’s no way to know what conditions are like,” Sogol
answered. “If they’re good, then the technos could reach
nexus within a matter of minutes. But judging from my contacts with Socket, I get the impression that they may encounter problems. As for the second part of the process, well,
I can be fairly precise about that. Given the fact that subsystems have to be conditioned while installation takes place,
the process will take three hours, twelve minutes, and fortytwo seconds. Give or take half a second.”
The sensitive felt the full impact of Rebo’s personality as
his eyes made contact with hers. He was there because of
her, because she believed in the star gates, and because he
was sworn to protect her. Even if that meant dying for her.
Something passed between them at that moment, as a
promise made before either one of them had been born was
kept and their fates forever joined. “Come on,” Rebo said
grufﬂy, as he reached out to take the sensitive’s hand. “We’re
almost there.”
The transit station was made of carefully joined blocks of

limestone, which had been eroded by the weather and almost entirely hidden by a blanket of green foliage. The raptor, which Tepho had sealed against intruders, crouched off
to one side. And right in front of the structure, where a
parking lot had existed once, there was a ﬂat area. And that
was where the assassin stood as she looked out over the verdant jungle to the sparkling sea beyond. Phan had never
been one to spend much time looking at nature, but as the
light started to fade, and a golden glow settled over the island, even she had to take notice of the beauty that surrounded her.
Then, just as quickly as the moment came, it was gone.
And when darkness fell, it fell quickly, as if eager to claim

LO G O S R U N

331

its full share of the day. And that was when the assassin was
forced to confront the fact that while Tepho, Logos, Shaz,
and the rest of the party had been transported to Socket, she
along with two metal men, had been left to guard what the
combat variant called, “the back door.”
It shouldn’t have mattered, not so long as she was being
paid, but it was difﬁcult to ignore the power-core-induced
nausea, or the feeling of disappointment that resulted from
having participated in a long, difﬁcult journey only to be
left behind just short of the ﬁnal goal. But such maunderings were unprofessional, not to mention unproductive, and
therefore dangerous. With that in mind, Phan forced herself
to focus on the task at hand.
Logos claimed that the runner, the sensitive, and the second AI were not only present on the island of Buru, but determined to reach Socket. Having traveled with the humans,
the assassin didn’t doubt it. She knew from personal experience that Rebo and Norr were not only tough but tenacious.
So they would come. . . . The question was when? Neither
one of them liked to travel at night. She knew that, but what
if they did? Phan could survive on very little sleep, but she
couldn’t go without any at all, and that suggested that some
sort of early-warning system was in order.
Fortunately, the metal men were perfect for that role, because while the cudgel-toting robots had limited combat
capabilities, they could literally see in the dark thanks to
their sophisticated sensors. With that in mind, the human
led the machines out to positions in front of the transfer
station, where their sensors would overlap, thereby establishing an invisible wall between the jungle and herself.
Once the machines were properly positioned, Phan withdrew to the point where a ﬂight of stone steps led up into
the building and settled in for the night. Somewhere out in

332

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the jungle an animal made a strange, gibbering noise,
Socket topped the eastern horizon, and ghosts roamed the
land.
The transfer station was no more than a hundred feet

ahead—and Sogol wanted to enter it with every atom of
her electromechanical body. And, had she been equipped
with a vehicle that could push buttons located approximately four feet off the ﬂoor, might have rushed to do so,
even if that meant leaving the humans behind. The need to
reach Socket and fulﬁll her purpose was that strong.
But, just as Emperor Hios and his engineers had been
careful to craft Logos 1.1 so that he couldn’t leave Socket
without human assistance, the same limitation had been
placed on her. Still, Sogol took satisfaction from the fact
that she could assist the humans by snaking her way forward to discover what sort of defenses lay between them
and the transfer station. Dead leaves rustled as the AI
slipped between thickly growing plants, slithered over an
enormous tree root, and “sensed” electromechanical activity ahead. That shouldn’t have been a surprise, since Sogol
knew that the Techno Society often made use of robots,
but it was because the AI had been on the lookout for human sentries. There was barely enough time to electronically cloak herself before the android’s sensors began to
ping the area around her. But the metal man had been too
slow, and after thirty seconds of intensive probing, reverted to standby.
Farther back, located about halfway between the androids, the AI “saw” a blob of heat and knew it to be of human origin. Sogol’s ﬁrst impulse was to return to the others,
report what she had discovered, and wait for them to handle
the problem. But then a more daring option occurred to the

LO G O S R U N

333

construct. One that, if successful, would not only be more
efﬁcient but save a signiﬁcant amount of time as well.
Still protected from prying sensors, the snakelike AI
slipped noiselessly along the ground, circled around behind
one of the two androids, and coiled herself into the shape of
a spring. Then, having launched herself into the air, Sogol
managed to fall across a crooked arm. The reaction was almost instantaneous as the robot sought to shake off whatever it was. But the AI was already up on the machine’s
shoulder by then, searching for what she felt sure would be
there. And the receptacle was there—right at the base of the
metal man’s alloy skull.
Sogol’s head morphed to ﬁt the hole, darted inside, and
locked itself in place. For one brief moment the computer
thought she might be able to take control of the robot and
thereby secure a larger body for herself, but quickly discovered that the other machine’s systems were too primitive for
her architecture. That left the AI with no choice but to lock
the robot’s joints, erase most of its CPU, and withdraw.
There was only the faintest thump as Sogol hit the ground
and wriggled her way over to the point where the second
metal man stood gazing out into the darkness. Sixty seconds
later that machine was off-line, too, and the AI was back on
the ground, snaking her way back to the point where the
humans were waiting.
Both Rebo and Norr listened intently as the construct
delivered her report—and the runner was already in the
process of rechecking his weapons when Norr touched his
arm. “No, Jak. I can ‘see’ in the dark . . . Remember? And,
given the fact that there’s only one guard, I should be able to
handle this one alone.”
Rebo didn’t like the proposal but, knowing what the
sensitive said about being able to see the guard’s aura was

334

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

true, reluctantly agreed. “Okay, but be careful, and don’t
hesitate to call for help.”
“I won’t,” Norr assured him, and proceeded to dump her
pack along with the stubby shotgun. Then, having checked
to ensure that none of her equipment would creak, rattle, or
otherwise betray her, the sensitive planted a kiss on Rebo’s
whiskered cheek and vanished into the night.
Foliage slid past Norr’s shoulder, a small animal scuttled
away, and the light reﬂected off Socket seemed to glaze the
area ahead. The robots were invisible, or would have been if
the variant hadn’t known where to look. But, thanks to Sogol’s report, she could see a faint glint off to the right, and a
place where the darkness seemed even darker over on the left.
Now, with her senses focused on the area between the
machines, the sensitive crept forward. She perceived nothing at ﬁrst, other than the multiple pinpoints of life force
that represented a host of ﬂying insects, but it wasn’t long
before a dim glow became visible. Based on the aura’s size
and shape Norr knew she was looking at a human. And not
just any human—but one she knew quite well. It was Phan!
Left to guard the star gate.
Norr felt a momentary surge of fear, because she knew
what the female warrior was capable of and felt certain that
Phan could best her. But, not at night, the variant told herself, not when the assassin couldn’t see.
Phan was leaning against her pack, which was supported
by the transfer station’s door, when she awoke from a light
sleep. A night sound perhaps? Or a surreptitious bug bite?
It must have been something of that sort the assassin
reasoned—or the metal men would have warned her. It was
tempting to illuminate the machines with her cell-powered
torch, but that would be childish, not to mention potentially

LO G O S R U N

335

fatal. Because if Rebo and Norr were lurking in the darkness,
trying to spot her position, a single ﬂash of light would provide them with everything they needed.
So Phan closed her ﬁngers around the grip of her submachine gun and let her head rest on the door behind her.
Sleep swept in and was just about to pull her down when a
soft breeze touched her face. With it came a strange yet familiar scent. Strange, because it was foreign to that environment, yet familiar, because Norr wore that particular perfume
every day!
The assassin rolled right, moonlight gleamed off the
razor-sharp blade as it passed through the area just vacated,
and the automatic weapon stuttered as Phan ﬁred a quick
burst. Not because it would hit Norr, but to intimidate the
sensitive and prevent a follow-up. But that was a mistake,
since the muzzle ﬂash left afterimages dancing in front of
the assassin’s eyes, just when she needed her night vision the
most. Where were the robots, Phan wondered? And why
hadn’t the machines given some sort of warning? But there
was no time for further thought as the norm heard three soft
footsteps and felt cold steel caress her right cheek.
The cut burned as Phan rolled again, slammed into a
wall, and bounced to her feet. The stairs made for uncertain
footing, but the norm soon regained her balance and was
back in the ﬁght. Having lost the advantage of surprise and
missed her target twice, Norr felt a surge of fear as Phan activated the torch. The light pinned the sensitive to the
stairs, feet planted, sword ready to strike.
The assassin saw the fear in Norr’s eyes, paused to savor it,
and felt something nudge her chest. Once, twice, then three
times as an energy weapon winked at her from the jungle.
Rebo! How could I have forgotten Rebo? Phan wondered. But the

336

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

question went unanswered as what looked like a thick gray
fog rolled in to engulf her—and the ﬁrst of more than a hundred of Phan’s victims arrived to greet the assassin.
Having holstered his weapon, Rebo emerged from the
bush carrying both packs and Norr’s shotgun. “Here you
go,” the runner said lightly. “And the next time you call for
help—speak a little louder.”
Norr was about to reply when Sogol interrupted. As before, the AI had wrapped herself around the sensitive’s arm.
“Tepho’s party ran into trouble! We still have time! Let’s go!”
Rebo wanted to ask, What kind of trouble? but was left
to follow as Norr mounted the steps, took hold of the massive door handle, and pulled the slab of metal open. Hinges
squealed as the rich odor of decay pushed out to greet the
newcomers. Then, as the sensitive moved forward, she
nearly tripped over a pile of bones. It was impossible to tell
if the remains were human, but their very presence was
cause for concern since the gate was supposed to be sealed
against all intruders.
“Look at this,” Rebo said, as he sent the light from
Phan’s torch down the tunnel in front of them.
That was when Norr saw that vines, some as thick as her
wrist, had forced their way down through the ceiling and
into the passageway. But why? Unless . . .
Having sensed their presence, a motion detector activated a long series of glow panels, some of which remained
dark. Here was the light the creepers would need—but
what would trigger the motion detector? And do so with
sufﬁcient regularity?
The answer became apparent as something dropped out
of an overhead vent, landed on Rebo’s right shoulder, and
went for the runner’s jugular. The norm felt needle-sharp
teeth penetrate his skin and made an ineffectual grab for the

LO G O S R U N

337

creature. But it was Norr who got a grip on the attacker’s
pointy tail, jerked the reptilian beast free, and smashed it
against the nearest wall.
Whatever it was fell, jerked spasmodically, and produced
a tendril of black smoke. “It’s some sort of machine!” Norr
exclaimed, her shotgun at the ready.
“Not ‘some sort,’ ” Sogol put in. “The guardian in question is a Porto Industries 8812-B specially enhanced
mechanimal. Back when Socket was ﬁrst commissioned,
thousands of security robots were introduced to the satellite’s crawl spaces and air ducts.”
“Then why did it attack you?” Rebo wanted to know.
“It didn’t attack me,” Sogol replied tartly. “It attacked
you. Which would explain why Tepho and his party are having so much trouble. Come on . . . let’s make the jump!”
“Oh, goody,” Rebo said, and he followed the other two
down the corridor. “That should be fun.”
Norr felt as if she was going to throw up as the radiation
produced by the power core grew even stronger. Because the
mechanimals were machines, they lacked auras, which
meant the sensitive was just as vulnerable as Rebo was. But
the shotgun imbued the variant with a sense of conﬁdence
and seemed to ﬁre itself when a sleek body launched itself
off a ledge, only to disintegrate in midair. The rotary magazine made a clacking sound as the next shell was advanced.
“Nice shooting,” the runner said approvingly, as they entered what had once been a standard decontamination chamber but had long since been converted into what looked like
a hothouse for exotic plants. The invaders lined both sides of
the chamber, and judging from the bits of bone that stuck up
out of the dirt, had originally been sustained by a corpse.
Perhaps a wing, who, curious as to what might lie behind the
outer door, had been so foolish as to venture inside.

338

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Some of the plants glowed as if lit from within, some
turned to track Norr’s progress, and one of them sent a
stream of ﬂuid squirting into the air. It fell short of the sensitive, but made a sizzling sound as it hit, and left another
burn mark on the ﬁlthy ﬂoor. Rebo gave the plants a wide
berth, heard something move over his head, and ﬁred three
energy bolts into the ceiling. The noise stopped.
The star gate itself was no better. The actual platform
had been cleared of debris, but all sorts of vegetation had
grown in and around it, and Sogol didn’t like the looks of
what she saw. “I think other life-forms may have passed
through long before Tepho and his party arrived,” the AI
warned. “Socket has been contaminated.”
“Terriﬁc,” Rebo said sarcastically. “Just what I wanted to
hear.”
Norr pushed the only button there was to push, but it
wouldn’t budge. But then, as she stepped out onto the
transfer platform, the now-familiar female voice started into
its usual spiel. That meant anything could have passed
through the gate over the years. The sensitive held the shotgun with one hand and extended the other to Rebo. “Come
on, hon,” Norr said, “we’re almost there.”
It was the ﬁrst and only time that Norr had ever called
Rebo “hon,” and there was something about the way it felt
that caused Rebo to step out onto the platform and take her
hand. The recording was followed by a ﬂash of light and a
long fall into nothingness.

FIFTEEN
™

Aboard Socket

Those individuals who choose to use the Elior Industries
IS472-B hyperspace transporter do so at their own risk, and by
using said transporter agree not to hold Elior Industries or any
of its subsidiary companies liable for incomplete transfers, traumatic injuries, radiation-induced illnesses, psychotic episodes,
or death.
—Standard disclaimer engraved into durasteel plaques welded
to each transport platform

Rebo absorbed the shock with his knees, nearly fell, but

managed to keep his balance. Norr arrived on the platform a
fraction of a second later, went facedown, but broke the fall
with her hands. “Uh-oh,” the sensitive said as she came to
her feet. “Look at that!”
Rebo looked and didn’t like what he saw. The body that
lay sprawled in front of the blood-splashed platform had a
machete clutched in its right hand. The corpse looked as
though something, or a number of somethings, had been
gnawing on it. “The guardians killed him,” Sogol remarked.
“Be careful, there are more of them.”
“Words to live by,” the runner said grimly, as he eyed the
dismembered mechanimals that lay scattered about.
“This guy’s dressed like a ﬁsherman,” Norr remarked, as
she bent over the body.

340

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“How much would you like to bet that Tepho sent him
through ﬁrst?” Rebo inquired cynically. “Just to see what
would happen.”
“I wouldn’t be surprised,” the sensitive agreed. “Look!
There are some dead mechanimals over by the hatch . . . except they have bullet holes in them.”
“Which suggests that Tepho and his crowd shot them,”
the runner concluded.
“I’m picking up some jumbled radio trafﬁc,” Sogol announced. “The technos are one level up. They’re battling a
group of enforcers.”
“Enforcers?” Rebo asked. “How are they different from
guardians?”
“They’re larger, more heavily armed, and they can ﬂy,”
the AI responded simply.
“I should have known,” the runner commented darkly.
“Can you turn them off ?” Norr inquired hopefully.
“Yes,” Sogol responded. “But only if I control Socket . . .
so let’s go.”
As Rebo and Norr stepped over the bodies heaped
around the hatch, it was clear that the robots had been cut
down as they attempted to enter the compartment. Reinforcements perhaps? Summoned after the ﬁsherman had
been killed? Yes, the runner thought that was likely. But,
unfortunately for the robots, it looked as though they had
arrived after the main party materialized on the platform.
Now, as Rebo entered the corridor, he found himself in
an environment that was reminiscent of the great starships.
Med kits, ﬁre extinguishers, and emergency pressure suits
could be found at regular intervals along the metal bulkhead, along with directional signs that pointed toward destinations like maintenance, personnel, and medical.

LO G O S R U N

341

But unlike all of the starships that Rebo had been aboard,
Socket had yet to be looted, and there was no grafﬁti to be
seen. “Take the next left,” Sogol ordered. “That hallway
leads to the lift.”
Rebo approached the intersection with care, paused to
peek around the corner, and was glad that he had. Judging
from the bullet-scarred bulkheads, and the burn marks that
crisscrossed the decks, Tepho and his party had been attacked as they transited the hall. But based on heaps of dead
mechanimals that littered the ﬂoor, it was clear that the
technos had been able to successfully defend themselves.
Except for a hapless metal man, that is, who lay with his
arms outﬂung, sensors staring sightlessly at the overhead. It
appeared that the mechanimals had been able to open the
robot’s belly, because the android’s electronic entrails lay
splayed across his waist, where many of the ﬁber-optic cables had been severed.
Norr “felt” a life force behind her, whirled, and ﬁred. The
shotgun went boom, clack, boom, clack, as a dozen of the chittering guardians rushed her. Green animatronic ﬂuid splattered the bulkheads as the ﬁrst wave of mechanimals came
apart. But farther down the hall, beyond the scope of the
present battle, more lithe bodies were spilling out of ducts,
chittering madly as their claws fought for purchase on the
metal deck, each robot communicating with all the rest by
radio.
Having spotted the oncoming wave, Rebo readied one of
the energy grenades that the phibs had given him, thumbed
the fuse, and tossed the weapon down the corridor. The
bomb bounced once, went off with a silent ﬂash, and blew at
least ﬁfteen mechanimals to smithereens.
In the meantime Norr pulled the trigger again, heard

342

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

nothing more than a metallic click, and grabbed for the
power pistol. There was no recoil as the bolts of blue energy
struck the remaining robots and reduced most to little more
than badly burned carcasses. But even though the rear portion of its body was missing, the front half of a guardian
continued to drag itself toward the sensitive, its jaws snapping at empty air. Another energy bolt put the beast down
for good, but the experience left Norr shaken, and the sensitive’s hands trembled slightly as she reloaded her weapons.
“Good job,” Rebo said reassuringly, as he administered the
coup de grace to a twitching robot. “Come on . . . Let’s get
down that next stretch of hallway before the little bastards
can regroup.”
Norr followed the runner as he turned the corner, glanced
at a hatch marked emergency access ladder, and made
his way past the same metal man he’d seen before. Meanwhile, having been attacked from behind once, the sensitive
didn’t want the same thing to happen again, and was walking
backward when she passed the robot. That’s why the variant
didn’t realize the android was still alive until steely ﬁngers
wrapped themselves around her ankle. There was a single
boom-clack combination as Norr blew the robot’s head off.
Rebo whirled, ready to ﬁght, but concluded that Norr
was getting jumpy, and turned back again. The runner arrived at the end of the corridor, followed the main lift sign
to the right, and spotted the door ahead. A few seconds later
he was standing in front of the polished metal door pushing
on the up button. Once the indicator light appeared, Rebo
started to back away, and motioned for Norr to do likewise.
And it was a good thing, too, because when the lift
chimed and doors parted, a Porto Industries 8813-B Enforcer opened ﬁre on them. The sphere-shaped machine

LO G O S R U N

343

ﬂoated two feet off the deck and was armed with an energy
cannon. A cluster of three energy bolts passed between the
humans as they opened ﬁre. Even though Rebo scored three
hits with the energy riﬂe, and Norr blasted the robot with
her shotgun, the machine remained unaffected. That was
when the robot swiveled toward Rebo, and Norr stepped
into the gap between them. There was a loud clatter as the
shotgun hit the ﬂoor. Rebo shouted, “No!” and the sensitive
went for her sword.
But, rather than blowing Norr in half, the enforcer
moved as if to bypass the female. That was when the runner
remembered what Sogol had said earlier—and realized that
the construct couldn’t attack the sensitive so long as the AI
was wrapped around her arm. Come to think of it, the
guardians they had encountered earlier had probably been
after him.
There was a metallic ﬂash as the sliver of steel fell, followed by a loud ka-ching, as the supersharp blade sliced
down through the robot’s armor casing to lodge itself somewhere inside. The sensitive tried to free her weapon, discovered it was locked in place, and was forced to place a foot on
the enforcer’s casing in order to pry the sword free.
Then, just as Norr was about to take another cut at the
robot, sparks spurted out of the gash in its casing. The machine shuddered, hit the deck with a thud, and rolled for
two feet before coming to a stop next to a bulkhead. The
sensitive returned the sword to its sheath, bent to retrieve
her shotgun, and broke the weapon open. “Damn,” the runner said fervently, as he watched his companion pluck empties from the weapon’s rotary cylinder. “That was close! You
scared the hell out of me.”
“I was never in any danger,” the variant replied smugly.

344

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Yeah? Well, you soon will be,” Rebo replied darkly.
“Tepho and his people would be more than happy to shoot
you.”
“They are entering nexus!” Sogol hissed urgently.
“Hurry!”
The humans entered the lift, the runner touched the button that said, level three, and felt the car jerk into motion. “Why three?” Norr wanted to know. “Nexus is on two.”
“Which means they’ll be waiting for us on two,” the
runner predicted. “By going up to three and going down
the emergency access ladder to level two, we might be able
to surprise them.”
The elevator stopped, the doors parted, and the runner
eyed the corridor. It was blessedly empty, for which Rebo
gave thanks as he jogged down the hall to the point where
the vertical emergency access ladder sign had been stenciled
onto the bulkhead. He opened the hatch, heard a gentle hiss
as pressures were equalized, and entered what amounted to
a vertical tunnel. “I’ll go ﬁrst,” the runner announced, as he
positioned himself on the ladder. “And remember, we don’t
have friends down there, so shoot anything that moves.”
Then Rebo was gone, his boots sliding along the outside
surface of the rails, the energy riﬂe hanging across his chest.
The runner braked when he saw the numeral 2 appear, transferred his weight to a small platform, and was already turning toward the hatch when Norr began her descent.
Cognizant of the fact that the hall was probably occupied, Rebo opened the hatch, tossed a grenade through the
gap, and pulled the door closed again. There was a mufﬂed
scream, followed by the dull rattle of automatic ﬁre and a series of unintelligible shouts.
That was Rebo’s cue to toss a second energy bomb into the
corridor. He pulled the door closed, counted to four, and

LO G O S R U N

345

pushed his way out into the hall. The badly pulped remains
of at least three bodies were scattered about, and two humans plus a metal man were crouched not thirty feet up the
corridor. Judging from the way some of the norms held their
weapons, they weren’t too familiar with them. A couple of
Tepho’s attendants perhaps? There was no way to know. But
when they ﬁred, the runner ﬁred back, and it was his bullets
that struck home. The robot went down ﬁrst, quickly followed by both humans, one of whom took a burst of bolts
from behind.
That surprised the runner until he saw something shimmery was standing farther down the hall, weapon in hands,
ﬁring through his own men. And that was the last thing
Rebo saw as Shaz shouted an order, the lights went out, and
the combat variant made his way forward.
Norr had cleared the hatch by then, and even though the
corridor was nearly pitch-black, the sensitive “saw” the manshaped blob of color coming her way. The shotgun roared, the
aura staggered, and the variant felt a moment of elation. But
that was when the target recovered, changed course as if to
avoid a potential follow-up shot, and continued to advance.
Some sort of armor perhaps? Yes, the sensitive thought so,
and suspected that the oncoming combatant could see her as
well.
Everything appeared green through the night-vision
goggles, but both of his opponents were clear to see as Shaz
pulled the trigger. That was when the variant felt something cold slither up his right leg and make straight for his
genitals. Shaz couldn’t resist the urge to stop and attempt to
grab whatever the thing was.
And it was then, as Shaz paused to deal with Sogol, that
Norr removed her opponent’s head. The combat variant felt
something tug at his neck, “saw” his head bounce off the

346

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ﬂoor, and knew the rest of his body was in the process of
falling. And that was when the man once known as Hoggles
appeared in front of him. His form was different now, but
powerful nonetheless, and there was nothing friendly about
his smile. “Welcome to the spirit world, friend. . . . It turns
out that there are worse things than dying . . . as you are
about to ﬁnd out.”
In the meantime, the lights came back on as the surviving members of Tepho’s force emerged to celebrate what
they assumed to be the combat variant’s victory. Except that
it wasn’t. All ﬁve of them were armed, but none was ready,
and that was a mistake. One fell to Norr’s sword and the rest
of them were still fumbling with their weapons when Rebo
cut them down. Sogol made her way back to Norr, the humans reloaded, and the entrance to nexus was clear.
The only way Tepho could obtain sex was to purchase it

from the whores of Seros. But pleasurable though such encounters had been, they didn’t even begin to compare with
what the technologist felt as he sat in the thronelike chair
and gazed at the 360-degree holo projection that encircled
him.
The panorama had been conceived to look as it should
when viewed from Zeen. All of the suns that had once been
part of the Imperium were represented, complete with their
planetary attendants, each orbiting exactly as it should. And
some of those worlds, the ones fortunate enough to boast a
star gate, were further identiﬁed by what looked like green
jewels. One for each portal that remained operational. Sadly,
in light of what had once been, such lights were few and far
between. Although Tepho was pleased to see that the vast
majority of remaining portals were under the Techno Society’s

LO G O S R U N

347

control, which was to say his control, given that the organization belonged to him.
Still, the extent to which the once far-ﬂung network of
star gates had deteriorated meant that the opportunity
before him was that much greater. As Tepho stared at the
panorama he could envision himself as humanity’s savior,
the emperor who returned mankind to its rightful place in
the galaxy and thereby earned himself a revered place in history. The sudden pressure of a gun barrel against the back of
Tepho’s head brought the glorious dream to an abrupt end.
“Stand up,” Rebo grated. “And remove the vest.”
But Logos 1.1, who was busy downloading himself from
the vest via a wired connection, didn’t want to be interrupted. Especially given the fact that the transfer was 96
percent complete. “Remain where you are,” the AI ordered
tersely, his voice booming through the overhead speakers.
Fortunately, Rebo was standing so close to Tepho and Logos that when the hidden weapon pods began to ﬁre it was
impossible to score a direct hit on the runner without harming the AI as well. The norm felt a momentary sensation of
heat as a ruby-red energy beam scorched his right sleeve,
struck the deck beyond, and etched a black line into the
steel plating.
“Stay close to Tepho!” Norr shouted, and was reaching
for the power pistol when Sogol attempted to jump free.
Not in an attempt to ﬂee, but to reach the console, where
the AI hoped to download herself into Socket’s CPU.
But Norr managed to grab hold of the construct before
she could escape, said, “Oh, no you don’t,” and took aim at
the nearest laser pod. The automated weapons couldn’t ﬁre
back, not so long as the sensitive had Sogol to protect her,
which left the variant free to destroy the energy projectors

348

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

one at a time. It typically required at least three energy
bolts before a given turret would explode in a ﬂash of yellow
light. And that meant precious seconds were coming off the
clock.
Once Norr had neutralized all the pods, and Rebo was
able to step away from Tepho, the sensitive carried Logos
1.2 over to the console. There was a small metal-rimmed
hole off to one side, which was intended for her, and the AI
went in headﬁrst. The variant saw Sogol’s tail wiggle for a
moment, then disappear as the construct sought the evil
twin within.
Tepho felt the gun barrel jab the base of his neck again.
“Stand up,” Rebo growled, “or I will blow what passes for
your brains all over that console.”
The technologist stood, mind racing, while the runner
tugged at the vest. Never in his wildest imaginings had
Tepho visualized a situation like this one. But there had to
be a way out, some means to escape the couple who had
caused him so much trouble, and return with reinforcements. What neither man realized was that by the time the
technologist passed the vest over to Rebo, Logos was no
longer resident within it, which made them vulnerable. A
fact that quickly became apparent as the surround rippled
and three of the spherical enforcers appeared. The ﬁrst energy bolt punched a hole through the garment that dangled
from Rebo’s hand, the second took a chunk out of Tepho’s
left arm, and the third severed the top of the chairman’s
thronelike chair.
Tepho ducked behind the console while the others turned
to engage the enforcers. Having already learned that the energy riﬂe didn’t have the power required to punch holes in
the robot’s armor, Rebo dropped that weapon in favor of the
dart gun, which he removed from its shoulder holster.

LO G O S R U N

349

And, while Norr was ready with her sword, the sensitive
was so busy ducking and dodging it was impossible to use
it. The variant’s opportunity only came when the runner
ﬁred—and the ﬁrst explosive round hit the enforcer nearest
him. There was a loud boom, the robot belched smoke, and
the acrid stench of ozone ﬁlled the air.
Then, as the other machines turned to concentrate their
ﬁre on Rebo, Norr managed to roll under one of them. That
turned out to be a mistake however, because the downward
pressure generated by the enforcer’s onboard repulsor unit
was sufﬁcient to pin her down, and the machine clearly intended to crush her.
But, thanks to the fact that the sensitive’s sword was
pointed upward, the enforcer wound up impaling itself on
the supersharp sliver of steel rather than killing the human
being it was after. Norr felt the pressure disappear as the repulsor went off-line, knew the robot would fall, and hurried
to roll out of the way. The variant felt the machine’s metal
casing brush her arm as it fell. There was a loud clang as armor hit the steel deck followed by the gentle moan of released air.
Meanwhile, the battle between Rebo and the remaining
enforcers continued. The good news was that the explosive
darts were effective against the big spheres. The bad news
was that the ﬁrst unit the runner attacked sustained three
separate hits before ﬁnally suffering signiﬁcant damage to
its onboard guidance system. A few moments later the construct powered its way through the surrounding holo curtain, smashed into the bulkhead beyond, and crashed to the
deck.
Now, having taken cover behind the wreckage of the ﬁrst
enforcer, the runner was attempting to get a bead on the
third robot. Unfortunately for Rebo, the machine had the

350

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

capacity to learn. And, having observed what had happened
to the other units, had taken evasive action. By going up to
its maximum altitude of twelve feet, the robot had positioned itself against the dark overhead, making it difﬁcult
to see. Although Rebo could see the energy bolts as they
ﬂashed down at him, it was impossible to know which way
the machine would move next. All of which explained why
the last three shots had missed their mark.
But the enforcer’s plan, good though it was, failed to take
the second biological into account. A fact that became evident when the robot passed under a crossbeam and felt something land on top of it. Then, even as the machine readied an
electric shock designed to counter that sort of attack, the
weight dropped away. The enforcer bobbed upward, and was
still in the process of analyzing what had occurred, when the
phib energy grenade went off.
Since she knew next to nothing about the robot’s design,
and was eager to jump off the machine as quickly as possible, Norr had been content to shove the little bomb into any
aperture she could ﬁnd. Which, as it turned out, was an intake vent. And once the grenade detonated, the duct channeled hot gases directly into the enforcer’s high-tech guts,
where they triggered a secondary explosion. Rebo heard a
dull thump, saw ﬂames shoot out through multiple cracks in
the machine’s armor, and watched the construct as it fell on
the far end of the kidney-shaped console.
Rebo’s ﬁrst thought was for Tepho. Had the technologist
been killed? The runner sincerely hoped so, but crossed the
room only to discover that the slippery bastard was nowhere
to be found.
Meanwhile, deep within the surreal universe of Socket’s
CPU, an entirely different kind of war was being fought.
A desperate conﬂict in which bolts of logical lightning

LO G O S R U N

351

illuminated a bleak landscape, multicolored lights glittered
as they cascaded down tiers of memory into rivers of molten
data, and mountainous subroutines vanished only to magically reappear as twin titans battled for control.
But dramatic though the contest was, there was never
any doubt as to which AI would emerge victorious. By the
time Sogol entered Socket’s Central Processing Unit Logos
was so ﬁrmly entrenched that a miracle would have been
required to dislodge him. And there were no miracles
within the space station’s CPU, just calculations, which
the older AI controlled. So, even as Sogol continued to
ﬁght, she knew what the ultimate outcome would have to
be. And though not capable of human emotion, processed
a sense of profound noncompletion, which was analogous
to regret.
Norr had just learned of Tepho’s escape when Sogol’s
voice came over the speakers. “I will hold out as long as I
can, but Logos 1.1 will ultimately seize control of Socket,
and therefore humanity itself.”
“No!” The word was formed by Norr’s lips and delivered
from her mouth, but had been spoken by someone else. The
sensitive felt a surge of something akin to electricity as the
entity once known as Emperor Hios took control of her
body. “This is Lysander. . . . Hold Logos 1.1 off as long as
you can! There is a way to destroy Socket . . . a code that I
took to my grave. Once I enter it into the console, my channel will have ten minutes to evacuate. Then, once the power
core blows, the entire satellite will be destroyed.”
Rebo watched Lysander walk Norr’s body over the badly
ravaged console. There was an audible whir as a section of
seemingly solid material opened in response to her touch,
and a keypad was revealed. Slim ﬁngers danced over white
buttons as a string of potentially lethal numbers were entered

352

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

and Logos 1.1 immediately sought to neutralize them. But
the AI couldn’t interfere with the ultimate safeguard, not so
long as his programming was intact, but was quick to express his frustration. “No! Are you insane? When Socket
dies, everything you built, everything you worked for will
die with it!”
“That’s true,” the onetime emperor intoned. “But it’s
better than allowing entities like Tepho and you to control
humanity! Perhaps someone will reinvent the star gates one
day. . . . If so, I can only hope that they do a better job of it
than I did.”
Then, as if to underline Lysander’s words, a klaxon began
to bleat. Norr staggered as the spirit entity released its grip
on her, felt Rebo take her hand, and heard him yell, “Run!”
Tepho tripped, fell, and threw out his hands in a last-

second attempt to protect himself. Having added still more
bruises to the collection he already had, the technologist
struggled to his feet and limped ahead. The shoulder
wound was painful, but the ﬂesh had been cauterized by
the same bolt of energy that injured it, so there wasn’t any
blood. Of more concern were the robots that wanted to kill
him. But not if he made it to the star gate ﬁrst!
Armed with a pistol taken off Shaz’s headless torso, the
technologist was on level one, making his way down a long
stretch of corridor, when a klaxon began to bleat. Emergency beacons began to ﬂash soon after that, and it became
obvious that something was wrong.
But the administrator was already running as fast as he
could, so there was nothing more that he could do as a synthesized female voice began the ﬁnal countdown. “Time remaining for evacuation nine minutes, thirty seconds. All
personnel who wish to exit the station prior to detonation are

LO G O S R U N

353

ordered to leave Socket now. . . . Time remaining for evacuation nine minutes, twenty-ﬁve seconds. All personnel . . .”
Tepho lost track of the announcement as a loud chittering
sound was heard, hundreds of guardians poured out into the
hallway in front of him, and the technologist was forced to
stop. The pistol jumped in the administrator’s hand as he
ﬁred into the oncoming mob. Tepho had the momentary
satisfaction of seeing more than a dozen robots go down.
But then he was out of ammo, and with no backup clips to
call on, the norm could do little more than throw the empty
gun at the roiling mass of electromechanical bodies before
him. Just as Tepho was about to surrender to the inevitable,
a dart whizzed past his right ear, struck one of the mechanimals, and exploded.
“So, we meet again,” Norr observed, as she stepped up to
ﬁre her shotgun.
The technologist felt something warm seep down along
his legs, and looked down to discover that he had peed himself, even as Rebo ﬁred three explosive rounds into what remained of the horde. “Time remaining for evacuation, eight
minutes, ﬁfteen seconds,” the voice announced calmly. “All
personnel who wish to exit the station . . .”
“That would be us!” Rebo exclaimed, and reached out to
help Norr through the electromechanical gore that covered
the deck.
“But what about me?” Tepho wailed miserably, as the
others left him behind.
“It looks like you’re screwed!” Rebo shouted cheerfully,
as Norr rounded the corner ahead, and he followed. The
couple were in the ﬁnal stretch by that time, and racing
through the area where an earlier battle had been fought,
when Sogol was forced to capitulate. There was a symbolic
explosion deep within Socket’s CPU, as the eternally shifting

354

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

computational landscape was momentarily illuminated by a
brilliant ﬂash of light, and operating system 1.2 was eradicated.
And it was then, even as the countdown fell to six
minutes, twenty seconds, that Logos chose to close all of
the station’s airtight, blastproof doors in hopes that he
could trap Rebo and Norr in the main corridor. Rebo saw
the steel barriers begin to deploy and urged Norr to greater
speed, but knew it was hopeless. They were still ﬁfteen feet
away from the nearest hatch when metal clanged on metal.
Socket was going to blow, the countdown continued, and
the star gate lay on the other side of the hatch.
Rebo felt his spirits plummet as both he and the sensitive were forced to put on the brakes, and were still struggling to slow themselves, when they threw up their hands.
“Damn,” the runner exclaimed as his hands made contact
with cold steel. “What now?”
“Time remaining for evacuation, ﬁve minutes, thirty seconds,” the voice put in emotionlessly. “All personnel who
wish . . .”
Norr had no answer, and was just about to say as much,
when a third person spoke. “Perhaps I can help,” Tepho said
calmly. They turned to ﬁnd that the technologist had approached them from behind. The front of his pants remained
wet—but the technologist was otherwise composed. “As with
any habitat of this size,” Tepho continued carefully, “there is
more than one way off. Come . . . I’ll show you.”
So saying, the administrator turned and limped back the
way he had come. Rebo looked at Norr, and the sensitive
shrugged. With no other options to choose from, the twosome had very little choice but to follow Tepho a short distance to a newly opened hatch and the bright red decal
located beside it. The sign was directly opposite the area

LO G O S R U N

355

where the ﬁrst battle with the guardians had been fought—
which explained why the runner failed to see it earlier. Simple though they were the words caused his heart to leap:
escape pod three.
Norr peered through the opening and saw that a short
ladder led up to another smaller hatch. The sensitive looked
at Tepho and frowned. “Why come get us? You could be
clear by now,” the variant commented suspiciously.
“Because I can’t climb the ladder by myself,” the technologist answered honestly. “Please help me.”
“You’ve got to be kidding,” Rebo responded angrily.
“After everything you’ve done? I don’t think so. Come on,
Lonni, let’s get out of here.”
“No,” the sensitive objected stubbornly. “It wouldn’t be
right. Boost him up there . . . Or would you like to be
standing there arguing with me when Socket blows?”
Rebo made a face, urged Tepho through the ﬁrst hatch,
and muscled the other man up the ladder. And it was there,
on the escape pod’s threshold, that the technologist launched
his backward kick. The blow struck the runner in the face,
which caused him to lose his grip, and fall backward into the
corridor.
Tepho laughed triumphantly as he scooted into the fourperson pod, and was reaching for the controls, when Norr
ﬁred the power pistol up through the open hatch. She
wasn’t an especially good shot, not by Rebo’s standards, but
the range was short. The energy bolt punched a neat little
hole through the technologist’s throat and left him gasping
for air. Rebo had recovered by then. He scrambled up the
ladder, grabbed the front of Tepho’s shirt, and jerked him
out through the hatch. There was a meaty thump as he hit
the deck.
Norr felt no sense of guilt as she was forced to step on

356

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Tepho in order to access the ladder and join Rebo inside the
vehicle. They heard the voice begin to announce that one
minute and twenty seconds remained, but the sound was
cut off as the hatch cycled closed, and an even shorter
countdown began. There was barely enough time to strap
themselves in before the escape vehicle blew itself free of
Socket, and the couple became weightless.
Meanwhile, back aboard the space station, Tepho struggled to breathe. He was still trying to come up with a plan
to extend his life when Socket exploded into a million
pieces. There was chaos on the surface of the planet as the
tides ceased to exist, the phib tidal generators failed, and
the oceans went on a rampage. Eventually, after all of the destruction, the phibs and norms might be forced to contemplate some sort of truce and ﬁnd ways to cooperate with
each other.
But for Rebo and Norr, there were other problems to
consider. Would they travel to Esperance? And attempt to
backtrack the technos to their hidden star gate? Or was that
a waste of time without Socket to facilitate the transfer?
And what about the great starships? Could they take passage aboard one of them? And thereby ﬁnd their way back
to Seros? That seemed like the best hope.
Finally, after a rough-and-tumble journey through the
planetary atmosphere, a red chute deployed. The escape pod
slowed and rocked back and forth before it ﬁnally smacked
down on an azure ocean. Fresh air ﬂooded the tiny cabin as
the off-worlders opened the top hatch, stood on their seats,
and eyed their surroundings. The escape pod rose as a huge
swell rolled in to lift it up, and it managed to remain stubbornly upright as the mountain of water fell away. Days, if
not weeks would pass before the ocean found its new equilibrium, and the tidal storms stopped. Rebo could see ﬂuffy

LO G O S R U N

357

white clouds, a circling seabird, and a point of land off in
the distance.
Norr thought about Seros, the hand-to-mouth existence
she had led there, and wondered if she would see the planet
again. Or even wanted to see the planet again. But then, as
Rebo put his arm around her shoulders, the sensitive knew
it didn’t really matter. Finally, having wandered halfway
across the galaxy, she was home.

