RUNNER

Ace titles by William C. Dietz
legion of the damned
the final battle
by blood alone
by force of arms
deathday
earthrise
for more than glory
for those who fell
mccade for hire
mccade on the run
runner

™

™

RUNNER

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ACE BOOKS, NEW YORK

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and
incidents are either the product of the author's imagination or are
used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons,
living or dead, business establishments, events or locales is
entirely coincidental.
Runner
AN ACE Book / published by arrangement with the author
All rights reserved.
Copyright © 2005 by The ACE Publishing Group.
This book may not be reproduced in whole or part, by
mimeograph or any other means, without permission.
Making or distributing electronic copies of this book constitutes
copyright infringement and could subject the infringer to
criminal and civil liability.
For information address:
The ACE Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Putnam Inc.,
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014.
The Penguin Putnam Inc. World Wide Web site address is
http://www.penguinputnam.com
ISBN: 0-7865-5933-0
AN ACE BOOK®
ACE Books first published byACE Publishing Group,
a member of Penguin Putnam Inc.,
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014.
ACE and the "A" design are trademarks belonging to
Penguin Putnam Inc.
Electronic edition: September 2005

For Marjorie with all my love

Acknowledgments
A special thanks to Allison E. Dietz
for her advice and counsel.

ONE
™

The Planet Anafa

Once accepted, a contract to deliver a message, package, or
person will be honored regardless of cost.
—The Runner’s Oath

The sun filtered through the charcoal-generated haze that

hung over Seros, warmed the city’s ancient bones, and
hinted at the coming of summer. A great deal had changed
during the more than ten thousand years since the ﬁrst
colony ship had landed on Anafa. A raw settlement had
grown into a village, a town, and eventually a city. Not one
city, but multiple cities, all stacked on top of each other like
layers of ancient sediment.
As Jak Rebo made his way through the streets he could
see the remains of the last technocivilization in the straight
gridlike streets and the weatherworn pylons that marched
down the middle of the main arterials. Each column was
topped by a hoop of gleaming steel through which bulletshaped vehicles had once ﬂown, or so it appeared based on

2

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the huge ﬂoor mosaic in what presently served as the city’s
public market.
Some of the structures that rose to the left and right
dated back to that same time. An era when power was plentiful, lift tubes carried people to the top of high-rise buildings that stood as thick as trees in a forest. But the
skyscrapers were little more than empty cadavers now, hulks
from which everything of value had been stripped, leaving
rusty skeletons to point impotently at the sky.
Most of the structures that lined the streets were no more
than ﬁve stories tall because that represented how many
ﬂights of stairs the average person was willing to climb. As
buildings burned, or were torn down, new ones were built
according to the tastes of those who could afford to do so.
That activity, carried out over thousands of years, had resulted in a diversity of architecture. Some buildings had
been hung with balconies, topped with domes, or provided
with columns that they didn’t need.
The older structures all had one thing in common, however, and that was the rectangular boxes from which street
numbers had been removed in order to create a need for the
hand-drawn maps that the writer’s guild sold to people like
Rebo. Many of the frames had been painted, or ﬁlled with
tiles, but some remained as they had been: wounds over
which no scab had been allowed to form.
Though understandable to some extent, the runner was
annoyed by what he and his guild considered to be a desecration of the city’s past and the destruction of a system by
which written messages had once been delivered on a daily
basis. An unheard-of luxury since the great purge 128 years
before, when thousands of technocrats had been rounded up
and slaughtered in the main square.
Rebo took a look around before stepping into the shadow

RUNNER

3

cast by an ancient arch to examine his hand-drawn schematic
without attracting unwanted attention. Though useful, maps
could be dangerous, since strangers were the only ones who
used them.
Unlike some members of his guild, who dressed like
dandies in hopes of attracting wealthy clients, the runner
preferred to wear everyday clothes. A bandanna covered his
jet-black hair, a gold earring dangled from one ear, and he
hadn’t shaved in two days. The Crosser ten-millimeter
semiauto pistol hung butt down under his left arm, hidden
by the runner’s red leather jacket, but the single-shot Hogger with the fourteen-inch barrel was intentionally visible.
It rode in a cross-draw holster along the front of his belly
and was powerful enough to stop a three-hundred-pound
heavy.
Rebo’s trousers were black, baggy, and gathered around a
pair of worn lace-up boots. All in all the sort of outﬁt that
thousands of the planet’s middle-class citizens sported every
day. Because of that, and the fact that there was nothing inherently threatening about the man who stood by the arch,
the locals ignored the runner as they set out for the local
bakery, hawked their wares, or made their way into one of
the local taverns.
Satisﬁed that no one was following him, or otherwise
monitoring his movements, Rebo consulted the map. He
was looking for Merchant Marly Telvas, a wealthy businessman, who was said to live in the reservoir district. Now,
having passed the man-made lake from which the area took
its name, the runner was on the lookout for landmarks that
would help him identify the correct dwelling. He spotted
the top of a small spire, ﬁgured it was the same ﬁfty-foottall obelisk that appeared on his map, and started in that
direction.

4

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

As the runner drew closer, a vine-covered twelve-foothigh wall appeared on his right, a sure sign that someone
had something worth stealing. It turned out that the spire
was ﬁrmly planted on an island located in the middle of the
street just opposite a pair of well-varnished wooden gates.
The city’s police force, or guard, as it was commonly known,
was notoriously understaffed, incompetent, and corrupt.
That meant everyone who could afford to do so paid members of the watch keeper’s guild for extra protection, be it
heavily armed norms like those who lounged in front of the
gates directly across from Rebo, or the cudgel-toting heavies who patrolled the better neighborhoods during the
night. The runner looked both ways before crossing the
street. While none of the brightly uniformed watchmen
looked to be especially bright, one of them proved to be
fairly assertive. His voice was gruff. “I don’t know what
you’re selling, citizen—but it’s safe to say that Merchant
Telvas already has one of them.”
Rebo could be charming when he chose to be. He summoned his best smile and displayed the lightning bolt that
had been tattooed onto the inside surface of his left forearm
when he was twelve. “I’m a runner. Is Merchant Telvas
home?”
“What difference does it make?” the watchman demanded. “Give me the message, and I will deliver it for you.”
Rebo shook his head, saw that the other watchmen were
moving to ﬂank him, and took three steps back. He hooked
his right thumb into the gun belt only inches from the
Hogger, and the effort to surround him stopped. “Thanks,”
the runner said evenly, “but I am required to put the message into his hands. That’s what it says in the guild book—
and that’s what I have to do.”
The head watchman wasn’t surprised. Even though the

RUNNER

5

runner had already been paid by the person who sent the
message, he wanted to deliver it personally in hopes of a
generous tip. A perfectly understandable motivation, but
one that he planned to quash. If anyone was to receive a tip,
the guard believed that it should be him.
“Okay,” the watchman growled, “but no weapons. They
stay with us.”
It was a ticklish moment. The request was reasonable
since members of the assassin’s guild had been known to impersonate runners, even going so far as to have fake guild
marks tattooed onto their skins, but once Rebo surrendered
his weapons he would be at the watchmen’s mercy. Would
they allow him to pass? Or take the box and deliver it themselves? Or worse yet, take the box, keep his weapons, and
send him packing? He could summon the guard, but ultimately it would be his word against theirs.
Time seemed to stretch thin, and Rebo was about to back
away, when Uba, the goddess of luck, came to his rescue.
There was a loud clatter as a bell rang, a small angen-drawn
cart rounded a corner, and the driver shouted at a pedestrian
foolish enough to cross the street in front of it. The conveyance was little more than a box on wheels but still managed to convey a sense of importance via its well-oiled
leather roof, pristine paint job, and the enormous brass
lanterns mounted to either side of the brightly clad driver.
The genetically engineered animal that stood between the
traces still bore a strong resemblance to the horses from
which it was descended, except that the angen was stronger,
faster, and even more graceful. A man leaned out of a window as the cart ground to a halt. He had a full face, sensual
lips, and wore a bright yellow turban decorated with a
white feather. “What’s going on here? Open the gate!”
The man could have been a visitor, but Rebo didn’t think

6

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

so, and took a chance. “Citizen Telvas? My name is Jak
Rebo . . . I have a package from your brother.”
The watchmen moved to intervene, but the merchant
raised a pudgy hand. “From my brother? Surely you are mistaken.”
“He said that you might doubt his identity,” Rebo
replied quickly, “and told me to tell you that he was the one
who took your rock collection when you were six and that
he’s sorry.”
The merchant’s eyes widened as if he was surprised, and
he hooked a thumb toward the back of the carriage. “Jump
aboard.”
Rebo took a dozen steps forward, jumped up onto the
step where a footman could ride, and grabbed on to the side
bars. The gate had been opened by then, and the watchmen
glowered as the cart jerked into motion. Rebo offered them
an insulting gesture and grinned as their faces turned purple and the gate swung closed.
Though not especially large, the grounds were well kept
and lavishly decorated. As the cart made its way up a slight
incline to a formal entry the runner saw all manner of statues, seats, and fountains to either side of the drive. Too many
in his judgment, as if someone continued to purchase objects long after the need to do so had passed.
The cart came to a halt under a portico, servants rushed
out to welcome their master home, and Telvas had just
stepped onto a carefully placed footstool as the runner
rounded the corner of the carriage. The merchant nodded.
“Feva will show you to my study. I’ll be along soon.”
Rebo had no desire to linger but discovered that he
didn’t have a whole lot of choice as Telvas turned and entered his house. The structure was three stories tall, capped

RUNNER

7

by domes of varying heights, and painted an eye-searing
white.
Feva proved to be a young, rather comely servant girl
with waist-length hair and a ﬂoral dress. Very few strangers
were allowed within the walls, so she was understandably
curious about the rufﬁan her master had brought home, and
directed sidelong glances at the runner as she escorted him
into the house.
It was cool inside, and thanks to a generous supply of
windows, very well lit. The ceilings were high, the rooms
were generously proportioned, and the same excess that
could be seen outside was visible within. Not only was each
room they passed through full to overﬂowing with furniture, but it seemed as though every surface supported a
lamp, urn, or vase, many of which struck the runner as quite
hideous. The smell of freshly baked bread ﬁlled the air, the
tinkle of a distant bell ﬂoated through the lightly perfumed
air, and Rebo wondered if Madam Telvas had just rung for
her maid.
Feva led the runner around a corner, gestured toward a
long, roughly hewn bench, and curtsied. “Please wait here.
Master Telvas will be along soon.”
Others were waiting for an audience as well. One had the
sleek well-fed look of a professional, an accountant judging
from the well-worn abacus that rested beside him, while the
other wore work clothes and sat with his feet on a wellcrafted wooden toolbox. A carpenter, perhaps, hoping to receive a commission, or having been summoned to repair
something of substance. Rebo nodded to both men, took
note of their somewhat grim expressions, and decided that
both had been there for a while.
Time passed, shadows slipped across the opposite wall,

8

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

and the carpenter started to snore. The runner didn’t own a
watch, not since a well-endowed barmaid had stolen it three
months earlier, but didn’t need one to know that at least
two hours had passed by the time the door ﬁnally opened
and Telvas stepped into the hall. The turban had disappeared, along with the robes, leaving the merchant in a
loose-ﬁtting white shirt, baggy black pants, and house slippers. It was a deceptively simple outﬁt that probably cost a
crono if not more. The accountant started to rise, clearly expecting that he would go ﬁrst, but the merchant pointed to
Rebo. “You. Come in.”
Rebo rose, followed Telvas into his study, and pulled the
door closed behind him.
The merchant circled an enormous wooden desk to sit in
a thronelike chair positioned behind it. There were two
guest chairs, and Rebo decided to appropriate one of them
without beneﬁt of an invitation. Unlike the rest of the
house, the study was nearly barren, suggesting that it was
someone other than Telvas who enjoyed the process of buying things just to buy them. That observation served to elevate the merchant in the runner’s estimation. “So,” Telvas
began, “you have a message for me?”
“No,” Rebo replied, as he reached inside his jacket. “Not
a message, but a package.”
Telvas watched the runner produce a ﬂat box and place it
on the surface of his highly polished desk. It was wrapped in
blue cloth, tied with a red ribbon, and looked a bit worn.
Strangely, from Rebo’s point of view, the merchant made no
attempt to touch it. Their eyes met. “What does the package contain?”
Rebo shrugged. “I don’t know. Your brother didn’t say.”
“Tell me more about my brother,” Telvas said, leaning
back into his chair. “What does he look like?”

RUNNER

9

It was a common question, one that runners, especially
interstellar runners received all the time. Communications
between star systems were infrequent at best, which meant
that those who were fortunate enough to receive a letter or
package often requested a description of their friends or
loved ones. Usually after opening whatever they had received however. “Your brother looks a lot like you,” Rebo
answered honestly, “although he has more gray in his hair.
He was nicely dressed, much as you are, and wore a lot of
gold jewelry.”
“Was there anything else?” Telvas demanded. “Anything
unusual about his body or the way that he moved?”
Rebo thought back to the meeting that had taken place
more than two years before. Unlike the present encounter it
had been brief. But there had been something distinctive
about the other brother’s movements. “Yes, your brother
had a pronounced limp.”
“Ah,” Telvas replied thoughtfully. “So he still has the
leg . . . I know this conversation must seem strange to you,
but sufﬁce it to say that my brother and I had what you might
call a business disagreement, which culminated in an injury to
his leg. I had assumed that the medicos would remove it.
“So, tell me, Citizen Rebo,” the merchant said, forming a
steeple with his ﬁngers. “What was your impression of my
brother? I haven’t seen him in many years. Is he a nice man?”
Rebo summoned up a picture of a man with hard eyes,
slightly overripe lips, and freshly powdered skin. A man
who looked like he’d been a killer once, but currently considered himself to be above that sort of thing, and hoped to
leave the previous him behind. But did it make sense to say
that? No, the runner thought to himself, and was about to
lie when Telvas produced three gold cronos and pushed
them across the desk. It was a gratuity, and a generous one,

10

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

which would make a nice addition to the account that Rebo
maintained with the runner’s guild. “Take them,” the merchant ordered, “and put them in your pocket. Then give me
your answer—and not the one you think I want to hear.”
Rebo slid the coins off into a palm, felt their reassuring
weight, and stashed them in one of the many pockets that
lined the inside of his jacket. With that accomplished the
runner looked straight into the other man’s eyes. “I think
your brother is an extremely dangerous man.”
The merchant nodded soberly. “So, that being the case,
would you open the box?”
Rebo looked down at the seemingly innocent box and
back up again. “No, sir. I wouldn’t.”
“But what if it contains a peace offering?” the other man
insisted. “What then? I feel bad about what happened to
my brother’s leg and would like to make it up to him.”
The runner shrugged. “Your brother didn’t strike me as a
man who makes peace offerings, but the choice is yours.”
“Yes, I suppose it is,” Telvas replied. “Thank you for delivering the box. And thank you for the advice. Feva will see
you to the gate.”
Rebo stood. “Is there a rear entrance?”
Telvas nodded understandingly. “Yes, there is. Tell Feva,
and she will take you there.”
Rebo withdrew after that, discovered that Feva had appeared in the hall, and glanced back over his shoulder as she
closed the door. The box remained on the surface of the
desk, and Telvas continued to stare at it.
The runner slipped out through the back gate ten minutes later, was pleased when none of the watchmen stationed
there showed the least bit of interest in him, and started
down the street. Rebo had walked about a hundred feet, and
was just about to cross a street, when he heard a dull thump

RUNNER

11

and looked back in time to see a puff of smoke shoot out of
a window. The study? Yes, he thought so. There were cries
of alarm, followed by hysterical screams, and Rebo knew
that Telvas was dead.
The runner paused to take a long slow look around. Was
there another runner lurking in the area? A man or woman
hired to conﬁrm the merchant’s death and carry a message
back to his brother? There wasn’t any sign of one, but that
didn’t mean much, so Rebo sauntered away. It was a nice
day, a proﬁtable day, but one that left him with an unfathomable question: How could such an apparently smart man
be so stupid?
Even though Lanni Norr was a stranger to the city, the

marketplace was easy to ﬁnd. First, because at least half of
the trafﬁc ﬂowing into Seros was headed there, and second,
because once the sensitive drew close enough she could
smell the rich amalgam of spices, fried food, and angen feces
that scented the air around it.
Then, as she entered the market, even more senses came
into play. There were racks of colorful fabrics, bins ﬁlled
with vegetables, tables covered with jewelry, booths hung
with amulets, racks of handmade clothing, piles of woven
baskets, bags ﬁlled with white nuts, reels of hand-twisted
rope, trays loaded with fragrant candles, display boards covered with wicked-looking knives and so much more that
one couldn’t hope to see all of it in a single day. And there
were sounds, too. The rumble of a thousand haggling voices
was punctuated by the squawks, snorts, and squeals of caged
angens, the incessant shouts of vendors who never stopped
hawking their wares, the ring of hammers on metal, the
wail of a lost child, and occasional snatches of music.
But there was more, much more, for Norr at least, who

12

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

unlike 99 percent of the people swirling about her could see
the separate energy ﬁelds that each individual emitted,
catch glimpses of the discarnate spirits who ﬂitted through
the area intent on errands of their own, and was constantly
buffeted by waves of projected emotion. Not because she
sought to experience such things, but because her ancestors
had been genetically engineered to pick up on other people’s
emotions, manipulate small objects from a distance, heal
the sick, and communicate with the dead.
As Norr made her way through the market, she was exposed to continual bursts of love, hate, greed, fear, lust, and
happiness as those about her wrestled with what fellow sensitives referred to as the holy trinity: money, sex, and
power—the basic drives behind most human activity, including hers. Because it took money to survive, which was
why the sensitive had been forced to emerge from hiding
and make the long, uncomfortable trek into Seros.
So, unpleasant though the task was, Norr wandered the
long, tight aisles until she spotted the sign she’d been looking for. Most of the city’s population were functionally illiterate, so a large replica of a quill had been hung over the
booth, and therefore over the scribe who sat on a stool beneath it.
Like most of his ilk, the bespectacled clerk was a member
of the so called A-strain, meaning the 80 percent of humans
also referred to as norms. Most had black hair, olive-colored
skin, and long, slender bodies. There were exceptions, of
course, genetic throwbacks to the days hundreds of thousands of years before, when people came in a rainbow of colors. Such individuals were rare however.
This specimen sported a bowl cut, a pair of thick handground lenses that were perched on the very tip of his nose,
and radiated smug superiority. His aura ﬂickered and mor-

RUNNER

13

phed into something like apprehension as Norr approached
the counter. Because even though the young woman with
the pack, the long wooden staff, and the knee-high boots
looked innocent enough, she had the large dark eyes, high
cheekbones, and narrow face of a sensitive. A breed that the
scribe, like many others, had reason to fear. Not because of a
personal experience with one, but because they were said to
read minds, and the wordsmith had things to hide. Like his
tendency to mentally undress almost every woman he encountered. In fact he had already stripped Norr, noting that
her breasts were too small for his taste, when she arrived in
front of his counter. The clerk swallowed the lump that
threatened to ﬁll his throat and struggled to speak. “Yes?”
he croaked. “Can I help you?”
Norr couldn’t read minds, but she could sense the emotions that surrounded the man and was willing to take advantage of them. “You are a very naughty man,” she said
experimentally, and knew she had scored when the scribe’s
face turned bright red.
“I-I-I’m sorry,” the wordsmith stuttered. “I didn’t mean
anything by it.”
“Good,” Norr replied soothingly. “Apology accepted.
Perhaps you can help me.”
“I’ll certainly try,” the clerk replied eagerly, pleased to
get off the hook so easily. “What do you need? A letter
perhaps?”
“No,” Norr replied deliberately. “I could write that myself. What I need is some advertising.”
“Ah,” the scribe responded happily, “a ﬂyer should do it!
I’ll write one up, send it over to the guild’s workshop, and
you’ll have ﬁve hundred copies by noon tomorrow. The
press is broken again, but the apprentices can copy it by
hand. The practice will do them good.”

14

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Thanks,” Norr said cautiously. “But how much would
that cost?”
“Oh, about a hundred and ﬁfty gunars,” the wordsmith
replied airily, “but well worth the price.”
“Perhaps,” Norr said agreeably, conscious of the fact that
she had only a hundred gunars in her purse. “However I’m
looking for something a bit more economical.”
The bright red money lust that surrounded the scribe
ﬂickered and started to fade. “Yes, well, I suppose we could
use grafﬁti instead. For seventy-ﬁve gunars our specialists
could paint one-line messages onto two hundred and ﬁfty
highly visible walls throughout the city.”
Norr looked surprised. “You mean people pay for that
stuff?”
“Of course,” the wordsmith said matter-of-factly. “We
run into freelancers from time to time, or lose messages
when a citizen slaps a fresh coat of paint over our work,
but it doesn’t take long for them to see the error of their
ways. Especially after a couple of heavies drop by to say
‘hello.’ ”
“Okay,” Norr agreed reluctantly. “Two hundred and ﬁfty
locations sounds good. But how many words to a line?”
“Ten,” the scribe replied succinctly.
“I need more,” Norr insisted, as she counted them in her
head. “Seventeen to be precise.”
“That’s going to cost you ﬁve gunars,” the clerk warned
primly.
“Not necessarily,” the sensitive countered as she leaned
forward. “Remember that apology? What if your superiors
were aware of what you’ve been up to?”
The clerk’s supervisor happened to be a woman, and he
could imagine what would happen if she knew that he had
undressed her hundreds of times. There were worse assign-

RUNNER

15

ments than the market, much worse, and he had no desire to
receive one. Ink-stained ﬁngers reached for a hand-sharpened
quill, which the scribe dipped into a disreputable-looking
bottle, and held poised above a blank sheet of paper. “Okay,
seventeen. What are they?”
Norr looked off into space as she recited them. “Come see
the famous sensitive Lanni Norr communicate with the
dead Friday at eight, in the actor’s guild.”
“That’s eighteen words.”
“Okay,” Norr said nonchalantly. “Make it eighteen then.”
The scribe’s pen made a scritching sound as he transferred the words to a piece of tan parchment. The sensitive
noticed that each letter was formed with the perfection of an
ancient printing machine and marveled at how precise the
man was. It was evident that he enjoyed his work because as
he wrote the color of his aura changed from red to a harmonious blue. “That will be seventy-ﬁve gunars,” the wordsmith said as he blotted the paper. “Payable in advance.”
“I’ll give you forty up front, and the rest when the messages actually appear,” Norr replied.
The scribe swore under his breath. “All right . . . But a
heavy will show up Friday to collect, so you’d better be
ready to pay.”
“I will be,” Norr replied conﬁdently and counted gunars
out onto the surface of the counter. “By the way, this will be
a demonstration of psychic phenomena rather than some
sort of show. I think you should come.”
“Thank you,” the wordsmith answered politely. “But I’m
busy that night.”
“Okay,” Norr said as she prepared to leave. “But your
wife is there by your side. She says that her death wasn’t the
least bit painful, she’s happy on the spirit plane, and you
should stop grieving for her.”

16

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

No one knew about the true extent to which the scribe
missed his wife, and he hadn’t mentioned her death to the
young woman, so how did she know? Tears welled up in the
clerk’s eyes, and he used a tattered sleeve to wipe them away.
He opened his mouth to speak, to ask Norr what his wife
looked like now, but the sensitive was gone.
Because the monastery had been built hundreds of years

before, back when Seros was little more than a settlement, it
occupied a piece of prime real estate atop one of the hills
marking the city’s eastern boundary. The complex was surrounded by high walls, which the brotherhood said had
been built to keep ignorance at bay, but had practical value
as well, for hardly a month passed without an attempt to
break in and steal the gold that was rumored to be kept
there. There wasn’t any gold, of course, but the monastery
did contain some precious artifacts, which was one of the
reasons why the Dib Wa (iron men) patrolled the walls. The
other reason, the person each of the warriors was sworn to
protect with his life, threw a door open and bounded onto
the surface of a large ﬂat roof.
The guards smiled indulgently as the ten-year-old boy
ran in circles, waved his arms, and sent a ﬂock of white
wings ﬂapping into the air. It was a daily ritual and one of
the few unstructured moments of the youngster’s day. He
wore a pillbox-shaped red hat like those favored by the
adult members of his sect, a matching knee-length jacket,
and black trousers. And, because Tra Lee was widely believed to be the reincarnated spirit of Nom Maa, a muchrevered teacher who had entered the spirit realms a dozen
years earlier, all the Dib Wa bowed. Not to the boy, but to
the man they believed he would become, and the role that
“the Divine Wind” was destined to play in the future.

RUNNER

17

Because, assuming that the reading of Nom Maa’s death
poem was correct, the time had come for a heavenly rebirth, meaning the reemergence of the Saa or “Way,” which
would serve as an important counterbalance against what
the monks saw as a steady slide into barbarity. The only
problem being that the competing black hat sect claimed
that Tra Lee was an imposter, and insisted that a lad raised
under their control was the real Nom Maa. But if such matters were of concern to Tra Lee, the little boy showed no
sign of it as he ran along the top of the walls, played games
of his own devising, and shouted orders to imaginary
friends.
The period of freedom was all too brief, however, and it
wasn’t long before Lee’s spiritual tutor, an avuncular monk
named Suu Qwa, rang a tiny bell. Lee ignored the tinkling
sound at ﬁrst, hoping for one of the rare occasions on which
Qwa might grant him some extra time, but the noise continued. Finally, shoulders slumped in defeat, the boy walked
across the roof to the point where his tutor waited. “So, little one,” the monk said softly, “where will we meet today?”
It was a game that the two of them played every day and
Lee brightened at the prospect of it. Although he had to
take part in the lesson, he could choose where it would be
taught, and delighted in forcing Qwa to teach in all manner
of unlikely locations. The only problem was that it was getting hard to come up with new venues. The youngster
looked around, spotted the coop where the specially bred
carrier ﬂits were kept, and pointed a grubby ﬁnger in that
direction. “Up there . . . On the roof.”
Qwa bowed deeply. “The roof it will be. Would your
majesty like me to boost you up there? Or will you climb?”
Lee eyed the structure but couldn’t see any way to scale
the walls. “It appears that I will need a boost.”

18

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Yes,” Qwa said as he accompanied the youngster to the
coop. “All of us need help from time to time. Many are
willing—but how to choose?”
Lee knew that the lesson was under way and responded
accordingly. “The correct individual will not only have the
desire to help, but motivations consistent with key goals,
and possess the skills or tools required to complete the task.”
“Excellent,” Qwa said approvingly as he boosted the boy
up onto the roof. “In spite of the abundant evidence to the
contrary, it appears that you pay attention once in a while.”
There was a momentary disturbance as the birds ﬂuttered around their cage and cooed to each other. Most had
settled down by the time the tutor hoisted himself up onto
the gradually slanting surface. It was covered with droppings, and Lee had already claimed the cleanest spot. He
grinned knowingly.
But it was difﬁcult if not impossible to get a rise out of
the monk, who squatted on his haunches and eyed his student with the same calm gaze that he always manifested.
“Today I would tell you of a village and the monk who
lived there. One night there was a loud disturbance outside
his hut. He got up and opened the door to ﬁnd that a man
and the local midwife were standing on his stoop. Both individuals poured out their hearts to the monk, and it wasn’t
long before the situation became clear. The man’s wife was
pregnant, but the baby was in a poor position, and the midwife believed that while she could save one of the two, there
was very little chance that both would survive. The man favored his wife, but the midwife argued for the infant, both
calling upon the monk to render a decision. Which view
was correct?”
Lee considered the problem for a moment. “The man was
correct.”

RUNNER

19

Qwa raised an eyebrow. “Why? The midwife argued that
while sad, a new life must always take precedence over an
old life, for such is the natural order of things.”
“That is true,” Lee answered, “so far as it goes. But the
monk had a responsibility to look beyond natural cycles to
the greater good. If the woman were to die not only would
the man lose his wife, but her other children would lose
their mother, and all she might have taught them.”
Qwa nodded approvingly. “That was well said, Excellency. You are both an excellent student and a teacher.
Please allow me to take this opportunity to thank you for all
I have learned from my contact with you and to say a reluctant good-bye. There are many paths, and now ours must
part.”
Lee felt something heavy drop into the bottom of his
stomach. The youth had only the vaguest memories of his
real family and had come to regard Qwa and his other instructors as a group of uncles. Each brought something
unique to his life, and if he lost one of them, it would be difﬁcult to ﬁll the gap. He frowned. “Why do you say that?
Are you leaving?”
“No,” Qwa answered, “but you are. The ﬁnal test awaits.
The time has come for you to travel to the holy city of CaCanth.”
Lee felt fear mixed with a sense of excitement. He didn’t
want to part company with Qwa, or the rest of his tutors,
but not a day went by that he didn’t look out over the city of
Seros and wish that he could walk its dusty streets. And CaCanth was on the planet Thara, everyone knew that, which
meant he would get to ride in a spaceship! The very thought
of it made his pulse pound. “You must accompany me, Master Qwa! I command it.”
“It is true that you command many things,” the monk

20

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

answered gently, “but this is not one of them. It will be a
long, dangerous journey, and special arrangements must be
made to ensure your safe arrival. My place is here.”
“But what if I’m not Nom Maa?” the boy demanded heatedly. “I’ll fail the test, the black hats will control the Saa,
and your efforts will be for naught.”
“Ah, but you are the Divine Wind,” Qwa answered
serenely, “and therefore have nothing to fear.”
A cloud chose that moment to pass in front of the sun, a
momentary darkness fell over the land, and Lee felt a chill
run down his spine.
The tattoo parlor was a small dingy little shop with two

workstations. Rebo sat in one of them, his back to the
frowsy artist, as she added a new image to the map that already occupied the upper portion of his back. Most of the
interstellar runners wore them, not because they had to, but
because they wanted to, as a way of memorializing successful
runs. Some even went so far as to will their skins to the
guild, which typically had sections of the artwork removed,
and fashioned into lampshades or other decorative objects.
They were the exceptions of course, since most of the star
runners died obscure deaths on remote planets, where they
were stripped of their valuables before being unceremoniously dumped into a ravine, bog, or unmarked grave. Until
that ﬁnal moment they lived in the hope that they would
make it back to whatever world they called home before
making the run from which no one could return. Not in the
ﬂesh at any rate—which was what the tattoo artist was focused on.
The pain was intense, but rather than attempt to push it
away, Rebo had learned to accept it. More than that to go
beyond it, to a place where he was only dimly aware of the

RUNNER

21

discomfort as the relentless needle pushed ink in under the
surface of his skin. During moments like that the runner
entered the equivalent of a reverie, reliving moments from
the past, or entering a fantasy world where there was no
such thing as pain. And that was why Rebo was slow to respond when a voice called his name. “Citizen Rebo? My
name is Suu Qwa. Brother Qwa. The people at the runner’s
guild told me I could ﬁnd you here.”
The words served to bring the world back into focus, and
the pain came with it. Rebo frowned as the needle plunged
into his back yet again. The monk’s head had been shaved, a
simple red robe hung from his skinny shoulders, and he
looked like he was thirty or so. The runner found that his
throat was dry. “No offense, Brother Qwa, but I’m kind of
busy at the moment. Could this wait?”
The monk shook his head. “No, I’m afraid it can’t. A
ship is due in four days. We hope to send a package out on
it. So, assuming that the vessel actually shows up, we need
to hire a runner.”
Rebo understood the problem. Or part of it anyway.
What little interstellar commerce there was took place via a
ﬂeet of spaceships that dated back to one of the last major
technocivilization. Because they were fully automated, the
ships continued to link the far-ﬂung star systems together
long after the culture that created them had been destroyed.
Now, thousands of years later, the spaceships were dying
because no one had the knowledge or the means to repair
them. The result was that there were fewer ships with each
passing year, it was no longer possible to reach some destinations directly, and entire solar systems had been left isolated. Just one of the reasons why people hired runners to
carry their messages rather than handling the chore themselves.

22

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The pain was even more intense now, and tiny beads of perspiration had appeared on the runner’s forehead. “Look,” Rebo
said, “I just ﬁnished a run and I’m tired. I suggest that your
return to the guild and ask for another recommendation.”
The monk looked unconvinced. “You are the best. That’s
what your peers say. We will double your fee.”
Rebo looked the monk in the eye. “Double? That’s a lot of
money. This package must be important.”
“It is,” Qwa conﬁrmed. “Come to the monastery tonight.
We will show you the package, and assuming that you agree
to handle the consignment, pay half of what we owe you up
front.”
“And the other half?” the runner inquired.
“You will receive that when you deliver the package to
the city of CaCanth on Thara,” Qwa answered.
The name startled Rebo, his body gave an involuntary
jerk, and the needle went deep. Thara! The planet on which
he had been born, left at the age of twelve, and never gone
back to since. Was his mother still alive? It seemed unlikely,
but without knowing it, the monk had hit on the one thing
that would change the runner’s mind. Rebo’s mother had
worked twelve hours a day to obtain enough money to buy
his apprenticeship, and now, if he could buy her some comfort in her old age, the journey would be worth it. “All
right,” the runner replied, “I’ll see you tonight.”
The monk left, the artist dabbed at her bloody work, and
the torture continued.
The hall maintained by the actor’s guild was second only

to the local amphitheater in terms of the number of people
that it could hold, and Lanni Norr peered through dusty red
velvet curtains as the citizens of Seros ﬁled in. Many carried
cushions to soften the unpadded seats, blankets to protect

RUNNER

23

them from the evening chill, and baskets of food. And,
judging from the steady stream of people, it appeared that
her advertising campaign had been a success. The actor’s
guild would get 10 percent of the gate, but assuming she
could ﬁll 80 percent of the seats, the sensitive ﬁgured she
would take in enough money to defray her expenses for a
year. She would come up with a disguise, fade into the
countryside, and rent a cottage. Each day would be spent
reading, painting, or simply doing nothing. That was
Norr’s dream—and the only reason she was willing to expose herself to the dangers associated with the impending
performance.
Because while clairaudience was one thing, and the occasional demonstration of telekinesis was another, a fullblown trance was something else. Once the sensitive exited
her body and allowed a discarnate soul to enter it, she would
be helpless until the entity left. Yes, she had spent her last
few gunars on a bodyguard, but what if the entire audience
stormed the stage as had happened in the past? Norr had
been present the night that an unruly crowd had accused
her mentor of witchcraft and subsequently beaten the old
woman to death. Norr had been forced to travel for more
than a hundred miles before she ﬁnally located a cemetery
that was willing to accept the sensitive’s remains.
Someone touched Norr’s shoulder and she jumped. It was
the heavy named Loro and he was huge. The variant stood a
full seven feet tall, weighted close to 350, and looked as
though his muscles had muscles. Like all his kind, the bodyguard was the result of the same sort of genetic tinkering
that had produced Norr, except that his body was designed
to cope with heavy-gravity environments, where massive
bones and big muscles were required to survive. Over time
some of the big brutes had been absorbed into the general

24

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

population, where they often wound up as laborers, watchmen, and freelance bodyguards. Loro’s voice consisted of a
deep rumble. “Where do you want me?”
“Between me and everyone else,” Norr replied fervently.
“Don’t let anyone up on the stage. Especially while I’m in
trance. Do you understand?”
The last was said as if the concept might be too complicated for a heavy to understand. Both norms and variants
had a tendency to assume that heavies were stupid, but that
was absurd since the scientists who designed the enormous
humanoids had been trying to create intelligent workers.
Loro was so used to the bias he didn’t even take offense anymore. “Of course,” the heavy replied. “I’ll take care of it.”
“Thank you,” Norr replied gratefully. “Now, if you
would be so kind as to take your place out on the stage, I
think your very presence will help keep the rowdies under
control.”
Loro nodded, pulled one of the curtains aside, and
stepped through the resulting gap. The sensitive saw that
two-thirds of the seats were full, and sought the momentary
solitude of her dressing room. It was her habit to meditate
for a few minutes prior to a demonstration, and even that
small amount of distance would help reduce the pressure
from the multitudinous thought forms that pressed in
around her.
Meanwhile, out in the audience, there was a stir as a
metal man entered the hall. He wasn’t real, of course, but a
replica of a man, one of dozens that had appeared on the
streets of Seros during the past couple of years. Nobody
liked them. Partly because they were machines, and there
was a segment of society that believed that machines were
dangerous, but mostly because of their incessant preaching
on behalf of a group called the Techno Society. In fact,

RUNNER

25

hardly a day went by when one or more of the androids
couldn’t be found near the public market droning on about
the beneﬁts of technology.
And sometimes, for reasons known only to them, the
metal men would appear at public events like this one. Only
rather than preach they were content to sit and observe. Like
the rest of his electromechanical brethren, the robot wore a
hooded robe that revealed little more than the sculptured
planes of his alloy face and hung all the way to the ﬂoor. The
machine whirred as it brushed past people who had already
taken their seats and plopped down between a teacher and a
butcher. Neither was especially pleased, and both went to
extremes to avoid contact with the creature.
Each attendee had been given a blank square of paper on
which they had been invited to write their name, make their
mark, or jot down a message to a dead loved one. There was
a stir as the ushers called for the audience to pass the billets
to the center aisle.
The metal man handed his note to the teacher, who took
the moment required to read it, and was surprised to see
some extremely neat printing. It read, “Milos Lysander.”
Did that mean the machine was named Lysander? There
was no way to know, and it was none of his business, so the
teacher passed all the pieces of paper that had come his way
down to the center aisle, where they were collected.
The lights dimmed, and the curtains opened, to reveal a
young woman sitting on a tall stool with a table at her side.
Lamplights, cleverly directed her way through the use of
lenses, lit a pretty face. She had long dark hair, large brown
eyes, and extremely fair skin. But slender though she was,
the sensitive projected an aura of strength, and her eyes
ﬂashed as she looked about the room. “Good evening. My
name is Lanni Norr. I have good news for you . . . There is

26

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

no such thing as death. Only a transition from one plane of
existence to another. I am not a witch, nor a magician, but a
member of a small group of people who refer to themselves
as sensitives. Just as phibs were bred to swim, and wings
were born to ﬂy, we were created to facilitate communications between this world and the next.”
Norr emphasized her words by seizing control of the
energy in the room, shaping it to her purpose, and reaching out to seize a black skullcap. It belonged to a man
seated in the very front row, which meant that everyone could
watch the object rise into the air and hang suspended over
the man’s head. Its owner looked up in astonishment,
clapped a hand to his mostly bald pate, and said, “What
the hell?”
A twitter ran through the crowd. One of the people
seated directly behind the bald man stood and swept an arm
back and forth above the cap to see if it was suspended by a
thread. There was no reaction from the hat other than to rise
even higher, move sideways through the air, and settle itself
onto the skeptic’s head. The audience member examined the
cap, shook his head in amazement, and returned the object
to its owner.
The crowd loved the byplay, and Norr could feel the
amount of positive energy in the room increase. “So,” she
continued, “I hope that you will relax and open your minds
to the possibility that there are forms of energy and planes
of existence beyond the physical realm in which we currently dwell. Contact with those in the next world is never
certain, but assuming that we are fortunate enough to construct a momentary bridge between the two planes, listen
carefully to what I say. In many cases, though not all, friends
and loved ones will attempt to communicate some fact or

RUNNER

27

incident that only the two of you would be aware of as proof
that they still exist and love you.
“During this process one or more of them may take temporary control of my physical body in order to speak directly. Should that occur, please remember that I am the
channel, not the spirit entity, and have no control over what
he or she may say.
“Please remain in your seats throughout the demonstration, and do not approach the stage, or my friend Loro will
be forced to reseat you.”
The heavy stepped out of the shadows at that point,
crossed his arms over a massive chest, and eyed the audience. Everyone got the point.
“Okay,” Norr said, “if someone will bring me the billets,
we will begin. Please note the fact that I had no way to
know who would come tonight—and the messages you submitted have been on display throughout the process.”
A basket ﬁlled with scraps of paper was brought forward
and placed on the table next to Norr’s stool. The sensitive
reached in, ran her ﬁngers through the billets, and stopped
when her hand started to tingle. She pulled a piece of paper
out of the pile without looking at it, crumpled the parchment into a ball, and held it in her ﬁst. Then, blanking her
mind, she let what she thought of as “the other side” take
over. Words and images began to appear, and she passed
them on. “Is there a Loki in the audience? Your mother is
here . . . She says that you are correct about Del. He is a
good man, and it would be a mistake to let this one get
away.”
The woman named Loki looked shocked, the audience
chuckled, and there was a scattering of applause. More than
a dozen messages followed. Most contained at least one or

28

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

two items that were evidential, and everything was going
well, until Norr dipped her hand into the basket and chose
the next billet. What felt like electricity ran all the way up
her arm, the sensitive felt cold air embrace her, and knew
that a spirit being was about to take control of her body. It
soon became apparent that the invading entity wasn’t used
to a female form and didn’t especially like it. But what he
did approve of however was the prospect of a captive audience. He took control of her voice box and spoke in a voice
so low that it hurt. “Good evening. My name is Milos
Lysander. Prior to my death I was a scientist, a philosopher,
and the primary force behind the Techno Society.”
Most of crowd sat motionless, not quite sure of what was
happening, or why. But the metal man was electriﬁed by the
announcement. The robot came to his feet, activated all of
its onboard recording devices, and ignored the complaints
directed at him by those seated behind him. “The mission of
the Techno Society,” Lysander continued, “is to literally reshape the future of mankind. More than that, to use technology as the means to reunite the pieces of a once-great
empire and lift the scattered remnants of humanity back
into the light of reason. How will we accomplish that?
Well, I will tell you. First . . .”
As the scientist continued to speak there was a mutter of
disapproval, followed by a scattering of insults, and a heartfelt chorus of boos. Norr could feel the sentiment in the
room start to shift and struggled to reassert control over her
body as pieces of food started to ﬂy. A well-aimed piece of
overripe fruit hit Norr in the chest, caused Lysander to
pause momentarily, and gave the sensitive the opportunity
that she’d been looking for. She clamped down, forced the
scientist out, and raised her hands in an attempt to calm the
crowd. It didn’t work. The rowdier members of the audience

RUNNER

29

liked throwing food at her, the rest were leaving, and the
ushers had produced clubs, which they swung freely.
Loro urged Norr to retreat backstage, which she did. A
heavy was waiting there to collect the money she owed to
writer’s guild and left the moment he was paid. Norr knew
she should count the take to ensure that the actor’s guild
hadn’t taken more money than they were entitled to but
didn’t want to take the time. The crowd was chanting
something ugly, the entity named Lysander frightened her,
and negative emotions converged from every side. With her
bodyguard in attendance the sensitive slipped out through
the back door. The metal man was waiting in the shadows,
and when the twosome left, the machine followed along
behind.

TWO
™

The Planet Anafa

In order to reestablish man’s dominion over the stars, and save
humanity from barbarity, it may be necessary to carry out barbarous acts against those who resist our efforts. The essential
irony of this is not lost upon the governing council, which regrets the necessity to use violence.
—Techno Society Operations Manual,
Section One: Guiding Principles

The milky white light produced by the planet’s twin moons

ﬁltered down through a thin layer of clouds to bathe Seros
in a ghostly glow. There were no streetlights, but as the
coach followed the winding road that led to the top of
monastery hill, Rebo could look out over the city and see
thousands of buttery rectangles, each representing a window. It was easy to imagine the warm homey scenes within
and the runner felt a momentary sense of envy as the vehicle’s steel-shod wheels bounced through a pothole, and a
pack of feral dogs emerged from the thick roadside underbrush to run alongside. That made the angens nervous, and
Rebo felt the carriage surge forward as the animals tried to
escape their pursuers. The driver hollered, “Whoa!” and
hauled back on the reins, but to no avail.

RUNNER

31

But the runner had hired two apprentices to accompany
him, and the youngsters knew what to do. Both were armed
with smooth-bore weapons. Twin ﬂashes strobed the darkness as the youngsters ﬁred, dogs yelped pitifully as the
buckshot tore into them, and those that could ran for cover.
The angens settled down after that, and Rebo felt conﬁdent
enough to remove his hand from the Crosser.
It wasn’t long before the carriage swung through a ﬁnal
turn, half a dozen members of the Dib Wa emerged from the
surrounding gloom, and orders were shouted up to the driver.
The conveyance jerked to a halt, Rebo opened the door, and
jumped to the ground. The runner held his hands away from
his body as a warrior approached, located his weapons in
record time, and removed both from their holsters.
Then, satisﬁed that the visitor had been defanged, a second Dib Wa led Rebo to a man-sized gate that had been set
into a larger gate. The runner stepped over the four-inchhigh crosspiece at the bottom of the structure and followed
the guard into the monastery’s shadowy interior. Rebo felt
rather than saw a distinct change, since it was just as dark inside the walls as it was on the outside. But there was no denying the profound sense of peace that pervaded the monastery,
a feeling so strong it seemed to emanate from the structures
around him the way accumulated heat radiates from a stone.
Though born on Thara, the planet on which the Way was
headquartered, the runner had never been especially religious. Perhaps that was due to the fact that the ﬁsherfolk of
Lorval put their faith in a complicated hierarchy of nature
spirits rather than a single god, or maybe it was because the
runner had left home at the age of twelve. Whatever the reason the result was the same. Though conscious of the Way,
and its importance to millions of practitioners, Rebo had
never developed an interest in it.

32

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Golden light spilled out through an open door to make a
path across the gray ﬂagstones. A man appeared and stood
silhouetted in the opening. It wasn’t until the runner was
only a few feet away that he recognized Suu Qwa. “Welcome,” the monk said, bowing deeply. “Please follow me.”
In spite of the fact that he was an invited guest, the Dib
Wa escort continued to tag along behind Rebo, and the runner wondered why an ostensibly peaceful monastery needed
so much security. Perhaps the rumors were true—and the
basement was packed ﬂoor to ceiling with gold ingots.
Various parts of the temple were connected by a maze of
passageways, and there were frequent turns, but if the
monks hoped to confuse the runner, they failed. Not only
did Rebo have a memory worthy of a tax collector, he had an
excellent sense of direction, and knew he could ﬁnd his way
out of the complex on his own should that become necessary.
Finally, after what he estimated to be a quarter-mile
walk, the runner was ushered into a large room. One end
was dominated by a twelve-foot-tall likeness of the ascended
being Teon. He had eight arms, and eight hands, each of
which held a symbol. The teacher sat as he always did, with
his feet on top of his thighs, a feat the runner knew he
wouldn’t be able to duplicate even with a gun to his head.
The center of the space was dominated by a circle, representing the eternal cycle of birth, death, and rebirth. Seated
within its embrace was an elderly man and a young boy.
Both wore nearly identical outﬁts that consisted of red
pillbox-style hats, matching robes, and leather sandals.
Rebo noticed that Qwa bowed to the youngster ﬁrst.
“Greetings, Excellencies,” Qwa said respectfully. “Please allow me to introduce Jak Rebo.”
Being unsure of the correct etiquette, the runner delivered a short jerky bow, said, “It’s a pleasure to meet you,”

RUNNER

33

and eyed the rather thin pillow that awaited him. Once on
the ﬂoor Rebo sat with his legs crossed in a poor imitation
of the Teon-like posture the monks adopted.
“My name is Dak Babukas,” the elder monk announced,
“and the young man to my left is presently referred to as Tra
Lee, although we believe that he has lived many previous
lives, including his recent incarnation as a teacher called
Nom Maa. Now, after years of preparation, the time has
come for Tra to make the journey to the city of CaCanth on
the planet Thara. Once there he will undergo certain tests,
and assuming that he passes them, will take his rightful
place as Inwa, or leader of leaders. Your task is to get him
there alive.”
Rebo frowned. Though interested in a trip to Thara, there
was a considerable difference between delivering a package
and a person. Of course such runs were not unknown. In fact,
he had handled two such assignments during his career. And,
because both individuals had been difﬁcult to get along with,
the runner had sworn that he would never accept such a commission again. More than that, Rebo sensed something ﬁshy
about the proposal and looked the older monk in the eye.
“You have more security than the governor does. So, why hire
me? Why not send a squad of your warriors along as escorts?”
The boy remained silent as the adult monks exchanged
glances and Qwa spoke. “Our religion consists of two sects,
generally referred to as the red hats and the black hats, although the real differences are based on theology rather than
fashion. Twelve years ago the sixteenth Nom Maa passed
into spirit without naming a successor. That led to a power
vacuum, which resulted in competition between the two
sects and what amounts to an administrative stalemate.
However, now that Tra Lee has completed his training, he is
ready to take the throne.”

34

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Yes,” Babukas agreed, “except that the black hats claim
that one of their boys is the real Nom Maa, and based on
that assertion, believe that he should ascend the throne.”
“That’s correct,” Qwa put in, “and there’s more. The
black hats may seek to prevent the Divine Wind from reaching Thara.”
“May?” Rebo inquired pointedly. “Or will?”
“There is no way to know for sure,” Qwa replied carefully,
“but the odds favor some sort of assassination attempt.”
“Which brings us back to where we started,” the runner
said. “Why me?”
“Because an escort of Dib Wa would attract a lot of attention,” Babukas answered honestly. “There are thieves to
consider . . . and the black hats can muster as many warriors
as we can. But a father and son? No one is likely to notice
such a pair.”
“If I had a son, which I don’t,” the runner remarked, “he
wouldn’t be bald.”
“A wig has been prepared,” Qwa replied smoothly, “and
appropriate clothes would be provided as well.”
There was a moment of uncomfortable silence, which
was broken when Tra Lee spoke for the ﬁrst time. “I don’t
believe that Citizen Rebo is being entirely frank with us.
He was willing to accept the assignment until he learned
the true nature of the package involved. Now he has doubts.
So, Citizen Rebo, what can I do or say to convince you that
I will be a minimum amount of trouble?”
The runner looked into Tra Lee’s eyes and saw unexpected depths there. The little boy sounded more like an
adult than a nine- or ten-year-old. Were the monks correct?
Did Tra Lee’s body house the reincarnated body of a great
teacher? Or did the little boy seem wise beyond his years
solely because he had been raised to come across that way? It

RUNNER

35

was impossible to tell, but something about the youngster’s
seemingly sincere demeanor caused the runner to soften
slightly. Besides, Rebo did want to visit Thara, and the pay
was extremely good. He cleared his throat and addressed his
questions to Lee. “Would you follow my orders? And do so
quickly? Without question?”
The boy gazed unblinkingly into Rebo’s eyes. “So long as
your instructions are consistent with moral law, I will obey.”
The qualiﬁcation bothered the runner, but he couldn’t
imagine asking the lad to do something immoral, so he nodded. “All right then, I’ll take the commission. One thing
though . . . See if you can ﬁnd a boy who looks a lot like our
young friend here. Dress him for the part, parade him
about, and treat him like he’s the real deal. Maybe, if we’re
lucky, the black hats will believe that he’s still in Seros long
after our ship breaks orbit.”
“It shall be as you say,” Babukas replied. “When should
his majesty join you?”
“Tomorrow,” Rebo replied. “Figure out a low-key way to
deliver him to my guild. I’ll take it from there.”
“Excellent,” Qwa replied. “Would you care for some tea?
No? I will escort you out then. The ﬁrst half of your pay is
waiting in your carriage.”
Rebo rose, hoped the monks couldn’t tell how stiff he
was, and said good-bye to both Babukas and Lee. Later that
night the runner would return to Thara in his dreams, none
of which were good.
It was dark along the street, very dark, which was one of

the reasons why the locals retreated inside their homes and
locked their doors within minutes of sunset. The Market
Street Inn was no different. Lights glowed behind thick
panes of glass, but the front door was securely closed, and

36

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

presumably barred from within. A problem, but not an insurmountable one, assuming that this was the correct location.
Jevan Kane used a series of quick hand gestures to position his operatives, taking special care to post lookouts and
ensure that the back entrance was covered. Finally, satisﬁed
that no would be able to escape the structure without being
intercepted, Kane turned to the metal man who stood at his
elbow. “This is the place . . . You’re sure?”
Robots didn’t possess emotions, so the machine took no
offense. “Yes, sir. The sensitive handed something to the
heavy. He left, and she went inside.”
Kane pulled a hood down over his face and pulled a semiautomatic pistol out of his waistband. The eyes that stared
out through the precut holes were like chips of blue ice.
“Good. Depart the area immediately. I don’t want you and
your kind associated with this kind of activity.”
The machine backed into the darkness and was gone moments later. Kane gave a low whistle. A pair of hooded heavies appeared. They held a metal battering ram between
them. On a signal from Kane they approached the front
door, swung the ram back, and heaved it forward. There was
a loud crash, followed by the splintering of wood, and shouts
from within. The battering ram struck again, the beam that
barred the door broke in two, and what remained of the barrier ﬂew open. A man appeared in the opening. He was
armed with a double-barreled scattergun, which he ﬁred
into the night. One of the heavies cried out in pain and
brass arced away from Kane’s weapon as it bucked in his
hand. The reports were still dying away as the innkeeper fell
over backward.
Three operatives pushed through the doorway after that
and Kane heard more gunﬁre. The operative entered the

RUNNER

37

tiny lobby to ﬁnd the innkeeper’s wife huddled in a bloody
corner, while a guest who had the misfortune to be in the
wrong place at the wrong time lay a few feet away. That left
a sobbing maid. Tears ran down her acne-pitted face, and
her body shook with fear, as a heavy held her in his grasp.
“I’m looking for a sensitive,” Kane told her. “A young female. Which room is she in?”
“R-r-room three,” the maid stuttered.
“Thanks,” Kane said, and shot her in the chest. Blood
sprayed the heavy, who swore, and let go of her arm. The
body made a soft thump as it hit the ﬂoor.
“Room three must be upstairs,” one of the operatives
said, having just returned from a quick exploration of the
ground ﬂoor.
Boots thundered on worn treads as the invaders raced up
the stairs to the second ﬂoor, where they examined the numbers on each door. “Here it is!” someone shouted, and Kane
turned in that direction. “Open it,” he said tersely, “but
don’t shoot. We need her alive.”
The operative knew that, but nodded obediently, as a
heavy shoulder hit the door. It ﬂew open and Kane followed
his team inside. But outside of a single bed, a dilapidated
dresser, and a single chair the room was empty. Kane kicked
the chair and sent it crashing into a wall. “Damn! Damn!
Damn!”
Although the metal man had seen Norr enter, the android had been forced to leave long enough to make his report. It appeared that during that relatively short interval
the sensitive had slipped away. The question was why? Did
the young woman know that the Techno Society was looking for her? She was a psychic after all. Or was she simply
prudent? The sensitive had every reason to be concerned
about thieves—and might have left for that reason alone.

38

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“We need to leave,” one of the operatives said urgently.
“The guard will arrive shortly.”
Kane followed his men down into the street, heard the
distant sound of a police bugle, and the entire group melted
into the night. There was a clatter of hooves and loose
equipment as the guard arrived, but the street was empty,
and the shadows were mute.
The sun had been up for three hours, and the streets of

Seros were already bustling with activity as the old angen
plodded along its daily route. The ﬂatbed wagon creaked
and groaned as its steel-shod wooden wheels bumped
through a seemingly endless series of potholes, the casks
that contained the morning’s milk rattled accordingly, and
Tra Lee took his ﬁrst unescorted ride through the city. Now,
having looked down on Seros for so long, he was ﬁnally
amongst its buildings.
The prospect ﬁlled the youngster with both excitement
and fear. Because even though everyone assured Tra Lee that
he was actually an adult named Nom Maa, he felt like a little boy, and a lonely one at that. Saying good-bye to Master
Babukas, Master Qwa, and all the others had been extremely painful because they were the equivalent of family.
Even so the chance to escape the endless drudgery of his lessons and explore what he thought of as the real world held a
great deal of allure.
Lee’s thoughts were interrupted as the wagon jolted to a
stop, and the driver looked back over his shoulder. Though
unaware of the youngster’s identity, he believed in the Saa
(Way), and had agreed to deliver the boy as a favor to a
monk named Suu Qwa. “This is where you get off, son . . .
That’s the runner’s guild on the far side of the street. Watch
out for trafﬁc as you cross the street.”

RUNNER

39

Lee said, “Thank you,” and jumped off the tailgate. A
member of the Dib Wa, disguised to look like a street
sweeper, watched the boy cross the street and start up the
broad marble stairs. Once the Divine Wind entered the
building the warrior’s mission would be complete, and he
would leave.
As Lee made his way upward he took note of the ﬂuted
columns, and above them, an entablature into which the
words department of communications had been chiseled more than a thousand years before. Had the runner’s
guild been born there? Created by displaced civil servants?
Or was the fact that the guild was headquartered in that
particular building a matter of coincidence? Such were the
questions that Master Qwa might well have asked him. Not
with an eye to actually solving the mystery, but to encourage his student to question everything around him and try
to make sense of the universe.
Lee switched his attention to the teenage guards who
stood to either side of the large double doors. Beggars were
a continual problem, and one of the apprentices was already
moving to intercept the lad, when Lee spoke. “My name is
Dor, and I’m here to see my father, Jak Rebo.”
The apprentice had been warned to expect such a visitor
and ran a critical eye over the boy. He had black hair that
didn’t look quite right somehow, the kind of clothes that
the offspring of a rich merchant might wear, and didn’t bear
much of a resemblance to his father. But who knew? Perhaps
the lad took after his mother. “All right,” the guard said
grufﬂy. “Follow me.”
Lee followed the older boy into a huge lobby. The center
area was ﬁlled with an eclectic collection of worn chairs,
couches, and tables. About half were occupied by journeymen and masters. Most were awake, sipping their morning

40

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

caf and chatting with each other, but some were asleep. Or
unconscious. The entire area was strewn with empty bottles,
dirty plates, and stray pieces of clothing. Youngsters no
older than himself had been put to work collecting trash
and mopping the ﬂoor.
The guard led Lee over to a desk and mumbled something to a man seated behind the tall marble-faced counter.
The clerk peered down over the edge. He had narrow-set
eyes, a nose that looked as if it had been permanently ﬂattened by someone’s ﬁst, and cheeks that bore a two-day supply of black stubble. “Stay right there, boy . . . I’ll send for
your father.”
Lee nodded mutely, eyed the faded mural on the wall opposite him, and wondered if the scenes depicted there were
historically accurate or the product of some artist’s imagination. There was what appeared to be a star map, hundreds of
ﬁne silver lines that ran back and forth between solar systems, and the motto: “We bind the empire together.”
Rebo rounded a corner, saw Lee standing in front of the
reception counter, and was struck by how small he was. He
forced a smile. “Dor! It’s good to see you, boy! How’s your
mother?”
It took Lee a fraction of a second to react to the new
name. He turned, scampered toward Rebo the way he’d seen
other boys do, and was swept off his feet. “Good job,” the
runner said in a voice too low for anyone else to hear. “Just
stay by my side. We have some errands to run.”
Lee felt his feet hit the ﬂoor and hurried to keep up as the
runner escorted him back outside. It was a ﬁve-block walk
to the public market, and all of the youngster’s senses were
engaged as he absorbed the many sights, sounds, and smells
that the city had to offer. Rebo led Lee past countless tables
loaded with all manner of fascinating objects, and stopped

RUNNER

41

in front of a booth that specialized in children’s clothing.
The runner spoke to the proprietress, and it wasn’t long before Lee found himself outﬁtted with three sets of used but
extremely serviceable clothing. Rebo used his garments,
those that Qwa had chosen for him, as trade-ins. That annoyed Lee and the moment he left the curtained off changing area he hurried to make his displeasure known. “Citizen
Rebo . . .”
“Father, Dad, or sir, is acceptable,” Rebo put in. “Citizen
Rebo is not. Start over.”
“Father,” Lee said imperiously, “these clothes are used.”
“Yes, they are,” Rebo agreed mildly. “Which will help
you blend in. Follow me. You’ll need some personal items
plus a pack to carry them in.”
An hour later Lee found himself in possession of a nearly
full pack. In addition to some new underwear, he was now
the proud owner of a comb he didn’t really need as yet, a
new toothbrush, a washcloth, a towel, two bars of soap, a
metal mirror, four candles, six boxes of waterproofed
matches, a knife, fork, and spoon plus a metal mug, and two
brand-new blankets. They were double-thick and gray in
color.
“Why did you buy new blankets?” Lee inquired, as Rebo
helped him strap them to the bottom of the pack frame.
“There were plenty of used ones.”
“True,” the runner agreed, “but they were thin, not to
mention ﬁlthy, and blankets are extremely important. Later,
when we have time, we’ll sew them together to make a
sleeping bag.” So saying, Rebo turned away, leaving a surprised Lee to heft his own pack and carry it down the aisle.
It weighed a good twenty-ﬁve pounds, and while the
youngster wanted to complain, he was determined not to.
The next stop was the booth located directly below a

42

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

large papier-mâché globe that had been painted to look like
a free-ﬂoating eyeball complete with a black pupil and lots
of squiggly red veins. The oculist was a friendly sort who
helped Rebo sort through three baskets of handmade spectacles until the runner found some glasses that met his
needs. The last pair had been broken in a ﬁstﬁght, and while
Rebo could read without them, objects more than a hundred feet away were blurry.
With that out of the way the runner sought out a booth
hung with all manner of charms, amulets, and magical paraphernalia. All of which were useless pieces of junk insofar as
Brother Qwa and the rest of the brethren were concerned,
but which Tra Lee found to be fascinating, even though the
boy knew that true strength came from within.
Rebo might have agreed with that, but liked to cover his
bets, and always felt better when he had an edge. Having
completed a lengthy discussion with the proprietor, the
runner purchased an all-purpose amulet—which if properly
cared for—was guaranteed to protect its owner from the
skin pox, wild eye, stab wounds, night sweats, bad dreams,
poor digestion, and a host of other maladies. Money
changed hands, the runner secured the object around his
neck, and the errands continued.
The next stop on their morning rounds was an armorer’s
shop. It occupied a long narrow storefront. Racks of
weapons lined both walls and led to a counter in the back.
There were three other customers, all examining ﬁrearms
under the watchful gaze of a salesman, who was heavily
armed himself. A wise precaution in Seros.
Rebo nodded to the grizzled old man who emerged from
a back room to greet him and laid both of his weapons on
the counter. “I need ammo for these . . . Say ﬁve hundred
rounds for the Crosser, and ﬁfty for the Hogger.”

RUNNER

43

The armorer took the ten millimeter, released the ﬁfteenround magazine, and thumbed a cartridge onto the palm of
his hand. Then, bringing a small lens to bear, he eyed the
hand-loaded round. “Nice work, but mine is better. When
do you need them?”
“By tonight,” Rebo replied.
“Are you sure?” the shopkeeper inquired skeptically. “I’d
have to charge you an extra 10 percent for such a short
turnaround.”
Rebo nodded. “I’m sure. How ’bout the Hogger?”
The armorer traded weapons, broke the single-shot
weapon open, and withdrew a long cartridge that had a
blunt nose. “A .30-30,” the old man mused. “I don’t see a
whole lot of these. Sure, I can handle them. Come back
about six o’clock.”
Rebo was about to reply when he heard a swish, followed
by a solid thunk, as steel struck wood. Both men turned in
time to see Lee remove a second knife from the countertop
and throw it at the circular target that hung against the opposite wall. It penetrated the bull’s-eye one inch from the
ﬁrst blade and continued to vibrate. The old man raised an
eyebrow. “Your son is pretty good with a knife.”
“Yes,” Rebo said mildly, “he is. The little devil has been
practicing. I’ll take both of those knives. Let’s have a belt
sheath for one—and a forearm sheath for the other.”
Fifteen minutes later Rebo and the newly armed boy
stepped out into the sunlight. Lee knew that other boys his
age carried weapons, but had never been allowed to do so
himself, and was very conscious of the blades that the runner had purchased for him. He hooked his thumbs under
the pack’s straps and looked up at Rebo. “Thank you for the
knives, Father.”
The runner nodded. “You’re welcome. Use the belt knife

44

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

for eating, cutting rope, and other chores. Keep the other
blade hidden. Where did you learn to throw a knife like
that anyway?”
“I took martial arts classes one hour a day, three days a
week,” Lee replied. “It was fun.”
Odds were that the boy had never suffered so much as a
bloody nose and had no idea what it was like to participate
in a real ﬁght, but Rebo kept such thoughts to himself.
“Good. It’s nice to know that you can handle yourself. Come
on, let’s take that pack back to the guild and go ﬁnd some
lunch. I don’t know about you—but I’m hungry.”
As the two of them set off, a customer emerged from the
store behind them and squinted into the sun. Though
dressed in everyday attire, there was something about the
precision of his movements that suggested a military background. He waited for his quarry to establish a sufﬁcient
lead, stepped off the curb, and followed the pair west. The
word on the street was that the black hat sect would pay ﬁve
gunars for information leading to the apprehension of a boy
similar to the one up ahead. But was this the correct child?
Only time would tell.
Jevan Kane paused in front of a store, pretended to peer in

through the window, and took the opportunity to make sure
that no one had followed him. Because, while the Techno
Society maintained a run-down ofﬁce near the public market, the location of the organization’s actual headquarters
was a well-maintained secret, a secret intended not only to
conceal the extent of the society’s resources, but to keep the
government in the dark and prevent thievery. Thanks to
Milos Lysander and his followers, the group had recovered
thousands of high-tech artifacts over the years, and they
were valuable.

RUNNER

45

Satisﬁed that no one had followed him, Kane turned into
a narrow passageway and paused in front of a nine-foot-tall
barrier. It was made out of ornamental iron and could withstand the impact of a battering ram if necessary. There was a
distinct click as the operative pressed his thumb against a
print-sensitive pad, and the gate swung open. Kane stepped
through, heard a clanging sound as it closed behind him, and
continued on his way.
A security camera mounted over Kane’s head whirred
gently as it followed the operative down the passageway to
the point where a heavy metal door barred further progress.
There was a pause as a guard eyed the operative through a
peephole, followed by a momentary spill of artiﬁcial light as
the door opened and Kane was admitted. A small man with
nervous hands waited to greet him. He was dressed in a
nondescript gray tunic and matching trousers. “You’re
late,” Ron Olvos said accusingly. “The rest of the council is
waiting.”
“It couldn’t be helped,” Kane replied, as the two men
made their way through a brightly lit corridor. “We tossed
the second inn, but the sensitive wasn’t there. Either she’s
very good at what she does, or very lucky, not that it makes
much difference.”
“Why her of all people?” Olvos wondered out loud.
“There are thousands of spooks, many of whom are quite
amenable. Why couldn’t the founder channel himself
through one of them?”
“I don’t know,” Kane answered honestly, “except to say
that Lysander was often difﬁcult to communicate with on
this plane of existence, so why would he be any different on
the next? Anyway, given the fact that the better part of a
year has gone by since his death, and this is the ﬁrst time
the founder has seen ﬁt to come through, it seems safe to as-

46

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

sume that there’s something about this particular sensitive
that he likes. And we need to talk to him! The old bastard
knows where the artiﬁcial intelligence named Logos is hiding, Logos knows how to reactivate the star gates, and the
portals are the centerpiece of our plan. Like it or not, Norr is
the key.”
Olvos winced at the use of the word “bastard,” wondered
if Lysander could listen in from beyond the grave, and
hoped that he couldn’t. Servos whined and double doors
swung open to allow the men to enter what had been a huge
vat but now served as a circular conference room. In spite of
the slightly astringent tang of vinegar that still hung in the
air, the rest of the enclosure was focused on the future and
equipped accordingly. Soft white light ﬂooded the tank, a
holo projector hung above the round table, at which six of
the seven council members were seated, data scrolled across
the curvilinear computer screens that lined the walls, and
video supplied by a reactivated satellite showed that a storm
was brewing off to the east.
Olvos took his seat while Kane stepped into the keyholeshaped slot that had been cut into the table. Despite the fact
that countless generations of interbreeding had erased most
of the physical characteristics that once served to divide the
human race into ethnic groupings, there were occasional
throwbacks, and Kane was one of them. Whereas everyone
else in the room had black hair, brown eyes, and olivecolored skin, the operative had longish blond hair, blue
eyes, and white skin. They were looks that had turned him
into something of an outcast as a child, but were later transformed into a blessing when they brought him to Lysander’s
attention. Because unlike the society around him, which
placed a high value on conformity, the scientist had a preference for that which was unusual.

RUNNER

47

“Please excuse my tardiness,” Kane said evenly, “but the
last twenty-six hours have been rather hectic to say the least.
As all of you know by now the founder has returned, and
judging from the comments he made to the crowd gathered
in the actor’s hall, he continues to have a keen interest in our
affairs.”
“There is no excuse for tardiness, or any other form of
failure,” Omar Tepho said disparagingly as he turned to face
the operative. Like Kane’s, the chairman’s body fell well
outside the bounds of what could be considered normal. His
skull was lumpy rather than smooth, one eye was higher
than the other, and his ears stuck out from the sides of his
head. And, as if that weren’t enough, Tepho had been born
with a spinal deformity. All of which explained why he had
literally moved into the city’s only library at the age of ten,
taught himself to read, and eventually become so knowledgeable that Milos Lysander had taken the young man in.
It also explained Tepho’s burning desire to reestablish science, especially medical science, which had once been capable of preventing conditions such as his. And because of his
passion, plus the lingering effects of an extremely cruel
childhood, Tepho was absolutely pitiless where subordinates
were concerned.
That alone was sufﬁcient to send something cold trickling into Kane’s veins, but when the wall behind the chairman appeared to shimmer, the operative knew there was
something more to fear as well. No one knew how the bond
between the rare combat variant and the malformed intellectual had been established—only that it had. Which
meant that anyone who wanted to kill Tepho, would have to
kill the being named Shaz ﬁrst, something no one had been
able to do. Partly because the variant could blend with
whatever background he stood in front of, partly because of

48

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

his superfast reﬂexes, and partly because he was very well
armed. All of which made Tepho even more intimidating—
something that Kane struggled to ignore. “I understand
that.”
“Good,” Tepho said coldly. “You may proceed.”
Kane swallowed. “After a long period of relative inactivity it now appears that we have a unique opportunity to
reestablish communications with the founder, and have beneﬁt of his counsel. No one that I know of fully understands
how sensitives do what they do, or why some discarnate beings choose one channel over another, but such is the case.
And, as I was saying to Council Member Olvos moments
ago, I believe that every effort must be made to locate and
secure the sensitive called Lanni Norr.”
“So, what’s the plan?” council member three demanded.
“It’s a big planet, and while signiﬁcant, our resources are
limited.”
“The ﬁrst thing to do is watch the spaceport,” Kane answered conﬁdently. “Norr knows someone is chasing her,
and a ship is due, so she could attempt to leave the planet.”
“And if she doesn’t?” council member ﬁve inquired
mildly. “What then?”
“Then she’ll be trapped,” Kane replied, “and we’ll have
time to track her down.”
“Good,” Tepho put in smoothly. “I’m sure I speak for the
entire council when I say that we have complete conﬁdence
in you.”
Kane knew the statement amounted to both an endorsement and the ﬁrst step in placing the blame squarely on his
shoulders should something go wrong. The operative nodded humbly. “Thank you. Your faith gives me strength. I
will do everything in my power to ﬁnd the sensitive and
bring her in.”

RUNNER

49

The operative felt a hand caress his shoulder, turned to
see the air shimmer, and heard Tepho laugh.
The once-vast spaceport had shrunk over the years as

newly constructed warehouses crept in to claim increasingly
large sections of its blast-scarred surface, and the elements
continued to eat away at what remained. At least one square
mile of surface remained, however, most of which was currently hidden beneath rows of brightly colored tents, openair booths, and a swirling crowd. They were present to
celebrate Ship Down, a biannual holiday with religious, cultural, and commercial signiﬁcance.
The cessationists were there, praying that the shuttle
wouldn’t appear, thereby cutting Anafa off from external
sources of cultural contamination, as were the metal men,
who worked to convince the crowd that technology was good.
Of course most people were there to buy the goods that
had been brought in from distant provinces, to eat the food
available from countless booths, and to bear witness to whatever did or didn’t happen. Would the shuttle appear? As it
had for countless generations? Or would this be the year
when Anafa was ﬁnally cut off for good? That day was coming, everyone knew it, but no one seemed to care enough to
do anything about it. Not the elderly woman who ruled the
planet, not the provincial governor, and not the people themselves. So the shuttle, or the possibility of it, drew a crowd
plus the pickpockets, con men, and fortune-tellers who had
come to depend on it.
One such woman, an elderly crone with gray-streaked
hair, a backpack, and a walking stick, limped through the
crowd hawking her services. “See into the future! Cast spells
on your enemies! Speak with dead! Five minutes for one
thin gunar.”

50

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

But there were plenty of such services available, most of
which were fake, so the heavily disguised Lanni Norr didn’t
ﬁnd many takers. Not that she required them since the gold
coins strapped around her middle were more than sufﬁcient
to her immediate needs. No, the disguise was intended to
fool whoever had invaded the Market Street Inn, and if rumors could be believed, not only murdered four people but
broken into her room. Or what would have been her room
had the sensitive not checked into another hostelry an hour
before.
Now she was killing time, waiting for the shuttle to arrive, with every intention of being aboard the ship when it
lifted off. She still planned to ﬁnd a refuge in the country,
but on some other planet, a long ways from Anafa. Norr gave
an involuntary jerk as someone touched her arm—and
whirled to confront a liveried footman rather than the assassin she had imagined. His distaste for her was apparent in
both the frown he wore and an air of stiff formality. “My mistress would like to engage your services. Please follow me.”
Norr swore silently, but knew she should accept the commission, if only to protect her disguise. She reached out to
take possession of the footman’s arm. “Why, thank you,
deary,” the sensitive cackled suggestively. “I’d be happy to
follow a strapping young man such as yourself!”
The footman shuddered as the crone’s grubby ﬁngers
made contact with his immaculate sleeve, allowed the fortune teller to transfer some of her weight to his arm, and escorted Norr through the crowd. It was a relatively short
journey to the point where a fabric-draped litter rested on
fold-down legs. Incense wafted out of small braziers
mounted at either end of the conveyance, thereby making
the air ﬁt to smell for the individual closeted within. Four
litter bearers, each armed with identical wooden cudgels,

RUNNER

51

kept onlookers at a distance. Norr couldn’t see through the
gauzy material that guarded the occupant’s privacy, but
there was no denying the femininity of the voice that came
from inside. It was light, musical, and a little girlish. “Good
afternoon . . . Thank you for coming.”
Norr felt a moment of envy, a ﬂeeting desire to live the
girl’s life rather than her own, but that was quickly superseded by a sense of deep sorrow. “You are welcome, deary,”
the sensitive replied soothingly. “Why do I feel such a deep
sense of sadness around you? Like an emptiness that cannot
be ﬁlled. A lover’s spat perhaps?”
There was a pause followed by the sudden rustle of fabric
as curtains parted. The face that appeared in the gap between them was perfectly symmetrical, but too pale to be
entirely healthy and framed by a fall of luxuriant black hair.
Norr found herself looking into two almond-shaped eyes,
both of which were protected by long lashes, and shiny with
pent-up tears. “No,” the young woman replied emphatically.
“There is no lover. Nor is there likely to be, not since the accident.” So saying the girl pulled a coverlet aside to reveal
that most of her right leg was missing. The stump was
neatly bandaged and wrapped with a lavender ribbon. “Can
one such as myself ever ﬁnd happiness?” the woman inquired desperately. “Or should I forsake all hope?”
Norr felt that the answer was, “Yes,” that there was very
little possibility of the sort of idealized romance the girl had
long dreamed of, but “saw” another possibility for her
client. One that could generate even greater happiness in
the long run. “There is a young man, who though not as
comely as some, loves you deeply. He’s not the stuff of
dreams, deary, but your disability has in no way reduced his
ardor, and he needs that which you would bring into his
life. For while you are comfortable with people, he is not,

52

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

and while the arts are second nature to you, he struggles to
master them.”
The girl frowned, registered a look of utter surprise, and
said, “Lars? Do you mean Lars?”
“I know not his name,” Norr answered, “but only that
which lies in his heart.”
“Thank you!” the girl whispered gratefully. “Thank you
very much,” and pressed ﬁve gunars into the sensitive’s
hand. The curtain closed, orders were given, and the litter
was hoisted off the ground. Norr was left to watch as the
brightly clad footman forced a hole in the crowd, and her
client was borne away.
The sensitive had just pocketed her fee, and was about to
move on, when an all-too-familiar feeling descended upon
her. Not at her behest, but because an extremely powerful
entity wanted to manifest through her and was determined
to do so. Normally such an invasion was impossible unless
Norr opened herself to it, but the process of giving the
young woman a reading had opened the door, and someone
was determined to force his way through.
The sensitive said, “No!” out loud, but discovered that it
was too late, as Milos Lysander brushed her identity aside
and took control of her body. In fact there was nothing Norr
could do other than go along for the ride as her disembodied
guest guided her physical body over to a platform established by a mime, shoved the unfortunate performer off his
perch, and mounted the riser. Words started to ﬂow from
his, no her mouth, and the deep booming voice soon drew a
crowd.
The mime attempted to reclaim his platform, received a
backhanded blow for his trouble, and fell onto his back.
That elicited laughter from the still-growing crowd. Inspired by the attention denied him in the past, the mime

RUNNER

53

decided to incorporate the old crone into his act by imitating her, striking all sorts of silly postures, and generally
making a fool of himself. Lysander was apparently oblivious
to the performer’s antics and continued to speak as if to a
convention of his peers.
“And so,” the scientist continued, “while the spaceships
that continue to link the remnants of the old empires together do us a service, their very presence serves to sap our
leaders of ambition. Soon that will end, however, as the last
of the great vessels die, and mankind is trapped on a thousand islands. It doesn’t have to be that way however. Rather
than mourn the starships we should strive to replace them!
Not with new hulls, but with the very technology that rendered them obsolete once before. Will such an effort require
sacriﬁce? Of course it will . . . But nothing worth having
comes without effort. The ﬁrst step is rise up against your
do-nothing government and overthrow it! Then, once the
regressionists have been deposed, it will be possible to . . .”
The crowd never got to hear what it would be possible to
do, because while passive in many respects, the empress
took an active interest where her power was concerned.
That’s why her so-called monitors attended every event of
any size and took steps to intervene when would-be dissidents stepped out of line. Ten of her operatives had pushed
their way into the crowd and were intent on reaching the
platform, when they were intercepted by three heavily
robed metal men. Wood clanged on metal as the government agents brought their nightsticks into play, and both
contingents were attacked by the rowdier members of the
crowd.
Seeing an opportunity not only to wreak revenge, but to
reclaim his personal property, the mime jumped Lysander
from behind. The unexpected attack was sufﬁcient to loosen

54

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the invading spirit’s grip on Norr’s body, thereby giving the
sensitive the opportunity she’d been hoping for. Norr
pushed Lysander out of her body, slammed the door behind
him, and fell onto the mime. The impact knocked the
breath out of the unfortunate performer. Norr took advantage of the opportunity to regain her feet, gather her belongings, and fade into the crowd. Had anyone sought to
follow they would have come across a wig, a gob of wax that
had been shaped into a bulbous nose, and a dusty black
robe. Search as they might, the crone had ceased to exist.
Out beyond the edge of Anafa’s atmosphere the fabric of

space parted just long enough for an object to leave the dimension called hyperspace and enter the system. Though
large by human standards, the ship was tiny when compared
with the planet’s moons, or the world itself, a fact not lost
upon the artiﬁcial intelligence who thought of herself as
Shewhoswimsamongthestars. Because as time passed, and she
grew gradually weaker, everything seemed more threatening than it had been thousands of years before. So much so
that the AI had even considered dropping into orbit around
a stable planet and placing her systems on standby as other
members of the brother-sisterhood had done. But to retire,
to truly retire, would be to exist without purpose. Something the starship couldn’t countenance.
So, ignoring the painlike feedback that trickled into her
brain from hundreds of ailing components Shewhoswims slid
past a half-slagged weapons platform, a space station that
had gone off-line more than six hundred years before, and a
mothballed in-system liner before dropping into a stable orbit. A quick scan of the standard communications frequencies was sufﬁcient to conﬁrm what the AI already knew: The
planet Anafa and the people who lived on it were still on the

RUNNER

55

long sad slide back into technological barbarity—the only
kind of barbarity that mattered to the spaceship, since there
was only one thing that could save Shewhoswims and her sisters from eventual dissolution, and that was for the humans
to rediscover the wonders of science.
The AI allowed herself the electronic equivalent of a
sigh, sent the usual messages to passengers waiting in her
belly, and prepared the only shuttle she had left. There had
been four originally, but the others had been taken out of
service over the years and been cannibalized for parts.
Once the shuttle was loaded Shewhoswims shifted a portion of her intelligence to the smaller ship, took command,
and broke away. While most of Anafa’s surface was tan, it
was broken here and there by the occasional patch of blue,
with white frosting at both poles. Armadas of clouds swept
across the planet’s surface and rose to envelop the shuttle as
it bumped down through the atmosphere and sent a sonic
boom rolling across the city of Seros.
People shaded their eyes, pointed toward the sky, and
tracked the speck as it circled the spaceport. The ship was
back! The news raced through the streets. And while of interest to everyone, the shuttle’s reappearance had a galvanizing
effect on those gathered at the spaceport, as the cessationists
began to wail and the metal men took advantage of the opportunity to reemphasize the virtues of technology.
Then, once the spaceship put down, and its passengers
began to disembark, the crowd swirled as everyone sought
to catch a glimpse of the daring, or possibly desperate people, who had gambled their lives and won. The group made
its way down the battered ramp and squinted into the
bright sunlight, before passing through the corridor that
opened before them, was disparate to say the least. Some
carried boxes between them, rare merchandise most likely,

56

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

acquired on some distant world and soon to grace wealthy
homes on Anafa. But most arrived with little more than the
packs on their backs, eyes darting this way and that, still
marveling at the fact that they were alive. A few faces lit up
with joy as family members rushed forward to greet them,
but most of the travelers went unrecognized and were soon
lost in the crowd.
Then, once the last person had disembarked, an equally
interesting procession began. Although there was no charge
for boarding the ship, and hadn’t been for hundreds of years,
people were admitted through the main hatch on a ﬁrstcome, ﬁrst-served basis. That meant those who wanted to
take their chances on the ship were motivated to arrive early.
Because while some shuttles lifted half-empty, others were
unable to accommodate all the people who wanted to leave,
and many decades had passed since a ship had returned for a
second or third load.
So, eager to secure their places in the ship’s belly, a steady
stream of travelers boarded the shuttle. All were heavily
burdened because it had been a long, long time since anyone
had been served a meal aboard a starship, and those who
failed adequately to provide for themselves could starve or
be forced into virtual slavery by the more provident.
Most of the onlookers were simply curious and stared at
the departing passengers with the same morbid fascination
normally reserved for condemned criminals. There were
others, however, like the father on the lookout for his runaway daughter, a merchant who wanted to ensure that an
employee boarded safely, and the monk assigned to watch
for a very special little boy. An assignment that he believed
to be a complete waste of time since black hat spies had
spotted the so-called Divine Wind taking his daily lessons
on the roof of the red hat monastery that very morning, a

RUNNER

57

fact that suggested that the would-be imposter and his corrupt supporters were too frightened to board the ship and
make the long, dangerous journey to the city of CaCanth. A
trip that the real Nom Maa had begun—some six months
earlier.
With that in mind, Brother Wama leaned on his staff,
enjoyed the warmth of the sun, and eyed the departing passengers. A merchant’s second son passed, complete with an
entourage and enough supplies to sustain a small army. The
merchant and his retinue were followed by a couple whose
possessions hung under the pole that was stretched between
them, a young man bent nearly double under the weight of
his pack, and a sad looking fellow followed by an expensive
cofﬁn and four pallbearers, laborers from the look of them,
who would exit the shuttle as soon as they had been paid.
The monk’s thoughts were interrupted as one of his superiors appeared at his elbow, a rather nasty sort who aped
humility but clearly aspired to higher ofﬁce. “How’s it going?” Brother Fiva inquired, eyeing the steady stream of
passengers. “Have you seen any sign of the imposter?”
“No,” the monk replied cautiously. “Not so far. In fact,
come to think of it, I haven’t seen any children at all.”
“Not that you know of anyway,” Fiva said critically. “For
example, who, or what is hidden in the bundle that those
people are carrying on that litter? You can’t tell from here.”
“That’s true,” Wama admitted. “But I don’t see . . .”
“No,” Fiva interrupted. “I’m sure you don’t. But there
will be plenty of time to meditate on your shortcomings
during the trip to Pooz. Someone must make the journey,
and you were chosen. It’s unlikely, but if the imposter’s supporters managed to smuggle the little rascal aboard, the boy
will be forced to reveal himself during the journey. If that
occurs, it will be your task to kill him. Do you understand?”

58

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Yes,” the monk replied doubtfully. “But the trip will
take weeks, I have no supplies, and . . .”
“On the contrary, your supplies are ready and waiting,”
the older man replied, and toed a pack Wama hadn’t noticed
before. “Good luck with your pilgrimage,” Fiva added sanctimoniously. “Our prayers will be with you.”
That was when Wama realized that Fiva was taking advantage of the situation not only to place an agent on the
ship but to open a slot for one of his toadies. The monk
opened his mouth to object, saw that two members of the
Dib Wa had materialized behind Fiva’s back, and bowed.
“Can I have a weapon?”
“You’ll ﬁnd a weapon in your pack,” Fiva replied gravely.
“Make good use of it should you have the chance. Otherwise, report to the brothers on Pooz. They will ﬁnd appropriate work for you to do.”
Mas Wama considered making a run for it, knew the Dib
Wa would catch him, and was forced to accept his fate. His
family would wonder what had happened to him, but he
would attempt to send a message back. He bent over, lifted
the pack, and hoisted it up onto his back. Then, without so
much as a backward glance, the monk boarded the ship.
Brother Fiva smiled thinly, waited for another ﬁve minutes, and had the pleasure of watching another member of
the black hat sect follow Wama into the waiting shuttle.
The young woman was extremely well trained, and if she
noticed his presence, gave no sign of it. A single long black
braid hung down the nun’s back, she was dressed in inexpensive clothes, and carried a fat satchel in each hand. They
were heavy and scraped the ground occasionally. In the unlikely event that the imposter had been smuggled onto the
ship, it was safe to assume that the boy would be accompanied by at least a couple of Dib Wa bodyguards. They would

RUNNER

59

almost certainly identify Wama as belonging to the black
hat sect—and could be counted on to reveal their true identities by killing the unfortunate monk.
If the young woman could neutralize both the bodyguards and the boy by herself, then she would. If not, she
would keep the party under surveillance and request assistance from the black hat monastery on Pooz. It was a good
plan, which was to say a convoluted plan, and Brother Fiva
was satisﬁed that it would work.
A ﬁnal announcement was made, and just as the shuttle’s
hatch started to close, a man with blond hair pushed his way
out of the crowd. He said something to the metal men that
accompanied him and pointed toward the shuttle. Metal
clanged on metal as the robots ran up the ramp and slipped
aboard just seconds before the hatch closed.
Then, having used her external loudspeakers to warn the
crowd, Shewhoswims ﬁred her repellers and pushed the planet
away. With that accomplished, it was a simple matter to engage her drives, gain the necessary altitude, and return to
the blackness of space. That was her purpose—and it felt
good to be alive.

THREE
™

The Planet Anafa

Even third-class passengers will enjoy comfortable quarters,
fine food, and a wide variety of entertainment. Please join us
as we celebrate the addition of a new ship to the company’s
fleet, establish a new link to the civilized planets, and place a
new star in the heavens.
—Excerpt from the promotional holo distributed to the Interplanetary
News Association (INA) on the day that the sentient vessel
Shewhoswimsamongthestars officially went into service

Shewhoswimsamongthestars guided the shuttle into its

docking bay with the ease of a beggar pocketing a coin.
Rebo, Lee, and all the rest of the passengers felt a distinct
thump as the smaller vessel’s skids made contact. That was
followed by the mufﬂed whine of unseen machinery. Different people reacted in different ways. Those who had never
been on a ship before, and Rebo sensed that was the majority of them, were round-eyed with fear, while the runner
and a few like him focused on the next step in the process.
Lee, who had only recently been allowed to exit the cofﬁn in
which he had been brought aboard, listened as the runner
spoke into his ear. “You’ll notice we’re positioned next to
the hatch. There’s a reason for that. Right now the ship is
pumping air into the compartment where the shuttle is

RUNNER

61

stored. Once that process is complete the hatch will open,
and we will be allowed to enter a decontamination chamber.
A thick mist will be pumped into the compartment, but it
won’t hurt you. A second hatch will open a few minutes
later. That’s the good news. The bad news is that we’ll have
to tow the cofﬁn, plus the supplies stored inside it clear into
the hold. Got it?”
“Yes,” Lee replied sotto voce. “But why should I concern
myself with such details? That’s what I pay you to do.”
Rebo’s eyes narrowed slightly, but his voice remained
level. “You should remember such things for two reasons.
First, because it’s what my son would do, and the best way
to play a part is actually to live it. And second, if someone
manages to kill me, you’ll be on your own. Or perhaps that
thought hadn’t occurred to your supreme highness.”
In all truth the thought hadn’t occurred to Lee, and now
that it had, the boy wondered if Brothers Babukas and Qwa
should have sent a force of Dib Wa warriors to protect him
as well. Still, true or not, that didn’t give Rebo the right to
be sarcastic. The youngster was about to say as much when
the hatch opened, and everyone shufﬂed into a sterilelooking compartment. There were cries of alarm as jets of
greenish mist were pumped into the chamber. It penetrated
their clothing, found its way into even the most tightly
wrapped packages, and made everything damp. However,
thanks to the calm, nonchalant manner in which the more
experienced travelers reacted, the rest were reassured and
began to relax.
Then, once the decontamination process was complete, a
ﬁnal hatch opened to admit a wave of fetid air. The runner
said, “Come on!” and pulled on the heavily loaded cofﬁn.
Lee had no choice but to do likewise. Two small wheels,
both set into the foot of the box, allowed it to be towed so

62

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

long as the surface beneath the cofﬁn remained relatively
ﬂat. Two or three individuals dashed out of the shuttle
ahead of them, but Rebo and his youthful charge were still
able to establish a lead on the majority of the passengers, all
of whom were burdened with supplies. Some of the ship’s
lights were functional, but not half as many as Rebo would
have preferred, leaving the passengers with no choice but to
make their way down a gloomy corridor, through widely
spaced pools of blue-green light, and into a huge hold where
thousands of cargo modules had once been stored. If one
looked carefully it was still possible to see yellow grid lines
under the ﬁlth that covered the deck, along with reference
numbers on the bulkheads that were practically invisible
beneath layers of head-high grafﬁti.
The runner paused to get his bearings, spied what he was
looking for, and pointed to the far side of the hold. “Over
there, son. Where that big beam hits the deck. That’s where
we want to go.”
Though determined to help, Lee found it difﬁcult to
keep up, and quickly discovered that if he wanted to pull,
rather than be pulled, it was necessary to jog rather than
walk. Added to their difﬁculties was the fact that the cleverly concealed wheels were too small to pass over obstacles
more than a couple of inches high. That meant the pair had
to weave their way between cook ﬁres that had only recently
been extinguished, piles of trash that the ship’s overworked
maintenance bots had yet to remove, and the makeshift
shelters left by the last group of passengers. All of which
added a considerable amount of distance to the trip.
Even worse was the necessity to stop and lift the heavy
container over a series of man-made barriers that looked as
though they had been erected as a way to deﬁne someone’s
territory. Rebo swore mightily as he jerked the wooden box

RUNNER

63

over the last waist-high wall and dragged the object toward
the darkly shadowed corner ahead. The runner glanced back
over his shoulder, saw that one of the merchants had dispatched a uniformed employee to secure the same spot, and
realized that the other man was coming on strong. Rebo
turned to Lee. “Run, boy! Put yourself in that corner and
pull your knife! I’ll be there as soon as I can.”
Lee looked back, spotted the threat, and took off. He was
a good runner, a very good runner, and ﬂew across the intervening space. It wasn’t until he had arrived and turned to
face his pursuer, that the boy remembered to pull the belt
knife. He felt scared as the full-grown man skidded to a halt
not six feet away and laughed. He raised a cudgel over his
head. “Skedaddle, runt . . . Or shall I drive your head down
through your ass?”
The youngster was busy trying to summon some brave
words when there was a loud report, the man pitched forward onto his face, and slid six inches across the deck. The
boy looked up and saw Rebo lower the long gun that he carried across his belly. The runner turned to scan the immediate area. Then, satisﬁed that no one else was inclined to
attack, the runner broke the Hogger open. A spent shell
casing popped out. It took less than three seconds to insert a
new cartridge and return the weapon to its holster. A wheel
started to squeak as he took the cofﬁn under tow.
It was the ﬁrst time Lee had been exposed to a violent
death, and he was still staring at the dead body when the
runner arrived. “You k-k-killed him,” Lee stuttered accusingly as the tears rolled down his cheeks.
“Yes,” Rebo agreed. “Just like he would have killed you.
Or me for that matter. That’s how things are.”
“But you shot him in the back!” Lee objected hotly.
“That was why you told me to pull the knife, wasn’t it? Not

64

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

because you thought it would stop him, but so he would
look at me rather than you!”
“So, what are you saying?” the runner inquired patiently.
“That there’s something inherently virtuous about shooting
people from the front? I don’t think so. Dead is dead.
Speaking of which, search the body. Take anything of
value.”
Lee shook his head. “No. I won’t.”
“Yes,” Rebo insisted. “You will. You promised to obey
me. Remember?”
“Only if what you told me to do was moral,” the boy
replied stubbornly. “And stealing isn’t moral.”
“Oh really? Well, I suggest that you give the matter
some additional thought . . . Let’s say this guy has ﬁve gunars in his pocket. There isn’t any way for you to convey the
money to his family, and if we don’t take them, then another
passenger will. Plus, four months from now, while staying
in some ﬂea-bitten inn, we might need ﬁve gunars to buy
food. Now, do as I told you.”
As with all prime campsites the corner had been occupied recently and as Rebo went to work clearing the accumulated rubbish away, Lee stood over the corpse thinking
about what the runner had said while trying to work up the
courage required to touch the body. The way Rebo spoke to
him was strikingly similar to the way Qwa lectured him,
and distasteful though the situation was, the boy could see
the logic involved.
Finally, after about ﬁve minutes had passed, he knelt
next to the quickly cooling cadaver and apologized as he riﬂed through the dead man’s pockets. “I’m sorry,” the little
boy said, “and I hope that was your last incarnation. But if
enlightenment lays ahead rather than behind you, then I

RUNNER

65

pray that you will ﬁnd the experience that your soul needs
most, and I apologize for my role in your death.”
The search yielded two gunars rather than ﬁve, and the
coins felt heavier than they should have. The journey had
barely begun—but Lee felt as if he had traveled a long way.
In addition to the physical sensations associated with

docking, Lanni Norr felt a confusing mixture of emotions
wash around her. Anticipation, dread, hope, fear, joy, and
sorrow all battered her senses and made it difﬁcult to think.
The sensitive did the best she could to block the input and
focused her attention on those passengers who seemed to
know what they were doing. She had never been off-planet
before, but there were bound to be strategies that could be
employed to gain small advantages, and the sensitive was
determined to identify them.
But, as the shuttle touched down, Norr had other things
to worry about. Primary among them was the fact that two
metal men had boarded the shuttle and appeared to be looking for someone. And, given the fanatical way the machines
had reacted to Lysander’s speech, the sensitive had a pretty
good idea of who that someone might be. The new disguise
had fooled the robots up to that point—but how long before
they saw through it? Based on the conversations taking
place around her, it sounded as if the voyage would last for
weeks, if not months. A long time in which to pose as a man.
The sensitive’s thoughts were interrupted as the hatch
opened, her fellow travelers poured into the larger ship, and
Norr joined the stampede. Based on conversations she had
overheard, and the speed with which the more experienced
travelers exited the shuttle, it was clear that they hoped to
claim the best spots for themselves.

66

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

But Norr’s pack was extremely heavy, which meant that a
lot of people arrived in the hold before she did and were already settling into their chosen nooks and crannies by the
time she paused to look around. The sensitive noticed that
while corridors led off into other parts of the ship, no one
seemed interested in following them, and ﬁgured that there
was a reason for that.
So what to do? That was when the sensitive noticed the
maze of interlocking girders that crisscrossed the area above
her head and spotted a black rectangle that might have been
some sort of platform. And not just a platform, but the
equivalent of a nest, which would be difﬁcult for intruders
to access.
Eager to ﬁnd a way up, before someone else spotted the
aerie, Norr followed a ﬁlthy bulkhead to one of the supporting members. Holes had been cut into the beam to make it
lighter, and judging from the way they were spaced, would
serve as a fairly efﬁcient ladder.
Knowing the pack was too heavy to climb with, the sensitive dumped it onto the ﬂoor and fumbled for the ﬁftyfoot length of cord that was included among her supplies.
Then, having tied one end to the pack and slung her staff
across her back, the young woman swarmed up the beam. A
few moments later she was crouched on a beam thirty feet
above the deck below.
One of the other passengers, a scruffy-looking male of indeterminate age, had just spotted the seemingly unguarded
pack, and was in the process of making his way over to inspect it, when the object in question suddenly rose three
feet into the air, and started to twirl. The would-be thief realized what was about to take place, produced a large folding knife, and ﬂicked it open as he ran. In the meantime,
someone ﬁred a gun, and the resulting boom reverberated

RUNNER

67

back and forth between the steel bulkheads as another property dispute was settled.
Norr saw the movement, hauled on the cord, and managed to heave the pack up over the rufﬁan’s head. He
jumped, attempted to slash the cord, and missed. The sensitive pulled again, had the satisfaction of seeing her belongings surge upward, and soon had them beside her. The thief
offered a rude gesture and wandered away.
The twelve-inch beam led Norr out toward the middle of
the hold, where a makeshift platform had been established.
Four sheets of metal had been removed from some other
part of the vessel, hoisted into place, and secured to the
girders. The surface was surprisingly clean, which Norr
took as a good omen, and helped ﬁnalize her decision. The
sensitive knew she would have to ﬁnd a place to hide her
valuables while she went to fetch water, but that was a problem that could no doubt be solved, especially if she made
some friends.
Of more concern were the metal men, who, unburdened
by supplies or a need for territory, could be seen roaming
the deck below. Norr knew that the machines would eventually focus their attention on her. That left the sensitive
with two choices: She could cede the initiative to the robots
and wait for the automatons to ﬁnd her, or she could go after them. The second alternative was clearly the more appealing of the two—and the hunt was on.
The shuttle had landed aboard the ship, and passengers

were streaming off, when a man and a boy towed a cofﬁn
past Brother Mas Wama. It didn’t take a genius to ﬁgure out
that the boy had been transported in the cofﬁn, but why?
Because he was the imposter? Or for a more mundane reason? A custody dispute perhaps—or something of that sort.

68

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The second theory seemed more likely, especially since the
boy lacked a retinue of bodyguards and boasted a full head
of black hair. Still, members of the red hat sect’s Dib Wa
could be hidden among the other passengers, and there was
the possibility of a wig. Wama resolved to investigate the
matter once things settled down.
Gregarious by nature, Wama offered to help a young
couple with their baggage, and the newlyweds were happy
to have some help. All of the best spots had been taken by
the time the odd threesome arrived in the hold, which left
them with little choice but to take over one of the campsites
out in the middle of the deck. They invited the monk to
stay, and Wama, who saw no reason to strike out on his own,
was quick to agree.
So, as the young couple went to work erecting a shelter
that would provide them with a modicum of privacy, Wama
opened his pack. It contained a generous quantity of simple
but nutritious food, a pot, a bowl, some eating utensils, and
a medical kit. But there was no sign of the weapon that he’d
been promised, not until Wama hit the very last layer of
supplies and discovered the red hat and robe.
That was when he understood what Fiva intended. If the
boy and the imposter were one and the same, he and his retainers would be much more likely to trust a member of
their own sect. So much so that it might be possible for
Wama to approach the boy, wrap his ﬁngers around the little rascal’s throat, and throttle the villain to death before
anyone could interfere. Such an assassination would mean
certain death, of course, but the wheel of incarnation would
inevitably turn and deliver him back to the physical world.
Strangely, in spite of the comfort that the knowledge should
have produced, the monk felt slightly sick to his stomach.

RUNNER

*

*

69

*

One of the things that Norr liked about the platform on

which she had taken up residence was the ease with which
she could monitor movements below. Especially those of the
metal men, who continued to watch their fellow passengers
like predators inspecting their prey.
Not too surprisingly, many of the people the machines
continually peered at became annoyed and weren’t hesitant
to make their displeasure known. The sensitive had seen the
robots subjected to verbal assaults, doused with slops, and
struck with a wide variety of clubs. None of those actions
served to discourage them.
Days had passed since the ship had broken orbit, or that’s
what Norr assumed, although she had no way to keep track.
Now, having spied on most of the passengers without success, it appeared that the mechanical men were in the process of exploring the rest of the ship in case their quarry had
taken up residence somewhere else. That’s the way it appeared anyway, since one of the robots left at what seemed
like regular intervals and was gone for what had to be hours.
A logical move, all things considered, and one that Norr
planned to take advantage of.
Having equipped herself with food, candles, and matches,
the sensitive hid her pack high among the girders and took
a long circuitous route down to the deck below. Hopefully,
if luck was with her, the rest of the passengers would believe
that she was still up on the platform.
Rather than call the metal men A and B, or 1 and 2,
Norr had named them Fric and Frac. And it was easy to tell
the two of them apart because even though their features
were identical, the robots wore slightly different clothing.
Fric’s robe hung loose and was tattered at the bottom,

70

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

while Frac used a length of rope to cinch his garment at the
waist.
That’s how the sensitive knew that Fric was the one she
followed out of the hold and into the ship’s darkened corridors. At ﬁrst the young woman was concerned about stumbling into the robot, or falling into some unseen hole, but
the metal man hadn’t walked for more than a few yards
when two beams of light splashed the hallway ahead and
wobbled across the grimy bulkheads.
Surprised, but pleased regarding her ability to see, Norr
followed along behind. Her staff, which was the only
weapon the sensitive had, was slung across her back. At one
point the brass-shod tip made contact with a bulkhead and
made a distinct click. Two white eyes swiveled toward the
rear as Fric turned, and Norr sidestepped into an open
hatch. Five extremely long seconds passed while the robot
listened for the sound to repeat itself and, not having heard
it again, continued on his way.
Norr discovered that she had been holding her breath
and gradually let it go. Then, moving carefully so as not to
make the same mistake twice, the sensitive pulled the staff
around so it was in front of her.
Then, hurrying forward in an attempt to make up for
lost time, Norr continued to follow the machine down the
corridor. Now, as the lights projected by the robot’s “eyes”
caressed the walls, the young woman began to understand
why passengers preferred to travel in the ship’s hold. One
stretch of the passageway had been blackened, as if by a raging ﬁre, and Norr caught a glimpse of a tracked maintenance bot as a small hatch opened to admit it.
Farther down the hall the sensitive passed the remains of
what looked like a crumpled barricade, bullet-dimpled
walls, and strange burn marks. Three minutes later Fric was

RUNNER

71

forced to stop in front of a closed hatch. White spray paint
had been used to scrawl the words, “This section
contaminated—stay out!” over a poorly rendered skull and
crossbones. The lights projected by the robot’s “eyes” swung
back and forth as Fric paused to look around, accepted the
fact that he couldn’t proceed any farther, and turned to retrace his steps.
Satisﬁed that Frac was too far away to be of assistance,
and convinced that she would never get a better chance than
the one at hand, Norr twisted both halves of her staff in opposite directions. There was a barely heard click, followed by
the gentle whisper of steel, as the three-foot-long blade left
its wooden scabbard. Fric heard the sounds, paused, and
spoke. “Hello? Who’s there?”
“I’m here,” Norr replied as she stepped out of the shadows and into the glare provided by the robot’s lights. “You
know, the person that you and your friend have been looking for.”
“Really?” the machine inquired skeptically. “How do I
know you are telling the truth?”
“You don’t,” Norr said, thumbing the vibro blade’s
power switch. “But ask yourself this . . . Who else would
want to remove your head?”
The blade hummed as it passed through the air and
made a metallic ka-chink as it sliced through Fric’s alloy
skin. Electricity crackled, and the harsh smell of ozone
scented the air as the weapon emerged from the other side.
The robot’s body collapsed into a heap even as his head
bounced and rolled to an uneven stop.
Never having done battle with a robot before the sensitive half expected the severed head to speak, but Fric remained mute as she toed his metal skull and bent to pick it
up. Twin beams still shot out of the metal man’s “eyes” and

72

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Norr made use of them to examine the metal cadaver. A
quick search turned up a purse heavy with coins but nothing else. The sensitive tucked the ﬁnd away and used the
head to light the passageway ahead. Frac wouldn’t allow
himself to be taken so easily, Norr knew that, but progress
had been made.
Lee opened the spigot and water rattled into the bottom of

the badly dented bucket that Rebo had salvaged from a
scrap heap. Everyone had to fetch their water, and in spite of
the boy’s protestations, the runner had assigned the task to
him. And not just that task, but other chores as well, so that
the ﬁrst part of each artiﬁcial “day” was spent cooking,
cleaning, and running errands. And what was Rebo doing
during that time? Nothing other than sitting around guarding their supplies. A task that required little if any effort.
It wasn’t fair, not by a long shot, and Lee could feel the
resentment bubbling up from deep inside as he made use of
both hands to lift the now-brimming bucket. “Resentment
is like acid,” Qwa maintained, “and if left unattended, it
will consume your spirit.” Skillful understanding should
have been sufﬁcient to ease Lee’s discomfort, but it didn’t.
Just one more indication that the elder brothers were mistaken and the entire voyage was a waste of time.
“Can I help you with that?” The words arrived along
with a hand that took up the slack and lightened the burden
by half. The response was automatic, and it wasn’t until Lee
had already said, “Thank you,” in the same tongue, that
he remembered that he wasn’t supposed to know Tilisi, the
language that the monks and parishioners alike spoke
among themselves. It was a terrible mistake, and Lee felt
the blood rush to his face as he looked upward. And there,

RUNNER

73

much to the boy’s surprise, stood a man in a red hat and
matching robe.
“Good morning,” the monk said, as he switched back to
standard. “My name is Brother Wama.”
“It’s a pleasure to meet you,” Lee answered politely. “My
name is Dor Rebo.”
Wama nodded solemnly, and because the introduction
had been made using standard, Lee wondered if he’d been
mistaken regarding the Tilisi. Besides, the youngster reasoned, it’s the black hats that I should fear, not one of my own.
That logic was so obviously correct that once the water
had been delivered, and Wama departed the campsite, Lee
saw no reason to mention the momentary lapse to Rebo.
In the meantime, Wama was not only stunned by the extent to which the trick had been successful but alarmed by
what it meant. Because, there, against all odds, was the very
imposter that the entire sect was searching for! There might
be some alternative explanation for what the monk felt sure
was a wig, but not for the boy’s facility with Tilisi, which was
virtually unknown beyond the realm of the church. His duty
was clear. Like it or not, Wama would have to lure the lad
away form the man with the guns and kill him. The knowledge was like acid and ate at the holy man’s gut as he returned to the shared campsite and began to brew some tea.
In the meantime, from her vantage point about ﬁfty
yards away, the black hat assassin kept watch. Contact had
been made, and while she couldn’t be sure of the exact nature of what had transpired between monk and boy, Wama’s
body language had been quite expressive. The long face,
slumped shoulders, and lethargic manner all hinted at the
same thing. Be he right or wrong, Wama was convinced
that he had found the imposter. But were bodyguards other

74

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

than the man in red leather jacket present? And if so, would
they move to block Wama? Only time would tell. Patience
is a virtue where assassins are concerned—and the woman
was content to wait.
The metal men didn’t maintain a campsite, not the way the

other passengers did, but when not out making their rounds
they had a tendency to loiter in the vicinity of the jack panel
from which power could be bled from the ship.
So, when Unit A-78214 returned to that point having
just completed a tour of the hold, he expected to ﬁnd 218
there to engage in the usual two-way exchange of data.
However, rather than his companion, 214 was confronted
by the other robot’s lifeless head, which had been left resting on a cross member located directly above the power
panel.
A human might have experienced a sense of horror,
quickly followed by deep sorrow, but 214 wasn’t equipped
for that. He simply noted that 218 was off-line and that the
perpetrator or perpetrators wanted him to be aware of it.
But why? A poorly conceived attempt to intimidate him
seemed like the most likely possibility.
The metal man tapped his temple, “heard” the hatch
whir open, and felt for the lead that was stored there. A
steady pull was sufﬁcient to produce a four-foot length of
thin cable. The jack made a click as it mated with the receptacle at the base of 218’s metal skull and a “thought” was
sufﬁcient to stimulate the data ﬂow. A few seconds later 214
had relived 218’s journey, had “seen” the man with the vibro blade, and immediately recognized him as passenger
“M” for male 146. A seldom-glimpsed individual who made
his home on a platform suspended above the hold.
Now, having heard the human admit who he/she was,

RUNNER

75

214 superimposed him/her over an image of the crone at the
spaceport and a picture of the woman who had appeared in
the actor’s hall. The video morphed only slightly as all of
the images melted into one and the truth was revealed. The
sensitive called Lanni Norr and passenger M-146 were one
and the same.
The metal man processed something akin to a sense of
completion, broke the connection with 218’s CPU, and
placed the skull back where he had found it. There was
work to do, and like machines everywhere, 214 was determined to accomplish it.
The message arrived wrapped around a bolt. It missed

Rebo’s head by a matter of inches, clanged off the bulkhead
beyond, and fell to the deck with a soft thud. The strange
half-light that pervaded the hold made it impossible to see
who had thrown the object, but the crude block letters on
the parchment were evidence enough. “Hol died . . . and so
will you!”
It didn’t take a genius to ﬁgure out that Hol was the man
Rebo had killed shortly after boarding the ship and that the
message had been delivered by one of his friends. In fact the
only real surprise lay in the fact that it had taken the merchant and his minions so long to get around to it. The runner sighed, took a seat on an empty crate, and fed another
piece of the cofﬁn into the tiny ﬁre. The ship did a pretty
good job of recycling the air, but its systems hadn’t been designed to cope with dozens of open ﬁres, and a permanent
haze polluted the hold.
A good ﬁfteen minutes or so passed before Lee returned
from wherever he’d been. The last couple of weeks had been
good for him, or so it seemed to Rebo, and the evidence was
clear to see. The previously round-faced youngster looked a

76

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

little leaner and was a lot more conﬁdent. He plopped down
next to the runner and held out his hand. “Look, Father! I
won them!”
Rebo looked, saw three coins, and raised an eyebrow.
“You were gambling?”
“I was playing a game,” Lee extemporized. “And I won!”
“You won this time,” the runner countered. “But I predict next time will be different. Once they hook you your
luck will start to fade.”
Lee didn’t want to believe it, but deep down he knew
that Rebo was probably correct and sought to change the
subject. “So what’s the plan for today? Wait! Don’t tell me,
let me guess. You’re going to sit around and watch the paint
fade.”
“No,” Rebo replied as he poked the ﬁre. “I have something a little more challenging in mind for today. Here,
read this.”
The runner handed the piece of parchment to Lee and
saw the boy’s eyes widen as he read the message. “They plan
to kill you! I know who they are . . . They watch me all the
time.”
“Which is why you’re going to stick around camp for a
while,” Rebo put in. “Now that they’re committed to a
ﬁght, they may try to take you hostage.”
“So, what should we do?” the boy inquired eagerly.
“Build some defenses?”
“No, I have something else in mind,” the runner responded. “And I need your help.”
Lee felt something expand inside his chest. “Of course!”
he said enthusiastically. “Tell me what I should do.”
The conversation continued for about ﬁve minutes before
the boy fumbled around in one of their packs, slipped a
package into a pocket, and grabbed hold of the water

RUNNER

77

bucket. None of which struck Tal, Hol’s brother, as especially noteworthy. He had been watching the man called
Rebo ever since one of his cronies had thrown the bolt. The
whole idea was to scare the runner, prevent him from getting enough sleep, and attack when he was weak. Everybody
agreed that the equivalent of two or three days without rest
would be sufﬁcient to wear him down. That’s when Hol
would be avenged.
Tal took pleasure in the thought and was still lingering
over it, when a series of what he thought were gunshots
went off behind him. The would-be killer dived for the
deck, rolled onto his back, and looked for the source of the
noise. “They were ﬁrecrackers!” one of his fellow employees
said from a hiding place nearby. “The boy set them off!”
The boy? Tal scrambled to his feet, peered toward the
distant ﬁre, and felt something cold trickle into his veins.
The runner was gone!
The quick series of explosions brought Norr up out of a

sound sleep only to discover that she was in deep trouble.
The metal man loomed above her. What looked like a silver
snake launched itself from a commodious sleeve, landed on
her chest, and sought her throat. The sensitive grabbed the
object and tried to fend it off, but the device was too
strong. Within a matter of seconds the synthetic serpent
had wrapped itself around Norr’s throat and swallowed its
own tail.
As the metallic noose tightened, it became difﬁcult to
breathe, and the sensitive’s lips and ﬁngernails had already
started to turn blue when the robot said something in the
universal mech language, and the steel loop loosened slightly.
“Why are you doing this?” Norr demanded, still tugging
at the collar. “Remove this thing!”

78

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Frac’s eyes lit up just as they had while exploring the
ship, only the beams of light converged this time, and a picture formed in midair. The image was that of a man with
blond hair, fair skin, and cold blue eyes. They seemed to
stare straight through her. When he spoke the sound originated from the robot. “Greetings, Citizen Norr. My name is
Jevan Kane. Please allow me to apologize for curtailing your
freedom, but for reasons known only to him, the founder of
the organization I represent has chosen to make himself
heard through you alone. Once you and my representative
arrive on Pooz you will be taken to our local headquarters,
where you will allow Milos Lysander to manifest through
you. You can participate in this process voluntarily, and be
paid for your time, or do so under duress. The choice is
yours.”
“Really?” Norr inquired hopefully. “Then tell this freak
to remove the thing that’s wrapped around my neck. Once
we reach Pooz I’ll be glad to bring what’s his name
through—especially if you pay me.” The last part was a lie,
because if the man with the blond hair was stupid enough
to let her go, the sensitive planned to destroy Frac and run
like hell.
But the effort to deceive Kane was a waste of time because the holo had been prerecorded, the operative couldn’t
hear her, and there was nothing left to look at beyond a few
motes of twirling light.
“I don’t like it up here,” Frac said ﬂatly, as his head
swiveled back and forth. “Collect your belongings. We leave
in ﬁve minutes.”
Norr tried to think of a way out of it, but she had been
transformed into a slave, and slaves have no choice but to do
as they are told.

RUNNER

*

*

79

*

Though not the best place in the hold, the blue-and-white-

striped tent had been erected on one of the better sites and
was quite comfortable on the inside. So much so that the
merchant named Dom Fermo rarely left it, preferring to
loll within, nibble on tidbits from his well-stocked larder,
and enjoy the attentions of his teenaged clerk. A winsome
boy, who though not especially skilled at the arts of love,
more than made up for that shortcoming with a wealth of
enthusiasm.
The two of them were resting, and communicating with
each other in whispers, when the point of a knife penetrated
the back wall of the tent, and there was a gentle ripping
sound as the razor-sharp blade sliced down through the
water-resistant fabric. Fermo had turned toward the sound,
and was still in the process of preparing to shout, when
Rebo stepped through the four-foot-long slit. The runner
pointed the Crosser at the merchant, held a ﬁnger to his
lips, and made his way across the cushion-strewn ﬂoor to the
point where a striped curtain blocked the entrance. “Call
your employees,” Rebo demanded. “All of them. Or maybe
you’d like to take a bullet. You decide.”
Fermo had full, somewhat sensuous lips. They suddenly
felt dry. He ran the tip of his tongue over them. “You won’t
hurt me? You promise?”
“I won’t hurt you,” Rebo agreed. “Now call them in.”
The merchant lifted a bell. It rang once, twice, and three
times, thereby signaling all of his employees to enter. And,
as luck would have it, they were only twenty feet from the
tent still discussing the ﬁrecracker incident when the summons was heard. They entered the tent one after another and
stood with their backs to Rebo. The one called Tal noticed

80

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

that his employer looked especially pale, and was about to
ask about his health, when the runner ﬁred his handgun.
There were three consecutive reports and each bullet found
its mark. Tal felt something knock his left leg out from under him, discovered he was on the ﬂoor, and grabbed his
thigh. The others were rolling around right next to him.
The sound of the gunshots was still fading away when the
teenager started to cry and Fermo raised a pair of pudgy
hands. “You promised you wouldn’t hurt me!”
“And I didn’t,” Rebo replied. “Now here’s the deal . . . I
think you’ll ﬁnd that all three slugs went through ﬂesh
without touching bone. Assuming that you and the boy slap
dressings on those wounds quickly enough, and apply some
pressure, the bleeding will stop. Then, so long as you keep
their wounds clean, these lads should be up and around by
the time the ship enters orbit around Pooz.”
“But why?” Fermo wanted to know. “Why did you attack us?”
Up until that point the runner had assumed that the
merchant had been behind the threatening note, but it appeared that he’d been wrong. The employees had been acting on their own. Not that it made much difference.
“Because of this,” Rebo replied, tossing the parchmentwrapped bolt into the merchant’s lap. “I have to sleep once
in a while, and I ﬁgured a few bullet holes would slow your
servants down. Now, remember what I said about those
dressings, or they’ll bleed to death right here.”
Rebo brushed the curtain aside, backed through the resulting opening, and disappeared. Fermo sat there for a moment with his mouth hanging open, before turning to the
boy and subjecting him to a frown. “You heard the man!
Make some dressings. The worthless fools are bleeding on
my carpet!”

RUNNER

81

All of his fellow passengers had heard the rapid-ﬁre series
of gunshots but none would meet Rebo’s eyes as he wound
his way back to the point where Lee was supposed to be
guarding their campsite. Only the boy wasn’t there.
The runner frowned and took a long slow look around.
Lee knew he was supposed to stay close, especially now.
That suggested that someone had seen an opportunity to
grab the boy and taken it. But there were no signs of foul
play, and everything looked as it should have, so maybe not.
But assumptions could be dangerous, and the runner decided to consult his neighbors. Perhaps they had seen something, or if not, would agree to keep an eye on his
belongings while he was absent. Especially in return for a
gunar or two. Rebo paused to slide a fresh clip into the
Crosser, put a bullet in the chamber, and slid the other magazine into a pocket. Then, trying to look as nonchalant as
possible, the runner went a-calling.
Ancient machinery whirred as the lift carried them up-

ward, and numbers ﬂickered on the readout high above Lee’s
head. “How much farther?” the boy inquired. “You said ten
minutes. My father will be worried.”
“We’re almost there,” Wama replied soothingly. “Wait
until you see it! The compartment contains hundreds of
plants all grown together. It’s a jungle! You can bring your
father. Think how impressed he will be! Don’t tell anyone
else, though, or they’ll come and ruin it.”
Lee listened to the happy babble, but wasn’t satisﬁed by
it, and still felt uneasy as the lift jerked to a stop and the
monk took his hand. “Come on!” Wama said cheerfully.
“We’ll take a quick look and go right back.”
The air was different from thick acrid fug that ﬁlled the
hold. It was warmer for one thing—and so heavy with mois-

82

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ture that Lee wondered if it might rain. And Lee had to admit that it was a wondrous place. Huge branches bore even
larger leaves that arched out to touch each other. And the
thick undergrowth pushed in from all sides to caress Lee’s
shoulders. “You were correct, Brother Wama. There is a jungle on the ship. But I’m supposed to be guarding the campsite, and my father will be angry.”
“No problem,” Wama assured Lee as he took hold of the
boy’s arm. “See that bright red ﬂower? Hand me your knife
and I’ll cut it off for you. It will make a nice present for your
father.”
Rebo didn’t strike Lee as a person who spent much time
looking at ﬂowers, but it would have been rude to say “No,”
so he removed the knife from its sheath and gave it to the
monk handle ﬁrst.
Wama accepted the blade, smiled a crooked smile, and
spoke in Tilisi. “This brings me no pleasure, little brother.
But the real Nom Maa is already on his way to the city of
CaCanth—and there is no room for an imposter. Rest assured
that I will free you from your body quickly, thereby sparing
you unnecessary pain, and speeding you on your way.”
Suddenly Lee understood the full extent of the errors he
had made and felt a deep sense of shame. He answered in the
same language. “No!”
Wama heard the word and felt the boy stomp on his
largely unprotected foot at the same time. The monk let go
of the imposter’s arm, realized his mistake, and saw the
youngster dash into the jungle. Wama swore, slashed at an
intervening vine, and plunged in after him. A relay clicked
somewhere—and it started to rain.
Rebo felt an empty gnawing sensation in the pit of his

stomach. He ﬁgured that the better part of half an hour had

RUNNER

83

passed, and what had originally been a sense of mild concern
had been transformed into out-and-out fear. Someone had
taken the boy, he felt sure of it, but the question was who?
His initial inquiries had come up negative, and now, as the
runner approached a neighboring campsite, the young couple who occupied it looked worried. The male said something to his wife, who picked up a homemade spear. Her
husband was armed with a double-barreled ﬂintlock pistol
that he wore thrust through his wide leather belt. In spite of
the fact that the design was hundreds of thousands of years
old, the weapon itself was of recent manufacture and potentially dangerous. Conscious of that Rebo held his hands
palms out and chest high. “Sorry to bother you . . . I’m
looking for my son. He’s been gone for quite a while now,
and I’m worried about him.”
The woman’s expression seemed to soften somewhat. She
knew the boy, everyone did, and liked him. “Yes, as a matter
of fact I did. He and Brother Wama left quite a while ago. I
don’t know where they were going, but I’m sure he’s safe.”
Rebo had seen the monk around, noticed that he belonged to the red hat sect, and therefore assumed that he
was okay. That assumption looked stupid now, and the runner silently cursed himself for his own stupidity as he
thanked the couple for their help and turned away. All he
could do was keep asking, and keep looking, in hopes that a
miracle would occur. And a miracle did occur, although it
didn’t look like a miracle at ﬁrst, and the runner didn’t recognize it as such.
Frac gave Norr a shove, and the sensitive, who was bur-

dened by her supplies, nearly fell. The snakelike collar was
tight, very tight, and squeezed her neck from time to time as
if to remind her of its presence.

84

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Then, having regained her balance, Norr looked up to
see a man coming her way. He was big and wore an expression that could only be described as grim. The sensitive had
seen him before, from the platform above, living with a boy
she assumed to be his son. Now, as if the memories were a
trigger, she “saw” a man in scarlet robes lead the youngster
away. The words seemed to speak themselves. “I know
where your son is.”
The collar tightened, Norr clawed at her throat, and fell
to her knees. “You will remain silent!” the metal man commanded sternly. “Now get up.”
Rebo paused as the woman struggled to rise under the
weight of her pack. For reasons that were anything but clear,
the robot had a female prisoner. The runner had never seen
or heard of such a thing before but didn’t consider it to be
any of his business. Or wouldn’t have, except for the words
she had spoken, which were very interesting indeed. He
moved to help her. “What was that? What did you say?”
“The female is not allowed to speak,” the metal man said
coldly. “Nor are you allowed to touch her. I suggest that
you . . .”
“And I suggest that you shut the hell up,” the runner
said, drawing the Hogger and aiming the weapon at the robot’s head. “Now, loosen the thing around her throat, or I’ll
blow whatever passes for your brains all over the deck.”
Lacking weapons other than its hands, the machine had
no choice but to comply. Norr felt the collar loosen slightly
and reached up to massage her throat. “Thanks,” she
croaked.
“My son,” Rebo insisted. “Where is he?”
Much to her joy the sensitive discovered that she had
some unexpected leverage. “Free me, and I’ll take you
there,” she replied.

RUNNER

85

Rebo turned to look into a pair of opaque sensors. “Free
her. Do it now.”
“No,” number 214 replied. “That is forbidden. I must
take her to . . .”
The runner squeezed the trigger, the Hogger bucked in
his hand, and the resulting boom echoed back and forth between the steel bulkheads. The metal man’s head snapped
back, he collapsed onto the deck, and Norr felt the metal
band fall away.
“All right,” Rebo said. “You’re free. Let’s go.”
“But my pack,” Norr complained. “It’s heavy.”
“That’s too bad,” the runner replied unsympathetically.
“Leave it if you want to. Now, where is my son?”
Norr “saw” thick green foliage part to let her pass, felt
her heart start to pound, and knew that danger followed
only steps behind. “Come on!” the sensitive exclaimed.
“He’s in trouble!”
The woman tried to run, but the pack was too heavy for
that, and slowed her progress. Rebo swore, ordered the sensitive to dump her burden, and shouldered it himself. Then,
following what she sensed to be the right path, Norr led the
runner to what looked like a sealed hatch and pressed her
palm against the cold, damp metal. There was a loud hiss as
the door opened, and the sensitive stepped into the dimly lit
interior. Rebo was hesitant, but she waved him in. “Come
on! Hurry!”
The woman seemed so positive, so certain, that the runner obeyed. The hatch closed behind him, the lift jerked
into motion, and the platform started to rise. “How do you
know where my son is?” Rebo demanded suspiciously. “Are
you friends with the monk?”
“No,” Norr answered truthfully. “I’m a sensitive. I don’t
understand why I can see where your son is . . . But I can.”

86

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“And he’s alive?”
Norr felt herself trip on a root, scramble to her feet, and
start to run. But the monk was closer now, crashing through
the bushes just behind her, yelling words in a language she
had never heard before. “Yes,” she said softly, “for the moment at least. We’ll be there shortly.”
The rain fell in sheets as Lee forced his body through a

thicket of woody reeds only to confront solid durasteel.
Brother Wama had intentionally herded him into a corner!
Lee turned, ready to use his small size and greater agility to
escape, but the monk was there with knife extended.
Rivulets of rain streamed down across Wama’s face, his robe
was ripped and plastered to his body. Red dye ran down his
skinny calves to pool around his sandals. “There’s no point
in making that which is already hard even more difﬁcult,”
the monk said kindly. “I am truly sorry that it is I who must
free you from your body, but your elders seek to deceive all
of those who follow the way, and it is my duty to stop
them.”
Lee licked rainwater off his lips, noticed how sweet the
liquid tasted, and stuck his right hand into his left sleeve.
The second knife was there, hidden against just such an
emergency, and his ﬁngers closed around the hilt. But
should he use it? According to the precepts he had been
taught, Lee had an obligation to resist evil and to protect
others, but was not required to defend himself. Yet he
wanted to live, and more than that, to complete his life purpose. Assuming that the elders were correct regarding his
spiritual identity. But there was no time for debate or meditation so the boy stepped forward. “It seems that there is
one thing we agree upon,” the boy said, “and that is the importance of duty.”

RUNNER

87

Wama mistook the boy’s movement for an act of surrender, and was caught completely unprepared as the youngster
drew the second blade and brought it upward. The underhanded blow, plus the difference in their heights, meant
that the knife entered the monk’s unprotected abdomen. He
felt tissues part followed by a dull pain. Wama released the
belt knife in order to reach down and fondle the weapon
that protruded from his belly. Blood mingled with the red
dye and trickled down his bony legs. “Oh no,” the monk
said reproachfully. “Look what you’ve done!”
“I’m sorry! I really am,” Lee said, as he backed away. And
he was. The horror of what he had done was still sinking in
as the tears started to ﬂow.
Wama felt dizzy. He staggered but managed to keep his
feet. “So tell me,” he said in Tilisi. “Was I wrong? Is that
why I am about to die? Are you the Divine Wind?”
Rain pattered on the leaves around them, causing each to
bob and sway as Lee struggled to come up with an answer.
Finally, after what seemed like an eternity but was only a
matter of seconds, he spoke. “I honestly don’t know.”
Wama’s eyes registered disappointment, rolled back in
his head, and remained open as he fell. There was a splash
and water ﬂew in every direction as the body hit, and Rebo
forced his way into the clearing. Norr followed so closely
that she almost ran into the runner as he came to a sudden
stop. The adults took in the body, the scared little boy, and
could see what had occurred.
Norr went over to wrap an arm around Lee’s shoulders.
She could feel what he felt, and the weight of the boy’s sorrow was almost too much for either to bear. His body shook,
he started to sob, and tears ran down his cheeks. “It wasn’t
your fault,” the sensitive assured him. “You had no choice.
Come on . . . Let’s get you into some dry clothes.”

88

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Rebo watched the two of them head back toward the lift
and returned the Crosser to its holster. The woman seemed
to know how to handle the boy, and for that he was grateful.
The runner turned his attention to the body. It seemed safe
to assume that the monk was a black hat assassin—but was
he operating alone?
A careful search of the monk’s robes turned up nothing
more than a few coins. Just what one would expect of a professional. Disappointed, but not surprised, Rebo removed the
blade from Wama’s abdomen and wiped it on the dead man’s
clothing. Then, having retrieved the belt knife, Rebo left.
The real black hat assassin waited a full ﬁve minutes before emerging from a thick tangle of vegetation to kneel
next to the body. She had arrived too late to save the monk
or kill the boy. Wama’s death had been useful however. It
now appeared that two bodyguards had been sent to protect
the imposter. The nun wondered how many more carefully
disguised warriors were lurking among the passengers.
Time would tell.
The assassin took a moment to close Wama’s staring eyes
and recited the prayer for the dead. The rain stopped, a mist
rose and wrapped the nun in a steamy embrace. All of the
blood had been washed away by then—and there was peace
in the garden.

FOUR
™

The Planet Anafa

Just as electronic media enabled homogeneous societies on individual planets, the advent of star gates laid the groundwork
for a multisystem government having a common language,
laws, and customs.
—Heva Manos, Advisor to Emperor Hios,
in his biography, A Web of Stars

Though secret now, the subsurface facility had once been

regarded as little more than a utility portal, through which
low-ranking technical personnel could travel to distant
planets to perform maintenance on the then-pervasive system of star gates that held the far-ﬂung empire together.
But time had passed, a terrible war had been fought, and the
computer that controlled the network had been destroyed.
Or that’s what most historians believed. But not Milos
Lysander, who insisted that the artiﬁcial intelligence called
Logos had been lost rather than destroyed, which meant
that the days of nearly instantaneous star travel could be restored if the AI were located. It was the very thing the
Techno Society had been founded to bring about.
Now, as Jevan Kane made his way down into the cata-

90

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

combs lying below the Society’s headquarters on Anafa, the
operative knew that the system he was about to use had been
created to operate in parallel with the more important public network. The maintenance system worked then, and it
still did, largely because it was extremely simple compared
to the network that it had been created to support. A fact
that enabled members of the Techno Society to move around
with a degree of freedom unimaginable to most people.
The stairs twisted down through a pool of light, descended twenty feet or so, and turned yet again. Steel
clanged under Kane’s boots, and the operative’s stomach began to feel queasy as the radiation produced by the nearby
power core invaded his body. The medicos weren’t sure what
sort of long-term health problems might result from prolonged exposure to the core, and Kane had no desire to ﬁnd
out. The key was to get in, pass through, and put the potential danger behind him as quickly as possible.
The stairs ended, Kane palmed a door, and was admitted
to a clearly marked decontamination lock. Even though a
great deal of knowledge had been lost over the years, the
Techno Society’s scientists had studied the ancient texts and
were aware of the problems that could occur were the organisms from one planet allowed to successfully colonize another. That’s why the operative was nude with the exception
of his boots, which he removed as he entered the chamber.
They would get wet the moment the shower came on—but
that was preferable to the hassle of obtaining off-the-shelf
footwear on a planet like Pooz. Clothes, weapons, and all the
rest would be waiting for him.
There was a hiss, which quickly transformed itself into a
roar as jets of hot water mixed with a broad-spectrum antibacterial agent hit Kane from all directions. The wash-down
lasted three minutes and was followed by blasts of pre-

RUNNER

91

warmed air. A door slid open, which allowed Kane to enter
a circular room. He left wet footprints on the cement ﬂoor.
The curvilinear walls were covered with hundreds of video
tiles. Each displayed a still photo of a distant world with the
appropriate name printed below. Roughly half of the images
were darkened, indicating that the gate that once provided
access to that location was no longer available. But the rest
were lit, meaning that the operative could travel there if he
chose.
The square labeled pooz showed a desert, a craggylooking mountain range in the distance, and a scattering of
high clouds beyond that. Having spent the better part of a
month searching for Norr in and around Seros, Kane had
concluded that the sensitive had boarded the ship and was
in transit to the planet he was presently looking at.
The operative double-checked to make sure that he had
read the destination correctly, touched the mountain, and
felt the tile give. The room lights ﬂashed on and off as the
voice of a woman long dead issued through overhead speakers. “The transfer sequence is about to begin. Please take
your place on the service platform. Once in place check to
ensure that no portion of your anatomy extends beyond the
yellow line. Failure to do so will cause serious injury and
could result in death.”
Although Kane had never seen, much less used gates
large enough to transport hundreds of people and tons of
cargo from place to place, he imagined that ﬂesh-andblood attendants had been present to ensure that customers
kept their extremities inside the transfer zone. Boots in
hand Kane stepped up onto a raised dais, checked to ensure
that he was standing at the exact center of the safety circle,
and uttered a silent prayer. There were no recorded incidents of a gate’s failing during a transmission, but an

92

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

unprecedented death was not what Kane wanted to be remembered for.
There was a brilliant ﬂash of light as all the atoms in the
operative’s body were disassembled, transmitted through
hyperspace, and systematically reassembled within an identical containment on the surface of Pooz. Kane felt the usual
moment of disorientation, followed by a few seconds of
dizziness and a bout of nausea. Then, eager to escape the
room and the nearly palpable radiation present there, the
operative stumbled into the local decontamination chamber, where he was disinfected all over again.
Finally, having donned his soaking-wet boots, Kane exited into a stairwell and climbed four ﬂights of stairs to a
platform where Mar Von stood waiting. Containers of mail
were sent through the star gates on a regular basis, and the
station on Pooz had been told to expect the operative. Von
was nearly six feet tall, a few years younger than Kane, and
wore a two-piece outﬁt that revealed a well-toned midriff.
She was an admirer of men, especially strong men, and was
conﬁdent enough to let that show. Von took an unapologetic
look at the Kane’s well-muscled body before wrapping it in
a thick locally made robe and handing him both ends of the
tie. “Greetings, Operative Kane. Clothes, weapons, and
food are waiting.”
Kane could feel the sexual energy that emanated from
the woman but gave no sign of it. He would have her, assuming there was time, but only if his primary purpose on
the planet had been served. “Thank you. Has the ship arrived from Anafa yet?”
“No,” Von replied as she led the operative through a door
and into an artiﬁcially lit hallway. “Assuming that the vessel is running on time—it should arrive in about two days.”
Kane nodded. There was usually some dilatation in-

RUNNER

93

volved in a transfer from one planet to another. Those who
constructed the system had presumably calculated such differences and been able to forewarn travelers about what to
expect, but such niceties were a thing of the past. He had
departed Anafa a week early, or believed that he had, only to
lose ﬁve days in transit. Still, the situation could have been
worse, so he felt fortunate. “Good. Please call a staff meeting. I’m convinced that a woman of great interest to the society is traveling aboard that ship. Our metal friends may
have taken her into custody by now. If not, it’s imperative
that we intercept and capture this individual the moment
she lands.”
“Of course,” Von replied obligingly. “Welcome to Pooz.”
The Planet Pooz

Although the shuttle’s arrival wasn’t surrounded by the
same level of excitement as it had been in the city of Seros
on Anafa, quite a few of the citizens of Gos still turned out
to greet both the ship and its passengers.
However, because of the impact of climatic changes that
had swept across the surface of Pooz during the past ﬁve
thousand years, large areas of what had once been fertile
land had been converted to desert. Then, as an army of sand
dunes marched up from the south, walls had been constructed to protect Gos and its spaceport. Over time both
the sand and the walls had risen until onlookers could
gather around the rim of the circular retaining wall and
look down on the shuttle as it discharged its passengers, a
process that was a good deal more formal on Pooz than it
had been on Anafa. Having stumbled down the ramp into
the blistering heat of a spring day, the bleary-eyed travelers
were funneled through a double cordon of brightly uni-

94

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

formed lancers and into the shade cast by a gently ﬂapping
awning.
Then, each having waited his or her turn, the recently arrived passengers were shown into the presence of a man
whose only qualiﬁcation for his job was the fact that he was
related to the Shah by an accident of birth. He was elderly,
but still handsome, and dressed in immaculate white robes.
Though never trained for the task, the ofﬁcial still took his
duties very seriously and subjected each person to a long list
of questions meant to establish his or her identity, reasons
for traveling to Pooz, and their future plans. Information
that was recorded by two serious-looking scribes.
Then, having assured himself that none of the travelers
had come to Pooz for the express purpose of overthrowing
the Shah or joining the ranks of the unemployed, the ofﬁcial
concluded each interview by demanding a hefty landing fee.
Those who couldn’t pay, and there were six of them, were arrested and led away. Later, having served three months at
hard labor, they would be freed.
No one was allowed to approach the immigrants until
they had been interviewed, which meant that there was
nothing for Kane to do except scan the passengers through a
small pair of binoculars and wait for the process to end. The
sensitive had proven herself to be something of an expert
where disguises were concerned, so the operative examined
each face with care. But that turned out to be unnecessary,
because it wasn’t long before Kane spotted a female sensitive standing next to a metal man, and knew his search was
over. But what happened to the second robot? the operative wondered to himself. He didn’t really care however, not so long
as Lanni Norr was in custody.
Some terse orders sent Von and two of her functionaries
scuttling along the circumference of the retaining wall to

RUNNER

95

the point where two brightly uniformed heavies blocked access to the long, curving ramp that led down to the blastscarred surface below. Once there, all Von and her men
could do was elbow their way to the front of the waiting
crowd and prepare for the moment when the last passenger
cleared customs.
It was midafternoon by the time the last person had been
processed, a whistle blew, and the heavies stepped out of the
way. Von and her functionaries ran down the ramp, plowed
through the crowd below, and closed in on the couple that
they had been looking for. Von was still ten feet away when
she realized that something was amiss. Though mostly hidden by a tattered, ankle-length robe, the metal man’s face
appeared to have slipped slightly, revealing a patch of olivecolored skin. And, now that she was closer, the operative
could see that while made up to look like a sensitive, the
woman who stood next to the machine was clearly a norm!
She pointed a ﬁnger at the couple and yelled, “Grab them!
Remove that mask! Wipe the makeup off her face!”
Her subordinates obeyed, but rather than the tussle that
Von half expected to ensue, the couple made no attempt to
resist. Instead the young couple laughed, as if expecting to
be intercepted and not the least bit concerned.
Von examined the metal mask, saw that the faceplate had
been removed from a real robot, and held it up for Kane to
see. The operative lowered his binoculars, swore bitterly,
and brought the device back up. Faces blurred as Kane
panned the crowd, but the sensitive was nowhere to be seen.
Somehow Norr had managed to neutralize both of the metal
men and make her escape. The woman was maddening.
Von arrived a few minutes later. Her breathing was normal in spite of the fact that she had run all the way up the
ramp. “We missed them, but the imposters provided what

96

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

could be some useful information. About halfway through
the voyage the sensitive was taken into custody by one of
the metal men—but another passenger freed her. Subsequent to that she spent most of her time with the man and
his son. It seems the disguises were his idea.”
Kane nodded thoughtfully. “Good work, Citizen Von.
Put out the word. The city of Gos is a lot smaller than Seros.
Given any luck at all we’ll ﬁnd them.”
In addition to the ramp that curved up along the side of

the retaining wall to access the planet’s surface, there were
three spaceport-level tunnels that provided access to the
largely subterranean city and allowed the threesome to enter
without going up onto the surface. It was a good deal cooler
underground, and the runner noticed that new shops had
moved in to replace some of the businesses he had frequented on a previous visit and that the efforts to reinforce
the city’s once-sagging support columns had been completed during his absence. The basic layout was the same,
however, and Rebo had no difﬁculty ﬁnding his way around.
Hundreds of carefully maintained skylights, some of
which were equipped with mirrors to direct the sunlight
downward, served to illuminate the main thoroughfares,
plazas, and squares. Smaller streets, and the labyrinth of
narrow passageways that wound through the tightly packed
residential neighborhoods, were lit with lamps fueled by
natural gas. The system had been in place for more than a
thousand years and drew upon a ﬁeld located twenty miles
away. It was an important resource and one that helped
make the city of Gos possible.
But what really kept the city alive was the Dimba River.
It ﬂowed through the middle of town and formed the community’s east–west axis. Not only did the Dimba provide

RUNNER

97

the citizens of Gos with drinking water—it was the watery
highway that brought raw materials in from the east. Finished goods were packed up and sent downstream to those
who lived in the cities, towns, and villages located along the
edge of the Great Sea.
So, knowing how central the river was to life in Gos, and
not averse to showing off a little, Rebo led Lee and Norr out
of a side street and onto the river walk that ran along the
river’s north bank. Having consumed nearly all of their supplies aboard ship, the group was only lightly burdened. Lee
barely felt the weight of his pack, or so it seemed, as he
peered through shop windows, jumped up onto the waisthigh wall that kept people from falling into the Dimba, and
was immediately ordered to get down.
The ﬁrst thing the newcomers noticed about the river as
they looked down into its blue-green depths was that it
seemed to be in a hurry to join with the great sea. The water
was very clear. That meant they could actually see incoming
cargo modules as they whipped past. Though more industrialized than the west end of the city, Mountainside as the
locals called the neighborhood they were in, was a lot more
interesting. Rebo pointed to rows of hand-operated cranes
and the nets that were stretched between them. “They lower
the nets into the river, catch the cargoes sent down from the
highlands, and pull them out. It’s a fast, inexpensive way to
bring raw materials down from the mountains.”
“But how do they keep track of who gets what?” Lee
wanted to know. “And how do they keep everything dry?”
“Well,” the runner answered, “each merchant maintains
an agent up in the highlands. They buy the materials and load
them into special watertight containers. Weights are attached
to achieve neutral buoyancy. Then they mark each barrel with
a code and toss it in. The river does the rest. Clever, huh?”

98

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Very,” Norr put in as she watched a wooden crane lift a
net loaded with dripping containers up out of the river.
“But what’s to stop thieves from deploying their own nets
upriver?”
“The river comes to the surface only a few times between
the headwaters and Gos,” Rebo responded. “And those locations are well guarded. Come on, we’d better ﬁnd a place to
stay, before the other passengers grab all the rooms.”
The other two nodded in agreement, and as they turned
to leave, a poisoned dart ﬂew past Lee’s neck and lost itself in
the river. The youngster remained blissfully unaware of his
narrow brush with death as Rebo led them toward the west.
Still concealed by shadow, the black hat assassin lowered
the hollow tube that doubled as her staff and marveled at
the boy’s good fortune. Or, had his survival been predestined? And, if so, what would that imply?
Norr felt a sudden need to turn and check on Lee. He
looked up at her, smiled uncertainly, and took the sensitive’s
hand. In spite of her efforts to counsel him, the youngster
continued to have nightmares about the battle with the
monk and was no longer willing to carry his knives.
Part of the problem stemmed from the trauma involved
in having to kill a man, but this boy bore a larger burden as
well. Lee had been raised to believe that he was the Divine
Wind, a great teacher sent to the physical plane to usher in
an era of spiritual enlightenment, which would beneﬁt millions if not billions of people. But now, having been confronted by an obviously sincere individual who was willing
to sacriﬁce his life in order to stop what he saw as an imposter from ascending the throne, Lee wasn’t sure what to
believe. “If I were truly an avatar, I would think nothing
but important thoughts,” Lee had told her in conﬁdence,
“and I would know who I had been in previous lives. What

RUNNER

99

if the black hats are correct? What if the boy they sent to
CaCanth is the real Nom Maa? Perhaps it would be better if
I were dead.”
Norr had worked long and hard to convince Lee that
murder was wrong, no matter what the supposed justiﬁcation, and that he had been correct to defend himself. But
while he smiled, and seemed to agree, the sensitive knew
that doubts remained.
A series of turnings brought the newly arrived travelers to
a narrow street lit only by lamps. The Starman’s Rest was reputed to be so old that it dated back to the time when starships landed on a weekly basis, and the little hotel had been a
favorite among professional spacers. Now, no longer able to
rely on off-worlders for a substantial portion of its revenue, the
inn had become a home away from home for coastal purchasing agents, many of whom lived in Gos for months at a time.
Rebo took the usual look around prior to approaching
the inn and wondered what to do. It had been clearly advantageous to form an alliance with Norr in the aftermath of
Lee’s ﬁght with the black hat monk. First, because two pairs
of adult eyes were better than one, and second because the
sensitive had been able to help the boy deal with the trauma
he had experienced, something the runner knew he
wouldn’t be much good at.
Now, with the ﬁrst leg of the journey behind them, Rebo
wasn’t so sure that the alliance made sense anymore. First,
because there was no particular reason for the threesome to
stay together, and second because while he had disclosed the
true nature of Lee’s identity to the sensitive, she had never
seen ﬁt to explain why the metal men were pursuing her and
remained somewhat secretive. With those facts in mind, the
act of checking into the Starman’s Rest together might send
the wrong signal. But how to gracefully disengage?

100

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The front door swung open, providing entry to a comfortable lobby, which was ﬁlled with staid but well-caredfor furnishings. The man behind the front desk had put on
some weight since Rebo had last seen him last, but there
was no mistaking the shaved head, gimletlike eyes, and
bushy black beard. It was Mo Jahn all right and Rebo
smiled. “Who’s in charge of this worthless dump anyway?”
the runner demanded loudly. “I’ve seen better pigsties.”
Jahn’s brows came together in one uninterrupted line,
and the proprietor was reaching for the black-market blast
stick that was racked under the counter, when something
about the stranger’s voice triggered a memory. “Jak Rebo? Is
that you? Why you worthless piece of crap! Look at you!
You’re all grown-up!”
Lee looked up at Norr, who shrugged. “I know it’s hard
to believe, but I get the idea that they like each other. It’s a
man thing . . . Once you grow up maybe you can explain it
to me.”
Jahn came out from behind the counter, the two men exchanged hugs, and Rebo heard himself tell an unrehearsed
lie. “Mo, this is my wife Lanni, and our son Dor.”
“You’re married?” the proprietor exclaimed. “My wife
will never believe it.”
Norr was still in the process of evaluating the falsehood
and wondering why the innkeeper found Rebo’s marriage so
hard to believe, when Jahn wrapped her in a bear hug.
“Welcome to the Starman’s Rest,” the businessman said. “I
will personally take you to your room.”
Because of the ovenlike conditions up on the surface,
anyone who had a desire to acquire additional square
footage was forced to expand downward. That meant the
newer hotel rooms were those located at the very bottom of
the structure. Jahn showed the threesome into the boxy

RUNNER

101

twelve-foot-by-ﬁfteen-foot room as if ushering them into a
palace. Which, based on Rebo’s previous experience, wasn’t
that far from the truth. Space was at a premium in Gos, and
judging from the number of beds that had been crammed
into the gaslit room, it sometimes serviced as many as six
guests.
Jahn had just completed a review of the room’s amenities, and was about to depart, when the runner took his arm.
“One last thing, Mo . . . Please put some other name on
your register. And, if someone comes looking for us, please
let me know.”
The proprietor’s eyebrows inched higher. “Oh, so it’s like
that, is it? I should have known. Some things never change.
Of course . . . I’ll speak to my staff.”
Norr waited until the door had closed before dumping
her pack onto a bed. “Well, sweetie, how long have we been
married anyway? About ten years?”
Rebo grinned sheepishly. “Sorry about that . . . You can
bail out anytime you want to. I assume you intend to make
for the coast. That’s the most pleasant place to live on this
planet.”
“Yeah, sure,” Norr replied, eager to cover up the fact that
she had no plan other than to escape Anafa. “Don’t get me
wrong . . . I appreciate your hospitality. Jahn seems like a
nice man. How did you come to know him?”
“It was one of my ﬁrst runs,” Rebo explained. “I brought
him a letter from his long-lost father. I had to wait four
months before I could board a ship and spent most of that
time living here.”
“Is that how long we’ll have to wait?” Lee inquired,
speaking for the ﬁrst time.
“I’m not sure,” Rebo answered honestly as he lowered his
pack to the ﬂoor. “I was bound for Anafa back then—and

102

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

we’re headed for Ning. The ship will leave from Tra. That
means a cross-country trip in order to get there. That much
is for sure . . . The question is when will the next vessel depart from Tra? Assuming it’s still running, that is.”
Although Rebo had disclosed Lee’s true identity, the sensitive had been unaware of where they planned to go next
and felt a sudden sense of loss. It had been a long time since
she had lived with—or been close to another human being.
Still, she had no reason to accompany them, so a refuge
along the coast made sense. “Yeah, well, I’m sure you’ll ﬁgure that out. So, given the fact that this is our ﬁrst night on
Pooz, how ’bout a celebratory dinner? I’m buying.”
Rebo grinned. “Sounds good! I know just the place. Assuming it’s still there.”
The illumination provided by the skylights had started
to fade, and an army of lamplighters had just started to
make their evening rounds, when the threesome left the hotel. Night came early below ground, but Rebo liked the
warm buttery glow that the gas lamps generated, as well as
the way that shadows slid across the city’s ancient walls.
Not only that, but the runner knew that most of the shops
wouldn’t close for hours yet, and all manner of pedestrians
were out strolling the streets.
But, appealing though the city was, Rebo knew that
dangers lurked in the less-traveled passageways, and kept to
the main thoroughfares. He also left the Hogger where
would-be cutpurses could get a good look at it, kept Lee
close by his side, and looked back over his shoulder from
time to time.
The black hat assassin was extremely skilled, however, as
were the Dib Wa provided to her by the local monastery, all
of whom were dressed in ordinary attire. The runner saw

RUNNER

103

them, but had no way to know who they were, or what they
intended.
The Falls restaurant was an open-air affair that consisted
of twenty linen-covered tables, each of which had its own
candle, and were grouped around the storefront that contained the kitchen. The falls, for which the eatery had been
named, could be seen on the opposite side of the river walk,
and roared gently as the Dimba tumbled down a series of
man-made ledges before entering a calm stretch, where outgoing cargo modules were being dumped into the water.
It was early yet, which meant that the threesome were
soon seated at one of the centermost tables, a location that
Rebo deemed to be safest because newcomers would form a
protective wall around his ten-year-old charge. The runner
felt reasonably secure as the three of them settled into their
chairs, but would have felt less so had he known that a black
hat assassin was in the process of being seated at a nearby
table, and that one of the waiters had already dispatched a
message to the Techno Society.
Having placed their orders, and talked for a while, Rebo
and his companions were still at work on their appetizers
when the street urchin arrived with Kane, Von, and two of
her functionaries in tow. Unable to intervene in such a public setting, and with the centermost tables having already
been taken, the newcomers were forced to sit at the very
edge of the river walk.
It wasn’t until the main course arrived, and Norr had consumed her ﬁrst forkful of baked river ﬁsh, when ﬁngers of inky
blackness started to ﬁnd their way in among the otherwise benign thought forms that hung all around her. The sensitive
frowned, swallowed, and dropped her fork. It clattered on her
plate. “Jak, I don’t like the feel of this place. We need to leave.”

104

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Rebo’s hand slid in under his jacket, and his eyes scanned
the diners seated around them. Though not acquainted with
the exact nature of the sensitive’s powers, he knew they were
real. On the other hand he had barely touched his dinner
and had no desire to leave on what might amount to a
whim. “Can you tell me why you feel that way? Or who to
look out for?”
“No,” Norr said stolidly, “just that someone . . .” The
sensitive’s voice faltered, her eyes widened, and her hands
came up as if to push someone away. “Oh, no! Not now! Go
away!”
But it was too late, as Milos Lysander took control of
Norr’s body, rose from the chair, and yelled at the top of her
voice. “My name is Lysander! This body is my channel! If
members of the Techno Society are present, then come to
my aid!”
Kane had no choice but to respond. He stood, drew his
handgun, and yelled, “Take her alive!”
The black hat assassin had no idea who Kane was, or
what he was shouting about, but saw what she deemed to be
the perfect opportunity. She stood, produced an ugly machine pistol, and yelled in Tilisi. “Kill him!”
The nun meant the boy, but one of the Dib Wa assumed
that she meant Kane, and ﬁred a shot at him. The technologist felt something burn the upper part of his left biceps,
heard a meaty thud as the slug struck Von’s chest, and ﬁred
in return. A Techno Society functionary shot one of the Dib
Wa, and Rebo pulled the Crosser. Food sprayed the air, and
the table rattled madly as the assassin’s bullets punched
holes in its surface, and barely missed Lee. The runner’s ﬁrst
bullet took the black hat assassin in the throat, the second
passed through her open mouth, and the third drilled a hole
between her eyes.

RUNNER

105

Meanwhile, Lysander continued to shout all sorts of nonsense as Lee threw himself at the sensitive’s legs and took
the woman down. That was when Rebo bent to grab the boy
by the arm. “Come on! Let’s go!”
“No!” Lee objected. “Not without Lanni . . . She’s in
trouble!”
The runner swore as a bullet pinged off a metal chair, reversed the Crosser, and made use of it to pistol-whip the
sensitive. He transferred the semiautomatic over to his left
hand as her body went limp. “Stay low! Grab a wrist! We’ll
tow her into the kitchen!”
Lee obeyed and together they were able to drag Norr’s
unconscious body into the storefront even as the gun battle
continued to rage. By that time, Kane had identiﬁed the
single surviving Dib Wa and shot him. A woman sobbed, a
man called for help, and those who could scuttled away.
There were shouts as a contingent of the Shah’s lancers appeared a thousand yards away and ran along the river walk.
Kane turned to see a man and a boy pull Norr into the
restaurant, swore for the second time that day, and backed
into the embrace of some welcoming shadows. By the time
the lancers arrived, and ordered everyone to remain where
they were, the technologist was gone.
Having dragged the unconscious sensitive into the restaurant’s steamy kitchen, Rebo and Lee soon found themselves in
danger from the cooks. But even a meat cleaver is no match for
a semiautomatic pistol, and the kitchen staff were forced to
back off as two of their patrons towed a third through a screen
door and out into the garbage-strewn passageway beyond.
“All right,” Rebo said grimly as he hoisted Norr into a
ﬁreman’s carry. “Let’s get out of here. These passageways are
home to all sorts of vermin, so your job is to watch our back
trail and let me know if anyone tries to follow.”

106

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Lee nodded solemnly and soon found himself walking
backward most of the time as the runner carried the sensitive down the narrow alleyway. The widely spaced gas lamps
created pools of uncertain light, each separated by a hundred feet of gloom, which made for excellent places to hide.
Lee heard what might have been claws scratching against
pavers, followed by the rattle of a garbage can, and reached
for his belt knife. That was when he remembered that he
had refused to wear it and why. But nothing pursued them,
and the boy felt a sense of relief as they passed under a light
before plunging back into relative darkness.
A rectangular glow appeared up ahead, quickly followed
by a burst of laughter and the slamming of a door as the
light was extinguished. Then, after what seemed like an
eternity, a well-illuminated intersection appeared. A promising development insofar as the runner was concerned.
Norr didn’t weigh all that much, but seemed to be getting
heavier, and Rebo knew he wouldn’t be able to carry her all
the way to the hotel. Not to mention the fact that an attempt to do so would inevitably attract the wrong sort of
attention. The answer was to hire some sort of public transportation and move the sensitive in a less-visible manner.
The runner’s breath was coming in short gasps by the
time he emerged from the passageway into one of the city’s
lesser squares. A well-illuminated fountain marked the center of an area that was surrounded by shops. Locals strolled,
stood in small groups, or sat on benches that faced the fountain. “Wait here,” Rebo commanded. “I’ll be back in a
minute.” The runner placed Norr with her back propped up
against a wall, paused to check her pulse, and was gone moments later.
Lee didn’t want to wait there, not all by himself, and
wondered if it had been a mistake to rescue Norr. It was a

RUNNER

107

small thought, a poor thought, and one the youngster regretted. The sensitive groaned and reached up to touch the
swelling on the side of her head. “What happened? Where
am I?”
“You began to shout, people shot at us, and Jak hit you,”
the boy answered earnestly. “As for where we are, I don’t
know.”
“Damn,” Norr said, examining her hand to see if there
was blood on it. “That hurts.”
The sound of footsteps combined with the monotonous
squeal of an unoiled wheel caused both to turn as Rebo returned accompanied by a three-wheeled pedicab. “Here she
is,” the runner announced loudly. “I told her to lay off the
booze, but she wouldn’t listen, and passed out. Hold it right
there . . . I’ll put her in the back.”
“I’ll have to charge three gunars if all of you ride,” the
whipcord-thin pedicab operator observed as he eyed Norr.
“Plus another gunar if she throws up on the seat.”
“No problem,” the runner grunted, as he lifted Norr up
into the back of the vehicle. “Take us to the Starman’s
Rest—and if there’s a back way, then use it.” Norr felt the
ﬂimsy conveyance sway as Rebo took a seat next to her followed by a less-noticeable movement as Lee hopped aboard.
The pedicab operator had to literally stand on his pedals
in order to get his rickety vehicle under way, but once the
conveyance was in motion, the going was easier. The fact
that there were very few inclines helped, too.
Norr closed her eyes, tried to ignore the pain that each
bump of the wheels caused her, and felt a sense of hopelessness. Rather than leave the Milos Lysander entity back on
Anafa, as the sensitive had assumed she would, the discarnate
had followed her to Pooz, a trip that was probably a great deal
easier to make on the spirit planes than it was on the physical.

108

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Not only that, but it seemed that Lysander’s followers
were tracking her, too, because even as the scientist harangued the restaurant’s customers, a ﬂesh-and-blood version of the blond-haired man had gotten up from one of the
tables, produced a gun, and opened ﬁre. And, had it not
been for the runner and his youthful charge, there was little
doubt that Kane and his associates would have been able to
spirit her away.
Norr’s thoughts were interrupted as the pedal-powered
vehicle coasted to a stop and light spilled onto the surrounding pavement. There was a jumble of subdued conversation
as Rebo provided Mo Jahn with a sanitized version of what
had occurred, paid the pedicab operator, and lifted the sensitive out of the vehicle. Norr said, “I can walk,” but the runner chose to carry the young woman into the hotel instead.
Ten minutes later the sensitive was propped up in bed,
with a cold compress bound to the side of her head, and her
ﬁngers wrapped around a mug of hot tea. Once the hotel’s
staff had exited the room, Rebo checked the door to ensure
that it was locked and pulled a chair up next to Norr’s bed.
“All right . . . There was a time when I ﬁgured that whatever you were running from was your business. That
changed earlier this evening. Who is this Milos Lysander
guy? And why were those people trying to shoot you?”
Norr opened her mouth to reply, but Lee spoke ﬁrst. “No
offense, Father—but at least three of those people were trying to kill me.”
Rebo frowned and swiveled around. “Really? What makes
you think so?”
“I saw one of them, the woman, aboard the ship. She
kept to herself, but she was there, I’m sure of it. Not only
that, but she gave orders in Tilisi, a language that no one
outside of my religion knows how to speak. Finally,” the

RUNNER

109

boy said gravely, “she ordered her men to ‘kill him.’ Not her,
but him.”
Rebo nodded approvingly. “Not bad, son. Not bad at
all . . . You paid attention in spite of everything that was
going on around you. I’m impressed.”
Lee felt his chest swell with pride. He couldn’t remember
his real father, or mother for that matter, both of whom had
been prevailed upon by the order to give him up at the age
of two. Now, having been forced to pretend that Rebo was
his father, the boy found that he wanted to please the runner
in much the same way that he might have sought to please
his real parents.
“So,” Rebo said thoughtfully, as he turned back to Norr,
“It appears that we were attacked by two different groups.
Three of them were after Dor here . . . but what about the
rest?”
Norr sipped her tea. She was a loner, and for good reason,
since it seemed as though once identiﬁed by the surrounding society sensitives were nearly always used, abused, and
persecuted. As a result she was understandably reluctant to
share information that could be used against her. But her
present situation was more than she could handle alone, so
Norr told Rebo about the ﬁrst time that Lysander had coopted her body, about the incident at the spaceport, and the
message from Jevan Kane. “He was the one with the blond
hair,” she added. “The one who yelled, ‘Take her alive!’ ”
“Well, at least they aren’t trying to kill you,” Rebo responded grimly. “Now, please don’t take this the wrong
way, but why not go along with them? You took money in
return for demonstrating your abilities back on Seros . . .
These people are willing to pay, so where’s the problem?”
It was a good question, an excellent question, and one
that Norr had struggled with on numerous occasions. But

110

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

how to answer without seeming hypocritical? It was Lee
who came to her rescue. “The ascended master Teon once
said that ‘the freedom to choose’ was the ﬁrst gift that God
presented to humanity.”
Norr nodded gratefully. “Yes! That’s it. I want the freedom to choose. And there’s something more as well . . .
Something that might be difﬁcult for a normal to understand. When I surrender my body to another person it’s like
having sex with them, except more intimate, if you can
imagine that. When Lysander takes over without my permission it’s like being raped.”
“Then why allow him to do so?” Rebo wanted to know.
“I don’t allow him to do so,” the sensitive insisted hotly.
“And the fact that he can do it anyway terriﬁes me. Most
sensitives can block most discarnate entities most of the
time. But there are exceptions, and this is one of them. No
one knows why.”
There was a long period of silence as each person thought
the situation over. “Okay,” the runner said ﬁnally, “so here’s
how I see it. Both the black hats and the techno people
know that we’re on Pooz. Mo Jahn tells me that the ship to
Ning is scheduled to arrive off-planet eighteen days from
now. We can hole up here and wait for the next vessel, or
make for Tra and take our chances. Personally, I ﬁgure it’s
only a matter of time before a member of the hotel staff sells
us out, and someone comes in after us. So I favor making a
run for it.”
Norr looked quizzical. “Was I mistaken? Or, did I hear
an invitation buried in that last statement?”
The runner shrugged. For reasons he wasn’t sure of, or
wouldn’t admit, the idea of sending the young woman off
on her own bothered him. “Yeah, I guess you did.”
“I appreciate it,” the sensitive replied, “I really do. But

RUNNER

111

I’m not sure it’s such a good idea. You two have enough
trouble on your hands without sharing mine.”
“Odds are that we’ll do better together,” Rebo said pragmatically. “Besides, I’ve got a feeling that both groups view
us as a single unit at this point, which means that they
aren’t going to be all that discriminating.”
“That’s right!” Lee added enthusiastically. “Jak’s my
father—and you can be my mother!”
Norr smiled. “Yes, I suppose I could.”
Back before human civilization had stalled, and the long

gentle slide back into barbarity had begun, there had been a
time when no task was considered too great for the ruling
technocrats and the scientists that they employed. Those
were the days in which the city of Gos lived on the surface of
the planet, and was, ironically enough, known as “The City
of the Sun.”
Back then, before the Dimba River had been “rationalized,” it followed through a series of long, gentle, east-towest curves before running into a ridge of upthrusting rock
just short of Gos. There were holes in the barrier, but when
the river split up in order to take advantage of them, barge
trafﬁc was forced to stop well short of the metroplex.
In order to remedy that situation and open the Dimba all
the way to Gos, the engineers blasted a hole through the
ridge, thereby allowing the water to form a single stream.
That left a labyrinth of water-cut channels in the subsurface
rock. The passageways, caverns and galleries were little
more than a curiosity at ﬁrst, but eventually, once the dunes
began their irresistible march, a group of monks took possession of them rather than dwell within the city itself. And,
given the fact that the underground maze was not all that
pleasant to live in, no one objected.

112

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Later, after surface conditions grew worse, the subsurface
habitat started to look a lot more attractive, and various
groups tried to dislodge the monks. But the Dib Wa were a
potent force—and kept the would-be invaders at bay.
Since that time the religion had split into two feuding
groups, and the schism had led to occasional violence. Now,
as torches ﬂared and threw dark shadows onto rocky walls,
the latest in what had been hundreds of casualties were
borne toward the traditional funeral pyres. The ﬁrst litter
bore the tightly wrapped body of the nun from Anafa. A
trained assassin, who along with two local Dib Wa, had sacriﬁced her current life while trying to prevent the imposter
from making his way to the holy city of CaCanth. A very
noble thing to do, which was why Lar Thota had insisted on
funeral rites commensurate with the high rank of Ona, or
truth giver. Happily, from Thota’s point of view, no red hats
were present to desecrate the solemn ceremony, since the
last of the misguided souls had been murdered in their sleep
some nine months before.
The passageway took a sharp turn, passed a pool inhabited
by blind ﬁsh, and went up over a rise. Thota followed the procession into a vast chamber. Thousands of crystals were embedded in the rocky ceiling. They twinkled like distant stars.
Below them, his back still connected to the rock from
which his massive body had been hewed, sat a likeness of
Teon. If the great master was saddened by the deaths of his
servants, there was no sign of it on his impassive face. Nor
should there be, the monk thought to himself, for he sees that
which we seek.
One by one the bodies were placed on a rocky platform, a
sonorous chant echoed between rough-hewn walls, and
Thota gave the necessary signal. Wood was a precious commodity in Gos, so natural gas had been piped into the cav-

RUNNER

113

erns, and was lit with a torch. There was a dramatic pop! as
blue ﬂames rippled out to embrace the bodies, and what little smoke there was wafted upward.
Finally, once the ceremony was complete, Thota bowed
to the image of Teon before retracing his footsteps and entering the medium-sized chamber that doubled as both his
living quarters and ofﬁce. The bioengineered beings who
awaited him there were so different from members of the
A-strain that they might as well have been aliens. The precise rationale for creating an offshoot of humanity that could
ﬂy had been lost to the sect’s historians but the monk suspected that the so-called wings had been created in order to
exploit certain habitats for commercial purposes.
Whether their creators had Pooz in mind back then, or
the winged humanoids simply found the planet to their liking was unknown, but the result was the same. Just as the
phibs made themselves at home in the Great Sea, their airborne cousins laid claim to the mountains, where they lived
in terraced villages, farmed hardscrabble plots, and preyed
on commerce below.
Two of the exotic creatures stood waiting. Both were
scantily dressed, about six and a half feet tall, and very thin.
Thota knew that their bones were hollow, certain portions
of their skeletons had been fused to make them stronger,
and the variants had muscles that norms didn’t. Their leathery wings were folded vertically along their backs, both carried projectile weapons, and eyed him with what could only
be described as a look of ﬁerce independence.
“Welcome to our humble monastery,” the monk said,
bowing formally. “My name is Thota. I would invite you to
take a seat, but I fear I don’t have any suitable furniture.”
“There is no need,” one of the wings replied stifﬂy. “My
name is Karth. This is Zota. What do you want of us?”

114

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Thota perched on the edge of a handmade desk that had
once been the property of the senior member of the local red
hat sect. “You come right to the point. I like that. Well,
here’s the situation . . .”
The ensuing conversation lasted for the better part of an
hour. Finally, once both sides were satisﬁed with the terms
of the agreement, and the ﬁrst of two payments had changed
hands, Thota escorted the bandits up to the surface. The top
of a sand dune made a good launching pad, and their long,
powerful wings made a gentle whuf! whuf! whuf! sound as
the variants beat their way upward, found a thermal, and let
it loft them even higher into the sky.
The monk watched his new allies for a while, marveled at
the freedom the wings enjoyed, but wondered about the
price they had paid. Had the technology used to create them
been a good thing? Or simply a distraction from humanity’s
real goal, which was to supersede the physical? There was no
way to be sure, but one thing was for certain, the sun was
extremely hot.
Thota turned, waited for a lesser monk to lift the metal
lid that prevented sand from spilling into the vertical access
stack, and made his way down the spiral stairway. Cool air
rushed up to embrace him, a cup of hot tea awaited, and
Thota was content.

FIVE
™

The Planet Pooz

There is only one race that can fly, that can ride the wind, that
can touch the clouds. Others may walk the sands, or swim in
the sea, but we own the sky.
—Author unknown,
A wing proverb

The sun had just broken contact with the horizon, which

meant that the air was still relatively cool, as the team of
twenty specially bred angens hauled the custom-built ﬂat
cars along the single track. Once, back before the rising
tide of sand had submerged all but the tops of the pylons,
the monorail had been elevated ﬁfty feet off the ground,
and sleek bullet-shaped trains completed the trip between
Gos and Tra in hours rather than the fourteen days currently required.
But once the sand had risen, and off-world parts were no
longer available, the bullet trains had given way to the current low-tech version. Extensions had been added along
both sides of the rail so that the huge draft animals had a
surface to walk on, and a system of walled “inns” had been

116

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

established so that passengers had a safe place to stay during
the worst heat of the day. Each fort was approximately ﬁfteen miles from the next, built around a hand-dug well and
protected by a contingent of lancers.
The trip was still rather dangerous, however, since bandit
raids were not only common, but to be expected as the angens pulled the rather optimistically named “Desert Zephyr”
up through the southern foothills and through Hyber Pass.
An area that the wings patrolled and considered to be their
own in spite of the Shah’s claims to the contrary.
Which was why each sixty-foot ﬂatcar was equipped
with a venerable but still-serviceable machine gun. Each
weapon squatted in a metal tub, where it could sweep the
sky above, and was served by a two-man crew. A corpulent
noncom was in charge of the detachment but spent most of
his time dozing in the sun. There had been talk of increasing the number of guards, but because the addition of ﬁve
soldiers would force the government to cut an equal number
of passengers, nothing had come of such discussions. It
seemed that the Shah felt the train was losing too much
money already. In fact, according to what one passenger
said, the only reason the Zephyr remained in service was the
need to move ofﬁcial mail from one city to the other, a function the government refused to let the local runners take
care of.
However, most of the other ﬁfty or so passengers were
armed. That added to the total ﬁrepower the train could
muster and served as an additional deterrent. Of course
there was no telling how effective the ragtag mix of merchants, civil servants, and other citizens would be if confronted by bandits. That was why Rebo maintained his own
watch on the second car. A tattered awning provided the
runner with a scrap of shade augmented by an oft-patched

RUNNER

117

sail. It ﬂapped uselessly on those rare occasions when a
breeze found it and only rarely functioned as intended. Both
the runner and his companions kept their packs at hand and
were prepared to abandon the train should an overwhelming
threat appear, even if that meant continuing on foot.
Rebo saw Norr appear at the back end of the ﬁrst car and
pause in front of the three-foot gap. It was as if the moment
was frozen in time as the sun hit the sensitive’s face just so,
the woman bit her lower lip as she contemplated the jump,
and a momentary breeze tugged at her loose-ﬁtting robe.
She was attractive, but Rebo had spent time with far prettier women, so why stare at her?
Then the moment was over as Norr completed the jump,
exchanged greetings with the machine gunner, and made
her way back to Rebo’s scrap of shade. “Here,” she said,
handing the runner a small bundle. “Have some dates. One
of the women gave them to me in return for reading her
palm.”
“And what did you see?” Rebo inquired as he untied the
cloth and selected a likely-looking piece of fruit.
“She’s going to die,” Norr said matter-of-factly, as she
stared off into the distance. “And soon. Which is too bad
because she’s no more than thirty-ﬁve years old.”
Rebo spit the pit into the palm of his hand and threw it
out into the desert. “Really? That’s tough. What did she say
when you told her?”
“I didn’t tell her,” the sensitive replied evenly. “Not the
truth. I told her that everything would go well, that she
would be happy in Tra, and live a long productive life
there.”
Rebo frowned. “But why? If she knew she was going to
die, she might make different decisions.”
“Exactly,” Norr replied, as she chose a date for herself.

118

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Which is why most sensitives won’t disclose death dates.
First, because we’re fallible, but mostly because people who
believe they’re going to die stop living and focus on death.
She’s happy. That’s what’s important.”
“So, what about me?” Rebo inquired, extending his hand.
“Hmmm,” Norr said, as she made use of a long slender
ﬁnger to trace the curve of his life-line. “It looks like you
will travel to the stars, have many adventures, and fall into
the company of a beautiful woman.”
She was joking, Rebo knew that, but when he looked up
into Norr’s face the runner thought he saw a look of concern
cloud her brown eyes, and was about to question her when
Lee dropped in on them from above. “I climbed all the way
to the top of the mast!” the boy announced proudly. “You
can see the next fort from up there. Well, not the fort, but
the tops of the palm trees around it. They’re Pooz palms.
That means they’re variants of trees that grew on ancient
Earth and were brought here by ancient colonists.”
Lee had been a full-time student until very recently and
had a tendency to absorb information like a sponge. The
only problem was that some of it tended to be wrong. “The
trees could be variants,” Rebo allowed, “but they didn’t
originate on Earth. It’s a legend—nothing more.”
“Maybe,” the boy said carefully, “but the ancient texts refer to it, and humanity had to come from somewhere.”
Somehow, without intending to, Norr had become the
peacemaker in such disputes. “Look!” she said, pointing to
the east. “What is that? Some sort of bird?”
The runner removed a small but powerful pair of binoculars from a pocket and brought them up to his eyes. He
panned a section of sky, acquired the object in question, and
pressed a button that rolled the image into focus. The range
was printed along the bottom edge of the frame. They

RUNNER

119

would wear out eventually—and no one would be able to repair them. “It’s a wing,” Rebo reported. “And that isn’t
good. A scout probably, watching our progress, so he can report back.”
“Can I see?” Lee inquired eagerly, and was thrilled when
Rebo handed him the glasses. Other passengers were pointing by then, chattering among themselves or calling to the
soldiers for reassurance. The gunner on the ﬁrst car even
went so far as to ﬁre a three-round burst toward the distant
target, but the airborne variant was well out of range and
continued to circle as if inviting the soldier to waste even
more of his precious ammunition.
Half an hour passed like that, until the train neared the
next fort, and the wing banked toward the south. The
foothills could be seen down there, shimmering in the
steadily increasing heat, with the vague shape of a mountain
looming beyond. That’s where the variant is headed, Rebo
thought to himself, and lowered his glasses. At some point
during the next day, or the day after that, the bandits would
attack. Would the machine guns be sufﬁcient to hold them
off? The runner certainly hoped so—but felt an emptiness
at the pit of his stomach. The train jerked forward as the
normally listless angens spotted the fort, realized that they
were about to be fed, and broke into a clumsy trot.
Inside the fort a whip cracked, and a capstan started to
turn, as a pair of elderly angens walked an endless circle.
Ropes grew taut, pulleys squealed, and a pair of bulletpocked iron doors parted to let the Zephyr pass between them.
The sun reached its zenith not long thereafter. Those lifeforms that could scurried for cover. The rest started to die.
Clouds slid in over the desert. They concealed the moon

one moment only to reveal it the next. During the brief in-

120

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

terludes when the satellite was visible it threw light down
onto the monorail, which gleamed like platinum and
seemed to streak through the night. Most of the passengers
had fallen asleep by then, not because they were especially
tired, but because there was nothing else for them to do.
There were exceptions, however, including the angens,
which continued to plod along both sides of the track, the
driver who sought to keep them moving, and the soldiers
who sat slumped in their gun tubs.
Farther toward the rear, with his back supported by a
crate, Rebo ﬂoated in the nowhere land that lies between
full awareness and sleep. The gentle sway of the ﬂatcar, the
creak of wood, and an occasional click as the Zephyr passed
over an expansion joint combined to take the runner back to
his boyhood on Thara. He could feel the subtle roll of his father’s ﬁshing boat as it surged forward, hear the gurgle of
water as it slid along the hull, and smell the sharp tang of
the sea.
He would have been about ten then, back when life was
good, before the storm took half the local ﬁshing ﬂeet, the
family boat, his father, and both of his brothers. His mother
had never been the same after that, working as a maid during the day and crying herself to sleep at night. The other
villagers assumed little Jak would become a ﬁsherman when
he grew up and serve on someone else’s boat, but his mother
had other ideas. She saved every gunar she could to buy Jak
a different future. Anything but the profession that had
claimed her husband and two oldest sons.
There weren’t many opportunities in the village of Lorval, and as time passed, Jak’s mother began to feel a sense of
hopelessness. But that changed one day when a stranger appeared at the inn where she worked. The stranger was a runner with a letter for those who lived in the big house up on

RUNNER

121

the bluff, and he was a sight to see. Thomas Crowley stood
six-six, had long gray hair and piercing green eyes. His skin
had a strange pallor, as if it was rarely exposed to the sun,
but the man seemed to radiate an inner strength. Rather
than carouse with the regulars while he waited for his
wealthy clients to compose a response to the letter he had
brought, the runner preferred to read books via a small machine that he held cradled in his hands.
From the ﬁrst moment that she saw him Torley Rebo
knew Crowley was the man who could save her son from
what she saw as certain death, and immediately went to
work on him. For the next three days the runner received
every attention that the maid could lavish on him, and
could easily have taken her to bed, had that been his desire.
But unknown to Torley Rebo, or to anyone else for that
matter, it had been many months since the runner had been
interested in sex. He was ill, and not only had the nature of
his disease robbed the off-worlder of his sex drive, it resulted in persistent abdominal pain and a dry, hacking
cough.
Rebo remembered the morning when his mother had
given him an unscheduled bath, dressed him in his very
best clothes, and taken him to work with her. Then, having
entered the inn via the hot steamy kitchen, Torley Rebo led
her son up through a tight, winding staircase to the second
ﬂoor. The runner occupied the best room the inn had to offer, and their shoes made a clacking sound as the two of them
walked the length of the hall and paused in front of a heavily varnished door. That was when Torley patted her hair,
checked to make sure that her son’s jacket was straight, and
rapped on the worn wood.
Rebo heard a mufﬂed cough, followed by a hoarse “Come
in!” and wondered what his mother was up to. The door

122

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

swung open, he was nudged inside, and soon found himself
standing in front of a man with a long, serious face. A handgun, a glass of wine, and a small machine lay on the table
next to him.
The boy hadn’t understood much of the ensuing conversation, only that it involved him in some important way,
but remembered how profusely his mother thanked the tall
man even as she handed him a purse full of coins. Then,
turning to him, she had smiled. Strange really, considering
the tears that ran down her cheeks, and the emotion in her
voice. “This is Citizen Crowley, son. He’s a runner—and
you are to be his apprentice! Isn’t that wonderful?”
The younger Rebo nodded dutifully, wondered what
runners did, and felt a hard lump form in the pit of his
stomach. Two days later he said good-bye to his mother,
boarded a coach, and began his new life. He hadn’t been
back to Thara since.
Now, as the train murmured along the track, the runner
was going home. Or hoped that he was. Was his mother
alive? Had the village changed? Only time would tell.
Memories morphed into dreams, and Rebo slept.
Enormous wings made a gentle whuf! whuf! whuf! sound as

the two variants closed with the train. Although the darkness offered concealment, the cool night air forced the wings
to exert themselves in order to maintain their altitude, and
chilled their thin, nearly unprotected bodies. That, plus the
fact that the two-car train was in motion, meant that the
snatch would be difﬁcult. But even as the air around him
acted to slow Karth down, it also provided his wings with
lift, a paradox he had once captured in a poem.
But this was no time to consider the gentler arts as the
bandit closed the gap with the second ﬂatcar and searched the

RUNNER

123

blackness below for the beacon that was supposed to mark his
target. The variant didn’t see it at ﬁrst, and was just about to
conclude that the black hats had been unable to tag the boy,
when he saw a patch of green luminescence. The substance
that produced the telltale glow had been sprayed onto the
youth’s pack as he boarded the train. It was invisible to anyone not equipped with goggles like those the variants wore.
A quick glance to the variant’s right, and a gesture from
Zota, was sufﬁcient to conﬁrm that his companion had seen
the beacon as well. Their wings beat faster, and the bandits
picked up speed as they dived through the darkness. Then,
just as their leathery arm ﬂaps ﬂared, all hell broke loose.
Norr “sensed” that something bad was about to happen,
shouted Rebo’s name, and came to her feet just as the variants took hold of Lee’s arms. The boy had been asleep. He
yelled and struggled wildly as enormous wings beat the air
and lifted his body clear of the car. Although the bandits
had been able avoid the sail on the way down, the boom that
it was attached to chose that particular moment to swing
across the ﬂatcar and struck Zota. The wing began to lose
his grip, Lee started to fall, and saw Norr reach up to grab
him. But Karth was strong enough to support the youngster
long enough for the other bandit to reestablish his grip.
Then, wings beating to the same rhythm, the variants
bore their kicking-screaming burden toward the south.
They didn’t plan to ﬂy far, just a mile or so, to the point
where other members of their tribe waited with a group of
desert-bred angens. But they were barely clear of the Zephyr
when one of the machine guns opened up, and Rebo yelled
at the gunner. “Cease ﬁre, damn you! They have the boy!”
The noncom shouted an order, the machine gun fell
silent, and chaos reigned as the newly aroused passengers
waved weapons and peppered each other with questions.

124

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Not knowing what might lie up ahead, and fearful of an
ambush, the driver pulled back on his reins. The angens
came to a confused halt, squalled loudly, and nipped at each
other. Rebo jumped from car two to car one, and from there
to the platform that ran parallel to the rail. Norr followed
behind him. The runner ﬁgured that maybe, just maybe,
something would break his way.
The ﬁngers that dug into the ﬂesh of Lee’s upper arms
were like iron, and in spite of all his struggles the boy had
been unable to break their relentless grip. However, by
turning his head just so, the youngster found that he could
see exposed ﬂesh. He sank his teeth into a leathery hand,
heard one of the variants swear, and felt the wing let go.
Zota tried to support the boy’s weight, couldn’t, and lost his
grip as well.
It wasn’t until Lee began to fall that he realized how stupid he’d been. How high was he? Ten feet? A hundred?
There was barely enough time to wonder before the youngster hit the top of a dune, had the breath knocked out of his
lungs, and tumbled down the side of a sandy slope.
Karth was angry by then and hopeful that the boy would
die as a result of the fall. Then all they would have to carry
was the little beggar’s head. A lighter burden by far, and
given the way his hand hurt, a task that he would relish.
But how to locate the little bastard in inky blackness below?
No sooner had the variant posed the question to himself
than the moon emerged from behind a bank of clouds, and
Zota pointed toward the ground. “There! Do you see the
glow? We’ve got him!”
Karth circled, spotted the target, and began his descent.
Rebo welcomed the additional light as the moon emerged

from behind the clouds and paused to scan the night sky.

RUNNER

125

“Look!” Norr shouted. “Can you see them? They’re silhouetted against the stars.”
The runner could see them, two variants, circling an area
ahead. But where was Lee? There was no sign of the youth
dangling between variants, which seemed to suggest that the
bandits had dropped him. Rebo felt a surge of anger, brought
the long-barreled Hogger up, and ﬁred in one smooth motion.
Karth heard Zota grunt, followed by the ﬂat report of a
large-caliber weapon. There was nothing the wing could do
as his companion lost motor control, rolled over onto his
back, and spiraled into the ground.
The second bullet, which arrived a few moments later,
passed through the bandit’s left wing but didn’t hit any of
his delicate bones. One of the Zephyr’s machine guns opened
up at that point, ﬁlling the air with projectiles, making it
impossible to land near Zota.
That meant the variant was forced to dive down into the
protection of the dunes and follow a zigzag course out of the
area. There would be no second payment, only the screams
of Zota’s bereaved mate and a symbolic death pyre high on a
mountain crag. But the train? That was a different story.
The train went where the track went, and like it or not, the
Zephyr would have to go over Hyber Pass. And that was
where it would be destroyed.
After Rebo and Norr had recovered Lee from where he had

fallen, the next few days passed slowly for those on the train.
Although the passengers were aware of the dangers inherent
in the trip between Gos and Tra, the attack made their
worst fears real and put everyone on edge. Laughter was seldom heard, people hugged their weapons like lovers, and
the desert gradually surrendered to hardpan as mountains
loomed ahead.

126

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Strangely, from Norr’s perspective at least, some of her
fellow passengers seemed to blame Lee for the impending
battle. Some had even gone so far as to suggest that, had the
ﬁrst variants been permitted to escape with their prize, the
train might have been allowed to transit Hyber Pass untouched, a theory that was patently absurd.
Still, that was the situation that forced one of the two
adults to remain awake at all times lest one of their traveling companions grab the boy and pitch him off the train in
a misguided attempt to placate the wings.
As for their part, two or three of the airborne variants
were always visible during daylight hours, riding the thermals well beyond riﬂe range, waiting for the angens to drag
the Zephyr up into the heights. Rebo kept an eye on the airborne bandits for a while before turning his binoculars to
the south and scanning the pass itself. Thanks to the long,
gradual approach that led up to the crossing, it had been
used for thousands of years before the monorail had been constructed and continued to be important millennia later.
The remains of an ancient fortress guarded the left side of
the shining rail. Only one section of its crenellated walls remained standing, while what appeared to be a newer structure sat to the right, its once brightly painted dome having
faded to a powder blue. A dark zigzag crack cut down across
the gently curved surface to meet the boxy walls on which
the roof rested. The barriers built to protect the structure
had crumbled, or been blown apart, and lay in weathered
heaps. None of which was especially remarkable, except for
a momentary ﬂash of bright green, which disappeared as the
ﬂatcar jumped an expansion joint and the binoculars came
off their target. Rebo was about to bring his glasses back
and reacquire the image when he heard a shout. “Look! The
wings are coming!”

RUNNER

127

The runner swiveled to his left, spotted a grouping of
dark specks, and swore softly. There were at least three
dozen of the airborne bandits, more than enough to overwhelm the train, especially if other variants were already
hidden toward the top of the pass.
Then came the distant pop! pop! pop! of what sounded like
black powder muskets followed by what might have been
shouting. Rebo turned back toward the pass, located the
patch of green that he’d noticed before, and realized that it
was just one of half a dozen brightly colored ﬂags. Puffs of
smoke could seen as the people on top of the pass ﬁred a volley down into the rocks below. Fire sleeted back upward a
few moments later, but was largely ineffective, and stopped
when a dozen variants emerged from hiding to take to the
air. More shots were ﬁred, one of the wings seemed to pause
in midair, then spiraled toward the ground below.
“Look!” Norr said from a position next to the runner’s elbow. “The wings turned back!”
Rebo turned once again and saw that the sensitive was
correct. With their ambush ruined, and confronted with
unexpectedly strong opposition, the variants had called it a
day. The train was a scene of wild jubilation as fear gave way
to joy, the passengers waved their unﬁred weapons, hugged
each other, and shouted insults at the distant wings.
Though pleased with the recent turn of events, the runner remained cautious as the angens labored up the long
slope, and entered the broad U-shaped pass. It had been his
experience that when someone ﬁres on a mutual enemy it
doesn’t necessarily mean that they will become a friend.
But any doubts the runner had vanished as a horn was
heard, drums rattled, and hundreds of friendly-looking people came to greet them. There were men, women, and children. And all, with the exception of the Shah’s lancers, were

128

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

dressed in red. They waved gaily, shouted greetings to the
people on the train, and were clearly in a jubilant mood.
Lee, his eyes huge, tugged at Rebo’s sleeve. “Do you see how
the people are dressed? They belong to the red hat sect!”
The runner eyed the crowd, conﬁrmed that nearly all of
them wore red clothing, and frowned. “You’re sure?”
“Yes!” Lee answered excitedly. “I’m sure!”
“But why?” Norr put in. “Why would so many people
walk all the way up here?”
There was no answer as the driver shouted an order, the
angens came to a stop, and a man crossed the short causeway
that extended out from the ancient fortress. He was tall,
thin, and wore a pair of thick glasses. “Greetings. My name
is Brother Larkas. Welcome to what was once the temple of
TasTas. We are about to break a ﬁve-day fast, and you are
welcome to join us.”
“Thank you,” Norr said, stepping forward to meet the
monk. “I’m sure I speak for all of my fellow passengers when
I say that it’s wonderful to see you. May I ask what brings
you and your adherents all the way up to the top of the
pass?”
“Of course,” the monk answered agreeably. “We are here
to celebrate the moment when the great teacher Nom Maa
paused here to rest. When the Divine Wind founded the
temple he promised to return on the 262nd day of the year.
So, having no way to know which year the great one had in
mind, we return each year to greet him. Then, once the ceremonies are complete, we return to Tra.”
Rebo looked at Norr, and she looked at Lee, who spoke
before either one of the adults could intervene. The words
were in Tilisi. “Greetings, elder brother. I believe it was
Nom Maa who said that ‘life is a journey during which each

RUNNER

129

traveler must seek to learn, taking knowledge where he or
she may ﬁnd it, even from the silence of the stones.’ ”
The runner didn’t know what the youngster had said,
only that the red hat monk looked thunderstruck, and that
a vast hush had fallen over the crowd. “Who are you?”
Larkas demanded, all color having drained from his face.
“What did he say?” Rebo demanded.
“He wants to know who I am,” Lee replied matter-offactly. Then, careful to speak standard rather than Tilisi, the
boy answered. “They call me Dor.”
The monk’s eyebrows rose, as if he had expected a different
answer, and he looked at Rebo. “Is this young man your son?”
The runner nodded.
“Good,” the red hat replied. “Please follow me.”
Rebo looked at Norr. She shrugged noncommittally and
took Lee’s hand. The crowd parted to let the threesome
pass, and the train’s passengers watched in mute astonishment as the man, woman, and little boy followed Larkas
across the causeway. From there it was a short walk up a
zigzag path to the base of the temple and a slab of highly
polished granite. The monument was surrounded by a border made out of slightly wilted ﬂowers, and it appeared as if
the stone’s surface had been cleaned and polished. “There!”
the monk said triumphantly, as he pointed at the marker.
“What does that say?”
The inscription was in standard, which meant that Rebo
could read it, and proceeded to do so. “Life is a journey during which each traveler must seek to learn, taking knowledge where he or she may ﬁnd it, even from the silence of
the stones.”
“So?” the runner inquired. “What’s the big deal?”
“It’s the same quote I used by way of a greeting,” Lee

130

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

replied, his voice uncertain. “Nom Maa was father to many
sayings. It’s a coincidence—nothing more.”
It seemed that Larkas thought differently however, because the monk turned to address the crowd, and his voice
carried a long way in the mountain air. “It’s him!” The holy
man proclaimed. “The Divine Wind has returned!”
There was a moment of silence as the throng processed
what the monk had said. That was followed by a loud hiss as
the entire crowd drew a deep breath and let loose shrieks of
joy. Rebo heard shouts of “God be praised!” and was helpless to intervene as the multitude surged forward to surround Lee. There was a moment of chaos as people
attempted to touch the boy, followed by a loud report as the
runner ﬁred a shot into the air, and Larkas joined the fray.
The monk could be something of a bully when he needed to
be, and a series of brusk commands, along with a ﬂurry of
well-aimed blows brought the mob under control.
Neither Rebo nor Norr understood much of what ensued, but it soon became apparent that a ceremony was under way, and Lee was to be at the center of it. That bothered
Rebo, who hated to see his client’s cover so thoroughly
blown, but Norr was more philosophical. “Maybe it’s for the
best, Jak. After all, once we board the ship, we can start all
over again.”
The runner wasn’t so sure, not if Lee was carried into the
city on the shoulders of his followers, but hoped that Larkas
could put things right. Given the fact that the local red hats
revered the boy, it seemed logical to suppose that they
would protect him, even if that meant keeping their
mouths shut.
Eventually, after a good deal of praying, chanting, and
singing on the part of the red hats, afternoon faded into eve-

RUNNER

131

ning. The train passengers voted to stay the night rather
than travel on their own, sentries were posted, and a ﬁre was
built in front of the temple. Then, as the sun dipped below
the western horizon, and ﬁrelight danced across the cracked
dome, the celebrants began to toot small horns and tap on
tiny drums. Then, once the proper mood had been established, legends were reborn as fancifully costumed men and
women took to the impromptu stage. Rebo watched for a
while, but quickly became bored, and was about to turn in,
when Norr materialized at his side. He was struck by the
way the light played across the planes of her face and the
fresh clean smell of her. But there was something different
about the sensitive. Something uncharacteristically hesitant, as if she was about to share some sort of secret. Her
voice was solemn. “Hello, Jak.”
The runner answered in kind. “Hello, Lanni.”
“I need a favor.”
“I’ll grant it if I can,” the runner answered cautiously.
“You remember Lysander . . . The entity who seized control of my body in Gos.”
“How could I forget?” Rebo inquired dryly. “What
about him?”
“Well,” Norr said hesitantly, “I ﬁgure it’s only a matter of
time before he tries the same thing again. The question is
why? There must be a reason.”
“Yeah?” the runner acknowledged. “So?”
“So,” the sensitive continued, “I want you to speak with
him.”
“Me?” Rebo demanded incredulously. “Why me?”
“Because I can’t do it myself, and I trust you,” Norr answered honestly. “Maybe, if I understood what the miserable bastard wants, I could get rid of him.”

132

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The proposal made a certain amount of weird sense. The
runner nodded slowly. “Okay, it’s worth a try. What should
I do?”
“Follow me,” the sensitive instructed. “We’ll need some
privacy.”
Rebo turned to look for Lee. The youngster was seated
right next to Larkas, and both of the monks were surrounded by dozens of superfanatical red hats. If the lad was
safe anywhere, it was there. “All right . . . Lead the way.”
The sensitive led the runner across the causeway, past the
carefully secured train, and toward the dark bulk of the
fortress beyond. The surety with which Norr moved seemed
to suggest that she had been that way before and knew
where to go. That impression was conﬁrmed a few minutes
later when Norr led Rebo through a door and into the ruins
beyond. A series of turnings brought them into a rooﬂess
room that had once served as the commanding ofﬁcer’s private quarters. A match ﬂared as the sensitive bent over the
makings of a ﬁre, ﬂames were born, and sparks swirled toward the starry sky. “There,” Norr said, pointing toward a
carefully positioned chunk of rock. “You will sit there, and I
will sit here, next to the ﬁre.”
Rebo nodded, and was about to take the seat assigned to
him, when Norr spoke. “Jak . . .”
The runner turned. “Yes?”
“Can I ask another favor?”
Her voice was so thin, so hollow, that Rebo found himself answering without hesitation. “Of course. What is it?”
The sensitive took two steps forward. “Hold me.”
The runner opened his arms, Norr took one ﬁnal step,
and felt him pull her close. The embrace was ﬁrm, but gentle, just as she had known it would be. And, as Rebo’s
strength ﬂooded in and around her, the sensitive felt the

RUNNER

133

ﬁrst stirrings of a physical need that she hadn’t thought
about for weeks.
Rebo felt a shiver run through the young woman, remembered her description of the last time Lysander had
taken control of her body, and knew that what she proposed
to do was equivalent to allowing a man she didn’t know to
have sex with her. His right hand found the hollow between
her shoulder blades and their lips met a few moments later.
Not because either one of them had planned it, but because
it seemed like the natural thing to do. Norr stood on tiptoes, locked her ﬁngers behind his neck, and returned the
pressure with interest. The kiss lasted for half a minute or so
and was broken as she pulled away. “That was nice, Jak. Very
nice. But I need to do what we came here for, or I’ll lose my
nerve.”
The runner released the sensitive and waited for her to sit
on a chunk of stone before taking the seat assigned to him.
“Don’t touch me while I’m in trance,” the sensitive cautioned, “and assuming that Lysander comes through, please
try to discover what he’s after.”
Rebo nodded and watched silently, as Norr closed her
eyes and positioned both hands palms upward. The runner
had attempted to make contact with his mother once but
without success. Did that mean she was alive? Perhaps, although the medium he had hired had cautioned him that
some spirits don’t want to return.
Later, Rebo had wondered why he hadn’t sought to speak
with his father, and concluded that while he respected the
big ﬁsherman, he’d always been afraid of him, too. Other
than that single attempt, the runner had been focused on
life rather than death, ﬁguring that he would deal with next
plane of existence once he arrived there.
Then, with no background sound other than the distant

134

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

thump! thump! thump! of the red hat drums, there was a long
period of silence. So long, that Rebo had just about given up
on the makeshift séance, when the sensitive opened her
mouth and spoke. But, rather than her voice, the runner
heard a deep baritone instead. “You! The fool on the rock!
Where am I?”
“You are dead,” the runner responded unsympathetically.
“I, on the other hand, am located at the top of Hyber Pass,
on the planet Pooz. Is your name Lysander?”
There was a moment of silence as if the spirit entity was
taking a moment to consider the question. “Yes, I was once
known as Milos Lysander, although I have had many other
names as well. Including that of Nilo Hios, father of the star
gate, and ruler of the Imperium.”
“Congratulations,” Rebo said evenly. “So, your eminence,
what is a star gate? And why would anyone care?”
Though more than a little contentious, the question had
the desired effect, and Milos Lysander, aka Nilo Hios,
launched into a long rant. By the time it ended the runner
had the impression of a once-glorious empire tied together
by a network of high-tech portals that rendered spaceships
obsolete and allowed travelers to move between planets as
easily as they might step from one room to another. “Okay,”
Rebo said agreeably, “so what happened? Why aren’t the
gates in use now?”
“With the exception of a maintenance system, which I discovered during the course of my last incarnation, all of the
portals were destroyed,” Lysander responded darkly. “In spite
of the gift I gave the people of the Imperium, some labeled me
as a tyrant, rose up, and tore my government down. My former
self was murdered, the star gates were destroyed, and a ﬂeet of
sentient spaceships were created to serve in their place.”

RUNNER

135

“Wait a minute,” the runner interjected. “Did I understand you to say that some of the gates remain in operation?”
“Yes, of course,” Lysander said loftily. “They continue to
operate under the auspices of the Techno Society, which I
founded and dedicated to the full restoration of the star
gates. It’s the only thing that can arrest mankind’s steady
slide back toward the barbaric past.”
“So? What’s the problem?” Rebo inquired.
“New gates can be copied from those that remain operational,” Lysander answered. “That lies within our power.
The missing element is the artiﬁcial intelligence required to
reenergize the interplanetary grid and operate the system.
Unfortunately, the knowledge required to construct such an
AI was lost hundreds of years ago.”
“So, that’s why you keep trying to communicate?” the
runner demanded. “In order to ﬁnd this AI thing?”
“Logos isn’t a thing,” Lysander said reprovingly. “He is,
for lack of a better description, an artiﬁcial person. I don’t
especially like him, but I need him, and he’s far too intelligent to allow some mob to destroy him. That’s why I continue to visit your wretched plane of existence. Because my
operatives have been unable to ﬁnd Logos.”
“But why this particular channel?” the runner insisted.
“She doesn’t want to take part in your search, and there are
thousands, perhaps millions of other sensitives. Why not
annoy one of them for a change?”
“Coming back is difﬁcult,” Lysander responded. “It requires a great deal of effort. That’s why a relatively small
number of entities make the attempt. However, when a preexisting link exists between the spirit and the channel, that
makes the task easier.”
“A link?” Rebo demanded doubtfully. “What sort of link

136

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

could possibly exist between the channel and yourself? The
two of you never met.”
“Not during our most recent incarnations,” Lysander admitted. “But, back when I was known as Nilo Hios, the
channel was my daughter. She didn’t like me, but a bond exists nonetheless, and that makes communication easier.”
There was a moment of silence while Rebo tried to absorb all the implications of what he had just heard. The ﬁre
crackled, collapsed in on itself, and released a column of
sparks. “Okay, let’s say you’re right, how ’bout some sort of
a deal? Rather than turn Lanni over to a bunch of homicidal
maniacs—why not help her ﬁnd this Logos thing?”
But if Lysander heard the words, he was unable to respond to them, as the connection between the two planes of
existence suddenly snapped. Norr shuddered, opened her
eyes, and swallowed. Her voice was hoarse. “Is he gone?”
“Hell, I don’t know,” the runner answered. “You tell me.”
Norr frowned, then nodded. “He’s gone. So, tell me . . .
What did he say?”
“You couldn’t hear?”
“Some, but not all. I kept drifting in and out.”
So Rebo told the sensitive what Lysander had said, starting with the star gates, and concluding with her previous
relationship to him. That caused Norr to shiver and wrap
her cloak around her body. “It’s disgusting, but makes a
strange sort of sense. The same thing can’t be said for the
deal you offered him, however. What led you to believe that
I would knowingly cooperate with him?”
The runner’s eyebrows rose. “Do you want him to leave
you alone or not? And, given the situation, do you have a
better idea? Besides, what if what he says is true? What if
we could bring back the spaceships? The medical treat-

RUNNER

137

ments that the ancients had . . . And all the rest of it? That
would be a good thing, would it not?”
Norr knew that technology had been used for evil as well
as good. Something that Lysander made no mention of. But
there was little doubt that technology had delivered beneﬁts
to the human race in the past—and she was ready to try just
about anything in order to rid herself of the insistent spirit.
“Yes,” she said reluctantly, “I suppose it would.”
Drums beat an insistent rhythm, a breeze slipped
through the pass, and the ﬁre stirred by way of a response.
Some, if not all, of her questions had been answered, but the
essence of the problem remained.
Having made its way up through Hyber Pass—the rail on

which the Zephyr rode fell toward the plain beyond. With
red hats not only crowded onto the cars, but hanging off the
sides as well, the driver was forced to brake constantly in an
effort to prevent the train from colliding with the angens
that half galloped ahead of it. Smoke issued from a wooden
block as it made contact with the metal rail, a cloud of
steam appeared as one of the lancers dumped a bucket of
urine onto the primitive device, and the wet wood squealed
in protest.
But, worrisome as the mechanics of the situation were
Rebo welcomed the feel of the early-morning sun on his
face, the smell of the mountain air, and the knowledge that
bandit country lay behind rather than in front of him. Further bolstering the runner’s spirits was the fact that Larkas
had ordered his ﬂock to treat Lee as they would any other
boy. Had the black hats inserted a spy into the group? Probably, but Rebo hoped to board the next ship before the opposition could get organized. As for the blond man, and the

138

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Techno Society, only time would tell. The runner knew it
was foolish to involve himself in Norr’s problems, especially
when such involvement could compromise his mission; but,
try as he might, Rebo couldn’t bring himself to part company with her. Not yet anyway.
As the monorail wound its way down through grassy
foothills, it crossed back and forth over a smoothly ﬂowing
river and swept past a multitude of well-kept farms. Then,
as it emerged from the hills, the train rumbled straight toward Tra. Unlike Gos, most of which lay below ground, the
towers of Tra seemed to leap up off the plain as if intent on
touching the sky. And, unlike the high-rise buildings back
on Anafa, which remained unoccupied because of a lack of
power, these structures were very much in use. That was
made possible by the plain that surrounded the city, the
winds that blew in from the west, and rank after rank of
two-hundred-foot-tall propeller-driven generators that provided Tra with electricity. There were gaps, of course, times
when for one reason or another the winds refused to blow,
but the local citizenry had adapted to that. When the power
faded so did they, quitting whatever they were doing to take
a nap, or breaking to eat a meal.
It hadn’t always been like that of course, because back in
the beginning, when Tra was founded, the wind-powered
generators had been used as a supplemental rather than primary source of electricity. But, after the fall of the Imperium, and the destruction of the technocracy that
followed, the city’s power core eventually wore out. And,
not having the parts to repair it, one of the Shah’s ancestors
had commissioned additional wind-driven generators to
make up the difference. A comparatively simple technology
local machine shops could support. Some even hoped to reactivate the monorail one day, but there wasn’t enough sur-

RUNNER

139

plus power for that, and the Shah was rumored to oppose it.
He liked the way things were, or so the wags said, and perhaps they were right.
Now, slowed to little more than a crawl by the weight of
all the extra passengers, the Zephyr rolled through a gleaming forest as a persistent breeze caused the gigantic propellers to turn. The enormous structures rumbled so loudly
that they stole the sound of the wind—and seemed to converse with each other in a language that mere humans could
never understand.
Eventually, as the train slowed to a crawl, some of the
passengers got off in order to lighten the load and stretch
their legs. Rebo was among them, as was Lee, who walked
at the runner’s side. “So,” Rebo shouted to make himself
heard over the wind-driven generators, “how’s the Divine
Wind?”
“Don’t call me that,” Lee said crossly. “While I doubt
that I’m anyone other than myself, your sarcasm would be
inappropriate if I were the Divine Wind.”
“Sorry,” the runner replied contritely. “Please allow me
to rephrase the question. The people all around us believe
that you are very special. How does that make you feel?”
“It scares me,” the boy replied honestly. “They think I’m
Nom Maa so they believe I’m wise. But it isn’t true. Yes, I
can repeat what the great masters said, but so what? That
makes me ﬁt to follow rather than lead.”
“I don’t know about that,” Rebo said thoughtfully. “Take
yesterday, for example. You certainly held your own during
those ceremonies.”
“Yes,” Lee agreed soberly, “because I was raised to do so.
Rituals can be conducted by anyone willing to take the time
to memorize them. But the spiritual understanding that lies
behind them? That comes from within.”

140

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The runner placed a hand on the boy’s shoulder. “What
about what you just said? It sounded like wisdom to me . . .
So where did that come from?”
“I don’t know,” Lee said miserably. “But the fact remains,
if I’m Nom Maa, then I should know it! What if we arrive at
the city of CaCanth, and I fail the test? The black hats will
take control.”
Rebo shrugged. “All you can do is try. While I admit
that the black hats seem like a rotten bunch, they’ve been in
charge before. Or am I wrong?”
“No,” Lee allowed thoughtfully. “You’re correct.”
“And the religion survived,” the runner observed, pausing to step over a pile of manure.
“Yes, I guess it did,” the boy agreed hopefully.
“So, do your best and let the chips fall where they may,”
Rebo advised. “That’s all any of us can do.”
The youngster took a moment to think about it, looked up
into his bodyguard’s face, and grinned broadly. “That sounds
like good advice. Perhaps you should have been a monk.”
Rebo would have replied, but Brother Larkas chose that
moment to begin one of his chants, and the sound of human
voices merged with the rumble of a thousand propellers to
create a deep humming sound. The sun inched a bit higher,
the city of Tra shimmered in the distance, and Pooz continued to turn.
The crowd that turned out to meet the Zephyr was domi-

nated by red-clad religious adherents. They insisted on scattering ﬂower petals all about the platform while burning
incense in tiny brass pots and chanting some sort of religious nonsense as they greeted friends and relatives who had
completed the pilgrimage. But there were others as well, including a brace of tax collectors, a squad of lancers, and a

RUNNER

141

swarm of vendors, beggars, and pickpockets. And there,
hidden among them, was an informer named Mik Stipp, a
man always on the lookout for potentially valuable information that he could sell to a variety of clients.
Stipp, who often posed as a beggar, elbowed his way to
what looked like a good spot and wrestled a felt hat out of
his coat pocket. Once opened, the heavily creased article of
clothing was instantly transformed into a serviceable beggar’s bowl, which the informer held out before him. “Can ya
spare a gunar for the poor? A crust of bread for the hungry?
A kind word for a man who can barely see? Oh, bless you,
ma’am, and your children as well.”
The red hats proved to be in a generous mood, and it
wasn’t long before a scattering of coins lined the bottom of
Stipp’s hat, providing the informer with what amounted to a
bonus for his labors. Then horns began to sound, shouts were
heard, as the heavily laden Zephyr pulled into the station.
There was total chaos as those standing on the platform tried
to board the train while those on the ﬂatcars sought to get
off. That provided Stipp with plenty of time to scan the incoming passengers, spot the sensitive, and empty the coins
into the palm of his hand. Ten minutes later, with the hat
pulled down to conceal the upper part of his face, the informer followed Norr in toward the center of town.
Like any good businessman, Stipp knew what his clients
wanted and what such information was worth. And while of
little interest to most people, the informant knew one individual who would pay good money to hear about the sensitive’s arrival, and would almost certainly want to meet her.
The knowledge lifted his spirits, put a spring in Stipp’s
step, and brought a smile to his face. Some days were better
than others—and this one looked as if it would be very good
indeed.

SIX
™

The Planet Pooz

By encouraging communications between systems, planets,
and people, the ancients sought to bind their empires together.
But those who wish to rule must divide populations rather than
unify them. The ancients are gone. We rule in their place.
—The Shah of Pooz,
in a letter to his sons

While even the newest of Tra’s skyscrapers was hundreds

of years old, and not even the Shah had the resources required to construct a new one, the citizens had been busy
modifying the buildings they had. The most obvious result
of their tinkering was the multiplicity of sky bridges that
linked the mostly vertical structures together. The spans
came in all shapes, sizes, and styles. Some were enclosed,
some were open, and some incorporated aspects of both.
Most were fairly substantial and capable of carrying a heavy
load, but others consisted of little more than four cables and
some planks to walk on. Those were used as shortcuts by the
city’s young people, who scampered across the chasms that
separated the high-rise buildings as if they were only a few
feet off the ground, and seemed to delight in the risks they

RUNNER

143

took. And not just at one level, but at many, so that when
Rebo looked upward it was through a maze of crisscrossing
structures that split the sky into small geometric shapes.
However, diverse though they certainly were, the sky
bridges all had a common purpose: to enable the local citizens to travel between the skyscrapers without taking the
long, tedious journey down into the crowded thoroughfares,
where open-air stalls lined both sides of the streets, piles of
angen manure awaited collection, and the air was thick with
the acrid odor of burning charcoal.
The combination of sky bridges above and streets below
made it difﬁcult for newcomers to ﬁnd their way around.
Based on the research he had carried out back on Anafa,
Rebo knew that unlike Gos, the city of Tra boasted a fullﬂedged branch of the runner’s guild. That meant a secure
environment in which he and his companions could hole up.
But where the hell was it? He hated to ask, since doing so
would identify him as a stranger, but the alternative was to
wander the streets forever.
The runner scanned the street ahead, spotted one of the
many cart men sipping a cup of tea, and waved. Eager to
earn a gunar or two the laborer swallowed the last of the
lukewarm liquid and returned the cup to the tea vendor in
exchange for a copper. Then, having retrieved his hand
truck, the cart man made his way over to the spot where his
perspective customers were waiting. “We just arrived from
Gos,” Rebo proclaimed, “and we’re tired of carrying these
packs.”
“Where to?” the cart man wanted to know, as he loaded
the packs onto his conveyance and roped them into place.
“The runner’s guild.”
The cart man gave a perfunctory nod and took off. Rebo,
Norr, and Lee tagged along behind. Mik Stipp watched the

144

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

byplay from ﬁfty yards away and hurried to follow. The
newcomers weren’t going anywhere too fancy he hoped, because while his clothes were ﬁne for the street, they
wouldn’t pass muster above the tenth ﬂoor of all but the
most disreputable buildings.
Their guide led the threesome into a metal-sheathed
building, through a crowded lobby, and into a packed elevator. The cart man got off on level six. Rebo, Norr, and Lee
followed their luggage through a maze of corridors and out
onto an open sky bridge. It seemed sturdy enough, but Lee
could see down through the metal grating and felt his stomach go ﬂip-ﬂop. It seemed natural to reach out for Norr’s
hand, and, once he had, to think of his mother.
For her part the sensitive felt uneasy, as if someone was
watching her, but try as she might Norr had been unable to
spot a threat. So the sensitive took comfort from Rebo’s
presence, kept a good grip on the youngster’s hand, and
tried to ignore the prickly sensation between her shoulder
blades.
It turned out that the runner’s guild occupied the entire
twenty-third ﬂoor of a respectable building. Each branch of
the organization had its own distinct personality, and while
the building on Anafa was impressive, the availability of
wind-generated power meant that the one on Pooz had more
amenities.
Interstellar runners didn’t pass through Tra all that often, so there was a stir when Rebo identiﬁed himself, veriﬁed his identity by answering questions kept on ﬁle at every
branch, and requested a suite. Such was the resulting swirl
of activity that none of the newly arrived travelers noticed
the small commotion as Stipp tried to talk his way past security and was turned away.
An apprentice led the runner and his party to a suite that

RUNNER

145

looked out onto the eastern part of the city. It consisted of
two bedrooms, two baths, and a central sitting room.
What remained of the day was spent turning the lights
on and off, taking long hot showers, and ﬂushing toilets. Finally, after a dinner that had been brought up to their room,
the travelers retired. Rebo and Lee settled into one room
while Norr took the other. It took the sensitive a while to
get to sleep, but eventually she did, and was soon lost in a
confused jumble of dreams.
All three of them awoke feeling rested and refreshed the
next morning. Rebo ordered a large breakfast, and by the
time it arrived, everyone was ready to eat. Rebo had established that three days remained before the next ship was
scheduled to arrive. The question was what to do with the
intervening time? Lee wanted to explore the city, and Norr
agreed, but the runner had something else in mind. “We’ll
do that later,” Rebo said, pausing between bites. “First, we
have some research to do.”
Norr sipped her tea. “What kind of research?”
“Lysander claimed that he had an incarnation as a man
named Nilo Hios and that you were his daughter.”
The sensitive made a face. “I was trying to forget.”
“Not to mention the artiﬁcial person that he referred to,”
the runner continued. “Who knows? Maybe we can ﬁnd
some mention of him in the history books. For example,
where was Logos when the Imperium fell? If we’re going to
ﬁnd him, we need a place to start.”
Norr frowned. “I appreciate the thought. I really do. But
you have responsibilities.”
“Yes, he does,” Lee agreed, speaking for the ﬁrst time. “I
don’t know who this artiﬁcial person is, but our trip remains
on hold until the ship arrives, so we have time. Let’s do
some research, then go out and explore the city.”

146

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“That’s the spirit,” Rebo said approvingly. “Now ﬁnish
your breakfast. With any luck at all some of the information
we need is right here in this building. Most branches employ a historian. I consulted the one back on Anafa while
planning this trip. In my profession it pays to learn about
the place you’re headed before you get there.”
Half an hour later the three of them had left the suite,
made their way through the halls, and were standing in
front of the reception desk. The runner told the clerk what
he wanted and saw the other man nod agreeably. “Of course,
sir. There isn’t enough room to house them here, so the
archives are stored down in the third subbasement. Our historian lives down there and should be up and around by
now. He was a runner once. His name is Wiley.”
Two different elevator trips were required to reach the
third subbasement. One that transported them to street
level and a second that dropped them below street level.
Rebo, Norr, and Lee had the elevator entirely to themselves by the time it stopped in the third subbasement and
understandably so. Unlike levels one and two there were no
cross-connections to other buildings on three, the corridors
were only dimly lit, and there were occasional puddles
where water dripped from overhead pipes.
Rebo approached a door with the words runner’s
guild—archives printed on it and gave it a push. The
room that lay beyond was relatively small, and he noticed
that regularly spaced holes dotted the walls as if to allow for
some sort of ﬁxtures that had subsequently been removed.
Strangely, from his perspective at least, three large drains
had been set into the ﬂoor.
The next door seemed to sense his presence and slid out
of the way on its own. That allowed the runner and his companions to enter a circular chamber before being confronted

RUNNER

147

by another barrier. It was crude when compared to the ﬁrst
two, and judging from the damage to the tile work around
it, had been added at a later date. It was locked, which
forced Rebo to bang on it. “Hello? Is anybody home?”
The runner’s words were still echoing back and forth as
Norr wet a foreﬁnger and used the moisture to rub the
grime off one of the surrounding tiles. Her ﬁnger was soon
black with dirt, but part of a picture appeared, along with
the word varga. It sounded familiar somehow, but the sensitive couldn’t quite place it, and the door opened before she
could mention what she had discovered to Rebo.
The man who peered out at Rebo had long, straggly hair,
slightly bulging eyes, and a pasty complexion. He was
clearly annoyed. “Yes? What do you want?”
“I’m a runner,” Rebo answered evenly. “I’d like to do
some research.”
The archivist shifted his gaze to Norr followed by Lee.
“And who are they?” he inquired suspiciously.
“The woman is my wife, and the boy is my son,” the runner lied smoothly. “Now, will you open the door? Or will I
have to go all the way upstairs and talk to the man at the
front desk?”
“That won’t be necessary,” the man replied grudgingly.
“My name is Wiley. You and your family can come in, but
be sure to close the door behind you. All sorts of riffraff ﬁnd
their way down into the third subbasement, and I get tired
of chasing them away.”
Rebo looked at Norr, raised his eyebrows as if to say, “Is
this guy strange or what?” and followed the archivist into
his private kingdom. The runner, who had been hoping for
shelves loaded with neatly bound books à la the branch on
Anafa, was in for a big disappointment. There were shelves
all right, what looked like hundreds of them, but rather

148

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

than the volumes Rebo had envisioned they were ﬁlled with
stacks of clearly unorganized papers, piles of tightly rolled
manuscripts, and boxes ﬁlled with what might have been
electronic storage modules. “Sorry about the mess,” Wiley
said defensively, “but this is what my predecessor left me. I
plan to organize all of it, but I have to read everything ﬁrst,
and I’m only halfway through.”
“How long have you been at it?” Norr inquired, as she
bent over to rescue a crumpled manuscript from the ﬂoor.
“About twelve local years,” the clerk responded, as he
brushed a strand of dirty hair out of his face. “But enough of
my problems . . . What can I do for you?”
The last was delivered in such an ingratiating manner
that the runner decided that he preferred the hostile Wiley.
“I’m looking for some general information about the Imperium, a leader named Nilo Hios, and an artiﬁcial person
called Logos. Can you help me?”
“He can’t,” a deep booming voice replied, “but I can.”
All three of the visitors looked around in an effort to ﬁnd
the source of the voice, but it seemed to originate from
everywhere at once. Wiley looked peeved. “I’m the archivist
here! And you’re just a machine. So shut up.”
Rebo raised a hand. “Wait a minute . . . Did you say a
‘machine’? I’d like to hear more.”
“Of course you would,” the voice said conﬁdently. “Wiley
couldn’t ﬁnd his ass with both hands, as you can plainly see.
I am a Gate Keeper model 517B, and in so far as I know, the
only one of my kind still in operation. Friends call me Fil.”
“Okay, Fil,” the runner said cautiously, “it’s a pleasure to
meet you. My name is Jak Rebo. This is my wife Lanni and
my son Dor. Pardon my ignorance, but what does a Gate
Keeper 517B do?”
“That’s a good question,” Fil answered cheerfully. “But

RUNNER

149

before I answer it, a short history lesson is in order. More
than a thousand worlds belonged to the empire during the
ﬁnal days of Emperor Hios’s rule. The starships used to ﬁnd
and settle the member planets were considered obsolete by
then and relegated to the status of mere curiosities. Hard
though it may be for you to believe, interplanetary travel
was carried out via a vast network of star gates. Portals like
the one that you passed through as you entered the archive.”
Norr remembered the tile, the picture she’d seen, and the
name Varga. Of course! The planet Varga, which had been
mentioned in some of the texts she had read as a child and
was supposedly home to a large colony of sensitives.
“And Hios?” the runner inquired. “How did he wind up
as emperor? Did he invent the technology behind the star
gates?”
“Yes, and no,” the computer replied. “Hios was part of a
team that created the technology, and being the most ambitious of the lot, took advantage of his position to seize
power.”
This was, or had been her father that Fil was talking
about, and Norr was naturally curious. “So, how did he do
that? Seize power I mean?”
“Hios controlled an artiﬁcial intelligence named Logos,”
the computer replied, “and Logos controlled more than a
thousand lesser AIs such as myself. So, given the fact that
interplanetary commerce depended on the star gates, anyone who controlled them controlled the ﬂow of information,
the shipment of goods, and the movement of troops.
“Many observers, including myself, believe that his original intentions were good. By tying the worlds together,
Hios was creating the means by which mankind could take
what he called ‘the next step,’ to a higher level of civilization. Or that’s what he said.

150

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“But, you’re probably familiar with the old saying that
‘absolute power corrupts absolutely,’ and such was the case.
Over a period of about ten years the emperor’s decisions became so self-serving, and so capricious, that many thought
him mad. A resistance movement was born, heretofore obsolete spaceships were reﬁtted, and rebellious runners began
to carry messages back and forth between the planets.
“Runners like you!” Lee said proudly, his hand tugging at
Rebo’s jacket.
“Yes,” Fil agreed, as he resumed his narration. “And Hios
was angered by such activity. So angered that the runner’s
guild was outlawed, star gates were used to deliver nuclear
weapons onto rebel planets, and entire cities were leveled.
The citizenry rose up, or tried to, but thanks to his evergrowing network of portals Hios could move his brutal security troops around very quickly, and the resistance ﬁghters
lost every battle. Finally, when things were so dark that it
seemed that all hope was lost, it was a member of the emperor’s own family who brought the madness to an end.”
Norr remembered what Lysander had said, that she was
the one who had ended the emperor’s life, and felt a chill
run down her spine. Rebo remembered, too—and wrapped
an arm around her shoulders.
The AI had no way to know about the sensitive’s relationship to Hios and continued his narration. “No one witnessed the murder, but it’s said the emperor’s daughter left
her quarters via an open window, negotiated the ledge that
ran the circumference of the building, and jumped down
onto her father’s private balcony.”
Although Norr had entered trancelike states thousands
of times during her lifetime, she had never experienced
anything like what happened next. Instead of stepping
halfway out of her body, as she normally did, the sensitive

RUNNER

151

found herself entering another vehicle, one that felt different. It was smaller, but very athletic, something she gave
thanks for as her feet smacked against the stone tiles of her
father’s balcony.
Outside of the door to his private suite, which was heavily guarded, the balcony represented the only other entrance
to her father’s bedroom. So far so good. But could she complete the task she had assigned herself? Her father was
clearly evil, so the justiﬁcation was there, as was the need to
take action. Because no one except for a member of the emperor’s immediate family would have the opportunity to kill
him. Not with combat variants guarding him around the
clock.
But to sneak into his bedroom, tiptoe up to his bed, and
sink a knife into her own father? That was a lot to ask of any
daughter, even one who was ashamed of what had been done
in her family’s name and desperately wanted the horror to end.
Still, that was the task that Princess Cara had set for herself, and that was what she was determined to accomplish
no matter the price. High-quality synsilk whispered softly
as the young woman made her way to the entrance, tried the
handle, and felt it give. The well-lubricated hinges were
silent as the door swung open and she entered the cavernous
bedroom. She paused, listened for signs of alarm, but heard
none. Light, such as it was, emanated from the slightly luminescent baseboard that circled the room.
Then, having removed the hunting knife from the sheath
strapped to her thigh, the princess advanced on the bed.
There were two forms under the covers, one of which represented her father, while the other belonged to whatever
woman he had chosen to sleep with the evening before. Just
the latest in a long string of lovers he had taken since his
wife’s death three years earlier.

152

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

A dozen steps carried Cara to her father’s bedside. He was
snoring gently as she raised the knife into the air; but then,
just as she was about to plunge the blade into his unprotected chest, the emperor gave a sudden snort and his eyelids ﬂuttered. He must have been able to see her in the dim
light, because his eyes widened, and he spoke. “Cara? Is that
you? What are you doing?”
Norr heard her previous self say, “I’m sorry,” as she
brought the weapon straight down. Her father produced a
grunt of expelled air as the steel entered his chest, arched
his back, and shufﬂed his feet. That was when the woman
lying at his side awoke, saw Cara jerk the bloody blade out
of her lover’s chest, and screamed. The noise brought two
combat variants into the room. They saw the assassin and
opened ﬁre.
Rebo felt Norr jerk as if something had struck her, saw
her eyes pop open, and realized that while he had been listening to Fil she had been somewhere else. “Lanni? Are you
all right?”
Norr, who was surprised to discover that she was still
alive, nodded weakly. “What Fil said is true. I killed my
father.”
“You killed him?” Lee asked, his eyes huge. “I’m sorry.”
“So am I,” Norr replied sadly, patting the boy on the
shoulder.
“Well, no one else was,” Fil commented emotionlessly.
“Once the word of Hios’s death got out there was dancing in
the streets—and that was the beginning of the end. The emperor’s son tried to hold the Imperium together, but he
wasn’t up to the job, and the whole structure came apart.
Mobs located and destroyed most of the star gates, not to
mention the AIs who operated them, and a new government
came to power. It lasted ﬁfty-four years before it was replaced

RUNNER

153

by what amounted to a technocracy, the same one that built
a ﬂeet of sentient starships to replace the star gates.”
“So, what happened to Logos?” Rebo inquired pragmatically. “Lysander, that is to say Hios, told us that Logos is too
smart to let himself be destroyed by a mob. Would you
agree with that?”
“Logos is, or was, extremely intelligent,” Fil agreed. “But
that doesn’t mean that he survived. After all, we Gate Keepers were pretty smart, too, and most of us were destroyed.
Still, I have no hard evidence regarding a termination, so
there’s no way to know.”
“Let’s say he’s alive,” Norr put in. “Where would he be?”
“That’s hard to say,” the AI replied cautiously, “but I can
tell you this . . . The last directive I received from him originated from Etu.”
“That’s where we’re going!” Lee said brightly. “Just before Thara.”
“Maybe, and maybe not,” the runner responded, frowning to signal his displeasure regarding the information that
Lee had unintentionally divulged. “Well, thank you very
much. You have been most helpful.” The threesome made
their way out through what remained of the ancient star
gate and into the basement beyond.
Meanwhile, back in the archive, Wiley scowled and made a
note to redouble his efforts to ﬁnd the AI’s central processing
unit as he locked the door behind them. He should spend the
rest of the morning reading, the archivist knew that, but decided on a nap instead. After all, he reasoned, the manuscripts
stacked all around him had been there for hundreds of years.
A few additional hours wouldn’t make any difference.
The lock made a gentle click as the key turned, the door

opened, and the lights came on as four heavily armed men

154

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

burst into the suite. Rebo awoke, and was in the process or
reaching for his handgun, when two of the intruders entered
the bedroom that he and Lee shared. “Hold it right there,”
one of them shouted, and pointed a double-barreled shotgun at the runner. Rebo held both hands up and away from
his body.
Lee was frightened, but determined not to show it, and
sat huddled on the couch where he had been sleeping. His
eyes were big, but his mouth formed a straight line, and the
runner felt proud of him. Especially since it seemed reasonable to assume that the men were there to kidnap the boy on
behalf of the black hats.
But that assumption soon proved to be incorrect as Rebo
came to realize that both intruders wore military uniforms,
and a voice was heard from the next room. “All right! We
have her! Time to pull out.”
The soldier nearest the door backed through it, but the
man with the scattergun remained where he was. Rebo
wanted to go to Norr’s aid, but the twin shotgun barrels
looked like railway tunnels. The intruder seemed to read his
mind. “There’s nothing to worry about. Prince Palo would
like to meet your wife. No harm will come to her and she
will be compensated for her time. Once the audience is over
we will bring her here. In the meantime I suggest that you
go back to sleep.”
Having provided what he believed to be comforting
words, the soldier backed out of the room and closed the
door behind him. The outer door slammed a few seconds
later, and Rebo knew that the intruders were gone. The runner swore bitterly as he grabbed his weapon, swung his feet
out onto the carpet, and left the bedroom to conﬁrm what
he already knew. Norr was gone.

RUNNER

155

Lee watched solemnly from across the room as Rebo returned. “Are you going after her?”
The runner was pulling his trousers on by then. He
shook his head. “I can’t. But I am going to go down and
have a conversation with the desk clerk. Somebody gave
those bastards a key to the front door. I want to know why.”
Lee frowned. “Why not? Go after her I mean.”
“Well, there’s my responsibility to you for starters,” Rebo
replied. “Plus, judging from what the guy with the shotgun
had to say, the Shah’s son is the one who put the snatch on
her. What am I supposed to do? Attack his palace?”
“Lanni wouldn’t abandon you,” Lee objected as he pulled
his clothes on. “And don’t use me as an excuse! I’m going after her, so if you intend to guard me, you’re coming, too.”
Rebo stopped what he was doing to look at the boy. His
eyes narrowed. “You promised to obey me and to do so
without question. That means you’re staying right here.”
“No,” Lee replied deﬁantly, “I promised to obey you so
long as your instructions were consistent with moral law.
This one isn’t.”
“The soldier said they would return her safe and sound.”
“And maybe they will,” Lee responded, as he laced his
boots, “but anything can happen when Lanni goes into a
trance. Nobody knows that better than you do. I want my
knives.”
There was something different about the way that the
youngster spoke. He sounded like a man rather than a boy.
Rebo frowned. “Your knives? You haven’t worn them since
the ﬁght on the spaceship.”
“That’s right,” Lee said determinedly, “but I’m going
wear them now.”
The runner thought about what that implied. Lanni

156

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

meant so much to Lee that he was not only willing to defy
his bodyguard but to kill in order to protect the sensitive.
Because she had become a sort of mother ﬁgure? Because he
had a crush on her? It hardly mattered. Rebo nodded
grudgingly. “All right, have it your way. The knives are in
my pack. But don’t go off half-cocked! If we’re going to
commit suicide, we’ll do it my way. Understood?”
Suddenly the man was gone and the little boy had returned. Lee grinned. “Yes, sir.”
“Good,” Rebo replied grufﬂy. “Get a shirt on. We have
work to do.”
A partially clothed Norr was still kicking and struggling as

she was carried out into the guild’s lobby, past the worriedlooking desk clerk, through security, and into an elevator.
That particular car had been taken out of service by a frightened maintenance man who hurried to close the door once
the sensitive and her abductors were safely aboard. He
turned a key, and the ancient box-shaped container shuddered slightly as it began its descent.
Then, tired of trying to restrain the woman without
striking her, the soldiers put her down. “Here,” a noncom
said, as he shoved a wad of the woman’s clothing at her.
“You’re going to have an audience with the prince, so you
might want to get dressed.”
That was when Norr remembered that all she had on was
a short-sleeved pullover shirt and a pair of panties. A fact
that wasn’t lost on the other soldiers, all of whom had taken
the opportunity to ogle her long, slender legs.
The sensitive managed to resist the temptation to try and
cover what the soldiers had already seen and sorted through
the ball of clothing that had been thrust at her. Finally, after
dumping most of the items onto the ﬂoor, she assembled a

RUNNER

157

halfway-decent outﬁt. Norr was just about to get dressed
when the elevator coasted to a stop. “So,” the sensitive demanded, “what’s it going to be? Should I ﬁnish dressing here?
Or are you going to march a half-naked woman out through
the lobby? That should start some interesting rumors about
the prince.”
The noncom looked annoyed. “Go ahead and ﬁnish.
Hurry it up though . . . We haven’t got all night.”
Norr frowned and folded her arms across her chest. “I’ll
start the minute that you and your men leave the elevator.”
The noncom started to object, appeared to think better
of it, and gestured toward the open door. “You heard the
lady . . . Wait outside.”
The soldiers left, the sensitive ordered the maintenance
man to close the door, and proceeded to glare at him until
he turned his back. She tried the same technique on the noncom, but he’d been around for a while, and didn’t trust the
variant farther than he could throw a howitzer. “You haven’t
got anything I haven’t seen before. Now get on with it.”
That left Norr with little choice but to turn her back on
the soldier, remove the pullover, and replace it with a bra.
Then, having attempted to shake the wrinkles out of her only
black dress, the sensitive stepped into it and pulled the garment up the length of her body. In the meantime her mind
was racing. When she awoke to ﬁnd men standing next to her
bed the sensitive’s ﬁrst thought had been for Lee. Then, once
it became obvious that they were after her rather than the boy,
Norr had assumed that the intruders worked for Lysander’s
Techno Society. But now, as she straightened her dress, the
sensitive realized that theory was wrong, too. Assuming that
what the noncom said was true, and Prince Palo wanted to see
her. The question was why? “Don’t just stand there,” Norr
said pointing back over her shoulder. “Zip me up.”

158

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The noncom considered the order for a moment, decided
that he could handle the spook if necessary, and took two
steps forward. The zipper rose smoothly, Norr said, “Thank
you,” and turned to face him. “So,” the sensitive said suggestively, “how do I look? Good enough for an audience
with the Shah’s son?”
The answer was that the variant looked a lot better than
she had any right to given the circumstances, but the noncom wasn’t about to say that. “It wouldn’t be for me to say,
ma’am. Please exit the elevator. The captain is waiting.”
Having been unable to learn anything from the noncom,
Norr stepped into a pair of seldom-used evening slippers,
wished they were black instead of dark blue, and was herded
out into the lobby. The soldiers gave her admiring glances,
wondered what the noncom had seen, and hoped he would
share.
It was late, so with the exception of the street people
huddled outside, no one was present to witness the sensitive’s departure. A ragged-looking beggar, one of only three
metal men in the city, noticed that the female was a 92.5
percent match with a person he had been ordered to watch
for and snapped a series of digital photos via his “eyes” as
the sensitive walked past him. The photos would be downloaded to a tiny disk, which would be secured to one of the
birds that constantly ﬂew back and forth between Gos and
Tra, and sent on its way the moment the sun rose.
The vehicle that waited curbside had once been equipped
with an engine, but it had long since been removed to clear
out a space where the coachman could sit. The conveyance
was shaped like an elongated teardrop, boasted permanently
darkened windows, and crouched on six tires—two in front
and four in back. Running boards and handgrips had been

RUNNER

159

added so that a contingent of bodyguards could cling to the
vehicle’s sides. The sensitive noticed that six perfectly
matched angens waited to pull the carriage and that each of
them sported a black, red, and silver hood, the same colors
favored by the Shah and members of his immediate family.
One of the soldiers opened a gleaming metal door and
motioned for Norr to enter. The sensitive looked back over
her shoulder, half-expecting to see Rebo come charging out
through the lobby, and realized how absurd that was. In
spite of the fact that he had been kind enough to take an interest in her problems, the runner had Lee’s safety to consider, not to mention needs of his own. And that was ﬁne she
assured herself. After all, she’d been on her own for a long
time and was perfectly capable of solving her own problems.
So why did she feel disappointed? Because she was being
silly, that’s why—an indulgence she couldn’t afford.
Norr turned back, hiked her skirt a tiny bit higher, and
slid into the coach. The interior was lit by candles concealed
inside cleverly designed wall sconces. A man in fancylooking uniform sat waiting for her. He nodded his head.
“Captain Rik Tovar at your service. Please make yourself
comfortable. We’re late.”
The candles ﬂickered as the door closed, and the driver
shouted an order to his team. The vehicle jerked into motion as the sensitive raised a well-plucked eyebrow. “Late?
Late for what?”
“I thought that would be obvious,” Tovar replied. “You
are a sensitive. Individuals having your, ah, talents are rare
hereabouts. Prince Palo would like to avail himself of your
services.”
Norr frowned. “Couldn’t he ask? And schedule something during the day?”

160

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“His highness has no need to ask,” Tovar replied dryly.
“And the summons was by way of an impulse. I apologize if
we frightened you.”
“Oh, no,” the sensitive said caustically. “People barge
into my room, point guns at me, and haul me off nearly
every night. What exactly does he want?”
Tovar was relatively young, extremely well groomed, and
possessed of a black mustache that he smoothed with a
knuckle. “The prince has brothers, both of whom want
more power, while his father seeks ways to keep all three of
them at each other’s throats. That makes for a great deal of
uncertainty, which is one of the reasons why his highness
tries to get an edge on his siblings by taking counsel from
all manner of psychics, oracles, and fortune-tellers. So, once
an informer reported that a sensitive had entered the city,
the prince was eager to hear whatever nonsense you might
choose to spout. I recommend that you take care however . . . The more obvious frauds end up working in the
mines.”
The ofﬁcer was a skeptic, the kind of person who assumed that all sensitives were frauds, a breed that Norr had
encountered many times before. She sat silent for a moment,
cocked her head as if listening to someone, and nodded. “A
woman is here to greet you . . . But she was a little girl
when you last saw her. She says that she liked the name you
gave her so much that she still goes by it even though there
have been hundreds over the course of many incarnations.”
All the blood seemed to drain out of Tovar’s face. “A little girl? Are you sure?”
“Yes, I am,” the sensitive replied. “Her name is Kia.”
“My God,” Tovar said, as tears ran down his cheeks. “It’s
true! My daughter is alive! Thank you.”
“You’re very welcome,” Norr replied sincerely. “Listen,

RUNNER

161

I’m sorry to press you, especially at a moment like this. But
what can you tell me about what I’m going to encounter? It
could make a difference.”
The ofﬁcer used a crimson sleeve to dry his cheeks. His
demeanor had changed. Now, in place of the cool skepticism
that characterized his earlier comments, he seemed genuinely concerned for her safety. “You already know about
Prince Palo and the situation within the family, so the only
other counsel I can offer you has to do with his temper.
Avoid it if you can.”
Norr heard the driver shout a mufﬂed order, felt the carriage start to slow, and saw lights through the darkened
windows. The ofﬁcer had regained his composure by then—
as well as some of the smugness that went with it. He
caught the sensitive’s eye. “I trust that our conversation will
remain conﬁdential?”
Norr nodded. “Of course.”
A servant opened the door, and Norr exited the carriage
to ﬁnd herself in what felt like a fantasyland. The roughly
three-story-tall building clearly predated the skyscrapers
around it and was bathed in artiﬁcial light. The structure’s
roof consisted of a dome that was very reminiscent of the
temple in Hyber Pass, except that this one was in perfect
condition and gleamed with fresh paint. Norr had the impression of a peaked pediment, horizontal entablature, and
sturdy columns before being led around the side of the
structure toward what she assumed was a service entrance.
Meanwhile, the manner in which the sparsely lit highrise buildings encircled the area, plus the gardens around
the palace, conveyed the impression of a park. And that was
when the sensitive realized that the structure had once been
open to the public. A museum, gallery, or library created for
the enjoyment of regular citizens rather than a single family.

162

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

But that line of thought was subsumed by a tidal wave of
emotion as Lysander’s distinctive personality ﬂooded in
around her. She hadn’t felt his presence since the session in
the pass, and it came as a shock. His words seemed to reverberate inside her head. “Listen to me! It’s important.”
The sensitive shook her head. “No! Not now! Go away!”
Tovar paused in front of an open door and turned to look
at her. “What did you say?”
Norr, who had been unaware that she had spoken out loud,
shook her head. “It wasn’t important. Please lead the way.”
The ofﬁcer took the young woman at her word and led her
inside. The service entrance opened into storage area and the
kitchen beyond. In spite of the fact that breakfast was still
many hours away, the staff was already hard at work preparing the wide assortment of fresh-baked ﬂatbread, butter rolls,
and sweet cakes that would be served to the prince and his
family should they decide to make an appearance before noon.
Having exited the kitchen, Norr was led through a maze
of hallways and ushered into a small but formal room. She
was the only person present, but judging from the benches
and chairs, up to a dozen people were required to wait there
at times.
Norr had no more than sat down and heard the lock
click, when Lysander took another run at her. The discarnate
entity seemed very agitated, even for him, but the sensitive
had no intention of allowing him through. What if the
guards came for her only to discover that she was busy channeling the lunatic who had once been her father? No, that
wouldn’t do at all.
So Lysander pushed, Norr pushed back, and the two of
them were at what amounted to a psychic impasse when the
lock clicked and the door swung open. In place of Captain
Tovar, who the sensitive expected to see, was a long-faced

RUNNER

163

majordomo. He was dressed in a loose-ﬁtting high-collared
black tunic that fell well below his hips, trousers to match,
and a pair of pointed slippers. He introduced himself as
Simms and produced a bow so modest it was little more
than a slight inclination of his torso. “The prince will receive you now.”
A heavy weight rode the pit of Norr’s stomach as she
forced a smile, stood, and followed the servant out into the
hall. Two members of the palace guard followed as the sensitive was led out into the formal passageway that circled
the building and from there into the chamber where Prince
Palo and his family preferred to receive unofﬁcial guests.
Unlike the throne room that Norr had imagined, it was
furnished with comfortable-looking furniture, and the walls
were lined with thousands of leather-bound books. A large
pair of double doors fronted what the sensitive imagined to
be a terrace and stood slightly ajar. Her arrival went almost
entirely unnoticed as the prince threw both doors open and
stood between them. His voice was angry. “What’s going on
out there? Who’s making that noise?”
Norr had been so focused on her own situation up till
that point that she hadn’t noticed the insistent thump!
thump! thump! of drums interspersed with the occasional almost discordant blare of distant trumpets. It was a strange
sound—yet oddly familiar at the same time. The majordomo looked unperturbed. “The red hats have entered the
public gardens, sire. They are staging some sort of religious
celebration—or so I am told.”
“Well, they can damned well celebrate somewhere else,”
the prince fumed, as he closed the doors. “Inform Captain
Tovar . . . Tell him to chase the beggars away.”
Simms nodded gravely. “Do you want them arrested,
sire? The captain will want to know.”

164

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The nobleman shook his head. “No, let them go. We can
rely on the black hats to keep them in check. If only my father and brothers were so easy to deal with.”
Norr felt her pulse beat a little faster. The red hats! Was
that a matter of coincidence? Or, were Rebo and Lee connected to the commotion somehow? And if so, to what end?
There was no way to know.
“So,” Prince Palo said as he turned his back to the doors.
Except for his nose, which was a little too large, he was a
handsome man and well aware of it. He was dressed in a
white jacket, red sash, and black pants. His back was ramrod straight, and his voice was stern. “We have a visitor . . .
What’s your name?”
“Norr, sire,” the sensitive responded. “Lanni Norr.”
“Thank you for coming,” the princess said, speaking for
the ﬁrst time. “I know it’s late.”
Norr turned to look at the other woman. They were approximately the same age, or so it seemed, although
Princess Sema was prettier. She wore a lime green headdress,
a ﬁlmy half veil, and a dress that fell gracefully around her.
She was seated on a couch. Two children, both young,
played at her feet. The noblewoman’s words made it sound
as if Norr had merely been inconvenienced rather than
snatched from her bed. Was that intentional? A device calculated to make Norr feel more like a guest than a prisoner?
Or was the princess so insulated from reality that she
thought it was true? The sensitive decided that it didn’t
make much difference. She dropped a curtsy. “You’re welcome, highness.”
The prince dropped into a chair. Neither he nor his wife
invited Norr to sit. “We have consulted all manner of psychics,” Palo observed coldly. “But none were variants. Per-

RUNNER

165

haps you would be so kind as to elaborate on the nature of
your paranormal abilities.”
“Some sensitives can see those who have departed this
plane of existence for the next,” Norr responded carefully.
“Others have the ability to sample past lives, or view events
from a distance. Still others can hear discarnate entities
speak, cause small items to ﬂy through the air, or heal by the
laying on of hands.
“As for my particular talents I am clairaudient, clairvoyant, and have the ability to leave my body for short periods
of time, thereby allowing spirit entities to occupy it.”
“Others have made similar claims,” the nobleman responded skeptically. “How can we tell which claims are
true?”
“Those who have genuine talents can provide evidence of
that fact,” the sensitive responded. “Information that only a
real channel could produce.”
“Can you give us an example?” Princess Sema inquired as
she lifted her son up onto her lap.
“Yes,” Norr replied as her eyes lost focus, “I think I can.
Please remember that while I see images of people from
time to time, they can change their appearance just as we
can, which means that a picture may or may not resemble
the way a particular entity looked during his or her most recent incarnation. Furthermore, some of the things that I am
shown are symbolic, which means that while they have little
signiﬁcance for me, they may be meaningful to you.
“For example,” the sensitive continued, as she stared at a
point above the prince’s head, “I see a three-headed snake.
It’s at war with itself as each head attempts to inject venom
into the others. In the background I hear laughter, as if
someone is watching the battle, and thinks it’s funny.”

166

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Your father,” the princess said, spitting the second word
out as if it might be poisonous.
Palo refused to take the bait but eyed the sensitive instead. “You call that proof?” he demanded cynically. “Everyone knows that my father takes pleasure in setting his sons
against each other. You could have obtained that information on any street corner.”
“Wait, sire,” the sensitive cautioned, “there’s more. I see
the ﬁgure of a man. I can’t discern his features, but I sense
that he’s older than you are, and a little bit taller. He stands
with both hands extended palms up. A crescent moon ﬂoats
above one—and a sphere hovers over the other. As I watch I
see his ﬁngers close around the sphere. I don’t know what
those symbols mean, but a voice tells me that you do.”
There was a sharp intake of breath at the mention of the
crescent moon, and Sema brought a hand up to cover her
mouth. Her husband nodded as if in agreement. “Zaster, my
eldest brother, was born with a red crescent on his ankle.
Such a mark is said to portend evil. No one beyond the
members of immediate family is aware of it.”
“The sphere starts to crumble as his ﬁngers close around
it,” Norr continued, “and what looks like sand falls away.”
“It’s the planet,” the princess whispered. “He plans to
control it.”
“Yes,” the sensitive agreed. “The voice agrees with
you . . . But the scene changes again as a dagger shimmers,
only to be transformed into the likeness of a man. A man
who extends one hand in greeting while keeping the other
hidden behind his back.”
And it was then, just as Norr was about to continue, that
Lysander launched a surprise attack. Suddenly, without
warning, the sensitive felt the discarnate entity push her out
and was forced to go along for the ride as the spirit who had

RUNNER

167

once been known as Hios charged across the room. Simms
saw the sensitive coming, but it was too late by then, and
the majordomo collapsed as Norr-Lysander fell on top of
him. “He has a gun!” Lysander yelled at the top of Norr’s
lungs. “Help me!”
But the prince had pulled on a cloth-covered rope by
then, and Norr was little more than a distant observer as
half a dozen bodyguards entered the room, and jerked her
body up off the ﬂoor. Palo was on his feet by then and furious. “This is your proof? An unprovoked attack on one of
my servants? Take her away.”
“No!” Lysander insisted. “He has a gun! And look at his
right ankle. That’s where you will ﬁnd the mark of his true
master.”
The prince was about to refuse when the doors to the garden were thrown open and four red-clad Dib Wa entered.
They were armed with razor-sharp swords and, judging from
the way they moved, knew how to use them. The royal bodyguards were just starting to turn toward the new threat when
Rebo appeared. Both of his weapons were drawn, and he leveled them at the guards. “Hold it right there . . . I don’t want
to shoot anyone, but I will if I have to.” Lee emerged from behind the runner and stood with one knife ready to throw.
Norr, who was still “standing” slightly outside of her
body, felt a sudden sense of warmth suffuse her being. Rebo
had come to her rescue, in spite of the fact that it was stupid
to do so and would almost certainly result in disaster.
“That’s right,” Lysander declared righteously. “Hold it
right there. Now, search that man and take his weapon.
Once he’s disarmed take a look at his right ankle.”
The lead bodyguard made eye contact with the prince,
saw the royal nod, and turned to his men. “All right . . .
Search him.”

168

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Simms turned to ﬂee but was brought down by a ﬂying
tackle. A struggle ensued, the now-desperate servant was
brought under control, and one of the guards emerged from
the melee holding a pistol. “Look! He was armed! Just like
the seer said!”
“That’s not all,” a second bodyguard proclaimed. “Look
at this!”
Prince Palo frowned as he made his way over to the spot
where one of his most senior servants lay pinned to the ﬂoor.
Though already shocked to discover that the majordomo
was carrying a weapon, the nobleman was completely taken
aback when he saw the man’s bared ankle and the red crescent moon that was tattooed there. The same mark that his
eldest brother had been born with, subsequently adopted as
his personal sigil and placed on all his property. No wonder
his brother always seemed to be two steps ahead of him. He
knew everything in advance!
The prince could hear the blood pounding in his ears and
was so angry that he felt a bit dizzy as he extended a hand.
“The pistol . . . Give me the pistol.”
There was a sudden ﬂurry of activity as the princess sent
her personal maid and both of her children out of the room.
The previously haughty spy was sobbing by then, as the
prince wrapped his ﬁngers around the weapon and felt for
the trigger. The royal had brought the handgun around, and
was holding the barrel only inches from the traitor’s head,
when a hand touched his arm. “No,” the princess said.
“Don’t do it.” Her eyes, which were normally so soft, looked
like chips of stone.
The prince spoke through gritted teeth, and Simms
whimpered as he wet his trousers. “Why not? The bastard
deserves to die.”
“That’s true,” the princess responded evenly, “but what if

RUNNER

169

you turn the dog against its master? Your brother will believe everything that the misbegotten whoreson says. For a
while at least . . . And that’s all you need.”
There was a moment of silence as the prince absorbed the
meaning of her words. A smile grew as he lowered the gun.
“You make an excellent point, my dear. This is an interesting opportunity indeed.” The nobleman’s head swiveled toward the senior guard. “Lock the scoundrel up. No one is to
speak to him without my permission. And both you and
your entire detail will remain on the palace grounds until
further notice. Not only must we must take all the steps
necessary to ensure that there was only one spy—but we
must do everything necessary to prevent word of what took
place from leaking out.
“Now,” the royal said, turning toward Norr. “It seems
that I owe you an apology. More than that a position within
my household. Your talent is not only genuine but extremely useful. So much so that it would be unfortunate if
you were to fall into the wrong hands.”
Norr struggled to speak but discovered that Lysander
still had control of her vocal cords. “Thank you, sire,” he
said huskily, “but my companions and I are already committed to an extremely important task. One that requires us to
depart Pooz on the next ship.”
The prince raised his eyebrows. “And if I object?”
Rebo waved the Hogger. “No offense, sire. But that
wouldn’t be a very good idea . . . We hold the high ground
at the moment, and while you could chase us down after we
withdraw, there’s your new secret to consider. If you allow
us to leave the planet, it will be safe, but force us to stay, and
the information will go straight to your brother.”
The proud nobleman felt another surge of anger and was
about to respond accordingly, when the princess touched his

170

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

arm. “What about the red hats?” she demanded, gesturing
toward the Dib Wa. “Will they leave the planet as well?”
Rebo looked at Lee, and the boy nodded. “Yes. You have
my word.”
The prince started to question the assertion, especially
since it had originated from a mere youth, but something
about the authoritative manner in which the boy spoke
caused him to hesitate. Finally, having heard no objection
from his wife, the nobleman agreed. “All right. But only if
two members of my staff accompany you until the ship
lifts—and you will agree to join my household if the vessel
fails to appear.”
Lysander was about to refuse when Norr managed to
wrestle control away from him. “Thank you, sire,” she said.
“We agree.”
Rebo hadn’t agreed to anything and resented the manner
in which the sensitive had spoken for him, but decided that
it would be best to raise the issue later. He motioned for
Norr to back out through the door. “We’re staying at the
runner’s guild. You can send your men there.” Then, without so much as a by-your-leave, the intruders were gone.

SEVEN
™

The Planet Anafa

There have always been some who could communicate with
those in the next world, but it was only when the ancients
found scientific proof of an afterlife that such individuals were
accepted, then studied. Later, by means of techniques no
longer understood, an entire subspecies of highly specialized
human beings was brought into existence. Not to comfort the
bereaved or access the wisdom of those who had passed into
spirit, but to make money. And so it was that our ancestors
were created for commercial rather than spiritual purposes—
and came to be regarded with suspicion rather than respect. A
curse that follows us to this day.
—Grand Vizier Horga Entube,
The History of My People

Soft white light flooded the circular conference room and

threw hard dark shadows down across the highly polished
concrete ﬂoor. All of the council members were present, but
Omar Tepho had yet to arrive, and Jevan Kane had little
choice but to wait for him. Having failed to capture Norr on
Pooz, and under pressure to get results, the operative had returned to Anafa and the city of Seros. His task, which was to
establish communications with Lysander, remained the
same. But rather than use Norr as the channel, the technologist planned to employ the services of a more cooperative
sensitive.
His name was Arn Dyson, and he was seated within the
embrace of the keyhole-shaped slot that ran in toward the

172

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

center of the round table. The variant was older rather than
younger, and possessed shoulder-length white hair, which he
wore in a ponytail. He had a deeply lined face, hooded eyes,
and a strong chin. Though not the most famous of seers,
Dyson had a solid reputation and, unlike the ﬂighty Norr,
demonstrated a willingness to serve. All of which boded
well. Which was good, because Chairman Tepho and certain
council members had grown decidedly restive of late.
There was a stir as the scientist entered, exchanged greetings with his fellow council members, and took his seat.
The chair had been specially designed to accept Tepho’s
spinal deformity and sighed softly. In the meantime, Shaz
appeared behind the chairman. He eyed Kane, treated the
operative to one of his caninelike grins, and disappeared.
“All right,” Tepho said, “let’s get on with it.”
Kane sought to swallow the lump that had formed in the
back of his throat and opened the meeting. “Ladies and gentlemen, all of you know why we’re here, so we might as well
get this session under way. Citizen Dyson? What can we do
to help?”
The sensitive smiled reassuringly as he looked from face
to face. “It would be helpful if those of you who actually
knew Milos Lysander during his most recent incarnation
would visualize his features, summon up a positive memory
of him, and focus on that. In the meantime the rest of the
group can send welcoming thoughts and do their best to remain open. Please turn the lights down—and don’t touch
me after I go into trance.”
Kane ordered that the lights be dimmed, managed to
summon up an image of Lysander’s face, and sorted through
his memories of the man, looking for one that was positive.
There were a few, but not that many, even though the two of

RUNNER

173

them had been close during the years prior to the founder’s
premature death, something Tepho continued to resent.
Lysander was a hard man to please, and even though Kane
had worked extremely hard to do so, he had rarely been successful. The operative selected one of the rare occasions on
which he had been praised, focused his mind on that, and
hoped that the thought would function as a beacon.
Meanwhile, Milos Lysander’s ethereal body shivered, began to dissipate, and came back together again as the discarnate entity paused to revisualize it. This was something he
and every other spirit had to do occasionally in order to
maintain a consistent appearance. Of course there were some
individuals who couldn’t be bothered with that sort of thing
and looked like blobs of constantly shifting light. The scientist didn’t care for that, however, and liked to maintain an
appearance similar to that of Emperor Hios.
Now, as Lysander forced his way down through increasingly dense layers of reality, he soon found himself among
the beings who liked to wallow about in the thick, glutinous muck that surrounded the physical plane, or were
there on an errand of some sort. A few, like the scientist,
were responding to a speciﬁc call. Some contacts were intentional, as when a sensitive attempted to communicate with
a speciﬁc entity, but most were accidental. Lysander had experienced many of those. Someone, members of the Techno
Society were the most frequent offenders, would think or
talk about him for an extended period of time and unknowingly pepper him with thought forms.
The scientist normally ignored such signals, but some
were too strong to ﬁlter out or were associated with someone he cared for. Jevan Kane in this case, the same entity
who had been his son during his incarnation as Emperor

174

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Hios and was most likely to help him now. Which was why
the discarnate decided to follow the energy back to its
source. And the closer he got, the stronger the attraction became, until it became a palpable force.
Finally, Lysander found himself at the source of the energy, the place where a group of people were gathered
around an individual who was focused on trying to bring
him through. Looking into the physical plane was like peering through thick folds of gauze, but the scientist recognized some of those who had gathered to speak with him.
Among them were Kane, Eby, and Tepho. A brilliant mind,
but one so distorted by his childhood experiences that it had
become as monstrous as his body and was capable of anything. Still, Tepho was determined to reestablish the star
gates, and that, at least, was good.
The words seemed to come from a long ways off, but
once he focused in on them, Lysander discovered that he
could hear most of the conversation. A sensitive, the person
seated at the very center of the group, was speaking. He was
male, well past middle age, and slightly nervous. “He’s
here . . . I can sense his presence.”
“Then what are we waiting for?” Tepho demanded imperiously. “He tried to communicate with Kane on Pooz a
short time ago. Bring him through!”
“I’m trying,” the sensitive responded defensively, “but
it’s up to him. Discarnate entities have free will. I can’t force
him to communicate with you.”
Lysander circled the assemblage. What Tepho said was
true. He had attempted to communicate with Kane, although he wasn’t sure about the exact time line, since the
whole concept of time was little more than an intellectual
abstraction on the spirit planes. So, given the fact that he

RUNNER

175

wanted to impart certain information to the group, and a
channel was available to do so, what was holding him back?
As with so many other things the answer was complicated. Thanks to the strange bond that existed between
them it was easier to communicate through Norr, but there
was more to it than that. Yes, it was his goal to see the system of star gates restored, but with an important difference.
Having misused the portals during his incarnation as Emperor Hios, he had returned to the physical as Milos
Lysander, intent on putting things right. But without the
memory of past lives to guide him, the scientist soon
strayed from the path, and had it not been for his premature
death would have committed the same errors all over again.
All of which brought Lysander back to the present and
an extremely important decision. Should he ally himself
with the organization he had created, and Tepho’s twisted
mind, or with the woman who had murdered him?
In the ﬁnal analysis the decision was easier than Lysander
thought it would be. He felt increasingly drawn to the
woman he still thought of as Cara. She didn’t like him,
Lysander knew that, and was glad of it. Knowing where he
had gone wrong in the past, and with Norr as a sort of auxiliary conscience, perhaps he could put things right.
“Lysander is here,” Dyson reiterated conﬁdently. “I can
see his energy circling the room. But he shows no interest in
making contact, and it looks like he’s about to leave.”
“Well, hold him!” Kane ordered angrily. “We need him,
damm it! The whole thing was his idea!”
Lysander knew that Kane had been his son during his incarnation as Emperor Hios, and as the outburst echoed
through the foglike substance that swirled around him, the
scientist was struck by the extent to which the two of them

176

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

were alike. Or had been, since Lysander was determined to
correct his past mistakes and repair at least some of the
damage he had done.
The discarnate was already in the process of directing his
energy elsewhere when Kane rose to address Tepho and the
council. His voice was hard and cold. “I apologize for wasting your time. It won’t happen again! The old bastard is
playing hard to get. I propose that we redouble our efforts
to capture Norr; failing that, we’ll kill her. At that point the
old coot can either come through Dyson here or forget the
whole thing. I believe that he will cooperate rather than sacriﬁce his dream.”
All eyes gravitated to Tepho. Some of the council members approved of the proposed plan while others didn’t. But
none of them were willing to express their opinions until
the chairman weighed in with his. And Tepho was silent as
he stared at Kane and watched tiny beads of perspiration appear on the operative’s forehead.
Tepho didn’t like Kane and never had. Partly because of
the other man’s good looks, partly because of his close relationship with Lysander, and partly because of his latent ambition. But to surrender to such emotions would be a
weakness. Because Kane, like every other person in the
room, was a tool. And when a cut fails to meet its intended
mark the fault lies with the carpenter not the saw. “The plan
makes sense,” the chairman said. “Keep me informed.”
Lysander heard the interchange, shook his head sadly,
and left Anafa behind.
Aboard the starship Hewhotravelsthroughtime

Having broken orbit around Pooz, the ship named Hewhotravelsthroughtime had scarcely entered hyperspace when Lee

RUNNER

177

fell seriously ill. It began with a vague discomfort in the
area around the boy’s navel that gradually developed into an
intense pain on the lower right sight of his abdomen which
was accompanied by a fever, nausea, and vomiting.
Rebo responded to the crises by breaking out his medical
kit and brewing up one of the ready-made poultices he had
acquired back on Anafa. The herbalist who had sold the
preparation to the runner had promised him that it would
be effective for a broad range of medical problems ranging
from gunshot wounds to certain forms of venereal disease.
But even a thick application of the noxious stuff did
nothing to relieve Lee’s symptoms, and by the time Norr returned from a scouting mission, Rebo was quite concerned.
Having been fortunate enough to emerge from the confrontation with Prince Palo without being sent to the royal
mines, his client was at risk once again, only this threat was
even more difﬁcult to counter. “As far as I can tell this ship
is virtually identical to the last one,” the sensitive commented, as she took a seat in front of the small ﬁre. “I even
found the lift that takes you up to the garden. This one is in
better shape, though, and judging from appearances, someone or something has been working to maintain it. My
guess is someone, since a robot wouldn’t need to cook anything, and I came across the remains of a ﬁre. The embers
were still warm.”
Rebo nodded politely, but the sensitive could see that his
attention lay elsewhere. “Lee is feeling even worse than he
was before. I put a poultice on his belly, but it hasn’t made a
noticeable difference.”
Norr frowned, got up, and went over to where the boy
lay. Once she was kneeling by his side, it quickly became
apparent that the youth wasn’t asleep as she had supposed,
but very, very ill. His forehead felt warm, his knees were

178

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

drawn up toward his stomach, and his eyelids ﬂuttered
when she said his name.
The poultice that Rebo had secured around the lower
part of Lee’s torso stank so badly that the sensitive pulled
her knife, cut the pouch free, and tossed it over her shoulder.
The dressing landed next to one of the Dib Wa warriors who
had been forced to accompany the threesome. He swore in
Tilisi and threw the offensive item out into the surrounding
murk. There were other passengers—but none close enough
to object.
“So,” Rebo whispered, as he knelt at Lee’s side. “What do
you think?”
“I don’t know,” Norr said doubtfully, as she poured water
onto a handkerchief and arranged it on the boy’s hot forehead. “He needs a medico.”
“We don’t have one,” the runner replied. “But you’re a
sensitive,” he added hopefully. “Maybe you could heal him.”
“I would if I could,” Norr replied regretfully. “But I lack
that particular talent. There is someone who might be able
to help us however.”
“Really?” the runner inquired. “Who?”
“The person who is living in the garden,” Norr replied,
jerking her thumb back over her shoulder.
“Why? Do you think he or she is a medico?”
“No,” the sensitive responded. “But we know that the
ship was originally designed to carry passengers as well
cargo. So it’s my guess that there is a highly automated
medical facility on board. Probably in one of the many areas
that we don’t have access to.”
Rebo looked hopeful. “It’s your ‘guess’? Or did one of
your invisible friends tell you that?”
Though never a true skeptic, he was far too superstitious
for that, the runner’s faith in Norr’s psychic abilities had not

RUNNER

179

only increased over the last few weeks, but reached the
point where he had a somewhat exaggerated notion of what
the sensitive was capable of. Something Norr intended to
talk to him about at the right moment. But right then, with
Lee’s welfare on the line, she chose to lie. “Yes. Someone
told me.”
“Excellent!” Rebo replied, as he came to his feet. “We’ll
make a stretcher. Two of the Dib Wa can carry it. The others
will remain here to protect our supplies.”
It was a good plan, and Norr said as much. There was a
ﬂurry of activity as orders were given, materials were gathered, and construction got under way. The stretcher party
was ready to go ﬁfteen minutes later. Lee had slipped into a
semiconscious state by then, had taken to calling Norr
Momma, and was clearly in pain.
Most of the other passengers were hunkered down
around tiny ﬁres, and there wasn’t a whole lot for them to
do, so most turned to watch as the stretcher party zigzagged
its way across the hold. The majority assumed that the boy
had passed away and, as was the prevailing custom on starships, would be entombed in some distant part of the hull.
Not only was such a death sad, but it reminded many of
their own mortality and caused them to turn back toward
the warmth of their ﬁres.
Having made use of the lift less than an hour before,
Norr had no difﬁculty leading the others to the grafﬁticovered door, where she pressed her palm against cold steel
and waited for the audible click. That was followed by the
steady whine of servos as the rarely used hatch cycled open.
“All aboard,” the sensitive ordered, as she gestured toward
the dimly lit interior and followed the rest of the stretcher
party onto the lift.
The door closed, the elevator rose, and Rebo pulled the

180

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Crosser out of its holster by way of a precaution. While
Norr seemed to assume that the person or persons who had
taken up residence in the ship’s artiﬁcial garden would welcome visitors, he wasn’t so sure.
The lift jerked to a halt a few seconds later. The runner
motioned for the others to stay where they were, sniffed the
moisture-laden air, and thought he detected a trace of
smoke. Then, eyes probing ahead, Rebo stepped out into a
compartment that was clearly identical to the one in which
Lee had been pursued by the black hat assassin. Except that
this garden was relatively orderly, and while the atmosphere
was humid, the sprinklers remained off.
Rebo followed a well-trodden path away from the elevator, and had just passed between a pair of fruit-laden
bushes, when someone grabbed hold of him from behind.
One hand went to his collar, a second to his belt, and the
runner had just started to react when his entire body was
lifted off the ground. Then, similar to the way a farmhand
might heave a bag of grain up onto a cart, Rebo was literally
thrown through the air.
Bo Hoggles uttered a victorious roar as the norm crashed
through a thicket of dead branches and hit the ground beyond. That was when the heavy realized that this intruder
was different from the one who had invaded his domain earlier in the “day,” and started to turn. However it was too late
by then, and Norr’s staff made a solid thwack! as it connected with the side of the other variant’s head and sent the
giant to his knees.
But the blow didn’t render Hoggles unconscious, and if it
hadn’t been for the Dib Wa warriors who had piled onto his
back, the heavy might have been able to rise. Fortunately,
the weight of the red hats, plus that of Rebo’s body was sufﬁcient to keep him down. Norr knelt next to the variant’s

RUNNER

181

head. “Hello!” she said cheerfully. “I’m sorry I had to hit
you . . . I suppose it’s hard to believe, but we don’t mean you
any harm. In fact, depending on how much you know about
the ship, we might even pay you for some advice.”
Rebo frowned. Like Norr, he was perfectly willing to pay
if that would help Lee, but resented the way she continually
took him for granted. But the runner knew it wasn’t a good
moment to broach the subject, so he let it go.
Hoggles, who had assumed that the intruders were there
to rob him of his food and take his home, blinked in surprise. His hair was ragged as if large ﬁstfuls of it had been
hacked off with a knife. He had a mostly symmetrical face,
an even nose, and a massive, stubble-covered jaw. Like many
of his brethren, the giant was often assumed to be stupid
but nothing could have been further from the truth. “Tell
your friends to get off my back, and we can talk about it.”
Norr looked at Rebo. “Let’s give him a chance.”
The runner grimaced, traded the Crosser for the more
powerful Hogger, and backed away. The Dib Wa, both of
whom were careful to stay out of the line of ﬁre, did likewise. One of them went to check on Lee.
The heavy got to his feet, touched the quickly swelling
lump on the side of his head, and made a face. His clothes
were a uniform gray color, had been mended countless
times, and were ragged around the edges. “It’s hard to keep
track, but I think I’ve been aboard for about three years
now, and I guess that makes me something of an expert.”
“Three years?” the runner said incredulously. “You must
have been to every planet on the ship’s itinerary at least two
times . . . Why stay aboard?”
“That’s none of your business,” the variant replied
haughtily, and stared out from under craggy brows. “Sufﬁce
it to say that I have my reasons.”

182

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Fair enough,” Norr said agreeably. “Based on your
knowledge of the vessel, can you tell us where the ship’s
medical facility is located? Our son is ill, very ill, and needs
immediate attention.”
Hoggles looked at the stretcher and the red hat who
knelt next to it. “No, I can’t, but that doesn’t mean there
isn’t one. I have found ways into most areas of the ship but
not all of them.”
Rebo directed a look at the sensitive. “You told me that
he would know,” the runner said accusingly. “This is a waste
of time! Lee is dying while you lead us all over the ship.”
If the conﬂict bothered Hoggles, he gave no sign of it.
“Of course there is someone who would know,” the variant
said. “If you can get him to talk, which will be difﬁcult to
do, since he tends to regard beings such as ourselves as little
more than barbarians.”
Norr knew that Rebo was frustrated, not to mention annoyed at her, and understood why. The runner was worried
about Lee and knew that time was running out. “Okay,” she
said, “who is this individual? Let’s have a talk with him.”
“He calls himself Hewhotravelsthroughtime,” Hoggles answered, “and he’s all around us. In fact, you could say that
we’re riding him, like ﬂeas on a dog.”
In spite of the fact that he had traveled aboard at least
two dozen spaceships, and knew that they were sentient,
Rebo had never spoken with one of the constructs. Perhaps
that was why he thought of them as machines rather than
people, and had never taken the time to consider how one of
them might regard his or her passengers. But one thing was
for sure . . . If anyone would know where the onboard medical facility was located, the ship itself would. “So, what are
we waiting for?” Rebo inquired eagerly. “Let’s get going.”

RUNNER

183

The heavy remained where he was. “I believe there was
some mention of pay.”
Some quick negotiations ensued, and Hoggles was able
to secure a substantial fee. Then, with the ﬁrst half of the
sum safely secured in an otherwise empty purse, the ragged
heavy led the stretcher party back along rows of well-tended
hybrid corn, past a pair of metal tanks, to a sealed hatch. “I
spent weeks punching numbers into this keypad before I ﬁnally came up with the correct combination,” Hoggles commented, as his huge, sausagelike ﬁngers mashed a series of
buttons. “Fortunately the code was set locally or Hewhotravels would have changed it on me.”
Servos whined as the hatch cycled open. That allowed the
huge variant and his clients to enter a maze of dimly lit passageways. Rebo managed to give the good luck amulet that
hung around his neck a surreptitious squeeze before pulling
the Crosser and holding it down along his right thigh. The
corridors hadn’t been vandalized thanks to the fact that no
more than four or ﬁve people had passed through them over
the last thousand years. They were dusty, though, and hung
with long, ropelike ﬁlaments of dust and festooned with
lacy cobwebs. However, thanks to the heavy’s size, and the
fact that he had created what amounted to a tunnel during
his previous explorations, those who followed along behind
were able to avoid most of the accumulated material.
Nonetheless, Norr felt compelled to lay a handkerchief
across Lee’s face to protect the boy from the stuff that fell
from above.
Finally, after numerous twists and turns, Hoggles led the
stretcher party through a door and out onto a suspended
platform. It was nearly dark within the globular chamber,
and what light there was emanated from thousands of tiny

184

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

lights, all moving slowly relative to the ship. That was
when Rebo realized that he was looking at a map, a star
map, of whatever part of the galaxy the ship was traversing
at the moment.
A quick glance over the edge of the platform revealed
that the chart extended downward as well, a sight that
caused the runner’s stomach to ﬂip-ﬂop and left him wondering why there weren’t any handrails.
The heavy, who had been there before, made straight for
the bulky-looking chair that sat perched at the very edge of
the black abyss. “The ship’s architects had a great deal of
faith in their AIs,” Hoggles explained, “but made provisions for a biological pilot too. More to reassure skittish passengers than for any other reason, or so Hewhotravels claims,
and I tend to believe him. In any case that’s what the chair is
for . . . All you have to do is sit down, and you’ll be in contact with his eminence, assuming he’s in the mood to receive guests. So, who will it be?”
Norr turned to look at Rebo. “Go ahead, Jak. You’ve had
more experience with machines than I have.”
The runner shook his head. “Thanks,” he said grufﬂy,
“but you’re more of a talker than I am. And that’s what this
situation calls for.”
If the comment was intended as a compliment, it didn’t
come across as one, but the sensitive thought it best to let
the issue slide. “Okay,” she replied philosophically. “It’s
worth a try.”
The others watched as Norr laid her staff on the platform, circled the chair, and put her foot on the ﬁrst of three
steps that led up to the thronelike position above. Then,
having mounted the short ﬂight of stairs, the sensitive
turned and lowered herself into the well-padded chair. A
puff of dust billowed up, hung suspended in the air, and

RUNNER

185

started to settle. The seat was huge, as if made to accommodate even the largest member of the A-strain, and the sensitive felt lost in it.
“Slip your hands and arms into the tunnels located on
both sides of the seat,” Hoggles instructed. “Then, depending on what sort of mood his excellency is in, he might be
willing to communicate with you.”
Norr examined both sides of the seat, veriﬁed the presence of twin holes, and slowly inserted her hands into the
apertures. And it wasn’t long before her ﬁngers began to
tingle. Though slightly uncomfortable, like the pins-andneedles sensation caused by a lack of circulation, the feedback wasn’t too bad, and Norr left her extremities where
they were.
A minute, that’s how long the sensitive intended to put
up with the prickly feeling, unless the AI made contact. She
started to count off the seconds, and had just hit ﬁfty-six,
when a basso voice thundered all around her. “You don’t belong here! I don’t like you! Go away.”
The effect was startling, and might have been sufﬁcient
to send another person packing, but the sensitive was not so
easily intimidated. “You are correct,” Norr agreed. “I don’t
belong here . . . But I need your help. Provide me with the
information I need, and I will leave.”
Rebo bit his lower lip. Lee’s forehead was so hot that
damp cloths no longer had the capacity to cool it, and the
boy moaned constantly. Now, with nothing to do, the runner regretted the decision to let Norr interact with the ship.
What if she made a mistake? What if the aggressive approach made the AI angry? But it was too late to switch,
and all he could do was stand by and hope for the best.
Norr held her breath as the silence stretched long and
thin. Finally, just as the sensitive had come to the conclu-

186

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

sion that the conversation was over, Hewhotravels spoke once
more. “What do you want?”
The sensitive took a deep breath. “One of our party is
ill,” she replied. “And we think he’s going to die.”
“So?” The single word echoed back and forth between
steel walls and was heavy with disdain.
“So, we believe there’s a medical facility on board this
ship,” Norr answered. “And you could tell us how to access
it.”
“You are correct,” Hewhotravels responded smugly. “There
is such a facility, but it has been closed for thousands of
years, and it shall remain so.”
“But why?” the sensitive demanded resentfully. “You
were created to serve humanity, to enable them to travel
among the stars, and to do so safely. So why would you deny
medical care to one of your passengers?”
“For a number of reasons,” the AI responded easily.
“Starting with the fact that while it’s true that your ancestors were responsible for creating beings such as myself, that
was before the race surrendered to entropy and began the
long slide back into ignorance, savagery, and barbarism.
Any obligation that my brothers, sisters, and I may have are
to what your kind once were. Not what you have become.
And, were I to open those areas that are presently restricted,
the vermin camped within my holds would destroy what remains of my once-magniﬁcent body, a fate that may have
befallen some if not all of the ships no longer in service.”
Norr remembered the brutish audience that had torn her
childhood mentor apart and knew exactly what Hewhotravels
was referring to. It seemed that knowledge had surrendered
to ignorance, and though no longer capable of building a
starship, there were plenty of human beings who would be
happy to destroy one.

RUNNER

187

“There is truth in what you say,” Norr admitted gravely.
“But I’m not asking you to open every nook and cranny of
your hull to the people camped in the hold. Just to one little boy . . . A spirit who, if his followers are correct, might
grow up to be a great teacher one day. The sort of man who
could set humanity back on the path to greatness.”
Rather than dismiss the comment, as she half expected
him to, the AI seemed intrigued. “A boy you say . . . And
who, pray tell, is this paragon of virtue?”
“We call him Lee,” the sensitive replied. “However those
who lead the red hat sect believe that he is the reincarnated
spirit of a teacher named Nom Maa. The truth or falsity of
that assertion will be determined in the city of CaCanth on
the planet Thara. But only if he lives long enough to get
there.”
So realistic was the panorama of stars projected on the inner surface of the control room that Rebo was taken aback
when it suddenly disappeared and was replaced by a hundred competing scenes. Each featured the same man, who in
spite of the fact that he appeared to be at least ﬁfty feet tall,
still managed to look benign. Perhaps that was the result of
his shaved head, open moon-shaped face, and the simple
green robe that hung from his roly-poly body. Or perhaps it
was an ineffable something that radiated from within.
Whatever the reason the runner recognized the backgrounds as being typical of what the interior of a great starship might have looked like millennia before. There were
bulkheads crowded with art, compartments ﬁlled with luxurious furnishings, and throngs of well-dressed passengers,
many of whom bowed as the man with the cherubic face
walked past.
“You are looking at Nom Maa,” Hewhotravels announced
dramatically, “during a voyage when I had the honor of

188

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

transporting his Excellency from Pooz to Ning. Please take
note of the fact that while both the red and the black hats
claim to follow his teachings, he opposed such groupings as
counterproductive, and always sought to promote unity.
That was why he wore green robes rather than red or black.”
There was a moment of silence as Rebo, Norr, and the
crimson-clad Dib Wa all struggled to absorb what they had
heard, and eyed the larger-than-life images that loomed
around them. But interesting as all of it was, Norr was
acutely aware of how important the passage of time could be
and forced the AI back to the subject at hand. “So, you agree
with me. There is hope . . . And Nom Maa was a great man.”
“Yes, he was,” the ship admitted. “But who is to say that
the man lives in the boy? You are a sensitive . . . Can you assure me that they are one and the same?”
“No,” Norr answered honestly. “Back when I ﬁrst met
him I requested that information and was refused. Because
if I knew the answer, I might tell the boy, causing him to
not only act on the knowledge but bypass certain experiences that he needs to have. But Lee could be Nom Maa—
and his life is at risk.”
The mosaic of moving images was replaced by the star
ﬁeld, and a long moment of silence ensued. Finally, as Norr
prepared to pull her arms out of the control sleeves, Hewhotravels spoke. “Follow the arrows. Use the facility. Save him
if you can.”
“Thank you,” the sensitive said humbly. “Thank you very
much.”
The strange tingling sensation stopped the moment that
Norr removed her hands from the control sleeves, and while
there was no outward sign to conﬁrm it, the sensitive
thought she detected a change to the surrounding atmos-

RUNNER

189

phere. It was as if the AI’s personality had substance, and
once withdrawn, left a vacuum in its wake.
“Look!” Rebo exclaimed, pointing to a previously blank
bulkhead. “An arrow!” It was light blue and seemed to glow
from within.
Norr’s boots made a clanging sound as they hit the steel
deck. “All right . . . Let’s get going.”
Hoggles took the lead as the stretcher party followed a
series of blue arrows through various twists and turns before
ﬁnally arriving in front of a hatch that bore a large red cross.
Rebo was about to palm the lock but the barrier hissed out of
the way before he could do so.
Norr assumed that Hewhotravels was monitoring their
progress via sensors of some sort and looked around in a futile
attempt to make eye contact with one of them. “Thank you.”
A series of lights ﬂickered on as the heavy led his companions through a dusty waiting area, past the stainlesssteel desk where long-dead staff had listened to an endless
list of complaints put forward by often cantankerous passengers, and into the well-equipped surgery that lay beyond.
Dozens of highly specialized machines, none larger than the
runner’s ﬁst, could be seen crawling across the overhead and
surrounding bulkheads. Each cut a damp swath through
layers of accumulated grime before turning to circle the
room again. A freshly scrubbed operating table crouched
under a battery of overhead lights, and Norr pointed to it.
“Put him there.”
Lee groaned pitifully as the Dib Wa warriors strapped
him to the table before stepping back out of the way.
“Now what?” Rebo inquired of no one in particular, as
the cleaning robots put the ﬁnishing touches to the room.
As if to answer the runner, a female voice issued from

190

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

what seemed like every corner of the operating theater. “All
nonessential personnel must exit the surgical suite. I repeat,
all nonessential personnel must . . .”
“Okay, okay,” Rebo said irritably. “We get the idea.
Come on . . . Let’s see if we can ﬁnd the way back behind
that window over there. Maybe we can watch.”
Norr whispered something into Lee’s ear, kissed him on
the forehead, and followed the runner out of the room.
As it turned out, the observation room was quite small,
so Hoggles accompanied the red hat warriors out into the
waiting room, leaving Rebo and Norr to monitor the situation alone. Having already seen the machines that crawled
over the walls and heard the disembodied female voice, neither observer was especially surprised when the table
sprouted mechanical arms. They cut the boy’s clothes off,
made use of a liquid disinfectant to prep his skin, and
placed a self-adhesive drape over his abdomen.
Once that was accomplished a long ﬂexible tube snaked
down from the overhead to make contact with the inner surface of Lee’s left arm. They boy jerked as a needle penetrated
a vein, went limp as the relaxant began to take effect, and
offered no visible resistance when a second tube arrived. It
took a peek into his mouth, found the passageway to its liking, and dived into the youth’s airway.
Meanwhile, the table on which the youth lay extruded
other leads that made their various connections and fed data
regarding Lee’s vital signs to the computer that ran the
medical facility. It sent a mix of oxygen and anesthetic into
the boy’s lungs, waited for the mixture to have the desired
effect, and gave itself permission to operate.
Still another tube deposited a handful of machines onto
Lee’s abdomen. One of the robots cut a tiny hole through

RUNNER

191

the patient’s skin, while others strained to pull the margins
of the wound apart, and the rest dashed hither and yon cauterizing bleeders. Three minutes later the youth’s badly inﬂamed appendix had been located, isolated, and cut free.
In spite of the fact that they had been watching intently,
neither Rebo nor Norr were aware that the operation had
even begun when a small piece of tissue materialized on top
of his skin, and the procedure was over.
Fifteen minutes later the appendix had been suctioned
away, Lee’s incision had been closed, and the anesthetic had
started to wear off. “Keep the wound clean, and notify me if
you notice any fever, drainage, or signiﬁcant pain,” the computer ordered, as Rebo and Norr reentered the surgical
suite.
The runner said, “Sure,” but doubted that Hewhotravels
would allow any of them to reenter the facility once they
left it.
The other passengers, all of whom had expected Rebo
and Norr to return without their son’s body, were visibly
surprised when a heavy they had never seen before led the
stretcher party back into the hold. However, such was the
wary “mind your own business” culture that prevailed in
the bowels of the ship, they turned back to their ﬁres without voicing the questions that begged to be asked.
After consulting with Rebo, Norr invited Hoggles to
stay, but the heavy refused. No reason was given, but the
sensitive assumed that the big hermit was on the run from
something, and looked him in the eye. “Okay, Bo, but let us
know if you change your mind.”
The variant nodded. “Thanks, I will.”
The sensitive’s eyes rolled slightly out of focus. “And
Bo . . .”

192

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Yes?”
“Does the name ‘Dak’ mean anything to you?”
Hoggles looked surprised. “Yes . . . Dak was my best
friend. He was killed in an accident.”
Well, Dak says that, ‘if you’re going to beat it, you’ve got
to face it.’ Does that make any sense to you?”
The variant’s eyes narrowed, and he backed away. “No, it
doesn’t,” the heavy lied, “but thanks anyway.”
Norr put out a hand as if to stop Hoggles, but the heavy
had turned by then and was walking away. Rebo had seen
the interchange and appeared by the sensitive’s side. “What
got into him?”
Norr shook her head. “I don’t know.”
“Ah well,” the runner said philosophically. “We already
have plenty of problems without adding any more.”
The sensitive knew Rebo was correct, but couldn’t help
but wonder who the entity named Dak was and what Hoggles was running from.
Lee recovered quickly, and the next few ship days passed
without incident, which had a meritorious effect on the onagain, off-again relationship between Rebo and Norr. So
much so that the twosome had even gone for a walk together, and rather than discuss their current difﬁculties,
focused on happier times instead. The runner described
what it was like to grow up within the topsy-turvy world of
a guild, and the sensitive reminisced about the idyllic days
before the night plague turned her into an orphan.
Perhaps that was why the runner not only dreamed about
Norr but wasn’t all that surprised when she came to him
during the period that most of their fellow passengers accepted as night within the eternally darkened hold. The
runner awoke as the sensitive entered his privacy shelter on

RUNNER

193

her hands and knees, saw who the intruder was, and removed his hand from the Crosser.
Norr crawled forward, straddled Rebo’s hips, and allowed her hair to fall forward as she looked down on him.
The runner reached up to cup her breasts, saw her lips part,
and was ready for an openmouthed kiss when the sensitive
spoke. Her voice was low and coarse. “Greetings, runner . . .
This is Milos Lysander. We meet again.”
Rebo jerked his hands off Norr’s breasts, fervently
wished that the sensitive wasn’t seated astride him, and
looked up into amused eyes. “Lysander? Get the hell off me!
What the hell do you think you’re doing?”
“Nothing like what you were hoping for,” the discarnate
entity answered dryly. “Not that I blame you . . . But
enough. I came here to warn you. Because I refuse to use the
channel they selected for me, the Techno Society decided to
redouble their efforts to capture my daughter, or failing
that, to kill her. You must stop them.”
“Me?” Rebo objected, as he tried to buck Norr off.
“Why me?”
“Because you have the necessary skills, your fate is somehow linked with hers, and you love her.”
“Love?” the runner demanded. “Who said anything about
‘love’? Besides, she’s bossy, presumptuous, and annoying.”
“Which is exactly what some people say about you,” the
spirit responded. “Now, remember what I said and be ready.
They know you’re on this ship, and their agents will be
waiting when the shuttle lands.”
Rebo felt a sense of alarm mixed with frustration as he
leaned back against his elbows. “Hey, I have idea . . . If
you’re so worried about Norr, all you have to do is cooperate
with the Techno Society! You invented the bastards.”

194

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“We want some of the same things,” Lysander admitted
cautiously, “but for different reasons. Take care of my
daughter, and I will help when I can.”
Then Lysander was gone and Norr awoke to ﬁnd herself
straddling Rebo. “Jak? Is that you? What’s going on?”
“Lysander decided to hijack your body and came by for a
visit,” the runner answered disgustedly. “He says that the
Techno Society will be waiting for you when we land.”
The sensitive frowned. “Was that all?”
“Yeah,” Rebo lied, “except for this, which is my idea.”
Norr felt the runner’s hands settle on her shoulders and
allowed him to pull her down. There was plenty to worry
about, but that was in the future, and this was now. Their
lips met, their bodies touched, and two became one.
Lysander smiled, thought about where he wanted to be,
and left the ship behind.

EIGHT
™

The Planet Ning

Although the gravity on Ning is not so severe as to prevent
norms from living there, it acted to limit the number of A-strain
colonists who wanted to settle the world, and gave the heavies
something of an advantage. They flourished on the planet—but
have yet to gain the political power they feel entitled to.
—Tuso the Wise,
A History of Ning

For reasons known only to the thousand-year-old com-

puter that lay buried many stories beneath the city, the
power came on at exactly eight each evening and remained
on until exactly 3:00 a.m., when it went off. No one knew
how the power was generated or how long it would continue
to be available, which meant that each working day ended
in a moment of suspense. Was this the day when the power
would fail? Or would the ancient system continue to operate
for another seven hours? There was no way to know, a fact
that robbed would-be inventors of their motivation, prevented the prices charged for electroartifacts from rising,
and kept the city of Zand in an eternal state of suspense.
But, when the power came on, it was truly something to
see. A fact that attracted pilgrims from thousands of miles

196

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

away. Just as darkness settled over the city, and thousands of
lanterns were lit, there was a loud bang! as power ﬂowed
through underground lines, encountered a multiplicity of
breaks, and followed the path of least resistance to the metal
pylons that had once been part of a citywide system that
broadcast power through the air. Unable to follow its proper
path, man-made lightning made the jump from pylon to
pylon illuminated the city with a series of strobelike ﬂashes,
and bounced thunder off the surrounding hills. Then, once
the display of pyrotechnics was over, and equilibrium was
restored, those who desired to do so could operate whatever
electrical equipment they owned.
A cheer went up all around the city as the citizens of
Zand paused to celebrate another seven hours of electricity,
spent a few moments wondering if it would be their last,
and returned to whatever they had been doing prior to eight
o’clock. In the case of those seated all around Jevan Kane,
that was eating, drinking, and talking.
The restaurant sat on a hill overlooking the city and was
packed at that time of day. The technologist had a good
spot, and was enjoying a glass of truly excellent white wine,
when a functionary named Ros Cayo wound his way between the tables. The functionary was a short, bandy-legged
man who affected a pencil-thin mustache, expensive clothes,
and shoes designed to make him look two inches taller than
he actually was—just one of the many individuals who
worked for the Techno Society but weren’t part of the core
leadership group. He smiled uncertainly. “I’m sorry to
bother you, sir, but I have news.”
Kane raised his eyebrows. “Good news? Or bad news?”
Cayo’s expression brightened. “Good news . . . Or so it
seems to me.”

RUNNER

197

Kane nodded agreeably. “Excellent! Please pull up a
chair. What would you like to drink?”
Cayo, who had every reason to believe that Kane would
pay the bill, ordered the most expensive drink he could
think of and savored the moment. For once, maybe the ﬁrst
time in his life, he was in the right place, at the right time.
Hopefully, assuming everything went well, he would receive a rather substantial raise and have the funds required
to rent a three-room apartment.
“So,” Kane said deliberately, “what have you got for me?”
Cayo swirled a mouthful of the expensive liquor around
the inside of his mouth before letting the liquid trickle
down the back of his throat. “Well, sir,” the functionary began, “it’s like this. There’s a tomb raider, a fellow named
Garth, who offered to sell me a number two.”
Kane frowned. “A number two? Sorry, I don’t follow you.”
“The second item on the Techno Society’s high-priority
procurement list,” Cayo responded tactfully. “A gate seed.”
Kane felt his pulse start to quicken. According to research carried out by Milos Lysander prior to his death, such
seeds had once been common. During the early days, before
the system of star gates had been fully established, runners
had been employed to carry the small spheres to distant
worlds, where they were “planted.” Once activated, the seed
sent out a signal that the computer called Logos could use to
knit the new location into the overall network. Once that
was accomplished, the necessary equipment was installed,
the new portal was christened by the local politicos, and a
star gate was born.
So, second only to ﬁnding Logos itself, the acquisition of
an intact gate seed was at the very top of the society’s procurement list. Partly because such a ﬁnd would provide the

198

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

society’s scientists with the means to make copies—but also
because Lysander believed that the seed could be employed
to ﬁnd Logos. Assuming that the AI remained on-line
somewhere. But was the opportunity real? There had been
many false alarms, and Kane was determined to maintain
his cool. “That’s interesting. So where is it?”
“I don’t have it yet,” Cayo admitted. “But I have Garth,
and that’s just as good.”
“No,” Kane replied softly, “it isn’t ‘just as good.’ There’s
no substitute for the actual item. This Garth person could
be lying to you . . . But I take your point. Assuming this individual has a genuine gate seed, and assuming it turns out
to be operational, then I shall be very happy indeed. If he
doesn’t, I fear that my spirits will plunge, causing me to become extremely cranky. Do I make myself clear?”
The liquid that tasted so good only a few moments earlier suddenly went sour, and Cayo struggled to get it down.
“Yes, sir. You do.”
“Excellent,” Kane said as he ﬁnished his wine. “I assume
that Citizen Garth is sequestered nearby?”
“Yes, sir!” Cayo responded eagerly. “He offered to sell the
seed, but set the price too high and refused to come down. I
ordered some of my, I mean your functionaries, to put him
under lock and key, hoping that would change his mind.”
“Oh, he’ll change his mind all right,” Kane said conﬁdently, as he tossed a handful of coins onto the table. “Or
he’ll be very sorry indeed.”
Kane’s voice was cold, very cold, which caused Cayo to
wonder what he had gotten himself into. Unlike the offworld operative, who appeared to believe in the techno crap
that the metal men preached on street corners, Cayo was in
it for the money. But now, ever since Kane had stepped
through the local star gate, the little man had become in-

RUNNER

199

creasingly uneasy. There were advantages to being a nobody,
not the least of which was staying well clear of people like
Kane, something he would strive to do a better job of in the
future.
After the power came on, the shops, factories, and other
businesses that lay dormant during the day came back to
noisy life, and the narrow, twisting streets ﬁlled with people
who were on their way to work. As Kane followed Cayo he
was conscious of the fact that every step he took required
more energy than it would have on Anafa or Pooz. Not a lot
more, but enough to leave him exhausted at the end of a
typical day, even though he hadn’t done anything out of the
ordinary. Locals, on the other hand, people like Cayo, had
developed musculature that enabled them to cope with the
planet’s gravity. Most were a bit shorter than norms on other
worlds were, had stocky physiques, and looked like weight
lifters. After thousands of years, the A-strain had started to
adapt.
Once the two men arrived in the commercial quarter a
broad ﬂight of well-worn stairs led them down into the
maze of passageways that lay just below Zand’s surface. A
dangerous place where visitors were well advised to watch
their step, but civilized when compared to the “deeps” that
lay even farther down.
There was no need for the twosome to descend that far,
because the complex of rooms that comprised the Techno
Society’s station were located only one level down. So, having descended four ﬂights of stairs, and having made their
way along a dimly lit corridor, Kane and Cayo neared a
well-guarded door. Two metal men, both of whom were
armed with carbines, stood aside so that the humans could
access a print-sensitive lock. Cayo pressed his palm against
the smooth surface, waited for the resulting click, and gave

200

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the door a push. The interior was cool, clean, and well lit.
Though happy to take advantage of the public grid during
the hours that it was operational, the technologists had their
own source of power, which had been brought in via the local star gate.
Cayo led Kane back to what was labeled conference
room but actually served a darker purpose. Once the door
was unlatched, and light ﬂooded the previously darkened
room, Kane could see the sturdy-looking hooks mounted on
the ceiling, eyebolts that were evenly spaced along the
walls, and the butcher block table that squatted at the center of the rectangular space. It was eight feet long and
equipped with a variety of hardware. In fact, judging from
the way the naked prisoner was spread-eagled on the stained
wood, the off-world operative assumed that each of his four
limbs was attached to a pulley. An effective way to keep him
under control and in a psychologically vulnerable position.
The man named Garth raised his head and turned toward
the spill of light. His eyes blinked in an attempt to penetrate the glare, and his voice was little more than a croak.
“Cayo? Is that you? I need some water.”
“And you can have some water,” Kane answered, as he
paused to examine the gleaming surgical instruments laid
out on a side table. “But only if you tell us what we need to
know.”
“I can’t,” the tomb raider replied plaintively, wondering
who the new voice belonged to. “Not unless you pay me.”
“We offered to pay you,” Kane countered patiently as he
selected a razor-sharp scalpel. “But you raised the price.
That was a stupid thing to do.”
“Yes! I know that now,” Garth agreed eagerly. “Free me
and I will accept the original offer.”
“Sorry, but it’s too late for that now,” Kane replied, as he

RUNNER

201

turned to survey the body in front of him. It was covered
with welts, bruises, and abrasions. “Now we want the information for free.”
“But if I provide it, you’ll kill me!” the tomb raider
wailed miserably.
“Maybe, and maybe not,” Kane responded calmly as he
placed the very tip of the scalpel at the point just below the
prisoner’s zyphoid process. Garth screamed as the off-world
operative made a shallow incision that led all the way down
to the base of his penis. A thin scarlet line appeared, Cayo
felt nauseous, and the tomb raider screamed. A beating, that
was one thing, but this was something else.
“So,” Kane continued, as he put some additional pressure
on the tip of the blade, “what will it be? Would you like to
tell me where the artifact is? Or should I keep on cutting?”
“I’ll tell you!” the prisoner answered desperately. “Whatever you want to know.”
Kane was slightly disappointed, or that’s the way it
looked to Cayo, as the off-worlder lifted the scalpel off the
tomb raider’s skin. “Okay, tell us . . . Where is the gate seed
hidden?”
“It’s down in the catacombs,” the prisoner answered.
“The only place where I knew it would be safe. Release me,
and I’ll take you there.”
“Release him,” Kane instructed. “If we die, then so will
he.”
A large lump grew to occupy the back of Cayo’s throat. He
managed to swallow it but not without difﬁculty. What had
originally seemed a coup, an accomplishment that would catapult him into the upper levels of the society’s management
structure, now threatened to cost him his life. Still, there was
nothing that the functionary could do other than to release
Garth’s restraints and help the prisoner down off the table.

202

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Thirty minutes later a heavily armed party that consisted
of Kane, Cayo, Garth, and two metal men left Techno Society headquarters and made its way through a warren of passageways to the point where a slime-covered ramp sloped
downward. One of the city’s many grafﬁti artists had
painted a realistic-looking mouth around the entrance to
the ramp, and the odor that wafted up out of the depths was
so foul that Cayo felt as if he and his companions were passing into the belly of a carnivorous beast.
There were electric lights underground, but very few,
which was why Kane and Cayo carried oil-burning lamps,
while the robots projected beams of light through their
“eyes.” Soft, buttery light swept across green-black walls,
momentarily glazed the bas-relief artwork of a bygone age,
and sent armies of hungry vermin chittering toward their
well-hidden nests.
The ramp turned in on itself, and spiraled downward, its
surface slick with runoff from the storm drains and broken
sewers above. Cayo noticed that there was a lot less grafﬁti
now that they were at least three stories below street level,
and that the piles of trash were smaller, a sure sign that only
the most desperate of people spent time there.
Even Kane, whom Cayo had previously assumed to be
fearless, sounded strained as he used his shotgun to jab
Garth in the back. “How much farther?”
“We’re almost there,” the prisoner assured his captors, as
he shufﬂed forward. His body hurt all over, the shackles that
linked his ankles together made it difﬁcult to walk, and he
needed to pee. Would all the noise attract the attention of
the half-human creatures who roamed the lowest levels of
the catacombs? They hadn’t attacked him in the past, but a
dozen heavily armed guards had accompanied Garth on his

RUNNER

203

previous visit, and the cannibals had a healthy respect for
modern ﬁrearms.
Kane jabbed the prisoner again. “We’d better be . . . Because you’ll be sorry if we aren’t.”
The tomb raider was already sorry, but knew that his
captors didn’t care and felt an ever-increasing sense of dread
as he led them around a corner and into what had once been
a small square. A mythical beast dominated the ornate fountain that claimed the center of the open area. Its mouth was
open as if to roar, but it had been a long time since water
had issued forth from it and splashed into the large circular
basin below. “This is the place,” Garth said hopelessly. “The
artifact is over there . . . Inside the beast’s mouth.”
A brooding silence surrounded the square, and the lamplight left most of the area in darkness. Kane didn’t like the
subterranean cityscape, not one little bit, and struggled to
hide his fear. “Cayo . . . Go get it.”
The functionary winced and wished that he had the
courage to say, “No,” but knew he didn’t. So, with his lantern
held high, Cayo approached the fountain. He climbed up
onto the knee-high containment and felt the trash in the
basin give under his weight. Something crackled as it broke
and Cayo felt his heart leap up into his mouth.
Then, with the lantern held aloft, the operative made
his way over to where the beast sat on its well-sculpted
haunches. The stone was cold and felt coarse under his ﬁngertips, as Cayo placed a foot on top of a chipped paw and
pushed himself up so he was level with the statue’s yawning
mouth. Anything could have made itself at home inside the
black hole, and it required all of the courage that the functionary could muster to reach down into the cavern and feel
around.

204

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

However, much to the operative’s relief, nothing bit his
hand, and it soon became apparent that nothing would.
Moreover, once he had pulled a ﬁstful of debris out of the
way Cayo’s ﬁngers encountered something that was round,
smooth, and inexplicably warm. It was the gate seed! Momentarily jubilant, the functionary withdrew the object
from its hiding place and raised the sphere for the others to
see. “I have it!”
Kane’s face lit up. “Good job! Toss it to me. Then we’ll
get out of here.”
Cayo did as he was told and hoped he wouldn’t come to
regret it. Because now that Kane had the device in his possession, the off-world operative didn’t need anyone else.
That shouldn’t make any difference, however, not so long as
the invaders departed the catacombs quickly, which Kane
had already started to do.
Cayo hurried to clear the fountain, and had just joined
the tail end of the procession, when the clacking sound began. The noise wasn’t all that loud at ﬁrst, but soon grew in
intensity and seemed to come from every direction at once.
“What the hell is that?” Kane demanded, as he paused to
look around.
“It’s the night people,” Garth replied huskily, “banging
leg bones together. They use them as clubs.”
“Not human leg bones I hope,” Cayo put in, but the answer was obvious, and the rest of the party ignored him.
“We need to buy some time,” Kane said coldly. “Secure
the prisoner to that grating. Perhaps he will distract them
for a while.”
Garth turned to run, but the shackles made that difﬁcult,
and the metal men were on him within seconds. The tomb
raider started to gibber as a pair of handcuffs were used to
lock him in place—and darkness swallowed him up. The

RUNNER

205

screams started shortly thereafter and ended so suddenly
that there was very little doubt as to the prisoner’s fate.
Meanwhile, the intensity of the clacking sound continued
to increase as Cayo followed the others up the slippery
ramp. Now, as they fought their way toward the surface, the
functionary realized how stupid they had been. Unlike the
metal men, who could generate their own beams of light,
both he and Kane were burdened with unwieldy lanterns,
which would make it difﬁcult if not impossible to ﬁre his
pump-style shotgun.
But that thought was driven from the functionary’s
mind by the sudden impact of the body that fell on him as
he passed below an old ventilation shaft. Cayo had no
choice but to drop the lantern in order to reach up and grab
a ﬁstful of rags. A simple jerk was sufﬁcient to snatch the
eight-year-old attacker off his back and dump the youth
onto the ramp. A single blast from the shotgun took care of
the rest, but the lantern had gone out by then, and it was
pitch-black.
Although the muzzle ﬂash had obliterated Cayo’s night
vision, he could still back up the ramp and ﬁre the shotgun
at the same time. Each boom, and the subsequent ﬂash of
light, was followed by a clacking sound as the functionary
pumped a new shell into the chamber. But the tubular magazine held only eight rounds, and as the operative prepared
to ﬁre his ﬁnal shell, he knew there wouldn’t be enough
time to fumble in his pockets for more. “Kane!” the operative shouted. “Help me!” But the off-world operative had
abandoned his own lantern by then, clipped a cell-powered
ﬂashlight to the barrel of his shotgun, and was busy following the robots up toward the dimly seen light above. Ning’s
gravity made it more difﬁcult to move, and his breath came
in short, desperate gasps.

206

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Cayo knew he had been abandoned when his weapon
clicked empty, then something snarled and a femur struck
him across the shoulders. Mercifully the next blow connected
with the side of the functionary’s head, which allowed him to
exit his body prior to the butchery and the subsequent feast.
Eventually, after the night people had claimed what was
theirs and returned to the stink of their dens, silence was restored. It settled into place like a thick blanket, which was
made all the more oppressive by the insistent drip, drip, drip
of water and the occasional rumble of ancient pipes. One secret had been recovered, but there, deep within the ancient
darkness, lay many more.
Aboard the starship Hewhotravelsthroughtime

In spite of the fact that most of the great starships were
nearly identical in terms of basic design, they did have a variety of personalities, which made themselves manifest in
unexpected ways, something Norr became acutely aware of
as she threw more fuel onto the ﬁre around which the group
was huddled. “It’s freezing in here!” the sensitive exclaimed.
“What’s going on?”
Rebo, who was seated on the opposite side of the blaze,
took a sip of tea. “Different ships handle the problem in different ways, but it’s my guess that the trip is nearly over,
and Hewhotravels wants his passengers to pack up and board
the shuttle.”
Lee had his hands under his armpits in order to keep
them warm. “Really? Why couldn’t he just announce that?
It would be a whole lot simpler.”
“Because, with the possible exception of you, he thinks
the rest of us are vermin,” the runner replied. “Not to mention the fact that he likes to jerk humans around.”

RUNNER

207

Norr nodded agreeably. “That sounds like him all
right . . . It looks like some of our traveling companions are
starting to pack.”
Rebo scanned the immediate area and saw that the sensitive was correct. “Yeah . . . Well, let’s get cracking. Remember, Lysander thinks the techno creeps will be on the ground
waiting for us, so keep your packs light. Leave the food,
your extra clothes, and anything else that can be replaced.
We need to be light on our feet.”
Norr opened her mouth to object, but the runner raised a
hand. “Don’t bother . . . You’re a pain in the ass, but my
client likes you, so there’s no way we’re going to leave you
on your own.”
“Well, I’m glad to hear that your client likes me,” the
sensitive replied sweetly. “But what about you?”
“That depends,” Rebo replied, “on which one of your
personalities I happen to be dealing with at the moment.”
“And how many clothes she has on,” Lee observed impishly, a grin splitting his face.
Norr blushed, and was about to reply, when a Klaxon
started to bleat. “It sounds like the old boy is serious,” Rebo
put in, and emptied his mug into the ﬁre. The liquid made
a hissing sound as it hit the coals, and a cloud of steam rose
as the group went to work.
Forty-ﬁve minutes later Rebo, Norr, Lee, and his red hat
escorts tagged on to the end of a ragged line as the passengers ﬁled through an air lock and boarded the waiting shuttle. The queue advanced in a series of ﬁts and starts, and it
was during one such pause that Rebo felt a hand on his
shoulder. “So, runner,” a baritone voice boomed, “is there
room for one more?”
Rebo turned to ﬁnd that Bo Hoggles was standing right
behind him. The heavy was dressed in his usual assemblage

208

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

of rags, wore a small knapsack high on his broad back, and
carried a war hammer in his right hand. It was a massive affair that consisted of an alloy shaft fastened to a chunk of
metal, which, judging from the ports that had been machined into it, had once been part of the spaceship. The runner grinned. “Beats me, Bo, but given the size of that
hammer, I’ll bet people will make room for you.”
Norr had spotted Hoggles by that time and rushed forward to give the variant a hug. “Bo! It’s good to see you
again, but we have reason to believe that some rather unpleasant people will be waiting for us on the ground, so I
suggest that you steer clear of us.”
The heavy frowned, and his voice rumbled like distant
thunder. “I’m tired of living alone. That’s why I came. Perhaps the people who are waiting for you would like to meet
my friend here.”
Norr eyed the hammer, imagined the kind of damage
that such a weapon could inﬂict, and smiled grimly. “Suit
yourself, Bo. But you can always change your mind.”
“Of course I can,” the heavy replied nonchalantly. “But it
isn’t very likely.”
The group followed the rest of the passengers into the
shuttle and positioned themselves to disembark ﬁrst. The
logic was simple. Even though the Techno Society had shown
itself to be ruthless, Rebo didn’t believe they were stupid
enough to ﬁre on a large group of innocent people, especially
given the fact that Norr might be killed as well. And, by placing themselves at the front of the crowd, the sensitive and her
companions could make it that much more difﬁcult for the
opposition to use ﬁrearms without running the risk of hitting
the wrong people. The plan was far from foolproof, but better
than nothing, and had at least some chance of success.
A warning tone sounded, hatches cycled closed, and Norr

RUNNER

209

felt her body attempt to ﬂoat upward as the shuttle separated
itself from the ship. But the old harness held her in place, the
transport began its descent, and Ning rose to meet her.
The Planet Ning

What had once been a huge spaceport had contracted as the
ﬂow of interplanetary travel was reduced to a trickle and
other enterprises crowded in around it. Now, little more
than a circular pad remained, as a crowd had started to
gather. However, unlike the free-spirited celebrants who
came to greet new arrivals on Anafa, this mob was made up
of street vendors, pickpockets, and would-be guides. One of
them, a strange-looking man with blond hair, was accompanied by a retinue of heavily robed robots, the same sort of
metal men that preached on street corners.
If not exactly happy, which might have been constitutionally impossible for someone of Jevan Kane’s disposition,
the operative was in a relatively good mood. And why not?
The gate seed, which Kane was unwilling to entrust to anyone other than himself, hung round his neck and formed a
large lump beneath his shirt. That alone represented a successful mission and would be sufﬁcient to silence those who
had been critical of him.
Now, assuming that he managed to capture Lanni Norr,
the technologist would be able to return to Seros in triumph. The off-worlder’s thoughts were interrupted by a
shout and an excited buzz as a white contrail appeared, and
a loud boom rolled across the land. It was a welcome sound,
and Kane looked upward with all the rest.
Though compelled to send part of himself down to the sur-

face of planets like Ning, Hewhotravels took no pleasure in it

210

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

and considered the whole process of transporting barbarians
between worlds to be a terrible waste of time. Unfortunately, such was not only his fundamental purpose but the
way he was programmed, which meant that he was fated to
perform such chores until his body disintegrated. This
bleak prospect was largely responsible for his perpetually
bad mood.
So, eager to complete the odious task as quickly as possible, and without regard for the comfort of the vermin who
traveled in his belly, the AI turned and sped north over the
outskirts of Zand. A sonic boom followed along behind
him, rattled windows, and sent ﬂocks of drab ﬂiers into the
air, where they circled aimlessly before returning to their
roosts.
And for that brief moment, as the shuttle skimmed the
land, the past came back to life. Because once, long before
any living memory, such events had been so commonplace
that not even the birds noticed them. And that, it seemed to
the ship, was a great loss indeed.
Rebo felt the transport start to slow and knew what that

meant. Soon, within a matter of minutes, he and his companions would exit the passenger compartment and walk
into a ﬁght. Not only that, but judging from what felt like
a mantle of lead that had settled onto his shoulders, the
gravity on Ning exceeded that maintained aboard the ship.
A deﬁnite disadvantage.
The runner checked to ensure that none of those seated
around him was looking before giving the amulet that hung
around his neck a surreptitious squeeze. And not just for
himself, as had once been his practice, but for his companions as well—an odd amalgamation of personalities that
combined to weigh him down and lift him up at the same

RUNNER

211

time. Norr was the best example since his feelings for the
sensitive ran the gamut from desire to frustration. It was all
very confusing, and the runner didn’t like things that were
confusing, because they were, well, confusing.
But as the shuttle touched down, Rebo knew it was important to put all such thoughts aside and focus on the matter before him. “All right,” he said, in a voice pitched just
loud enough for his allies to hear, “stick with the plan. And
whatever you do, remember to keep moving, because if they
surround us, it will be next to impossible to break out.”
Norr nodded, Lee forced a smile, Hoggles produced a
grunt of acknowledgment, and the red hat warriors
sketched religious symbols into the air in front of them.
Then the hatch opened, fresh air surged into the cabin, and
it was time to leave. Rebo came up out of his seat, made a
clacking sound with the three-foot-long ﬁghting sticks that
he had shaped for the occasion, and uttered a roar intended
to freeze the rest of the passengers in place.
The unexpected sound had the desired effect, and that allowed the runner and his friends to exit ﬁrst. Rebo had not
been to Ning before, and there was no time in which to appreciate the scenery as he led the rest of the small company
down a metal ramp onto heat-scorched duracrete. He had the
lead, with two Dib Wa warriors to either ﬂank, and Norr at
his back. Hoggles, who still insisted on taking part, brought
up the rear with Lee riding high on his shoulders. It was a
sturdy formation, or so it seemed to the runner, who spotted
the waiting crowd and charged straight at it. But his movements weren’t as quick as they would have been aboard the
ship—and it was like trying to run through deep water.
Jevan Kane had been watching for Norr and spotted the
young woman right away. But while the technologist had
been aware of the fact that Norr had what he assumed to be

212

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

a lover, he had no reason to expect an escort that included
four red hat warriors and an unkempt heavy. All of whom
were not only armed but clearly ready for trouble. That took
the operative by surprise. How could they know? Then he
had it. Lysander had been present during the meeting on
Anafa but refused to manifest through Dyson. But he could
have listened in and, having done so, told Norr what to expect. The rotten bastard was switching sides!
But there was no time for further thought as the metal
men rushed forward in an attempt to surround and capture
Norr while bystanders screamed and ran in every direction.
The robots were dressed in nearly identical black robes that
ﬂared as they ran. Each android was armed with a wooden
cudgel, which judging from the nicks and cuts they bore,
had clearly seen action.
Wood clanged on metal as Rebo closed with the ﬁrst machine and brought both of his ﬁghting sticks together in the
attack called “clapping hands,” shifted his weight to his
right foot, and turned to let the robot’s club brush his left
shoulder. Then, having brought his left foot up and back,
the runner launched a kick that struck the machine’s torso.
The automaton toppled over backward, hit the ground, and
was struggling to rise when Norr took its head off with her
vibro blade. Sparks shot from the neatly severed neck, and
the machine’s limbs jerked spasmodically before the metal
man ﬁnally went limp.
Rebo, who had been unaware of the fact that the sensitive’s staff concealed yet another weapon, barely had time to
say “Thanks!” before the next robot came at him. Meanwhile, the Dib Wa were engaged as well. One of the warriors brought his sword down only to have it blocked by a
wooden cudgel, and then, while working to free his blade,
took a fatal blow to the head.

RUNNER

213

Metal rang on metal as another red hat sought revenge,
but discovered that unlike Norr’s vibro blade, ordinary steel
couldn’t part the android’s alloy skin in a single blow. But
the religious warriors were resourceful, and it wasn’t long
before they learned to bring the automatons down by
throwing shirts over their heads and beating them to death.
But the heavier gravity put them at a disadvantage, and another Dib Wa fell, tried to rise, and was slaughtered where
he lay.
In the meantime Kane, who had chosen to follow the robots into battle rather than lead them, saw the opportunity
that he’d been waiting for. Having conserved his strength,
and with both sets of combatants fully engaged, it was a
simple matter to slip between the skirmishers and make for
Norr. But the blond hair was hard to miss, and the sensitive
was preparing herself to ﬁght the operative, when she came
under a different kind of attack. With so much of her attention focused on the physical battle, the sensitive had inadvertently lowered her psychic defenses, opening herself to
Lysander. Norr attempted to resist, but it was too late by
then, and the discarnate took control of her body. He took a
swing at Kane, swore as the vibro blade sizzled over the operative’s head, and felt his former ally wrap his arms around
Norr’s torso.
Lysander felt a sudden stab of fear as he struggled to keep
Kane from simply lifting the female body off its feet and
carrying it away. But Norr was heavier than Kane expected
her to be, and the discarnate took advantage of that fact to
knee his onetime son in the groin. “You’re ﬁghting for the
wrong side,” Lysander lectured Kane, as he brought the vibro blade’s hilt down on the back of the other man’s skull.
“We need to restore the gates, but for the beneﬁt of humanity, not ourselves! That’s where we went wrong last time.”

214

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Kane let go of his aching privates, felt a moment of vertigo, and struggled to keep his feet as the planet sought to
pull him down. “Lysander? You old bastard . . . Is that you?”
“You bet your ass it is,” the scientist replied, and was
about to take another swing with the vibro blade when a
metal man seized him from behind. Lysander struggled, but
soon discovered that Norr’s body wasn’t strong enough to
break the machine’s steely grip, and saw Kane smile as the
machine pulled him backward. “We have what we came
for,” the operative shouted. “Take her away!”
But Norr’s capture had not gone unnoticed, and even as
the metal man began to carry the sensitive away, Hoggles
brought his homemade war hammer down on the android’s
head. Metal crumpled, circuitry failed, and sparks shot out
through the metal man’s eyes.
Lysander felt the robot’s arms fall away, and was about to
counterattack, when a wave of androids swept around him.
Strong though he was, Hoggles was hard-pressed to stay upright, and thereby keep Lee safely above the fray, as three of
the machines attacked simultaneously.
The last of the Dib Wa warriors had fallen by then, and
as he and his remaining companions were surrounded by
what seemed like an army of cudgel-wielding metal men,
Rebo knew that the battle was lost. Or so it seemed until a
huge shadow spilled over him, a blast of hot air washed
across his shoulders, and a huge skid nicked the side of
Kane’s head. It was a glancing blow, but one from a large
shuttle, and the Techno Society’s operative fell like a rock.
Hewhotravels had never been in a ﬁght before. And had it
not been for the fact that the little boy who might be Nom
Maa was involved, would have stayed clear of this one. But
given humanity’s steady decline, and so little reason for
hope, the ship found itself unable to sit by while what

RUNNER

215

might be a great teacher came under attack. And though
not speciﬁcally equipped for combat, the AI discovered that
he didn’t need to be, as he sent combatants scattering in
every direction.
Rebo got a grip on Norr’s arm, and was about to drag the
sensitive to safety, when Lysander jerked it loose. “Not yet,
you fool! The lump under Kane’s shirt . . . It’s a gate seed!
We need it!”
The runner wasn’t so sure about the “we” part, but took
the opportunity to plod over to where the operative lay and
cut the thong to which the metal sphere was attached.
Then, with the seed safely stashed in a pocket, Rebo led
Norr, Hoggles, and Lee off the pad. The surviving metal
men attempted to follow, but Hewhotravels wasn’t about to
allow that and moved to block them. So, with no way to
pursue their quarry, there was very little that the surviving
robots could do other than give aid to their fallen leader.
Once Kane had been carried away, dozens of vendors, pickpockets, and guides returned to the pad. They neither knew
nor cared what the ﬁght had been about. All that mattered
to them was the possibility of proﬁt and the fact that the
day was still young.
Zand was a complex city, which made it both hard to gov-

ern and easy to hide in. First, because there were numerous
distinct neighborhoods, each of which wanted to govern itself. That meant that local ofﬁcials were sometimes less than
cooperative where the city’s police force was concerned. And
making the situation even more difﬁcult for local authorities was the fact that many of those who lived in the city
made their livings from the hundreds of caravans that entered and left Zand on a daily basis. Since those caravans
transported not only all manner of legitimate goods but

216

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

contraband, too, the axiom ask me no questions and i’ll
tell you no lies was inscribed over the eastern gate to the
city.
All this meant that Rebo, who had quite a bit of experience where such things were concerned, had little difﬁculty
locating a place where he and his companions could stay.
The key, as his mentor Thomas Crowley had taught him,
was “to ﬁnd the middle.” By which the sickly runner meant
accommodations that weren’t so posh as to be targeted by
the thieves guild, nor so low as to be the focus of whatever
passed for the local police force. “What you want,” Crowley
had advised, “is to render yourself invisible.”
Easily said, but hard to do, when you’re traveling with a
sensitive, a heavy, and a ten-year-old religious leader. Still,
after a bit of research, Rebo managed to locate a small hotel
that was located on the edge of a middle-class neighborhood
called Levels, because of the way it had been terraced into a
hillside. The hostelry was located on a sleepy street, in a
wood-frame stucco-covered building, not far from a small
but serviceable market. Just the place to rest, regroup, and
prepare for the cross-country trek that would take the travelers to the spaceport in Cresus—a city located more than a
thousand miles away.
Ideal though the hiding place might be, Rebo knew that
all sorts of people would be on the lookout for both Norr
and Lee. Norr, because the Techno Society was not going to
give up, and Lee, because Zand was something of a black hat
stronghold, and senior members of that sect were sure to
learn that four red hat bodies had been left on the landing
pad. What was less certain was whether the monks would
hear about the presence of a little boy and jump to the right
conclusion. But if they did, and the runner thought it was
best to assume that they would, it seemed likely that Lee

RUNNER

217

would be targeted. That was why he insisted that everyone
remain in their rooms and out of sight.
Norr, who was still recovering from her latest encounter
with Lysander, was quick to agree. As did Hoggles, a fact
that came as something of a surprise to Rebo since he would
have expected some sort of objection from a man who had
spent the last few years on board a spaceship. Still, it was
nice to have something break his way.
That left Lee, who had been devastated by the loss of all
four Dib Wa warriors and blamed himself for their deaths.
He wanted to leave the hotel, not to explore the city as he
normally sought to do, but to visit a temple where he could
apologize to the dead warriors. Norr and Rebo had attempted to dissuade the boy but to no avail.
And, making the problem that much more difﬁcult, was
the fact that the only temple in Zand belonged to black hat
monks. A fact that didn’t bother Lee, who swore he could go
there without being recognized, but worried Rebo no end.
All those factors accounted for the tension in the room
where the group was gathered. A table had been pulled out
away from a wall, chairs had been brought in so that everyone could sit, and a curtain had been drawn in front of the
single horizontal slit-style window that local architects favored. While that ensured their privacy, it was necessary to
light candles in order to see. The hotel’s owner claimed that
later, when the power came on, the disk-shaped ﬁxture
mounted on the ceiling would start to glow, but Rebo had
his doubts and made a mental note to request an oil lamp.
Norr, who had a tendency to become moody when surrounded by large groups of people and their emotions, was
even more so immediately after one of Lysander’s invasions.
She sat with the newly acquired metal sphere balanced on
her ﬁngertips. The hair-thin lines that zigzagged across the

218

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

object’s surface seemed to suggest that it could be opened
somehow, but no amount of twisting and turning had been
sufﬁcient to make it do so. The metal housing felt warm, and
that suggested some sort of internal power source, as well as
a purpose. The sensitive frowned. “What did Lysander call
this thing?”
Rebo sighed. He had already answered that question half
a dozen times. But Norr had a tendency to gnaw at things,
especially when depressed, and wasn’t aware of how annoying that could be. “He called it a ‘gate seed.’ ”
Not to be left out, Lee, who had voiced the same possibility before, did so again. “We could grow a star gate!”
“Or trigger some sort of disaster,” Rebo said darkly, as he
ﬁngered the amulet that hung round his neck.
Hoggles, who hadn’t commented on the subject until
then, broke his silence. “Maybe you should give it back.
Otherwise, they’re going to come after you.”
Rebo looked at Norr. “Bo has a point . . . Why keep it?
Kane is alive. Once the bastard recovers, he’ll be after you
with a vengeance.”
Candlelight reﬂected off the ball as the sensitive continued to rotate the sphere with her ﬁngertips. She knew that
both men were correct. If she kept the seed, both Kane and
Lysander would come after her. The latter was the worst in
some ways.
But, just as she had resisted their efforts as Princess Cara,
Norr found herself unwilling to give in to either one of
them now. Not without a full understanding of what such a
surrender would mean. “You’re right, Jak. I know that . . .
But, what if the seed could make a difference? There’s so
much suffering. I can feel it everywhere we go. A system of
star gates could bring back the days when scientiﬁc knowl-

RUNNER

219

edge ﬂowed back and forth between the planets. Just think
what that would mean to the ﬁeld of medicine alone!”
“Yes,” Rebo agreed somberly. “But only if the system is
used for good. So, who do you trust? The man who was so
tyrannical that you were forced to murder him? Or the man
who wants to enslave you?”
Norr sighed. “That’s the problem. The potential for
good is there, but I can’t trust either one of them. Not yet
anyway.”
“Which means?”
“Which means,” Norr replied, as she stared into her
own badly distorted reﬂection, “that the gate seed will stay
with me.”

NINE
™

The Planet Ning

The schism between black and red stems from disagreements
regarding the relative merits of mind versus emotion as paths
to enlightenment. Such considerations are a waste of nas (spiritual energy), and equivalent to debating which is more valuable, the left hand or the right hand. Both come together to
pray, work or play.
—The tenth Nom Maa

In spite of the fact that the overhead light had been ex-

tinguished as Lee was put to bed, not even the curtain that
Norr had pulled across the window could block the ghostly
green glow produced by the streetlamp outside, and all
manner of shadows populated the walls. Time seemed to
creep by as the boy waited for Hoggles, then Rebo, to enter
the room and go to bed. Finally, once the heavy had started
to snore, and the runner was breathing evenly, Lee made his
move.
Slowly, so as to generate as little noise as possible, the
youth threw his covers back and swung his feet out onto the
cold ﬂoor. He was already dressed, so it was a simple matter
to pick up his boots and tiptoe over to the door. Lee knew
Rebo was a light sleeper and likely to wake at the slightest

RUNNER

221

sound, which was why the boy exercised great care as he removed the chair that the runner had propped up against the
door. Not in an attempt to block the entrance, but to serve
as an alarm, should someone with a key attempt to open it.
Once that was accomplished it was a simple matter to unlock the door, retrieve his boots, and tiptoe into the corridor. Having gained the hall successfully, the youngster
closed the door so gently that there was no more than the
faintest click, as the spring-loaded bolt found its well-worn
hole and slid home.
After that it was a simple matter to pull on his boots,
lace them up, and slip out of the hotel. The power was on,
the streets were crowded with people, and it was easy for Lee
to assume the persona that he had prepared for himself. If he
were stopped, which seemed unlikely given all of the children out on the streets, the youngster would say that he was
running an errand for his father, a claim he would substantiate with a shopping list prepared earlier in the day. And, if
attacked, Lee had both of his knives. Those, combined with
his speed, would get him out of trouble. Or so the youth
hoped.
But there were no signs of trouble as Lee made his way
down a street that switchbacked down the hillside. Just the
opposite, in fact, as shoppers paused to look through shop
windows, street vendors hawked their wares, and a metal
man took a moment to explain the beneﬁts of technology to
a hungry dog.
Lee gave the robot a wide berth and continued on his
way. Rebo had taught the youth a great deal about how to
move around in a strange environment without attracting
the wrong sort of attention, so the youngster knew better
than to ask strangers for directions, and was relieved when
he saw a black hat initiate pass by. Could the nun be headed

222

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

for a place other than the local monastery? Yes, but given
the fully loaded shopping bags the girl carried, Lee felt reasonably sure that the initiate had been sent to do some shopping and was on her way back to the temple.
The theory soon proved to be correct as the nun led Lee
through a maze of passageways, across an open plaza, and up
to the monastery beyond. Unlike the soft, often curving
lines that red hat architects favored, the black-hat-inspired
structure was a study in hard angles, ﬂat planes, and geometric shapes. It was a design esthetic intended to emphasize mind over emotion, control over chance, and man’s
ultimate ascendancy over nature.
Lee didn’t care for it, but knew that people tend to be
most comfortable with familiar forms and forced himself to
consider the structure’s virtues. The long, slanting rooﬂine,
for example, which pointed up toward god consciousness, as
well as a line of eight triangular entrances, each representing
one of the eight paths to enlightenment and full mastery of
the way. All of which combined to help focus the mind.
The nun entered the building through door ﬁve, the entrance that symbolized skillful livelihood, leaving Lee to
choose an entrance of his own. Given the nature of his journey, the youth decided it would be appropriate to pass
through portal one, which stood for skillful understanding.
The interior was well lit, and the walls were intentionally
bare, lest the faithful be distracted by gratuitous decorations. Still another element of the black hat mind-set that
made logical sense but didn’t appeal to Lee, who enjoyed religious art.
No matter which door an aspirant chose, he or she wound
up in a single hall, or “way,” which was symbolic of the
manner in which each individual had to walk all eight of the
major paths before achieving self-mastery. The hallway gave

RUNNER

223

access to a large rectangular room and a ﬁfteen-foot-tall
likeness of Teon that sat with its back to a white wall. The
ascended master had golden skin, and the symbols that he
held in each of his eight hands seemed to glow as if lit from
within. The boy paused to bow respectfully before turning
into one of the aisles and seeking a place in which to kneel.
He had never been allowed to enter a black hat temple before, and while part of him was afraid, the rest was at ease.
For there, surrounded by those intent on traveling the same
path that he had chosen, Lee knew he could meditate in
peace.
Meanwhile, at the rear of the chamber, Abbot Hico
Marth stood watching those at prayer. Having completed
some of the bureaucratic chores that plagued his days, and
having granted himself a bowl of sweet berries by way of a
reward, the monk carried them into the temple proper. And
it was there, while leaning against the back wall, that the
black hat noticed the little boy. First, because the youth was
alone, second, because there something special about the
way that the youngster held himself, and third, because he
brought his palms together as he bowed. A small thing, but
just one of many small things that distinguished red hats
from black hats, who always kept their hands at their sides
when they bowed.
It was nothing really, and the abbot would have dismissed the boy as a convert, had it not been for the battle
that had taken place just days before—a strange conﬂict in
which a force of metal men attacked a group of newly arrived travelers. Of particular interest was the fact that four
red hats had been killed—and a little boy had been seen riding high on a heavy’s shoulders.
Marth surveyed the room, assured himself that it was
empty of both metal men and variants, and turned his at-

224

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

tention back to his berries. What did the incident at the
landing pad mean? Nothing probably, except that among
the papers that had arrived along with the latest ship, was a
letter from a monk who identiﬁed himself as Brother Fiva,
alerting all of the monasteries that lay along the route between Anafa and Thara that a ten-year-old pretender might
pass their way. Could that boy, and this boy, be one and the
same? It didn’t seem likely, but there was no way to be sure.
Unaware of the extent to which he was being scrutinized,
Lee visualized each of the fallen warriors, apologized for his
role in cutting their incarnations short, and said prayers for
them. It wasn’t much, but the youth had faith his thoughts
would reach the red hats, and the knowledge made him feel
better.
Spiritually refreshed, and eager to make his way back to
the hotel lest his absence be discovered, Lee rose and bowed.
Other worshipers were both arriving and leaving. The boy
fell in behind a family of four, and was just about to exit the
chamber, when a heavy hand fell on his shoulder. The unexpected contact startled the boy, and he looked to his right to
discover that a rather imposing monk was staring down at
him. The top of the cleric’s head was obscured by a round
hat, but those portions of his scalp that remained visible had
been shaved, leaving only a haze of black stubble. His
cheeks were gaunt, his skin was pitted as if by a childhood
disease, and the smile belied the look in his eyes. “And why,
if I may be so bold as to ask, would a red hat deign to visit
our humble temple?”
The comment, which was intended to shock, had the desired effect. Lee felt a heavy weight hit the bottom of his
stomach and knew that an expression of fear had already
registered on his face. He had given himself away somehow,
and rather than offer denials that the black hat was unlikely

RUNNER

225

to believe, Lee knew that his best chance lay in providing
the monk with an opportunity to reach the wrong conclusion. For, as the great Teon once said, “Errors occur not by
chance, but through choice, which was god’s second gift to
humanity.”
“I meant no disrespect,” Lee stammered in Tilisi, “but it
was my desire to communicate with the being within, and I
was told that yours is the only temple in Zand.”
Not only had the boy offered an honest reply, but he had
done so in a respectful manner, and Marth allowed his demeanor to soften. “You are a stranger to the city then?”
“Yes,” Lee answered truthfully. “We arrived a few days
ago. We came a long ways, the journey was difﬁcult, and some
of our companions were killed. I wanted to pray for them.”
“And you felt comfortable coming here?”
“No, I was scared,” Lee admitted. “But I remembered
what Brother Qwa taught me.”
The abbot raised a dark eyebrow. “Which was?”
“Brother Qwa said that while those who follow the way
think with two heads, they have but a single heart, and that
belongs to god.”
Even though Marth had been fully prepared to dislike
the youth, especially if he appeared to be the pretender, he
felt his heart soften instead. Still, while he was inclined to
accept the lad as a harmless traveler, some further questioning wouldn’t hurt. Besides, the boy looked a lot like someone else, which while not important in and of itself, was a
matter of some curiosity. “Brother Qwa is a wise man.
Come, we shall have tea and speak from the heart.”
The invitation was phrased as an order, and in spite of all
the misgivings that he felt, Lee had no choice but to accept.
“Thank you, Excellency,” the youth responded humbly. “To
do so would be an honor.”

226

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Pleased by the extent of his own perceptiveness, and
having been charmed by the youngster’s unassuming manner, Marth introduced himself and learned that the boy’s
name was Lee. A short trip through a series of sterile passageways brought the pair to a generously proportioned ofﬁce. The entirety of the back wall was obscured by
ﬂoor-to-ceiling cubbyholes, all ﬁlled to capacity with rolled
manuscripts. The broad desk, which had been made out of
the dark ebony-like wood native to Ning’s southern jungles, sat no more than a foot off the reed mat that covered
the ﬂoor and was ringed by red, gold, and green cushions.
“Please,” the abbot said, “take a seat. There’s something I’d
like you to see.”
Lee sat cross-legged on a cushion, while Marth rang a little bell and provided instructions to an aspirant who appeared as if by magic. Though careful to maintain a calm
exterior, Lee wondered if his absence had been discovered
and wrestled with the hindrance called worry. It had been
wrong to sneak out, very wrong, and while he deserved
whatever punishment the law of cause and effect might
mete out to him, such was not the case for those who had so
mistakenly placed their trust in him.
“Here,” Marth said, as he dropped a roll of paper onto the
surface of the desk. “Take a look at that.”
Lee had to use both hands to pull the scroll open. What
he saw was a charcoal drawing rather than the religious
manuscript he had expected to see. The face that stared out
at him was that of a teenaged male. Outside of the adolescent’s eyes, which seemed to reﬂect a brooding intelligence,
there was nothing remarkable about the portrait, and Lee
was at a loss to understand why Marth wanted him to look
at it.
“Do you see the likeness?” the abbot insisted, as he sat on

RUNNER

227

one of the cushions. “Yanak is older, of course, but if it
weren’t for the fact that I know his family so well, I would
swear that you were his younger brother.”
Lee took another look and, having done so, could see
what the monk meant. The overall shape of the teenager’s
face was similar to his own, even though the signiﬁcance of
that fact escaped him, and he wasn’t sure what to say. “Yes,”
Lee said politely. “I see what you mean.”
The tea arrived then, and even though Marth could tell
that the boy had no idea who Yanak was, the abbot wasn’t
ready to suspend his somewhat oblique investigation quite
yet. While the odds were excellent that Lee was just what he
appeared to be, a somewhat precocious youngster raised
within the intellectual embrace of a red hat monk off to the
east, it was his duty to make sure.
Once the tea had been poured, and the aspirant had
withdrawn, the subtle-yet-persistent interrogation continued. “In spite of the fact that Yanak’s physical body is only
sixteen years old, we have reason to believe that the spirit of
the great teacher Nom Maa dwells within it,” Marth said
conversationally. “That’s why he is on his way to the central
temple at CaCanth. Once he arrives Yanak will be tested
and take his place on the throne. After that, well, who
knows? Perhaps he will ﬁnd a way to heal the rift that separates black from red.”
Even though he knew that the black hats had a candidate
of their own, Lee had never been told the other boy’s name
or been shown a likeness of his face. Not until now that is.
While the monks on Anafa insisted that his was the spirit of
Nom Maa, and there had been moments when he believed
the assertion to be true, such was the veil between him and
his past lives that Lee had never been entirely sure. Did that
mean the teenager with the aloof stare was the real Nom

228

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Maa? And that he was little more than a pawn? Groomed by
the red hats to serve their political ends? As he listened to
Marth it seemed all too possible. And, rather than the disappointment that Lee might have expected to feel, the boy
experienced a sense of exhilaration instead. Because if he was
nobody other than himself, and wasn’t expected to take the
throne, he could live his life any way he chose! “That would
be a good thing,” Lee said, “I afﬁrm whatever is for the
highest and the best.”
The abbot took a sip of tea. Had Lee been the red hat
pretender, and been confronted with an image of his rival,
the monk would have expected to see some sign of consternation on his face. Resentment perhaps, or even anger, but
such was not the case. In fact, judging from appearances, the
boy appeared to be anything but jealous. A good sign indeed. “Here,” Marth said, as he passed three incense sticks
to the boy. “Please convey these to your parents. They have
been blessed and will help all of you battle the hindrance
known as doubt.”
Lee knew a dismissal when he heard one, felt a tremendous sense of relief, and was careful to bow once he got to
his feet. “Thank you, sasa (wise one). I will tell them.”
Marth rang the tiny bell even as the youngster withdrew.
The aspirant, who had been waiting only steps away, appeared immediately. “Yes, Excellency?”
The abbot gestured toward the door. “Follow the boy.
Don’t let him see you. Once you know where he is staying
report to me. It’s my opinion that he is what he claims to be,
but clouds can appear in an otherwise blue sky, and it is wise
to remain vigilant.”
The aspirant had no idea what Marth was talking about,
but didn’t need to know, and slipped out into the night. It

RUNNER

229

was just past one in the morning, the lights remained on,
and the boy was easy to spot. The rest was easy.
When Kane came to he was flat on his back looking up at a

blurry sky. It wobbled, along with the makeshift stretcher
that supported him, and someone snapped an order. “Watch
where you’re going, damn you!”
The operative brought a hand up to the side of his head,
winced as his ﬁngertips made contact with a large lump,
and remembered the way the shuttle had attacked both him
and his metal men. Such an action was unprecedented in so
far as he knew, and would have been worthy of analysis, except that his head hurt so badly he couldn’t think straight.
A wave of dizziness rolled in from somewhere unknown,
took control of Kane’s consciousness, and carried it away.
A good deal of time was spent in the land of darkness,
and when the light ﬁnally returned, Kane found that he was
reluctant to acknowledge it. But there were voices that
called his name, and beyond that a vague sense of urgency,
as if something important had been left undone.
Like a bubble ﬂoating to the top of a primeval pond,
Kane rose, popped open, and found himself looking up at a
ceiling. Water had leaked down onto it at some point in
the past and created what looked a world map after it
dried. Yellow lakes, brown-rimmed continents, and white
oceans all waited to be explored. But, before the operative
could do so, a face interspersed itself between the ceiling
and him. It belonged to Ron Olvos, the moon-faced council member who owned the impressive sounding title of
“Operations Coordinator,” but was actually little more
than Chairman Tepho’s all-purpose gofer. “Kane? Can you
hear me?”

230

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Yes,” the operative croaked. “And what’s worse is that I
can see you.”
Olvos shook his head reprovingly. “Well, I can see that
the blow to the head did nothing to improve your native
charm.”
The face disappeared as Kane pushed himself up off the
bed, groaned as a dull, throbbing headache kicked in, and
swung his feet out over the side of the bed. “Where the hell
am I? On Anafa?”
“No,” Olvos replied primly. “You’re still on Ning. They
were afraid to move you. The chairman sent me to check
on you.”
Kane cradled his head with his hands. “Don’t bullshit
me, Olvos. Tepho sent you to retrieve the gate seed . . . He
couldn’t care less about me.”
“Well, that isn’t entirely true,” the council member said,
as he pulled a chair up next to the bed. “Although I’d be lying if I said that the chairman was pleased to discover that,
having recovered a gate seed, you chose to keep it on your
person, rather than send it back to Anafa where the tech
types could go to work on it.”
“That was a mistake,” Kane admitted, “and one I plan to
rectify.”
“The chairman will be gratiﬁed to hear that,” Olvos observed mildly. “And in the meantime I have some good
news for you. While you were on vacation in dreamland I
put all of the local staff to work looking for Norr and the
group of weirdos that she hangs out with. That included reviewing footage from every metal man in Zand. And, while
we didn’t get any hits where the sensitive was concerned,
I’m happy to announce that the little boy walked through a
shot in a neighborhood called Levels. The little shit’s image
wasn’t clear enough to trigger the robot’s spot and report

RUNNER

231

programming, but we found it during the review. Once we
applied some magniﬁcation, presto, there he was!”
Kane felt a surge of hope and looked up. “You located
them?”
The functionary shook his head. “No, we were lucky, but
not that lucky. The metal men are out canvassing the area
where the boy was spotted, so it should be just a matter of
time before we ﬁnd their hidey-hole.”
Kane threw his weight forward and managed to stand.
The pain was intense. “Are you out of your mind? Norr and
her companions will spot the robots and run! Then where
will we be?”
“No worse off than we were after you allowed them to
take the gate seed,” Olvos replied pointedly. “Please, feel
free to go out and set things right.”
“That I will,” Kane replied grimly. “Hand me my pants.”
The hotel’s kitchen was small, hot, and steamy. And, be-

cause the restaurant it served was an important source of revenue, various members of the proprietress’s family were
bustling about preparing for lunch. The power wouldn’t
come on for many hours yet, so charcoal had been used to
fuel the ancient cast-iron stove that dominated one greasy
wall. Rebo, still furious with Lee for sneaking out the night
before, was halfway down the center aisle when the hostelry’s
owner turned to block the way. She was a large woman, and
given the bloodstained meat cleaver clutched in her right
hand, would make a formidable opponent. Her hair hung
down around her face in greasy ringlets, tiny beads of perspiration dotted her broad forehead, and her enormous bosom
strained against the front of the ﬁlthy apron that hung down
to her ankles. “Citizen Horko . . . Assuming that’s your actual name. You’re just the man I wanted to see.”

232

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Rebo, who had hoped to exit out the back unobserved,
forced a smile. “Yes, Mrs. Pella . . . What can I do for you?”
“People are looking for you,” she said accusingly. “A man
came by early this morning, and another left just a few minutes ago.”
“Yes, I’m aware of that,” the runner replied. “Please tell
your staff how much I appreciate their discretion.”
“He offered us money,” Pella replied artlessly. “A crono
for information related to your whereabouts. And he knows
what all four of you look like.”
Rebo sighed. A counteroffer was clearly in order and
would clearly have to be more than a crono, even though the
actual reward was probably less. Another reason why he and
his companions needed to escape the city. Negotiations ensued, and by the time they were over, Rebo’s purse was two
cronos lighter. But, if that was what it would take to keep
the Techno Society operatives at bay for another planetary
rotation, then the runner had no choice but to pay it.
Mrs. Pella made the coins disappear and stepped out of
the way. Her smile revealed two rows of green teeth. “Have
a nice day, Citizen Horko . . . I will see you later.”
Rebo slipped out the back door and took the time required to survey his surroundings. Then, satisﬁed that it
was safe to do so, the runner made his way down the alley,
turned into a busy street, and set off for the eastern border of
the city. Because it was there, along both banks of the Xee
River, that the great caravans paused to rest before setting
off again. One of them was bound to be headed south, or so
Rebo assumed as he made his way through a succession of
neighborhoods and paused half a block short of the city’s
eastern gate. The wall, which had been raised to defend the
city from some forgotten threat, stood a good twenty feet
tall and was every bit of six feet thick. The off-worlder was

RUNNER

233

tired by then and felt as though he had been walking for
days rather than hours.
Brightly uniformed guards stood to either side of the
street, but the runner assumed that their role was largely
ceremonial, since none of the soldiers attempted to interact
with the hundreds of people who ﬂowed back and forth
through the ancient portal. That meant the only impediment to further progress was the trio of black-hatted clerics
who stood with begging bowls extended and dispensed
blessings to those who made donations.
Rebo knew that the monks might be there for no other
reason than to collect alms, but he couldn’t afford to take
the risk, especially after Lee’s clandestine activities the
night before. With that in mind the runner took a quick
look around and spotted an angen-drawn wagon that had
approached from behind. The boxy conveyance had an enclosed cargo compartment, a raised driver’s seat, and rode on
four metal-rimmed wheels. The mouthwatering aroma of
freshly baked bread traveled with the conveyance, and the
runner ﬁgured that the contents were intended for the men,
women, and children who were camped along the Xee
River.
It was a simple matter to slip through the crowd, jump
up onto the wagon, and claim a seat right next to the surprised driver. The old man held the reins with workthickened ﬁngers and looked as if a thousand storms had
been etched into his skin. “Here, father,” Rebo said, before
the driver could object, and offered him a handful of coppers. “My sore feet would like to pay for the privilege of riding next to you, my stomach would like to purchase a bite
of bread, and my ears would like to buy a portion of your
wisdom.”
Passengers weren’t allowed, but the combination of hu-

234

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

mor, ﬂattery, and the bribe were sufﬁcient to overcome any
doubts the oldster might have otherwise had. He produced
a mostly toothless grin. “I can take care of your feet, and
your stomach, but I fear for your ears.”
Rebo laughed, and the two of them continued to chat as
the wagon neared the gate. Then, just as the black hats
started to turn their heads toward the movement, Rebo
stuck his head into the cargo compartment as if checking on
the load of crusty bread. The odor was overwhelming. The
runner waited long enough for the conveyance to roll
through the gate and had a loaf of bread clutched in his
hand when he turned forward again. The runner tore off a
chunk and bit into it. The monks were nowhere to be seen.
The wagon lurched as two of the big wooden wheels were
forced to roll over a dead dog, and the angen pulled the
wagon down the right-hand side of the thoroughfare everyone referred to as “the street of thieves.” The name stuck because the bars, saloons, and whorehouses that lined both
sides of the ﬁlthy boulevard were natural habitats for outlaws of every stripe, and because the shopkeepers who made
their livings selling food, equipment, and weapons to the
nomads were said to have the highest proﬁt margins on the
planet. A promising neighborhood for anyone who was interested in certain forms of entertainment, but Rebo’s attention was focused on other things, such as the caravans and
the routes they followed.
As Rebo questioned the old man, it soon became apparent that while Omar had very little formal education, he
was a keen observer of everything that took place around
him. And that included the nomads to whom he had been
selling bread for more than forty years.
One of the ﬁrst things the runner learned was that most
of the caravans operated on a seasonal basis. During the win-

RUNNER

235

ter they typically headed south, but it was summer at present, which meant most were traveling north. That meant
travelers who wanted to go south, but lacked the knowledge
required to make their own way, would be forced to sign on
with one of the few caravans headed in that direction. Such
pack trains were made up of hardy types who were willing
to brave the southern heat to reap the high prices that luxury goods would fetch in cities that hadn’t been visited by
outsiders in months. So, secure in the knowledge that the
bread wagon was slated to visit both southbound caravans,
the runner was content to sit back and soak up the atmosphere while the old man made his rounds.
For obvious reasons the most popular camping spots
were those located along both banks of the Xee River. But
there were only a limited number of slots, which meant that
some of the nomads were forced to pitch tents in the areas
off to either side of the river and bring their thirsty angens
down to drink in the evening, an activity that not only involved a lot of work, but put a serious dent in the amount of
time available for equipment maintenance and the nightly
carousing of which the nomads were fond.
However, regardless of location, all the encampments
had certain features in common. Chief among them were
the domed tents that sat clustered together, the moody
beasts of burden that were penned up inside their makeshift
corrals, and the stench of angen feces, human waste, and rotting garbage that hovered over each encampment.
The bread wagon made half a dozen brief stops before arriving at the ﬁrst of the two southbound caravans Omar had
mentioned earlier. The conveyance was greeted by the usual
pack of yapping mongrels, a ﬂood of grubby children, and a
squad of burly women. While Omar sold his bread, Rebo
went off in search of the headman, and soon found himself

236

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

talking to a woman instead. She had short-cropped black
hair, a heavily lined face, and solid-looking body. A hardy
sort who radiated self-conﬁdence and appeared to be exactly
what the runner had been hoping for.
But, having listened to Rebo’s business proposal, it soon
became apparent that the nomad had no interest in escorting four off-worlders south through the badlands to the city
beyond. Even the runner’s offer of additional money fell on
deaf ears. The chieftain had a perishable cargo to transport,
which meant she intended to travel at night and cover at
least twenty miles per day. A pace nonnomads would never
be able to maintain.
That left Rebo with no choice but to seek out the second
southbound caravan in hopes that the person in charge of
that pack train would prove to be more accommodating. It
was early afternoon by the time the nearly empty bread
wagon pulled up in front of one of the most distant and undesirable camping spots. A single scroungy-looking mutt
came out to meet them, and it was lame. And, rather than
the rush of children the runner had come to expect, only six
of them actually materialized. They stood in a small
somber-looking group that remained right where it was until Omar offered the youngsters some free hard rolls. That
brought them forward, but hesitantly, as if fearful that doing so might land them in trouble.
In the meantime, half a dozen heavily armed men had
emerged from the scattering of dingy, ragged-looking tents.
In spite of the fact that the bread wagon couldn’t possibly be
interpreted as a threat, the nomads continued to watch in
baleful silence as a handful of scrawny women ventured out
to make their purchases. In all truth the encampment was so
lackluster that Rebo would have skipped the group entirely
had there been another choice. So, feet dragging, the runner

RUNNER

237

approached a sun-darkened warrior and asked if he could
speak with the chief. The nomad had dark eyes, a single eyebrow, and a scar that ran diagonally across his face. He extended a hand palm up. “Pay me.”
The runner looked the villain in the eye. “Take me to the
chief, or I’ll ﬁnd him on my own, and tell him that you
identiﬁed yourself as the headman.”
Most of the blood drained out of the warrior’s face. A
sure sign that whatever his other attributes, the chief was
jealous of his authority and completely unforgiving where
would-be usurpers were concerned. “But that would be a
lie!” the nomad objected.
Rebo produced what he hoped was a predatory grin.
“Yes, but that won’t make much difference will it? Not if
you’re dead . . . Now, take me to your chief, or get the hell
out of the way.”
Scarface started to bring his long-barreled riﬂe up, saw
the newcomer’s hand go to the enormous pistol that he wore
crosswise across his belly, and knew he would lose the ensuing race. Well aware of the fact that his peers were watching, and mindful of his reputation, the warrior turned away.
Rebo followed Scarface over to the largest tent, where the
villainous nomad shouted something in a dialect the runner
hadn’t heard before, and pretended to examine one of his
ﬁlthy ﬁngernails.
A full minute passed before the leather curtain that protected the entrance was pushed aside and a man emerged.
He squinted into the sun, belched loudly, and scratched a
small but prominent belly. With the exception of a dirty
loincloth and the black pelt that covered his bony chest, the
headman was naked. “Yes?” the apparition said. “Who calls
on Valpoon? And what the hell do you want?”
“My name is Taka,” Rebo lied, “and my companions and

238

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

I wish to travel to Cresus. I heard that you and your caravan
plan to go there. Perhaps we could come to some sort of
agreement.”
There was a momentary paused as the chieftain processed
the runner’s words, followed by a generous display of yellowed teeth. “Of course!” the nomad said enthusiastically.
“Nothing would give my family and I more pleasure than
the opportunity to speed you and your companions to Cresus. Where are these noble beings? Please summon them
forth that I might greet each of them personally.”
“They’re in the city,” the runner answered vaguely, “so
the introductions will have to wait. In the meantime, perhaps you would be so good as to tell me when you plan to
depart, what sort of supplies we would be expected to bring
along, and how much such a journey would cost?”
Valpoon, who was fully aware of the fact that only two
caravans were slated to head south during the next month,
set his price accordingly. “We plan to leave in two days’
time, my men would be happy to purchase your supplies for
you, and the price is ﬁve cronos each.”
Rebo frowned. If allowed to purchase the supplies,
Valpoon and his men would no doubt charge a healthy commission, thereby fattening their purses even further. “The
departure date is ﬁne, but we will buy our supplies, and four
cronos per person is considerably higher than the going rate.
However, I will pay you a bonus of one crono per person, if
you get us to Cresus within sixty days.”
Valpoon was impressed by both the stranger’s forceful
manner and his knowledge of seasonal pricing. Not only
that, but by ultimately agreeing to a total price of ﬁve
cronos per person, his reputation as a tough negotiator remained intact. He gave a bow. It should have been ludicrous, especially given his lack of clothing, but such dignity

RUNNER

239

had been invested in the gesture that it came off rather well.
“How can an uneducated wretch such as myself even begin
to bargain with a man such as yourself? It shall be as you
say . . . Be careful when buying your angens, however.
Thieves abound, and your lives will depend on which animals you chose.”
That, at least, was good advice, and Rebo accepted it as
such. The runner bowed in return. “Thank you. We will be
very careful indeed.”
Omar had sold his last loaf of bread by then and was
waiting when Rebo climbed up onto the wagon. The old
man’s expression was grim. “You didn’t give that scoundrel
any money did you?”
“No,” the runner answered. “Not yet.”
“Good,” Omar replied, as he made use of the reins to slap
the angen’s glistening back. “Because I don’t like the look of
this bunch. Not one little bit.”
Rebo felt the same way—but there was no point in saying so. The wagon lurched over a loose rock as the sun continued its march across the sky, and night waited to reclaim
the land.
It was dusk, and while the sun was about to drop over the

edge of the western horizon, it was only a little past seven,
which meant the power wouldn’t come on for a while yet.
But the citizens of Zand were used to that, which was why
thousands of candles, lamps, and lanterns had already been
lit and people had started to ﬁlter out onto the streets as
they did every evening. And Jevan Kane was one of them.
Not because he wanted to go out, but because he had to,
headache be damned. After questioning hundreds of people,
one of the local operatives had come up with a lead, the only
one generated so far. It seemed that a street vendor had no-

240

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ticed a youth who matched the description of the boy Kane
had seen on both Pooz, and on Ning, riding atop the
ragged-looking heavy.
For some reason the youngster had been out running
around the streets alone. The vendor had seen him pause in
front of the black hat temple, look all around as if to make
sure that no one was watching him, then enter alone. Later,
after an hour or so, the boy had departed. That was intriguing enough—but there was more. The vendor was
well acquainted with the black hats, having given all of the
monks food at one time or another, so when the boy left
and one of the aspirants followed, the woman couldn’t help
but notice.
Now, as Kane stood next to her ﬂat-cake stand, the offworlder sought to put the pieces of the puzzle together.
Norr had been accompanied by four red hat warriors at the
spaceport, the boy had been seen visiting a black hat temple, and a monk had been dispatched to follow him home.
But why? There was only one way to ﬁnd out.
Kane turned to Olvos. “Okay, I’m going in. If I haven’t returned by eight-thirty, or sent word, then come in after me.”
The council member nodded, but the gesture lacked
conviction, and Kane knew he might renege. Especially if
the black hats put up some resistance. Still, he had no other
choice, not if he wanted to ﬁnd Norr.
Head pounding, Kane made his way across the open area
in front of the monastery and entered through one of eight
possible doors. As luck would have it the operative passed
through portal six, the entry that stood for skillful effort,
the very thing the operative would have chosen had he been
aware of the symbology involved. Once inside, the offworlder looked around, spotted a likely-looking monk, and

RUNNER

241

approached him. “Excuse me . . . I’m a stranger here—and
would like to speak with the abbot.”
The monk bowed, promised to return, and disappeared
down a hallway. A full ten minutes passed, and Kane had
started to wonder if he was being systematically ignored,
when the black hat reappeared. He bowed respectfully. “My
apologies regarding the delay. The abbot was in a meeting.
He will see you now.”
Kane followed the monk through a series of passageways
and into a large ofﬁce. Outside of a single overhead light ﬁxture there was no sign of technology, and the whole notion
of sitting on the ﬂoor struck Kane as primitive. The man
who rose to greet him wore a black hat, matching robe, and
a polite expression. “I am Hico Marth. Please have a seat.
How can I help you?”
Kane waited for the black hat to take his seat, lowered
himself onto a cushion, and dreaded the effort that would be
required to stand up again. Then came the difﬁcult part.
Broaching a subject that might, or might not, have meaning for the monk, plus doing so in a way that wouldn’t reveal too much. “Thank you for agreeing to see me. My name
is Jevan Kane. I know you’re busy so I’ll try to be brief . . . I
represent a group called the Techno Society.”
Marth allowed his eyebrows to rise. “The organization
that the metal men preach on behalf of?”
Kane nodded. “We don’t think of our efforts to remind
people of the beneﬁts of technology as preaching, but yes,
the metal men belong to us.”
“I hope you’ll forgive me for saying so,” the abbot responded mildly, “but the metal men are more than a little
annoying. But that aside, what brings you to our humble
temple?”

242

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“A little boy,” Kane replied truthfully. “A little boy who
arrived on Ning along with four red hat warriors, survived a
battle at the spaceport, and was subsequently seen entering
your monastery.”
Marth, who still had the boy’s hotel under surveillance,
knew who Kane was referring to. Rather than reveal that
knowledge, however, the black hat thought it best to maintain a neutral expression and draw the stranger out. “I see.
But many boys enter our temple . . . What makes this one
so special?”
The monk was already aware of the boy, Kane could sense
it, and felt his heart beat just a little bit faster. That made
his head throb, and he struggled to maintain focus. “The
boy isn’t special, not so far as we’re concerned, but the
woman he is traveling with is. She has something that
doesn’t belong to her, something she stole from me, and I
want it back.”
“Ah,” Marth replied, “now I understand. If you ﬁnd the
boy—you ﬁnd the thief.”
“Exactly,” the technologist answered. “Can you help me?”
“Yes,” the abbot replied judiciously, as his ﬁngertips
came together to form a steeple. “I think I can . . . But ﬁrst
I would appreciate it if you would tell me everything you
can about the boy. I’m not entirely sure as yet, but based on
information I received a few days ago, there is a strong possibility that the boy is an imposter.”
A ten-year-old imposter? It didn’t make sense, but Kane
didn’t care, not so long as he got what he wanted. So, starting with the disastrous ﬁreﬁght at the riverfront restaurant
in Gos and ending with the brawl at Zand’s spaceport, the
operative told the black hat what he wanted to know.
Marth listened intently. The fact that the boy named Lee
had clearly been on the same ship that Brother Fiva had

RUNNER

243

monitored and was pursuing an itinerary that could take
him to Thara and the city of CaCanth certainly seemed to
conﬁrm his identity. Not with 100 percent certainty perhaps, but to an extent that justiﬁed a momentary deviation
from the way, even if that meant negative Ka, and some additional incarnations prior to full enlightenment. Because,
onerous though the results of his actions might be, the
needs of the church must necessarily take precedence over
his life and the boy’s as well. Marth looked into the other
man’s ice-blue eyes. “Based on your description of what took
place, I think there is a high degree of likelihood that the
boy is the one we’re looking for.”
“I am gratiﬁed to hear it,” Kane replied eagerly. “If you
would be so kind as to tell me where the woman and the boy
are staying, my personnel will take both of them into custody. Once that has been accomplished, the boy will be
handed over to you.”
The abbot smiled thinly. “Thank you, but no. I mean no
offense, but the attempt to capture the group at the spaceport lacked ﬁnesse and could only be described as a miserable failure. No, I think a different approach is in order, one
that won’t attract any further attention. Assuming the boy
is the person I believe he is, then I know exactly where he
and his escorts will go next, which means we can intercept
them. Not here, in the city, but well beyond the walls.”
The suggestion went against all of Kane’s instincts, but
so long as the black hat withheld the boy’s location, he had
the advantage. All the technologist could do was smile, nod,
and hope for the best.
The abbot ordered tea, which in spite of the fact that it
didn’t contain any sugar, still tasted sweet.

TEN
™

The Planet Ning

Each incarnation can be viewed as a pilgrimage in which we
will encounter many obstacles. It is how we react to those obstacles, and the choices that we make in response to them,
that determines the extent of our progress.
—The ascended master Teon,
The Way

The angen’s hooves made a methodical clop, clop, clop

sound and an axle squeaked monotonously as the bread
wagon bumped and clattered its way along the misty alleyway to the point where a trio of overﬂowing garbage bins
guarded the rear entrance of the hotel. That was where
Omar said, “Whoa!” pulled the slack out of the reins, and
brought the conveyance to a rattling stop.
The travelers were ready. Hoggles carried Lee out through
the portal, lifted the boy into the back of the wagon, and
climbed in after him. Norr went next, closely followed by
Rebo, who pulled the tailgate up behind him and latched it
in place. Then, having dropped the rear curtain and tied it
down, the runner rapped three times. The reins made a slapping sound as they hit the angen’s back, and the wagon

RUNNER

245

jerked into motion. The entire process took less than a
minute, and thanks to the early-morning hour, went unobserved. Or so the travelers hoped.
Though empty of bread, the cargo compartment was already half-full of supplies when the foursome had boarded
the wagon, which meant that it was crowded. Especially
given how much space the heavy required. But Rebo considered that to be a small price to pay if he and his companions
could escape the city undetected. Something that would
have been easy prior to Lee’s midnight outing, but had subsequently been transformed into a major operation, a fact
not lost on the boy himself.
As the wagon bounced and swayed Lee felt his stomach
rumble in response to the mouthwatering odor that lingered from the previous day’s load of bread, and wondered if
he would ever manage to regain the runner’s trust. One
thing was for sure, no matter how long he lived, the boy
knew he would never forget the moment when he opened
the hotel room door to discover that he had been missed.
Both Rebo and Hoggles had been out looking for him,
while Norr remained behind to coordinate the search and
solicit help from the spirit world.
The sensitive gave a cry of joy as Lee entered the room,
pulled the boy into her arms, and gave him a hug. She was
in the process of chewing him out when Rebo returned. A
variety of emotions had registered on the runner’s face beginning with relief, quickly followed by anger, and a look of
profound disappointment.
And it was the last, the loss of Rebo’s respect and trust,
that Lee regretted the most. He said as much to Norr the
following day, hoping that she might intervene on his behalf, but was disappointed when the sensitive told him
something the boy already knew. “Trust is a fragile

246

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

thing . . . It takes a long time to establish, and once created,
can easily be destroyed. There are no shortcuts. Decision by
decision, action by action, that’s the way to rebuild Rebo’s
trust.”
The words not only rang true, but resonated with the
older, more mature being that dwelt deep inside him, a fact
that made Lee all the more determined to restore that which
had been frittered away.
It took the better part of a long, uncomfortable hour for
the bread wagon to clear the eastern gate, pass through the
street of thieves, and rumble out onto the dirt road that paralleled the Xee River. Thanks to Omar’s encyclopedic
knowledge of the caravans as well as the nomads themselves,
Rebo had been able to purchase two prime angens the previous afternoon, and now it was time to claim them. It wasn’t
long before the wagon turned off the main track, rolled past
a couple of well-armed guards, and the entered the semipermanent encampment maintained by Pithri Gorgo, the selfstyled “King of L-phants.” He was an entrepreneur who,
though dishonest, was widely believed to be less dishonest
than most of his peers, and therefore a good person to do
business with.
Omar pulled on the reins, the wagon came to a halt, and
Norr slid the rear curtain to one side. The sun had risen by
then, the mist had been vanquished, and the encampment
was coming back to life now that the hours of darkness were
at an end. Cook ﬁres sent delicate spirals of smoke up toward the sky, and a battalion of children were busy carrying
buckets of water up to their mothers. Later, after that chore
had been completed, they would turn their attention to the
L-phants. Each animal had to be fed and checked for sores
prior to being led down to the river to drink.
Rebo dropped the tailgate and jumped down to the

RUNNER

247

ground. Gorgo was famous for the quality of his hospitality,
so it was only a matter of moments before a teenaged girl arrived with a load of caf and hot fry bread. “Try it,” Omar
suggested, as he accepted a steaming cup. “I think you’ll
like it.”
None of them had eaten prior to departure, so Rebo took
a bite, and soon discovered that the old man was correct.
The fry bread had a crunchy exterior, had been liberally
sprinkled with cinnamon, and went well with the black caf.
Gorgo arrived a few minutes later. His thick black hair
was wet, as if he had just emerged from a dip in the river,
and his white robe was spotless. “So,” the merchant said,
thereby offering his customers an extravagant display of
white teeth, “you are on time. Please follow me . . . Your
L-phants are ready.”
A few steps carried the travelers over to a huge tree,
where two of the mighty beasts stood waiting, their rear
legs chained together to prevent them from wandering off.
Although Rebo had observed L-phants from a distance, he
had never stood next to one until the previous afternoon,
and was still astounded by how large they were. The beasts
weren’t native to Ning, but were believed to be the bioengineered descendants of animals that humans had brought
with them more than a million years before.
Having been speciﬁcally bred to carry heavy loads over
long distances while subject to Ning’s gravity, the L-phants
had huge six-ton bodies supported by four massive columnlike legs. But, what made these particular creatures different from all of the other angens Rebo had seen was not only
their size, but the fact that they lacked heads. In an effort to
lengthen their torsos and maximize their ability to carry
cargo, L-phant brains had been relocated into the anterior
portion of their chests. The animals’ eyes were located there,

248

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

too, which meant that while they had an excellent view of
the trail ahead, they couldn’t scan the horizon for danger.
This modiﬁcation assumed a symbiotic relationship with
humans, who would eternally bear responsibility for spotting and protecting the angens from potential enemies.
Not that the animals were entirely helpless, since each
L-phant was equipped with a long, ﬂexible trunk that extended from the area immediately over its eyes and could be
used for eating, drinking, and ﬁghting. Other attributes,
like their heat-sensitive skins, and the special subcutaneous
tissues that could store up to ﬁfty gallons of water, were a
good deal less obvious, but just as important to performing
their intended function. That was to carry people and goods
over long distances. Never mind the fact that the animals
produced enormous mounds of manure, were notoriously
ﬂatulent, and eternally cranky. “So,” Gorgo said, as he patted a leathery ﬂank, “if you would be so kind as to hand over
the remainder of the purchase price, we can ﬁnalize this
transaction. The sunny south awaits!”
Rebo was already in the process of reaching for his purse
when Omar interrupted. “Excuse me, but a mistake has been
made. Yesterday, while you were ﬁnalizing the price, I
scratched my initials into each animal’s skin. That angen still
bears my mark . . . but this one doesn’t. A mix-up perhaps?”
In spite of the fact that Omar knew there hadn’t been any
mix-up, he had been careful to leave Gorgo with a way out,
which the merchant was quick to take advantage of. “Please
accept my most sincere apologies! The children who
brought animals out of the corral clearly made a mistake. I
can assure you that they will be punished. In the meantime
have some more caf . . . I will remove this beast and return
with the correct angen.”
Rebo waited until the merchant was well out of earshot

RUNNER

249

before turning to Omar. “Thank you! I missed the switch.
What sort of scam was he trying to pull?”
“It’s hard to know for sure,” the oldster replied. “But I
suspect that this particular L-phant, the one he tried to give
you, is healthy but two or three years older than the one I
initialed yesterday. It’s a small thing, but lots of small profits can add up to a large one, which is one of the reasons why
Gorgo does so well.”
“Thank you,” Rebo said sincerely, as he offered Omar a
handful of coins. “I won’t forget your kindness.”
“It’s nothing,” the old man replied as he watched the remaining L-phant run its potentially lethal trunk over Lee’s
head and shoulders. It constituted a rather unusual display of
affection given the fact that the huge beasts were famously
bad-tempered. “Be sure to take good care of that boy . . . I
don’t know why, but he strikes me as special somehow.”
“He’s disobedient at times,” the runner observed, “but so
was I! He doesn’t know that, however—which is just as well.”
Both men laughed as Gorgo returned with a second
beast. Omar veriﬁed the presence of his mark, money
changed hands, and a bill of sale was executed. It took the
better part of an hour to hoist the formﬁtting cargo boxes
into place, secure them with straps that passed beneath
huge bellies, and load them with supplies that had been removed from Omar’s wagon.
Then, once the L-phants had been ordered to kneel, the
travelers took their places on the bench-style seats that were
built into each cargo box. Rebo watched with interest as Lee
made use of a four-foot-long ponga rod to touch a massive
shoulder before tapping on it twice. The runner quickly discovered that it was necessary to hang on as the animal
lurched from one side to the other as it came to its feet.
Gorgo, along with some of the members of his extended

250

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

family, were clearly surprised by the ease with which the
boy had assumed control of the angen, and there was a scattering of applause as the L-phant stood.
Meanwhile, the second beast, the one that Norr and
Hoggles were supposed to ride, refused to stand. The heavy,
who had assumed the role of L-phant driver, frowned. The
ponga rod made a slapping sound as it hit the animal’s hide,
and each time it made contact, Norr “saw” lightninglike
ﬂashes of orange and red ripple through the envelope of energy that surrounded the angen, a sure sign that the beast
was experiencing pain. “Here,” the sensitive said, holding
her hand out. “Let me try.”
Hoggles didn’t want to surrender the rod, not with the
nomads looking on, but forced himself to do so. Rather than
strike the animal as the heavy had, Norr made use of the
very tip of the rod to scratch the spot where she sensed that
the L-phant had a persistent itch, and was rewarded with
sparks of bright blue light. The angen stirred, and the sensitive grinned as the beast came to its feet.
There was a second cheer as Rebo waved to Omar, the
L-phants got under way, and an unofﬁcial escort comprised
of noisy children and their equally boisterous dogs ran
alongside. Ten minutes later the last youngster had fallen
away, the angens had established their normal rhythm, and
the runner had begun to wonder whether his stomach
would ever become accustomed to the rocking motion. He
rubbed his amulet in hopes that it could counter motion
sickness and soon felt better.
In spite of Rebo’s considerable misgivings where
Valpoon and the tribesmen were concerned, the runner was
pleased to discover that the nomad and his family were not
only packed but eager to leave. So much so that the chieftain
ordered the travelers into the line and led the caravan out

RUNNER

251

onto the main road without so much as a perfunctory inspection of their animals and gear. And, once under way, the
column moved with what the runner thought was admirable speed. Within a matter of minutes they had
splashed through the glittering Xee River, climbed the opposite bank, and turned toward the south.
Given that the L-phants could walk at six miles per hour
and maintain that speed all day, Rebo estimated that the
caravan could make the trip to the city of Cresus in about
sixteen days, assuming that all went well, and twenty days
even if they didn’t. Such pace would still put them at the
spaceport with three days to spare. Assuming the spaceship
remained operable and actually appeared. They had been
fortunate in that regard, but there was no way to tell when
their luck might run out.
Of course, there was nothing that Rebo or anyone else
could do about that, except keep on going, and hope for the
best. The runner took the opportunity to look back over his
shoulder, saw no signs of pursuit other than that provided by
a couple of mangy-looking mutts, and turned back again.
Satisﬁed that he and his companions had managed to slip
out of Zand unnoticed, and still feeling a little woozy, the
runner allowed his eyes to close. Not to sleep, but in an attempt to reduce sensory input and thereby quiet his rebellious stomach. Had Rebo’s eyes been open, and had he been
looking toward the west, he might have seen the glint of
sunlight reﬂecting off a well-polished lens. But the moment
passed, the caravan made its way up out of the river bottom,
and the horizon beckoned. The journey to Cresus had begun.
The novelty of riding on L-phants, and the newness of the

planetscape around them held the travelers’ attention at
ﬁrst; but as time passed with only a brief stop for lunch to

252

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

break the monotony, their interest soon started to wane.
And later, having been seduced by both the warmth of the
sun and the steady sway of animals beneath them, all of the
off-worlders eventually fell asleep. Even Rebo, whose stomach had troubled him earlier, sat with his chin resting on his
chest.
A fact that Valpoon took full advantage of by hoisting a
faded red pennant on the end of a lance. The chieftain’s sixth
son, who had been shadowing the caravan from the start,
saw the signal and raced in from east. Rather than riding
one of the ponderous L-phants, he was mounted on a
smaller, more graceful angen. The warrior arrived with a
minimum of noise, listened to his father’s orders, and was
gone two minutes later. Valpoon had prepared a cover story,
in case one of the off-worlders awoke while the messenger
was present, but never had to use it.
Outside of the occasional farmhouse or pile of ancient ruins, there wasn’t much to see, except for the increasingly
arid land. Finally, as the shimmery sun made contact with
the western horizon, the caravan wound its way up onto a
low hill, circled a ﬁre pit that had served thousands of nomads over the years, and came to a noisy stop as the humans,
angens, and dogs all began to shout, grunt, and bark at the
same time.
However, in spite of the apparent chaos Norr noticed
that the women put up the clan’s tents with remarkable efﬁciency even as their children took the L-phants off to a
nearby spring, and the men stood guard. Or supposedly
stood guard, since the hilltop provided an excellent view of
the surrounding countryside, and the sensitive thought it
unlikely that so much as a hopper would be able to approach
the encampment without being spotted a full hour before it
arrived.

RUNNER

253

But the roles were ﬁxed, which meant that the males
watched while the women worked, and the age-old process
of preparing dinner began. Children collected the nowdesiccated rounds of L-phant dung left by the last caravan to
pass through and stacked them next to the glowing cook
ﬁre, where they would soon be used as fuel. Women put water on to boil, dumped all manner of dried ingredients into
what would eventually become a communal stew, and
dropped dollops of freshly prepared dough into pans halfﬁlled with hot oil. The sensitive offered to help but was immediately rebuffed. With nothing else to do, she and her
companions turned their attention to setting up their own
tents and preparing their beds.
Meanwhile, as the stew started to burble, Valpoon approached his second wife. “Here,” the chieftain said, as he
handed her a vial made out of blue glass. “When it comes
time to serve the indibi (human trash), transfer their food to
a separate pot and empty this into the stew. Stir it well, because the taste is bitter, and be sure to use all of it. Do you
understand?”
The woman, who was already looking forward to sorting
through Norr’s belongings, smiled coyly. “Of course . . . It
shall be as you say.”
Valpoon, who had a soft spot for his number two wife
both because of her skill at making love and her utter reliability, patted her behind. “I know it will . . . Come to my
tent after dinner to receive your reward.”
Pleased by the fact that at least two of her peers had witnessed the interchange, and were certain to be jealous, the
woman returned to work. As for the indibi, well, they were
indibi, and of no concern to her.
Rebo was not looking forward to sharing a meal with
Valpoon and his extended family, and was therefore pleased

254

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

rather than offended when two of tribe’s scrawny women arrived supporting a pot of stew between them. A pair of girls
followed. One bore a platter of fry bread while the other carried a pot of green tea.
“It looks like we’ll be eating by ourselves,” Hoggles observed, once the females had departed.
“Which is ﬁne by me,” the runner responded, eyeing the
aromatic stew. “I don’t know about you, but I’m hungry!
Let’s dig in.”
Though not entirely sure of what was in it, Norr decided
that the stew was good, and surprised herself by eating an
entire bowl. Her male companions, all of whom were
equipped with healthy appetites, consumed two portions
each. Hoggles even went so far as to use of the last piece of
ﬂatbread to clean out the inside of the pot, washed the
morsel down with a mouthful of tea, and issued a mighty
belch to signal his satisfaction.
It wasn’t long before a ﬂock of girls arrived to retrieve the
pot, platters, and plates. Lee started to yawn shortly thereafter, went to bed uncharacteristically early, and was soon
followed by Norr. Rebo developed a stomachache, which
when combined with a sudden wave of fatigue, caused him
to retire as well. “Be sure to keep your eyes peeled,” the runner advised. “Valpoon and his family have been on their best
behavior so far, but these are early times, and you never
know.”
“Don’t worry,” the heavy replied reassuringly, and patted
the war hammer that lay by his side. “Anyone who tries to
approach one of our tents is going to have one helluva
headache in the morning.”
Rebo grinned. “Good! Wake me at midnight.”
Hoggles nodded, the runner disappeared into his tent,
and a chorus of loud whistles and grunts signaled the fact

RUNNER

255

that the children were herding the L-phants up onto the lee
side of the hill, where they would spend the night. Stars
glittered above, a light breeze blew in from the west, and
the heavy tried to suppress a gigantic yawn.
Although Rebo had slept soundly, his rest had been riddled

with unpleasant dreams, some of which were genuine nightmares. In spite of his desire to wake up, the runner was unable to do so, until some very sharp teeth nipped at his arm.
That caused the off-worlder to cry out, and ﬂail around, or
try to ﬂail around, since it wasn’t long before Rebo discovered that try as he might he couldn’t move his arms or legs
more than half an inch or so.
But the effort had the desired effect, because as the runner opened his eyes, the pointy-nosed quadrupeds commonly referred to as Ning dogs drew back to see what
would happen next. That was when the runner realized he
had what felt like a hangover, his wrists and ankles hurt,
and he had a pressing need to urinate.
Thoughts swirling, Rebo struggled to absorb what had
occurred, and swiveled his head. The ﬁrst thing he saw was
that leather thongs had been used to secure his wrists to
sturdy stakes. Other than the rocks that circled the hilltop
like jewels in a rustic crown, and the slow drift of smoke
from the abandoned ﬁre pit, there was nothing else to see.
The tents had disappeared, as had the angens, and the nomads themselves. In fact, except for Hoggles, who lay not
ten feet away, the runner was alone. Rebo shouted Norr’s
name, followed by Lee’s, but received no response.
First came a crushing sense of guilt, quickly followed by
an almost overwhelming sense of grief, since there was every
reason to believe that both of his missing companions had
been murdered.

256

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

But those emotions were nothing compared to the anger
that Rebo felt as he swore at the Ning dogs, jerked at his
bonds, and attempted to free himself. The runner’s struggles were to no avail, however, since Valpoon’s warriors had
soaked the leather strips in water prior to using them,
which meant the thongs were getting tighter as they dried.
The intent, or so it seemed, was to ensure that Rebo’s death
was as slow and painful as possible. The runner’s efforts did
produce one beneﬁt, however, which was to wake Bo Hoggles from his drug-induced stupor. The heavy was understandably disoriented, but eventually came around and gave
his bonds an experimental tug. Then, angered by what
lesser beings had done to him, the giant sat up. Two threefoot-long tent stakes were plucked out of the ground as if
they were little more than toothpicks. They ﬂew all about as
Hoggles bent down to access the thongs attached to his
massive ankles. The heavy stood a few seconds later, undid
the last of his bonds, and made his way over to where Rebo
lay. “The stew,” Hoggles said thickly. “The drug must have
been in the stew.”
“Yeah,” Rebo agreed somberly, as the thongs were released. “The possibility that they might slip something into
our food didn’t occur to me, but it sure as hell should have.
I’m an idiot.”
“We’re both idiots,” Hoggles said darkly. “I must have
fallen asleep without even realizing it. That’s when they
staked me out.”
Rebo checked for his weapons, wasn’t surprised to ﬁnd
that both of them were missing, and gave a sigh of relief
when he found his glasses. With his spectacles ﬁrmly in
place the runner chose a likely-looking rock and threw it at
the nearest Ning dog. The missile hit its target, the animal
uttered a startled yip, and took off running. More missiles,

RUNNER

257

all thrown by Hoggles, were sufﬁcient to send the rest of the
scavengers scurrying for cover as well.
“All right,” the runner said grimly, “let’s take a look
around. If Lee and Norr are here, we need to ﬁnd them.”
Hoggles didn’t expect to ﬁnd the other two, not alive at
any rate, but decided to keep his opinion to himself. Together, the two men scoured the surface of the hill, but the effort didn’t turn up anything beyond two dozen piles of
L-phant dung and the heavy’s massive hammer. It was lying a
fair distance from the spot where the off-worlders had pitched
their tents. That suggested that having appropriated the
weapon, one of the nomads had quickly grown tired of its
weight and decided to leave the object behind. A decision the
variant clearly approved of as he brought the hammer down
on top of an imaginary head and produced a guttural war cry.
Though disappointed by their failure to ﬁnd either Norr
or Lee, Rebo chose to take hope from the fact that they
hadn’t found any bodies, which meant that the twosome
might be alive. But if so, why? Not for ransom, since
Valpoon knew they had no families on Ning, so there must
be another reason. What if he and his companions hadn’t escaped Zand unseen? What if the technos had located Norr?
Or the black hats had identiﬁed Lee? Either group might
have paid Valpoon to kidnap the person they were interested in.
Of course that possibility raised still another possibility.
Why would the nomads take both people? Unless they had
been paid to do so—which implied some sort of pact between the Techno Society and the black hat sect! The runner
felt a sudden sense of hope and swore out loud. “I think
they’re alive, Bo. All we have to do is follow the piles of angen dung. Then, once we know where they are, we’ll ﬁgure
out what to do next.”

258

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“I know what to do next,” the heavy said, as he swung his
hammer. “Let’s go.”
It took less than ﬁve minutes to pick up the caravan’s
well-marked trail and follow it toward the southeast. Jog for
ﬁve minutes, then walk for ﬁve minutes. That was the pace
Rebo set and the heavy followed. Ning’s gravity weighted
heavily on them and eroded their strength. The sun warmed
their shoulders, the wind caressed the surrounding grass,
and time slowed to a crawl.
When Norr awoke it was to the rhythmic sway of an

L-phant on the move, the musky odor that clung to the angen’s nearly hairless skin, and the realization that she had
been secured facedown across the animal’s broad back. All
she could see was the L-phant’s wrinkled skin, which had
turned white in response to the heat from the sun and was
broken by a thousand tiny lines. Her head hurt, a foul taste
had taken up residence in her mouth, and the sensitive felt
nauseous.
It took a while, but after a number of mufﬂed requests,
Valpoon ﬁnally vacated his well-cushioned seat long enough
to free the sensitive. Once that was accomplished, the nomad invited his prisoner to join him, which forced wife
number four to jump down from the still-moving L-phant,
and walk alongside it. Norr rubbed her wrists as she sat
down. “Where are my husband and son? And Citizen Hoggles?”
“He isn’t your son,” the chieftain answered reprovingly,
“but the boy is on the animal behind us. He’s been awake
for some time now and is doing well.”
Norr turned to look, saw Lee wave, and raised her arm
by way of acknowledgment. In the meantime she took note
of the fact that somehow, the means wasn’t clear, Valpoon

RUNNER

259

had discovered that two of them weren’t related. “And the
others?”
The nomad shrugged and looked up at the sky, as if the
answer might appear there. His tone was matter-of-fact.
“Dead I’m afraid . . . since there was no reason to keep them
alive.”
Norr experienced a horrible sinking feeling and bit her
lower lip. “You murdered them—but allowed us to live.
Why?”
“Because the Techno Society is willing to pay for you,”
Valpoon answered pragmatically. “And the black hats want
the boy. I can see that bothers you, but after you’ve had time
to think about it, I think you’ll realize it’s better than the
alternative.”
Norr wasn’t so sure of that, not if meant being separated
from the one man she might have been able to love and
what amounted to slavery. But was it true? The sensitive
tried to reach out, tried to make contact with Rebo’s spirit,
but was unable to do so. That left her with some hope . . .
but an empty feeling as well. “Where are we headed?”
“To Station 46,” the nomad replied curtly. “That’s where
your indibi friends will come to pick you up. And that’s
enough of your questions . . . Women are for screwing,
washing clothes, and cooking. Not for asking questions.”
Norr wanted to ask about the gate seed, but ﬁgured the
nomads had the object and would deliver it to Kane. And, if
by some miracle, they had thrown the artifact away, there
was no point in bringing the device to their attention.
There was a brief stop for lunch, followed by a long,
lurching ride, as the caravan continued its journey toward
the southeast. There was no way to be sure, but Norr ﬁgured
that the destination had been chosen by Valpoon rather than
his clients and helped put him in control. But whatever the

260

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

reason the journey continued until a shout was heard, one of
the warriors pointed his riﬂe toward the horizon, and Norr
saw what looked like a tiny black blob. As the caravan drew
closer the black blob gradually resolved into a group of
three low-lying domes. They were all of different sizes and
sat clustered together next to a metal mast. It was at least
ﬁfty feet tall, and some sort of mechanism was mounted at
the very top of it. Part of the device rotated in response to a
sudden breeze, then stopped when the wind died away. The
purpose of the installation was a mystery until the L-phant
brought the sensitive close enough so she could read the
faded white letters that had been painted on the metal
structure hundreds of years before. The second “o” in meteor logical had been worn away, but that didn’t matter.
What had once been Meteorological Station 46 still stood.
Norr knew that scientists had been able to predict the
weather with a high degree of accuracy at one time, and if
some stories were to be believed, actually control it to some
extent. That capability had been a boon to farmers and city
folk alike. So, assuming that was true, it would have been
necessary to gather data, which was where Weather Stations
1–46 came in. Or, had there been more? Yes, the sensitive
decided, there must have been.
Shortly after the L-phants came to a halt and were ordered to kneel, Norr and Lee were reunited. Although the
boy had comported himself with a dignity that would have
made both Qwa and Rebo proud, he had been very frightened and was happy to take Norr’s hand as the two of them
were ushered into the main dome via a shattered doorway.
There was no way to tell whether the damage had taken
place during the civil unrest that followed the fall of the last
interstellar government—or whether it was the work of the
tomb raiders who still eked out a living by digging up an-

RUNNER

261

cient bits of technology. But it hardly mattered. The facility
had been stripped, occasionally used as a barn by local
herdsmen, and eventually reduced to little more than an
empty, litter-strewn shell.
By remaining alert and staying to the narrow path that
ran down the center of the main hallway, the prisoners were
able to avoid the worst of the ﬁlth that covered the oncepristine ﬂoor. They turned left, into a corridor that circled
the dome, and passed under a series of ﬁlthy skylights. Cubicles, which might have once functioned as ofﬁces, lined
the outside wall. There were round windows, which though
covered with accumulated grime, still managed to admit
some light.
Eventually they came to a room that had been equipped
with a grill instead of a window, was furnished with built-in
shelving, and boasted a door. A sturdy affair made of interwoven rods. There was a loud clang as it closed behind them.
The sensitive watched as the nomad she thought of as Scarface secured the door with a padlock normally used to protect the L-phants from thieves. Then, having placed the
six-inch-long key on a ledge that ran along the far side of
the walkway, the warrior turned to confront the teenager
who had been assigned the role of jailer. “Keep a close eye
on the prisoners,” the nomad admonished, “and don’t open
the door without obtaining permission ﬁrst. Do you understand me?”
The boy, who was nearly a man, drew himself up
straight. “Yes, sir! You can count on me!”
“That remains to be seen,” Scarface answered cynically,
“but do your best. Dinner will be brought to you. And one
other thing . . . If the indibi slut offers to have sex with you,
don’t accept. Not unless you would like to see me wearing
your balls as a necklace.”

262

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“No, sir! I mean yes, sir!” the youth exclaimed. “I won’t
listen to anything she says.”
“That’s the spirit!” the warrior replied. “I’ll see you
later.” And with that he left.
Norr, who hadn’t even considered offering herself to the
boy, made a face and looked for a reasonably clean place to
sit. They were going to be in the onetime storage room for a
while, or that’s the way it looked, so she might as well get
comfortable. Or as comfortable as she could be, knowing
that two of her friends were dead and the future looked
bleak. Suddenly the memory of the train trip between Gos
and Tra came ﬂooding back. The sensitive remembered
holding Rebo’s hand in hers and tracing the curve of his lifeline. Rather than wrapping itself clear around the base of his
thumb as it should have the crease ended well above his
wrist. Palmistry was anything but reliable, but now it
seemed as if the prediction had been borne out, ending not
just his life but what could have been hers as well. A tear ran
down her cheek, Lee watched miserably solemnly from his
place in a corner, and the light started to fade.
Being a thief himself, Valpoon had a healthy respect for

the other criminals who roamed the surface of Ning and
never failed to post sentinels during the night. The purpose
of the outermost ring of warriors was to spot a potential
threat early enough to call for help, thereby summoning the
rest of the clan’s males. The problem with the strategy was
that the family was too small to effectively guard the entire
perimeter, which meant that if an enemy attacked two or
even three points at once, they stood a good chance of success.
However, thanks to the fact that the tribe was extremely

RUNNER

263

poor and were seldom entrusted with a cargo worth stealing, they weren’t targeted often. Perhaps that accounted
for the fact that Rebo and Hoggles were able to crawl with
a few yards of one of the sentries. The nomad was sitting
on a boulder and humming to himself as he picked at his
bare feet.
The waist-high grass provided excellent cover, and large
though he was, Hoggles made very little noise as he advanced to within four feet of the unsuspecting nomad’s
back. And, if it hadn’t been for the direction of the wind,
and a whiff of body odor that was markedly different from
his own, the warrior might never have noticed. The clansman wrinkled his nose, let go of his right foot, and made a
desperate grab for his long-barreled riﬂe.
But death was already falling by that time as the variant
brought the ten-pound hammer head down on the top of
the clansman’s skull. There was a sickening thud, followed
by a sudden exhalation of breath, and little more than a
whisper as the grass parted to accept the dead body.
The off-worlders paused to see if some sort of alarm
would be raised, but the nearest lookouts were a thousand
yards away, and neither had witnessed the incident. Rebo
intercepted the nomad’s riﬂe before it could hit the ground.
What little light there was came from the stars, which made
it difﬁcult to examine the weapon in detail, but there was
no need to. After running his ﬁngers over the long gun,
Rebo knew it was one of the Ning-made bolt-action riﬂes
that many of Valpoon’s warriors carried. It had a wooden
stock, an integral box-style magazine that had a capacity of
ﬁve rounds, and open sights. Not his ﬁrst choice in
armament—but a whole lot better than nothing.
It took less than a minute to release the dead man’s car-

264

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

tridge belt, appropriate his dagger, and take a long pull
from his water ﬂask before handing it to Hoggles. It had
been a long, tiring day, with nothing to eat and only two
opportunities to scoop water out of streams. But neither
man had faltered since both were driven by a powerful need
for revenge. Now, within shouting distance of the domes,
they burned with a common resolve. They would ﬁnd Norr
and Lee if they were alive—and woe be to anyone foolish
enough to get in the way.
As Hoggles took one last swig of water, Rebo counted
the cartridges on his newly acquired belt and opened the
pouch attached to it. It was ﬁlled with wax-coated matches,
the kind made for the caravan trade and carried by nomads
everywhere. The runner was just about to close the pouch
when an idea occurred to him. Hoggles listened intently as
the smaller man whispered into his ear, nodded eagerly, and
wrapped his sausagelike ﬁngers around a handful of the
phosphorus-tipped sticks.
Then the giant was gone, the grass ﬂattened where he
had passed, the stars twinkling above. Rebo placed the riﬂe
across the inside surface of his arms and elbowed his way
forward. Death stalked the night.
A lantern had been hung outside, but there was very little

light, and it was nearly dark within the cell. Lee was sound
asleep, and had been for the better part of an hour, when
someone shook his shoulder. His eyes ﬂew open, and rather
than the scar-faced warrior that dominated his dreams, the
youth saw Norr glaring down at him. Her voice was low,
and rather husky, but the youngster had no difﬁculty recognizing it as belonging to Lysander rather than the sensitive
herself. “Bestir yourself, boy! I will depart . . . But my
daughter will continue to sleep. Wake her . . . Tell her that

RUNNER

265

Rebo is alive! He will attack soon, but the two of you could
be used against him, which is why you must hide.”
Lee had questions, lots of them, but never got to pose
them, as the spirit entity exited Norr’s body. The sensitive’s
face went blank, and she sat on a storage unit. The boy
touched her arm. “Lanni! Wake up! Jak is alive!”
Norr blinked uncomprehendingly. “Alive? What are you
talking about? Jak’s dead.”
“No!” Lee replied insistently. “He isn’t! Not according to
Lysander. He told me to tell you that Jak’s coming, but we
need to escape, or Valpoon will use us as hostages.”
Though still groggy from sleep, as well as the trance that
Lysander had imposed on her, the sensitive began to come
around. She also felt renewed hope. Even the chance that
Rebo was alive was well worth acting on. She took hold of
Lee’s hands. “That’s wonderful, hon . . . But how?” she whispered urgently. “Did Lysander tell you that?”
The boy shook his head. “Yeah, that’s what I ﬁgured,”
the sensitive said cynically. “The old bastard loves to give
orders but isn’t much good when it comes to actually getting the job done.”
“No,” Lee agreed solemnly, “but you can do it! I know
you can.”
Perhaps it was the boy’s faith in her, or a moment of inspiration, but whatever the reason Norr had an idea. An unlikely
idea, given the circumstances, but an idea nonetheless. “The
key,” she whispered. “Is it still on the ledge? Quietly now.”
Lee tiptoed over to the door, peered through one of the
four-inch squares, and returned. “Yes,” he said, “it is. But
it’s behind the guard.”
“What’s he doing?”
“Cleaning his riﬂe.”
“Okay,” Norr said thoughtfully, “here’s what I’m going

266

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

to do . . . I will reach out with my mind, lift the key off the
ledge, and ﬂoat it through one of the holes in the door. The
moment it clears I want you to grab it.”
Lee’s eyes were huge. “Really? You can do that?”
“Sometimes I can,” the sensitive temporized. “But not always. It takes a clear mind, perfect concentration, and some
luck.”
“Okay!” the boy responded eagerly. “I’ll be ready.”
“Good,” Norr whispered as she closed her eyes. “Don’t
disturb me until you have the key in your hand.” It was going to be difﬁcult to muster the concentration necessary to
transport the key across the corridor and into the cell, but
public demonstrations were stressful, too, and if the sensitive could handle one, then why not the other?
Thus reassured, Norr worked to gather energy in around
her, shaped it into an invisible pseudopod, and sent the
carefully fashioned tool out to do her bidding. The guard
felt his scalp tingle, ran an unsuspecting hand through his
hair, but continued to focus on the riﬂe. He was proud of the
single-shot breechloader and never tired of manipulating its
well-machined parts. Now, as the key rose straight into the
air, the teenager pushed the trigger mechanism down into
the slot where it belonged.
Lee, his eyes locked on the piece of ﬂoating metal, found
himself holding his breath as the all-important object glided
out over the ﬂoor and ﬂoated toward his waiting ﬁngers.
Then, with only a couple of feet left to go, a door slammed.
Norr lost her concentration, and the key fell, just as a girl
called out to the guard. “Teo! I brought your dinner!”
One part of the teenager’s hormone-soaked brain heard
the tinkle of metal making contact with the ﬂoor, but the
part that was hooked up to his raging libido heard the melodious sound of Sisa’s voice, and that had priority. Had she

RUNNER

267

been sent by her mother? Or chosen to come on her own?
He hoped for the latter, but there was no way to know. The
teenager stood, placed the riﬂe against the wall, and was
waiting when the nubile Sisa arrived.
Lee stood with his ﬁngers wrapped around two of the uprights and stared through one of the four-inch holes. He
could see the key! It was only two feet away—and gleamed
with reﬂected light. Surely one of the nomads would see
it . . . Surely they would . . . But that was when a miracle
occurred. As Sisa walked toward the Teo the leading edge of
her right sandal struck the key and sent it skittering across
the ﬂoor under the cell door! Lee had just bent over to retrieve the object when he heard a mufﬂed thud. Teo frowned.
“That sounded like a gunshot.”
Then there was a second thud, followed by the sound of
yelling, which caused the teenager to pick up his riﬂe. “Stay
here!” he ordered. “Watch the prisoners! I’ll be back as soon
as I can.”
Sisa had doubts as to whether the clan’s elders would want
Teo’s help, but never got to voice her concerns, as the wouldbe warrior took off. That was when the little boy stuck an
empty cup out through the bars and waved it from side to
side. “Could I have some water please? I’m very thirsty.”
It was not only a harmless request but one that didn’t
require the girl to open the door. She picked up the waterskin that was resting on the ﬂoor, carried it over to the
cell, and was in the process of pouring when Norr wrapped
an arm around the teenager’s throat and Lee put the key in
the lock.
Scarface was standing in front of the main dome, sipping

hot tea, when the ﬁrst ﬂames appeared. He was more annoyed than alarmed at ﬁrst, since it was his assumption that

268

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

one of clan’s less intelligent warriors had struck a match for
some reason and failed to extinguish it properly.
However, when the ﬁre started to run from south to
north, the warrior knew someone had ﬁred a wad of grass
and was towing it behind them in an attempt to set the
whole area ablaze. He dropped the cup of tea, grabbed the
semiautomatic carbine that had been looted from a country
estate the year before, and ran toward the ﬂames. “We’re under attack! Form on me! We’ll defend the main dome.”
It was a brave thing to do, but not the smartest move,
since as Scarface ran forward he was soon silhouetted against
the now-leaping ﬂames. And not just him, but other warriors as well, as they raced to obey his orders. Though better
with a handgun, Rebo was no stranger to riﬂes, and was a
reasonably good shot so long as he had his glasses. Now,
with his spectacles perched on the end of his nose, the runner peered through the open sight. He had positioned himself behind a small cluster of boulders on top of a low rise.
They were located about halfway between the line of ﬁre
that Hoggles had ignited and the inner circle of sentinels,
all of whom rushed past him as they followed Scarface out to
engage the thus-far-invisible enemy. The rest was a matter
of judgment, practice, and cunning.
Rebo placed his sights on the rearmost warrior ﬁrst, applied pressure to the unfamiliar trigger, and eventually felt
it give. The wooden butt kicked his shoulder, the .303 slug
slammed into the nomad’s back, and the bolt made a snicking sound as the shell casing was ejected, a fresh cartridge
was seated, and the sights drifted onto a second target. Five
warriors went down before the runner was forced to reload,
and Scarface realized that the enemy was behind rather than
in front of him. That was when the surviving clansmen

RUNNER

269

dropped into the grass and started to elbow their way back
toward the domes.
But, with no one between him and the weather station,
Rebo had pulled out by then. Conscious of the need for
speed, and having forced the opposition to the ground, the
runner took advantage of the opportunity to close with the
domes. He had expected to see, or at least hear from Valpoon
by then; but the chieftain had yet to make himself known.
And, rather than the activity that one would have expected
around the main entrance, it was dark and seemingly undefended. That suggested some sort of an ambush lay within,
and the runner knew he would be badly outgunned.
The solution was more the result of an impulse than careful planning. Rebo ran straight at the main dome, jumped
up onto the slanting surface, and kept right on going. It was
difﬁcult at ﬁrst but soon became easier. His boots thundered
on metal, Valpoon heard the sound, and shouted to his followers. “They’re on the roof! Come on!”
More than a dozen nomads charged out into the night,
only to be ﬁred on by Scarface and the incoming sentries, all
of whom mistook the shadowy ﬁgures for enemy raiders.
Bullets pinged off the dome or slammed into ﬂesh as men
went down. “No!” Valpoon screamed. “Stop ﬁring! You’re
shooting at us!”
Rebo was on top of the dome by then. Assuming Norr
and Lee were still alive, the runner had no way to know
where they were, which meant that one entry was just as
good as the next. With that in mind, the runner took aim at
the nearest skylight and ﬁred. The plastic shattered and
clattered to the ﬂoor below. Rebo kicked the remaining
shards free, worked another cartridge into the chamber, and
dropped feetﬁrst through the hole. Duracrete smacked the

270

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

bottom of his feet, his knees ﬂexed to absorb the shock, and
a bullet buzzed past his head. The resulting boom echoed under the metal roof. “There he is!” Valpoon shouted from the
other end of the hall. “Get him!”
But the runner didn’t want to be gotten. He ﬁred the riﬂe one-handed. The bullet missed, but gave the nomads reason to pause and Rebo the chance to run.
More shots were ﬁred as the off-worlder skidded around a
corner, called Norr’s name, and heard a distant reply. Heart
pounding, he raced down another passageway and took a
left. It was a mistake. Teo was not only waiting there, but
had the invader in his sights and quickly pulled the trigger.
There was a loud click as the ﬁring pin penetrated empty
chamber and the teenager realized his mistake. In his hurry
to join the ﬁght, he had forgotten to reload! The knowledge
ﬁlled him with shame.
Rebo shook his head sympathetically and pointed down
the hall. “Run!”
Teo did as he was told, but the delay had been costly, and
the runner had progressed no more than ten feet or so when
he tripped over some debris and went down. The accident
saved his life since the bullets that would have otherwise
slammed into his back passed over Rebo’s head instead. But
the fall gave Valpoon and one of his sons an opportunity to
catch up.
The runner felt the air being forced out of his lungs as
the nomad brought a boot down on his back and saw the riﬂe slide away. “So,” Valpoon said grimly. “Look who’s here!
It was a mistake to let you live. One I won’t make twice.”
Rebo felt the gun barrel press against the back of his
skull, and was waiting for the inevitable explosion, when he
heard a solid thwack! instead. Warm liquid splattered his

RUNNER

271

back, and the runner rolled over to see the chieftain’s head
hit the ﬂoor, and roll away.
Norr, who had appeared out of the shadows just as
Valpoon was about to pull the trigger, turned toward the
surviving nomad. The sword, which she had found lying
next to someone’s bedroll, was smeared with blood. She
brought the weapon up, and was about to take another cut,
when Hoggles dropped the hammer on the nomad from behind. The heavy uttered a grunt of satisfaction as the body
hit the ﬂoor. “That’s all of them—not counting the women
and children. We’d better get out of here though . . . There’s
no telling when company will arrive.”
Rebo completed a push-up and came to his feet. “I’ll second that motion! But let’s grab some weapons and supplies
ﬁrst. We need L-phants, too—unless you’d like to walk all
the way to Cresus.”
Then, turning to Norr, the runner said, “You look good
with a sword.”
The sensitive gave the weapon to Lee, gently removed
the runner’s spectacles, and placed them in his breast
pocket. Then, cupping his face between her hands, she
kissed him.
Lee, who had been watching with considerable interest,
felt a hand fall on his shoulder. “Come on,” Hoggles said
matter-of-factly. “There won’t be any kisses for us! We have
work to do.”

ELEVEN
™

The Planet Ning

Although the caravan routes of Ning are marked by the graves
of our forefathers, and have been watered by our tears, they
care nothing for our people.
—Iznu Partha, nomad chieftain,
Letters in the Sand

The Cyclops beetle crouched within the two-inch-square

scrap of shade cast by a small rock as it prepared to make the
perilous journey to a similar refuge some two feet away.
That was where a protein-rich grub lay hidden just below
the surface of the dry soil. But, before the insect could begin
its mad dash across the intervening wasteland, it felt the
earth move. Not just once, as when the substrata that supported a ten-thousand-year-old rock ﬁnally surrendered to
the weight and allowed the boulder to topple into a ravine
but over and over again. Though not capable of conscious
thought, the Cyclops beetle could rely on its instincts—and
decided to remain right where it was as the huge L-phants
passed within inches of its hiding place.
It had been four days since the travelers had won the bat-

RUNNER

273

tle at Weather Station 46, reclaimed most of their possessions, and resumed the journey to Cresus. Rebo carried a riﬂe in addition to his handguns—and Norr had reacquired
both her staff and the gate seed. The supplies that Omar had
helped them obtain, plus extras that the heavy had appropriated from the nomads, completed the loads secured to
the angens’ broad backs.
Strangely, from Rebo’s perspective at least, the days were
getting cooler rather than warmer as all of them had been
led to expect. The proximal cause was obvious. After following the well-established trail across a grassy plain, the party
had been forced to climb a series of steadily rising switchbacks toward the jagged mountains beyond and what promised to be a snowy pass. That suggested that the badlands,
and the heat associated with them, lay somewhere to the
south.
All of them were accustomed to the back-and-forth sideto-side sway of the L-phants by then and had grown genuinely fond of them. Lee handled the beasts best, but Norr
came in a close second, followed by Hoggles and Rebo. So
when they paused for lunch, the boy and the sensitive took
care of the animals, while the heavy prepared a simple meal.
Rebo, who was eternally concerned about security, took
the opportunity to backtrack. The pinnacle of wind-worn
rock had plenty of handholds and it wasn’t long before the
runner had pulled himself up onto a ledge where previous
lookouts had carved their names into the soft sandstone.
The runner was out of breath by then, but felt better than
he had the week before and knew he was getting stronger.
Then, with his back pressed against the warm stone and
having brought his knees together to form a crude bipod,
Rebo removed Valpoon’s four-foot-long brass telescope from
its hand-tooled leather case, and aimed it across the plain

274

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

below. The large ﬂuffy clouds cast shadows down onto a sea
of amber grass. And there, cutting across the prairie,
stretches of trail could be seen. Not all of it, since there were
places where the path dipped into ravines, but enough to
suit the runner’s purposes.
The off-worlder started in close, then tilted upward, as
he scanned for what he knew would be there. More than ﬁve
minutes passed before he spotted the momentary glint of reﬂected light as a metal man topped a rise, paused to survey
the terrain ahead, and took up the chase once more. Four additional machines followed. Not the everyday androids that
spent most of their time preaching on street corners, but
something new and a lot more dangerous. They were shaped
like animals rather than humans and ran on all fours. Tirelessly, in so far as Rebo could determine, although they were
no closer than the day before.
Why? Because they’re not even trying to catch up, the runner
thought to himself. Having arrived at the Weather Station
only to discover that Norr and Lee were gone, the technos
and their black hat friends had dispatched the machines to
ensure that the fugitives remained on the trail to Cresus.
The question was why—and there was no way to know.
Rebo returned the telescope to its case and reslung the instrument across his back prior to returning to the camp.
Was it his imagination? Or did the two L-phants already
look a little skinnier since departing the rich grasslands to
the north? It was one more problem to worry about.
Lunch was ready by the time the runner returned, and
Hoggles handed him a mug of tea. Norr was present, too, as
was Lee, and three of them were waiting to hear Rebo’s report. He blew steam off the surface of the drink, took a tentative sip, and let the soothing liquid slide down the back of
his throat. “They’re still on our tail.”

RUNNER

275

Norr frowned. “Are they any closer?”
The runner shook his head. “No. But you’ve seen them
run . . . They could catch up to us if they wanted to.”
“Maybe we should lay an ambush for the bastards,” the
heavy commented darkly.
“We could,” Rebo allowed, “but for what? Even if we
manage to destroy them, and that would be far from certain,
we’ll still be headed for Cresus. The technos and the black
hats know that. So, where’s the gain?”
Lee had heard the entire conversation before and knew
how it would come out. He smiled. “Teon had a saying . . .
‘He who spends his life in future denies the present.’ Let’s
eat!”
The adults laughed, food was served, and the journey
continued.
The temperature fell as Rebo and his companions climbed

higher. The trail skirted the edge of an ancient landslide.
The rocks were brown, marbled with streaks of dark blue,
and sharply jagged. Some were the size of a hut, but most
were smaller, and the crevices between them served as a
labyrinthine highway system for dozens of small furry creatures who surfaced occasionally, swiveled their heads to the
right and left, and chittered at each other.
The slope was steep, and the humans could hear how labored the L-phants’ breathing had become as jets of vapor
shot out of their long ﬂexible trunks. Rock clattered as it
slid out from under enormous feet, leather harnesses creaked
under the strain, and the lead angen grumbled as Lee urged
it up the slope.
The ice revealed itself slowly at ﬁrst, hiding in the shadows cast by the larger rocks, hinting at what lay ahead.
Then, as the group moved even higher, the small, nearly

276

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

translucent patches of ice grew steadily larger, even going so
far as to venture out into the wan sunlight, as if testing to
see whether it could survive.
Then, as the group passed a ﬁnal cluster of trees, the real
ice ﬁeld appeared. It glistened pure white, like a shroud for
the dead, which it certainly was. Because as the snow-ice
mix crunched under the L-phants’ combined weight, the
tail end of an ancient caravan appeared. There was no way to
know the exact nature of what had taken place but the general outline of the tragedy was obvious. It had been early
spring or late fall when the travelers set out. But an unexpected storm had swept in and caught the group so high on
the slope that a retreat was impractical. The snow blinded
the nomads, layered their clothing in white, and conducted
the chill deep into their bones.
Some of the travelers were weaker than the rest. They fell
ﬁrst, unintentionally bringing the caravan to a halt as their
companions paused to gather them up. Then, even more
heavily burdened than before, those who could continued
their climb. But not for long. One by one, they, too fell,
were covered with a thick layer of snow, and frozen into
place. Now, more than a thousand years later, they were still
there, ravaged by the slow-motion effects of geologic time,
their leathery brown bodies blurred by the intervening ice.
Another hour of hard slogging brought the party to the
pass itself, which was nearly bare of vegetation and home to
a weatherworn granite obelisk. Empty bolt holes suggested
that a plaque had been attached to the monument at one
time, but that had been stolen, leaving the marker mute. It
might have been interesting to pause and see what other curiosities the pass had to offer, but a battalion of clouds chose
that moment to sweep over the summit and release a freez-

RUNNER

277

ing mist. Lee urged the ﬁrst L-phant forward, and it was eager to comply.
The balance of that day, and the ﬁrst half of the next,
were spent on a steep trail that switchbacked down the
mountainside and into the foothills below. Thanks to the
unique nature of their physiologies, the L-phants had a better view of the trail than anyone else, but still found it difﬁcult to ﬁnd their footing and were sometimes forced to skid
stiff-legged while dropping their haunches onto the slope
behind them. Those moments were the worst, when it
seemed like the huge animals would lose control, and there
was nothing the humans could do except trust them.
But the L-phants didn’t lose control, the trail eventually
leveled out, and the travelers found themselves high in the
southern foothills. A fortress, or what remained of one,
crowned a neighboring summit, as the increasingly gaunt
animals followed the rocky path around the ﬂank of a
lightly forested hill and onto something entirely unexpected. Though partially obscured by countless rockfalls,
the two-lane duracrete road was not only intact, but continued for almost two miles before disappearing into the maw
of an ancient tunnel. It was the perfect place for an ambush,
and Rebo had no intention of entering the passageway without scouting it ﬁrst. “That’s far enough,” he told Lee. “Let’s
pull up and give the angens a rest.”
The boy brought the ﬁrst animal to a halt and ordered it
to kneel. The runner removed a lantern from the pile of
equipment behind him, slid to the ground, and made his
way down the road. Hoggles, riﬂe at the ready, stood by to
provide covering ﬁre should that be necessary.
The runner paused long enough to light the lantern,
drew the Crosser, and eased his way into the tunnel. Buttery

278

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

lanternlight slid over grimy walls, illuminated the remains
of a campﬁre, and revealed the grafﬁti that layered the walls.
As Rebo advanced, lantern held high, he heard something
squeal as it ran away, felt a few drops of cold water hit the
back of his neck, and eventually saw daylight as he rounded
a gentle curve and the far end of the tunnel appeared. A
short walk was sufﬁcient to conﬁrm that the way was clear.
Fifteen minutes later the L-phants emerged from the tunnel’s cool interior and it wasn’t long before Rebo found himself removing his jacket, knowing that the additional
warmth was but a taste of the heat to come.
The night was spent on a gently rounded hilltop, which
though exposed and bereft of water, was encircled by a
hand-built stone wall and had clearly been used for that
purpose before. Lee was none too happy about the need to
carry water up from the stream below, but understood the
threat that the robots posed and took advantage of the opportunity to practice mindful understanding by consciously
transmuting the resentment he felt into a state of willing
acceptance.
The next day followed what had become a regular routine as the foursome emerged from their tents, made breakfast, and repacked their gear. Norr looked forward to such
moments as an opportunity to work side by side with Rebo.
Nothing had been said, not directly at least, but the battle
at the weather station had deepened the bond between
them. To what extent was not apparent, since there was no
way to know what the future might hold, but Norr chose to
ignore that.
The group set out as they usually did, with Rebo and Lee
riding the lead angen. As the L-phant topped a rise the runner caught a glimpse of the famed badlands off in the distance and was amazed by what he saw. For as far as the eye

RUNNER

279

could see, there were the steep hills and deep gullies that resulted from thousands of years worth of erosion. The mechanics of the process were clear. Rain fell in the mountains,
rushed down through a myriad of streams, and gushed
through the foothills and out into the lands beyond. That
was when the ﬂash ﬂoods carved their way through weakly
bonded layers of rock creating a maze of interconnecting
ravines and a landscape so tortured it looked as if a gigantic
knife had been used to hack at it.
Then the vision was gone as the angen started down
again, and a ﬁnal rank of foothills screened the land beyond.
Hoggles had told the other three that they would pass
through the village of Urunu prior to entering the badlands
and was soon proven correct. It wasn’t long before dozens of
terraced gardens appeared. Though relatively small, the
well-tended plots were protected by walls of dry, ﬁtted rock,
and serviced by a cleverly engineered system of miniaqueducts and carefully maintained irrigation ditches. Each and
every patch was protected by brightly colored prayer ribbons that did double duty by scaring foraging ﬂyers away
while simultaneously drawing God’s attention to both the
crops and the farmers who depended on them. The pennants
ﬂuttered from poles, fences, and even ropes that had been
suspended over the road.
Lee felt his heart jump when he saw the ribbons because
they signaled the presence of people who followed the way
and believed as he did. But which sect did they hold dear?
The red hats as Hoggles claimed? Or the black hats? There
was no way to tell from the ribbons alone, and in spite of the
fact that the crops were well tended, not a single farmer
could be seen. A strange state of affairs, which the boy
brought to Rebo’s attention. Thus alerted, the runner drew
the bolt-action riﬂe from its scabbard, checked to ensure

280

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

that a cartridge was seated in the chamber, and signaled
Hoggles to do likewise.
But, ready though they were, the travelers weren’t prepared for the sight that greeted them as they rounded the
next bend and paused on a section of relatively ﬂat road that
overlooked the village of Urunu. It consisted of a main
street lined with sturdily built stone homes that led up to a
domed temple. The building had an organic appearance, as
if it had been extruded from the earth, which wasn’t far
from the truth since it had been constructed with tailings
from the mine located behind it. An ancient enterprise
which, while played out, still served the villagers as both a
granary and communal tomb. Farther down the hillside,
unseen but not unheard, a river roared its way through a
narrow canyon.
But it was the brightly attired crowd that had gathered
in front of the temple that claimed Rebo’s attention, not to
mention the temporary gallows that had been established
there and the frail little girl who stood with a noose looped
around her neck. “They’re wearing red hats,” Rebo observed
dryly. “I assume that qualiﬁes them as friends of yours.”
“Not necessarily,” Lee replied, as he stepped up onto the
surface of the seat in order to get a better view. “They plan
to kill that girl! You must stop them! And that’s an order.”
Whatever else he might or might not be, Lee was a tenyear-old boy and in no position to give orders. But such was
the authority in his voice that Rebo hesitated for a moment,
and had just opened his mouth to put the youngster in his
place, when the second L-phant drew up alongside the ﬁrst.
“I think you should listen to him,” Norr put in. “They plan
to kill a little girl! It isn’t right.”
Rebo’s mouth closed, then opened again. “Are the two of
you crazy? We could bring the entire population of the vil-

RUNNER

281

lage down on us . . . Besides, how the hell would I stop
them? We’d never get down there in time.”
“Shoot the rope,” Lee replied pragmatically. “You can do
it if you wear your glasses. Please,” the boy implored him.
“Trust me.”
The runner looked into Lee’s eyes and would have sworn
that the personality reﬂected in them was different somehow. Rebo mumbled to himself as he laid the riﬂe across his
knees and fumbled for his glasses. Then, with the spectacles
ﬁrmly planted on his nose, he looked down through the
open sights. A cheer went up as a red-robed monk ﬁnished
exhorting the crowd, and a man with a wooden mallet prepared to knock a plank out from under the girl’s slipperclad feet.
The off-worlder needed time, a lot of it, but knew he
wouldn’t get any. Steadily ﬂapping prayer pennants pointed
in the direction that the wind was blowing and the runner
made a tiny adjustment to compensate for it. As the executioner pulled the mallet back, and the little girl closed her
eyes, Rebo ﬁred. The hammer hit the plank, the bullet
nicked the rope, and the youngster fell. Norr gave an audible gasp, but the girl’s weight was sufﬁcient to break the remaining strands of ﬁber, and the prisoner was still alive
when she landed on the ﬂagstones below.
The crowd ﬂinched as the gunshot echoed back and forth
between the hillsides before turning to see where the bullet
had come from. The monk shouted something incomprehensible and pointed up at the L-phants. “She isn’t out of
danger yet,” Lee said grimly, as an old man hobbled forward
to help the girl up. “Take me down there.”
“Sure,” Rebo replied sarcastically. “Why force the villagers to climb the hill? Let’s go down where they can dismember us more easily.”

282

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

But the boy was determined, and truth be told, having
saved the little girl once, the runner wasn’t about to let the
locals hang her again. So the crowd swirled as the L-phants
lumbered down into the village. Weapons appeared, and
Rebo began to sweat. They might be farmers, but the villagers were tough enough to keep bandits at bay, and it
wasn’t long before he and his companions were completely
surrounded by riﬂe-wielding locals. The angens came to a
halt, and Lee stood on the seat. His hands were on his hips
and his anger was plain to see. “You!” he said as he pointed
at the red-robed monk. “What is your name? And what is
going on here?”
The words were in Tilisi, and delivered with such authority, that a stir ran through the crowd. The holy man’s
long, narrow face darkened, his eyes seemed to converge on
each other, and his voice was stern. “My name is Fas Fadari,”
the local replied. “Who are you?”
“Switch to standard,” Rebo ordered, his eyes sweeping
the crowd. “We need to understand what’s being said.”
“My name is Nom Maa,” the boy replied conﬁdently. “I
hold the rank of Prelate, and as such, expect to be treated
with the respect due a person of my seniority.”
Due to the fact that the L-phants stood side by side Rebo
and Norr were seated only a few feet apart. They looked at
each other in amazement as the boy with whom they had
been traveling laid claim to both an attitude and a title they
hadn’t been exposed to before.
The monk appeared to be a little less sure of himself at
that point but remained deﬁant. The contempt that was visible on his face extended to his voice. “Oh, really? Well,
your highness, perhaps you would be so good as to prove
your identity.”
Lee was at a complete loss. He carried no badge of ofﬁce,

RUNNER

283

no symbolic scepter, nothing beyond the testimony of his
personal bodyguard, which the monk was sure to disregard.
Suddenly what had previously seemed so simple, so obvious,
wasn’t any longer. The silence had grown long and thin by
that time, and it was clear that Fadari was about to dismiss
the youth as an imposter, when Norr came to Lee’s rescue.
“Tell him that you can see an old man with a long white
beard standing at his right side,” the sensitive whispered
from a few feet away. “Tell him that the old man is saddened
by what nearly took place.”
So Lee did, and no sooner were the words out of his
mouth than a loud murmur ran through the crowd, and
every man, woman, and child bowed. Because the man the
boy described could be none other than the hermit who
once lived in the hills above and passed away the year before. Fadari looked stricken. “Ona (truth giver) Hybok is
here? Beside me?”
Lee glanced at Norr, saw an almost imperceptible nod,
and turned back again. “Yes.”
“Then I apologize,” the monk said, dropping to his knees
in the street. “Teach me that I may learn.”
Later that day Lee had an opportunity to meet with Fadari,

the village elders, and the girl named Odani. Having refused the ornate chair that had been brought out for his
comfort, Lee sat cross-legged on a mat laid down in front of
the temple. The others arranged themselves in a circle.
Hoggles kept watch over the L-phants while Norr and Rebo
looked on. Though momentarily safe, the little girl was still
under a sentence of death and sat with downcast eyes. Tears
ran down her face as the monk made his case.
“Teon wrote that we must honor our parents,” Fadari began. “He also said that we should take their counsel, see to

284

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

their needs when they grow old, and protect them from
harm. Odani saw her mother fall into the river, and rather
than go to her rescue, allowed her own ﬂesh and blood to be
swept away. Teon taught us that to allow someone to die,
when we could have saved them, is no different than murdering them ourselves. And murder is punishable by death.
Therefore, like it or not, Odani must die.”
Lee sat with his back perfectly straight. He was reminded of the lessons that Suu Qwa had attempted to teach
him, the hypothetical situations that he had been forced to
respond to every day, and discovered that he couldn’t remember one that even came close to the situation he found
himself in. Yet there he was, surrounded by adults who believed that they were in the presence of the great Nom Maa,
even though that had been a lie, as was the title of Prelate,
and his claim that he could see Fadari’s discarnate mentor
standing by his side. The lies were wrong, he knew that, but
the intent was good. And qualiﬁed or not, he would have to
ﬁnd a way to convince the villagers that he was correct, or
the little girl was going to die. She stared at him from the
far side of the circle her eyes bright with hope.
“It may or may not be relevant,” Lee said cautiously, “but
if someone would be so good as to fetch a copy of the Path, I
think they will ﬁnd that what Teon actually said is that
when it comes to our parents we should consider their counsel, which is different than being required to ‘take’ it.” The
actual text wouldn’t make much difference, not really, but
the boy was stalling for time.
Fadari frowned, but had little choice but to send one of
the elders after the book and to read the passage once the old
man returned. Having done so he bowed. “I stand corrected.
The Prelate is right . . . The correct word is ‘consider.’ ”
Everyone, including both Rebo and Norr, looked at Lee

RUNNER

285

with increased respect. Because, relevant or not, the boy’s
knowledge of Teon’s teachings had been proven to be at
least momentarily superior to Fadari’s. “All right,” Lee said,
having used the delay to create a strategy. “I would like to
hear from the accused . . . Odani, is what Brother Fadari
claims true? Did you allow your mother to drown?”
Odani looked down at the ground. “Yes,” she said miserably, “it is. I’m very sorry.”
“You see?” Fadari exclaimed triumphantly. “The girl admits it herself! No offense to the Prelate, who was understandably distraught when he saw that a child was about to
be put to death, but the situation is clear.”
“But why?” Lee demanded desperately. “Why would you
do such a thing?”
The girl remained mute and kept her eyes ﬁxed on the
ground. Norr had worked her way around behind the child
by then. She could “see” the streaks of red-orange pain that
darted away from the girl and bent to take double handfuls
of her ﬂimsy dress. There was a loud ripping sound as the
fabric parted and Odani clutched at the front of her garment. “Here’s your answer,” the sensitive replied grimly as
she lifted the girl to her feet and forced the child to turn a
circle. “Look at her back.”
There was a mutual gasp of surprise as the group looked
upon more than a dozen angry red welts, and more than
that, the puckered scar tissue left behind by the countless
whippings that had gone before. There, right before their
eyes, was the reason why Odani allowed her mother to
drown.
“But why?” Fadari inquired softly, his words echoing
Lee’s. “Why didn’t you tell us? We very nearly killed you.”
“Because,” Lee answered for her, “the teachings counsel
us to honor our parents. And Odani did. It’s up to us, those

286

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

who have taken up the task of interpreting written text, to
bring it fully and fairly to life.”
And it was then, as Lee glanced up to meet Rebo’s eyes,
that the boy saw the very thing that had been missing for so
many days: respect. It ﬁlled the youth with pride, and suddenly he felt whole again.
Brother Fadari bowed until his forehead touched the
ground. “We give thanks that the Prelate chose to pass this
way. I will never forget the mistake that I made and will
work diligently to look beyond text to the realities of life.”
Lee felt guilty about the lies he had told, but was forced
to tell one more by touching the back of the monk’s closely
shaven skull with two ﬁngertips and giving the traditional
blessing. “May God be with you, for you are the instrument
of God, and the hope of humanity.”
The council was concluded after that. Odani’s father had
been killed by bandits two years earlier, but the elders assured Lee that a good family would take the child in, and
she would never be abused again.
Word of what had taken place during the meeting spread
like wildﬁre, and once the true nature of Lee’s journey was
understood, the entire village turned out to celebrate the
passing of the boy who might be the next Inwa (leader of
leaders). There was a feast, and ﬁres burned long into the
night, but the other three off-worlders didn’t take part.
They took a group of ﬁve well-armed men back up the trail,
told them about the metal men, and established an ambush.
But the night passed without incident, and Rebo insisted on an early departure, lest still another day of travel
be lost. Brother Fadari watched the L-phants lumber down
the road, cross over the ancient duracrete bridge, and climb
the opposite slope. The holy man knew that the Prelate and
his party would soon enter the badlands, where they would

RUNNER

287

face all manner of dangers, not the least of which would be
the summer heat.
He couldn’t prevent that, but there was something that
he could do, which was why the monk ordered all of the elderly and children into the deepest recesses of the ancient
mine before taking up a riﬂe and leading the remaining
adults up to the point where they would confront the killer
constructs. To take a life was wrong, the Path made that
clear, but the machines weren’t alive, and that meant he and
his ﬂock could attack the constructs with spiritual impunity. Not that it made much difference, since such was
the strength of Fadari’s belief in the spirit who had just
passed through the village that the monk would have
doomed himself to a hundred hellish incarnations had that
been necessary in order to protect the Prelate. The sun
warmed his back, the holy man could see his breath, and he
had never felt so good before.
The yellow-orange sun hung directly over head, so there

were no shadows to speak of, just the unrelenting heat.
Rebo ran his tongue over cracked lips, but his mouth was so
dry that it didn’t make much difference. Four days had
elapsed since they had departed the village of Urunu, and
two days had passed since the near-disastrous attempt to
travel at night. Although the trail was well-worn, and relatively easy to follow during daylight hours, the opposite was
true at night. That was when the details that seemed so obvious at high noon disappeared, and, illuminated by nothing more than starlight, every branching of the trail looked
equally important. And that was how the group had taken a
wrong turn, and spent hours meandering through a maze of
ravines, only to wind up in a box canyon just before sunrise.
That left the dispirited travelers with no choice but to

288

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

follow the now-modest deposits of L-phant dung back to
the point where the original mistake had been made in order to get back on course.
Thus having been forced to travel during the day, both
the humans and the animals were teetering on edge of exhaustion. Having consumed their reservoirs of water and
fat, the angens had taken on the appearance of walking
skeletons and were too tired to even complain. The humans
were in somewhat better condition, thanks to the fact that
they could ride, but water was in short supply, and the runner knew that it wouldn’t be long before he and his companions began to suffer from dehydration. That was what
made the town of Higo so important. Although Hoggles
had only passed through it once, and was therefore unsure
exactly how many days would pass before it appeared, the
heavy insisted they would come across it before long. Once
they did, the travelers would have the opportunity to rest
for a couple of days, feed and water the angens, and purchase
some much-needed supplies.
And Rebo believed him. The problem was that he had
seen, or thought that he had seen the community a dozen
times by then, only to have seen buildings morph into
chalky cliffs, its streets dissolve into rock-strewn steambeds,
and its crenellated ramparts turn to dusty stone.
So, having been fooled many times, the runner didn’t
take the clusters of what looked like trees very seriously until the distance closed, the greenery remained right where it
was, and a faded sign appeared. It read, welcome to higo.
A message that would have been a good deal more convincing if it hadn’t been for the bullet holes that marred it.
Still, such was the group’s eagerness to enter a town, any
town, that the humans perked up as the L-phants waved
their trunks in the air, picked up the scent of water, and

RUNNER

289

hurried to trumpet the news. Their calls were answered by
angens located somewhere on the other side of Higo,
thereby alerting residents to the fact that strangers were
about.
A pack of half-starved dogs lay in the shade provided by
a pod-heavy snap-snap tree, tongues lolling from their grinning mouths, as the newcomers plodded past. Had it been
in the early morning, or in the late evening, the animals
would have given chase but this was the middle of the day, a
time when nothing moved unless it absolutely had to.
That imperative applied to humans as well, because as
the travelers entered the town, it soon became apparent that
the citizens of Higo were lying low, waiting for the worst of
the heat to pass before emerging from their various lairs.
That didn’t mean that the travelers went unobserved
however. Norr could feel the sudden spikes of energy as the
locals took notice of the newly arrived foursome quickly followed by feelings of curiosity, avarice, and greed.
The structures that lined both sides of the dusty main
street were made of adobe and equipped with deep porches.
Some were simply places to get in out of the sun, but most
had a commercial function as well, as was made clear by the
signs that hung above them. Rebo counted four saloons,
two eateries, one hotel, and one store, all of which signaled
that while the drinks would be cheap, the rooms and the
supplies wouldn’t be. And, in addition to the problems associated with buying supplies in a town with only one store,
the runner knew it would be a challenge to keep what they
already had. Because as the L-phants continued down Higo’s
main street, the runner saw curtains move in upstairs windows, and knew that dozens of hungry eyes were taking inventory of the group’s scanty belongings.
Just as the angens neared the southern end of town, and

290

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Rebo was about to stop and ask someone for directions, he
saw what he’d been looking for. A thick grove of trees, surrounded by high stone walls, and the unmistakable odor of
L-phant dung.
There was water within, or so the runner assumed from
the eagerness with which his mount approached the massive
wooden gate and trumpeted loudly. A boy in a long, ragged
shirt and sandals watched the angens with big eyes as they
entered the enclosure before turning to push the door
closed. There was the squeal of unoiled metal followed by a
loud clang as the gate hit its stops.
Hoggles, who had last seen the enclosure during his
ﬂight north from Cresus many years before, was of the opinion that it hadn’t changed much. It was a little more dilapidated, if such a thing was possible, but essentially the same.
Other angens were present, about two dozen of them, although the park was large enough to accommodate ten
times that number. There was a cacophony of trumpeting,
grunting, and farting as the animals greeted each other, and
a pair of wizened men exited one of the huts and made their
way forward. They were twins, but since both were named
Abo, there was no need to ﬁgure out which was which, a
convention Rebo approved of.
The decision of where to stay was made easy by the fact
that the town had a single hotel. Having no reason to trust
the Abo brothers, the runner insisted on having all of their
belongings transported to the local hostelry, where they
could be locked up, and would have taken the L-phants
along, too, had that been possible.
Having been assured that the angens would be watered
and fed, and accompanied by a dozen heavily burdened
youngsters, the group trudged into town. The hotel had

RUNNER

291

been named the Warfarer’s Rest by the man who built it,
and since none of the subsequent owners had seen any reason
to incur the expense of a new sign, the name was still in
force.
Though dry as a bone at present, a veritable river of water ﬂowed down the main street during the worst days of the
rainy season, which explained why all of the buildings had
been raised off the ground, and stairs led up to elevated
walkway that connected the storefronts. The hotel’s lobby
was spacious, if somewhat sparsely furnished, and open to
the street. A ceiling fan turned slow circles as a girl on what
had been a bicycle pedaled to make it move. Insects circled
a scattering of tables, landed, and took off again. The proprietress sat behind a barricade-like counter and waited for
the newcomers to approach. Her face was as expressionless
as the lime green wall behind her.
Hoggles, who had been forced to sleep out on the edge of
town during his previous visit, opened negotiations. Not
because he truly believed that he would get the price down,
but to establish that he and his friends were experienced
travelers, and therefore not to be cheated any more than the
regulars were.
After some hard bargaining the corpulent hotel owner
dropped the outrageous price by a largely symbolic copper
per room, handed the heavy two iron keys, and pointed toward a ﬂight of stairs. “Your suites are upstairs and toward
the back. It’s cooler there.”
Hoggles led the rest of the party upstairs and had to
duck under a series of supportive crossbeams, before arriving in front of Room 203. The key turned smoothly, the
door swung open, and if it was cooler inside, the heavy was
unable detect it. The furnishings consisted of two mis-

292

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

matched beds, a rickety-looking chair, and a sooty oil
lantern that sat on a beat-up table. “Well, here it is,” the
variant said sarcastically. “Home sweet home.”
All of the gear that had been brought over from the caravan park had to be stowed and the next few minutes were
spent stacking it along the walls of both 203 and 204. Unfortunately, much of it, especially the L-phant trappings,
smelled like the animals themselves. That, combined with
the warm air, made for a thick, rather unpleasant atmosphere. Norr opened the window in the room she was slated
to share with Lee but discovered that it didn’t make any
difference.
Once everything had been put away, and the youngsters
had been paid off, it was time to take much-needed baths
and share an enormous meal in the restaurant next door. The
eatery was a natural gathering place, especially around
lunchtime, which meant that the place was already more
than half-full when the foursome arrived. Rebo took immediate note of the fact that just about all of the other customers were armed. Some, one group in particular, seemed
to be especially interested in Hoggles. That wasn’t unusual,
however, since the heavy stood out like a sore thumb.
Still, there was something about the way the men stared
at Hoggles and continued to whisper among themselves
that bothered the runner. So much so that he brought the
matter to the heavy’s attention. “The three men in the corner seem to be especially interested in you . . . Have you
seen them before?”
Hoggles, who was not only well aware of the threesome
but worried about them shook his head. “Nope . . . People
stare at me all the time. You know that.”
Rebo nodded but remained unconvinced. Though unwilling to discuss it, the variant was on the run from some-

RUNNER

293

thing. Why else would live like a hermit on board a spaceship? And now, as they made their way toward the city
where Hoggles had been born, there was something increasingly furtive about his behavior. Or was the runner imagining things? Rebo wasn’t sure, but made a note to keep an
eye on the heavy, as well as those who seemed to be interested in him.
The food was surprisingly good, and having checked to
ensure that the L-phants were receiving the best of care, the
travelers retired to the hotel for much-deserved naps. The
rooms were hot, and Rebo thought it would be impossible
to sleep, until Norr entered the room, ripped the sheets off
his bed, and dunked them in a bucket of water. Then, once
they had been wrung out and replaced on his bed the runner
discovered that it was miraculously if only temporarily cool.
The same brand of magic was soon applied to the heavy’s
bed as well, and there was something about the brisk efﬁciency with which the sensitive saw to the needs of her
strange brood that not only warmed Rebo’s heart but made
him want to kiss her. But others were present so that was impossible. Still, there was an opportunity to touch her arm and
look into her eyes. “Thank you, Lanni . . . For everything.”
Norr felt the pressure of the runner’s ﬁngers and saw
what was in his eyes. More than that she could “see” Rebo’s
emotions in the rich panoply of color that rippled around
him. She smiled. “You’re very welcome.”
Lee, who had witnessed the moment, made a face. In
spite of the occasions on which he seemed to be something
more, the youngster was still a ten-year-old boy. That meant
he not only found expressions of adult affection to be somewhat embarrassing, but sometimes felt jealous as well. Especially where Norr was concerned. He tugged at the
sensitive’s sleeve. “Come on, Lanni . . . Let’s do our sheets.”

294

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Happily wrapped in the cool embrace of his sheets Rebo
soon fell asleep, and such was his need for rest that the runner continued to snooze long after the fabric around him
was dry and the sun had sunk into the west. And, had it not
been for Norr’s insistent touch, the runner might have remained in bed even longer. “Jak . . . Wake up! Where’s Bo?”
The runner opened his eyes, blinked until the sensitive
swam into focus, and yawned. “Bo? I don’t know . . . Isn’t
he here?”
“No,” Norr answered deﬁnitively, as she pointed to the
now-empty bed. “He isn’t. I think he’s in trouble.”
Rebo swung his feet over onto the ﬂoor and fumbled for
his boots. His mouth was dry and home to a foul taste.
“Trouble? What makes you think so?”
Though conﬁdent of her psychic abilities, they weren’t
perfect, and Norr had a tendency to play them down. She
shrugged apologetically. “I don’t have anything solid—just
a feeling.”
The runner nodded. He had come to believe in the sensitive’s occasional premonitions and other “feelings.” He continued to tie his boots. “Where’s Lee?”
“Still asleep.”
“Good. Lock him in. We’ll go out and take a look
around.”
Norr left and returned ﬁve minutes later. She had
changed into street clothes, armed herself with her staff, and
left a note for Lee. Given the heavy’s well-documented appetite, Rebo and Norr ﬁgured it would make sense to visit
both of Higo’s restaurants, followed by the bars, since the
variant could be thirsty.
Visits to the eateries came up empty. Not only was Hoggles nowhere to be seen, none of the locals who worked in

RUNNER

295

the restaurants would admit to having seen the heavy, although Rebo wasn’t sure how far he could trust them.
The saloons came next, and while one bartender admitted to having seen a heavy enter, then leave, there was no
way to know if the variant was Bo. Still, the odds were
stacked against the likelihood of two heavies visiting Higo
at the same time, which meant that Hoggles could be
nearby. The next bar styled itself as the Higo Oasis, and
judging from the number of customers inside, was one of
the town’s more popular establishments. In spite of the relatively early hour, it was already half-full. A quick scan of the
long, narrow room conﬁrmed that most of the establishment’s clientele consisted of drifters on their way from
somewhere to nowhere, unemployed nomads waiting for the
next caravan to pass through, and others who, if not actual
bandits, lived along society’s margins.
Heads turned as the twosome entered the room, eyes
stared, and the heretofore incessant buzz of conversation
came to a halt. The blare of a hand-cranked phonograph
continued for another revolution, came to a stop as the operator took the opportunity to give himself a break, and silence took over.
Norr sensed what felt like a wall of hostility. She wanted
to say as much to Rebo, but quickly realized that the runner
already knew and was about to handle the situation his way.
First, rather than attempt to reduce the tension as the sensitive might have, the runner seemed intent on running it up.
His eyes swept the room, and he smiled broadly. “So,” Rebo
said calmly, “look at what we have here. Somebody was
thoughtful enough to pile all of the town’s manure in one
place.”
Norr felt her heart start to pound, and the sensitive

296

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

twisted both halves of her staff in opposite directions so she
could draw the blade more quickly. But the violence she expected failed to manifest. Perhaps it was because of the conﬁdence that the runner projected, or the hand that already
rested on the Crosser, or the fact that he hadn’t insulted any
person in particular, but whatever the reason, none of the
people in the room chose to move against him. “You!” Rebo
said, drawing the Hogger so fast it was little more than a
blur. “What’s the stuff on the ﬂoor?”
That was when Norr realized that she hadn’t taken notice
of the youth in the ﬁlthy apron, the long-handled mop, or
the mess on the ﬂoor in front of him. Now, as he stared into
the weapon’s massive bore, the adolescent entered something akin to a state of shock. “N-n-nothing, Excellency.
Just some blood . . . That’s all.”
A man stood at the rear of the room, raised a ﬂintlock
pistol, and was slammed into the wall behind him as the
Crosser spoke. The dead man looked surprised, slid toward
the ﬂoor, and left a trail of blood on the wall.
The youngster with the mop had wet his pants by then,
and Rebo waggled the Hogger back and forth as a way to recapture the local’s ﬂagging attention. “Sorry about the interruption, son. You mentioned some blood . . . Whose blood?”
“Th-th-the heavy’s,” the swamper stuttered eagerly. “A
couple of bounty hunters hit him from behind. He went
down hard.”
“Did they kill him?” Norr demanded, her voice hard
with anger.
“N-n-no, I don’t think so,” the youngster added, realizing he didn’t know for sure.
“Where did they take him?” Rebo asked levelly, his eyes
scanning the crowd for any sign of movement.

RUNNER

297

“I-I-I don’t know,” the swamper replied pitifully. “I
didn’t have anything to do with it . . . Please don’t kill me!”
Conﬁdent that he had all the information he was likely to
get, and realizing that he had already pushed his luck to the
max, the runner ﬁred two rounds from the Crosser. A bottle
of booze exploded, and the bartender’s fez ﬂew off. The purpose of the shots was to freeze the customers in place and
create an opportunity to withdraw. “Okay,” Rebo said, as he
backed toward the door and motioned for Norr to do likewise. “Stay right where you are for the next ﬁve minutes. Or
come out and catch a bullet between the eyes. The choice is
yours.”
Would the man with the guns actually wait outside? It
didn’t seem likely, but except for the dead man’s friends, the
customers didn’t have any reason to test the stranger’s assertion. Especially given the precision of his marksmanship.
But the runner had no interest in lurking around outside
the bar and wasted little time taking hold of Norr’s wrist,
and pulling her down the street. But the sensitive balked
and jerked free. “Wait . . . What about Bo?”
“You heard the kid,” Rebo answered impatiently. “Some
bounty hunters nailed him. It was obvious that he was hiding something—now we know what it was. The big guy has
a price on his head.”
“So we abandon him?” Norr demanded angrily. “Is that
what you would do to me?”
“That isn’t fair,” Rebo replied resentfully. “Did I abandon you back at Weather Station 46?”
“No,” the variant answered, “and neither did Bo.”
It was a good point, and the runner might have responded, if a couple of the dead customer’s friends hadn’t
chosen that particular moment to silhouette themselves

298

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

against the light that spilled out of the bar. A single shot
ﬁred from the Hogger was sufﬁcient to send them scurrying
for cover, but it also brought other people out into the
street. The odds were getting worse. “Okay,” the runner
agreed, “we’ll try to ﬁnd him. Follow me.”
“Where are we going?” The sensitive inquired, running
to keep up.
“The caravan park,” Rebo replied. “Chances are that the
bounty hunters have at least one L-phant there. Assuming
that Bo is worth a lot of money, they need to get him out of
Higo quickly or risk losing him to the competition.”
The plan made sense, and the variant fell into step next
to the runner as they entered the ocean of darkness that lay
beyond the edge of town. What little bit of light there was
barely touched the caravan park’s walls before surrendering
to the night. That was when a quick ﬂurry of gunshots were
heard, the L-phants started to trumpet, and Rebo realized
that either the Abo brothers had opened ﬁre on bounty
hunters or vice versa. Which party had ﬁred ﬁrst didn’t
make much difference to him, although the fact that the
huge wooden gate hung ajar suggested that the heavily burdened man hunters had overwhelmed the guard and forced
their way in, an act suggesting that they didn’t own an angen and were intent on stealing one instead.
There was a considerable amount of confused shouting as
the twosome entered the enclosure and the ground literally
shook as gigantic feet thundered from one side of the park
to the other. Rebo heard the L-phants coming, but turned
too late as a mountain of leathery ﬂesh brushed the runner’s
shoulder and tossed him aside. The ground came up
quickly, his skull made contact with a rock, and there was
an explosion of light inside his head.
Norr, who had been following a few steps behind, “saw”

RUNNER

299

a red blur as the badly frightened animal rushed past, and
“felt” the resulting impact. She called Rebo’s name, but
heard no reply, and suddenly found herself alone in the dark.
Except that it wasn’t dark, not where her psychic abilities
were concerned, meaning that while the sensitive couldn’t
make out inanimate objects, she could track living things,
and that included bounty hunters. The variant took comfort
from the fact that while Rebo was down, she could “see” the
light that shimmered all around him, and drew the threefoot-long sliver of steel from its wooden scabbard. The sensitive heard a reassuring hum as she thumbed the power
switch, and the vibro blade came to mechanical life.
Then, holding the weapon in both hands, and running
on the balls of her feet, the variant cut across the open space
in front of her to close the distance with the blobs of energy
that were milling about a hundred feet away. An angen objected loudly as one of the bounty hunters beat it with a
ponga rod in an attempt to bring the animal down onto its
knees. His partner ﬁred a riﬂe, gave a cry of exultation as a
member of the Abo clan fell, and hurried to work a fresh
cartridge into the chamber of his bolt-action riﬂe. Hoggles,
who was bound hand and foot, lay at his feet. The variant
was conscious and trying to free himself, but to no avail.
That was when Norr came up behind the bounty hunter
and took a cut at his aura. She felt the vibro blade hesitate
momentarily as it passed through ﬂesh and bone. Though
not immediately fatal, the blow removed one of the man’s
arms and left the bounty hunter screaming as he clutched at
the stump. He fainted a few moments later—and collapsed
in a heap.
The remaining bounty hunter turned, heard a boot scrape
on gravel, and caught a whiff of perfume as cold steel cut
through the warm night air. He felt something tug at his

300

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

throat and brought his hands up to investigate, only to have
them drenched with his own blood. Then he was outside of
his body, looking down on it, still trying to understand.
Norr “saw” the man’s life essence drain away and experienced an immediate sense of regret. The emotion faded,
however, as the wounded clansman cried out in pain, and
she bent to cut Hoggles free. After a quick check to ensure
that the heavy was okay, and shouted explanations to the
quickly gathering Abo family, the sensitive went looking
for Rebo.
There was a sudden commotion as a mob comprised of
townspeople, transients, and assorted rufﬁans surged into
the caravan park. Some of them were equipped with
lanterns, which they held high. That was when some of the
customers from the Oasis spotted Rebo and pointed him
out. The crowd uttered what sounded like a hungry growl,
and Norr had just started to run toward their intended victim, when geysers of dirt shot up into the air and the quick
crack! crack! crack! of a semiautomatic weapon was heard.
The citizens of Higo saw the bullets hit, heard the gunshots
echo between the enclosure’s mud walls, and suddenly lost
their enthusiasm.
That was when the sensitive saw that Lee was crouched
over the runner. He held the Crosser in the two-handed grip
that Rebo had taught him, one eye closed, ready to ﬁre
again. And the would-be assailants saw the boy as well, and
even though the mob possessed more than enough ﬁrepower
to kill him, there was something about the tableau that
served to freeze the many-headed beast in place.
But what they didn’t know was that while Lee was willing to pretend, an activity that could be characterized as
skillful thinking, he was no longer willing to kill. Not for
himself, Rebo, or even Norr.

RUNNER

301

The result of the standoff was an opportunity, a potentially ﬂeeting moment when exactly the right words could
turn the tide and send the townspeople home. The problem
was that Norr didn’t have any words, not for that situation,
and struggled to come up with something to say even as she
interposed her body between the crowd and her friends.
Though armed with a sword, the woman looked frail,
and a friend of the man who had been killed in the bar was
about to urge his companions forward when the sensitive
spoke in a deep baritone. “You!” Lysander boomed. “The
man with the eye patch . . . I see three spirits standing behind you! You murdered them in their sleep, and others,
too, all for a few gold trinkets.
“And you, the man with the crutch, your ex-partner is
here . . . He’s pointing at the knife sticking out of his chest,
and asking ‘why?’ ”
The discarnate was about to continue, but his ﬁrst two
victims had turned pale by that time and started to back
away. Seeing their example, and having no wish to be reunited with their victims, the rest of the crowd withdrew
as well.
Then, having accomplished his purpose, Lysander let go.
Norr’s body gave an involuntary jerk as the spirit departed
and left her to deal with the aftermath of the abduction and
rescue. Fifteen minutes later both Hoggles and Rebo were
back on their feet, the Abo family was busy calming the
L-phants, and the bounty hunters still lay where they had
fallen. Lee returned the Crosser to Rebo, who released the
nearly empty magazine and inserted a fresh clip in its place.
The runner frowned. “Nice job, son. Thanks . . . Now, with
that out of the way, what the hell were you doing out running around by yourself?”
Lee shrugged. “I heard shooting, found Lanni’s note, and

302

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ﬁgured there was trouble. The door was locked, so I went
out the window and circled around front. You ran past, I
followed, and that’s the end of the story.”
“No,” Rebo said, as he slipped a fresh cartridge into the
Hogger. “It isn’t. But we’ll discuss that later. After we deal
with Citizen Hoggles here.”
Hoggles, shoulders slumped, stood with his chin resting
on his collarbone.
“So,” the runner continued grimly, “I think we deserve
some sort of explanation. Why did those bounty hunters
come after you? And what else did you leave out?”
The explanation came in ﬁts and starts at ﬁrst, but soon
turned into a ﬂood of words, as his inhibitions fell away, and
the heavy warmed to his story. While it was true that he had
been born and raised in Cresus, Hoggles had previously
neglected to mention the fact that he had been something of
a political ﬁrebrand during his youth, even going so far as to
call for the overthrow of the all-powerful Caliph, something
that not only attracted the ruler’s attention, but that of his
eldest son, who was in charge of the city’s police force.
Months of hide-and-seek followed, during which Hoggles
was able to elude the authorities. Finally, having spotted the
rebel, government agents followed the variant to the rundown tenement where he lived and summoned their patron.
The Caliph’s son was a weight lifter whose real name was
Peeno Zynthias, but was commonly referred to as “the
brute” behind his back, a nickname he had done nothing to
discourage. And, though not quite as large as a heavy, it was
said he believed he could best one. Perhaps that was why
Zynthias insisted on leading the assault team personally,
and once inside the mazelike building, came face-to-face
with the man who had challenged his father’s rule. By
breaking the upstart’s bones with his own hands, the heir

RUNNER

303

apparent not only intended to further his reputation, but to
end the resistance movement once and for all.
Hoggles chose not to go into detail where the ensuing
ﬁght was concerned, but Rebo had the impression of a hardfought battle the heavy ultimately won, but not by much. “I
killed him,” the variant admitted regretfully, “but the price
was high. A few weeks later, while I was hiding in the countryside, I learned that my entire family had been executed.”
With a price on his head, there was nothing the fugitive
could do but run. He ﬂed north to Zand, boarded a spaceship, and stayed. Now, after years of lonely introspection,
the variant was determined to return home.
Once the story was over, Norr felt a great deal of sympathy
for the heavy, but Rebo shook his head in disgust. “Perfect.
Just what we needed. A high-visibility three-hundred-pound
fugitive with a price on his head.”
“It could be worse,” Lee allowed philosophically. “After
all, it’s not like Bo is being pursued by religious fanatics or
homicidal robots.”
There was a brief pause while the others considered the
boy’s words, followed by mutual laughter. “Come on,” Rebo
said, touching the spot where his head had connected with
the rock. “Let’s bandage our wounds and get some rest. We
have a long way to go.”

TWELVE
™

The Planet Ning

The nice thing about rivers is that you know where you’ll end up.
—River Captain Vog Duther

Unlike ancient cities like Seros, and Gos, Cresus was only

a few hundred years old. That was because the city on the
land north of the point where the Juno and Esper Rivers
came together had been leveled during the last techno war,
and rather than rebuild atop the ruins, the survivors
founded a new community along the south shore instead.
And, like most towns built on trade, Cresus was more the
result of happenstance than a singular vision. So, while the
original city had been laid out around the badly cratered
spaceport, New Town, as it was sometimes referred to, was
oriented to the river, and for good reason. Because as the
high-tech transportation systems faded away, the planet’s
rivers carried an increasing amount of commerce and were
vital to trade.

RUNNER

305

In fact both the Juno and Esper Rivers conveyed a steady
ﬂow of log rafts and heavily laden barges down to the point
where the waterborne trafﬁc was forced to pass between the
three carefully sited gun batteries that the Caliph’s grandmother had commissioned many years before. Not to defend
Cresus against invaders, but to ensure that all who passed
paid a hefty fee, a tradition that remained in force. The
money the tax generated was sufﬁcient to provide the
Caliph and his extended family with the lavish lifestyles to
which they were accustomed and pay the police force that
kept them in power.
All of this was interesting, but of no particular importance to Kane, who had no intention of staying in Cresus
one moment longer than was absolutely necessary. There
were numerous reasons for his dislike of the city, including
the poorly constructed timber buildings that seemed to lean
in over the claustrophobic streets, the pervasive odor of
urine that rose to envelop Cresus once the sun rose high
enough to look down into the capillary-like passageways
and footpaths that crisscrossed the city, as well as the sullen,
eternally suspicious manner in which the citizens interacted
with strangers.
None of it was pleasant, and having just returned from
the shattered spaceport on the north side of the Juno River,
the operative was looking forward to a shower as he
mounted a ﬂight of creaky stairs, made his way down a
dingy hallway, and inserted the handmade brass key into its
lock. That was when Kane noticed that the thread he had
spit-glued across the doorjamb had disappeared and started
to back away.
But it was too late by then, far too late, and as the door
swung inward, the variant named Shaz stepped out into the
hall. The enforcer was so fast that Kane barely had time to

306

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

wrap his ﬁngers around the gun butt before a bony ﬁst hit
the side of his head. It hurt, but by the time the pain registered on his brain, even more blows had landed. The operative was down on his knees by the time the variant kicked
him in the head.
Later, when the technologist came to, he had a throbbing
headache. He attempted to move but quickly discovered
that he couldn’t. Not while seated with his wrists secured
behind him and his ankles tied to the legs of a chair.
“Ah,” Shaz said. “The prince awakens. You were a prince
once . . . Did you know that? No, I suppose you didn’t. But
I did some research. You might want to try it sometime. It
could improve your thus-far-abysmal performance.”
Kane continued to blink his eyes until the room eventually swam into focus. As if determined to illuminate the
room, the sun continued to push its way in through the louvered shutters. Bars of horizontal light slashed the ﬂoor and
the opposite wall. They rippled as Shaz passed through
them. The variant circled the operative and leaned in to
sniff him in the same way that a dog would. “You stink of
fear . . . But that is as it should be. Those who fail Chairman
Tepho have every reason to be afraid. And yours is the most
signiﬁcant failure of all.”
Kane cleared his throat and opened his mouth to object.
His head snapped to the left as a backhanded blow struck
the side of his face. “I’ll let you know when it’s time to
speak,” the enforcer said coldly. “Now, where were we? Ah,
yes. Your many failures. You let the sensitive slip through
your ﬁngers on Anafa, again on Pooz, and now on Ning.
Then, in a misguided attempt to rectify your many errors,
you entered into an unauthorized alliance with the black hat
sect. And, as a result of that decision, the warriors you transported to Cresus know about the star gates.”

RUNNER

307

It was risky, but the pause could be interpreted as permission to speak, and Kane was determined to defend himself. “I need the manpower . . . The resident staff isn’t large
enough! The black hats are at the spaceport waiting for the
sensitive to show up.”
Kane felt Shaz grab a ﬁstful of blond hair and jerk his
head back. The variant’s long, muzzlelike nose, close-set
eyes, and oversized ears gave the enforcer a canine aspect.
His lips curled back to expose a double row of extremely
sharp teeth. “I know that,” Shaz said contemptuously.
“They’re hard to miss. Fortunately, they haven’t had either
the time or opportunity to communicate with their superiors. Once you kill them our security will be intact.”
“Kill them?” the operative asked incredulously. “How?”
The air seemed to blur slightly as Shaz released his grip
on Kane’s hair. “I don’t know—and I don’t care. That’s your
problem. That and the sensitive. Chairman Tepho is tired of
your incompetence. Finish the matter, and ﬁnish it here, or
join your friend Lysander in the spirit world. The choice is
yours.”
The variant seemed to ﬂoat toward the door. Kane struggled against his bonds. “Aren’t you going to untie me?”
“No,” Shaz replied evenly. “You, like the rest of humanity, must free yourself.” And with that the enforcer was gone.
Because the transition took place gradually it would have

been impossible for Rebo to identify the exact moment
when he and his companions put the badlands behind them.
But once green vegetation reappeared, and the seemingly
endless maze of tortured ravines gave way to a gently rolling
plain, it seemed safe to assume that the worst was over. That
impression was reinforced when they had to circle around
stands of virgin timber, the headwaters of the Juno River

308

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

appeared, and the travelers began to pass isolated cabins.
Later, as the L-phants carried them into the town of Iz, the
runner knew that particular leg of the journey was over. But
the clock was ticking, and with only ten days left until the
shuttle was scheduled to depart from Cresus, there was no
time in which to relax.
With the possible exception of Rebo, the rest of the party
had come to like the L-phants, who, obnoxious though they
were, had faithfully carried them all the way from Zand.
But the river offered a much faster means to reach Cresus,
and local loggers were willing to pay good money for angens
that could be used to drag newly fallen timber down out of
the surrounding hills. So, having made a proﬁt on the animals, Norr, Lee, and Hoggles said their ﬁnal good-byes to
the L-phants while the runner and a bemused timber merchant looked on.
Finally, having been promised that the angens would be
well cared for, the sensitive, red hat, and heavy allowed
themselves to be led through the bustling town of Iz down
to the banks of the river, where all manner of jetties poked
their wooden ﬁngers out into the free-ﬂowing current. Farther out, rafts that consisted of more than a hundred logs
each tugged at their anchors while nimble river folk used
long pikes to push, shove, and otherwise coax the unwieldy
lengths of timber into ﬂoats that would make the trip
downstream.
Based on input from Hoggles, which had been reinforced
by information gleaned while selling the angens, Rebo
knew that a fast ﬂoat could reach Cresus in just six days. If
so, that would leave the group with a comfortable pad in
which to rest prior to boarding the shuttle, and the spaceship. But only if the ﬂoat hung together through three sets
of rapids. If it didn’t, and the raft came apart, they could

RUNNER

309

drown. Or, if they managed to survive, ﬁnd themselves
stranded a long way from Cresus. That was why it was important to purchase passage with a captain who had the necessary experience, a ﬁrst-class crew, and enough to money to
construct a strong ﬂoat. Because those who lacked sufﬁcient
funds, or attempted to improve their proﬁt margin by minimizing the amount of cordage and chains used to bind their
raft together, could pay with their lives.
But, by all accounts Captain Vog Duther was exactly the
kind of man they were looking for, and a heavy to boot, one
of the many variants who had left the repressive atmosphere
in Cresus to ﬁnd work in the timber industry up north.
That’s why Rebo preceded the rest of the group down a
swaybacked gangplank and onto a ﬂatboat, where he ordered the waterman to head for Captain Duther’s ﬂoat.
The boatman’s teenaged son used a pole to free the scow
from the mud, pushed the blunt bow upriver, and took control of the port sweep. Then, with a surety born of long
practice, father and son muscled their craft upstream,
knowing that the current would push them down to their
destination.
There was a good four inches of water sloshing around
the bottom of the ﬂatboat, not to mention some live bait,
and Norr elected to stand on one of the seats. From that
vantage point she had a good view of the town, which judging from all the raw wood that was visible, had grown of
late. Two- and three-story buildings stood shoulder to
shoulder, columns of black smoke wound around each other
as they rose into the sky, and geysers of white water soared
high into the air as logs plunged into a pool of slack water.
Once in place, they bobbed gently as a gang of tree walkers
herded the timbers into a ﬂoat.
Rebo said, “Hold on,” and grabbed Norr’s arm in order

310

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

to steady her as the ﬂatboat nudged a log. Like most of the
more promising rafts, the one that Captain Duther had assembled was built around a temporary building commonly
referred to as the shack, which rested on the ﬂoat, and
housed the all-important galley as well as bunks for the tree
walkers and a single cabin for passengers. All of which was
ﬁne, except for the fact that it would be necessary to cross
twenty or thirty free-ﬂoating logs in order to access the
shack.
But the ﬂoatboat’s arrival had not gone unnoticed, which
meant that half a dozen river folk were there to greet the
party and help them cross the water-slicked logs. Fortunately, most of the so-called sticks were not only large, but
supported by the logs to either side, which made the crossing easier. Rebo was resentful of the hand under his arm at
ﬁrst, but soon changed his mind when he noticed that the
tree walkers wore spiked boots and realized that if he were
to fall through a gap, the ﬂoat would close over his head and
make it impossible to reach the surface.
Once the visitors had been safely deposited on the spikeripped planking that surrounded the shack, the tree walkers
went back to work as Captain Duther emerged to greet
them. He was even larger than Hoggles, and although his
head was clean-shaven, he boasted a beard that more than
made up for the loss up top. His eyes, which looked like
chips of black stone, were set deep in their sockets. The river
man’s gaze swept past Rebo and hesitated on Norr before
coming to rest on Hoggles. Duther frowned. “Have we met
before?”
The second variant shifted his considerable weight from
one foot to the other before shaking his head. “No, I don’t
think so.”
One of the reasons why Rebo had insisted on booking

RUNNER

311

passage quickly was the fear that someone in Iz would recognize the fugitive and try to collect the bounty on his
head. Now it appeared that the river captain knew who his
perspective passenger was. The runner was wondering if a
single slug from the Hogger would be sufﬁcient to put
Duther down when the ﬂoat captain smiled knowingly.
“Whatever you say, friend. It looks like you’re headed in the
wrong direction—but I suppose you know that. Come on,
let’s retire to the shack where we can drink some tea and
dicker over the cost of your passage. It will most likely be a
lot higher than you’d like, but I’ll do my best to make you
feel good about it.”
Careful to keep the lens away from the sun and any possi-

bility of reﬂection, Kane lay on a hot duracrete roof and surveyed the scene before him. A full day had passed since the
beating Shaz had administered, and he still felt sore. Unlike
spaceports on other planets, the cratered pavement and the
remains of the blast-blackened buildings that looked out
over it had not been converted to new uses and gave mute
testimony to the power of ancient weapons. And, with the
exception of some hardy weeds, and a pack of Ning dogs,
the once-bustling port appeared to be deserted.
But Kane, who had escorted the black hat warriors to the
facility himself, knew that appearances were deceiving. The
religious warriors had gone to ground, just as he had instructed them to, and were waiting for Norr and her party
to arrive. That was the one thing that the operative had on
his side, the certain knowledge as to where his quarry would
have to go, hence the opportunity to ambush them.
But not anymore . . . Tepho and the council were angry.
So angry that they had sent Shaz to discipline him. Kane
sighed, inched the carefully wrapped riﬂe forward, and de-

312

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ployed the built-in bipod. The operative felt a persistent
itch between his shoulder blades, as if someone was watching him, but resisted the temptation to scan his surroundings. The roof from which he had chosen to ﬁre was higher
than all of the surrounding structures with the single exception of the decapitated control tower, which made it unlikely that anyone was looking down on him.
Still, the feeling that he was under surveillance persisted
as Kane swung the powerful telescopic sight onto a gaping
window and waited for the warrior hidden inside to reveal
himself. Strangely, from the operative’s perspective at least,
his thoughts turned to Lysander as the seconds continued to
tick by. Ever since the moment when they had ﬁrst met, and
for reasons he wasn’t entirely sure of, the operative had experienced an inordinate desire to please the cantankerous
bastard. And now, even though the scientist had switched
sides, Kane was still trying to earn his mentor’s approval.
Not the namby-pamby Lysander, but the original version,
who knew what he wanted and wasn’t afraid to take it.
There was a ﬂicker of movement as the black hat stepped
into the scope’s crosshairs, blinked as he sought to accommodate the bright sunlight, and turned his head to the
right. That exposed his temple and Kane felt the trigger
break, let his shoulder absorb the resulting recoil, and was
already swinging his weapon toward the next target by the
time the body fell.
Having heard the shot, and unaware of the fact that they
were being stalked, the technologist felt sure the other Dib
Wa would pop up for a look around. And, because he knew
where to look for them, would make themselves vulnerable.
The second target stepped halfway out of a doorway, was
blown off his feet, and was still falling as the third slug

RUNNER

313

slammed into a man foolish enough to ﬁre at a target he
couldn’t see.
That was when silence fell over the spaceport, Kane elbowed his way back into the cool embrace of a shadow, and
the last black hat went to ground. Or that’s what the warrior intended to do, except that Shaz was standing directly
behind the monk and promptly slit his throat. Then, having
dragged the body out to a point where Kane would ﬁnd it,
the variant vanished. Not as a means to prove how elusive
he could be, but because Kane was an excellent shot, and the
variant had no desire to take a bullet in the back.
The Ning dogs moved in on the corpse shortly thereafter,
but scattered when Kane arrived and were content to ﬂop
down in some shade and wait while the two-legged predator
examined the body. Though pleased that his ﬁnal target had
been eliminated, the operative felt a chill run down his
spine and whirled to see if Shaz was standing directly behind him. But the room was empty . . . and Kane was alone.
Or was he? A sense of uneasiness followed the operative out
into the sun and persisted even after the Ning dogs had begun their meal.
The Juno River sparkled with reflected sunlight as it

turned toward the south and carried the ﬂoat along at a
steady six miles per hour. The men on the sweeps had to
push hard to prevent the log raft from grounding in the
shallows, while the tree walkers dashed hither and yon,
shouted friendly insults at each other, and used iron-tipped
poles to stab at the sometimes recalcitrant logs.
Rebo, who was seated on the bench that ran along the
front side of the shack, never tired of watching the walkers
dance from one bobbing, twisting, rolling log to the next.

314

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

And that was what he was doing when Duther rounded the
corner and paused in front of him. The heavy nodded politely.
“Good morning . . . Please inform your companions that we
will be passing through the Devil’s Chute in thirty minutes
or so. We shouldn’t have any trouble—but it’s best to be prepared. I suggest that you make sure that everyone is ready for
a swim—and assemble your group forward of the sweeps. If
the ﬂoat begins to separate, and you hear me give the order,
be sure to go off the trailing edge of the raft. That way you’ll
be upstream of the logs—and a lot less likely to be crushed.
“Tell your people not to ﬁght the river,” the river captain
continued, “but to ease their way out of the current, wait for
an eddy, and swim into it. Oh, and one other thing . . . If
you wind up ashore, watch out for wreckers. They live
downstream of the chute and live off the sticks that escape
from ﬂoats and the people who wash up along the riverbanks. Not only will they steal whatever you have—they’ll
probably hold you for ransom. Any questions?”
Rebo frowned as he came to his feet. “No, I don’t think
so. Why didn’t you mention all of this earlier?”
Duther shrugged philosophically. “There wasn’t anything you could do about it except sit around and worry . . .
Besides, odds are that we’ll make it through without difﬁculty. I’ll see you at lunch.” So saying, the river captain
stepped off the platform and onto a glistening log. It dipped
under his considerable weight, and water sloshed over the
top of it as the variant started his morning rounds.
Rebo watched the heavy for a moment, shook his head in
consternation, and went in search of his companions. The
clock was ticking, and given the fact that there was no way
to get off the ﬂoat, the passengers had no choice but to prepare themselves for what lay ahead.
* * *

RUNNER

315

Meanwhile, a few miles downstream, a man named Horg

Zikko settled into the carefully padded position that he had
prepared for himself earlier that morning. The longbarreled .50-caliber riﬂe had been specially designed for
him, which meant that the stock ﬁt his shoulder perfectly,
and the trigger was an exact match for the curve of his right
index ﬁnger. That, plus the fact that he had spent the last
two days shooting at ﬂoating targets, made the marksman
conﬁdent that he could fulﬁll the terms of his contract. The
ﬂoat, which had been tracked since its departure from Iz,
had three sweeps, therefore three sweep operators. One
would be worth two gold cephors, two would be worth four
cephors, and three would be worth eight cephors. A princely
sum that would make the journey upriver from Cresus
worth the effort.
Three wreckers, all members of the local council,
watched Zikko make his ﬁnal preparations and exchanged
congratulations. Although various members of the wrecker
community had attempted to kill sweeper operators before,
none had succeeded. It was extremely difﬁcult to hit a target
that was not only drifting downriver but bobbing up and
down and jerking from side to side at the same time.
But Zikko not only could, but had made many such
shots over the last couple of days, a fact that caused the locals to feel very optimistic indeed. So much so that the rest
of the villagers were waiting downstream, where they stood
ready to pounce on whatever goodies emerged from the
chute. Assuming that things went well, and there was no
reason to believe they wouldn’t, the next few hours would
be proﬁtable indeed.
Having successfully made their way back to the platform

on which the sweep operators stood, the foursome could do

316

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

little more than wait and try to stay out of the way. Like the
others, Norr wore light clothing plus a small pack, which in
addition to her necessaries, contained the gate seed that
Lysander had stolen from Kane. Was the artifact waterproof? She believed that it was, but had no means to test her
theory, and she hoped to keep the device dry.
The river had narrowed during the last half hour or so,
which caused the current to run faster. So fast that the gradually rising banks seemed to zip past as the leading edge of
the ﬂoat bucked its way through a series of standing waves.
Sheets of spray ﬂew into the air and were transformed into a
windblown mist. Most of the water fell on the ﬁrst rows of
logs, but some of it ﬂoated to the rear, where it wet Norr’s
face. The sensitive used a sleeve to wipe the water away and
felt a momentary sense of exhilaration.
Then the ﬂoat rocked from side to side, a sweep operator
yelled, “Here we go!” and the raft entered the chute. Rocky
walls rose to either side of river, the ﬂoat began to undulate
as it passed through a series of dips, and the deck shook as
the raft’s right ﬂank scraped a boulder topped with a cap of
green moss.
That was when the sensitive heard a loud crack! and saw
movement out of the corner of her eye. Rebo had seen it too.
The centermost sweep operator had disappeared. “Someone
shot him!” the runner yelled. “Bo! Grab that sweep! Lanni,
get down!”
Norr threw her arms around Lee, and had just pulled the
boy down onto the water-slicked deck, when a second shot
rang out. The starboard operator looked surprised, clutched
his chest, and fell.
Rebo had his glasses on by then, and stood with legs
spread, as he used both hands to aim the long-barreled
handgun up at the embankment ahead. He spotted a group

RUNNER

317

of three tightly clustered stick ﬁgures, ﬁred the single-shot
pistol, and returned the weapon to its holster. Then, having
grabbed hold of a loose sweep, the runner pulled with all his
strength. The ﬂoat, which had been sliding toward the right
up until that point steadied, and passed within a foot of a
huge, gray-speckled rock.
Zikko saw his second bullet strike home, and was prepar-

ing to place his third, when one of the tiny ﬁgures below
produced a long-barreled pistol and ﬁred. It was a nearly
impossible shot, but such was the pistoleer’s skill or luck
that the slug hit one of the wreckers and killed him instantly. The body fell on Zikko, which made it impossible
to ﬁre, and the third sweep operator was spared as a result.
The surviving council members were distraught to say
the least, although it was difﬁcult to say what bothered
them more, their collaborator’s death or the prospect of having to pay Zikko even though the ﬂoat had passed through
the chute intact. But it hardly mattered. The marksman demanded his pay, tucked it into his purse, and was soon on
his way. Though not entirely successful, the trip had been
worthwhile, and his family would eat.
Much to the disappointment of the wreckers who lined

both sides of the river, the ﬂoat was still intact as it surged
out of the chute, and followed the main channel downstream. There was a fusillade of shots as the locals ﬁred off
their mostly muzzle-loading weapons; but none of the balls
found ﬂesh, and it wasn’t long before even the trailing edge
of the raft was out of range.
Rebo heaved a sigh of relief as the last shots sent geysers
of water up behind his sweep—and felt even better when a
tree walker came back to relieve him. Then, with the ﬂoat

318

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

under control, the passengers were free to return to their
cabin. It felt good to get in out of the wind, but the bullet
holes that let light through the walls served to remind the
group of how fragile their shelter was and served to erode
any sense of well-being they might have otherwise felt.
The river, which ran only inches under the decking,
chuckled heartlessly. The only things it cared about were
the raindrops that occasionally fell from the sky, the streams
that contributed to its strength, and the sea that waited
somewhere over the horizon. Those were everything—and
nothing else mattered.
Dinner was over, and, while it was dark outside the cabin,

soft buttery light ﬂooded the interior. The wall that divided
the passenger quarters from the galley and bunkroom was
only one plank thick, which meant that the foursome could
hear the clatter of pots and pans interspersed with mufﬂed
conversation as off-duty members of the crew mourned their
dead crewmates and discussed the events of the day.
Bo was snoring in the bunk beneath him, and Lee was
supposed to be asleep as well. By just barely opening his
eyelids, the youngster could see Rebo sitting at the table,
with the Crosser disassembled in front of him. Norr sat
across from the runner with her chin resting on her hands.
She looked beautiful in the soft lamplight, or that’s what
Lee thought, and he suspected that Rebo would have
agreed. They hadn’t had much opportunity to be alone of
late, and there was tension at times. There was no sign of
that, however, as the runner peered through the newly
swabbed gun barrel. “I don’t know, Lanni,” he said doubtfully. “Are you sure that’s a good idea?”
Norr shrugged. “You know Lysander . . . If I say no, he’s

RUNNER

319

likely to come through anyway. We might as well get it over
with.”
Rebo lowered the gun barrel and made a face. “Yeah, and
there’s no telling when he’ll decide to do it. Okay, so long as
you’re up for it, let him through.”
Lee, his interest fully piqued, lay perfectly still. If a dead
person was about to speak, then he wanted to listen.
Norr nodded and closed her eyes. Lysander was present,
she could feel it, already trying to push his way in. The sensitive knew he couldn’t take over her body permanently, not
so far as she knew anyway, but feared that he would if he
could. Not to hurt her, but without regard for her desires,
consistent with the relationship that existed between them
hundreds of years before. He had been ruthless then, and he
was ruthless now, the only difference being that the discarnate had switched sides. Now he was ruthlessly good if such
a thing was possible. That was the last thought the sensitive
had before Lysander pushed in and took control.
Rebo saw Norr jerk as her onetime father stepped in
and was ready when the dead man spoke. His voice was
pitched a good deal lower than the sensitive’s and sounded
hoarse. “Oh,” Lysander said as he stared across the table,
“it’s you.”
The Crosser’s barrel made a positive click as it mated with
the weapon’s receiver. “Yeah,” the runner replied emotionlessly, “it’s me. Who were you expecting? The Caliph?”
“No, you’ll do,” the dead scientist allowed. “Now listen
carefully . . . A man named Kane and his operatives are
watching the spaceport in Cresus. They don’t care about
you, the boy, or the heavy, but they want my daughter. More
than that, they want the gate seed. You care about her, I can
see that, so keep her safe.”

320

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Rebo frowned. “Thanks for the warning—but how am I
supposed to accomplish what you ask? We need to get off
this planet, and the shuttle is going to land at the spaceport.”
“Go to Techno Society headquarters,” the spirit instructed, “and use the star gate. They won’t expect that.”
“No,” the runner agreed soberly, “they won’t. But the ofﬁce will be guarded. What about that?”
“That’s your problem,” Lysander said unsympathetically.
“Now remember, it’s absolutely imperative that you ﬁnd
Logos before they do, or those who control the Techno Society will make the same mistakes that I did. That has priority over everything else.”
“Not for me it doesn’t,” Rebo replied, but the connection
had been broken by then, and Norr was back in her body.
The sensitive blinked and shook her head as if to clear it.
“What did he say?”
Rebo slid the magazine into the butt of his gun and felt
it lock into place. “He says they’re waiting for us at the
spaceport in Cresus.”
“And?”
“And he says we can escape Ning by making use of the
star gate located inside Techno Society headquarters.”
Norr uttered a low whistle. “So, what do you think?
Could we pull it off?”
Rebo thought about his responsibility to Lee and the fact
that if the two of them were to divorce themselves from the
sensitive, they would be a whole lot better off. The problem
was that what he should do to take care of Lee was in direct
conﬂict with what he wanted to do for Norr. A second had
passed, and the runner was still struggling with the problem, when Lee sat up. His eyes were bright and determined.
“The answer is, ‘yes.’ We can pull it off.”

RUNNER

321

Norr laughed and looked from the boy to Rebo. He
smiled. “You heard the boss . . . We’ll ﬁnd a way.”
The Techno Society’s offices were pleasant compared to

the rooming house where Kane slept. So, when the operative wasn’t out at the spaceport, he preferred to spend most
of his time in the station chief’s ofﬁce. It had a large window
that opened onto a narrow side street that was lined with
stalls. The noise generated by squalling angens, merchants
endlessly pitching their wares, and the steady bang, bang,
bang of the local tinsmith had bothered the off-worlder at
ﬁrst, but now, after more than a week at his borrowed desk,
he barely noticed the racket. He toyed with a double-edged
letter opener and stared out the window.
There was a commotion out in the hall, followed by a
loud thump, and a heartfelt swear word. Kane turned to see
the station chief standing in the doorway. Her name was Ilia
Posa. She was middle-aged, thick-waisted, and typically
wore loose robelike garments that were intended to conceal
her ﬁgure. She didn’t like Kane, the task that had been assigned to her, or the fact that the operative had commandeered her ofﬁce. Her voice was cold as ice. “Your visitor is
here.”
“Bring her in,” Kane ordered, and stood while a blanketdraped stretcher was maneuvered into the room. The person
who lay on it was so skeletal that the covers lay nearly ﬂat.
But the seer was there, and, though said to be near death, continued to occupy her body. Once the stretcher had been laid
across the surface of the desk, and the generator-powered
light had been extinguished in order to protect her eyes, Posa
pulled the blankets down to reveal a skull-like face. Most of
the old woman’s hair had fallen out, her skin looked like gray

322

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

parchment, and her lips had a bluish tinge. But when her eyes
locked with Kane’s, the operative could feel the power still residing in her body. Her voice was little more than a croak.
“What do you want? Let me die in peace.”
“My name is Kane,” the operative replied. “They tell me
that you have the ability to communicate with the dead.”
The crone blinked. “I’m a sensitive. Everyone knows
that.”
“Yes,” Kane agreed lamely. “Well, tell me this . . . Can
you put me in contact with a spirit named Lysander?”
The old woman’s eyes narrowed. “Why should I? And
what will you do if I don’t? Kill me?”
The joke was followed by wild cackling that Kane took
to be laughter. He looked up at Posa. The station chief held
a six-year-old girl by the hand. She let go and pushed the
child forward. “No,” Kane replied calmly. “I’ll kill her. And
I’ll do it slowly . . . While you watch.”
The little girl said, “Grandma!” and ran to the old
woman’s side.
The sensitive tried to rise but lacked the strength and fell
back onto the stretcher. “You bastard.”
Kane nodded as if in agreement. “Put me in contact with
Lysander, and both of you will go free.”
The seer closed her eyes. There was a long pause, and the
operative was ready to conclude that his prisoner had either
fallen asleep or passed into the next world, when her eyes
suddenly popped open. “Lysander refuses to speak with
you—but there’s another spirit who will.”
Kane’s felt a sense of frustration mixed with curiosity.
“Really? Who?”
“His name is Cayo,” the sensitive said hoarsely. “He
claims that you left him to die in the catacombs beneath the
city of Zand.”

RUNNER

323

The operative remembered the desperate ﬂight up out of
the depths, the sound of shotgun blasts echoing back and
forth between the ancient walls, and the pitiful way in
which Cayo had called his name. “Kane! Help me!”
But he hadn’t helped, and now, rather than the spirit he
wanted to communicate with, Cayo was attempting to come
through. The reality of that sent a chill down Kane’s spine
but he still managed to keep his voice level. “Tell him that
I’m sorry—but there was no way to save him. I hope his
next life will end more peacefully.”
“He doesn’t believe you,” the old woman replied, “but he
has information regarding the woman you’re looking for and
the object you brought up out of the catacombs.”
“Information?” Kane inquired cautiously. “Why would
Cayo provide me with information?”
“In return for money,” the sensitive croaked. “Take a
hundred cephors to Zand and deliver them to his wife. Once
she has the money, Cayo will tell you what the woman plans
to do.”
“I know what she plans to do,” Kane replied. “She and her
friends intend to board the shuttle and leave the planet.”
“Cayo says you’re wrong,” the seer responded, “and he
seems sincere.”
There was a long pause as Kane considered the proposition. It seemed like a long shot, but it wasn’t that much
money, not by the society’s standards, and thanks to the local star gate, he could travel to Zand in a matter of minutes.
“All right,” he said ﬁnally, “tell Cayo that I will do what he
asks. Except that his wife will receive half the money up
front—and the other half once he delivers on his promise. In
the meantime both you and your granddaughter will remain here.”
“You’d better hurry,” the old woman cautioned, “or

324

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

you’re going to need a sensitive in order to communicate
with me.”
Speed. That was the most important factor in Rebo’s opin-

ion, and the others were in complete agreement. The longer
it took to reach Cresus and implement their plan, the more
time their enemies would have to prepare a trap for them.
And that could be important, because even though the
group intended to stay clear of the spaceport, they might ultimately be forced to use it. Just because Lysander said that
a star gate was available didn’t mean it was so, and if it
turned out that the discarnate was wrong, the travelers
would have little choice but to try for the shuttle.
So, no sooner had the ﬂoat successfully made its way
through the last set of rapids and entered the stretch of calm
water that river folk called the ﬂat, than the foursome left
the slow-moving raft in favor of a long, narrow mail boat. It
was powered by two heavies pulling four oars. Captain
Duther and his crew waved as sweeps ﬂashed in the sunlight, water dripped off bright red blades, and their former
passengers were borne downstream.
The river was ﬂowing along at about two miles per hour.
That, combined with the strength of the burly oarsmen, was
sufﬁcient to propel their craft at a steady six to seven miles
per hour. Thanks to the fact that the boat was on an express
run, carrying correspondence for the Caliph himself, there
was no need for it to stop at each jetty along the way.
As time passed, and the distance to Cresus continued to
dwindle, villages appeared with increasing regularity, as did
river trafﬁc, until the young woman who served as the
coxswain was forced to steer a zigzag course between heavily
laden barges, rafts of slow-moving logs, and a variety of
boats. Most were drab affairs, dedicated to ﬁshing or carry-

RUNNER

325

ing small cargoes, but a few boasted striped awnings, bright
metalwork, and uniformed crew people. Lee never failed to
wave as the mail packet swept past them—but none of the
wealthy boaters chose to return the gesture.
That was to be expected, from Hoggles’s perspective at
least, but what troubled the heavy was the other items that
the current carried with it. There was trash of every description, ugly-looking white foam that poured into the Juno
from what had once been freshwater streams, and the occasional corpse. Flood victims perhaps? Boatmen murdered
by pirates? Casualties of the latest plague? There was no
way to tell.
The half-submerged bodies caused the heavy to think,
however, about the city and his reasons for returning there.
Not to see his family, all of whom had been murdered, but
to rediscover himself. Was he the ﬁrebrand of his youth?
The hermit who lived aboard a spaceship? Or someone else
entirely? And what about his friends? Was he ready to part
company with them? And make a life for himself in Cresus?
And how realistic was the idea given that there was a price
on his head?
The ﬂood of questions was interrupted as the mail boat
rounded a bend, slid under a high-arched bridge, and passed
between the whitewashed pylons that marked the city limits. Most watercraft were required to pull over to the riverbanks at that point and line up to go through customs, but
the mail boat belonged to the Caliph and was exempt from
his taxes. It sailed past the ofﬁcial barges, pennant ﬂuttering
gaily in the breeze, as water boiled at its stern.
Though not supposed to carry passengers, the mail boat
frequently did, which was how the three-person crew were
able to get by on their parsimonious salaries. This fact was
not lost on the customs agents, who expected a gratuity at

326

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the end of the month in return for remaining silent, and who
lived in large houses deep in one of the safer parts of the city.
Rebo, who had absolutely no interest in the extent to
which the city’s ofﬁcials had been corrupted, was simply
grateful for the fact that he and his companions had been allowed to enter Cresus without undergoing any scrutiny. It
was a piece of good fortune he had never dared dream of.
While somewhat open about carrying passengers, there
were limits as to how brazen the boat crew could be without
eliciting the ire of their superiors, which is why they sought
to discharge their illicit cargo prior to pulling up alongside
the government dock. It was already host to one of the new
steamboats that plied the river, and Lee thought the vaporbelching side-wheeler was fascinating.
Having paid the coxswain, the foursome climbed a
much-abused ladder to the jetty above. From there it was
necessary to thread their way between food vendors, ﬁshermen, and pickpockets before emerging onto the busy thoroughfare that ran parallel to the river and terminated some
ﬁve miles to the west.
Even though he had grown up in Cresus, Hoggles didn’t
know where the Techno Society’s headquarters were. He
pulled a hood up over his head. “Come on,” the heavy said
as he made a hole in the crowd, “let’s ﬁnd a wordsmith.”
The others followed, and it wasn’t long before Hoggles
led them through a passageway and into the thriving market that lay beyond the row of stores and warehouses
fronting the waterway. The odor of urine mixed with what
the sewers routinely disgorged into the river produced a
combination so malodorous that the runner was hesitant to
breathe.
At one point Rebo saw light reﬂect off metal as one of the
Techno Society’s robots appeared up ahead. It was a danger-

RUNNER

327

ous moment, but the runner managed to hustle his companions into a tea shop before the machine marched past.
Not long thereafter Hoggles spotted what he was looking for and led the group into a storefront dominated by the
steady thump, thump, thump of a hand-operated press, the
harsh smell of chemicals, and the head scribe’s frenetic personality. She was small, no larger than a normal teenager,
and seemed to ﬂit from place to place. Norr winced as the
woman came out to greet them and sent a tidal wave of raw
energy toward her potential customers. “Welcome! And
what can we do for you today? Wedding invitations perhaps? No? Well, we can handle whatever the project is.”
“We need an address,” Hoggles said. “For an organization called the Techno Society.”
“Oh,” the wordsmith replied, her disappointment plain
to see. “I’ll look it up.”
Five minutes later, and one copper poorer, the group was
on its way. Many of the shops had changed during the
heavy’s extended absence, but the streets remained the
same, so it wasn’t long before the foursome found themselves across the street from the building in which the
Techno Society was headquartered. What the others didn’t
know, because Hoggles had chosen not to tell them, was
that the route had taken them across the square where his
family had been slaughtered. There were tears in his eyes,
but the heavy managed to surreptitiously wipe them away
as he herded his friends into a deeply shadowed alcove and
nodded toward the building on the far side the street.
“That’s the place,” the variant said. “Right over there.”
Rebo eyed the structure. It was solid, but far from fancy,
and, judging from the signs that hung out front, the building housed a rug merchant and an apothecary in addition to
the Techno Society. “All right,” the runner said, as he

328

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

checked to ensure that his weapons were loose in their holsters. “Surprise is everything. Once inside I’ll take care of
the staff. Lanni and Lee will look for the star gate. Any
questions?”
Lee frowned. “What if Lanni and I don’t ﬁnd the gate?”
“Then tell me,” Rebo answered, “and we’ll run like hell.
But let’s hope you ﬁnd it, because the spaceport would be a
tough nut to crack, and I have no desire to live in Cresus for
the rest of my life.”
Hoggles grinned. “And neither do I.”
Norr looked up at the variant. “Really? You’re coming
with us?”
The giant nodded gravely. “If you’ll have me.”
Rebo raised an eyebrow. “We don’t know where we’re going to end up.”
Hoggles shrugged. “It can’t be any worse than Cresus.”
“You can stay with me if you want,” Lee said, as he
peered upward. “My brothers and sisters will welcome you.”
The heavy wasn’t sure that he was ready to adopt a
monastic life, but nodded anyway and gave the boy a pat on
the head. “Thank you, friend. We’ll see what the future
brings.”
“Okay,” Rebo said, eyeing his friends. “Bo will help me
deal with the staff. Let’s get this over with.”
The runner led the others across the cobblestone street,
up a short ﬂight of stairs, and through a much-abused door.
The apothecary was to the left and the rug merchant was to
the right. A sign indicated that the Techno Society was located on the second ﬂoor, and Rebo was halfway up the
wooden stairs when a metal man stepped out of a door and
started down. The robot had been programmed to look for
the very people now blocking the way, and while emotionless, paused to double-check the data provided by its sen-

RUNNER

329

sors. The machine had turned, and was about to give the
alarm, when Rebo did it for him.
Though never quiet, the Hogger sounded like a cannon
as it went off within the close conﬁnes of the stairwell. The
slug struck the android between its alloy shoulder blades,
severed the ﬁber-optic pathway that ran down through the
center of its plastic spinal column, and dumped the machine
onto the stairs. The metal man wasn’t dead, not so long as
its processor continued to function, but it was certainly out
of commission.
Ilia Posa heard the gunshot and was fumbling for the pistol that she kept in her top desk drawer, when a man with a
gun burst through her door. From the shouting that could be
heard from out in the hall, she judged that he wasn’t alone.
“Hold it right there,” Rebo ordered. “Raise your hands.”
The station chief had little choice but to comply.
“What about my hands?” a voice croaked, and the runner
turned to see that an old woman lay on the ﬂoor and that a
little girl was crouched at her side. “Yeah, you too,” Rebo
responded backing up so he could he could keep track of all
three of them at once. “Where’s Kane?”
Posa saw no reason to lie. “He’s in Zand.”
“They’re holding us prisoner,” the seer said hoarsely. “Let
my granddaughter go.”
The runner eyed the little girl and jerked his head toward the door. “She can go.”
The old crone whispered something to the girl, who nodded obediently and scampered out of the room. “So,” Rebo
said as he refocused his attention on Posa, “when will Kane
return?”
The station chief shrugged. “The journey takes weeks.”
The Crosser barked and the woman jerked as the bullet
scored her left cheek. “Wrong answer,” the runner said grimly.

330

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“The trip takes no more than a few seconds if you have a star
gate.”
“He’s got you there!” the seer cackled approvingly.
Posa touched her cheek and examined her hand. There
was blood on it. For the ﬁrst time since the invasion had begun, she was truly afraid. “What do you want?”
“The gate,” Rebo said grimly. “Take me to it. And no
tricks . . . I can ﬁnd it without you.”
Posa, her left hand on her cheek, led the runner down a
dingy green hall. The station chief was forced to step over
her security chief, who no longer looked like himself, and lay
in a pool of steadily spreading blood. The rest of the staff
waited beyond, faces to a wall, hands on their heads. A heavy,
his war hammer drenched with blood, nodded politely.
The man with the gun said, “Keep moving,” and Posa
had just rounded a corner and stepped into the station’s conference room, when she saw the sensitive and the little boy.
They had already searched the space and discovered the
hinged painting. “There it is,” Norr said, pointing at the
keypad that was set into the wall. “All we need is the code.”
“You heard her,” the runner said as he jabbed the gun
into the station chief’s back. “Enter the code.”
Hand shaking Posa did as she was bid. Something went
thud, a motor whirred, and an entire section of wall slid out
of the way. “Check it out,” Rebo said, “but be careful.”
Norr nodded, motioned for Lee to remain where he was,
and thumbed the power switch. The vibro blade hummed
ominously as the sensitive stepped into the chamber beyond. The air was cool but stale. Though dim, the lighting
was adequate, and Norr saw what she was looking for up
ahead. More than that she felt it, as something made her
stomach feel queasy and triggered a headache.
The symptoms were sufﬁcient to claim some of the sensi-

RUNNER

331

tive’s attention, but not all of it, which was fortunate. Norr
“felt” a source of life energy above her, and looked upward
just in time to see the carefully hidden sentry drop off a
ledge, a two-foot-long blade held in each hand. The sensitive fell backward, heard steel swish through the space she
had just vacated, and rolled to her feet. The sentry grinned,
and his short blades whirred as they etched patterns into
the air.
But skilled though he was, the sentry was human, which
meant that he was surrounded by a multicolored energy
ﬁeld. And because the sensitive had spent her entire adult
life studying such things she could read her opponent’s aura,
and thus his intentions. That enabled Norr to swing her
blade at the spot the sentry was about to occupy, which
meant that when he stepped into that position, the vibro
blade was there to meet him. The weapon sliced down
through a shoulder blade and into his chest.
He looked surprised, and Norr felt sorry for him as his
physical body fell, and his spirit remained standing. But
there was no time to console the man, or offer him counsel,
as Rebo entered the room behind her. The runner eyed the
body, said, “Good work,” and pointed at the door marked
decontamination lock. “Let’s get that sucker open . . .
Bo locked the staff into a storeroom, but it won’t take them
long to escape.”
The lock opened in response to the sensitive’s touch, the
others followed Norr inside, and Hoggles pulled the door
closed behind him. There was a hiss, followed by a roar, as jets
of disinfectant-laden hot water hit the foursome from every
possible angle. Rebo spluttered. “It’s some sort of bath!”
The water turned to steam as it hit the vibro blade and
Norr thumbed the weapon off. Her dark hair hung in wet
strands all around her face, and her clothes were plastered to

332

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

her body as she sought to protect the gate seed from the water. “It’s about time that three of you took a shower!”
The humor was lost on the others as they were systematically drenched and buffeted with blasts of hot air, before
being allowed to enter the circular chamber beyond. Water
continued to drop from their clothes as they looked around.
Norr immediately recognized the tiles that covered the
walls as being similar to those she had seen under the city of
Tra, except that some of these were lit, and clearly active.
Lee was delighted by his surroundings and read some of the
names out loud. “Look! There’s Anafa! And Hemo, and
Pooz, and Zand!”
“We need to ﬁnd the one labeled Thara,” Rebo said as he
scanned the squares arrayed in front of him.
“Here it is,” Hoggles said, “but it’s dark.”
Rebo felt a crushing sense of disappointment. Partly
because of what that might mean near term—but for an
additional reason as well. Thara was more than another
destination, it was the planet on which he had been born
and the primary reason why he had agreed to take on this
particular assignment. To come so close, then be blocked,
was hard to take. “Try it anyway,” the runner said hopefully. “Let’s see what happens.”
Hoggles pushed on the tile, and felt it give, but there
was no response.
“Then let’s go to Etu,” Norr said pragmatically as she
pointed to a brightly lit tile. “That’s where the ship would
have taken us from here—and we can reach Thara from
there.”
“Maybe,” Rebo replied darkly, “assuming the next ship is
operational . . . But that’s then—and this is now. Go
ahead—punch us out of here.”
The sensitive pressed against the shiny surface, felt the

RUNNER

333

square give, and gave an involuntary start as a woman’s
voice issued from a speaker mounted over her head. “The
transfer sequence is about to begin. Please take your place
on the service platform. Once in place check to ensure that
no portion of your anatomy extends beyond the yellow line.
Failure to do so will cause serious injury and could result in
death.”
“Come on!” Rebo urged as he stepped up onto a slightly
raised platform. “Who knows how quickly this thing
works!”
Because of the size of the heavy’s body it was difﬁcult for
all four of them to squeeze inside the yellow safety circle,
but they made it, and were locked in a group hug when they
were blinded by a ﬂash of light. Rebo lost his vision, felt
sick to his stomach, and wondered if he was dead.
Posa had escaped from the storeroom, by then. She entered the control room, slapped the kill switch for the station’s generator, and the lights went out. Dozens of tiles on
dozens of planets suddenly went dark as Ning’s number two
star gate went off-line. “That should ﬁx the bastards,” the
station chief said grimly, and went to get her pistol. The little girl had escaped—but her grandmother was going to die.

THIRTEEN
™

The Planet Etu

Because variants were created by man rather than God—they
cannot be categorized as human.
—Archbishop Chario Immu, The Church of Etu

Rebo screamed, but no one could hear him as his body was

ripped apart, transmitted through hyperspace, and systematically reassembled many light-years away. A fraction of a
second passed while the runner hung suspended in midair,
followed by a sudden fall as local gravity took over, and
Rebo crashed to the ﬂoor below. It was slanted, and he was
still in the process of sliding downward, when Lee landed on
top of him. There was a loud grunt as Hoggles crashed next
to the pair, followed by a thump as Norr landed on her feet.
“Where the hell are we?” the runner inquired as he
struggled to get up. The ﬂoor was cracked, slanted, and
lower than it was supposed to be. The gravity was lighter
than Ning’s, however, which made it easier to get up.
“I assume we’re on Etu,” the sensitive replied, as she

RUNNER

335

scanned the mosaic of tiles that covered the walls. “Look!
The control for Cresus is dark! I wonder what happened?”
“Beats me,” Hoggles said ponderously, “but judging
from the kind of folks we left behind, we’d better get ready
for a ﬁght.”
“That sounds like excellent advice,” Rebo agreed, and
felt his stomach heave as he made for the door. It looked a
little out of square, as if whatever caused the ﬂoor to buckle
had done damage to it as well, and that gave rise to a series
of questions: Would the hatch open? What would they do if
it didn’t? And what lay beyond?
The runner pressed his palm against the sensor plate and
felt a sense of relief as a motor whined, and the barrier began
to move. But that was when he heard a grinding noise, followed by a loud click as a relay opened, and the motor
stopped. The runner stuck his right arm through the gap,
but it was obvious that not even Lee would be able to
squeeze through.
“What now?” Norr said weakly, as she battled the urge to
vomit.
“Bo can force it open,” Lee said conﬁdently. “Can’t you,
Bo?”
The heavy looked down at the boy and forced a smile. “I
don’t know,” he replied honestly, “but I’ll try.”
So saying, the variant handed his war hammer to Norr,
made his way over to the door, and got into position. Then,
having set his feet, Hoggles pushed. Muscles writhed, cords
stood out from his neck, and all manner of veins appeared as
the heavy exerted all of his considerable strength.
There was no reaction at ﬁrst, and Norr had started to
wonder if the task was hopeless, when she heard something
creak. That was followed by a groan as metal gave way, followed by a clang as a locking pin broke, and a rattle as the

336

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

door slid back into its housing. “See?” Lee demanded
proudly. “I told you he could do it!”
“And you were correct,” Rebo agreed as he removed the
Crosser from its holster. “Now, let’s see what’s waiting for us
outside.”
Only half the water jets came on as the runner entered
the decontamination chamber—and those that remained
operational lacked force. The air blowers were working,
however, and the runner had no choice but to wait them
out, since it was apparent that the next door wasn’t going to
open until the cleansing cycle had completed itself.
Once the dryers clicked off, the door opened smoothly,
and Rebo raised his weapon. But, rather than the bloodthirsty horde of metal men he half expected to see, the runner found himself looking out into a dusty room half-ﬁlled
with debris. A few steps were sufﬁcient to ascertain that no
one waiting to ambush them, and, judging from the allpervasive silence, the surrounding structure had been abandoned. Once clear of the decontamination room the nausea
started to fade.
“Maybe they were hit by an earthquake,” Norr speculated as she toed a chunk of broken duracrete. “That would
account for all of the destruction.”
Rebo nodded. He had been through a quake once, on a
planet called Keno, and knew how destructive such events
could be. “That would explain it,” he agreed. “But it appears that whatever the techno crazies use for power is still
operational. And that means they can follow us.”
“I thought we were going to sabotage the place,” Hoggles remarked as examined the damage.
The runner shrugged. “Yeah, that was the plan, but I
don’t have the foggiest idea how to go about it. Especially
with all of this debris in the way.”

RUNNER

337

“Then let’s do what we do best,” Norr put in. “Let’s get
the heck out of here.”
“That works for me,” Rebo agreed as he made his way toward an unobstructed archway. “And who knows? Maybe
the next leg of the journey will be easy.”
“Yeah,” Hoggles replied darkly. “And maybe L-phants
will ﬂy.”
The Planet Ning

The blowers stopped, Kane palmed the door, and waited for
it to open. Except for the boots that the operative held in his
right hand, he was nude as the barrier slid out of the way to
reveal Posa and two members of her staff. Incredibly, and for
reasons Kane couldn’t fathom, they held weapons that were
pointed at him. If they found his lack of clothing to be offensive, there was no sign of it. “Please let me be the ﬁrst to
welcome you back,” the station chief said sarcastically.
“There’s some good news and some bad news. The good
news is that you won’t have to pay Cayo’s wife the second
half of the fee . . . The bad news is that rather than head for
the spaceport, the way you assumed that she would, the sensitive and her rufﬁans came here instead. They murdered two
of my staff members before making a jump to Etu. I cut the
power after they entered the transfer chamber—but they
were already in transit by then.”
It was a lot to absorb, but the operative had a quick
mind, and was able to make sense of it. It looked like Cayo
had been correct about Norr’s plans, but because of differences between the spirit and physical planes, had misjudged
how much time things would take. The operative made a
mental note to return to Zand, kill Cayo’s wife, and retrieve
the money. Not because the Techno Society was short of

338

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

funds—but as a point of honor. “Okay,” he said levelly, “so
why point those weapons at me?”
“Because Shaz returned to Anafa six days ago,” Posa explained, “and we’re the only ones who know what happened
here. You would kill us if you could, blame the murders on
the sensitive, and continue on your way. That’s why.”
Kane hadn’t had the opportunity to hatch such a plot as
yet, but knew he would have and was forced to raise his estimate of the station chief’s intelligence. “That’s absurd,”
the operative lied, and held his arms straight out to emphasize his nudity. “I’m unarmed, not to mention a bit chilly, so
how ’bout we continue this discussion in your ofﬁce?”
“Give him his clothes,” Posa said grufﬂy, “and let him
get dressed. Once that’s accomplished bring him to me.
Everyone in this organization is accountable—even Mr.
high-and-mighty Kane.”
The man in question hoped it wasn’t true, but feared that
it was, and had little choice but to cooperate. Even though
Shaz was back on Anafa, the variant was still only minutes
away, and the knowledge made Kane’s knees feel weak. The
clothes hit him in the chest—and he hurried to put them on.
The Planet Etu

It was difﬁcult to tell what the city of Epano had been like
before the quake, because most of the buildings constructed
during the last hundred years lay in ruins; but as the foursome picked their way through rubble-littered streets,
Rebo got the impression of wide boulevards, which had
been laid out grid fashion, ornate public buildings, some of
which remained intact, and lush greenery, all of which was
coated with dust.
Smartly uniformed troops could be seen, lots of them,

RUNNER

339

and seemed to have the situation well in hand. People were
out and about, but there were no casualties to be seen,
which suggested that they had been removed to hospitals.
Further evidence of how organized the local government
was could be seen in the gangs of workers already toiling to
remove debris from the streets so that repairs could get under way.
In marked contrast to the other cities they’d been in recently, Rebo noticed that none of the civilians were armed.
That caused him to remove the gun belt from around his
waist and place the Hogger in his pack. His jacket hid the
Crosser, so he left that weapon where it was.
The enormous war hammer was impossible to hide, but
Hoggles managed to disguise the weapon by wrapping the
business end with rags, which he tied into place with twine.
Norr’s vibro blade was concealed within her staff so there
was no need to alter its appearance. Her appearance, however, as well as the heavy’s, was a deﬁnite problem, which
quickly became apparent as the travelers rounded a corner
and happened onto a checkpoint.
They saw the group of soldiers up ahead and were about
to angle away from them, when a sharp-eyed ﬁle leader
spotted them. He frowned as if he had just bitten into
something he didn’t like the taste of. He wore leather body
armor, a knee-length kilt, and sandal-style boots. He spoke
standard but with the lilt typical of the local population.
“Come on . . . Don’t be shy . . . Let’s have a look at you.”
Rebo didn’t like the situation, not one little bit, but had
to comply. He stepped forward and the others followed. The
ﬁle leader had thick brows, a hooked nose, and thin lips.
“So,” he said, addressing himself to Rebo, “who are you?
Who do the freaks belong to? And where are their chains?”
Having suddenly been confronted with a series of ques-

340

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

tions that he wasn’t prepared to answer, the runner struggled to come up with answers, and do so quickly enough to
seem credible. It seemed safe to assume that the term
“freaks” referred to the variants, both of whom looked like
what they were, but what to make of the rest? Rebo decided
to start with the obvious stuff and elaborate from there. “My
name is Rebo, Jak Rebo, and this is my son Lee. As for the
freaks, they belong to me.”
The ofﬁcer nodded. “Well, Citizen Rebo, these are difﬁcult times, but you know the rules. Variants must wear restraints . . . And hoods, too. What if the big fellow were to
turn on you? Or the witch were to channel an evil spirit?
The laws were written for your protection.”
Rebo thought about Lysander and could understand the
concern. Strangely, while the variants had attracted negative
attention, it seemed as if they had served to establish Rebo’s
status as a lawful citizen, too, since there had been no effort
to conﬁrm his identity.
Meanwhile, having been referred to as freaks, and discussed them as if they were little more than livestock, both
Hoggles and Norr were understandably outraged. The
heavy wrapped and rewrapped his ﬁngers around the war
hammer’s handle while the sensitive bit her lower lip.
“Yes, I know that,” Rebo said humbly. “Unfortunately my
wife and I lost nearly everything in the quake. The house collapsed, and we were lucky to escape with our lives.”
“Well, we don’t have any hoods,” the ﬁle leader responded sympathetically, “but we do have some spare leg
irons.” So saying the ofﬁcer called for one of his noncoms
and gave the necessary orders. Metal rattled as two sets of
leg irons were removed from a wooden hand cart and the
variants had little choice but to remain motionless as the
heavy restraints were locked around their ankles.

RUNNER

341

“There you go,” the ﬁle leader said as he handed the keys
to Rebo, “get some hoods on them as soon as you can. I hear
the slave market will reopen soon . . . The heavy would
fetch a good price. Especially given all the rebuilding that
needs to be done. Perhaps the proceeds could go toward rebuilding your home.”
“That’s a good idea,” the runner agreed politely. “Thank
you for all of your help.”
“That’s what we’re here for,” the soldier replied
pompously, and gave Rebo a slip of parchment. “Here, show
this to any unit that stops you, and good luck.”
Rebo accepted the pass and tucked it away. Then, having
taken Lee by the hand, the off-worlder assumed what he
hoped was the appropriate demeanor. “All right, you two—
that’s enough standing around. We have work to do.”
The chains that connected the ankle bracelets together
weren’t very long, which forced Norr and Hoggles to adopt
a quick shufﬂe in order to keep up. It was awkward, humiliating, and ultimately painful.
The runner took the ﬁrst turn that he could, gave thanks
for the fact that there weren’t any troops in sight, and gave
the keys to the variants. “Here, hang on to these, but leave
the shackles in place. We’ll get stopped if you don’t.”
Norr made a face. “Okay, but walk more slowly, and let’s
put some padding in these things.”
“All right,” Rebo agreed lightly. “But try to look a little
more subservient. I think I could get used to it.”
“In your dreams,” the sensitive replied. “In your dreams.”
The Planet Ning

Someone pushed Kane from behind. He stumbled, and
nearly fell, but managed to keep his balance. The seer had

342

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

been laid out across the top of the station chief’s desk the last
time the operative had been in her ofﬁce, but the old woman
had disappeared, as had the little girl. There was a patch of
what might have been blood on the ﬂoor, which suggested
that Posa had put the two of them to death, not that it made
any difference to Kane. He had problems of his own, not the
least of which was ﬁguring out how to escape before the station chief shipped him to Anafa, or summoned Shaz to
Ning, either of which would almost certainly be fatal.
“Have a seat,” Posa said, as she gestured toward the single guest chair. “You and I are going to have a nice little
chat about the sensitive and the item she took from you.
Who knows? Maybe I can recover it. If I do, perhaps that
will be sufﬁcient to get me out of this hellhole.”
The very thought of Posa’s recovering the gate seed and
using it to gain the approval denied him was enough to
make the blood pound in Kane’s head. The operative looked
down at his hands. They had been bound, but in front of him,
in order to facilitate his trip to the men’s room. That was a
mistake and one he planned to take advantage of.
Kane stepped up to the desk as if preparing to sit down,
raised both hands over his head, and brought them down
as fast as he could. Clenched ﬁsts connected with the station chief’s skull. The blow stunned Posa, who fell forward, and threw her hands down in order to brace herself.
The operative took advantage of the opportunity to head
butt her, saw his opponent fall backward, and knew she
was out of it.
There was a guard, but he held his ﬁre out of fear that a
bullet might strike his boss, and rushed to grapple with the
prisoner. When Kane turned it was with Posa’s doubleedged letter opener clutched in his right hand. The guard
came to a stop, or attempted to, but the effort came too late.

RUNNER

343

The knifelike instrument went deep into his chest; he gave
a little sigh, and collapsed in a heap.
Fortunately for Kane none of the battle had generated
much in the way of sound, which meant that the rest of the
staff weren’t aware of what had just taken place, or the danger they were in. That was about to change, however, as
Kane took the guard’s weapon, plus Posa’s, and all the
ammo he could ﬁnd.
Then, his pockets heavy with the gold coins that he had
looted from the station chief’s safe, the operative took the
time necessary to garrote Posa with her own belt, prior to
going room to room with a pistol in each hand. The unsuspecting staff members fell like targets on a combat range.
Once the shuttle had come and gone, the people posted at
the spaceport would return to ﬁnd a nasty surprise waiting
for them.
Satisﬁed that all of those who could testify against him
were dead, and conﬁdent that he could blame the slaughter
on Norr, Kane entered the decontamination chamber. The
sensitive had gone to Etu, so he would too. Once on the
planet he would ﬁnd the bitch, kill her, and recover the gate
seed. Then, with the device in hand, the operative could return to Anafa. Yes, there would be questions, but nothing
speaks louder than success. Water soaked his clothes, and
his stomach felt queasy, but Kane didn’t care. He was alive,
and even though his quarry remained a few steps ahead of
him, he would soon catch up with her.
The Planet Etu

It was hot inside the ﬂour-sack hood, not to mention claustrophobic and humiliating. Norr’s vision was restricted to
what two small slits allowed her to see. That, combined

344

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

with the dust that found its way up under the hood, and the
endless jerk-jerk-jerk of the leg shackles threatened to drive
the sensitive insane.
The obvious solution was to hire or buy some sort of
angen-drawn cart, so the entire group could ride, but the
countryside was alive with displaced city folk, so transportation was in short supply. So, if the travelers wanted to
reach the spaceport at Overa in time to board the next ship,
they would have to walk.
Rebo thought conditions would improve once they put
the city of Epano behind them, but Norr wasn’t so sure.
Variants were just another category of personal property on
Etu, and since rural areas tend to be more conservative than
urban centers, the sensitive ﬁgured that things weren’t likely
to get any better out in the country. And that raised some
frightening possibilities. What if someone saw through
their charade and turned all four of them in to the authorities? Or, what if something happened to Rebo? Or, the shuttle never arrived? Doubts plagued the sensitive, and time
seemed to slow as she shufﬂed through each weary mile.
By that time the boulevard they had followed out of
Epano had degenerated into a two-lane highway, which
morphed into a single set of deep ruts served by occasional
pull-outs. Occasional stretches of ancient duracrete and
some sturdy bridges hinted at glories past, but such artifacts
were rare. For the most part the road simply followed the
path of least resistance as it wound its way between softly
rounded hills, crossed rivers at the point where the water
was shallowest, and meandered between small farms and
vast estates.
It was easy going really, or would have been, had it not
been for the misery that the variants were subjected to.
Rebo was worried about them, very worried, but there

RUNNER

345

wasn’t much he could do about it. Not considering that it
wasn’t unusual to pass a pair of matched slaves laboring between the traces of a cart loaded with angen manure, or to
see a variant pulling a plow in a nearby ﬁeld, or to be passed
by a norm mounted high on a heavy’s back.
And sensitives were no better off. Most were used as
household help, but the hooded ﬁgures could be seen escorting children to school and working in the ﬁelds as well.
Chances were that their other talents were being put to use,
but privately, and for the exclusive beneﬁt of their owners.
The fact that the variants had clearly been enslaved for a
long time, yet continued to have distinguishing traits, suggested an enforced breeding program—a horrible thought
and one that caused Rebo to shudder.
Unpleasant though the society around them was, the
weather had been relatively mild, with only the occasional
rain shower to interrupt long, mostly sunny days. The foursome made good time as a result, covering about ﬁfteen
miles per day, as the dirt road led them through a series of
rural villages.
The routine was pretty much the same from day to day.
Get up early, ﬁx a light breakfast, and hit the road. Food for
lunch and dinner, as well as the next breakfast, was purchased at the ﬁrst village they came to. Lunch was consumed by a stream if possible, far enough off the road that
passersby wouldn’t be able to see that the variants had been
allowed to remove their shackles and hoods, or the fact that
their supposed owner was breaking bread with them.
Later, after the sun had dissolved into a red-orange smear
on the western horizon, the foursome sought a safe spot to
camp. But such places were sometimes hard to ﬁnd, and
there were nights when it wasn’t safe to have a ﬁre, forcing
them to eat cold food. Lee made use of the discomfort an op-

346

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

portunity to exert mindful control over his physical body,
but it made the rest miserable, especially Norr, who missed
her hot tea.
But the days passed, and as they did, things started to
change. There was more trafﬁc on the road, the villages were
closer together, and ﬁles of brightly uniformed angenmounted cavalry passed from time to time. These were all
signs that a city lay ahead, which according to Rebo’s scribedrawn map, was called Citro. And, judging from the speed
at which they were walking, it was clear that it would be
necessary to stay the night. A none-too-pleasant prospect, especially where the variants were concerned, since it didn’t
take a genius to realize that they wouldn’t be allowed to occupy the same quarters that Rebo and Lee would.
There was nothing Norr could do about the situation,
however, so the sensitive did the best she could to put the
matter out of her mind as the foursome made their way
across a wooden bridge, past a group of bored-looking soldiers, and entered the city of Citro. It showed no signs of
earthquake damage—and was clearly less prosperous than
Epano had been prior to the temblor. Raw sewage ran along
both sides of the unpaved streets. No structures stood more
than two stories tall, and with the exception of old ground
cars that had been converted into farm wagons, there were
no signs of ancient technology. Laundry ﬂapped from lines
strung between buildings, children carried buckets of water
home from public wells, and piles of rotting garbage
marked major intersections.
Rebo sought directions from a street vendor, gave the
woman a copper by way of thanks, and led the group to a
hostelry that claimed to be the ﬁnest hotel in Citro. The
runner might have been more impressed had it not been for

RUNNER

347

the pile of angen manure out front, the trail of mud that led
up the wooden stairs to the entrance, or the somewhat
threadbare doorman who waited to greet them. But, shabby
or not, the employee wore an invisible cloak of superiority,
which could be seen in the way he looked down his nose at
the road-weary travelers. “Yes? How can I help you?”
“We wish to stay the night,” Rebo replied evenly, trying
his best to sound like the merchant that he was pretending
to be. Not rich, but successful, even if the rigors of the road
had left him and his party looking a bit disheveled.
“I see,” the doorman said, as if doing Rebo a favor. “You
and the boy may proceed to the front desk. I’ll have one of
the stable hands take the slaves around back.”
“I want them fed and given a chance to bathe,” Rebo insisted. “They’re starting to smell.”
“As are you,” the doorman thought to himself, but nodded and blew a tin whistle. A ratty-looking twelve-year-old
appeared a few moments later. He was armed with a whip,
and judging from the look on his thin little face, was eternally on the lookout for an opportunity to use it. The runner
had collected the keys for the shackles earlier that morning.
He frowned as he handed them to the boy. “If I ﬁnd whip
marks on my property, you’re the one who will wear the next
set of stripes.”
That, as it turned out, was exactly the sort of motivation
that the youngster understood. He nodded sullenly and ordered the variants down into the street. Norr paused long
enough to shrug her pack off, remove the cloth-wrapped object inside, and hand it to Rebo. “Here, master . . . This will
be safer with you.”
The runner knew what was in the package and nodded as
he accepted the spherical gate seed. He wanted to take Norr

348

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

in his arms but couldn’t. “Thanks,” he said grufﬂy. “I want
to get an early start tomorrow—so make sure that you’re
ready.”
Norr said, “Yes, master,” and was led away. Hoggles,
chains rattling, followed behind. The sensitive, her vision
restricted by the hood, followed the boy through a narrow
passageway and into a muddy courtyard where a cluster of
children were busy washing a droopy-eared angen. Beyond
them a low one-story building could be seen. It boasted two
openings. The ﬁrst, which was located at the south end of
the structure, was large enough to accommodate animals.
The second, which gave access to the north end of the building, was smaller and clearly intended for people. And it was
through that entrance that the variants were led.
Light ﬁltered into the reception area via four panes of
thick glass. There was a counter, some rusty ring bolts that
had been set into the mud-smeared ﬂoor, and the air was
thick with the rank odor of the angens stabled next door. An
armed guard sat on a tall stool in one corner, a potbellied
stove squatted in another, and the woman in charge was
protected by a crudely constructed counter. She wore a kerchief on her head, a long baggy dress, and a pair of wooden
clogs. They made a rapping sound as she moved out into the
center of the room. “The showers will open in two hours,
dinner will be served an hour after than, and the lights go
out at nine,” she said curtly. “Behave yourselves, and everything will be ﬁne. Cause trouble and you’ll be sorry. Any
questions? No? Good. It’s been my experience that it’s the
troublemakers who like to ask questions. Males go in there,”
the norm said as she pointed at a sturdy door, “and females
go in there.”
Norr was forced to wait while the norm unlocked the
door to the male barracks so that Hoggles could enter. Then,

RUNNER

349

once the door had been secured, it was the sensitive’s turn as
the woman clumped from one side of the reception area to
the other. The handmade key rattled as it was inserted into
its hole, there was a loud click-clack as the lock turned, and
the squeal of unoiled metal as the door swung open.
As Norr shufﬂed into the long narrow room she saw that
rows of heavy-duty beds lined two of the four walls. A
much-abused table ran down the center of the room. It was
ﬂanked by a dozen mismatched chairs, four of which were
occupied by female sensitives. A couple of heavies sat beyond, their hands locked together, as they struggled to determine who was strongest. Both females had biceps the size
of Norr’s thighs—and neither broke eye contact with the
other as the newcomer entered.
The door swung closed with a decisive thud, the key rattled in the lock, and Norr was on her own. “So,” a voice said
at the sensitive’s elbow, “what have we here?”
Norr was about to answer when the hood was jerked up
off her head and the ﬁfth sensitive made her presence
known. “Hello, my name is Riba,” the variant said cheerfully. Though a good deal older than Norr, the woman had
the same big eyes, high cheekbones, and narrow face.
“Hmmm,” Riba said, as she circled Norr. “I sense something strange here.”
That seemed to serve as an invitation for the others to examine the young woman as well. And not just examine, but
probe, as only sensitives can. It had been a long time since
the variant had been in the same room with another sensitive, much less ﬁve of them, and she had nearly forgotten
what such an experience was like. The heavies were oblivious to the way in which auras ﬂared, energy seethed, and
unusual things began to happen. A cut on Norr’s left arm
was miraculously healed, her pack seemed to ﬂoat off her

350

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

shoulders, and strains of ethereal music could be heard ﬂoating through the air.
Norr was a very self-contained person, but she also
missed her own kind, so the unexpected “conversation” if
that was what it could be called, both frightened and
thrilled her. “You are correct,” the oldest sensitive observed.
“She has something to hide all right.”
“Yes!” another put in excitedly. “He’s tall, a bit dangerous, and uh-oh! He’s a norm!”
“That’s bad,” a third agreed somberly. “But there’s
more . . . The lass has another man in her life as well. He
lives in the spirit planes and was her father once. He’s here
and wants to speak.”
“Oh, goody! Bring him through!” the fourth sensitive
insisted. “We could use some entertainment.”
“I’m not sure that’s a good idea” Riba said doubtfully.
“You know the rules . . . What if the heavies turn us in?
The norms would burn us alive.”
The arm-wrestling contest had ended by then and the
heavies were listening. “You have nothing to fear from us,”
the female to Norr’s left said stolidly. “Freaks side with
freaks . . . that’s what I say.”
“Fair enough,” Riba replied. “So how ’bout it, honey?
The man wants to talk to you . . . Are you willing to listen?”
Lysander had been trying to break through for days by
then, but it was dangerous to enter a trance on Etu, and
Norr had been too tired by the time dinner was over. Now,
surrounded by her own kind, she felt tempted. “Okay,” she
said tentatively, “but I’d like to sit down.”
Riba said, “Of course, dearie,” and led her to the table.
“This is Pru, Kama, Tris, and Nina.” Norr said hello to
each, took a chair, and waited to see what would happen. It
turned out that Tris was the one who had been elected to

RUNNER

351

bring the spirit through. Not simply for Norr’s beneﬁt, but
because Tris was known to have a very special talent, one
that the others were eager to witness.
The woman named Riba eyed the heavies. “Would one of
you be willing to guard the door? Thank you. Stall if someone attempts to open it.”
Silence descended over the room as the sensitives came
together under Riba’s direction to gather the energy that a
full materialization was going to require. Now, seated directly across from Tris, Norr saw that the other woman’s
eyes had been removed leaving her sockets horribly empty.
It was a precaution that some of the more superstitious slave
owners took to protect themselves from the evil eye, an
imaginary threat that many believed to be real.
Even the heavies could feel the change that followed as
something caused the hairs on the back of their arms to stand
straight up, all of the available light was sucked into the center of the room, and the air above the table started to glow.
Then, as if attracted to an unseen form by means of spiritual magnetism, the light began to coalesce. The man’s
head, like the rest of his body, was slightly transparent. It
turned from side to side, as if the spirit was unsure of his
surroundings. And this time, rather than communicate
through human vocal cords as he had in the past, Lysander
spoke via an ectoplasmic voice box. “Who are these people?”
the discarnate demanded hoarsely. “And what do they want
of me?”
“They’re friends of mine,” Norr responded, “and they
don’t want anything of you.”
“Tell them to leave,” Lysander said arrogantly. “My
words are for your ears only.”
“Sorry,” the sensitive replied, “but we’re locked in . . .
So, say your piece or leave me alone.”

352

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Lysander struggled to bring the physical plane into focus, but much to his frustration, the luminescent green
blobs remained just as they were. Norr’s words seemed to
come from a long ways off. The scientist didn’t like the situation but was determined to get his message through. “Logos is on Etu. Seek him among those who ﬂock to Mount
Pama. That’s all I can say.”
The sensitive was about to ask where Mount Pama was—
when the heavy who had agreed to guard the door put her
ear to the barrier. “Someone’s coming!” she whispered urgently. Then, having raised her voice, she yelled, “Hey! Can
anyone hear me? I feel sick.”
The general effect was to cause the person outside to
pause and consider what had been said before slipping the
big handmade key into the lock. That gave Tris just enough
time to break contact with the spirit world and exit her
trance. As she did Lysander’s image wavered, turned to what
looked like smoke, and disappeared.
The door swung open, and the guard appeared. He held a
shotgun in his hands and was clearly ready for trouble. But,
with no evidence of malfeasance to be seen there was nothing he could do except frown at them. “Which one of you
answers to the name Kama? You do? Then come on out . . .
Your mistress is ready to leave. Now, which one of you is
sick?”
The heavy who had been guarding the door raised her
hand. “Go lie down,” the guard instructed. “Once the vet is
ﬁnished with the angens he’ll take a look at you.”
Attachments were discouraged, and slaves weren’t allowed to display their emotions lest they intentionally or
unintentionally generate sympathy for themselves, so there
were no good-byes as Kama pulled the black hood down
over her head and stepped out of the room. “So,” Riba de-

RUNNER

353

manded, once the door had closed, “what did you make of
your message? Who is Logos? And why would a slave make
the pilgrimage to Mount Pama?”
Norr shrugged. “I have no idea . . . Let me know if you
ﬁgure it out.”
Riba didn’t believe the newcomer, but she had some secrets of her own and couldn’t blame Norr for keeping the information to herself. Etu was a dangerous place, especially
for those with paranormal talents, and silence was the only
defense that the slaves had.
Pala’s lungs felt as though they were fire, and the wounds

on her hips were bleeding from the most recent application
of the norm’s spurs, as the heavy trotted up the heavily rutted road and entered the village of Kaya. A trio of mangy
dogs darted out and nipped at her heels until one of the men
seated in front of the feed store whistled them back. Kane
said, “Whoa!” and jerked on the reins. Pala felt the leather
bit hit the corners of her mouth and came to a stop. She
stood chest heaving as the off-worlder placed his boots
against her lower back, pushed the sling-saddle away from
her body, and dropped to the ground. He had purchased her
in the slave market in Epano and ridden her hard. Pala had
come to hate the man called Kane and, if given the chance,
planned to kill him.
The operative, who was under no illusions regarding the
way that his mount felt about him, took the time required
to shackle the variant’s feet together prior to climbing the
wooden stairs that led up to the general store. The heavy
could run if she chose to, but not very far, and only if she
wanted a beating. His spurs jingled as Kane entered the
one-story building and peered into the cluttered gloom.
Like any general store this one carried a wide variety of

354

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

items including food, hardware, and clothing. A single ray
of sunshine slanted in through the front window. Dust
motes orbited around his head as the off-worlder stepped in
to claim it. “Hello? Is anyone home?”
“There’s no need to shout,” an irritated voice responded.
“I’m right here.”
Kane gave an involuntary start as a man in a long gray
apron materialized in front of him. It seemed that the local
had been there from the start, hidden among the things he
hoped to sell. The operative forced a smile. “Sorry about that.
I’m looking for a friend of mine . . . A man with dark hair, a
little boy, and a couple of slaves. They would have passed
through within the last few days. Have you seen them?”
The storekeeper had two days’ worth of stubble on his
pointy chin. It made a rasping sound as he ran his spatulate
ﬁngers across it. “Maybe, and maybe not.”
Kane recognized the response for what it was and withdrew a coin from his vest pocket. It found an open palm.
“Here, perhaps this will aid your memory.”
The merchant weighed the coin in his hand, and ran a
grimy thumbnail over the shiny metal, before ﬁnally tucking it away. “Yes,” the local allowed phlegmatically, “there
was such a group. They bought some food from me. That
was two days ago.”
“Tell me about the slaves,” Kane demanded, “or return
my money.”
The storekeeper didn’t like the implication and frowned
resentfully. “There was a female sensitive and a male heavy.”
“Good,” the operative said approvingly. “Now, which
way did they go?”
“Toward Mount Pama,” the local answered. “Like all the
pilgrims do.”

RUNNER

355

Kane nodded. “Thank you. I need bread, meat, and tea.
Enough to last me and my heavy for a day. Please hurry.”
The merchant bustled about, gave the stranger what he
had requested, and charged him the extra 10 percent that he
levied on all strangers. Having followed the norm out into
the street, where a tired-looking slave waited, the shopkeeper watched the blond man mount up and ride off. An obscene gesture sent the pilgrim on his way. The men sitting
in front of the feed store laughed, their dogs lolled in the
sun, and shopkeeper went back inside. A squadron of buzz
bugs followed behind. The day wore on.
The sun had been up for little more than an hour, and a

layer of early-morning mist still ﬂoated just above the
ground, as the foursome topped a rise and paused to look at
Mount Pama. Though too tall to be properly classiﬁed as a
hill, the softly rounded elevation didn’t make much of a
mountain, not to Rebo’s thinking at least. No, what made
the geological feature remarkable was the manner in which
it appeared to have been plopped down at the center of an
otherwise barren plain. That, and the ribbon of people that
already snaked their way up around the mountain’s ﬂanks,
inching their way toward the summit.
“Look at that!” Hoggles exclaimed. “There must be hundreds of them! How will we ﬁnd Logos in the crowd?”
“He’s an it, and we don’t even know what it looks like,”
Rebo commented sourly.
Thanks to a pair of really hideous glasses, and the skillful
application of the makeup Rebo had purchased during their
stay in Citro, the sensitive had been transformed into a
homely norm. She no longer had to wear shackles as a result,
but Hoggles did, and they rattled as he moved. “That’s

356

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

true,” Norr agreed thoughtfully, “but I have a feeling that
we’ll know him when we see him.”
“No offense,” Rebo replied, “but I don’t ﬁnd much comfort in that. And remember, the real goal is to reach Overa,
and the spaceship. One day, that’s all we can afford to spend
on this nonsense, so use it wisely.”
Subsequent to Lysander’s appearance in the female slave
quarters back in Citro, the adults had spent a good deal of
time discussing whether to go along with the discarnate’s
request or ignore it. The runner saw no reason to humor the
cantankerous spirit, but Norr and Hoggles believed that the
group should ﬁnd Logos, for use as leverage if nothing else.
Finally, having been ﬁlibustered, Rebo gave in. But Lee
didn’t care about the right or wrong of it. He couldn’t wait
to ﬁnd out why thousands of people would travel for weeks
to visit the top of a mountain. “Come on!” the ten-year-old
urged. “Let’s get going!”
The better part of an hour had passed before the foursome arrived at the bottom of the mountain and the settlement there. Hundreds of tents had been pitched in the
surrounding area, which when combined with all manner of
pilgrims, slaves, vendors, and hundreds of angens made for a
colorful but chaotic mix.
By that time Rebo had noticed that most of the people
making their way toward the foot of the trail were young
couples. And it wasn’t long before a man dressed in a spotless white robe moved to block their way. “That will be ten
gunars,” he said. “Payable in advance.”
Rebo, who had started to run low on expense money by
then, grumbled as he opened his purse. “Is that ten for each
person? Or does that cover the four of us?”
“The oracle’s readings are intended for couples,” the at-

RUNNER

357

tendant said condescendingly. “The admission charge covers
both of you. The boy and the slave must remain here.”
Though mystiﬁed by the process, and reluctant to part
company with Lee, the runner had no choice but to acquiesce. He paid the fee and received two small tiles in return.
The ceramic squares had been inscribed with mysterious
symbols and dangled from leather thongs. Rebo passed one
over the sensitive’s head and let if fall against her chest.
Each tile was clearly intended to function as both a receipt
and a memento. The question was why?
In the meantime Lee had succumbed to attachment and
therefore resentment. He wanted to visit the top of the
mountain in the worst possible way, and try as he might,
had thus far been unable to accept the fact that he wouldn’t
be allowed to accompany the adults. He was still sulking,
and feeling guilty about it, when the twosome began the
uphill climb. Hoggles made a show out of snifﬁng the air.
“Come on, son . . . I smell food. We’ll eat while they climb!
What do you say?”
Lee was almost always hungry, and the smell of grilled
food, plus the opportunity to eat without being required to
build a ﬁre, fetch water, or wash up afterward proved to be
irresistible. He nodded, took hold of the leash that was attached to the heavy’s harness, and led the variant toward the
collection of huts that had been established to provide the
pilgrims with food, necessaries, and useless trinkets.
Meanwhile Rebo and Norr followed the line upward—
even as other couples continued to make their way down.
Most were happy, their features alight with pleasure, but
some were devastated. Tears trickled down their cheeks as
they clung to each other for support and stumbled down the
mountainside.

358

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

The line moved steadily for the most part, but it came to
a stop every once in a while, and Norr took advantage of one
such a moment to initiate a conversation with the couple directly behind them. Both had dark hair, light brown skin,
and shiny eyes. Especially when they looked at each other—
which was often. The sensitive didn’t need to see the colors
that swirled around them to know that the youngsters were
in love. “So,” Norr said encouragingly, “where are you
from?”
Rebo watched in admiration as his companion led the pair
through a series of seemingly innocuous questions. It seemed
that the Oracle of Mount Pama had the power to foretell
whether the children produced by a particular union would be
healthy and free of birth defects. No small matter within a society where good medical care was a thing of the past. So,
while some would-be couples chose to ignore the oracle, fearing what he might tell them, most sought his blessing. Those
who received good news were thrilled, and came down off the
mountain ready to marry, while those who had been warned
not to procreate were not only devastated but faced with difﬁcult choices. They could marry, and pray that the oracle would
be wrong, marry and remain childless, or seek different mates.
“That’s fascinating,” Norr responded sincerely. “We come
from a long ways off—so we hadn’t heard about the oracle
until very recently. How accurate are his predictions?”
“Very accurate,” the young man replied. “So much so that
when a couple who has been warned about their prospects
produces a completely healthy child it is customary to assume that another man was involved.”
All four of them laughed, the line jerked ahead, and the
conversation ended. Rebo looked at Norr just as a clearly
distraught couple passed them. “Are you thinking what I’m
thinking?”

RUNNER

359

The sensitive’s eyebrows rose. “That Logos and the Oracle of Pama are one and the same?”
“Exactly.”
“Yes, I am. He wasn’t designed for this purpose, but
judging from our experiences with Hewhotravels and our
friend Fil, old machines can learn new tricks.”
“So what do we do?” the runner wanted to know. “If we
grab the old geezer, and haul him down the mountain, that
isn’t going to be very popular with the people in the robes.
Not to mention the paying customers.”
“No,” Norr agreed thoughtfully, “it wouldn’t. I guess
we’ll have to wait and see.”
More than three hours had passed, and the sun had sunk
into the western sky by the time the twosome ﬁnally neared
the summit. Each had purchased sweet cakes by then—plus
ladles of water to wash the sticky stuff down. Now, as they
made their way up onto the ﬂat area atop the mountain, more
vendors lay in wait.
Rebo waved them off so as to focus his attention on the
small structure around which the important activity was
centered. The domed roof had been white once but was currently in need of paint. The dome was supported by six
ﬂuted columns and hung with vines that served to screen
the interior. And that, judging from appearances, was the
location from which the oracle plied his mysterious trade.
Meanwhile, as a joyous couple left the shelter of the
cupola and began their journey down the mountain, a pair
of attendants urged the runner and the sensitive toward a
table and the metal box that rested on top of it. It was getting cooler as the sun started to slip over the horizon, and
Norr shivered as gravel crunched beneath her feet.
“Insert your hand in the box,” one of the attendants instructed for what might have been the millionth time. “You

360

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

will feel a pinprick. Once you do, please remove your
hand.”
There was something ominous about the gray metal box
and the circular hole. Rebo frowned. “Are you sure this is
necessary?” The attendant nodded wearily. “It is if you want
to know whether your children will be healthy. And you do,
don’t you?”
“Yes,” Norr answered ﬁrmly. “We do.”
Once the sensitive stepped forward and inserted her hand
into the box, the runner had no choice but to do the same. It
felt like shoving his hand into a warm glove. It seemed to
shrink around his ﬁngers and held them in place. Then, consistent with the warning they had been given, the machine
sampled his blood.
“All right,” one of the attendants intoned pompously,
“the oracle will see you now. May the gods bring you the
news that you desire to hear.”
With those words the couple was ushered into the structure, where a woman waited to greet them. She had thick
black hair, some of which was swept back over her shoulders, while the rest curved forward and down. Although her
face was perfectly symmetrical, and therefore beautiful, her
eyes were strangely opaque. The birth defect made her a living symbol of what every couple hoped to avoid.
But, riveting though she was, the oracle was nothing
when compared to the ankle-length coat that she wore. It
had long sleeves, shimmered as if lit from within, and
seemed to be invested with a life of its own. But where was
Logos hiding? There were no machines in sight.
The woman opened her mouth, but much to the couple’s
surprise, it was a male voice that greeted them. The
woman’s lips moved, but seemed to lag behind the voice, as
if repeating what had already been said. That was when

RUNNER

361

Rebo realized the truth—and nudged Norr. “Logos was
built into the coat,” he said sotto voce, “the woman is nothing more than a person to hang it on.” Norr’s eyes grew
larger, and she nodded in agreement.
“It’s my pleasure to announce that the signs are propitious,” the voice continued. “Although one of you has a
unique genetic inheritance that won’t be passed on to your
children, they will be healthy nevertheless.”
It wasn’t what they had come for, and they weren’t a couple, not in the ofﬁcial sense, but Norr felt a sudden rush of
happiness. Rebo remained focused on the task at hand. “Is
your name Logos?” the runner demanded bluntly. “Because
if it is, we were sent to collect you.”
There was a moment of silence as the oracle’s lips moved
soundlessly. Once it resumed the voice was harsh and demanding. “Who sent you? And why?”
“I sent them,” Lysander replied, as his personality rolled
in to claim Norr’s body.
“Hios?” the voice inquired disbelievingly. “Is that you?”
“Yes,” the discarnate replied emphatically. “It is. Although I go by a different name now. The time has come for
you to return to work.”
“I am at work,” the AI responded tartly. “Thanks to my efforts birth defects are practically a thing of the past on Etu.”
“That’s just lovely,” Lysander commented sardonically,
“except for the fact that other planets are not so fortunate.
That’s why you must return to the work for which you were
originally designed. By helping me to reestablish the star
gates, you can put all of the planets back into contact with
each other once again. Knowledge will spread like wildﬁre,
conditions will improve, and the slide toward barbarism
will end.”
“That’s what you said last time,” Logos replied cynically.

362

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“But look what happened. You built an empire based on the
star gates, used it to enslave billions of people, and became
the proximal cause of all the destruction that followed.”
“Yes,” Lysander admitted sadly. “And you were part of
the problem. So, work with me and put things right.”
Logos processed both the words and their meanings.
While satisfying to the extent that his role as a DNA Gate
Keeper helped fulﬁll his inherent need to coordinate a large
system, the AI’s current function paled in comparison to the
signiﬁcance of the task that the biological had offered him,
and that was tempting. Still, one thing bothered him. “Let’s
say I accepted,” the AI temporized. “What assurance would
I have that you won’t revert to your old ways?”
“That’s simple,” Lysander responded. “I’m dead. The
only way I can communicate with those on the physical
plane is through sensitives like this one—and she’s about to
force me out. The plan is to reestablish the gates, run the
network independently of whatever governments may arise,
and let the increased interconnectivity have its predictable
effects.”
Logos could see potential problems, lots of them, but
such were his personal priorities that he chose to put all of
them aside. That was when an attendant entered. He looked
annoyed and was armed with a cudgel. “Your time is up . . .
Please exit through the back.”
“There is nothing to be concerned about,” Logos said reassuringly. “This turned out to be a rather complicated
consultation.”
Such occurrences were rare but not unknown. The attendant bowed respectfully and withdrew. The oracle stared
sightlessly ahead as the AI’s voice issued from the collar of
her coat. “Camp at the foot of the mountain. I will ﬁnd you
there . . . That will be all.”

RUNNER

363

Rebo didn’t like the AI’s somewhat imperious tone, or
the prospect of adding even more complexity to an already
difﬁcult situation, but knew that so long as Norr continued
to be tied in with Logos, Lysander, and the Techno Society
then he would be, too.

FOURTEEN
™

The Planet Etu

Only I, and I alone can look into the future, and see that which
awaits.
—The Oracle of Mount Pama

Torches had been lit as the sun descended over the west-

ern horizon and spaced along the trail so that those making
their way down the mountain could ﬁnd their way to the
encampment below. But the torchlit areas were separated by
pools of darkness that made it advisable to watch one’s step.
It was chilly, and Norr was grateful when Rebo draped his
red leather jacket over her shoulders, and wrapped a protective arm around her waist.
Dozens of campﬁres could be seen on the plain below.
They appeared to blink as people walked in front of them
and sent gouts of sparks whirling up into the air whenever
one of the pilgrims added a piece of wood. Just the sight of
them made the sensitive warmer, or maybe it was the feel of

RUNNER

365

the runner’s body next to hers; but whatever the reason, she
enjoyed the steep decent and was sorry when it was over.
Lee and Hoggles stood waiting at the foot of the trail.
Other reunions were taking place all around them as the
foursome came back together. “What was it like?” the boy
wanted to know. “And where’s Logos? You found him,
didn’t you?”
Conscious of the fact that there were people all around
them, some of whom were well within earshot, Rebo herded
his companions off to one side before inviting Norr to give
her report. Hoggles shook his head in amazement once she
ﬁnished. “Logos is a machine? That you can wear like a
coat? It’s hard to believe.”
“Where is he?” Lee demanded excitedly. “I want to wear
him!”
“We don’t know,” Rebo replied evenly. “He told us to
camp at the bottom of the mountain . . . Which makes
sense since it’s dark. Maybe he’ll show up, but we have a
ship to catch, so be ready to leave ﬁrst thing in the morning.
Coat or no coat.”
Norr understood the need to keep moving—but hoped it
wouldn’t be necessary to leave the AI behind. That was why
the sensitive kept a sharp eye out for strangers as she and her
companions laid claim to a vacant campsite, purchased a
bundle of wood, and lit a ﬁre. But none of the people who
swirled around them showed the least bit of interest in the
foursome, so the sensitive, the heavy, and the boy slid into
their makeshift sleeping bags while Rebo kept watch.
Even though Norr was fully dressed, and sandwiched between a pair of wool blankets, she felt cold. But the sensitive
was so tired that she fell asleep anyway. She dreamed of being warm, dreams that were so real that when Lee woke her

366

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

four hours later, an act of will was required to crawl out of
her toasty sleeping bag. And it was then, after the sensitive
was up on her feet, that she turned back toward her bed and
saw the quilt that had been laid on top of her sleeping bag.
“Lee . . . Where did the quilt come from?”
The boy, who had just completed a two-hour watch, was
looking forward to slipping between his own blankets. He
turned to look at her sleeping bag. “Quilt? What quilt?
That looks like a coat to me.”
Norr looked down to discover that what had been a quilt
had mysteriously transformed itself into a coat. And a rather
disreputable-looking garment at that. The sensitive felt
something cold trickle into the pit of her stomach as she
knelt next to the mysterious object. “You had the watch,
Lee . . . Who left it?”
The boy shrugged apologetically. “I don’t know. I took a
trip to one of the latrines about an hour ago . . . Maybe
someone left it there while I was gone.”
“You should have woken someone,” the sensitive replied
sternly. “You know the rules.”
Lee hung his head. “Everyone was tired. I was back in a
matter of minutes.”
Norr ran her ﬁngers over the coat before picking it up.
The garment was warm to the touch and surprisingly light.
“I know your intentions were good, they always are, but a
trained assassin could slit our throats in a matter of seconds.
Remember that.”
“I will,” Lee promised contritely. Then, after a short
pause, his head came back up. “Wait a minute . . . Is that it?
Is that Logos?”
The sensitive had slipped her arms into the generously
proportioned sleeves by then—and allowed the coat to settle onto her shoulders. “Yes,” the AI replied emphatically,

RUNNER

367

“it is. I was reactivated the moment the sensitive put me on.
Quickly now . . . It’s time to leave! I sent my previous host
home—and hundreds of people are waiting to see her. Once,
the sun comes up it will be obvious that she’s missing!
Everyone will be suspect, including you. I strongly recommend that you get well clear of the area before the madness
begins.”
The voice seemed to issue from the vicinity of the coat’s
collar, and Norr found the AI’s rather authoritarian personality to be somewhat reminiscent of Lysander’s. That was
when the sensitive realized that rather than deal with just
one disembodied personality, she would have to cope with
two, both of whom were somewhat obnoxious. But the AI
was correct, or so it seemed to Norr, who hurried to wake
her companions. It took ﬁve minutes to convince them that
Logos was resident in what appeared to be a ratty overcoat,
twenty minutes to pack their gear, and another ﬁve to melt
into the night. Then, with Mount Pama at their backs, the
group set out for the spaceport at Overa.
A stable hand rousted Pala an hour before dawn, gave her

a bowl of the same slops that he fed to the farmer’s angens,
and offered the heavy a gunar in return for sex. One of his
friends had been part of a group that had gang-raped a heavy
and never stopped talking about how much fun it was.
Pala refused, the stable hand kicked the bowl out of her
hands by way of punishment, and stomped out of the barn.
Disgusting though the slops were the variant knew that she
would need the food in order to survive and took the only action she could. The nearly hairless prots were slightly larger
than the average dog and made grunting noises as the variant forced them to make room in front of the trough. Then,
having knelt in front of the long narrow box, the heavy

368

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

scooped double handfuls of warm semiliquid mush into her
mouth. The taste didn’t matter. The important thing was to
eat her ﬁll, because Pala knew that once Kane climbed up
into the sling-saddle, she would need every ounce of
strength she could muster just to get through the day.
Fifteen minutes later there was a stir as a door opened,
voices were heard, and Kane entered the barn. His blond
hair was damp from a shower, his clothes were as clean as
the farmer’s wife could make them, and his stomach was full
of hearty food. Pala had ﬁnished eating by then and stood at
something akin to attention as the operative circled her. He
wrinkled his nose. “You stink,” the norm observed critically,
“but we’ll be crossing some rivers later in the day, and that
should be sufﬁcient to wash some of the ﬁlth off you. Now,
kneel, so I can saddle you.”
Pala wanted to grab the norm and break him in half. But
he wore two guns, both of which were easily accessible, and
there was the farmer to consider. Even if she managed to kill
Kane, the rest of the norms would fetch weapons and
quickly put her down.
The heavy knelt, waited while the operative fastened half
a dozen straps in place, and felt the additional pull as the
saddle took the norm’s weight. “All right,” Kane said as the
variant came to her feet. “Let’s hit the road. I hope to reach
Mount Pama by noon.”
The heavy exited the barn, slogged through the mix of
mud and manure that surrounded it, and started to walk.
Then, with Kane’s spurs already nipping at her hips, Pala
began to jog. It wasn’t long before the twosome passed the
farmer. He offered a cheerful wave, but having no further
need for the local or his hospitality, Kane saw no reason to
respond. Based on anecdotal evidence accumulated along
the way, it appeared that the sensitive and her companions

RUNNER

369

had departed the highway that would have taken them to
Overa for the less-traveled route that swung past Mount
Pama. Not that it made much difference to the technologist
so long as he caught up with them.
Time passed, the sun arced across the sky, and it was midafternoon by the time the exhausted heavy lumbered out
onto the plain that surrounded the cone-shaped mountain.
The ﬁrst thing Kane noticed was the fact that hundreds of
people were milling around the tent city at the bottom of
the mountain. Some were locked into animated conversations, while others sobbed hysterically, as they clung to each
for support. Meanwhile dozens of downcast couples had
packed their belongings and were streaming away.
It took interviews with a number of people in order to
sort out what had taken place. It seemed that an oracle inhabited the top of Mount Pama, or had until the night before, when she mysteriously disappeared. Prior to that the
blind woman had been known far and wide for her ability to
predict whether a prospective couple would produce
healthy children.
Kane only half listened to the accounts at ﬁrst, fearful
that he might miss his quarry in the mass of people around
him, but paid more attention when it became clear that the
predictions issued by the missing oracle were considered to
be infallible. A level of reliability that could only be ascribed to a machine. And once that thought crossed his
mind, it wasn’t long before the Techno Society operative remembered Lysander’s interest in the AI called Logos and
knew what had taken place. Either by choice or happenstance, the computer had washed up on the planet Etu hundreds of years before and established itself as an oracle.
Lysander had somehow gotten wind of that, guided the sensitive to Mount Pama, and convinced her to steal the AI.

370

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

But, unlike the crowd that surrounded him, Kane knew,
or thought he knew, where the thieves were headed. So, assuming that he could catch up with the fugitives, the operative could retrieve the gate seed and Logos. That would not
only restore his reputation within the Techno Society—but
might vault him onto the council as well.
Tired though the operative was, he felt reenergized as he
steered Pala over to the stockade where two dozen slaves
were waiting to be sold. It took less than twenty minutes to
purchase a second heavy, switch the saddle to his broad
back, and climb aboard. Then, with Pala on a twenty-foot
lead, Kane spurred his new mount toward the southwest.
By switching back and forth between the two slaves, and
traveling ﬁfteen out of every twenty hours a day, the operative thought he could catch up. Then, with Norr in his
sights, the rest would be easy.
It had taken three days of hard walking to reach Overa.

Rather than having been built, the city had been carved out
of a two-hundred-foot-high cliff and looked out over a vast
expanse of glittering water. The approaches to the city were
guarded, but none of the lightly armored soldiers saw any
reason to stop the man with the homely wife, young son,
and heavily burdened slave.
So, having paid the so-called gate fee and been allowed to
round the headland that gave access to the Bay of Overa, the
travelers followed a heavily trafﬁcked road up onto the strip
of land that fronted the multitiered cliff dwellings and
sloped down to the rocky beach below. It was littered with
piles of cordage, ﬁshing nets, and upturned boats.
Wings could be seen out beyond the surf, circling above
multicolored boats before they dived down into the water
and disappeared for up to three minutes at a time before

RUNNER

371

bursting up out of the sea with ﬁsh wriggling on their
barbed spears. The variants looked as if they were free, but
when Rebo, Norr, Lee, and Hoggles paused to buy water
from one of the beach stalls, they soon learned differently.
Though not fettered by the sort of chains Hoggles wore, the
airborne variants were far from free. Each wing knew that if
he or she were to turn and ﬂy away, a parent, sibling, or
child would be put to death. A cruel but effective system of
restraints that kept all but the most uncaring variants under
control.
Farther out, almost invisible from shore, something else
could be seen. It was huge, at least half a mile across, and
clearly made of metal because nothing else would have been
strong enough to withstand countless storms. Rebo thought
he knew what the structure was for, and the vendor conﬁrmed it. Assuming that the spaceship it served was still
alive, and if weather conditions allowed, an atmospherescarred shuttle would land on the platform the following
day. That was when those crazy enough, or desperate
enough, could go aboard. Others, those who were content to
remain on Etu, would watch from the beach. They would
buy things, the beach vendors would enjoy a very proﬁtable
day, and life would subsequently return to normal.
Rebo took a sip of water and looked down along the
beach. Most of the ﬁshing boats were out at sea during that
time of day, each served by one or more wings, but a few remained ashore. Most were painted primary colors and rested
on the rollers that were used to launch and retrieve them.
But a few had seen better days, and having been turned upside down, served as seats for ﬁsherfolk who were too old or
too crippled to go to sea. They lounged in the sun, as the
seabirds wheeled above, and the tides came and went.
Rebo found the scene to be hauntingly familiar and was

372

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

reminded of his childhood on Thara. Was his mother alive?
And how had the village fared? Suddenly, more than ever,
the runner wanted to go home.
Kane was halfway across a river when the heavies at-

tacked him. At the time, he was mounted on Bruno, who,
having agreed to a plan conceived by Pala, pretended to
trip. The water was only about three feet deep at that point,
but the current was swift, and water boiled around a boulder to his left. He fell facedown, hands out to protect himself, and took the norm with him.
Because the bottom of the swiftly ﬂowing tributary was
treacherous, Kane took the situation at face value, until the
second variant approached him from behind. She wrapped a
steely arm around his throat and began to tighten her grip.
Not only was it too late to go for one of the guns by that
time, but both of the operative’s hands were busy trying to
break Pala’s hold, even as his lungs fought for air. But the
heavy was stronger than he was, a lot stronger, and the operative had already begun to lose consciousness when the river
came to his rescue. Because even as the life-and-death struggle continued the combatants were swept downstream, and
into a clutch of lichen-covered boulders. Bruno hit hard,
cracked two of his ribs, and felt the sling-saddle come loose.
Pala saw the collision coming and was forced to release
Kane in order to protect herself. She hit with her feet, realized that Bruno was in trouble, and made a grab for the
other heavy’s harness. Then, propelled by the current, both
of the slaves were carried out into the main channel and
downriver. Though sorry to let Kane escape, Bruno meant
more to her, and Pala had plans for the future. A vast
wilderness lay to the east, which, if the rumors could be be-

RUNNER

373

lieved, served as a sanctuary for escaped slaves. Perhaps the
two of them could make a home there.
The heavy kicked with her feet, pulled her companion
into an eddy, and towed him ashore. Then, lying on a sandy
beach, she started to laugh. Bruno had never heard the female laugh before and liked the sound of it. The river
chuckled, the variant laughed in spite of the pain that it
caused him, and both of them were free.
Hewhosingstosuns dropped hyper, “saw” the Etu system

wipe itself onto his electronic vision, and gave thanks. Not
for himself, since his fate was certain, but for those who rode
in his belly. A random collection of biologicals who knew
the great ships were dying but gambled their lives and were
about to win.
But what about the others? Those waiting on the surface
of Etu? Should he take them aboard? Knowing full well that
the next jump would probably be his last? Or enter hyperspace alone and ﬁnd his fate out among the stars?
One aspect of the AI’s programming urged him to go on,
to serve the creators as long as he possibly could, while a
countervailing imperative insisted that he protect human
lives rather than put them at risk.
However, the very beings he was fretting over had given
Hewhosings something akin to free will, which meant that
while he was subject to the equivalent of desires and preferences, it was his responsibility to make the ﬁnal decision.
But what if his cognitive abilities were starting to fail?
What if his electronic brain, like the rest of his body, could
no longer be relied upon?
And so it was that even as the spaceship dropped into orbit around Etu, and sent part of itself down to the planet’s

374

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

surface, the intelligence that controlled it struggled to
make the most difﬁcult decision it had ever faced. Whether
to serve—or take itself off-line.
The oars creaked as four heavies pulled on them, the

bright red ﬁshing boat surged forward, and spray ﬂew as the
bow broke a white-topped wave. The temperature dropped
as the twenty-ﬁve-foot-long craft entered the shadow cast
by the platform above. Rebo, Norr, Lee, and Hoggles were
seated in the boat’s stern, just forward of its owner, and aft
of the heavily muscled slaves.
Rebo fought to keep his breakfast down as he scanned
the steel above. None of the locals he had spoken with were
sure why the spaceport had been constructed offshore, although some were of the opinion that the sea had risen over
the last few hundred years, indicating that the construct
might have been closer to land when it was built.
The structure remained mute as the ﬁsherman steered his
boat in toward the rusty seaweed-draped platform that
hung a few feet above the surging water. There was an insistent booming sound as waves broke against one of the platform’s hollow legs, and the ﬁsherman shouted to make
himself heard. “You’re lucky! The tide is high! The last time
the ship came in we had to throw grappling hooks up onto
the landing stage so passengers could pull themselves up.
Five of them wound up in the drink, and one drowned.”
The runner nodded, felt his stomach heave along with
the boat, and ﬁngered the amulet that hung around his neck
as the heavies pulled on their oars. Another brightly painted
craft, this one loaded with incoming passengers fell away on
a wave and surged toward the shore. “Pull!” the ﬁsherman
commanded sternly. “Put your backs into it! Or would you
like a taste of the lash?”

RUNNER

375

The variants pulled, the boat slid into position, and
Hoggles stood. With feet ﬁrmly planted, and seemingly indifferent to the movement of the boat, the heavy lifted Lee
up over his head. The boy literally ﬂew through the air, hit
the metal grating with a clang, and scrambled to collect the
packs that began to land all about him.
Norr was next, followed by Rebo, who almost fell but
managed to make the transfer unassisted, and Hoggles, who
made the whole thing look easy. The ﬁsherman raised a
hand as the boat drifted away, waited for an opportunity to
turn, and told the oarsmen to “Pull!” as he put the tiller
over. It had been a proﬁtable morning—and the norm was
happy.
Grateful to have solid metal under his feet, the runner
looked up to where ﬂight after ﬂight of rusty stairs switchbacked up into the gloom. Rebo assumed there had been
some sort of elevator once, but there was no evidence of any
now. “Okay,” he said, hoisting a pack onto his back and
clutching two more. “Let’s get going. The last one to the
top gets to cook dinner.”
“It won’t be me!” Lee shouted joyously, and scampered
upward.
“No,” the runner said philosophically, as he began the
long, torturous climb. “It won’t be you.”
Gravel flew away from the big angen’s hooves as Kane

jerked on the reins and brought the animal to a skidding
halt. A single sweeping gaze was sufﬁcient to take in the
cliff dwellings, the cluttered beach, and the enormous platform that loomed offshore.
The operative swung his right leg up over the bloodstained saddle and jumped to the ground. The angen shook
its head and snorted loudly as Kane led the animal over to

376

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

the nearest food stand. “The ship,” the technologist demanded. “When will it land?”
“It already has,” the woman replied mildly. “But there’s
no reason to fret . . . Take a seat. I’ll make you some tea, and
you can watch it take off.”
“You expect it to lift that soon?”
“Yes,” the vendor answered cheerfully. “The last of the
incoming passengers came ashore a couple of hours ago, and
the outgoing passengers should be up on top of the platform
by now.”
Kane swore. He had no way of knowing if Norr and her
companions were among those on the platform, and there
was no way to ﬁnd out. That meant he would have to
gamble—even if it meant traveling to Thara for nothing.
But the black hats believed the boy was headed for Thara,
which meant the man with the guns was headed for Thara,
which meant that the sensitive was headed there, too. “I
need to get out there before the ship lifts,” Kane said desperately. “Do you know anyone who could help?”
“My husband could take you,” the woman said warily.
“But it would be expensive.”
Having been spared by the river, the operative had
crawled up onto a rocky beach, only to discover that both of
the slaves had escaped. It had been a bad moment, a very
bad moment, but one Kane had overcome. A short hike put
him back on the road. After that it was a simple matter to
set an ambush, wait for a well-mounted rider to pass, and
shoot him in the back. Then, having murdered the man’s
wife as well, the technologist took possession of both angens. The ﬁrst had already dropped from exhaustion, but
the second had proven to be more resilient and stood not
ﬁve feet away. “Here,” the operative said, thrusting the reins
into the woman’s hands. “The animal is worth at least ten

RUNNER

377

times what your husband would charge. Run! Get him!
And a pack ﬁlled with provisions as well.”
It was a generous offer, so generous that the woman ran
full out, with the newly acquired angen trotting along behind her. Kane stepped around to the other side of the
counter, where he stuffed half of a meat pie into his mouth
and shrugged the pack off his shoulders. Maybe the woman
would bring him something decent to eat and maybe she
wouldn’t. All the operative could do was take everything
that wasn’t nailed down and hope for the best.
Hewhosingstosuns was in a quandary. The shuttle was

loaded and ready to lift. And part of him wanted to lift, to
function, to remain relevant. But another part of him had
doubts, serious doubts about his ability to reach Thara,
which was why the transport remained where it was.
The passengers meanwhile had nothing to do but strap
their belongings to the deck, converse in low voices, and
wait for the shuttle to take off. Those who had ridden the
great ships before were the least concerned. They knew how
arbitrary and uncommunicative the starfaring AIs could be
and were relatively relaxed.
Not so the ﬁrst-timers, however, some of whom felt claustrophobic, and had a tendency to ﬁdget. One couple became
so disturbed, in fact, that they left the ship. And, as luck
would have it, Kane arrived just in time to see the couple
exit the shuttle. Two of the ﬁsherman’s sons, both burdened
with packs, were right behind him. The long, arduous climb
had left all three of them out of breath, and their legs felt as
if they were made out of lead.
But, just as the operative experienced a sense of jubilation and allowed his pace to slow, Hewhosings made the decision he’d been struggling with. Despite doubts regarding

378

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

his cognitive process, and the multitudinous ailments that
plagued his electromechanical body, the AI would make one
ﬁnal trip to Thara.
There was a high-pitched whine as both of the shuttle’s
engines started to spin up, followed by a loud hiss as jets of
vapor stabbed the surface of the landing pad, and a worrisome thumping sound as the main hatch began to close.
“Come on!” Kane yelled, as he waved the teenagers forward.
“Throw the packs through the door!”
Neither one of the youngsters had ever been that close to
a ﬂying machine before and showed every sign of remaining
right where they were, until the operative pulled one of his
pistols and ﬁred it into the air. “I said move!”
The teenagers ran forward, heaved the packs into the air
lock, and were barely clear when Kane rolled in under the
steadily descending hatch. The door should have detected
the movement and paused, but that particular motion detector had burned out some forty-six standard years earlier
and never been replaced. The hatch closed with a thud, the
hull began to vibrate, and the shuttle’s skids left the guanostained platform a few moments later.
Rebo felt a sense of relief as the ship ﬂew out over the
bay, released his grip on the good luck amulet and took
Norr’s hand. “We made it. We’re in the clear.”
The sensitive wasn’t so sure. Something had changed
over the last few minutes, and not for the better. But Norr
didn’t know what it was, so she smiled and told the runner
what he wanted to hear. “Yes, we’re in the clear.” But the
variant didn’t believe it—even though she didn’t know why.
The trip into space went smoothly, as did the transfer to

the larger vessel, and the runner, sensitive, red hat, and
heavy wasted little time in claiming a corner of the ship’s

RUNNER

379

murky hold for themselves. And, thanks to the experience
gained during previous trips, they had set up camp and
were already lounging about a tiny ﬁre while many of the
other passengers were still getting oriented.
One of them, a man who wore a black bandanna over his
hair, had been overjoyed to discover that Norr and her companions were on the ship, and, judging from their relaxed
demeanor, completely unaware of his presence. So, conscious
of the fact that his primary quarry had some very unusual
capabilities, the operative went out of his way to ingratiate
himself with a group of ﬁve merchants. The relationship enabled him to blend his aura with those around him. Then,
having hidden himself in plain sight, Kane began the long,
careful process of stalking his prey.
Meanwhile, oblivious to the life-and-death drama being
played out deep within his body Hewhosings executed a
stomach-ﬂipping leap into hyperspace, felt the electromechanical equivalent of severe pain, and knew that something had gone horribly wrong. The ensuing investigation
took less than a minute, was repeated by way of a check, and
quickly conﬁrmed. The good news was that the jump into
hyperspace had been successful. The bad news was that the
last of four redundant phase arrays had ﬁnally gone down.
Now, without the ability to make repairs, both the ship and
its passengers were trapped in hyperspace.
Hewhosings processed something akin to a sense of overwhelming shame. It had been wrong to grant himself one
more trip, and now, thanks to his selﬁshness, his passengers
were going to die. And that raised an important question . . . Should he tell them? Or remain silent? And let the
never-ending journey speak for itself? The answer was obvious, to the AI at least, since Hewhosings knew that if he were
a biological, he would want to know.

380

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Most of the great ships were extremely taciturn, so no
one was more surprised than Rebo when dozens of rarely
used speakers came to sudden life. “Greetings. My name is
Hewhosingstosuns. I have roamed the stars for hundreds of
years. During that time it was my privilege to serve millions of beings such as yourselves. But now, having suffered
a mechanical malfunction that will make it impossible to
exit hyperspace, my years of service have come to an end.
While functional, the shuttle lacks a hyperdrive, and is
therefore useless. I apologize for the lapse in judgment that
led to this shameful situation—and assure you that I will do
everything in my power to make your ﬁnal days as pleasant
as possible.”
The loud click served to punctuate the end of the last sentence and echoed between steel bulkheads. There was silence at ﬁrst, as dozens of passengers stared at each other in
consternation and struggled to absorb what they had just
heard.
Rebo, Norr, Lee, and Hoggles were just as stunned as
everyone else, and were still trying to deal with what
amounted to a death sentence when the people around them
uttered a wail of mutual sorrow. The joint declaration of
misery was soon punctuated by screams, the sounds of crying, and all manner of commentary, questions, and prayers.
The man who wore the black bandanna over his hair reacted somewhat differently however. Much to the amazement of the merchants seated all around him Kane began to
laugh. And not just laugh, but howl as he remembered all
the sacriﬁces he had made, the risks he had taken, all to end
up aboard a doomed ship lost in the never land of hyperspace. The situation was funny, stupid, and sad all at once.
Strangely, or perhaps not so strangely, Lee was the ﬁrst to
try and comfort those around him. “Ah well,” the boy said

RUNNER

381

philosophically, “all of us have died many deaths. “What’s
one more? Not that I’m in a hurry to return to the spirit
planes, mind you.”
“Nor am I,” the sensitive replied thoughtfully. “And I’m
not ready to give up yet. Hand me that pack . . . Let’s see
what, if anything, our new friend has to say.”
The sensitive had worn Logos a great deal at ﬁrst, but
soon grew tired of the computer’s self-centered personality
and began to carry the device instead. That effectively silenced the AI, who resented the fact that Norr could turn
him off. “Where the hell are we?” Logos demanded, as the
variant slipped her arms into raggedy coat sleeves.
“We’re aboard a spaceship bound for Thara,” the sensitive answered briskly. “But there’s a problem.”
“Of course there is,” Logos replied sarcastically. “I assume that’s why you put me on. Or is it about to rain?”
“No,” the variant responded patiently, “it isn’t going to
rain. But you have as much of a stake in the present situation as we do—so you might want to pay attention.”
Logos listened as the sensitive outlined what the ship had
said. Then, once she was ﬁnished, the AI spoke again. The
voice originated from behind her—and Norr managed to resist the desire to turn and look. “I’m not sure that I understand the nature of your problem,” the computer said
pompously. “You have one of my gate seeds . . . So use it.”
Norr frowned. “I never told you that.”
“No,” the AI agreed smugly, “you didn’t.”
“Then how did you know?”
“I knew the same way that you know about your ﬁngers
and toes. I can feel the gate seeds. All of them.”
“Even in hyperspace?”
“Even then,” the computer conﬁrmed.
“Excuse me,” Rebo interrupted caustically, “but so what?”

382

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“But can you activate my gate seed?” the sensitive persisted,
still addressing herself to the AI. “We don’t know how.”
“Yes, of course,” the artiﬁcial voice replied. “Not only
can I activate them, but coordinate them as well. Such is my
purpose.”
“See?” Norr demanded, as she turned toward Rebo. “Logos
can activate the gate seed—and we can use it reach Thara.”
“Why Thara?” Logos demanded. “I need to reach Socket.”
“Because that’s where we’re going,” Rebo said unsympathetically. “So get used to it.”
“What about the others?” Lee inquired, gesturing toward the rest of the hold. “It would be a crime to leave them
here.”
“If you help them, the secret will be out,” Hoggles
warned. “Everyone will know about the star gates.”
“So? Who cares?” Rebo replied lightly. “It beats the heck
out of leaving them here.”
“The Techno Society cares,” Norr answered wearily, “and
once we make use of the seed, they’ll hear about it. But Lee
is correct . . . Once the gate has been established we’ll have
to send all the passengers through.”
“So, what about power?” the heavy demanded pragmatically.
“It’s all around us,” the AI responded. “A dedicated
source would be best, but most of the ship’s systems run off
broadcast power, and the gate can feed on that.”
“But what if the ship objects?” Lee wanted to know.
“We’ll deal with that when and if it comes up,” the computer responded irritably. “Go play with something. We’ll
call you when it’s time to leave.”
“Let’s get organized,” Rebo said briskly. “I’ll provide security for Lanni and Logos while the two of you go out and

RUNNER

383

spread the word. I suspect that most of our fellow passengers will be rather skeptical to say the least.”
“If anyone can sweet-talk them it would be Lee,” Hoggles rumbled. “I’ll go along to keep him out of trouble.”
“Good,” the runner agreed. “But let’s pack our stuff ﬁrst.
We’re going to need it once we reach Thara.”
The foursome was packed and ready to leave twenty minutes later. Norr removed the gate seed from her pack while
the heavy and the red hat disappeared into the surrounding
murk. “All right,” the sensitive said, as she held the sphere
between the palms of her hands. “What now?”
“You will ﬁnd that the seed has two dimples,” Logos answered. “One located on the top of the globe and one on the
bottom. All you have to do is press them at the same time.”
“I did that once before,” Norr objected. “Nothing happened.”
“That’s because you were impatient,” the AI replied critically. “Now do as you were told.”
The variant made a face, pressed an index ﬁnger into each
dimple, and waited. Nothing happened. “All you have to do
is maintain an even pressure,” Logos said reassuringly. “Humans tend to be extremely impatient. Once they push a
button they expect instantaneous results. A long delay is
sufﬁcient to keep all but the most persistent of them at bay.”
And sure enough, once sixty seconds had passed, the sensitive felt something give. “Now,” the AI continued, “grab hold
of both hemispheres and twist them in opposite directions.”
Norr obeyed and felt both halves of the globe give. Rebo,
who had been watching the process, saw a crack appear as
beams of light shot out into the murk. “It’s moving!” the
sensitive exclaimed, as her hands shook in sympathy with
the oscillating gate seed.

384

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“Let go of it,” Logos instructed sternly, “or it will hurt
you.”
Such was the sensation that the variant was happy to release her grip on the object. But, rather than fall to the
ship’s deck the way she expected it to, the sphere ﬂoated in
front of her!
“Good,” the computer said, as he continued to monitor
the situation via dozens of sensors embedded in the front of
Norr’s coat. “This is where it gets tricky. I will need to relay
some messages through Socket in order to establish the
gate—and it will take some time to get all of the equipment
aligned. Now stand back.”
Both Rebo and Norr were quick to back away as the
globe began to spin faster and faster. Then, after thirty seconds or so, it disappeared!
Meanwhile, out in the surrounding murk, Kane listened
as two of the people he was determined to kill invited both
him and his companions to step through a star gate and
thereby escape the dying ship! Given all he had gone
through to catch up with them, and the artifacts they possessed, the invitation struck the technologist as both ridiculous and sublime.
Once Lee had ﬁnished his speech, a chubby merchant
shook his head angrily. “Get out of here, kid . . . And take
the freak with you. Oh, and put some chains on him. You’ll
be sorry if you don’t.”
The response was similar to the one the pair had already
received from more than a dozen other people. The whole
notion of star gates was more than they could accept. Hoggles frowned, took a step forward, but stopped when Lee
grabbed his arm. “Forget it, Bo . . . They made their
choice.”
The variant nodded reluctantly and took a step back-

RUNNER

385

ward. Kane saw his opportunity and was quick to seize it.
The operative stood and bent to retrieve his pack. “Wait for
me! I not only believe you—I volunteer to go ﬁrst. Anything is better than starving to death on this ship.”
Lee stared at the man. He looked familiar, but why?
“Good for you,” Hoggles rumbled sincerely. “You won’t
be sorry.”
Lee continued to feel doubts about the man in the black
bandanna, but having been unable to place him, kept those
concerns to himself as they left the merchants behind. “Let’s
go back,” Hoggles suggested. “It seems as if no one wants to
listen, and the gate should be established by now.”
Kane managed to carry out a surreptitious check of his
weapons and felt a keen sense of anticipation, as he followed
the odd-looking pair over to their ﬁre. The boy had yet to
recognize him, nor had the heavy, but the sensitive would.
That meant he would have to act quickly. The key was to
kill the man with the guns, the heavy, and the female in that
order. The boy would be easy. Then, with both the gate seed
and Logos in his possession, he could return to Anafa.
Norr “felt” the technologist’s presence before she actually
saw him, turned, and opened her mouth to shout a warning.
But Kane had already drawn his weapons by then. Lee saw
the pistols appear and acted without thinking. The boy hit
the operative from behind, heard one of the handguns go
off, and felt a moment of nausea as they fell through the star
gate together.
Rebo saw the air shimmer as the twosome disappeared
and heard Norr shout “No!” as he followed them through.
Kane landed hard, felt the pistol ﬂy out of his right hand,
and heard a metallic clatter as it slid away. He scuttled forward, wrapped his ﬁngers around the gun butt, and realized
that something had gone awry. Either the gate had been

386

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

locked onto the wrong destination, or was badly out of
phase, because everything about the environment was
wrong. Thara had a reputation as a rather pleasant planet
but this world had been ravaged by war.
As the operative rolled over onto his back what he saw
were banks of darkly roiling clouds punctuated by occasional
shafts of orange sunlight and the occasional bolt of lightning. Thunder rolled across the land as drops of blood-warm
rain hit his face, and Kane’s lungs struggled to process the
painfully thin air. The technologist fought to rise, discovered
that his body was at least 20 percent heavier than it had been
on the ship, and barely made it to his feet. Farther out, in the
jagged, bomb-ravaged ruins that surrounded him, a tornado
could be seen. The twister wandered through what remained
of the once-proud city as if searching for something to kill.
The operative might have seen more, but that was the moment when the man with the guns appeared out of nowhere
and landed a few feet away.
What happened next was more the result of impulse than
planning. Kane grappled with the man, let go of a gun to
free up a hand, and grabbed a ﬁstful of jacket. Then, moving
as if in slow motion, the operative brought the remaining
pistol in from the side. It connected with his opponent’s
head and drew blood. Rebo staggered, started to black out,
and fell.
Lee threw a rock at the blond man, saw it hit, and began
to run. Or tried to run, since it felt as if his lungs were on
ﬁre, and his legs were made of lead. There was a loud bang as
Kane ﬁred but missed the boy. Lee staggered along a debrisstrewn street, wound his way through a maze of passageways, and found himself within the embrace of a U-shaped
wall. A hole beckoned, the boy fought his way over a pile of
bricks, and went down onto his knees. Then, just as he

RUNNER

387

started to enter the heating duct Lee felt a set of viselike ﬁngers wrap themselves around his ankle. The youth’s ﬁngernails clawed at duracrete as Kane dragged him out into the
wan sunlight.
For the ﬁrst time since giving them up Lee wished he
had his knives. But they were in his pack back on the ship.
The boy sought to turn, and had just managed to do so,
when Kane pressed the gun barrel against the center of his
forehead. The operative produced what was supposed to be a
smile, but looked more like a grimace, and ordered the pistol to ﬁre.
The message had left Kane’s brain, and was halfway to
his trigger ﬁnger, when Rebo beat him to it. The Hogger
boomed, the .30-caliber slug blew half of Kane’s head away,
and sprayed Lee with gore. The youngster screamed, looked
at his blood-drenched arms, and started to cry.
Kane felt the bullet nudge the side of his head and tried
to object as the physical plane fell away. That was when the
operative saw his most recent life pass before his eyes, felt
the pain he had caused, and tried to scream. But, many
years had passed since a previous him had given the order to
nuke the planet Poxor, so no one was present to witness his
anguish.
Meanwhile, Rebo discovered that his head hurt even
more now that he had a moment to think about it, returned
the weapon to its holster, and trudged over to where Lee lay.
It took repeated attempts to help the youngster to his feet,
but the third was successful, and the runner took the boy’s
hand. Hopefully, if they were lucky, the gate was open. If so,
they could step through, and return to the ship.
But that was the moment when the runner realized that
all of the ruins looked the same, that he had no idea which
way to go, and that he was hopelessly lost. Lee, who had

388

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

started to recover, felt Rebo pause. The reason for the runner’s hesitancy was obvious, and the boy had just experienced the ﬁrst stirrings of panic, when he spotted what
could be their salvation. “Look!” the boy said. “Blood! We
can follow it back!”
Rebo looked, saw that droplets of blood from the gash on
the side of his head led out into the ruins, and realized that
Lee was correct. Quickly, lest one of the rain showers wash
the red dots away, the runner followed the regularly spaced
blobs back to the spot where the empty shell casing marked
the point of arrival. The air shimmered where the spacetime continuum had been disrupted. “You—ﬁrst,” the runner gasped, and pushed the boy forward.
Rebo experienced a profound sense of gratitude as the
youngster disappeared. Then, having achieved his goal, the
runner collapsed. He fell into a well of darkness, felt his
body start to spin, and waited to die.

FIFTEEN
™

The Planet Thara

In spite of all the wisdom that has been spoken, or preserved in
manuscripts, each soul must search for enlightenment. There
is no single path, but rather a multiplicity of ways, some short
and some long. Go forth and find your path, help others along
the way, and enjoy the journey. For this is life.
—The ascended master Teon,
An admonition to my students

Death isn’t so bad after all, the runner thought to himself,

as he opened his eyes and looked up through lacy fronds
into a pale blue sky. Paradise felt deliciously warm, a soft
breeze stirred the thick foliage off to his right, and brightly
colored insects darted through his vision.
There was a problem, however—and that had to do with
the persistent pain associated with the left side of his head.
Dead people don’t experience pain, or so Rebo assumed, although there was a great deal about the spirit realms that he
couldn’t remember. But then, as if to assure the runner that
he really was in heaven, an angel appeared. She had high
cheekbones, a narrow face, and her eyes were ﬁlled with concern. “Jak? Can you hear me?”
“Yes,” the runner croaked. “Are we dead?”

390

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Norr looked relieved. “No, silly. We’re on Thara.”
Rebo blinked. “On Thara? But how?”
“You fell through the portal onto the ship. Logos reset
the gate for Thara, Bo carried you through, and I put some
stitches into your scalp. You’ll have a scar—but your hair
will cover it. What else would you like to know?”
Rebo pushed himself up onto one elbow. He had been
laid out on top of his sleeping bag. Packs were stacked all
about. “Where’s Lee?”
“Right here,” the boy said as he knelt next to the runner.
“Thanks to you.”
Rebo felt a profound sense of relief. “We made it
then . . . How ’bout the rest of the passengers?”
The sensitive looked down at the ground. “Bo made one
last attempt to round them up . . . But none were willing to
listen.”
The runner thought about what it would be like. The
strongest passengers would kill weaker ones and take their
food. Then, once that was gone, they would start to feed on
each other. Not a pleasant way to die.
“So,” Rebo said out loud, “the man who was following
you is dead. The rest should be easy.”
“Should be, but won’t be,” Hoggles said darkly, as he entered the clearing. “Look at this . . .”
The heavy handed a ﬂyer to Norr, who looked at it and
frowned before turning the document around so that the others could see it. “It looks like me!” Lee said in astonishment.
Rebo glanced at the crudely printed sketch, then at the
boy. “You look a lot like you did when we were on Ning,”
the runner observed. “What does the text say? I can’t read it
from here.”
Norr turned the ﬂyer around. “Be on the lookout for this
boy . . . Though posing as the reincarnated spirit of Nom

RUNNER

391

Maa, the youth called Tra Lee is actually little more than an
imposter, bent on stealing the throne of CaCanth. All sightings should be reported to the nearest black hat monastery
to receive a material as well as spiritual blessing.”
“Where did you get that?” the runner wanted to know,
his eyes on Hoggles.
“It was tacked to a tree next to the main road,” the variant replied.
Rebo shook his head disgustedly. “It looks like the other
kid managed to reach Thara before we did, and his supporters are hard at work.”
“Which makes sense,” Norr added thoughtfully, “since
nobody was chasing him.”
“Where are we? Does anyone know?” the runner inquired, as he struggled to stand. His head hurt and he felt
dizzy.
“I spoke with a farmer,” Hoggles replied. “He was on his
way to a town called Nomath.”
Even though Rebo had left Thara when he was very
young, he still remembered the names of the cities that he
and Crowley had passed through, and Nomath was one of
them. He had obtained a map from the runner’s guild on
Anafa and the time had come to take a look at it. The norm
dispatched Lee to fetch the document while he took a seat
on a ﬂat-topped rock and probed his bandage. It hurt. The
boy returned, spread the map out on the ground, and
pointed at one of the symbols. “Here’s Nomath,” Lee said,
“and look! There’s CaCanth!”
The youngster was correct, and it was then, as Rebo eyed
the road that connected the two places together, that the reality of the situation struck him. He was home! And there,
located in a small bay about a hundred miles east of the holy
city of CaCanth, was the village of Lorval. Was his mother

392

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

still alive? Or buried next to the symbolic resting places
that she had established for her dead husband and sons?
There was no way to know.
Something of what the runner felt must have registered
on his face, or been visible among the colors that shimmered
around him, because Norr knelt next to Rebo and placed an
arm around his shoulders. “We must be close to the village
in which you were born. Very close.”
“Yes,” the runner agreed. “We are . . . But CaCanth
comes ﬁrst. It’s obvious that the black hats are out looking
for us, and it wasn’t for the completely unexpected manner
in which we arrived, would have located us by now. We’re
safe for the moment—but someone is bound to report us.”
“That’s true,” Lee agreed as he brought a grubby digit
down onto the surface of the map, “but here’s the solution.”
Rebo squinted at the map. Part of the symbol was hidden
by Lee’s grubby ﬁnger. It lay a little to the north, in the direction of CaCanth, but east of the main road. “Nocar
Rebu? What does that mean?”
“It means the ‘Temple Red,’ or the ‘Red Temple,’ in
Tilisi.”
“It’s a red hat monastery,” Norr observed. “Perhaps they
could help.”
“I like it,” Rebo replied thoughtfully, as he remembered
the well-armed Dib Wa warriors they had encountered on
Pooz. “And who knows? Maybe they would supply us with
an escort.”
And so it was agreed that rather than strike out for CaCanth directly—the foursome would head for the Red Temple instead. The problem was how to complete the
three-day march without attracting the wrong sort of attention. Norr was the one who came up with the solution and
the clothing necessary to make it work. “There,” the sensi-

RUNNER

393

tive said, as she tied one of her scarves under Lee’s chin. “I
had to wear a disguise on Etu. Now it’s your turn.”
“But I don’t want to dress like a girl!” the boy objected
as he looked down at the hem of his skirt. It was too long
for him, but the sensitive solved that problem by rolling
the excess fabric up around his waist. When covered by a
jacket the bulge made the youth look as though he was signiﬁcantly overweight. A plus insofar as the disguise was
concerned.
“And I didn’t enjoy wearing chains,” Hoggles put in unsympathetically. “Get over it.”
There was a moment of silence followed by an embarrassed smile. At that particular moment it was as if the boy
was someone much older. “It seems that even now, after
many lifetimes, it is still difﬁcult to focus on that which is
truly important. I apologize.”
There was no slavery on Thara, which meant that Rebo
and Norr could pretend to be husband and wife, while Lee
posed as their daughter. Then, in an effort to break up what
would otherwise amount to an easily identiﬁable group, it
was agreed that Hoggles would follow a quarter mile behind, thereby creating the impression the variant was alone.
That stratagem would still allow the heavy to rush forward
should that prove necessary.
The way north proved to be exactly two carts wide, and
alternated between stretches of fused rock the ancients had
laid down, and sections of poorly maintained dirt road. That
particular portion of Thara’s surface was not only tropical
but relatively ﬂat, which meant that there weren’t many
hills to deal with. There was plenty of water, however. It fell
out of the sky at approximately the same time each afternoon and served to ﬁll not only the native lakes, rivers, and
streams but a complex network of ponds, canals, and

394

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

ditches. The natural result was a road that not only wandered back and forth across the landscape, but crossed innumerable bridges, some of which were quite a bit wider than
the current path and suggested that the thoroughfare had
been larger at some point.
Most of what the travelers saw came in shades of green,
since the frothy-looking trees, spiky undergrowth, and carefully tended ﬁelds were all variations of the same color. The
exceptions included the brightly colored spirit poles that
served to support neatly thatched roofs, clothing hung out
to dry, and prayer ribbons that reminded Rebo of his youthful journey to the spaceport.
That had been a long time before, of course, and much of
what the younger him had witnessed had been eroded by
the passage of time, but some things were as they had been,
including the enormous waterwheel that continued to grind
tas for the village of Kua, a metal tower so strong that generations of scavengers had been unable to bring it down, and
a twenty-foot-tall likeness of Emperor Hios, which though
badly dented, still stared out over the land that had once
been his.
The younger Rebo had been scared during that ﬁrst journey, afraid of what might await him, and now these many
years later, the grown-up was frightened as well. Not of the
physical dangers that might lie in wait, but of what he had
or had not become. Because, other than the considerable
sum of money on deposit with the guild, the runner had returned to his home planet with none of the things by which
most men measured their success. No friends other than
those at his side, no home other than the one in his pack,
and no family other than a mother who might or might not
be alive.
Or was he wrong? The runner examined Norr from the

RUNNER

395

corner of his eye, tried to imagine a future without her, and
found that it was difﬁcult to do. But what did she want? A
life on Thara? No, that seemed unlikely . . . And what
about Lysander, Logos, and the Techno Society? The man
with the blond hair was dead—but the danger continued.
That wasn’t his problem, of course, or was it?
A two-wheeled cart rumbled past. A little girl rode the
angen’s broad back while her father dozed high on a wooden
seat. A cloud of dust rose, and the runner held his breath
while it settled. The road stretched ahead.
Had Norr been paying attention, she might have picked
up on some of Rebo’s emotions, but her thoughts were centered on her own problems. Even though the journey would
come to an end soon, her difﬁculties wouldn’t, not so long as
she had the being called Logos stuffed into her pack. Would
she proceed alone? Or would Rebo accompany her? And if
he did, would that be good or bad? Gradually, without intending to do so, the sensitive had allowed the runner to
pass beyond the barriers she had erected to keep other
norms at bay. But was such a course wise? In spite of the fact
that they had been forced to act like a married couple, and
been physically intimate, they remained strangers on certain levels. Perhaps it would be best to go her own way before she became too entangled with Rebo and set herself up
for a painful fall.
Prayer ribbons ﬂuttered gaily as the travelers passed between a cluster of neatly kept homes, and Lee fought a battle with himself. Though long and arduous, the journey to
Thara had been liberating after all of the years spent within
the monastery on Anafa. Now, as each step carried the boy
closer to CaCanth and the test that would determine his future, a weight rode the pit of his stomach. What if he took
the test and failed? Or, and the second possibility would be

396

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

worse in some ways, what if he passed the test? And was he
thereby sentenced to a life of meditation, deliberation, and
probity? But such thoughts were not only selﬁsh, but unworthy of his higher self, which had returned to the physical
plane to be of service.
The red hat’s thoughts were interrupted as he and his
companions rounded a curve and ran into a checkpoint. It
consisted of a pole that blocked the road, a black-clad
monk, and four equally drab Dib Wa warriors. They had
just ﬁnished searching a four-wheeled freight wagon. The
pole was raised and the conveyance rattled loudly as it got
under way.
Rebo’s ﬁrst inclination was to turn and ﬂee, but the runner knew that could be disastrous, so he produced a determined smile as the monk crossed the road to intercept
them. The black hat had a broad forehead, a long nose, and
a pair of bright, inquisitive eyes. When he spoke it was with
a Tharian accent. “Good afternoon . . . And where might
the three of you be headed?”
In spite of the fact that Rebo’s accent had all but disappeared during the years he’d been gone, the runner could
bring it back when he chose to do so. “To attend my
nephew’s wedding, holy one.”
“I see,” the monk replied noncommittally, as he circled
the travelers. “And where will the blessed event take place?”
“In Lorval,” the runner replied, giving the name of his
native village.
“Ah,” the black hat said having come full circle. “So your
nephew is a farmer?”
“No, holy one,” Rebo answered humbly. “The land
around Lorval is far too rocky to farm. My nephew makes
his living from the sea.”
It was not only a good answer, but the correct answer, and

RUNNER

397

the monk was about to let the family pass when the girl
caught his eye. Her face looked familiar, but why? Curious,
and with no other travelers to attend to at the moment, the
black hat chose to approach her. Lee felt his stomach perform a somersault as the man reached out to tug at the scarf.
The knot came loose and the fabric fell away. “Well,” the
monk said smugly. “What have we here? A girl? Or a boy?
And not just any boy, but one who bears a strong resemblance to the red hat imposter.”
The Hogger was in Rebo’s pack, but the Crosser was
available, and the runner went for it. The Dib Wa warriors
were armed with long double-barreled ﬂintlock pistols, but
the weapons were difﬁcult to draw, and the semiautomatic
handgun barked twice. Two of the soldiers fell, but Rebo
knew the others would have time to bring their weapons
into play, or would have if it hadn’t been for Norr. For rather
than simply stand there, as the warriors had assumed that
she would, the female produced a strange-looking blade. It
made a sizzling sound as it passed through the air and sank
into ﬂesh. One of the surviving black hats screamed while
the other had the good sense to drop his pistol and back
away. The monk did likewise.
Rebo raised the Crosser as if to ﬁre, but Lee grabbed his
arm. “No! Let them go.”
“They’ll bring more black hats down on us.”
“It would happen anyway,” Lee said philosophically. “Besides, it’s one thing to kill in self-defense, and another to
shoot an unarmed man.”
Rebo wasn’t so sure, but knew it would be a waste of
time to trade words with the boy and waggled the pistol instead. “You heard Nom Maa . . . This is your lucky day. Run
while you still can.”
The black hats turned and ran. Lee took a moment to

398

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

watch them go before turning to his protector. “My name
continues to be Tra Lee until such time as I prove otherwise.”
“Sure,” the runner replied, as Hoggles arrived on the
scene. “Whatever you say.”
“Come on,” Norr said, as she eyed the road ahead. “It
will take at least twelve hours to reach the temple. More if
we take back roads. We’d better get moving.”
Norr’s words made sense, but the group soon discovered
that there weren’t any back roads, just a tangle of footpaths
that led from ﬁeld to ﬁeld, home to home, and village to village. And without a map, or signs to guide them, the travelers soon lost their way.
That was when Lee sauntered up to what he assured his
companions was a red hat house, rang the ornamental bell
that hung out front, and spoke with the wizened little
woman who appeared in the cloth-hung doorway. Then,
once the woman had agreed to help, a child was dispatched
to fetch her grown son. He arrived about ten minutes later.
His baggy trousers were still wet from his work in the family’s tas paddy. A rapid-ﬁre exchange of Tilisi ensued. Finally, his questions having been answered, the farmer
bowed to Rebo, Norr, and Hoggles. The next words were in
standard. “My name is Twi. Come . . . I will take you to the
Nocar Rebu (Red Temple), but we must hurry, or the black
hats will cut us off.”
The local took off at a ground-eating jog, which left the
off-worlders with little choice but to do likewise. Though
he was in good shape after weeks of arduous travel, Rebo’s
head continued to hurt, and the pounding did nothing to
lessen the pain. Still, there was some satisfaction to be found
in the fact that Twi’s knowledge of the countryside would
not only cut hours off the journey, but help ensure their
safety. Because, like so much of Thara’s surface, the area they

RUNNER

399

were traveling through had long been divided into a patchwork quilt of black-hat- and red-hat-dominated ﬁefdoms.
The locals lived in peace most of the time, but there had
been an increasing amount of friction as the time of choosing drew near. Especially since word had ﬁltered out of CaCanth that, while the black hat boy had arrived weeks
earlier, and continued to prepare for his test, the red hat
equivalent had yet to appear.
A miserable state of affairs from a red hat point of view,
but one that the black hats took considerable pleasure in, especially since the lack of a qualiﬁed candidate would provide their sect with an effortless victory. That was why the
farmer was careful to lead his charges around certain
villages—and straight through those he knew to be friendly.
Finally, after only two short breaks, and with darkness
settling all around them, the fugitives turned onto the path
that led up a statue-ﬂanked path to the Red Temple. Iron
oxide had been mixed into the plaster that covered the
structure’s gently curved dome, and it appeared to glow as
the last rays of the quickly setting sun caressed it.
But no sooner had the travelers spotted the temple than
they were spotted in return. A Dib Wa ofﬁcer appeared up
ahead and shadowlike warriors detached themselves from
the surrounding gloom. Twenty minutes later Lee was deep
inside the Nocar Rebu standing before the local abbot. The
whitewashed room was bare except for a bas-relief likeness
of Teon that occupied most of one wall, the incense burner
that crouched in one corner, and the mat on which the elderly monk sat. No less than three pretenders had arrived on
Thara over the last seven months—so the holy man was
somewhat skeptical at ﬁrst. However, unlike those who had
arrived before him, this boy knew every single one of the
code phrases that had been received two years earlier.

400

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Upon hearing the last of them it was the abbot who rose,
came forward, and knelt even as tears of joy ran down his
cheeks. “Welcome to Thara, Excellency. We are truly
blessed.”
Lee smiled and bent to assist the old man. “Yes, we are,
because life provides us with the opportunity to grow. I
need to reach CaCanth, and the black hats are determined to
stop me. Will you help?”
When the sun rose the next morning and bathed the
countryside in golden light, the abbot’s answer was plain to
see. A force of a hundred heavily armed Dib Wa warriors
stood waiting as Lee and his companions arrived to inspect
them. They were backed by thirty red hat monks equipped
with wooden staves, and roughly the same number of farmers armed with shovels, hoes, and axes. It was a veritable
army by local standards and Lee was grateful. He told the
abbot as much, and when asked for a blessing, gave the same
one that any other member of the order could have bestowed. “May the great Teon watch over and guide you to
the truth within.”
Then, with a vanguard of warriors leading the way, the
entire force set out for CaCanth. Things went well at ﬁrst,
and the miles seemed to melt away as the column snaked
through a succession of small villages. But not all of them
were friendly, as evidenced by the hostile stares and obscene
gestures directed at the travelers.
Of more concern, however, were the reports that civilian
scouts brought back. The reports went straight to Lee who,
in spite of his age, was assumed to be none other than the
great Nom Maa. Eventually, after repeated efforts to realign
the command structure had failed, the boy effected what
amounted to a compromise by insisting that both the senior

RUNNER

401

Dib Wa and his traveling companions be included when the
scouts came in.
The most recent report, which had been delivered by a
long-legged girl with dark eyes, was especially worrisome.
It seemed that before the red hat procession could start up
the road that led to the holy city of CaCanth, it would ﬁrst
be necessary to cross the bridge at a place called Noko Ree,
where a large group of black hats had begun to gather.
“Can we circumvent the bridge?” Lee inquired hopefully.
“I would like to avoid bloodshed if possible.”
“No, Excellency,” the girl replied. “The ancients built
the bridge so they could cross high above the Ree Ree River,
which passes hundreds of feet below. It would take weeks to
go around.”
But Lee didn’t have weeks, not if he wanted to arrive in
time to take the test. “So,” the boy said, as he turned to his
advisors. “What do you think?”
Rebo was about to tell Lee that he should go for it but
Norr spoke ﬁrst. Except that it wasn’t Norr, not really, since
the voice clearly belonged to Lysander. “There’s more,” the
discarnate proclaimed. “Something the girl didn’t see.”
The Dib Wa ofﬁcer and the scout looked understandably
surprised as a distinctly male voice issued from Norr’s
mouth. Rebo had heard the sound before, didn’t want to
hear it again, and shook his head in disgust. “Wonderful . . .
Just what we needed. Citizen star gate.”
“I don’t remember you objecting to star gates when your
life was at stake,” Lysander observed tartly. “Now, where
was I? Oh, yes, the simulacrum.”
Hoggles frowned. “The simu what?”
“A simulacrum is an image of something,” the scientist
explained patiently. “In this case the image resembles the

402

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

personage once known as Teon. Except that this particular
likeness can move around.”
“So it’s a metal man,” Lee put in. “Like the ones the
Techno Society has.”
“Yes, and no,” Lysander replied. “Yes, in that the simulacrum is a machine, but no, because it lacks the ability to
make decisions for itself.”
“The black hats possess such a thing,” the Dib Wa ofﬁcer
conﬁrmed. “A machine that looks like Teon—but is worn
like a suit of armor. They keep it in the temple of Wat. The
monks believe that the ancients built the device for use in
processionals and festivals. It doesn’t work though—so who
cares?”
“You do,” the discarnate insisted, “or you should, because
the black hats hired a sensitive. A person who, though ignorant of mechanical things himself, channeled a being who
has the requisite knowledge.”
“Perfect,” Rebo said sarcastically. “Just what we need. Is
this simulacrum armed?”
“No,” the scientist answered. “Not to my knowledge. But
it’s big, larger than a heavy, and that’s dangerous enough.
That’s why I came . . . There’s no point in proceeding farther.
I recommend that you turn back.”
“Because of the danger?” the runner inquired cynically.
“Or because you want Lanni to transport Logos to Socket?”
“Because of both,” the discarnate answered honestly. “If
my daughter were to be injured or killed, who would reunite Logos with the equipment necessary to reestablish the
gates?”
“I know I wouldn’t,” Rebo conﬁrmed sourly. “But Lanni
can decide for herself. So go back to wherever you stay when
you aren’t bothering us and do whatever you do.”
There was a slight hesitation, as if Lysander was consider-

RUNNER

403

ing what had been said, followed by a distinct change in
Norr’s demeanor as her chin fell, her shoulders slumped,
and her head came back up. The locals looked on in wonder
as the sensitive’s eyes blinked, and her normal voice was restored. “Logos can wait. We have a boy to deliver.”
Rebo was surprised to discover that he had been holding
his breath. Lee grinned, and Hoggles put an enormous hand
on his shoulder. “The Divine Wind is not a boy,” the Dib
Wa ofﬁcer observed mildly, “but we are in agreement . . .
The processional will continue.”
As the procession continued to wend its way through the

verdant countryside, word of its purpose spread like wildﬁre. As that occurred the column started to grow. Some people came because they were red hats, others came in hopes of
obtaining a special blessing from Nom Maa, and still others
came because they didn’t want to miss the clash when red
encountered black at Noko Ree.
But whatever their intentions, hopes, and desires, come
they did until what had begun as a short, military-style formation, had grown into a column that was at least a mile
long. Finally, by the time Lee called a halt, Rebo estimated
that the processional included at least two thousand people.
The number was so large that the monks, who had originally been sent along to support the Dib Wa, were forced to
ﬁll in as both policeman and healers as their engorged ﬂock
proceeded to squabble over campsites, give birth to babies,
and die of natural causes.
Lee was stunned by the size of the crowd and watched
from the top of a rise as a gentle rain began to fall, and hundreds of ﬁres served to punctuate the gloom. He wasn’t
aware of Norr’s presence until she hung a coat over his shoulders and looked out over ﬁeld. “You must be very proud.”

404

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

“No,” Lee replied somberly. “I’m very, very, frightened.
They believe in me . . . What if they’re wrong?”
“But they aren’t wrong,” Norr replied conﬁdently. “The
monks on Anafa were correct. You were born for this.”
“Maybe,” the boy allowed uncertainly. “What about you?
What were you born for?”
Norr looked up toward the sky only to discover that
clouds blocked the stars. “I don’t know,” the sensitive
replied softly. “Perhaps time will tell.”
The cold, gray light of dawn arrived slowly, as if reluctant

to begin a new day. Lee stood on the same rise he had the
night before as his followers added fuel to their campﬁres,
made tea, and exchanged ritual greetings. The faithful were
in high spirits, but he was nervous, very nervous, knowing
that the abandoned village of Noko Ree and a large force of
black hats lay only a few miles ahead. Efforts had been made
to provoke them during the night but without success. The
bridge across the Ree Ree River was a natural choke point,
and the black hat ofﬁcers knew it. After all, why come out
and battle the enemy on the plain if they could force them
to attack what amounted to a well-defended funnel?
The boy felt sick to his stomach as he imagined what was
to come. Many people would be injured, maimed, and
killed, all in the name of Teon—a man who taught nonviolence and peace. And yet, the same Teon had said, “. . . To
witness evil, yet raise no hand against it, is to perpetrate an
even greater crime.” And Lee was convinced that much of
the dark sect’s leadership was intent on the acquisition of
power rather than the furtherance of Teon’s teachings.
But was his perception correct? Or was he about to become the unwitting tool of a hierarchy that had raised him
to believe that they were superior?

RUNNER

405

“It’s tough to be a leader,” Rebo observed, as he arrived at
the boy’s side. “That’s why I strive to avoid it. Here, Bo sent
this over.”
Steam rose from the mug of hot tea as Lee wrapped his
ﬁngers around it. “Thank you . . . And yes, it is.”
There was a moment of silence during which Lee took a
sip of the scalding liquid. “Jak . . .”
“Yes?”
“Thank you.”
Rebo smiled. “You’re welcome.”
“And Jak . . .”
“Yes?”
“I’m going to need my knives.”
The runner removed a small bundle from under his right
arm. “Here they are.”
Lee looked up at his protector. “So you knew what I
would decide to do?”
Rebo nodded solemnly. “Yes. I knew.”
Though not especially amazing by ancient standards, the

steel-arch bridge over the Ree Ree River was not only regarded as one of the twelve wonders of Thara, but was critical
to commerce, and therefore guarded both day and night lest
the voracious metal scavengers attack and destroy it. But the
relatively small group of guards had been easily swept aside
by a force of three hundred black-clad Dib Wa warriors under
the leadership of an up-and-coming ofﬁcer named Bitu Neor.
Now, as the insistent sun acted to burn the earlymorning mist away, the soldier stood atop the southern
abutment and stared through the brass telescope that had
been presented to him by his superiors in recognition of his
success in battling local bandits. What Neor saw surprised
him. Rather than the massed rabble the ofﬁcer expected to

406

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

confront it appeared as though the red hats knew what they
were doing. The leading element of the column consisted of
about a hundred Dib Wa warriors, backed by ranks of stavewielding monks, and a large number of hardy-looking farmers. The rabble, which was to say the noncombatants, were
farther back. But there were lots of them, and now that they
were in motion, the mob would be hard to stop. They had
passed through Noko Ree by that time—and were a quarter
mile from the bridge.
Which brought Neor back to the purpose of the impending conﬂict, which was to deny the red hat pretender access
to CaCanth and thereby ensure that the real Nom Maa could
ascend the throne. Surprisingly, from the Dib Wa’s perspective at least, it appeared that the pretender had chosen to
lead his followers from the front. He was mounted on a
brutish-looking heavy who was armed with a gigantic war
hammer. The pair of them marched only ﬁve ranks back and
were ﬂanked by a norm and a female sensitive. Bodyguards
perhaps? Well, it would make very little difference, since all
of them were going to wind up in unmarked graves. A boon
to the plants that would sink roots into their skulls and the
worms which would consume their ﬂesh. The thought
pleased Neor, who smiled as he lowered himself down to the
ground.
Lee felt his heart beat in time with each step that the

heavy took. Because he was riding high on the variant’s back
his followers could see him. Of course that meant the enemy
could see him, too, something that troubled Rebo, but
couldn’t be avoided. Because if Lee was going to precipitate
a battle, then he felt obliged to participate in it and take the
same chances that everyone else did.
The position high atop Hoggles’s back meant that the

RUNNER

407

boy had an excellent view, one that allowed him to see not
only the rust-encrusted bridge, but the rush of black-clad
warriors and the mechanical monster that followed along
behind. The simulacrum was at least two feet taller than the
heavy and, like most images of the ascended being, had six
fully articulated arms. Each arm terminated in a hand, and
each hand clutched a weapon. Even though the youth had
been expecting to see it, the reality of what confronted him
was worse than he had imagined, and he wasn’t the only
person who felt that way.
Upon spotting the simulacrum, the front row of red hats
paused, the next rank collided with them, and that was the
moment when Bitu Neor ordered his forces to attack. And,
had it not been for the fact that they were being pushed forward from behind, the very sight of the mechanical Teon
might have been sufﬁcient to turn the red warriors. Partly
because the simulacrum was so imposing, but mostly because the machine’s presence conveyed the impression that
the ascended master had chosen to ally himself with the
black hats and sought to destroy their opponents.
Lee saw their hesitancy, understood the moment for what
it was, and stood in the homemade stirrups. The voice that
had once been high and shrill was deeper now. “Follow me!”
the boy shouted, and the very sight of the being they believed to be the reincarnation of Nom Maa put heart into
the assembled red hats. A cheer went up as Hoggles charged
the enemy. Up ahead, perhaps ﬁfty yards away, the simulacrum could be seen, the sun rippling across its gold alloy
skin as it lurched forward.
Metal ﬂashed as swords came into play, wooden staves
clattered as they met, and the variant’s war hammer made a
dull thumping sound as it made contact with enemy heads.
People on both sides screamed as they went down, cheers

408

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

went up as one sect or the other gained a few feet of hotly
contested ground, and the steady boom of the drums made
for a predictable counterpoint to the more erratic pop, pop,
pop of gunﬁre and a throaty boom! as a homemade bomb
went off and red hats were hurled in every direction.
Lee had become a prime target by then, as was Hoggles. A
hailstorm of bullets, arrows, and rocks came their way. The
variant swore as an arrow penetrated his left shoulder, and
staggered under the impact of two musket balls, but kept on
going. Rebo had assigned himself the task of covering the
heavy’s left ﬂank, while Norr had responsibility for the right,
and two burly monks were protecting the variant’s back.
Having fought off half a dozen black-clad Dib Wa, the
runner had just slammed a fresh magazine into the Crosser
when a new threat emerged. The black-clad mob parted long
enough to let a team of four men through. They carried
what amounted to a twelve-foot-long battering ram and
hoped to attack Hoggles with it.
Rebo shot the lead men. They fell, the others tripped on
them, and went down as well. Both rose, and were attempting to draw their swords, when the heavy took two steps forward, The already bloodied hammer fell, then fell again, as
the variant put them down.
Meanwhile, off to the right, Norr parried a blow from a
pike before pulling the vibro blade from its wooden sheath
and pushing the thumb switch. The weapon hummed as it
sliced through a wooden staff and sank into the skull beyond.
Lee saw the black hats fall back, waved his followers forward,
and heard them cheer as they set foot on the bridge deck.
Seeing that, and realizing that the red hats had started to
gain the upper hand, Bitu Neor sent his reserves forward.
They were civilians mostly, armed with little more than
farm implements but led by fanatical monks. The ofﬁcer

RUNNER

409

hoped that they would add weight to a counterattack and
help turn the red tide.
Norr felt the newest assault rather than saw it and fought
to block out at least some of the pain, fear, and hatred that
swirled around her. That was when the simulacrum and the
heavy collided. Lee was forced to duck as two of the machine’s
six hands swung swords at him, even as the rest grappled
with Hoggles, and sought to get a grip on the giant. The machine was taller, and heavier, but slower than the variant was.
Lee took advantage of the Teon’s clumsy movements to
free himself from the saddle. He scrambled up over Hoggles’s right shoulder, nearly lost his balance, and threw himself onto the simulacrum’s head. The unintended but
nonetheless beneﬁcial result of the youth’s attack was to
blind the behemoth, which let go of both swords in an attempt to remove the boy.
A communal wail went up as the red hats saw the machine grab Tra Lee, lift the youth up, and prepare to throw
him down. That was when all sorts of things began to happen. Steel ﬂashed as Lee used one of his knives to stab at the
monster’s face, there was a loud report as Rebo ﬁred the
Hogger into the simulacrum’s torso, and sparks ﬂew as Norr
cut into one of the machine’s legs. Lee’s assault left the Teon
half-blind, while Rebo’s bullet nicked the sensitive inside
the machine, and Norr’s blade severed two critical cables.
The results were spectacular.
The machine was in the process of squeezing the life out
of Lee’s body when the simulacrum stumbled, and the boy
was forced to hang on as the golden machine began to topple. Screams were heard, two of the black hat soldiers were
crushed as the likeness collapsed on top of them, and the
boy rolled free.
And then, as if to conﬁrm the red hat victory, a breeze

410

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

came out of nowhere. The sky grew momentarily dark, rain
began to fall, and the bridge deck ran red with diluted
blood. “It’s the Divine Wind!” a monk shouted, and the
faithful surged forward.
Bitu Neor ordered his troops to hold, and they tried, but
were literally trampled to death by the scarlet-clad mob.
The road to CaCanth was clear.
Three days had passed since the battle at the bridge.

Once across, and determined to complete their journey before black hat reinforcements could arrive, the red hats
surged ahead. Those who could walk did so. Those who
couldn’t were carried. Fearing that they might encounter
some sort of ambush, Lee urged his followers to form ranks,
but it was difﬁcult to convince them of the need, and his efforts came to naught.
But even though the strictures against sectarian violence
were often ignored out in the countryside, they were
scrupulously observed within the vicinity of CaCanth and
had been for thousands of years. Because of that there were
no further attempts to stop Lee, and there was little that the
black hat hierarchy could do but stand on their various balconies and fume as the red hat candidate and his rabble
passed between gates that hadn’t been closed in centuries.
The holy city of CaCanth was huge. Though little more
than a remote settlement some two thousand years before, it
was widely believed to be the place where Teon’s last incarnation had begun, a fact that made it symbolically signiﬁcant.
And, back during the machine ages, when people could travel
to the civilized planets by ship or star gate, millions made the
pilgrimage to Thara, and the city had been enlarged to accommodate them. And, since both sects had inﬂuenced construction, the result was a vast layering of domes, towers, gates,

RUNNER

411

balconies, walls, halls, gardens, vaults, crypts, walkways,
aqueducts, stables, and now-antiquated landing platforms.
The city had been described as both beautiful and ugly,
depending on the eye of the beholder, but one thing was for
sure: It was complex. In fact, it was said that many monks
lived entire lifetimes within the sturdy walls without having the opportunity or reason to visit all of the city’s many
rooms, chambers, and halls. Which was why a guide was assigned to strangers like Lee, Rebo, Norr, and Hoggles. The
nun led them from their quarters through a maze of busy
passageways and into the Hall of Deliberation, which was
an enormous room boasting a vaulted ceiling, walls that
were hung with intricately woven tapestries, and marble
ﬂoors so glossy it was possible to see one’s reﬂection in them.
Lee had chosen to wear a green, rather than red robe, just
as Nom Maa had hundreds of years before. Regardless of
which side they were on, none of the monks could openly
criticize such an obvious call for unity. But was the act sincere? Or a cynical attempt to inﬂuence the council? That
was open to interpretation, and squabbles broke out all over
the room.
There were ﬁfty rows of low bench-style seats, which had
it not been for the back support they provided, would have
been little different from sitting on the ﬂoor. There were
cushions, however, which Rebo welcomed, although many
monks tossed them aside. Thanks to their ofﬁcial capacity as
Lee’s bodyguards, his companions had not only been allowed to keep their weapons but given seats in the very
front row. The heavy, who was still recovering from multiple wounds, sat with one leg resting on a footstool.
And there, on the opposite side of the aisle, was the ﬂeshand-blood version of the black hat teenager pictured in the
drawing that Lee had been shown in the temple on Ning. In

412

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

fact, now that Lee could see what Yanak actually looked
like, he felt a new sense of respect for the artist who had so
ably captured the other youth’s thick brows, brooding eyes,
and slightly petulant mouth.
Meanwhile, others had noticed the extent to which the
boys resembled each other and the buzz went up a notch as
a variety of theories were advanced. Some believed that the
boys were related by blood, others suggested some sort of
spiritual connection, while a third group believed the similarity was little more than a coincidence.
Lee bowed, Yanak rose to do likewise, and the tension in
the hall increased. There was a great deal at stake because if
Yanak and his sect were to take power, the black hat emphasis on intellectual concerns would percolate down through
the religion to color everything from the sermons that local
monks gave to the way that altars were conﬁgured. And, if
the spiritual approach favored by the red hats were to gain
ascendancy, then that too would have a profound effect. Not
just on the direction of the religion, but on careers and
which projects would be funded.
The council, seven members in all, were seated in a semicircle on a platform at the front of the room. There was a
prayer, followed by a description of the selection process and
a request for both candidates to stand.
The ﬁrst monk, an individual named Brother Caspas,
had a broad forehead, sunken cheeks, and a wispy white
beard. His red robe appeared to be at least three sizes too
large for him and puddled around the cushion he sat on.
Slightly rheumy eyes sought Yanak and held him. “As our
Inwa you will have tremendous power—how will your decisions be made?”
It was a question that Yanak was not only prepared to answer but had hoped for. Norr noticed that his words had a

RUNNER

413

singsong quality, as if they had been written for the adolescent and rehearsed many times. “I will seek to govern
wisely, always considering that which will be best for the
majority, before arriving at a ﬁnal decision.”
It was a good if not especially deep answer but one likely
to satisfy most of those in attendance. The monk with the
wispy beard inclined his head respectfully and directed his
gaze to Lee. “And you? How would your decisions be made?”
Rebo noticed that Lee’s eyes were focused on a point
above the old man’s head. His voice was calm. “I will drop a
stone into a pond, observe how the ripples expand, and note
the way they touch the opposite shore. Then, mindful of
stone, water, and shore, I will decide.”
Outside of the fact that it was cast in more mystical
terms—Lee’s answer wasn’t that much different from the
one that Yanak had given. Subtleties such as that were important, however, especially in light of the fact that some
felt the black hats had strayed from Teon’s path and had a
dangerous tendency to emphasize mind over spirit. So, while
interesting, neither answer was clearly superior to the other.
The second monk had a round face, slanted eyes, and ears
so prominent that some of his peers referred to him as
“Brother Jug” behind his back. He wore a black hat, an immaculate robe, and a gold ring on his right pinkie ﬁnger.
Never one to squander words, or any other form of energy
for that matter, his question was limited to three parsimonious words. “What is money?”
Yanak responded with conﬁdence. “Money is a medium
of exchange—or a measure of value.” The teenager was
aware of the fact that his responses were being evaluated on
brevity, clarity, and content. Yanak was conﬁdent that his
reply met or exceeded all three criteria and allowed himself
a momentary smirk.

414

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

Lee waited for some sort of prompt, and when none was
forthcoming, gave his answer. It was inspired by memories
of Omar, the way the back of his wagon smelled, and the
loaves of bread kept there. “Money symbolizes the energy
required to harvest grain, process it, and turn it into bread.
It is therefore spiritual rather than material in nature and
should be used accordingly.”
It was clearly a much deeper and more thoughtful response
than the one that Yanak had put forward, and even the black
hats recognized it. Hoggles heard the murmurs and smiled.
The third council member was a nun. She wore a blue
robe to symbolize the fact that, while loyal to Nom Maa, her
order had thus far refused to align itself with either of the
major sects. She was beautiful, so much so that many of her
male peers had spent hundreds of hours trying to cleanse
themselves of the fantasies she unknowingly stimulated,
many without success. Her voice was like music, and the
words seemed to ﬂoat through the air. “Teon said that attachment equals suffering. What did he mean?”
Yanak was well aware of the fact that Lee’s last answer
had been superior to his and had no intention of letting that
happen again. His brows came together and formed a single
line. “In order to achieve true enlightenment, and therefore
happiness, we must let go of our attachments to ideas,
things, and people.”
It was almost an exact quote from the Path, and for those
who were content to simply to follow Teon’s recipe for enlightenment, completely satisfactory. But, while no expert at
such things, Rebo couldn’t help but notice that Yanak’s answer didn’t really address the question. The nun tried again.
“Lee? Teon said that attachment equals suffering. What did
he mean?”
Lee remembered Abbot Marth and the black hat temple

RUNNER

415

in the city of Zand. “Everything will eventually pass away,
so to the extent that we remain attached to it, we must
eventually suffer. For some, even Teon’s teachings can become an attachment that clouds their minds and bars the
path to enlightenment.”
There was a sudden buzz of excited conversation as
monks of all persuasions turned to each other in amazement
and consternation. Some found the suggestion that the religion itself could constitute an attachment to be a true revelation, a thesis that would generate discussion for years to
come, while others saw it as inherently threatening. They
were the more vocal of the two groups and didn’t hesitate to
make themselves heard. “That’s absurd!” “It’s red hat nonsense!” “Who taught the boy?”
The fourth council member wore no hat on his clean shaven
skull but was swathed in red. If he had eyebrows, they were so
minimal as to be invisible from a distance, and his nose was
both broad and ﬂat. Though not the question that he had originally planned to ask—the one he gave voice to was appropriate to the moment. “All of us experience emotions . . . One of
the most dangerous is anger. How should we deal with it?”
Conﬁdent that Lee’s most recent reply had been met with
general disapproval and that he knew the answer to the current question, Yanak produced a serene smile. “Anger constitutes a loss of control. Through skillful thinking, and
relentless self-discipline, anger can be suppressed.”
In spite of his allegiance to the red sect, the questioner
happened to agree, and nodded in acknowledgment.
“Thank you. Master Lee? What is your view?”
Lee remembered the village of Urunu, the terraced gardens that cascaded down its rocky slopes, and the carefully
maintained aqueducts that served them. “It’s my opinion
that any effort to suppress anger via an act of will is doomed

416

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

to failure. However, just as the force of a raging river can be
diverted into an irrigation system, an act of skillful understanding can transmute anger into positive energy.” The
council remained impassive, but the audience was less so.
Some heads nodded as others rotated from side to side.
The ﬁfth member of the council had a long, thin face,
narrow shoulders, and the manner of a schoolmaster. He
wore a black skullcap, a matching top, and baggy trousers.
His feet were bare and so callused from walking country
roads that they looked like tree roots. His voice had a deep
resonant quality. “Everyone seeks happiness . . . What is it?”
Yanak frowned. His opponent had demonstrated an uncanny knack for coming up with answers that while a little
off center seemed to be well received by at least some of the
council. He chose his words with care. “Happiness is freedom from want, which is to say attachment, and consists of
a state of enlightenment.”
It was a good answer, an excellent answer, and Yanak’s
mentors exchanged congratulatory looks. Rebo, who was
curious as to how Lee would respond, watched with interest
as the ﬁfth monk gestured toward his charge. “Tell us, son,
what is happiness?”
Lee considered all that he and his companions had been
through since his departure from Anafa. The answer seemed
obvious. “Happiness consists of resistance, because only
through encountering resistance can we learn, and thereby
attain enlightenment.”
Someone applauded, was ordered to stop, and sat shamefaced as the next council member prepared to take his turn.
Though not a monk, he was a highly respected layperson,
and one of the individuals who was expected to vote independently. He was a farmer by trade and looked the part.
“As the Inwa what will your greatest challenge be?”

RUNNER

417

To purge the hierarchy of red hats, Yanak thought to himself,
but knew better than to say that out loud. His voice was
grave. “There are many who don’t understand the way, or
feel threatened by it, and seek to control or destroy it. The
greatest challenge will be to counter their efforts without
violating the precepts by which we live.”
Heads nodded, many of those present smiled, and the
farmer bowed from the waist. “Thank you . . . Master Lee?”
Lee looked up from the tiled ﬂoor. “The greatest challenge lies within . . . For that is where the monster called
ego stares into its mirror, listens for the sound of its name,
and mouths the words that will serve it.”
The seventh, and last council member, was a black hat abbot. And, because that meant that Yanak automatically had
three votes, the audience was well aware of the fact the decision would fall to the two independents. And the abbot, who
was cognizant of that as well, had every intention of trying to
sway both the nun and the farmer. He stared over his glasses,
which were perched on the very end of a long, thin nose. And,
rather than address himself to Yanak as the others had, the abbot fastened Lee with a clearly hostile look. “Needless to say
the Inwa must live his life in a manner that is above reproach.
However, according to information provided to me by
Brother Lar Thota on Pooz, there is considerable evidence to
suggest that you murdered a black hat monk during the voyage from Anafa. Do you deny the charge?”
There was a sudden commotion as the audience erupted
into conversation, and the burly master-at-arms rapped his
staff on the ﬂoor to silence them. Yanak shook his head, as if
disappointed to hear such a serious charge levied against his
peer, and smiled sadly. Norr, who was determined to object,
started to rise. Lee gestured for the sensitive to remain
where she was. He looked the abbot in the eye. “No, I do

418

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

not deny the charge. A black hat monk was sent against me,
and I killed him in an act of self-defense. Nor is that all . . .
During the journey to Thara there were times when I surrendered to fear, hatred, and vanity.”
A sigh ran through the crowd, Yanak tried to conceal a
smirk, and the abbot nodded gravely. “Though your spirit is
ﬂawed, I admire your honesty, and hope that others learn
from your example.”
Having heard from both candidates, the council retired
to another room, and the waiting began. Everyone knew
that such deliberations could last for quite a while. In fact
there had been cases when it had taken days or even weeks
for a ﬁnal decision to be rendered, which was why most of
the attendees had come prepared for a long stay and had already started to set up what amounted to small camps
throughout the great hall.
The candidates were besieged by both admirers and detractors, all of whom wanted to set each other right and
were eager for verbal combat. But as the hours rolled by, the
discussions began to cool, and a meal was served. Then, once
stomachs were full, many of the participants opted for naps.
And that’s where most of them were, asleep on the ﬂoor,
when the council reemerged. There was a mad scramble as
everyone sought to reoccupy their seats, and the inevitable
face reading began. “Uh-oh,” Norr heard one red hat say, “it
looks like the blacks have it.”
“No, look at Caspas,” another replied. “He’s smiling!”
“That’s no smile,” a third interjected. “It’s a grimace. He
has gout, you know.”
And so it went as the members of the audience continued
to speculate on which boy would ascend the throne. Finally,
after weeks of inner turmoil, Lee was pleased to discover
that he no longer cared. If it was he who had been chosen,

RUNNER

419

then he would do his best, and if Yanak had been chosen, he
would still do his best.
For his part Yanak was not so philosophical and with good
reason. His fate, should the other youth win, would be ignominious at best. His heart beat like a silversmith’s hammer
and his forehead was shiny with perspiration by the time the
master-at-arms thumped the ﬂoor with his intricately carved
staff. “Silence! There will be order! Brother Caspas?”
It took a moment for the old man to rise, but when a
younger monk moved as if to offer assistance, Caspas
waved him off. Then, having gained his feet, his rheumy
eyes surveyed the room. “Our deliberations are complete,”
the red hat said deﬁnitively. “Nom Maa has returned and
sits before us!”
The entire audience held its collective breath as the old
man shufﬂed forward and paused halfway between the boys.
Then, after what seemed like an eternity, the elderly monk
turned his back on Yanak and bowed to Lee. “Welcome, oh
great one. The throne is yours.”
Lee bowed in return, and Rebo frowned. “What throne?”
he whispered. “Where is it?”
Norr smiled. “Lee told me that the throne is spiritual
rather than physical. That means that it can be everywhere
and nowhere, both at the same time.”
Hoggles shook his head bemusedly as the acceptance
chant began. “You walked right into that one.”
“Yeah,” Rebo reﬂected, “I guess I did.”

SIXTEEN
™

The Planet Thara

Runners have no homes other than the pillows beneath their
heads, the closest saloon, and whatever world they happen to
be on when the last starship dies.
—Thomas Crowley, Runner

Thanks to its location on the coast, most of those who

chose to visit the village of Lorval came and went by boat.
Because of that, as well as the fact that there was very little
reason for outsiders to go there, the lightly rutted road was
only one cart wide. Rebo, who was seated next to the driver,
was forced to hold on tight as the heavily laden fourwheeled coach followed a pair of sturdy angens up a steep
incline. Then, as the conveyance rattled over the top of the
rise, a panoramic view was revealed, and the runner ordered
the driver to stop.
Once Rebo had jumped down to the ground, he found
himself standing at what had once been the southernmost
border of his boyhood universe, the point beyond which he
and his brothers weren’t to go without permission from

RUNNER

421

their parents. From there the road went steeply down past
the ancient boatyard, the drying sheds, and into Lorval itself. Rocky hillsides left very little space on which to build,
which meant that the houses stood shoulder to shoulder
across the street from weathered docks and sheds that were
partly supported by tar-coated wooden piles, huge timbers
that could withstand the winter storms that rolled in from
the east. But there was no sign of that now, as seabirds circled an incoming ﬁshing boat, and sunlight glittered on the
surface of the bay.
Farther on, past the hotel where Rebo’s mother had been
employed, a terraced graveyard could be seen. It contained
twice the number of markers as actual graves. That was because the sea rarely surrendered the bodies of those it had
claimed, leaving their families to grieve over tiny symbolic
caskets.
And there, perched high on the promontory to the north,
was the Halgo mansion. The very people to whom Crowley
had delivered a letter those many years before, and by doing
so forever changed a little boy’s life.
Now, having spent so much time with Lee, the runner
was struck by the fact that the village lacked any sort of
temple or other religious structure. Because it was so remote? Or because the ﬂinty ﬁsherfolk who lived there had a
tendency to view the sea as their supreme being? It hardly
mattered.
Norr had a way of not only appearing at his side—but
knowing what to say when she did. “It’s beautiful.”
Rebo slipped an arm around her waist. During the weeks
spent resting in CaCanth, Lysander had made himself
known yet again and offered to hire the runner. The task
was to deliver both the sensitive and Logos to a place called
Socket. Wherever that might be. An arrangement that al-

422

WILLIAM C. DIETZ

lowed the two of them to stay together without peering too
far into the future. “Thank you,” Rebo replied. “But it isn’t
as beautiful as you are.”
Norr smiled knowingly. “You say the sweetest things
when you want to sleep with me.”
The runner raised his eyebrows. “So, you can read
minds.”
“Men have minds but tend to think with something
else,” the sensitive observed tartly. “Still, you might get
lucky.”
Rebo laughed as a deep resonant voice was heard from
within the coach, where Hoggles sat with one leg propped
up on pillows. “Hey! Why did we stop? It’s time for lunch.”
“Sorry, master,” the runner replied, as he helped Norr
back inside. “We will get under way immediately.”
“See that you do,” the variant responded airily. “This is
most inconvenient.”
Rebo offered the heavy what he thought was an appropriate gesture, returned to the front of the carriage, and
climbed up next to driver. Hooves clattered on loose shale as
the carriage jerked into motion, and the last mile of the
journey began. Deep down, and without having consulted
Norr, Rebo knew that his mother was dead. But her essence
was there in the breeze that swept in off the bay, the sharp
tang of the sea, and the warmth that caressed his face. A boy
had left—and a man had returned.

Author’s Note

The book Runner was inspired by a Time magazine article

that appeared in the May 2, 1994, issue. The piece, under
David Van Biema’s byline, but with additional reporting by
Patrick E. Cole in Los Angles and Jefferson Pemberthy in
New Delhi, ran under a subhead that read, “Two different
boys claim to be the reincarnated master of a popular school
of Buddhism.”
That alone was sufﬁcient to capture my attention, but
the body of the article, which went on to detail the ongoing
battles between two different factions of the Black Hat sect
to control “assets worth $1.2 billion, and the reverence of
up to a million followers,” got me to thinking about the
possibility of a novel.
But ten years were to pass between the moment of initial

424

author’s note

inspiration and the actual writing of the book. Part of that
was due to the fact that I had other projects to pursue—but
part of the delay stemmed from the fact that I wasn’t sure
how to handle the concept. Finally, having married the intergalactic courier outline that I had developed years earlier
to the Buddhist story, I came up with a science ﬁction novel
that honors fantasy and reacts to religion.
I feel it’s important to note that while the story was inspired by one aspect of Buddhism, and those familiar with the
religion may see numerous similarities between “The Way”
and Buddhism, it was not my intent to replicate the Eightfold path or any other religious tradition. In fact the religion
laid out in the book includes concepts borrowed from many
faiths, all of which have value, and my respect.
For more information about author William C. Dietz and his
upcoming novels, visit his website at www.williamcdietz.com.

