IN THE HIGH COURT OF FIJI
AT SUVA
CIVIL JURISDICTION

Action No.: HBC 58 of 2011

BETWEEN:

KRIZ CORPORATION (FIJI) LIMITED a limited liability company duly incorporated in Fiji and having its registered office at 47 Auckland Street, Vatuwaqa, Suva, Fiji Islands.
PLAINTIFF

AND:

NILESH KRISHNA KUMAR CHETTY of 22 Yohann, Bay View Heights, Suva, Company Director.
SECOND PLAINTIFF

AND:

KAVINESH NARENDRA REDDY a.k.a. KEVI N REDDY of Nadi, Company Director.
FIRST DEFENDANT

AND:

DAVENDRA DUTT SHARMA of Nadi, Businessman.
SECOND DEFENDANT

AND :

TECRAFT ENGINEERING (FIJI) LIMITED a limited liability company duly incorporated in Fiji and having its registered office at Jaswant Munesh & Associates, 59 Vunavou Street, Nadi Town, Nadi.
THIRD DEFENDANT

APPEARANCES: Mr Pillay N of NEIL SHIVAM LAWYERS for the Plaintiffs
Ms Marrey Chan of M CHAN LAW for the First and Third Defendants

DATE OF THE ORDER: 3rd Day of July, 2012
ORDER OF: CHANDRASIRI KOTIGALAGE, JUDGE

ORDER

1. This Leave to Appeal application Out of Time filed against the default Judgement granted by the Master on 17th May, 2011. 

2. The Judgement in default entered and sealed on 17th May, 2011 states as follows:

"No acknowledgement of serving having been made filed and served by the named Defendants herein. It is this day adjudged that judgement is entered against the Defendants to pay the above named Plaintiffs a sum of $37,662.29 (Thirty seven thousand six hundred and sixty two dollars and twenty nine cents) with interest costs and further general damages to be assessed".

3. Against the Master's Order the Defendant had filed Leave to Appeal application Out of Time and sought following Orders:

"(i) That leave be granted by the First and Third Defendants to file Leave to Appeal the decision of the Master of 17th May 2011 Out of Time;

(ii) That the First and Third Defendants be granted Leave to Appeal the decision of 17th May 2011 of the Master;

(iii) That the time period for filing and service of the Notice of Appeal of the decision of 17th May 2011 of the Master be enlarged and extended for filing the Notice of Appeal within 14 days of prayers being sealed;

(iv) That there be an interim stay of proceedings and execution of judgment pending the final determination of the First and Third Defendants' application to appeal the decision of 17th May 2011 of the Master;

(v) That there be a stay of proceedings on winding up proceedings in the High Court HBE 80/11S and bankruptcy proceedings MBF 139/11S pending the final determination of this Court on the appeal;

(vi) That costs be in the cause".

4. As a preliminary issue this court had to decide as to whether Leave to Appeal application Out of Time is justifiable if the answer is negative the Master's Ruling and the default judgement stands.

5. By the affidavit filed by the First Defendant, pleaded the following to justify the delay:

(i) The Defendant stated when he visited his solicitors, Babu Singh Associates, they assured everything was done to apply for setting aside the Judgement in default;

(ii) The Defendant alleged that Babu Singh Associates neglected to carry out his instructions;

(iii) When the Defendant came to know his lawyers had not taken steps to contest the Ruling of the Master, he contacted his present lawyers Chan Law and he was made to understand that the Master's Order would have been appealed within 14 days of delivery of the said Order.

6. The Defendant further alleged he was never advised by his lawyer with regard to the time frame of the Appeal and he paid the deposit required by his present solicitors;

7. The Defendant also had stated 4 cases were handled by his solicitors and the delay of appealing caused due to the reason that the Defendant had to take steps in several other cases relating to this same issue.

8. The Defendant also had stated since the Judgement entered in default he didn't had the opportunity to contest and defend the action;

9. It was also stated by the Defendant how the transaction had taken place and alleged that the documents were signed under duress and coercive in nature.

Proceedings Before Me

10. When this matter was called before me on 29th January 2012, Plaintiffs were granted time to file affidavit in opposition before 10/2/12 and the Defendants were granted to file affidavit in reply before 26th February 2012 and hearing was fixed for 5th March 2012.

11. When the case was called before this court on 5th March 2012, no counsel appeared for the 1st and 2nd Plaintiffs and Defendants' counsel stated she also had taken the hearing date as 12th March and the Plaintiffs too had taken the date as 12th March. It was revealed 1st and 2nd Plaintiffs did not file their affidavits in opposition before 10th February 2012 as directed by this court and the Court ordered to proceed with the case without the affidavit in opposition by the Plaintiffs and matter was fixed for 27th April 2012.

12. Hearing of this application was taken up on 27th April 2012 and Oral submissions were made by both Counsels; and the Defendants filed written submissions on 18th May 2012.

Findings and Conclusion

13. It is my contention as stated in paragraph No. 4, firstly this Court has to consider the preliminary issue of Leave to Appeal application Out of Time. If the Defendants succeed in this application, the Court shall consider the other Orders pleaded by the Defendants in their summons for Leave to Appeal.

14. To arrive at a conclusion of the preliminary issue, I have perused Affidavit file by the Defendants, oral submissions made by the Defendant's counsel and Plaintiff Respondent's counsel and written submissions filed by the Defendants and most importantly Ruling made by the Master.

15. Now this court has to decide as to whether application for Leave to Appeal was filed Out of Time and as to whether the Defendants had substantiated and justified their application to be accepted Out of Time under Order 59 Rule 11 of the High Court Rules.

16. Order 59 Rule 11 of High Court Rules states as:

"Rule 11. Any application for Leave to Appeal an interlocutory Order or Judgement shall be made by summons with a supporting affidavit filed and served within 14 days of the delivery of the Order or Judgement".

17. In the present case the default Judgement was entered and sealed on 17th May 2011 and summons filed on 29th June 2011 seeking the following Orders:

"(a) That there be Stay of Execution of the default Judgement entered against the Defendant on 17th May, 2011;

(b) That the default Judgement so entered in this matter be set aside and the Defendant be given unconditional leave to defend the within action;

(c) That costs of the application be costs in the cause". 

Having heard this matter, the Master by his ruling dated 4th day of October, 2011, the following Orders were made:

"(a) The summons of the Defendant to set aside the default Judgement is struck-off;

(b) The Plaintiff is granted a cost of $1000 as the cost of this application assessed summarily to be paid within 21 days".

18. However, it is noted that there was no Order prayed against the Ruling of the Master dated 4th October, 2011 and Orders were prayed only against the default Judgement entered on 17th May, 2011.

19. In my view, application would have made by the Defendants to set aside both, Judgement in default and Ruling dated 4th October 2012 which Defendants had failed to do so.

Sequence of Events

20. It is important to consider the sequence of events taken place to arrive at a final conclusion: 

(1)     
Writ of summons filed on 2nd March 2011.

(2)     
Affidavit of service filed on 17th March 2011 stating that on 14th March 2011 summons was served on the 1st and 3rd Defendants and duly acknowledged by the Defendants (Annexure marked as RN1 to the Affidavit of Service).

(3)     
Affidavit of service was filed on 21st March 2011, stating that summons served on the 2nd Defendant on 21st March, 2011 (Annexure marked as RN1 to the affidavit).

(4)     
All the Defendants failed to return the acknowledgement to the court within 14 days after the summons was served as per writ of summons dated 2nd March 2011.

(5)     
It was not denied by the Defendants summons were not served and they failed to file the acknowledgement of service.

(6)     
Search for acknowledgement was filed by the Plaintiffs on 11th April, 2011 and Judgement in default was entered and sealed on 13th of April, 2011.

(7)     
Thereafter, Notice of Motion was filed by the Plaintiff's on 19th April, 2011 to amend the Judgement in default. On 17th of May 2011 default Judgement was entered and sealed and served on the Defendants on 3rd June 2011.

(8)     
It is important to note default Judgement was entered and sealed:

(a)     
After 64 days from the date of serving writ of summons on the 1st and 3rd Defendants;

(b)     
After 57 days from the date of serving summons on the 2nd Defendant.

(9)     
Affidavit of 1st Defendant in opposition to the Judgement in default was filed on 29th June 2011, by Messrs Babu Singh Associates, Barristers and Solicitors for the First Defendant together with the Draft Statement of Defence.

(10)    
Summons to be set aside the default Judgement was filed on 29th of June 2011.

(11)    
Affidavit in opposition filed by the 2nd Plaintiff on 18th August 2011 and written submissions were filed by the Plaintiffs opposing the setting aside application.

21. Learned Master Amaratunga delivered his Ruling on 4th of October 2011 and concluded that summons of the Defendants to set aside the default Judgement is struck off.

22. Master Amaratunga had extensively dealt with the facts of the case and concluded that there was no merit in the Defendants defence. I too agree that the subject share sale agreement conditions were violated by the Defendants and the Defendants had not established any defence in this regard.

23. I quote para 15 and 16 of the Master's Ruling:

"15. The Plaintiffs submitted that the Defendants have no Defence and let alone a meritorious one. Dealing with the discretionary powers of the Courts under English Order 13r.9 sub-rule 14 the Supreme Court Practice 1997 (the White Book) (Vil. 1 p. 145) cites the Court of Appeal's Judgement in Alpine Bulk Transport Inc. v- Saudi Eagle (1986) 2 Lloyds Rep. 221 as authority for following prepositions:

(a)     
It is not sufficient to show a merely "arguable" defence that would justify leave to defend under Order b14; it must both have a "a real prospect of success" and "carry some degree of conviction". Thus the Court must form a Provisional view of the probable outcome of the action.

(b)     
If proceedings are deliberately ignored this conduct, although not amounting to an estoppel at law, must be considered "injustice" before exercising the Court's discretion to set aside."

"16. The Fiji Court of Appeal in the case of Wearsmart Textiles Limited v General Machinery Hire Limited & Anr, Civil Appeal No. ABU 30/97, at page 11, stated with approval from the Supreme Court practice, Vol. 1 at page 143 that:

"it is an (almost) inflexible rule that there must be an Affidavit of merits, i.e. an Affidavit stating facts and showing a defence on the merits".

24. As stated by the Master in para 24, the Defendant failed to reply to the affidavit in opposition which contained some vital material and allegations against the Defendants clearly shows the defendants did not had a meritorious defence.

25. I quote the paragraph 25 of the Master's Ruling and agree with the findings:

"25. There is no merits in the proposed statement of defence and this proposed defence can be clearly indicated as a method to delay the repayment of money that was obtained dishonestly from the already 'sold' Company, only because the Plaintiff delayed in notifying the Bank of the change of authorization after the said 'sale of shares' of the company. The Plaintiff would have trusted the Defendants, who sold the said company Air Pro Services Limited to the Plaintiff company and would have expected to act ethically, till the other formalities in the change of ownership is registered and finalized. The 1st and 2nd Defendants have completely disregarded the said trust and has transferred money in the said already sold Air Pro Services Limited and it is clear that Defendants do not have a defence and the statement of defence that is proposed, is a 'sham' one and it is only another method to delay the money that was siphoned out of already sold company, by the Defendants. If this default judgement is vacated, the Plaintiff will seriously prejudiced and there would be further delay in the recovery of money that was siphoned out after it was 'sold' but before the banks were informed of the chance of hands of the company Air Pro Services Limited".
 
26. I disagree with the submissions of the Defendants that Master erred in law; and conclude he had carefully considered all the facts, and law correctly.

27. The Defendants relied in the case of Safari Lodge Fiji Ltd v Rosedale Limited Civil Action No. 319 1999 (5th February, 2008) and the said case was decided on different facts and grounds which are not relevant to the present case.

28. As stated in 1st Deo Maharaj v Burns Phillips (South Seas) Company Limited, Civil Appeal No. ABU 0051 1994 citing the Judgement of Norwich and Peterborough Society v. Steed 2ALL AER880 CA:

"The Court has unfettered discretion in the grant or refusal of Leave. The factors which are normally taken into account in deciding whether to grant extension of time are:

(a)     
The length of delay;

(b)     
The reasons for delay;

(c)     
The chances of succeeding if time is extended; and

(d)     
The degree of prejudice to the Respondent if the application is granted.

29. As stated in the above Judgement, I am satisfied the Defendants failed to substantiate the chances of succeeding if time is granted and agree with the Master's Ruling.

30. I also conclude if the time is granted great prejudice will be caused to the Plaintiffs.

31. The present application was filed on 9th December 2011 which would have filed 14 days from 4th of October, i.e. before 18th of October 2011 and Defendants failed to abide by the Order 59 Rule 11 of the High Court Rules and there was a delay of 51 days. In the circumstances I conclude the reasons given by the Defendants for the delay are unfounded.

32. The fact elaborated by the Defendant is based on the delays caused by the Solicitors of the Defendant and I conclude that there is no material forwarded to prove this position taken up by the Defendants. The Defendants continuously delayed to take steps as stated in paragraphs 20(1) to 20(11). Further the Defendant had deliberately avoided to state following dates in his affidavit when he made the allegations against the Solicitors:

(a)     
Which date he was informed the Leave to Appeal Out of Time is to be applied. (Para 2 of the affidavit of the Defendant filed on 9th December, 2011;

(b)     
When he received Writ of Summons was received on which day he instructed his Solicitors M/S Patel and Sharma and Babu Singh Associates to file Statement of Defence. Mere allegation against the Solicitors without any basis does not give valid grounds to justify the delay. (Paragraph 3 of the affidavit filed on 9th December 2011);

(c)     
In para 4 and 5 of the affidavit, dates of meetings with Babu Singh Associates were not stated and in this paragraph the Defendant only stated he met Chan Law Associates on 2nd November, 2011. I conclude, that purposely Defendant avoided to state the dates and merely making allegations against his Solicitors to justify the delay without any proper material to consider by this Court.

33. I quote below the Judgement of Privy Council in Rahiman v Kumaran Swamy 1964 3AET 933 at 935 stated:

"The rules of court must, prima facie be obeyed and in order to justify court in extending time during which some step in procedure requires to be taken; there must be some material on which the court can exercise its discretion. If the laws were otherwise, a party breach would have an unqualified right to an extension of time which would defeat the purpose of the rules which is to provide a time table for the conduct of litigation. (emphasis by me)

34. The materials submitted by the Defendants do not warrant using the discretion of this Court to allow the application for Leave to Appeal Out of Time.

35. Accordingly, I make the following Orders on the motion filed by the First and 3rd Defendants:

(a)     
Leave to appeal Application Out of Time is dismissed and Judgement in default dated 17th May, 2011 stands;

(b)     
Having dismissed the application for Leave to Appeal Out of Time, there is no necessity to make Orders on para 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 of summons filed on 9th December, 2011;

(c)     
In addition to the costs of $1000 summarily assessed, by the Master, I ORDER the 1st and 3rd Defendants to pay summarily assessed cost of $1,500 as costs of this application.

Delivered on 3rd day of July, 2012. 

......................................
Chandrasiri Kotigalage
JUDGE
