AT NASINU

Family Case No. 340/NAS/2009

BETWEEN:

ASHIKA SAVITA KUMARI
[Applicant]

AND:

SANJAY SINGH
[Respondent]

BEFORE: RESIDENT MAGISTRATE: MR. SUMUDU PREMACHANDRA

APPLICANT : appeared in person
RESPONDENT: appeared in person 

Trial Details
Date of Hearing: 20th September 2012
Judgment : 15th November 2012 at Nasinu, Fiji

JUDGMENT ON SPOUSAL MAINTENANCE & DIVORCE

A.      
The Application

1.      
This is an application for spousal maintenance by the applicant and in return the Respondent filed form 1 application for Divorce. Both applications were heard in one trial. The Applicant in her Form 5 application claims $57 per week. The Respondent in his form 1 seeks divorce. 

B.      
The Response

2.      
The Respondent has filed his response form 6 to form 5 and disputed the spousal maintenance application. In his response he said that his pay is $75 per week and he cannot pay maintenance to his wife as he cannot afford any maintenance. The Applicant filed Form 4 for Divorce and resisted the application on 30th June 2011. 

C.      
The Issues

4.      
(i)     
Whether the Respondent is responsible for pay spousal maintenance;
(ii)    
If so, whether he has the capacity to pay any maintenance for the wife; and
(iii)   
Is the financial support necessary for the wife?
(iv) Whether their marriage has irretrievably broken down?
(v)     
If so, will Form 1 for the Respondent succeed? 

D.      
The Evidence

5.      
The Applicant and the Respondent gave sworn evidence under oath.

6.      
The Respondent man gave evidence first. In his testimonies he told the court briefly the following:-

"They got married on 28-02-2008 and started living together in 6 miles, at the Respondent's parent's place. In August 2008, they got separated. The reason being is his parents are vegetarians and wife was asked to do a pooja which she refused. On that issue there was an argument and the wife left the place. He further said they were counseled and he waited three years to reconcile. He said he cannot pay spousal maintenance as he gets only $85 and he has other commitments. "

7.      
In cross examination, the applicant asked when he can pay maintenance for her, but the Respondent said that he cannot pay maintenance. She said that she will not consent to the divorce. But the respondent said that he wants to move on with his life and marry another lady. The Appellant asked if you can support his parent why he can't support her, the Respondent man said that $85 pay is not enough for support her. The respondent said that he do not have the pay slip with him to prove that he is getting $85 per week. 

8.      
Thereafter the Respondent closed his case.

9.      
Then the Applicant's rights were explained and she opted to give sworn evidence.

10.     
In her evidence she testified as follows;

"She is not willing to stay with her in laws. The reason being is they are vegetarians and always pray and religious. If she does something they always argue with her. She asked him to build a new house but he did not build new house for her. The in laws told her to do whatever she can do but the Respondent would not stay with her, she has no one to support, so she applied spousal maintenance. In relation to Divorce application the applicant said the problem could be solved outside of the court. If the Respondent builds a new house then she will resume marriage and live with him peacefully. Past three years the Respondent has been listening to his parents. She is inviting her husband on that condition then she will withdraw the maintenance application. The applicant questioned if the Respondent can marry and support another lady why he can't support her? " 

11.     
The Respondent was given chance to cross examine the Applicant lady and impeach the Applicant's evidence. The Respondent suggested that she agreed before the counselor to give divorce and to start work, but she said that counselor is lying to the court (There is no such recommendation by the family counselor). She said that she can't work because she is looking after her parents and in return, they are supporting her. She said her parents only provide her 3 meals, so she wanted the Respondent to support her. She admitted she worked at Ranjith Garment, Vatuwaqa as a machinist. Because her income was not sufficient for bus fare, she stopped working. The Applicant admitted she can work in Nausori closer place to her home. The Respondent suggested she can get divorce and marry another man. She said just because of small issue she did not like to get divorce and marry another man. The applicant said that their marriage was arranged marriage and she did not know about the vegetarian issues. In reexamination the applicant said if the maintenance granted she wants that the Respondent to pay on time. 

E.      
The Law on Spousal Maintenance

3.      
The relevant laws governing spousal maintenance are provided in Sections 155, 156 and 157 of the Family Law Act 2003. For clarity I will reproduce these sections 155, 156 and 157.

"155-A party to a marriage is liable to maintain the other party, to the extent that the first-mentioned party if reasonably able to do so, if, and only if, that other party is unable to support herself or himself adequately, whether-

(a) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years;

(b) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment; or

(c) for any other adequate reason"

"Section 156 says in proceedings with respect to the maintenance of a party to a marriage, the court may make such order as it considers proper for the provision of maintenance in accordance with this Part"

"Section 157 says In exercising jurisdiction under section 155, the court may take into account only the following matters-

(a) the age and state of health of each of the parties;

(b) the income, property and financial resources (including any interest in leasehold or real estate which is inalienable) of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment;

(c) where either party has the care or control of a child of the marriage who had not attained the age of 18 years;

(d) commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support 

(i) himself or herself; and
(ii) a child or another person that the party has a duty to maintain;

(e) the responsibilities of either party to support any other person;

(f) the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under-

(i) any law of the Fiji Islands or of another country; or

(ii) any superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside of the Fiji Islands;

(g) the rate of any such pension, allowance or benefit being paid to either party;

(h) a standard of living that in all the circumstances is reasonable;

(i) the extent to which the payment of maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase the earnings capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course of education or training or to establish himself or herself in a business or otherwise to obtain an adequate income;

(j) the extent to which the party whose maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning capacity, property and financial resources of the other party;

(k) the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose maintenance is under consideration;

(l) if either party is cohabitating with another person - the financial circumstances relating to the cohabitation;

(m) the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 161 in relation to the property of the parties.

F.      
Law on Divorce:

4.      
Grounds for dissolution of marriage have been given in section 30 of the Family Law Act 2003. I reproduce it for clarity.

"30.-(1) An application under this Act by a party to a marriage for an order for dissolution of the marriage must be based on the ground that the marriage has broken down irretrievably.

(2) Subject to subsection (3), in a proceeding instituted by an application, the ground will be held to have been established, and an order for dissolution of the marriage must be made, if, and only if, the court is satisfied that the parties have separated and have thereafter lived separately and apart for a continuous period of not less than 12 months immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for dissolution of marriage.

(3) An order for dissolution of marriage will not be made if the court is satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood of cohabitation being resumed."

G.      
The Findings

12.     
The Applicant in her evidence said he is looking after her parents and they support her. The Applicant admitted that she worked previously and still able to work in Nausori. The Respondent did not produce his pay slip. He said he can't afford the maintenance money as he is getting only $85 per week. The Spousal Maintenance is based on section 15. The court should consider followings before ordering spousal maintenance. Those are incapabilities of the Applicant lady. I fix to those to instant case are as follows; 

(a) by reason of having the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years. In this matter parties have no issues from this marriage.

(b) by reason of age or physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment. The Applicant did not reveal any physical or mental incapacity for appropriate gainful employment.

(c) for any other adequate reason. The Applicant did not adduce any adequate reason. Only reason is she is looking after her parents. We all have parents and if we stay back home for look after parents and claiming maintenance is not acceptable practice. The Applicant even did not say that parents are elderly or they cannot look after themselves, but said her parent support her. That means they are capable to look after themselves and the applicant capable to work and support herself. 

13.     
I now consider Form one Divorce application. The date of separation is not disputed by the Applicant or the Respondent. They have separated in August 2008. The Form 1 filed on 08-03-2011 and by then they had separated more than one year. The Applicant is inviting with condition. that is the Respondent to build house to resume cohabitation. The Applicant demands that the Respondent should build a house for them and live without the Respondent's parents. If not she will not return or start cohabitation. It seems this is a unreasonable demand. The main problem was aroused on vegetarian issue and surrounded with their beliefs. The Respondent wishes to get divorced and remarry. But the Applicant objects for divorce. This court had sent them for counseling. At Counseling, the parties attended a joint session and the Applicant two individual sessions. A teleconferencing session was also conducted with the Respondent. The Family Counselor noted that the parties used to live with the Respondent's parents when they were living together. The Respondent and his parents are Hare Rama Hare Krishna devotees who live a very strict vegetarian life. The Applicant is a Sanatan Hindu and is not a vegetarian. The Applicant said that she wishes to reconcile and that she will only reunite with the Respondent if he (Respondent) builds a separate kitchen for them. The Respondent said that he wishes to reconcile. He also said that the Applicant can eat meat but not at home. The Applicant said that while she also has a strong faith in God, she finds it very difficult to abide by the Respondent and his family's demands for her to comply with all their rituals and eating habits. The Respondent said that there is no space to build a separate kitchen for the Applicant. The Applicant said that if the Respondent is not prepared to arrange for their separate living arrangements, then she is not prepared to return to live with his family. The Applicant therefore seeks the Courts assistance in awarding spousal maintenance at $50.00 per week for her. The outcome of the counseling was not good and Reconciliation is not possible at present as the Respondent is not prepared to live with the Applicant separately from his parents. Counselor recommended Spousal maintenance for the Applicant since she is unemployed and relies entirely on her parents for day to day support. But this is not a ground to order spousal maintenance as I noted above. The Applicant lady capacity to earn. 
 
14.     
Our Family law simply allows divorce whether party is a guilty party or innocent party to get divorce after one year continuous separation. It may be unfair by innocent party which the court cannot help. It is apparent, the parties have separated continuous period of 12 months before the application. The Applicant as lawful wife is duty bound to live with her husband, support his day to day life, and provide cohabitation, love, and affection. In return the lawful husband should provide a marital home or shelter, support her wife, and provide, cohabitation, love, and affection. Their religious beliefs are strong and this court cannot think this will ever resolve. They may find proper partner for their life in future. I therefore hold there is no chance for reconciliation of this marriage. I further hold this marriage has been broken down irretrievably. 

15.     
 At the moment there is interim spousal maintenance in place to pay $12 per week with effect from 23-04-2010.

16.     
Considering all these facts, on balance, I make following orders;

i)      
The Applicant is entitled to have spousal maintenance $15 per week for one year only from this order (till 15-11-2013) with effect from today. The Applicant to find a suitable job within one year and whatever spousal maintenance will cease thereafter (by 15-11-2013). 

ii)     
The Respondent to pay full arrears of maintenance before 15-11-2013 or to pay as lump sum together with arrears if any. 


iii)    
In the event of default of spousal maintenance the applicant to file JDS and 10 days imprisonment is imposed for every $100. 

iv)     
I grant conditional order for dissolution of marriage and it will absolute after one month.

v)      
Orders with effect from today

Orders Accordingly

30 days to appeal

SUMUDU PREMACHANDRA [Mr.]
RESIDENT MAGISTRATE
15-11-2012
