
-----------------
IN THE MAGISTRATES COURT AT NASINU

Family Case No. 457/2011

BETWEEN:

FARIDA BIBI MAKBOOL
of 1/173 Kings Road, Salisbury Downs 5108, South Australia.
[Applicant]

AND:

MOHAMMED MAKBOOL
of Lot 4, Rosi Street, Nakasi in the Republic of Fiji.
[Respondent]

Ms. Radika Naidu for the Applicant (Sherani Solicitors) 
Mr. Krishn Shah for the Respondent (Shah and Associates) 

Ruling on Property Settlement

01] The Applicant instituted matrimonial proceedings in the Family Court by filling form 9, 12, 19 and 23, seeking matrimonial property distribution. The Applicant seeks court orders in her Form 9 are as follows;

1.      
That Transfer No. 746392 for Certificate of Title No. 13411, Lot 4, DP No. 3291 be set aside.

2. The Court declares that Lot 4 on DP 3291 for Certificate of Title No. 13411 is matrimonial property subject to distribution.

3. The Respondent be restrained from withdrawing his FNPF funds from Fiji on the grounds of migration.

4. The Respondent be restrained from disposing off any properties, motor vehicles, chattels or any other properties deemed to be matrimonial property pending the determination of this application.

5. The Respondent be compelled to disclose his cash at bank, his properties and current FNPF balance.

6. There be 50% division of the matrimonial property.

7. Costs of these proceedings to be paid by the Respondent on an indemnity basis.

8. Such further orders that this Honorable Court deems just.

2] The Respondent filed a form 10 and 23 through his solicitors. He seeks orders are as follows;

1. That Transfer No. 746392 for CT No. 13411, Lot 4, DP No. 3291 be declared as valid and the rules of indefeasibility of title be maintained.

 2. That the Court declares that Lot 4 on DP No. 3291 for CT No. 13411 is not matrimonial property between Mohammed Makbool and Farida Bibi, rather it is property inherited by the Respondent way prior to marriage.

3. That there be no orders on the Respondents FNPF, if any.

4. That the Respondent be allowed to deal with his assets in his own manner.

5. That the Respondent has no duty to disclose his cash at bank, his properties of FNPF balances.

6. That there is no matrimonial property in CT 13411, however the Respondent counter claims on property belongings to Farida Bibi at 1/173 Kings Road, Salisbury Downs 5108 Adelaide South Australia and there be 50% division of the Australian property as matrimonial property.

7. The Respondent further seeks that the Court declare CT No. 13411, Lot 4, DP No. 3291 as not being part of matrimonial property, and declare that the property located at 1/173 Kings Road, Salisbury Downs 5108 Adelaide South Australia is matrimonial property.

8. That the Respondent be given 50% of the property located at 1/173 Kings Road, Salisbury Downs 5108 Adelaide South Australia.

9. That the Applicant be ordered to pay the Respondent all moneys used by Farida Bibi from his GE Money Card and his ANZ Credit Card.

10. That the Applicant pay the Respondent the sum of $16,000.00 being the amount at which she sold his business.

11. Costs of these proceedings to be paid by the Applicant on an indemnity basis.

12. Such further orders that this Honorable Court deems just.

3] The matter was listed for hearing 21st June 2012 and there was no appearance by the Respondent or his Counsel. In fact the counsel for the Respondent came in the afternoon after trial was concluded ex parte. It was never set for that evening but the court allowed him to file submissions. The parties have filed their written submission on 23rd August 2012. The matter is fixed for judgment today. It is to be noted both parties have filed form 23 affidavits along with their respective relying documents. But lamentably no cross examination was done to test the truth or witness as it went ex parte, but it is plain to see documents elaborate the true story. 

4] The applicant story as follows. 

The applicant said that she was married to the Respondent on 17th February 1997 in Suva, Fiji Islands, under his old name, Mohammed Iqbal Khan. She marked it in the affidavit as FB1 is a copy of the said Marriage Certificate. She is an Australian citizen and after she married the Respondent in Fiji on 17th February 1997, she applied for a spousal visa for the Respondent, on the basis of their marriage. The said application was refused and they reapplied on 31st July 1998 and it was again refused on 16th July 1999.Then on 30th August 1999 Mohammed Iqbal Khan, her husband, changed his name to Mohammed Makbool by virtue of a Deed Poll. She marked as FB2 is a copy of the said Deed Poll. The Respondent was then able to travel to Australia in September 1999 on a visitors visa. Then the Respondent applied for Divorce in Fiji and they were divorced on 3rd November 1999 in Fiji. On 8th November 1999 she was married to the Respondent under his new name in Adelaide, Australia which was registered on 12th November 1999. She marked as FB3 is a copy of the said Marriage Certificate. From this cohabitation, that they have child namely Areefa Sadiyah Makbool a female born 3rd September 2002. She marked as FB4 is a copy of her Birth Certificate. The Applicant said that in 2003, the Respondent was deported from Australia back to Fiji because of bad character. His spousal visa was cancelled. However, the Respondent was in contact with the Applicant while he was in Fiji. In 2007, she again applied for a Spousal Visa through her lawyers Jane McGrath, as the Respondent was constantly persuading her to get him back into Australia. The Respondent told her that he missed his daughter and the Applicant and he did not have a chance to raise his daughter. She marked as FB5 is a copy of the application letter dated 20th February 2007 from her lawyers to the Australian High Commission in Fiji for grant of partner visa. Through her lawyers she was able to clear his name from bad character on the basis of their marriage and their daughter. She paid legal fees to have the Respondent granted a spousal visa. In 2009, everything was cleared and the Respondents spousal visa was approved. She annexed a copy of the letter dated 5th June 2009 from the Embassy, together with the copy of the stamped visa on the Respondents passport, annexed and marked as FB6 and FB7. The Applicant mentioned when the Respondent arrived in Australia in 2009, he started creating problems with her, as his ex-wife and children were in Sydney. The Respondent and she started having matrimonial problems and then he started detaching himself from Applicant and the daughter. This caused her to apply for child maintenance in Australia through the Child Support Agency. The Respondent objected to the child support assessment by the Child Support Agency but on 25th March 2011, she was notified by the Child Support Agency that the maintenance is still payable. She annexed and marked those documents as FB8 is a copy of the letter dated 25th March 2011 together with the Decision. She stated the marital status of the Respondent, he was a divorcee when she married, and after marriage they had marriage problems, then she was told that he had started residing with his ex-wife in Fiji when he was deported from Australia and he had never separated or broken ties with her. The Applicant said that the Respondent had lied to her that he was not associating with his ex-wife. She later found out that the Respondent had cheated on her, and only got married to her for the purposes of coming to Australia as all his previous applications had been rejected. She said that she has been very loyal with the Respondent since the day they married and she was supporting him from Australia when he was stranded in Fiji, due to visa problems from 1997 to 1999. Annexed and marked as FB9 are copies of deposits made and sent to the Respondent. She said that she is also currently legally bonded with the Australian Government to pay for a debt owed by the Respondent to the Government, amounting to the tune of $76,457.63. Annexed and marked as FB10 is a copy of the letter dated 5th June 2007 together with the repayment schedule. The Applicant told that now the Respondent has become very cold and hostile towards her and he has moved in permanently with his ex-wife and had even gone to the extent of executing documents depicting they are husband and wife. The Applicant stresses the Respondent owed a property in Fiji, being Certificate of Title Number 13411 and after they separated, he has had a transfer done Pursuant to a Family Arrangement to his ex-wife. Annexed and marked as FB11 is a copy of the said Deed of Family Arrangement dated 3rd July 2010 and as FB12 is a copy of the Transfer executed on 3rd July 2010. The Respondent has lied in the Family Arrangement Deed that Amina Khatoon is his wife. Annexed and marked as FB13 is a copy of the Decree Nisi of the parties. The Respondent has deliberately lied and cheated and done this transfer to avoid any property claim filed by her. She did place a caveat over the said property and it was removed under very unusual circumstances. An application for removal of caveat was signed on behalf of the Respondent by his Solicitors in Fiji, dated 4th March 2011. Annexed and marked as FB14 is a copy of the said application. That a Notice of Removal of Caveat dated 26th April 2011 was sent on the local postal address given in her Caveat, but the same Notice did not give the 21 days requirement that she had only 21 days to show why the Caveat was not to be cancelled. By the time she received this notice, it was after the 21 days and the Caveat was cancelled and the Transfer was registered. Annexed and marked as FB15 is a copy of the said Notice dated 26th April 2011. She further sais that she has been legally advised and verily believe that the Notice sent by the Registrar of Titles is a defective notice and thus the Registrar of Titles should not have cancelled the Caveat and registered the new Transfer. She annexed and marked as FB16 a recent search of the Certificate of Title. That her Solicitors have written to the Registrar of Titles seeking a clarification on this. Annexed and marked as FB17 is a copy of the said letter dated 26th July 2011. The Respondent has not re-married his ex-wife, and thus all documents he has executed with his ex-wife, as husband and wife, is challenged. The Respondent lied when having his signature witnessed before a Solicitor. The applicants Solicitors wrote to the Registrar General on 26th July 2011 to enquire if the Respondent has re-married with his ex-wife. They received a response through a letter dated 28th July 2011 that the parties were divorced on 18th December 2006. She annexed and marked as FB18 is the letter dated 26th July 2011 and as FB19 the reply dated 28th July 2011. These facts reiterated in her sworn evidence and all documents were again tendered as Ex-1 to Ex-24. 

5] Under these circumstances she is challenging the Transfer done by the Respondent and she is further seeking for discovery of the Respondents financials and properties in Fiji and abroad.

6] The Applicant stated that during the course of their marriage, she has financially assisted the Respondent in meeting his day to day expenses in Fiji when he was deported from Australia, and she has also helped him non-financially as well. She said that the Respondent has his FNPF funds in Fiji and as at 27th August 1999, he had a sum of $32,985.41. Annexed hereto and marked as FB20 is a copy of the said statement. The applicant said that she is a recipient of a Disability Support Pension in Australia and through that she has been supporting the Respondent, and also now his daughter. 

7] The Respondent disputed these facts. He submits that the property situated at CT No. 13411, Lot 4, DP No. 3291 was never matrimonial property between Farida Bibi and Mohammed Makbool as she had never contributed to this property, and this property was inherited by the Respondent as family property. The Respondent further submits that he financially and physically contributed to the construction of their family home with the Applicant at 1/173 Kings Road, Salisbury Downs 5108 Adelaide South Australia, and had resided with her there, and that was matrimonial property. The Respondent further submits that he has continuously paid maintenance for his daughter Areefa Sadiyah Makbool and is paying about $200.00 per week and this second proceedings is therefore an abuse of process.

8] The Respondents story as follows. He said that he was married to Amina Khatoon in 1971 under his old name of Mohammed Iqbal Khan and resided with her in Fiji Islands. From that marriage he had three (3) children, and they divorced in 1996 and he had been in the relationship for 26 years when they divorced. He said that even after he married Farida Bibi, he resided with his wife (defacto) Amina Khatoon and they stayed together in a family relationship at Lot 4 Rosi Street, Nakasi. He further said that Farida Bibi never came to reside with him in Fiji, but was residing in Australia at all times and he continued to stay with Amina Khatoon. The property known as CT 13411 being Lot 4 on DP 3291 was not a matrimonial property which was acquired by him when he married Farida Bibi. The Respondent annexed and marked as MMI is a copy of the said title. This property known as CT 13411 being Lot 4 on DP No. 3291 was a family inheritance property which had belonged to his parents and was inherited by him with no financial contributions by Farida Bibi. He annexed and marked as MM2 is a copy of the said title and transfer page. During all this period whilst this family property was being resided in by him, and his children he was in a constant relationship with Amina Khatoon, the woman that he loved and always considered as his wife and still do. His marriage to Farida Bibi was divorced on 3rd November 1999, as he had remained with his loving wife (defacto) Amina Khatoon and Farida Bibi, the Applicant was living separately in Australia. In 1999, he moved to Australia under the new name of Mohammed Makbool and again remarried Farida Bibi to see if things would work out, but it did not and in 2003 he moved back to Fiji to stay with Amina Khatoon, whom he always considers as his wife. He further says that while he was deported to Fiji, and not in Australia Farida Bibi used his credit card to maintain herself, and continued to use it despite his telling her not to. He annexed and marked as MM3 are copies of ANZ Credit Card statements. Whilst he was always in Fiji Farida Bibi also used his GE Money despite his telling her not to use those moneys which belonged to him. He also annexed and marked as MM4 are copies of the GE Money statements. He says that he has been paying maintenance for the child Areefa Sadiyah Makbool and he has been advised that any orders made by this Court would be allowing Farida Bibi to double dip and be unjustly enriched. He annexed and marked MM5 are copy of child support payments in Australia. The respondent said that he has contributed to the house which Farida Bibi now resides in as he is a builder and has financially and physically contributed to the construction of the house including general building with the contractor (World Concept), the tiling of the house, construction of driveways, construction of house at 1/173 Kings Road, Salisbury Downs 5108, Adelaide, South Australia. He has financially contributed to the building of the entire house at 1/173 Kings Road, Salisbury Downs 5108, Adelaide, South Australia and consider it to be matrimonial property. The Respondent reiterated that he always treated Amina Khatoon as his wife, both religiously and emotionally and referred to her as such and the Deed of Family Arrangement was made for the transfer to Amina Khatoon out of my natural love and affection for as she had always been there to support me. He annexed and marked as MM6 is a copy of the Deed. The Respondent in his form 13 said that Farida Bibi has never financially assisted him, however as seen by the use of my credit cards when he was not there, she has been using his finances for herself. She has also sold his driving business for $16,000.00 when he was not in Australia, but in Fiji and has kept that money. But the Respondent did not give sworn evidence and tendered the documents. These evidence are untested and has less value than the Applicants sworn evidence.

9] The facts illustrated in the Respondent form 10 and 23 can be summarized as follows; The Respondent has opposed the Form 9 orders by a Form 10 and a Form 23 only. The Respondent position is that he has always been in a relationship with Amina Khatoon although they have been divorced and even after marrying the Applicant, the Respondent stayed in a family relationship with Amina Khatoon. The Respondent says that CT No. 13411, Lot 4 on DP 3291 is not matrimonial property as he had inherited it with no financial contributions by the Applicant. He maintains he resided on this family property with his ex-wife and children. But the Respondent confirms he divorced the Applicant in Fiji and again re-married her in Australia. He further states that when he was in Fiji, after being deported from Australia, the Applicant used his credit card. He confirmed he is paying child maintenance for the daughter of the marriage. The Respondent states he contributed to the Applicants house in Australia as he is a builder, and considers the Applicants house as matrimonial property. He maintains that the Applicant sold his driving business for $16,000.00 and has kept the money. The Respondent has given contradictory statements in his Form 23 as he considers Amina Khataoon to be his wife and at the same time he is seeking matrimonial property shares from the Applicant. The Respondent seeks order for the transfer over CT No. 13411, Lot 4 on DP 3291 to be declared valid and that it is not matrimonial property. He further seeks an order that no orders be made on FNPF or any assets, and he need not make any disclosure to the Court. He seeks the Applicants house to be declared matrimonial property, and a 50% share from the same. The Respondent seeks all monies from his ANZ Credit Card and his GE Money Card from the Applicant and $16,000.00 for his driving business and costs with further orders as the Court feels just.

10] Though, the Respondent has mentioned above facts in his Form 23, he did not face the hearing. Unfortunately, there has not been a Financial Statement, as is a requirement under Rules 8.27 and 8.28 of the Family Court Rules 2005 wherein the Respondent has to file a financial statement in accordance with Form 19. The Respondent was defended by a solicitor yet failed to file form 19 financial statement. 

11] Under the Family Law Act, the court is empowered to make two principal kinds of orders in respect of the property of the parties to the marriage. The first is an order under section 160 of the Act through which a court can make a declaration of the interests of parties to the marriage in their property. The second is an order under section 161 for an alteration of interests of the parties in the property including an order for settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property and an order requiring either or both of the parties to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines. 

12] I will now outline the statutory provisions of the law governing property settlement as well the basic steps that a deciding court must take before making any orders under the provisions governing property distribution. 

13] The parties are seeking for their share in the property of the parties to the marriage. Their claim therefore falls under section 161 of the Act.

14] Section 161 of the Act gives the court general powers to make any orders it considers appropriate in altering the interest of parties to a marriage in their property. S. 162 outline the matters to be taken into account in deciding upon the order.

15] Specifically the material sections read as follows and I reproduce it for clarity:-

Alteration of property interests
161.-(1) In proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to a marriage or either of them, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate altering the interests of the parties in the property, including- 

(a) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property; and 

(b) an order requiring either or both of the parties to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines&

 (6) The court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.
Factors to be taken into account
162.-(1) In considering what order (if any) should be made under section 161 in proceedings with respect to any property of the parties to a marriage or either of them, the court must take into account- 

(a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of the last-mentioned property, whether or not the last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them; 

(b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them; 

(c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent. 

(d) the eligibility of either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under- 

(i)     
any law of the Fiji Islands or of another country; or 

(ii) any superannuation funds or scheme, whether the fund or scheme was established, or operates, within or outside the Fiji Islands. 

(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) the contribution of the parties to a marriage is presumed to be equal, but the presumption may be rebutted if a court considers a finding of equal contribution is on the facts of the case repugnant to justice, (for example as a marriage of short duration.)

(3) The court must also take into account- 
(a) the age and state of health of the parties; 

(b) the income, property and financial resources, including any interest in inalienable property, of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of them for appropriate gainful employment; 

(c) whether either party has the care and control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18 years; 

(d) the commitments of each of the parties that are necessary to enable the party to support- 

(i)     
himself or herself; and 

(ii) a child or another person that the party has a legal or customary duty to support. 

(e) a standard of living that in all circumstances is reasonable; 

(f) the financial resources available to a person if cohabiting with another person; 

(g) the duration of the marriage; 

(h) the terms of any order for spousal or child maintenance made in favour of or against a party; 

(i)     
any other fact or circumstances which, in the opinion of the court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into account. 

16] In this judgment, I will reiterate the three basic steps the court will take in proceedings for alteration of property interests under s. 161 of the Family Law Act 2003. Under the Family Law Act the property distribution is based on 3 steps. That is; 

a)      
The First Step: Ascertainment of the Property of the Parties. First, it must ascertain what property is owned by each of the parties to the marriage at the time of hearing. It is now firmly established that upon hearing of an application by a party to a marriage for an alteration of property interests under s. 161, the court is required to take into account all the property of both of the parties to the marriage.

b)      
The Second Step: Valuation of Property: After ascertainment of the property of the parties, the court must then determine the value the property of the parties to the marriage. In doing so the court normally also takes into account the liabilities of the parties. In determining the value of the property of the parties to a marriage, the court must deduct from the gross value of the property the value of any encumbrances secured upon it. The Family Court must take the property of a party to the marriage as it finds it. The Family court must accordingly take the property of a party to a marriage subject to any mortgage, charge, restrictive covenant or other encumbrance that has been placed upon it.

c)      
The Third Step: Exercise of the Court Discretion- The third and the final step is the exercise of the courts discretion concerning what order to make under section 161 of the Act. In considering what order to make under section 161, the court must take into account certain matters. These certain matter are outlined in section 162(1) and s. 162(3).

17] The above are the procedural steps that the court must take when determining a partys entitlement under a property alteration claim. The Applicant is not aware of the Respondents pool of assets but she seeks an order for a 50% division of the matrimonial property. The Applicant has filed a Form 19, deposing she owns a Family Home with her sister, and also an economical car and is the recipient of a Pension Scheme in Australia. She has outlined all her repayments and list of expenses.

18] The Applicant has further sought an order for the Court to set aside Transfer No. 746392 for CT No. 13411, Lot 4 and to make a declaration that the said property is matrimonial property. The Applicant sought restraining orders of withdrawal of FNPF funds by the Respondent and other restraining orders together with disclosures orders.

19] The Respondent raised a jurisdictional question. That is Can the Court set aside a Transfer and declare it to be Matrimonial Property? 

20] As I noted in my judgment, under Section 160 of the Family Law Act 2003, the Court has powers to make declarations of interests in property.

Section 160 (1)

In proceedings between he parties to a marriage with respect to existing title or rights in respect of property, the Court may declare the title or rights, if any, that a party has in respect of the property.( Emphasis is mine) 

Section 160 (2)

Where a Court makes a declaration under subsection (1), it may make consequential orders to give effect to the declaration, including orders as to sale or partition and interim or permanent orders as to possession. . (Emphasis is mine)

21]     
Under Section 161 the Court can alter property interests;

Section 161 (1)
In proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to a marriage or either of them, the Court may make such order as it considers appropriate altering interests of the parties in the property, including-

(a)     
 An order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property; and

(b)     
 An order requiring either or both of the parties to make, for the 

(c)     
benefit of either or both of the parties or a child of a marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the Court determines.

22] The Respondent stresses that the principle of indefeasibility of title comes into operation in this question. On this aspect the following section 38, of the Land Transfer Act is relevant to this case and are to be borne in mind in considering the issue before the Court.

23] Section 38 provides: (registered instrument to be conclusive evidence of title).

No instrument of title registered under the provisions of this Act shall be impeached or defeasible by reason of or on account of any informality or in any application or document or in any proceedings previous to the registration of the instrument of title.

24] The Exception for section 38 is the section 40, it states: 

Except in the case of fraud, no person contracting or dealing with or taking or proposing to take a transfer from the proprietor of any estate or interest in land subject to the provisions of this Act shall be required or in any manner concerned to inquire or ascertain the circumstances in or the consideration for which such proprietor or in any previous proprietor of such estate or interest is or was registered, or to see to the application of the purchase money or any part thereof, or shall be affected by notice, direct or constructive, of any trust or unregistered interest, any rule of law or equity to the contrary notwithstanding, and the knowledge that any such trust or unregistered interest is in existence shall not of itself be imputed as fraud

25] The relevant law in this area is ambiguous. There are no local judicial precedents. The issue to be determined is whether a family division Magistrates Court has jurisdiction to hear and grant orders of this matter, especially as it deals with the Applicant seeking to set aside a transfer which has already been registered by the Registrar of Titles. Section 168 of the Land Transfer Act gives powers to the Court to direct the Registrar to cancel, correct, substitute or issue any instrument of title&etc; this power is currently given to the High Court. Thus, has Magistrate Court jurisdiction to try this issue?

26] Needless to say, the jurisdiction for property distribution is vested with Magistrates Court of Family Division. Any transaction which was executed to defeat any claim can be altered under section 169 of the Family law act 2003. It says;

169.-(1) In proceedings under this Act, the court may set aside or restrain the making of an instrument or disposition by or on behalf of, or by direction of or in the interest of a party, that is made or proposed to be made to defeat an existing or anticipated order in those proceedings or if, irrespective of intention, it is likely to defeat any such order.

27] The Respondent in his affidavit admitted that he was the lawful husband of the applicant but he treated his de facto Amina Khataoon to be his truly loved wife. The Applicant is used for his migration purpose and it is clear by this action the Respondent proved his mala fides. 

28] In K v K (1983) England CA as quoted in S v S (1992) 51 WIR 286 at 282:

the Court had to be satisfied that the disposition had been made with the intention of defeating the applicants claim. The burden of proof was not to be found in fraud cases, nor in any particular test such as the balance of probability or beyond reasonable doubt. The word satisfied was to be given its ordinary meaning.

29] In Cadogan v Cadogan, [1977] 3 All ER 831 at page 842, the Court of Appeal found that the husbands conveyance deprived the wife of the possibility of seeking any remedies in relation to financial relief and that this loss of opportunity constituted sufficient prejudice for the wife to be granted the opportunity to amend her claim to properly include an application to set aside the transaction for fraud. 

29] In Re Kumar [1993] 1 WLR 224, the husband had transferred his interest in the jointly owned matrimonial home to his wife in consideration of her taking over sole liability for the mortgage debt secured thereon. Nearly a year later the wife's claim in the matrimonial court for capital provision was dismissed by consent on the grounds that the husband had already transferred his legal and equitable interest to the wife. Three months later the husband went bankrupt. The claim of the Trustee in Bankruptcy to set aside the transfer under s.339 Insolvency Act 1986 succeeded on the grounds that the only consideration for the transfer was the assumption of the mortgage liability and that was insufficient value for the husband's interest in the equity of redemption.

30] The speeches in the House of Lords in White v White [2001] 1 AC 596 and Miller v Miller and McFarlane v McFarlane [2006] 2 AC 618 is somewhat helpful to resolve this question. Specially, in the speech of Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead in the latter authority, his Lordship said (Paras 8 and 9):

"8. For many years one principle applied by the courts was to have regard to the reasonable requirements of the claimant, usually the wife, and treat this as determinative of the extent of the claimant's award. Fairness lay in enabling the wife to continue to live in the fashion to which she had become accustomed. The glass ceiling thus put in place was shattered by the decision of your Lordships' House in the White case. This has accentuated the need for some further judicial enunciation of general principle.

9. The starting point is surely not controversial. In the search for a fair outcome it is pertinent to have in mind that fairness generates obligations as well as rights. The financial provision made on divorce by one party for the other, still typically the wife, is not in the nature of largesse. It is not a case of 'taking away' from one party and 'giving' to the other property which 'belongs' to the former. The claimant is not a suppliant. Each party to a marriage is entitled to a fair share of the available property. The search is always for what are the requirements of fairness in the particular case."

31] The Respondent heavily relied on Hon. Justice Pathik's in Shah v Fifita [2004] FJHC 299; HBC0392j.2003s (23 June 2004). But this case has not addressed the current issue of this case and has no application to instants case. It is seen that the Respondent transferred his share to Amina Khataoon for no reason. The transfer defeats the applicant's claim and it may involve a fraud just to defeat potential family property distribution claim. Thus it can be challenged collaterally either Family Magistrate Court or High Court.

32] The Respondent whilst disputing the jurisdiction of this Court has submitted and admitted the jurisdiction of the court by filing the form 10 and form 23. The jurisdictional constrained was not raised by the Respondent at the first place. By his gesture he admitted this court's jurisdiction and he deemed to be waived his rights by now. He is estoppelled to get this objection at this moment. As I mentioned earlier the Family law and common law give the jurisdiction and on top of that the Respondent had not taken the objection for the jurisdiction at first instance. I hold this court has the jurisdiction to determine and dispose this case. I therefore suppressed the Respondent's objection in this regard.

33] I now explore the pool of assets. The Respondent did not file any financial statements. The Court is left with uncertainty of current pool of assets. But Australian Courts considered property alteration despite the Respondent's defaulting. In West & West [2012] FamCA 182, the wife did not know what pool of assets the husband had (paragraph 15), and the husband had not disclosed documents (paragraph 29) thus the Court was satisfied to make alternation or property interests orders under Section 79 of the Family Law Act. In another case, Wulan & Gema [2012] FamCA 262 the wife applied for matrimonial property claim and the husband did not appear. There was an undefended hearing due to the failure of the husband from appearing. There was also complete non-disclosure by the husband. The wife was able to show that her needs exceeded the needs of the husband and her orders for alteration property interests were granted.

34] In Abdoo & Abdoo [2011] FamCAFC 234 the husband appealed to the High Court before a Single Judge on the decision of the Lower Court. The Lower Court had taken a Section 79 approach and was satisfied that the husband had not made full and frank disclosure (paragraph 30). The Judge when dealing with the Grounds of Appeal relied on the famous Australian Case of Weir & Weir (1993) FLC 92  338.

"It seems to us that once it has been established that there has been a deliberate non-disclosure&.then the Court should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favor of the innocent party. To do otherwise might be thought to provide a charter for fraud in proceedings of this nature". (paragraph 57). Emphasis is mine.

The Appeal by the husband was dismissed.

35] In Relying on the above Australian cases as well as the relevant provisions in the Fiji Family Law Act, being Sections 160 and 161, I proceed to the alteration of property interest as orders sought by the Applicant. On the other hand the Respondent has sought that the Applicant's disclosed property in her form 19 be taken to the pool of assets. 

36] The Applicant evidence went uncontested at the hearing. On the other hand the Respondent's Form 23 has no value as it was not tested by cross examination. The Respondent did not prove that he contributed to this property and without any proof I decline give the Respondent's relief which prayed in his form 10. I therefore reject the mention facts in the Form 23 of the Respondent.

37] The Applicant has claimed 50% of the Respondent's FNPF Funds. The Applicant has shown an old FNPF Statement of the Respondent showing a balance of $32,985.41 as at 27/8/99 (Exhibit 21). Section 136 of the FNPF Decree permits to calculate FNPF money as marital property. Therefore, she is entitled to 50% of the FNPF funds. In the absence of any FNPF recent statement, the Court orders the 50% entitlement to the Applicant as at the date of Application of Form 9.The Court directs FNPF to release the monies standing to the credit of the Respondent and then do a 50% division from it, and release to the Applicant. If the Respondent has drawn all monies of FNPF, the FNPF is here by directed to issue full statement of the withdrawal to ascertain the Applicant's share. 

38] The Applicant mentioned the Cash at Bank. The Applicant has been depositing monies into the Respondent's Bank account and Western Union as can be seen from Exhibit 10 (annexure FB 9) in the Applicant's Form 23, filed on 28/10/11.The Applicant has from 1997 to 2007 has sent the Respondent an estimated amount of $10,440.90. The court orders that the Applicant is entitled to get $10,449.90 plus AUD $3210.00 or 50% of the current cash at banks. The Court directs Westpac to release the bank statement of the Respondent for Westpac Account No. 325756-29, BSP for BSP Bank Account Number 4587469 and do a division from the cash at bank, in favor of entitlements to the Applicant.

39] The Applicants claim ½ of the Motor Vehicles. The LTA search under the Respondent's name showed 4 motor vehicles which were acquired and disposed off during the course of the marriage. E 8107 acquired in 1994 and disposed off in 1997, CF 185 acquired in 2005 and disposed off in 2007, FL 052, acquired in 2009 and disposed off in 2009. DD 1888 acquired in 2009 and disposed off in 2010. The Respondent still owns BK 506, which is a 1981 new registered Daihatsu Tray Truck, as per the LTA search done last year. These all are subject to property distribution. The Applicant is entitled to get 50% share on the said motor vehicle BK 506 as well as the motor vehicles that were bought and sold off. The value and type of the motor vehicles are to be released by LTA upon this Court Order.

40] The applicant claims her share of immovable Properties. The Applicant mentioned of one property, being Certificate of Title No. 27407, being Lot 5 on DP No. 6107, which was bought by the Respondent under his old name, Mohammed Iqbal Pursuant to Transfer No. 315873 on 19th February 1992. It was later on sale for $140,000.00 to one Waisea Somisucu. The Transfer was registered on 5th February 2010. The Applicant is entitled to get 50% from the sale proceeds of the said property as she was married to the Respondent when the said property was sold and not a single cent was given by the Respondent. The Court makes a declaration order under Section 160 and an entitlement order under Section 161, and 50% of the selling price, namely $70,000.00 for the sale of Certificate of Title No. 27407, being Lot 5 on DP No. 6107 to be given to the Applicant.

41] The Financial contribution of a party to a marriage can be directly and indirectly. It is seen that the Applicant contributed financially to the marriage with the Respondent, from the time she got married to him. The Respondent's local bank statements will show all deposits made by the Applicant, as well as refer to Exhibit 10. The Applicant was sending money from Australia to Fiji for the Respondent to make his payments and to survive in Fiji. On an estimated basis, from 1997 till 2009, the Applicant is to have sent about FJD $10,440.90 plus AUD $3210.00. These facts proved she contributed to all above pool of assets financially and non financially. 

42] I therefore make following orders. The Applicant is entitled to:

a.      
50% share of $70,000.00 from the sale of CT No. 27407, Lot 5 on DP No. 6107 via Transfer No. 491843.

b.      
Transfer No. 746392 for Certificate of Title No. 13411, Lot 4, DP No. 3291 is hereby set aside. The Registrar of Lands is directed to take the necessary steps in order to give effect to the terms of this order. The Court declares that Lot 4 on DP 3291 for Certificate of Title No. 13411 is matrimonial property subject to distribution. The Applicant to have 50% of the current value of the Respondent's share in CT No. 13411. The Court orders valuation has to be carried out and a figure to be ascertained.

c.      
50% share from the Respondent's FNPF current balance after a Court ordered FNPF statement is released, or alternatively if the FNPF funds have been withdrawn, then an entitlement order be made of 50% from the value that was standing to the benefit of the Respondent as the date of withdrawal.

d.      
50% share from all 4 motor vehicles namely E 8107, CF 185, FL 052, DD 188 disposed off. The Court orders LTA to release Vehicle Registration Certificate on all 4 vehicles and an estimated value is placed on all 4 vehicles.

e.      
50% share from the Motor Vehicle BK 506 still under the Respondent's name. The LTA to issue valuation report. 

f.      
50% share from the two cash at bank accounts or alternatively if the accounts have closed, then an entitlement to the Applicant for FJD $10,440.90 plus AUD $3210.00 as direct financial contribution to maintain the Respondent in Fiji during his standard years.

g.      
$5000 cost to be paid by the Respondent (Summarily assessed).

Orders accordingly,

On 22nd November 2012, at Nasinu, Fiji Islands

Sumudu Premachandra [Mr.]
Resident Magistrate-Nasinu
