-----------------
IN THE MAGISTRATES COURT AT NASINU

Family Case No. 339/2008

BETWEEN:

DAYA WATI PRASAD
[Applicant]

AND:

OM PRAKASH
[Respondent]

Mr. Nilesh Sharma for the Applicant
Respondent appeared in person
No appearance for the FNPF

Ruling on FNPF refusal to pay JDS and University Fees as Child Maintenance.

01] The Applicant (hereinafter called the applicant) obtained orders from the Court in the sum of $40 per week for child maintenance from the Respondent (hereinafter called the Respondent) on the 23rd March 2009 and thereafter increased to $50 per week on the 11th August 2011 for her two children.

02] The Respondent has accumulated arrears of $4861.50. The Applicant applied for the JDS where the Respondent in his response agreed to have the arrears of $4861.50 to be deducted from the FNPF.

03] The Court then made such orders by consent on the 17th May 2012 to allow FNPF to release the sum of $4861.50 to the Applicant as settlements of the said arrears. The FNPF however refused to release the funds to the lady.

04] The applicant stressed that this sum to be paid as lump sum to recover university fees of the child namely Shalvin Prakash. Child is reading bachelor of commence degree in the University of South Pacific. The payment to be paid on 31st August 2012 and the Respondent agreed to pay this amount through FNPF. By consent the court made order on the 17th May 2012 to allow FNPF to release the sum of $4861.50 to the Applicant as settlements of the said arrears and the FNPF disobeying the court order. This situation I have extensively dealt with Butadroka v Butadroka [2012] FJMC 204; Family Court Case 0274.2008 (23 August 2012). I need not reiterate it again. Though the FNPF appealed against that ruling no stay order has been applied or granted against that judgment. I proceed to decide this matter. 

05] The Legal Aid Counsel Mr Sharma has filed submission in this regard which is useful. 

06] The stem of recovery of child maintenance is section 95 of the Family Law Act 2005. It says; 

"95  (1) In proceedings for a child maintenance order, a Court may at any time do one or more of the following:-

(a)     
Order payment of a lump sum, whether in one amount or by installments;

(b)     
Order payment of a weekly, monthly, yearly or other periodic amount;

(c)     
Order that a specified transfer or settlement of property be made by way of maintenance for a child;

(d)     
Order that a party deliver to another party, or to a child, goods specified in the order;

(e)     
Determine the times and places for goods to be delivered under an order made under paragraph (d) and place a monetary value on such deliveries;

(f)     
Order that payment of an amount ordered to be paid be wholly or partly secured as the Court specifies;

(g)     
Order that any necessary instrument be executed, and that such documents of title be produced and such other things be done, as are necessary to enable an order to be carried out effectively or to provide security for the due performance of an order;

(h)     
Order that payment be made to a specified person or public authority or into Court

(i)     
Make a payment or interim order, an order pending the disposal of proceedings, an order for a fixed period, an order until a child attains a specified age or an order until further order;

(j)     
Make an order imposing terms and conditions;

(k)     
Make an order by consent;

(l)     
Make any other order (whether or not the same nature as those referred to in paragraphs (a) to (k) that it considers appropriate.

(2) The making of an order of a kind referred to in subsection (1) (c), or of any other order under this Division, in relation to the maintenance of a child does not prevent a Court from making a subsequent order in relation to the maintenance of the child.

(3) The Rules of the respective Family Division may make provision with respect to the making of orders under this Division (whether as to their form or otherwise) for the purpose of facilitating their enforcement and the collection of maintenance payable under them".

07] Section 136 of the FNPF Decree allows that FNPF funds be attached as maintenance. It states:

"136  (1) This Section applies in proceedings under the Family Law Act 2003 between the parties to a marriage-

(a)     
 With respect to existing title or rights in respect of property; or

(b)     
 With respect to the property of the parties to a marriage or either or them; or

(c)     
With respect to maintenance; where one or both of the parties is an FNPF member.

(2) The powers of the Court extend to making an order requiring the Board  

(a)     
 If 1 of the parties is not FNPF member  to admit the party as an FNPF member and make an order under subsection (2) (b); and
 
(b)     
 To credit a specified amount to an FNPF entitlement of a party; and debit a specified entitlement of the other party, accordingly; and 

(c)     
To require a specified part of payments under an annuity payable to 1 of the parties to be paid to the other party.

(3) The Board must comply with an order under subsection (2).

(4) This Section does not affect any other power of the Court" (Emphasis is mine)

08] FNPF funds can be released on application by the member. Then Section 51 of the Fiji National Provident Fund Decree comes to play. It states:

"51. Subject to this Decree, an FNPF member's preserved entitlement and general entitlement are payable in respect of the member if the Board is satisfied, on application, that an entitlement event has occurred in relation to the member".

09] General entitlement is interpreted in Section 4(1) of the Fiji National Provident Fund Decree. It states:

"Entitlement event", for an FNPF member, means any of the following:

(a)     
The member reaches the age prescribed by regulations for this Section;

(b)     
The member becomes physically or mentally incapacitated from ever engaging in any further employment;

(c)     
The member has left, or is about to leave Fiji permanently to reside in another country;

(d)     
The death of the member.

10] Further, The FNPF Decree also allows for other withdrawal in such circumstances as stated in Section 59;

"59  (1) The Board may make rules making provision for the withdrawal of amounts of FNPF member's general entitlement by way of assistance-

(a)     
 For any of the following 

(b)     
Medical expenses;

(c)     
Education expenses;

(d)     
Funeral expenses; and 

(e)     
Other matters prescribed in regulations;

11] The FNPF Decree is sufficiently clear on the issue of maintenance on the FNPF contribution under Section 136 whereby an order of the Court in respect of the FNPF funds would allow the FNPF to credit the Applicant's FNPF account with the amount of $4861.50 which would be payable upon entitlement as defined under the Decree, which FNPF refuse to do so. It is clear that FNPF did not intervene as party to this action if they were dissatisfied. If the FNPF thinks that court should invite them and get their views, it is not to be done because under section 136, the FNPF is liable to pay and there is no need to ask views of them. 

12] The FNPF board can decide whether to release funds or not if the application before them. But this is a court order and the board has no power to refuse it. The order made on 17th May 2012 and they have appealed against that order within 30 days which they failing to do so. The FNPF has no right, jurisdiction or power to refuse or ignore the order.

13] By refusing to carry out lawful orders of this court the FNPF contravenes section 202 of the Crimes Decree. It says;

"202. Everyone who disobeys any order, warrant or command duly made, issued or given by any court, officer or person acting in any public capacity and duly authorised in that behalf, commits a summary offence. 

Penalty  Imprisonment for 2 years, unless any other penalty or mode of proceeding is expressly prescribed by law in respect of such disobedience." 

14] This is an offence of on the face of this court. This is a summary offence and the court could act on this. It is to be noted in Nasinu Family Court Case 274/2008 the FNPF refused to carry out lawful orders. If this keeps on persists, this is a challenge of rule of law in this country and it is denial of child's right. I therefore order the FNPF to show cause why they should not be convicted for the offence of disobeying lawful orders of this court under section 202 of the Crimes Decree. 

15] I make following orders;

A)      
The FNPF is ordered to obey the court order dated 17th May 2012 forthwith.

B)      
The FNPF is ordered to show cause why they should not be convicted for the offence of disobeying lawful orders by not carrying out order dated 17th May 2012 of this court under section 202. 

C)      
This order to be faxed and handed over by the senior court officer of this court to the FNPF personally.

D)      
30 days to appeal this order

Orders accordingly
On the 01st November 2012, At Nasinu, Fiji

Sumudu Premachandra [Mr.]
Resident Magistrate-Nasinu
