-----------------
IN THE MAGISTRATES COURT AT NASINU

Civil Case No. 107/10

BETWEEN:

MOHAMMED IMRAN QARAM of Nakasi, Businessman.
Plaintiff

AND:

NATIVA HOLDINGS LIMITED is a limited liability company having its Registered Office at 10 Karsanji Street, Vatuwaqa, Suva.
Defendant

Mr. Ram Chand for the Plaintiff 
Mr. Ritesh Naidu for the Defendant 

Judgment

Background

1] By writ of summons the plaintiffs commenced this action against the Defendant Company- Nativa Holdings Limited. The Facts of the Plaintiffs case are as follows;

a)      
 The Plaintiff is the importer and dealer of Second hand Japanese imported vehicles supplied by Tokuso Corporation Limited from Japan and he has his place of business situated at 9 Miles, Nakasi in Nasinu.

b)      
 The Defendant is a limited company having its registered, office at 10 Karsanji Street, Vatuwaqa, Suva.

c)      
 In about June 2007 the Defendant Director Rizwan Ali Haroon approached the Plaintiff to provide his Company, motor vehicles imported from overseas for sale from his depot.

d)      
 The agreement was that the company depot was to be used as a private customs bond where the Plaintiff will supply vehicles to the Defendant Company free of any cost or charges in consideration that if and when the Defendant Company sells any vehicle, the Company shall pay the Plaintiff only the C.I.F. (Cost Insurance and Freight) price and retains all the profit derived from any sale in makes.

e)      
The purpose of the dealing between the Plaintiff and the Defendant was that the Defendant will get its stock by way of vehicles supplied by the Plaintiff free of any payment of money up front and upon any sale it makes, it FIRSTLY pays the customs duty payable on the vehicle to the Government, SECONDLY it pass the Plaintiff the CIF price for the vehicle and then it keeps all the profit.

f)      
 There was a clear agreement that between the Plaintiff and the Defendant that the Plaintiff shall not pay any bondage or any form of rentage to the Defendant for the vehicles kept and sold from the said private customs Bond.

g)      
 The Defendant sold one Toyota Mark II vehicle to a customer which was through Fiji Development Bank loan on or about the 10th day of June, 2009, for a prince which was not disclosed by the Defendant to the Plaintiff.

h)      
 The Fiji Development Bank paid the full purchase price to the Defendant who after paying off the customs duty to the Government failed to pay the Plaintiff the C.I.F. price in the sum of $7,400.00 as was agreed but kept all the money inclusive of the profit it made from the sale for its own use absolutely.

i)      
 When the Plaintiff asked for the C.I.F. (Cost Insurance Freight) moneys the Defendant at first told him that the Fiji Development Bank did not pay the money but after 3 months persistent enquiry by the Plaintiff the Director Rizwan started dodging.

j)      
After some 8 months of running around and false promises made by the Defendant Companys Director Rizwan Ali Haroon to pay the Defendant Companys Second Director  Roopal Patel for the first time issued an invoice in the sum of $16,215.00 for certain charges which had no clear explanation or particulars.

k)      
 The Director  Roopal Patel gave the invoice to the Plaintiff in about the 15th day of March 2010 but she had back dated it to 1st day of December 2009.

l)      
 The Plaintiff claims that the Company Director raised the invoice unilaterally and without any agreement between the parties.

m)      
 The Plaintiff states that both the Directors are bent inc heating him in this dealing which had entered into good faith.

n)      
 The Plaintiff approached the Director Rizwan Ali Haroon as he was the only Director during all these time with whom he had dealt with right from the beginning but he referred the Plaintiff to deal with the second Director Roopal Patel after the insurance of the invoice which was backdated to 1st day of December 2009.

o)      
 This was the first time that the Plaintiff came to realize from the Director Roopal Patel that she will not pay the C.I.F moneys as agreed between the Director of the Defendant Company, Rizwan Ali Haroom and the Plaintiff.

p)      
The C.I.F. amount for the sale of the vehicle Toyota Mark II was $7400.00 which remains unpaid by the Defendant in spite of numerous requests made for payment by the Plaintiff.

2] Therefore the Plaintiff prays the following Orders:

1.      
That the Defendant pays the sum of $7400.00

2.      
That the Defendant pays interest at the rate of 12% effective from the 15th day of March 2010 till full payment.

3.      
That the Defendant do pay costs on a Solicitor/Client and/or Indemnity Basis

3] The Defendant Company opposed the claim. They filed statement of defence and made counter claim. Their claim can be summarized as follows; 

a)      
The Defendant also operates a licensed customs general bonded warehouse. 

b)      
Sometimes between August and September 2008, the Plaintiff entered into an agreement with the Defendant whereby the Defendant agreed with the Plaintiff to store three of the Plaintiffs motor vehicles (which vehicles at that time were stored at the bonded warehouse of Cars and Cars) at its bonded warehouse at an agreed fee. The Plaintiff found the Defendants bond charges to be lesser compared to what he was paying to Cars and Cars. 

c)      
The Defendant did not enter into any agreement with the Plaintiff as alleged. The Defendant imports its vehicles from its suppliers in Japan.

d)      
The Defendant informed the Plaintiff that the Defendant will have to pay storage charges to the Defendant for storing the vehicles at its bonded warehouse to which the Plaintiff agreed.

e)      
It is admitted that the Defendant sold one Toyota Mark II vehicle to a customer. The customer had sought finance from Fiji Development Bank. The customer approached the Defendant to buy this vehicle which was stored at the Defendants bonded warehouse at Lot 1, Lakeba Street, Samabula, Suva. This sale took place with the consent, knowledge and approval of the Plaintiff. Since the Plaintiff owed to the Defendant a large sum of money in storage charges, the Defendant agreed to assist the Plaintiff in the sale of this vehicle so that the Defendant would recover some of its storage charges. The condition of the vehicle was also deteriorating whilst parked at the Defendants bonded warehouse.

f)      
The Defendant was always ready and willing to pay to the Plaintiff the sum of $7,400.00 (seven thousand four hundred dollars) provided the Plaintiff paid to the Defendant the Defendants outstanding storage charges which the Plaintiff refused to pay. Since, the Plaintiff refused to pay the outstanding storage charges and removed his vehicles from the Defendants bonded warehouse, the storage charges kept accumulating, and as a result the Defendant held onto the sum of $7,400.00 (seven thousand four hundred dollars).

g)      
It is admitted that the Defendant issued an invoice to the Plaintiff for the storage charges. This invoice was issued on 1 December 2009 which was the day on which the Plaintiff removed his last vehicle, a Hino Dump truck from the Defendants bonded warehouse. The Plaintiff tricked Rizwan Ali (a director of the Defendant) in removing the Hino Dump truck statking he will pay the Defendants storage charges once he sold the said truck. In good faith and on the representation made by the Plaintiff, Rizwan Ali let the Plaintiff take the said truck. The invoice was personally served on the Defendant on 1 December 2009.

h)      
The Plaintiff was fully aware from the beginning that he was to pay to the Defendant the storage charges. Without the Plaintiffs agreement, the Customs Department would not have allowed the Plaintiff to move his vehicles from the bonded warehouse of Cars and Cars to the Defendants bonded warehouse. It is the Plaintiff who is acting in bad faith since he refuses to pay to the Defendant for the usage of its bonded warehouse. The Plaintiff knew and dealt with both the directors of the Defendant. Since Roopal Patel is more firm, the Plaintiff tried to avoid having contact with her but he was not successful.

i)      
The Defendant has been always willing to release to the Plaintiff his money provided the Plaintiff paid to the Defendant the storage charges.

j)      
Alternatively, the Defendant will seek to set off against the Plaintiffs claim the matters set out in the Counterclaim herein, in extinction or diminution thereof. Therefore defendant denies that the Plaintiff is entitled to the reliefs claimed or any part thereof for the reasons alleged or at all. The Defendant prays that the Plaintiffs claim be dismissed with costs to an indemnity basis.

k)      
Further the defendant made counter claim as follows. PURSUANT to the above agreement, the Defendant stored 3 of the Plaintiffs motor vehicles at its General Bonded Warehouse at Lot 1, Lakeba Street, Samabula, Suva for a certain number of days. The Plaintiff agreed with the Defendant to pay for the storage charges.

Particulars


	Description of Vehicle	Storage Period	Charges
	
	Toyota Townace CR 21	18/9/08  22/12/08 (96 days)	$1,440.00 @ $15 per day)

	Toyota Mark II	18/9/08  10/9/09 (287 days)	$4,305.00 @ $15 per day)

	Hino Dump Truck	18/9/08  1/9/09 
(349 days)	$10,470.00 @ $30 per day)

	TOTAL
		$16,215.00	


4] Therefore the defendant claims that the Plaintiff in breach of the agreement failed to pay to the Defendants storage charges. The Defendant has made several demands but the Plaintiff has refused and/or neglected to make payments.

5] The Defendant Counterclaims:

(1)     
Judgment against the Plaintiff in the sum of $16,215.00 (sixteen thousand two hundred fifteen dollars).

(2)     
Interest on overdue moneys at 23% per annum. Alternatively, statutory interest on the Judgment sum at 5% per annum from the date of Judgment Pursuant to Order XXXII Rule 8 of the Magistrates Court Rules;

(3)     
Costs on an indemnity basis;

6] for this counter claim the plaintiff replied; the Plaintiff admits that the Defendants is a limited liability Company from Mohammed Rizwan Haroon and that they have a bonded warehouse but further states that he only dealt with Mohammed Rizwan Haroon except that when he started pressuring Mohammed Rizwan Haroon for the payment of the charges as claimed in the sum of $7,400.00 the second Director Roopal Patel came in the picture and issued an invoice backdated to 1st day of December 2009 whereas the same was given to the Plaintiff on 15th day of March 2010 after some 9 months of the sale of the vehicle to a customer via Fiji Development Bank loan had taken place. Therefore the plaintiff denied the counter claim and prayed judgment be entered in his favour. 

Evidence

7] On 04th May 2011, 18th May, 2011 trial was heard and both parties have filed their written submission respectively. Initially, Martino from Carz and CarZ gave evidence, but I take the plaintiffs evidence first. 

MR. MOHAMMED IMRAN QARAM (the Plaintiff); He said he is a dealer in motor vehicles. He sells vehicles and Company named as Tokuso Corporation Limited. He said he is the overseas director of this company. He said he knows the director of Nativa Holdings, Mr Riswan Ali. They dealt with him personal basis. He used CARZ and CARZ warehouse but he did not pay any rental. The plaintiff said they entered a deal with Nativa Holdings Company. The terms and Conditions were if they got any client they can sell the plaintiffs vehicle at any price but defendant to pay CIF (Cost, Insurance and Freight) price to the plaintiff and they should also pay duty charges after selling the vehicle. The plaintiff categorically said there was no agreement to pay warehouse charges. There were three vehicles in dealing and the defendant sold Toyota Mark II and he signed the authorization papers in mid 2008. He said the CIF price was $7400 he asked the money from the defendant but they never paid it. The vehicle was sold through Credit Corp; he does not know the exact selling price. It was never revealed in this trial. The plaintiff said that he waited 6 to 8 months but they did not pay the CIF price for that vehicle to him. The plaintiff said there were two more vehicle and he paid the duty and took them back in month of September 2009. When he took those vehicles they did not inform that storage charges to be paid for these vehicles. The plaintiff said after six months of removal of those vehicles, in March 2010, the defendant company issued storage bill to him. It was three months back dated and he received it in March 2010. He said the directors allowed him to take back the vehicles, but, at that time no storage charges were claimed or mentioned. Therefore he prayed the judgment in favour of him. 

8] The Plaintiff, in his cross examination said he has the license for the business. It was given to him by Tokuso Corporation Limited- Japan. The witness said the company is the dealer and he is the representative of the company. The company has registered his company in Fiji. He admitted that this vehicle imported by Tokuso Corporation Limited. When Tokuso Corporation Limited imports vehicles, those go to the Carz and Carz yard. Once the duty paid by the company, it takes the vehicles out. The witness said he chose to go to Nativa Holdings. He reiterated that arrangement was that him to get CIF price other profits goes to the Nativa Holdings. Apart from this Toyota Mark II, there were Hino truck and Town ace. For Hino and town Ace he paid the duty. The plaintiff admitted that defendant also imports vehicles and they invested $80000 to keep the warehouse. The plaintiff said that invoice was backdated and it was not given when last vehicle was released. The Plaintiff said he did not demand this money in writing, but he was promised to pay, but the defendant evaded the payment. 

9] In re examination, the Plaintiff said he has the authority of the company. 

10] The plaintiff called Mr. Maritino Daundcamika as witness. He said he works in Carz and Carz from 2003 as an Account Officer. He said he knows the Plaintiff and he does vehicle importing business. He said the plaintiff did not pay any rental charges or any sort of bondage charges for his vehicles. 

11] In cross examination the witness said Carz and Carz provided service for storage and importing Japanese vehicles. They have bonded warehouse for that. He said an individual can store vehicles for that he has to pay storage charges. But in the case of the plaintiff they did not charge as both are Pakistani Nationals. In bonded warehouse, until custom duties are paid vehicles cannot move. The custom duties should pay by bonded warehouse owner. 

12] Then the Plaintiff closed the case. 

13] For the Defendant Company, a directress Mrs Roopal Patel gave evidence. She said she is one of director of Nativa Holdings and other director is Mr Riswan Ali Haroon, her husband. They engaged in importation of second hand Japanese vehicles and also operates custom bonded general warehouse. Nativa Holdings started in 2004 and they provide storage place for other customers on charges. She produced warehouse original register book to the court and relevant pages marked as DEX-1. In 2008, the Plaintiff and they discussed regarding three vehicles and they inspected the vehicles at Carz and Carz. She said the plaintiff wanted secure place to store because some of vehicle parts were missing when those were at Carz and Carz. The witness extensively elaborated the function of bonded warehouse in her evidence. She said after inspection they agreed with the Plaintiff to facilitate their warehouse. She said we have not given anybody to general bonded warehouse on free basis, I was present that meeting, Rizwan explained the charges to Mr. Imran. This happened when he came to give details of Carz and Carz . Then after inspecting the three vehicles, we went to Imrans office. Mr Imran agreed&.There was not an agreement not to pay storage fees& She said that two vehicle were taken much earlier. But no storage charges were paid. But she mentioned that he (the plaintiff) supposed to pay storage charges. She said that her husband said that the plaintiff is a Muslim and he will pay the storage charges. On that good faith they released vehicles without paying storage charges. She said they finally issued invoice to Mr. Imran. This invoice was tendered as DEX-2. The witness clarified the details of DEX-2 in her evidence. The witness said they sold Toyota Mark II and the plaintiff transferred the ownership, he claimed $7400 and they agreed. The witness said that money is still in their custody. She said that the plaintiff is not a personal friend of them and he called on odd times asking money. The plaintiff was fussing. She said that if the plaintiff pays the storage charge they are ready to release this money. Whenever they asked storage charges the plaintiff did not show any initiatives. She said that for warehouse they employed security guards, warehouse is on under flood lights, vehicle are washed therefore they charged storage charges. Therefore, as a counterclaim they seek $16,215 and other charges as prayed in their statement of defence. 

14] In cross examination, the witness said the plaintiff came on his own to their office. The witness admitted that they owe $7400 to but they counterclaim $16.250 storage charges. But the plaintiff did not agree and dispute the storage charges. The Plaintiff suggested that there was no storage charge, but the witness said No, There was an agreement. He did not answer anything. He said he will sell Hino truck and pay this storage charge. But he did not have any intention to pay it This was a new edition that the plaintiff said to the witness that he will sell the Hino Truck and pay the storage charges. The witness said this version in the first time of her evidence under cross examination. The witness admitted by 01-12-2009 all vehicles were taken out and on 10-06-2009 Toyota Mark II was sold. But they tried to set off that money to storage the bill, the plaintiff refused. The Plaintiff was questioned On 01-09-2009 you asked Imran to pay the amount, now you are changing tried to set off on 10-06-2009? I kept on mentioning him. Question: You sold the vehicle on 10-06-2009; did you reconcile the accounts on that date? Yes! I did on 10-06-2009. The duty was paid 10-06-2009, vehicle out of the bonded warehouse, vehicle was taken away after two months. The witness admitted that Mark IIs money belongs to the plaintiff and every time he comes to them they remind him about the storage fees. But the Plaintiff did not want to deduct the storage fees and further said that Mark IIs profit belongs to Nativa holdings. At this time that witness said that the defendant did not claim the storage charges for Mark II and $4305 to be deducted from the counter claim. The witness admitted that the plaintiff strongly resisted that storage fees to be deducted and consequently they held the plaintiffs money and the profit. The witness admitted that DEX-2 has mistakenly mentioned 4 units and it was a human error. While on cross examination, the witness admitted it was wrongly mentioned storage charges for Mark II. The witness admitted that DEX-2 is wrong. The plaintiff suggested that DEX-2 was issued in March 2010. The witness said she held other two vehicles till December 2009, but her husband agreed to release those vehicles without storage charges. The Plaintiff suggested that last vehicle was sold Toyota Town Ace. The witness said it was sold in 2008. According to DEX-3 Toyota Mark II entered to the bonded warehouse on 18th September 2008. It was delivered (Sold) on 10th June 2009. On 18th September 2009 Hino Dump Truck came and it was released on 01st September 2009, on 18th September 2011 Toyota Town ace came and it was delivered 24th December 2008. It is to be noted all three vehicles came on 18th September 2008 but went out different dates and last one was Hino Truck 18th September 2009. It seen that DEX-2 was issued 01st December 2009 after two months of Hino was removed. According to the plaintiff this invoice was backdated. The plaintiff suggested that there was no agreement for storage charges, it was made up and come afterwards. But witness said that there was a verbal agreement to pay storage charges. 

15] In re examination she said they charge storage fees for the bonded warehouse only. She said once the duty is paid they do not charge for storage. Therefore they charged $11,910 as storage charge. When the plaintiff came to release the Hino Truck she took a print out (DEX-2) and gave it to the plaintiff. They did not release the Hino Truck. But the plaintiff did not agree to pay storage charges. But witness later said the plaintiff agreed to pay storage charges when Hino truck being sold. The court notes that this piece of evidence contradicts per se. 

16] Second witness for the Defendant Company was Mr. Rizwaan Ali Haroon. He is a director of Nativa Holdings. He said in mid of 2008 the plaintiff came to his office and wanted his vehicles to be removed from Carz and Carz to his Nativa Holdings. He said he disclosed storage charges to the plaintiff at their first meeting. It was $15 per day for small vehicles and $30 per day for bigger vehicle. The witness said the plaintiff happily agreed to the rates. The witness elaborated the description and removal of vehicles from Carz and Carz. The witness adduced that the plaintiff said money is not issue for him when vehicles were sold storage charges could be dealt with. He said that the last vehicle was removed on 01-12-2009, when they did ask the storage charges the plaintiff said We are brothers of Islam. When he took last vehicle he asked CIF price, then they ask storage charges. Then he refused to pay. The witness tendered DEX-4 and said the plaintiff has no connection with Tokuso Corporation Limited according to company search. Therefore the claim storage charges for Town Ace and Hino Truck and it comes $11910. 

17] On Cross examination the witness said he hold equal share with other director. The plaintiff agreed to pay storage charges before vehicles were moved. When vehicles were moved those were in running conditions. For Mark II duty was paid and vehicle was sold after one month. He did the body work. (This is new piece of evidence that they did the body work and it was never said by first witness for the defendant, Mrs. Roopal Patel.) But witness failed to prove exact selling date or they did body work. Then witness said once we received the Mark II money, I told him that money received. He told to keep the money with us. He did not demand the money at that time; after he took last vehicle then he started demanding us The witness admitted according to the DEX-3 they brought 7 vehicles from Carz and Carz through the plaintiff. He said three belongs to the plaintiff and other 4 belongs to the Carz and Carz. The witness said for other four vehicles belongs to Carz and Carz. They took 3 vehicles and one was auctioned-C37475, custom took that vehicle. He (the plaintiff) should responsible to pay storage charges, but I did not charge for that. Then witness went on saying Question:Hino Truck kept as a Security, because he did not pay storage charges? Yes I confirm. Q: You held it for three months. Why did you release after three months without paying? He promised me that he got a customer when he sold it, he will pay storage charges, I trusted him and I could have sold it through us. The court notes that now witness is changing the stance as he earlier said that We are brother of Islam, for that they released the vehicles, but now, they hold Hino Truck for three months as he admitted despite, they could have sold it. The witness admitted that Company Search was done after court hearing. 

18] In re-examination, witness said initially they agreed storages charges for all three vehicles but for Mark II, there was no storage charge to be paid. According to the DEX-1, the custom entry shows the owners name. In that, even, court notes 5 vehicles belong to the plaintiff and 2 vehicles belongs to the Carz and Carz. But the Defendant claims storage charges for 3 vehicles in this case, later they amended it to Town Ace and Hino Truck and Mark II was released from storage charges. 

19] Then the defendant closed their case. I am mindful of respective written submissions which both parties have made. 

Determination

20] I now evaluate the evidence before me. The Defendant admits in their statement of defence and in their evidence that they owe $7400 to the plaintiff. But their contention is that the plaintiff owes $16,215.00 (sixteen thousand two hundred fifteen dollars) and they are rightfully holding plaintiffs money. Later this amount was reduced to $11910. The Plaintiff states that this was a claim the Defendant made up after 9 months of his pursued for his money in the sum of $7,400.00 which the Defendant agreed to pay all along but finally at the end it refused to pay and issued the invoice backdated to 1st day of December 2009.The Defendant apparently amended its storage claim during trial by reducing the sum of $4,305.00. Hence, the storage charges for Mark II excluded after giving evidence. Thus, plainly, it seems that there is no agreement between the parties on the Defendants claim for the Plaintiff to pay storage charges.

21] I now turn to consider the legal implication of a valid contract, specially, verbal contract. Contract law is based on the principle expressed in the Latin phrase pacta sunt servanda, which is usually translated "agreements to be kept" or pacts must be kept". Contract is an agreement entered into by two or more parties with the serious intention of creating a legal obligation or obligations, which may or may not have elements in writing. Contracts can also be formed orally (parol contracts). It is seen that there is no legal impediment to the parties entering into a contract based on their conduct and verbal statements or representations. When parties agree the terms of the contract by verbal statements, the binding terms of the contract are more difficult to ascertain. Usually a court will look to the history of the statements made by the parties and the performance of the parties to obtain assistance in determining what was actually agreed by the parties. Where one person however has not performed their part of the obligation, and court is left to more uncertain means in reaching a decision. Draft contract documents, emails, letters and order forms may lend assistance to deciding the terms of a verbal agreement in this regard, and courts have used similar agreements with third parties to apply a standard of reasonableness in determining the terms of the contract in the absence of writing. As I noted earlier, there is no legal impediment to the parties entering into a contract based on their conduct and verbal statements or representations. When parties agree the terms of the contract by verbal statements, the binding terms of the contract are more difficult to ascertain. In this instant case the court to ascertain whether there was an agreement to pay storage charges. In terms of Agreement, at common law, the elements of a contract are mutual assent and consideration. Mutual assent is reached through offer and acceptance, that is, when an offer is met with an acceptance that is unqualified and that does not vary the offer's terms. The latter requirement is known as the "mirror image" rule. If a purported acceptance does vary the terms of an offer, it is not an acceptance but a counteroffer and, therefore, simultaneously a rejection of the original offer. In this case, there was no evidence with regards to this. The most important feature of a contract is that one party makes an offer for an arrangement that another accepts. This can be called a concurrence of wills or consensus ad idem (meeting of the minds) of two or more parties. This court cannot read minds and the existence or otherwise of agreement is judged objectively, with only limited room for questioning subjective intention. This was held in Smith v. Hughes (1870-71) LR 6 QB 597. 

22] Therefore, there must be evidence that the parties had each from an objective perspective engaged in conduct manifesting their assent, and a contract will be formed when the parties have met such a requirement. An objective perspective means that it is only necessary that somebody gives the impression of offering or accepting contractual terms in the eyes of a reasonable person, not that they actually did want to form a contract. Offer and acceptance does not always need to be expressed orally or in writing. 

23] In this case the parties to prove their case balance of probabilities. It is adduced by the defendant that they owe $7400 and this is the best evidence to prove the plaintiff's case. The Plaintiff has nothing to prove beyond that. Thus, the defendant to prove their counter claim. As I noted earlier, the evidence revealed some of vehicles were released without claiming storage charges. They defendant said last Hino truck was released on 01-12-2009. But According to DEX-3, it was released on 01-09-2009. This is written in DEX-3 and the defendant cannot adduce evidence against it. On 01-12-2009 DEX-2 was issued, but the plaintiff claims it was backdated. I find there are several contradictions in defendant's evidence per se and inter se. I need not reiterated those inconsistencies as I highlighted in my judgment earlier. The plaintiff never agreed to pay storage charges according to his conduct. His CarZ and Carz witness proved that there were no storage charges were claimed by Carz and Carz from the Plaintiff. This may be because of they are Pakistani Nationals. Interestingly, the second defendant witness said that the plaintiff said "We are Brothers of Islam". By gesture, this may leads to not to charge storage charges from the plaintiffs. When, the defendant refused to pay the plaintiff was fussing. This is a natural behavior of a reasonable man. It proved that the plaintiff has no intention to pay storage charges. I am mindful that evidence must be weighed and evaluated not to be counted. Though, Defendants have given evidence glamorously, they did fail to prove their counterclaim balance of probabilities. Mainly, in the middle of their evidence they reduced the counter claim. If there was a fixed storage policy, why this was happened? It is unclear whether and counter offers in this verbal agreement (If so) according to mirror image rule. I hold there is no assent by the plaintiff to pay storage charges. The evidence placed before me by the defendant is highly unsatisfactory. The defendant did not prove their counterclaim on balance of probabilities. I therefore disbelieve and reject their evidence. Consequently the plaintiff proved his case. 

24] Finally, the defendant tendered DEX-4 to prove that the Plaintiff has no "locus standi" for this case. This type of objection must be taken at the very outset of the case. By filing a Statement of Defence, they defendant has admitted that there is cause of action to the plaintiff. I lament, now they cannot go back. This objection is therefore dismissed. 

25] Therefore, I make following orders.

a)      
There will be a judgment for the Plaintiffs. I grant Judgment as the Plaintiffs prayed in the Statement of Claim. 

b)      
The Defendant's Statement of Defence and counter claim is hereby dismissed.

c)      
The Defendant should pay $750 as cost to the plaintiff (summarily assessed). 

26] Judgment to be entered accordingly.

On 18th October 2011, at Nasinu, Fiji Islands

Sumudu Premachandra
Resident Magistrate-Nasinu
