-----------------
IN THE MAGISTRATE COURT OF FIJI
AT TAVUA
CRIMINAL JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL CASE NO. 33/13

BETWEEN:

THE STATE

AND:

EPELI CANIKAU BALEIDROKADROKA

Prosecution: PC Dinesh
Accused: In Person

SENTENCE

1.      
Epeli Baleidrokadroka you pleaded guilty to the offence of Assault Occasioning Actual Bodily Harm contrary to section 275 of the Crimes Decree No. 44 of 2009.

2.      
You pleaded guilty to the charge on your own free will. You admitted the facts submitted by prosecution. The Court being satisfied that your guilty plea being unequivocal convicts you as charged.

3.      
On 18/2/13 at 2pm at Nasomo Vatukoula, you had an argument with your wife the complainant (Selita Liku, 27yrs, D/Duties) as to why she had not cleaned the house and bathe the children after lunch. In the process of the argument you got angry took a stick and struck the complainant on her back and shoulder. You also punched her on the jaw. 

The matter was reported to police you were arrested and questioned for the allegation and charged accordingly. 

The complainant was also taken for medical examination and her medical report shows that she sustained injuries.

4.      
You mitigated and I take the following in your favour:

"        
Your guilty plea.
"        
This is your first offence.
"        
You've remorseful and promised not to re-offend.
"        
You've reconciled with your wife, and you've also looking after elderly parents and your younger brother.
"        
You've the sole breadwinner.

5.      
I consider the following as aggravating features in this case:

"        
Prevalence of offence in community.
"        
Lack of provocation.

6.      
The tariff for the offence of Assault Occasioning Actual Bodily Harm appears to range from an absolute or conditional discharge to 12 months imprisonment (see: State v Salote Tugalala, HAC025 of 2008). The High Court in Elizabeth Joseph v. The State [2004] HAA 030/04S and State v. Tevita Alafi [2004] HAA073/04S stated that it is the extent of the injury which determines sentence&Where there has been a deliberate assault, causing hospitalization and with no reconciliation, a discharge is not appropriate. In domestic violence cases, sentences of 18 months imprisonment have been upheld (Amasai Korovata v. The State [2006] HAA 115/06S.

7.      
Due to your relationship with the complainant, the offending in this matter is regarded as a domestic violence offence. In considering the circumstances of the offending in this case, I take a starting point of 12 months.

8.      
For the aggravating features I increase your sentence by 1 month making your sentence at 13 months imprisonment.

9.      
I deduct 4 months for your guilty plea and a further reduction of 3 months for your good background and other mitigating circumstances. Your final sentence is now 6 months imprisonment. 

10.     
This is your first offence and also remorseful for the offence. As the court sees it, you need to be given an opportunity to reform yourself. Your sentence of 6 months imprisonment will hence be suspended for 2 years. 

11.     
If you commit any offence within the operational period of 2 years, you'll be further charged for breaching this suspension order and if convicted, you'll be made to serve the 6 months with any other punishment imposed in that case. 

12.     
The domestic violence restraining order imposed by the court on 20/2/13 is now made permanent and can only be varied, suspended or discharged by further orders of the court.

13.     
28 days to appeal.

Samuela Qica
Resident Magistrate

11th March 2013
