-----------------
IN THE RESIDENT MAGISTRATE'S COURT OF SUVA

Criminal Case HAC No: - 090/2011

STATE

V

ONISIMO TAUCILAGI VOTEA,
MICHAEL JONES QORINIASI,

For Prosecution: - Mr. Fotofili L,
1st, 2nd, Accused Persons: - In persons

SENTENCE

1.      
You ONISIMO TAUCILAGI VOTEA, MICHAEL JONES QORINIASI, were convicted by this court, for the offence of 'Aggravated Robbery', which is punishable under Section 311 (1) (a) of the Crimes Decree No 44 of 2009, entailed a punishment up to 20 years of imprisonment.

2.      
The conviction was entered consequent upon your "pleas of guilty' on 20th of April 2011. I am satisfied that both of you fully comprehended the legal effects and that your pleas were voluntary and free from influence.

3.      
Summary of facts, as admitted by both of you before the court, revealed that the offence of 'Aggravated Robbery' was committed on Mr. Arunesh Naidu on 21st day of March 2011 at Laucala bay road, Suva. 

4.      
Further, the summery of facts revealed, both of you approached the victim and trackled him down and tried to remove the Puma canvas he was wearing when he was walking home along Laucala Bay Road from the University of South Pacific. You punched the victim when he tried to resist you. You stole the puma canvas valued at $120, and LG mobile phone valued at $80. 

5.      
The learned State counsel submitted in his sentencing submission that some of the notable aggravating features of your offending are 

i.      
It was committed in a group,

ii.     
It was in a public place,

iii.    
The victim suffer minor injuries as a result but nothing overly serious,

6.      
The learned state counsel further submitted that following facts could be consider as mitigating factors for your favor,

i.      
Cooperation with the police,

ii.     
All properties stolen except of the mobile phone and the Vodafone flash net were recovered,

iii.    
Early guilty plea,

iv.     
Young age,

v.      
Remorse,

vi.     
First offenders,

vii.    
Time in remand,

7.      
In his sentencing submission the learned counsel brought to my attention several judicial dictums on various sentencing options on first young offenders and the tariff for the offence of Aggravate Robbery. 

8.      
The 1st and the 2nd accused person tendered their mitigation submission with the assistance of the Legal Aid Commission. 

9.      
This is a case involved a gang robbery which was committed at a public place, in a joint enterprise. Both you approached the victim when he was on his way back to home from the University and tackled him down and stole the items mentioned in summery of facts.

10.     
 The offence of Aggravated robbery is becoming a serious problem and warranted a great judicial intervention with responsibility. The increasing crime rate in this nature has made the society to a vulnerable and insecure place where even an ordinary citizen is not allow moving freely on the public street. Any person who is stepping into a public place has to think twice of his own safety before he does so. Both of you waited for an opportunity and went on executing your criminal plan without any remorse. 

11.     
I now proceed to consider appropriate sentences on you upon considering the general principle of sentencing under Section 15 (3) of the Sentencing and Penalties Decree and objective of sentencing under section 4 (1) and 4 (2) of the Sentencing and Penalties Decree. 

12.     
The purpose of sentencing you for the offence of aggravated robbery in pursuant to section 4 (1) of the Sentencing and Penalties Decree to punish offenders to an extent and in a manner which is just in all the circumstance, to protect the community from offenders in this nature, to deter offenders or other persons from committing offences of the same or similar nature, more importantly the to signify that the court and the community denounce the commission of such offences

13.     
 Justice Goundar in State vs Mataiasi Bulivou Susu[2010] FJHC 226; HAC054.2010; HAC055.2010; HAC056.2010 (2 July 2010) found that organized gang robberies attract the sentence of 8-14 year imprisonment. Justice Shameem in Seseu v State 2003, FJHC 224, HAM0043J, 2003S, 10 December 2003) found that the tariff for robbery with violence is 4-7 years. Justice Shameem in Sakiusa Basa vs. the State(Criminal Appeal AAU 24/2005), held that "'Sentences for robberies involving firearms should range from six to eight years. A lower range of four to seven years is appropriate where firearms are not used and the premises are banks, or shops, post offices or service stations. However, the sentence may be higher where the victim or victims are particularly vulnerable due to age, infirmity, disability or where children are involved. Similarly where injuries are caused in the course of the robbery, a higher sentence will be justified. The value of the property stolen, evidence of planning or premeditation, multiple offences and previous convictions for similar offences should be considered aggravating features. The sentence may be reduced where the offender has no previous convictions, has pleaded guilty and has expressed remorse. This list of aggravating and mitigating features is by no means exhaustive. Furthermore, the sentence will always be adjusted up or down, depending on the facts of the particular case'

14.     
Justice Goundar inSusu's case(supra), has summarized the guiding principles in sentencing in cases involving robbery. They are:' From these authorities, the following principles emerge. The dominant factor in assessing seriousness for any types of robbery is the degree of force used or threatened. The degree of injury to the victim or the nature of and duration of threats are also relevant in assessing the seriousness of an offence of robbery with violence. If a weapon is involved in the use or threat of force that will always be an important aggravating feature. Group offending will aggravate an offence because the level of intimidation and fear caused to the victim will be greater. It may also indicate planning and gang activity. Being the ringleader in a group is an aggravating factor. If the victims are vulnerable, such as elderly people and persons providing public transport, then that will be an aggravating factor. Other aggravating factors may include the value of items taken and the fact that an offence was committed whilst the offender was on bail.

The seriousness of an offence of robbery is mitigated by factors such as a timely guilty plea, clear evidence of remorse, ready co-operation with the police, response to previous sentences, personal circumstances of the offender, first offence of violence, voluntary return of property taken, playing a minor part, and lack of planning involved.

15.     
His Lordship Justice Madigan in State v Rasaqio [2010] FJHC 287; HAC 155/2007, observed that the normal range of sentence for robbery with violence is now 10 to 16 years in the High Court

16.     
In view of above judicial precedents and provisions of the Sentencing and Penalties Decree and careful perusal of your respective mitigation submissions, I now draw my attention to determine an appropriate starting point for you. This is a gang robbery at a public Place. In line with above sentencing guidelines and principles, I select 8 years imprisonment period as a starting point.

17.     
You committed this offence in a join enterprise. By virtue of the principle of join enterprise each one of your culpability and degree of responsibility for inflicting of violence and robbing the complainant same as of your accomplices. 

18.     
The impact of the offence on the victims must be a horrified experience as he was suddenly surrounded by both of youth, tackled down on the ground, punched and robbed. This dreadful experience definitely remains with him in rest of his live. 

19.     
 Your act of offence could have the effect of endangering innocent public and their freedom of life. You demonstrated that you have no respect and regard for other's rights and freedom. You completely disregarded the law and order and utilize the vulnerability and insecurity of the victim to carry out your criminal act.

20.     
I now draw my attention to address the mitigating factors in your favors. 

Onisimo Votea,

i.      
You are 18 years of age,

ii.     
Promise not to re  offend,

iii.    
Asked leniency and forgiveness,

iv.     
First Offender,

v.      
Early guilty plea at the first available opportunity,

vi.     
Remorseful,

Michael Jones Qoriniasi,

i.      
You are 18 years of age,

ii.     
Student,

iii.    
Asked leniency and forgiveness,

iv.     
First offender,

v.      
Early guilty pleas at the first available opportunity,

vi.     
Remorseful,

21.     
 In view of aforementioned aggravating factors I increase 2 years, to reach the period of 10 years. In considering your early guilty plea I reduce 4 years and in view of other mitigating factors, I reduce 4 years to reach the period of 2 years. Furthermore, in pursuant to section 24 of the Sentencing and Penalties Decree I reduce 3 months for the period that you were in remand prior to this sentence. Now your sentence reaches to 21 months imprisonment period. According to section 26 (2) (b) of the Sentencing and Penalties Decree sentence which is below two years could be suspended by this court. 

22.     
I now move to the issue of suspended sentence. Both accused persons are first young offenders and pleaded guilty at the first available opportunity by expressing their remorse on committing this offense and also admitted the responsibility of this offence. In contrast it is a responsibility of the court to protect the public from the growing criminal culture which is prevailing in the society. In view of these two diverse aspects in sentencing, the court has to consider the purpose of rehabilitation of the criminals by giving greater attention to the principles of deterrence and protection of the society. At this point I am assisted by Justice Nawana's findings in " State v Vilikesa Tilalevu and Savenaca Mataki ( 2010) FJHC 258, HAC081.2010(20 July 2010)) in relation to the First offenders, where his lordship Nawana J held "I might add that the imposition of suspended terms on first offenders would infect the society with a situation - which I propose to invent as'First Offender Syndrome'- where people would tempt to commit serious offences once in life under the firm belief that they would not get imprisonment in custody as they are first offenders. The resultant position is that the society is pervaded with crimes. Court must unreservedly guard itself against such a phenomenon, which is a near certainty if suspended terms are imposed on first offenders as a rule".

23.     
In the meantime I draw my attention to the possible adverse repercussions on a first young offender who is imprisoned with hardcore criminals. Both of you are very young offenders wherefore; I consider a custodial sentence in an adult prison center would not meet both purposes of rehabilitation and the deterrence. I am of the view, a organize rehabilitation process will be able to reform you into a better citizen of this country by giving you vocational training, spiritual guidance and confidence with recognition in future. I am confident, the opportunity of vocational training, spiritual guidance will restore your confidence and recognition for yourself in the society as a change person.

24.     
In view of theses forgoing circumstances, I act in pursuant to section 26 (1) of the Sentencing and Penalties Decree and partly suspend your sentence. 

25.     
Accordingly, you ONISIMO TAUCILAGI VOTEA, MICHAEL JONES QORINIASI I sentence you for 21 months imprisonment period for the offence of Aggravated Robbery contrary to section 311 (1) (a) of the Crime Decree No 44 of 2009 and suspend 11 month from it for three years. The 10 months imprisonment period to be served in Nasinu Prison center with training facilities, and counseling. 

26.     
If you commit any crime during the period of 3 years and found guilty by the court you are liable to be charge and prosecute for an offence in pursuant to section 28 of the Sentencing and Penalties Decree. 

27.     
Since this court exercising the extended jurisdiction of the High Court in your case, you may appeal against this sentence within 30 days with leave to the Court of Appeal. 

On this 16th day of June 2010.

R.D.R.Thushara Rajasinghe
Resident Magistrate, Suva.
