-----------------
IN THE MAGISTRATE'S COURT AT LAUTOKA

Family Case No 26/2006

BETWEEN

BIBI WAHIDA

AND

BASHIR MOHAMMED

RULING

1.      
The Applicant has filed an application to enhance the payment of maintenance on the 21st May 2008. The respondent filed the response and the case was taken up hearing on the 26th January 2010. Apparently the enhancement application was made on behalf of the Applicant and the daughter of the Applicant.

2.      
It appears that the court has initially ordered the Respondent to pay 150 dollars on the 9th august 2004 and later it has been increased to 200 dollars on the 25th November 2004. However it has not been specified separately the amounts ordered to be paid to the applicant and her daughter.

3.      
 It was revealed that the parties were divorced on the 15th May 2008. But the court faced with the difficulty of ascertaining the exact amount which has to be paid to the daughter as maintenance. It is clear that the Respondent is not liable to pay maintenance to the Applicant after the divorce. Yet the court found it difficult to entertain the enhancement application as it was not clear how much was ordered to be paid to the daughter out of 200 dollars.

4.      
Thus the applicant was informed to file a fresh application asking for maintenance for the daughter on the 13th May 2010. Further both parties agreed, the evidence led so far to be adopted at the hearing once a fresh application is filed.

5.      
The applicant filed an application for maintenance for her sickly daughter, Zaheeda Bashir on the 04th May 2010 asking for 130 dollars weekly as maintenance for her medicine, food and other necessities. 

6.      
The response was filed by the respondent on the 25th May 2010 setting out the following facts;

i.      
Its ordered by the court, the application should have been by the daughter not mother

ii.     
Daughter is not a child a grown up of 36 years

iii.    
I am retired since 2001 and have never worked for FNPF as stated on application

iv.     
There was no order made to my knowledge for 300/ mth as claimed.

Further he has stated that;

"No proof has been given as been bedridden. Excessive amount has been sought with no proof. Most medication comes through govt. hospital pharmacy. There is no reason why one should need fares wkly."

7.      
Before proceeding any further, at this juncture I think it would be pertinent to consider the facts stated in the response filed on the 04th June 2008 with regards to the application for enhancement. Further the facts stated there need to be ascertained and verified, as it appeared from the beginning that the Respondent seemed to have misconceived certain facts. 

8.      
The said response dated 04th June 2008 contains the following facts inter alia;

i.      
There shall be no more claims of maintenance as it was agreed by court and Respondents lawyer on 22.6.06

ii.     
All monies paid after I signed for transfer of lease 177244 in November 2007 shall be refunded.

iii.    
The initial agreement was that I give whole house in return for no claims towards respondent and daughter

9.      
But it should be stated that there is no order made by the court as claimed by the respondent. This has been verified before too and the senior court officer has submitted a report to the court confirming the same on the 07th July 2008. Therefore I decide that there is no such order made by this court canceling the payment of maintenance based on any agreement between the parties.

10.     
The only issue before this court now is whether the child of the Applicant who is over 18 years is entitled for maintenance and if so, the quantum of maintenance. 

11.     
There is no dispute regarding the paternity of the child. The respondent has patently admitted that he is the father of the child on whose behalf this application is made. Further both parties agree that the child is over 18 years of age.

12.     
The Section 92(1)(a) of the Family Law Act stipulates that a court must not make a child maintenance order in relation to a child who is aged 18 or over unless the court is satisfied that the provision of the maintenance is necessary because of a mental or physical disability of the child.

13.     
Now I will consider the evidence led in this case. Also it should be noted that although the parties agreed to adopt all the evidence led regarding the enhancement application in this hearing, in fairness to the Respondent I decide to disregard the evidence led in the said hearing. I will only consider the evidence led at the hearing of the present application. 

14.     
The applicant gave evidence on behalf of her daughter and said her daughter Zaheeda Bashir is 36 years old and Respondent is her father. She said that her daughter was not well since she was 11 or 12 years old. The applicant said that her daughter cannot engage in an employment or at least cannot attend to her work without the support of another. She tendered a medical report of her daughter as evidence. According to the medical report which was issued in 1999;

"She has been constipated and depends on laxatives to move her bowels. Most of the times she feels bloated and regurgitates "bitter juices". She would sometimes feel that food get stuck up in her throat or chest leading to breathing problems. Because of these she again had several admissions to lautoka Hospital the most recent of which was on February 1999. A barium meal which was done was reported normal. An endoscopy to the pylorus was also done revealing no significant findings although the duodenum was not seen because the procedure has to be aborted as patient started to become restless. She was then managed as a case of irritable Bowel Syndrome. She has been on Cisapride 10 mg 1 hour before meals which she claims afforded her some relief. She however continues to have lots of pain in her back which she is aggravated by movement. She is able to walk on her own but has to be at a slow pace and for short distances only."

15.     
The applicant said that with time her daughter has become weaker and her illness is aggravated. It appears that even the Respondent does not dispute the fact that his daughter is suffering from an illness. This is more clear when the following excerpts of his cross examination of the applicant is considered;

Q: When I was with you 6 years ago the condition was not bad?
A: Those days it was him who took her in his arms. Now she can walk a bit.

Q: I was holding her only when we were taking her to the hospital. Some times she used to go on shopping?
A: We had a car we took her in the car.

Q: She was not this bad?
A: If a person cannot eat for 2-3 days obviously that person will get sick.

Q: For how long haven't you taken to the hospital?
A: about one year now.

Q: That means you give medicine without doctor's advice?
A: I told the doctor I don't have money to take her often. Then he said if she shows any progress from that medicine, to keep on giving the same medicine.

Q: When are you going to take her to the hospital again?
A: When I have money I will take her.

Q: You are giving her medicine and tablets and making her weaker?
A: If I don't give medicine she gets medicine for 4-5 days she gets constipation.

Q: She was getting the same problems before too?
A: Day by day she is getting old and everything getting bad.

16.     
The Applicant tendered two photographs of her daughter. It appears that she is a very feeble and a sickly person. Those photos show that she cannot attend to her work without support of the others. I have considered the evidence given by the Applicant as well as the Respondent. Further I considered the medical reports tendered by the applicant. Although the reports are somewhat old, nothing suggests that the daughter has recovered now at least to some extent. Even the Respondent did not suggest that her condition has turned better. 

17.     
In the circumstances I am satisfied that the Applicant's daughter is suffering from a chronic ailment and she cannot maintain herself due to her physical disability. Therefore I decide that the court can consider an application for maintenance made on her behalf although she is over 18 years old. 

18.     
Further I decide that her mother, the applicant can make this application as section 88 of the Act provides for an either of the parents to make an application for maintenance in respect of a child.

19.     
The next issue the court has to consider is the quantum of maintenance. I have taken in to consideration the evidence given by both, the Applicant and the Respondent. The Applicant said that she is unemployed and her son and other family members assist her to support her daughter. She said sometimes she takes loans to cover her daughter's expenses. 

20.     
The Applicant said that she spends about 134.24 dollars for a month for her daughter medicine. To support that she tendered an invoice dated 12th May 2010 and a letter dated 03rd September 2008, issued by the pharmacist confirming the amount of money she spends on medicine for a month. The Applicant further said that other medicines are given by the government hospital. The only issue raised by the Respondent with regard to this, is as to why she buys medicine from the same pharmacy. In reply to that she said that even the Respondent used to buy medicine from the same pharmacy when he was with them and further she said sometimes they give medicine on credit since they know her now. She also said that her daughter is not taken to the hospital frequently as she does not have money and she is only continuing the same medicine given to her before.

21.     
The Applicant said that her daughter can have only a selected food due to her illness and she named them as soups, cabbages, carrot, ice cream and milk. She tendered a written list of expenses which amounts to 66.33 dollars for a week for her daughter's food and other necessities. Also she said that she pays 7 dollars to a nurse to do physiotherapy to her daughter as she needs exercises. The Applicant asked for 200 dollars as maintenance for her daughter.

22.     
The Applicant gave evidence saying that the Respondent has given one flat of his house on rent for 150 dollars a month. She also said that the Respondent owns a car. She said that the respondent got 75 000 dollars from FNPF when he retired. 

23.     
The Respondent said in evidence that he retired in September 2001 and now only gets 333.33 dollars monthly as pension. He said he is married again. He gave the following expenses he has.

350 dollars annually for NLTB
300 dollars annually for registration of his car
40 dollars annually for the postal box
16 dollars monthly for electricity
33 dollars every 3 months for water
120 dollars monthly for food
40 dollars monthly for fuel 

24.     
It appears the Respondent has monthly expenses of about 246 dollars. He said that he gave his house on rent about 4 years ago and he didn't give it on rent after that since the last tenant left the bills without paying. He said "that's why I don't want any body there" and that was the only reason he gave. However the Applicant cross examined him on this point attacking his credibility in the following manner;

Q: This April you gave the house on rent?
A: I did not put it on rent. I was not at home. My wife has given it for one month.

Q: after that a Fijian man came?
A: I don't know about that.

25.     
It is very clear that the Respondent has a flat which can be given on rent if he is facing any financial difficulties. Even the reason he gave for not doing so cannot be considered as a valid and just excuse. Even if the court believes that the Respondent has not given it on rent, it is not ruled out that the Respondent has a potential source of income which he has not made use of.

26.     
The respondent said he spend 120 dollars a month for food. Even if it is assumed that it is for him and his wife, it should cost at least 60 dollars a month for food for a person according to the respondent. However according to the evidence led in this case, it is very clear that the Applicant has to spend more for her daughter's food. I have considered the evidence given by the Respondent and the Applicant. I am convinced that the Applicant has to spend at least 250 dollars for her daughter's food, medicine and other necessities.

27.     
Section 86 of the Family Law Act reads as follows;

Parents have primary duty to maintain child

86. (1) The parents of a child have subject to this division the primary duty to maintain the child.

(2) Without limiting subsection (1) the duty of a parent to maintain a child 

(a) is not lower priority than the duty of the parent to maintain any other child or another person;

(b) has priority over all commitments of the parent other than commitments necessary to enable the parent support-

(i) himself or herself

(ii) any other child or another person that the parent has a duty to maintain and

(c) is not affected by the duty of any other person to maintain the child.

28.     
 The Applicant in this case is not employed and she is asking for maintenance her daughter who is unable to maintain herself due to her chronic illness. I have taken in to consideration the income, earning capacity and financial resources of both parties as well as the necessities of their child. It is clearly discernible that both the parents have a duty to contribute for the maintenance of their child. 

29.     
Having taken in to consideration all the aspects I have discussed above, I decide that it would be just and reasonable to order the Respondent to pay 120 dollars a month, before the end of each month as maintenance for his physically disable daughter, Zaheeda Bashir. I order the Respondent to pay maintenance from the date of the application i.e. 14th May 2010.

28 days to appeal.

Rangajeeva Wimalasena
Resident Magistrate

Lautoka
02.09.2010 
