The War of Fate
Chad W. Shreeves

-2-

The War of Fate

Text copyright ©2005-2006 by Chad W. Shreeves All rights
Reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system, without written
permission from the publisher.
Cover art by:

The following story and characters are fictitious. Any
resemblance to any persons or events, whether living or dead,
is completely unintentional and coincidental.

The War of Fate

-3-

“In the deepest corners of our country, where no
human has ever gone, lie six mysterious diamonds.
Apart these jewels are simple priceless artifacts, but
if one man manages to gather all six, the gateway to
the realm of Evolution will open. However, inside
the gateway is a terrible force which, if unleashed,
will destroy the entire universe. Before the ritual is
finished however, inside the realm of Evolution is
the ruler of the universe, the Master Diamond. It
will witness all of man’s actions, and if it finds
corruption in every area of the human heart, it will
send its angel of death, Evolvia, to finish the human
race and the universe. Thus begins the War of Fate
anew, and to our knowledge no being has ever
stood up to fate and succeeded.”
-Old Yakumian legend

-4-

The War of Fate

Prologue
At the beginning of the universe, when the
earth was filled with poisonous gas, before any
other kind of life inhabited the earth, a powerful
race of creatures known as Destinos, or dragons,
reigned over the land. This reign lasted for almost
one thousand years until a special Destino mutated
and underwent a change that later became known as
the “Final Evolution”. The creature that sprung
from this evolution, Evolvia, quickly brought other
Destinos to his side and incited civil war. After a
very brutal and bloody campaign Evolvia
overwhelmed the Destinos and destroyed the
universe, only to have a new Earth emerge where
many different kinds of life were capable of living.
When human beings first came into being a
tribe known as the Yakumians, settled near modern
day Japan, saw the Destinos as threats to society
and sealed the remaining inside of six magical
diamonds which could only be unlocked when all
six are together. After several thousand years when

The War of Fate

-5-

archeology became popular no evidence of the
Yakumians or the Destinos were found. These were
quickly dismissed as myths of the island inhabitants,
but underground the Yakumians began to reform
their society and began plans to take back their
lands.
June, three years prior to the telling of this
tale, the Yakumians came out of hiding and led a
brutal campaign to take over the Japanese Empire.
The leader, Kon, brought the war to Tokyo and
quickly ravaged the Empire. Soon, after the major
Japanese landmarks were destroyed, excavation
began on ancient Yakumian sites. Shortly, though,
the newly appointed emperor could not sustain
control over the empire and then recognized Kon as
emperor. Kon’s natural blue hair, major height for a
Yakumian, and of course his amazing strength,
brought him immediate power among the people.
He then turned his attention to the one country that
stood in the way of his dreams of global domination;
the United States of America. Little did he know
that his plan to attack the states would be threatened
by a single survivor that came from Kansas City.

-6-

The War of Fate

* * *
“Sir Kon, there is somebody to see you.”
said the guard at the entrance of the throne room of
Yarzon Castle. The throne room was elaborately
decorated with the red and gold flag of the Yakumi
Empire right above the gold-plated throne created
for the Emperor. The guard eased along the
polished marble floor as he cautiously approached
Kon to give him the news.
“Who is it?” asked Kon, the seriousness and
the threat already in his voice. Kon was already
known throughout the empire for having a short
fuse and when that combined with his power it only
meant one thing was certain for whoever set him off;
death. This image was enhanced by his huge
muscular figure and raging natural blue hair of the
Yakumians. Kon rose from his seat and took a
couple of steps toward the guard in the typical blue
Yakumian armor worn by all soldiers, the fear
already in his eyes.
“She- she won’t give me her name, sir, but
she says she has vital information about how you
can easily attack the United States and get away

The War of Fate

-7-

with it.” proclaimed the frightened guard trying to
stand still and not indicate weakness.
Kon hesitated then proclaimed “Bring her in
here. I’ll give her a chance to speak.”
The guard quickly walked out of the throne
room and opened the steel door at the end slightly to
allow a small draft inside and a quick view at the
main hallway outside. The castle was a marvelous
feat for only being built three years earlier. The
Yakumians fashioned it out of technology that had
not been used for centuries because of their beliefs
that modern weapons were too dangerous to use. It
was in their beliefs that they did manage to sign a
treaty with the United States to only use swords and
arrows should the U.S. and the Yakumian Empire
ever find themselves on the brink of war. It was a
treaty that sounded like a good idea at the time, had
the President known that it was really a strategic
ploy by Kon to give them the upper hand in battle.
A woman then walked inside the room
wearing a black dress with dark black armor
attached to the top of the body. A dark complexion,
possibly South American, and silky long black hair
down to her waist Her long legs running down to a

-8-

The War of Fate

pair of heels at her feet. Kon watched in amazement
as the woman walked between the two central
pillars and stopped.
“So you’re the emperor Kon?” asked the
woman.
“Yes I am. Who are you and what
information do you have that I need about the
states?”
“Straight to the point. Just like a true leader.
But you’re too quick to rush into a battle and that
will be your undoing.”
“What?”
“You cannot attack the states by going to
their west coast. That’s suicide. The Americans will
have troops stationed off of every beach for miles.”
“Then what shall I do?”
“It seems like an expensive endeavor but the
only way to get away with an attack is to sail
around the South American continent and attack the
states from their east coast. From there attack every
major city until you make it to the middle and attack
a city called Kansas City. There is a boy there that
can and will destroy the empire if he is given the

The War of Fate

-9-

chance. After he’s dead escape to the south and sail
back here.”
“What do you want for helping me?”
“Easy. Around these islands are caves that
contain six magical diamonds that have the power
to destroy the world. I need you to find those. In
return I give you immortality from the destruction.”
“Fine. What’s your name?” asked Kon.
“Ultemeir will do for now.”
Ultemeir turned and walked out of the
throne room as Kon sat down and thought for a few
seconds. Then he stood up and walked out into the
main hall.
The main hall was decorated with Yakumian
flags filled throughout the room and several
columns lining the red and gold carpet leading up to
the throne room and the main door. Kon continued
his pace to the west side of the room and opened a
small door there which led him into the war room.
An ornately decorated map of the world was
hanging on the far wall and several strategists in red
Yakumian robes were looking at it. Kon stopped at
the head of the oval-shaped oak table in the center
as his main strategist turned to face him.

- 10 -

The War of Fate

“What are our plans for attack, sir?” asked
the strategist.
Kon hesitated for a second before
responding. “We’re going around South America.
Ready the troops. We leave tomorrow.”

The War of Fate

- 11 -

- 12 -

The War of Fate

Part I:
The First Quest

The War of Fate

Chapter I

- 13 -

- 14 -

The War of Fate

The sun rose over Kansas City on a very
early July morning. Dew slid down the windowsill
as rays of sunlight came through the window. An
alarm clock went off and a hand quickly reached
over and shut it off as Christian slowly climbed out
of his bed, his long brown hair down to his
shoulders completely a mess and his muscular build
sore from hours of not being active. Christian got up
and walked through his small bedroom to a dresser
and pulled out a black pair of jeans with a black
shirt. As Christian pulled out a towel from the closet
on the opposite side of the room the phone rang and
he had to run to pick it up.
“Hello?” asked Christian.
“There’s a town meeting this afternoon and
the mayor requests the guardian attend.” said a
voice on the other side of the phone.
“Alright. I’ll be there.” Christian replied as
he hung up the phone and once again continued his
walk to the bathroom. After the Yakumian capture
of Japan the President made each city vote on
somebody in the town to become their guardian just

The War of Fate

- 15 -

in case of an attack. Their purpose was to simply
mobilize to forces. Surprisingly enough the city
voted Christian Baylor as the guardian. Nobody
knew exactly why they voted for him, but Christian
seemed to do the job perfectly, despite the fact he
was only fourteen years old at the time. Christian
readily accepted his responsibilities but did not see
that without an attack the job was pretty useless. He
only had one month of his term left, however,
before the town would vote on a new guardian or
for Christian to keep his job.
Christian got out of the bathroom
completely dressed as he walked further out into the
living room of his house. Neither one of his parents
were there. That became common for Christian to
accept considering the fact that when they weren’t
at work they were usually at a bar getting drunk.
Christian pretty much ended up raising himself
throughout all of his childhood. Christian fixed
himself something to eat quickly before leaving the
house and heading out to the meeting.
The meeting hall was on the west side of the
town but before he went to the meeting Christian
made sure he made a stop at Alice’s house. Alice

- 16 -

The War of Fate

Davens and Christian had been dating for almost a
year. Just about the perfect girl in Christian’s eyes,
long smooth golden blonde hair, deep green eyes,
and an always happy attitude, mostly caused the
jealousy that ensued among the high school which
actually began when Christian was nominated for
becoming the guardian.
Christian walked along the street until he
saw Alice sitting on the front porch. Alice looked
up from her book long enough to see Christian
ascending the stairs. She stood up and greeted him.
Christian hugged her and gave her a small kiss.
“Christian, I’ve heard the Yakumians are
coming. When are they going to be here?” asked
Alice after they talked.
“I don’t know but there is a meeting called
today. Maybe that’s what it’s about; but I have a
feeling that it’s just some type of ploy to get more
money for the city.”
“Oh, well can I come with you?” asked
Alice again.
“Sure it’s a public meeting so we’ll take
Kamo along with us. He likes going to those
things.” said Christian as he pulled out his cell

The War of Fate

- 17 -

phone and dialed Kamo’s phone number. He waited
for several seconds before finally hanging up and
turning back to Alice. “Guess he’s not home.” he
took Alice by the hand and led her down the stairs
as they walked toward the meeting hall together.
In the lobby outside of the main meeting hall
Christian and Alice met with Mia. One of Alice’s
friends who escaped Kon’s takeover of rule, Mia
was a pure Yakumian that displayed all of the
features, the natural blue hair being the most
obvious of all.
“Good to see you again Alice.” said Mia in a
suspiciously cheery mood. Mia was usually known
for having a very snotty attitude and definitely
disapproved of Christian becoming the guardian but
kept to herself on most political issues.
“Yeah you too Mia.” said Alice as the three
of them walked into the meeting hall and sat at a
table specifically designated for them at the front of
the room.
The mayor of Kansas City walked into the
meeting hall and the chatter that was heard
throughout the hall all morning stopped. The mayor
walked past the rows of seats and a table designated

- 18 -

The War of Fate

for the guardian and guests. He then made his way
to his podium at the end of the room where he stood
and began to conduct business.
“The first order of business today is the
subject of securing our trade routes to Omaha and
Denver by placing extra troops from our reserves
here onto the roads. I believe our guardian has
something to say about this.” said the mayor.
Christian immediately rose to his feet.
Christian started to walk toward the center
of the room when all of a sudden the door to swung
open and in came Kamo. Kamo already had a bad
reputation for always being late and when he did
manage to show up to a meeting or even to school
on time he was always in trouble for not doing what
he was there to do and trying to make his moves on
the women, moves that ninety percent of the time
did not work. Kamo opened his mouth to speak
before Christian, Alice, and the Mayor all replied at
the same time “Shut up and sit down!”
Kamo sat down and Christian continued to
say what he was going to. “I think we do need
protection for our roads. But I do not think that we
should use our military reserves the government

The War of Fate

- 19 -

gave us in case of an attack. We should use local
authority. Policemen to patrol our trade routes.
Leave the military here in case of a Yakumian
attack.”
“We’ve already agreed on this that if Kon
attacks then he’ll have to attack a coast city first and
then we’d have word of it before he got here to
gather our reserves.” argued the mayor.
“Everybody here thinks the Yakumians will
attack from the west. A city like Los Angeles or San
Francisco. But I’ve been watching Kon’s strategies
and believe he is much too smart to do exactly what
we expect him to. He’s going to attack from the east.
He’s going to come from where we’re vulnerable.”
At that moment chatter arose throughout the
hall. Several members of the council began to leave
when the mayor shouted to the crowd. “Everybody
sit down! Now, Mr. Baylor. I hope you have some
good evidence to back up this incredibly outrageous
claim. I will not risk the trade routes being attacked.
I’m sending troops to patrol. That’s the end of this
discussion. Our next order of business is to....”

- 20 -

The War of Fate

The mayor did not have time to finish his
order before the door burst open and a soldier came
running into the hallway.
“I have some bad news!” shouted the soldier.
“How bad is it?” asked Christian in a
seemingly calm manner.
“Kon’s landed in the United States. He
attacked New York City. Troops are meeting him
now to try and stop his spread into the states.”
Christian hastily walked out of the hall.
“Next time I tell you something you should listen to
it!” he screamed as he ran outside.
Along the defensive walls built for the city
Christian ran up to see several soldiers preparing for
the battle that was about to ensue.
“Get those arrows ready!” shouted Christian
as he walked by the archers. Several archers were
stumbling from too little practice in the field and
kept dropping arrows and caused a mess on the
walkway. Christian continued to walk as he made it
to the captain waiting for the orders.
“Are they ready yet for the battle?” asked
Christian.

The War of Fate

- 21 -

“Not yet.” said the Captain as he pointed to
a mess on the ground.
“Get them ready quickly.”
“It’ll be done by the time the night’s over.”
Christian ran to the center of the city where
the town had become a complete scene of chaos as
the citizens tried to abandon their homes and
apartments in their attempts to evacuate to the
shelters. Alice was there giving orders to some of
the confused citizens trying to escape. Christian
quickly went to her.
“How is the evacuation coming?” he asked.
“Not good. We never had time to have a
drill so right now the problem is trying to get
everybody either out of the city or into a shelter.”
replied Alice.
“Well hurry. What about Kamo and Mia?”
“They’re already at the shelter.”
Christian began to walk away before
responding, “You let a Yakumian into the shelter?”
“Yeah but she’s good. She’s with us
remember?”
“I guess so but don’t let your guard down.
Be aware of any suspicious activity.”

- 22 -

The War of Fate

“Done.”
Christian walked away and back up the wall
to see that all of the archers were cleaned up and
prepared. The lookouts turned their lights on as the
sun began to set over the trees in the distance.
“That’s about all we can do today. All right
everybody, let’s go home except for security.”
Christian shouted to the soldiers. The archers went
away with the exception of a few and Christian
walked down to the ground level and toward the
front gate.
The guard at the front gate was prepared as
usual watching for any suspicious activity. Christian
came forward and the officer saluted him.
“I need you to open the gate.” said Christian.
“Will do.” said the guard. “Why do you
need to go out?”
Christian just looked out at the large steel
gate opening. “I need some time to think.”
There was a small clearing out in the forest
that Christian visited anytime he had a problem or
just needed to think. A small log sat on the side of
the clearing and the sounds of birds chirping and
insects whistling away just made it feel like an

The War of Fate

- 23 -

ordinary night in the woods. Yet it did not feel like
an ordinary night. Something was coming. An
enemy that came to kill him and everything he
believed in. It was up to him to save everyone and
everything in a city that three years ago was like
any other city. Cars bustled about on a rush hour
morning. School buses packed the roads also trying
to get a bunch of whiny kids to school. Now it
changed. Now everybody walked. Kids stayed
home. Everything their lives had meant changed
with the threat of a Yakumian attack.
Then the sounds of nature stopped.
Everything that was making noise, including the
whistling of the wind through the trees, was
replaced by a dark, ominous silence. Christian
immediately stood up and looked around. At that
moment a sound came through the bushes. A sound
that had to have been made by something larger, it
had to have been bigger than a deer or any other
kind of wildlife around this part of the Midwest.
Christian heard whatever it was getting closer. He
drew the sword out of his sheath attached to his belt.
More sounds came from the bushes. He cold then
hear noises from every direction. Whatever was

- 24 -

The War of Fate

coming close to him it wasn’t friendly and wanted a
fight. Christian had his back turned to the bushes of
the nearest noise when a small rabbit jumped out
and ran toward him.
Instinctively Christian turned around and
swung his sword at his unknown opponent.
Christian stopped and stared at the sight that he had
just killed a helpless rabbit that was probably just
on its way home. Christian’s mourning for the thing
he was ready to make stew with, however, was cut
short when five Yakumian soldiers dressed in their
dark blue armor all lunged out at him.
Christian quickly dealt with the first soldier
that attacked him with one slice of his sword. The
two other soldiers quickly teamed up and attacked
Christian from both sides. Christian turned to stab
one and ducked from the other’s attack before
immediately turning around and stabbing the other
soldier straight through the heart.
The two other soldiers left stared at their
three dead allies that were all dealt with in under a
minute and decided not to have a part of it. Both of
them left quickly and ran toward the city. Christian
fell to the ground in exhaustion and looked up as a

The War of Fate

- 25 -

spark of flame rose above the city walls. There was
nothing he could do now. He had no strength left to
fight but at the same time was fighting himself for
the willpower to move on and save what was left of
the city.
All of a sudden Christian looked up and saw
a magic barrier cover the city like a blanket and roll
over the sides. Christian had nothing left that he
could do with his little strength but listen to the
screams of people inside the village as he slowly
fell into unconsciousness.
* * *
A cliff overlooking the lake in the forest was
the only chance left for escaping alive as Alice,
Kamo, and Mia all ran out to escape the attacking
Yakumians in the city. The shelters had already
been attacked and the group was forced to watch as
an onslaught took place among the survivors.
“How were they able to find us? Nobody
knew the locations of the shelters until today!”
asked Kamo as they hurried up the cliff. The grade
down to the lake was extremely steep but they had

- 26 -

The War of Fate

no other choice. It was either risk death by scaling
the cliff or be killed by advancing enemies. Alice
made their choice for them.
“We’re going to have to climb down from
here. Let’s hope Christian finds a way out alive.”
called Alice as she looked back at Mia after Kamo
met her at the edge. “Mia?” she asked.
Mia was acting very strange and her
suspicious nature was not helped by the evil grin
she had across her face. Both of Mia’s hands were
hidden from Alice and Kamo’s sight as she slowly
made her way toward them. Alice turned around.
Whatever was about to happen wasn’t good and
there was nothing else they could do.
“Don’t worry about Christian,” said Mia
with an overly arrogant tone of voice, “he’s meeting
you where you’re going.” Mia pulled both of her
hands out to reveal knives being held in both of
them. Alice tried to back away but with nowhere
else to run she just stared at Mia with a scared look.
Mia thrust the knives into both Alice’s and Kamo’s
stomachs.
Alice just stared for a second as Mia began
to walk away. Alice and Kamo’s bodies fell to off

The War of Fate

- 27 -

of the cliff and into the lake below. Both bodies
were carried off with the current of the connecting
creek and slowly take downstream.
At the side of the creek Alice’s body was
laying down barely alive. Her heart was still beating
and lungs breathing but both were barely there due
to the impact of the fall. Alice tried to open her eyes
to examine her situation but couldn’t find the
strength. Alice did find a way to move her hand a
bit and pull a part of her long blonde hair out from
under a rock.
Alice stopped all movement as soon as her
faint hearing left detected something. She began to
hear footsteps. It could have been a Yakumian
patrol and if that was the case she was dead for sure.
Here she was at death’s door and only the identity
of the stranger walking could be heard. A hand then
took hers and she didn’t know what to think. She
couldn’t tell if it was a friend or who it was as she
still tried to open her eyes. The hand reached over
and began to lift the knife from her body. Alice
tried to scream in pain but was cut short due to her
lungs not functioning correctly.

- 28 -

The War of Fate

The hand gently pushed itself against the
wound and at that moment Alice felt several small
sparks begin to pulse through her body. She then all
of a sudden began to feel regenerated. Her heart
began to beat faster. Her lungs were beginning to
breathe normally. Her strength was still out of her
though so she couldn’t open her eyes and all she
heard before falling asleep was a woman’s voice.
“Don’t worry. You must live. Too many
things are in motion now that you will soon become
involved in. You must aid him.” said the voice.
Alice tried to respond with a question but passed
out asleep.
Kansas City was in ruin. Nothing was left.
Not a survivor walked away from the onslaught of
Kon and his Yakumian army. Kon was going to pay
a price for his actions. Vengeance was going to one
day knock on his door.

The War of Fate

- 29 -

- 30 -

The War of Fate

Chapter II
Morning rose from the rubble of Kansas
City and the terror that was created the night before
in the exact same manner that it rose a day ago. The
trees of the forest covered the clearing where
Christian’s unconscious body laid in a dark cover.
Still nothing sounded through the trees. Not a bird
chirping. No ants were scurrying along to catch
their morning food. Not even a gust of wind flew
through the leaves. Everything was at a standstill.
An ominous silence still covering what was left of
the city.
Christian’s eyes slowly opened as he woke
up from his exhaustion the night before. Christian
found the strength to pull himself up and looked
around at the clearing where he had fought the
Yakumian soldiers the night before. He looked
around and saw no sign of the bodies of the soldiers
he killed or footprints telling where the escaped
soldiers escaped to. He looked toward the city and
saw a black smoke rising from the walls. Christian

The War of Fate

- 31 -

stumbled as he began to run toward the city, afraid
of what would be found there.
Christian made his way through the gates
that were completely broken off of their hinges and
into the city to see the ruin that was around. Bodies
of the slain were scattered across the ground and
fires set by the enemy were still burning along the
ground. Christian looked at the carnage that was
spread across the city and then stopped to think for
a second. He knew most of these bodies should
have been in the shelters but they were here. He
quickly made his way to the shelter that Alice and
Kamo were staying in.
Christian fell to the ground in shock from
what he saw when he entered the shelter. It was
completely abandoned and the entire place was torn
apart from destruction. Burns were along the walls
as bookshelves were knocked to the ground with
books and food scattered among some dead bodies.
Christian looked at some of the dead bodies looking
for some trace of survivors. He couldn’t find any
traces but found some bloodied footprints among
the burns on the ground leading out. Christian

- 32 -

The War of Fate

concluded it was a woman’s shoe and whoever she
was she ran outside.
Christian followed the footprints as far as he
could until he came to a cliff outside of the city. He
searched the area and couldn’t find any sign of what
happened. He then spotted something on the ground
that looked familiar he reached down and picked up
the shining object laying in the dirt. After cleaning
it off he noticed it was Alice’s pendant. The
diamond one he had just given her for her birthday a
few months ago. Christian put the pendant to his
face and began to cry.
Christian continued to cry on the cliff for
quite some time before he finally got the nerve to
get up and bury the dead bodies. Christian managed
to complete the burials himself in about a week
before building a small memorial. He did wait
around for a while hoping for some kind of rescue
team or even a Red Cross team or something that
would come and help him. Nothing came. No
rescues, no help, just Christian in the ruined city.
Christian found the remains of his house and
scoured through the wreckage to find the gun of his
father’s. He then was able to find the sword he

The War of Fate

- 33 -

dropped in the forest during the fight with the
Yakumian soldiers. He gathered all of these while
preparing for a campfire the next night.
The light provided by the campfire was the
only light that was offered for miles around.
Christian stood in front of it as he read his
newspaper article about the leader of the Yakumi
Empire, Kon. After he finished reading, Christian
dropped the newspaper into the fire and drew his
sword.
“From this point on,” said Christian talking
aloud to nobody but himself, “I promise that
everything that happened here, everything that was
destroyed and every life that was taken by the evil
that rests in Yakumi, will be avenged. I know
what’s going to happen. I know that Kon attacked
for a reason and he has some plan of using these
attacks for his gain. I will kill him though. I must
kill him. For everything. I will avenge Kamo. I will
avenge Kansas City and every single other city that
was attacked. I especially will avenge Alice.”
Christian pulled the pendant out from under his shirt
and pressed it to his blade.

- 34 -

The War of Fate

Christian put his sword back into his sheath
and sat down on a log he managed to pull from the
forest as he began to eat the deer he hunted in the
forest. It wasn’t much but it was better than eating
and Christian needed all the energy he needed for
the journey that lay ahead of him. He finished his
meal and turned around to check the traps he set for
any thugs and looters that may be searching the city.
Finally he laid down on the ground and went to
sleep. He found sleep that night only from the
thoughts of vengeance.
Christian awoke with a startle that next
morning and quickly drew his sword and pressed it
under the man standing above his head’s chin.
“What are you doing here?” asked Christian.
“I don’t know where to go.” said the man
dressed in a black business suit, short well-made
black hair greased back and a very serious look on
his face. “I saw you and wondered if you could help
me. I need to find somebody. Somebody that was
living here.” Christian’s first thoughts were that he
was surprised how the man easily made it through
the traps.

The War of Fate

- 35 -

Christian hesitated before responding.
“Everybody else that was living here is dead.”
“Surely there must be some other
survivors.” spoke the man, the anxiousness in his
voice getting worse.
“Give me a name and I might be able to take
you to where they’re buried.”
“I’m looking for my daughter.” spoke the
man getting more anxious.
“I need a more specific name.” said
Christian getting annoyed easily. Christian began to
head toward where he put the graves.
“My name’s William Davens. My
daughter’s name is Alice Davens. Do you know
where she is?” said William now seeming calm.
Christian stopped dead in his tracks. The
father of the girl he loved and had let die was
standing right before him and he had no words to
even explain it to him. He stood there for a few
seconds while tears once again started to fall from
his eyes. William saw this and just waited.
“If you’re looking for Alice then I’m
extremely sorry. I couldn’t protect her. I should

- 36 -

The War of Fate

have but I couldn’t.” said Christian as his tears
became worse. “I… I couldn’t even find her body.”
William finally started running toward him.
“You knew my daughter? If you didn’t find a body
then there is still hope.”
Christian looked at him directly. “If there’s
one thing I’ve learned, it’s that clinging to hope is
probably the worst idea you can ever think of.
Sometimes it’s better to accept fate as it is.”
William finally gave up and said. “I guess
you’re just trying to survive.”
Christian responded. “I’m not staying here.
There’s nothing left. No family. No friends. I’m
training, training for my revenge against Kon and
the Yakumi Empire.”
“Then you’re going to need help. I can do
that. I’ll stay here and help you get you’re revenge.”
replied William.
“Thanks. Well, time to get to work. It’s time
for me to start to train. I could use the company
though.”
William and Christian both ran off to find
materials to prepare for training.

The War of Fate

- 37 -

Christian managed to find a gym on the
south side of the city that was destroyed but the
equipment was still in tact. Christian called William
over and they helped carry the equipment to the
camp they had set up. William prepared a target
range for gun shooting, and Christian had built a
small area for sword training. The rest of the day
was spent training. Christian had developed a
rigorous program for himself that included over an
hour of warm-ups in the morning, then a quick
breakfast, followed by around four hours of sword
training.
After resting and having lunch then he
would join William for several hours of training to
become accurate with his gun. Christian would then
quit training to hunt and eat dinner. After dinner
Christian would lie down and talk with William
about various topics which changed nightly. Then
Christian would go to sleep and wake up in the
morning to begin his routine all over again.
Finally one day after about three in the
afternoon Christian and William decided to stop and
take a small break. Christian had just turned fifteen
years old. William pulled something out of his sack

- 38 -

The War of Fate

and gave it to Christian as they sat around the
campfire.
“What is this?” asked Christian curiously.
“I’m interested in seeing how your journey
progresses, so I’m giving you this journal to keep
track of what happens.” replied William.
“But… I’m not ready.”
“You’re almost there. Just a couple more
months and you’ll be ready to go. You’re stronger
than most people already and are more accurate
with a gun than anybody else I know. You should
start preparing because it is coming.”
“Thanks.” said Christian. Both of them sat
around the fire for a few minutes without saying a
word.
“Christian,” said William finally. “I’m
curious how you knew my daughter.”
“Do you want the truth?” said Christian
starting to become afraid.
“Yeah.”
“We were friends. In fact we were actually
good friends.”
“You mean you two were dating?”

The War of Fate

- 39 -

“Yeah. I just keep thinking of what I would
do if I could go back and protect her. Order her to
get out of there.”
“It’s not your fault. It’s Kon’s and the
Yakumi Empires’ fault. You should go get your
revenge.”
Christian agreed and then rolled over for the
night and in the morning began his regular routine
once again.
It had been a total of six months since the
carnage that was wreaked upon Kansas City that
night. Christian knew he was ready for his quest for
revenge against Kon. He started preparing a sack
full of weapons, food, and other materials he would
need to get to Yakumi. The last item he put into his
was the journal that William had given him for his
birthday. It was the least he could do for somebody
who helped him for the last six months.
Just as he wrapped up his sack and prepared
to go see William to leave an alarm sounded from
one of the traps he had set for looters in the city.
Christian hurried to the site where the alarm was
sounded and found two robbers trying to loot a
destroyed bank. William had made it there first and

- 40 -

The War of Fate

tried to hold them off but by the time Christian
arrived it was too late. William had been shot in the
stomach. Christian hurried inside the bank where
the looters were clearing out.
Christian drew his sword as he ran through
the front door and toward the opened vault. The two
looters were emptying sacks of cash from the vault
as Christian entered.
“Let that money go. It’s not yours is it?”
said Christian as the looters turned to face him. The
looter on the left pulled a gun and tried to shoot but
Christian beat him to it. He shot the robber with the
gun and it immediately killed him. The other looter
tried to run and Christian pulled his sword to the
side and caught the robber with it killing him.
Christian put away his sword and his gun and
looked at the spilled money on the floor. It would
take a lot of money for the journey and all the
people who had money here were dead.
After putting some of the money into his
pockets he walked out and met William laying on
the ground holding his wound as he fought to stay
alive. Christian pulled out a bandage and tried to
cover the wound but it was too late.

The War of Fate

- 41 -

“Christian,” spoke William his voice very
faint. “She has to be alive. I can feel it. Please stop
Kon, save everything.” William tried to say
something else but couldn’t find it as he died slowly.
Christian buried William with the rest of the
bodies he had buried earlier. After he prayed for the
people who had died during this incident he picked
up his sack and headed out the west exit of the city.
His journey had begun, and the fate of the world
was riding on him.

- 42 -

The War of Fate

Chapter III
It was March and the snow around the
Colorado area had not yet melted but trying to get
through it was still hard. Christian had been
traveling for a week and it was beginning to tire him.
Strange creatures had infested the roads that made
travel for anybody even more perilous. Christian
was already almost out of money which also would
be difficult because the Yakumian currency was
more as valuable than American money which
would deplete his money supply when he made it to
Yakumi.
Christian became tired when it became close
to nighttime so he stopped at a small lodge on the
side of the highway. He stopped inside and looked
around as he headed for the front desk to obtain a
room for the night. There was a bar in the front
rooms of the inn so Christian was forced to make
his way through the tables, broken bottles, and the
occasional tipped over drunk man on the floor.
Christian finally made it to the front desk.

The War of Fate

- 43 -

“I’d like a room for the night.” said
Christian.
“Just one moment, Sir.” said the man at the
desk as he began to look through the guest book for
an open room. “I’m sorry but it appears that we’re
filled for the night.” he then said. Christian turned
and began to walk back through the bar.
As he made it to the door he all of a sudden
heard a familiar voice coming from the bar.
“I’m sorry. I didn’t know she was your
girlfriend I swear!” said the voice as Christian
turned to see who it was, even though that kind of
talk could only mean one person. Kamo was backed
into a corner by three huge guys that apparently
wanted to take care of him.
One of the big guys approached Kamo and
raised his fist to strike. He didn’t finish his swing,
though, as a knife hurled through the air and into
the back of the brute. Kamo finally opened his eyes
that were closed the whole time. Christian walked
forward and picked up the knife and turned to
Kamo.
“Didn’t you hear the lesson I gave you about
not picking fights with people older than you!”

- 44 -

The War of Fate

shouted Christian as he joined Kamo in the corner.
The other two brutes came closer and pulled out
large knives.
“I.....uh.....guess this won’t be the first time
you guys have used those...” said Kamo as they
came even closer. Christian pulled out his sword
and prepared an attack stance.
The two brutes came even closer and
Christian finally got tired of waiting and cut them
both down. Christian pulled his sword out of the last
brute to fall and began cleaning it. Kamo looked at
Christian in amazement.
“Wow,” said Kamo as Christian finished
placing his sword back into its sheath “I can’t
believe you actually made it out of there alive.”
Christian didn’t say anything and began his walk
out of the inn. Kamo became confused and then ran
out the door after him.
On the snowy bank on the side of a hill
Christian stopped for the night and lied down and
tried to get some rest. He started a fire to warm
himself up as he tried to get some sleep. The hill
was on the other side of the road so Christian
thought he was safe from the tourists and other

The War of Fate

- 45 -

travelers. Just as he was about to fall asleep Kamo
made his way toward the small camp that had been
set up.
“What do you want?” asked Christian even
though he didn’t turn and look at Kamo. He just
knew he was there.
“I… I just wanted to know how you got
away.” replied Kamo as he approached Christian.
Christian finally sat up and drew his sword.
“You were supposed to take care of her. And now I
find you alive.”
“We... we were separated after Mia hurled
us off of that cliff. I stopped downstream a bit and
was just able to catch a glimpse of Alice floating
downstream. I tried to get up but was too tired until
later I felt the pull of a woman as my wounds
strangely began to become healed. I’m sorry. I did
look for her though before coming here.” said
Kamo as he sat down on a log that just happened to
be there.
“So... You headed out here for no apparent
reason?”
“No. I’m traveling to Yakumi to stop Kon.”

- 46 -

The War of Fate

“What a coincidence. I guess I’ll have to
take you with me.”
“Really? You mean then we’re allies
again?”
“Yeah but let me warn you. If you get in my
way or I find out you’re lying, I’ll leave you, so rest
up tonight.” Christian rolled over and began to sleep.
In the morning Christian woke up and found
Kamo not only had everything packed already but
had made breakfast for them. Deer meat had been
the only thing Christian was able to eat for six
months, and he was getting tired of it but it did give
him the energy he needed to fight the monsters on
the roads.
After almost two weeks of traveling,
Christian and Kamo had finally made it to the
refugee camp outside of Los Angeles. Upon
entering the guards forced them to turn in all of
their weapons and then they went inside unarmed.
They made their way through the plain hall that had
nothing decorating it but stone. Inside the next room
was the office of the Commander. Outside the room
Kamo turned to the officer.

The War of Fate

- 47 -

“Does this guy have a name?” asked Kamo
curiously.
“I’m sure he does, but around here
everybody just calls him Commander. Show some
respect when you’re in there. He keeps hearing bad
news and he’s not been being very forgiving
recently.” said the officer without even blinking an
eye.
Christian and Kamo walked inside the room
and stood at the end of the desk while Commander
looked at the latest reports from the attacks.
“Can I help you?” asked Commander in a
frustrated voice. He had a military uniform that was
completely unwrinkled as he sat up straight for his
tall six foot height.
“I need a pass to go to the Yakumi Empire.”
said Christian before he backed away.
“After everything that’s happened in this
country and you still want to take a vacation there?”
“This isn’t for a vacation.”
“Really? Then what’s it for?”
Kamo immediately jumped in front of
Christian and whispered to him “Are you sure that
you should tell him the truth?”

- 48 -

The War of Fate

Christian pushed Kamo to the side without
even wasting any energy and then turned to
Commander “I want revenge. I’m going to kill
Kon.”
Commander stared at Christian for a second
and then started laughing. “You really want to take
on Kon? He marched through this entire country
and didn’t even get a scratch, and now a thirteen
year old wants me to let him visit Yakumi to kill
Kon. Listen to me. Go home. Be a kid. Forget about
this. I can’t let everyone who wants to kill Kon
through. There are a whole lot of survivors
downstairs from other cities and...”
Christian immediately cut him off. “Other
survivors?” He then turned to Kamo.
Kamo thought for a second before realizing
what Christian was thinking. “Alice.” Both
Christian and Kamo ran out of the room ignoring
the woman that was coming in. The woman then
turned to commander with her smooth face and dark
brown hair.
“What are you going to do?” asked the
woman “The boy obviously is serious to come all
this way from Kansas City.”

The War of Fate

- 49 -

“Michelle. I don’t have time for this. Let’s
see how serious he is.” replied Commander.
Downstairs Christian and Kamo made their
way through the sea of refugees from all of the
deserted towns Christian combed through the west
side of the room as Kamo searched the east.
Christian finally saw a girl about Alice’s height
with her back turned to him exposing long blonde
hair that was about her length. He touched her on
the shoulder and she quickly turned around to face
him and he realized he was mistaken.
“Sorry.” said Christian trying to cover his
mistake.
Kamo joined him at the opposite end of the
room. “I couldn’t find her either.” Christian just
shrugged his shoulders and walked back upstairs.
Kamo turned around and saw a small girl with short
blonde hair and deep green eyes walk right past him.
“Could it be?” he said as he got the thought out of
his head and followed Christian back up the stairs to
commander’s office.

- 50 -

The War of Fate

Chapter IV
Christian and Kamo walked into the main
hallway before Commander walked toward them
with Michelle following behind.
“Kid!” shouted Commander causing
Christian to immediately stop. “If you want to go to
Yakumi then I’ve got a deal for you.” Christian
became interested and turned around. Commander
took off his jacket and handed it to Michelle as she
walked to the side of the ornately decorated hallway.
“We’re going to have a duel. One-on-one. No
killing, but if you can knock me down then I’ll let
you go to Yakumi.” Commander reached under his
belt and pulled an ornamental sword from a sheath
Christian never saw before.
Kamo turned to Christian “Don’t worry
we’ll fight together.” Christian didn’t say anything
but put his hand on Kamo’s shoulder and gently
pushed him aside. Kamo understood that Christian
was willing to fight alone. Christian pulled his own

The War of Fate

- 51 -

sword out of its sheath and took a couple of steps
forward to the center of the room.
Commander took his sword and prepared
himself in a fighting stance. Christian did the same
and after a brief moment of pause both of them
swung their swords at each other as the clash was
heard throughout the rest of the facility. Kamo
looked up after the first few swings afraid that it
would be decided quickly and up on the balcony he
saw the same blonde girl standing there watching
the battle, but not too surprised because quickly
other refugees all came from different doorways
and crowded around to watch the fight ensue.
Christian ducked underneath the next blow
that came to him as he backed up and did a small
leap off the wall to the other side of Commander.
Christian took a few more swings at his opponent
before once again taking the defensive position.
Even more refugees had gathered to watch the
ensuing battle as they seemed to keep going neck
and neck with each other. Christian finally backed
up enough where both of them ended up ascending
a small staircase. Christian kept the upper hand
when Commander took a wide swing at him as he

- 52 -

The War of Fate

rolled underneath the swing and ended up on the
bottom floor.
Commander took another swing as Christian
blocked this time and their swords remained locked
in the dead heat for several seconds. Commander
finally let go of the lock and juked Christian straight
in the chin instantly knocking him to the ground.
“You’re good. I’ll give you that.” said
Commander as he took a step toward Christian.
Christian grabbed his sword and jumped up.
“I’ve been here long enough for you to know that I
don’t give up.” he said as he quickly jumped to his
feet and took several more swings at Commander.
Commander blocked the first two that came to him
but at the third Christian knocked the sword from
Commander’s hands and slightly pressed his blade
against Commander’s throat. “I think we had an
agreement.” he replied as he withdrew the blade and
placed it back in its sheath.
“All right. You can go to Yakumi. But not
without help. Michelle, you’re going with them.”
proclaimed Commander as he put his jacket back on.
Michelle started to respond and then shut her mouth
knowing that an argument was useless at this point.

The War of Fate

- 53 -

The girl Kamo recognized earlier came running into
the hall from one of the side doorways.
“Wait! I’m going with them too!” she
shouted as she made her way to Commander.
“Schala Erdenson. I can fight too.” Commander
didn’t say anything just gave a small nod of
approval out of complete frustration and then turned
to Michelle giving her a stern look that was meant
as a warning to watch over the three teenagers left
in her charge. All four of them turned and left.
Christian and Kamo waited at the main gate
when Michelle and Schala came out with their bags
packed. “Well let’s get moving. Don’t want to miss
the boat now.”
Michelle gave a small laugh. “A boat?
Really now. Commander can’t risk that. What we’re
doing is going five miles north to a place known as
the Black Hole Mine. Inside of there is an
underwater passage that leads straight to Yakumi.
It’s a tight squeeze in there but it’s the best way to
slip in undetected by Kon and our own
government.”
Christian turned and walked toward the
plains as his three other companions followed him.

- 54 -

The War of Fate

* * *
Inside Yarzon Castle Kon and Ultemeir
walked through the dimly lit staircase leading down
the southwestern tower to the castle library. At the
bottom of the staircase Kon lit a single candle over
a shelf containing ancient scrolls.
“This is where we keep our records of the
locations of ancient landmarks. Those diamond
things must be explained somewhere in here.” said
Kon as he searched through all the scrolls. Ultemeir
just stood in the corner of the room being
conveniently disguised in the shadows. Kon
searched through several other scrolls until he came
across one with gold plating over it. A red cloth
taped on with the word ‘laei’ inscribed on it.
“The Yakumian word for forbidden,”
Ultemeir finally responded with a dark tone in her
voice. “This must be the location of the diamonds.”
Kon remained still staring at the scroll in
amazement. In the Yakumian religion of Kaiylo
there weren’t many things forbidden and if they
were then they were forbidden for a good reason.

The War of Fate

- 55 -

Ultemeir finally grew impatient and pulled
the scroll from Kon’s hand. She yanked the cloth
off and pulled the scroll open to reveal a map. The
islands were all together which was believed true
for the time the map was made. She looked as at the
top of the map was a picture of two dragons fighting
each other and the map in the middle. Six areas
were colored on the map indicating the general
location of the diamond. At the bottom of the map
was some Yakumian text. Ultemeir gave the text to
Kon to read.
“Lo kaiso sme may sores pleepem, esan les
epian wikh meiatah.” said Kon with his sharp
Yakumian accent coming out.
“What does it mean?” asked the impatient
Ultemeir.
“To those who seek the power, only great
destruction will come.”
Kon dropped the scroll on the ground and
stepped away. The problem with the ancient scrolls
was that those weren’t warnings. If he allowed this
Ultemeir to search for these diamonds then he may
end up paying the consequences. Uletemeir picked
up the scroll and walked away.

- 56 -

The War of Fate

“I’ll have troops begin to search the area.”
she declared as she walked out of the room. Kon sat
down at a small desk and rested his hands
wondering if had just made a deal with the devil.
* * *
The moon shined through the windows of
the main entrance hall as Ultemeir walked down the
hall hurriedly to the soldiers’ quarters.
“Getting the soldiers to do your dirty work
because you’re too lazy, huh? Is that it? Or is it that
the boy may figure out what he’s carrying before
you have the chance to extract it?” said an unknown
voice from behind Ultemeir. She turned around to
see another woman about her height with crimson
hair down to her waist over an elaborately decorated
white robe of a Yakumian priest standing at the
door to the throne room. “You know he’s alive
don’t you? You know that he’s coming here. He
wants his revenge.” The woman took a few steps
closer as Ultemeir finally prepared a response.
“Why do you side with the humans? You
saved those two at the waterfall too? I forsaw that.

The War of Fate

- 57 -

That doesn’t matter anymore, however. My plans
are almost complete. All I need to do is find the
diamonds and release the Destinos. After he
recognizes they’re still alive he’ll come out of his
sleep early to finish the job he should have finished
millions of years ago. Then, the universe will be
mine.” Ultemeir said with a dark smile stretched
across her face.
“It doesn’t matter. You’ll never find the
sixth diamond.”
“Why?”
“I hid it. To stop people like you of
obtaining the forbidden power.”
Ultemeir raised her right hand in the air as a
black sword took its shape as she made a few
violent steps toward the priest. “Tell me where it
is!” she screamed.
“Your mole couldn’t have been standing
more than two feet from it. Now it belongs to the
only one that can end this. Our final hope. You
would be wise to give up now.” Ultemeir finally
took two more steps toward the woman who
immediately vanished. Ultemeir stood in shock as
Mia walked into the hall.

- 58 -

The War of Fate

“I thought I heard talking.” said Mia as she
advanced toward Ultemeir. “I guess the troops need
to get ready then.”
Ultemeir blinked and then turned to Mia.
“Yes, we leave at dawn. We leave for the Black
Hole Mine” Mia started to walk away before
Ultemeir grabbed her hand. “Wait, I have a new job
for you.” Ultemeir followed Mia to the barracks.
She was going to have her way one way or another.

The War of Fate

- 59 -

- 60 -

The War of Fate

Chapter V
The initial cavern of the Black Hole Mine
was dark and dusty as the group made their way to
the underwater area. Christian’s first thought was
that Michelle wasn’t kidding when she said things
were going to be a tight squeeze through there.
Every once in a while the tunnel would open up and
allow for them to rest and get some fresh air.
“How was this built?” asked Schala as she
marveled at the limestone gathering on the cave
walls. Schala pressed her head to the side of the
wall and could hear the faint sound of ocean life
underwater.
“Careful,” said Michelle “we’ve never
actually been through here so we don’t know how
sturdy the walls are. They could cave in at any
second and we would be dead.”
“Wow. You can here the ocean from here.”
Schala replied as she made her way back to the ring
of stones.

The War of Fate

- 61 -

“So you’re telling me we’re in one great big
seashell. Wonderful.” said Kamo sarcastically as
they all sat down to rest.
“How far are we?” asked Christian to
Michelle as she pulled a fire starter out of her bag.
“No clue, but the time we’ve taken we
should be about halfway to the hidden gate.”
“The hidden gate?”
“A security device we installed so that if the
Yakumians came in here then they wouldn’t know
where to start looking for it. In other words we can
see in but they can’t see out.”
Schala got interested “Why do we need a
security device in here? I think the narrow tunnels
would provide enough protection.”
“They do but there are a lot of people that
come here. You see, the Yakumian side of this
houses one of the oldest discovered Yakumian
Kaiylo temples to date so there are a lot of visitors.
But I do think this mine harbors something more
important. That’s why there’s increased soldier
activity in this area.”
Kamo fell off the stone he was sitting on and
fell asleep. Michelle and Schala didn’t say anything

- 62 -

The War of Fate

and rolled over themselves. All of them had a long
day and Christian finally decided to join them and
tried to sleep himself. The problem was he couldn’t.
He saw a small alcove and decided to visit it as he
went inside the dark alcove and turned on one of his
lanterns to see as he started to think.
Christian all of a sudden heard a noise and
looked up to find Schala coming in to join him.
“Can’t sleep.” she said as she sat on the
stone opposite of him. Christian didn’t say anything
just listened to the sound of the ocean coming
through the walls and the dim glow of the lantern.
“I just love listening to this sound. I wish we were
here under other circumstances.”
Christian finally stood up and responded
“Why are you here then? You could easily be
somewhere else.”
“My... My hometown was also attacked by
Kon. I want my revenge just as much as you do.”
“Really?”
“Why are you being so heartless?”
“No real reason. I just had everything taken
away from me and now I’m afraid to trust again

The War of Fate

- 63 -

because the same thing could possibly happen
again.”
“But you trust us, right? That’s why we’re
all here.”
Christian sat back down resting his head on
his hands. “I don’t know anymore. One thing has
led to another and I’m just going with the flow right
now. All that matters is killing Kon right now.”
Christian turned off the lantern and went to sleep.
* * *
Christian woke up a few minutes later but
didn’t find himself where he slept that night or even
in the mine at all. Instead he was inside a room that
looked like it was primarily used for the use of
magic spells. Torches set in a circular pattern
around an ominous looking alter. Christian saw a
body atop the alter and walked closer to it to get a
better look. When he got in front he realized that the
person on the alter was none other than Alice.
“Oh my...” said Christian in shock as he
took a couple of steps backward.

- 64 -

The War of Fate

“Don’t worry. She’s alive.” said a voice in
the dark shadow of the corner of the room. Christian
reached for his sword and found that it wasn’t there.
Christian immediately looked around for something
else he could use as a weapon. “You won’t find
anything here. Anything of use that is.”
“What do you want?” asked Christian.
“Easy. North of Yarzon city in the frozen
snow fields lies this tower in actuality. I want you to
bring your diamond pendant to the top room. As
soon as I have the pendant, she will go free.”
“You promise?”
“I always keep my word.”
“Who are you?”
The woman walked out of the shadow and
into the light wearing dark armor. “Ultemeir, but
trust me, names are of no concern here. Now bring
me the pendant or I will kill her. I don’t think you
want that do you?”
Christian started to run after her before he
felt an arm grab his side.
* * *

The War of Fate

- 65 -

“Relax, buddy. It was just a bad dream.”
said Kamo as Christian snapped back to reality. He
began thinking about the dream, about how he saw
Alice lying there, and if it was real or not.
Everybody was packing up and Christian decided to
do the same. The last thing put into his bag was the
journal of his travels that he had made an entry
during their stay.
The tunnels through the caves seemed to get
wider as they advanced through the mine toward
Yakumi. Christian was still pondering the dream
last night and wondered what it meant. Schala
looked over to see Christian holding the pendant
and became her curious self again.
“Who gave that to you?” she asked trying to
sound cheerful.
“Nobody. This is actually something I gave
somebody a while back.”
“A girl I’m taking it. Did you love her?”
“Yeah, a lot to tell the truth. But she died
when Kansas City was attacked.”
Schala stopped talking and just said one
more thing. “I’m sorry.”

- 66 -

The War of Fate

Finally the group made it to what seemed
like a dead end. Michelle made her way to the front
and opened a small console. “Are we ready?
Because when we go through here we’re not
coming back until Kon’s dead. Even then we might
not be able to go home for a while. Is everybody
here willing to continue?”
Everybody just shook their heads as
Michelle input a passcode in the terminal and the
wall slid open and the team quickly rushed inside.
Inside the mine became a temple and
Christian and the rest of the group began to marvel
at the ancient writings on the walls and more.
Michelle stopped them suddenly as the sound of a
Kaiylo chant was heard in the main sanctum.
Christian turned the corner to see Mia standing
around several other soldiers as the chant was
finished and the altar in the front of the sanctum
began to glow green. Christian looked around the
sanctum and didn’t see seats but circles that also
began emitting a green luminescent glow. Above
the altar was an elaborate statue of some type of
large scorpion. He began to wonder if it wasn’t
some sort of deity. Christian stared at the statue

The War of Fate

- 67 -

almost as if it were alive, that there was something
inside of it struggling to break free.
At that moment the altar released a wave of
energy and disappeared. Christain and the group
looked at it and noticed it had an amazingly large
diamond in its center. Mia grabbed the diamond and
stuffed it into a large bag as the soldiers all paid
their last respects to the temple and followed her out
of the door. Christian and the others all hid
themselves around the corner praying they were just
leaving because any other business in the temple
meant they were going to be caught. Luckily the last
soldier left and Christian and everybody else were
able to relax. They both began to move on until they
made it past the sanctum.
In the hallway in front of the sanctum
Christian stopped when he heard a low sounding
noise coming from inside the sanctum. Christian
drew his sword and slowly proceeded into the
sanctum where the noise got louder.
“What is it?” asked Michelle as they entered
after him. Kamo heard something too and drew his
own sword.

- 68 -

The War of Fate

“Get out of here. Let me handle it.” said
Christian as he walked further and saw the scorpion
statue begin to vibrate. Schala began to hesitate and
then turned around to leave as stones started to fall
from the roof of the cave.
“You sure you’re going to be alright?” asked
Kamo as they began to run out.
“Yeah I’m fine. Wait for me at the first
village north you find.” replied Christian. Kamo
nodded and then joined the two girls outside.
Christian left his sword in his right hand and drew a
gun in his left as he started to see green skin, or
armor, or something else break free of the statue as
it began to come alive and release a high pitched
squeal as more stone fell off of it.
Finally the creature broke entirely free of its
stone prison and fell to the earth right in front of
Christian. Christian surveyed the large reptilian’s
green armor that he knew not even his gun could
break wondering if there was a weak spot anywhere.
The scorpion let out a large squeal again and raised
its large claws in a threatening attack stance.
Christian finally noticed that each one of the plates
of armor was bent backward toward the creature’s

The War of Fate

- 69 -

tail. If he could find a way to get his sword or a
bullet between two of the plates he knew he could
probably hurt it and then eventually kill it. Christian
got ready to dodge as the creature opened up its
claws and appeared to begin a descent down on the
small human standing in front of it. Instead, the
claws opened wider and sparks of fire began be
emerge from it as flames came out in a
flamethrower effect at him.
Christian ran away from the flames as he
began to feel the heat of them gaining on him. He
turned just before making it into the hallway
knowing that he would easily become trapped in
there and the largeness of the room made it easy to
maneuver. He made his way by the creature as it
finished its flamethrower attack and then threw his
claws at Christian as he expected earlier. Instead of
dodging he made a daring move and slid right under
the claws as the came down on him and slid all the
way to the creature’s underbelly. He saw a small
opening and took it with his gun. He pulled it out
again and quickly fired right into the creature’s shell.
The bullet missed though and bounced off a plate of

- 70 -

The War of Fate

armor and into the side of one of the claws that
annoyed the creature more than anything else.
Christian knew he didn’t have much time
and quickly aimed and fired again. This time the
bullet made its target and left a small hole in the
creature’s green colored skin. The creature flung
itself into the wall on the side and began to scream
in pain from the gunshot. The creature was
infuriated and turned to face Christian for a second
round.
It worked, thought Christian as he tried to
think of where to find the second hole. The creature
finally opened its eyes to reveal two blood red
spheres staring at him. Christian realized he could
use the creature’s poor eyesight to his advantage
and threw one of his empty bags to the side. The
creature, not realizing the trick, chased after the bag
and Christian easily had a shot into the back end of
the creature. He aimed and fired as the creature
retracted itself into the wall again writhing in pain.
Christian knew it was now severely
wounded and jumped on top of it to deal the
finishing blow. He rolled around trying to dodge the
tail swinging at him and keeping on top of the large

The War of Fate

- 71 -

body. He made his way to the soft area right behind
the head and fired one last shot. The creature began
to writhe again as he was tossed off and the
creature’s movements became more spastic and
more desperate.
The creature turned around and swung its
tail at Christian in a complete circle as he jumped
over it and swung his sword cutting off the tail.
Christian took advantage of the creature’s screams
in pain and jumped back on top of it as he stuck his
sword in the spot behind the creature’s head one last
time. The creature gave one last scream before
finally falling to the ground. Christian looked at the
guardian he had just slain and wiped some sweat off
of his forehead. The creature was dead, but where
was the treasure the guardian was supposed to be
guarding?

- 72 -

The War of Fate

Chapter VI
Michelle, Kamo, and Schala all were
looking at a map of Yakumi at the inn they stayed
in the night before. Christian had come in late that
night exhausted from his fight with the guardian in
the mine.
“Look,” said Schala as she pointed to a spot
on the map when they realized where they were.
“We’re only a few hours away from Yarzon.”
“Which means it’s almost over already.”
replied Kamo as he saw pictures of Kon on the
opposite wall and some sort of Yakumian writing
under it.
“No it’s not.” said Christian as he came
downstairs from the room.
“What do you mean?”
“I... I found Alice.” said Christian as he
turned to the map. “There’s a small mountain range
on the north side of Yarzon. According to what I
believe then there should be a tower about here.” he
pointed to a point on the highlighted section of the
map. Kamo looked down and saw a note saying that

The War of Fate

- 73 -

highlighted sections should be avoided. “That’s
where they’re keeping Alice. I’m going there before
taking on Kon.”
Christian began to leave when Michelle
stopped him. “Do you realize what you’re doing?
We’re here on a mission. We can’t just abandon it
to save some girl!”
Christian drew his sword without thinking.
“I’m going. If you guys, if you don’t want to then
stay here and I’ll be back later; but I am going to
find her.” Michelle walked away as Schala and
Kamo both stared at him. Finally without saying a
word Christian grabbed his sack and left the room.
Christian turned around and faced the gates
of town as he made it out. He knew it was ten times
more dangerous to go alone and he should probably
wait for after Kon was killed and then come back
here to save Alice; but he didn’t know how long
that woman was going to wait for that answer to
come to him. He stopped to think, and quickly
decided that one of the few people he still cared
about was still alive, and he knew he was going to
save them no matter what the cost or risk. He turned
and started walking north as Yarzon castle already

- 74 -

The War of Fate

could be seen in the distance. He continued on his
path with two thoughts going through his mind:
why the pendant was so important and how he was
going to get past the castle undetected.
* * *
Back at the inn Michelle came downstairs as
Schala and Kamo were playing a traveler’s game
with marbles left on one of the lobby tables.
“Get up and get ready to leave.” called
Michelle to the two. “There’s somewhere we need
to go.” Michelle grabbed their bags and tossed them
to their respective owners.
“Where are we going?” asked Schala in a
calm manner.
“To the US embassy in Yarzon.
Commander’s waiting there and I need to brief him
on a few things.”
Kamo and Schala both tried to respond. If
she told Commander about Christian disobeying
Michelle’s orders and going to find Alice, they
would all be on the next trip home. However, if that

The War of Fate

- 75 -

happened it may save Christian some beatings or
even his life if he’s captured by Yakumian forces.
* * *
There was a trail leading up into the
mountains where the snowfield began as Christian
made his way through he could constantly feel a
drop in temperature as he moved further into the icy
valley. Christian wrapped his jacket around him
tighter as he continued his path into the mountains.
Inside the valley, it seemed like a maze for
Christian to make it through. He found a sign that
seemed to point his way toward the tower, but ice
had covered the entire sign and what he could read
was Yakumian. After trying to decipher the
Yakumian writing he gave up and pressed onward
in the direction the sign was pointing.
The wind picked up and it became even
colder as a breeze of flurried snow came falling
from the darkened sky. Christian hurried through to
find the tower before nightfall because he knew that
if he couldn’t find shelter before nightfall, he was
dead for sure. The snow soon picked up as if

- 76 -

The War of Fate

somebody was trying to stop his progress, and the
view he could see became shorter and shorter before
the horizon he saw in the distance was just a faint
glow.
He saw a cave up ahead and headed for it.
Christian kept moving trying to escape the cold that
was encroaching on him. He grabbed his heart and
felt it begin to move slower. He was losing body
heat, and fast. If the shelter was not reached and a
fire was not made soon enough, then he would be
buried under the now even faster snowfall that came
around.
Christian saw the cave get closer before it
seemed to just magically disappear. He wondered if
it was a snow mirage caused by that sorceress that
summoned him here. He couldn’t think for too long
because soon five goblins all jumped out of the
snow wearing the fur of some kind of white animal
he couldn’t recognize. The goblins all pulled out
some jagged and sharp looking knives as they
continued their approach toward Christian.
“I’m really not looking to fight,” said
Christian at the approaching goblin. “I actually
could use your help in getting to the tower that’s

The War of Fate

- 77 -

around here.” The goblins just made a few eerie
grunts and continued their approach. One finally
raised its knife and Christian realized he had no
choice. He drew his own sword and swung it around
a few times. After about ten seconds he put the
sword back in the sheath and all of the goblins fell
to the ground dead.
“I don’t have any more time for this.” said
Christian as he quickly moved back down the
mountain.
* * *
At the main gates to Yarzon Castle,
Michelle approached both guards that were standing
in front of the gate. The guard on the left stopped
her.
“Tu mai sai duemo?” asked the guard in
Yakumian. Kamo and Schala were both confused at
the words since neither one of them spoke
Yakumian and became worried Michelle’s cover
might have been blown.
“Wese cara er vew er laisiko, io cenmponas
weg mare les ilsento als o stroma.” replied Michelle

- 78 -

The War of Fate

in the same language. The guard said nothing,
nodded to his partner, and the partner opened the
gate.
Inside the town Schala became amazed at
the actual size of the town, remarkable as it was to
only have been built a few years ago. All of the
buildings looked new, and there seemed to be no
sign of crime or any kind of slums in the streets at
all.
However, first glances were deceiving. Just
then a small boy came running out from behind a
building, holding some kind of bag. Three soldiers
appeared from nowhere and immediately killed the
boy. Schala and Kamo both stared in disbelief at the
sight of the murder of just a small kid. What
shocked Kamo, however, was the armor the soldiers
were wearing. Kamo had grown up in the
underground and had even been interested in the
Yakumian army before Kon took over, but these
soldiers were not Yakumian troops, they seemed to
be something else.
“We should probably hurry.” said Michelle
to Kamo and Schala. “Yakumians tend to not react
nicely around Americans exploring their own

The War of Fate

- 79 -

territory.” Kamo agreed and both followed Michelle
to the side of the street. In the corner of town was a
building that Michelle seemed to be heading toward.
“I thought you’d said there was an embassy
here?” said Schala as they continued walking.
“Well, not a legal one, if you want to put it
that way. Commander prefers to call it a ‘temporary
spy operation’.” replied Michelle. Kamo was still
wondering what the soldiers actually were. The
green, glowing eyes he saw underneath their
helmets seemed to suggest some type of creature
that wasn’t human. He tried to shake the thought out
of his head before rejoining the girls into a small
building in the corner of the town, tucked between
two walls.
* * *
Back on the mountain Christian was tired,
hungry, and freezing. The mountains had proven
treacherous and Christian was not sure how much
longer he could hold out. Finally he knelt to the
ground. He leaned against a hard surface he found
behind him. He felt behind him. It was stone, but

- 80 -

The War of Fate

not like the other stone in the mountain. It was flat
and somewhat polished. Christian gathered some of
his energy and looked at the colossal structure in
front of him. He looked up and could not even tell
where the tower ended. This was the tower he was
looking for, and inside he knew he would find more
than just Alice. He snuck around the back where
there was no path and rested in an alcove for the
battle he knew waited inside.

The War of Fate

- 81 -

- 82 -

The War of Fate

Chapter VII
By the time Christian had regained his
strength, night had fallen on the snowy
mountainside. Christian gathered his belongings and
headed into the large white tower. He swore to
himself he couldn’t hear anybody leaving or going
into the tower while he was recovering, but the way
things had been in the world the last several months
Christian wasn’t about to take any chances about
what was considered impossible.
Inside the tower was a large carving on the
floor in the shape of some large dragon-looking
creature. Christian walked inside and saw the inside
bricks were just as white as the outside of the tower.
The ceiling was about fifty feet above him so
Christian knew that he would be going up, and from
the shape of the tower, a long way up. Christian
decided to quit looking at the tower and move
toward the small alcove containing some stairs
upward. When Christian entered the alcove he
seemed to be pushed back by somebody he couldn’t
quite see at the time.

The War of Fate

- 83 -

Christian stumbled to his feet and looked
back at the entrance to the alcove. He drew his
sword when he noticed it was the one person he was
waiting for his revenge on.
“Been a long time, Mia.” said Christian as
he walked toward the center of the room.
* * *
Michelle took Schala and Kamo down a
flight of stairs which led into an underground base
for the Americans to spy on the inside of the
Yakumian Empire. Once at the bottom of the
staircase Michelle led the two through a seeming
labyrinth of green dots and maps and other hightech equipment. Finally they reached the end where
Michelle ushered Schala and Kamo into a small
office. Inside was Commander, already waiting for
the two.
“We have a bit of a problem.” said Michelle
as she entered the room.
“I know. I got a report saying that the kid
left the group and headed for the mountains toward
that weird tower, which has of course once again

- 84 -

The War of Fate

disappeared on us.” replied Commander as he stood
up and looked at a monitor on the other end of the
room above the doorway.
“So, what are we going to do about it?”
asked Kamo.
“Nothing,” continued Commander, “All we
can do is sit here and wait until we either find the
body of your friend or he returns. It may sound
cruel, but I won’t risk giving away our presence
here just for some kid who feels he has to save the
world.”
“That’s not good enough! Now there’s a
reason why they wanted Christian alone and I don’t
think we want to see what will happen if they get
him! I’m rescuing him. Anybody else can just stay
here.” shouted Kamo. Kamo was enraged and
stormed out of the building.
Inside of the strategic room, Schala stopped
Kamo.
“Look,” she said. “I know you want to
rescue your friend, but you need to understand that
Christian is on his own out there. We don’t know
what will happen if he’s caught but I don’t think we

The War of Fate

- 85 -

can let anybody else be captured. Please try to
understand, Kamo.”
“Don’t worry. I’m a Yakumian, remember?
Nobody’s going to notice me.” said Kamo as he left
the room.
Outside of the building, Kamo casually
walked down the street, trying to blend in. When he
made it to the entrance, however, he found himself
surrounded by seven Yakumian soldiers. He didn’t
want to give away his position as an American, so
he allowed the soldier to wrap the rope around his
wrist and was dragged off toward the castle.
* * *
Christian and Mia didn’t have any other
words for each other. Both of them ran toward each
other and clashed their swords. Mia seemed to be
giving Christian a hard time, but Christian easily
fought back showing no signs of wearing down.
Their swords continued to clash for several minutes
before Mia knocked Christian back several feet.
Christian was unable to get to his feet before
Mia pressed her blade against Christian’s chin.

- 86 -

The War of Fate

“You don’t know how many years I’ve
dreamt of this moment.” said Mia confidently.
Christian quickly grabbed his sword back and cut
Mia in the leg, sending her back holding the wound.
“Keep dreaming.” said Christian as he
jumped back to his feet and back into the battle.
Mia answered back within a few seconds
and cut Christian across the cheek. Christian
jumped toward Mia, who fell to the ground when all
of the torches in the building suddenly went out.
Christian and Mia both stood up and looked at the
alcove to see the black-dressed Ultemeir standing in
the doorway.
“That is enough. Mia, bring the boy here. I
need to show him something.” spoke Ultemeir as
she began to walk up the stairs. Christian thought
about using the darkness to kill Mia, but shrugged
off the thought and followed the traitor up the stairs.
Christian walked up several flights of stairs
before finally reaching the top. When he emerged in
the doorway into a similar round area like the
ground floor, Christian saw the same alter holding
Alice as was in his dream. Ultemeir was standing at
the alternate end of the alter.

The War of Fate

- 87 -

“Did you bring the pendant?” asked
Ultemeir. Christian reluctantly pulled off the
pendant from around his neck and handed it to the
woman. Ultemeir laughed in a dark way and smiled
at Christian.
“All right. I kept my end of the bargain, and
now you need to keep yours. Give back Alice.” said
Christian seriously. He had enough of the tricks
Ultemeir pulled on him and was in no mood for
anything else.
“Of course,” said Ultemeir, “I said you two
would see each other again, but I never said where.
I think at both of your executions should be a well
enough time for you two to say goodbye.” Ultemeir
waved her hand and several Yakumian soldiers ran
into the room. Christian was quickly tied up and
taken to Yarzon castle.
“At last. The final diamond is mine. Now
everything on Earth shall witness the power of the
Final Evolution.” laughed Ultemeir as she stared at
the glistening diamond in the pendant.

- 88 -

The War of Fate

Chapter VIII
Christian woke up in a damp cell in the
dungeon of Yarzon Castle. He felt a few drops of
water fall on him as he looked up at the cracked
ceiling. He saw no water coming from the ceiling,
only his hands tied to a bar above him. To his sides
he could see both Kamo and Alice tied up the same
way he was. Christian tried to wriggle himself free
of the ropes, but they were too tight to get out of.
He finally gave up and stopped struggling.
The door in front of him opened and in
walked the person responsible for everything that
had happened, Kon.
“I guess this is the little kid who’s been
giving my soldiers a rough time,” said Kon as he
entered the room and stood right in front of
Christian. “You really thought I wouldn’t find you
on my own territory?”
Christian looked Kon straight in the eye.
“This was never your land. There was a group here
centuries before you Yakumians ever set foot on
this land.”

The War of Fate

- 89 -

Kon became angry and punched Christian in
the stomach. By this time Kamo and Alice had
woken up and were watching what was going on.
“Prepare for public executions. We’ll hold
them at dawn.” said Kon as he left the room with
two guards. Christian just drooped his head in
despair at the inevitable.
“Christian,” said Alice. “Do you think you
can find us a way out of here?”
“I’m... I’m sorry, everybody.” said Christian,
almost to the verge of tears.
“For what?”
“I thought I could do it. I thought I could
save everybody and get my revenge, but I guess I’m
still just a kid after all. I should’ve just stayed in the
ruins of Kansas City and waited for the government
to react instead of coming here.”
Kamo gave Christian a stern look. “Oh,
come on! You can’t tell me that we came all the
way here to give up now! Look, Christian. You’ve
led us here and now you’re about ready to go home.
This isn’t you. Now, I say we find a way out of here,
go talk to Commander, and take on Kon before he

- 90 -

The War of Fate

has a chance to attack the States again. You with me
Christian?”
Christian finally cheered up. “You... You’re
right. This wasn’t about me. It’s about my country.
All right. Let’s get out of here.”
Alice looked at Christian. “That’s what I
was expecting!”
Christian continued to think of a plan before
the door bust open and Commander, accompanied
by Schala and Michelle, walked in.
“What are you doing here?” asked Kamo as
they began to untie the three.
“I wanted to tell you something, Kamo. You
were right. We should protect all citizens of our
country,” said Commander. Christian was untied
last and Commander handed him his sword. “I think
you’ll need this.” continued Commander as
Christian once again tied the sheath to his belt.
Christian drew his sword and looked at the
blade. “Everybody,” he said, “New plan. We head
on up to the throne room and give Kon a little
parting gift!” Kamo and the rest of the group
nodded as they headed out of the room into the
dungeon hall. Inside the hall the first group of

The War of Fate

- 91 -

guards came after them and Christian almost
immediately defeated them. After the battle,
Christian leaned down and grabbed two swords,
handing them to Kamo and Commander.
“We should split up, in case we meet any
more troops.” said Commander as they arrived at
the stairs going up. The rest of the group agreed,
and the boys split up heading down one side of the
hall while the girls went down the other end.
Christian, Kamo, and Commander met the
most troops going upstairs as they fought their way
to the throne room. However, more soldiers kept
coming, and Christian had no idea how so many
soldiers from the Yakumian army were able to keep
coming into the main hallway. Finally, Kamo got an
idea.
“Just keep them here for a second. I’ll be
right back!” said Kamo as he left for the door in the
corner of the room.
“I sure hope your friend knows what he’s
doing.” said Commander as he and Christian
continued to fight off Yakumian troops.
* * *

- 92 -

The War of Fate

Kon came down the back staircase into the
throne room from his bedroom infuriated. As he sat
down to begin giving orders to his guards, Ultemeir
appeared out of nowhere from behind a pillar in the
corner of the room.
“You should have killed the kid when you
had the chance.” said Ultemeir in a dark tone as she
advanced toward the throne.
“Your prophecy is what got me this far.
Now, Tell me how it’s going to end!” demanded
Kon harshly as he gave Ultemeir an evil glare.
“This was none of my fault. Your ambition
gave way to common sense. In truth, you paved the
road for revenge. If you hadn’t attacked Kansas
City, the boy wouldn’t be on his way into this room
right now.”
At that moment the sky turned dark and the
sounds of thunder were heard outside of the castle.
“What have you done, witch!” screamed the
infuriated emperor as more thunder began to roar
outside the window.
“It has begun. Soon the Destinos shall be
released from their seven-billion year old prison and

The War of Fate

- 93 -

shall once again wage the civil war that led to their
destruction. In the end, all that shall be standing is
me! And after I have the power to control Evolvia, I
shall become the empress of the universe!”
Ultemeir began to laugh hysterically as Mia
came down from the back stairway also.
“But,” said Mia as she walked toward
Ultemeir, scared from the speech Ultemeir had just
given, “you said I would be spared also when the
Destinos were released.”
“Oh, I lied.” laughed Ultemeir as she began
to walk out.
“You mean… I betrayed my friends and my
adopted family for a lie!” screamed Mia. Mia drew
her sword and lunged at Ultemeir. Ultemeir raised
her hand and used her magic to stop Mia dead in her
tracks.
“Mia, I never got to thank you for how
helpful you’ve been.” said Ultemeir as she flung
Mia through the wall, leaving only a small pile of
stone where she had flown out of. “I guess that’s
one pest out of the way.” She then turned to face
Kon again. “Oh, by the way. Before Christian kills
you, tell him I’ll be waiting at the ritual tower at the

- 94 -

The War of Fate

northwest corner of this castle.” Ultemeir turned
around and began to walk out of the tower. Kon
motioned to his guards and they tried to block her
from exiting. She flung them out the same hole she
threw Mia out of and left the room.
Kon put his hand over his mouth and
watched the door to the main hallway. For one of
the first times in his life he could actually feel fear.

The War of Fate

- 95 -

- 96 -

The War of Fate

Chapter IX
As Christian and Commander continued to
fight the hordes of Yakumian soldiers coming
toward them, Kamo ran his way through the
underground tunnel through where the soldiers were
seemingly spawning from. Kamo slashed his way
through the soldiers rushing through the tunnels
until he found a large door.
Kamo defeated the two guards and walked
through the door into a large underground dome
structure. Kamo looked in amazement wondering
how the Yakumians could build such a large
structure underneath the castle. Kamo forgot his
trance at the structure and moved to the large
machine at the center.
“Hm,” said Kamo to himself. “Just when
you thought you’d found all the dirt Kon was hiding,
you find Kon violating one of Yakumi’s most
sacred rules. What’s next, guards run out here with
rifles?”
At that moment five Yakumian soldiers, all
carrying old-fashioned rifles, appeared out of the

The War of Fate

- 97 -

shadows and surrounded Kamo. “That just figures.”
said Kamo as the guards moved closer to him. As
the guards got closer Kamo looked into their eyes
and saw that faintish green luminescent glow in
them as he saw in the soldiers in the city. He then
turned to the large machine. Kamo thought about
the enclosing soldiers and then pulled out a typical
American fragmentation grenade.
“Gift from the States!” shouted Kamo as he
threw the grenade toward the large machine. The
grenade exploded and although it didn’t destroy the
machine altogether, it did manage to make the
machine short circuit and stop producing the
soldiers. The four soldiers around Kamo instantly
dissipated into thin air like ghosts. Kamo looked
around for a second. “That… was really, really
weird.” said Kamo as he ran upstairs to help
Christian and Commander.
In the main hallway of the castle, Christian
and Commander stared in shock as the soldiers that
were surrounding them dissipated into the air. Their
way was now clear and they could head into the
throne room. Commander stopped Christian before
he opened the door.

- 98 -

The War of Fate

“Wait,” said Commander, “I should get back
to the base, tell them what’s going on. You go on
and finish Kon. I’m rooting for you, kid.” Christian
nodded and he and Commander walked in different
directions.
* * *
The woman in the white robe walked into a
small central chamber in an unknown area. She
walked into the center of the area that a large
horseshoe-shaped table encircled and stared at the
six people wearing brown cloaks sitting at the other
end of the table.
“So, I see that Ultemeir has reawakened the
Destinos.” said a man’s voice from one of the men
in the brown cloaks.
“Yes,” said the woman. “Ultemeir knows
Kon’s rule will not last past this night so I see she is
making other plans.”
“Other plans?” said another voice from the
group of people in brown cloaks.
“Ultemeir is planning on something more
powerful, and more deadly, than the Destinos. I

The War of Fate

- 99 -

think she’s planning on using the boy to reawaken
the one thing we’ve feared for centuries. We knew
the time when ‘he’ would return to finish the
humans was coming, but we had no idea that if the
boy gets his revenge tonight, his reawakening will
be only a couple of years off, instead of a couple
centuries like we had predicted.”
A murmur of voices rose into the group and
then another man looked replied.
“However, what happens if the boy fails to
stop Kon and Ultemeir?” said the cloaked man.
“Then Ultemeir will use the Destinos to
destroy Earth and build her own empire.”
“So, you’re saying that either outcome of
this battle will result in the destruction of the
universe either sooner or later.”
“I’m afraid we’ve found ourselves in a loselose situation.” The woman looked up at a ceiling
that seemed to blend in with the dark walls. She
knew that one way or another, things were going to
change tonight.
* * *

- 100 -

The War of Fate

Ultemeir was waiting at the top of the ritual
tower in a ceremonial room with six pedestals
around a raised platform in the center. She looked
outside in delight as the sky became darker and an
even darker cloud began to hang over the castle.
She had chosen this spot to be the site of the revival
of the Destinos. This way she could destroy
everybody who stood a chance to stop her before
she began her sweep across the planet. Only a
couple of hours remained until the revival.
Ultemeir’s self-gloating to herself was short
lived when Alice burst through the door to the ritual
room.
“So,” said Alice, “You’re the one who
captured me and used me for bait. Time for a little
payback.” Alice walked forward and stood on the
raised platform. Ultemeir smiled and stood on the
platform facing Alice. “You like deals. Let’s see
who’s the better woman. No magic, no weapons.
Just fists. Deal?”
“You haven’t got a chance.” said Ultemeir.
Ultemeir drew her sword and threw it to the side of
the room. She then removed the skirt of her black

The War of Fate

- 101 -

dress to reveal a type of loose pants. “Well, let’s
begin.”
Ultemeir ran forward and started to throw
several punches toward Alice. Alice blocked all of
them and counterattacked with a few punches of her
own. Alice and Ultemeir continued to fight while
they circled the platform. Ultemeir gave up on her
fists and spun around kicking Alice square in the
stomach. Alice was sent flying back and landed on
her back on the platform, barely missing landing on
one of the podiums holding a diamond.
Alice quickly jumped back to her feet and
countered Ultemeir with a few more punches as
Ultemeir fought back fiercely.
A few minutes later, lightning struck the
roof. The roof was sent plummeting toward the
ground in flames and Ultemeir and Alice were left
under a black sky.
“It’s almost time,” said Ultemeir as she
walked to the dead center of the platform. The six
diamonds around her began to glow and Ultemeir
looked up at the sky. “Humans, your existence is
about to end.” Ultemeir chuckled as Alice looked
around for some way to stop her.

- 102 -

The War of Fate

A few feet above where the roof used to be,
a large portal of some sort began to open up. Alice
stood in shock as several dragon-type creatures flew
out of the portal and began to circle the castle.
Ultemeir continued to laugh as more dragons began
to flow out of the portal.
Michelle and Schala had now made it up to
the top of the tower as the Destinos were emerging
from the portal. Schala looked around and noticed
the glowing diamonds around the platform.
“Alice!” said Schala. “She’s controlling
them through the diamonds! Maybe if we destroyed
one of them…” Schala couldn’t finish her sentence
before Ultemeir sent a bolt of magic flying right
into her. Schala lied on the floor injured while
Ultemeir continued to call even more Destinos.
Michelle wasn’t about to waste any more
time. She grabbed one of the diamonds closest to
her. The diamond seemed to be resisting, and was
very hot to touch. Michelle ignored and looked for a
place to toss it. She noticed a window to her right as
Ultemeir finally noticed that a diamond was missing.
Ultemeir tried to stop Michelle but couldn’t as the
diamond went flying out the window and fell to the

The War of Fate

- 103 -

ground below, shattering after impact. Ultemeir
screamed in anger and the portal began to violently
dissolve.
A Destino then landed on the platform
behind Ultemeir and Alice, Schala, and Michelle all
looked in shock as the Destino stared at them for a
few seconds.
“What exactly do you think you can do? The
Destinos are already here! This world is mine!” said
Ultemeir.
Alice just pointed at her as she turned
around to see the large, gray-scaled dragon looking
straight at her. The three girls watched as the
Destino grabbed Ultemeir and began to fly off with
her. Ultemeir’s pendant fell to the ground as the
Destino carried her off into the portal.
“Well,” said Schala, holding her wound.
“That’s one problem out of the way.” The portal
had dissolved but several Destinos were still
circling the castle. The girls looked out the window
facing the castle and saw on the roof Christian
standing face to face with Kon.

- 104 -

The War of Fate

Chapter X
Christian burst into the throne room as Kon
drew his sword. He turned to the side noticed a
large hole in the wall and then continued to walk
toward the emperor. As Christian took a few more
steps Kon ran to a side door and Christian followed
him through the door and up the stairs.
In the main hallway Kamo walked back in to
see no soldiers or Christian and Commander
anywhere. Kamo walked toward the center when he
heard a voice coming from one of the dungeons
downstairs. He thought for a second and then
decided to go to the dungeon.
Christian followed Kon up a couple of
flights of stairs before emerging on the roof. He
could see the taller towers around him, but
otherwise all that could be seen is the stretch of
mountains in one direction, the plains in another,
and plains leading to the beginning of the desert in
another.
Kon ran to the edge of the roof and looked
down. Anybody who fell from this height was

The War of Fate

- 105 -

automatically considered dead, but Ultemeir
prophesized that Christian would win this fight.
Kon seemed to believe there was no way out of this
fight. Kon turned to face Christian.
Kon and Christian were only a few feet
away from each other. Kon tried to speak but he
couldn’t as Christian had been waiting for this day
for months now. Christian immediately began to
lunge at Kon. Kon blocked the attacks.
Kamo continued to walk through the dark
tunnels of the dungeon as he made it to the cell he
heard the voice from. Kamo looked inside the damp
cell and then opened it. He checked for traps and
then walked toward the body he saw.
It was a young girl, probably not much older
than he was. He stared to check if there was any
way to identify her and found only one thing; a
Yakumian royal pendant.
“This girl’s a member of royalty? But, not
even Kon would stoop that low, would he?” said
Kamo as he picked the girl up and carried her
outside.
Back on the roof, Christian and Kon fought
almost equally. Christian jumped around and

- 106 -

The War of Fate

continued to surprise Kon with his speed. Kon
continued to counterattack with amazing agility.
Kon managed to scrape Christian in the leg, but
Christian then spun around and cut Kon across his
back.
After one high attack Kon sent at Christian,
Christian blocked the attack and the swords clashed
and remained tangled as Kon and Christian moved
closer to each other.
“Why are you even fighting, kid?” asked
Kon.
Christian quickly replied, “Millions of lives
were lost to your invasion. You made one mistake
though. You forgot to kill me!” Christian kicked
Kon back and Kon fell to the floor of the roof. Kon
quickly jumped back to his feet. The next several
attacks seemed more of desperation than an actual
attempt at winning.
Kon then made a low swing to Christian’s
legs. Christian jumped over the blade and used the
side of his own sword to slap Kon across the face.
Kon went flying to the other side of the roof. He
then jumped up again and rushed toward Christian
with even more a speed that suggested desperation.

The War of Fate

- 107 -

In the cell, the girl had woken up as Kamo
was taking care of her. Kamo had finally realized
she had to be a member of the royal family. Her
tattered violet robes she was wearing and the
pendant all but guaranteed it. Even the dirt on her
face and in her long, flowing blue hair wasn’t
enough to hide the royalty in her eyes. Kamo stood
up as she began to wake up.
“W… Who are you? Another guard?” asked
the girl.
“No, I’m actually part of the rebellion
against Kon. Why exactly are you here?” replied
Kamo.
“My name is… Miion. Princess Miion of the
Yakumian Empire. Daughter to the rightful emperor
of Yakumi, Matumo. You see, after the invasion of
Japan, the three generals of the Yakumi army
fought over how the new government should be run.
My father was chosen as the first leader of whatever
government was set up. My father wanted an
empire, while Kon wanted a dictatorship, which is
of course what our government technically is right
now, and the third, Layo, wanted a republic. Layo
was the first to be killed by Kon’s assassins. He had

- 108 -

The War of Fate

a daughter named Kasumi, but nobody exactly
knows where she is right now. My father was the
second targeted by Kon. After my father’s “illness”
killed him, Kon assumed rule, and as you’ve seen
from the town life has been a living nightmare since
then. It only took a few months for him to declare
me suspicious of plotting a rebellion and I was
thrown in here.”
It took a couple of minutes for Kamo to
fully absorb what exactly happened. He knew the
struggle to choose a leader was difficult, but had no
idea Kon was pulling the strings to make himself
leader.
“We should get you out of here before the
guards come back.” said Kamo.
“No, you don’t understand,” replied Miion.
“If Kon finds out I’m missing…”
Kamo interrupted her. “I don’t think Kon’s
going to have any say in this country much longer. I
should probably take you to see the fight.” Kamo
ran out of the room and Miion instantly followed
him.
Kon and Christian’s swords clashed once
again as a large clap of thunder rolled over their

The War of Fate

- 109 -

heads. Christian and Kon quickly dodged each
other’s attacks as a heavy rain began to fall. The
roof almost automatically became slippery and
Christian began to lose his footing on the wet
surface.
Kon used this to his advantage and knocked
Christian’s sword out of his hand. He then kicked
Christian into the ground and Christian was now
lying on the floor, defenseless. Kon kicked him in
the stomach.
“Get up.” said Kon as Christian rose to his
knees. “I can’t believe she told me to be afraid of
you. After all this, you only came this way to die.
Well, I guess I can do that.” Kon raised his sword in
alignment with Christian’s neck. Kon then quickly
lifted his blade into the air and came down on
Christian at an amazingly fast speed.
Christian then managed to dodge the blade
stroke and grabbed both of Kon’s wrists. Christian
squeezed tighter and Kon managed to drop his
sword. For a brief moment, both Christian and Kon
glared each other in the eyes.
“You never realized something. Some things
are worth fighting for.” said Christian. Christian

- 110 -

The War of Fate

then instantly spun around and kicked Kon square
in the chest. Kon slipped on the wet tile and went
falling off the edge of the castle.
The rain almost instantly let up. Christian
walked to the end of the roof and looked down to
see Kon’ lifeless body on the ground in front of the
main gate to Yarzon Castle. He instantly dropped
to his knees and breathed a heavy sigh of relief.
Kon was dead. His revenge had at last been
completed. He looked up at the largest tower and
saw the three girls, Michelle, Schala, and of course
Alice, screaming and celebrating Kon’s defeat.
The rain stopped and the portal reopened
allowing the Destinos to return to their own realm
before the rift between the two worlds was sealed
forever. Only one Destino stayed, and it landed in
front of Christian. Christian stood at the edge of the
building as the Destino got closer to him.
The Destino then disintegrated into a yellow
light. Christian became confused at what was going
on, but glad it wasn’t something worse. The yellow
light then flew right into Christian’s body. A surge
of power began to flow through him, and Christian
had no idea what exactly happened, but he seemed

The War of Fate

- 111 -

to be safe and in one piece. The black clouds parted
and sunlight once again lighted the land over the
city of Yarzon. The first rays of light that shined
down landed right over Christian.

- 112 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XI
A week had passed since Kon’s defeat.
Miion had assumed rule of Yakumi, and Christian
and the rest of the group were just happy to be able
to sleep in peace again.
Miion had built a balcony overlooking the
city of Yarzon and Commander, Schala, Michelle,
Kamo, Alice and Christian were all standing in
front of the gates to Yarzon Castle.
“We are gathered here this morning,” said
Miion, “to honor these six heroes who defeated the
tyrant Kon, saved the world from an unspeakable
evil, and in the end averted a war between the
Yakumi Empire and the United States of America.
From now on, these heroes shall be granted
unrestricted travel throughout the Yakumi Empire,
and are under the protection of my personal
generals while they remain in Yakumi territory.”
Alice looked up and saw the generals. One,
a small, but heavy man with a black beard and
semi-wrinkled skin, was standing to the left of
Miion. To her right was a younger woman, with

The War of Fate

- 113 -

short-cut blue hair and a sinister look behind her
beauty. Alice was sure they would be running into
those two soon.
Miion continued the celebration throughout
the night and Christian and the others left for home
in the morning. While surveying the damage caused
by the final battle, Miion found a small pendant.
When she picked it up, several images began to
swirl through her head. She quickly gained
knowledge about the Destinos, Evolvia, the Final
Evolution, and all the events that led up to this point.
Miion quickly began to be corrupted by this new
wealth of knowledge and a dark smile fell across
her face. She knew then that Yakumi hadn’t seen
the darkest of its days yet.
* * *
Christian and Alice stood on a cliff
overlooking the slow rebuilding of Kansas City. He
had spent the entire afternoon after their arrival
home telling her of the event that transpired after
the attacks leading to her rescue.

- 114 -

The War of Fate

“It was a long journey, but… it’s over,
right?” asked Alice.
“Yeah, it’s over.” replied Christian as he
leaned over and kissed Alice. Christian and Alice
continued to kiss as the sun set over the horizon of
Kansas City.
* * *
In the distant plains, out of sight from
Christian and Alice, stood the woman with the
blonde hair, who was watching Christian, waiting
for the right time to tell him of what was about to
happen.
“So,” she said to herself, “he thinks that by
getting his revenge he can just go home happy.
Even he should know that revenge, even saving the
world, has consequences. Enjoy your revenge,
Christian. Enjoy your time of peace. While it lasts.”
The woman then walked away into the emptiness of
the plains, waiting for the day the next story would
begin.

The War of Fate

- 115 -

- 116 -

The War of Fate

Part II:
Serenade of Destruction

The War of Fate

- 117 -

- 118 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XII
Two years had passed since the defeat of
Kon in Yarzon Castle. The Yakumi Empire had
slowly begun to walk the road to recovery. Princess
Miion had almost immediately begun to reinstate
the freedoms Kon took away during his rule. It
seemed that the entire world once again rested in
peace, but peace was only skin deep.
The pendant Miion found after the final
battle had filled her head with several thoughts,
most of which were about the Destinos and several
other things Ultemeir had used to nearly take over
the universe. The thought that remained in her head
was that if Ultemeir was able to use magic and
conquer the universe, than so could Miion. She
would have to find a quieter way to do so, however,
because if Christian found out about it, he was sure
to stop her as well.
The young princess’ thoughts were
disturbed by one of Yakumi’s top generals.
“Your highness, I’ve received a report about
the Plainswalkers from the guards outside the gate.

The War of Fate

- 119 -

These creatures that have been attacking our
country seem to be growing. What are your
orders?” asked the female general, Kristie.
Out of the top military in the Yakumian
army, Kristie was known as one of the most
decorated soldiers, if not also one of the most brutal.
In fact, she was one of the few veterans of the
invasion of the United States left in government
service. Even though Miion had given strict orders
to honor all American tourists, Kristie had other
plans, plans that would, like Kon, bring the war to
American soil. In fact, Kristie was renowned with
such a warmongering and brutal reputation, rumors
were always flying about her own soldiers
considering abandoning her if it wasn’t for their
own safety to stay in the army.
“Wait a few days,” said Miion, staring
obsessively at her pendant. “We’ll track the
monsters’ growth, and then, you and the army will
take care of them.”
Kristie was in shock. Usually Miion would
turn down any request for military action, even if
they were monsters. Kristie decided not to say
anything and left the princess’ room.

- 120 -

The War of Fate

Miion forgot everything that Kristie said.
She continued to stare at the pendant and plan her
strategy for universal domination. Since one of the
diamonds was destroyed Ultemeir’s plan was no
good. She decided to wait for this ‘Final Evolution’
to take place and then would make up her mind
about what to do.
* * *
It was a cold night in Kansas City as the
usual problems with reconstruction had begun to
occur. Many of the buildings and stores had not
been renovated or even occupied since the
destruction which made these stores open to looters.
Two robbers came running down an alley
way between two decrepit buildings. The police
cars that had been following them stopped at the
edge of the alleyway. One of the looters looked
back to see that the police had stopped following
them. On the rooftops there was a masked figure
chasing after them that neither one of the looters
noticed.

The War of Fate

- 121 -

Finally the two looters arrived in a corner
area of the alley where even the flashing lights of
the police car were not visible. One of the looters
turned around to talk to the other.
“Hey, Jim, I think we’re home free.” said
the looter as he turned to find his partner missing.
The looter looked around and drew his knife. He
took a couple of steps back toward the entrance and
at that moment the body of the other looter fell to
the ground in front of him. The looter instantly
became scared and started to run back toward the
police cars.
Just then the masked figure dropped in front
of the looter. The looter was so shocked that he fell
to his feet and looked at the tall figure. The figure
removed its mask to reveal that it was Christian.
Christian had gotten a little stronger and a little
more masculine in the two years since the attacks
on Kansas City, but otherwise Christian still looked
pretty much the same as he did two years prior.
“Y…y…you’re…” muttered the looter as
Christian drew his sword and began to advance
toward him.

- 122 -

The War of Fate

The looter picked up his knife and lunged at
Christian. Christian didn’t say anything and dodged
the attack. He then turned to face the looter who
tried to regain his balance and as the looter
managed to get up and lunge again Christian
stabbed the looter once. After removing his sword
Christian gathered the bodies and made a call to the
police.
After Christian hung up the phone, he swung
around to see a woman in a white robe staring at
him. Christian placed his sword back in its sheath as
he walked toward the blonde-haired woman.
“What do you want?” asked Christian as he
continued to walk forward. The woman closed her
eyes and then looked straight at Christian again.
“I’m here to give you a warning. A dark
power is once again regaining power on an island
nation to the west, and I need your help to fight it.”
said the woman.
“What kind of power are we talking about,
and why am I the one who could stop it?”
“Because she is seeking you. You are the
one who stopped Kon when the empire was at its

The War of Fate

- 123 -

weakest, and now she fears you will repeat it and
stop her before her plans are completed.”
“It can’t be…Miion’s planning something
like Kon?”
“Yes, but this time things are on a much
grander scale than what Kon and Ultemeir planned.
I suggest you immediately leave for Yakumi before
Miion discovers you’re headed this way. When you
reach Yarzon, seek Kasumi, the rebel leader, and
find a way to stop the princess before she can start a
war on an unimaginable scale.”
“I should go get Alice and Kamo first.”
“There’s no time. Every second you waste
here gives the universe a smaller chance of
surviving.”
“Who exactly are you?”
“Just call me Master Destiny.”
Christian tried to answer but in a flash the
woman was gone. He stood in the emptiness of the
alleyway and pondered the events that had just
occurred. For some reason, he decided to take
Master Destiny’s advice and leave Kansas City
once again for the Yakumi Empire.

- 124 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XIII
It took about two weeks for Christian to
reach Los Angeles port from Kansas City. From the
many ships docked in the harbor Christian was
already sure that something was going on. It
appeared that trade was stopped from Yakumi to the
States.
He passed several dockworkers on the way
to the main office on the port. Many of them were
just lounging on the side of the port, and a few had
even taking up their free time to do a little fishing.
As Christian made it to the door into the port
master’s office, he found the door locked and
decided to wait until the port master arrived.
Christian waited until nightfall and still the
port master did not show. He tried several times to
get some rest, but the dockworkers staying
overnight, whether it was fishing, arm wrestling, or
poker, seemed to cause enough noise to forbid
anyone of sleep.
Finally, during one of the early hours of the
morning, Christian finally managed to get some

The War of Fate

- 125 -

sleep. In a few hours, however, he was awakened by
somebody yelling down the side of the pier.
Christian jumped to his feet and looked around as
the sun was beginning to rise on the port. He then
found three large sailors were chasing a small,
young man with straight red hair and glasses. The
kid looked to be slightly older than Christian, but
with the way he was running it was hard to tell
anything about him.
Christian ran after the sailors. The boy had
some speed, but the sailors seemed to be catching
up with him quickly. Several of the sailors enjoying
their free time stopped to watch the chase. Finally,
the red-headed boy backed himself into a corner.
The three sailors began to close in on him as
Christian approached.
There was a parked car on the side of the
pier and Christian used it to propel himself over the
sailors and in front of the boy. Christian drew his
sword and faced the sailors, who were glaring at the
boy and had pulled out knives in the meantime.
“What exactly is going on here?” asked
Christian.

- 126 -

The War of Fate

“Out of our way,” said one of the sailors, “or
we’ll cut you down just like this piece of garbage
here!” The sailor took a menacing step toward
Christian and the boy, but Christian swung his
sword, slightly scratching the sailor and drawing a
little blood.
“I don’t think you’re getting this kid until
you tell me what he did to deserve to die.”
continued Christian.
“You little rat,” said the sailor, “This kid
cheated us out of fifty dollars at the poker game last
night and we want our money!”
“That’s a small amount of money to kill
over. I don’t think so.”
The three sailors had quit talking and all
three of them began to advance on Christian. The
sailor to the left of the leader lunged at Christian.
Christian stepped to the side as the sailor missed
him and went tumbling into the ocean below. The
other two began slashing their knives wildly and
seemed to be completely unaware of how to
actually fight. Christian kicked one of the sailors
into the other and both of them fell to the ground
unconscious.

The War of Fate

- 127 -

Christian then dug through the pockets of
the main sailor and found a small bag of cash.
“Thanks for the tip.” said Christian as he
stashed the bag in his own and turned to the boy.
The boy seemed to be in awe and unable to speak
from how quickly Christian defeated the three of
them.
“You do realize you just beat up the three
toughest sailors in L.A. in under a minute, right?”
spoke the boy as Christian returned his sword to its
sheath.
“And your point is?” replied Christian as he
started to walk back toward the port master’s office.
The boy turned and started to follow him.
“Those were really some cool moves out
there. How old exactly are you? To be that good
you’d have to be about twenty-four, twenty-five…”
“Seventeen.”
“What? How long did it take you to learn
those abilities?”
“About six months. I saved your life. Now, I
need to get to Yakumi, and I could use your help.”
“Oh, I don’t think you’ll be going to
Yakumi for a while. The government’s ordered all

- 128 -

The War of Fate

travel to the empire restricted until after the summit
in Yarzon this weekend.”
Christian looked away and started to talk to
himself. “Summit? If Miion’s planning on starting
any trouble then while the President is in Yarzon,
this would be the perfect chance. She would need
some type of excuse though; a rebel faction, or
defecting general, something of that sort to stop all
relations with the States. I think… I bet she’s
planning on starting a war…” He turned back to the
boy. “We need to get to Yarzon, quickly. If we
don’t something terrible is going to happen.”
“Like I said before, the only ship bound for
Yakumi is the President’s private boat, and your
chances of getting on that are slim.”
“Then you’re coming with me. I’ve lived
through slim chances before, I can do it again.”
Christian and the boy went running down
the dock toward the private pier for governmental
use.
“By the way, the name’s Leon.” continued
the boy as they continued to run down to the dock.
Leon wasn’t kidding. Secret Service officers
were everywhere as Christian and Leon approached

The War of Fate

- 129 -

the dock. Christian also checked the sides of the
boat and saw security cameras on each corner of the
boat. He knew he wasn’t getting on easily. Christian
was already sure there was no way he could sneak
onto the boat undetected. He turned and walked
down a set of stairs to the dock. He decided he
would try to talk to the president.
At the gates to the dock, two Secret Service
agents stopped the two boys.
“We can’t let you through here, kid.
Government business.” said one of the more
muscular guards at the gate.
“I need to talk to the president concerning
something very serious.” replied Christian.
The agent thought for a second before
bursting into laughter. Even Christian knew that his
comments were a pretty lame excuse for a reason to
board a government vessel. The guard continued to
laugh at the two teenagers before having the other
guard escort them out of the port.
Outside the gates to the port, Christian stood
next to a sign wondering what they could do to get
into the Yakumi Empire. It seemed that travel by

- 130 -

The War of Fate

boat was out of the question at that point as the
President’s ship departed from the pier.

The War of Fate

- 131 -

- 132 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XIV
A couple more days had passed and still no
ships left the port of Los Angeles for the Yakumi
Empire. Christian had found a way to make enough
money on the monsters on the roads outside of town
to support himself and eat while he waited for the
ship to arrive to take him to Yakumi.
What’s more was that Christian had begun
to have some dark nightmares every time he closed
his eyes. In his nightmares, he was standing off
against a man who looked a lot like him, and this
man easily destroyed the universe around Christian.
Christian tried to shrug off the nightmares, but
something inside him said that something huge was
going to happen to him when he arrived in Yakumi.
* * *
General Kristie walked down the hallway
toward Princess Miion’s room carrying a sheet of
paper. Kristie walked into the dark room as Miion

The War of Fate

- 133 -

was sitting on her bed staring obsessively at her
pendant as usual.
“We’ve got a big problem.” said Kristie as
she threw the paper down on Miion’s bed.
“Somebody told Christian that something is about
to happen and that he needs to stop us to prevent the
end of the universe!”
Miion smiled. “Let him come,” she said.
“He’s the key to Evolvia and I need him to tell me
what exactly I need to do to unleash him. So you
see, everything is falling right into my plans.”
“Then, you’ve planned this?”
“Of course. Now, I want you to go to the
kid’s hometown and pick up some leverage for me
so we can make sure that he doesn’t pull any moves
on us while I’m preparing for Evolvia. Also make
sure all the preparations for the President are
finished. Do you understand?”
“Yes, Ma’am. So it’s true, the war is
beginning?”
“Yes. The war has just begun.”
Kristie was walking out of the castle when
the second general in Miion’s army, General Leo,
stopped her.

- 134 -

The War of Fate

“What’s our plans?” asked Leo as Kristie
walked by him trying to ignore the question. As
General Kristie was known as the warmongering
general in the Yakumian army, Leo was known for
the exact opposite. In fact, Leo was so liked with
the townspeople that they nicknamed him the Peace
Keeper. This was primarily named to him because
not only did he serve as a law enforcement officer
in the city of Yarzon, but also was rumored to have
been so well groomed every day that it made
anybody not want to cause any problems while he
was in a mile radius of the town.
Leo and Kristie had been known to have
several disputes throughout the last couple years
about the possibility of going to war against either
the rest of Asia or the United States. Miion tended
to listen to Leo more, which irritated Kristie to the
point where there were whispers Kristie may be
planning some kind of military coup against Miion.
“We prepare training our troops tomorrow
even harder. The war is coming.” replied Kristie as
she went and walked with Leo down the road to the
town.

The War of Fate

- 135 -

“What war? Miion’s been against any kind
of military action since she took power.”
“I don’t know. Something’s changed her.
It’s for the best, I’m sure. Kon should have finished
off the United States when he started.”
“We can’t attack the States! Their military is
still too powerful, treaty or no!”
“No, the Americans rely too much on their
firearms and the treaty forbids the use of firearms or
any modern weapons on the field of combat, thus
giving us the advantage.”
“What about Christian?”
“I’ve got him taken care of. He may be
powerful, but he’s got a weakness, and I’m betting
he would even die for this particular weakness.”
“You can’t be serious. Christian was
prophesized to destroy the empire and it looks like
you’re giving him the motivation to do it!”
Kristie gave up trying to reason with Leo
and finally grabbed the general by the collar of his
dark blue armor.
“Listen to me,” she said with a tone of
hostility in her voice, “In a little over a month both
the United States President will be dead along with

- 136 -

The War of Fate

Christian. This leaves the States vulnerable to attack
and that’s when I march my army straight through
their pathetic country. My only issue is that the
princess won’t be able to go through with it, and
that I have a problem with. Now, you can either join
me or I could execute you as a traitor and a spy for
the States right here and now. What’s your
decision?” Kristie removed her ornamental gold
sword from its sheath and pressed it to Leo’s neck.
Leo swallowed and then bent down on his knee.
“Your… Your desire will be done. I will
follow you to war if it does come to that.”
proclaimed Leo as a small tear welled up in his eye.
Leo may have been known as a Peacekeeper, but he
certainly wasn’t known for being able to stand up
for what he believed in.
“Good. Go back to your fortress and wait
until I summon you.” Kristie walked out of the city.
Leo remained on the ground and wondered what he
could do to get himself out of the mess Kristie had
created.
* * *

The War of Fate

- 137 -

Outside the gates to Los Angeles port,
Christian woke in the middle of the night as a cold
wind blew through the lifeless harbor. Leon was
sound asleep, which made the harbor even lonelier
than it was before.
There had to be a way for Christian to get to
Yakumi before Miion had a chance to do anything
to the President. Christian thought of a way. The
Black Hole Mine had been sealed by the military
just in case anyone in Yakumi decided to use the
passageway as a center for illegal immigration, so
getting through most of the blockades and
landmines was out of the question. Most planes also
refused to make runs to Yakumi, and with all planes
needing clearance to even get off the ground
nowadays, he would be caught before he even got
close to Yarzon.
Christian stood up and walked to the edge of
a pier, staring into the black horizon. As he looked
around in the corner of his eye he saw a small cargo
ship docking in one of the nearby piers. He ran to
Leon and then went to the pier where the ship had
docked.

- 138 -

The War of Fate

The Captain of the ship was standing in the
doorway as a few people proceeded to get on.
Christian ran to the Captain.
“Excuse me,” said Christian, trying to regain
his breath from running around the port. “Where is
this ship headed?”
“I’m not supposed to tell anybody,” said the
Captain, who proceeded to whisper “but we’re
headed to Yakumi with American fighters who are
planning to compete in the Yakumi Festival fighting
tournament. The grand prize is an audience with
Princess Miion herself, and I hear that that’s one
girl you really need to see.”
Christian turned to Leon. “This ship’s
headed to Yakumi. I think it would be best if we got
on now.” said Christian.
“I think you’re right,” said Leon. “I’m
guessing that if we don’t get on now we won’t be
getting to the country in time to stop the incident.”
whispered Leon.
“Wait a second!” yelled the Captain. “I
know you’re not going to get on my ship without
paying me.”

The War of Fate

- 139 -

Christian thought for a second and then
pulled out some car keys.
“It’s a Toyota, but it works wonders.” said
Christian as he handed the keys to the Captain. The
Captain pressed the unlock button and the lights lit
up on a red sports car in a nearby parking lot.
“I think it’s a fair trade.” smiled the Captain
as he allowed Christian and Leon to go inside.
After a couple more hours the ship departed
the United States toward the Yakumi Empire, and
Christian was determined to find out exactly what
was going on.

- 140 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XV
It was quite a long sea trip from Los
Angeles to the port town of Raiyko and Leon had
gotten sick several times on the trip. Leon continued
to get seasick and Christian was never happier to be
on Yakumian soil again.
After the ship finished unloading and Leon
and Christian gathered their bags, they immediately
headed for the gates to the town.
“I hope you brought comfortable shoes,”
said Christian as they left the town. “The Captain
said it’s about a two day walk straight to get to
Yarzon from here.”
In front of the gates the two were stopped by
an old man.
“Kids,” he said. “Are you planning on
traveling to Yarzon?”
“How did you know?” asked Christian.
“I could tell you were ready to cross the
plains, but let me warn you. Be careful when you
travel the plains because a vicious monster known
as a plainswalker has been wandering the plains
lately, searching for the flesh of humans.” Christian

The War of Fate

- 141 -

honestly did not believe the man. He had seen his
share of monsters, but none that wandered empty
plains. Most snuck around outside populated areas
for food.
As Christian and Leon left the small port
village behind them they could see nothing but
beach and ocean; and in front of them, nothing but
plains. Christian looked at a map of the Empire and
was amazed at how well the Yakumians were able
to artificially adapt different parts of the country to
different environments. To the south were forests
and swamps. West of Yarzon was the snow fields
Christian visited in his last trip to Yakumi. To the
east were the plains that Christian and Leon were
currently on, and to the north was nothing but an
endless desert until the very top part of the country,
which was Princess Miion’s private villa.
About halfway to Yarzon Leon stopped and
Christian turned around to see what was wrong.
“I heard something,” said Leon as he
looked around at the ground. “I think it’s coming
from below the ground.”
As Leon finished his sentence Christian
could hear the sound of something running through

- 142 -

The War of Fate

the dirt beneath him and drew his sword. He looked
at the ground for some sort of indication of what
they were, but couldn’t find anything. Just then
several light brown tentacles flew out of the ground
and began to swing wildly at the two.
Leon tried to duck out of the way as he took
the brunt of the attacks and Christian began to swat
the tentacles away as a few more sprung from the
ground.
“Don’t tell me you didn’t bring a weapon
with you!” screamed Christian as he slashed at the
tentacles coming straight at him. Leon pulled out a
small dagger and started to lightly stab the tentacles
that were attacking him.
“I don’t think these are all on one creature!”
yelled Leon back. “I think we ran into an entire
herd!” Just then a couple more tentacles flew out of
the ground and one grabbed Leon and picked him
up a good seven feet off the ground. Leon’s glasses
fell to the ground as the tentacle began to swing him
around like a doll. Christian ran to the tentacle and
hacked at it to try and free Leon. The tentacle
writhed for a second before dropping Leon and
withdrawing itself into the ground.

The War of Fate

- 143 -

After the tentacle was clear underground,
Christian formulated a plan. He ran around the
circle taking small pieces out of the tentacles,
causing enough pain in the creature for it to
withdraw the tentacle. Leon also joined in and
started to hack at the tentacles until most of them
were gone.
“Let’s get out of here, before they decide to
come back.” said Christian as him and Leon ran
toward Yarzon City.
The city of Yarzon was pretty crowded, as
usual, when Christian and Leon entered the front
gate. Some sort of festival seemed to be going on.
“This must be the Conquering Day festival,”
said Christian as he saw people dressed up and
dancing through the streets. The Yakumian people
had built their whole lives around war and their
festivals were no exception. “We should find a hotel
before they’re all taken by tourists.” continued
Christian.
It was a couple of hours before Christian and
Leon were able to find a hotel with rooms still
available. Christian walked into his room, set his
bags on the floor and got some rest. It had been

- 144 -

The War of Fate

such a long trip and he didn’t even care about his
nightmares anymore. The room was nice and even
had a balcony that gave a decent view of the
gargantuan castle in the distance. The clay walls
painted white gave a sense of calm to Christian as
he shut his eyes and gently went to sleep.
* * *
That night a chill from the western
mountains sent the city into freezing temperatures.
Several of the citizens who had been celebrating
had put on their jackets and headed for their homes.
In the main plaza in the city Master Destiny walked
to a platform to meet another hooded figure. The
hooded figure removed her hood to reveal a small,
but beautiful woman with long brunette hair and
deep green eyes.
“You’re late again.” said the girl as she
stepped off of the stage for festival performances.
“Well, when you’re trying to save the
universe, you tend to be a little preoccupied,
Kasumi.” replied Master Destiny as she stared at
Kasumi.

The War of Fate

- 145 -

“Has the kid arrived yet?”
“Only a couple hours ago. I think it’s best if
we let him sleep through the night.”
“I’m worried. Kristie’s planning something
and if I’m correct it has something to do with
Christian coming.”
“Yes, Kristie’s planning on taking out
Christian, the United States President and Princess
Miion herself all during the same incident.”
“How is she going to do that?”
“The tournament is a trap. She’s going to
lure all of them there and then unleash her army on
all three of them to stop all of them without her
being tied directly to it. She’ll blame it on a rogue
captain or something after she becomes empress.”
“I need to find a way to stop her.”
“There’s only one way. Talk to Christian
and send him to Leo’s fort. Leo knows something’s
about to happen to the empire and if Christian forms
an alliance with him then Leo’s army might just be
enough to stop Kristie. However, Christian getting
involved in this crisis might just be what Miion’s
planning.”
“What do you mean?”

- 146 -

The War of Fate

“There’s something that’s been growing
inside Christian since he was born. Now, it wasn’t
planned to be released anytime soon and was meant
to be passed through Christian’s bloodline, but since
Kon and Ultemeir summoned the Destinos the
creature inside of Christian is gaining power and
very soon it will be released and unleash a wave of
destruction so powerful that the entire universe will
be consumed by his hatred.”
“So, we need to kill Christian.”
“No! Christian’s the only one who can stop
the creature and save the universe.” Master Destiny
sighed as she looked straight at Kasumi. “You
should know that Christian needs all of us to help
him get through this. Things are about to get really
bad around here.”
“I know that Kristie’s planning on doing
something and I know that Christian is needed to
stop her. I guess I’ll go along with your plan as long
as nobody gets in the way of my fight against Miion.
Agreed?”
“Sounds like a good idea to me. Just make
sure to get to him before Kristie finds out he’s
here.”

The War of Fate

- 147 -

“Good. Now you need to go before we’re
spotted by one of Miion’s troops.”
Kasumi waved to Master Destiny as they
both ran their separate ways from the stage for the
festival.
* * *
That morning a knock came at Christian’s
hotel room door. Christian immediately grabbed his
sword and walked carefully to the door. As he
opened the door he immediately caught sight of
three Yakumian soldiers.
“Drop the weapon. We come with a message
from General Leo. It says ‘I have the information
you seek. If you wish to save both our countries
come see me at my desert fortress later tonight’. We
don’t want a fight with you.” The soldiers left
Christian, who was easily stunned. It was, in fact,
the first time he had run into Yakumian soldiers
who didn’t want to take his head. Leon was still
sleeping as Christian sat on his bed and wondered
what he should do. If Leo was being sincere, then

- 148 -

The War of Fate

his luck may just turn around; but if he wasn’t, then
Leo could just be leading him into an ambush.
Christian continued to ponder the situation
and decided to go to Leo’s fort. The only problem
he was facing was Leon. He didn’t want to lead him
into harm, but he was pretty much doing that if he
left him in the middle of the Yakumi Empire. His
red hair and green eyes were sure to stand out in the
middle of Yakumi. He then remembered that when
he left Master Destiny told him to seek Kasumi
when he arrived in Yarzon. The plan was simple.
Find Kasumi, drop Leon off with her, and then head
into the northern desert to find Leo’s fortress. If
only he didn’t have the feeling that things were
about to take a turn for the worst.

The War of Fate

- 149 -

- 150 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XVI

The city of Yarzon was a big enough place
to get lost in, and it certainly was the last place
Christian would have picked to find a single person,
not to mention that probably half of the Japanese
who converted to Yakumian named their children
Kasumi.
It also appeared that Princess Miion had
begun to persecute those who disagreed with her,
and if he was looking for some type of rebel leader,
he might be attracting the wrong group of people.
Mercenary and bounty hunter work paid pretty well
in this part of the world. The festival was still
occurring which made the streets extremely
crowded with people, and where large crowds
gathered, so did the body odor, and Christian was
about sick from the stench. Yakumian patrols were
also at every street corner. Miion must be expecting
something. What had once been a peaceful city
recently looked like it was more under martial law.
“Where do you think we should be
looking?” whispered Leon to Christian as they

The War of Fate

- 151 -

passed another security guard. Christian waited
until the guards were out of sight.
“My guess is that if we’re looking for a
rebel faction then we should start by searching the
sewers.” said Christian after the guard was several
feet away and looking the other way.
“The sewers. Come on, that’s a real cliché
place to hide while planning a rebellion against an
empire. What do they think…” Leon didn’t have
time to finish when Christian grabbed him and
pulled him down into the sewers below.
The disgusting scent down in the sewers was
even worse then it was in the chaos above. All of
the spilled liquor and other things the citizens were
doing spilled into the system and created a major
mess down in the tunnels. No Yakumian soldiers
even wanted to deal with the stench, which left both
the tunnels and the passageways into Yarzon Castle
relatively safe for any rebellion.
Leon had finally pulled his shirt up over his
nose as the two made their way through the dimly
lit tunnels. A labyrinth seemed to sprawl out and
Christian had a hard time finding his way to
wherever Kasumi’s base actually was. Only a few

- 152 -

The War of Fate

lights lit the way to a small room in a crevice of one
of the main tunnels. Christian pressed his ear to the
crevice and listened to the small voices that came
from the room.
“I don’t think striking now is a good idea.
Miion’s got the President of the United States
hostage!” said a man’s voice from one side of the
room. As Christian listened he saw out of the corner
of his eye a young woman with long, flowing
brunette hair. If it was blonde it would have
reminded him a bit of Alice and it also made him
think about how things were going back in Kansas
City.
“We don’t have enough time to think about
this! Now somehow Miion’s managed to keep the
kidnapping a secret and if we blow the secret then
we not only blow our cover but we also break
several international laws and risk another war!”
screamed the woman.
“Can’t you listen? This already is a war!
And we’re right in the middle of it. They’re
searching for Christian right now! If Miion finds
him…”

The War of Fate

- 153 -

The woman cut him off. “She’s not going to
find him. I’m betting Christian’s found us already
and is standing right outside the crevice on the
eastern wall.” Christian walked a few feet away and
stood against the wall as the man walked straight
toward the crevice and looked outside.
“There’s nobody there, Kasumi. You’re just
being paranoid.” said the man as he walked back to
his seat. Christian breathed a sigh of relief and then
continued on to find a doorway as he now knew that
that woman was Kasumi.
The labyrinth of sewage continued for a
while before Christian found the door to the secret
base. As he opened the door he was instantly
surrounded by a group of men with knives and
swords pointed at him.
“Whoa. Relax, I know this is a secret base
and all, but do we need to have the death threats?”
joked Christian as he and Leon were pushed into the
center of the first room.
“So you must be the famous Christian
Baylor everybody’s been talking about. You don’t
look like much of a hero to me.” said Kasumi as she
walked into the room. Most of the rebels had put

- 154 -

The War of Fate

their swords up but a few were still skeptical of him
and stared at him with hostility and their swords
ready to attack if the need arose. “Swords down,
you guys. He’s one of us. A friend of democracy, or
so I’ve been told.”
“By who?” asked Christian.
“I’m guessing you’ve had an encounter with
the fortune-teller too?”
“Yeah, I have. She told me to come here to
find you and then figure out what to do about saving
the universe or something like that.”
“Well, you came to the right place. I don’t
know if you’ve realized it, but in the last couple
months this whole empire has gotten really corrupt.
Miion’s started torturing people in ways that not
even Kon ever did, and Kristie’s just as cruel to the
citizens that most are afraid to even leave their
homes anymore.”
“I thought Miion was different from Kon? I
thought she was going to work for peace?”
“She was, and that’s what I can’t seem to
understand, and why we haven’t taken any action
against her yet. When she first took rule, she was
everyone’s favorite person in the Yakumian

The War of Fate

- 155 -

government, but lately it’s as if she’s become…
possessed by something.”
Christian stopped to wonder about the
events that had just been explained to him. Miion
had been acting completely different from her usual
self and was now siding with General Kristie on
everything? Something wasn’t adding up in his
head and he knew that a good explanation was
somewhere. “Could Kristie be doing something?”
asked Christian as he continued to ponder the
possibilities behind Miion’s recent transformation.
“We originally thought that, but believe me
if Kristie wanted her way she would have had
Miion done in months ago. With no heirs and no
husband, Kristie would have assumed control of the
Empire. Kristie’s tower in the southern forest has
also been unnaturally quiet.” Christian still couldn’t
put everything together and decided to head to
Leo’s fort and see if he couldn’t find a missing
piece to the puzzle.
“I need a favor,” said Christian. “I need you
to look after this kid while I’m away.” He grabbed
Leon and shoved him toward Kasumi. “I’m going to

- 156 -

The War of Fate

Leo’s fort, and a surprise may be waiting for me
there. I’ll be back when I find out any news.”
“We’ll wait, and I’ve got spies in the castle
trying to find out some news for me. I’ll contact you
if anything important comes up.” Kasumi said as
Christian began to walk out the door. Christian
nodded back at the group of rebels and headed
outside to prepare for the long trek through the
desert.

Kristie entered the throne room where Miion
was waiting. She then waved to her guards, who
dragged the President into the throne room.
“It is done,” said Kristie as she bowed to the
princess.
“Good, General. Now, I have a big favor to
ask. Go to the desert and take care of our traitor.
How is the interference by the fortune-teller
going?” replied Miion.
“Exactly the way we want her to believe.
She thinks I’m acting alone and planning on
overthrowing you at the tournament tomorrow.”
The two quickly began laughing. Miion ordered the

The War of Fate

President to be moved to Kristie’s tower, and
everything was going their way to obtaining
Christian as their prisoner as well.

- 157 -

- 158 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XVII

General Kristie rode up to Leo’s fortress in
the desert with a small convoy. As they approached
the main gates Kristie stopped and looked at a small
balcony above the main gate. General Leo walked
onto the platform and stared straight at the general
and her small army of convoys.
“Kristie,” he shouted down so they could
hear, “What brings you to the middle of nowhere?”
Kristie squinted into the desert sun as she
replied to Leo. “I have some information about
Christian you’re going to need.” she said. Leo
nodded and signaled to his guards down below. The
gates slowly opened afterward. Leo walked off of
the balcony and around an upper-floor terrace that
surrounded the courtyard and training grounds of
the fort. Leo continued to walk around to the other
side where he entered into his office.
Leo waited in his office as Kristie walked in.
“You can let the guards leave. They don’t need to
panic over this.” said Kristie. Leo pointed to the two
bodyguards as they left the room.

The War of Fate

- 159 -

“Now, what about Christian did you need to
tell me?” asked the irritated General. Nobody was
going to give any more orders to his troops.
“You do know he’s coming right this way,
right?”
“Of course. I have my own spies and
watchmen too.”
“Then you should also know that he’s
planning on taking us out one-by-one. He’ll start
with you since you’re the weakest, of course, and
then move down to my tower and try to kill me.”
“I don’t think you know how powerful
Christian is. There’s no way you’ll be able to stop
him.”
“That’s where you’re wrong. I’ve got a little
leverage, you see.” Kristie pulled a few photographs
out of one of her pockets and handed them to Leo.
Leo picked up the pictures and looked at them a
little closer. The first one featured Alice, while the
second one was a picture of Kamo all tied up. The
third, and most shocking, was a picture of the
President of the United States.
“This is just sad,” said Leo as he bowed his
head in disbelief, “that the Empire’s greatest general

- 160 -

The War of Fate

would resort to common kidnapping in order to
duck out of a fight with a kid. You really are worse
than scum, you know that?”
“Oh, believe me, I know. Now, as I’ve said,
Christian’s coming right here for you, but I’m going
to do the merciful thing.” Kristie quickly pulled out
her sword and cut a small slice into Leo. Leo fell to
the chair, holding his wound in pain. “I’m not about
to let you give away everything me and the Princess
have been working six months on! In case you’re
wondering, Miion herself ordered your execution,
but I’m putting a little bit more emotion into your
death. You see, I’m going to leave you alive and
bleeding to death here for a couple of hours before
Christian arrives. When he does, he’ll come here
and I want you to tell him absolutely everything you
saw here. I want you to show him the pictures and
tell him that if he cares about both his country and
the people he loves then I’ll be waiting in my
tower.” Kristie leaned forward and then whispered
into Leo’s ear as the sound of his troops were heard
screaming in the background.
“Kon’s plans are about to be fulfilled, and
there’s nothing anybody can do about it now. This

The War of Fate

- 161 -

world is about to be ours. I’m really sad you won’t
be there to experience our vision for the world.”
Leo spat into Kristie’s face. “I’d rather be
dying here right now than live in your demonic
world!” he screamed as he tried to hold in the pain.
Kristie stood up and sheathed her sword as she
sternly looked at the bleeding General. As Leo
arched back in pain Kristie gave an evil smile as she
walked out into the massacre in the fort.
Miion’s orders had been fulfilled. Leo was
dead and all of the members of his army killed
during a “revolt”. Miion was prepared to blame the
revolt and the death of the President on Christian
and use it as an excuse to start the war. Kristie
walked outside of the fort very satisfied.
* * *
A couple hours later Christian arrived at the
front of Leo’s fort to see a dead body lying in the
road. Christian instantly ran to the body and saw
Master Destiny standing in the main gateway.

- 162 -

The War of Fate

“What happened here?” asked Christian as
he saw several more Yakumian soldiers killed and
scattered all over the interior of the fort.
“A sort of civil war broke out. Only all of
the opposing party were annihilated in a single
battle. Miion’s serious about her plans, I’m sure of
it now.” stated Master Destiny as she walked
alongside Christian.
“So, it’s true that Princess Miion is behind
everything.”
“Maybe she’s not the real Miion. Maybe
she’s just a puppet of somebody else.”
“What?”
“A puppet of one of your old enemies.
You’re still young and don’t quite understand
what’s going on like me, but I’ll try to understand.
You see, evil… true evil, it never really dies.
Usually when somebody is so evil that they dedicate
their lives to it then that hatred and that darkness
cannot be undone. I believe that your old enemy put
all of her hatred and of us, the human race, into a
certain object, a necklace, perhaps. When Miion
picked up that necklace at the site of the final battle
two years ago, it reawakened the darkness inside

The War of Fate

- 163 -

her heart and slowly began to eat away at her. Thus,
the last few months she’s turned into somebody I’m
sure you know quite well.” She looked straight at
Christian. “You can’t tell me you’ve forgotten her?”
Christian knelt down on the ground at the
painful thought that ran through his mind. “Ultemeir.
Miion acquired all of Ultemeir’s knowledge and is
currently using that knowledge to start the new war.
One that will destroy our world.”
“You’re starting to get there, but I don’t
think that’s the case. Miion is the new Ultemeir.
Haven’t you noticed it when you arrived? That
same foul air is running through this land like it did
two years ago, one that is now threatening to
consume us all.”
“Then, I go to Yarzon and finish off
Ultemeir like we did before. That’ll end it, right?”
“No. This time the entire universe has
something else to fear from the outcome of this
battle.”
“What now?”
“You.”
“Me?”

- 164 -

The War of Fate

“Yes. You’re carrying something that if it is
released, will destroy us all.”
Christian sat on a chair in the courtyard.
Everything was riding on him, but if he did
anything to stop Miion, he would doom the planet
anyway. This seemed like a dead end for him.
“What do I need to do?”
“Go to Kristie’s tower in the south. She has
your friends and I’m afraid something may happen
to them if you don’t act soon.”
“She’s got Alice and Kamo?”
“That’s why you need to hurry. I will go to
my superiors and figure out what exactly to do
about the other issue. After you save them head
back to the United States as quickly as you can.
Things are about to get really ugly around this
country.” Master Destiny immediately disappeared.
Christian found some stables nearby and took a
horse. He rode off into the desert toward the
southern forest, where he knew the general waited.

The War of Fate

- 165 -

- 166 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XVIII

A dark night had settled in the forest where
Kristie’s tower sat as Christian approached.
Christian was relieved that amid all the commotion
that had surrounded the recent events, the animals
and the plants remained relatively calm. As he
approached the tower he noticed it did look similar
to the white tower Ultemeir had in the snow fields
when he visited. Christian stopped at the main
entrance to the tower to make sure he had
everything he would need.
The inside of the tower violated just about
every Yakumian teaching known today. The entire
building seemed to be comprised as one large
machine, even though nobody knew exactly what it
did. Christian made his way up the large staircase
toward the center of the tower. As he entered the
main area at the top of the tower he could instantly
see Kristie’s three prisoners tied up on a platform
hanging several feet above him to the back of the
room.

The War of Fate

- 167 -

Underneath that platform was a door in
which Kristie walked out of. Kristie was holding an
ornamental sword as she approached the center of
the room.
“General Kristie,” said Christian as he drew
his sword. “You’re both a traitor and a murderer. I
still don’t know what you’re planning, but I will
stop you and then tell Miion what you’ve been up
to.”
Just then several Yakumian soldiers ran out
from the doorway Christian entered and surrounded
the room. At the end of the procession of soldiers
Princess Miion herself walked into the room.
“Christian, what if I ordered Kristie to do all
of these things?” asked Miion as she laughed.
“You… I’ve doubted it until now. You are
Ultemeir.” said Christian. Miion thrust her hand
forward and it sent Christian flying into the ground
below.
“Ultemeir. Such a worthless name. She’ll be
nothing once I get my ultimate goal. Yes, what I’ve
been planning these last two years, my union with
Evolvia.”
“Evolvia?”

- 168 -

The War of Fate

Suddenly Christian heard a voice from the
platform above him. “Christian, don’t worry about
that! You’ve got a job to do, remember?”
proclaimed the voice as Christian made it back to
his feet. Once he was standing he turned around to
see Michelle standing next to Alice and untying her
ropes. As Alice, Kamo and the President were being
freed Miion sent a small group of troops after her.
When the troops made it to the top floor Michelle
and Kamo quickly wiped out whatever soldiers
came across the balcony. The group quickly ran to
the exit and Michelle turned back to Christian.
“Don’t worry about us! Just come back in
one piece and we’ll figure out what to do from
there!” shouted Michelle. She then turned to run out
of the door.
“Worthless soldiers! I guess I’ll do it
myself!” screamed Kristie. Kristie pulled a small
knife out of her shirt and threw it straight at
Michelle. The knife pierced itself straight into
Michelle’s heart. Michelle stood for a second before
finally falling to the ground.
“Michelle!” Christian said as he turned to
face the psychotic general. Alice and Kamo came

The War of Fate

- 169 -

back and picked up Michelle’s body when they left
the tower and headed for a boat Commander had
reserved for the evacuation. When they were gone
Christian readied his sword and faced Kristie.
“This time there’s nothing to stop us.” said
Christian as he started to run toward Kristie.
“Well, I’m afraid I’m just not in the mood to
fight today, so your execution is going to have to
wait.” said Kristie who signaled to a couple of the
soldiers who formed the perimeter around the room.
Two soldiers grabbed Christian and managed to
hold him down as Kristie left. They then turned to
face Miion.
“We have a guest room ready for him in our
dungeon. Make sure he gets there in one piece.”
said Miion as she laughed her way down the stairs.
Christian tried to struggle but with that many
soldiers and the confiscation of his sword, it
appeared that there wasn’t much hope for him as
they loaded him onto a wagon and headed for
Yarzon Castle.
* * *

- 170 -

The War of Fate

A week later, Alice, Kamo, Commander and
Master Destiny were all bowing their heads and
praying during Michelle’s funeral. The humid,
outside warmth of the summer accompanied by the
thickening fog made the ceremony even harder for
the group as they said goodbye to one of their
companions. Schala had just received word on what
had happened and was planning on taking some
time out of her schedule to help Commander.
The President had been returned safely to
Washington, and an emergency meeting of congress
was expected to take place on the recent turn of
events in the Yakumi Empire during Miion’s
summit. Commander had been awarded a medal for
strategizing the extraction and rescue of the
president, which stayed next to Commander’s bed
out of modesty.
After the burial Alice was in her hotel room
packing as a clam rain began outside. She took a
few of her clothes and packed them into a backpack.
As she started to finish her packing Kamo walked
into the room and stared straight at her.
“I understand how you feel,” said Kamo,
“but I have to ask you not to go. Christian is alive,

The War of Fate

- 171 -

we all know that, but you won’t be if you go
chasing after him. The Empire’s unstable as it is let
alone trying to march straight into Yarzon. Now,
once things settle down…”
“Don’t you understand?” asked Alice.
“Christian is in danger and if we wait for this to end
then he won’t be alive! I have to go save him!”
Alice sat on the bed and started to cry. Kamo
thought for a few seconds and then sat next to her.
He was Christian’s friend, after all, and knew
exactly how Alice was feeling.
“It’s too dangerous to go to Yarzon alone.”
said Kamo.
“I don’t’ care what you think.” cried Alice
as she looked away from him.
“You don’t understand. I’m not letting you
go to Yakumi alone… which is exactly why I’m
going along.” Kamo smiled at Alice. Alice smiled
back and then hugged Kamo as they stood up and
started to walk out the door. Alice was grabbing her
bags when Commander burst into the door.
“You guys better come quick,” said
Commander, “Things are getting really nasty
outside.”

- 172 -

The War of Fate

“What do you mean?” asked Kamo.
Commander gulped a couple of times and
then looked straight at the two teenagers.
“The United States has just declared war on
the Yakumi Empire.” All three of them looked at
each other. No more words needed to be said.

The War of Fate

- 173 -

- 174 -

The War of Fate

Part III:
The Final Evolution

The War of Fate

- 175 -

- 176 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XIX
The ocean uttered an unusual calm as Alice
stood on the deck of one of the thousand ships
headed for the Yakumi Empire. She still had trouble
believing that war had actually erupted. Everything
seemed to be moving so fast, nobody was able to
keep up anymore, which made Miion even happier.
Commander walked out onto the deck with
Alice as she saw the Empire coming on the horizon.
“Don’t worry,” said Commander, “When we
seize Yarzon we’ll find Christian or find out where
Miion’s hiding him.” Alice nodded and looked at
the horizon as several more American soldiers
walked onto the deck carrying swords.
“We’re still under the treaty?” asked Alice.
“The President doesn’t feel that the danger’s too
great yet to break off the treaty.”
Alice disapproved of the measure, but knew that
if Miion notified other countries about the States
breaking off the treaty, they would come and help
her fight them off. The Yakumian troop strength

The War of Fate

- 177 -

was already high without the aid of foreign
governments.
About twenty minutes later the ships began to
dock on Yakumian soil. Both Alice and Kamo had
been named captains of their own units, which
made them the youngest ranked officers in history.
The American army ran off the decks of the ships to
meet the Yakumian army who had already gathered
to meet them.
* * *
One of General Kristie’s captains, Salo, walked
into her tent to deliver news of the battle.
“General Kristie, ma’am. The United States
army has arrived and has prepared for battle. What
do you want the army to do?” asked Salo.
“Have them wait,” replied Kristie. “The troops
are more than enough to take care of the American
forces. When the Americans make their charge,
have my troops wait until the Americans make it to
our lines, and then unleash everything on them.”
Kristie nodded to Salo, who immediately ran out of
the room and went to notify the other commanders.

- 178 -

The War of Fate

Kristie looked at a map on the table in front of her.
Since the Americans were on the beach, if they won
this battle it would be enough to push them back
onto their homeland. From there things would get
trickier due to the increase in urban fighting and the
unfamiliarity of the States. Overall she figured that
if everything went as planned, she should have
Washington captured in about six months. Kristie
finalized her plans, picked up her sword, and
headed out onto the battlefield.
The Yakumian army was lined up in standard
formation by the time the United States army was
assembled. Kristie was surprised at the sudden
discipline the opposing army showed as they began
to march in uniform toward the Yakumian troops.
Kristie could do nothing but smile as the troops
began to walk straight into her trap.
On the frontline of the States, Alice ordered her
troops to stop.
“What are you doing?” asked Kamo as he also
ordered his troops to stop. Only Commander’s
troops were left marching toward Kristie after a
couple of minutes.

The War of Fate

- 179 -

“Kristie’s leading us right into a trap,” said
Alice. “There’s a reason why nobody’s moving on
their lines. Remember how Kon attacked Kansas
City? He used some kind of a magic barrier so
nobody could escape, and I’ve got a feeling…” at
those words a barrier went up surrounding
Commander’s unit and enough Yakumian troops to
easily take it out. Alice looked straight at
Commander on the deck of one of the main boats.
Commander was leaned over on a desk in shock as
he tried to reformulate his strategy. Alice and Kamo
also could do nothing but sit at their command posts
on the ship and watch the small massacre that was
taking place.
For every Yakumian soldier that fell, at least
five American soldiers also fell and there seemed to
be no stopping it. Alice continued to watch as
Master Destiny appeared and noticed the battle.
“I see Kristie’s breaking the treaty,” spoke
Master Destiny as she walked straight toward
Commander.
“What?” asked Commander, stunned that Master
Destiny was helping with war strategy.

- 180 -

The War of Fate

“You didn’t know? Sure, the treaty forbids the
United States use of firearms, but on the positive
side for us it forbids the Yakumian use of magic.”
“I didn’t know that,” said Commander as he
immediately pointed to a supply officer near him.
“Alice, Kamo, I want you to get every soldier under
your command equipped with a rifle as fast as you
can.”
“Done.” said Kamo as he started to carry rifles
out of the lower decks and began handing them out
to his troops. By the time the units were done being
slaughtered and the barrier lifted, every American
soldier had a rifle in their hands ready to fire. “Wait
for our orders!” yelled Kamo out to his troops.
Commander watched the rest of the battle and gave
the two young captains advice as the battle
proceeded.
* * *
Kristie looked at the now armed troops.
“Very smart, Commander. I break a rule, you
break a rule. But, I’m only just beginning.” laughed
Kristie as she ordered her troops to charge. As the

The War of Fate

- 181 -

Yakumian troops charged several bolts of magic
flew from the air and began to pierce the army like
bullets. Several troops fell while others in their
panic began to fire back at the troops.
Finally, too many troops had fallen and the
battle was easily lost. Commander bowed his head
in shame and then ordered the retreat. Kristie
stopped the magic and watched as the ships were
boarded and the American troops retreated back to
their homeland. Kristie laughed at the American
mockery as she knew she had won her first decisive
victory in the war.

- 182 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XX
Alice and Kamo stood on the deck of the ship
they had departed on as the Yakumian Empire
shrunk in the distance. A defeat on Yakumian soil
really damaged the morale of the troops and heavily
damaged those that believed until now that the
American army was invincible. Everybody’s big
worry now was that the next major battle would be
on American soil, a spectacle not seen since the
Civil War.
The Yakumian army was probably already
preparing a horde of ships headed for the States and
Kamo wondered if anything could stop them now
since the main force was just decimated in a single
day. That night, through that sunset, even the
calmness of the waves were unable to ease Kamo’s
nerves as he wondered what the people would think
if they knew a Yakumian was helping the United
States.
Master Destiny walked out onto the deck.

The War of Fate

- 183 -

“You know, you two should really get some
sleep and not worry about what’s going to happen
next.” said Master Destiny as she joined the two.
“That’s easy for you to say,” said Kamo as he
pointed toward Master Destiny in an irritated tone.
“You know everything that’s going to happen! You
probably know how this war is going to end too!”
“That’s where you’re wrong. I don’t see exacts.
I see possibilities. Where one sees an absolute, I see
a crossroad. For example, you see a definite end to
this war coming. The Yakumians will march
straight through your country and conquer it as they
did Japan. However, there is another route. If, for
some reason, Christian should return and face
Kristie, then I believe there may be hope for victory
left.”
“So you mean we need to find Christian?”
“Oh, believe me on that. He’ll come to you. Just
stay here and face your enemies the way you have
for the past several weeks and just leave the rescue
missions to me.”
Kamo smiled at Master Destiny who once again
instantly vanished. “Do you really think she’ll find
Christian?” asked Kamo as he looked at Alice.

- 184 -

The War of Fate

“Let’s hope so,” replied Alice. “It sounds like
we don’t have much of a chance without him.”
“What’s with you? I thought you loved him.”
“I thought I did too, but lately I’ve been
feeling… I’ve been feeling that I need something
else than somebody who’s going to constantly put
his life on the line to save someone else, even me. I
need somebody who’s only a hero to me, not a hero
who saved the world and is getting attention every
ten seconds.” Alice began to feel upset and Kamo
decided not to say anymore. Alice continued to
stare at the waves of the new night as Kamo began
to move toward his room. “The night before he
left,” began Alice again, “Christian and I, we got
into an argument about him always trying to protect
me. I guess I said some things I really regret now,
and we broke up. I just never got the courage to tell
anyone about it.” Kamo stopped for a second and
thought about what Alice had told him. He then
realized there was nothing he could do; only leave
the two of them, Christian and Alice, to work things
out after the war was over.
* * *

The War of Fate

- 185 -

Inside the throne room of Yarzon Castle,
General Kristie walked in to find Miion laughing
hysterically. Miion usually let her hair down but
now had it tied up in the back just like Ultemeir had
two years ago.
“I am here to report,” said Kristie as she knelt
right in front of the Princess. “That the Americans
have been run out of our Empire. I am currently
planning on boarding my ship and meeting with the
rest of the fleet. I am planning to catch them off
guard as I attack their naval forces head on. Soon
their army will be smashed enough to create an easy
ride through their country.” Both Miion and Kristie
began to laugh as one was now just as insane as the
other.
“Good,” spoke Miion. Miion then stood up and
ushered a couple guards in. “Do me a favor. Take
the Baylor kid with you and see what the taste for
battle does for Evolvia. The kid’s gathering too
much attention here.” Kristie turned to face the
guards who brought in Kasumi, tied-up with strong
Yakumian rope. “It’s a shame really that one of my
half-sisters would be the one to try to save Christian.

- 186 -

The War of Fate

Nevertheless, she will be executed at dawn while
you sail toward victory.” Miion grasped a sword
that was sitting on the armrest of her throne and
handed it to Kristie. Kristie took the sword and
walked to Kasumi.
“You’re both crazy! You know what’s going to
happen, don’t you?” screamed Kasumi. Kristie
ignored her and stabbed Kasumi straight through
the stomach.
“They know about Evolvia,” said Kristie
unfeeling after the murder. “Send someone to round
up the rebels and find out just how much they
know.” Kristie handed the sword back to Miion and
walked out the door.
* * *
In the dark room of the Council of the Elders,
Master Destiny walked through a portal into the
council chamber where she saw the leader, Ralfor,
standing in the light.
“Have you discovered the key?” asked Ralfor as
Master Destiny walked to the center of the circle as
she always did.

The War of Fate

- 187 -

“Yes,” said Master Destiny quietly, “The key to
the Final Evolution, the awakening of Evolvia, and
the final battle for the universe is not nearly what
we thought. I’ve tried everything, but nothing seems
to be working in driving out Evolvia. He doesn’t
seem to be budging, no matter how hard we elders
try. Evolvia is not something that chooses when
he’s released. He set a timer for himself.”
“A timer? If it’s a timer, then when is the timer
going off?”
“I had trouble pinpointing that out, but after
some careful analysis on the Destino extinction, I
found the answer. The Destino that underwent the
Final Evolution was approximately 267 years old,
which in human years equals…”
“Eighteen. That means he’s going to be here in
the next few weeks.”
“That’s what I’m afraid of. Evolvia’s coming,
and unless I can teach the boy a few tricks about
Evolvia, he doesn’t stand a chance. But first, we
need to stop this war so I can get the boy to the
artifacts!”
“Agreed. Go, save the boy, and lead the
American army to victory.”

- 188 -

The War of Fate

“I have another favor to ask.”
“What is it this time?”
“Evolvia gave the Destinos a choice, didn’t he?
A choice between joining him and letting the
species survive, which is what you all want and
what the Destinos chose, or facing him in battle for
the fate of all. Now, I know it’s our tradition to…
shall we say, sway the victim of Evolvia toward
survival, but I have a good feeling about this kid,
and I think he may be the one to destroy Evolvia
forever and let us finally rest.”
“You will stop right there! No member of us has
even considered chancing the end of the universe!
We have always chosen survival, and that’s the way
things must be!” Ralfor slammed his hand on the
table in front of him as Master Destiny took a
couple steps back. Ralfor was furious at the request
and none of the council members around the table
wanted to challenge his judgment. “If you even
think about challenging our tradition, I’ll personally
destroy you. Do you understand?”
Master Destiny was too petrified to answer and
only nodded. Ralfor sat back down as Master
Destiny left the room. The human race was meant to

The War of Fate

- 189 -

survive this, and Master Destiny even knew what
she had to do in order to ensure it.

- 190 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XXI

The next morning, Kamo was washing up when
he heard the sound of gunfire from the upper deck.
He quickly put his shirt back on and ran upstairs to
see what the problem was.
As Kamo opened the door outside he nearly
escaped being pierced from a flaming arrow headed
straight toward him. He quickly ran to where Alice
and Commander were standing giving orders to the
troops who were firing back.
“What happened?” asked Kamo as he
approached the flustered Commander.
“Those dirty cheats attacked us during retreat!
Kristie has no respect for international treaties”
Commander was running his hands over his hair
and looking at the sky, wondering how he would
survive this. “Tell the captains of the ships to push a
little harder! We’re going to need all the
acceleration we can get!” He shouted to one of his
runners. Three ships had already gone down in
flames as more tried to make it back to the mainland.

The War of Fate

- 191 -

Kamo began giving orders to some of his troops
when he noticed Alice pick up a rifle and begin
firing at the Yakumian vessel.
“What are you doing, trying to get yourself
killed?” asked Kamo.
“We need everybody we can get firing at those
Yakumian scum!” screamed Alice as she continued
to fire at the soldiers. Kamo watched as five archers
on the opposing ship fell to Alice. Kamo then
decided to pick up his gun and also fire at the
Yakumians.
The battle continued to rage for several hours
before Master Destiny finally arrived. She searched
the main flagship to realize that over a hundred
ships had been destroyed already. This was no
longer a war, it was a massacre.
“Commander, I need you to get as far away from
these things as you can.” said Master Destiny as she
looked at the darkened sky.
Within an hour the flagship managed to get to a
distance Master Destiny said it was safe, but was
unclear about what it was safe from. Commander
wasn’t sure what she was doing, but ended up
agreeing to all of the terms she insisted on.

- 192 -

The War of Fate

“So, Kristie,” she said to herself as she looked at
Kristie’s flagship, “You like to play with magic.
Let’s see how you like your own strategy used
against you.”
Alice was in awe as Master Destiny raised her
hand and a small opening in the sky appeared. All
of the soldiers in the group stopped firing and
watched as several beams of light came from the
sky and began to cut their way through the
Yakumian fleet. Kristie stopped the attack and even
more ships around her flagship fell to the onslaught
of Master Destiny’s magical abilities. Soon, after
several other ships sunk, Kristie had no choice but
to order the retreat and give the Americans time to
flee the battle.
After the ships began fleeing, Master Destiny
stopped the attack and went to the command post to
meet with Commander.
“Remind me to take your advice more often,”
said Commander as he breathed a sigh of relief that
most of his army escaped the battle unscathed.
“We need to prepare.” replied Master Destiny in
a serious voice.
“Prepare for what?”

The War of Fate

- 193 -

“The next battle will determine everything. If
you don’t come away with a victory, then we’re all
doomed.” Master Destiny was sure that the next
battle, already planned for the plains outside of Los
Angeles, would be a turning point in the war for
both sides. The only hope was that finally, the
Americans could have some good luck on their side.
Later that night Master Destiny walked down
into Alice’s cabin. Alice was already preparing her
stuff for the quick time she would have to leave the
boat once it docked in Los Angeles. Commander
had already ordered that the entire fleet should be
evacuated within fifteen minutes as the ships
docked on a twenty mile stretch of land.
“I’m sure you’re worried about him,” said
Master Destiny as she walked into the clean room,
the only room on the ship she could say that about.
“No, I’m not. I’ve already prepared for the bad
news,” said Alice as she continued to pack. Master
Destiny was shocked that Alice seemed pretty
unconcerned about Christian.
“For Christian’s girlfriend…” Master Destiny
tried to say something but Alice immediately cut
her off.

- 194 -

The War of Fate

“As I told Kamo, that’s not the case anymore!”
Alice screamed, although anybody could have seen
a tear well up in her eye at that moment. “I’m tired
of him treating me like I need to be protected all of
the time! I want my own life. I want to protect
myself!” Alice sat down on her bed and began to
cry. As Alice lied down on her bed crying Kamo
rushed into the room.
“Did I… uh... come at a bad time?” asked Kamo
as he saw Master Destiny hovering over Alice.
“You know he needs you, Alice. He won’t be
able to do what he has to if he knows you’re not
supporting him,” said Master Destiny. Alice gave
her a stern look while crying.
Alice all of a sudden recognized Master
Destiny’s voice. “That night, at the cliff. It was you
who saved me wasn’t it?” Master Destiny nodded to
her.
“I’m not having any part to do with this,” said
Kamo as he tried to walk away.
“Wait, Kamo. I need you to hear this too.”
“What?”
Master Destiny managed to make Alice sit up as
she also made Kamo sit on a chair in front of the

The War of Fate

- 195 -

door. “Now listen to me, both of you. Alice, I’m not
saying you have to love him, but I need you to at
least help him. Kamo, you know him better than
anybody and you’ll know he’ll try to do this all
alone. He needs both of you to show him the truth.
It’s going to take a powerful bond to help Christian
survive the coming battle. Now do both of you
understand me?” both of the teenagers nodded.
They knew that Christian needed help, and the next
battle they would give it to him. “Good. I have
information that I want you two to know. Kristie’s
brought Christian here under Miion’s orders. You
two are going to help me save him.” Master Destiny
looked at the two of them and smiled.

- 196 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XXII

Christian woke up in a dark room and saw
nothing around him as he stood up. The floor was
covered in a deep mist and Christian couldn’t tell
what exactly he was standing on as he continued to
look around and saw nothing but darkness around
him.
Christian took a few steps forward thinking he
might find a way out of this area he was in, but
every foot taken looked exactly the same as the last.
Finally, Christian stopped and wondered just
how he could get out of here when he heard
something behind him.
“Surprised to see me?” asked the voice behind
him.
Christian turned and saw a young man who
looked almost exactly like him. He had the same
height and weight as he did. The only
distinguishable difference in the two was that the
one who was not Christian had long blonde hair tied
up to the back as Christian still had his brown hair,

The War of Fate

- 197 -

but due to the six months of captivity and torture, he
had it down to his shoulders.
“W..Who are you?” asked Christian, who was
still stunned as he looked a near-mirrored image of
himself.
“It’s been almost eighteen years now and you
haven’t figured that out yet?” said the other man as
Christian began to look for another way out. “I’m
you, or rather, a compilation of your species. I’m
here to pass final judgment on you right here and
now, Christian.”
“Final judgment? And how do you know my
name?”
“Are you kidding? I’ve been inside of your body
for eighteen years. I know everything about you.
What you like, what you hate, your favorite foods,
television shows, movies, games, books, everything
there is to know.” The man ran to Christian and
suddenly appeared behind him as he whispered into
his ear. “I even know what you want the most.”
The man disappeared again as Christian turned
around. Just then an image of Alice appeared.

- 198 -

The War of Fate

“Christian!” shouted the apparition as it ran
toward Christian. As he ran toward it the image
disappeared and the other man appeared again.
“What exactly do you want with me!?” shouted
Christian as the other man smiled at him.
“I’m only fulfilling my fate. Mine is to destroy
the universe and rearrange it, creating a new
dominant species on the only planet where life is
capable. Now, I’m admitting my destiny was not
supposed to be fulfilled until about five million
years from present date, but I realized I made a
mistake. The chosen Destino who faced me chose to
survive while the dinosaurs chose complete
extinction. The Destinos should have been
destroyed along with the dinosaurs, but something
that even I can’t explain happened.”
“You’re telling me that you are the one who
destroyed the dinosaurs?”
“Perfect. You’re catching on already. Now, I’m
giving you a choice, as I’ve said before. The first
one is that we face each other in a bloody battle to
the death over the fate of your species. Not the
smartest choice, as I’ve never been killed yet, but it
is a possibility. The second choice is to submit to

The War of Fate

- 199 -

your destiny and allow me to destroy the universe.
Earth will be reorganized but you and a female of
your species will be allowed to survive and carry on
your species.”
“So you’re saying I need to sacrifice everybody
else just for me to survive?”
“Precisely. It’s for the good of the species. You
see, the universe will be destroyed one way or
another, and I’m giving your species the chance of
survival.”
“Why?”
“Because that’s the way things have been for the
last several billion years and I’m hoping that you
follow that same belief.”
“And if I don’t?”
“Then your entire species go extinct just like the
dinosaurs and you will be the one responsible for
it.” After that the man disappeared and Christian
was left all alone. He ran for a few seconds looking
for a way out once again but still couldn’t find a
way out. Finally Christian gave up and sat on the
misty ground.
After a few minutes of thinking about how to get
out of the area Christian heard a noise behind him.

- 200 -

The War of Fate

He turned around to see the man standing right
above him, hovering in the air.
“I’m giving you a choice,” said the man. “Now,
when I come again I’ll expect you to choose.” The
man disappeared and all of a sudden Christian
found himself in some sort of wagon, tied up. As he
looked outside he saw at lease four Yakumian
soldiers walking alongside the wagon and carrying
swords or bows.
As he laid down on the ground he tried to figure
out exactly what that person that looked like him
meant.
* * *
In the tents where the commanders of the army
had set up for the battle of Los Angeles,
Commander was preparing his maps with Master
Destiny to strategize for the coming battle.
“We’ll need to cut off Kristie’s troops on the
field so they can’t escape,” said Master Destiny as
she drew some arrows on the map representing
Kristie’s troops and the way they would be
marching. “Pull the same trick on her she pulled on

The War of Fate

- 201 -

us.” Commander nodded and closed the map as he
walked outside to meet the troops.
All of the soldiers in the army possible had
gathered in the field as Schala drove into the
battlefield accompanied by a small caravan of
trucks all carrying army soldiers.
“What’s with the new troops?” asked
Commander as Schala approached him.
“A gift, courtesy of the New York National
Guard,” replied Schala as she walked to
Commander.
Commander took Schala to a small tent where
Kamo and Alice were preparing to go undercover.
“We’ve caught a few Yakumian outfits and
we’re going to dye our hair later tonight. It won’t
fool Kristie but it should fool the smaller-ranked
soldiers,” said Kamo as he placed the armor over
his shirt and jeans.
“Exactly why are we going undercover?” asked
Schala.
“We need to rescue Christian. He got himself
captured trying to save us a few months ago. Now
it’s time for the two of us to repay the favor to
him.” Schala then understood as she left the tent

- 202 -

The War of Fate

with Commander and began preparations for the
morning’s battle.
As the two walked through the camp Schala
could feel a sense of uneasiness about the troops.
She knew they had all suffered terrible losses in the
Empire and if it weren’t for Master Destiny and her
magic, most of them wouldn’t be here right now.
“You can probably tell that we need a victory
tomorrow, if for all else to keep the morale of the
soldiers high. But still, the Pentagon estimates that
if we lose too much strength here then Kristie could
make it all the way to Washington with almost no
resistance.” Commander spoke that knowing what
needed to be done. Everybody on the American side
knew that as long as Kristie lived, there was little
hope of winning the war. That’s why Master
Destiny devised a plan to rescue Christian and only
prayed that he had enough strength to deal with
Kristie almost immediately after his rescue.
Finally, nighttime had arrived and Alice and
Kamo were ready to sneak into the Yakumian camp.
Schala, Commander, and Master Destiny had all
stayed up and wished the two of them luck.

The War of Fate

- 203 -

“Now, when you finish rescuing Christian, the
battle will probably already have started, so make
sure you find your way back to our side,” said
Master Destiny as she gave the two swords. Alice
and Kamo both grabbed the confiscated Yakumian
swords and headed out west toward the beach,
where Kristie awaited in her camp.
It was almost two hours before Alice and Kamo
found the Yakumian camp. Kristie must have been
paranoid of spies with all of the guards who were
waiting outside of the camp. Alice noticed the large
flagship docked on the beach and was pretty sure
that’s where Christian was being held, but also
knew Kristie was there as well.
Kamo and Alice snuck around to the side of the
camp and watched the guard movements for any
opening where they could easily sneak into the
camp. Once they were inside, it would be easier to
explore since they were in their Yakumian armor.
No matter how hard they looked forever, Kristie’s
guard schedule seemed impervious from anything
coming from the outside.
In a few minutes Alice looked up and saw
Kristie walk out onto the deck of the ship

- 204 -

The War of Fate

accompanied by two soldiers. Alice nudged Kamo
and pointed to the general yelling orders at a group
of soldiers who had gathered to meet her.
Apparently something had happened to upset
Kristie and possibly shaken up the Yakumian
military.
Just then Alice saw an opening as the soldiers
ran to the ship to see what the commotion was all
about. Alice noticed this and quickly ran for the
hole to get into the camp unnoticed. Kamo quickly
followed Alice as the two managed to enter the
camp and blended right in with the Yakumian
soldiers.
“Good, we made it. Now we need to find out
where they’re keeping Christian. My guess is it’s on
that ship, but we’ll have a hard time getting past
Kristie and her guards. Maybe we should wait until
the battle begins.” said Alice as she continued to
think of a plan of how to save Christian without
giving away their cover. She watched as the sun
began to rise over the horizon behind the ship.
While the sun was rising Kristie quickly
gathered her troops and headed for the battlefield.
Alice and Kamo managed to hide in the kitchen tent

The War of Fate

- 205 -

while the troops left. Even after all they’d been
through Alice still couldn’t believe just how well
disciplined Kristie’s troops were. It was almost like
Kon’s, only this force seemed stronger. As the
troops left the two snuck onto the ship, making sure
not to be spotted by any of the guards who stayed
around, but both of them knew that it would be a
fight to get out of there.
Kamo counted six soldiers on the ship as they
entered the interior to search for Christian. The
corridors inside of the wooden ship were narrow
and it would be impossible to sneak around
anymore. Kamo and Alice both grabbed their
swords and began to walk through the corridor.
The corridor seemed to continue as far as the
two could see. What was weirder was that not a
single Yakumian soldier seemed to be on the ship. It
seemed pretty lax security, especially for someone
as highly regarded as Christian, for them trying to
keep someone prisoner. Kamo and Alice continued
to walk along the empty, dark corridor until they
reached a door that they heard noises coming from.
Kamo pressed his ear to the door and listened for
what the soldiers inside were talking about.

- 206 -

The War of Fate

After a few seconds Kamo stepped away and
whispered to Alice.
“It seems that that’s the room they’re keeping
Christian in,” said Kamo. “I’m guessing there’s
about seven guards in there.”
Alice looked straight at Kamo. “Seven? Since
when have those odds stopped you and Christian?”
“They never have.” Kamo tightened the grip on
his sword and the two burst into the room.
When the door opened the seven guards all
jumped to their feet and began to attack. Both Kamo
and Alice quickly wrapped around them and within
seconds all seven of the soldiers were lying on the
ground. Alice waited at the door they came out of
while Kamo walked into the cell behind him.
Two more guards waited for Kamo as he entered
Christian’s cell, and once again, they didn’t pose
much of a threat. Once Kamo was finished pushing
the bodies to the side of the room, he went to the far
corner and unchained Christian.
Christian was so disheveled and beaten that
most people would have hardly been able to
recognize him. Kamo picked the unconscious

The War of Fate

- 207 -

Christian up and dragged him into the guards’ room
where Alice helped Kamo place Christian on a table.
“I hope we can get him awake before the battle’s
over,” said Kamo as they looked at Christian.
* * *
Commander looked over the battlefield as the
Yakumian troops approached. Master Destiny was
sitting on a horse right next to Commander as her
and Schala began issuing orders to their troops. The
American troops split into three forces as they
began to flank the Yakumian army.
Kristie realized the trick Master Destiny and
Commander were trying to pull and quickly set her
troops up to avoid the flank. She divided her troops
in half and separated them about a hundred feet
from each other.
“I hope those two kids find Christian soon,” said
Master Destiny to Commander. Kristie was
outsmarting them every step of the way and she
knew as well as every other member of the army
Kristie had to fall today for any chance of a victory.

- 208 -

The War of Fate

After a few more seconds of marching and
dividing Kristie immediately stopped all of her
troops. As she turned to Salo she looked at the
massive American force.
“Leave no prisoners.” said Kristie coldly as she
then ordered all of her troops to charge. The
Yakumian troops charged at an alarming speed as
the Americans used their rifles to kill some of the
charging soldiers. For some reason, Kristie was
unable to use her magic, a trick that Master Destiny
had set up for once Kristie landed on American soil.
As soon as the Yakumian troops made it to the
American front lines all rifles were shouldered and
each American soldier grabbed a sword and began
to attack the Yakumians. The entire battlefield soon
became mixed with a cloud of Yakumian and
American troops covering it.
* * *
Christian woke up and the first thing he saw was
the bright light of the lamp above the table. He
squinted as he struggled to sit up, surprised at not
being tied up.

The War of Fate

- 209 -

“Where is this?” asked Christian as he finally
managed to sit up on the table.
“We’re docked outside of L.A. right now, but I
don’t think we can wait here any longer,” said Alice
as she quickly left the room. Christian looked at
Kamo. Kamo took his helmet off so Christian could
tell it was him.
“What’s wrong with her?” asked Christian as he
began to stand up.
“It’s been a long six months. I’ll tell you
everything after the battle, now come on!” replied
Kamo as the two ran out of the room. In the corridor
Kamo stopped and handed a bag to Christian. “I
almost forgot. These are presents from Master
Destiny.” Christian opened the bag and inside was a
fancy sword with some clean clothes. Christian
went into another room and dressed into the jeans
with white shirt, and the black jacket he usually
wore. After he changed, Christian placed his sword
in a custom-made sheath with ancient Yakumian
writing on it. When he was finished the two of
them left the Yakumian camp.
* * *

- 210 -

The War of Fate

The battle seemed to be going into the
Americans’ favor and Kristie wasn’t going to let
that happen. After the Americans started to
outnumber her troops two to one she charged into
the battlefield and began slaughtering countless
soldiers on the field.
Commander watched as he saw Kristie’s
reputation come true in front of him. On the
battlefield, the general truly had no rival. No
wonder Master Destiny said Christian was the only
one who could take her on.
All of a sudden Commander watched as both
Alice’s and Kamo’s troops appeared out of nowhere
and joined the battle, led by their commanding
officers. The battlefield became even more crowded
as the American forces began to once again
outnumber the Yakumians.
Kristie continued to wreak havoc on the soldiers.
Nothing the American forces threw at her seemed to
stop her. Even Master Destiny’s magic wasn’t
enough to get through the general’s defenses.
“General Kristie!” shouted a voice from the far
end of the battlefield. At that moment the battle

The War of Fate

- 211 -

became eerily silent as both sides watched as
Christian, cleaned up and prepared for battle,
walked onto the battlefield holding his sword and
advancing toward Kristie.
“I knew this was going to happen sooner or
later,” said Kristie as she started running toward
Christian. The other soldiers would have started
fighting again, but everyone was interested in
seeing the outcome of the battle. Even tourists and
Los Angeles residents set up lawn chairs outside the
field to watch the battle that was ensuing.
Christian and Kristie met in the middle of the
battlefield, if one could call it that. It now seemed
like more of a middle-school fight between two
rivals where everyone was crowding around to see.
As their swords clashed, everything else became a
blur. Even Schala and Alice were surprised to see
how fast Christian and Kristie’s moved during the
fight.
As the fight ensued, neither Christian nor Kristie
managed to show any signs of weakening after
almost a half hour of fighting. As Kristie managed
to cut Christian somewhere along the torso, he
instantly cut her back. Kristie tried to knock

- 212 -

The War of Fate

Christian on his feet by sweeping her legs under
him, but she couldn’t seem to catch up with his
agility.
Finally, Kristie grew tired of dealing with
Christian. “H…How can you still be standing? I’ve
thrown everything I’ve got at you!” Kristie
exclaimed as she fought to catch her breath. She
decided to run away but as she did a barrier of light
surrounded the area.
“Sorry, general,” said Master Destiny as she
watched the feud from outside the barrier she had
created. “You’ve been dying for a fight with him
ever since he defeated Kon, and now you’re going
to run away as you near defeat? Is your life that
important to you?” Kristie glared at Master Destiny.
She must have taken the last remarks as an insult.
At that moment, Kristie could feel her magic
returning to her and smiled back at Christian.
“I’ll show you what’s important. Now nobody
can stop him! Nobody will be able to be your
‘savior’!” Kristie laughed as she used her magic to
fling a bolt straight through Christian.
Christian fell to the ground, holding his hand
against the wound Kristie had given him. The

The War of Fate

- 213 -

wound was on Christian’s lower stomach, which
gave him a slight chance of survival. Kristie
continued to laugh as she brought her sword above
Christian’s head, knowing that she had actually won.
“So, the great Christian will die by my hands,”
proclaimed the general as she remained on her
psychopathic rant. Christian looked up to see Kristie,
which he thought would be the last image before his
inevitable death.
However, to the right he saw someone. Alice
was standing on the hilltop in front of him watching
everything. It was at that moment he knew he had to
survive. He quickly grabbed his sword and raised it
up to stop Kristie from completing her savage
execution.
“I’ve had a lot of time to think while I was
captured,” said Christian as he stood up to stare
straight into the general’s eyes. “I think I learned
something as a soldier that I think you never have,
Kristie. I learned that in order to fight successfully
you need three things. The first of which is to love
the country you’re fighting for. The second is to
know exactly why you’re fighting. And the third is
to never, never forget the other two. You’ve lost all

- 214 -

The War of Fate

three of these things, Kristie, and have been fighting
this entire war for your own selfish reasons. And
that is why you’ll never be able to defeat me.”
Kristie tried to push back Christian but he
quickly knocked her back instead. While she was
trying to regain her balance, Christian quickly
stabbed her in the heart and then pulled out his
sword just as quickly. He watched as within
seconds Kristie’s body fell to the ground.
In an instant all of the American troops began to
celebrate as the new general, Salo, ordered his
troops to pull out. The battle needed to be won, and
it was. Christian even began to celebrate while
Commander walked onto the battlefield.
“All right, soldiers,” yelled Commander so
everyone could hear. “Tonight, celebrate your welldeserved victory! But make sure you’re here
tomorrow morning to leave again for Yakumi! We
still have a war to win!” Everybody shouted as they
began to walk back to the city. Christian tried to
walk to Alice, but she quickly ran away from him.
Confused, he then went and celebrated with Kamo
as they too walked toward the city for the
celebration.

The War of Fate

- 215 -

The troops had the right to celebrate victory, but
Master Destiny seemed to be the only one who truly
understood what was going on. It may have been
the turning point in the war, but as she looked at the
stars she noticed that the night sky was becoming
emptier and emptier. It seemed that something was
happening, and it was only a prelude to what would
happen once Evolvia released himself from
Christian.
It was getting close to the day she feared. She
knew she had to tell Christian the scope of what was
about to happen.

- 216 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XXIII

The victory celebration was way too short as the
morning after the battle Commander had every
soldier on the boats ready to ship out toward
Yakumi before the sun even began to rise. On the
central flagship Christian was welcomed aboard by
Commander and Master Destiny.
“Welcome aboard the Liberation, Christian,”
said Commander as the three walked toward the
cabins.
Inside of Commander’s cabin Christian gazed
the surroundings of the room in amazement. It
seemed that Commander had not only won several
awards for his military service, but was also a
respected leader of the community. Christian
continued to gaze at all the awards and recognitions
placed across all the walls before Commander
finally stopped him.
“Christian, I’d hate to distract you, but there’s
something that needs to be discussed immediately.”
spoke Master Destiny. Her voice was as serious as it
was concerned. “Now,” she continued. “Before we

The War of Fate

- 217 -

arrive in Yakumi you need to know a few things
about the upcoming battles. First, I need you to
know that you will probably not be able to engage
in any of the army’s movements from now on. The
next battle has been set for the island of Mouktou,
five miles east of Yakumian shore. On this island is
a temple that will tell you about what you are about
to undergo.”
Christian was already confused. “Wait a second.
What exactly is going to happen to me?”
“I don’t even know the exact answer to that. All
I know is that you have something inside of your
soul that threatens all of our lives. I’m trying to help
you fight it.”
“Something inside of me… While I was in
captivity I had a dream in which a person who
looked almost exactly like me spoke to me and gave
me the choice of surviving some kind of universal
destruction.”
“So Evolvia has already spoken to you. It looks
like things are worse than I thought.”
“Who’s Evolvia?”
“He’s the angel of death, minion of the Master
Diamond. It chooses a race that has grown corrupt

- 218 -

The War of Fate

beyond civilization and sends Evolvia to destroy
everything, thus recreating the universe anew,
beginning the dawn of a new dominant species on
Earth. This is the third time this cycle has been
started. First with the Destinos, then with the
dinosaurs and now it appears humans are the next
species in Evolvia’s sights.”
“But we saw the Destinos three years ago during
the final battle with Kon! How did Evolvia destroy
them and yet they reappear?”
“The Destino that underwent the Final Evolution
chose survival of himself over fighting to save his
species. As the centuries grew on he began to
reproduce and that is what we found. At the dawn
of man we sealed what was left of the Destinos in
the other world, completing the seal with the
magical power of the six diamonds Ultemeir was
after three years ago. After she unleashed the
Destinos Evolvia quickly learned and knew he had
to destroy the humans in order to finish the job he
should have finished millions of years ago.
Everything moves in a cycle, such is the way of
life.”

The War of Fate

- 219 -

“So, you’re saying that because I saved the
world three years ago, it started a cycle that led up
to this moment?”
“Exactly. Everything has consequence. Even
saving the ones you love. The choice is yours, but I
do ask you a favor.”
“What kind of favor?”
“For several centuries the Council of Elders has
remained hidden in a timeless realm awaiting the
return of Evolvia, and each time Evolvia wins we
must await his return in a new species and take
shape as that species. Christian Baylor, I ask that
you destroy Evolvia and finally allow the elders,
including myself, to rest.”
Commander stopped the conversation. “Wait a
second here. You’re saying that you’re not even
human? And that you thousands of years old? And
now a threat greater than Kon is preparing for the
destruction of the universe?”
“That’s about the summary of it.” replied Master
Destiny as she once again turned to Christian.
Commander was still dumbfounded as he struggled
to comprehend what was happening.

- 220 -

The War of Fate

“I need to defeat Evolvia to save the universe. If
he’s really that powerful, is there any hope of
defeating him?” asked Christian, almost as confused
as Commander.
“Of course,” said Master Destiny, “Evolvia,
when you face him, will be, in essence, your very
shadow. That is why he will look almost exactly
like you. Think of your confrontation of more as an
inner conflict. If you make the right decisions, fate
will predetermine you as the victor, but make a wish
against Evolvia’s plans and all is lost, or so the
Council has said for centuries. However, I believe
that even if you face fate and challenge the road
already laid out for you then there is still hope.
Hope for a better tomorrow. I believe you, Christian,
can finally end the centuries old conflict against
fate.”
“But why me?”
“The Master Diamond chose you to be Evolvia’s
host for a reason. It fears you, fears what you may
become. I think it knows you have the strength in
your heart to stop Evolvia and it wants him to kill
you as soon as he can.”

The War of Fate

- 221 -

Christian pondered what Master Destiny said for
a couple of minutes, wondering what he should do.
“I’ll sleep on it and tell you what I’ve decided in the
morning.” he said as he left the room. Master
Destiny shook her head and reclined in her chair.
She wondered if the trip to Mouktou would bring a
change in heart for Christian, who she knew was
still unconvinced about risking everything.

- 222 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XXIV

Alice sat at the edge of her bed pondering what
she was going to do. Life seemed so much easier
before she became involved in the war. She
remained unsure about how she would talk to
Christian, and how she would survive the next
battle. Master Destiny ordered everybody to be on
alert. They would be docking on Mouktou Island in
about twelve hours.
Not helping her was the fact that midnight was
fast approaching and Alice knew that it was the
night of Christian’s eighteenth birthday. Master
Destiny predicted something was going to happen
and the few who knew what seemed very edgy
during the evening hours.
A few seconds later Kamo rushed into Alice’s
room.
“Something’s wrong with Christian,” he said,
flustered by something. “Master Destiny wants you
and Commander in his room right away.”
Alice ran outside with Kamo as they ran down
the cramped corridor toward the room designated

The War of Fate

- 223 -

for Christian. Inside the small room the two saw
Master Destiny and Schala as they all looked at
Christian sitting upright on his bed. His eyes were
squinted as if they were in pain and he was holding
his chest and Alice could see some yellow sparks
coming from him.
“What’s happening to him?” asked Alice as she
approached Master Destiny.
“It’s his eighteenth birthday. The day Evolvia
chose to revive himself into this world. Soon this
world will be consumed as part of the universal
destruction depending on the wishes of the Master
Diamond.” Replied Master Destiny as Christian
continued to writhe in his bed.
All of a sudden Christian fell off the bed and fell
unconscious. A large yellow light flew from
Christian’s chest and outside of a porthole.
Everybody watched as the light flew toward the
Yakumi Empire at an alarming speed before
disappearing behind the horizon.
“The Final Evolution has begun,” said Master
Destiny when she walked out of the room. Doctors
then came into the room and carried Christian to the
infirmary.

- 224 -

The War of Fate

Christian was in his coma for over twenty-four
hours even when the ships docked on Mouktou
Island. The troops left and prepared for the coming
battle while he rested in the medical room. Alice,
Kamo, Schala and Commander all went to the
battlefield while Master Destiny agreed to stay on
the ship and wait for Christian to wake up.
* * *
Christian woke up again in the dark room where
he met Evolvia earlier. This time Evolvia wasn’t
trying to hide and was standing right in front of
Christian.
“Have you made your decision?” asked Evolvia.
Christian still hadn’t made up his mind. “If I
chose to survive, will there be a chance that others
will survive?”
“Impossible. You see, one way or another,
everything in this universe is going to die. You are
special, Christian. You have been given the choice
of surviving when the rest of your race is doomed to
extinction. This is the path that has been laid out for
you.”

The War of Fate

- 225 -

“So, you’re saying that Fate prepared this
decision for me?”
“Yes. Fate chose everything you would do, from
surviving Kon’s attack on Kansas City, to defeating
Kon, to being captured by General Kristie all were
choices Fate made for you long before you were
born. No matter what your choice may have been,
Fate would make sure you completed your destiny.”
“What about everybody else? Commander?
Alice? Kamo?”
“You’re actually concerned about others?
You’ve grown up, Christian. The American
Commander will fall in battle before the end of the
war. Alice will survive as the last human in the
world with you. Kamo, he will die with the others.”
Christian remained silent for several seconds as
he thought about what he would do. Then he found
himself thinking about what would happen if he
chose to survive. Everybody he had journeyed with
for the last four years would all die. Everybody in
the world would be killed because of his one
decision. This wasn’t even a matter of one city
anymore, it was the entire planet. His choice was
clear.

- 226 -

The War of Fate

“You’re not destroying this universe.” Christian
finally exclaimed.
“What? You don’t have a choice in the matter.”
“No. I’m going to fight you. I’m going to show
you that humans should no longer be forced to
follow the paths Fate lays out for them. Humans
should be allowed to write their own destinies. You
won’t be allowed to control us humans any longer.”
“How pathetic. I give you a chance to survive
and you throw it away. Very well. The Master
Diamond has no tolerance for those that try to
oppose her order. At the place where you faced Kon
three years ago will be a portal to my realm. When
the time for the final battle comes, I will be waiting.
Until then, try to survive.”
In a flash Evolvia had disappeared. Christian
blinked and found himself on the ship with Master
Destiny hovering over him.
“Did Evolvia speak to you?” asked Master
Destiny as she helped Christian sit up on the bed.
“Yeah, he gave me the choice of surviving the
end of the universe again.”
“And what did you tell him?”

The War of Fate

- 227 -

“I told him… I said that humans are going to
write their own destinies from now on, that I will
destroy him and end this all. Did I make the right
choice? Can I even have a chance at winning
against him?”
Master Destiny smiled. “Only time will say
whether you made the right choice or not. What’s
done is done and now we must prepare you for your
final battle with Evolvia.”
“Is it almost that time?”
“All our lives we write pages in the book of
history. You have also followed this tradition and
been writing you own part in history, even if you
don’t know it. Now it’s you turn to decide how
you’re going to finish this particular chapter in
history. Will this be another installment, or the final
chapter?”
“Final chapter?”
“You’re facing Evolvia in combat instead of
surviving. Now you’ve put everything on the line. If
you fall, nothing will be left alive except for
Evolvia and the Master Diamond.”
Christian put his hand over his forehead. He
knew how important the next battle was going to be.

- 228 -

The War of Fate

It was like Master Destiny said; it was his turn to
decide how he would finish the chapter.

The War of Fate

- 229 -

- 230 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XXV

Every soldier was lined up in several rows that
spanned the length of the eastern beach of Mouktou
Island. On the ship was Commander accompanied
by Kamo, Alice and Schala. Christian and Master
Destiny snuck off to the interior of the island to find
the ancient Yakumian temple which held the key to
stopping Evolvia.
On the western side, Salo was in command of
the Yakumian troops as he prepared his army.
Princess Miion ordered only about a quarter of the
army to attack the island. All other soldiers were
gathering in Yarzon in case the Americans forced
their way through the island. After all of the
Yakumian troops were lined up precisely to cover
the width of the island, Salo ordered the troops to
march toward the center of the forested isle, hoping
to catch the Americans unguarded.
“They’ll try to catch us off guard in the forest.
We can’t let that happen. Our troops need to watch
their feet as well as their heads. No doubt Salo will
use the trees to his advantage. I say we also use the

The War of Fate

- 231 -

trees.” said Commander as he pointed to some
diagrams of the island.
“What are you saying?” asked Kamo.
“I’m saying we send a few camouflaged units
into the forest early and see how many we can take
out before the Yakumian troops make it to our
frontlines. The fewer troops the better since our
sword skills are still in need of practice.”
Kamo and Alice nodded as they both left the
ship to prepare their troops. Each one of the four
commanders chose five of their best soldiers to
camouflage and sneak into the interior of the island.
Finally, all of the camouflaged troops disappeared
from the island and Alice, Kamo and Schala all
positioned their soldiers in a semi-circle
surrounding Commander’s main brigade.
Commander used his telescope to see into the
interior of the island and how the pre-battle
preparations were going. Almost fifty Yakumian
soldiers had already fallen to the stealth troops but
the Yakumian army was still managing to push
through the forest to the American camp. However,
the Yakumians’ blue armor stood out in the forest
and it made all of the soldiers easy targets.

- 232 -

The War of Fate

Commander quickly ordered his troops to advance
toward the forest. Within an hour the battle seemed
like it had already been won. Salo soon had no
choice and ordered his troops to retreat to Yarzon
Castle, where the decisive battle would begin. The
American forces began to celebrate a second victory
in a row as Commander joined in. Before the full
celebration began, however, Commander decided to
give a short speech.
“Soldiers, I know we have been faced with
hardship in this war the last several months.
However, luck seems to have turned us around
toward our final battle. Celebrate tonight, for
tomorrow, we march toward Yarzon City and end
this war!”
The soldiers all cheered as many loaded
themselves onto the ships to celebrate. Kamo, Alice
and Schala all joined in the celebration as well even
though Christian had still not returned with Master
Destiny.
* * *

The War of Fate

- 233 -

Master Destiny had to light a second torch as the
two began to reach the interior of the Yakumian
temple. Aside the walls were drawings of Destinos
and what seemed like ancient Yakumian leaders,
but since Christian couldn’t read the ancient
Yakumian writing, he couldn’t tell what it was. The
writing all looked like hash marks with dots and
joints at the two ends. Maybe the number of dots
was supposed to symbolize which letter the symbol
represented. That brought him to his sword that
Master Destiny gave him which had similar marks
on it.
“What exactly do these marks say?” asked
Christian as he stared at the sword.
“I had to engrave them myself,” said Master
Destiny. “But they say ‘I am the one who fights
against my own destiny to free others from theirs.’”
Christian was surprised. Master Destiny must
have known that he would choose the path he chose.
He began to think about how he would fight the
battle with Evolvia as the two entered the large
sanctum of the temple. The temple itself seemed to
be about as big as the one in the Black Hole Mine

- 234 -

The War of Fate

with the same glowing circles on the floor where
the faithful were meant to sit.
“Was Ultemeir here to collect one of the
diamonds?” asked Christian.
“Yes she was. She alone destroyed the guardian
of the shrine and stole the diamond from the Alter,
thus bringing the world closer to turmoil.” replied
Master Destiny as she raised the torch high enough
to see the large mural on the back wall. The mural
had two Destinos, one of a gold Destino with the
other being black with both of their claws entangled.
“This was the first showdown of the Final
Evolution,” said Master Destiny as Christian
continued to be amazed at the mural. “The Destinos
fought until the chosen one was brought to the edge
of death, when he gave in to Fate and chose to
survive. I hope you will fight until the end,
Christian, even if it means your own death.”
Christian swallowed, unsure of what to say. He
began to wonder if the same thing would happen to
him, would he have the courage to face his own
death?
“I see you disobeyed me,” said a voice suddenly
from the entrance to the sanctum. Christian and

The War of Fate

- 235 -

Master Destiny turned around to see an elderly man
in a brown cloak with similar designs to Master
Destiny etched into the cloth.
“You are wrong, Ralfor,” replied Master Destiny.
“This boy is different. He will defeat Evolvia!”
“He will destroy us all!”
“Please! Do what you want with me, but let this
boy free us!”
“He does not have the strength, isn’t that what
I’ve been telling you? None of the ones chosen for
the Final Evolution have ever been strong enough to
defeat Evolvia. It is unfortunate, but we must
continue our eternity of servitude to Fate, we must
abide by her will.”
“No! We can’t serve Fate anymore! We must
protect the humans. Isn’t that what you said when
we created the council after sealing the Destinos?”
Ralfor stopped for a second. It seemed Master
Destiny was using everything she could to let
Christian face Evolvia. “Fine, let me test the boy. If
he can wound me in battle, I will let him face
Evolvia. However, if he loses, I will kill both of you.
Agreed?”

- 236 -

The War of Fate

Master Destiny nodded. “Christian, consider this
a test for Evolvia. Use all your strength as I’m sure
he won’t hold anything back.”
“Is he that powerful?” asked Christian.
“Well, he did defeat a Destino single-handed
while his legs were bound in his younger days.”
said Master Destiny
“Okay, he’s really powerful, I get the picture.”
Christian drew his sword and began to walk
toward Ralfor. Ralfor placed his hand in the air and
a double-bladed sword appeared in his hand. After a
brief pause the two ran toward each other and
quickly clashed swords. Their swords clashed about
three times before Christian leaped over Ralfor and
tried to attack his back. Ralfor swiftly turned around
and blocked Christian’s attack as the two continued
their battle.
Ralfor then hit Christian across the head with the
blunt end of his sword and Christian was sent flying
into the wall behind him. Ralfor began to run
toward him, but Christian rebounded off the wall
and lunged at Ralfor. Finally Ralfor did an overhead
sweep of his sword toward Christian’s neck.
Christian quickly ducked from the attack and

The War of Fate

- 237 -

managed to cut Ralfor in the back of the leg as he
rolled away from him.
Ralfor looked down and saw the blood that
began to come from the wound.
“We had a deal,” said Christian as he placed his
sword back in its sheath.
“Very well,” replied Ralfor. “Just promise me
that you will defeat Evolvia and restore peace to
this universe.”
Christian looked toward the ceiling and saw
even more murals. “I can’t promise anything, but I
will try my best to end this.”
Ralfor looked almost as if he was smiling before
he disappeared a second later.
“He’ll be waiting for me in the chamber of the
Council,” said Master Destiny. “It’s time we went
back to the ship. The battle should be over by now.”
Christian nodded as the two walked out of the
temple.

- 238 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XXVI

The following day all of the American troops
had set up camp outside of Yarzon. The city could
slightly be seen on the horizon from Commander’s
tent where a meeting of Captains from all squads
were meeting. The sun had begun to set as the
meeting began.
“This goes without saying, but tomorrow is the
deciding battle of the war,” began Commander.
“We’re going to need a good strategy. We’re
estimating that we’ll be facing a Yakumian force
larger than we’ve ever seen. The fact that Miion
will be issuing commands within the comfort of her
own castle won’t make the battle any easier.”
“Ultemeir my be psychotic,” interrupted Master
Destiny, “But she’s a military genius. Chances are
she’ll be able to figure out anything we throw at
her.”
“Then we need to send somebody in to kill her,”
replied Alice, “If I went in I think I could destroy
Miion.”

The War of Fate

- 239 -

“That won’t be a good idea. Miion is more
powerful than she was three years ago. It will take
all of us to take her out.” continued Master Destiny.
“I agree,” said Commander. “We need to all stay
here and command each brigade to make sure we
can win the battle.” Everybody agreed with the plan.
After the battle was over Commander, Alice, Kamo,
Schala and Master Destiny would all storm Yarzon
Castle to defeat Miion.
The meeting continued for a couple of hours
while everybody gave ideas on a strategy for the
final battle. Nobody seemed to be able to reach an
agreement about which strategy would work best as
each wanted their own strategy to be used. During
the heated debate Leon walked into the tent.
“I heard the American troops were here, so I
decided to come and offer my help. I’m Leon,
leader of the Yakumian Resistance.”
“Aren’t you a little young to be a rebel leader?”
asked Commander.
“Kasumi Layo used to be our leader, but she was
captured by Miion and executed. Now I’m in charge.
I’ve got two hundred and fifty rebels ready for you
to take command of, if you want them.”

- 240 -

The War of Fate

“No,” said Commander, “they’re your troops;
you should take command of them. However, we
could use some help in the battle tomorrow.”
“Good. I’ll order my troops alongside yours. I
need to tell you a few things about the battle.
Miion’s going to have archers on the rooftops of the
city. She’s ordered all citizens into the castle and set
her army up throughout the city. The soldiers are
expected to start gathering at the main gate at
daybreak.”
“Thanks for the info. It looks like we have about
twelve hours before the battle begins then,” said
Commander. “Everybody get some sleep and make
sure you’re well prepared in the morning.”
Everybody then left the tent for their own tents
as they began to prepare for the morning’s battle
and then went to sleep. Separate tents were made
for Leon and the rebels.
Master Destiny walked to a small ridge where
Christian was standing, looking at the castle.
“When are you leaving?” asked Master Destiny.
“Tonight. I was just saying goodbye,” replied
Christian.
“Goodbye?”

The War of Fate

- 241 -

“Evolvia wants me to face him in his own realm.
There’s a chance that even if I do defeat him, I
won’t make it home alive. I want to see this earth
one last time before the final battle.”
“I hate to say it, but Fate won’t take kindly to
you if you manage to defeat Evolvia. Even if you
survive, the Master Diamond will seek you. It will
seek revenge for what you did.”
“Why was it named the Final Evolution?”
“It was named that to be mankind’s final test. To
tell you the truth it has nothing to do with evolution
at all.”
“It doesn’t?”
“Evolution is a fraud. A fraud created by some
scientist to explain what he couldn’t so he made up
a story. Humans have never gone through an
evolution. They have only gained knowledge. One
man learns the knowledge and passes it onto their
children, who in turn pass it on to their children. We
‘evolve’ only because of what we teach our children.
That is what has made humanity the people we are
today.”
“So, the chain of knowledge will continue or
end today.”

- 242 -

The War of Fate

“Yes. It’s all in your hands. I never mentioned it
to you but there is one thing that you never learned
about the Council. We call this ongoing cycle of the
Final Evolution ‘The War of Fate’. In actuality, it’s
the war against Fate, as every species tries to write
its own destiny and eventually falls to the cruel
hand of Evolvia. The Destinos decided to live,
while the dinosaurs made a decision that led to their
extinction.”
“Well, this time things are going to be
different.”
Master Destiny smiled as Christian left the ridge
to gather his belongings inside of his tent. After he
grabbed his sword he stopped by Alice’s tent and
looked inside. Alice was fast asleep and looked
peaceful as Christian only smiled and then left. He
quickly mounted a horse tied up at the side of the
camp and rode off toward Yarzon Castle. He
followed the river to the main gate. He then dove
into the grate leading into the city which would take
him all the way to the castle where Evolvia waited.

The War of Fate

- 243 -

- 244 -

The War of Fate

Chapter XXVII

Before the sun had risen every American soldier
was in their respective place for the battle.
Commander and Master Destiny had worked out a
strategy for the battle and had begun to place their
troops where the strategy would benefit. Miion
couldn’t pass up the opportunity to march straight
through the American troops to the camp and that
was the plan. Give them a clear shot to the
commanding officers and then close them in.
All of the commanding officers watched as the
Yakumian army began to march toward them in
unison. Not a single soldier was out of step from the
rest of them. On the left side of Commander, Alice
and Leon were prepared with their own troops.
“Are you scared?” asked Alice to Leon.
“Who isn’t?” replied Leon as he saw that the
American troops were largely outnumbered.
In an instant the Yakumian troops broke their
formation and blindly began to charge the American
forces.

The War of Fate

- 245 -

“What’s going on here?” asked Commander to
himself. “Miion’s not this stupid. She would never
blindly charge an enemy like this. Everybody!
Reform ranks!” The army struggled to attack the
Yakumian troops as the battle quickly became
enveloped in a mess of soldiers.
* * *
Christian managed to make his way through the
empty castle to the roof where the portal to the
realm of Evolvia was, just like Evolvia told him it
would be. In front of the portal, however, Ralfor
was standing. Christian drew his sword as Ralfor
stared at him.
“You do realize the penalty for failure, don’t
you?” asked Ralfor suddenly.
“I do. That’s why I can’t afford to lose to him.”
replied Christian.
“If you manage do defeat Evolvia, you should
be aware that the gateways between the realms will
disappear. Magic will be gone forever. Everything
will change back to the way things were before the
Yakumians even existed in this era.”

- 246 -

The War of Fate

Christian stopped and paused for a second.
“Maybe… Maybe things will be better that way.”
Ralfor agreed silently as Christian stepped
through the portal into the Realm of Evolvia.
The inside of the realm seemed like a thick sheet
of glass underneath Christian’s feet as he walked
toward where Evolvia was standing. Around
Evolvia were two large blue rings etched into the
glass with some sort of symbols wrapping around
the large diamond below the glass in which the
rings seemed to revolve around. That must have
been the Master Diamond as Evolvia was in the
center of the rings.
“I was beginning to wonder if you would come,
Christian Baylor,” said Evolvia as Christian entered
the rings.
Christian quickly drew his sword and raised it to
his shoulders. “It’s going to end here,” he said as he
took a couple of steps forward.
“I see your beliefs have made you stronger, but I
must know something. What are fighting for? Is it
someone who you may indeed love, but she doesn’t
feel the same way? Or is it for your own selfish
reasons?”

The War of Fate

- 247 -

“Shut up. I’ve had enough of your riddles.”
Evolvia began to laugh. “You really think that
defeating me will end the War of Fate?”
“It’s a good starting point.”
“I see there’s no convincing you of joining me. I
guess that your universe is just going to have to be
destroyed…” Evolvia swung his hand around and a
black sword appeared in his right hand. “…and
you’ll just have to be the first victim.”
Evolvia and Christian both jumped toward each
other as their swords clashed. Christian immediately
spun around and kicked Evolvia in the chest
sending him flying back a few feet. Evolvia quickly
regained his balance and ran at Christian once again
and jumped toward him. Their swords then locked
once again.
“I see you are more powerful than I expected,”
said Evolvia. “But still, it won’t be enough to save
the ones you love.”
Christian only glared at Evolvia and sent him
flying back again. He then jumped toward Evolvia.
Their swords clashed about four more times when
Evolvia managed to cut Christian across the
stomach. Christian stumbled back and then noticed

- 248 -

The War of Fate

Evolvia lunging for him. He quickly evaded the
attack and then cut Evolvia across the back.
“So we’re even. What makes you think that you
can kill me here?” asked Evolvia.
“Because six billion people are counting on me
to win!” shouted Christian as he made a lunge for
Evolvia. Evolvia jumped over Christian and quickly
made a leg sweep for Christian, who then jumped
and back flipped to clash with Evolvia’s sword once
again.
“We’re the same blood, Christian,” said Evolvia.
“Anything you know I also know. I know even the
person you love the most in this world. And I think
wherever Alice is will be the first place I’ll strike
when I begin to destroy the universe.”
“There’s just one problem,” said Christian, “You
won’t make it back to Earth alive!” Christian kicked
Evolvia who instantly fell to the ground. Evolvia
then jumped straight to his feet and lunged
frantically at Christian.
“Just face it boy, you can’t defeat me,” yelled
Evolvia.
“Funny, that’s what Kon said three years ago,
too,” responded Christian.

The War of Fate

- 249 -

“Isn’t your revenge against Kon the reason I’m
here?”
“Yeah, I know. I’m here to correct my mistakes,
though. Not run from them!”
Evolvia swung at Christian’s feet and Christian
kicked away his sword. Evolvia rolled to grab his
sword once again and then stood at opposite ends of
the circle.
“Any last words for Alice?” asked Evolvia.
“I’ll tell her myself...” exclaimed Christian in
return. “… when we return home together!”
“You going to tell her that you love her?”
“No. I won’t tell her that.”
“Why? It’s what you want to say. I’ve been
inside your body for eighteen years. I know what
you want the most.”
“If I learned one thing these last four years, it’s
this. True love… True love isn’t loving somebody
who loves you back. It’s loving somebody and
having the courage to do what’s right! Now,
Evolvia. Let’s finish this!” Christian drew his
sword and began to run as fast as he could toward
Evolvia. Evolvia then also began to run. At the

- 250 -

The War of Fate

midway point the two jumped in the air and slashed
each other as hard as they could.
Christian was the first to fall to the ground. He
had a deep gash in his left shoulder that was quickly
starting to draw blood. He then turned to Evolvia
and noticed him floating at the point where they had
met.
“You… You… actually… wrote… your own…
destiny…” muttered Evolvia as he looked down to
notice Christian’s sword stuck straight through his
heart.
“It’s finally over.” said Christian back as yellow
sparks began to emit from Evolvia’s body. In an
instant Evolvia’s body became enveloped in a
bright yellow light that surrounded the entire area.
Christian became lost in the wave and couldn’t
figure out what was happening at all.
* * *
On the battlefield everybody stopped as a large
explosion was heard in the direction of Yarzon
Castle. Commander noticed the roof was emitting

The War of Fate

- 251 -

yellow lights that were being sent in every direction.
Master Destiny was the first to jump up and down.
“He’s done it! Christian defeated Evolvia!”
shouted Master Destiny.
The Yakumian troops soon surrendered. The
leader of the Yakumian army who officially signed
the surrender spoke about how Princess Miion and
General Salo left without any word and left the
Yakumian army to fend for themselves. Later
investigations into Yarzon Castle confirmed that.
Everybody began to celebrate the end of the war
and the defeat of Evolvia, even though few people
knew about the actual events.

- 252 -

The War of Fate

Epilogue

Soon after the battle was over, magic began to
wane from the planet. Anything that was created by
magic, including the monsters that roamed both
countries, began to disappear as well. Alice watched
as Master Destiny was standing on a ridge away
from the celebration.
“Master Destiny, why don’t you join the party?”
asked Alice as she joined Master Destiny.
“I think I’ve stayed in this world too long
already.” replied Master Destiny as she began to
disappear.
“You can’t… We still need you to help find
Christian.”
“Thanks, but I’ve been waiting to go where I’m
going for thousands of years now, and I think that
you humans can help each other now. You don’t
need magic to help you anymore.”
Master Destiny smiled back at Alice as she
disappeared into the sky. Alice looked up at the
clouds and a tear fell in her eye.

The War of Fate

- 253 -

“Thank you,” said Alice as she walked back to
the party.
In Yarzon City, Leon gathered all of the citizens
of Yarzon for an announcement.
“Citizens of Yarzon, I bring good news. The war
is over! Furthermore, I announce the formation of
the Yakumian Republic!” the citizens also began to
celebrate in the city as Leon visited the graveyard
and stood at Kasumi’s grave.
“It’s what you wanted, isn’t it?” Leon said as he
placed a flower on the tombstone.
* * *
One week later Commander, Alice, Kamo and
Schala all met in Washington D.C. for an awards
ceremony with the President. Each of them received
an honor for their heroism during the Yakumian war.
Afterwards, Kamo and Alice met in Kansas City for
their own homecoming celebration.
“It just doesn’t seem right without the hero of
this story,” said Kamo as he looked at Alice.
“No, it doesn’t. But I’m sure Christian’s out
there somewhere trying to find a way to get back

- 254 -

The War of Fate

home. Meanwhile, I think it’s time we start acting
like regular eighteen-year olds. I think it’s time to
get back to school. How about you?”
“I think I’ll go back to New York and go to
college with Schala.” Kamo smiled at Alice.
“You didn’t…”
“Yep, I did. It looks like she’s going to be
coming here next week for the ceremony.” Kamo
and Alice laughed as they looked at the horizon.
Alice later went to the cliff where Mia knocked
her down four years earlier.
“Christian, I know you’re still alive out there
somewhere. Please, hurry home.” She looked into
the sunset and remembered the four-year journey
they had all had together.
* * *
“I seem to be stranded in some sort of unknown
world. After Evolvia was defeated I woke up on the
mountaintop and began to journey around, hoping
for somebody to point me in the right direction. I
thought that defeating Evolvia would be the last
chapter in my adventure, but it appears that I was

The War of Fate

- 255 -

wrong. Evolvia was only the end of the first episode
of my journey. I do not know where the path ahead
of me will take me; all I know is that Fate can’t
control it anymore. I’m free to write my own destiny,
my own story, my own chapter in history, and
continue to walk down this road until I reach the
path home.”
Christian finished writing in the journal William
gave him and placed the journal in a goatskin bag.
In a cave where he decided to rest for a while,
Christian looked at the horizon in front of him, at
the endless plains at the base of the mountain. He
knew this couldn’t be anywhere on Earth. He must
have been stuck in another realm, like Ralfor
predicted. The gateways may have been closed,
magic may have vanished, but Christian knew that
he could find a way home. “It looks like I have
another journey ahead of me,” said Christian to
himself. “But, now, we are free.”

- 256 -

The War of Fate

