SOMETHING FROM ABOVE
Donald Wandrei
1

In themselves, the events had all the horror of a nightmare but a nightmare
can be explained so that it ceases to oppress one's mind. The incidents at
Norton in western Minneso were different, for now they may never be
completely explained. It is not so much the things we know that terrify us a
it is the things we do not know, the things that break all known laws and
rules, the things that come upon us unaware and shatter the pleasant dream
of our little world. The occur-rence at Norton was of such a kind, a horror
so appalling and incredible a nature that no one concerned will ever be abl
to forget the day of madness.
Everything that might have any bearing on the explanation is included in th
following narrative in order that the truth may not be overlooked through
omission. It may be that some facts have not yet come to light, and perhaps
there have been included a few details that do not really pertain to the
affair. The incidents themselves may not be in the right order. If further
information should be possessed by any one, the narrative will gladly be
corrected, for anything that may help to explain will be eagerly welcomed
by scientists and public alike. We walk in darkness with phantoms and
specters we know not of, and our little world plunges blind-ly through
abysses toward a goal of which we have no conception. That thought itself
is a blow at our beliefs and comprehension. We used to content ourselves b
thinking we knew all about our world, at least; but now it is different, and
we wonder if we really know anything, or if there can be safety and peace
anywhere in the wide universe.
2

The phenomena with which we are here concerned began with the blotting
out of the stars, an astronomical riddle which was observed by three
watchers: Professor Grill of Harvard; his assistant, Mr. Thorndyke; and an
amateur as-tronomer in California, Mr. Nelson. An odd feature of the

ob-servation is that the two Easterners swear the blotting out occurred far
down on the western horizon, whereas Mr. Nel-son reported that it took
place near Saturn. Are we to believe that one observation was inaccurate, o
that there actually were two simultaneous phenomena in different parts of
the heavens? In the light of former and after events, the latter conclusion
seems more likely. Furthermore, Mr. Nelson's observation, made on the
night of March 28, is apparently connected with one he had made on the
preceding night. According to a note he had sent in to the Mount Wilson
Observatory, he had been idly examining the planet Saturn on the night of
March 27. The atmosphere was exceptionally clear, the observation perfec
The rings were so plain and the planet so impressive in its peculiar way tha
he stayed on watching it minute after minute. Thus it was that the
un-expected happened even while he watched. Shortly after one o'clock,
there appeared on its surface a spot of such blind-ing, dazzling radiance tha
he thought his vision must have been strained and he was merely seeing
things. He looked away for a minute; when he resumed his watch at the
eye-piece of his telescope, he discovered that where the spot of
incandescent brilliance had been was now a dot of blackness. As he
watched it in curiosity, he saw it grow lighter and lighter until finally the
planet presented its normal appear-ance. Mr. Nelson might have ignored th
matter altogether if he had not had sufficient scientific training to respect
the cardinal principle of never overlooking any fact or data. Thus it was tha
he wrote down his observation and duly sent it in.
The blotting out of the stars on the night of March 28 was an even stranger
phenomenon. In the act of training his telescope on Saturn again to look fo
a reappearance of the radiant spot, Mr. Nelson noticed a star suddenly
flicker out and return, another vanish and shine bright again an instant later
He thought at first that he must be the victim of an optical illusion, but he
kept on observing, and saw that the stars which disappeared and shone aga
were in a straight line which he computed to lie in the general path between
Saturn and the Earth. It was a curious spectacle to watch, ac-cording to
Nelson. It was just as if you were strolling down a street at noon, and
stopped to look at a diamond on a black plush cushion in a jeweller's
window; and then all at once the diamond wasn't there, even while you we
looking at it; and then suddenly there was the diamond again, sparkling as

ever. It was not as if a solid body had come between you and the diamond,
but rather as if something invisible had crossed your field of vision,
something you could not see but which intercepted light-rays. The
observation of the two Harvard astronomers duplicated Nelson's, but they
said that the blot-ting out took place down on the western horizon, far awa
from Saturn. Odder still is their statement that the stars vanished in a straig
line that progressed in the general direc-tion of the Earth.
No wide attention was paid to these unusual observations, and even the
three watchers did not have much more than idle curiosity. For that reason
because every one was unpre-pared, the terror at Norton stalked out of nig
like a hideous dream, as overwhelming as madness itself. Perhaps the rest o
the story should be told through the eyes of Lars Loberg, a stolid Norwegia
farmer living some three miles from Norton, for it was around his farm that
the terror centered, and he himself was a first-hand witness until he went
insane and committed suicide.
He arose early as usual on the morning of March 30. It was cold in the
farmhouse and he stepped outside to chop an armful of kindling wood. It
was already light and snow was falling when he opened the door. He starte
to go through, then stopped just beyond the threshold and looked around
with a blank, puzzled expression on his face. He carefully traced his steps t
the room he had just left, and stood there, looking across the farmyard and
open fields.
"Helga!" he called in a curious tone to his wife. "Come here!"
His wife came, and the two stood in the doorway looking at a sight such as
they had never before seen. The whole air seemed to be oozing blood. Not
breath of wind was stir-ring, not a cloud hung in the sky, but a fine mist wa
falling, a substance that was neither snow nor dust nor blood but that had
something of the nature of all three. The snowdrifts around the farmhouse
that were not yet fully melted in the spring thaws were already covered wit
a mantle of brownish-red, and minute by minute, as the strange stuff kept
falling from the sky, the layer on the ground grew thicker. The two of them
stood there in the quiet of dawn with awe and a little fear, looking at the
unusual downfall and a world that was bloody-red. There was a queer odor
in the air, almost a stench. It reminded Lars of a two-days-dead cat he once
stumbled on, and of a pig he had bled to death recently.

Lars stretched his arm out and caught some of the falling stuff in his hand.
"See!" he said simply to Helga. The stuff melted. It did not run off like
water. It stayed in little oily globules of a color like old blood. Instead of
having the fresh, earthly smell of snow or rain, it gave off an unpleasant
odor that offensive-ly suggested something dead.
Helga was superstitious. She shivered and drew back from Lars'
outstretched palm. "Red snow!" she said uneasily. "It—it ain't natural—I
don't like it. Oh. Lars, shut the door!"
Lars looked out somberly for a minute. "Yeah—red snow. Maybe it means
bad year for the crops." Then he shrugged his shoulders and half smiled at
Helga. "But it's probably only dust in the air that got mixed up with the
snow. Nothing to get scared about, and—"
"Listen!" broke in Helga sharply.
Lars left unfinished what he had started to say. Up to the house from the
pig-sty drifted an uproar of grunting and mad squealing such as he had nev
heard. In the barn, the horses were neighing and whinnying shrilly, and he
heard the wild clatter of trampling hooves. Above the racket of the
frightened animals he heard the mournful, whimpering howl of Jerry, the
Scotch collie.
Lars tore out of the house on a run. "You stay here!" he shouted back as
Helga started to follow him. "I'll see what's after 'em and quiet 'em down!"
The red snow was still falling. Lars raced to the barn first but there were no
tracks of any intruder around it in the new-fallen snow, nor could he find
any evidence that man or beast had been prowling around the pig-pen. Lar
ran back to the barn, slid open the doors, and did his best to quiet the
plunging horses. Something had badly scared them, but he had little time to
speculate on what it was. For the first time in his life, the animals paid
hardly any attention to his efforts to calm them, and Lars became more
puzzled and bewil-dered every moment. Then he heard Jerry howling
nearer, the patter of racing feet came across the yard, and the dog leaped
through the open door, shaking itself and tumbling around at his feet.
"There, Jerry, there, Jerry," Lars crooned, bending over to pat the dog. His
hand came away wet with the snow, and then it struck him that the animals
were afraid of the weird downfall.
There was nothing much he could do till the snow stopped, so he walked

around among them talking to them and pat-ting them until they became a
little more quiet. About seven o'clock, the snow ceased falling. The horses
were still nerv-ous, but gradually ended their crazy bucking and whinny-ing
Lars decided it was safe to leave them now, and walked back to the
farmhouse, mopping his brow.
Over bacon and eggs and steaming coffee, Lars and Helga discussed the
phenomenon, but with these homely breakfast items before them and
a-warm feeling inside, the strange snow became less mysterious and
alarming to them.
"No wonder the pigs and hosses was scared!" said Lam, half in jest. "I gues
anybody'd feel funny to see red snow instead of white. But it ain't anything
to worry about. It's probably just dust in the air like I said."
"Maybe so," Helga answered doubtfully. "But where's there any red dust
around here?"
The question stumped Lam. Ha knew Minnesota, the Da-kotas, Montana,
and Nebraska, but in none of those states was there anything with the
peculiar color of the snow.
"I wish you'd stay around here today," Helga kept on slow-ly. "I don't feel
right somehow. Things ain't natural like they ought to be."
"No need to worry," Lars answered briefly. "Everything's all right."
As if in mockery of his words, the whole house shook, the coffee slopped
across the table, and a terrific crash burst on their ears from nearby.
Without a word Lars made another run for the door. Helga, with
superstitious fear clutching heavy at her heart, stayed behind to straighten
out the table. Some intuition warned her that something was wrong with th
world. The red snow, and now this explosive crash—what could they mean
She heard Lars and Jerry walking around the farm-house as they searched
for the cause of the, disturbance, but when Lam re-entered the house ten
minutes later, the frown on his face showed the futility of his search.
"What was it?" Helga asked.
"Nothing that I could find," he replied, puzzled and irri-tated. "Sounded lik
a tree or something fell on the barn, but there wasn't anything the matter. I
guess maybe we're hear-ing things that ain't."
It was poor comfort. The two finished their breakfast in silence. At the
conclusion of the meal, Lars said briefly, "I'm going up to the forty-acres to

see how the ground's coming along. If you want me, shout and I'll hear you
Helga made no answer in spite of her fears—she knew the futility of arguin
with Lars.
Her husband called Jerry and the two set off. The sun was up and the sky
fairly clear. It was rapidly getting warmer. The red snow already looked
soggy and the air had a bad smell, malodorous and stale.
A path led from the rear of the farmhouse down past the chicken coops and
barn, cut across the hog-run, then ran across an open field and finally up a
small hill, on the other side of which lay the forty-acres, a tract used for
wheat. Lars walked down the path past the barn and across the hog-run. A
they started across the open field, Jerry suddenly bristled. Lars heard him
growl savagely. He looked around, but noth-ing unusual was in sight.
"C'mon, Jerry," he called and walked on. The dog lagged behind him,
growling and whining. Then Lars stopped abrupt-ly in surprise. Some ten
yards ahead of him was a great gash in the wet earth. It must have been
freshly made, for the earth bulged around its edges, and there was as yet no
pool of water in it.
As Lars continued striding toward it after his momentary pause, Jerry set u
a furious barking that ended in a lone whining howl, and refused to advanc
"Stop that fool bark-ing and come along." Lars swore irritably. His nerves
were becoming frayed. But the collie absolutely would not come, and Lars
went on, thinking that the dog would follow him if he took the lead.
He was a few feet from the edge of the gash when some-thing he had not
seen caught his ankle and he tripped for-ward. In one mad second of horro
the pit of hell seemed to open up before him. Something else he could not
see hit him a great blow on his forehead, and his outstretched arms were
bruised on a hard substance. He was leaning forward at a forty-five degree
angle over the deep gash. He looked straight down, and saw its bottom a
dozen feet below him, but he did not fall. He might have been resting on a
steel platform, but there was absolutely nothing in sight.
A great bubbling of sweat broke out on him. The blood from the bruise on
his forehead dripped down, but hung sus-pended in midair a few inches fro
his face. His eyes glazed with terror, Lars slowly pushed himself upright an
stood trembling a moment. He put out his hand again, and his fin-gers felt
the same stuff, hard as steel, colder than ice, with knobs here and there and

strange grooves. There was one depression on the solid surface into which
he put his fist, and the hand vanished from sight.
At that, sheer fright gripped him and he turned and ran with all his strength
while Jerry whined along at his heels. The terrific crash remained a mystery
no longer—would to God that it had! Something that never was of this eart
had fallen in the midst of an open field, whether by accident or purpose. Al
the old folk-lore and witch legends of his race surged into his thoughts to
increase his panic. But he thought of Helga too as he ran, and decided that
he would say nothing which might alarm her more.
He stopped for a minute outside the farmhouse to get his breath. Then he
walked in, trying to be his usual self.
"That you, Lars?" Helga called out. A moment later she entered the kitchen
When she saw him, she ran forward. "Why, Lars, your face is bleeding!"
"Yes, I—I tripped and fell."
Helga looked into his eyes that were yet wild and dilated, and the truth of
intuition leaned into her heart.
"Lars! That crash—you know what it was! There was something in the
field!"
"No," he answered deliberately, "no, there was nothing in the field."
It was a solemn pair that sat down at midday for lunch.
The oppressive weight of mystery and fear hung over the table, and stoppe
even the small talk that Lars and Helga ordinarily indulged in. By tacit
consent, they said nothing further about the incidents of the morning.
Toward two o'clock, the sky began to cloud up, and it grew cooler outside;
but the red snow had all melted in the warmth of the late morning, and
around the farmhouse bung a putrid smell, stale and nauseating, the odor o
a charnel-house or the grave.
Lars puttered around the kitchen and basement, doing odd jobs to pass tim
He did not leave the house. His nerves were on the ragged edge, and he did
not know what might happen next. The red snow and the thing in the field
lay heavy on his heart. Nature had gone all wrong this day, the security and
trust of a lifetime had vanished in a brief hour. What could he do in the
presence of a mystery that seemed to have no explanation, and things that
went against the laws of life he had relied on? As the great masses of leade
clouds piled up overhead, and gusts of chill wind whined around the yard

and the house, the indefinable fear of the unknown hung over his thoughts.
He had only one ray of hope: that the paper which the rural postman would
leave in the afternoon would give some explanation of the mysteri-ous
snowfall. The thing in the field he vainly tried to put out of mind by
pretending that it must be a new kind of comet.
It was about four o'clock when Lars, who was upstairs fix-ing a broken
window-sash, heard the postman's whistle. He put down his hammer and
nails, then walked down a short passage to the head of the stairs. From
there, looking across the front bedroom and out its window, he could see th
mailbox on its post where the country road ran by some ninety or a hundre
yards in front of the house. There the familiar horse and buggy of the
postman were halted. To his surprise, Helga with the mail in her hand was
standing there too, talk-ing with him but evidently on the point of returning
to the house. She must have seen him coming down the road and gone out
meet him.
The sight of Helga made him curiously uneasy. He wished she had waited t
let him go after the mail. As he started to descend the flight of steps, he
decided he would ask her to stay inside for the next day or so. But all
thoughts were driven from his head and black terror overwhelmed him in a
sickening rush when he was half-way down.
For there came to his ears a sound that was yet many sounds. There was a
strange, long zing-g-g, the mad whinny of a horse, and the sudden, piercing
shriek of a woman. And then there came again that long, strange zing-g-g,
and the noise of a great wind.
Lars cleared the rest of the steps in one leap and stumbled on a twisted
ankle around the corner and to the front door and so outside. The blind fea
which he had felt as he hung over the pit that morning suspended by a thing
which he could not see was as nothing to the surge of horror that swept
upon him now.
For there was no one in sight. The mail-box was deserted. The road
stretched away to the left, bare of any human traveler for three-quarters of
mile, and to the right, just as empty for a half-mile. And in the field that
stretched away on the other side of the road, not a living creature was to be
seen. Helga and the postman with his horse and buggy had vanished as
though they had never been.

But there was a curious thing: all around was gray from the clouds that
obscured the sky, except in a round patch of blue perhaps a hundred yards
in diameter through which sunlight was pouring above the mailbox. Lars
mechanically looked up. High above was the single rift in the cloud-banks,
rift that the surging clouds were rapidly filling again. Even as he looked,
some white things fluttered toward earth—let-ters and papers. Lars picked
up a handful like one dazed or mad and stumbled back into the house. He
was hardly con-scious of the sudden roar of wind that came up, or the wall
of sleet that drove in a wild slant from the clouds. In the same mechanical,
irresponsible way, he turned again and went out into the half-darkness with
the hopeless hope that his eyes and ears had played him a trick. He walked
down the road in either direction, searched across the field, called and
shouted till his voice was hoarse, but not a thing did he find, and no one
answered his vain cries. Then at last when the sleet turned to a fine drizzle
which ceased shortly, he went back to the farmhouse, still in that numbing
daze.
The letters were lying on the floor where he had dropped them, and he
automatically picked out of them the paper that he had thought might
contain a news item of explana-tion. But he could not concentrate his
thoughts, and they were only disjointed phrases that his eye picked out her
and there. "Red snow falls—volcanic dust in upper atmosphere—dust
clouds from western prairies—curious unknown organ-ism puzzles
scientists—chemist asserts he found traces of a substance like blood—"
were the paragraph's explanations and comment that ran in a jumble throug
his thoughts; and somewhere else on the page, a few other phrases: "Strang
display of Northern Lights—beams of red, green, violet,
yel-low—phenomenon observed over Norton—university astron-omer
offers no explanation—"
By nightfall of that day of madness, it was again partly clear outside. In the
east still hung a low bank of clouds, but overhead and to the west, the stars
were coming out.
Lars sat by a window looking dully into the night, as he had been sitting for
the last three hours. His mind had be-come calmer while he brooded over
mysteries he could not fathom, but there was a light in his eyes that had
never been in them before. Only the stolidity of his race had thus far kept

him from going mad. In his ears still rang that medley of sounds, and his
horrified eyes held before them yet the vacant roadway, and the letters
fluttering down. It was in-credible, unthinkable; yet all his thoughts wound
up with the explanation that was no explanation at all: somehow, the
postman and Helga had been whirled up from the surface of earth. He had
thought of a tornado, but nothing else had been disturbed and he had seen
no telltale whirling in the sky. What was it that could reach down to earth a
in a brief second or two and instantly vanish skyward with its prey? The
cold sweat broke out on his forehead. Once as a child he had wondered ho
he would feel if he saw an apple fall from a tree and, instead of dropping to
earth, sail toward the heavens. Now he knew that dreadful sensation, the
feeling that nature had suddenly gone askew.
He stared again into the sky directly above, where the stars shone bright an
cold, vainly hoping that he might draw a solution out of those fathomless
deeps. Minutes ticked by. The Milky Way blazed out in its mysterious
beauty, and the night was quiet with no wind.
When it was that he became conscious of something new, he could not say
But in back of his futile thoughts, a forgot-ten phrase groped for expression
Northern Lights—phenom-enon—red, green, violet
Then he knew. High above him, so faintly that at first he could not be sure,
beams of many-colored light stabbed and shot and pulsed across the stars.
And it struck Lars with sur-prise and something of a new fear growing upo
him that nowhere else was the display to be seen. In the past, he had
frequently watched the Aurora Borealis creep down from the north, flamin
brighter till streamers and cataracts of weird radiance played across all the
northern sky. But he had never before seen it confined to so small a spot in
the heavens. These flashing beams of green and violet, red and yellow did
not seem as remote as the Northern Lights usually were, and it was strange
that they occurred in so small an area, an area which looked no larger than
plate, though he knew it must be immensely larger out there in space.
Some-times only two beams would dance around each other, some-times a
would be gone, then a minute later rays of different colors leaped out
against the starry velvet of night. And the strangest part of the display was
the clearness and straight-ness of the beams; there was none of the
vagueness and change and slow merging into other patterns and colors that

the Aurora had; this resembled more the snapping on and off of giant
flashlights.
For several minutes, Lars looked at the queer lights with the dullness of a
mind dazed by too many shocks. And even as he watched them, he became
aware of something yet newer: he seemed to see one or two black specks in
the air between him and the lights, like the dancing specks before the eyes
of some one who has been struck on the head; and there came to his ears a
rush of wind, and two objects hur-tled furiously past him to smash on the
ground. A moment later, he thought he heard a thud down by the road and
an-other from somewhere afar, but perhaps they were only echoes that he
heard, or his ears may have been playing him tricks. He could not be sure,
for he looked at the two in the farmyard and his eyes went wide and glary.
Like a run-down
automaton he rose and stumbled downstairs out into the chill, quiet night.
There was something oddly familiar in that nearest object, and he went up
it with a far-away buzzing in his ears, and a wild swirl of insane dreams in
his mind. He bent over the still form; a scorch odor came to his nostrils, he
recognized the poor, broken body of Helga, the hideously white skin, he
—crooned a word of grief and bent over to stroke the lifeless clay. And the
he snatched his hand back again, for it burned like the fire of a furnace, bu
he knew it was no fire that he touched, nor any heat, but the biting; absolu
cold of outer space. As Helga had vanished, in mystery and terror, so had
she returned, but the horror for her was over. For him it kept on. The night
was all silent, but that maddening buzz was louder in his brain. He shook hi
head to get rid of it, and his eyes fell upon the other object.
For a second that was as long as eternity, time and space and the world
stood still for Lars. No eyes could look un-changed on that slimy blob of
liquid flesh and fungus and ichor, With its loathly tentacles and beaks, its
blackness of corruption, its monstrous mixture of all that was obscene in th
vegetable and animal kingdoms, and more horrible still, the thing's metallic
core like brown quicksilver that still moved feebly with an appalling parody
of life; and in its center a sickly, rotten bulb of a dead, blind eye that glared
foully at Lars with its dying light.
The buzzing in his ears swelled to a grating, shrill din, something snapped,
his teeth champed together, and the mad-ness was upon him. He muttered

crooning endearments to Helga, shrieked blasphemies at the slimy thing
from above, burst out into peals of mirthless laughter and rasping sobs. His
crazed mind went off on another tangent, and he stopped his muttering and
shrieking as suddenly as he had begun; instead, he chuckled with insane
cunning as though he had thought of a way to cheat his enemy. He backed
slyly to the farmhouse, was gone for a minute, reappeared with a great
armful of kindling wood. He returned to fetch another, till a heap of it lay o
the ground. He made a rude pyre out of it, except for an armful or two; he
dragged the body of Helga onto it though his hands burned as if in a
white-hot furnace; he ran back, reappeared with a can, poured kerosene on
the pyre. He lighted it with tears of madness and grief running down his
face. Then fury entered his heart, and he threw the rest of the kindling on
the obscene thing, and drenched it with the kerosene. As the flames flared
up, he danced around with grief and hatred and insanity alternately writhin
across his features. He ran back to the woodshed for more fuel. He was
about to return with a load of cordwood when he heard the roar of a small
explosion, saw a fountain of sparks and burning wood spew into the air. He
stood agape for a second, then ran madly to the fires. The obscene
monstrosity was no more—something in it or something it carried had
ex-ploded, and in two or three places burning chunks smoldered on the
farmhouse roof. But Lars paid no attention to them or to the flames that
were beginning to lick at the eaves, for some half-forgotten thing was
pounding at the back of his thoughts.
The thing in the field! The thing in the field! The phrase sang through his
head like a chant, and he burst out into an-other wild peal of maniacal
laughter. He scarcely looked at the black smoke that surged up from Helga
funeral pyre, or the flames that consumed, as he turned and sped back to th
pile of wood. He picked up all he could carry of the three-foot lengths and
stumbled down the path, staggering under the weight. When he reached the
gash in earth, faintly illuminated by the red glare that began to come from
the burning roof of the farmhouse, he tossed his whole armful onto the
invisible thing, and shouted madly again as the wood hung suspended in air
over the gap. He returned again and again until all the wood was strewn
around and over the thing that could not be seen. On his last trip, he brough
two one-gallon cans of kerosene and poured them on as much of the wood

as was within reach, then tossed them to the top of the pile and lighted the
mass. A tongue of fire leaped out and raced over the pile, and a volume of
thick black smoke issued up. The field around him was already made brigh
by a lurid glare from the farmhouse that was now entirely ablaze. Like a
nec-romancer uttering his ritual of incantation and dark sorcery, Lars leape
and danced and howled around the great bonfire he had built. A tower of
black smoke from the kerosene mounted almost straight up in the air from
the flames, the wood crackled, the heat became scorching and blistering.
And under the metamorphosis of fire, Lars saw a last, strange riddle shape
itself before his eyes. There were outlines form-ing, the suggestion of a vas
structure imbedded deeply in earth. He gibbered to the stars as he saw
planes and angles and cubes that looked like spheres and the geometry of
an-other dimension. His maniacal laughter rang out again as he looked
through the glowing, transparent walls and saw objects he could not name,
strangely mounted mechanical devices, fantastic articles that no mind on
earth could have imagined or shaped. And lying around them were dozens
of those hell-ish slimy things that were neither animal nor vegetable nor
matter, but partook loathsomely of the nature of all three. He shouted in
mirthless glee as he glimpsed briefly still other things—weird, gaseous
substances on the floor that held their shape as rigidly as dead bodies.
There came a hiss like a great sigh, a rumble of warning, and Lars insanely
flung his arms wide apart as if to embrace the cleansing fire. It was his last
gesture, for earth and sky and life trembled and were blasted before the
titanic explo-sion that wiped out the thing in the field.
3

On the afternoon of March 30, shortly after two P.M., Larry Greene took
off from the Twin City flying-field with a special consignment of bank
dispatches for Seattle. His 'plane was last seen at Elk Forks, twenty miles
east of Nor-ton, at approximately four o'clock. When nothing more was see
of him for several hours and no report was received, the importance of his
cargo caused a searching-party to be sent out. Early in the morning of
March 31, his airplane was found near the burned Loberg farmhouse. It wa
completely smashed, but the pilot's body was nowhere around. The

searching-party continued to scour the area. An hour later, the missing flye
was picked up, wandering in a dazed condi-tion through a field near Norton
His account of what had happened was so singular and fantastic that his
sanity was questioned. When, however, he was discovered to be suffering
Twin Cities for medical attention. All efforts to save his life were unavailin
He died of gangrenous infection several days later. Among his effects were
found two significant items: a black object, and the following extraordinary
communication, which was apparently written sometime during the first da
of his confinement for medical care:
"To others I leave the task of deciding whether I have been the victim of
insanity or hallucinations. Already I self doubt the testimony of my own
eyes and ears. If it were not for the disk which I brought with me, I would
belie the entire adventure to be a delusion or a dream, but unless the disk
proves to be a figment of a deranged imagination, can not doubt the truth o
what I have to say and the reality of what I saw.
"At two-ten P.M. on March 30 I took off from the Twin City flying-field
with a bundle of bank dispatches for Seat-tle. I headed due west. Weather
conditions were fair for the first hour and I kept at the relatively low flying
level of two thousand feet. At this point, somewhat less than one hundred
miles from the Twin Cities, I was nearing a region for which sleet or snow
storms were forecast. Cloudbanks were piling up ahead, so I immediately
began to climb for altitude. The last town I saw was Elk Forks. After that,
the clouds below me obscured everything.
"I had climbed to six thousand feet, then seven thousand five hundred, and
was now keeping to an altitude of nine thousand feet. I estimated that I mu
now be nearing Norton.
"Without a word of warning, the terror came.
"My plane was suddenly enveloped in a greenish light. The motor and
propeller droned, but my progress was at a complete standstill. My altimete
showed eleven, thirteen, fifteen thousand feet so rapidly that I could hardly
follow it. Nothing I could do had any effect on the 'plane or its incredi-ble
rise. The sensation was sickening. I had the motor wide open, but not a foo
did we advance. Instead, the plane rose straight up like a balloon. I scarcely
had time even to adjust my oxygen tank and turn on the current for the
airtight electrically heated suit that I always wear in cold weather flying.

The altimeter soared to forty thousand feet, then froze.
"Everything had happened so instantly that I was almost stunned. A few
seconds at most could have elapsed between the moment the greenish light
came and the altimeter froze.
"Through my suit, I began to feel an intense cold. I had no knowledge of
how high I now was, but I knew that if my strange ascent were not quickly
halted, I would perish in the absolute or almost absolute zero of the upper
atmosphere. The motor now froze and went dead. Instead of falling, the
airplane remained in its unnatural suspension, still bathed in green light. Th
sky above me had become so dark that I was certain I must be near the
outer edge of earth's atmos-pheric blanket. The cold was more piercing tha
ever.
"At this moment, I thought I heard two faint clicks closely following each
other. A few seconds later, they were re-peated. The green light
disappeared. Overhead, the stars went out. The effect was precisely as if I
were looking through an invisible pane of glass but could see nothing. And
only a few feet away from my 'plane there had suddenly appeared the
bodies of a dead man and a woman. The intense cold rapidly lessened in
severity, but had it been a thousand times as icy as it was, it could not have
been as numbing as the strange horror of all that had happened to me in a
brief minute. I was in the midst of a hellish nightmare infinitely more titani
and brain-shattering than any I had ever had. The terror and fear of
nauseating mystery were upon me, I hardly knew whether I was dreaming
awake, alive or already beyond the borderland of death. And those two
corpses hanging in the air near, me—their appearance was as ghastly as it
was inexplicable.
"The whole thing was like a delirious vision. I felt as if I were confined, the
terrific cold had ceased, yet there was not a star in the sky above me nor
could I see the earth beneath. If it were not for the airplane and the two
bodies, I would have believed that I had gone blind.
"I had hardly understood—or rather, realized my situation since I did not
understand it at all—when there came to me again a faint click, from abov
end I automatically looked up.
"I do not know what I expected to see, except anything or nothing. But it
was no answer to any of the thousand ques-tions in my mind that I saw, bu

mystery darker and deeper. There was cloud vapor a dozen feet above
me—or was there? I have never before seen a gaseous substance hold its
form and shape rigidly, but I did then, and with a sick, faint feel-ing, I
realized that the cloud-like thing was alive. I had an impression of eyes
burning into mine, but there were no eyes visible in it. My brain received a
command, but my ears heard no sound. In some way that I could not
comprehend, the monstrous living substance above me had put into my
thoughts a picture of myself climbing from the cockpit, and ascending.
"Climb from the cockpit of an airplane heaven knows how many miles
above earth? It was madness, suicide. I fought with all my strength to retain
my seat. But I was powerless, and slowly I climbed over the side into empt
space.
"I should have fallen, down, down like a dead weight. But I was standing a
upright as if solid ground were beneath my feet. Where was the ultimate
cold that should be freezing me? Why did I not fall? What was the meaning
of all the eery events of the past few minutes? I was trembling violent-ly,
hot and cold sweat broke out on me, a deadly fear gnawed at my heart for
the first time in my life.
"Then I thought I must have entered some queer, hypnotic state, for a
sudden feeling of peace came over me, and in answer to another silent
command I mounted what seemed to be a short ladder, and stepped off a
moment later to another invisible floor. The gaseous thing retreated as I
advanced, and now hung a few yards away from me. But I scarcely noticed
it, for my eyes were bewildered by the sight around me, and a dim light of
comprehension began to clear away the fog over my thoughts.
"Masses of intricate, gleaming machinery and delicate mechanism were
everywhere about me, together with elab-orate dials, controls, and other
devices whose purpose I could not even conjecture. Around each device
and control were grouped scores of the gaseous things. I dreamed for a
moment that I was in an airship of some new kind, but there were no
enclosing walls and I could see no floor beneath me. Yet the sky was devoi
of stars.
"All this I noticed in a brief instant before my captor mutely commanded m
to walk forward a few paces and seat myself. Too stunned and overwhelme
to offer any re-sistance, I did so. The thing drifted toward me and hung a

few feet away. I looked at it, and again I had an impression of burning eyes
that I could not see. But there came over me again that odd sensation of
peace.
"How can I describe the strange terror and fascination of the scene, or wha
followed? Surely no man was ever before so suddenly jerked from the habi
and thoughts of a lifetime as I was then. Without my realizing it until
afterward, I must have been placed again under hypnotic or mental control
for the mechanism and gaseous shapes surrounding me sud-denly faded
away into blankness, and then, while I had the disembodied feeling of one
who dreams, a succession of fantastic images and pictures were imposed on
my imagination by the thing before me. No word passed between us, for
nei-ther could have understood the language of the other. By a kind of
mesmeric thought-transference, I was made to under-stand all that had
happened to me, and some things I had not known about, and some of whic
I shall probably never have any further knowledge to certify their truth.
"As I had begun to suspect, I was now in a space-flyer of utterly new type
and construction to me. The being who hung a few yards away was Relelpa
director of an expedi-tion from Saturn on a mission that meant existence or
death to the solar system.
"For thousands of years, civilization had been progressing there until the
inhabitants were now as far ahead of us as we are ahead of jungle apes. Th
life force which is persistent everywhere in an infinite variety of organisms
produced on Saturn opaque, gaseous substances like Relelpa. Many years
before our meeting, these eery inhabitants of Saturn had dis-covered deep
the bowels of their planet one of the rarest elements in all the universe.
Saturn itself contained only a few thousand tons of the ore from which this
element, Seggglyn, was extracted.
"Seggglyn resists cold even to absolute zero, but if ex-posed to sufficient
heat it explodes. Its most curious and most valuable property is its
imperviousness to gravitation. For in-stance, a lump of the pure element
isolated under an open sky is immediately hurled skyward by the centrifuga
force of the spinning planet, since gravitation has no effect on it. Until it
finally breaks up into atomic particles, it hurtles for-ever through the
universe, rebounding anew from any gravita-tional pull which it may chanc
to come near.

"In extracting the element and in experimenting with it, the Saturnian not
only discovered how to control it but ob-tained by-products of inestimable
value. Seggglyn is com-pletely transparent, but nothing beyond it is
visible—as if you looked through a pane of glass but could see nothing
beyond. Perhaps I can make this clearer by saying that it is like a blind spo
If you put two black dots on a cardboard, hold the cardboard at arm's lengt
focus your eyes on one dot, and then draw the cardboard toward you, one
the dots will disappear when the cardboard is about a foot and a half from
your eyes. Well, Seggglyn acts like a blind spot at any distance from the ey
of the beholder.
"In extracting the element, the Saturnians found that the last impurity
removed had the effect of counteracting the element; that is, until the
impurity was taken out, Seggglyn was held by gravitational attraction. Thus
by putting the impurity back in, or coating Seggglyn with it, the element ha
only normal mineral properties.
"There was only a limited amount of the stuff on Saturn, and no trace of it
was ever found in the spectrum of any star. What should be done with it?
The Saturnian considered every possible use, and finally decided that it
would be most valuable as an offense and defense against any danger; and
so they built this vast space-flyer, and armed it with all their weapons and
rays of destruction. The flyer could not be seen, nor its location guessed
unless it crossed a star and shut out the light.
"On the outside of the flyer at one tip were placed dozens of thin plates of
the impurity. These were, controlled by radio from inside the ship. They
could be adjusted to any position on the outside, so that the ship's speed
could be regulated, and just enough gravitational pull shut off or turned on
to let the ship rise and land safely.
"With their space-flyer, the Saturnians had explored the solar system
hundreds of years ago, and had even ventured out into the galaxy beyond,
for there was apparently no limit to the speed which it could attain. If its
rate of speed were constant when it left the gravitational influence of
Saturn, it would keep on going at that rate. But if its speed were con-trolled
so that it was constantly increasing at the point where it passed beyond
Saturn's influence, its acceleration would continue at the same rate, and if i
were worth the risk, a speed of hundreds of thousands of light-years per

second could be reached.
"After their early explorations and experiments, the Saturn-ians kept the
flyer idle, but always in readiness for any dan-ger. They had discovered
many disquieting matters on their trips, but so long as nothing happened,
they preserved their policy of waiting in readiness.
"And out of night with no warning had suddenly come the one cataclysmic
danger that they had not anticipated. From their great central observatory,
the Saturnian kept up a con-stant survey of the heavens for astronomic and
protective reasons. One week the observation had shown a normal view of
the region of the evening star. And the next week, stars were disappearing
momentarily in a straight line that travelled toward the solar system.
"They could not believe the explanation, but there was only one explanatio
possible. Some star or world beyond the reach of their farthest telescope ha
possessed the rare ore, and a space-ship made from Seggglyn, whether a
scout-ing party or an expedition of invaders, was hourly leaping colossal
stellar distances toward the solar system. Their surprise turned almost into
panic when they discovered that instead of one, there were three
space-flyers hurtling on-ward!
"So short was the warning that desperate measures had to be taken. Hasty
calculations showed that the invaders were heading toward Earth first,
perhaps to reconnoiter or to use Earth as a ricochet for reaching Saturn.
Relelpa was summoned to lead the party. The need of reaching Earth befor
or not later than the invaders was desperate. It could not be accomplished
even with the normal acceleration of the Saturnian space-flyer. In the crisis
at the moment when the nullifying plates were stripped from the outside of
the flyer, Saturn's most powerful explosive was used to hurl it off in a
blinding flash to give it the initial acceleration required.
"Over Earth, they met; and before the invaders realized that their coming
was known, the red annihilation ray of the Saturn flyer stabbed out and the
first ship from outside dis-solved into brownish dust that drifted down. The
red ray stabbed out again but missed; the second ship which used some
other means than black plates of using gravitational pull as the first and thir
also did had dropped suddenly to escape the deadly ray; but the ship behin
it had also dived and crashed into the tip of its own comrade, and as the
bitter cold of space mowed down its occupants, the second ship hurtled to

Earth. Some of its occupants spilled out into space, and from one of these
who was instantly caught and swept to the Saturn-flyer by the green
magnetic ray, the story of the invaders was found out.
"Where they came from is unknown, for their world lies beyond any galaxy
or nebula known to astronomers of the solar system. They too had
discovered Seggglyn on their world, and had discovered it at the last
moment, for their world was dying and had almost reached its end. With
their super-telescopes, they had found traces of Seggglyn in the spectrum o
Saturn long before it was isolated on their own world. Time was priceless to
these gruesome plant-animal--mineral creatures from the spaces beyond.
They had built three ships, but these were not enough to transport all the
inhabitants of their world before the end came. If they could obtain the ore
from Saturn and build two more ships or even one great flyer, they would b
saved.
"And so the three flyers started out, each loaded with a thousand of the
loathly creatures. One ship was to land on the most habitable of the planets
Earth, and wipe out all life on it with the violet ray of terrific heat and the
yellow ray that blasted anything it touched. The other two were to disgorge
on Saturn, and while one band destroyed the inhabitants, the other would
extract Seggglyn from the ore and build as many ships as possible. As soon
as the three flyers had landed, they were to return to their world, empty
except for the crews to man them, in order to bring back other thousands o
the loathsome, obscene things.
"And their hellish plan would have succeeded if they had not neglected on
possibility: they thought that the Saturn-ians were unaware of the property
of Seggglyn, and that the ore was still unmined; or that in any case, their
own three space-flyers would prove to be invicible. And so, all unpre-pared
in the very moment of their triumph the strength of the invaders was cut
down by two-thirds.
"But now the third ship was warned; and all this day the Saturn-flyer had
been engaged with it in a struggle on which the fate of worlds depended. If
the Saturnians were defeated, Earth and Saturn were doomed, even though
the invaders were unable to save all the inhabitants of their own world by
transporting them across space.
"Relelpa showed me a great, metallic disk, on which the heavens were

mirrored; since those inside the flyer could see nothing outside, television
was necessarily employed for guidance. And there, close to the center of th
disk which marked our position, I saw stars blotted out where the in-vaders
hung.
"What can I do? Why do you want me? were the two silent questions that I
asked Relelpa; and the answer came back, there was nothing I could do up
here. Relelpa had sight-ed my airplane and ordered it picked up by the gree
ray. He had told me all he wanted to, and I was now about to be released to
warn the people of my world in the event that the Saturnians were defeated
"I had no willpower of my own beside this mental giant, I merely followed
his directions. It would we been fatal to try using my airplane at this height
my parachute would probably have ripped from my shoulders with the forc
and speed of my fall when it finally opened. Relelpa gave me a curious
black disk when he read my thoughts, and again by mental imagine showed
me how to use it.
"Suddenly he flashed me the image that the final, desper-ate battle was nea
At the same instant, he thrust me toward the outer chamber through which
had originally entered. I saw his strange, cloudlike form for the last time, I
felt him wish me good luck as I in turn wished him success, and then the
door clicked behind me. I held the disk over my head, manipulating it as he
had explained, so that parts of the black covering slid off the Seggglyn. I
heard another click, and then all at once I dropped, and my airplane twisted
past me hurtling downward and after it the bodies of the two people who
had been on earth in the path of the green ray when its magnetic power
picked me up sped by me, and be-hind them the hideous monster which the
Saturnians had captured.
"As I fell slowly, still feeling as if I had dreamed a horrible nightmare, I
looked above me; and my eyes went wide when I saw red and green ray
flashing against yellow and violet beam. Surely it was the strangest and mo
important battle ever witnessed by man! Sometimes all four rays darted and
flamed out, sometimes only one or two; or both rays of one flyer would
vanish only to reappear suddenly in another spot.
"I heard the wind whistle past me, I looked at earth far be-low, and a great
fear took hold of me; but I was falling no faster than I would be with a
parachute, and the mental picture of Relelpa came back to reassure me.

Once more I looked upward. I saw only the red and the green rays leaping
madly across the sky. . . .
"The doctor tells me that gangrene has set in. I guess I was more seriously
frozen than I thought in those upper spaces. They think I am crazy and they
won't believe what I tried to tell them last night. Maybe I am crazy, but I
swear that I saw all the things I have written of as plainly as I see now my
hospital cot or the skylight above me or the black disk under my pillow,
Well, that ought to convince them if nothing else does.
"Larry Greene."

Underneath the pillow of the cot on which Larry Greene had died, a small
disk was found. The nurse who discovered it looked at it in some curiosity,
puzzled as to its purpose and wondering what to do with it. Finally she
called the doctor who had vainly tried to save the pilot's life.
"What is it?" he inquired bruskly.
"I don't know."
The doctor took the object and scrutinized it closely. It was a black disk,
slightly oval in shape, and approximately a foot in diameter. It was perfectl
flat, with an unvarying thick-ness of a half-inch. On two sides it was
indented, and at each indentation was a row of tiny knobs.
"H'mm," mused the doctor. "I've never seen anything quite like it." He
fingered the knobs meditatively.
There was a faint click, and the black covering of the disk somehow seeme
to slide off or collapse. And all at once, he found himself with nothing in hi
hands. He heard a sudden wind, the crash of shattered glass, a sound like th
rush of air.
The dumfounded doctor looked at an amazed nurse, as bits of glass from th
broken skylight dropped around them. The black disk which they had been
examining a few seconds ago had vanished.

