T H E
S T E E P
A P P R O A C H
T O
G A R B A D A L E

Also by Iain Banks

THE WASP FACTORY
WALKING ON GLASS
THE BRIDGE
ESPEDAIR STREET
CANAL DREAMS
THE CROW ROAD
COMPLICITY
WHIT
A SONG OF STONE
THE BUSINESS
DEAD AIR

And as Iain M. Banks

CONSIDER PHLEBAS THE PLAYER OF GAMES
USE OF WEAPONS
THE STATE OF THE ART
AGAINST A DARK BACKGROUND
FEERSUM ENDJINN
EXCESSION
INVERSIONS
LOOK TO WINDWARD
THE ALGEBRAIST

IAIN
BANKS

T H E
S T E E P
A P P R O A C H
TO
G A R B A D A L E

Little, Brown
LITTLE, BROWN
First published in Great Britain in 2007 by Little, Brown
Copyright © Iain Banks 2007
The moral right of the author has been asserted.
All characters and events in this publication, other than
those clearly in the public domain, are fictitious
and any resemblance to real persons,
living or dead, is purely coincidental.
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior
permission in writing of the publisher, nor be otherwise circulated
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
A CIP catalogue record for this book
is available from the British Library.
Hardback ISBN: 978–0–316–73105–8
C Format ISBN: 978–0–316–73106–5
Typeset in Berling by Palimpsest Book Production Limited,
Grangemouth, Stirlingshire
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Clays Ltd, St Ives plc
Little, Brown
An imprint of
Little, Brown Book Group
Brettenham House
Lancaster Place London WC2E 7EN
A Member of the Hachette Livre Group of Companies
www. littlebrown.co.uk

FOR LOST LOVES

WITH THANKS TO:
YVONNE FRATER, PATRICK GREENOUGH, ADÈLE HARTLEY,
LAURA HEHIR, SIMON KAVANAGH, GARY LLOYD,

EILIDH AND LES MCFARLANE, AND CAROLE SIMPSON

1

H
is name is Fielding Wopuld. Of those Wopulds, the games family, the people
with their name plastered all over the board of Empire! (still the UK’s
best–selling board game, by some margin). They’re behind a heap of other
stuff, too, of course, but that’s the famous one, the one people tend to have
heard of, whether it’s the original snail–play version featuring cardboard,
paper and plastic or its slick, attractively rendered and award–winning
electronic successor, currently riding high in the computer games charts.
Vice–President, Sales. That’s his position in the family firm: in charge of a
multimillion–pound budget promoting their various wares around the world,
persuading wholesalers, online concerns, retail chains and big store groups to
stock and sell their product. Doing well at it, too – hefty bonus last year.
Henry Wopuld, the guy who first dreamed up Empire!, back in Victorian times,
was his great–grandfather, so for whatever it’s worth he’s kind of direct in
line. Fielding is still just thirty and keeps himself in pretty good shape
with a variety of sports. He drives a Mercedes S–class, has a whole bunch of
friends, a very beautiful and sexy partner and generally lives the kind of
successful life most people can only dream of.
All of which does kind of raise the question in Fielding’s mind,
1
What the hell am I doing here? as he drives into this scummy–looking housing
estate in Perth. This is Perth, Scotland, we’re talking about here, not Perth,
Australia. Perth, Australia, is a beautiful, bright, sunny kind of place
sprawling between the desert and the ocean – lots of surf and sizzling barbies
and gleaming bronzed bodies. Perth, Scotland, is smaller and a lot less
high–rise, sitting surrounded by low hills, forests and farmland. It boasts a
variety of nice buildings and some very attractive detached properties facing
the river, but not a lot of bronzed bodies that Fielding can see. He knows
Scotland a bit – various family members have chosen to reside here for reasons
best known to themselves and the Wopulds still, for now, have one of those
vast huntin’, shootin’ ‘n’ fishin’ estates in the far north of the place – but
this is the first time he’s been to Perth, he’s fairly sure. The Fair City
they call it, apparently. And it’s okay, he supposes, if you like old stuff
and history and that sort of thing. He always had the impression that it was
pretty posh and full of people wearing corduroy, tweeds and Barbour jackets,
but this housing scheme on the outskirts looks like Chav City, Ned Central – a
sink estate at the bottom of the U–bend.
He’s driving down Skye Crescent – the whole scheme is nothing but islands –
between long blocks of three– and four–storey flats covered in patchy
pebble–dash spotted with poor–quality graffiti. The tiny gardens at the front
of the flats are just plain unkempt. He’s used to kempt.
There’s a lot of litter about, some of it flying about in the breeze coming
funnelling down the street from the bright September clouds. He hasn’t seen

any bottles of Buckfast lying in the gutters – or any people lying in the
gutter for that matter – and the kerb is lined with cars rather than wrecks,
but – well – still.
Okay, some shops here, doors open but windows covered in metal grilles even
now, during the day. Couple of thin, pimply youths standing outside something
called Costcutter, sharing a bottle and watching the car slide past. Yeah,
it’s an S–class 500 AMG, boyz. Look upon it and weep. See what you might get
if you do your homework
2
and work hard. Whatever. Just keep your fucking hands off it. The delicate art
of not making eye–contact while looking hard and supremely confident.
Uh–uh: there’s a bottle, there in the gutter. Just a little green beer
bottle. Beck’s, possibly. Not so bad.
He finds number 58 by a process of elimination. The sat–nav gave up at the
start of the street and there’s no sign where the number should be, by the
security grille at the side of the door; however, the entrance before was
number 56 and the one after is 60, so he’s pretty confident. Check for broken
glass, park carefully, nice and tight by the kerb. Swing the wing mirrors up
into their parked position, just to be on the safe side. Deep breath and
prepare to go out into the mild air. First, though, into the glove box and
administer a few quick squirts of Versace, up each sleeve and on the back of
the neck. At least something around here isn’t going to smell of shit.
He stands on the uneven pavement, watching from the corner of one eye as the
car alarm flashes the indicators once. Smells like somebody is cooking tinned
Irish stew for a late breakfast or an early lunch. What does he feel like? He
feels like a shark out of water, that’s what he feels like.
He knows this is how a lot of people live, and he’s sure they’re not all
druggies and nutters, but, Christ, what a soul–destroying spot, what a place
to basically get the hell out of as soon as you can.
Shit, I forgot the fucking briefcase. Now he was going to look like a
dickhead, getting out of the car, locking it and standing here, then having to
unlock it again almost immediately and getting the case out. Maybe he should
leave the briefcase in the car. There’s only mail in it, anyway. A bunch of
letters and bills and junk his dingbat cousin probably never wanted in the
first place. Mail your man abandoned months ago, on another job, in another
country.
Nope, can’t leave the case in the car because it’s sitting on the back seat,
in full view. A Zero Halliburton aluminium case like you see in the movies,
which in this kind of neighbourhood – well, in almost any kind of
neighbourhood, to be fair – just shouts Steal me!
3
at a zillion fucking decibels. He can’t see anybody watching him, but it feels
like the whole street is. He unalarms and reopens the car, takes the case,
re–alarms casually (but still makes sure the hazards flash) and strides
purposefully up the short path to the security door, kicking the gaudy wreck
of a broken toy gun out of the way as he goes.
The block’s glass–and–metal door looks like people have thrown up on it and
then tried to rinse off the mess by pissing all over it. This obviously didn’t
work because apparently then they tried setting it on fire. The button by the
scarred plastic name–plate for flat E just sort of sinks into its housing. No
buzzer sounds anywhere.
He pushes on the door and it scrapes open. Inside there are shiny concrete
steps and a suspicious smell of disinfectant.
Well, Fielding, he tells himself, the only way is up.
‘Hey, Al? Al? Al, ya dozy cunt, fucken wake up. All Come on, big man. Wakey

fucken wakey.’
He opened his eyes one at a time, to allow for anything unforeseen. The
world converged into focus, as though the effort was all its. The thin,
pointy, slightly chipped–looking face of Mr Daniel Gow – Tango all the rest of
the time when he wasn’t wearing a suit and trying to look sincere while
somebody more privileged pleaded his case – looked down at him.
‘Tango,’ he said, croaking a little. He rubbed his face, then shifted in the
sleeping bag, feeling its nylon covering snag on some carpet tacks left
exposed on the bare wooden boards of the small room. He looked up at the light
coming through the thin sheet nailed over the window. ‘What, late afternoon
already?’
‘No even eleven yet, pal. But ye’ve got a visitor.’
He blinked, rubbed his eyes and coughed, twisting and sitting up, his back
against the bare, magnolia–painted wall. He scratched his chin through a
fairly full brown beard. ‘Official kind of visitor?’ he asked. His voice was
slightly slurred. ‘Kind of visitor a person might associate with manila
envelopes and threats regarding non–compliance, or
4
failure to attend an appointment arranged by an institution of a governmental
nature?’
‘Naw, dude. Posh. A suit.’
‘A suit?’
Aye, a suit. He’s no wearin a suit, but he’s a suit all the same. Teeth like
Tom fucken Cruise. Smells like a expensive hoorhoose; the dugs took one sniff
of his shoes and started sneezin. They’ve retreated to the kitchen. Surprised
ye hauvnae caught a whiff of him already. Currently standin near the windae in
the livin room, watchin nae bugger fucks with his motor. Briefcase like the
kind that always has drugs or bings a money in it, in the fillums. Says he’s
yer cousin.’
Ah.’ Alban McGill rubbed his face, smoothed his beard down as best he could
and scratched fingers through thick, curly, light brown hair. His face and
lower arms were the kind of deep tanned red that fair–skinned people get when
they spend a lot of time outside, though his upper arms and torso, which were
thickly muscled, remained pale. Part of the small finger on his left hand was
missing. A cousin,’ he said, sighing. He blinked at Tango, who was squatting,
watching him. ‘Give a name?’
Tango’s pinched–looking face, stalagtital beneath the grey dome of a shaved
head, wrinkled. ‘Fielding?’ he offered.
‘Fielding?’ Alban said, obviously surprised. Then his brows furrowed. ‘Oh,
yeah; the teeth like Tom Cruise. Okay, fair enough.’ He scratched his chest,
looked round the room at his boots, backpack and clothes. There was an open
bottle of red wine on the floor near his watch, the top lying nearby. Further
along the skirting board lay a shadeless bedside lamp. ‘Fielding Wubble–you,’
he pronounced. He reached out towards the wine bottle, then seemed to think
the better of it, frowning.
‘Cup a tea?’ Tango suggested.
Alban nodded. ‘Cup of tea,’ he agreed.
My names Tango, this is my house. Technically it belongs to the council, but
you know what I mean. Al is my guest, welcome to
5
crash here any time. Met the big guy in a pub year or two ago with the guy’s
he was working with. Foresters, chopping down trees and the like. Been doing
just that somewhere nearby, living in caravans in the mighty forests of Perth
and Kinross. Serious drinker’s. The ones he was with, anyway. Few games of
pool, few rounds of drink. Him and one of his pals came back to mine for a

couple of cans and a smoke. Also, Al was getting on very well with a girl we
were with. Sheen, I think it was. Maybe Shone. Either way. Think him and the
lassie went off together late on.
No, wait, Sheen/Shone (delete as applicable) went off with Big Al’s
tree–chopping compadre, not him. Al seemed keenish for a bit but then got all
that dead quiet way he gets when he gets stoned and drunk and doesn’t say much
and all he seems to want to do is drink some more and stare into corners or at
blank walls at maybe something nobody else can see, so Shone/Sheen turned her
attentions to his mate. Fair play to the girl. Must have thought she was doing
all right with Al – he’s not bad looking and he’s nice and got a soft,
well–speaking kind of voice – and I think Al’s pal said Was it OK? even if it
was said just with the eyebrows and a sideways nod kind a thing, and Al just
grinned and nodded, so, like I say, fair do’s.
Well, I think so. Truth be told I was a bit out of it by then.
Anyway, he’s been back a few times since and he’s spent the last couple of
weeks here at the abode of yours truly since he got invalided out of the
forestry service for growing insensitivity. Which sounds a bit daft I know but
apparently is true. He looks about my age (I was born in November 1975, so
I’ve got the Three–Oh coming up in a couple of months – fucking hell!!!) but
he’s actually five years older than me. Probably look even younger if he
ditched the face–fungus.
Anyways, here we go with the making of the tea. While I’m doing this,
tripping over the dogs and checking in the fridge on the milk situation the
door goes again and I let in Sunny and Di and they go in and nod to the
Fielding guy – who is still standing at
6
the window so he can see his car – and they sit on the couch and spark up a
couple of Camel Lights, On Which Duty Has Not Been paid. Their both trying to
give up so only smoking Lights and so find they have to smoke more for to get
the full effect. They’d both be about ten years the younger of me. Sunny’s
full name is Sunny D and his even fuller name is Sunny Daniel, to distinguish
him from me, as I’m a Daniel too, even though people call me Tango and that’s
more my real name than Daniel, same way that for at least the last few years
now Sunny’s name has been just that, not Daniel. Meanwhile Al is voiding
noisily in the toilet. Sorry, but it’s true.
‘Dinnae open the window, pal, you’ll let the budgies out!’
‘Sorry,’ the Fielding character says, not sounding it, and closes the window
again. He glances down at Sunny and Di, still drawing hard on their Camel
Lights. Must be one of those real anti–smoking types, I suppose. I do worry
about the health of the livestock sometimes. Have I stunted the growth of the
hounds by keeping them in a flat where people smoke all the time? Are the
budgies going to be more prone for respiratorial diseases in later life? Who
can say?
Anyway, it’s not cold out and you’d have to say the man does have a point. I
make sure the budgies are in their cage, close it and tell the Fielding guy he
can open the window again, which he duly does, giving a tight wee smile.
Anyway, the smell of his aftershave is honking the place out worse than the
fags.
And so to tea. Fielding inspects the insides of his mug quite carefully
before accepting any, the cheeky bastard. He’s still up at the window, keeping
his clear view. The shiny metal briefcase is at his feet. He’s wearing jeans
with a crease in them, a soft–looking white shirt and an expensive jacket of
mustardy leather that looks softer than the shirt. Them shoes with hundreds of
holes; brogues? Anyway they’re brown. Sunny and Di have switched the TV on and
are watching a shopping channel, taking the pish out of the presenters and
whatever it is this hour that you canny buy at the shops.
Al comes through – jeans and T–shirt as per usual – and nods at

7
Fielding and says hello and sits down in the second best easy chair, but no
friendly or family hugs or even the shaking of the hands for these two. I’m
looking for a resemblance but answer comes their none.
‘Sorry,’ Al says to Fielding, looking round us all. ‘You been introduced?’
‘Sunny and Di, this is Fielding,’ says I. ‘I’m Tango,’ I tell him, as I
think we might have missed on that nicety. I nod at the good chair. ‘Take a
seat, pal, make yourself at home.’
‘I’m fine,’ Fielding says, glancing out the window. He makes a stretching
motion. ‘Been driving all morning. Good to stand up for a while.’
‘Aye, sure,’ I say, taking the good seat myself.
‘So, what brings you to the Fair City, Fielding?’ Al asks. He sounds tired.
We’ve both, over the last fortnight or so, been skelping the arse off the
drink and a wide selection of herbal and pharma logical merchandise, all
provided by the generosity of Al’s last pay packet.
‘Well, cuz, I need to talk to you,’ the man in the sharp creased jeans says.
Al just smiles, stretches and says, ‘Talk away.’
‘Well, you know, it’s family business.’ Your man Fielding looks round at the
rest of us, granting us what you might call a sympathetic smile. ‘I wouldn’t
want to bore, ah, your friends with it, you know?’
‘I bet they wouldn’t be bored,’ Al says.
All the same.’ The smiling of the Fielding is a tight affair indeed at this
point. ‘Plus, I brought some mail,’ he says, looking down at the briefcase.
‘Fucken wicked case, man, by the way,’ Sunny says, seeing the offending
article for the first time. He’s got one of those high, nasally weejie voices.
Di widens her eyes at him and elbows him in the ribs for some reason and they
get into a elbowing competition.
‘Well, let’s have a look at it,’ Al says. He starts clearing a space on the
coffee table in front of him, redistributing empty cans, ditto
8
bottles, full ashtrays and various remotes onto the mantelpiece and the arms
of other seats and the like.
Fielding appears unhappy, looking round us all again. ‘Look, ah, man, I’m
not sure this is the right place . . .’
‘Na, come on,’ Al says. ‘Here’s fine.’
Fielding does not look happy at this idea, but sighs and comes over with the
case. Meanwhile I’m helping with the table–clearing, getting a beamer (that
means going red in the face, by the by, not anything else) because I hadn’t
got out of bed in time to do the clearing up in here. Canny get the staff
these days, know what I mean? The briefcase is placed on the – being honest –
fairly sticky table. The case looks like it’s been worn down from a solid
ingot of silver at the bottom of a stream for a few hundred years, all sort of
worn–polished and curvy–edged and round–cornered. Al is presented with his
mail – a big slidey pile of your usual assorted nonsense – and the briefcase
is snapped shut again. Fielding looks like he wishes he could handcuff himself
to it. Obviously hasn’t spotted the stickiness yet. Anyway,’ he says to Al,
‘we still need to talk.’
Al just grunts and starts sorting through the envelope’s, throwing most of
them unopened onto the tiles of the fireplace, skidding into the base of the
electric fire. Fielding stands looking over Al’s shoulder for a bit until Al
actually opens one of the smaller envelopes and looks up and round at his
cousin, who takes his briefcase and goes to stand back at the opened window,
checking outside on his wheels again.
‘Hey, Tango,’ Sunny says, staring at one thumb. ‘Where’d you think’d be the
worst place to get a paper cut?’ Him and Di have desisted from the elbowing of
each other and are sitting rubbing their ribs.
‘No idea,’ I tell him. ‘Your eye, maybe?’

‘Naw, man,’ Sunny says. ‘I reckon your cock. Right on the top, along the
slit, man; that’s goanae hurt like fuck, so it is. Ow! Ya –!’
It’s back to the mutual elbowing session again for the young happy
9
couple on the couch. Tea is spilled. Your man Fielding stares out the window
with patented disgust.
Al ignores all this and continues through the rest of his mail, discarding
most of it, then finally opens one letter, looks at it for a moment and stuffs
it into a back pocket in his jeans.
Meanwhile Sunny has jumped away from Di – fare enough, it does look like she
has the sharper elbows – and squatted down at the fireplace, looking at Al’s
mail discard pile. "Alban",’ he says, picking up one junk–mail shrink–wrapped
envelope, covered with official–looking stamps and personalised just for Alban
like only a big company on the make can. ‘Is that really your real first name,
big man? Fucken weird yin that.’ He grins an already gappy grin at big Al and
holds up a bunch of the junk mail. ‘Ye finished wi all this, aye, Al?’
‘Yeah, take it,’ Al says, standing. He looks at his cousin.
There’s an alarm going off in the street but it’s obviously not coming from
Fielding’s car because he looks relaxed about it. He puts his mug down on the
window ledge. ‘Can we talk now?’ he asks.
Al sighs. ‘Aye, come in to my office.’
Finally he gets the guy out of that scuzzy, smoke–filled living room, down a
dim, narrow hallway made even narrower by what looks like a roll of carpet
underlay lying on the floor and piles of cardboard boxes. The carpet feels
sticky, like something from a cheap nightclub. Opposite the kitchen, where a
couple of thin, nervous mongrels cower, there’s a fist–sized hole in the
plasterboard at shoulder height. They enter a small, bare room with a piece of
thin material nailed over the window. Al hooks the makeshift curtain up over
another nail to let in more light.
No carpets in here and no proper flooring either, not even laminate – just
bare floorboards, unpolished and unfinished. Each wall is a different colour.
One has what looks like Power Rangers wallpaper,
half ripped off, exposing
plasterboard. Another has been
10
partially repainted, from green to black. Another looks like it’s covered with
silver foil, while the last wall is sort of off–white, heavily scuffed.
There’s a sleeping bag by the wall, a big camouflaged backpack leaning nearby
spilling clothes and stuff on to the floor, and a small chrome and fabric seat
that looks like it was designed in the Seventies. Al takes some clothes off
the seat, dropping them on the floor.
The soft bits of the fragile–looking little chair are covered in brown
corduroy. Stained brown corduroy. Stained brown corduroy with little bits of
grey stuffing showing round the edges where the stitching has given way.
Al says, ‘Take a seat, cuz.’
‘Thanks.’ Fielding sits down gingerly. The room smells of drink and stale
sweat with a hint of what might be air freshener or maybe male grooming
product from the more budget end of the range. There’s an open screwtop bottle
of red wine in one corner. No shade or bulb attached to the ceiling fixture. A
dark stain covers a quarter of the ceiling. One shadeless lamp near the wine
bottle. Al bunches up the sleeping bag to make a seat, then sits leaning back
against the wall and waves one hand.
‘So, Fielding, how are you?’
Al looks ruddy, fit – better quads and abs than me, the fuck, Fielding
thinks – but his hair is a mess, the beard looks like you could hide a flock
of starlings in it and there’s a sort of crumpled set to his face and a beaten

look around his eyes Fielding doesn’t remember from before. At least, not as
bad. ‘I’m fine,’ Fielding says, then shakes his head. ‘No, I’m not fine. I’m
not happy in this situation.’
‘What situation?’
‘This situation. Look, d’you mind if I close the door?’
Alban shrugs. Fielding closes the door then goes to sit down, then doesn’t.
He looks about the place, waving. ‘I’m not happy here. In this place.’ He
looks around the room again, wanting to shiver, then shakes his head. Alban,
tell me this isn’t where you live. This isn’t your home.’
11
Alb an shrugs again. ‘I’m just staying here for now,’ he says casually.
‘It’s a roof over my head.’
Fielding looks up at the stained ceiling. On closer inspection, the stained
bit looks slightly bulged. ‘Yeah, right.’
Another shrug. ‘I guess technically I’m of no fixed abode.’
‘Wow. What age are you again?’
Alban grins. ‘Over twenty–one. You?’
Fielding looks round the place again. ‘I don’t know, Al, I mean, just look
at this. What have you done with–?’
Al gestures at the corduroy seat. ‘Fielding, will you sit down? You’re
making the place look untidy.’
This is one of Gran’s phrases. Fielding guesses Alban means it ironically,
an attempt at humour.
Fielding says, ‘Let me take you for lunch. Please.’
There’s some nonsense about taking the dogs for a walk but there’s no way
Fielding’s letting these mangy mutts in the Merc so he pleads an allergy. Then
the chav couple with the tobacco habit ask if they’ll be going anywhere near
the ‘middle o’ toon’.
‘Why?’ Fielding asks, in case they’re going to ask him to score them some
drugs or – worse – bring them back a McDonalds.
‘Wur goin’ that wiy, boss, ye know?’ the male one says. ‘Save us the bus
fare.’
Fielding’s about to piss all over this idea too but then somehow just
looking at their pathetic, pasty, thin, proto–junky faces makes him think, Oh
fuck, I’m bigger than this. The car’ll smell of cigarettes for a day or so
just from their clothes even if he doesn’t let them smoke in it, but what the
hell.
Al throws on a grubby–looking green hiking jacket that probably cost a lot
when it was new. The Tango guy announces he’s got cleaning and stuff to do and
waves them off down the echoing, disinfected stairwell. The car is unmolested,
the briefcase goes in the boot and Al navigates them out of the scheme towards
the centre of the little city. Di and Sunny amuse themselves playing
12
with the buttons that control the rear sun–blinds. Fielding drops them near
the Job Centre.
Al suggests he and Fielding take a walk as it’s too early for lunch and so
they drive on a little further and park by the river in the shadow of some
grand Victorian buildings, then walk along the bank, heading downstream with
the swirling brown flow of the waters. It’s a mild, half–sunlit day beneath a
sky of small white clouds that makes Fielding think of the title sequence of
The Simpsons. The air smells good here by the water, though there’s traffic
buzzing on both sides of the river.
‘Kind of you to pick up the mail, Fielding,’ Al says.
‘Well, I was in the area.’
Alban looks at the other man, grinning. ‘What, in Llangurig?’ He sounds

amused.
Llangurig is a small town in mid–Wales, near the Hafren Forest, where Al was
working for the first half of the year. ‘Well, not so much passing through or
anything,’ Fielding admits, ‘as scouring the length and the breadth of the
land for your absconded arse.’
Alban makes a noise that might be a cough or a laugh or something in
between. ‘You were looking for me?’
‘Yes. And now I’ve found you.’
‘Kind of guessing you weren’t doing all this just to facilitate my
re–subscription to Foresters’ Anonymous and What Chainsaw?’ Al says.
Fielding looks at him and Alban catches the glance, holds up his left hand,
the one with only half a little finger. ‘Kidding. Made them up.’
Another attempt at humour, then. Fielding had taken a look at the envelopes
his cousin’s mail had arrived in and there had been nothing obviously from any
such publications, but you never know.
‘Well, exactly,’ Fielding says. ‘As I said, I was looking for you. And you
are not an easy man to find.’
Amn’t I? Sorry.’
He doesn’t sound it. Fielding turns to him, takes one sleeve of
13
his jacket, making him turn towards him, so they stop walking. ‘Al, why are
you like this?’
Fielding wasn’t losing his temper or anything at this point – he’d decided
from the start to be calm and reasonable with the guy – but he really would
just like to know why Al’s gone like this, become like this, even though he
realises Alban probably wouldn’t tell him even if he could, even if he knew
himself. Maybe they’re just too far apart, too different these days, family or
not.
‘Like what?’ Alban looks genuinely puzzled.
‘Like a man who’s trying to lose himself, like a man who’s trying to abandon
his family or get them to abandon him; I don’t know. Why? I mean, your own
parents don’t know whether you’re alive or dead.’
‘I sent them a Christmas card,’ Alban says. Plaintively, Fielding thought.
‘That was – what? Eight? Nine months ago? And they only knew you were still
in the country because it had a UK stamp on it. Nobody seems to know where you
are. Jesus, Alban, I was on the brink of hiring a fucking private detective to
find you when I heard you’d been working in Wales. Even then it was sheer luck
I bumped into one of your forester chums who knew you’d started a job round
here and eventually remembered the firm’s name after a curry and about
eighteen pints of Stella.’
‘Sounds like Hughey,’ Al says, and starts walking again. To Fielding, it
looks more like wandering off. He falls into step with his cousin, frustrated.
‘How was Hughey?’ Alban asks.
Al, I’m sorry, I don’t care about Hughey. Why don’t you ask how any of the
family are?’
‘Hughey’s a pal. Seriously, how was he?’
‘Drunk and well fed when I last saw him. Why do you care more about people
like him than about your family?’
‘You choose your friends, Fielding,’ Alban says, sounding tired.
Al, Jesus, man, what is this?’ Fielding asks, controlling his voice. ‘What
the hell has the family ever done to you to make you like this? I know you’ve
had some tough breaks, but we gave you–’
14
Alban stops and spins round, and just for a second Fielding thinks he’s
going to shout or at least poke a finger in his chest or maybe just point at
him or, if nothing else, express himself with a bit of passion. But the look

on his face fades almost before Fielding can be sure it’s really there and he
shrugs and turns and starts walking again, along the broad sand–coloured
pavement, between the twin streams of water and cars. ‘It’s all a long story.
A long, boring story. Mostly I just got fed up with . . .’ His voice trails
off. One more shrug.
After a dozen or so steps, he asks, ‘How’s Lydcombe? You been there
recently? They keeping the gardens tidy?’
‘I was there last month. It all looked fine to me.’ Fielding leaves a gap.
Aunt Clara, everybody else, they’re all well. Same with my parents. Thanks for
asking.’
Alban just grunts.
Forget the draughty castle and thousands of windswept barren acres the
family owns – for now, anyway – in the Highlands. Lydcombe, in Somerset, was
the first serious out–of–town property purchase Great–Grandfather Henry made
when he started to rake in his millions. Quite a beautiful setting, on the
north edge of Exmoor National Park. Bit quiet, and a long way from London, but
a good place for family holidays unless you want guaranteed sun. Only forty
acres or so, but it’s lush and green and sunny and the grounds go rolling down
to the coast of the Bristol Channel.
Fielding was brought up in a few different places round the world, but as a
kid he probably spent more holiday time there than anywhere else, in the big,
rambling house overlooking the terraced lawns, close by the walled garden and
the ruins of the old abbey. The main building is listed and, of course, it’s
all part of the National Park so there are various planning restrictions if
you wanted to do anything radical with the place.
Alban knows Lydcombe better than Fielding. It was his home for most of his
childhood, then he spent a couple of summers there as a teenager, discovering
what green fingers he had. And thereby, of course, hangs the tale.
15
Fielding’s moby chooses to go at this point, inside his jacket pocket. He’s
left it on vibrate since he made the turn into Skye Crescent and probably
missed a couple of calls – otherwise it’s been amazingly quiet. Fielding gets
a weird, tight, unpleasant feeling in his guts when he’s out of touch for this
long, like there’s vitally important stuff happening that he really needs to
know about and there are people on the other end desperate for him to answer .
. . Though of course he knows it’ll probably be nothing, or more likely just
somebody asking a question they wouldn’t need to ask if they were seriously
intent on actually doing their job rather than always passing the most trivial
problem upstairs to cover their miserable asses. Even so – though his hand is
itching to grab the fucker – he’s not going to answer. He ignores the
vibrations, keeps up with Alb an.
This is all so annoying! He’s a good manager, a good person–manager and he
has certificates to prove it, not to mention the respect of his peers and
subordinates. He’s good at selling, good at persuading. Why is he finding it
so hard to get through to this one guy he should feel closer to than most?
‘Look, Alban, okay, I can understand . . . Actually, no, I can’t understand’
(about tearing his hair out here!) ‘but I guess I just have to accept you feel
the way you do about the family and the firm, but that’s part of what I need
to talk to you about.’
Alban turns to him. ‘Maybe we should get a drink.’
‘Whatever. Yeah, okay.’
They find a bar nearby, the lounge of a small hotel in the compressed–feeling
town centre. Alban insists on paying and has a pint of IPA while Fielding
takes a mineral water. It’s still before noon and the place is quiet and dim
and smells of last night’s cigarettes and spilled beer.
Alban swallows about a quarter of the pint in one series of gulps, then
smacks his lips. ‘So why are you looking for me, Fielding?’ he asks.

‘Specifically’
‘Well, frankly, I was asked to.’
16
‘Who by?’
‘Gran.’
‘Good God, is the old harridan alive and compos mentis?’ Al shakes his head
and takes another drink.
‘Al, please.’
Gran – Grandmother Winifred – is the Wopuld materfamilias, the head of the
family and one of its eldest surviving members. She’s also, in terms of voting
rights, the most powerful person on the board of the family firm. She’s not
perfect – at nearly eighty, who is? – and she can be prickly and fussy and
sometimes even wrong, but she’s seen the firm and the family through tough
times and good times and a lot of people still have a real soft spot for her,
Fielding included. And she is very old and of course everybody feels
protective of her, no matter how spirited and feisty she might seem, so it’s
not good to hear somebody in the family dissing her. Fielding tries to let the
hurt he feels show on his face.
Al frowns at him. ‘You look like you’re straining.’
‘What?’
‘How’d you find out I was in Wales anyway?’
‘I talked to your girl . . . your friend, whatever you . . . you know: in
Glasgow. What’s her–?’
‘VG?’
‘VD?’
‘Vee, Gee. Those are her initials.’
‘Right. What was her name again? Foreign, wasn’t it?’
‘Verushka Graef
‘Ver–oosh–ka. That’s the one.’
‘Yes, I know.’
This, frankly, does give Fielding pause for thought. ‘You and her really an
item?’ he asks.
Alban grins without any apparent mirth. ‘Fielding, I can see you looking at
me with new respect and a degree of incredulity, but no, we’re not an "item".
We meet up now and again. Occasional lovers. Don’t imagine I’m her only one.’
17
‘Oh, I see. Anyway, she told me the last definite address she had for you
was in this Llangurig place.’
‘That was good of her.’
‘Took some persuading.’
‘She knows I like my privacy.’
‘Well, hurrah for her. Actually, she took some finding herself, too. Had to
go through the university. Are you part of some sort of weird cult or
something? I mean, renouncing the use of mobile phones. What the hell is that
all about?’
‘I don’t like being at other people’s beck and call, Fielding. VG . . . She
just doesn’t like being disturbed.’
‘She for real?’
‘What do you mean, like not a robot or something?’
‘Fuck off, you know what I mean. Is she really this shit–hot mathematician?’
Al shrugs. ‘Think so. Glasgow University Mathematics Department seems to
think so. Not to mention what you could justifiably call a plethora of
peer–reviewed journals.’
‘So, really a professor?’
‘Yeah, really. Not that I actually saw her being invested or whatever it is
they do when they make you one.’

‘She doesn’t look like a professor.’
‘That’d be the spiky blonde hair.’
‘It was black.’
Again?’ Al shakes his head, drinks. ‘She’s a natural blonde.’
‘Is she mad?’
‘She’s a little eccentric. Once dyed it mousy brown, just to see.’
‘Just to see what?’
‘I don’t know.’
‘Right. Anyway.’
Anyway.’
‘So, Gran asked me to find you and talk to you. There’s stuff happening.
Stuff you need to know. Stuff you might even want to be involved in.’
Fielding’s mobile is vibrating again but he’s ignoring it.
18
‘Really?’ Al sounds sceptical.
‘Yes, and I think you’ll agree when you hear it . . .’
‘This going to take long?’
‘A few minutes.’
‘Hold on then. Better take a leak.’ Alban stands up, draining his pint as he
does so. He starts towards the exit, then pauses, turning back. ‘You could get
another round in.’
‘Okay, okay’
Alban made his way to the Gents in the Salutation Hotel, sighing and smoothing
his hand over his beard. He smiled at a passing waitress, let himself into the
toilets, stood looking at the tall porcelain urinals for a moment and then
went into a cubicle, closing the door behind him. He didn’t need to sit down;
he didn’t really need to visit the toilet at all. He pulled the letter from
his pocket and sat on the seat cover. He read both sides of the
closely–written single sheet, squinting in the dim light. He read the letter
once straight through, then re–read a couple of sections. After that he just
sat there for a while, staring at nothing.
A little later he shook his head as though pulling himself out of a
daydream, stood, put the letter back in his pocket and left. For some reason
he flushed the toilet as he did so, and then washed his hands.
Fielding, just putting his mobile away, looked relieved and then slightly
annoyed when he saw his cousin again, as though he’d been worrying that Al had
run off. At least the pint of IPA was sitting there.
‘Right, there’s a few things,’ Fielding tells Al once he’s started on his new
pint. ‘First of all, Gran is thinking of – well, she’s decided, it’s happening
– to sell Garbadale.’
‘Uh–huh?’
‘Yes. Well, I mean, come on. She’s eighty soon and she had a couple of
health scares over the last year or so and some of us have
19
been trying to persuade her to move to somewhere near a decent hospital for a
while now. It can take a couple of hours to get to, umm, the Inverness
hospital–’
‘Raigmore.’
‘Yeah, that’s the place. Anyway, that’s far too long, and that’s just a
one–way trip, somebody driving her there. An ambulance would take twice as
long. I mean, they have an air ambulance, but you can’t rely on that always
being available. I think that last heart thing she had–’
‘She had a heart thing?’ Al sounds almost interested.
‘Fibrillations or something. She kind of fainted. Of course, that was back

in March, so you won’t have heard, will you?’
‘That’s right. Was it serious?’
‘Serious enough. Anyway, that seems to have convinced her to move out of the
middle of nowhere at last. She’s only talking about Inverness or maybe
Edinburgh or Glasgow, but I think we can convince her she’d be better off in
London and near Harley Street.’
‘But they haven’t, say, given her only a couple of months to live or
anything?’
‘Oh, God, no. Nothing that bad. She’ll live to be a hundred if she takes
care of herself, or lets us take care of her.’
‘And you really don’t find that depressing?’ Al asks, looking at his cousin
quizzically.
Al, stop it.’ Fielding sips his mineral water. Anyway, there’s more. The
thing – oh, yes. You’re invited to Gran’s eightieth birthday party next
month.’ He digs in his other jacket pocket and produces the envelope with Al’s
invitation in it and hands it to him. Al looks at it like it contains a bomb,
or possibly anthrax. He puts it unopened in his grubby hiking jacket. ‘The
place is going on the market this week,’ Fielding tells him, ‘though there’s
no viewing for a couple of days either side of the party. But it will be the
last chance for the family to see the place. Well, you know. To stay there.’
20
‘Think I’ll pass.’ Al drinks. ‘Thanks all the same. Pass on my apologies if
I forget to RSVR.’
‘There’s more.’
‘Is there now?’
‘This is what it’s really all about. I didn’t track you down over half the
UK just to give you a party invite. The point is, the party’s more than just a
party. I mean, there’ll be the party, but there’s other stuff over those few
days too. That’s what I really need to talk to you about.’
‘Will it take long? Should I nip to the loo again?’
‘Please don’t.’
‘Just kidding.’
‘It’s about Spraint Corp.’
‘Oh, really? What joy’
‘Basically, they want to buy us out.’
Al’s glass is halfway to his lips, but there it stops, for quite a few
seconds. At last – some sort of reaction. He looks surprised. Taken aback,
Fielding would even go as far as to say. ‘Do they now?’ Alban says, and
drinks, but it’s with a forced casualness. Now they were getting somewhere.
‘One hundred per cent,’ Fielding tells him. ‘Total buy–out. One or two of us
might get to stay on as consultants. Maybe. It’d be for shares and cash.
Mostly shares. They’d keep the name, of course. That’s a large part of the
value.’
Al just sits there nodding for a while, arms folded. He seems to be staring
at his boots; chunky yellow things with lots of laces.
He looks at Fielding and shrugs. ‘Is that it?’
‘Well, that’s where the party comes in. The family, the firm, will be
holding an Extraordinary General Meeting the day before Gran’s birthday, at
the castle, at Garbadale House.’ Fielding sips his water. ‘Pretty much
everybody will be there.’
‘Mm–hmm,’ Al says, and nods. He’s still staring at his footwear. His eyes
are open quite wide.
‘So you might like you to be there for that, too, obviously,’ Fielding
21
tells him. ‘The EGM is on Saturday, October the eighth. Gran’s birthday party
is the day after.’

‘Okay’
‘Like I say, more or less the whole family should be there. They’re coming
in from all over the world.’ Fielding gives it a moment. ‘Be a pity if you
weren’t there, Al. Really.’
Alban nods, looks at his pint, then nearly drains it and stands up, pulling
on his jacket. ‘You fit?’ he asks, nodding at Fielding’s mineral water.
‘Continue our walk?’
‘Sure.’
They walk down the river embankment, to where the traffic on that side
disappears and a railway bridge crosses the river. There’s a footbridge tacked
on to the side of the rail bridge; they take the steps up to it and on.
‘So, what do you think?’ Fielding asks Alban.
‘About the party? The Extraordinary Meeting? The takeover? Our one big happy
family getting together for a knees–up?’
All of the above.’
Al strides purposefully on for a bit, then slows and stops, near the centre
of the footbridge. He turns and looks down at the water rushing gently past
beneath. It’s clear brown like smoked glass and sparkles fitfully under the
sun. Fielding leans on the parapet beside him.
Alban shakes his head slowly, light brown curls blowing in the breeze. ‘I
don’t know that I want to be part of any of it. Sorry.’
Fielding feels like saying something and normally would, but sometimes you
just have to let people fill their own silences.
Al takes a series of deep breaths and looks up to where the river disappears
upstream. ‘Once upon a time I felt . . . constrained, all tied up by this
family. I had this idiot idea that if I could get away for a year and a day,
I’d be free of it somehow, or at least able to accept it on . . . On mutually
agreeable terms.’ He glances at his cousin. ‘You know? Like in the days of
serfdom? If a serf could
22
race his master for a year and a day without being caught, he was
a free man.’
‘I’ve heard something like that.’
He laughs. ‘Stupid idea, anyway. Glorified gap year. But anyway. After I
came back, after I took up my supposedly rightful place in the company, and
then got fed up with that, that was when I knew I had to get out, and decided
– realised – a year and a day wouldn’t be enough, that it would never have
been enough. Not with this family.’ He turns, gives a small smile.
And then, sometimes, people leave you silences you have no real choice but
to fill. ‘So,’ Fielding asks him, ‘how long would be long enough?’
A shrug. ‘Somewhere between until further notice and for ever, I suppose.’
Fielding leaves it a bit, then says, ‘Look, I seem to remember you left
because we sold a quarter of the stock to Spraint in the first place.’
No reaction.
‘That’s certainly become the story,’ Fielding tells him. ‘That’s the family
mythology, that you disagreed with the twenty–five–per–cent disposal and
jumped ship. Back in ninety–nine. I mean, is that right?’
‘That had a lot to do with it,’ Al says. ‘Well, something to do with it.’
‘So, look, if you’re still on the anti side, then–’ Fielding pulls back.
‘Are you?’
‘Am I what?’ Alban asks. ‘Still sworn to renounce the Spraint Corporation of
America, Inc., and all its works?’
‘Yes.’
Al shakes his head. ‘I’m not sure I care any more, Fielding. I’m not sure it
matters very much at all. One group of shareholders: another group of
shareholders.’ He makes a sort of rolling motion with one hand then the other.
‘Shit,’ Fielding says, leaning back on the metal tube of the parapet.

23
‘I’ll be honest, Al. Some of us were kind of hoping you might help organise
the opposition to the deal.’
Alban looks round, surprised. ‘There is opposition?’ He pauses, appears to
think. ‘We’re not getting greedy, are we?’ He looks away again. ‘Why, that
would never do.’
‘Of course there’s opposition,’ Fielding tells him, trying not to respond to
the obvious sarcasm. ‘This is our firm, our family, Al. It’s our name on the
board. It’s what we’ve done for four generations. It’s what we do, it’s what
we are. That’s the point, don’t you see? I mean, that’s what’s thundered
through to quite a few people in the family, especially since Spraint took
their quarter–share. That it’s not about money. Sure the money’s good, but –
Jeez – we’ve all basically got enough. If we sell up we’ll all be richer, but
we’ll be just like any other family.’
‘No, we won’t.’
‘Well, okay, like any other well–off family’
‘That may not count as demotion.’
‘Al, come on! I thought this at least would get you going! Aren’t you
interested at all? Doesn’t any of this matter to you?’
‘Not in the ways you might think, cuz.’
‘Shit.’
They stand like that for a while, leaning on the edge of the bridge, looking
upstream. A passenger train rumbles slowly past, heading into the city, wheels
screeching. It looks very tall and heavily metallic, this close up. A kid
waves down and Fielding waves back, then turns to lean with Al again. It’s one
of those silences.
‘Are you seriously trying to tell me,’ Al says at last, ‘there’s any
possibility of stopping the sale?’
Fielding keeps deadpan, in case Al looks round at him suddenly. ‘Yes,’ he
states.
‘How many people . . . no, make that, what are the percentages involved?’
‘Hard to say for sure. People are keeping their cards pretty close
24
to their chests. Spraint only needs twenty–six per cent of the remaining
family shares to get control–’
‘No, they need a third of the remaining–’
‘You know what I mean.’
‘I suppose. Would they be satisfied with control, or do they want total
ownership?’
‘They say they might settle for control, but they really want the lot.’
‘"Might settle for control"?’
‘They’d have to think about it. They say they’re so confident we’ll take
their offer they haven’t bothered thinking about what to do if we don’t.’
Al snorts. ‘Yeah, sure. Well, it’s this family. There are always going to be
some diehards.’
‘Guaranteed.’
Al looks thoughtful, strokes his beard. ‘Doesn’t the ninety–two–per–cent
thing apply here?’
‘Yeah. They’re really looking for a ninety–two–per–cent share, so they can
compulsorily purchase the rest.’
‘Mm–hmm.’ Alban looks round at his cousin. ‘So who’s going to stop them?’
His gaze seems to search Fielding’s eyes. ‘I seem to recall you were on the
for–sale side, six years ago.’
‘Yes, I was,’ Fielding says smoothly. ‘Struck me as the right thing to do
then. Probably still would, circumstances being the same. We needed the cash
injection. I mean, I understand – understood – your point of view, but there

wasn’t much argument that we needed more investment. But anyway. That was
then. This is now. We don’t need to sell to Spraint. We could keep going as a
– basically – family firm. We could keep Spraint on board as helpful, even
enthusiastic partners, we could be happy with them selling the shares to a
third party or we could easily organise a bank loan to buy them back.’
Fielding expects Al to look round again at this, but he doesn’t. ‘Seriously,’
Fielding tells him. ‘That’s a possibility. Our credit’s good. Very good.
Kath’s already . . . That’s Aunt Kath – she’s Finance Officer now. You knew
that?’
25
‘Yeah, I knew that,’ Al says quietly.
‘Anyway, she’s held informal talks with a couple of banks and they’re like
totally up for it. Positively encouraging. I think they think we should go for
it.’
Fielding lets Alb an mull this over for a while.
‘So. Look, Al, there’s a couple of people in the family who could be
wavering on this. They feel tugged both ways. They can see what Spraint are
offering is basically a good deal. It would make sound business sense to sell
up. That’s a given. Okay. On the other hand, this is their life, their family,
their name being sold here. They can see value – and I mean something more
than monetary – in staying on board, keeping in charge. It all depends on how
much we value the family, I guess. How much all of us do.’ Fielding thinks he
sees his cousin nod. ‘So, some of us would like to at least give Spraint a
proper fight. And you could help, Al. There are people – Jeez, my dad’s one –
people who’d listen to you. Beryl? Great–Aunt Beryl? She’s always had a soft
spot for you, hasn’t she? She’s another.’
‘What about the old girl?’
‘Gran?’
‘Yes. Where does she stand on this?’
Well, she sent me. This was her idea. Well, and mine.’
Alban looks at the other man. ‘She’s against the takeover?’
‘Yes,’ Fielding tells him.
‘She was for the last one, the twenty–five–per–cent sale.’
‘I keep telling you, that was different. That was about keeping the company
going. This is about keeping the company going.’
‘That’s not different, that’s the same.’
‘Jesus, Al, you know what I mean. Without Spraint’s money we might have gone
under, so we took it and the company survived. But now they want to make it
all theirs and it’ll only be the name that goes on – the company will have
gone. It’s business – it’s all about survival. Look, you can help here. If you
want to you can make a difference, you can matter. I’m serious. You could have
a real influence. Just come and talk to a few people.’
26
Fielding leaves a space.
‘Why now?’ Al asks. He turns round and his eyes have narrowed and Fielding
knows he’s got him.
‘Why now?’ Fielding repeats.
‘Why are Spraint so keen now? What’s changed, what’s on the horizon?’
‘Ah, well, now, we think it’s because the Empire! series has been doing so
well on the PC and Gamebox, and they’re working on a fresh title for their own
new machine, the NG. You heard of that?’
‘No.’
‘NG. Next Generation, taking over from the V–Ex. Out early next year. Kicks
kitty–litter sand in the face of the PS2 and the X–box 360. Better, faster
processor than top–of–the–line PCs. Processors plural, I should say – it’s got
three, plus the best dedicated graphics card on the market. Eighty gig hard

drive minimum, HD ready. Built–in broadband.’
Alban’s laughing at his cousin. ‘You’re in love, I can see.’
Fielding’s laughing, too. ‘It is one fuck of a machine. It’s going to define
the console games market for the next five years.’
‘Yeah, no doubt.’
‘No, this is true.’
‘They got the software, the games ready?’
‘That’s what we’re talking about. We reckon the Empire! titles and
derivatives are going to form a major part of the roll–out and their future
plans. One of them might even be bundled with the initial release.’
‘Might?’
‘Yeah, as in maybe.’
‘They’re obviously keeping you well up to date with developments.’
‘Hey, we’re partners, not Siamese twins.’
Al turns away again, but he’s thinking. Ah, hah,’ he says softly. There’s a
surprisingly long pause. And you want to stand in the way of this fucking
behemoth.’
And we can do it,’ Fielding tells him. ‘If people believe. I mean,
27
we need to get to them before the EGM at Garbadale, but there’s time. We could
do it. We’d need to be there at Garbadale, too, obviously, but there’s work to
be done beforehand. Just a couple of weeks, max, Alban, that’s all. Expenses
on me, obviously.’ Fielding leaves a gap. He can hear the river gurgling.
‘What do you think?’
Alban shakes his head. Says nothing.
‘Jeez, Al,’ Fielding says, ‘is the tree–chopping business so fucking
entrancing you can’t tear yourself away?’
Alban laughs. ‘No,’ he says, pushing his fingers through his hair again.
‘I’ve been invalided out, anyway.’
‘What?’ Shit, Fielding thinks, did I miss something? Has Al sliced off a
finger or some toes or something? He lost the top of one little finger years
ago, not long after he first started this forestry crap, but has he lost
something else?
‘See these fingers?’ Al says, holding up the index and middle fingers of
each hand.
Fielding nods. ‘They all seem to be there.’
Al looks at them, too. ‘Yeah, but so’s something called white finger’
What?’
‘You get it from too much vibration. Starts killing off blood vessels or
something. The doc explained it all. Handled too many old chain–saws in my
time. Shouldn’t really have happened so quickly but I must just be especially
vulnerable.’
‘Shit. Is it sore?’
‘No.’ He rotates the fingers round in front of his face, inspecting them.
‘Lost a bit of sensitivity, and I need to watch they don’t get too cold in the
winter, but I can live with it.’
‘So you’re out?’
‘Yup.’
‘Couldn’t they find you a desk job?’
Al grins. ‘It was the cutting–down–trees bit I liked. They offered me a
driving job, hauling trees or stripping them or stacking or whatever, but I
wasn’t interested.’
‘So . . .’ Fielding holds up both arms. Why not–?’
28
He lets his voice fade as Al turns to look upriver again.
The waters run on away beneath them both.

‘Look,’ Fielding says, ‘won’t you at least come and see Beryl and Doris?
Jesus, man, it’s only Glasgow.’ Actually, Fielding has himself a kind of
horror of meeting the two great–aunts. Not that he’s going to mention that,
obviously. They’d love to see you,’ he tells Alban, possibly truthfully. ‘We
could drive through today.’
Nothing.
Then Al says, ‘Maybe. I don’t know.’
God, Fielding thinks, he sounds depressed, defeated. Well, this is
something, he supposes.
After a while Al says, ‘You said that pretty much the whole family’s going
to be there, at Garbadale.’
‘They kind of have to be. Gran’s got – well, the Trust has got, but that
means Gran – proxy voting rights for anybody who isn’t. Effectively.’
‘Okay,’ Al gives a big sigh. And from the States?’
‘Oh, whole bunch o’ folks.’
Al’s shoulders shake with what might be another laugh. ‘We’re both being coy
here, Fielding. We both know
This time it’s Al’s voice that trails off.
Fielding clears his throat and says, ‘I understand Sophie is going to be
there. Cousin Sophie. She accepted the party invitation, registered for
attendance at the EGM. I guess she’ll be there.’ A pause. ‘Though, obviously .
. .’
Fielding is suddenly aware that he might be about to shoot himself in the
foot while it’s still in his mouth, so he shuts up.
Alban puts his head down into the V of his outstretched arms and his clasped
hands, as though studying the river passing immediately beneath.
As though praying.
He looks up and turns, smiling. ‘You fit for some lunch?’
‘Good idea,’ Fielding says.
They walk back towards the city.
*
29

*

*

‘Oh, God, are you all right?’
It took him a while to get the breath to wheeze, ‘Not really.’ He tried to
curl up tighter, while being perfectly aware that this would do no good
whatsoever.
The pain was about as bad as anything he’d ever felt. It seemed to radiate
out from his groin like some terrible searchlight, forcing its ghastly dark
rays of agony into every part of him, from his hair to his toenails. It went
beyond pain, into other realms which included an encompassing feeling of cold
and nausea and despair. It also seemed to be getting gradually worse. Alban
had lived fifteen years and had never experienced anything like it. He hoped
he never would again.
‘Oh, God, I’m so sorry’ The girl took off her black riding hat and put it
down on the brick path. She knelt by him, hesitating, then she put her hand on
to his shoulder and squeezed gently. He was making a noise somewhere between a
wheeze and a gurgle. She looked around, but there was nobody else in the
walled garden. She wondered if she ought to go up to the house and alert
somebody. How bad could this be? At first she’d thought he was exaggerating
when he’d fallen like a sack of potatoes and curled up like a hedgehog. Now
she thought he probably really was in intense pain.
Scrabbles gave a cough and flexed one hind leg again, backing towards the
two of them. Oh, God, she might kick him again. Or her. She tutted and rose,
chiding the tall chestnut mare and leading her to where she could munch on
some carrot leaves, out of harm’s way. Then she went back to the boy lying
clutched around his pain on the red–brick path. She bit her lip and patted his
head softly. He had curly light brown hair.
‘That’s called a stringhalt,’ she said, not knowing what else to say.

He made a noise that might have been a ‘What?’
‘Sudden spasmodic lifting of a horse’s hind leg,’ she explained. ‘It’s
called a stringhalt.’
He made a sort of keening noise and seemed to try to straighten out, then
gasped and curled up again. ‘Thanks,’ he said. It sounded
30
like his teeth were clenched. ‘That’s good to know.’ He paused for breath.
‘Felt more like a . . . kick.’
‘Actually you’re right, it was more like a kick. I’m so sorry. Is it really,
really painful, yah?’
He might have nodded. ‘Kinda.’
‘Scrabbles has never done that before.’
‘Sorry?’
‘Scrabbles. She’s never done that before. Kicked anyone.’
‘Really’ Each of his words sounded clipped, bitten off.
‘Yah. You’re not really supposed to walk that close to the rear legs of a
horse, ‘specially one you don’t know.’
‘Uh–huh. Well,’ he said, ‘you’re not really,’ he took another shuddering
breath, ‘meant to bring horses’ – one more breath, wheezing – ‘into a kitchen
garden,’ he told her. ‘Either.’
‘Sorry. Suppose not.’
‘And, are you deaf?’
‘I’m sorry? Oh, no. No, I was listening to my Walkman.’
‘What were you –’ he sucked air in raggedly ‘– listening to?’
‘Oh, ah, Now That’s What I Call Music; one of those.’
‘Right.’
She bit her lip again. All she’d been doing was taking a look round the old
walled garden at the end of her ride round the estate and along the beach.
She’d just got back from Spain and the first thing she’d wanted to do was take
Scrabbles out for a hack. She patted the boy’s head again. His hair was very
soft. She was pretty sure she knew who he was. ‘Should I go get help or
something? What do you think?’
‘Dunno. Ice?’ He looked round at her and she saw his face properly for the
first time. His face was contorted, right now, obviously, but she suspected it
was probably rather nice when it wasn’t. He had beautiful brown eyes, the same
colour as Scrabbles’ coat. She guessed he was a year or so older than her;
sixteen, say. He reminded her a bit of Nick Rhodes, from Duran Duran. She felt
she’d rather outgrown Duran Duran about a year ago, but she still had a soft
31
spot for Nick. ‘Really no idea,’ he gasped. ‘Might need a doctor at some
point. Just to check, you know?’
‘Shit, yah.’ She squeezed his shoulder again. ‘I’ll go up to the house.’
‘And will you get that animal out of my carrot lines?’
‘Yah, no problem. Back in a bit.’
She led the horse back through the tall gate in the west wall, walking
quickly.
The pain came and went, like waves on a shore, every particle of sand a tiny
raw testicle being rubbed up against every other one. Dear fucking God this
was sore. Why did it have to be this sore? He’d taken a tennis ball in the
balls once, maybe three or four years ago, and that had been bad, but this was
infinitely worse. Were sex and orgasms and reproduction really worth this
demented fucking agony? He’d never even got to do it properly yet, just
wanking, and now it felt like he never would. Could balls actually burst?
Fucking hell. He’d just been thinking lately it might be good to be a dad one
day, eventually, but now maybe that was off the menu entirely, all thanks to
some Yah–girl and her mad, man–hating, ball–bursting horse from hell. What he

really wanted to do was stand up, take down his jeans and boxers and take a
look at the damage, but he couldn’t, not when the girl might reappear at any
moment, with Uncle James or Aunt Clara or his own parents.
Gradually – far too bloody gradually – the pain started to fade. He stopped
feeling quite so sick. He pushed himself upright with one hand and sat
carefully on the brick path running between the lettuce beds. He dried his
eyes. He hadn’t really been crying as such, but the pain and the grimace it
had forced on to his face had sort of squeezed his tear ducts, he guessed. He
took a hanky from his pocket and blew his nose. Even that hurt. He coughed.
That hurt as well. He started thinking about standing up, wondering if that
would be painful, too. He looked at the black riding hat the girl had left
lying on the path. A single long, curled red hair lay coiled around the
velvety surface, shining in the sunlight like a vermilion meridian.
32
She was away five or ten minutes, then returned alone, swinging an ice
bucket. ‘They’ve all bloody gone!’ she said. ‘Nobody there. Cars aren’t there
either.’ He wiped away the last of his tears and looked at her. She was small,
a good head shorter than he was. He guessed she was about his age. Quite
curvy; well developed, was the phrase, he thought. She looked good in her long
black boots, stretchy fawn trousers and long black jacket. Her gathered–up red
hair glowed like copper in the sun against the shining blue of the summer sky.
She sat down beside him on the raised edge of the path. Green eyes. Gently
tanned skin, flushed a delicate red on her cheeks. Nice little nose. ‘Here. I
got the ice.’ She plonked the ice bucket down on the path between his booted
feet, then dug into her black riding jacket and pulled out a packet of pills.
‘Paracetamol. Thought these might help.’
He made a patting motion. ‘Thanks. I’ll be okay. It’s starting to go now.
I’ll live.’ He put his hands on his knees, stared ahead and blew out a deep
breath.
His hands looked long and strong and were incredibly dirty; brown with the
soil and quite black under the nails. She felt herself shiver.
‘Well, yah. Phew, right?’ She smiled.
She had, he noticed, braces on her top teeth. She saw him glance at her
mouth and closed her lips. It was almost a pout, he thought. She was very
pretty. Well, apart from the braces, obviously. Then she stuck her hand out.
‘Sophie. You’re Alban, my cousin, is that right?’
He took her small hand and shook it carefully. So they were cousins. That
was a pity. ‘That’s me,’ he said. ‘Pleased to meet you.’
‘Actually we have met, apparently, back when we were very young, but, ah,
how–do–you–do anyway’
He nodded. ‘Thanks for the ice,’ he said, leaning forward and scowling with
pain again. ‘But I think I’ll just get back to the house. Nice cool bath,
maybe.’
She stood and helped pull him up until he was standing, then retrieved the
ice bucket and nestled herself under his right shoulder
33
after seeing his first few, waddled steps. She stayed like that, supporting
him, all the way back to the house. She was more hindrance than help, but it
felt nice and she smelled good, cousin or not.
It was the second full summer he’d spent at Lydcombe since he’d grown up. But
he already knew the place well. He’d been born in Garbadale, in the far
north–west of Scotland. He and his real mum, Irene, and his dad had lived
there until he was two, when the thing with his mum had happened. Then he and
his dad had moved to Lydcombe. Both estates, with their large houses, were
owned by the family trust. Who got to live where was largely a matter of

choice but was ultimately in the gift of the family’s elder members. In those
days, this effectively meant Grandad Bert and Grandma Win.
He couldn’t remember anything of his mother, or of Garbadale. Lydcombe was
all he knew. They’d lived here and he’d grown up here, in the house when he
was very small, but then, as he got bigger and stronger and braver, the place
he really grew up within was the garden and the estate itself.
At first he only felt comfortable on the lawns and terraces around the
house, usually staying close to his dad as he sat on his little stool before
his easel, painting, but after a while he started to make friends with the
Victorian walled garden, and later began to play inside the old apple orchard
within the ruins of the ancient abbey. The orchard had gone to pasture and was
used to help feed the estate’s few sheep and goats, which were more pets than
anything else. Later still, expanding what he was starting to think of now as
his domain, he began venturing out beyond these concentricities of safety and
security and familiarity into the further meadows, copses, fields and woods of
the estate. Then, one bright day, he rambled as far as the river with its
banks strewn with wild flowers and bushes and, on that day of wanton
exploratory zeal, even went on and out past that, across the broad, sluggish
ford to the dunes and beach beyond, out
34
to the margin of the land where the rollers boomed and the hills of Wales
shimmered in the blue distance.
He’d started at Mardon Primary School, near Minehead. He explored the
gardens and estate in the evenings and at weekends. Sometimes he would chance
upon his dad, painting some distant view or part of the gardens. His dad sold
paintings sometimes, though mostly they seemed to slowly fill up the walls of
the house. School friends came to stay, and explored the estate with him. He
felt he was special, somehow secretly in charge of it all. It was his.
His father married again. Alban was very suspicious of this Leah person at
first, and insisted on calling her Aunt Leah, for ages. (A solemn, secret
pledge whispered to the ghost of his real mother under the bedclothes one
night.) But Leah was nice to him, even when he wasn’t nice to her, and his dad
seemed happier than Alban could ever remember, and told him off less. His dad
would let him sit on his knee and he always kept a small, spare canvas with
him – Alban’s Painting – which he let the boy scrawl on, encouraging him to
spatter paint across the woven, giving surface. His father sometimes suggested
subjects, or said not to hold the brush so tight, or just to use one hand, or
pointed out colours that might be interesting, but mostly he just sat there,
patiently, smiling, until Alban got bored and jumped down and went off to play
again; then his father would set the little canvas aside once more and
continue with his own work.
Alban made a slightly shamefaced apology to the memory of his real mother
one night, then started to call Leah ‘Mum’.
After being frightened of him – and even resenting his presence – he started
talking to the old gardener, Mr Sutton, who let him chatter away while he
worked, and sometimes let him help.
Cordelia came along. This incredible new, tiny thing; a sister. Amazing. He
realised suddenly they were a family. Cory took up a lot of his parents’ time,
leaving him even more free to continue exploring the garden. Mr Sutton only
came to the gardens in the afternoon of some days now, because he was getting
on. Alban had
35
started making maps of the garden, naming parts and features, invoking his own
lore. They had very nice long, hot holidays abroad, and short, cold ones in
Garbadale. Lots of sunshine was all right, for a couple of weeks, but then
they had sun, sea and sand at Lydcombe, too, and the plants and gardens abroad

always seemed rather garish and obvious compared to home.
As for the rocky desolation of the steep slopes around the waterlogged
grounds and rhododendron–choked gardens surrounding the grim grey walls of
Garbadale House; that meant little to him and somehow he never felt
comfortable there. He did his best to enjoy whatever any given holiday offered
(his dad had tried to get him to understand this: appreciate whatever life
throws up, make the most of now, because all things change, and sometimes not
to the good), but most holidays were merely different, not better, compared to
life at home. After the first few days of any time away, he always found
himself longing for Lydcombe, and whenever they returned from holiday he’d run
out into the garden, across the lawns, through the orchard and the echoing
abbey ruins, sometimes all the way down to the river and the sea.
Mr Sutton got really, really old and went into a Home; two lads from the
village both called Dave did some gardening stuff sometimes, but they weren’t
interested in talking to a kid Alban’s age. They used to make jokes about the
herb garden which he didn’t understand, and they didn’t seem to care about the
garden the way Mr Sutton had, but that just left it more to him, he felt.
Later, he wished he’d stopped just once to think about what a wonderful,
privileged, graced life he’d been living then.
What happened, when he was eleven and about to go to big school, was that
his dad sat him down one day and told him they were leaving Somerset, leaving
Lydcombe. His dad was joining the family firm. He would need to work in the
company’s main office. They would still come back, of course they would, but
they were off to the big city now: London! Well, Richmond, which wasn’t far
away, and had good train connections with the centre. They’d sorted
36
out a good school nearby where he could be a day pupil and everything.
They’d left Lydcombe. Another lot of people, some aunt and uncle and their
children – he was supposed to know them, but he couldn’t remember meeting them
– were going to live there now, now that his dad was taking up a new post in
the family and working in London.
He felt betrayed, exiled, cast out. Richmond was a strange, crowded, busy
place after Lydcombe. The house was only a little smaller, apparently, but
much more vertical and far more ordered; fewer eccentric corridors,
half–landings, erratic staircases and oddly shaped rooms. It felt tight and
constrained after Lydcombe, as though the building was forever standing at
attention, incapable of relaxing. The garden was supposed to be huge but this
was nonsense; he paced it out and reckoned it was barely half the size of
Lydcombe’s walled garden alone. His dad was out to work most of the time.
Being taken to films and shows in London made up for some of this, but not
all. School, after a couple of awkward weeks, was actually a comfort. All he
had to do was alter his accent a little – though it had never been especially
West Country in the first place – and take up the challenge of one boy who was
older and even bigger than he was, but slow. They shook hands after the fight,
which he thought was slightly hilarious; very jolly hockey sticks. He enjoyed
learning, enjoyed being one of the lads, enjoyed being taken to London
(especially if it was just him and his dad) and being allowed to wander the
streets and parks of Richmond with his pals, but he missed Lydcombe more – he
realised one terrible night – than he missed his dead mother.
Now Lydcombe had become the place to go on holiday to, rather than the place
to go on holiday from; a destination, temporary and somehow conditional. The
first time they went back, he noticed that the half–dozen or so of Andy’s
paintings that had been left behind, a present to the house and its new
inhabitants, had all been
37
shifted, consigned to bedrooms rather than left in public spaces. If Andy was

bothered by this, he didn’t say.
He had visited the estate with his mum and dad and sister Cory every year
since the great move to Richmond, sometimes stopping for a week or two,
sometimes just staying overnight, but he could only barely remember Sophie. He
thought they’d each been five the last time they’d met. He had a vague
recollection of having made her cry.
Since then their paths had contrived not to cross, even though Lydcombe was
her home. Sophie was the child of Uncle James and his first wife, not Uncle
James and Aunt Clara, so she was away a lot staying with her birth mother in
Spain.
The first time he worked out the implications of this, he thought how weird
it must be. Having two mothers wasn’t weird – he was used to that – but having
two mothers who were each still alive. That was bizarre. It was only when he
began asking other kids about this sort of thing that he started to realise it
wasn’t that strange at all. Adults were definitely strange though.
He’d started taking charge of the garden at Richmond almost without
noticing, from when he was about twelve. They had a gardener who came in, and
he hung around with him a lot, asking questions, helping out and doing some of
the spade work and the other heavy–lifting stuff that hurt Mr Reynolds’ back.
He grew to love the work, love the horti lore, the vast hidden store of
knowledge that seemed to exist behind every leaf and blade and petal and sod.
Kew Gardens was not far away. He went there first with his parents, one
cool, misty autumn day, in a bad mood for some forgotten reason and really not
wanting to be there at all, or anywhere with them (Cory came too, all
simpering and sweet for a change, as if sensing his mood and deliberately
trying to provide a contrast), but he was reluctantly impressed with the trees
and shrubs and the stately, towering confection of the Pagoda looming through
the haze. Then came the glasshouses. Those he was quietly
38
stunned by, their smell and heat and pressing humidity containing whole,
fragrant, fabulous world of riotous greenery – plants from everywhere,
dreamlike caricatures of plants, some almost nightmarish, as though from alien
worlds, all flourishing luxuriantly here under a grey English sky. Jets, also
from all over the world, roared overhead in the murk every few minutes, on
their way into Heathrow. He had to lean over and peer at labels as casually as
he could, not wanting to show how deeply impressed he was, how much this was
meaning to him. He already knew he’d be coming here a lot.
When he was asked what he wanted to do for his summer holidays in ‘84 – he
was fourteen and had been invited to come and stay with various outposts of
the family, from Garbadale to the States to the Far East – he said he’d like
to go to Lydcombe and work in the garden.
By the end of that first summer he’d already almost started to think of the
place as his home again. The house itself was all very well, but it was the
estate, the gardens, the plants – flowers, shrubs, trees and vegetables, even
the differing species of grass on the lawns and meadows, as well as the animal
life that they supported – that fascinated him.
An interest in horticulture was a bit naff, as his school pals had taken
some satisfaction in telling him, and in a way he knew they were right. But
there you were. He just found all this green, supposedly boring stuff utterly
spellbinding. God help him, he was a teenager who got a real kick out of
growing vegetables.
So, sitting on a rubber ring are we, Alban?’ Uncle James asked. ‘Pass the
peas.’
‘Oh, my poor boy,’ Leah said, for perhaps the fifth time, from the other
side of the table. There was a comforting smile on her race and a small,
sympathetic groan in her voice.
‘Muuum,’ Alban said, glaring at her. Leah just smiled more widely.

39
Alban passed the bowl of peas towards the head of the table. Actually, it’s a
cushion, Uncle,’ he told Uncle James.
God, this was embarrassing. He was horribly aware he must have sounded like
a little child calling Leah ‘Mum’ like that. Not even just ‘Mum’, but ‘Muuum’,
the sound all stretched out just as though a little kid had said it. He
glanced down the table at Sophie, to see if she was smirking or giggling or
anything, but she was just helping herself to more potatoes.
‘You poor lad,’ Aunt Clara said, brusquely. ‘Got to be careful round
horses.’ Clara was a large, florid lady, prone to wearing smocks and
headscarves. Alban didn’t think he’d ever seen her with her – sometimes
disquietingly orange – hair worn down.
‘Doc says there’s no permanent damage,’ Andy said. Alban’s dad had insisted
on being present when the doctor had examined him. That had been kind of
embarrassing, too, though Andy had been very sympathetic. And it had been a
young, female doctor. That had been excruciatingly embarrassing.
‘Family line secure then, is it?’ Uncle James asked Alban’s dad. Uncle James
was a sort of nouveau fogey. He wore lots of waistcoats, those yellow check
shirts real farmers rarely wear, and corduroy trousers, all of which helped
bulk out his already slightly oversized frame. He had thick curly black hair,
rosy cheeks and a nicely developing paunch.
Andy just smiled. Alban’s dad was normal in comparison; thinner, with
straightish black hair already going grey. He had a kind–looking face with
crinkly bits round his eyes that usually made it look like he’d spent his life
smiling, but which occasionally – if you caught him just sitting alone,
staring into space the way he did sometimes, and he hadn’t noticed you – made
him look very sad, until he realised you were there.
‘You’ll be fine, won’t you, darling?’ Leah said, still smiling across at
Alban. Alban’s mum was slight and pale but with the sort of cheerful character
people usually associated with somebody twice her size. She had luxuriant
quantities of curly blonde hair which
40
she called her crowning glory. Also, as more than one of Alban’s school pals
had pointed out to his intense discomfiture, she had – for her age – great
tits.
‘I’ll be fine,’ he muttered. He bent over his plate and started removing the
fat from the edges of the pork chops.
‘Hope you weren’t doing a Geldof in front of my little girl, Alban,’ Uncle
James said, slathering apple sauce over his plate.
‘Sorry, Uncle?’
‘Swearing, like that Geldof guy. It’d only be natural, after getting kicked
in the nuts like that; can see that, but I’m just hoping you managed to
constrain your profanities from my little girl’s ears.’
‘James, please,’ Sophie said, rolling her eyes.
Sophie’s father made a show of turning round in his seat to look behind him
at the dining–room door. ‘Somebody else come in?’ he asked, frowning mightily.
‘Somebody called "James"?’
‘Dad, Da, Pater, Papa,’ Sophie said through tight lips, glaring at him.
‘Oh! It’s mel’ Uncle James said, turning back. ‘Sorry, daughter.’
‘You’ll be glad to hear I didn’t have any spare breath to swear, Uncle/
Alban told him. He glanced down the table. ‘Your daughter’s delicate ears were
unpolluted.’
Sophie snorted. (‘Dear, really,’ her mother said. ‘You sound like a horse.’)
‘I can swear fluently in three different languages,’ Sophie said brightly,
‘Mother dear, Father darling.’
Uncle James was shaking his head. ‘Geldof geezer. Really. What was that

group he used to be in? The Boomtown Cats?’
‘Rats,’ Alban said.
‘Oh, quite,’ agreed Uncle James. ‘Couldn’t believe it when he started
swearing like that. On television.’
Dad, it was a month ago,’ Sophie protested. ‘Can’t you leave it? Anyway, he
did it, it worked; he got people to give him their "fookin moaney".’ She
widened her eyes, lowered her voice and made a reasonable impersonation of an
Irish accent as she pronounced the
41
last two words. Cory, Alban’s minuscule but massively annoying eight–year–old
sister, made a shocked peeping noise. Alban, laughing involuntarily, nearly
choked on a mouthful of pork.
‘Now that’s enough, young lady,’ Uncle James said, suddenly serious and
going rather red, pointing his fork at Sophie. This is the dinner table.’
‘How much did you give to Live Aid, Daddy?’ Sophie asked. Alban would have
sworn she fluttered her eyelashes.
That’s not really your concern, frankly,’ Uncle James told his daughter, and
smiled.
‘Well,’ Sophie said emphatically, ‘I gave all the money I’d saved to go
skiing last year.’
‘You mean all the money that I gave you to go skiing.’
‘It doesn’t matter where it came from,’ Sophie said emphatically, ‘what
matters is where it went.’
‘Well bully for you. Hope the Ethiopians sent you a thank–you note. Now I’d
like to get on with my dinner, if that’s all right with you.’
Sophie made a growling noise and stared at her plate.
‘Sophie, dear. Are you sure you won’t try one of the chops?’ Aunt Clara
asked suddenly.
‘Mum,’ Sophie said, exasperated, ‘I’m a vegetarian!’
‘Yes, I know, dear. But they’re awfully good.’
Sophie just rolled her eyes. Her gaze caught Alban’s, and they shared one of
those rueful parents, eh? smiles.
Back to Tango’s unlocked flat (these people live the US sitcom dream, where
friends just wander into your apartment. Ha ha). From the living room, a voice
Fielding doesn’t recognise is saying,
‘Whit are ye talkin’ aboot? If ye take aff all yer clothes, of course ye’re
fuckin’ naked.’
‘No, but,’ Tango says, ‘what I’m sayin’ is, if ye’ve got a tattoo, ye canny
take that off. So you’re never totally naked. De ye no’ see?’
Ah see yer aff yer chump, that’s – Oh–aye, it’s Yakuza. How’s it hingin,
Yak?’
42
Al says, Afternoon all.’
The new arrival proves to be a fat wee guy with hilariously long dark hair.
He’s wearing jeans and a black leather waistcoat and looks like a roadie for
Black Sabbath circa 1970. Two narrow–set eyes, a large nose and a fat spliff
all poke out through the curtains of hair on either side of his face. He looks
puzzled when he sees Fielding, then sort of nods. The only other person
present is Tango, with whom Al requests a word. They head out of the room.
Fielding sits down on the couch, thinking how good it’s going to be to get out
of here. There’s a familiar–looking silvery box sitting by Tango’s television,
wires joining one to the other and a couple of games controllers lying on the
carpet beneath the TV. The wee fat guy sits and looks at Fielding while
Fielding looks at him, determined not to be stared down. Fat Boy smokes
prodigiously, creating a thick grey screen in front of what little of his face

isn’t obscured by hair. After a while he grins and holds the joint out. ‘Want
a toke?’
Fielding nearly does, just because he’s expected to say no, but sense
prevails. ‘No, thanks. Driving.’
The hairy guy nods, sucks another lungful. He holds it, then breathes out.
Fielding thinks about opening the window again. He suspects he’s getting
stoned just sitting in the same room. ‘Don’t believe we’ve been introduced,’
the hairy guy says at the end of the next exhalation.
‘Fielding.’
‘Aw aye. Ah’m Burb.’
Fielding smiles perfunctorily and nods. The hairy guy sees Fielding glance
at the games machine. ‘That’s mine,’ he says. ‘Goanae play a game, me an’
Tango.’
‘Really’ Fielding spots the DVD lying on the shelf holding the TV,
recognises the cover immediately, and grins broadly.
Alban and Tango come back. ‘Maybe just a day or two,’ Al’s saying. Slung
over one shoulder is a small backpack, not the scruffy great torso–sized
squaddy–issue monster Fielding had seen earlier. Guess I
43
haven’t been quite as persuasive as I’d hoped,
thing at a time.
Al looks at him. ‘You fit?’
‘Vamanos muchachos,’ Fielding says, standing.
‘See you later, big man,’ Tango says, seeing
tae meet you, Fielding. Anytime.’
‘Too kind. You take care.’
Through in the living room, Fielding can see
Corp V–Ex games machine. Into the slot is slid
Masters of EMPIRE!

44

Fielding thinks. Still, one

them to the front door. ‘Nice

Burb turning on the Spraint
the disc that bears the legend

2

O
nce, in the middle of the night, in the centre of a great plantation, he’d
been drinking with a couple of his coworkers; good guys who’d become pals.
They were on Speyside, in what had been a big forest, staying in an old
caravan the forestry people had provided. They’d been drinking whisky and cans
of beer and playing cards. He’d been making steady money at poker through the
evening until a couple of wild bets towards the end of the night when he’d
lost most of what he’d accumulated and they all ended up fairly close to where
they’d started. They’d had a cup of tea and a biscuit about three o’clock,
then collapsed snoring and smelly into their sleeping bags. Tomorrow was
supposed to be a full working day but they knew the foreman was away in
Inverness until at least noon, and they were ahead of schedule.
He awoke before dawn with a painfully full bladder. He stumbled in the
darkness, stepped into his unlaced boots and went out to pee wearing just his
briefs.
It was late summer and a clear night. He stood in the bright light of a full
moon, a few feet away from the caravan, peeing into the tumble of branches
near the side of the road. They’d been clearing the trees, the final cut,
bringing down the tall Sitkas, strip–Ping them with machines like giant pencil
sharpeners, carting them
45
off on big trucks. What was left – what he could see as far as a ridge a
kilometre distant – was a chaos of smashed branches and torn pieces of smaller
trees; a pale jumble of fractured wood like something from a volcanic disaster
or the first days of a war. He looked up at the stars, then back down at the
frozen fury of shattered wood. The pee went on. It had been a very full
bladder. He’d better drink some water when he went back in or he’d have a head
in the morning.
The fox trotted silently round the corner of the caravan and stopped, head
slightly to one side, looking up at him. It was beautiful. Its coat shone in
the moonlight: inky black, brilliant white and a red he wasn’t sure he could
actually make out in the moonlight or was just seeing because he knew it was
there. The light was so intense he could see the moon reflected in the
creature’s eyes. A hint of moisture glistened on its black nose.
He looked back at it and slowly tipped his head to one side, too. The fox
took a couple of cautious steps forward, putting its nose near where his urine
was landing. He was very tempted to twist his body ever so slightly and direct
the piss straight at it – it was, he thought, what most of the guys would have
done – but he didn’t. The fox took a delicate sniff, then looked up at him
again. He was about out now, the stream of pee falling back and breaking up.
He smiled at the animal and shrugged. The fox trotted round and past him, head
slightly down, giving him one last glance before it disappeared round the
other end of the caravan.
He hadn’t ever mentioned this to anybody, not even to the guys the next
morning. It wasn’t all that remarkable, anyway – they saw deer and squirrels
all the time and sometimes stoats and wild cats and pine martens – but it was

something he wanted to keep to and for himself. He wondered if the fox
lived in the forest and was having to leave because it was all torn up
if it was moving in after new opportunities had been opened up for it,
it didn’t – and perhaps couldn’t – care. He wondered if the
animal
somehow known
that men
had
created this

had
now, or
or if
had

46
monoculture plantation over the ruins of earlier forests, then created the
chaos, and whether it could in any sense blame them.
Alban sat watching the A9 unroll towards the silver snout of the car the
three–pointed star like some indiscriminate gun sight. They were heading away
from Perth on the long downward slope towards the plain of the River Earn, a
Sitka forest on one side of the car, the view across the flood plain to the
northern slopes of the Ochil Hills on the other. A black and red iPod linked
into the car’s entertainment system was playing old dance music, from
Fielding’s wild years. Alban could feel the slim bulk of the folded letter in
the back pocket of his jeans. He was remembering a conversation from years
ago.
‘There’s a lot you don’t know, young man,’ Great–Aunt Beryl had told him. A
lot I can’t tell you, at least not now.’
‘Then when?’ he’d asked.
T don’t know. Perhaps never. Certainly not now.’
‘But why not?’
‘Sometimes, whether it’s a family or. . . any other institution, one has to
wait for people to die, or until one knows that things won’t matter any more
for some reason or other. Though, it has to be said, some things seem never to
cease mattering. Or, one has to wait until one knows one is about to die
oneself and so won’t care, frankly, when the balloon goes up. You know; when
the whatsit hits the fan.’
He’d been silent for a while. ‘Then why are you telling me at all?’
Beryl had looked at him with a strange expression. ‘Perhaps I’m not entirely
sure myself, Alban. Or perhaps it’s a way of salving my conscience, even if
only partially. Perhaps it’s like avoiding telling lies Without in any way
telling the truth, and so misleading somebody by omission, as it were. Do you
understand?’
The music in the car changed from something Alban barely recognised or
remembered to the Chemical Brothers’ Block Rockin’ Beats. Fielding whooped
and turned up the volume. ‘Oh yes!’ he said,
47
smiling broadly at Alban. ‘Remember this? Remember Singapore? Oh, fuck! That
was fucking crazy, man.’
‘Yeah,’ Alban said. ‘I remember.’
‘Let’s get drunk.’
‘Woh! Not like you, cuz. What’s the problem? Don’t answer that. Good idea.
Let me just say that right now. However, I have a counterproposal. A not
mutually exclusive counter–proposal re the above.’
‘Fielding, what the hell are you talking about?’
‘Let’s get wasted as well.’
‘Wasted? You have drugs?’
‘Most certainly do. Never travel unprepared.’
‘You brought drugs to Singapore? Are you fucking insane? Haven’t you been
paying any attention at all? Do you know what they do to people who import
drugs to this place?’
‘Alban, get real. I’m not a fucking dealer, just a user. And if I did get
caught, so what? I’m rich, I’m white, I’m male, I’m an executive with an

internationally respected games company with lawyers to command and, as of the
other night, I’m on first–name terms with the British High Ambassador of
Commissions or whatever he is.’ He laughed, waved his arms. ‘What could
possibly go wrong?’ He laughed louder.
It was 1997. They were in Singapore attending a toys and games trade fair,
promoting Empire! (unashamedly, in an ex–imperial outpost, Alban had pointed
out) and the other products of the Wopuld company to wholesalers. The day’s
work was done, the trade fair over, their display was being packed away in the
exhibition centre and they had a free evening plus a day off to follow so they
were in a quiet corner of the main bar of Raffles, drinking Singapore Slings
because Fielding had this thing about Geographically Appropriate Alcoholic
Beverage Consumption – Manhattans in Manhattan, etc.
‘You fucking lunatic. What have you got?’
‘E, coke, dope. Some K, but it’s rubbish.’
48
‘Jesus H. Christ. We’d better take it fast just to get rid of it and remove
the evidence.’
‘That’s more like it.’ Fielding raised his own glass and nodded at Alban’s.
‘Drink up. We’ll have a rickshaw race back to the hotel. Loser buys the drinks
all night.’
‘I am not having another fucking rickshaw race. My last guy was four foot
tall and a hundred and three. I wanted to get out and take over and tell him
to sit in the back and relax while I wheeled him back to whatever old folks’
home he’d wandered out of
‘Well, I’m racing. And I’m deeming you to be racing, too, like it or not. If
you lose I’m just going to walk out of wherever we end up drinking and you’ll
either have to pay up or do a runner. Don’t think I won’t.’
‘I might just do the runner. If they catch us, you’ll be the one in
possession.’
Fielding gasped stagily and picked up his jacket. ‘That’s not very cousinly
of you.’
‘Yeah, well, family bonds don’t mean what they used to.’
‘Ooo!’ Fielding camped. ‘What’s all that about?’
‘Nothing. Never mind.’
It’s the next day and Alban is seriously fucked up. He seems to have lost a
day or a night, and he appears to be living the current waking period in some
sort of shuffled order, slabs and tranches of experience and awareness
traincrashing into one another in no discernible order whatsoever, just a
blurred riffle of sensations and events thrumming past, some of which might be
flashbacks – he’s not sure.
History is finished. It’s all over! Even Deng said it’s glorious to be rich.
Capitalist democracy has won and the rest is mopping up. That Jap guy was
right.’
Bullshit. You need to read more science fiction. Nobody who reads SF comes
out with this crap about the end of history.’
Science fucking fiction? Do I look like some sort of fucking anorak?’
49
‘Oh, fuck off
‘Why have we stopped?’
‘Oh my God. We’re going to die.’
They were in a cable car that went from this enormous grey building with
giant circular windows to a low island just offshore which seemed to be called
Semosa or Samosa or Sentosa or Samoa. They couldn’t exactly tell because even
when they looked right at the signs for the place, the letters seemed to
change in front of their eyes. (‘Samosa, he was some sort of fascist general

or something, wasn’t he?’ ‘Or one of those fried triangles. Don’t ask me.’)
The last time Alban looked at the sign it appeared to say Lampedusa, and
that’s just totally wrong. He didn’t even risk mentioning that one to
Fielding.
There doesn’t seem to be any good earthly reason for there to be a cable car
going from this tall building to this low–lying, just–offshore island, so
that’s exactly why it seems absolutely necessary to make the trip but now the
cable car’s come swinging to a stop over the slack brown waters of the strait
beneath and they’re just hanging there in the baking sunlight, looking out
through the haze–crammed sky towards the distant towers of the city centre.
They’re sharing the car with about a dozen Malays and Chinese and having to
mutter, which must look suspicious in itself, only Alban has no reliable idea
how loud they’re really talking and that’s paranoia–inducing all by itself.
‘Have we taken all the drugs?’
‘Most of them. Will you keep your voice down?’
‘What if they’ve stopped the cable car because they know we’re on board and
we’re carrying?’
‘Don’t be stupid. Why would they stop the car? What are they going to do?
Rappel down from a helicopter?’
‘It’s suspicious.’
‘It’s not suspicious, it’s just one of those things.’
‘Don’t trot out bourgeois cliches at me, you–’
‘Just try to keep calm.’
50
‘I am calm. This is calm. This is me being calm. See; I am calmness
personified.’
‘Let go of my shirt.’
But it was the middle of a warm, intensely humid night and they were walking
the streets, through the stink of shit and rotting fruit and perfumes and
within the echoes of low–rise buildings, stepping over scuttling cockroaches
the size of mice that looked the size of rats under the lens of chemical
enhancement and passing by sudden courtyards where a tiny, ancient, leathery
man is skinning what looks like a monkey on a bloodstained table, smoking as
he pulls the furred skin away from the white and pink beneath, and open
doorways to temples reveal guys in loincloths and surrounded by fumes and
incense and wild bunches of flowers standing chanting, facing barely seen
altars; snapped shots of imagery while they pace with jackets over shoulders
and their shirts sticking to their bodies and their hair sticking to their
scalps because they’ve just been to a club and they’re still hot from dancing
and talking to two girls who might not have been real girls and then there was
nearly a fight and Alban had to pull Fielding out of it and the only tune they
can remember from the club is Block Rockin’ Beats and it’s impossible to cool
down because the humidity is like walking around in a wetsuit constantly being
topped up from a kettle until they hail a taxi just for the air conditioning
and sit listening to the merry chime, chime, chime noise from the device that
makes that noise when you go over the Singapore speed limit and Fielding
insists on being taken to the zoo because he’s heard they have polar bears
there in a huge chamber that’s kept at the sort of constant, chilly
temperature that is acceptable to your average top land predator of the Arctic
wastes.
It’s the middle of the fucking night! The zoo’ll be closed, you idiot! Look.
Look!’ Alban holds up his watch. ‘It’s half past four in the fucking morning!’
That’s not right. Your watch must still be on UK time or something.’
Then why does the cab’s clock say the same?’
51
‘That’s not the clock – that’s the fare.’

‘Believe me, that is not the fare. I’m asking the driver.’
He asks the driver, whose command of English seems mysteriously to have
disappeared since he accepted the fare.
‘What was that?’
‘I don’t know.’
‘What were you asking him?’
‘Whether the zoo would be open at five in the morning.’
‘What did he say?’
‘He just smiled and talked a lot of. . . I don’t know.’
When they get there, the zoo is extremely closed and they nearly lose the
cab for the return trip because Fielding wants to negotiate a reduced tariff
on account of the fact that the driver should have known the zoo would be
closed and was blatantly exploiting their innocent touristic ignorance and he
threatens to summon the Tourist Police if there indeed is such an entity and
Alban has to calm both him and the taxi driver down and only persuades the
latter to take them back to the centre of town again by handing over the whole
two–way fare and an arguably extortionate tip in advance, something that even
then he only gets away with because Fielding has gone off to shout loudly at –
and kick – some nearby chain–link fencing.
Before, or possibly after, with brains totally fried, they’re in the World
Famous Tiger Balm Gardens, going on all the rides and staring goggle–eyed at
the various bizarre and totally twisted tableaux and paintings and dioramas
that depict in vibrant, pulsating colour, with little left to the imagination,
the suite of utterly grisly tortures that await those who smuggle drugs into
Singapore or take drugs while they are there or are in some other way bad.
There seems to be some sort of ghoulishly barbaric competition going on
between the local belief system’s grisly squad of supernatural demons and the
jolly japesters of the various Singaporean law enforcement agencies concerning
who can be most inventively horrible, and it is profoundly not what you want
to see when you’re up to your eyelids in a whole
52
unholy cocktail of supremely illegal and remarkably powerful drugs, not all of
which are yet safely – ha! – actually inside your body or that of your partner
in crime.
They wander around, assaulted by appalling images on all sides, bludgeoned
by the screams – happy screams, definitely happy screams – of small children
and impressionable adults, damp and getting damper as they stroll and stagger
through clouds of water vapour being sprayed from path–side sprinklers studded
amongst the flowers and shrubs.
Riotous profusions of insanely vivid blooms flourish everywhere; greenery of
a thousand shades and wild outburstings of flowers fill every speck of
un–concreted, ill–asphalted ground in the gardens. Alban keeps wanting to stop
and look at all this fabulously fascinating flora and maybe take notes or
something or take photographs with the disposable camera he’s bought for the
purpose – in fact, with one of the two disposable cameras he now has, because
he forgot he’d bought the first one – but Fielding continually hustles him
onward, demanding they exhaust the possibilities of the various exciting rides
before they start looking at fucking flowers. Throughout the city Alban has
sensed this vast, extravagant energy of growth and greenness forever trying to
burst out through all the cement and tarmac, clawing at every missed nook and
cranny in this fanatically self–controlled city, punching from every vacant
patch of ground larger than a postage stamp like a violent reproof.
They get kind of locked into the water slide, which provides a fine view of
the harbour and the docks and the ships at the quaysides and anchored offshore
and steaming slowly along the nearer shipping lanes, not to mention Sentosa
island, they think, which is where they’re going next or possibly have already
been to. The extra soaking at the bottom of the ride each time makes no
difference whatsoever to their clothes and helps keep them cool. Then at the

end of one turn, Fielding doesn’t get out and Alban realises his cousin is
asleep and snoring. In a way this is fine because it means they can go back to
their hotel, but in a way it isn’t really fine at
53
all because Alban’s forgotten which hotel it is they’re staying in and has
been trying to think of its name for the last two hours or so. He’s checked
his pockets but can’t find a key card and he’s looked in Fielding’s wallet and
pockets too and for the last half–hour or so he’s had to contemplate desperate
measures like just approaching people at random and asking if they recognise
him or Fielding and might remember, say, which hotel bar, reception or
restaurant they might have happened to see them in, though he suspects this
plan may be a little on the optimistic side.
He’s hauling a stumbling, incoherent Fielding along the path to the exit,
thinking that maybe by some miracle he’ll find a taxi driver in the rank who
remembers taking them back to their hotel some time over the last week or so,
when a tall tanned white guy in a baseball hat and shorts and a bum bag comes
up to them, all smiles, and greets them both by name. Fuck, we’re rumbled;
it’s the pigs, Alban has time to think, but he’s wrong; it’s just friendly
cousin Steve – Linda and Percy’s eldest – the guy who’s never at home because
he’s always somewhere in the world installing or maintaining or replacing
container terminal cranes but whom Alban and Fielding have both met at a
couple of family weddings over the last few years. Which is great, though of
course cousin Steve has absolutely no idea which is their hotel either.
While Alban is desperately trying to make small talk and remember how people
behave when they’re straight, Fielding wakes up with a start and stands
staring at Steve with a stunned, terrified expression on his face and is
unquestionably just about to start gibbering or screaming or throwing punches
or running away or possibly all of the above when Alban throws himself on
Steve’s mercy by claiming they’re both suffering mightily from some dodgy
prawns consumed a couple of hours ago – the near–hallucinatory effects of
which may admittedly have been accentuated by a beer or two – and could do
with some help.
Steve’s hotel is nearby. He takes them there and they straighten out
sufficiently in his room while he’s away summoning a doctor
54
to be able to bribe the medic when he arrives so that he accepts and even
confirms their story. Fielding wants to score some more drugs off the doc, but
that’s just going too far.
Somehow they’re able to have a couple of beers in the hotel bar with Steve
and push down a few morsels of a Vietnamese meal before making their excuses
and heading back for the thankfully now remembered hotel and crashing for the
next fourteen hours.
The reason he’d wanted to get drunk in the first place – being brutally honest
– was because he was feeling sorry for himself. The reason he was feeling
sorry for himself was he’d been rejected, again, by Sophie. She worked for the
family firm, too, in the US sister company. When he’d started working for
Wopuld Games Ltd he’d imagined they’d bump into each other all the time, but
they almost never did. She’d been there in Singapore at the trade fair,
though.
‘You’re the love of my life.’ (Despairing; a last, pathetic roll of the
dice.)
‘Well, gee. I’ll pass on that privilege.’
She seemed serious. He just stared at her. ‘What have you become?’ he
whispered.
‘Wiser.’

‘Shit, that was close/ Fielding muttered. There was a beeping noise from
somewhere and the big car’s nose dipped as it braked sharply. A speed camera
zipped past. Fielding was watching the rear–view mirror intently. He flashed
Alban a grin. ‘Made it!’
Alban had to turn his face away. The exit for Auchterarder and Gleneagles
disappeared behind them as the car accelerated again, heading for Glasgow.
He’s too young to be there, of course, but he is, all the same. He’s with her
as she comes down from her room, down the wide, gleaming staircase under the
tall, south–facing window and walks across the creaking parquet of the main
hall towards the kitchen, and he’s there as she
55
turns into the short corridor that leads past the gunroom and the inside log
store and the drying room to the cloakroom, and he watches as she stops and
chooses what to wear to go outside.
She’s dressed in brown Clark’s shoes, a pair of white socks, jeans – her
own, but too big, needing to be secured with a thin black belt – a brown
blouse and an old white roll–neck jumper. White M&dS underwear. No watch or
rings or other jewellery; no cash, chequebook, credit cards or any form of
identification or written material.
He watches her choose the long dark coat with the poacher’s pockets. It’s
huge and almost black, its original dark green–brown staining weathered and
worn and grimed over decades on the estate to something close to the darkness
of the brown–black water in a deep loch. Sometimes he watches her go
immediately right up to the coat and hoik it off the wooden peg between all
the other coats and jackets, and sometimes he sees her stand there for quite a
long time, in the gloom and the pervading smell of wax while rain patters off
the glass in the shallow, high–set windows (because it was raining lightly, at
the time).
The coat is too big for her, drowning her; she has to double back the cuffs
of the sleeves twice, and the shoulders droop and the hem reaches to within
millimetres of the flagstones. She rubs her hands over the waxy rectangles of
the flapped external pockets, and looks inside at the poacher’s pockets.
Then she goes through the outside door of the room, into the shining grey of
the early afternoon. The door slams shut behind her, leaving him where he’s
been for some time now, screaming unheard at her; silently and hopelessly,
begging her not to leave.
He woke from the doze and the dream – the recurring nightmare, he supposed,
if it hadn’t become so familiar and if he didn’t know the ending so well by
now – to find Fielding humming along to the last Coldplay album. They were
just turning off the M8 where it passes through the centre of Glasgow, about
ten minutes or so from Beryl and Doris’s house.
Fielding grinned. ‘You okay?’
56
Alban rubbed his face, scratched through his beard and yawned. ‘Fine.’
He stood, resting a moment, in the sunken garden, south–west of the house on
the far side of the abbey ruins, the rake held at the top in both hands and
snugged in under his chin. He breathed deeply, taking in the sharp tang of
wild garlic. A strong gust of warm wind moved the branches of the Scots pines
along the western edge of the garden, shifting their shaggy, asymmetric tops
slowly while the nearby stand of birches swayed together, like dancers.
Blackthorns and wild roses rustled in the breeze, white and red blooms bobbing
over the long grasses and the herringbone patterns of the brick pathway.
He looked at the wall of the abbey, hanging over the little valley like a
grey cliff surmounted by the pointed arches of its empty windows, like a

series of giant grey whalebones leaning against the sky. There was some ivy in
a few places on the abbey’s ruined walls, but last year he’d been to the
gardens at Dunster Castle, not far away, just south of Minehead, and seen much
more interesting climbers on the walls of the castle; stuff like Solarium
laxum, Clianthus puniceus and Rosa banksiae ‘Lutea’. They’d look good on the
abbey’s walls. He knew he’d taken notes at the time of his visit to Dunster
but couldn’t recall offhand in which direction the wall with the climbers had
been facing. Had it been south? This was the abbey’s south wall he was looking
at. South should be perfect. They weren’t the kind of plants that needed a lot
of shade. He’d have to see about getting cuttings.
Movement on the path from the house.
Cousin Sophie, in a long white T–shirt and black leggings. Limping. She
waved and hobbled down towards him. Looked like she could barely flex her
right knee at all.
‘What happened to you?’ he asked.
‘Fell off me ‘oss, guv’
Her gleaming red hair was held back in a ponytail. Her mega
57
T–shirt said, Welcome To The Pleasure Dome. One of his school pals, Plink –
Robbie Alford – always seemed to find a double meaning in everything. Alban
could just hear him saying something like, You can pleasure my dome any time,
love. Alban thought about saying this, then thought perhaps not.
‘See,’ he said instead. ‘Horses. Dangerous animals. Could have told you.’
He meant it lightly and he’d thought he’d been smiling when he’d said it,
but she seemed to take it badly, scowling and saying, Anyway, how are your
balls today, cousin?’
He felt himself rock backwards slightly. Ahm, they’re, ah, fine, thanks,’ he
said, thoroughly fazed.
‘Super,’ she said acidly, nodding at the rake he was holding. ‘Well, don’t
let me keep you.’ She turned and started back up the path.
He didn’t say anything. He watched her go. When she was almost out of sight,
near the corner of the ruined abbey, she stopped, still turned three–quarters
away from him, only her upper body visible, and looked down and seemed to nod
downwards once, very sharply, as though she was angry or upset. Then she went
on, copper hair bobbing slowly away out of sight.
He was annoyed with himself. He should have said something like, Great,
actually; had a couple of really painful wanks last night, thanks. That would
have got her back. He shook his head and gripped the rake properly, getting
back to work. You never thought of the right thing to say at the time.
It was late afternoon of the same day. Alban and Sophie had been given the job
of setting the table for a big family dinner that evening, with extra guests
invited from amongst the many local friends of Uncle James and Aunt Clara. A
couple Andy and Leah had known when Lydcombe had been their home had also been
added on.
The table in the dining room was extended to its fullest extent, and had to
be polished. The finest silverware was brought out and also had to be
polished. It was surprisingly warm work; they opened
58
the dining room’s windows, letting in a cooling breeze. Sophie’s face shone,
little beads of sweat at her temples. She limped upstairs to put her hair up
and swap her leggings and baggy T–shirt for shorts and a thin blouse. Later
she opened a couple of the buttons, fanning herself.
Alban wondered if she knew how ridiculously, ferally attractive she looked.
Was the girl flirting with him? He didn’t know. He and his pals had talked
about flirting and fancying and how you could tell whether a girl liked you or

not and whether she wanted to do it, but for all their boasting and pretended
certainty, it was still a madly confusing area. The stuff you saw on films and
TV didn’t really seem like it was in the real world, and porn was useless. He
hadn’t seen much porn, but he was damn sure the way to instant sexual success
wasn’t becoming a plumber or a pool technician. He had no idea. Maybe she was
just teasing him because he’d upset her somehow earlier that morning.
Anyway, she was still his cousin. His pals had discussed this, too, after
Plink had fallen totally if briefly in lust with one of his cousins, and it
wasn’t supposed to be illegal or anything, but it was definitely frowned on,
discouraged, the stuff of jokes and adults going, Diddle–ing ding ding ding
ding ding ding, which was something called Duelling Banjos, from an old film,
and seemingly terribly witty.
Once they’d done the cutlery, Sophie announced she was going to the kitchen
for a big bucket of water just off the boil, and started hobbling in that
direction. He dashed after her and volunteered to do the carrying.
They put the bucket of hot water on the sideboard, on top of some old
newspapers. She showed him how to hold the crystal and glasses in the rising
steam, before giving them a polish.
‘That’s a handy tip,’ he said. ‘Who taught you that?’ Old waitressing trick.’
‘Ah hah.’ Sorry if I was a bit, you know,’ she said, glancing. ‘This morning.’
‘That’s okay,’ he said. Probably a bit too quickly, he realised. God it was
hard getting this stuff right!
59
‘Just annoyed at myself for falling.’
‘That’s okay. Sorry you got hurt.’
‘Me too. Wasn’t my fault, you know.’
‘No?’
‘No. Scrabbles decided to take a short cut, then changed her mind.’
‘Really’
‘Soon as I get this knee working properly . . .’ she said.
‘Yes?’ he asked, grinning, sensing he was being used as a straight man.
‘I’m going to kick that bloody horse.’
‘Well, give her one for me,’ he said, then quickly added, ‘Just kidding.’
‘Yah,’ she said, ‘me too.’
They polished some more glasses, presenting them to the silently rising
steam until they went cloudy with the moisture, and then smoothing them over
with the cotton cloths. Songbirds sounded in the gardens beyond the opened
windows, and a magpie gave its sharp, coughy call.
He looked at her. ‘Can I ask you something?’ he said.
She made a tsk noise. ‘Does anyone ever say "No" to that sort of question?’
she said, shaking her head. The ponytail flicked back and forth. ‘Yeah, I
suppose.’
‘How come your dad got custody of you?’
‘Oh, as opposed to my natural mum.’ She shrugged. ‘I dunno. Just unlucky I
guess.’
‘No, come on.’
Sophie put her hand to her mouth, rubbing at the little dimple between her
top lip and the base of her nose, as though making sure her brace was still in
there. She shrugged. ‘Well, June – my real mother; you know, biologically –
she was a bit wild. That’s the family line, anyway. Apparently she ran off
with another man. Spanish guy. Madrid. Not Tajo, the one she’s with now;
another one. Actually Tajo’s quite nice. Very good–looking, very Spanish. He’s
an artist.
60
Very hairy though. He’s quite a bit younger than her. She calls him "dishy".
Honestly.’ Sophie tutted and shook her head at such a lack of sophistication.

‘Actually they’re thinking about getting married.’
‘So you’ve got two mothers as well.’
‘Hah?’
‘Same as me. I’ve got my real mother, the one that died, and Leah, Mum.’
Sophie looked thoughtful. ‘Hmm. Yah. I suppose.’
They went on with the preparations.
‘Young lady, you are not sitting down to dinner dressed like that,’ Uncle
James told his daughter. ‘Not in my house.’
Sophie was wearing white heels, sparkly leggings and another T–shirt with a
print of Michelangelo’s David on the front. She looked down at it. Alban,
who’d been out doing a bit of edging round one of the terraces and not
realised how late it was getting, was stuck behind Uncle James, who was
filling the bottom of the staircase as he looked up at his daughter. Alban
really needed to get washed and changed – the house was full of the smell of
food and he could hear conversations and smell cigarette smoke coming from the
lounge – but he didn’t feel he could just brush past Uncle James.
‘Oh, sorry, Pops,’ Sophie said as she looked back up from the black and
white image. She snapped her fingers. ‘You wouldn’t recognise this. It’s
called art.’
It’s a full–frontal male nude and I for one refuse to sit looking at that at
the dinner table,’ her father told her. ‘Now get changed. That is not
suitable, and you know it.’
Sophie looked down at her father, seeming not to see Alban standing behind.
‘James,’ she said, ‘I really hope right now you’re secretly thinking, "Oh my
God, I’m sounding like my father.’"
Don’t tell me what to think, young lady.’
Oh, that’s just one–way traffic, is it?’
And stop trying to be clever.’
61
She went, ‘Ah!’ and bent forwards as though hit in the solar plexus. ‘Well,
so much for that expensive education you’re always–’
‘Go up to your room and change at once,’ he told her.
Sophie looked over his shoulder and smiled. ‘Hey, Alban.’ She turned on her
heel. ‘Whatever you say, Father dear.’
Uncle James turned and saw Alban. Uncle James wore a suit and an expression
of some frustration. He looked quite red in the face. He smelled of smoke.
Alban,’ he said, standing aside. ‘My God, you’re filthy! Well, come on, come
on. Get a move on. We haven’t got all night.’
Alban bounded up the stairs two and then three at a time.
Later, he knew the precise moment when he fell in love with her. It was the
day his parents would be departing for Richmond and leaving him behind at
Lydcombe for the rest of the summer. A bunch of them – some of Sophie’s
friends plus Alban – had been down to Lynton, a few miles along the coast in
Devon. One of the boys’ dads had a speedboat there and took them out a handful
at a time for a buzz around the bay, up to Foreland Point or out west to Woody
Bay and Highveer Point. He’d been doing this the last few years and always
flung the boat about and tried to get everybody soaked and the girls
screaming.
Alban had gone out on one of the runs but hadn’t really enjoyed it as much
as he’d hoped. The guy at the controls was a git, he thought, just showing off
in his wraparound sunglasses and his ridiculous stripy T–shirt, trying too
hard to get everybody drenched (the sea was calm save for a long, lazy swell
and he had to circle and seek out his own wake to find any suitable waves) and
not even a very good boat handler, either, Alban suspected, probably putting
them all at risk. The guy made everybody else wear life vests, though he
didn’t wear one himself.

Also, the girls sounded vacuous, the way they screamed so easily. Alban felt
sadly disappointed in them, though he didn’t really know
62
any of them. He’d noticed that Sophie went back to saying ‘yah’ a lot when she
was around these people. Her dentist had replaced her earlier cemented–in
braces with a set she could take out, and she had removed them today.
Alban didn’t go on either of the speedboat runs that Sophie took – he stayed
in the quayside cafe, reading L’Etranger in French, for next year’s class,
very slowly, being made occasional fun of, but ignoring it – but he’d have put
money on Sophie going all girlie, too, and screaming like a banshee every time
the boat slammed off a wave or the least little bit of spray splashed any of
them in the face.
The moment hit him as they got back to the house, picked up from Lynton and
delivered home by Aunt Clara. His dad was crossing the hall carrying some bags
as they came in through the front door, laughing and joking, Sophie leading
the way.
‘So, Sophie,’ Andy asked her, ‘did you enjoy the speedboat?’
‘Yes I didl’
‘Did you get awfully wet?’
‘Blimey, Uncle, I didn’t enjoy it that much.’
He is collecting her, scooping up the crumbs that fall from her mouth,
clutching at them, cradling them, holding them up to look at them, minutely
inspecting them, treasuring them, putting them into wildly ornate frames of
desire and hope, encapsulating them in precious metal boxes and cabinets
studded with jewels like some mouldering flake of bone declared a Catholic
relic; something to be venerated, worshipped through its association, its
alleged provenance. The first is not something she said, just something he
associates with her. He remembers a line – it’s from a play, he thinks, maybe
one by Shakespeare, from school (he wishes now he’d paid more attention in
that particular lesson). It goes, ‘Cuz, cuz, sweet cuz.’ That’s it. That’s
all. It’s nothing really, just sounds, but it has become like a precious
incantation for him, a sort of mantra.
Cuz, cuz, sweet cuz.’ He’s been whispering it to himself for the last few
nights as he’s started to fall for her, lying in bed in the
63
darkness, repeating it over and over, as if it’s a spell, as though it might
magically bring her to him, cause her to blur and shimmer into existence like
she’d been beamed up or something. ‘Cuz, cuz, sweet cuz. Cuz, cuz, sweet cuz.
Cuz, cuz, sweet cuz . . .’
The rest have accumulated, the rest are all her own. He can still hear her
say, ‘They’ve all bloody gone!’, still remember, with extraordinary precision,
the exact tone and syllabic weighting of her voice when she said, ‘Fell off me
‘oss, guv’, still replay in his head – every subtle nuance of pitch and timing
and pronunciation captured as though on the most perfectly faithful recording
mechanism ever invented – ‘Blimey, Uncle, I didn’t enjoy it that much.’
That last one is the jewel of jewels, the star of the cast. The quickness of
it, the easy confidence, the sheer unashamed sexuality it revealed! (His dad
had looked at her, not getting it for a moment. When he did, Andy had made a
single explosive noise halfway between a laugh and an embarrassed cough. Then
he’d grinned, gone slightly red and busied himself with packing the car. A
couple of Sophie’s girlfriends had squealed, one slapping her on the arm.
Sophie had just kept on going across the hall, unconcerned, red hair
undulating as she skipped to the stairs; la la la.)
He’d got it instantly, might even have been on the brink of saying something
himself if she hadn’t (the influence of his pal Plink, perhaps, seeing a

sexual reference in everything. Or just rampant hormones). He stood and
watched her go, her pals streaming around him, a huge smile forming on his
face, something between admiration and adoration growing and blossoming inside
him.
That night, thinking of her just a couple of rooms away, only three or so
walls between them, he replays that phrase in his head time and time again,
like a record, like a single you’ve just fallen in love with and need to
listen to again as soon as you get to the end of it, hearing her voice, seeing
captured images of her in his head – in the horse–riding outfit, in her shorts
and blouse, in her leggings, in her jeans, red hair tumbling. He masturbates
three times before he falls asleep, exhausting himself, hurting himself,
having to use
64
one cold, damp paper hanky twice, pumping no more than a dribble of thin water
the last time before finally slipping into a feverish, troubled sleep where he
still hears her silky voice, still sees her walk effortlessly, hips swaying,
through the hazy sunlit gardens or swinging in slo–mo across the gleaming,
polished wood of the hall.
‘Well I don’t think they’re insipid. In fact, I think they’re very sipid
indeed.’
He could hear the tone of slightly hurt indignation in her voice, and began
to smile so broadly he felt he had to turn away from her in case she was
further insulted by his reaction. Then a moment later he realised it might
have been deliberate – been wit, in fact, not a childish mistake.
He cleared his throat, turned back, studying Sophie’s face. Very hard to
tell. ‘Sipid?’ he asked, trying to sound grown up and knowing and like
somebody from a film or something. They’d been talking about what bands they
were into, and she liked – predictably, he felt – rather vacuous poppy, singly
kind of stuff – just whatever was in the charts, basically. He was more into
albums and artists like Bowie and bands like Talking Heads and Prefab Sprout
and so on, though he had eclectic tastes; the next album he was going to buy
was Red Roses for Me, by the Pogues, from last year (apparently their full
name was something quite filthy in Gaelic, at least according to Plink). They
had a new album out in a month or two, as well. He’d really been into U2 for a
while there, but they were starting to look a bit too commercial after Live
Aid.
Sophie wore brown hiking boots, black leggings and the Michelangelo David
T–shirt Uncle James had objected to a week or so earlier. She’d sewn a little
leaf made from some green material over the statue’s genitals, which was just
the perfect thing to do, because it at once removed the excuse her father had
for telling her to take the T–shirt off, while at the same time acting as a
constant reminder to him how ridiculous he was being. It had become her
favourite piece of clothing, prioritised to the extent that she would
65
take it out of the just–washed pile and iron it herself – a rare distinction.
Alban had noticed that Uncle James’s face reliably turned one to two shades of
red darker every time he was confronted with the article of clothing, which
was, of course, often.
‘What’s wrong with "sipid"?’ she asked.
‘You sure that’s a word?’
‘You sure it’s not?’
‘I’m not claiming it isn’t.’
‘Then why are you mentioning it?’
‘I’m just curious.’
Her eyes narrowed. ‘You’re just weird.’

He laughed. ‘You don’t mean that.’
Her eyes went wide. ‘So now you’re telling me what to think! Thanks a lot.’
She looked resentful and sat down on a tumbled piece of dressed stone half
buried in the mossy grass that covered the inside of the ruined abbey like a
green carpet. She’d wandered in while he’d been de–mossing the grass with a
rake. She had a stalk of straw in her mouth, as though impersonating a yokel.
She’d been fiddling with this while they’d talked and now she replaced it
between her lips.
He shrugged and went back to scraping the moss out of the grass and
depositing it in the wheelbarrow. She watched him work for a while. He tried
to look strong and graceful and purposeful.
‘What are you doing?’ she asked.
He’d kind of assumed this was obvious. Was she serious? Her expression was
quite solemn, almost resentful, as though she was still smarting about people
ordering her around and telling her what she thought or what she ought to
feel.
‘Taking the moss out of the grass,’ he said, trying to pitch his voice just
right in case she was being sarcastic, but not making it so obvious that she’d
be further insulted if it had been an honest, innocent enquiry.
‘Why?’
‘Because otherwise the moss takes over.’ He glanced up at the
66
i
grey remains of the building’s high walls. ‘It’s cos it’s quite shaded in
here.’
‘Can’t you just let the moss take over?’
He shrugged again. ‘Suppose. It’d always look patchy, though.’
She was silent for a while, seemingly lost in watching him work. ‘Dad’s
talking about getting a swimming pool,’ she said.
‘Oh.’ He supposed the house could do with one.
‘Yeah. They went to see some Round Table friends over in Barnstaple the
other night – ‘member the really hot one?’
‘Yeah.’
‘They had a pool. Very nice time was had by all, apparently. Well, Mum had
to drive back after Dad said he would, but I think she’s used to that. Better
than him drinking and driving.’
Alban straightened, looked at her. ‘Hang on,’ he said. ‘Where are they
thinking of putting the pool? Which bit of the garden?’ The more he thought
about it, the more he wondered how you could fit one in.
She shrugged, studied the end of the stalk she was chewing. ‘I dunno.
Somewhere next to the house.’
He tried to think of other places he’d been that had pools. ‘Inside?
Covered? Or outside? How big?’
She looked at him, tipped her head way to one side so that her long red
ponytail hung, swaying heavily in the afternoon sunlight streaming through one
of the tall, broken stone arches. ‘Underground, twenty–two–point–five metres
long. Three wide. Green and purple tiles. Four diving boards and a slide.’ She
shook her head, eyes widening as she looked away again, chewing on her straw.
‘How should I know? Just a pool.’
He stared at the part of the house he could see; a corner of slate roof and
one dormer window, side on. They’d have to put this stupid pool on the first
terrace, the parterre on the south–west side. Bastards) There were some
beautiful flowers and shrubs there. Bastards!
‘Huh,’ he said. He attacked the moss and the rake dug in, catching soil. He
shook it free, altered the angle and pulled at the same patch
67

again, more gently. He tapped the moss into the wheelbarrow, then tugged the
reluctant remainders off and threw them in, too.
‘How’s your knee?’ he asked her.
‘S’okay.’ She was concentrating on smoothing the end of the chewed stalk
down, pressing it hard between a thumb and index finger.
‘You got a moment?’ he asked her. She looked up at him. He shrugged. ‘You up
for doing a bit of work?’
She raised her dark eyebrows. ‘What sort of work?’
‘Shifting stuff. Two–man job.’
She gave a taut little smile, as though she wanted to smile more, but was
controlling it.
‘I’m not a man,’ she said quietly to the stalk.
He left a tiny pause. ‘Yeah, I’d noticed.’ His mouth had gone quite dry all
of a sudden.
‘Cheers, cousin,’ she said archly, rising smoothly from the stone, throwing
the straw away and putting her hands on her hips. She looked, he thought,
great. ‘Okay, what?’
He grinned, mouth not so dry any more. ‘Don’t worry. Nothing too strenuous.’
‘I’m not worried. Come on then.’
He gave her the rake to carry and lifted the wheelbarrow. She followed him.
‘What are these?’
‘Not entirely sure,’ he admitted.
They were standing on a large lawn on the north–east side of the gardens,
near the Wilderness and the bog garden, surrounded by azaleas and American
Black Walnut trees. The lawn was bisected by a long straight ditch which
emerged from beneath the trees on a low bank to the south and disappeared
under the azaleas to the north. About three–quarters of the ditch had been
partially filled with long wooden posts, covered in places by moss and grass.
‘They look a bit like strainer posts or gateposts or something.’
68
‘What’s a strainer post?’
‘Sort of, umm, heavy–duty post you sink in really deep where a fence changes
direction.’
‘How interesting. What are they doing here?’
‘No idea. Looks like somebody once thought of filling in the rill, but using
wood is just mad, it’ll–’
‘A what? A rill?’
‘This is a rill,’ he said, indicating the length of the ditch. He squatted
and pulled at the grass on the edge of the ditch, lifting up the sod to reveal
a flat stone surface. A water channel. Artificial; ornamental.’
‘Couldn’t just call it a water channel.’
‘Na, it’s a rill.’
‘So,’ she asked, ‘what’s the idea? Try not to use any more technical terms.’
‘We lift the logs out of the rill and . . .’ he looked over at the east edge
of the lawn. It was further away than he remembered when he’d first thought of
this. ‘Roll them over there. That direction.’
She leaned over, looking down. ‘They look a bit damp for the fire.’
‘It’s not for the fire. The idea is to clear the rill, see if we can get it
working again.’ She didn’t look convinced. ‘It’d be nice!’ he told her. She
nodded, looking as though she was humouring him. He spread his arms and smiled
encouragingly. Anyway. Just getting them out will be a big help. But they’re
not small. If this looks like too much for you, you know; just, umm, well, you
know. It doesn’t, I mean, it won’t really –’
She was looking down again. ‘They’re going to be full of insects and worms
and stuff, aren’t they?’
‘Umm, well, yeah, probably,’ he had to agree.
She made a show of looking round his rear. ‘That a pair of gloves in your

back pocket?’
‘No, r m just pleased to, umm, wave you goodbye.’
She looked at him, brows raised, mouth pursed.
69
He cleared his throat. ‘Yeah, that was rubbish. Here; have the gloves.’
The system they worked out was to pull the grass and moss away from each of
the semi–decayed logs and dig out the sand and earth surrounding them. Then
she stood inside the rill, feet braced against the stone walls of the channel
while he leaned over from the side; they slid out one log at a time to make it
protrude into the part of the rill that hadn’t been filled in so that he could
get a good grip underneath it, then they lifted each one together, grunting
and staggering, and rolled the log up on to the grass. They’d leave the
rolling away bit till later, or another day.
He thought he heard her bite back a squeal the first time they disturbed a
big colony of silverbacks, but after that she just seemed to ignore the
various insects they uncovered.
‘Who!’ she yelled, when they lifted one log and a whole brown swarming
family of tiny fieldmice scattered in various directions. She stepped quickly
back, then grinned sheepishly at him and took hold of the log again.
The posts were partially waterlogged, heavier than he’d expected. He had the
harder job, working from the side and above, but he was still impressed that
she worked so hard and uncomplainingly. The day was hot and they both sweated
a lot. She rolled her T–shirt sleeves up as high as they would go, not that
this made much difference.
When she got a dark brown–green stain on her T–shirt from the end of a log,
she said, ‘Shit!’
She looked at him, breathing hard. She wiped under her nose with one
forearm. She pointed one gloved finger at her T–shirt. ‘You won’t get any
wrong ideas if I take this off, will you?’
Oh, Jesus, he thought. ‘Scout’s honour,’ he said, saluting. He’d been
thinking of taking his own shirt off – it was an old one of Uncle James’s,
frayed at collar and cuffs – but now that might look like, well, like he was
getting the wrong idea or something. Maybe he’d just undo one more button and
roll his sleeves up a bit further instead.
70
She took off the gloves then crossed her arms beneath her breasts and pulled
her T–shirt up over her head, revealing a lacy white
bra.
Oh, fucking hell. This was brilliant; her T–shirt stuck on her head/
ponytail and he got a totally free chance to ogle her amazing, completely
globular, lightly tanned breasts while she was cursing and struggling before
finally pulling the T–shirt off, her face looking red and hot and flustered
when it eventually emerged.
‘Get a good look?’ she asked him, rolling up the T–shirt and lobbing it on
to the grass.
Oh, fuck! ‘What at?’ he asked, missing both convincingly faked sincerity and
complicit sarcasm completely and sounding, he was painfully aware, like a
total dork; he might as well have leered and gone, phwoar, yeah!
She shook her head and looked away, fiddling two–handed behind her head with
the band holding her ponytail. This both raised her breasts and made them
jiggle. He felt himself getting an erection. Oh, great.
The rest of the summer, he could just tell, was going to be about never
getting anywhere near this fabulous creature.
‘Well, back to work,’ she said. ‘Tote that log, lift that big lump of wood .
. .’
They worked long into the late afternoon, almost wordlessly from the simple

effort of it. A light breeze cooled them a little, but it was still hot work.
His hair stuck to his scalp and the shirt to his back. They swatted away
flies. He caught glimpses of little rivulets of sweat running down between her
breasts and within the runnel on her back formed by the muscles on either side
of her spine –her body’s own miniature rill. He’d kind of hoped to see her
panties, maybe, but the leggings rode too high on her hips. The slanting
afternoon sun was golden, coating her body in a glowing, honey tight.
They finished, and lay on the lawn, one on either side of the revealed rill,
each spread–eagled on the cool grass in the shadow of
71
the trees, panting, exhausted. He wondered what would happen if Uncle James,
say, discovered them like this. What would he think?
Sophie put her T–shirt back on. They traipsed back to the house, muscles
burning.
‘We’ll be sore tomorrow,’ she said.
‘Or the day after,’ he said as they climbed to the highest terrace just down
from the house. The breeze had gone, and the garden seemed stuck in some
breathless, timeless moment, only the buzzing of insects indicating any moving
life beyond the two of them.
‘God,’ she said. ‘Still hot, isn’t it?’
‘Yeah,’ he agreed, and laughed. ‘Be good to have a pool.’
She looked over at him and smiled as they went up the steps and in through
the French windows to the smell of a garlicky salad dressing and the sound of
a radio.
Suddenly he’s kissing her! They’re at a party in a big open–sided barn on a
farm near Bampton on the edge of the National Park that belongs to the parents
of one of Sophie’s girlfriends and they’ve all been drinking cider – gradually
lapsing into stupid, growling, absurdly broad West Country accents and
probably deeply pissing off any locals present, going ‘Oh–arr, Oh–arr!’ and
‘Oi shall drink moi soyder,’ and ‘Garr she be lurverly’, and all sorts of
other rubbish – and dancing madly to a load of bands neither of them has ever
heard of – not that they’re admitting this, obviously, until he does at one
point and she admits the same – and taking little puffs of joints though the
smoke barely gets past either of their tonsils, frankly, and they spend a lot
of time coughing and having to drink more of the cider to soothe their burning
throats.
But he’s kissing her! She’s letting him! She’s kissing him back! They’re
kissing! He almost can’t believe it.
They all watched the sun going down and they turned the music down so that
they could go to the farmhouse to phone parents in turn and tell them they
were fine. This is meant to be a sort of sleep–over and a lot of the parents
think it’s the farmer guy and
72
his wife who are in charge of things and making sure everybody behaves
themselves, but it’s the nephew and his girlfriend who are there instead,
giving the older couple a holiday, and the thing is they’re into a smoke and a
drink and whatever and certainly happy to host an all–night party and they’re
like totally relaxed about pretty much anything, though the nephew guy does
carry a fire extinguisher around with him, even when there’s a spliff hanging
out of his mouth, because it is a barn after all even though it’s mostly empty
and there is a fair bit of straw lying around and people are smoking. There’s
a fairly serious sound system rigged up in the back of the barn and barrels
and troughs full of ice or at least cold water to put cans and bottles in.
They haven’t even needed to bring booze because the nephew guy has bought
loads and is selling it almost at cost price and also has this really strong,

filthily cloudy cider in a couple of big demijohns which his girlfriend is
selling in little white plastic cups – each one strong as a normal pint, she
says, and after a couple nobody’s disagreeing.
At first Sophie dances with a few other guys and the older nephew who’s
called Jamie, and Alban just sits and watches people and asks a couple of
girls to dance when they look at him, but only one does and she’s a bit small
and a lot drunk and staggers and soon goes off to throw up and so he doesn’t
pursue that, while the other girl, it turns out, is with a big fair–haired
drunk Young Farmer type who takes considerable exception to this suggested
dance and offers to fight Alban, who apologises and holds up both hands and
walks away and goes back and sits on one of the straw bales and concentrates
on drinking, until Sophie plonks herself down beside him, breathless from
dancing, and moans about how fucking knackered she is because it’s only two
days after their heroic afternoon’s work in the rill.
She’s wearing really tight jeans and a sheer black top you can see this
black bra through, and she’s taken off her boots and is dancing in her bare
feet and she really is blaming Alban for making her feel so totally frazzled;
it’s all his fault, so he offers to dance
73
for her, and so she gets up on his back, head over his shoulder, his arms
round her thighs, and he dances like that with a couple of her girlfriends
while she waves her arms about and bounces up and down, nearly sending them
flying to the ground a couple of times but not quite, and a few other guys do
the same thing with their girlfriends. He gets totally exhausted after a
couple of songs and has to let her down and stagger dramatically to a wall of
bales at the back of the barn; they sit on the ground with their backs to the
bales and her leaning alongside him, laughing, until she goes and gets them
both cups of the strong, cloudy cider and comes back and sort of slumps
against him, still breathless and giggling, then, next thing, while the last
of the sunset disappears from the western sky and the barn’s lights shine down
on them, suddenly –amazingly, unaccountably, without either of them really
seeming to start it – they’re kissing; just a little sort of dipping/rising
mouth–peck at first, then serious, no–exclusion–zone open–mouth
tongue–involving action, cider cups set aside/dropped shamelessly on to the
ground, turned crushed into each other, arms pulling tighter.
After a few moments she pulls away suddenly, a massive frown on her flushed
face. ‘How did this happen?’ she asks, sounding horrified.
He shakes his head. ‘I don’t know!’ he says loudly, waving his arms about.
‘Good, though, isn’t it?’
The horrified expression dissolves and she laughs and starts to say
something but it’s smothered as she falls to him again, mouth against mouth
against tongue against tongue.
Later, behind the barn, out of sight, while the music thuds on the far side
of the corrugated metal wall, they keep kissing and cuddling and fondling and
just holding each other. Her hair is the most wonderful thing he has ever
smelled. He’s been allowed to undo her bra and feel her beautiful, magnificent
breasts and rub her between the legs through the jeans but she won’t let him
undo the jeans at all, though she strokes his cock through his jeans, up and
down so that he thinks he’s probably about to come a dozen times
74
but never quite does, and his balls ache, like a memory.
‘We really shouldn’t be doing this,’ she says at one point when they’re
lying there pressed together, panting, giving their mouths a rest.
‘It’s not illegal,’ he points out.
‘Yeah, but still.’
‘Anyway, we haven’t done anything yet.’

‘What do you mean "yet"? What, you think we’re going to? Do you? Huh?’
He hugs her closer, buries his nose in her fabulous hair again. It smells of
the outside, of the open air and every beautiful plant and flower and grass in
the whole world. ‘Well,’ he says, ‘it’s crossed my mind even if it hasn’t
crossed yours.’
She doesn’t say anything to that, but keeps on stroking the small of his
back with one hand and the nape of his neck with the other. This goes on for
some time. He thinks, I would never grow bored with this.
‘I’m not really a proper virgin, you know,’ she tells him.
He pulls back, looks at her.
‘Blame Scrabbles,’ she says with a small smile he can just about make out in
the darkness. She shrugs. ‘Some saddle, anyway.’
‘Oh,’ he says. It takes him a while to get this. He hadn’t known it could
work that way. He’s always (well, for the last couple of years or so since
girls and sex started to become of interest) found this idea that females come
sort of factory sealed kind of weird – like nature playing into the hands of
religious nutters or something. Oh well. Even when you thought you knew
everything about sex, there was always some detail left to learn. ‘Well, umm,
you know,’ he says, reeling a little out of his depth here and suddenly
entirely pathetic.
What about you? Have you done it?’ she asks. It sounds to him like she’s
trying to sound casual. ‘Tell the truth.’
He thinks about lying, all the same, but then says, ‘Ahm, well, ahm, no. No.
‘Fraid not. A virgin too. Totally’
She goes quiet and still for a while, then says, ‘Well, this is just, you
know.’
75
He doesn’t know. ‘What?’ he asks.
‘Well,’ she says. ‘Just fun.’
‘Yeah. Yeah, it’s fun. That’s true.’
‘I don’t think we’re going to do anything. I don’t think that would be –
that would make sense.’
‘Yeah, okay.’
In a way he’s devastated, because this has all felt like it might be leading
up – eventually, even if not tonight – to doing it properly, but on the other
hand he fully expected never even to get this far with her, in fact never
really thought to get anywhere with her –never to get to kiss her, certainly;
not proper kissing, not with semi–serious groping too, so it’s all been a
bonus in a way . . .
At the same time . . . Oh, hell, she was his cousin. Part of the family.
He’d be better off doing it the first time with a civilian. This would have to
do for now. This would do for now. This was, in the end, great. He wants to
throw his head back and laugh out loud, wild and mad and uncaring, howling
unhinged into the darkness, but he’s worried this would seem a bit weird and
alarming, so he doesn’t.
She says, ‘Let’s kiss again.’
They end up crashing out in the barn with about a dozen other sleeping
couples, snuggling together under an old tarpaulin, taking cups of water from
the stuff in the barrels where the cans and bottles had been stored. A little
after dawn, long before anybody stirs, she cuddles up to him, spooning against
his back, nestling in, holding him, making tiny, faint, fast asleep noises.
He whispers, ‘Cuz, cuz, sweet cuz’ to her, to himself, very, very quietly,
then drifts off to sleep again, smiling.
Great–Aunts Beryl and Doris live in the upper three–quarters of a fine tall
sandstone townhouse cinched within a grand sweep of similar properties forming
a terrace in deepest Hillhead. The streets are lined with cars. Amazingly,
Fielding finds a parking space almost right outside the place.

76
He and Alban arrive to a house in turmoil. There are shrieks coming from
inside. The front double doors are hanging wide. All the windows are open,
curtains billowing from several. What appears to be orange smoke is issuing
from one of the windows on the top
floor.
A middle–aged man in a boiler suit is standing at the top of the relatively
narrow steps rising from the garden flat beneath, holding on to one of the
whorls of metal which form the end of the two elegant railings bracketing the
broad front steps leading to the main dwelling. He is looking up at the open
front door. Halfway between him and the doorway, a large lump of raw red meat
is lying in the middle of one step. The meat looks rather squashed and blood
is spattered alarmingly around it. The man looks round as Alban and Fielding
walk up the steps from the street. ‘You the police?’ he asks, with what sounds
like relief.
‘No,’ Fielding says firmly, ‘we’re family’

77

3

‘M
en, Doris! There are men here! We have men!’
‘What’s that? Have you found it? Say again?’
‘Men, you cloth–eared old tortoise!’ Great–Aunt Beryl bellowed up the stairs
to the first floor.
Great–Aunt Beryl was small, thin and ninety but possessed of a surprisingly
powerful voice. She was dressed in faded blue overalls with a scarf tied round
her head and knotted over her forehead. A few wisps of white hair protruded.
She held an old–fashioned broom with a vicious–looking Bowie knife
gaffer–taped to the handle. On closer inspection, the turn–ups of her overalls

had been gaffer–taped to the rubber of her black Wellington boots.
‘Beryl, what’s going on?’ Alban asked.
‘So nice to see you, Alban, and you, Fielding!’ the old lady said, the Bowie
knife flashing dangerously near to the two men and making them flinch as she
reached out to shake their hands. ‘Come in, come in! You’ve arrived at just
the right time. We have various escapees. Arm yourselves and come help. Oh,
you’re men; you won’t need to arm yourselves.’
A voice floated down from the floor above. ‘Beryl, who is that? To whom are
you talking?’
‘Beryl–’ Alban began.
79
‘Men, Doris, men! Nephews!’ Great–Aunt Beryl shouted up the stairs. She
turned back to Alban. ‘What, dear?’
‘Who’s escaped?’
‘Not who, dear; what. About half a dozen mice and, now, Boris.’
‘Boris?’
‘He’s a python. Actually, he’s a she, but it was a long time before we found
out and Boris rather stuck, d’you know?’
‘You have an escaped snake in here?’ Fielding said, looking worried, his
gaze darting about the hallway. ‘How big is it?’
‘About eight feet in length.’
‘Jesus,’ Fielding said, drawing his feet together.
‘Fielding, language!’ Great–Aunt Beryl barked.
Fielding swivelled to look around the hallway again, holding on to his
cousin’s sleeve as he leaned over and tried to see behind various potted
plants and tall vases standing on small tables. The stretch of corridor to the
side of the stairs looked suspiciously dark and extensive.
‘Beryl, are you talking to tradesmen?’
‘No, it’s – oh, do listen, dear!’
‘There’s, ah, a lump of meat lying outside,’ Fielding said, gaze flicking
this way and that.
‘Yes,’ Great–Aunt Beryl said. ‘We were trying to set a trap but it fell out
of the window. Then we remembered we had some indoor fireworks from the
Jubilee and thought we might utilise smoke to flush the wildlife into the
open, thus far without success. Largely, though, our strategy has consisted of
stamping and screaming.’
‘Beryl, I demand to know who you’re talking to! I can’t hold the fort up
here myself for ever, you know!’
‘Oh, for goodness’ sake!’ Great–Aunt Beryl said. She thrust the broom with
the taped–on Bowie knife at Alban, who started backwards, but took hold. The
old lady turned and stamped up the wide wooden stairs. ‘First thing tomorrow,’
she shouted upwards, ‘we call Doctor McLaughlin and make an appointment for
another ear–syringing!’ She turned halfway up and looked back at the two men.
80
‘If you see any mice,’ she told them, ‘don’t hesitate to skewer the little
blighters. Boris prefers them alive, but I reckon if he’s hungry enough he’ll
eat them cold.’
‘What about the snake?’ Alban asked.
‘Oh, for pity’s sake, don’t skewer Boris. Grab him behind the head. Don’t
worry if he winds himself around your arm. Though of course if he goes for
your neck, dissuade him gently.’
Alban smiled and raised the home–made pike as Great–Aunt Beryl disappeared
round the turn in the stairs. ‘Righty–ho,’ he said. He glanced at Fielding,
who was looking at him. He shrugged.
‘"Well, you may regard him as you wish," Doris said to me.

‘"I shall, too," I said.
‘"I still think he’s a jolly good egg."
‘"Perhaps so," I said, "but his brains are scrambled!"‘
Great–Aunt Beryl threw back her head and laughed loudly. Her black wig,
topped by a small hat made largely from purple feathers, tipped back
alarmingly and threatened to come off, but she snapped her head forward again
and it resumed its rightful place. Then she reached over and squeezed Alban’s
forearm with surprising force. ‘More cherry brandy?’
‘I’m kind of full up, thanks, Beryl.’
‘That’s not quite what I meant, dear.’
‘I beg your pardon.’ Alban reached to the drinks trolley sitting between him
and Beryl. Allow me.’
‘Oh, thank you. Not too – oh never mind, eh?’
Great–Aunt Doris took a moment or two longer to get, or possibly remember,
the joke, but then laughed quite loudly, too. Her head didn’t go quite so far
back. A few little flecks of spittle danced like fireflies under the lights,
all of which, like most of the lights and lamps in the house, were covered by
thin scarves and gauzy pieces or material. The dining room was tall,
bay–windowed and panelled in what Alban was fairly sure was mahogany. Long
lilac curtains festooned themselves over the windows and pooled on the
teak
81
floor. Only the white cube of a new–looking and fully–plumbed–in Bosch
dishwasher, sitting to one side of the attractively tiled fireplace, rather
jarred.
Both Alban and Fielding had stared at it when they’d first walked in.
‘Saves all that traipsing,’ Great–Aunt Beryl had explained.
The two old ladies had dressed in ancient formal evening wear – long,
high–necked silky dresses – and opened up their dusty dining room for the
occasion, even though the two men had no clothing quite so formal. Fielding
had a dark grey business suit, which he duly wore, but the best Alban could do
was put on a clean, if unironed, white shirt with his most recently washed
jeans.
Dinner itself was a Chinese takeaway, delivered by an amiable young man
named Shing who was on first–name terms with Beryl and Doris. The dining table
rather outshone the takeaway containers and the ladies confessed that the
crockery was only their second best (certain takeaway foods were liable to
contain ingredients which might stain the finer plates); however the champagne
and wine, selected by Fielding from an old scullery which now served as a wine
cellar, had been – save for one lamentably corked bottle of La Mission
Haut–Brion 1950 – very good indeed.
‘So, Fielding,’ said Great–Aunt Doris, addressing Alban.
‘It’s Alban, dear,’ Beryl informed her. She glanced at Alban and shook her
head. Fielding wasn’t even in the room at that point.
‘Of course,’ Doris said, waving one hand imperiously. She was a little more
robustly made than Beryl – a sparrow to her wren – but still gave an
impression of delicacy and even frailty compared to Beryl’s aura of air–dried
toughness. Doris wore a similar hat to Beryl, though her feathers were crimson
and her wig was platinum blonde. She wore alarming horn–rimmed glasses she
called her Dame Ednas. ‘So, Alban,’ she said, ‘are you well?’
‘Every bit as well as he was fifteen minutes ago, when you last asked, one
imagines, dear,’ Beryl told her crisply.
82
‘Really?’ Doris said, blinking behind her glasses. And what did you say
then, my love?’
‘I said I was well, thanks,’ Alban told her, smiling.

‘Jolly good,’ Doris said. ‘Well, perhaps now I’ve asked you a sufficient
number of times, it’ll stick, d’you know what I mean? And I shall remember.
Hal’
‘Yes, perhaps,’ Beryl said.
‘I say,’ Doris said, looking serious, ‘is there any more of that peach
schnapps?’
‘Here we are,’ Alban said, refreshing her glass.
Great–Aunt Doris made little cooing noises as he filled the thin glass,
which was somewhere in size between a liqueur shot and a schooner.
And so,’ she said, when the glass was nearly full, ‘did you have to get a
pink chit from, umm . . . from, umm . . . ?’
A pink chit?’ Alban asked.
‘You know – permission to . . .’ she waved one thin, vein–ribbed hand
around, ‘from your other . . . I’ve forgotten her–’
‘Oh. No, I’m not currently with anybody, Doris.’ He raised his glass and
smiled. ‘Not properly’
‘What about that young mathematician girl?’ Beryl asked. ‘Verushka. She
seems jolly nice.’
‘She is. But we’re not a couple.’
‘You aren’t?’ Beryl said, seemingly surprised.
‘No,’ he told her. ‘That’s not really what either of us is looking for.’
Doris tutted. A handsome young man like you? You must have the girls falling
at your feet, I should say. Wouldn’t you say, Beryl?’
‘I should say,’ Beryl affirmed.
Doris leaned a little closer over the table and lowered her voice. Are we
still sowing our wild oats?’ she asked, and winked.
‘While playing the field,’ Alban told her.
‘Ploughing the field?’ Doris looked a little nonplussed. She looked at
Beryl. ‘Is that rude?’
83
Beryl ignored her and leaned to Alban. ‘And always trying to ensure there’s
a crop failure, what?’ she snorted.
‘You’re not a gay, are you, dear boy?’ Doris asked.
‘Oh, Doris, really!’ said Beryl.
‘Fielding and you aren’t–?’ Doris went on, now looking thoroughly confused.
‘No, Doris. I’m pretty sure neither of us is remotely gay.’
‘Oh,’ Doris said, frowning. ‘Only I’m sure we could have given you a room
together.’
Alban laughed. ‘I imagine if I find Fielding in my bed tonight, Doris, it’ll
be because Boris has escaped again.’
‘What?’ Doris looked alarmed. ‘Boris has–?’
‘Boris is in his tank, dear,’ Beryl said loudly. ‘And Alban is not a gay!’
‘Oh,’ Doris said, looking hardly less bewildered. ‘Jolly good. Well,
cheers!’ She drank from her schnapps glass, then dabbed lightly at her thin
lips with her napkin.
Finally everything’s ready. He’d thought this was all going to go horribly
wrong when he’d found the nearest socket and it was round pin – round pin! –
but either the house had two separate circuits or the old sockets had been
left in place when the building had been rewired, because there’s a normal
double socket along the wall a bit.
‘Ladies and gentleman,’ Fielding says, clapping his hands as he opens the
dining–room door, ‘presentation is served!’
‘Presentation?’ Alban asks as they escort the two old bats through to the
drawing room. This all takes a while, as Beryl and Doris flutter and fuss and
dither one way then the other, collecting shawls and handbags and pillboxes,
glasses cases and whatever the hell else and wittering on about God knows what
all the time, but finally – holding on to the arms of the men like children –

they are led through to the drawing room, where Fielding has chairs set up and
the laptop plus projector sitting on the table facing a white sheet slung
across the window alcove.
84
Al looks at Fielding as they get the girls seated. ‘You’re doing a
presentation?’ he asks, like it’s funny or something.
‘Well, duh,’ Fielding tells him.
‘Power Point.’
‘What else?’
‘Like, with bullet points?’ Al says, a big dumb grin on his face.
‘Of course!’
‘Fielding,’ Al says, shaking his head.
‘What?’ Fielding says, but now Al’s fussing about getting a table over so
the old girls have somewhere to rest their drinks. Fielding turns off the main
light so that the only illumination is coming from a standard lamp in one
corner and the empty white light the projector is throwing at the sheet.
‘I say, Fielding,’ Beryl says, ‘what is this thing?’ She’s pointing at the
projector.
‘That’s a projector, Great–Aunt Beryl. Now.’ Fielding claps his hands,
standing before them, the projector acting like a soft spotlight on him. He’s
taken off his jacket, rolled up his shirtsleeves and loosened his tie, so he’s
looking pretty casual. Friendly, even. ‘First of all, I’d like to say thank
you to Beryl and Doris for a wonderful meal and enchanting hospitality.’ This
is a bit shameless, Fielding thinks, considering the embarrassment of having
to eat a takeaway Chinese, even though the drink was almost tragically good.
Never mind. Flatter to be received. They’re wined and dined and their bums are
on the seats. ‘I don’t think it’s any secret that the family firm, Wopuld
Limited – indeed, the whole Wopuld Group – has been approached–’
‘Are we going to see some slides?’ Doris asks nobody in particular.
‘Yes,’ Beryl says. ‘I think so, dear.’
Well, it’s a computer presentation, technically,’ Fielding tells them,
taking his silver laser pointer from his shirt pocket and nourishing it.
Anyway, as I was saying. The Wopuld Company, Limited.
The
Wopuld
Group.
And
Spraint.
The
Spraint
85
Corporation. The Spraint Corporation of America.’ Fielding tightens his mouth,
looks down and turns sideways to them, then starts to pace slowly, hands
behind his back. Fielding thinks of this as his Ladies and Gentlemen of the
Jury dynamic. ‘I remember when I was–’
‘So, is there a computer?’ Beryl asks, looking under the table.
‘Yes, that’s the computer there, Great–Aunt.’
‘What, this?’
‘Yes, that.’
Ah. So this is a portable type of computer?’
‘Notebook laptop, Great–Aunt. Now–’
‘So, shouldn’t we be facing it, then? I mean, I can’t see the tube, the
screen thing. Can you, Doris?’
‘What’s that, dear?’
‘See the screen. On this thing.’
‘I . . . well, it’s there.’
‘Yes, but can you see it?’
‘Well, sort of
‘But not properly?’
What the hell are they talking about? I’m sorry, I don’t . . .’ Fielding
starts to say, then realises. ‘Oh, I see what you mean! No, that’s the idea,
you see. The computer tells the projector what to put on the big screen, here.

The sheet, see? You don’t have to look at the screen on the computer. And I
control it with this little remote. All very clever, but that’s just the
tech.’
A remote control?’ Beryl says, squinting at the device Fielding has just
produced from his back pocket.
Are we going to watch television?’ Doris asks.
‘Look, ladies, these are just the tools, you know? Not really the point of
the whole exercise.’ Fielding glances at Alban but he’s not being any help at
all, just sitting with legs and arms folded, grinning at his cousin.
‘I do hope that’s not off my bed!’ Doris says, staring at the sheet. ‘Ha ha
ha!’
86
This, Fielding thinks, is ridiculous. ‘Look, I’ll show you.’ He steps to the
side and clicks up the company logo opening shot, showing a kind of stylised
Empire! board with lots of pieces and cards scattered about, the camera
swooping down on to the playing surface, banking and swerving around the
pieces and over the various territories.
‘Oh, my!’
‘Good heavens!’
Fielding smiles. That’s got their attention. This is just a glorified screen
saver really, but it shows how the system works.
‘I say, that is clever!’ Beryl says.
‘Is this a film?’ Doris looks confused again. ‘Are we going to watch a
film?’ She leans over to Beryl. ‘I shall need to go, you know, if we’re going
to watch a whole film.’
Fielding clicks on to an ancient sepia photo of Great–Grandfather, company
founder Henry Wopuld, looking very grand and Victorian in his whiskers.
‘I remember when I was–’ Fielding begins again.
‘Look, Doris!’ Beryl exclaims. ‘It’s old Henry’
‘Oh, it is slides,’ Doris says. ‘So what was that other thing?’
‘Is this all inside the projector what–do–you–call–it?’ Beryl asks.
‘No, it’s all in the computer,’ Fielding tells her, keeping calm. ‘The
projector just puts what’s in the computer on to the screen. Do you
understand? And I control it with my remote. It’s just the usual . . . It’s
just the means to the end.’ Fielding clicks back to the company screen–saver
sequence. ‘See?’
‘There it is again!’ Doris exclaims. She leans over to Al. Alban –whatever
is going on?’
‘Technical wizardry, Doris,’ he tells her.
‘And are you doing this?’ she asks.
‘No, Fielding is. I’m just the sidekick.’
‘You’re psychic?’
‘Sidekick, Doris,’ he says more loudly, laughing. ‘I’m just the assistant.’
87
Not – in Fielding’s considered opinion – that Al’s assisting with anything
whatso–fucking–ever, the smug asshole. He’s just sitting grinning. Meanwhile,
Fielding is getting hot under the collar. ‘Look, everyone,’ he says, ‘I
realise all this technology might seem quite–’
‘So, what else do you have in here?’ Beryl is asking, leaning over to look
at the computer. She reaches out to touch the machine.
‘Beryl! Please don’t–!’ Fielding starts to say. She doesn’t touch it, but he
must have clicked the remote because the movie of the game board clicks back
to old Henry, then on to some shots of famous people playing Empire! as a
board game – here’s Bing Crosby and Bob Hope looking slightly startled,
playing the US version, here’s the famous still from that old TV film about
the Royal Family with the game in the background at Balmoral, here’s another

still from when they were playing it in EastEnders (they couldn’t name it but,
again, you could just about make out the board, and one of the characters kept
talking about ‘this game of world domination’). Then there’s a few seconds of
action from the latest version of the electronic version, followed by an
animated graph of past sales, with projected future sales zooming away into
the top right. Basically this is ruining Fielding’s presentation. ‘Sorry,
sorry.’ Fielding lets go a sigh and clicks back through the images to old
Henry.
‘Henry again!’ Doris says. ‘I think I’ve seen this bit.’
‘I think this is where we came in, dear,’ Beryl tells her. She smiles at
Fielding, just as he makes the mistake of checking that the laser pointer’s
working by shining it at the palm of his hand. ‘Oo! And what is that thing
for? What does that do?’ she asks.
‘It’s a laser pointer/ Fielding tells her, resigned. He points it at the
corner of the sheet/screen.
‘What’s that?’ Doris asks.
From this point on Fielding kind of loses them. They’re far more interested
in the pointer, the remote, and the idea that the laptop is pushing images
through the connecting cable to the projector than they are about Spraint
Corp’s takeover bid and Fielding’s
88
arefully worked–up history of, and tribute to, the family’s long and
successful struggle to bring high–quality board and electronic gaming to a
waiting world.
Somehow they end up playing a game of the medieval action version of
Empire!., hacking and slashing through vast battles and towering sieges and
dodging cannonballs the size of basket balls, though without the proper
controllers, just using the laptop’s configured buttons, it’s pretty messy.
Being drunk probably doesn’t help, either. Doris and Beryl take turns using
the laser pointer as either a pretend weapon or to highlight the crotches and
codpieces of the various characters. Beryl in particular seems to love the
gore, and shrieks regularly and loudly. Doris goes off to make coffee, refuses
any help and reappears with tea. Irish tea, if there is such a thing – she’s
put whisky in it. It tastes hideous.
Beryl advances to the rank of Margrave. Alban laughs a lot. Doris falls
asleep. A mouse skitters across the floor from under the screen, heading for
the door. They all chase it.
Alban lay in bed for a little while, drinking water and thinking back to the
phone call he’d made earlier. He’d asked to use the phone shortly after they’d
rounded up most of the mice and discovered Boris wrapped around the hot–water
tank in the upstairs airing cupboard. He drank his water, and smiled into the
darkness of the room. It was good to be in a proper bed again, a bed with
sheets and pillows. This one was an ancient brass double bed, creaky and
somewhat sagging, but comfortable enough. He had every hope of not being in
this bed tomorrow night. He drank more water, grinning into the darkness,
remembering.
‘Graef.’
‘Hello there.’
‘Ah, Mr McGill’
‘How are you?’
‘Very well. And you?’
‘Well.’
89
‘Where are you?’
‘Glasgow.’

‘That’s good. Shall we meet?’
‘Tomorrow?’
‘Would be perfect. Though I could become free tonight.’
‘Won’t pretend I’m not tempted.’
‘As you should be.’ He could hear her smile. ‘And flattered. I’d never risk
appearing this eager for anybody else.’
‘Wish I could. But there’s family stuff to be done.’
‘Your aunts? Beryl and Doris?’
‘Yes, them. And a cousin.’
‘Tomorrow, then. Say hello to the girls from me.’
‘Will do. Where do we meet?’
‘Come to the office. Any time after seven. I’ve been away conferencing so
there’s piles of backlog.’
He’s not really there. He knows this but it makes no difference. He knows this
but it is no help.
He is not there, firstly, because he knows this is not happening. He’s not
there, secondly, because there was nobody there – that’s known, that’s a fact.
And he’s not there, thirdly, because when it happened he was barely two, and
in the dream he is a few years older, maybe five or so, able to understand
something of what is going on and to talk and plead with her (even though she
never listens, even though she cannot hear, even though she doesn’t see him).
In the dream he is able to walk fast enough to keep up with her as she walks
through the house and into the cloakroom where she chooses the long dark coat
with the poacher’s pockets, the coat that had been her father’s and –
sometimes, as now, like this time – he’s able to follow her out of the gloom
of the house into the light of the day and trail after her as she walks down
the dark, dank path under the alders and rowan to the burn–side walk leading
towards the gatehouse and the main road and the sea.
*

*

*

90
The dream was interrupted when the door of his bedroom opened, light spilled
in briefly and somebody stepped into the room, closing the door.
‘Alban?’ a voice said in the darkness. At first, he wasn’t sure whether he
was really awake or not, and just for an instant he thought it might be his
mother, finally replying. He struggled to wake up properly. It didn’t feel
like he’d been asleep long. ‘Beryl?’ he said.
‘Put the light on,’ Great–Aunt Beryl told him. ‘Don’t want to bark a shin.
One takes for ever to heal at this age.’
He felt for the bedside lamp, found it and switched it on. Great–Aunt Beryl
was dressed in a long white nightgown and a warm–looking tartan dressing gown.
Her hair – her real hair – was very white and wispy and sparse.
‘Is there something wrong?’ he asked.
‘No,’ she said. ‘Well, yes, but there’s no emergency.’
‘Boris still in his tank?’
As far as I know.’ She walked up to his bed and started unmaking the corner
of the bed at its foot. ‘Shift over, nephew, and pass me a pillow.’ Beryl got
the sheets at the bottom of the bed undone, accepted the passed pillow and
climbed in, putting the pillow behind her so that she could sit up facing him.
She fixed him with a disarm–ingly bright gaze. He pulled the sheets up a
little to cover his nipples, bemused at himself for feeling so self–conscious.
His great–aunt took a deep breath. ‘Now, Alban.’
‘Yes, Beryl.’
‘Did you get my letter?’
‘Yes, I did. Though only today. Fielding brought it from Wales.’
And you’ve read it.’
‘Yes.’ He reached for his water glass. Would you like some water?’

‘Yes, please. Thank you.’
‘You’re welcome.’
‘So,’ she said, clasping her hands. ‘Unfortunately, since I wrote that
letter, matters have rather come to a head, medically.’
91
‘Oh Beryl, I’m so sorry,’ he said. The letter had just said that she was
unwell and undergoing tests. As he’d never known Beryl complain about – or
even mention anything regarding – her health, he’d guessed this was something
out of the ordinary, something she considered important.
‘Oh, I’m ninety – a good innings and blah blah.’ Beryl waved away any
sympathy. ‘However, it would seem that I am highly likely to die within the
next year or so. Hal As though, at this age, that was ever other than true.
Annoyingly, though, they have found one of those unpleasant things that end in
–oma inside me and apparently that makes the outcome pretty much inevitable,
rather than giving one a sporting chance. I ought to have six months though,
and possibly a year. The only good thing about getting cancer at this age is
it spreads very slowly; the cancer cells are as decrepit and sluggish as every
other part of one’s body, and take their time multiplying.’
‘Oh, Beryl–’
‘Do stop it, please,’ she said, blinking furiously. ‘I take some comfort in
people’s sympathy, but only so much. We all have to go; in a way I’m lucky to
have the notice.’
‘If there’s anything I can do–?’ he began.
‘There is,’ she said brightly.
‘What?’
‘Be quiet and listen.’
‘Okay.’
‘Now, I may, in due course, as my illness progresses and my condition
deteriorates, have to take matters into my own hands, because I have no
intention of dying in any great pain, if there is no hope of recovery. That is
something I feel I have to tell you, Alban, you understand, but you must be
assured it is simply a practical means of escaping an unpleasant experience,
that is all. Normally, obviously, one doesn’t really approve of that sort of
thing – bit of an easy way out, always best to just soldier on, you never know
what might be around the next corner, that sort of thing – however it is
92
something that has to be faced, and I particularly want you to be prepared. It
has also struck me that for some people, the unpleasant experience they are
trying to escape through suicide is the rest of their lives. If they see that
life as being filled with nothing but emotional pain until they die of old
age, well, one can understand that would in itself be unbearable, and the
younger you are, the worse. That’s the kind of thing one thinks about when one
finds oneself in this sort of pickle. So, for what it might be worth, I pass
that on.’ She paused. ‘Yes?’ She could see he wanted to say something.
He drew in a breath but eventually just nodded and said, ‘Okay. Thank you.’
‘Now, the other matter I alluded to in my letter. Which we spoke about once,
some years ago.’
There was a pause, then Alban said, ‘Ah ha,’ for want of anything better.
‘I don’t know how much you know about the circumstances surrounding your
birth.’
Alban looked away, seeming to search the dark corners of the room, lost in
the shade.
He shrugged. ‘I was born in Garbadale House on September the third,
nineteen–sixty–nine. My parents had been married two days earlier, also at the
house. They’d been living in London before that. They were students at the
LSE; that’s where they met. They stayed on at Garbadale and Dad became, well,

it was never a formal post, but sort of trainee estate manager. Think that’s
where he started painting. Winifred and Bert were there, too, most of the
time. Mum –Irene – looked after me, though apparently she wasn’t very well
herself. Some of it might have been postnatal depression. We stayed at
Garbadale until. . . Until I was two. Until Irene died.’ He shrugged again.
Beryl looked thoughtful, her already small eyes reduced to puckered slits.
‘Hmm. I see. All well and good. What I wanted to tell you was from just before
you were born, from the end of August that year’
93
He nodded, folded his arms high over his chest.
‘Did you know your mother had been knocked down in the street, by a bus, in
London, a couple of weeks before you were born?’
‘Yes, I did. That was one reason for her to go to Garbadale, for them both
to go; she was recuperating.’
‘Hmm. Though undertaking a five–hundred–mile journey, even on the sleeper
train and in a big comfy car, does seem a little strange when one’s been that
knocked about. She had a lot of bruising, and head injuries.’
‘So I heard.’
‘If it had been a car that knocked her down,’ Beryl said, ‘she’d probably
have had two broken legs.’
‘If you say so,’ he said. ‘But she can’t have been that badly injured; they
let her out a day or two later.’
‘Yes,’ Beryl said, sounding thoughtful.
The truth was he didn’t like talking about any of this. He didn’t like to
think about any of this. For most of his life he’d avoided going back to the
great gloomy house and the damp, dark garden with the huge, desolate estate of
rain–slicked rock and gale–hammered heather surrounding it. There had been
those few long weekend visits to Garbadale House in his childhood to see
Grandma Winifred and Grandad Bert, and once – shortly after his sister Cory
had been born – they had stayed for a week, but he hadn’t liked the place and,
looking back, was pretty sure his dad had hated it, too. You could hardly
blame him. The first time Alban had chosen to go back of his own volition had
been to dispose of something that had profoundly needed disposing of. Since
then he’d been back a few times, determined not to let the place and the
legacy it held intimidate him, but it was always, in effect, with gritted
teeth.
‘You see, the thing is,’ Great–Aunt Beryl said, ‘I was in London when your
mother had her accident.’
‘Oh,’ Alban said. Beryl had been a nurse, first in the Wrrens, then in the
NHS, in Manchester, then in Saudi and Dubai, then – for the last few years
before her retirement – in Glasgow.
94
‘She was knocked down in Loake Street, close to a clinic,’ Beryl said.
‘Private place; surgical. What they’d call elective surgery nowadays. It was
one of their doctors who was first on the scene. I visited her in Bart’s, the
day after the accident. She was quite heavily sedated; couldn’t get much sense
out of her. Tried talking to her for a bit, but then I was sent packing. Very
furious Sister. Explained I was a relative and a senior nurse but she wasn’t
having any of it. Rather bad form, I remember thinking at the time.’ Beryl
frowned, as though this thirty–five–year–old incident still annoyed her.
‘Thing is, I was only down in the big smoke to visit an old girlfriend from
the war. Pure chance I happened to be round for tea with Win and Bert in their
flat in South Ken when the rozzers came to say Irene had been knocked down.
I’d only just arrived, in fact; barely had time to dunk a biscuit before the
door went. It was Win and Bert who dashed off as soon as they heard and left
me to man the fort and stand by the telephone and so on. They didn’t get back

till very late that night and then said Irene was unconscious and not allowed
any visitors, though, as I say, I went next day anyway, just to make sure they
were looking after her properly. Had to head off for the Gulf the following
day, so it was my last chance, really.’ She went silent for a bit. ‘Never did
see her again.’ ‘Well, you went to see her; that was good of you.’ ‘Something
she said,’ Beryl said suddenly. ‘While she was lying there. I mean to say, she
was semi–lucid at best, poor girl, but she sounded coherent when she said it.’
‘What?’
‘That he hadn’t wanted her to have it, and that was why.’ Alban thought about
this for a moment. ‘Ah, I’m sorry?’ Beryl said, very clearly: ‘He hadn’t
wanted her to have it, and that was why’
‘Oh, Christ,’ he said, eyes widening, ‘the "it" here is me, isn’t it?’
‘Typical man,’ Beryl sighed. ‘Yes, obviously, the "it" was you. The point is,
though, who was this "he"? And did this mean she’d walked out in front of that
bus on purpose?’
95
‘Fu–’ Alban began. ‘Jeez, Beryl,’ he breathed.
‘Before I left for points east I found your father and talked to him.’ She
paused. ‘Alban, has your father ever shown any aptitude for acting, or any
sign of being especially good at lying?’
Alban was already shaking his head. Andy was a down–the–line kind of guy.
Fairly quiet, arguably a bit boring; just a self–contained, buttoned–up kind
of man. He’d been a good, caring father, and – as far as Alban knew – had
never told a lie in his life. Jeez, he’d casually told Alban Father Christmas
wasn’t real the first time he’d been asked directly. Even now, Alban could
remember feeling horrified, and wishing his dad could have gone along with the
story like everybody else’s.
Acting? Lying? No,’ he told her.
‘Hmm. Didn’t think so. I thought at the time that either your father had
missed his vocation as an actor or he was telling the truth. Don’t think
Andrew was the "he" she was talking about.’
‘She was only semiconscious, Beryl, maybe it was . . .’
‘Maybe it was all nonsense,’ Beryl stated.
‘Well, yes.’
‘Perhaps,’ Beryl said.
They were silent for a moment, then he said, ‘Who else could it have been?
This "he". Grandad?’
‘Or one of your uncles? Blake, James, Kennard, Graeme? I had no idea,
frankly. I’m sorry to say I still don’t. Thing is, they all doted on you after
you were born; Bert especially. If any of them didn’t want her to have it,
they certainly changed their tune once you were on the scene.’
Anyway. This was nineteen–sixty–nine, not nineteen–forty–nine,’ Alban said.
‘It wasn’t that big a deal, being single and pregnant. Was it?’
‘The stigma was much reduced from my day,’ Beryl said. Something in her
voice made Alban look at her closely. ‘Oh,’ she waved a hand. ‘Not me, but a
couple of friends.’
‘I’m sorry.’
96
‘Not as sorry as they were.’
‘Did you mention this to anyone?’ Alban asked her.
Beryl frowned again. ‘Only to Winifred. I don’t know if she told anybody
else.’
‘She never told me.’
‘No,’ Beryl said. She twisted some bedclothes into a knot in front of her.
Then she allowed the sheets to unknot, and her hands to fall apart. ‘Perhaps
I’m just a silly old woman, Alban. It was a long time ago and . . .’ She

looked down, and Alban thought how suddenly infinitely frail and vulnerable
she looked. Her voice died away.
Then she pulled herself up, cleared her throat and said, ‘Perhaps you ought
to ignore me. Perhaps I shouldn’t have said anything.’ She smiled; a thin,
wavering smile beneath rheumy eyes and a thin, skull–betraying face, yellow
with age and marked by prominent blue veins. ‘Too late now, of course. Oh
well. Put it down to this deck–clearing instinct, eh? One becomes frailer as
one ages, in all sorts of ways. The burden of memories and . . . and secrets,
suspicions . . . They all start to seem heavier.’ She fixed him with a very
specific look and said, ‘They all start to tell, after a while.’
Then she yawned widely, putting one thin hand up to her narrow mouth. ‘I’d
best get back to my own bed. Sorry to have disturbed you.’
‘That’s all right,’ he said. He watched her push back the bedclothes.
‘Beryl?’
‘Yes, dear?’
‘Are you telling anybody else about your health problems?’
‘Strictly need–to–know basis, dear. Tell people if you feel you have to,
otherwise –’ she double–tapped the side of her nose ‘– shtum.’
Beryl slipped out from beneath the sheets.
As tiny and thin as a child, he thought.
She tucked the sheets back in efficiently.
She turned to go, then looked back. ‘What was all that nonsense
97
about the company and shares and so on, this evening? What was Fielding on
about?’
‘Spraint want to take over the whole company. Fielding’s trying to organise
the opposition, allegedly with Gran’s backing.’
‘Oh. Is that it?’ She looked thoughtful. ‘I think I’ve only got about two or
three per cent. Doris has nothing, of course.’
‘I’m sure Fielding would tell you it all adds up.’
‘Well, I’d never vote to sell out.’ Great–Aunt Beryl made her way to the
door. ‘Might have just asked,’ she muttered. At the door she stopped, hand on
the handle. ‘Oh, tomorrow?’
‘Yes, Beryl?’
‘You’re taking us to Ayr races, apparently. Hope you don’t mind.’
‘I’m sure it’ll be our pleasure.’ He smiled.
She started to open the door, then, frowning, said, ‘It’s not that big a
favour, you know. We were going anyway; just means we can cancel the limo.’
Finally Fielding gets the chance to make his pitch, over breakfast the next
morning. Al and he have to head out early to find the relevant supplies, and
seem to be expected to make it (Alban volunteers, thankfully – Fielding’s
cooking skills lie more in the appreciation rather than in the practice). The
old girls seem horribly perky considering the amount of cherry brandy and
peach schnapps they were pouring down their necks last night. Fielding is
feeling a little the worse for wear, though hiding it well, and Al looks a bit
tired (though at least, Fielding thinks, he’s trimmed the beard. It looks
almost tidy. Seeing Mathgirl tonight apparently – must be love). Supposedly,
last night Fielding agreed to take them all to some race meeting, though
frankly he’s suspicious. Anyway, he’ll just have to think of it as
entertaining clients, treat them like prospective customers, and keep up the
patter. Soften them up over a fry–up and work on them over lunch.
The girls seem quite receptive. Later, though, while Alban and Fielding are
clearing up and the old dears are upstairs getting
98
ready for their day out, Al says, ‘You know, Fielding, I’m along here for the

ride so far, but I’m not really here – and I won’t be going anywhere else – to
mount some propaganda campaign against selling out. If I can talk to people,
find out what they think, maybe help them think through what it is they really
want, fine. But–’
‘Cuz, you either believe in this sale or not. Come on – get off the fence.’
He just smiles. ‘Yes, but trying to get people to do what they don’t want to
do is generally stupid and self–defeating.’
Fielding is incredulous. How can anybody be so naive? ‘Trying to get people
to do what they don’t want to do,’ he tells his cousin, ‘is what advertising
and marketing are all about.’
The races are actually okay. Fielding doesn’t place any bets, which the girls
think is bad form; even Alban has a flutter (loses), but Fielding likes his
bets with better odds. He does enjoy risk – that’s what business is all about
– but the chances of success have to be greater, and more malleable, frankly.
More open to being massaged and cajoled and controlled and all that stuff.
It’s an enjoyable, breezy day out, the course looks very jolly in a rather
old–fashioned, white–painted–wood kind of way and you certainly see a few
characters – all the trilby hats in Scotland and northern England seem to have
come here, possibly to mate or something – plus they have a pleasant lunch.
The girls get tipsy on G&Ts and white wine, and listen with obvious interest
to Fielding’s pitch about not selling out to Spraint Corp. He’s thinking he’s
almost done here. Mission accomplished.
Al has a couple of drinks but then switches to water. He is indeed seeing
Mathgirl this evening and doesn’t want to arrive wrecked. Still, Fielding is
pretty sure he catches him taking a swig of Beryl’s hipflask, after their one
win of the day. Fielding, of course, is driving, which was okay on the way
down but hellish getting away, trying to leave the car park.
99
‘I hate this,’ he says, as they wait their turn to exit, behind God knows
how many hundred other cars. You should be able to pay for a quick–getaway car
park, he believes; it would be worth it. Why aren’t the Gaga Girls VIPs?
Alban, in the front passenger seat, doesn’t say anything. Beryl and Doris are
in the back and have already made alarming noises about needing a loo before
too long. They also look sleepy, though. This could either be a lucky break or
very bad for Fielding’s upholstery.
‘I hate this feeling of being stuck,’ he says, slumped over the steering
wheel. ‘I hate being in queues, I hate being shepherded and corralled and
controlled and treated like one of the herd. I hate this feeling of. . .
inertia.’
‘What’s that, dear?’ Beryl says over the sounds. Fielding is playing some
piano–ey classic stuff he keeps to impress clients, hoping it’ll take the old
girls’ minds off their bladders.
‘I hate this feeling of inertia,’ Fielding says, more loudly. He hits the
horn, just for the sheer hell of it.
‘Hmm? Eh? Say again?’ Doris says, sounding half asleep. At least slurred.
‘Hates what?’
‘Inertia,’ Beryl tells her.
‘Yes, dear. I know we are.’
Al looks round at her, then starts laughing. Beryl cackles, too.
Fielding shakes his head. Hipflask, obviously.
‘Questions and answers are not like the poles of magnets; one does not imply
the other. There are a lot of questions without answers.’ So saying, she takes
his right hand and studies it carefully in the late–evening light spilling
from the window above the bed. She strokes each fingertip in turn with her
thumb. ‘Can you feel this?’ she asks.
‘Just about.’

She kisses each finger delicately, making a tiny noise. ‘That?’
‘Mm–hmm. Kissing them better?’
‘In case I have any magical healing powers,’ she explains. She shrugs, pale
breasts wobbling fractionally. ‘What is to lose?’
100
Verushka Graef is half Czech and, very occasionally, he thinks he can hear
this in the way she puts words together. He can sense that ‘What is to lose?’
is going to join a short list of phrases he keeps, tiny talismans of
difference, of adoration.
He’d done the same thing with Sophie, of course. He still does, forgetting –
it sometimes seems to him – nothing, no matter how much he might wish he
could.
Verushka Graef is long and blonde, with black dyed hair now growing out,
fair roots showing. Her face is broad, eyes wide–set above a strong nose with
curved, flared nostrils and – when her cornflower blue eyes are open – she is
rarely without what appears to be an expression of constantly bemused
surprise.
Just visible on the lightly tanned skin of her left flank Alb an can see a
tracery of narrow, shallow pink scars, altogether about a hand wide. Extending
across her back, these have been caused by her being dragged seaward over a
coral outcrop just off the coast of Takua Pa, an island north of Phuket,
Thailand, and constitute a slowly fading souvenir of the Boxing Day tsunami.
When she moves, sometimes, there is a gawky, loose–limbed quality about her
and unless she is concentrating on some physical activity she can appear
awkward in her tall frame, like a still–growing teenager, unfamiliar in
themselves.
‘Anyway, doesn’t it all depend on the sort of question?’ he asks.
‘Whether it has an answer?’ Her eyes are still closed. ‘Of course.’ She
pauses. A tiny frown creases the space between her pale brows, the sole line
on an unmarked face. ‘Though to define the question sufficiently precisely,
you might have, in effect, to answer it. Which is not so helpful.’
‘It’s my family. Things are rarely helpful.’
‘You have an interesting family. I’ve liked the ones I’ve met.’
‘You’ve liked the ones I’ve felt safe letting you meet.’
‘You’re protecting them! How sweet.’ She opens her eyes and looks at him,
grinning. She thinks of herself as fierce.
101
‘Of course,’ he says. ‘What was I thinking of? Of all the people to cosset.’
‘I am always available for cosseting.’
She is thirty–eight; two years older than he is. He remembers being
surprised when she first told him this, a few days after they met in a hotel
which could have been anywhere but was in fact in China. He also remembers
being surprised that this age–difference disturbed him slightly, that he felt
he should always be older than any girlfriend. What was that about? Why did he
feel that?
He still has not ceased to be surprised that they are lovers, and not just
because he feels like a Clydesdale to her thoroughbred. She is tall and blonde
(well, usually blonde, and certainly she was when he first met her, in
Shanghai) and slim – small breasts, narrow hips – when he had a thing for red
hair – or rich brown hair – and curvaceous, voluptuous women. She has
absolutely no intention of ever having children, while he still harbours a
half–secret wish that one day he’ll be a father, part of a family. She is a
mathematician, an academic, a sportswoman with no interest in gardening or
plants –there isn’t a single green growing thing in this ascetically clean,
sparsely furnished flat – and they even fell out and almost split up over the
fucking Iraq war; he’d been reluctantly, suspiciously pro–war (and so now is

even more disillusioned and cynical than before) while she had been anti–war
from the start – in fact she’d been antiwar since 9/11, guessing that one
atrocity would be used as an excuse to commit a still greater one.
At the time he’d thought this was over–cynical: he hoped now that was the
last illusion he’d ever lose.
She lives on the top floor of a sandstone tenement in Partick, a building
still stained with the soot of century–old smoke from the hearths of long dead
fires, yet to be blasted clean, back to its natural pale red. The building is
just fifteen minutes’ walk from Beryl and Doris’s house and only a little
further from the university. The flat has a chunked, restricted view of the
river and the low hills beyond Paisley. It is a bare place, sparsely dotted
with
102
furniture, without a television or a phone. There is one radio, and a dainty
CD player beside a small bookcase full of Bach, Mozart, Beethoven and the
collected works of Led Zeppelin. There are no curtains or blinds on any of the
windows; she likes to wake with the dawn for most of the year and keeps an Air
France sleep mask for the height of summer, when the dawn comes in the wee
small hours.
This is all in odd contrast to her room in the Maths building, which is
wildly untidy and contains three different computers, five screens from
bulging cathode ray antiquity to wide–screen cutting edge LCD modernity, two
TVs, an overhead projector and a square bookcase filled with a dozen identical
red–and–silver lava lamps shaped like spaceships. There are even plants: a
small yucca, two busy Lizzies and a dwarf cactus like a booby–trapped
golf–ball. These were all gifts and she rarely remembers to water them;
colleagues do. The only similarity to the flat is that she never closes the
blinds. She claims her job involves a lot of staring out of windows, thinking,
and curtains and blinds just get in the way, wherever she might be.
She had been raised in Glasgow, gone to university in Trier, completed a
post–doc at Cambridge and her speciality was geometries; tilings, though she
was prone – sometimes, after reading papers from other branches of the great
growing tree of mathematical knowledge – to shake her head and mutter things
like, ‘I really should have gone into number theory.’
She sporadically had quite involved and sometimes surprisingly heated email
forum discussions with people way outside her field about things like the
nature of consciousness and brain–bafflingly obscure questions such as, ‘Where
are the numbers?’ (‘Where you left them?’ had been Alban’s suggestion.) That
one was still unresolved; she was talking about this with a guy from St
Andrews who was interested in the philosophy of mathematics – a speciality
Alban had never even imagined existing but felt obscurely comforted to know
did.
103
He’d opened a deep drawer in the living room once and discovered a
collection of about forty glass millefiore paperweights. They were intricate,
beautiful, vivid with colour.
‘Why don’t you display these?’ he’d asked, holding one up to the light.
‘Dusting,’ she’d explained lazily, from the couch. They were playing chess
and she’d been considering her next move. He’d beaten her just once in over
twenty games, and still half suspected she’d let him win that one.
Her only other extravagance was mostly underfoot; she loved Oriental
carpets, the more elaborate in design the better, and the otherwise bare
boards of the flat were scattered with Persian, Afghan and Pakistani rugs. The
flat had large rooms by modern standards, but only one bedroom and one public
room; she had almost run out of floor space for the carpets and had started to
hang them on the walls, which made the place, Alban thought, look a little

more lived in, less cell–like. The general effect of the flat, though, was
still pretty spartan.
Such austerity extended to her clothes. She dressed habitually in a white
shirt with black trousers and jacket. She had about thirty almost identical
white shirts/blouses, a dozen or so pairs of black trousers plus a few pairs
of black jeans and half a dozen black jackets, all of which looked like they
formed part of a suit, save for one, which was leather. Her shoes were
sensible black lace–ups with minimal heels. She possessed a black coat and two
pairs of black gloves for winter, surmounted by a black hiker’s ear–flapped
hat in the very coldest weather.
She had a long black dress and a short black dress for very special
occasions where she really couldn’t get away with the usual trousers, shirt
and jacket outfit. However, by her own estimate, approximately ninety–nine per
cent of the time – when she was not naked or wearing clothes specific to some
sport or pastime – she stuck with the monochrome look.
‘What about holidays?’ he’d asked her.
104
‘Holidays don’t count, darling.’
Once – just once – he’d seen her wearing make–up, after a couple of
girlfriends had persuaded her to let them apply some for a faculty party.
She’d looked breathtaking, he’d thought, but not herself. She’d said that she
felt like she was wearing a mask, and that it had been most unsettling at
first.
Otherwise she wore no make–up at all and did not possess a comb or
hairbrush. Alban had watched her morning routine several times: she splashed
her face with water, rubbed vigorously, patted her face dry with a towel,
then, with her hands still damp, straked her fingers through her short hair.
That was it.
She showered after sport. She played squash ‘like a lethally disjointed
cheetah on speed’, according to one Eng. Lit. lecturer with a bandaged ear and
extensive facial bruising, to whom Alban had spoken at a party. She had a
mountain bike that she stashed in the flat’s hallway, where it moulted dried
mud between excursions. She had played in goal for the university women’s
football team, was a demon fast bowler in the ladies’ cricket team – though
what she really wanted to be was a spin bowler – and played golf occasionally
with her late father’s clubs, each of which was older than she. For a few
years she had rowed on the Clyde, but then given up after she’d rowed her
scull right over the body of a teenage boy suicide and been thrown into the
river with the corpse. She lived for climbing mountains but she had no head
for heights. She’d tried rock climbing, specifically to tackle this shaming
limitation, persevering beyond sense and expert advice, but the problem was
not a fear that could be faced down, and so, eventually, she had accepted this
and restricted herself to walking up mountains, with a minimum of
don’t–look–down scrambling episodes.
She was an enthusiastic if surprisingly graceless dancer.
Alban knew of at least two male colleagues in the Mathematics Department who
were hopelessly in love with her.
105
She had a couple of other sporadic, casual lovers besides himself he knew –
both fellow sporty types.
There had been another, but he’d died in the tsunami.
Her widowed mother also lived in the city. Eudora was a small, lively woman
who worked in the Mitchell Library and who dressed and moved with an elegance
Alban suspected her daughter had long ago decided never to try to match or
even attempt to emulate.
‘So, Mr McGill,’ the lovely Verushka says, gently releasing his hand and

bringing it up to her mouth to kiss the fingers individually once more. ‘Your
family raises its hydra head again. And what is to be done?’
‘Probably nothing,’ he says, looking intently at her mouth. She has full,
pale pink lips. ‘They’ll sell out, the family will fall further apart, we’ll
stop pretending it all really means very much, we’ll stop having to decide
whether to promote people within the family or bring in people from outside
who actually know what they’re doing, so it’ll all get more efficient and
lucrative and slick under the wing of the Spraint Corporation, some of us will
sit on the money and retire and resort to hobbies, some will invest in their
own businesses or somebody else’s and make even more, and some will do the
same and go broke. Whatever it is we are, whatever it’s supposed to be worth,
that’ll all . . . disperse.’ He stops looking at her mouth and looks at her
eyes instead. They are open, now, and crossed. ‘What?’ he says.
‘That is not what I meant at all.’
‘You mean Beryl.’
‘Yes. What she told you.’
‘I was thinking of forgetting it; ignoring everything.’
‘You’re an idiot.’ She places his hand flat on her chest, between her
breasts.
‘It’s probably nothing.’
‘So why be afraid of looking into it further?’
‘I’m not afraid.’
‘Yes you are, Alban,’ she says casually, with a smile to take some
106
of the sting out of it. ‘You’re afraid of lots of things about your
family’
He’d gone to meet her a little after seven at the Maths building where she
worked. Hers had been the only office which remained lit and occupied;
everybody else was either still on vacation or had better things to do on a
Saturday evening, but she was dealing with a backlog of mail and emails after
attending a conference in Helsinki. They hadn’t seen each other for a couple
of months and had come very close to having sex right there, but that, she’d
decided, would have been unseemly (she used words like that sometimes). They’d
walked smartly back to the flat.
Afterwards, he’d told her about the white finger diagnosis, crashing at the
flat in Perth, Fielding’s sudden arrival with news about the family firm, and
Beryl’s bedtime chat, which, for sure, had been a little alarming at first,
when he’d wondered, still half asleep, why this ancient, shrivelled old woman
was inviting herself into his bed, but had hardly been anything to be
genuinely afraid of.
‘Well,’ he says, defensively, ‘they’re an alarming family.’
‘This you keep telling me. Mum and I have taken the girls for tea and cakes
a couple of times when you haven’t been present. They were great fun.’
‘Tea?’
‘Well, drinks and cakes,’ she concedes. ‘And your parents; they were very
nice.’ Andy and Leah had been passing through Glasgow a couple of years ago
when he’d been staying with her. Verushka had more or less insisted on meeting
up, bringing her own mum along. They’d had lunch. He’d been terrified
beforehand but it had gone surprisingly well. ‘And those two old guys at
Garbadale,’ she continues, ‘when we stopped off there for tea that time after
doing Foinaven and Arkle–’
He remembers both mountains, and the insane, uber–competitive pace she’d set
on each ascent.
He also remembers both of the old guys she’s talking about.
107
They’re staff,’ he tells her. ‘Servants – not family. And I’d made damn sure

Gran wasn’t at home.’
‘Well, anyway. And Fielding seemed all right.’
‘Now, Fielding really is an idiot.’
‘He’s not so bad. I think he looks up to you.’
‘Really?’ He is genuinely shocked to hear this. ‘Anyway, you still haven’t
met Gran.’
‘Yes, your gran. She sounds interesting.’
‘So does chemical and biological warfare.’
‘Oh! Shame!’ she says, and darts one hand across to tweak his nearest
nipple.
He hisses, rubs the offended bulb of flesh.
‘She’s your grandmother,’ she says, vicariously indignant. ‘She gave birth
to your poor dead mother.’
‘And seven other freaks and nutters.’
She hovers her tweaking fingers over his still smarting nipple. He holds her
wrist, one–handed, feeling her straining against him. ‘How many again?’ she
asks, looking at the offended nipple with an expression of intense
concentration.
‘Oh, just stop,’ he says. ‘Okay, they’re not all mad. Some are all right.’
He loosens his grip experimentally. She jerks, as though about to attack, and
he clutches her wrist tightly again. She’s very strong, but he is stronger. He
is already wondering how long that will last, now he’s stopped working in the
forests, unless he too starts getting all sporty. Finally she laughs and
withdraws her hand.
‘So,’ she says. ‘Where does your road show go next?’
‘Fielding wants to talk to my dad, and his dad. Which means London.’
‘So, are you going?’
‘Oh, I don’t think so. It’s probably pointless.’
Woh,’ she says flatly, deliberately monotonic. ‘Down, tiger.’
He rubs his face. ‘I’m sorry. I just can’t summon up much enthusiasm for any
of this.’
108
She is silent for a moment. He can almost hear a carefully marshalled,
logically linked series of clearly stated questions being sorted into the most
appropriate analytical order inside her head. The bedrock of all these
exercises tends to be the same: What are you trying to achieve? What is it you
really want?
Answered diligently, each question considered separately, the gulf between
the resulting answers is sometimes startling. This technique often works
amazingly well, but he still resents it, every time. Sure enough, when she
speaks, there is a seminar–room crispness to her delivery that he associates
with earlier attempts to force him to sort out his thoughts and feelings. ‘Do
you care,’ she asks, ‘that the family firm might be sold to this Corporation?’
He thinks. This is a question he has been asking himself quite a lot lately.
‘A bit,’ he says, and grimaces, knowing how pathetic this sounds.
‘Uh–huh,’ she says. He can tell she’s having to back–track here, or at least
go laterally, still looking for a definitive – or at any rate useful – answer
to her first question before any of the subsequent ones can be presented.
‘What does "bit" mean in this context?’
‘I don’t know, I don’t know!’ he says loudly, exasperated not so much by her
somehow inappropriate logicality but by his own even more point–defying
uncertainty.
There is another silence. Anyway,’ she says, and her voice lets him know
she’s abandoned the analytical route for now, ‘you should go to this family
gathering at Garbadale.’
His heart seems to leap. He feels this, and wonders at it, half hates it. He
wants her permission to go to Garbadale even though he has always said he
dislikes the place and usually avoids it. He wants – he still wants, even with

this beautiful, intelligent, deeply affectionate woman lying in his arms – to
see Sophie, to press his suit, to make his case again, to try and redeem all
the past hurt by some sort of acceptance, some form of return of feeling, just
one degree of acknowledgement.
109
And, he has to admit to himself, he wants to witness his slightly mad family
again, no matter what they decide to do about the takeover offer. He used to
have a sort of childish love for them all, for the institution the family as a
whole represented, then he came to hate them, hate it. . . Then he tried to be
accepted again, and joined the firm and felt that by doing so he was rejoining
the family itself, then later still he could stand it all no longer and left
them again – the partial sale to Spraint more of an excuse than anything else
– but still they fascinate him, attract him, and he knows there is some
immature, shameful part of him that profoundly needs their approval, and that
included in that – yet beyond that – there is the need to be accepted,
somehow, some time, by his girl in the garden, by his lost love, by Sophie.
Verushka is watching him. He looks away from her. ‘You know you want to,’
she purrs, partly in jest.
‘That might be a good reason not to.’
She tuts. ‘You should trust your instincts more.’
‘My instincts have got me into a lot more trouble than my reasoning ever
did.’ He’s amazed at the sudden bitterness he hears in his own voice as he
says this.
‘Still, you should go,’ she says, either missing – uncharacteristically – or
glossing over his tone. And ask questions while you’re there. Find out what
Beryl’s talking about. Will she and Doris be there?’
‘Probably. Think they’ve already booked Fielding to drive them there. As a
courtesy, they might even have informed Fielding regarding this, but – well –
who can say?’
And then, suddenly, she says: ‘What about your old love?’
It’s asked easily enough.
‘Sophie,’ he breathes.
He looks up at the window. Verushka had placed the bed under the window
specifically to get good light for reading and because she liked the way that
you got little cold down–draughts from it on to your face, especially in
winter. The bedroom wasn’t designed with
110
this in mind and didn’t really work properly in that configuration, but she
didn’t care.
‘Yes,’ she says gently. ‘Sophie.’
‘Apparently, yes, she’s going to be there. Fielding’s said as much. I don’t
know that I trust him though. I might check with somebody else.’
‘And only go if she’s there?’
‘I don’t know.’ He shakes his head, honestly not knowing. ‘Maybe not go if
she is.’
‘That would be stupid.’ Her voice is very soft. ‘You ought to go anyway, in
any event.’
He looks at her, feeling himself frown. ‘You really think so?’
‘Yes, really. Who else might be there?’
‘Oh, sounds like they all will.’ The thought produces in him a strange
amalgam of outright fear and nervous, adolescent anticipation.
‘And who might be there that could enlighten you regarding this mysterious
"he" Beryl mentioned?’
Alban sighs. ‘Gran, obviously.’ He makes a sort of ‘tchah’ noise (Verushka
shakes her head). ‘Grandad Bert is no longer with us. Uncle James – Sophie’s
dad – dead too. Blake – he’s the eldest of that generation – well, he was

caught with his hand in the till thirty years ago and took the FILTH route.’
‘The FILTH route? What does that mean?’
‘Failed In London; Try Honkers.’
‘Honkers?’
‘Hong Kong.’
‘Ah–ha.’
‘He’s been out there since God–knows–when. Done all right for himself –
multimillionaire – but no real contact with the family any more. He wouldn’t
be allowed into the EGM; he was disinherited when they found he was on the
take. Can’t imagine he’d be invited to the birthday party either.’
‘But you’ve met him,’ she says, remembering an old conversation, ‘haven’t
you?’
111
‘Sure did. Last saw him back in ninety–nine. Showed me round his skyscraper.
The way he talked, he fully expected it was going to get turned into a Red
Army barracks as soon as the Chinese had sorted out the paperwork. Big,
gloomy, creepy kind of guy. Absolutely no advert for extreme fucking wealth
whatsoever.’
‘So, who does that leave?’
‘Uncle Kennard – Fielding’s dad – and Uncle Graeme.’
She is silent for a moment. ‘And when is this party–cum–EGM?’
‘Gran’s birthday party is on October the ninth. EGM’s the day before. We’re
supposed to be there by the Friday to allow for the fact that it is officially
the arse–end of nowhere.’
‘There you go. Ask me nicely, I might even drive you there.’
‘Won’t classes be starting about then?’
‘I make a dramatic entrance somewhat later in the term, darling. I’d have
the time. Don’t you want me to take you there?’
She owned some sort of red four–wheel–drive estate thing called a Forester
(a coincidence – she’d bought it new and it was older than their
relationship). She drove punctiliously, almost primly in town, then like a
rally driver on a Special Stage when she hit the open road, especially in the
Highlands. He’d been alarmed the first couple of times she’d driven him
anywhere at speed, but now felt quite relaxed about it, having decided she was
a judicious, quickwitted and extremely fast–reacting driver. It was just that
she drove rather quickly, as well – that was all.
‘I–’ He stops, flops back in the bed. They had promised from the start that
they would always be honest with each other. He glances at her. Now she is
propped up on one elbow, looking at him. Her right breast, under her, is a
long lozenge of loveliness, her left a warm symmetrical scoop of cream. She
looks curious, smiling faintly. He waves his hands, lets them fall back. ‘Part
of me wants you to come with me and stay at the fucking place.’
‘This part?’ she says, briefly sliding her hand under the duvet to squeeze
his cock.
‘Mm–hmm. Another part is embarrassed by my family, wants you
112
to have nothing to do with them in case they put you off me. And . . . and
another part doesn’t want to have to cope with you and Sophie in the same . .
. frame of reference.’
‘Well, I was only intending to drop you there and then bugger off, frankly;
canter up a hill or two, taking the tent or bivvy bag. Bunk–housing in your
ghastly Scots Baronial monstrosity wasn’t really part of the plan.’
‘Oh. Okay. Sorry.’
‘Whatever, the offer stands.’ She lies back, lifting her hands up in front
of her face to inspect her fingers and nails. ‘Or Fielding might take you.’
She looks over at him. ‘And do you still have that ancient smokescreen on two

wheels you call a motorbike?’
‘Sold it,’ he tells her. ‘Doc said that wasn’t helping the white finger
either. Had to go.’
‘So: me, Fielding, or just hire a car. No shortage of means. Just go.’ She
returns to the close inspection of her hands, then reaches over to the bedside
table and puts on her glasses, which have black, rectangular frames.
What do I really want? he thinks. This is, of course, an extremely good
question. It was just such a pity that, life being as it tended to be, it so
rarely came as part of a matched pair, with an extremely good answer.
Well, not being an idiot would be a start. He puts out his hand and strokes
Verushka’s arm. That’d be great if you took me. I’d really appreciate it.
Thanks.’
She glances over at him, brows furrowing over the black–framed glasses. ‘Are
you sure?’ she asks. ‘The journey could be fraught with safety’
He grins, traces the line of her full, smiling lips. ‘I’m sure.’
Alban and Sophie begin to conduct a sort of secret, technically chaste affair
which only goes as far as what they agree is the rather quaint term, heavy
petting – the stuff that some swimming pools still have signs saying is
banned, along with running by the
113
poolside, jump–bombing from the side, and standing on somebody else’s
shoulders.
Sometimes she just openly goes with him to help with chores in the garden,
sometimes she says she’s taking Scrabbles for a hack, then leaves her
tethered, cropping nearby grass, sometimes she says she’s going for a walk,
sometimes she says she’s going to the summer–house to read and study.
Whatever; it always ends with them hidden by long grass or inside the
tent–like space of a big rhododendron bush or in a half–ruined shed on the
west edge of the estate or one of half a dozen other secret, private places he
knows of.
It’s not simple, though. In fact, it’s very complicated.
Quite apart from the logistics involved with maintaining the secrecy, there
is the ever present problem of, How far do they go? Her breasts have become
gloriously familiar territory to him now; he feels he knows each pore and
microscopic pucker, each tiny, soft wisp of down, and is convinced that he
carries a touch–memory of their weight and giving firmness in his hands. Her
nipples are like little brown raspberries, sweet and full and succulent.
A couple of times, when she’s worn a dress and his hands aren’t filthy, she
has let him put one hand inside her panties, and he has found the hot, moist
slit, and stroked and slipped his fingertips inside her, but she usually has
to stop him before this can go on for very long – gasping, face flushed, heart
pounding – because, she confesses, it’s just too much, too tempting, too
likely to lead to what they can’t do because they have no condoms and are both
terrified of her getting pregnant and anyway, and anyway . . .
After a week of this, she unzips his jeans and takes his cock out. She’s too
rough with it at first and he has to show her how to grasp and stroke and
gently squeeze it. He comes quickly in her hand and she makes a face.
‘Hoo–hoo!’ he laughs, looking up at the blue sky above the thick, feathery
tops of the breeze–swayed grass.
She says, ‘Yeah, well, sorry, but; yuk.’
‘We could use a tissue next time,’ he suggests. He’s aware he’s
114
sounding hopelessly eager. He really hopes this hasn’t put her off tne whole
idea.
‘Hmm.’ She wipes her hand on the beaten–down grass and looks dubiously at

his penis, which is still stiff.
Or you could suck it, he wants to say, but doesn’t. He cleans up with a
paper hanky from his jeans pocket and she lies down beside him on the
flattened grass, stroking him.
There is also, at the same time, the larger moral question regarding, What
the hell does anything matter when we are forever on the brink of killing
ourselves – killing everybody?
This is not a trivial matter. This is 1985, and their parents, the previous
generation, they both agree, have managed very successfully to almost
completely fuck up the world, and left the solutions – the tidying–up, if any
such healing is possible – to the following generation, and their children’s
children, and their – well, you get the idea. The world still stands on the
brink of all–out nuclear war, the superpowers constantly find new excuses to
confront each other, half of Africa seems to be starving, hundreds of millions
go to bed hungry while the West stuffs its bulging collective face with greasy
fries and fat–pumped hamburgers made from diseased meat, and on top of all
that this Aids thing looks like making their generation’s sex–lives more
fraught, limited and dangerous than they ever deserved. It’s so unfair. Really
unfair; not the sort of unfair kids and teenagers are always complaining about
to their parents or teachers or anybody else in authority, but genuinely,
manifestly, no–question–about–it unfair.
You always hope and you try to believe that there must be a way forward,
because we – humans, the species – are where we are, so we’ve always found a
way forward before, but sometimes hope is a difficult thing to hold on to.
Jeez, you just had to watch the news . . .
They talk about this a lot. It matters to them. At the same time, he is
aware, being honest with himself, that he’s kind of pushing this apocalyptic
vision and getting her to talk about the sheer snowballing awfulness of the
world because he does want them to go
115
the whole way, he does – of course he does – want to have proper sex with her,
and emphasising the dangers that lie ahead in their future lives, and the
possibility that those lives might be horribly unfairly short thanks to their
parents’ idiot generation is maybe one way of getting a girl – maybe
especially an intelligent, thoughtful kind of girl – to throw inhibition to
the winds and – as their American cousins would express it – put out.
It’s not something to be proud of, maybe, but it’s not like he’s telling any
lies here.
‘I’m thinking about it,’ she tells him, the first time he asks her to suck
him off, in the old shed on the western limit of the estate, almost in Devon.
She’s stroking his cock, kneeling between his legs, his jeans down around
his knees, a tissue in her other hand. He’d kind of assumed she’d put the
paper hanky over his prick like a sort of soft condom, the way he does when he
wanks, but she has discovered that she likes to watch his penis spasm and see
the warm white liquid spurt, so she keeps the hanky ready until the last
second, then catches his ejaculate on the wadded tissue, smiling as he tenses
and gasps and comes.
‘Think I’m going to–’ he says.
He does, arching his back. ‘Maybe next time,’ she murmurs.
The question, they agree, is simply, How do we cope sensibly with the
present quota of shit left to us by the parental generation without
surrendering our souls and just accepting any amount of shit for ever, thus
turning sensible acceptance into outright exploitative stupidity and becoming
part of the problem, so that we go on to be just as stupid and selfish and
thoughtless as the generation before?
Answers on a postcard.
They take turns; he prefers to kiss her while she wanks him; she prefers
kneeling over him, watching.

‘Do you think our mums and dads did all this sort of thing?’ she asks
time, inside a little arbour formed by the tapestry

one

116
hedge at the side of the south lawn and a curved coppice of sweet chestnut.
She is lying with her head on his chest. ‘I suppose so,’ he says. ‘Dad says
every generation thinks it invented sex.’
She is silent for a moment. ‘I can imagine your parents doing it.’ She
shivers. ‘Euwl Not mine!’
He’s thinking of Uncle James and Aunt Clara. ‘No,’ he agrees. ‘I’d rather
not imagine it, either’
‘Maybe they never have,’ she says. ‘Like, obviously James must have done it
with June, cos there’s me. And June is quite sexy, I suppose. But maybe they .
. .’ Her voice trails off. ‘No, wait; I think I heard them through a wall
once. That was horrible.’
They start kissing again. She’s wearing jeans and he presses and strokes her
between the legs through the jeans for a long time, long enough so that he can
feel the heat and the dampness of her through the thick denim and she doesn’t
stop him, just hugs him very hard and breathes faster and faster, her head
buried in his neck until eventually she shudders, her arms grip him even more
tightly, she bites his shoulder through his shirt and a strange, cat–like
noise is forced from her lips. She gives one final shiver, then goes limp,
body heaving against him as she breathes, her breath hot on his neck and
cheek.
He says, ‘That was you coming, wasn’t it?’
She just lies there panting for a moment or two, then, on shaking arms,
struggles to raise herself up and look at him. Her face is flushed; a
beautiful scent like pine seems to fill the heavy, hanging curtain of her
hair. She looks like she’s about to say something. Possibly something
sarcastic, he suspects, now he thinks about it, but instead she just rolls her
eyes, shakes her head and collapses back on top of him.
He grins a huge grin.
Fielding stares at his mobile. He doesn’t believe he’s hearing this. He knew
he should have stayed in Jockland, but there was urgent stuff needing
attending to back here in London, and so he had to
117
blast south, leaving Al happily shacked up with Mathgirl. Fielding’s been
ringing her at her office making a nuisance of himself, asking her to tell
Alban to give him a call. Finally this harassment has paid off but now Al’s
gone all uncooperative.
Al, I need you here. I can’t do this myself. I can try, but I may not
succeed. With you, I’ve got a much better chance. We make a good team. Come on
now. I’m serious. I’m kind of relying on you here, man.’ Fielding can feel
himself making a face as he walks along Wardour Street, on his way for an
after–work drink with some Chinese factory owners, in town to pitch units,
runs and costs.
‘Look, Fielding,’ Al says, sounding far too damn calm and casual. ‘I’ve said
I’ll be at the bash in Garbadale. So I’ll be there. But I’m not coming to
London to try and browbeat my dad and yours into opposing the sell–off’
‘Don’t you want to see your own parents?’
‘I’ll see them in a couple of weeks anyway.’
Al, I can’t believe you just don’t seem to care about this family any more.
We’re in danger of losing everything and all you can do . . . You’re just
happy to . . . I mean, I’m happy you’re having such a peachy time in Glasgow
with Verushka, but this is our family at stake here, man. This is our chance
to do something, to make a difference.’

‘I’m heading back to Perth in a couple of days, anyway,’ he says, like he
hasn’t heard a word.
Perth. Jesus weeping H. Christ. Fielding bites back a whole clip of
sarcastic comments about the comparative merits of a rainy sink estate in
Perth and the glitzily moneyed buzz that is London, and just says, ‘Throwing
you out, is she?’
‘Yeah,’ Al says, obviously not meaning it. ‘No, I just feel like I’m taking
up too much of her time when I stay with her for longer than a few days. She’s
a life she needs to lead. I start to feel I’m monopolising her after a while.
Makes me uncomfortable.’
‘Right.’
Right my fragrant arse, Fielding thinks. He’s seen them together.
118
The woman is totally fucking gorgeous and blatantly worships him. Alban’s a
fucking idiot. But Fielding’s not going to tell him. Some people just seem to
spend their misbegotten lives stepping smartly out the way of anything
remotely good for them and ignoring any and all good advice well–meaning
friends and family might offer. It’s a gift. An anti–gift. A curse. Yeah,
that’s the word, Fielding decides. A curse.
Stupid fuck.

119

4

I
’m in the Volley in the Valley – that’s the Volunteer Arms, Valley Street, for
those not fortunate enough to be acquainted with the more select drinking
emporiums of Bonnie Perth – sitting there quite the thing with Deedee (i.e.
D.D., which stands for Designated Drinker) and Veepil (i.e. V.P.L. which is
short for Visible Panty Liners or something). I’ve also seen Veepil’s name
spelt V–pill; there is a piece of highly fucken derogatory graffiti on a gable
end in Islay Avenue which favours the latter spelling – when in walks your man
Alb an.
All Bran!’ Deedee shouts, seeing the prodigal as he comes through the door and
stands looking round. Deedee is waving a suddenly empty glass. It is well
known that the big man is not normally short of a sheikel or two and some of
my more embarrassing friends (just let me pause while I consider who amongst
said bunch would not qualify for this label, big Al himself excepted . . .
well, maybe we’ll come back to that one!!) anyway they sort of exploit him a
bit sometimes, though he never seems to mind. Like I say; embarrassing. Al
waves and comes over. He looks just like he did when he left, a week ago.
Maybe the beard’s a bit trimmer. He nods at Deedee and takes his glass. ‘What
the fuck happened to the flat, Tango?’ he asks me.
121
‘Fucken D.S. is what happened to the fucken flat, that’s what,’ I tell him.
He rolls his eyes. ‘Oh, for fuck’s sake.’
‘My feelings exactly, big man.’
‘Jesus,’ he says. ‘Right. First things first. Who wants what?’
In a round is got. Al says his formal hellos and sits beside me, putting his
wee backpack on the floor.
And before you ask,’ I tell him, ‘yes, they did take your big pack. Heard
one of the boys in blue saying what a smart–looking bit of kit it was, too, so
I wouldn’t hold out great hopes of ever seeing that again.’
‘Did they nick anybody?’
Aye, me!’ I poke myself in the chest. ‘I had about ten ounces of blow in the
place cos Special Kay and Deep Phil were back from Umshter–fucken–dum.’
‘Shit. You been charged yet?’
Aye, fucken possession with intent to supply. No date yet.’
Ah thought they wur meant tae be no botherin wi blow these days, but,’
Veepil says, waving her cig around. This is about the seventh time she’s said
this over the last couple of hours. Drink has been taken.
‘Sorry to hear that, Tango,’ Al says. ‘You got a legal?’
Aye, getting aid, and that.’
‘Did they leave anything of mine?’
‘That’ll be right. Maybe some dirty washing.’
‘So, are you locked out?’
Aye. The council took serious fucken exception for some bizarre fucken
reason and put me in a fucken B&B on Flowers Street. Fucken shite it is.
Sorry, Al; canny put you up now. I had a word, and Sunny D says you can stay
at his and Di’s if you don’t mind sharing a room with the twins.’ I hold my
hands up, feeling mortified and dead inhospitable, even though this is
definitely not my fault. ‘Best I can do, big man. I’m really sorry.’
Al pats my shoulder. ‘That’s okay. Don’t worry’
122
‘Yell no be wantin tae go tae Sunny an Di’s though, will ye?’ Deedee says,
giving it serious face.
‘No,’ Al says. ‘I’ll pass. Don’t worry about me. I’ll be fine.’
‘Where are you going to go, but?’ I ask him.

‘Where fate seems to be pushing me,’ he says, sighing and staring up at the
ceiling. ‘Back into the welcoming fucking tentacles of my
family’
Deedee is poking a finger through a handful of small change, mostly
copper’s. ‘Anybody got any dosh fur the fag machine? Ma duty–frees must be
back hame.’
Al digs in his pocket.
It begins with a choice. She picks a large coat with the deep, inside pockets
that people call poacher’s pockets from the variety of coats and jackets and
capes in the cloakroom of the house. The coat she selects is an old, shabby
one that has been in the family for decades; it has been worn by her father,
some of her uncles, perhaps a few of her larger–made female relations over the
years, and by most of the males in the present generation of the Wopuld
family. She leaves the house by the side door and takes the indirect route
towards the main road, heading not down the drive that loops up to the front
of the house and through the avenue of tall cedars, but instead walking down
to the shadowy path that follows the River Garbh on its way from the inland
loch towards the sea.
She picks up the first stone while she’s walking through the garden,
stooping to pull it from the side of the path. She looks at it, thinking of
cleaning some of the damp brown soil from it, but then puts it straight into
one of the external pockets of the coat. There’s a glove in the pocket. She
looks at it as she walks and feels in the other outside pocket, finding the
second glove. She puts them on. They’re too big, like the coat, but it doesn’t
really matter.
She walks down the path by the river, listening to the waters roar and
shush. Some of the people on the estate call the river a burn. She has always
wondered why something full of cold water is associated
123
with a verb denoting fire and heat. There seems to be no adequate explanation
for this.
The trees down by the river are what–do–you–call–it; deciduous. They have
broad leaves they shed in the autumn. Autumn comes early here, this far north;
a month or so early compared to Somerset, compared to Lydcombe. In perhaps as
little as a couple of weeks the broadleaf trees here will be starting to turn
brown and red and gold and begin to lose their leaves.
The rain has almost ceased now and the sky is going from a dull to a
brighter grey. She squats by a stone in the centre of the rough path and tries
to prise it out, but it will not come. She takes the gloves off, thinking this
may help, but it doesn’t. She puts the gloves back on again. She walks down a
narrower path to the side of the stream and pulls a rock from the bank,
putting that rock into the external pocket on the other side of the coat from
the first stone.
She continues down the riverside track, stopping now and again to add stones
and rocks to her pockets, beginning to use the deep, inside poacher’s pockets.
The coat is starting to become heavy, pulling her shoulders down.
Where the road into the estate crosses the river, via an old curved bridge
of grey stone, she stays with the path, passing under the road. A car hisses
overhead on the still damp tarmac. She hears that, and listens to the tumbling
waters echo off the curved surface of arching stone, then she’s out from
beneath the bridge and walking down the path towards the rocky shore and the
dull grey gleaming that is Loch Glencoul, the sea loch. The line of rocks
arranged like giant pearls around the shore of the loch are different shades
of grey; a rainbow of monochrome. Their colour changes to brown near the
water, covered in seaweed. The mountains tower around the loch, their high
tops hidden by the uniform blanket of grey cloud.
The coat feels very heavy on her now, weighing her down with the mass of

stones she’s accumulated, making her shoulders ache. The rocks in the
poacher’s pockets click and clack as she walks and force her to move with a
swaying, halting, slightly unnatural step.
124
The river shallows and broadens out between banks of rain–bright grass that
give way to the rocks and seaweed at ragged, undercut margins of dark, peaty
ground where the grey remains of barkless tree trunks and giant branches –
element–stripped, time–polished –lie trapped and caught, twisted limbs spread
and out–flung in frozen poses of what look to her like agony and despair; a
Pompeiian tableau representing the fossilisation of a meaningless end.
There is no discernible path any more. She stumbles down the side of the
stream, nearly falling, then stoops to pick up another couple of rocks, adding
them to the collections in the poacher’s pockets. She thinks she feels
something give as she adds the stones to the right pocket, and worries that
the material will rip, letting the stones fall out. She recalls a fable about
something like that. Aesop, probably. The fable of the woman who tried to
carry too many rocks; that would be her. Not that it would ever be written,
not that anybody would ever read it. Not that it mattered in the least. Not
that anything did.
The rocks on this part of the shore are round and hard to walk over,
especially with all the extra weight she is carrying. She had carried less
when she had been pregnant with the child, though sometimes it had felt like
all the weight in the world. She splashes into the stream as it spreads out
still further, leaving behind the grassy banks and forming a rough delta
across the rocks, straggled with seaweed and the flayed flotsam branches. Her
boots fill with cold water. She stops, takes off the gloves and carefully does
up the buttons on the coat, right up to her chin. Then she stoops, plunging
her hands through the water rushing around her boots, and picks up a last
couple of stones from the bed of the stream. Cradling them in the crook of one
arm, she pulls the gloves back on over her wet hands, then holds the stones,
one in each hand, rather than risk putting them into the already overloaded
pockets of the coat.
She keeps on walking down the stream until the stream becomes the sea,
becomes the waters of the loch. By sticking to the stream bed she’s walked
past the seaweed, avoiding slipping and falling on
125
it. She wonders where the water stops tasting fresh and starts being salty.
The waters of the loch rise around her ankles, calves, knees. The coat’s
tails float up on the surface of the loch, moving with the small waves, then
start to disappear under the surface, weighed down by the stones she has
gathered in her pockets. The water is stunningly, sharply, cruelly cold.
Already, as the waves chop and surge around her knees, she can hardly feel her
feet, and what sensation remains is painful; a bone–chilling ache she
remembers from childhood. The coat sinks around her. The water rises to her
thighs.
A seagull – wings stretched across the breeze – banks around her, some
distance off. Its white head and black bead–eyes swivel once in her direction,
then the bird pulls up and flaps slowly away, heading for the shore.
The rain has started again, dampening her hair. She wades further on, each
step deeper and draggier than the last, forcing her way out towards the dark
centre of the loch as though through a nightmare. The waters reach her groin,
then her belly and waist, chilling her utterly, sucking the warmth from her
body. Bubbles rise from her clothes. Each step she takes is a little easier
now; she feels more sure–footed on the hidden surface of the bed under the
brown waters as her body tries to float. She’s holding her gloved hands and
the two last stones out of the water, hugging them up near her shoulders.

Water trickles over her wrists and down her forearms.
Tears fill her eyes and start to roll down her cheeks as she takes each
sucking, gasping breath. The cold of the water, gradually transferring itself
to her body, seems to be draining the ability to breathe from her chest
muscles, putting them into spasm, forcing her to fight for every breath. She
wonders if this terrible, wrenching, invasive cold will stop her heart even
before she drowns.
She is terrified. She starts to sob, the sobs made sharp and ragged by the
penetrating cold of the water and her spasming chest. She had hoped that right
now, in these final moments, there might be
126
some sort of peacefulness, that she might find a state of uncaring resignation
imposing itself upon her, like a foretaste of the freedom from pain she is
looking to oblivion to provide. Instead she is going to her death in a state
of dread and cold–flayed agony, blundering across the rocks hidden by the dark
brown water beneath her, horror stricken at the thought of what she is doing
to those who will survive her, filled with fear at the idea that there might
after all be a stupid, vengeful, punitive God, a God ultimately no better than
Man, a God who punishes further those so lost to hope they take their own
lives in the first place. What if all that nonsense is true? What if the
ghastly Christian mumbo–jumbo is based on truth?
Well, let it be. She deserves any punishment, will accept it, embrace it. If
this too–humanly formed God really existed, then the afterlife was as
vindictive and spiteful as the world, indeed was just a continuation of it,
and what she was here she would be there, and so no more deserving of any
mercy or relief in that world than she was in this. She knows what she is
doing is wrong. The knowing that what she is doing – what she has realised for
some time she was committed to doing – will hurt others (one or two deserving,
the rest not deserving at all) is itself one of the reasons that she hates
herself and her life and what she has become, and so seeks this extinction.
Anyway, it still doesn’t matter. Just the chance of not being, not thinking,
not suffering, is worth it all. Deep inside, she knows it really is all
nonsense, and there is no continuation whatsoever.
Another few steps. She feels lighter still, gasping as the water surrounds
her torso like an icily enveloping lover. Her heart is beating very quickly.
The coat and the collection of stones keep her down, stopping her from
floating. The water comes to her breasts – the obscene, cold lover squeezing
like something hungry – and a wave splashes her stone–clutching hands,
dribbling water down her wrists towards her elbows. The next wave splashes her
face. One more step, then another, sinking deeper. The water is at her chin
now. She takes a deep breath, instinctively, then thinks how stupid this is,
and
127
lets the air away again, forcing the last of it out as the water ascends to
her mouth.
A note. She should have left a note. She thought of this weeks ago, days
ago, even last night, but in the end she didn’t do it. Perhaps she ought to
have left one. It was traditional. Traditional. This thought makes her smile,
briefly, tremulously, as the sense–destroying coldness of the water splashes
up to her nose. No, there was no point leaving a note. What would she have
said?
The tears roll down her cheeks and into the slapping waves, taking their own
tiny cargo of saltiness with them.
She feels sorry for the child, for Alban.
The gently sloping shelf of the loch bed ends here; she walks off the hidden
underwater cliff with a tiny surprised cry, bitten–off, and vanishes

immediately under the brown waves, her auburn hair sucked down at last like
fine tendrils of seaweed, leaving only a few bubbles which float briefly and
then burst and vanish.
Her last breath, taken reflexively the instant before she cried out, held
instinctively despite her desire for death, finally surrendered to the
crushing pressure of the black water fathoms down, surfaces in a small silvery
cluster of larger bubbles about half a minute later.
The gull comes back through the soft veils of grey rain, wing–tipping down,
feathers almost touching the surface of the waves over the place where she
disappeared, then it curves away once more.
Back on track. He should think so, too.
Alban turns up at the London offices less than a week after Fielding had to
leave him in Glasgow. They meet in Reception, Al standing dressed like a tramp
in that same grubby–looking hiking jacket and toting his little stained
backpack, his dirty jeans and scuffed hiking boots making him look like he’s
just stepped out of the forests or a workman’s van. His beard is looking well
trimmed, Fielding thinks, but still. They’re surrounded by the prizes,
plaques, awards and certificates hanging on the walls, and by the framed
128
newspaper cuttings and photographs of the famous, featuring either a game –
usually Empire!. – or Wopuld family members.
When Fielding walks up to his cousin – nodding and smiling at Suze, the very
fit blonde receptionist and switchboard operator –Al’s beneath a portrait of
their great–grandfather Henry, standing in front of a glass case with one of
Henry’s original prototype game boards displayed inside, complete with
hand–carved pieces.
‘Cuz, good to see you,’ Fielding tells him, giving him the sincere handshake
with added left–hand forearm grip. Fielding steers Al over to Suze. Fielding
introduces them – you can see her re–categorising in real time, taking Al out
of Shabby Hobo, Possible Thief or Nutter and putting him into Yet Another
Eccentric Wopuld Family Member
–
then Fielding takes Al up to his office. Another portrait of old
Henry looks down on them in the elevator as they exchange small
talk about Al’s journey south.
Dear old great–grandfather.
Henry Wopuld was a clerk with a farming supplies company based in Bristol
when he dreamt up Empire!, in 1880–81. It was the heyday of the British
Empire; the map of the world had turned or was turning pink or red or whatever
hue map–makers chose to illustrate the holdings of the first Empire in history
on which the sun never set, because it encompassed the globe itself.
Civilisation, Christianity and trade were being taken to those inhabiting the
furthest corners of the world whether they thought they wanted it or not, and
in a sense all Empire!, did was epitomise this, allowing the Victorian middle
class – along with the more aspirational denizens of the lower orders – to
fight and trade and preach and bluff their way to world domination from the
comfort of their own homes. A claimed educational aspect to the game – in the
fields of both geography and morality – helped it appeal to all ages and
classes, and earn the praise of school boards and parish councils alike.
The game was taken up by a small printing and toys company in London and
marketed aggressively, mostly thanks to Henry. He had a partner who owned the
original company, but there was some sort
129
of unrelated investment scandal, the partner was bankrupted and Henry bought
up the company for a song and never looked back. The family moved to Lydcombe
on the proceeds of the fortune Henry made from the original game, but he was

already working on new ideas.
The USA, perhaps not surprisingly, proved reluctant to accept Empire!; sales
were miserable. Henry tried a version of the game based on a map consisting
only of the contiguous states of the US, but that did little better. Finally
he bought up a small printing firm in Pittsburgh so that the box and board
could each bear the legend Made in the USA, altered the map of the world on
which Empire! was based so that the USA was centred – the boundaries of the
board cutting through the heart of Asia – renamed the game Liberty!, changed
nothing else and watched the dollars roll in. He bought the estate of
Garbadale in the far north–west of Scotland with the intention of hunting,
shooting and fishing there and had the most expensive architects of the day
design a grand new lodge in the finest Scotch Baronial style, to be named
Garbadale Castle (later House, when tastes in such matters changed).
There were various different editions and versions of the game, and a lot of
litigation – or at least the threat of it – as other games suspiciously
similar to Empire! appeared. Often the easiest way to deal with certain
companies threatening the Wopuld firm’s position was simply to buy them up and
close them down, incorporating whatever of worth there might be in the
purchased firm into Wopuld Games Ltd, whether it was company personnel, some
minor innovation in the playing of the game, or the manufacture of the
product.
Henry died in 1917, leaving a family he hoped was large enough to provide
the firm with all the executive officers it might need to carry the Wopuld
name onwards, though this was not sufficient to prevent a dip in sales after
the Great War.
Mornington Crescent, a game based on the map of the London underground with
a complicated double–level board sold well in Britain and modestly abroad. A
more purely trade–based game called

130
High Seas! did reasonable business. Another based on stocks and shares called
Speculate! was a brief, faddish hit on both sides of the Atlantic, though in
the States it was marketed purely as a children’s game on the basis that all
the adults were feverishly engaged in the real thing, making a game of it
superfluous.
The Depression necessitated the sale of the factory in Pittsburgh.
The Thirties saw a partial revival of the family’s fortunes. An austerity
version of the original game did well for a time during the Second World War,
though there was some difficulty over the news that the Germanised version,
produced in Leipzig by a now wholly German–owned company, was doing even
better. Also, only for a while.
After the war, the rejigged, relaunched, version of Empire! –Commonwealth
(no exclamation mark) – remapped to reflect the changed political realities of
the planet, did surprisingly poorly. Monopoly (once seen as an upstart, now
regarded as the old enemy) outsold the old game for the first time. The
company drifted, holding talks with other firms about merging or being taken
over, though without serious effect.
The original game staggered on through the Sixties, nearly went under in the
Seventies – a very brief–lived game called Karma! based on a grotesque
mishmash of misunderstood hippy gibberish and cereal–box Buddhism was an
unmitigated disaster – and only started to revive in the Eighties. An
electronic version of Empire ! proved popular, then very popular. Then wildly
popular. More PC and games–console versions followed, gradually creating a
uniquely smooth spectrum of gaming potential to suit virtually all tastes,
from those who aspired to the most calm, cerebral, turn–based experience –
more akin to chess than anything else – to users who just wanted to wade
straight into the most gore–spattered slice– or shoot–them–up, jerking round
floors and couches, teeth grinding, eyes wide, face contorted, sweat beading.

The board version became fashionable again on the back of the electronic
successes and in 1999 the Spraint Corporation of America,
131
Inc., making profound noises regarding stuff like vertical integration and
OS/platform synergies, bought up a quarter of Wopuld Games Ltd for a
significant amount of money and an even more significant quantity of its own
forever soaring shares.
Every share–wielding member of the extended Wopuld family suddenly became
quite a bit richer.
‘Haydn,’ Fielding says, calling in at his brother’s office on the way to his
own. ‘Look who’s here.’
Good things happen. Sometimes they happen for no particular reason, the way
the bad things so often seem to happen.
Once, about seven years ago, less than a year before he left the family
firm, and certainly when he was already thinking about doing so, Alban had
what may still count as the most exquisite sexual encounter of his life. This
all happened about a year after the insanity of the Singapore episode with
Fielding and his drugs, about eight or nine months before he met Verushka
Graef in a hotel in Shanghai, and about a year before he encountered his
sepulchral Uncle Blake for the second time on top of his hulking neon
skyscraper in the hazy steam–bath hive that is Hong Kong.
Looking back, his world seemed very Asian, and he supposed they were out
there a lot because that was where the factories were these days. It was also
where the latest, greatest economic growth happened to be spurting.
The company had come up with a luxury edition of the board game version of
Empire! The board itself was constructed from semiprecious stones pivoting on
titanium hinges, the cards were embossed silver, the dice stacks were formed
from mahogany inlaid with mother of pearl and the pieces were carved from
jade, ebony, jasper, agate, onyx and porphyry. This cost a cool ten thousand
dollars US and they had expected to sell a few dozen to some sheikhs.
Instead – well, as well as – they sold hundreds to what seemed like a whole
new breed of the South–East Asian rich. For China and similar cultures, they
had what they called the chipped version.
132
It had been Alban’s idea to introduce a gambling element to the old game and
they first brought that out as an even more extra–special edition of the
luxury version. They also increased the number of potential players to eight,
because that was a number with especially good associations in parts of
Chinese culture. That too had sold in relatively small but highly profitable
and usefully influential numbers. The gambling version of the standard
eight–player game subsequently shifted in gratifyingly prodigious quantities,
too.
At the time it didn’t just seem like Asia. At the time Alban remembers
thinking that his life seemed to revolve around initials: HK, KL, LA, NYC . .
. The whole world was becoming shorthand, becoming text, becoming txt.
His encounter – his perfect, soul–saving, life–redeeming experience – took
place in the deeply civilised, imperially stately and casually cool – if
rather less far–flungly exotic – setting of Paris.
He was there to see cousin Haydn, Fielding’s elder brother, who worked for
the firm as a production wizard, ensuring the snuggest possible fit between
supply and demand, and who had had, apparently, some sort of breakdown. Haydn
had skipped town a week earlier, leaving the London office in Mayfair and the
family home in Knightsbridge to abscond all the way to Paris – specifically,
the Ritz – via Eurostar and a grand total of two taxis. Oddly, as well as
displaying a singular lack of momentum in his moonlighting, he still seemed to

be doing his job, running figures and production quotas off his laptop while
staying in the Ritz, tying in – with a hardly reduced degree of exquisite
precision – the specific extent to which profoundly need–motivated
dextrous–fingered Malaysian, Indonesian and Chinese children should be worked
to produce a monetarily measurable quantity of pleasure in buyers from Alaska
to Kamchatka. (The long way round, obviously.)
‘Oh, Christ. Gran sent you, didn’t she?’
Was the first thing Haydn said to Alban when he appeared at
133
Haydn’s usual table in the hotel’s main restaurant, lifting over a gilt chair
and sitting on it.
‘Yes, she did,’ Alban said. Somewhere in the near future there could well
lie times when he’d have to deceive Haydn, but this was not one of them.
He had, anyway, already decided this was an interesting but probably forlorn
excursion. For some reason Winifred – Gran –was treating him as the company’s
troubleshooter, sending him to do the more off–piste pieces of nonsense that
she judged needed to be done for the good of the family and the firm. Oh fuck,
he was her secret agent, her man on special assignment, Alban thought all of a
sudden as he looked across the napkins, flowers and silverware at Haydn’s
round, shining, fragile face.
Haydn was a fat little guy who insisted on dressing in grey suits about one
size too small. It was a perversion, in the sense that it did exactly the
opposite of what it was supposed to do; he looked fatter than he really was,
not thinner. Haydn had started going bald at about sixteen, which was just a
plain cruel thing for an adolescent to have to go through as well as all the
usual stuff. He had elected ever since for the comb–over option, which was
also never going to do him any favours, although – on the plus side – he had
yet, at the age of twenty–seven, to suffer from spots.
Since he had ensconced himself here, Haydn had not been answering his
suite’s telephone, his mobile or his email. He also had most of his meals
delivered to his suite, though he did sometimes appear for dinner alone in the
main dining room. That was why Alban had had to drag over the shiny chair and
plonk himself down across the table from the chap.
‘Why are you here?’ Haydn asked.
‘Well, there’s a good question,’ Alban said. ‘Why are any of us here?’ He
sat back. ‘Are you always this profound over dinner?’
‘Stop dicking about, Alban. I just want to know what the hell you think
you’re doing here.’
Alban couldn’t remember hearing Haydn swear before. Paris really
134
was persuading him to let what remained of his hair down. And in a dining
room.
‘I came to see how you are,’ Alban told him.
‘Well, you’ve seen me. How do you think I am?’
‘I have no idea yet. I’ve only just found you.’
‘Is everything all right here, sir?’ the maitre d’ asked, suddenly
table–side.
‘Yes, no problem; thanks.’ Haydn waved the man away.
‘How do you think you are?’ Alban said.
‘Do you mean, how do I feel?’ Haydn asked, with what was probably meant to
be sarcasm.
‘I suppose I do.’
‘I’m fine.’
‘So why have you decamped,’ Alban looked round the high, ornate dining room,
‘to here?’

Haydn fiddled with his napkin. ‘I needed a break.’
‘Gran used the word "breakdown". So did your dad.’
‘They would.’
‘Well, if it’s any comfort, it doesn’t look like a breakdown to me.’
‘Thanks a lot.’
‘Moving a couple of hundred kilometres to a life of abject luxury and
keeping doing your day job at the same time doesn’t exactly smack of a
tortured soul’s descent into bedlam.’ Alban paused. ‘Unless you think you’re
Napoleon or something.’
Actually I’m not doing my day job properly,’ Haydn said, ignoring this and
nodding to the waiter as his consomme was set before him. The slim young
waiter turned and walked away. Haydn watched him for a couple of seconds.
Haydn was widely assumed within the family to be gay but in denial about it.
Haydn looked at Alban. ‘I’m only half doing it.’ He looked after the waiter
again. Actually, about a third doing it, or an even smaller fraction. Usually
I spend three hours in the morning and three hours in the afternoon working.
An hour or two extra on a busy day. Here, I’m doing two one–hour stints.’
135
Alban thought about this. ‘Is that it?’
Haydn frowned, dipped his spoon into his soup and let the watery brown
liquid dribble away back into the bowl again. ‘I’m missing nuances. Going more
broad brush,’ he said. ‘Also, I’m not looking very far ahead. Over time
there’ll be cumulative errors. They’ll build up.’ He shook his head. ‘It’s
ticking over. More of a game.’ He looked darkly at Alban. ‘But don’t be
deceived; I am not still doing my job properly. I’ve run away and I’m just
playing. You can call that a breakdown if you like.’
He carefully rearranged his napkin, holding it up to alter it from a
triangle to a perfect rectangle, lining the edges up to within a millimetre,
then replacing it on his lap.
‘Well, okay,’ Alban said, watching this. ‘But it’s a very civilised form of
breakdown.’
Haydn busied himself with his soup. After half a dozen spoonfuls he paused
to dab at his lips with the napkin. He returned the napkin to his lap, still
spotless.
Man, you seriously need to get laid, Alban thought.
‘So, what’s the problem?’ he asked.
‘You really want to know?’
‘Cuz, I’m here.’
Haydn took a deep breath, studying the blank white tablecloth. He grimaced,
looked up. ‘I’ll tell you later. I need to formulate exactly how to express it
linguistically’ He nodded at the table in front of Alban. ‘Have you eaten?
Will you join me? I don’t care to drink alone, but we could have a bottle of
something.’
‘What a good idea.’
‘You see, that’s the mistake people make. It’s not supply and demand; it’s
demand and supply’
‘Is that a big difference?’
‘It’s fundamental! It’s a whole new way of thinking, of working, of
ordering, and of ordering.’
They were sitting in the living room of the suite at the Ritz which
136
Haydn was currently charging to the family firm. The suite was quite big.
Alban wondered if the main cause for familial concern here was the room rate
impacting on the firm’s liquidity.
Alban nodded. ‘Right,’ he said. He felt he sort of half–got the distinction

between ordering and ordering. He hoped he did. Either that or cousin Haydn
genuinely was cracking up. In which case maybe he should hope he didn’t get
the distinction.
Maybe he shouldn’t have come to Paris.
They were sharing a bottle of champagne. Alban was trying hard to convince
Haydn to come out on the town. He hadn’t wanted to come to the suite but Haydn
had insisted, finally admitting it was because he didn’t like using public
toilets, even if they were the public toilets of five–star hotels. So they’d
come up to the suite. But they needed to go out, dammit. They were in Paris,
for Christ’s sake. It was even spring. In the week he’d been here, Haydn had
confessed, he hadn’t actually been out at night yet. This was so wrong–headed
that Alban actually felt slightly angry. It was like going to the Grand Canyon
but keeping your eyes shut, or declaring yourself a fan of Jimi Hendrix, but
only for his singing.
Alban wondered if he’d basically been sent here to pimp. He certainly wasn’t
the only person in the family who thought that what Haydn needed more than
anything else was a healthy dose of rumpy–pumpy, whichever gender might be
involved. Or maybe Gran thought Haydn fancied him; maybe she’d sent Alban to
Haydn, one cousin to another (very fucking funny), as a present, as a prize to
tempt him back to the bosom of his family and responsibilities. He certainly
wouldn’t put something like that past the old she–goat.
‘This isn’t the reason you’re here, is it?’ Alban asked, genuinely confused.
‘This so–called breakdown doesn’t resolve into a question about fucking
semantics or something, does it?’
‘No, no,’ Haydn said, staring into his champagne. He was sitting, legs up,
on an ornate chaise longue. Alban had opted for a single–occupancy chair.
‘What, then?’
137
Alban was painfully aware he was probably the wrong sort of person to send
on a mission like this. He’d never thought of himself as having a great
aptitude for getting people to talk, or indeed as having any sort of gift for
amateur counselling. He was pretty sure nobody else had thought of him in that
way, either. Agreed, he’d provided a shoulder to cry on for a few people of
both sexes over the years, some close, some not but just – he guessed –
desperate, and had had a few people treat him like some sort of cross between
a priest and a psychiatrist, but his only skills in this field, he was sure,
consisted of knowing when to shut up, make sympathetic noises, ask the very
occasional question and resist the sometimes quite powerful urge to shake the
person concerned and tell them loudly just to pull themselves together.
Haydn looked uncomfortable, fidgeting on the chaise, mouth compressed into a
tight line. ‘Excuse me,’ he said, getting up. ‘I need to visit the loo.’ He
disappeared.
Alban drained his champagne, studied the empty glass for a moment, then got
up, went to the phone on the desk and ordered a taxi.
He heard the sound of a toilet flushing. ‘You fucking shall go to the ball,
Cinders,’ he muttered to himself as he returned to his seat.
He’d had to negotiate. He’d wanted to go straight to a club but Haydn had
shown every sign of plunging headlong into outright hysteria at the very idea,
so they’d compromised with a coffee and a glass of brandy sitting outside one
of the cafes at the west end of the Rue–St–Andre–des–Arts. This was where
seven streets converged and the full mad circus show of Parisian road skills
is displayed day and night in all its heart–stopping glory.
Alban had had the taxi drop them at the St–Michel end so they could walk the
length of the street. This was one of Alban’s favourite places in Paris, in
the whole world, and if Haydn didn’t at least start to fall in love with the
city after this then the fucker had no soul and Alban would personally take
him firmly by the collar and belt,

138
march him up the Mazarine and drop the sorry witless wazzock off the Pont des
Arts to let him swim home to the fucking Ritz.
‘Cheers.’
‘Sante.’
‘So, what then? What is the problem?’
‘You really want to know?’
‘Haydn, we’ve kind of been through this. Stop it.’
‘Well, okay. It’s . . . it’s the impossibility of ever getting an order just
right.’ He grinned quickly at Alban and drank deeply from his brandy.
‘What?’
Haydn coughed and then said, ‘I am perfectly serious. Every time I place an
order, I feel I’m failing. You either order too much of –well, anything – and
stock ends up sitting on shelves or pallets in warehouses – costing money,
obviously – or you don’t order sufficient and have to reorder, which is
inefficient, and also costs extra. Two production runs cost more than one run
of the same combined total. Don’t you see?’ Haydn seemed like he really needed
Alban to understand. And also slightly pitiful.
Alban looked at his cousin. Haydn’s nervous, tense, slightly flushed face
was illuminated by the lights of the cafe at their back and those of the
surrounding restaurants, bars and shops, the nearby streetlights, the red glow
of a recently ignited gas heater and the headlights of the closest
eccentrically parked hatchback.
‘For this you run away from your family, you cause your poor mother no end
of worry and run up a hotel bill that would feed a–’
‘You’re sounding like you’re pretending to be Jewish.’
‘That was deliberate, Haydn. My final word was going to be "Oy". Thanks for
spoiling it.’
Haydn looked alarmed. ‘You’re not anti–Semitic, are you?’
‘No I’m not,’ Alban said indignantly. ‘I’m positively pro–Semitic. And
anyway, the fucking Palestinians are a Semitic people. Now–’
‘You’re anti–Palestinian?’ Haydn yelped.
‘Oh, dear God,’ Alban moaned, putting his face in his hands. ‘No!’
139
he said loudly. ‘Do you want to see my subscription details for
Medical Aid for Palestine, or what?’ ‘Sorry’
‘Will you shut up and let us get back to the point?’ ‘All right, all right.
I’m sorry. Don’t shout at me.’ Alban took a deep breath. ‘You skedaddled
because you, because you . . . You never get orders for bits of games right,
not precisely right, not to, to the individual unit? Is that what you’re
saying?’
‘Broadly, yes,’ Haydn said, looking relieved to have negotiated the
minefield of Middle Eastern sympathies and to be back on the relatively safer
ground of his own neuroses.
Alban placed one hand flat on the little metal table and looked away,
shaking his head. ‘Oy,’ he said softly. He looked at Haydn. He shrugged
resignedly. ‘It’s just the right word, dude.’
Haydn continued to prove resistant to the idea of going to a proper club with
people and music and dancing and such. Alban knew of at least two which were
about fifty–fifty straight/gay – to allow Haydn the choice without seeming to
impose it upon him – but the guy just wasn’t playing ball at all. Instead they
walked a meandering path along the route of the St–Germain, sometimes on the
boulevard itself, sometimes on smaller streets leading off it, parallel with
it and leading back to it again. They walked slowly; Haydn’s bulk and short
legs meant he was a natural waddler, and he seemed to get out of breath

climbing a kerb.
‘I don’t care to go to these places,’ Haydn tried to explain. ‘They’re too
loud, too crowded.’
‘That’d be all the people in them, causing that.’
‘Also, they’re too smoky.’
‘Some of them can be,’ Alban conceded. ‘Others have these things called air
conditioning or just extractor fans.’
‘Everybody smokes,’ Haydn said, glancing at two young men as they passed on
the pavement, both talking loudly and gesturing with glowing Gitanes.
140
‘Haydn, this is Paris. It’s practically compulsory.’
‘I just don’t like being in large groups of people I don’t know. It’s just
not me.’
‘Oh, jeez, Haydn, you just need to meet people. Young attractive people who
might want to meet you.’
‘I’m not attractive,’ Haydn said. ‘And please don’t try to pretend
otherwise. I refuse to indulge in that sort of self–deceit.’
‘You’re young. That’s halfway there.’
‘Huh, yeah. Plus I look older than I am.’
‘Some people like a wise head on young shoulders,’ Alban said, then laughed.
‘Or better still, between their legs.’
‘Oh, please.’
‘Haydn; people far less interesting, who are actively ugly in a serious
claw–your–own–eyes–out–now kind of way, rather than just not six–packed
buff–gods, get laid every day, sometimes by very good–looking women indeed.
And men, for that matter. I’m totally serious. It’s just a question of giving
yourself the chance, of not being so terrified of rejection you don’t ask in
the first place, and of having just the tiny, teeny–weeniest little bit of
self–confidence.’ Alban held up one index finger and thumb, tips barely
separated, to help his cousin visualise the exact degree of teeny–weenyness
they were talking about here.
‘Alban,’ Haydn said. ‘I don’t like being with lots of other people,
especially strangers. Don’t you understand?’
Alban shook his head, then blew out a breath. ‘No. Well, yes. If you don’t,
you don’t. I’m sure we could find, you know, a less crowded environment.
Someplace quiet, where there might be–’
‘Alban,’ Haydn said, stopping on the pavement. Alban turned to race him.
They were outside a garden in front of a small church, a little patch of
darkness in the commercial glitz of St–Germain. Haydn crossed his arms. ‘Do
you know what?’
Alban nodded emphatically and said, ‘Yes.’
‘Eh?’ Haydn looked confused. ‘What?’
Alban waved one hand regally. ‘Sorry. Just fuckin’ with you. What?’
141
‘I’ll tell you what,’ Haydn said. ‘I know what you’re saying, I know what
you’re – what you’re angling at. What you – where you want to get me, or at
least the sort of place you want to get me, and why. I know what you think and
what the family thinks and what people say behind my back. I am not fucking
stupid. And do you know the truth?’
Alban said nothing. Cousin Haydn actually sounded angry. Alban was
determined to treat this as a positive development unless and until it ended
with him getting biffed on the nose.
Haydn’s eyes opened wide. He leaned fractionally towards Alban. Alban leaned
back a slightly smaller fraction, still alive to the nascent nose–biffing
possibilities inherent in the current situation. Haydn said, ‘I don’t
particularly like sex.’ Having said it, Haydn drew himself upright and raised

his chins defiantly.
Alban felt the need to cross his own arms. He kind of wanted to lean back –
way back – as well, but thought that would look too much like he was taking
the mick, so he contented himself with biting the corner of his mouth and
leaning to one side, as though there was a young, thin tree directly in
between them and he was trying to look round it.
‘Really?’ he asked, frowning mightily.
‘It’s like it’s a crime or something,’ Haydn said, and Alban had the
impression his cousin was about to start crying. ‘People treat you as though
you’re mad, or it’s a disease they might catch, or as if it’s some sort of
criticism of them, of everybody else . . . Some even assume it’s just a line,
some sort of ridiculous, pathetic tactic to get them to sleep with you. The
truth is I’ve had sex. I’ve tried it. Tried it several times, in fact, and I
just don’t see the attraction. It’s messy, it’s undignified, it’s hot and
sweaty and, and – animalistic’ Haydn was looking down at the pavement by now,
as though he was telling the sidewalk what he thought of it. From the corner
of either eye, Alban could see other pedestrians giving them a pretty wide
clearance zone. Haydn was still speaking: ‘It hardly lasts any time, you make
a complete fool of yourself in front of another person and then
142
you have to make embarrassing small talk for ever afterwards and the whole
fucking world is just completely bloody obsessed with it _ it’s ridiculous,
it’s preposterous, it’s demeaning, it’s just so . . . ridiculous!’ He looked
up at Alban, appearing quite angry, breathing hard, arms still crossed over
his heaving chest. He reached up quickly and smoothed some of his comb–over
back into place and then crossed his arms defensively again.
‘Hmm,’ Alban said thoughtfully. This was worse than he’d thought. He cleared
his throat. ‘You have been doing it with the right, ahm . . .’ he scratched
behind one ear.
‘Sex?’ Haydn said, almost spitting. ‘Gender? Type of person?’
‘Well,’ Alban said, actually feeling slightly embarrassed. ‘Yeah.’
‘Yes,’ Haydn said. ‘I find women quite attractive in a theoretical sort of
way. They’re smaller, more efficient, better packaged. I just don’t have any
overwhelming desire to penetrate them with any part of my own body’
Alban wasn’t sure this was at all the right thing to say, but he was drunk
and he knew he was going to say it anyway, so he did. ‘You absolutely sure?
Haydn, I’ve seen you looking at waiters and guys in the street. Especially
good–looking guys–’
‘I look at men like that because I wish that I was them,’ Haydn said,
suddenly bitter. ‘I look at them with longing because I long to be like them.
Good–looking and assured and attractive to women.’ He shrugged. ‘Or men. Just
to somebody’ He shook his head, looking frustrated at his own inability to
explain himself fully. ‘Though, and please believe me in this, most of the
time – almost all the time, honestly – I just don’t care. I don’t miss it, I
don’t feel deprived or sad about it. In fact, in myself I’m perfectly fine;
it’s the reactions and the prejudices and the, the stupidities of other people
that distress me.’ He blew out a breath after these words, like punctuation.
Specifically, a very full full stop.
Alban thought about all this. He looked up at the under–lit clouds above the
city. Traffic roared behind him. He looked back at Haydn. ‘Fucking hell,’ he
said.
143
‘If it’s any, oh, I don’t know; not consolation,’ Haydn said, glancing away
for a moment. He started again. ‘If it makes you feel better, I have sort of
tried with a man. It really is absolutely not any of your bloody business at
all, and it had better not go any further, but I have tried it. I tried it as

far as kissing, anyway, and – you know –touching; fondling, you might say.’
Haydn closed his eyes at the memory. ‘That was the single most embarrassing
incident in my life,’ he said with a shudder. He looked at Alban. ‘And you?’
he asked.
A bit aggressively, Alban thought.
‘Me what?’ he asked, confused.
Are you sure you’re doing it with the right gender?’
Alban frowned.
‘You have something of a reputation as a ladies’ man in the family, don’t
you, cuz?’ Haydn said. ‘But how do you know? How can you be sure unless you’ve
tried? Have you tried?’
‘Well, bit like you,’ Alban admitted, scratching behind one ear again.
‘Youthful fumblings.’ He laughed. ‘Fucking hell, Haydn; I went further than
you! I was actually wanked off and I’ve had another guy’s cock in my mouth.’
He looked thoughtful. ‘Never came.’ He sounded wistful. Always put that down
to drink and lack of technique. Anyway’ He cleared his throat. ‘Tried. Just
not me. Like you say.’
‘Well, there you are then.’ Haydn sighed.
Alban made a clicking noise with his mouth. ‘I think we need more drink.’
They found a little dive bar – smoky but just about bearable –somewhere near
the Invalides, the Eiffel Tower visible above the buildings beyond the
gardens, golden–lit, searchlight revolving at its summit. The bar was perfect;
almost a cliche. There was even a trio of guys on a small stage in one corner
playing jazz. Alban had to stifle a laugh and look around as they got to the
bottom of the steps, claiming to be trying to spot hep cats dressed in black
polo–necks and wearing berets. ‘Only in Paris,’ he breathed as they walked
144
to a table. He made sure it was near an air duct, to keep Haydn happy.
She came down the steps ten minutes later, dressed in black; mid–length
skirt, blouse, a small jacket like a bullfighter’s, glittering with detail.
She was medium height, with a figure the svelte side of full, and long hair
that was dark, dark red. She looked vaguely Asiatic, but was somehow not
immediately placeable even roughly anywhere between Istanbul and Tokyo. And
her face was one that even a pessimist might grant could stop wars; exquisite,
serene, flawless. Alban immediately tried to fit her into his Top Ten Most
Beautiful Women I’ve Ever Seen With My Own Eyes list. That is, he immediately
tried to fit her into his TTMBWIESWMOE list anywhere except number one,
because he’d met Kathleen Turner once on a flight to LA with his dad when he’d
been sixteen, shortly after he’d seen The Man with Two Brains, and he’d sworn
to himself the Kathleen he’d met that day would keep the number–one spot for
ever, no matter what. It didn’t work.
She went to the bar, ordered a glass of red wine and stood there, perfectly
casually poised, watching the jazz group. They returned the favour, as did
most of the men in the bar, plus the majority of the women. It took about one
minute for the first man to approach her. She smiled a little, held up one
hand, shook her head. Alban tore his gaze away.
Even Haydn was looking at her. ‘Fucking hell,’ he said, ‘what a beautiful
woman.’
Alban did a double take, then returned his gaze to the woman at the bar. The
first rebuffed guy returned to his seat, rejected but still looking happy,
almost blessed. Alban thought about taking a crack himself. Hell, he was
currently uncommitted, she was stunningly beautiful, and the fact she’d
probably say no was almost irrelevant. Because you never knew. Damn it, it
would more or less be rude not to. But he’d be abandoning Haydn, even if only
briefly, symbolically. That wouldn’t be too polite.
145

Alban leaned over to Haydn, not taking his eyes off the beauty at the bar.
‘Would you mind terribly if I–’
‘Oh, God,’ Haydn said. ‘Will you just control yourself? Just because you’ve
admitted you’ve sucked another man’s penis that doesn’t mean you have to
over–compensate by throwing yourself at the first unobtainable woman who
drifts into view.’
Alban glanced. ‘You don’t know she’s unobtainable.’
‘Oh, get real,’ Haydn breathed. He looked round, sighing. ‘Do you think
they’re actually going to serve us at any point?’
‘But you wouldn’t mind? I mean, you’re right, I’ll probably be straight
back, but–’
‘Can’t you just leave her alone? That woman probably spends her entire life
batting away guys like you. Completely fed up with it, I’d bet. Give her a
break.’
‘Oh; there goes another one,’ Alban said, as a second man left his table and
went up to her. She turned him away gracefully, too. Alban looked at Haydn.
‘Look, it’s paying her a compliment. And the fact she has to do it all the
time just means she has lots of practice; water off a duck’s back.’
Alban, you’ve said yourself she’ll almost certainly turn you down, so why
bother?’
Alban was still drinking her in. She was looking round the room, sipping
from her glass, face currently turning away from him. Alban adjusted his chair
a quarter–turn to get a better look at her without cricking his neck. ‘You’re
missing the point,’ he told Haydn. ‘Even if the chance is one in a thousand or
one in a million, she might say yes. And what have I got to lose?’
‘Your dignity?’ Haydn suggested. ‘You’ll be humiliated.’
‘It’s just a knock–back, Haydn. It’s not the end of the fucking world. And
do you know what?’ He turned back to look at his cousin, who made a resigned,
What? kind of face. ‘That woman,’ Alban said, ‘is so beautiful it will still
be a positive experience. It’ll be a privilege to exchange even just a few
words with her; a fucking honour to be knocked back by a creature that
stunning.’ He nodded
146
for emphasis and tapped on the table with one middle finger just in case there
was any remaining shred of doubt regarding the matter. ‘I’m perfectly
serious.’
‘Yes, I’m somewhat gathering that,’ Haydn said.
Alban looked back at the woman. Her gaze swept round their end of the room,
hesitated on him, producing a brief, uncertain smile, then went on. Whereupon
she turned back to watch the jazz band.
Alban felt himself do a kind of internal reality check, assuring himself as
well as he could that what seemed to have just happened, actually had.
Then he breathed, ‘Did you see that?’
‘I think I did,’ Haydn said, voice also hushed.
‘That was directed at me, not you, wasn’t it?’ Alban said. He glanced behind
them. Of course there wasn’t anybody else behind them; there was just the
brick wall.
‘It certainly wasn’t directed at me,’ Haydn said.
‘Well, fuck it; that’s that,’ Alban said, standing. He made his way to the
bar.
‘Best of luck,’ Haydn whispered.
She was called Kalpana. She was some astounding combination of north Indian,
Sri Lankan, Native American and Japanese – a mixture of ethnic cues in the
bone structure and surface textures of her face that defied any easy racial
stereotyping. Planet beautiful; basically that was where she was from. Her
hair was the colour of copper beech, her skin like velvet, a moleskin softness

somewhere between pearly grey and the brown of a polished conker. Her eyes
were hazel, heavily flecked with green. And she moved like she wasn’t made
from the ordinary stuff of common–or–garden humanity; she moved like she was
made of some exotic matter from a dimension composed exclusively of pure
sexual radiance, like she came from another universe, an existence where the
usual clunky physical laws that governed movement and the getting of clumps of
matter from one
147
place to another simply didn’t apply. Fuck me sideways, she’s the luxury
edition, Alban thought, watching her rear as she swivelled and stepped her way
between the tables, heading for the one by the wall where Haydn Wopuld was
staring goggle–eyed at her.
Alban felt the gaze of a very large proportion of the clientele on him as he
escorted her away from the bar. He felt himself blush. This was crazy; he was
more embarrassed to have succeeded in gaining her attention than he would have
been to have got knocked back like the other two guys, which really had been
entirely what he’d been expecting, right up until that hesitating glance and
that tiny, slightly confused–looking smile. Hell’s teeth; even after it.
‘Kalpana, this is my cousin Haydn,’ he said, pulling out a seat for her.
‘Pleased to meet you,’ she said, holding out her hand before she sat down.
Her voice was soft and made Haydn think of an otter sleekly slipping without a
ripple into a sunny brook. He shut his mouth, blinked and then finally got
round to shaking her hand. He didn’t quite achieve anything intelligible by
way of greeting, but made instead a sort of gagging, gargling noise which
would have to suffice.
She sat. If a chair could faint with pleasure, Alban thought, that one would
have.
Alban sat, too, looking from Haydn to Kalpana. ‘There’s an explanation,’ he
explained.
‘There is?’ Haydn squeaked.
Alban nodded. ‘We know each other.’
‘You do?’ Haydn said, ‘and you forgot?’
‘Your cousin was very drunk,’ Kalpana said, smiling. A waiter materialised
and took their order. Alban suggested only the best champagne in the place
would do, and nobody disagreed.
‘Mumbai,’ Alban said to Haydn while looking at Kalpana.
‘I’m a journalist,’ she told Haydn. ‘I was writing an article about the
politics of games. Alban gave me an interview.’
148
‘Did we prearrange this interview?’ Alban asked. ‘And I turned up drunk? I’m
never normally that unprofessional.’
‘We hadn’t arranged anything. You rather insisted on giving me the
interview. I’d already talked to . . . One of your uncles, I think. It was my
belief at the time that I already had what I needed. You begged to differ.’
‘Oh dear,’ Alban said. ‘Sorry.’
That’s quite all right. You were very funny.’
Alban narrowed his eyes. ‘Did I in any way try it on with you?’
‘Yes, you most certainly did.’ She smiled broadly, displaying perfect teeth.
‘That was funny, too.’
She had been here for a year, writing about Paris and the French and sometimes
covering the European Parliament for a variety of Indian magazines and
newspapers. She could write in Japanese, too, with care and a good dictionary,
and sometimes sold stuff to Japanese publications. She was leaving Paris in a
couple of days, to go back to India to be married. To a very sweet American.
They would live near Seattle, looking out over the Sound. She was kind of

wandering round the city over these last few days, saying goodbye to places
she had good memories of, sometimes with friends, sometimes alone.
The champagne arrived. They toasted her forthcoming marriage.
They dropped off a happy, tipsy Haydn at the Ritz. Alban was staying at the
George V. Her apartment was in Belleville; she’d take the cab on to there.
At his hotel, the doorman opened the taxi door for Alban, who turned to
Kalpana on the seat beside him and smiled, holding out his hand. ‘Kalpana,’ he
said, ‘it’s been an absolute pleasure.’
She was staring straight ahead, not looking at him. She seemed to have
sucked her lips right into her mouth. She looked down at his offered hand,
then out at the waiting doorman.
Finally, she looked into his eyes. She took his hand in both of
149
hers. ‘Listen,’ she began, then sucked air through her teeth, leaned forward
and addressed the doorman. ‘Pardon, monsieur.’
‘Pas de probleme, madame,’ Alban heard the man say.
She was still looking into his eyes. He saw her swallow. ‘Ah,’ she said. She
swallowed again. ‘This is – that is, I’d never – oh dear. Ah – if, ah . . .’
She squeezed his hand.
He lifted his left hand and touched it very gently to her lips. ‘Kalpana,
whatever it is you’re even thinking of suggesting, it’s going to be perfect by
me.’
She smiled, then looked down and sat back, still smiling. He pulled his hand
gently away, took out his wallet and handed a large note to the doorman, who
grinned, might even have winked, and shut the taxi door again, giving the roof
a quick double slap.
He never saw her again, never even tried to contact her – they’d agreed they
never would – and he had always assumed that she went on to marry her nice,
unutterably lucky American guy and live happily in Washington State for what
he hoped would be the rest of a long and exquisitely happy life, but the next
evening, after they’d said goodbye, while he was in the taxi being driven away
from her apartment, he thought, That was probably the best eighteen hours I’ll
ever spend in my entire life. This did not in any way make him sad.
He supposed not having to use condoms might have made it even better, but
then that was just the way things had to be. Nothing else he could think of
could have made the experience any better at all.
He saw Haydn once more before he left Paris; they stood in Notre–Dame soaking
up the echoes, rode the Metro and had a wander round Montmartre, a district
Alban had always rather dismissed as too touristy but discovered that day he
quite liked. They sat on the steps at Sacre Coeur, eating ice creams.
‘I bet you’re going to find you’re just not looking at it the right way,’
Alban told Haydn.
150
‘You think so?’ Haydn was sitting forward, legs splayed, holding his tie
back with one hand so that his ice cream wouldn’t stain anything.
Alban lounged, stretched back, watching sunlit girls and licking
lasciviously. ‘Yeah. I knew this guy once who had the neatest, cleanest office
you’ve ever seen; real place–for–everything fixation. You know those tiny
hand–held vacuum gadgets you get for keyboards? He had two – in case one broke
down. The thing was, he hated anything being out of place, even momentarily.
He wanted his office so neat and tidy he couldn’t actually do any work in it;
he’d convinced himself he’d brought it to such a peak of perfect tidiness even
opening a drawer would spoil it. It was like the place was frozen. He wouldn’t

even have a litter bin in it because that was like some polluting hole of
untidiness in itself.’
Alban looked at Haydn, but he wasn’t responding, just frowning at his ice
cream.
‘But the litter bin was the key. I told him, Have a fucking litter bin; it’s
the sacrificial anode, the mousetrap; where all the untidiness gets sucked
away to. In the bin, it’s all chaos and no ordering is needed, in fact any
attempt to organise it misunderstands its function.’
Haydn still wasn’t replying, but he seemed to be listening.
‘It’s like a good filing system always has a Miscellaneous section,’ Alban
said. ‘It’s not a failure to have some things that can’t be filed in exactly
the right file, it’s just acknowledging something about how things work in the
real world. That’s what Miscellaneous is for and the alternative isn’t more
accuracy, it’s less, because you end up overstretching definitions or creating
a fresh file for every single thing, each unit, and that’s not filing, that’s
naming. Miscellaneous is the definition that makes sense of all the others. In
the same way, a litter bin is the heart of tidiness.’
He went back to licking his ice cream. Haydn looked round at him, still
keeping his tie pressed close to his chest. ‘Did it work?’ he asked. ‘This
incisive piece of analysis. Did your friend see the
151
light and become once again a happy, productive cog in the office machine?’
Alban had to decide quickly – he’d been making the whole thing up – so he
did and said, ‘Yeah.’ He was wearing a pair of dark glasses, and he lifted
them over his eyes for a moment to smile out at Haydn. ‘Yes, it did. Good,
eh?’ He put the glasses back again.
Haydn had looked unconvinced, at the time.
A week later, though, he was back in London. Alban got some of the credit
for this. Personally he thought the guy had just needed a holiday.
‘Hmm. So, Alban, are you still a champagne socialist?’ Kennard asks.
They are at dinner in Fielding’s parents’ place in Malison Street: Kennard
and Renee playing host to Alban and Fielding (Haydn’s here too, but then he
still lives at home). Nina – Fielding’s partner – was invited but she has some
class she has to attend this evening. Probably Mayan Astrology for Cats or
something. She and Fielding live in Islington.
Fielding’s got Alban to wear an old suit of his. Al’s scrubbed up all right,
really, though patently a tie was too much to hope for. This champagne
socialist stuff strikes Fielding as a load of crap. Alban, when he worked for
the firm, took his yearly bonus and company car. Chopping down trees doesn’t
make you a leftie, and now he just seems to like playing at being poor.
Al glances at his glass of Aussie Shiraz (trust Dad, Fielding thinks, to ask
over the wrong drink).
‘I used to be a champagne socialist,’ Al says.
‘So.’ Kennard’s eyebrows rise. ‘You mean you’re not any more?’
‘No,’ Alban says. ‘I’m older now. I’m a vintage champagne socialist.’ He
raises the glass. ‘Cheers.’
Kennard blinks. Haydn smiles.
‘So, where are you working at the moment, Alban?’ Renee asks. Over the
years,
Kennard’s wife has
slowly developed the skills
152
required to cover for her husband’s mistakes, gaffes and stumped silences.
‘I’m not, Renee,’ Alb an tells her. ‘I’m unemployed.’
‘Between jobs,’ Kennard says, nodding. ‘Hmm.’ Kennard is not long turned
sixty–two, though he seems somewhat older. He has put on some weight over the
last year, lost the remains of his hair and developed impressive if at the

same time rather offputting jowls. Remarkably bad teeth. He’s company Managing
Director, which sounds quite impressive. He is oddly good at talking to small
children and politicians.
‘Between jobs,’ Alban agrees.
‘And are you seeing anyone at the moment?’ Renee asks Alban. Fielding’s
mother is quite slight.
‘Not really,’ he says. He catches Fielding looking at him.
‘Ah, hah,’ Kennard says.
Alban’s got a very bonnie lassie in Glasgow,’ Fielding tells them. ‘She’s a
mathematician. A professor.’
A what, dear?’
A professor.’
‘Oh. That was what you said.’
‘She’s a professor of mathematics,’ Fielding tells her, just so there’s no
doubt about it.
‘Really?’ Renee says.
‘Dark horse,’ Kennard tells nobody in particular.
Renee looks impressed. She turns from Fielding to Alban. And will you be
bringing her to the bash at Garbadale?’
‘She might give me a lift there, but she won’t be staying,’ Alban tells
Renee. ‘She may go off and climb some mountains.’
‘Climb mountains?’ Renee looks astonished.
‘Oh, yes, Garbadale,’ Kennard says, as though just remembering they’re all
supposed to reconvene there in about ten days’ time. Which is not impossible.
‘She climbs mountains?’ Renee says. And she’s a professor?’ She pauses, then
laughs that shrill laugh of hers, hand in front of her
153
face. ‘She sounds like a man!’ She looks at Haydn. ‘Haydn. Don’t
you think? She sounds like a man!’
‘I couldn’t possibly say, Mother,’ Haydn says, and looks at Al with
a tiny shake of the head as though apologising for Renee.
‘Climbs mountains, eh?’ Kennard says. ‘Hmm, there’s a thing.’ This torture
only lasts another hour or so and then they’re free
to follow Kennard upstairs to the loft and his train set and get some
talking and persuading done.
‘Alban thinks, as I do, that we should keep the family and the firm together,’
Fielding tells Kennard. He glances over at Al, who is still looking out over
the train set. The display is at waist level, mounted on a stout base of
two–by–fours. It fills most of the loft, with a central spine of forested
hills and alpine–looking mountains made from papier mache dominating the
centre. The mountains are riddled with tunnels and the peaks of the higher
ones come within a half–metre of the inverted V of the loft’s ceiling. ‘That’s
a fair enough thing to say, isn’t it, Alban?’
‘If it was up to me alone, I wouldn’t sell to Spraint Corp,’ Alban agrees.
‘Dare say you’d rather have a workers’ cooperative, wouldn’t you, Alban?’
Kennard says. ‘Hmm?’ He’s cleaning the underside of one of the locomotives
with a small paintbrush.
‘Chance would be a fine thing, Kennard,’ Al says. He sees a little switch on
the edge of the layout. ‘What happens if you flick this?’ he says, pointing.
Kennard looks over. ‘Try it and see.’
Alban flicks the switch. A little cable car starts to whirr its way from the
station at the foot of the layout’s central mountain and make its way towards
the summit, a good couple of metres higher. ‘Ah ha,’ he says. He folds his
arms, inspects the rest of the layout.
Kennard turns another control and a one–carriage funicular train begins to
click its way up a cogged track set at forty–five degrees on an only slightly
smaller mountain. Meanwhile a couple of other

154
trains – a TEE and a mixed goods – whirr round and round the whole layout,
contra–rotating.
Fielding can remember when Kennard was still building all this. He’s never
seen his father happier or more energised. The layout has essentially stayed
the same for the last fifteen years or more, and is still the one place
Kennard seems to be truly at home and relaxed. It was important they were
here, in this place, to be able to talk to him like this.
‘We both think it would be a terrible waste, and a shame, if we sold up to
Spraint,’ Fielding tells Kennard. ‘After everything that Henry built up, and
Bert and Win continued and built upon, it would be an act of vandalism to tear
it all down.’
‘Wouldn’t really be tearing it down, would it?’ Kennard asks, holding the
loco up to the light on its back, almost tenderly. There are strip lights
fastened to the underside of the roof trusses all over the loft.
‘It would be tearing us away from our heritage, Daddy,’ Fielding tells him.
‘Spraint will be able to do what they want with the game and you have to
assume having paid good money for our name they’ll try to make it all work,
but it still might not. These things just don’t, not always. What is certain
is that we’ll be separated from the one thing that’s made us who we are as a
family for the last century and a quarter. I know this matters to you, Daddy.
I don’t want us all to sleepwalk into something we’ll regret later. I just
want you to think about it.’ Fielding looks at Alban. We both do.’
Almost miraculously, Al plays along. ‘It is a crunch point,’ he says. ‘Once
it’s done, that’s it.’
‘So we all need to think,’ Fielding says. ‘It’s not just us – it’s
everybody, Daddy.’
‘I have shares, too,’ Haydn says. He’s here, though sat in a small chair in
one corner, reading a book.
‘They all count,’ Fielding agrees. He looks at Haydn. ‘You’re still a Don’t
Know, aren’t you, Haydn?’
‘No, I’m a Not Telling You.’ Haydn looks up briefly and blinks at
155
them. ‘Though Spraint have said they want me to stay on in charge of
production, if they do take over.’ He looks down to his book again. ‘Mind
you,’ he mutters, ‘the word they used was "when".’
‘We can’t just let them roll over us like this, Daddy,’ Fielding tells
Kennard.
Kennard puts the loco carefully back on the outermost track, then bends and
– using a little jeweller’s screwdriver – hooks the engine up to its train of
carriages. ‘Have to put up a fight, eh?’ he says.
‘I think we must,’ Fielding tells him. He waves at the whole layout.
‘Otherwise it’s just destroying everything we’ve spent so long building up.’
‘Hmm.’
‘So,’ Fielding says. ‘What do you think, Kennard?’
‘Hmm?’
‘Which way do you think you might vote, Daddy?’ Fielding hasn’t dared ask
his father so directly before, and Kennard has never volunteered any sign at
all. This is a man who abstained in the vote on the 25–per–cent sale to
Spraint back in ‘99. Fielding honestly has no idea what he’ll say.
‘Hmm.’ Kennard squints at the top of the layout’s highest mountain, where
the tiny cable car has just snicked home into the summit station. ‘Think about
it,’ he says. He looks at Fielding, then at Alban. ‘You both say No, hmm?’
‘That’s right, Daddy’
Al just nods.
‘Hmm.’

‘In a way, none of this is real.’
Sophie turned in his arms, looked into his eyes. ‘What do you mean?’
He waved his free hand around. ‘That cliff face, this soil, these rhodies.
None of this belongs here.’
She turned on to her front, put her chin in one hand. ‘How come?’
‘Old Henry, the great, mythical great–grandfather, our glorious
156
founder, he brought all the rocks and the soil and the plants from Scotland,
from Garbadale. You been there?’
‘Uh–huh. Just once. Rained a lot.’
‘Yeah. Anyway, I’ve looked it up. It was 1903. He had thousands of tons of
rock quarried out of a mountain near the big house there and shipped to
Bristol, then smaller boats brought it along the coast to a special pier they
had built down by the river, then traction engines hauled it all up to here.
That’s when the ford in the river at the bottom of the garden dates from.’
‘The rock was brought from Scotland?’ She was playing with a long lock of
her red hair, shining in a stray beam of sunlight finding its way through the
enveloping canopy of broad, dark leaves. She wound the hair round her index
finger, let it unwind again. ‘Why?’
Alban shrugged. ‘Because he could. There’s rock like this everywhere; loads
on Exmoor. He just wanted this stuff from Garbadale called Durness limestone,
wanted it here. Had it made into that little cliff, right there.’
She turned and looked at the low cliff of great, slabby rocks which was
visible beyond the western limit of the giant rhododendron bush they were
lying inside. A breeze disturbed the ragged umbrella of leaves around them.
They had been here about ten minutes, kissing and caressing each other,
though not yet to any sort of climax. They did that sometimes – just pulled
away a little, took time off to talk, get their breath back, before they
started again and, usually, brought each other to orgasm with their fingers.
She had taken him in her mouth once, in a bedroom at a friend’s party in
Minehead a few days earlier, but he’d thrust too eagerly, making her gag, and
she hadn’t wanted to repeat the experience.
This would be their last week together; the summer holiday was near its end
and they’d both be heading off to school soon, him back in London.
The beam of sunlight striking her hair disappeared as clouds
157
covered the sun, and the broad tent of cover under the spreading branches
became a little darker.
They talked a lot, too, about the mess the world was in, about music they
loved and hated, about how they’d organise things with their parents so they
could see each other again soon and, frequently, about TV programmes and
films, about war and famine, about what they expected to do with their lives –
careers, ambitions – and about whether they wanted children. Sometimes they
both assumed they’d be together for the rest of their lives, and get married,
or not, and have lots of children, or at least two. Other times they talked in
a way that tacitly acknowledged they would never be more than cousins who’d
had an adolescent sort of affair, and would meet up at family events in the
future – weddings, funerals, big birthdays – probably each with their own
partners and children, sharing a conspiratorial look and a smile across a
crowded room and maybe having just one dance together, holding each other,
discreetly remembering.
They didn’t know. They could not be sure, not even of themselves, and
playing it out by talking about it was the only way they had to deal with the
uncertainties.
‘He brought the soil from Garbadale, too, same way,’ Alban told her. She was

sitting up now, peering through the green gloom at the convincing–looking
cliff. They both wore jeans; his T–shirt was the best they could do for a
blanket. She still wore her blouse, though he’d undone the buttons and it was
hanging open at the front. He knelt behind her, putting his hands to her
breasts and cupping them, then nuzzling his nose through the dark, fragrant
mass of her hair and kissing the nape of her neck. She pressed back against
him.
‘Why bring the soil?’ she asked. He bit her neck very gently and she
shuddered.
‘That made a bit more sense; lots of peat in it – very acidic. Let them grow
different types of plants.’ He ran his open mouth down to her shoulder, tips
of his teeth leaving faint red marks on her skin. He pulled back to get some
of her hair out of his mouth. ‘Plenty of peat on Exmoor, too, though. Must
have–’
158
‘Do that again,’ she said.
He did that again.
After a while she rose back up against him and then turned so that they were
kneeling face–to–face, and kissed him very deeply for a long time, before
pulling away and saying, ‘Listen; at Jill’s party the other night?’
‘Uh–huh?’ he said.
‘I bought some condoms from her.’
His heart leapt. He stared at her. ‘You did?’ he said, uncertain. Mouth dry.
She nodded. Her eyes looked very wide and she was still breathing hard. She
quickly wiped some hair from her mouth then held his face in both her hands.
‘So,’ he said, then had to stop to swallow. ‘Does that mean you want to?’
She nodded again. ‘Suppose it must.’ Her gaze searched his eyes. ‘You?’
‘Oh, fuck,’ he said, letting himself go partly limp, as though he was about
to faint or something. ‘Sorry. Yes. Oh, yes. Come on, you know.’
‘I was saving them for our last day,’ she explained, talking quickly,
urgently, ‘when your parents are here, but that’s mad; there’ll be more people
around and anyway it’s probably when my period starts.’
‘Oh,’ he said. ‘Right.’
‘Only one problem.’
‘What?’
‘I left them in the house.’ She twisted one corner of her mouth, raised both
eyebrows. ‘Eek.’
He reached for his T–shirt. ‘Where are they?’
She put her hand on his. ‘Too long to explain. I’ll go.’
He helped her do up the buttons on her blouse.
‘You sure about this?’ he asked her.
‘Positive.’
159
‘You’re serious?’
Tup.’
She kissed him quickly, stood. She looked up and around in the half–light,
hair swinging to and fro. ‘Raining,’ she said.
He listened, too. He could hear a pattering noise. ‘Oh, yeah.’
‘Back soon.’ She pushed out of the bush. He heard her running on the brick
path.
He lay back, chest heaving. He looked up at the pattern of light and shade
produced by the glimpses of grey sky and the dark underside of the broad
leaves. It was finally going to happen. He sat up. Was it? What if she changed
her mind? What if somebody at the house told her to do something she couldn’t
get out of or made her go somewhere, or if someone had found the condoms
wherever she’d stashed them, or what if it was all just a joke, and she was

off to lie in a bath, or sit on a couch in the sunroom, eating chocolates,
reading magazines and giggling at how she’d left him?
He got to his feet and paced, ducking his head beneath the great bare looped
branches of the bush, stepping over an exposed root. No, she wasn’t like that.
Some of her friends played practical jokes on each other and teased each other
all the time, but one of the things he thought was great about her was she
didn’t take part in any of that. She might laugh with the others, but she
didn’t like being cruel. So, she’d be back. She’d be true to her word. Maybe
he should have a wank first; when they did it properly he’d probably come
really quickly and that would be frustrating for her, wouldn’t it? Maybe he’d
come as he – or she – put the condom on. That would be embarrassing. And a
waste.
He paced back, almost hitting his head on a branch. A few drops of rain got
through the canopy of leaves and hit him on the face. It was quite dark
outside now.
He glanced at his watch. Maybe she wasn’t coming back. How long had she been
gone? He ought to have looked at his watch when she’d left, but he hadn’t
thought. Oh, but it might be going to happen, they might be going to do itl
160
The rain came on harder.
She wasn’t coming. She had never meant to come back. He was fooling himself.
She was fooling him. He was a fool.
He sighed and looked up, shaking his head. He listened to the rain, sounding
quite loud now, all around. The temperature had dropped a little.
Out of the sound of the rain there came the slap–slapping sound of trainers
on a wet brick path. He held his breath. He heard leaves rustle nearby, but
she didn’t appear.
He was about to stick his head out of the bush, but then saw a shadow appear
at the place he’d been going to push the branches aside, and she was there,
wet through, hair plastered to her forehead, grinning. ‘Wrong bloody rhodie
bushV she said. She was breathing hard. The rain–wet blouse stuck to her
breasts.
He stepped forward and took her in his arms.
He did come too quickly. She caught her breath when he first pushed into her,
though she still said it hadn’t hurt. They weren’t even sure the condom was on
right because it had been reluctant to unroll, but it seemed to work. No
blood, which they both thought was good. He got to see her vagina for the
first time, even though everything had become very dark under the canopy of
leaves. He kind of wished for a torch. She thought it was ugly but he thought
it was the single most beautiful thing he had ever seen in his entire life.
They waited, her stroking his back with her hands, listening to the rain,
feeling the odd droplet hit their naked bodies. Twigs and old leaves and bits
of soil, all dampened by the raindrops starting to patter through the canopy,
began to stick to them. They were both beginning to feel cold. Then they did
it again, using a fresh condom.
He wanted to tell her that he loved her, but it was such a corny thing to
say, and this was somehow such a corny time to say it, he didn’t. It took a
bit longer this time. She came a few seconds after he did and this made him
want to cry.
161
They lay pressed together, holding each other in the gloom listening to the
rain.
Two days later his mum and dad appeared for the weekend, to take him back to
Richmond. They brought Grandma Win with them, though mercifully they’d left

the deeply annoying Cory behind with friends.
‘Alban’s a prefect at school, aren’t you, darling?’ Leah said, leaning to
take a mouthful of profiteroles.
‘Leah, please,’ Alban said. He could feel his ears going red. He took a
drink of lemonade. His father laughed silently, sipped his coffee.
At her school,’ Aunt Clara said, ‘Sophie’s a monitor.’
‘Really?’ Grandma Win asked. ‘Isn’t that a kind of lizard?’
Sophie’s eyes widened as she added some sugar to her coffee, but she didn’t
say anything.
Uncle James looked confused.
Grandma Win was a tall, thin, sharp–looking lady who had what Alban’s dad
called Thatcherite hair. She was fifty–nine, which was pretty ancient,
obviously. She’d be sixty in a couple of months. She carried herself in a very
upright, angular sort of way and always looked a little stiff. She wore large
glasses with a graded shade element, even indoors, and often wore mauve
dresses and tweed twin sets. Her voice was usually soft but a little throaty,
which she excused on the grounds that she still liked the occasional
cigarette. It was a very English voice, which always surprised Alban because
she’d lived mostly at Garbadale for twenty years now with Grandad Bert, who
was much older even than Grandma Win and who’d broken his hip last year and
tended to stay there at Garbadale all the time.
‘So, Alban,’ Grandma Win said, ‘do you play Empire! on the computer? What do
you think of it?’
Alban looked up. He glanced at his dad, then at Grandma Win. Ah, no, Gran.
Not really’
162
‘Oh dear,’ she said, frowning. She looked at Andy. ‘Andrew, don’t you let
the boy play?’
‘We’ve decided Alban can use my home word processor for writing essays and
so on. In the coming academic year.’ He glanced at Leah. ‘We’d really rather
he didn’t play computer games.’
Leah nodded.
‘Oh, I see,’ Gran said. ‘Well, I think we have to hope that not all parents
feel the same way about their precious little darlings, or we’ll be bankrupt.’
She emitted a brittle smile and leaned forward towards Alban. ‘I bet you want
to play games like Empire!., though, don’t you, Alban?’
Alban glanced at his dad, who was watching him with a look of wry amusement.
‘They look interesting,’ Alban said, hoping this would keep everybody happy.
He went to take more lemonade but he’d drained the glass. He pretended to
drink anyway, hoping nobody would notice. A last dribble. God, he’d thought
that – now that he’d Done It – this sort of embarrassment would stop. He’d
felt like he’d become a man two days ago, with Sophie, but nobody else seemed
to have noticed any difference; they still treated him like a child. Mind you,
he supposed it was for the best nobody had noticed.
In fact, he’d already played the arcade version of Empire!, and one of his
friends whose dad published a computer magazine had a Nintendo Entertainment
System and a Sega Master System, and there was another version on the NES
which he’d also tried. The arcade version didn’t really work because you
couldn’t make a territory–capturing game fast enough to keep people coming
back with more coins, though the games designers had done their best. The NES
version was better and more suited to the character of the game but looked
clunky, and the board game was still more satisfying. He hadn’t wanted to
mention any of this in case Andy and Leah disapproved. Looking at Grandma Win,
though, he had the oddest impression that she could tell all this. He’d never
sat at
163

the same table as her before, never really talked to her properly. He was
starting to think she was quite a scary old woman.
‘I don’t see what’s wrong with rounders,’ Uncle James said suddenly. ‘Or
rugby. Children watch too much telly as it is.’
‘Oh, James, please,’ Sophie said, over her coffee cup. She shared a brief
look with Alban as her father did his intensely funny turning round in his
seat thing, pretending to look for this person called ‘James’ who must just
have entered the room.
Sophie and Alban had met up twice more and yesterday they had used up their
last two condoms in the tumbledown remains of an old cottage at the southern
boundary of the estate. He’d found an old tarpaulin and cleaned it up and
brought it to spread over the grass and nettles in the centre of the ruined
building, and they’d lain together there. They’d laughed and giggled
afterwards, tickling each other and trying to keep quiet, just in case. These
dinners, afterwards, have almost become fun. They exchange sly looks, catch
each other’s eye and have to suppress smiles, and –once, last night, the way
they were seated – he felt her stroke his leg with her foot. Meanwhile their
parents chatter and natter and clatter their cutlery and talk about all sorts
of rubbish, perfectly oblivious.
This was the third little shared moment they’ve had, this meal.
Alban let the sweet, conspiratorial smile linger just a moment. Then Sophie
looked away. He asked for a coffee and, as he accepted it, glanced at Grandma
Win, to see a hard, narrow–eyed look disappear, like something swallowed in by
her whole face, to be replaced instantly by a thin, glasses–glittering smile.
The next morning, the day before they’re to leave, he goes to Barnstaple with
Andy and Leah and he just walks into a chemist’s and – using money that
usually he’d have spent on sweets or a single – buys a packet of condoms. His
face is scarlet and he can’t look at the assistant, who is young and pretty,
but it doesn’t matter; it’s done. He’s done it. He feels intensely proud. When
he gets out of
164
the chemist’s he wants to jump in the air and shake his arms and scream!
Instead he just makes sure the packet is firmly lodged in a secure jeans
pocket and walks with a grin and a swagger back to where they’ve all arranged
to meet.
‘Really? Alban, you’re marvellous!’ she yells, taking hold of his shoulders
then throwing herself against him, hugging him and kissing him.
They’re down in the long grass on the far side of the old orchard wall, in
the early part of dusk. He’s supposed to be doing some final tidying–up before
the so–called ‘proper’ gardeners start again next week. She’s meant to be
taking a walk down to the river in the last of the light.
She’d thought it would be a sorrowful, frustrating goodbye, but now they
have condoms, and, thankfully, her period still hasn’t started. (He’d
completely forgotten about this, he realises as they start undressing each
other – if he’d remembered he probably wouldn’t have thought it worth the
embarrassment of buying the condoms in the first place.)
‘This is getting better every time,’ he whispers into her ear, a little
after entering her. They’re bucking and jerking away at each other, not always
in sync, but the actual feeling of being joined like this is becoming
something he’s learning to enjoy properly. The first time or two it was all so
quick and complicated. There seemed to be so much going on there was no time
to appreciate it.
‘I love you inside me,’ she whispers back.
Then he feels her stiffen. ‘Ssh!’
‘What?’ he says. Maybe too loudly.
She slaps a hand over his mouth, forces him to lie still on top of her. He

wonders if this is some new sex thing she’d read about –he’s read about a lot
of stuff in Plink’s older brother’s porn mags, and even in Leah’s Cosmopolitan
– but then he realises she’s heard something. He starts to bring his head
further up to look her in the eye, but she pulls it down again.
165
He turns his head a little, smells crushed grass, honeysuckle, hints of
magnolia and pine.
Now he can hear something. Steps on brick, then the noise of one or two
people walking through long grass. Oh fuck, he thinks. Oh fuck. He hears a
murmur, then somebody whispering, ‘Over there.’
Sophie hugs him very tight, keeping him as low as possible, as still as
possible. She squeezes him from the inside and he feels fear start to belittle
him, his erection – so fierce and hard a couple of minutes ago it was painful
– beginning to go.
The noise of grass being pushed aside shifts, seems to get louder, then
starts to fade, then comes back. It stops. He can’t see. He has no idea if
this person, these people, are just a metre away or ten.
A woman’s voice whispers, ‘There.’ There’s a pause. The same voice – it’s
Grandma Win, he can tell now – whispers impatiently, ‘Now!’
Blinding light.
‘You fucking little–!’
‘Daddy, no! Daddy, it’s–!’
Alban rolls over, out of and off Sophie, covering his eyes with one hand as
a powerful torch beam flicks from his face to Sophie’s, exposing her long
white body as she tries to cover herself. He’s feeling for his cock and the
condom and at the same time he’s trying to curl up to cover himself and
struggling to kneel.
‘Oh, Christ!’ Uncle James shouts. Alban’s punched hard on the shoulder and
falls back in the grass, still trying to get the condom off and get back up
again. ‘You filthy little fucker!’ His jeans are around his knees and this is
making everything impossible.
‘Get up! Get up! Come on, get up!’
‘Daddy–!’
He’s glimpsed Uncle James and Grandma Win. James is carrying the torch. He
doesn’t know if there’s anybody else there. ‘Get up!’ he hears Uncle James
say. He’s turned away, pulling his jeans up, condom still on.
166
‘James, let me,’ he hears Grandma Win say. ‘Here.’
Alban zips up and turns round into the glare of the torch. Something whacks
into his head and the next thing he knows it’s half dark again and he’s lying
in the grass.
‘No, Daddy! No!’
‘James!’ (Grandma Win, loudly.) ‘Never strike a child on the head.’
‘The head? I’ll cut his fucking balls off!’
‘Daddy, please! Oh please!’
Wow, that had hurt. Sore cheek. Distinct ringing in head. He really ought to
get up. Oh fuck, oh fuck, oh fuck. Up; get up.
‘Don’t be ridiculous, Alban! Get up! Help him up, James.’
Sophie, crying.
Oh, now he knew what the worst and saddest sound in all the world was.
‘Certainly bloody not. You’re coming with me, young lady. Thank you, Win.
Thank you. Right.’
The torch light wobbled off. The sound of Sophie’s sobbing slowly faded.
The sky was the colour of a dark, ripe peach.
He struggled to his feet. Grandma Win stood in front of him in the long
grass. Her face looked set and hard. ‘You young idiot,’ she said.

‘It’s not illegal!’ he said. It was just the first thing that came out. He
sounded like a child, even to himself.
‘Yes it is. You’re both under–age. Get dressed.’
He completed getting dressed. He felt tears welling up in his eyes and tried
to force them back.
Grandma Win saw him back to the house.
He wasn’t allowed to enter. Uncle James wouldn’t have him in the house.
He sat on the front steps, then in Andy’s car. The hour or so that followed
was a nightmare he couldn’t wake from. Andy was quietly furious. Leah – pale,
shocked – kept wanting to put an arm round him, but he shrank from her. Aunt
Clara was in bed, howling,
167
audible from all over the house in the pauses when James stopped shouting.
Sophie: gone, locked away. Assailed, ears battered, by this awful, unending,
screaming shouting.
Eventually, Andy drove them to the Lamb in Lynton, taking the one family
room which was all that was left. Alban was awake most of the night, listening
to his dad quietly snoring and his mum quietly crying.
He felt himself oscillating wildly from anger, from the absolutely certain
feeling that it still wasn’t illegal and what they’d been doing had been
beautiful and right and they were all over–reacting absurdly . . . to feeling
the utmost, utter shame. It was at these points that he wept, burying his face
in his pillow to stifle the noise, feeling he’d destroyed his own life and
Sophie’s and everybody else’s, too.
They left for Richmond in the morning.

168

5

D
ecking. They’ve covered half the fucking garden in decking. Alban has
developed a certain low–level hatred of decking. It’s become all the rage,
it’s the flavour of the last few years, it’s what you do to bring the outside

in or the inside out or create a roofless room or however the hell you want to
express it, but he just finds it annoying. He shouldn’t hate it the way he
does because it has its place; it effectively extends the house or flat it’s
attached to, it’s a lot easier to build decking up to the same level as an
internal floor than it is having to cart in tons of earth and hardcore to
support a stone or brick patio, plus it fits in with people’s modern,
money–rich, time–poor lifestyle blah blah blah, reducing the amount of actual
garden that you have to deal with – all that messy soil and ground and such –
and letting you get away with a few artfully placed plant pots . . . but he
still hates the fucking stuff. He hates it because everybody’s doing it,
thoughtlessly. He hates it because it’s become the default solution, and he
distrusts default solutions. He takes a certain guilty malicious glee in
looking forward to when, across the country, it gradually all starts to rot.
Shrieks and spilled G&Ts as legs plunge through sudden holes.
‘What do you think?’ Leah asks, holding him by one arm, hugging him side–on
as they look out over the grey, split–level expanse of
169
wood. ‘We had to take out a few bushes and flowers and a couple of small
trees, but it’s made a huge difference. Do you like it? Cory liked it,’ she
said. ‘I think.’ His sister was an industrial designer in LA, married with two
children. ‘What do you think?’
‘Looks great,’ he says. He smiles and turns to Leah. She is mid–fifties now,
hair still curly and blonde though much shorter and less full than it used to
be. She’s filled out a little, though she still looks good for her age. She
wears a pleated skirt and a pale blouse under a light jersey. She plays a lot
of tennis and has taken up golf. Alban wonders if she’s had a little work done
about her eyes; they’d looked droopier, older, the last time he’d seen her,
over a year ago.
‘You’re happy with it?’ he asks her.
‘Oh, yes! We’re out here all the time now. I mean, not in the winter,
obviously. Though the patio heaters make a big difference, too.’
They have three big gas–bottle patio heaters; together with the two teak
loungers, table and six chairs and double swing–seat with canopy and the
barbecue, there isn’t much room left for plant pots. In pride of place,
though, at the head of the steps down to the next level, they have two of
those carefully sculpted, perfectly round lollipop trees in a couple of giant,
expensive–looking terracotta pots.
‘We’re thinking of getting one of those free–standing canvas canopy things,’
Leah adds. ‘For when the sun’s too strong.’
‘Wasn’t there a water feature here a couple of years ago?’ Alban asks. ‘One
of those marine–ply–and–mirrors things?’
‘Oh, that!’ Leah squeezes his arm. ‘Nothing but trouble.’ She squeezes his
arm again. ‘Oh, Alban, it’s so good to see you again!’
‘Yeah,’ he says, putting an arm round her waist.
‘Mind your backs! Here we go.’ Andy arrives at the patio doors behind them
with a tray of drinks.
Andy is much as ever, though he’s thickened around the middle and about the
lower face. He’s wearing dark chinos and a worn denim shirt. His hair is still
only three–quarters white. He’s grown a sort of moustache plus goatee thing –
same mixture of colours as
170
his hair – which Alban isn’t sure about. He’s taken to wearing glasses with
thick legs and fashionably angular black frames. He grins at Alban, who grins
back – it is good to see Andy and Leah. He supposes he has to accept he has
spent too much time away from them. They walk out on to the decking.

It was like the old days. Andy and he went into town to see a film at the NFT.
They took an early train, walked across the river, ate Italian near Covent
Garden, walked back across the river and caught Ran, the latest in a Kurosawa
retrospective and which, coinciden–tally, neither had seen. Leah said she
thought she probably had seen it, but they both suspected it was more likely
she was just giving them time together.
‘Fielding bring you out of hiding, did he?’ Andy asked as they walked along
the South Bank, curving back towards Waterloo past the concert halls, the
river dark to their right, lights glittering beyond, Big Ben and the London
Eye rising ahead.
‘Oh, he tracked me down.’
‘Did you need much tracking down?’
‘Well, it wasn’t deliberate, but I’d covered my tracks fairly well.’ He
glanced at Andy. ‘You got my cards all right, yeah?’ He’d always sent them
Christmas cards and birthday cards.
‘We got them.’
‘Well, sorry to have been so . . . out of touch.’ He puts his arm briefly
round Andy’s shoulder, just a little awkwardly. ‘It’s good to see you again.’
Andy smiled at him, nodded. ‘Good. You too.’
Alban wasn’t sure what to say. He and Andy had always had a fairly calm,
measured kind of relationship – Andy was a fairly calm, measured kind of guy,
so there wasn’t much choice. The worst that had ever passed between them had
probably been due to that awful last evening at Lydcombe, and even then it had
been more the tight–lipped, silently disappointed you’ve–let–us–all–down kind
of very British reaction. The evening they got back to Richmond after
171
more or less being thrown out of Lydcombe, Andy had delivered a short sermon
about responsibility, mutual respect, sexual health, the obligations one had
as a guest to one’s hosts, and legality, even if the law might sometimes seem
like an ass. As a punishment, Alban would work every Saturday for the rest of
the year at the charity shop Leah helped out in, and donate the money to
Oxfam. Dismissed.
Alban remembered thinking at the time, even as he felt grateful for being
treated like an adult rather than a child, that he’d almost have preferred a
shrieking spit–flecked bollocking.
That wasn’t the worst of what happened because of James and Win finding
Sophie and him like that, not by a long, long way, but it was the worst that
happened between Andy and him.
‘You going to the–?’ Alban began, then smacked himself on the forehead.
‘You’re Company Secretary. I guess you kind of have to be at Garbadale for the
EGM. Sorry.’
‘Yes,’ Andy said with a small smile. ‘Don’t think Leah’s looking forward to
it, but she feels she has to be there for Gran’s eightieth.’
‘How about you?’
‘Looking forward to it? Not especially.’
‘No, me neither.’
‘But you’re going.’
‘Yes, I’m going.’
Andy looked at him. ‘Why?’
Andy had always had the disconcerting ability to ask the most obvious
questions that turned out – unless you resorted to an insultingly trivial
answer like ‘Why not?’ – to have answers that required an unanticipated degree
of complexity if you were to reply truthfully. Sometimes you even had to
think.
Alban frowned and rubbed his beard. ‘Chance to see everybody.’
‘That’s a sudden change of heart. You seem to have spent so long avoiding us
all. Even Leah and me.’
Alban glanced at Andy, but he wore his usual kindly, slightly quizzical

look. His tone of voice had not sounded bitter.
172
‘Well, I’m sorry about that,’ Alban said. ‘Feeling sorry for myself for a
long time there. Not the best frame of mind for, well, socialising.’
Andy thought about this. ‘Well, you know Leah and I are always here. We both
understand you can’t always be running back to us whenever there’s a problem,
but ... As long as you know we’re here when you need us.’
‘Thanks, Dad.’
‘Hey, you’re welcome,’ Andy said, nudging him and grinning. ‘Garbadale,’ he
said. They walked a few more steps. ‘I suppose Sophie’ll be there.’
‘Yeah, but I’m not–’ Alban began, then stopped himself. ‘I’m not investing
any hope in that.’ They looked at each other. ‘Honestly.’
Andy waited a few moments before saying, ‘Okay.’
‘But I suppose I should be there for the EGM and the old girl’s party.’
‘I’m sure we’ll all have lots of fun,’ Andy said, deadpan. He glanced at
Alban. ‘You still have the minimum shares. Which way will you vote?’
Alban shrugged. Against. Just on principle. Probably futile, but, hey. And–’
‘What principle?’
Alban thought. ‘Resisting American cultural imperialism?’ They both grinned
at that. And you?’
‘I was thinking of selling,’ Andy told him. ‘And that would be my advice to
anybody who asked for my opinion.’
‘The keeping–the–family–together argument doesn’t impress?’
‘Alban, if it takes a set of shareholdings to keep a family together . . .’
Andy shrugged. Anyway, who would we be keeping it together for? Your
generation?’
‘Well, there’s Fielding . . .’
‘He does seem surprisingly concerned,’ Andy said. ‘I always got the
impression he was on the brink of jumping ship, finding a sexier line of
business or starting up on his own. But I know he and Nina
173
have been talking about children, so maybe he wants stability, something to
pass on.’
‘Oh?’ Alban felt bad he’d hardly asked anything about Fielding’s partner. Oh
well. ‘Aunt Kathleen?’ he suggested.
‘She’s my generation, not yours.’
‘Oh, yeah. Of course.’
‘Haydn?’ Alban said.
Andy shook his head. ‘Guaranteed a job with Spraint.’ Andy looked at Alban.
‘He is our one star, you know. I wouldn’t say he’s been wasted on us, but he
could easily handle a lot more. Same job, but with a wider remit, more
variables, bigger numbers.’ They walked on a few more steps. ‘But that’s it,
really. The rest, they’re all away doing other stuff.’
‘There’s a whole new crop of kids, though,’ Alban said.
‘Maybe, but it’s your generation has to think about them, Alban, not my lot.
Fair’s fair.’
‘Just Fielding and Haydn, then.’
‘And Sophie,’ Andy said reasonably. He glanced at Alban. ‘You wouldn’t want
to forget her.’
‘Oh yes, and Sophie,’ Alban agreed, oddly embarrassed. He grinned ruefully.
And, of course, not me.’ He thought he might as well be the one to acknowledge
this.
Andy didn’t say anything for a while. ‘Well, you can’t convincingly ask
people to keep the firm and the family together when you turned your back on
both, Alban.’
Alban snorted. ‘Yes, well, I’m back. For now, anyway.’

Andy looked at his watch. ‘We’d better walk on if we’re going to make that
train.’
They turned away from the river.
The worst of it – the worst of it initially, anyway – was not knowing how long
it would be before he would see Sophie again. He felt at once bloated and
empty, filled with that same mixture of anger and shame while at the same time
consumed with a restlessness,
174
an unresolved impatience, because he knew that nothing would really be settled
or decided until he’d seen her again, talked to her. Even just talking over
the phone would be something; it wouldn’t be perfect, it wouldn’t be enough,
but it would be a start. They just needed to talk.
The trouble was he didn’t know how to get in touch with her. He wished he’d
got the phone number of even just one of her friends; then they could maybe
talk when she went round to their house. He tried to think of somewhere public
they’d been together that she might go to again, but there was nowhere. She
would be back at school now – did that help? He didn’t even know which school
she went to, or he might have tried calling there.
He rang Lydcombe a few times over the following week, hoping she might
answer, but it was always Clara or Uncle James. He never said anything, just
put the phone down.
For all that week, he tried to answer the phone whenever it rang in the
house at Richmond, running down the hall, dashing downstairs, grabbing the
receiver. He was sure Sophie must be as desperate to talk to him as he was to
talk to her, but it was never her.
The frustration of it all made him want to cry sometimes, but he didn’t cry;
he refused to cry. He had cried that first night, lying in the Lamb Inn in
Lynton, because of the suddenness of it, the sheer speed and shock of what had
happened and maybe because he could hear Leah crying, but he hadn’t cried
since even though he had come close, many times. Crying, he decided, would be
like he was accepting something, as though he was agreeing with the family’s
hysterical, punitive view of what had happened. Crying would be making himself
complicit with them. Crying would be giving in.
He remembered her face, her body, the feel and smell of her; he heard her
voice, repeating and repeating the humble mantras of their summer together.
They’ve all bloody gone!’, ‘Fell off me ‘oss, didn’ I?’, ‘Blimey, Unc, I
didn’t enjoy it that much.’
He kept trying Lydcombe.
The third or fourth time he got James. His uncle started yelling
175
as soon as Alban failed to speak after James recited the number, shouting that
he was going to call the police. Alban put the phone down quickly, wondering
if James had guessed it was him rather than just some crank caller.
He began to think about going back to Somerset and finding her. That might
be the best bet. He had saved up nearly thirty pounds in cash; that would
easily buy a return by train to Bridgwater, and then he could get a bus or
hitch. Maybe he could play truant, or somehow get enough time off school
without Andy and Leah knowing, or get one of his friends to lie about
something they just had to go to so that he could be excused a Saturday at the
charity shop and escape for long enough.
He tried phoning again the next day from a call box. He got an answering
machine.
It didn’t matter. He could make the journey. The doing of it, the hardship,
the danger of discovery or possible failure would be the proof of how much he
loved her. She would know then how he felt about her, but then she probably

already did, even though they’d never dare use the word itself. But, almost as
importantly, they would know: her parents, Grandma Win, Leah and Andy – all of
them. They would see how serious he was, how serious they were. They might
start to understand.
He would do it. He would go.
That evening, over dinner, his dad mentioned – casually, more to Leah than
Alban – that Sophie wasn’t at Lydcombe any more. She’d gone to school in
Madrid and would probably be there until next summer, spending Christmas in
Spain.
Alban spent a long time looking at his plate, unable to move or think.
‘Are you all right, darling?’ Leah said.
He had to ask to be excused.
Sitting on his bed, breathing hard, hands on his knees, staring at the
carpet in his room, he came extremely close indeed to crying –he could feel
the tickle behind his nose, and the very start of the
176
tears welling up behind his eyes – but still he refused to let the tears come.
No crying, not even now. There would still be a way.
The year went on. His sixteenth birthday came and went. He was allowed a party
at the house, but his parents were there the whole time. School was all right.
According to a couple of the other boys, he wasn’t the only one who’d popped
his cherry over the summer, though he’d listened to the accompanying stories
and hadn’t found the details convincing. He’d refused to speak about his own
experiences. He’d developed a way of just smiling when people asked him about
it. Half the boys thought he was trying to bluff, the others thought he must
indeed have Done It.
Colder weather came in. He lay awake one night, still trying to think up
ways of getting to Sophie, about getting to Spain himself or just finding out
how to phone her.
An alarm sounded in the street outside. Car or house, he couldn’t tell. He
should be trying to get to sleep; it was a busy day at school tomorrow. He
thought ahead, reviewing all the stuff he had to do, making up a mental list
of the books and pieces of kit he’d need for the whole, complicated school day
and checking each item off in his head, knowing they were all already packed
or easily to hand and obvious.
The alarm was really annoying, going on and on, same two stupid high–pitched
tones warbling away, minute after minute after minute.
He had to get to her. But what could he do? He couldn’t go there. It was too
far, too foreign; he didn’t even have his own passport yet. Had they sent her
away to Spain because of what had happened? That was crazy, that was
over–reacting, wasn’t it? Phoning was the only possibility, or maybe writing
her a letter if he could get the address. He’d tried rifling through Leah and
Andy’s desks (guiltily but determined), searching for a number or address that
might help. He’d hoped they might have the address of Sophie’s biological
mother in Spain, but there was nothing.
177
The alarm wailed on, relentless, inconsolable.
Would there be anybody else in the family who might know anything? Maybe
somebody his own age – Sophie’s age – who might understand?
Cousin Haydn? He was just a year younger than him and Sophie. But he was a
shy little fat kid – Alban found it hard to believe he’d know anything.
The alarm, or a nightmare, had woken Cory; he could hear her wailing from
her room, then the distant sound of Leah getting up to go through to her.
Uncle Graeme and Aunt Lauren’s children? Cousin Fabiole? Cousin Lori? Fab
was eighteen, so maybe too old to understand. Lori: she was the same age as

him, wasn’t she?
He didn’t think they’d been especially close to Sophie either, but he was
prepared to try anything.
The alarm went on and on and on and on and on and on . . .
He turned over in his bed, then turned back again. He’d already wanked,
hiding the tissue under his bed. Maybe he should have another go. It would
help pass the time; might even let him get to sleep. This fucking alarm was
really doing his head in. He tried putting his head under the pillow and
cramming the pillow down over his ear, and that sort of helped, but he could
still hear the alarm.
‘Fuck it,’ he muttered. He pushed the pillow away and threw the duvet off,
crossed to the window and opened it to the first notch, letting cold air spill
in and the alarm sound still louder. Something about attack being the best
form of defence. Confront the damned thing, show it you weren’t afraid of it.
This was nonsense, obviously, but he felt it was important somehow.
He went back to bed and went on thinking about how he might get to Sophie,
or get to write to her or phone her; somehow speak to her.
It went round and round in his head while the alarm went on and on outside.
It would be all right. It was possible. It looked impossible
178
but it wasn’t, it couldn’t be. Sophie was probably trying just as hard
wherever she was to think of ways of getting to him. He was here and she was
in Spain or wherever, but they were still together. They would always be
together.
It was getting cold in the room; he could feel it on his face. He got up and
closed the window. The alarm continued to sound, but it was as though it had
been going on so long now that his brain was somehow cancelling it out. He
remembered something similar from biology or physiology, about how the nose
could only smell fresh smells – it then sort of got bored with the smell and
stopped smelling it even though it was still there.
It would be all right. Somehow, it would work out. He knew it would. He
would think of Sophie and go to sleep thinking about her and so dream about
her. He kept trying to do this.
The alarm cut off eventually, leaving something more than sudden silence.
He could still hear it.
The alarm had stopped, the noise was no more, but he could still hear it.
Whatever part of his brain had cancelled out the sound was now creating
precisely the disturbance it had sought to negate.
He lay there and he listened to the ghost sound, hearing with the utmost
clarity the thing that simply was not there any more, and that was when he
started to cry.
He buried his head in his pillow so nobody else would hear and wept on into
the night in terrible, body–spasming sobs; desolate, heartbroken, in mourning
for all that was lost.
He meets VG in Shanghai in ninety–nine, in a big hotel which is just one of
several attached to a conference centre and mall complex it is bizarrely
difficult to get out of. He’s there for a games and toys trade fair. She’s
there for a conference. He’s been vaguely aware for the last few days that
there are other groups of people wandering around the place who obviously
aren’t part of the trade fair and don’t quite look like normal business people
or tourists either. A
179
sign propped in a lobby spells out in gold letters: Welcome To The 23rd
Desitter Mathematical Conference. Mathematicians, then. A high proportion of
them are people one might charitably call Characters.

He’s there with Fielding. His cousin has cut back quite severely on his
drug–taking in the two years since the fun and games in Singapore, and so, he
supposes, has he. They don’t have any with them here, anyway. Fielding has
talked about getting some locally, but it’s probably just bravado.
Alban’s up relatively early one morning after a late meal with some
overenthusiastic production people from Pudong and an uneasy night’s sleep
interrupted by indigestion. Awake at five, he never really got back to sleep,
so he’s had a very early breakfast. Now his rhythms will be all messed up, as
though they weren’t a bit fucked just because of the jet lag. He’s getting
heartily fed up with all this travelling and schmoozing and partying and
forced sociability. It suits some people down to the ground – Fielding just
loves all this networking stuff, treats it as really important and fulfilling
– but he’s finding it wearing. He’s just not cut out for it. It’s early 1999,
he’s not even thirty, yet he feels old and jaded and fed up with what ought to
be a great job. There’s been a modest reorganisation within the firm and he’s
officially now responsible for Product Development, though in practice his
brief runs a lot wider than that and he can meddle with impunity and indeed
matriarchal blessing in almost any area of the firm he wants to. To the
delight and pleasure of his peers and colleagues, obviously.
Grandma Winifred is entirely in charge of the firm now. She still stays at
Garbadale most of the time, but she visits the London office four or so times
per year and has even been known to come on jaunts like this one.
Alban’s breakfast was relatively light and he thinks about taking a walk
before the first meeting he has scheduled. Only it was raining when he looked
out the window when he first got up; a hazy, low–cloud kind of rain he’s come
to associate mostly with South–East Asia (which he supposes this isn’t, but
still). He feels he hasn’t really
180
been to Shanghai yet, even though he’s here. The night of the day they arrived
they had a guided bus tour through what’s left of the old city and along the
Bund and round a couple of very large building sites and past some
spectacularly unironic buildings, including the famous Oriental Pearl TV
Tower. ‘It looks like a spaceship that’s just landed,’ Fielding said,
impressed. ‘Or the biggest Van de Graaff generator in all the world,’ Alb an
suggested, craning his neck to take in the great globular lattice.
He’s walking through the lobby and then along a promising–looking corridor,
searching for an outside window to check on the weather situation, thinking
maybe he’ll go back to his room, brush teeth etc. and order a cab, but then he
discovers another part of the conference centre and another corridor. There’s
still no outside perspective on the weather, though he thinks he hears
pattering noises coming from a series of what certainly look like –
unhelpfully opaque – skylights. Then he sees a noticeboard outside a smallish
conference room saying somebody’s going to be reading a paper on Game Theory
here in – he checks his watch – five minutes. It’s a Desitter thing; the Maths
Conference. Open session – all welcome.
Game Theory. Maybe he should check this out. Hell’s teeth, these guys start
early though. The room could hold about a hundred. Less than twenty seats are
taken, all near the front. The people look fairly normal. Maybe a bit too
lively for eight in the morning.
He goes in, staying near the back in case he needs to leave because he gets
bored and/or starts to fall asleep. He’s also very slightly worried that they
might instantly see that he’s an interloper and all point and scream at him or
something or anyway turf him out, so staying near the exit seems like a good
idea. He sits two seats in from the aisle itself, so as not to look too primed
for a hair–trigger scarper, but is prepared to move if somebody blocks his
getaway route.
The room fills to about half–capacity and starts to smell of coffee as
people bring paper cups of the stuff in with them. A girl – no, a woman . . .

No, maybe you would call her a girl – anyway, this
181
female with blonde spiky hair and dressed in what looks like a black business
suit but with no tie sits down on the very end seat two rows down. He’s
confused. She does not look like a mathematician. The black–and–white look is
perplexing, too. But for the fact he hasn’t seen any Caucasian help around,
he’d probably assume she was a waitress. Only she doesn’t look like a waitress
either. Mind you, her shoes are sensible shoes, like somebody would wear who
had to stand a lot. She has a broad, vaguely Slavic face and looks a bit
bleary–eyed. As though hearing him think, she pulls out some dark glasses and
puts them on with the sort of deliberation he’s come to associate with either
fragility or morning–after drunkenness.
She has a great face. And for some reason, he really likes the way she sits.
Which is a weird thing to pick up on, he tells himself. She puts an arm out
along the top of the seat next to her – towards him, though he’s pretty
certain this is a coincidence, because after all she’s on the end of the row
and there’s no chair in the other direction. Her fingers drum slowly on top of
the seat. She crosses one foot up on to her opposite knee, the way women
don’t. Maybe she’s a man! Definite breasts, no discernible Adam’s apple . . .
Not that these things mean much these days . . . No, he can’t believe she’s
not a woman. Not his type, of course – too lean and angular and blonde and not
really curvy enough – but interesting; definitely interesting.
She takes out a bulky–looking mobile. It’s more of a PDA; or one of these
spiffing new BlackBerrys, perhaps – he can’t quite see. She pushes her dark
glasses up on to her spiky blonde hair, checks messages briefly, presses a few
more buttons then returns the machine to an inside jacket pocket and her
glasses to their place over her eyes. He wonders if he should say something to
her. He has a sudden micro–fantasy of her falling asleep during the thing on
Game Theory and him accidentally–on–purpose knocking her seat at the end and
her waking up and there’d be some Bottom–like moment when she falls for the
first thing or
182
person or whatever she sees when she wakes up, or she’d realise he’d woken her
deliberately and be grateful and offer to buy him a coffee to say thank you or
something.
All highly fucking likely.
No, they’ll never speak, never meet – she may not even speak English, and
aside from French he’s barely functional – they’ll sit here a metre and a bit
away from each other for an hour or so and that will be that. They’ll go their
separate ways, never knowing whether they might have been friends or lovers or
business partners or a casual shag for each other, however rubbish or sublime
(he still thinks of Paris, of Kalpana, and knows with a strange certainty that
will remain his most sublime one–night encounter). There must be hundreds of
people you almost meet, perhaps thousands, and you’ll just never know what
might have happened. You might have been seconds, a metre, a word away from
the true love of your life, and you’d never know.
Well, whatever. That was just the way the world worked and you might as well
get on with it. No point worrying. Anyway, he already had a love of his life
and much good it had ever done him.
A tall, hulking guy who looks like a lumberjack arrives on the little podium
at the end of the room and goes up to the lectern. He takes off his watch,
sets it on the lectern, shuffles his papers, takes a look out over the people
there to listen to him and starts reading without preamble, save for the
words, ‘Good morning.’ Coincidentally, these are pretty much the last two
consecutive words Alban understands. He struggles for a minute, comprehending
perhaps one word in fifteen, then gives up. He’s still trying to decide how

long he can give it before decently leaving when he falls asleep.
He’s woken by somebody knocking into his seat. He starts, jerks upright and
sees everybody leaving. He looks round and sees that the only person near him
is the girl with the spiky hair, now moving smartly away from the end of the
row of seats he’s sitting on. She doesn’t look back.
*

*

*

183
‘You want more water?’
‘No, thanks, I’ll take it as it is. I can drink it too easily with water.’
‘I find it numbs, sometimes.’ Andy waved vaguely at his face.
‘Kind of the idea, isn’t it?’ Alban smiled.
Andy gave a small laugh. ‘I meant the mouth and tongue, but, yeah, I
suppose.’
They sat in Andy’s study, surrounded by bookcases, filing cabinets and
screens. Andy had poured decent measures of Springbank. Leah had gone to bed.
Alban knew there should be one small framed photo of Irene on a narrow
stretch of wall between two bookcases, and had duly found it. He stood looking
at it, sipping the whisky.
‘Do you think about her often?’ Andy asked him. He was sitting on the corner
of his desk. He couldn’t see the picture, but he knew what Alban was looking
at.
‘To be honest, no,’ Alban said. ‘Once or twice a week, maybe.’ He looked at
Andy. He couldn’t read the expression on Andy’s face. He felt a frown gather
on his own. ‘I suppose some people would say that is quite often.’
‘Some people,’ Andy agreed mildly. ‘Maybe.’
Alban took a deep breath. ‘It’s something we’ve never really talked about,
isn’t it?’
‘Your mother?’
‘Yeah.’
‘I thought we had,’ Andy said. He shrugged. ‘While ago, I suppose, back when
you were a kid. Up to adolescence. We talked about her quite a lot. You wanted
to know all you could about her. Come on, kiddo, you can’t have forgotten.’
Alban had only very vague memories of this. When he thought about it, he
realised they were some of the most vague memories he had from that period of
his life, precisely as though he’d been trying to bury them all this time.
‘Yeah, I suppose,’ he said, uneasy. ‘But it’s been a while.’
‘There’s only so much that can be said, Alban,’ Andy told him.
184
‘Sometimes you just end up hurting yourself and others more, going back over
old ground.’
He wasn’t sure what to say at first, so he said nothing, just sipped his
whisky and looked at the old photo of Irene. She was sitting in the sunlight
on a low stone wall somewhere high, a light blue sea behind her, pale islands
in the distance. She wore a short blue dress and her fair brown hair was
gathered up. Her legs were crossed and she was holding a glass, looking just
to the side of the camera, mouth open, smiling or laughing. Happy.
‘I was talking to old Beryl the other night, before we left Glasgow,’ Alban
said.
‘Oh yes?’
He told Andy what she’d told him.
Andy listened, stood, drank about half his whisky, stood for a bit longer,
then walked round the back of his desk, sitting in the leather wing–back
chair. He put the glass down on the desk. He looked at Alban, who pulled up a
seat in front of the desk.
Andy seemed to be about to say something, then appeared to catch himself and

said, ‘It’s not a brain tumour, is it? Aunt Beryl, I mean. She’s pretty old,
after all. She’s not going–?’
‘No,’ Alban said. ‘If anything it’s like she’s gained a few marbles.’
Andy looked thoughtful, nodded. ‘Well, it certainly wasn’t me,’ he said. ‘I
mean, about not wanting her, not wanting Irene, to keep it.’ He looked down at
the desk, running a thumbnail along the edge of the inset leather surface. ‘I
did everything I could to make sure she did keep it, keep you, kiddo.’ His
smile was small and sad.
‘Did she – was she thinking of an abortion?’
Andy did a lot of swallowing, then picked up his glass again. He sighed. Are
you sure you really want to know about all this stuff, Alban?’ He shook his
head. ‘It’s all so old, and it’s all so painful. Sometimes it’s best to let
things scab over, to let things heal up.’
‘I’d really like to know, Dad.’
‘Okay, okay,’ Andy said, drinking. He frowned at his nearly empty glass.
‘Yes, I think your mother did – well, I know she did – think
185
about getting an abortion.’ He patted the desk. ‘It wasn’t something I thought
you needed to know.’ He didn’t look at Alban, preferring to study his hand on
the desk, but he said, ‘Please tell me you understand this, Alban. More than
anything else, Leah and I wanted you to feel wanted, to feel loved.’ He
cleared his throat.
‘Well, I always did, so–’
‘We even delayed trying for a child of our own–’
‘I appreciate all that, Dad.’
‘Ah, shit,’ Andy said, putting his hand to the bridge of his nose, pressing
and wiping. He sniffed.
Alban felt oddly calm and nowhere near crying. ‘Honestly, Dad. I don’t blame
you for not mentioning the abortion thing. I’m glad you didn’t. You did the
right thing. And – look, my problems with this family have always been with
the whole family, not you and Leah. I appreciate everything you’ve done for
me.’
‘She’s been a good mother to you, Alban,’ Andy said, looking away to the
side, towards the hidden photo of Irene. ‘She’s been your real mother, the one
who’s been there throughout, in all the important ways.’
‘I know,’ Alban said. ‘I know. Leah’s been great, she’s been lovely; she
always has. She’s been kind and tolerant and loving and that’s more than a lot
of kids get from their biological mothers.’ He smiled, spread his arms. And
I’m okay. Seriously. I’m enjoying my life. I had a good career in the firm and
then I got fed up with it and I had a highly satisfying job working in the
forests and now I’m thinking about what happens next, but I’m happy’
‘This white finger thing–’
‘Yeah, well, I was getting a bit bored with the sound of buzz saws by then,
too. No biggie.’
‘Look, I’m sorry, but do you need any money or–?’
‘Dad, I sold my shares. Well, except for that block of a hundred, so I can
still vote. Anyway, I didn’t give them away. The family trust bought them. And
I haven’t been spending it all on horses or girls or drugs.’
186
‘Oh, well. But this thing with your fingers . . .’
‘Nothing serious. If I’d kept on working with a chainsaw, it would gradually
have got worse. But I’m not, so I’ll be okay. Absolutely not debilitating.’
‘Do you think you should have a specialist?’
‘Dad, please.’ He let the words hang for a bit. ‘Don’t worry about it. It’s
nothing. Really.’
Andy nodded. He drained his glass. ‘Refill?’

‘I’ll take a top–up.’
Andy crossed to the drinks trolley near the door and poured the whiskies.
‘Do you think you and Irene would have married if I hadn’t been on the way?’
Alban asked him. Andy paused as he palmed the cork back into the neck of the
bottle.
‘Maybe not,’ he said. He handed Alban back his glass. He sat in his big seat
again, studied his whisky. ‘I would have. I mean, the reluctance, if there was
reluctance, wasn’t from me.’ He looked at Alban. ‘I loved her from the first
time I saw her, in a lecture theatre. LSE. Well, you know what I mean; I
started to fall for her, I wanted to get to know her, I was convinced she was
the one for me and I was the one for her. Instantly. Made a nuisance of myself
for a year; chased her, basically.’
‘Was she seeing anybody else?’
‘No – I think she was too busy with her studies and a bunch of girls she
hung out with. Then there was the family, of course.’
Andy looked back to his whisky. ‘There was always somebody passing through
London, staying at Bert and Win’s, usually. And James had a flat in Bloomsbury
at the time. He and Blake were doing their sort of hippy playboy thing,
running around with a bunch of artists who used to stage these Happening
things, and the sort of junior aristo who gets sent down from Oxbridge for
something unspeakable. Graeme and Kennard were part of the same set.’ He
snorted, drank. There was a degree of Upper Class Twit of the Year to the
whole thing, except with velvet jackets and drugs. She never
187
got that involved with them. Anyway. I finally–’ he looked at Alban, laughed.
‘Irene was still a virgin when we, when we finally ended up in bed together.’
He held up one hand, apologetic. ‘Stop me if this is grossing you out; I know
most children prefer to think their parents never actually had sex.’
‘Somehow I’m coping.’
‘But,’ Andy sighed heavily and looked vaguely in the direction of the
photograph, ‘I don’t think I kidded myself at the time and I don’t believe I
ever have kidded myself since that she felt as much for me as I felt for her.
I loved her with all my heart. She–’ He stopped, shrugged, looked down. ‘Well,
she liked me. She thought I was fun to be with.’ He gave a sort of shy laugh
and glanced at Alban. Anyway, I made her laugh, and we had fun together, and
we were boyfriend and girlfriend, going steady – all that – but she never
pretended to love me. At least, not as more than a, more than a friend.’ He
shrugged again. ‘But a good friend.’ He drank. ‘I hope.’ He cleared his
throat. ‘Anyway, I hope you’ve realised by now – you were a wanted child. I
wanted you. I wanted her. She . . . Oh,’ Andy said, and it was a long,
slightly drunken ‘oh’; ‘she accepted me. Accepted you. Just couldn’t accept
herself, accept living in this world.’ He shrugged, drank.
‘I’m sorry to have brought this up, Dad.’
Ah . . .’ Andy waved one hand.
‘How close was she to her own dad?’
‘Bert?’ Andy said. ‘Oh, they were very close. She was more like a first
daughter to both of them. Linda and Lizzie were always different; kind of a
unit because they were twins, you know what I mean? Practically had their own
language until they were teenagers. Anyway, there was a nanny for them; Irene
was closer to Bert and Win.’
‘Do you think it was Bert, then?’ Alban asked. ‘Who didn’t want her to have
the baby,’ he added when Andy looked uncertain. Andy’s eyes were shining.
‘I don’t know,’ Andy confessed. ‘Bit late to ask him.’ He gave a
188
bitter laugh. ‘Bit late to ask him about ten years before he died, poor old
bugger.’

‘Well, he might have loved her but he might have been one of these fathers
who can’t stand the thought of his little girl having sex, let alone having a
baby.’ Alban sipped his whisky. ‘Did you get on okay with him?’
‘Mm–hmm,’ Andy said. ‘Yeah, we were cool. Nice enough old guy. He was in
Egypt and the Far East during the war; hair–raising stories. Not a great
business brain, but at least he’d had the sense to marry Win, who was. Is.’ He
shook his head. ‘Eight children, and she’s been the real hand on the tiller
for nearly sixty bloody years.’ He shook his head again. ‘Hell of a woman.’
‘Do you think Bert thought you were good enough for his little girl?’
Andy looked into the distance and rolled his bottom lip. ‘I think so. We got
on all right. No arguments or anything. I worshipped his daughter, I got a
good degree, I was a good fit for the firm – I mean, okay, for a long time I
didn’t fit in anywhere; I was helping to manage Garbadale for a bit and then
doing a bit of painting for the first few years at Lydcombe, but I took the
shilling in the end and I’ve done my best for the business. Can’t think they
have any complaints. No, no, I liked him. Decent old guy.’
‘What about Irene’s brothers? Would any of them have disapproved?’
‘Of me and her?’
‘And her getting pregnant.’
‘If they did they kept quiet about it, which wouldn’t have been like them.’
‘So you got on okay with them? Blake, James, Kennard, Graeme? Were you
mates?’
‘No, I was never mates with them. They were like officer class. I was the
first person in my family to go to Uni. But I met them a few times and they
were okay. They were a bit loud, a bit hooray–ish, but we got on all right.’
189
Alban smiled. ‘You get on all right with everybody, Dad.’
‘Yes, I know, and I assume everybody’s as easy–going as I am. Terrible
failing, I’ve been told. But anyway, bloody hypocrisy if they had objected,’
Andy said. ‘They were all shagging around all over the place. Well, Kennard
wasn’t especially, he was always the quiet one. But the rest . . . James – no,
it might have been . . . no, it was James . . . anyway, got at least one girl
pregnant. Abortion. Posh girl. Became Lady something, later. Anyway, don’t
know of any illegitimate little Wopulds running around out there. Enough of
the blighters born in wedlock, God knows. Oh, I don’t know, I shouldn’t be–’
‘Was it Mum who delayed you two marrying until just before I was born?’
‘Hmm? Yes. Yes, it wasn’t parental disapproval or anything. Certainly not
me. I wanted to marry her as soon as we knew she was pregnant.’ He shook his
head. ‘I don’t know. Maybe we did the wrong thing staying at Garbadale. She
wanted to be there, she said. And I came to love it. It felt right, and Bert
and Win seemed happy we were there – they were still in Knightsbridge at the
time, mostly, but they were coming up quite often – but maybe we should have
stayed in London. She might have got better medical treatment. They couldn’t
really do all that much for postnatal depression, but they might have been
able to do more.’ He shrugged again, drank. ‘She’d been prescribed some
antidepressant – Valium or whatever they had at the time – but she wouldn’t
take it. Chemicals.’ He held up his glass, looking at it.
Alban said, ‘Beryl told me Irene walked in front of a bus after coming out
of a clinic in town. That was how she came to be in hospital, when Beryl heard
her say this thing about somebody not wanting her to have the baby. She
wondered if that was a first attempt at suicide.’
‘Did she?’ Andy said, over a deep breath. He drank some more. ‘Did she now.’
‘It is a thought.’
190
‘Thoughts. Don’t ya love ‘em?’ Andy said. He downed his whisky then put the
empty glass down on the desk with a smack. ‘Oops.’

‘She never said anything to you about this?’ Alban asked.
‘We never talked about it,’ Andy told him. ‘We kind of drew a line below
everything that happened before your birth, when we moved to Garbadale. Maybe
not the most sensible thing to do, but it’s what we did. No counselling or
analysis or post–traumatic whatsit, just good old British stiff upper lip not
talking about unpleasantness and hoping it’ll all go away with time. And
that’s what we did. I swear. We just didn’t talk about it.’ He pat–patted the
desk again. ‘Anyway, look, you’ll have to excuse me; I am suddenly very drunk
all of a sudden and I had best get to me scratcher. Excuse I.’ He got to his
feet, waving towards the drinks trolley. ‘Help yourself. Sorry about this.
Party pooper. Disgraceful.’
Alban stood and put his arm briefly round his dad’s shoulder as he passed.
They wished each other good night again and Alban sat in the study by himself
for a while, finishing his whisky.
He keeps thinking about her. She is so not his type, but, over the course of
that long Shanghai day, he can’t seem to get her out of his head. He duly does
the trade fair stuff on the firm’s stand, does the glad–handing and sincere
smiling and two–handed business card handing–over thing and the evening drinks
thing and the dinner at whatever glitzy restaurant with whoever it is to be
bought food by or buy food for thing and at the end of it rather than go for
more drinks he claims he needs a breath of fresh air and maybe an early night
and leaves Fielding quite happily assuming the chef du parti role and getting
overexcited about the idea of the internet being everything good and wonderful
in the world of the future, and actually manufacturing stuff being boring and
something he calls Sunset (to a group of Chinese and Korean manufacturers, who
look mystified) while Alban heads off but – rather than go to bed – makes for
the part of the hotel and conference complex where the mathematicians appear
to hang out.
191
A bit of walking and listening and tracing a finger over floor plans brings
him to a busy bar where the people might be mathematicians or not, he can’t be
sure; they look very normal. Drinks and loud talking and a few people smoking.
He sees a group of people bent over a low table, one of them sketching
something that reminds him of high–school geometry, and he starts to think
he’s in the right place. He makes his way to the bar, listening, gets a bottle
of Tsingtao and starts wandering slowly through the press of people. It is
crowded. Somebody mentions something about a packing problem and he wonders if
this is a practical.
No sign. He wanders a few corridors, ends up back at the same bar and asks
an affable–looking little guy in jeans and a T–shirt covered in what appears
to be the first few hundred digits of Pi if there’s another bar where the
maths people are hanging out because he’s looking for somebody.
‘Who are you looking for?’ the little guy asks.
‘I don’t know her name. She’s kind of. . . Tall and blonde? Sort of
sticky–out hair. Saw her at a thing on Game Theory early this morning. Dark
business suit, white shirt. Dark –’
‘Sounds like Graef. Lecturer. Glasgow.’ He looks away, shakes his head. ‘Odd
choice. Sure Cambridge offered.’ He looks back. ‘Could try the cocktail bar.
Some of the hard–core tiling people seem to have colonised it.’
He’s not sure quite what this means, and thinks the better of asking. ‘How
do you spell that name?’ he asks.
The cocktail bar is quiet and dark, with good views over the river, ten
floors further up in the hotel. He sees her sitting talking with another,
older woman and four men, three young, one about his father’s age. She looks
at him as he enters the bar, watching him while still talking to one of the
younger men. She’s wearing glasses with round, clear lenses.
Alban’s escorted to a table, taking one near the group of mathematicians

rather than by the window.
He chooses something called a Shanghai Surprise because it sounds
192
vaguely familiar and for all he knows may even be a classic cocktail, then
recalls as he’s waiting for it to arrive that it’s the name of yet another
crap Madonna movie. It looks and tastes very orange. He’s chosen his table and
seat well; he can look straight at Ms Graef without it being too obvious. He
looks over at her. Very interesting face. Wide, high cheekbones, thin,
strong–looking nose widening to broad nostrils. Hmm, nice nostrils.
Then he thinks, Suddenly I’m a nostril man? Where did that come from? She
wears – inhabits – an expression of seemingly continual ironic surprise. He
can just about make out her voice. It sounds pleasantly mellifluous; not
especially Scottish.
She will look at me, he thinks. Pretty much everybody has this ability to
spot via peripheral vision that a face with big, front–facing eyes is looking
steadily at them, even from some distance away. The message may take a while
to thunder through, but people usually catch on in due course and look back.
Finally she does look his way. He hoists his cocktail glass and smiles
broadly, as though they know each other. She frowns.
A few minutes later she puts her hands on the ends of the arms of her seat
and nods round the various people in the group, like she’s getting ready to
get up.
She is getting up. Probably going to leave and go to her room, he thinks.
Too much to hope she’ll come over to talk to him.
She walks over to him, face to one side, frown there again. Well, he thinks,
whadaya know?
‘You’re the guy who fell asleep at the Game Theory paper this morning,
aren’t you?’
He nods. ‘Guilty.’
‘So, should I know you?’
‘Yes,’ he says emphatically. ‘You should.’
She lowers her head and looks at him over the top of her glasses, still with
half a frown on that mildly, amusedly surprised face.
He stands, holds out his hand. ‘Pleased to meet you. Alban McGill.’
*
*
*
193
They have a couple of drinks. He tries to tempt her out to a club or something
but she’s tired from the night before; this drink and then she really must to
bed. They get on really well, though. She’s heard of Empire! and the family
firm. He’s – well, he’s done maths at school. He makes an executive decision
regarding which he’ll inform Fielding in the morning and asks her out for
dinner tomorrow. He only finds out much later that as he’s asking this she’s
making a similar decision – actually even more inconvenient for her than his
is for him – that allows her to say yes.
They eat in a floating seafood place looking upriver from near the Yanpu
Bridge. Drink is taken. Things from the depths which look as though they ought
not to exist on any world, let alone this one, and which most certainly do not
look as though they should be allowed anywhere near a kitchen, let alone the
human digestive tract, are duly served for their delectation, and consumed.
More drink is taken.
They’ve talked about SETI, the search for extra–terrestrial intelligence and
about SETI@home, a program that will let computers – computers that are
switched on but not otherwise being used –look for evidence of alien
intelligence within the mass of radio signal data SETI has accumulated and
which its own computers are going to take for ever to sift through unassisted.

From there they get to talking about consoles and online gaming. She wonders
if games machines could be used in the same way, to tackle tasks like
extending the value of Pi or looking for big primes.
They’re sitting back in their little red–lacquer–and–gold–leaf alcove, him
drinking brandy, her drinking whisky, watching the lights of the ships pass up
and down the river to one side, and the waiters and diners on the other side.
‘What you should do,’ she tells him, ‘is try to create an AI by hooking up
all the games consoles in the world. Use the connectivity.’
‘AI@home?’
‘Good a name as any’
194
‘Through 56k modems?’ he says scornfully.
‘Not now; once most people are connected by fibre optic or wireless.’
‘Anyway, these things are maxing out their hot little chips filling the
screen with gore and flying bullets; they’ve no time left for creating HAL.’
‘Get people to leave them switched on.’
‘Yeah. Best of luck.’
‘Or while they’re being used. You’d need to have them all doing something
else for a while.’
‘What?’
‘I don’t know.’
He thinks. ‘You could have them downloading updates off the net or showing
some screen stuff off their hard disks or a CD. Though there’s the small
matter of time synching everything throughout the world.’
‘Do–able, surely.’ Her little round glasses keep sliding down her nose and
she keeps popping them back up with her right index finger. He’s wondering how
she’d take it if he leaned over just before she did this herself and did it
for her. ‘Anyway,’ she says, ‘you wouldn’t need every single one.’
‘And you really think you could keep something like that secret?’
‘Good grief, no, you wouldn’t want to keep it secret!’ She looks horrified.
‘Why would you want to do that? No no! Tell people they’re part of a really
cool experiment to create an AI. Give them an incentive; make them cooperate.’
He screws up his eyes. ‘Why are we doing this again?’
‘What?’ she says brightly, almost jumping in her seat, ‘having dinner?’
He laughs. ‘Creating this AI.’
She shrugs. ‘Hell of it.’
He laughs again.
More drink is taken.
*
*
*
195
‘Gee, dude, you sound, like, conflicted.’
‘And that is a terrible American accent.’
She sucks air through one side of her mouth. ‘I know. I keep trying but it
never gets any better.’
‘May be time to give up.’
‘Nevertheless, I intend to persevere.’
‘Please reconsider.’
‘Umm,’ she stares upwards. ‘No.’
He shakes his head.
‘Sorry,’ she says. ‘We’re just stubborn.’
‘What, mathematicians?’
‘No, Graef family. So we return to the issue of family and feelings
towards.’
Anyway, I’m not conflicted.’
‘I think you are. You love your family and you hate them at the same time.’
‘No, I just hate them. See? No conflict.’

‘You’re conflicted about not being able to admit you love them.’
He squints at her. ‘You sure you’re a mathematician?’
More drink has been taken. They’re in the taxi going back to the hotel.
Anyway, I’m probably not going to sleep with you.’
‘Probably? Probably?’ He’s appalled. ‘You can’t say probably! That’s not
right! That’s not in the rules! You’re not allowed to say that!’ He’s on the
point of appealing to the taxi driver on the matter.
All right, definitely. Not tonight.’
‘What? Why not? I thought we were getting on great!’
‘So did I,’ she says. ‘Therefore we must have.’
‘So, what is it? You never do on a first date?’
‘Oh, God, no. Done that . . . Poh! Many a time and oft.’
‘Oh, thanks.’
‘But these were casual encounters,’ she tells him. ‘Basically physical.
Like sport, really.’
She looks pleased with this comparison.
196
‘Whereas we’re getting on so well, this is maybe too important to risk just
jumping into bed at the first opportunity.’
‘We’ve got on too well so you’re saying no?’ He’s genuinely aghast. ‘That’s
girl logic! You’re a mathematician; you should be immune to that!’
‘Ha,’ she laughs. ‘Proof against it. Hee hee.’
‘Look,’ he says, deciding to change tack, ‘just supposing we do.’
‘Supposing?’
‘Will you still respect me in the morning?’
– Not what he meant to say at the start of this but he’s always wanted to
say that line.
She frowns theatrically. ‘"Still"?’
Back at the hotel, they have the lift to themselves. He leans against one
mirrored wall, hands in trouser pockets, back slightly bent. She leans against
the opposite wall of mirror, one leg up behind her, arms crossed. She’s
smiling at him. He’s shaking his head at her.
It’s her floor first. There’s a delicate eking and the doors separate. She
steps up to him, pecks him on the cheek, then swivels to the doors, looks
back. ‘So, Mr McGill, coming?’
‘What?’ he says, leaning further forward. Thoroughly confused now.
The doors start to close but she blocks them with one sensibly shod foot and
a straight–armed hand.
‘Well?’ she says, nodding her head to the side to indicate the corridor.
He pushes away from the mirrored wall. ‘Did I pass a test or something?’
She’ s out the door, walking down the corridor, hips swinging. ‘No, just
changed my mind.’
He has to jump out through the closing doors.
‘You don’t say.’
‘A girl can change her mind, can’t she?’
197
He doesn’t know what to say. He shakes his head and starts loosening his
tie. She’s started whistling.
He began to write poems, and long letters to Sophie which he kept, dated and
sealed, just ready to have an address added to the envelopes, so that he could
post them to her when he discovered where she lived. He sent one short letter
to her at Lydcombe, marked Private and Personal and Please Forward and printed
out rather than handwritten so that it wouldn’t obviously be from him, asking
her very formally to get in touch with him and wishing her well, even though

he knew the letter was almost certain to be intercepted by James and Clara.
The poems were packed with dark images of loss and betrayal and long lyrical
passages full of references to plants and growth and beauty. The letters were
a kind of diary, telling her how he spent his days and weeks (partly to assure
her that he wasn’t trying to get off with any other girls), and partly
memories of their time together at Lydcombe, as well as intense avowals of
love and declarations of his determination to see her again and give their
love another chance.
There hadn’t been much more fallout. He’d overheard talk about sending him
to the school counsellor but that died a death. Andy had no more man–to–man
talks with him. Leah was, if anything, even more loving and sympathetic
towards him than before. That could be embarrassing when they went out. He
usually tried to walk a few steps behind her if they had to go into Richmond
together.
He tried talking to his cousin Haydn when Andy and Leah had Kennard and
Renee round for a dinner party. They sat playing computer games in Alban’s
bedroom. Haydn was hopeless. He wasn’t allowed to play computer games at home
and had promised not to play them if he went to friends’ houses. Alban wasn’t
sure which was more mad; making this promise or actually sticking to it. Also,
Haydn’s younger brother Fielding was there too and was a complete nuisance. He
and Haydn were obviously expected to keep the brat
198
amused even though he was so much younger than they were. Ten; just a kid.
Really.
Happily, Alban was able to dig out an old Rubik’s cube from the back of a
toy drawer and get the boy fascinated by that – Fielding had never seen one
before – so Alban and Haydn were able to play in peace. Haydn had no idea what
he was doing, but he loved playing. There was a desperate enthusiasm to his
game–play as though he was trying to pack in a year’s worth of competition
into one evening.
‘How come you’re playing here when you won’t play with your friends?’ Alban
asked Haydn as the younger boy handed him the warm handset.
‘I promised I wouldn’t play with friends, not relations,’ Haydn explained,
blinking behind his glasses.
‘Hmm,’ Alban said, seeing an opening. ‘Talking about relations, do you ever
see Uncle James and Aunt Clara at all these days?’
‘Not since last year. They’re down in Somerset, aren’t they?’ Haydn was
watching Alb an’s hands as they fiddled absently with the controls, his turn
waiting.
‘Yeah. What about cousin Sophie?’
‘What about her?’ Haydn frowned, still looking at the controls, unused in
Alban’s hands.
‘Where is she these days?’
‘I don’t know. Are you going to take your turn? I could take yours if you
like.’
‘Done it!’ Fielding shouted, and came bouncing off the bed to shove between
them, flourishing a cube with one completed side, all red.
Alban sighed.
He tried phoning and writing to other cousins, but nobody seemed to know
anything. He kept on writing his poems and his letters to Sophie. He copied
out some of the better and more romantic and tragic poems and included them
with some of the letters.
He wondered aloud over a Sunday brunch about whether they
199
might go back to Lydcombe for Christmas, but was reminded that they were all

going skiing in Austria. Maybe next Easter? They were staying at home, or
going to Garbadale. The summer, then? he suggested.
‘Bor–ing!’ Cory sang, turning over her empty eggshell to do the trick where
you pretended it was an uneaten one and you didn’t want it – would you like
it, Mummy?
Andy closed his Observer and looked at Alb an over the newspaper. Alban, I’m
afraid we can forget about going back to Lydcombe for the foreseeable future.
Certainly for as long as James and Clara are there.’ He looked like he was
going to say more, but then just exchanged a look with Leah and opened his
newspaper up again.
‘I think Austria’s going to be wonderful!’ Leah said.
Austria. That was nowhere near where Sophie had gone skiing before – and so
might go skiing again – in the French Alps.
Alban started thinking again about making his own way back to north Somerset
and trying to find some of Sophie’s friends.
The next big family bash was the marriage of cousin Steve – the son of Aunt
Linda and Uncle Percy – to his girlfriend Tessa, in York, the following
February. He knew they’d been invited and had RSVP’d. He made sure to ask
about where they were staying, just to check that everything was still
proceeding smoothly. They were staying at a hotel; now he was sixteen, Alban
was even getting his own single room.
She would have to be there, wouldn’t she? It was a wedding. They were
important, symbolic. There hadn’t been a big family celebration and
get–together for a couple of years; everybody had to be there. She’d be there.
She’d probably insist.
He didn’t ask beforehand whether Sophie would be at the wedding – that would
look suspicious, desperate. He kept thinking of her, though; remembering her
smile, her laugh, her voice, the smell of her hair and the feel of his hands
on her body, hers on his, the memory of being inside her.
Her words, the sayings – all now incorporated into poems – were
200
with him still. ‘They’ve all bleedin’ gone!’ ‘Fell off me ‘oss, didn’ I, guv?’
‘Blimey, Andy, I didn’t enjoy it that much.’ He has made a private ritual of
whispering, ‘Cuz, cuz, sweet cuz,’ to himself each night before he goes to
sleep, like a little prayer.
‘You must think me terribly rude.’
‘Must I? Very well.’
‘No, really, Win; I’m sorry about–’
‘Think nothing of it, dear. I’m sure I don’t.’
Oh, shit, he must be standing beside Grandma Win. The voices are coming from
behind him, and sound close.
‘Well, so long as we–’
‘Of course, of course. Now . . .’
‘Fine, then. I’ll see you in a bit.’
‘Not if I see you first,’ he hears Grandma Win say quietly. He hadn’t
recognised the other voice.
They’re in the big hotel near York, for the buffet reception, to be followed
by a wedding dinner in the evening. He’d got fed up being collared by old lady
relations telling him how much he’d grown (he had to wipe his cheek after
Great–Aunt Beryl kissed him) and so he’d wandered over to the windows,
carrying a glass of lemonade because Andy says he’s still not allowed even a
glass of wine until the evening. There were some chairs and he’d thought he
might sit down, but then he’d have looked lost and lonely and like a
wallflower, so instead he went to look at the view over the grounds which is
why he’s looking out over the damp grass and the leafless trees towards the
distant grey river, standing within the high alcove of the floor–length
windows, some very tall green velvet curtains at his back. He wasn’t trying to

hide, he was just leaning against the inset’s white–painted wood panels, but
the curtains must be sort of hiding him and now he’s trapped.
He turns as carefully as he can, realising that, shit, yes, he’s almost
completely hidden by the curtains. A chair scrapes on the parquet flooring and
the curtains nudge out towards him at chair–back height. Oh, fuck, she’ s sat
down.
201
He could be trapped here for hours.
On the other hand, he might hear some useful stuff. Maybe he’ll even hear
Grandma Win tell somebody where Sophie is – you never know.
It had been a disappointing wedding so far. Sophie isn’t here. James and
Clara are. He’s seen them both; Uncle James spotted him while they were filing
into the church but ignored him, just looked right through him. Aunt Clara saw
him as he came into the ballroom for the reception a little ahead of Andy and
Leah and Cory. She scowled at him before quickly turning away. He’s been
wondering whether there is any point in going up to either of them, just to
say hello, maybe even to apologise for any misunderstanding, but he doesn’t
really want to have to and is almost relieved that they seem so forbidding.
Probably no point.
Now he was trapped here, and if he moved or sneezed or this fucking chair
was pushed much further back, he’d be discovered, and of course Grandma Win
would assume he was deliberately spying on her. Oh, bugger. This is his dad’s
fault; Andy stopped him from taking his new Walkman to church or to this
reception. If he’d had the damn thing he could have pretended that he’d been
standing here listening to it and so been completely, innocently unaware of
what was going on behind him.
A muffled voice, then Grandma Win saying, ‘Of course, dear. Would you? Oh,
just a little bit of everything. And a refill, if you would. Graeme; come and
sit here. Where’s Kennard? Fabiole, dear, see if you can find Kennard, would
you? Lauren, you’re an absolute dear, but would you sit over there? I’d like
to talk to Kennard, and you know he does talk so softly, and that is my good
side. Thank you; bless you, dear.’
He knows he really ought to wait here and see if he hears anything about
Sophie, but he doesn’t know that he dares. If he’s discovered, they’re bound
to blame him. If he goes now he might get an odd look or two, but he should be
okay because they’ve all only just sat down. If he waits, then it’s going to
be obvious even though he was here first
202
that he chose to stay to listen to what people are saying. And sooner or later
his mum and dad are going to wonder where he is and start looking for him,
maybe calling for him. That’ll just be too awkward.
He had worried about being treated like some sort of freak or leper because
of what had happened with Sophie, but so far everything seems normal. Well, as
normal as these family get–togethers ever got. He’d had nightmares about
entering a room like this in front of everybody and the whole place going
silent as they all looked at him, appalled – he’d assumed – that he’d had the
nerve to turn up after the disgraceful under–age deflowering of his cousin.
Then he’d look down and realise they were staring at him because he was
completely naked. Then he’d wake up.
In the end, though – back in boring reality – nobody seemed to be reacting
any differently towards him apart from James and Clara. Maybe it had all been
hushed up, like the government did with awkward stuff. He supposed, being
honest with himself, that suited all of them, including him.
Anyway, he needs a pee; too much lemonade.
He sort of nudges his behind backwards, against the top of the chair–back
through the curtain.

‘Oh! Who’s that?’ Grandma Win says. ‘There’s somebody there!’ he hears her
say to the others.
He steps round the curtain. ‘Hi, Grandma.’ He feels himself going red.
‘Alban!’ Grandma Win says cheerfully, putting out her hand to him. She is
dressed in dark lilac and wears a wide hat the same colour. There’s a group of
family ranged around her, all nodding, saying hello. And what were you doing
there, young man?’ Grandma Win says, smiling up at him and taking hold of his
hand, ‘Trying to escape? Eh? Planning a getaway?’
‘No, I was just–’
‘And how are you, young man? You’re looking very well. What a lovely suit.
And are you sticking in at school? I hear very good reports, academically.’
203
‘I’m fine,’ he says, not sure what to answer, or even whether.
‘I’m very glad to hear it, Alban,’ Grandma Win says, patting the hand she is
holding with her free hand. ‘Oh, I can see you’re going to break a few hearts
before you’re done! Isn’t he, Lauren?’
‘Bound to,’ Aunt Lauren agrees, lighting up a cigarette.
‘Oh, Lauren, please,’ Grandma Win says, with a sorrowful smile.
‘I’m sorry,’ Aunt Lauren says. ‘Forgot.’ She stubs the cigarette out in a
little round ashtray she keeps in her handbag.
‘Now, Alban,’ Grandma Win says, ‘I hope you’ll have a dance with your old
gran this evening. Will you? That won’t be too terrible for you, will it?’
A dance? Is she mad? ‘Of course, Grandma,’ he says.
‘Good lad. I can see you’re going to be a very nice young man. Now, I’d
better let you go, or people will talk, don’t you think?’ She giggles like a
girl and lets go of his hand. He smiles awkwardly and turns to go. ‘Oh,
Alban?’ she says.
He turns back. ‘Yes, Grandma?’
‘Fabiole seems to have disappeared. Would you be a darling and bring me a
glass of champagne?’
‘Of course, Grandma.’
‘You are so sweet! And – please – do call me Win.’
‘Okay, Win.’
‘You’re an absolute darling.’
Even in their heels, he realises, he is taller than most of the female
relatives he has to dance with after dinner.
Grandma Win insists on her dance. She has changed, wearing a gauzy red dress
now. She smells of lilies. Her eyes are about level with his chin.
And how are you really, Alban?’ she asks him.
‘Really, Win?’
‘You know what I mean.’
‘I am,’ he begins. ‘I’m fine.’
‘So, you’re over your little pash, are you?’
204
It takes him a moment to realise what she’s talking about. A little pash? He
feels like stepping on one of the old cow’s feet. He hesitates, not sure what
to say. He’s worried that he might break down and start crying if he talks
about Sophie, especially to Grandma Win.
Alban, dear,’ Win says quietly as they dance, ‘y°u have to realise that I
always try to do what’s best for the family. I don’t do things for myself, or
even for Bert. It’s all for this family. That’s been my role. It might seem
old–fashioned nowadays, but it’s what I believe in. I know you must blame me
for what happened at Lydcombe, but – oh dear, there really is no other way of
saying this – it is for your own good. Can you see that? Are you mature enough
to understand that?’ They look into each other’s eyes at that point. She seems

small and frail, but he feels like he’s dancing with a flick knife wrapped in
a lace hanky. He wants to shiver. ‘No, you must hate me for that too, I dare
say,’ she says, looking over his shoulder again. ‘But never mind. I know I
hated being told that sort of thing. Everybody does. And of course it’s even
more annoying when it’s true and it honestly is for your own good. Sometimes
you just have no choice but to trust your elders.’ They dance on a little
further. He prays for the tune to end. ‘So, are you all right, Alban?’
Of course he’s not all right. How can he ever be all right without Sophie,
without even knowing where she is? ‘I’ll be fine, Win,’ he says.
‘And are you over it?’ Her voice is quite soft.
‘I will be fine, please believe me,’ he tells her. He means, I’ll be fine
when I can get back in touch with Sophie, and even more fine when we’re
together again, for ever this time. He is not going to say more, he is not
going to deny Sophie, deny his love for her, or say anything that is actually
a lie.
‘Good,’ Win says. Well, please believe me, I do hope that you are and you
will be.’ She stops dancing and takes her hands from his hand and his
shoulder. And now you’d best see me back to my seat, I think. If you’d be so
kind.’
He remembers to thank her for the dance.
205
He dances with Tessa the bride. She’s nineteen; only three years older than
he is. She’s petite, curvy and blonde and, frankly, he fancies her. He gets an
erection when he dances with her, but keeps it out of the way so that she
doesn’t notice. She’s dancing with everybody, and just glows and smiles and
seems to be having a great time.
He has to dance with Leah, too, who is tipsy and giggles a lot. It’s just
embarrassing.
There are some very pretty girls and at least one stunning bridesmaid from
Tessa’s side of the family he wouldn’t mind dancing with. There’s supposed to
be a disco later, with proper records rather than this rubbish band; he’ll
wait till then to start asking girls to dance. He’s had two glasses of wine –
Andy knows about one, Leah about the other – but he’s not really affected much
at all. He feels a little merry, if that’s the right word, but nothing
special. He thinks he’ll try for another glass at the bar in a minute.
He’s sitting at a table, taking a rest – his shoes are new and not all that
comfortable, so it’s worth saving his feet for the disco later
- when Aunt Lauren comes to sit with him, asking him how he is and if he’s
enjoying himself. Aunt Lauren is about Andy’s age; a round, cuddly–looking
woman with fuzzy brown hair and – usually
- a taste for alarmingly stripy tights. This evening she’s more conventionally
attired in a floaty peachy thing.
‘Darling,’ she says quietly, briefly touching his arm, ‘I did hear something
about you and young Sophie.’ She smiles tremulously.
She did? Who told her?
He says, ‘Oh?’
‘It must have been difficult for you, Alban. These things always are when
you’re very young.’
‘D’you mind if I ask how did you find out, Aunt Lauren?’
‘Don’t worry.’ Aunt Lauren winks at him. ‘Nobody else knows.’ She leans in
closer. ‘And not everybody knows that I know.’ She smells of cigarettes and
perfume. ‘But I thought you should.’
‘Right.’
206
‘Were you very serious, the two of you?’
‘Yes,’ he tells her. He can’t help feeling she’s going to slap him in a

minute, or burst out laughing, but she seems to be serious so he treats her
the same way. ‘Yes, we were.’
‘Was it terribly romantic? Was it?’
‘It was–’ He feels embarrassed, looks down. ‘It was . . . it was beautiful,
Aunt Lauren,’ he tells her, looking up at her, feeling terribly vulnerable,
already preparing to be stoical and unflinching if she does now laugh at him,
or tell him not to be so stupid, it’s just puppy love, a silly infatuation.
Instead, she catches her breath, puts one hand to her peach–lipsticked
mouth. ‘You poor, poor things.’ She shakes her head, her eyes shine and he
worries that she’s about to start crying. ‘You loved her,’ she says, nodding.
‘Yes, of course.’ He keeps his voice calm, level.
She gives a trembly smile and reaches out, ruffling his hair. He manages not
to flinch. ‘Oh! You’re so young! You poor things! Our own little Romeo and
Juliet! You’re just children, but you grow up so fast nowadays.’
‘She’s in Spain now, I think,’ he says, not knowing what else to say.
Aunt Lauren takes her hand out of his hair. That’s a relief. ‘I know,’ she
says. ‘Madrid. I know.’
She does, does she? He says, ‘Do you know whereabouts she is? I’d like to
write to her but James and Clara won’t forward–’
‘Now, Alban, I’ve had to promise not to tell you where she is, I’m sorry.
But she’s fine, I know I can tell you that.’
‘All I want to do is write to her, Aunt Lauren.’
‘I know, dear, I know. But I can’t give you her address. Actually, I don’t
know her address. Not properly. I know where she is, but not its address.’ (He
makes a mental note of that ‘its’.) She looks thoughtful. ‘I suppose it
wouldn’t be difficult to find out. That should be possible. I suppose.’ She
bites on the nail of her left small finger.
‘Could you do that?’ he asks.
This could be the way!
207
‘Well,’ she says, sounding uncertain.
‘Could you maybe forward my letters to her?’ he asks urgently, turning to
her and leaning forward, keeping his voice down. There doesn’t seem to be
anybody near enough to overhear. Most of them are up dancing. The music is
quite loud, drowning out any other conversations and keeping theirs unheard by
others. ‘That’s all I need, just to be able to write to her. Could you?
Please? Please, Aunt Lauren.’
Aunt Lauren takes a breath and draws herself upright. ‘Yes. I could do that
for you, Alban,’ she says. She nods. ‘I would love to do that for you. Yes, I
would.’
‘Oh, Aunt–’
‘No, wait. You’d have to promise me you wouldn’t be trying to get her to do
something her parents wouldn’t want. I mean like running off together or
something equally silly. I couldn’t be party to something like that. You’d
have to promise me that.’
‘All I want is to talk to her, to see her again.’
‘Well, that might happen one day, but you have to promise.’
‘I promise I won’t ask her to run off with me.’
‘Well, if you promise, all right.’
‘Thank you, Aunt Lauren. This means a lot to me.’
‘That’s quite all right. Now, you’ve got our address?’
‘Yes.’ He had the addresses of pretty much all the family; Andy and Leah
were strict about thank–you letters.
‘Right then. Just send me what you want me to pass on to her. I can’t
promise she’ll write back, of course. You do understand that?’
‘Of course, Aunt Lauren. Thank you. Thank you so much.’
‘Oh, you poor, lovely boy,’ she said, and held his face in both hands. He
could smell the sweet perfume and cigarette smoke again. ‘Now, will you have

one more dance with me?’
Aunt, I’d love to,’ he told her. He stood, grinning, and offered her his
arm.
Serves Two: boil a kettle (about four cups of water should be enough). Then in
a medium–sized bowl or other container big enough, make
208
a double helping of instant mash. Me myself personally I’d always use proper
Smash, so you’d pour the wee nuggety bit’s into the bowl first and then add
the water, but obviously substitute types of instant are acceptable (usually
this means putting the water in first – read the fucken packet). Add lump’s of
marge, butter if you have it and use some milk to replace some of the water if
desired. You can season the mash before–hand if prefered, salt and pepper
before adding the water, so the one mixing with the fork does two jobs. Add
Wooster sauce and Tomatoe sauce part way through mixing, again to taste, I
like quite a lot.
At this point, if I’m in a proper kitchen rather than out camping, I’ll be
adding the tin of baked beans cold, though you can have them heated up first
in a wee pan. Anyway, add them now. Just your usual tin–size tin. Mix a bit.
Now take a standard size tin of corned beef, dice and add to mixture. There
are different schools of thought regarding whether to scrape the fat that you
usually get round the top and corners of the beef off of it, but I advise it’s
removing. Take care to mash the chunks of corned beef well into the mix with
the fork, breaking apart any specially lumpy bits (also, if you happen to spot
any bits of vein or artery or whatever those pale chewy bits are you sometimes
get, at this point, hoick them out – better than discovering them wedged
between your gnashers later. Add more chutney’s, pickle’s and such like to
personal taste, always taking into account the proclivities of your fellow
diner. For a festive touch, great some cheese over the top, (or just add a few
slices if like me some basterts swiped your grater.) Microwave (only in a
proper kitchen, obviously, unless they’ve invented camping microwaves I’ve no
heard of!!!). Usually a couple of minutes does it.
Serve. One soup or desert spoon each should be all thats required.
Oh, sorry; name of dish: Slurry. So named by your man Alban, taking the pish
as per usual.
Enjoy!
*
*
*
209
In the end he took it down the loch, trussed in a brown paper parcel tied with
old, scratchy, hairy string. He’d wrapped it round a big boulder and had
intended to let it sink in the deepest part of the loch, but then he’d changed
his mind. He undid the package, took the boulder out and dropped it over the
side of the boat into the black–brown water, watching its unsteady paleness
disappear towards the cold depths within a couple of seconds.
The mountains stood tall on both sides of the long inland loch, greening
with the new spring. The eastern peaks shone with the sinking sunlight, the
western slopes were dark. A few high clouds spun slow across the sky, wisping
pink as the sunset came gradually on. Moderating, gusting, the west wind
brought a tang of ocean with it. He was about halfway down the loch, out of
sight of the jetty at its head and the windows of the top floor of Garbadale
House, out of sight of any habitation or road.
After he’d got rid of the boulder he tied the parcel back up again, then
used the petrol out of the boat’s fuel can to soak it, holding the bundle over
the side to try and avoid spilling the petrol and oil mixture inside the boat.
The tipped boat rocked to and fro beneath him, waves slapping on the hull.
Some of the fuel mixture hit the water, spreading almost instantly, producing

shimmering rainbow colours across the part–calmed waves in the lee of the
boat.
The fuel was cold where it touched his fingers. He washed one hand then the
other in the icy waters of the loch, holding the dripping, stinking parcel
through a loop of string on the top. Then he threw the package out, lobbing it
a metre or so from the boat. He brought out the container of windproof
matches. He lit one and threw. The wind caught it and so it missed, fizzing
out in the water just shy of the quarter–submerged package. He tried again,
allowing for the wind. The match struck the package and bounced off and at
first he thought it hadn’t worked, and so was preparing to strike another
match, when he saw the flame on the top of the parcel suddenly show blue, then
yellow.
The flames thickened and spread, quickly engulfing the package.
210
The wind was pushing the boat closer to the little island of flame he’d
created; he lifted an oar and pushed it further away. A lick of flame was left
on the blade of the oar; he stuck it in the water, dousing it. Then he started
the outboard, pulling on the starting lanyard a couple of times until the
little two–stroke puttered into life. He sat down, put the engine into reverse
and steered the boat a few more metres away from the burning package, then let
the engine idle, out of gear, while he sat and watched the parcel burn.
It burned well, the paper and string blackening and disappearing, letting
the fuel–soaked coat inside unfold itself as its constraining packaging flamed
away, like a dark, burning flower. The old waxed coat burned ever better; the
boat’s engine fuel starting it, the wax permeating its fibres keeping it going
until the whole brown–green skin of it was burning bright and fierce,
reflecting off the peaky little waves and warming his face.
He waited until there was almost nothing left, just a few ash–coloured
pieces of material, some still licked by tiny feeble tongues of flame, then he
gunned the boat’s engine, swung it round and ran right over what was left of
the coat that his mother had worn when she killed herself. He didn’t know what
ghoulishness or thoughtlessness had driven them to take the coat off her
recovered body and keep it – untouched, never to be worn, a ghost in
part–human shape, hanging, haunting – in the cloakroom of the house, but it
was not something he could bear. He had seen it last year when he’d been here
with his parents and could not believe that it was there. He couldn’t believe
it was still there when he’d come back by himself this year.
He’d talked to Neil McBride but the estate manager had been unwilling to do
anything about it; it was a family matter. He’d mentioned it to Grandma Win,
but she insisted the coat had to remain where it was and hinted,
round–aboutly, that her late husband Bert had wanted it to stay there. It had
been his favourite old coat, then one of the boys’, and it was in Bert’s
memory as well as Irene’s that it hung there in the cloakroom.
211
He hadn’t cared. He didn’t care. He’d stopped off at Garbadale while on a
motorbike tour of the Highlands, he’d taken the coat, wrapped it up around a
boulder from the shore, got a boat from the boathouse and come down here, out
of sight in the dying, gloaming light and burned the fucking thing. His
mother. His choice. If they really were upset, well tough; it was done.
Some sodden, flameless rags remained, barely floating. He ran the boat over
them a few more times, until there was almost nothing left to see, then turned
the bows of the boat to the north–west and the house, opening the engine up
and sitting back, breathing hard, the tears drying on his cheeks in the
created breeze of the boat’s slipstream.
‘All Bran!’

‘Yo, big man, feck me, you’re lookin smertl Fucken hell, wid ye take a look
at yon! Fucken hell!’
‘Big Al! How’re ye doin?’
‘Evening all.’
He’s back in Perth, at Tango’s old flat, order restored, door renewed after
the attentions of the police battering ram, Council apparently mollified, rent
and bills being paid off and life largely back to normal.
‘Take a seat, Al, go on; take a seat. Shone; shift up ya ignorant bam.
There. So, big man, how’s it hingin?’
‘I’m good. How’s everybody?’
Pleasantries are exchanged. The living room is fairly crowded and smoky, the
coffee table jammed with cans, bottles, ashtrays and mugs. Alban knows six of
the eight people present and recognises the other two, one of whom is a large
lady sporting a black eye. He can hear children yelling in another part of the
flat. ‘I was just thinkin about doin a giant–size Slurry fur the assembled
party,’ Tango explains. ‘Utilising a couple of tins of the mulligatawny
donated by your man Burb here. You in?’
Alban grins. ‘Tempting as ever, especially with the spicy soup, obviously;
however I was thinking of treating us all to a meal and it was a curry I was
thinking of
212
‘You flush, Al?’
‘As a freshly planed piece of inlay.’
‘Whit?’ says Shone.
‘Curry it is then.’
A takeaway is decided upon, not everybody wanting to have to go out to eat.
A large order is placed by phone. Al helps with some tea–making in the
kitchen, stepping over the dogs and two unidentified children conducting a
game which seems to consist entirely of being chased and screaming a lot.
‘Good tae see ye, Al.’
‘You too, Tango.’
‘Al, awfy sorry, but I still canny offer ye your room back. It’s just big
Mifty had a bit of a contretemps with her man and–’
‘No problem, Tango; staying at a hotel.’ He looks in the fridge. ‘Need more
milk. I’ll nip down to the shop.’
‘Shite,’ Tango says, nudging a passing child with one knee. ‘You been
pouring the milk down the toilet again?’ Children squeal, disappear.
‘Tango,’ Alban asks, drying his hands on a towel, ‘you said some of my stuff
reappeared?’
‘Aye, like ah said on the phone; fucken miracle, but it did. Out here. In
the cupboard.’ The big black plastic bag falls out of the hall cupboard as the
door opens. ‘No actual pack, of course – tolt you that cop fancied it – but
they sent you all this lot back.’
Alban takes a quick look inside. ‘Right. I’ll just leave it here for now,
pick it up before I head back to the hotel.’
‘Dinnae forget now.’
‘I won’t.’
The takeaway is delivered; they eat most of it and some is saved for the
next day. Tango makes burgers and chips for the children. Cans are drunk,
vodka bottles are opened, joints smoked. Deedee admits that he doesn’t
actually like Tango’s Slurry. Tango is horrified. ‘But it’s my signature
dish!’
A heated debate ensues regarding the relative merits of Smash
213
and Mr Mash, the latter finally coming out on top in a vote – despite Tango’s
howls of protest – largely due to the shape of the pack making it easier to

conceal about one’s person whilst departing from your average retail outlet
without the monetary side of said purchase technically having been completed.
Vodka bottles are emptied, more joints smoked. Alban is relatively abstemious,
and gets up to leave about eleven, to a chorus of calls to stay.
Tango sees him out. They retrieve the black plastic bag with his belongings
from the hall cupboard.
‘This you off, then, Al?’ Tango says quietly.
Alban looks at him. There’s something in Tango’s expression, as though he’s
seen something in Alban’s.
Aye, might be a while,’ he says, twisting the top of the bin liner to get a
better grip. ‘Through to Glasgow tomorrow, up north for a family gathering in
a couple of days. After that, we’ll see.’
Tango puts his hand out. ‘Well, you take care, man, all right?’
‘Course I will. You too. Keep in touch.’
Aw aye?’ Tango grins.
‘No, seriously. I’m thinking about getting a mobile; maybe even tomorrow.
I’ll call you.’
‘You do that, big man.’
‘Cheers, Tango. Thanks for everything.’
‘Via con Dios, Al.’
‘Not a fucking chance.’
They hug, then he’s out the door, down the stairs and away.

214

6

T
hey’re walking along the bank of the River Kelvin on a cool day in Glasgow
when it feels like the year’s turned, the city a distant grey loudness away
and above them, the dank smell of the river – white tumbling down weirs, slack
and dark on the long stretches in between – following them, its sound echoing
under the bridges and between the walls and abutments hemming it.
She is dressed as ever, with gloves but no coat. He’s in boots and jeans and
his old hiking jacket, though he’s had it cleaned and reproofed. They’re
walking slowly. They have their arms round each other’s waists, her head
sometimes resting lightly on his shoulder.
Finally, she is talking about what happened in the tsunami. She wouldn’t,
before now. The shallow scars on her flank and back were the only memories she
was prepared to reveal. They’re almost gone now, slowly fading to nothing. Now
she’ll talk about what happened.
She was snorkelling over the reef, early morning. She’d left Sam, the guy
she’d gone on holiday with – another climber – fast asleep in their beach hut.

Another beautiful day; she’d felt energised and elated and had swum far along
and far out, just happy to feel the sunlight and warm water on her skin. She’d
been swimming, head down, watching a bright shoal of tiny fish far below,
heading for a small ridge of reef vaguely visible ahead when she realised the
fish
215
had speeded up, and so had she; the rippled scape of sand under the fish was,
quite abruptly, moving past much faster than it had been. Tiny puffs of sand,
moving and lengthening like microscopic smoke trails, showed that some sort of
current was moving the whole mass of water she and the fish were swimming in
out to sea. She didn’t understand this.
She brought her head out of the water, but everything looked normal; waves
everywhere, but with some roughness over the reef ahead that she hadn’t
noticed before . . .
The water was moving away from the land. She started to realise what it
might be as she was pulled over the start of the reef, the waves rising,
becoming more turbulent. She felt a sudden chill and was uncertain whether
this was a patch or current of cold water or something from inside herself.
This meant something. She’d heard of this. This was bad. A warning. She put
her head under the water again, trying to see the reef. It was very shallow;
she didn’t want to hit any coral. You weren’t supposed to touch the reef,
break any bits off. The water was turning cloudy with sand, filling with air
bubbles. What she glimpsed of the reef was very close. She tried to swim
towards what looked like a slightly deeper part off to one side. The water was
getting wild over the reef, sloughing back from the land all along the coast
of the island. She got a glimpse of the golden beach, lush green trees and
perfectly blue sky in the distance, all seemingly serene and untroubled, as
though nothing was happening.
She was pulled sideways on a curving current. Something slammed into her
side and started to turn her over. She yelled, spitting out the snorkel’s
mouthpiece as she was hauled on her back over the rough fingers and hard
ridged surfaces of the coral.
Tsunami. It had to be a tsunami. She’d been to a conference in Japan, some
place by the sea she couldn’t remember the name of where they had tsunami
warning signs everywhere and this was one of the things they told you about,
the phenomenon that let you know there was a big wave coming; the sea
disappeared, pulling
216
back from the land. When that happened you had to get to high ground, because
the sea always came back, in a tsunami.
The sea was rough, no longer sparkling and blue but turning a sandy brown
colour where it wasn’t frothing dirty white. The reef was behind her now. She
tried to swim, keeping her body as close to the surface of the water as she
could to avoid being hit by any more bits of reef or rock. She started
swimming out to sea through the crashing waves. There was no pattern to the
waves now, just chaos; she coughed and spluttered, taking in mouthfuls of
gritty water. The mask and snorkel, she realised, had gone, torn off. She
remembers thinking, quite calmly, that this was annoying and inconvenient,
because the snorkel might have come in handy in all this turbulent water, and
the fact she’d lost it meant she might die.
‘And I thought of Sam,’ she says, now, by the bank of the Kelvin. ‘He’d
wanted to buy me a mobile at the airport before we left, but I wouldn’t let
him. I had this little waterproof bag on my bikini bottom with money in it and
the money was still there. Sam kept his mobile in his. If I’d had a mobile I
could have rung him and warned him.’
‘Or that might have got torn off too,’ Alban says, tightening his arm around

her, pulling her closer. ‘Or his might have been turned off. You don’t know.’
‘Anyway, I kept swimming out, following the water.’
‘Not to land?’
‘I was too far out. Anyway, it had just taken me.’
The water grew less turbulent, a little colder, as she followed its slow
retreat. She thought of turning back, of swimming back to land, of running up
the beach and along it back to the hotel and beach huts, warning people,
warning Sam. But she didn’t know how soon the wave would come, was terrified
that if she did swim back the tsunami would catch her while she was still
running along the beach.
When the wave came it lifted her like a big breaker on a surf beach, but
then didn’t drop her back; instead the bevelled, not quite
217
yet breaking slope of water was like the edge of a vast moving slab of ocean,
powering its way en masse towards the land. She felt herself accelerated in
the direction of the shore, and turned and swam as hard as she could out to
sea again, really frightened now, starting to panic, feeling the strength
leach out of her as her muscles tired. She was a strong, fast swimmer; she
tried to put what was happening out of her mind and just settle into a
powerful, rhythmic crawl, imagining herself in a pool, trying for a personal
best 100 metres.
She heard the wave hit the land, the thunder of its falling on the exposed
reefs and sand, the splintering, crashing sound of it smashing trees. She
listened for screams, each time she turned one ear upwards to the air, but
didn’t think she heard any.
Finally, she was too exhausted to do the crawl. She turned on her back, to
use a slightly different set of muscles in the backstroke. She could look back
at the land now, seeing far distant trees, and waves almost as high. She
couldn’t tell if she was still being driven towards the land or not. The trees
she could see looked quite far away. She kept on swimming. Her arms and legs
felt like jelly, like there was no bone in them, like they were as
insubstantial and weak as the flesh of a stranded jellyfish. She felt sick,
and retched up salty water, coughing and spluttering as some of it came down
her nose and feeling for a moment that she was drowning. She kept on swimming.
Some time later a fishing boat picked her up. She tried to help them pull
her into the boat but she had no strength left. It took three of the men to
haul her in. She lay gasping on the guts–slicked deck, staring up at the
rolling sky beyond a stubby mast, trying to thank them, saying, ‘Tsunami,
tsunami.’ They put an old waterproof jacket round her, though she wasn’t cold.
She got to her knees, puked over the gunwale, then saw they were heading in,
towards land.
‘You’ve got to wait,’ she tried to tell them. ‘Sometimes there’s more than
one.’ Didn’t they know this? She couldn’t explain. The
218
men were staring at the land and shouting and pointing and arguing, seemingly
unable to work out exactly where they were, or not sure whether to go back in
or not. They didn’t pay her much attention and she was too weak to stand up
and start shouting and waving her arms about and punch shoulders and talk
loudly or whatever it would take to get them to listen to her and somehow make
them understand.
She lay draped over the gunwale of the fishing boat, her hands dipping into
the water, her head lying on the wooden rail, her body slack against the
inside of the hull, her lower legs splayed across the deck, and she listened
to the drone of the outboard taking them back towards danger and to the sound
of the men shouting and arguing, and she started to cry as she realised what
she was going to have to do.

She waited as long as she dared while a little strength began to return to
her muscles, then levered herself up and slipped over the side of the boat.
She’d hoped they might circle back and try to pick her up again, which might
at least stop them from going any further in, but the boat ploughed on. She
never knew if they’d even noticed her throwing herself back into the water
again.
‘You had to get back in the water?’ he says.
‘I’d convinced myself there was going to be another wave; maybe more than
one. I felt as long as I could stay in the water far enough out I’d be safe.
I’m at home in the water, I can tread water, I can swim for hours at the right
rhythm. Even tired out I felt I had a better chance than being back on shore,
facing another wave.’
‘Fucking hell.’ He stops and swings into her, taking her in both arms,
enfolding her, hugging her to him, putting his nose into her short,
black–blonde hair, and feeling her respond and clasp him to her. ‘And there
was another wave?’
‘It was almost as big as the first,’ she says into the collar of his jacket.
Then a smaller one after that. I think I saw the fishing boat upside down in
the trees a couple of days later, while we were still waiting to be lifted
out. But it might not have been the same one.
219
I forgot to look for a name or number or anything. Just another white fishing
boat with an outboard.’
When she says ‘we’, she means all the surviving holidaymakers. She doesn’t
mean her and Sam. They finally found his body half a kilometre inland a week
after the tsunami hit.
A few things came to fill her mind as she trod water and swam weakly and
discoordinatedly against the slow current. First, she wished she had a hat
(she kept flapping water over her head to cool herself as the sun rose,
beating down). Second, she remembered that Alban had once called her a tough
cookie. At the time she had felt somewhat insulted, but just then, floating
there wondering if Sam was dead and whether she was going to die, the phrase
took on a kind of almost mystical significance. Yes, she was a tough cookie,
and she would survive and she would not easily disintegrate and turn to mush
just because she had been dunked in the water for a long time.
Also, third, she tried to quantify how hopelessly, uselessly, pathetically
weak she felt. It took a long time – she was a mathematician, after all, not a
poet, so images were not normally her strong suit –but eventually she decided
on one. It involved a banana. Specifically, the long stringy bits you find
between the skin and the flesh of a banana. She felt so weak you could have
tied her up with those stringy bits of a banana and she wouldn’t have been
able to struggle free. That was how weak she felt.
She was so exhausted and delirious with the weight of sunshine slamming down
on her blonde, short–haired head all those long lonely hours that when she did
finally come up with this image of utter and pathetic weakness she gave
herself a croaky little cheer.
She didn’t swim back in until some time past noon. When she got to the shore,
staggering through the debris washing around the tide–line, having to sit on
the wave–smoothed sand for a while to get some strength back into her
quivering legs, she thought that – despite trying to swim against the current
and so keep opposite the same
220
stretch of shore all this time – she must be a kilometre or two down the
coast. This stretch was unrecognisable, just a wasteland of flattened trees
and drifts of branches, leaves and fronds, studded with more smashed wood and

the occasional piece of wreckage recognisable as human stuff: white plastic
patio chairs, a piece of material that might have been a sundress, a
cheery–looking beach towel with a sunset on it, and a parasol – colourful
strips hanging tattered from white, twisted ribs. There were some sort of
sand–covered ruins off to one side. She walked inland a little and discovered
the remains of the tarmac road, and looked back and realised that the ruins
were the hotel they’d been staying beside. She had come ashore almost exactly
where their beach hut had been.
She escaped with bruising and cuts to her side and back, dehydration, and
sunburn that made her face and shoulders peel.
He doesn’t know what to say. He just holds her. He’d been waiting for her to
tell him, but had started to think that maybe she wouldn’t, ever. All he’d
known was that she’d been there with this guy Sam – he’d never met him – and
Sam had died and she’d survived because she’d been in the sea at the time. The
rest, the details, she hadn’t wanted to talk about, until now.
‘Did you ever get any counselling for this, VG?’
She shakes her head, takes a deep breath and pulls away from him, still
holding his waist with both hands. ‘No.’
He tips his head to one side. ‘You talked about this to anybody else?’
One quick shake of the head. ‘No.’ She frowns. ‘Well. I did try to tell
Sam’s family, but they . . . They were understandably . . . They were very
upset. The more I said the worse it got, so I shut up.’
‘Think maybe you should talk to somebody else?’
‘No, I don’t.’ Her eyes are the colour of old ice, and big and bright and
very open, the look of perpetual surprise phased into something injured but
defiant. ‘I’ve told you. And that’s more for you than for me. Feel free to
feel privileged. I don’t need to tell anybody
221
else. And I’d appreciate it if you didn’t tell other people. Not without
checking with me first.’
He shakes his head. Dear God, you’re a hard one, VG. Or at least you think
you are. Who is he kidding? She is.
All the things he can think of saying sound trite and tired and clichéd when
he thinks of them, so he doesn’t say anything.
He puts one hand up to her cheek. She leans her face very slightly towards
his hand. Her eyes close. He lets his hand slip round behind her head to the
nape of her neck. It feels soft and warm. He pulls lightly, bringing them
slowly towards each other, and kisses her gently on the lips, nose and cheeks,
then hugs her carefully to him again.
The year went on. Exams came and went. He grew a little taller, then stopped
growing. He was shaving every couple of days now; more often if he was going
out. He fancied other girls, danced and kissed and copped the occasional feel,
but – even when, a couple of times, he was told he could – he didn’t take it
any further, because he was trying to stay faithful to Sophie. He still wrote
poems, and sent her a letter every week, usually writing a few lines each
night before he went to sleep. He sent the letters to Aunt Lauren on her and
Graeme’s farm in Norfolk. He’d sent a whole package the first time, a kind of
edited highlights of all the poems and letters he’d written before Lauren had
made her offer. He’d asked Sophie to reply in the covering letter that went
with that first bundle as well as in most of the letters in the package, and
he repeated the request in his first few letters after this secret postal
service had been set up. About a week after the first bundle had been sent, he
allowed himself to start getting excited, waiting for the reply that now,
surely, had to come. Their post was usually delivered after he’d gone to
school, so he had to wait until he got home each day to see if there were any
letters. The second Saturday after he’d had the conversation with Aunt Lauren,
he’d hung around near the front door when the postman was due, making sure he

was first to the mail, but there was nothing for him. The week became a
fortnight, then three weeks,
222
then a month. He wondered if something had come for him but had been
intercepted by his parents. But that was paranoid. They weren’t like that.
Were they?
He told himself it would take time. He imagined her being shut up in some
forbidding Spanish boarding school – he’d seen photos of the Escorial, near
Madrid, and that was the image he had whenever he thought of the place – and
it being, perhaps, difficult for her to get out to a post office. He wondered
if his mail was being intercepted before it got to her, if there was some
strict housemistress who censored the mail of the girls and would never let
anything as passionate and improper get through to one of her charges.
He wrote to Aunt Lauren, checking that she really was sending the letters
on. She wrote back saying that she was. In his next letter to Sophie he asked
her to write care of Jamie Boyd, his best friend for the last term. Jamie was
the sort of pal who’d pass on mail dependably and unopened. Nothing came via
Jamie either.
The Easter holidays arrived. He hoped that he’d hear something then, when
she might be home and so able to write or phone. But still nothing. He decided
she was probably staying with her biological mother, still in Spain. He’d have
to be patient, wait until the summer holidays. She’d be bound to come back to
the UK then. She’d be at Lydcombe and able to write or phone.
More studying, exams, homework, washing the car and doing housework to
justify his pocket money, more snogs at parties.
At one party, at Plink’s house, a week before the start of the summer
holidays, he got the knickers off a girl and used his fingers to make her
come, hugging her to him afterwards.
His fingers smelled just the way they had with Sophie, which was achingly
nostalgic and sweet, yet somehow sad at the same time. She was called Julie.
He fell out with her the next day when he said he didn’t really want to go
steady.
Andy, Leah, he and Cory spent the first two weeks of the summer holidays in
Antigua. He felt he was practically thrown at the sixteen–year–old daughter of
a Manchester couple who were
223
in the bungalow next to theirs; the adults suddenly became fast friends and
their offspring seemed to be expected to follow suit. Emma was blonde and
leggy and attractive in an ice–maiden kind of way but the only similarity to
Sophie was that she had braces. They kissed at a dance in the big hotel. The
next day they rode around part of the island in a two–person bike thing with a
canopy and he told her something about Sophie and his feelings for her. She
understood, seemed almost relieved. They played a lot of tennis and kept in
touch for years afterwards until she moved to South Africa.
During the summer he had a work–experience job at Kew; just general digging
and lugging and so on, but it was at Kew, which was all that mattered, and he
loved it. He started going out with one of the girl trainees, Claire. She was
small, dark, chunky and curvaceous. They kissed sometimes but she wouldn’t let
him go any further than putting his hand between her top and her bra. They
went to each other’s houses; her parents lived in a semi in Hounslow under the
Heathrow flight path. They spent time listening to records and playing games
and kissing. He still felt he was being faithful to Sophie. This was, partly,
an act; cover.
The summer wore on.
Still nothing from Sophie. Grandma Win had invited him to Garbadale for the
last two weeks of the holidays, to do some gardening if he was so inclined –

goodness knows, the place could do with all the help it could get – just to
relax and amuse himself as best he could if he’d prefer. He hadn’t said a
definite yes or no yet, but he needed to make up his mind.
There’s a small family do at the Richmond house; Kennard and Renee come with
Haydn and Fielding and while he and Haydn are playing on the NES – he’s got a
US version of a new game called Super Mario Brothers via his pal with the
computer magazine–publishing dad – Haydn mentions being at Lydcombe a couple
of weeks ago and seeing cousin Sophie. Alban drops the controls.
224
What?
Sophie had been there for about a month at that point. Off to the States to
stay with Aunt, umm, well aunt and uncle somebody – he couldn’t remember . . .
Haydn looks at his new Casio watch, which has an entire tiny keyboard of
buttons, and of which he is inordinately proud, even though his fat little
fingers can barely manage the buttons . . . Leaving today, actually. This
evening, in fact. Ha! That distant roar could be Sophie’s plane leaving now,
for all they know. That’d be funny, wouldn’t it?
For an instant, as he sinks back against the side of the bed –Fielding is on
it, cross–legged, reading a comic he’s brought with him – Alban thinks of
dashing for the underground station and getting to Heathrow, finding her,
maybe catching her right at the departure gate the way they did in films, and
persuading her to stay behind, at least getting her to promise to write.
He’s getting another roaring in his head, and tunnel vision. Last time this
happened he’d been smacked full in the face by a football. He hears Haydn
talking about Lydcombe, about Sophie. Met some of her pals. Went on a
speedboat ride. She tried to get him on a horse but it was very high up. Her
boyfriend was very rude to him and Fielding. She’d said the reason for that
was because she was leaving for the States soon for a couple of years and he –
her boyfriend – knew she was leaving him probably for ever. If and when she
came back he’d most likely be married with a couple of brats via some farm
girl, and she’d have a Californian hunk in tow. But, hey – such was life.
Alban excused himself, staggered to the toilet, leaving Haydn blinking after
him, asking him, Was he all right?
He sat on the loo seat for a long time with his head in his hands.
He needed to get out. He went down to where the oldies were, still at
dinner, and said he needed some fresh air (some curious looks, but that was
all), went out into the garden and over the back wall, along the lane, across
a couple of roads and into the vast darkness
225
of Richmond Park. He lay on the grass, looking up at the sky; a dirty orange
cloudscape of reflection. Off to one side, between the clouds, he saw the
navigation lights of the aircraft. Coming in, of course. Usual westerly
airstream, so cousin Haydn was wrong; her plane would have taken off heading
west, heading for the States, out over the M4 corridor, across Wales and
Ireland . . .
Except, no, now he thought about it coldly, the planes went northwest
towards Scotland before crossing the Atlantic. They’d flown to New York a
couple of years ago, and after the trouble he’d gone to to get the window seat
– out–tantrumming Cory, basically, though his trump card had been that she’d
sleep most of the way – he’d taken care to keep asking his dad what they could
see out of the window every now and again. Scotland, had been the reply a
couple of times. They might even be flying over Garbadale right now . . .
Anyway, Haydn had been wrong. They wouldn’t have heard Sophie’s plane taking
off. The distant roaring they could hear from the house was made by planes

coming in to land.
He closed his eyes and turned his head away, letting the tears come.
He got up reluctantly a little later, feeling old and tired and worn out by
it all, like his life was already over. He didn’t really want to move, he
wanted to stay here lying on the warm, fragrant grass, listening to the
traffic on the road and in the sky and smelling the cool night smells of the
great park and mourning his lost love, but he couldn’t stay. They were
probably already starting to worry about him, maybe calling for him in the
garden, out looking for him even.
He went back to the house, relieved to find no teams with torches searching
the garden. Not even anybody at the back door, calling him. He stuck his head
round the door of the dining room; laughter and the smell of smoke. Yes, good,
no problem. Feeling better? Fine. They hadn’t realised how long he’d been
gone.
Upstairs, Haydn was smugly beating a squirming, bleating Fielding at Super
Mario Brothers.
*

*

*

226
‘And anyway, what are these classy drugs?’
‘Sorry, Beryl?’
‘On the news. They keep talking about them.’
‘Ah: heroin, cocaine?’ Fielding says, uncertainly. He looks over at Alban,
who looks over at Verushka, who narrows her eyes and then smiles.
‘What are what?’ Eudora asks. It is the night before Fielding is due to take
Great–Aunt Beryl and Great–Aunt Doris towards Garbadale while Verushka will
drive Alban there. A dinner has been arranged, at Rogano, in the city centre.
Alban has invited Eudora, Verushka’s mother.
And what is it that makes them classy in the first place?’ Beryl asks. ‘Is
it just the price?’
‘When I was young,’ Doris announces suddenly, ‘one didn’t have to travel
abroad to discover oneself. One was, rather, simply always there.’
‘Drugs, Eudora,’ Verushka tells her mother.
‘Drugs, really?’ Eudora says, her gaze darting around the table as though
looking for evidence.
Verushka smiles. ‘I think we’re talking about class A drugs.’
‘Why are we talking about drugs, darling?’ Eudora asks. She’s a tiny, lively
old lady – not that old, Fielding supposes; Mathgirl must be about early
thirties, so he’d guess her mum would be mid–fifties. She wears a cream suit
and dark blouse. Nicely done hair, sort of grey–blonde. You wouldn’t, Fielding
thinks, but if you had to, it wouldn’t be so bad. Not like if you had to with
somebody the age of Doris or Beryl – that kind of thing doesn’t bear thinking
about. Pretty stylish, really, old Eudora. When she walks she moves in a way
that seems to have become a lost art.
Actually, maybe you just would anyway.
Who’s for pudding?’ Alban asks, as menus are redistributed. Then he leans
over to talk quietly to Beryl.
‘I’m not entirely sure,’ Verushka says to her mother.
‘I was thinking of having a cigarette. Do you think this would be all
right?’
227
Verushka looks pained. ‘Oh, Eudora, please don’t.’
‘Oh, I seel’ Beryl says, sitting upright.
‘You had a gap year, didn’t you?’ Doris is saying to Fielding.
‘Building toilet blocks in Mozambique,’ he tells her. ‘Hated it. Only went
there because of an old Dylan song.’ Fielding shakes his head. ‘God, that was

a mistake. It was rubbish.’
‘So, did I hear that you will be going camping while we’re all up at Win’s?’
Beryl asks Verushka.
‘I shall be camping,’ Verushka says. She’s had a few drinks. Not exactly a
bucketful – like Fielding, she’s driving tomorrow – but sufficient to loosen
her tongue.
I’m sure you could stay at the house if you liked,’ Beryl tells her. This is
probably not true, Fielding suspects. Sounded like the place is going to be
full up, what with most of the family, some people from Spraint and various
lawyers being present.
‘The camping’s not the point,’ Mathgirl tells Beryl. ‘The climbing’s the
thing.’
‘Climbing? What, mountains?’
‘That’s right.’
‘And is there a group of you doing this?’
‘I think I shall have the cheese,’ Doris announces. ‘And perhaps a small
port.’
‘No,’ Verushka says, ‘just me.’
‘Really? Just you? Isn’t that rather dangerous?’
‘Yes, it is,’ Verushka agrees. ‘Thanks, I’m fine,’ she says, handing the
waiter back the menu. She sits back, arms folded. ‘Not really supposed to
climb by yourself. In theory three’s the minimum, so if somebody’s injured one
stays with the injured party and the other goes for help. But that’s not so
important nowadays with mobile phones and tiny wee walkie–talkies and strobe
lamps and pocket flares and space blankets and GPS and bivvy bags and so on.
You can have an emergency in comfort these days. Still not advised, going by
yourself, but not completely irresponsible.’ She sticks a nail between two
teeth, digs around and then rinses with water.
228
‘Darling!’ her mother says, frowning.
Verushka grins at her mum, tips her head briefly in what might be an
apology. ‘Anyway, I’m hoping never to see the inside of a rescue helicopter,’
she tells Beryl.
‘Well, I think you’re awfully brave,’ Beryl tells her, ‘climbing up
mountains all alone.’
‘Brave or foolhardy,’ Verushka agrees. ‘Depends on one’s definition.
Frankly, I’d admit to selfish.’
‘For pudding?’ Doris says, horrified, looking at Verushka.
Beryl touches Doris’s arm lightly. ‘Selfish, dear,’ she says.
‘Oh. I see.’
‘Selfish, dear?’
Verushka shrugs. ‘I don’t like climbing with other people. I prefer to be by
myself. And it’s taking a bigger risk because of that. So, selfish. Yes.’ She
takes up her water glass again.
‘So, is that why you haven’t married Alban?’ Beryl asks Verushka, who is
taking a mouthful of water at the time and comes very close to spitting it
back out again.
‘I beg your pardon, Beryl?’ she says, somewhere between a smile and
laughter.
‘Well, you know,’ Eudora says, leaning over conspiratorially to Doris, ‘I’ve
asked her the same thing myself
‘Beryl . . .’ Alban says, sounding like he’s a headmaster addressing a kid.
One of those, Worst of all, you’ve let yourself down voices. It’s hard to tell
with the fairly dim level of lighting back here, but Fielding strongly
suspects Alban is blushing. Verushka is looking a little rosy around the
cheeks herself. Wow, Fielding thinks, this is fun!
‘Well, you’ve always seemed very sweet on each other,’ Beryl says, sounding
perfectly reasonable. ‘I simply wondered.’ She looks round the table. ‘Oh

dear, have I said the wrong thing again?’
‘Not in the least, dear,’ Eudora tells her.
‘I’ll have the chocolatey thing and this dessert wine,’ Doris tells the
waiter, tapping the menu with the leg of her glasses.
229
‘Alban,’ Beryl says, putting her clasped hands on the table. ‘Why haven’t
you asked this young woman to marry you?’
Alban closes his eyes, puts his elbow on the table and his hand over his
eyes, shaking his head once.
Verushka purses her lips and stares at the table.
‘Hmm? What’s that?’ Doris says to the waiter. ‘Different sizes? Oh, well,
large, I think, don’t you?’
‘Oh dear, I’m embarrassing my nephew,’ Beryl says. She turns to Verushka. Am
I embarrassing you, dear?’
‘I’m pretty hard to embarrass,’ Verushka says. She still looks flushed
though.
‘Well, what would you do if he did?’ Beryl asks. Mathgirl has her gaze fixed
firmly on Beryl and does not look at Alban. This undoubtedly means something
but Fielding is buggered if he knows what.
‘Marriage isn’t something that I’ve ever really contemplated,’ Verushka
says. She smiles widely. ‘I’m very happy with my life. It would be hard to
improve it.’
‘Yes, but just supposing he did ask you.’
‘What, now?’
‘Yes, I suppose. Now.’
‘I’d ask him why he was asking anybody to marry him when he hadn’t yet
resolved his feelings for his cousin Sophie,’ Verushka says, and looks over at
Alban, at last, with a small smile.
And?’ Beryl pursues.
And then I’d listen to what he said in reply,’ Verushka says smoothly.
Alban catches Fielding’s eye. And it was all going so well,’ he sighs.
Fielding shrugs. ‘C’est la vie, cuz.’
Doris looks round, seemingly confused. ‘Have we had coffee yet?’
Beryl holds Alban’s arm as they make their way to the door and the waiting
cabs. They’re bringing up the rear of the party, walking slowly.
230
‘Did I rather put my foot in it there with all that talk about marriage?’
she asks.
‘It did feel a bit awkward, Beryl,’ Alban admits.
‘Sorry. One gets impatient at my age. Desire to see ends tied up before one
pops one’s clogs, sort of thing. But why don’t you ask her?’
‘To marry me?’
‘Yes.’
‘Beryl, I don’t think I want to get married.’
‘Well, just live together. That’s what counts, not the piece of paper.’
‘I don’t know if I want that either. And even if I did, I’m pretty sure it’s
not what she wants. You did hear what she said.’
‘I’ve never seen two such clever people be so stupid. But it’s your life.’
She squeezes his arm as they approach the doors. ‘However. Any luck with
finding out what was going on with your mother saying what she did to me?’
Alban had got used to old people making these ninety–degree changes in
conversational direction. ‘Not a lot of luck,’ he told her. ‘I talked to Andy.
He says it wasn’t him.’
‘Never thought it was.’
‘Same here.’

‘He had no ideas who might have disapproved so much?’
‘None. None he was willing to share, anyway.’
‘Oh well.’
‘Well, we’re going to have the whole family in the one place for the
weekend. That’ll be the time to ask questions.’
‘Jolly good,’ Beryl says, and pats his arm as they stop at the cloakroom.
Eudora is saying, ‘What a lovely evening!’
Well, carry on then,’ Beryl tells Alban. ‘Let me know if I can help.’
‘Sorry about that.’
‘Beryl?’
231
‘The whole marriage thing.’
‘Don’t apologise. You didn’t do anything.’
‘Yes, but they’re my family. I feel I have to.’
They’ve dropped Eudora at her flat in Buccleuch Street and are on their way
to Verushka’s. She looks at him for a moment. He’s staring ahead.
She touches his arm. ‘Any more you want to add?’ she asks him.
‘What do you mean?’
She moves over, snuggles up to him, holding his arm with both her hands, her
head on his shoulder. ‘You do know how I feel about all this, don’t you?’
‘I think so.’
‘I don’t want children. I don’t want to get married. I may never even want
to settle down.’
‘That’s pretty much what I thought.’
The cab stops, jerks forward, the driver mutters a curse under his breath
then they move on again.
‘I love being with you.’ She says this quite quietly. ‘I miss you. When
you’re away, and the phone rings, always I hope it’s you. Every time. Just in
a small way, but always.’
He leans his head over so that it touches hers. He says, ‘I suppose I’ve
always treated it like there’s only so much fun you can have with somebody. If
you’re with them for decades then it’s spread very thin; watery, diluted and
tasteless. But if you only live for a few days every now and again, then it’s
all intense and concentrated.’
She shakes her head, runs a hand through his curls. ‘Oh, my poor love,’ she
says softly through a sad smile. ‘You do talk the most utter nonsense
sometimes.’
He reaches up and puts his fingers round the wrist of the hand that is
stroking his head. ‘Do I now?’
She nods thoughtfully. ‘Yes, you do.’ She’s thinking that the action of
gripping her wrist like that – gently and lightly, certainly – and stopping
her from stroking his head is as aggressive as he ever gets with her. She
suddenly realises that she quite happily slaps his arm,
232
punches his shoulder, and even kicks him – albeit softly, pulling the action –
in the calf and thigh and backside, and can recall at least once balling her
fists and beating him on the naked chest, play fighting . . . And he never
even pretends that he is about to respond. He has never raised a hand towards
her.
Probably their most violent actions have involved arm wrestling.
Well, and sex, she supposes. But, even there, it is just the conventional
lunge and thrust of perfect normalcy; no slapping or clawing, no bites or even
love–biting. She’s had her ears re–pierced, nipples bitten so hard she’s cried
out – not in a good way – and been left with bruises, scratches and grazes
from other lovers, and in every case made clear her objections . . . But with
him, nothing. In bed or out, he has always been gentle, thoughtful, sweet and

even – in some sense that she has to confess confuses her own notions of
masculinity and femininity – accepting.
This will, she decides, need some thinking about. He lets go of her wrist.
She puts her palm to his cheek, feeling the warmth of him through his neatly
trimmed beard.
The cab bounces over some road repairs. ‘Anyway, I’m sorry, too,’ she tells
him.
‘What about?’
‘What I said about you and Sophie. I didn’t need to. I was kind of replying
in the same coin and I shouldn’t have. So, apologies.’
‘Oh.’ When he thinks about this, he remembers that, yes, he was hurt at the
time, that he felt in some tiny way betrayed, even though he feels he
shouldn’t have, even though it seems a rather petty thing to have felt, and
even though everybody round the table, with the possible exception of Eudora,
knew pretty much the whole story anyway. He pats her leg just above the knee.
‘That’s okay’
She puts her mouth near his ear. ‘We’re okay,’ she whispers. We’re still
okay, aren’t we?’
He turns to look into her eyes in the half–darkness of the cab, the slow
strobe of orange streetlights flickering over them like film.
233
‘Of co–’ he begins, then stops and smiles and kisses her lightly on the lips.
‘Yes, we’re okay,’ he says.
She whispers, ‘I just want to get you home and feel you inside me.’ She
kisses his ear and he turns to her and puts his arms round her, hugging her.
They kiss for a while. They break off, see the cab driver looking at them
dubiously, and both draw close again, heads bowing to each other, laughing
quietly.
When he’s eighteen he has a gap year. Later, he won’t remember anybody at the
time actually calling it that, but that’s what it was. He knew a few people
who’d taken a year off between school and university and thought it seemed
like a good idea. He’s left school with very good A–levels. After a lot of
thinking he’s decided that when he goes to university – St Andrews or
Edinburgh, probably –he’ll do Media Studies.
When he tells Andy this, his dad lowers his paper, looks at him over the top
of his reading glasses and says, ‘In my day if you didn’t know what to do at
Uni you did Sociology.’
Alban is less hurt by this remark than he might have expected. Anyway, in
the end he goes to Bristol and does Business Studies. Though, in his defence,
as he points out to people for rather too long a time afterwards, he had the
good grace to hate it.
He sees quite a lot of the world in his gap year, though – being,
effectively, a Wopuld – he sees much of it filtered through the multi–faceted
eye of his family. It is much more difficult for a Wopuld family member,
especially a young Wopuld family member, to see the world unassisted and
unencumbered than it is for the average traveller. There are simply too many
Wopulds, too many members of associated clanlets, too many accomplice
families, too many ex–and current business partners and too many individuals
still displaying – and in many cases also feeling – a soft spot for the family
scattered across the face of the planet for one to be able to avoid them
without causing severe offence, or conducting one’s travelling in conditions
of inappropriate secrecy. When you know no one in a
234
country, you are free, if you wish, to experience the place to the full, on
its own terms. When somebody who knows the place and is well–disposed to you

takes you under their wing, then you have the place discovered for you.
It could, Alban realises as his own little world tour unfolds, cut both
ways. On the one hand, having somebody to show you around and do the talking
and point out all the interesting places that the guidebooks didn’t always
know about, is really handy. Such people will also usually buy you meals and
drinks and put you up in their houses and apartments for quite long periods of
time without showing any of the obvious signs of wishing you gone or expecting
payment. On die other hand, you start to fall into the trap of seeing
everywhere as essentially the same because everywhere you go there are these
roughly similar, kindly–seeming, certainly helpful people, well–disposed to
you for whatever reason, who will smooth your padi and grease a few wheels and
even palms to make your stay more pleasant on their patch.
Getting out, away from this sort of smotheringly helpful succour, might
result in getting dysentery, being beaten up by local surlies, fending off the
advances of large sweating men in charge of cement trucks, having your wallet
skilfully razored from the bottom of whatever deeply cunning pocket you might
have secreted it in while sleeping, missing trains and buses due to ruthlessly
exploited Brit diffidence and you mysteriously being the only person present
to have entirely assimilated the concept of queuing in an orderly – or indeed
any – fashion, wishing – while on the trains and buses that are successfully
boarded – that you had missed them because anything would be better than being
stuck on this hellish conveyance in hundred–degree heat with iffy bowels,
either no toilet at all or a blocked toilet – usually within all–too–easy
sniffing distance – while the rear end of the bus or the corners of the train
carriage go Right Out Over the Thousand–foot Drop and a local with severe body
odour problems in the next seat tries so aggressively to sell you drugs that
you’re convinced he must be an undercover cop with a grudge against young
Westerners and a quota to fill and a hundred
235
other vicissitudes the young and inexperienced traveller is liable to
experience before gratefully returning home, but at least you know you’ve been
abroad, at least you know what life is really like, if not for the other
billions you share the planet with then at least for the hundreds of thousands
of the young and relatively rich who take their lives into their hands by
going out amongst them.
There are, also, the chance encounters with places and with people
–
ultimately, arguably, with yourself – that would never truly happen
if you had somebody looking after you, and which might actually
give some point to all the shit and suffering involved in travelling
and make the whole process, the entire exercise, worthwhile: a
gleaming temple glimpsed through mists at dawn; a perfect, deserted
beach arrived at at the end of a ghastly journey; an evening round
a fire with people you didn’t know yesterday and may well never
see again after tonight but who, for now, you feel close enough to
to want to spend the rest of your life with – a sudden, intense
connection with others or with a place that you will never, ever
forget.
On his travels, Alban tries to balance the amount of time he spends with
Wopulds and allied traders and the intervals of what he has come to regard as
proper travelling, when there is the opportunity for adventure and, frankly,
uncalled–for unpleasantness that at the very least he will be glad has stopped
– and to have lived through – and one day may even look back on with a degree
of nostalgia and possibly something resembling gratitude.
When he reaches Hong Kong, he judges it is time for a bit of pampering
again, and so takes up the invitation of his Uncle Blake
–
issued rather vaguely via a Christmas card the year before – to
come visit.
He flies in from Darwin after a fun but hot and tiring couple of months

sharing a microbus across Australia with a pair of recently qualified
electrical engineers from Brisbane. Alex and Jace are great, generous, giggly,
eternally optimistic guys – especially about sex, which they get exactly none
of during the whole journey, though
236
Alban comes close one evening with a waitress in Kalgoorlie – and the three of
them get on really well as a hitch from Sydney to Melbourne turns into an epic
journey all the way to Darwin via Alice Springs and Perth, but after nine
weeks in the same tiny space and a total of about twenty showers between them,
he feels they’ve undergone the male equivalent of that thing women are
supposed to get when they’re cooped up together, when their periods –allegedly
– synchronise. Alban would swear that Jace, Alex and he now have coordinated
sweat and he subsequently shares a sort of genetically averaged smell with the
two of them.
They part at Darwin Airport, all grins, with a long, grunty group hug and
sincere pledges of eternal friendship. (He will never see either of them
again.) He falls asleep shortly after take–off and only wakes up as the plane
makes the sort of steep, even violent turn that big jets only make, as a rule,
when they’re either about to crash or actually in the act of crashing. He
looks out of the window at a tall building rushing past about a metre from the
wingtip. It’s night and he sees a Chinese guy looking at him. The guy is
wearing stripy shorts and a grey vest and leaning on the concrete balcony of
this appallingly close apartment block; he flicks a lighter and ignites a
cigarette. Alban will later swear he could identify the lighter as a Zippo and
at the time honestly believes that a crash is exactly what is about to happen.
In fact it’s just all part of the fun of landing at Kai Tak Airport, situated
alarmingly close to the heart of downtown Kowloon.
His uncle has sent a driver to pick him up. Alban’s still buzzing from the
interrupted deep sleep and the near–death experience and stumbles through the
clamorous light of the airport and the gritty night–time haze and muggily
enveloping warmth of the city into the icy AC of the leather–scented Bentley
without really taking much in. He’s delivered to a hulking skyscraper by the
harbour and directed – by a Chinese angel in a slit–skirted business suit – to
an express lift which hurtles upwards, leaving his stomach somewhere around
the mezzanine floor. He stumbles out of the gleaming cube with
237
his backpack and is confronted with a vast, glittering room opening out on to
a tree–studded rooftop garden the size of a couple of tennis courts, all of
this swarming with sleek–looking people of too many racial types to keep track
of, every one in suits or cocktail dresses or perfect white uniforms as
appropriate and beyond which and whom lies what looks like every electrical
light ever manufactured in the history of the world since Edison, shining
madly in inchoate swirls, vast ropes of highways, glowing pools of
intersections and stadia and mirroring off both the crystal–surfaced
complexity of hundreds of tall buildings and the city–blanketing under–surface
of a layer of thick, shining cloud which mirrors the colours of the enormous
vertical signs on the towers, slabbed neon edges reflected on the vapour
producing an overhanging stratus patched with green, blue, red, purple and
gold.
A smiling Chinese gent in a starched white jacket which would grace the
captain of the Q£2 relieves him of his backpack and guides him via a tray of
large champagne flutes to a tall, grey–haired man who is standing near the
railed edge of the roof gesturing grandly out over the city before a small
group of Chinese men. The grey–haired man turns round. Alban is introduced to
Uncle Blake.
‘Alban. Good to see you. Do call me Blake.’ Uncle Blake is tall and

formidable, with a lengthy nose that looks like it was once broken and a kind
of determinedly jowly set to his long features. His skin looks tanned grey. He
puts out one big, beefy hand and shakes Alban’s. Something of the humid
closeness of the night seems to communicate itself through the man’s
enveloping clasp. Alban says Hi. He’s introduced to the various important
people Blake is with, all of whom seem to have titles or ranks and short but
ineffably Chinese names, not an iota of which he remembers a heartbeat later,
and has various features of the city, harbour and distant, twinkling islands
pointed out to him until finally, perhaps sensing his befogment, Blake steers
Alban away towards the elevators with one big dinner–plate–size palm on his
back and suggests he might want to get freshened up before rejoining the
party. Another gleaming
238
Chinese servant in a jacket seemingly made of pure starch escorts him in the
lift down two floors to an apartment on the swish side of lavish, a corner
bedroom with glass walls on two sides and a bathroom the size of a squash
court.
He has a shower and lies on the bed in a huge white towelling robe to
collect his wits and promptly falls asleep. When he wakes up the room’s lights
are off and Blake is leaning round the edge of the door.
‘Sorry, Alban,’ he says, deep voice booming. ‘Just wanted to make sure you
were all right.’ He gives what is probably meant to be a friendly smile that
succeeds in appearing remarkably ghoulish. ‘Long flight, was it?’
‘No, just from Darwin,’ Alban says, feeling displaced once again. "What time
is it?’
‘About midnight.’
‘Oh, God.’ He’s slept for over two hours. ‘I’m sorry. Have I missed the
party?’
‘No, a lot of people are still here.’
‘Oh. Right. I’ll get dressed.’ He swings off the bed.
He only has a few days before a flight to Peru via Hawaii and a visit to his
Aunt Else in Lima. The time in Hong Kong passes in a fast–forward blur of
overripe high–rise fragrance, blasts of chill in offices and limousines
followed by choking hazy interludes in the smothering blanket of fume–laced
kettle steam that passes for the open air of Honkers, a buzzing, smog– and
smoke–scented pressure suit that seems at once to percolate him and keep him
at a distance from the place.
He mixes with the toffs at the races, is wheeled around the harbour and a
couple of the nearby islands on Blake’s humungous, gleaming power boat – he’s
given a chance to steer it when they’re clear of most of the other traffic and
laughs like a loon when he gets to open the throttle and feel this whole
ridiculous machine the size of a substantial house lift its sharky nose and
accelerate – and spends a bewildering evening at a small party at the home of
some of the
239
hyper–rich up on the Peak, with a hazy view that includes the distant summit
of Blake’s skyscraper near the harbour. The whole Peak seems to smell of
jasmine and bananas. The ultra–opulent people are from Canada (him) and Japan
(her) and where they live is more like a palace or a museum, walls lined with
art plundered from every continent of the planet save Antarctica. Alban sips a
cocktail with flecks of gold in it and feels like a child again.
When Blake drops him at the airport with a new Walkman, a shiny Swiss Army
knife with a lockable blade, a fat envelope of used ten– and hundred–dollar
bills for emergencies and the advice, ‘Remember, Alban; always look out for
number one. Be selfish. Every other bugger is,’ he feels like he’s been spat
out by the city, and boards the 747 and turns right for Tourist class with

something like relief.
He sleeps through Hawaii.
He spends a month in Lima with Aunt Else, Andy’s long–absconded sister and
the only non–Wopuld relation he visits during his whole gap–year world trip.
She runs a pool bar of deranged seediness on the least fashionable edge of the
city.
It is an education.
He takes the train to Machu Picchu, hitches down then back up the coast, in
trucks mostly, watching waves spin in hypnotically along the hundreds of miles
of unrolled golden beach, then heads north – suddenly realising he’s starting
to run out of time, that there’s only a month to go before he’s due home –
finally ending up in Los Angeles where, almost by chance, while looking in on
cousin Fabiole, who harbours pretensions of becoming a film director, he bumps
into Sophie.
Alban has forgotten about his cousin fairly successfully, especially over the
last nine months that he’s been travelling. Sophie fills fewer and fewer of
his thoughts since he discovered she’d been back from Spain for most of the
summer after the one they spent together, but had not even tried to get in
touch with him.
240
They meet in the middle of the desert. Cousin Fabiole is doing some location
scouting and has heard about all these hundreds of aircraft sitting in the
sunshine on a playa out on the Mojave, left to
- well, not rot, because out there it’s very dry and that’s kind of the whole
point; they won’t deteriorate even though they’re outside
- and he thinks it sounds like a great location and so wants to go have a look
and maybe get some inspiration. They pile into his car and head for the
desert.
Cousin Fabiole is small, wiry, red–haired and voluble. He’s at film school,
lives in a small condo in Topanga and spends a lot of time looking at things
through a rectangle he makes with both sets of index fingers and thumbs. He
wants to make inspirational movies like Rocky and has already acquired a
convincing southern Californian accent.
‘Rocky? But it’s a classic’ Uncharacteristically, he does not on this
occasion use the word dude.
‘I thought it was awful,’ Alban admits, then licks some gummed paper
carefully. He has been given the job of building joints on the journey. This
is one of the many new skills he has developed over the last year or so,
adapting his technique to the grass that Americans favour or the
tobacco–and–resin approach he’s encountered elsewhere, as required. The main
challenge here is making sure the grass doesn’t blow away. Fab’s car is an old
Ford sedan with fading red paint and broken air conditioning so they have to
travel with the windows down. Fab likes to drive pretty much as fast as the
car will go when he’s confident there are no cops around, so this is not a
trivial matter.
‘Orr–fool,’ Fabiole mimics, shaking his head. ‘Well, whatever floats your
muesli, I guess.’
They arrive at the aircraft park, a flat, dusty, windy place in the middle
of bright nowhere. There’s some difficulty with the security guys at the gate
until a phone call is made to the people on the coast that Fab knows who have
set this all up, then they’re through, though rather than head straight for
the rows of parked aircraft they
241
go to the pale, seemingly never–ending expanse of the only runway and an
untidy scatter of small hangars near one end.

‘Meeting a photographer I know,’ Fab explains. ‘He’s flying in from San
Francisco.’ He hands the joint back to Alban, who takes a shallow breath of
the smoke. ‘Friend of,’ Fabiole says, then gulps back the smoke, ‘cousin
Sophe’s.’
Just the mention of her name is enough to make Alban’s heart leap. He coughs
smoke like he’s been punched in the gut. The last he heard of Sophie she was
in New York at some art college, staying with some relative of her mother’s.
New York City was going to be his last port of call on his world tour and he
had been hoping to try and see her. ‘Oh,’ is all he can find to say.
He immediately fantasises that she is on the light plane they’re waiting
for, but can’t think why she should be.
A little Cessna appears out of the blue, comes in one wing down on a partial
crosswind and lands on about ten per cent of the vast runway, trundling up to
the hangars where Alban and Fab are standing leaning against the hood of the
car. There are two people in the plane, and – after a long–seeming delay once
the prop has stopped turning – the two people get out and one of them is
female, but Alban’s heart – having leapt again – sinks when he sees the girl
is a willowy blonde, nothing like Sophie after all.
‘Yo, Fab!’ the man says. He’s a tall guy, maybe mid–twenties, with untidy
dark hair, a bulky camera bag and Ray–Bans.
‘Dan–ee–yeWl’ Fab hollers. They run up to each other and high–five.
The blonde – trainers, cut–off jeans and a Cure T–shirt – stops a few steps
short when she sees Alban. She’s wearing dark glasses too, and pushes them up
into her hair to look at him. ‘Alban?’ she says.
Jesus, it is Sophie.
Dan and Sophie are seeing each other – he’s partly based in NYC – and this
is how Fab knows him in the first place.
They drive around in the beaten–up Ford, looking at the hulks and husks
of the
planes,
some intact,
most with
their engines
242
removed. Dan photographs assiduously. Then they take to the skies in the
Cessna, Fab using Dan’s camera to take more photos. Both in the car and the
plane, Alban and Sophie are in the back seats. Dan turns out to be a great
guy; full of stories and wisecracks. Sophie laughs a lot at what he says. She
and Alban are awkward with each other, not entirely knowing what to say. In
the plane they’re kind of pressed up against each other. He can smell her
perfume, and thinks he can smell the her beyond the artificial odour, the
unique scent that is the girl, her skin; a memory of Lydcombe, three summers
ago.
The plane banks, one wing pointed almost straight down at the ground, engine
revving up as they circle like a wheeling tin vulture over the carcasses of
the abandoned aircraft.
Back on the ground, Dan shouts, ‘You ever been to San Fran, Al?’ as Fab
packs up the camera gear while Dan, up a short stepladder, refuels the plane.
‘No,’ Alban admits, ‘I was thinking I might take a look but I don’t know if
I’ve the time now.’
‘Well, Alban, shit, you don’t have to trust your Brit ass to this maniac on
the road back to La–la land; come see a real city.’
‘Fuck you, dude!’ Fabiole shouts good–naturedly.
‘What, now?’ Alban asks. He glances at Sophie but her expression is
unreadable behind the dark glasses. Staring at her in the hammering sunlight,
he still can’t believe how blonde and slim she’s become. She’s grown at least
three centimetres, too.
‘Sure, now,’ Dan says, dribbling a last few drops into the plane’s starboard
tank then securing the fuel cap. ‘Come spend a couple of days at mine. You’re
about my size; you can borrow stuff of mine or just buy shit. We’ll throw you
on a bus back to LA on Sunday or Monday. I might even fly you back myself if
I’m not busy.’

‘Fab?’ Alban asks. ‘You mind?’
‘No,’ Fabiole says, grinning. ‘You go, dude.’
He goes, sitting in the back of the little aircraft and watching the dry
duns and khakis and fawns and browns and strips and stripes
243
and circles and squares and rectangles of serene Californian greenery pass by
beneath.
They land at Hayward before dusk, pick up Dan’s convertible Saab, take the
bridge across the Bay then swing north to the city.
They stop at Dan’s apartment looking over Lafayette Park and eat at a
Vietnamese restaurant just off Columbus Avenue. Back at Dan’s – modest but
tasteful apart from rather a lot of chrome –he’s just opening a bottle of Napa
Merlot when the phone rings and he asks Sophie to turn the TV on. Dan keeps
the receiver under his chin, wandering through from the kitchen on one of
those long phone leads that only seem to exist in the States, holding the
bottle and three glasses. He sets these down on the coffee table in the lounge
and clicks through to a news channel and a helicopter shot of a yellow school
bus being driven fast along a brightly lit freeway, police cars pursuing. ‘Got
it,’ he says. ‘What? The thirty–five? Daly, okay. On my way. Yeah ‘bye.’ He
retreats to the kitchen, hangs the phone up and comes back with arms spread.
‘Duty calls. You kids’ll just have to amuse yourselves. Sorry.’
He’s gone a minute later, dashing from the flat pulling a jacket on and
clutching two cameras.
Alban and Sophie look at the bottle of wine.
‘Or we could just go to the pub,’ Alban says. ‘I mean a bar’
Sophie shakes her head. ‘We’re three years too young, cuz.’
Alban has a good laugh about this and sits down. ‘Oh, yeah.’ He digs in one
shirt pocket, producing a joint. Also, I have some of Fab’s finest
home–grown.’ He looks at the number, then into his shirt pocket, then shrugs.
‘Oh well, I’m sure he’s got more.’
Sophie sits down across from him. She smiles and pours the wine. ‘Well,
party time.’
They keep the TV on the same news channel with the sound off –the school bus
chase continues, now bannered as School Bus Chase –and listen to albums,
drinking wine and smoking. The bus chase ends with the vehicle – Alban has
been in the States just long
244
enough to start thinking of it as a vee–hickle – crashed but upright and
poised on a fulcrum of concrete barriers in the middle of a highway somewhere,
surrounded by police cars and flashing lights. Shots from the bus look like
sparks, and police are seen diving for cover behind cars.
‘This is great,’ Alban says, nodding at the TV and passing Sophie the
current joint.
‘Welcome to America.’
‘How long you been here?’ he asks.
So far they haven’t said anything about what happened at Lydcombe three
years ago.
‘In the States? Just since last fall, last autumn.’
‘Before that?’
‘Madrid. Lydcombe now and again; flying visits mostly. How about you?’
She looks so different and so the same. Her mouth is still the mouth he used
to kiss, but her teeth look whiter as well as more regular, and her face is
framed in different hair, and carried on a far thinner body. He guesses the
way she looked before was due to puppy fat, but he’d liked her like that. He
feels like he’s found her again but she’s still lost to him; another person,

another life, another lover. Her accent has changed, become mid–Atlantic, but
the tone, the timbre are the same. ‘Me? Oh, just, you know, at home,’ he says,
taking the joint back. ‘Richmond, then I’ve been travelling the last, well,
nearly year’
‘You look good,’ she tells him. ‘You’ve filled out. Tan suits you.’
He grins. ‘I bet you say that to all the boys.’
‘Yeah,’ she tells him, reaching for the joint again. ‘I do. Cheers.’
He laughs some smoke out, lifts his own glass. He’s sitting on the floor
with his legs under the glass–and–chrome coffee table. She’s sitting on the
couch behind him so it’s easier to pass the numbers to and fro while watching
the TV.
This is so different from what he imagined. He’d thought that they would
either see one another and instantly rush into each
245
other’s arms, maybe never to part again, or, alternatively, have the most
horrendous, hurtful fight that would leave them both emotionally scarred for
life.
Either way, something momentous. Not this strange, edgy, slightly nervous
situation where they both act like they were never lovers, like Lydcombe had
never happened.
‘I tried to get in touch with you for so long after they split us up,’ he
tells her.
‘Really?’ She sounds sceptical.
‘Really. Did you ever get any of my letters?’
‘Not one,’ she says, passing the joint back.
He doesn’t know what to say to this. Wasted, wasted, all of it wasted. Ah
well. He takes a deep breath, clears his throat.
‘Tried calling. Even thought about coming down on the train and bus and
looking for you at Lydcombe, until I heard you were in Spain.’
‘In–a–Shpine. In–a–Shpine,’ she says, staring at her glass and sounding
thoughtful in a stoned kind of way. It sounds like she’s quoting somebody
else, from some other time, not making fun of him. ‘In–a–Shpine . . .’ Then
she looks at him. ‘Did you really?’ she asks. ‘Really write all these letters.
Seriously?’
‘Yep, and lots of poems, too. Hundreds of sheets in the end. Aunt Lauren
said she’d send them on to you.’ He looks up at her. ‘You definitely didn’t
get anything?’
‘Not a flippin’ fing.’ She gets up to change the record. ‘Thought you’d
forgotten about me,’ she says quietly, back to him.
‘Well, I didn’t.’ He looks round at her but she’s taking in Dan’s wall of
records and books. She had changed into a light, short green dress for the
restaurant. She reaches up to a top shelf and he sees the tanned back of her
thighs.
‘Do you have any CDs?’ she asks. ‘Dan’s got some here, though he says he
likes the sound of vinyl better. And he has these things.’ Reaching down, she
pulls out what looks like an album of music from Chinatown. ‘Laser discs?
Like, for films?’
246
‘Heard of them,’ he says.
‘Hmm.’ She slides the laser disc back into its place on the shelves.
‘Did you try to get in touch with me?’ he asks, looking away and taking the
last of the joints out of his shirt pocket.
‘Fuck me, how many of those have you got?’ she asks.
‘Last one. Won’t light it if you don’t want me to.’ He already feels pretty
wasted though he’s trying hard to keep it together. He looks round but she’s
studying the record collection again, arms folded.

‘Na, na, don’t let me stop you.’ There’s a pause. ‘Might open a window
though.’ She turns and glances back at the TV, then away again.
‘Sophie?’
‘What?’
‘Did you?’
‘Do you like Joni Mitchell? Dan’s a big fan but I’m not so sure. Must bring
some Cure over. Did I what?’
‘Try to get in touch with me.’
There’s a long pause. ‘No, hon, I didn’t.’ The needle clunks down into the
vinyl’s lead–in spiral with a near subsonic rumble; a hollow, empty sound
pregnant with impendence.
His heart feels like it flows out of him and down the three floors to the
street. Hon. Short for honey. That’s a new word. Probably Dan calls her that.
Probably calls her that in bed. Or maybe she calls him that. Maybe she calls
that out when she’s coming. When he’s making her come. Oh, fuck, what is he
doing here?
She sits down on the floor opposite him, at the foot of the other couch, her
legs slid under the coffee table, parallel with his.
‘Things were made pretty bad for me after you guys left Lydcombe,’ she tells
him. She looks sad and serious and beautiful, but still disorientatingly
different. ‘They made me feel pretty bad about myself. About everything that
happened. About all that we did.’
He still hasn’t lit the last joint. He looks into her eyes, trying to
247
imagine how it must have been for her. In all this time, in all this thinking
about her, he never really thought about how she must have felt about it; he
just pictured her as the same girl she had always been, but stopped, frozen,
paused, something caught in amber or carbonite or something but still staying
the same person, ready to resume her life, their life, the instant whatever
spell had been cast over them could be broken.
He had never imagined that she might change as a result of all that
happened. Even after hearing from Haydn that she’d been back to Lydcombe, that
she had a boyfriend, he had somehow written that off, dismissed it. That had
been somebody else, or that had been just her turning out to have been a bad
person all along but only now being exposed as such. And somehow the image
that he held of her had not changed; that strange, frozen icon of her that he
possessed had stayed with him and somewhere deep inside he’d felt – even after
all the travelling and changing he’d done – that he could still wake them both
from their dream if he could only find her and somehow nothing essential would
have changed. It was only now he realised he never could do that, that
everything had changed; most of all the two of them.
‘James and Clara made me feel I’d hurt everybody,’ Sophie says quietly.
‘Themselves mostly, naturally, but Grandma Win, your parents, the whole
family. Even you. We had to . . . I had to draw a line under it all and start
again. That was the only way forward, the only way out. Put it down to
youthful stupidity and move on. If I could do that, if I could not look back,
then we’d all be okay. They’d be happy. I’d be saved. You’d get over me
quicker’
He feels tears prick behind his eyes but fights them back, clenching his jaw
to try and bite them down. ‘So,’ he says, and has to clear his throat again.
‘Do you think it was just youthful stupidity?’
She looks at him for a long while. Joni Mitchell sings about Cold Blue Steel
and Sweet Fire. Eventually Sophie says, ‘You going to light that joint or just
fondle it all fucking night?’
They smoke the last joint, passing it back and forth over the table.
248

On the TV, the School Bus Chase is now being labelled as the School Bus Siege.
Dan rings to say he’ll be there all night and intends to crash at a pal’s
nearby in Daly City – apologies. Usually he’d feel threatened leaving her in
the apartment with such a handsome guy, but – hey – they’re cousins and it’s
not like they’re from the Ozarks or something.
They finish the wine.
She gets up, has to hold on to the end of the couch for a moment, goes
‘Wool’ then puts on This is the Sea by the Waterboys. ‘Do you know this?’
It’s a record he remembers from just after they were split up.
‘Yes,’ he tells her. ‘I remember this.’
She stands in front of the hi–fi, between the speakers, swaying, head down,
eyes closed, hands clasped above her head.
He twists round, watches her for a while.
She turns and says, ‘Do you want to dance?’
‘You’ll have to go,’ she tells him.
What, now?’
‘No, but before Dan gets back.’
Why?’ Though of course he knows. He tries not to let the hurt into his
voice.
‘Because it’s too complicated otherwise. And I’m not so great at lying.’
‘But why do I need to go if–?’
‘Look, it’s not like we’re going to be able to do this again, Alban. He’ll
be here. I’ll be here.’
It’s been the first time they’ve made love in a bed.
Well, I know, but–’
Til say we had a fight. An argument. Some family thing. I can make that
stick. That I can do. But not if you’re here.’
He waits a while, bringing her a little closer, stroking her hair, her newly
skinny side and flank, cupping one sweet, smallened breast. ‘Okay,’ he says.
249
She reaches down, pulls at some of the sheet lying crumpled beneath them.
‘And I’d better get this washed, too.’ She breathes deeply, glancing at the
blinds then pushing away from him. ‘Christ, it’s dawn. Come on; shift. If I
get this down to the laundry now I can have it back on by the time he gets
back.’
He helps her strip the sheet, wondering when she became so thoughtful, so
adept, so managerial.
They say their goodbyes in the apartment block’s basement laundry while pale
pink sunshine seeps through a high, grubby, pavement–level window. She doesn’t
let him kiss her deeply, unpeels his hands from her behind and just shakes her
head when he tries to say too much.
She puts her forehead against his and says, ‘We probably shouldn’t have done
this.’
‘Yes we should.’
‘No. No we shouldn’t.’
He finds out much later that Dan guessed they’d fucked anyway, almost as soon
as he got back, and threw her out.
Since Lima, he’s been keeping at least half a grand of Blake’s money inside
his sock, curled in a sweaty wad round his ankle. He uses some of this to fund
a taxi to the station and then buy a train ticket back to LA.
He starts university a month or so later.
Sophie avoids him subsequently.
The next time he’ll see her will be at a trade fair in Singapore. She’ll
have perfect, shiningly white teeth, her nose will be smaller, she’ll be
slimmer still and even more blonde.

250

7

T
hursday. Verushka drives him north, out of the city in a grey smir of rain
along Great Western Road, staying within a couple of mph of the speed limit
until the roads near the Erskine Bridge, slowing again subsequently then
opening the Forester up once more after Dumbarton. The traffic thickens along
the side of Loch Lomond but she manages some coolly judged overtaking
nevertheless.
‘This thing feels quicker,’ Alban says, frowning.
She flashes him a grin. ‘Yeah, I’ve had it chipped.’
‘That makes it go faster?’
‘Oh yeah.’
‘Bet you didn’t tell the insurance company.’
‘Bet I did, smart alec’
The back of the vehicle is mostly full of her kit. He has one newly bought
bag but she has a substantial backpack plus all her other hiking gear and a
spare tent in case she wants to establish a base camp partway between the road
and any given mountain – otherwise she’ll sleep in the car or wherever’s
appropriate on the hill in a bivvy bag.
They make good time after the road opens out past Ardlui, scything through
drizzle and darting past other road traffic. She gets
251
flashed at once by an oncoming car, and passed by a growling Evo carrying
serious tail. The getting passed, she explains, cancels out the getting
flashed at. Especially as the flashing was entirely unjustified.
They reach positively dizzy speeds during an unexpected dry period on the
few miles before Bridge of Orchy. They stop for fuel and lunch in Fort
William. She’s in what she describes as mountaineering mode, and packs away an
all–day breakfast of considerable size and fat content. He smiles at her,
shaking his head. Just out of town they pass the sign for Inverlochy Castle
Hotel where Fielding and the duet of great–aunts will be staying the night,
breaking the journey to Garbadale.
They listen to her iPod on random, playing through the car’s system via a
technically illegal radio transmitter unit, and are treated to rather a lot of
Bach, mixed in with Berlioz, Gwen Stefani, Hector Zazou, the Kaiser Chiefs,
Jethro Tull, the White Stripes, Belle and Sebastian, Michelle Shocked, Massive
Attack, Kate Bush, Primal Scream and the Beatles. They’re twenty–one tracks in
before a Led Zep song, which apparently is some sort of record (though, as she
points out, they all are – haw haw).
The obvious route is via Inverness but Verushka has other ideas so they
swing west at Invergarry – he asks to stop and look at some interesting trees
but she wants to press on – and take the road for Kyle. The roads to the

junction at Auchertyre pass in a dazed sweep of sunlit summits, heavy showers
and startled overtakees. More pedal to the metal stuff along the roads either
side of Achnasheen as the road dries. Verushka is driving with a broad smile
on her face.
‘Maxed out?’ he asks.
She glances at the speedometer, which appears to have run out of numbers to
point at. ‘Yup.’
‘Tyres up to this sort of speed?’
‘Yup.’
North of Ullapool – a fuel top–up and scones with tea – the late afternoon
brightens further. She lets the pace drop off a little, though
252
they’re still zipping past slower traffic. They’re less than an hour from
Garbadale.
‘Have you sorted out what your –’ she hoists one eyebrow ‘– I’m trying to
think of another word instead of agenda, here/ she confesses. ‘But anyway,
have you? Do you really know what you’re going there to do?’ She glances over
at him.
He watches the road ahead unspool towards them.
‘I feel like a UN Observer or something,’ he tells her. ‘I’m going to watch
them tear themselves apart, for money. Or stay shackled together, in some
dubious spirit of solidarity. Which we are not, frankly, very good at.’
‘But what do you want?’
‘I suppose being honest with myself I want Spraint to fuck off and leave us
alone, though if we’re prepared to sell out to them then we deserve whatever
we get. With the possible exception of the money.’
‘Okay. How much money?’
‘They’re valuing the seventy–five per cent of the company they don’t already
own at a hundred and twenty million US dollars. About seventy million of your
Earth quids.’
‘That a final offer?’
‘They say. But they only started at a hundred, so probably not. If we’re
greedy we’ll hold out for something a lot closer to two hundred mill US.’
‘And are you greedy?’
‘Of course we are.’ He smiles humourlessly.
‘So if they raised their bid to that level, you’d still vote no and try to
get other people to do the same?’
‘Yes.’
‘But you’re not that bothered if it goes the other way?’
‘Correct.’
And it doesn’t mean much to you financially?’
‘I’ve a hundred shares left, specifically so I still get a vote. If I’m
forced to sell I’ll use the proceeds to buy you a slap–up meal and
253
a bottle of something nice to go with it. But there won’t be any change.’
She frowns. ‘Can you be forced to sell?’
‘If they get ninety–two per cent of the shares, the law says they can buy
the rest compulsorily.’
‘Hmm.’
She’s quiet for a few moments while a moderately fast–moving Audi saloon is
dispatched with a series of deft flicks of the wrists and a blip of throttle.
Alban twists in his seat, looking back. ‘I think that was Aunt Kath and
Lance,’ he says. He gives a small wave, in case it was. The Audi flashes its
lights. They haven’t been flashed since Glen Coe. Or overtaken since the Evo
near Crianlarich, for that matter.
‘That count?’

She shakes her head. ‘That doesn’t count.’
‘Anyway,’ he says, settling back, ‘I don’t think I’ll have much influence on
them. They’ll sell. Just a question of how much for.’
She looks over at him. And what about your cousin? What about Sophie?’
‘Yes, she’s supposed to be there. Probably.’
‘That’s not what I meant. Come on.’ She says it gently enough.
He watches the road for a while. ‘I don’t know,’ he says quietly. ‘It’s like
I’m always expecting –’ he looks over at Verushka ‘– at this point I’m looking
for an alternative to "closure", but, well . . .’
‘What? Every time you see her you realise you still feel something for her?’
‘I suppose.’ He looks down, brushing imaginary specks off his jeans.
‘Something like that.’ He reaches up and massages his temples, as though he
has a headache. ‘I don’t know. It’s . . .’ His voice trails off.
‘How do you feel about her?’ Verushka sounds intrigued, no more. ‘Come on,
McGill. Be honest.’ Another glance. ‘With yourself; be honest.’
‘Oh, I don’t know, VG,’ he says, shaking his head as he looks out
254
at the mountains sliding slowly past in the distance. ‘Sometimes I think the
easiest person to fool is yourself. How do I feel about her? I honestly don’t
know. I look and look and I can’t seem to find anything there. I feel that
I’ll only know when I see her again, but then that never works out either. And
she’s – she’s changed so much. Changed herself so much.’ He shakes his head.
‘She looks good – she looks ten years younger than she is – but she’s had a
lot of work done.’
‘Think she’ll have had anything else done since?’
‘Hal Fuck knows. Botox, probably. Facelift? Bigger bum? Smaller bum? Boob
job, either direction? I don’t know; what’s the fashion these days?’
Verushka grins. ‘Gee, dude, you are like so asking the wrong poisin.’
And your American accent is still terrible,’ he tells her, smiling at her.
‘Maybe so, but, one day . . . Anyway.’
Anyway,’ he says, reaching out and putting his hand to the nape of her neck.
‘That’s nice,’ she purrs, pushing her head back a fraction. ‘If I start to
drool, you will stop, won’t you?’ Another flashed grin. ‘Same if we crash.’
‘Deal,’ he tells her. ‘But shouldn’t the question you ought to be asking be
how I feel about you?’
She shrugs. ‘I know how you feel about me.’
‘You do? Well, tell me.’
‘You think I’m great,’ she tells him. ‘Which, I mean, I am, obviously.’ She
has a cheerful smile on her face. ‘But, you know I’ve been free with my
favours, I’m unrepentantly selfish, I have no intention of ever getting
married and I don’t want children. So we’re fine unless and until you find
somebody you can love who wants the things you want, especially children.’
‘Or you do.’
‘That’s the difference,’ she says. ‘I pretty much already have what I want.’
255
‘Well lucky old you.’
‘Yup, lucky me.’ She spares a look for the few high, puffy clouds.
‘Actually, no, that’s not entirely true.’
‘No?’
‘I miss you,’ she says. Brightly, almost. ‘I told you last night. I meant
it. I wish you lived in Glasgow, or somewhere nearby. I wish we saw each other
more often.’ She shrugs.
He wonders what to say to this. ‘Well,’ he says eventually, ‘I guess I have
to live somewhere.’
‘Steady, now,’ she says archly, ‘these wild rushes of enthusiasm will be the
unmaking of you.’

‘I’m sorry,’ he says. ‘That sounded wrong. I just mean . . . But what about
you? Would you move somewhere else?’
‘Has to have a university and easy access to mountains,’ she says crisply.
‘Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dundee, Aberdeen. In Europe, woh, anywhere near the Alps
would do. Oslo. In the States: Colorado . . . Oh, loads of places. Why?’
‘Just checking.’
‘I’m not necessarily asking you to move in, you understand,’ she says.
‘I realise that.’
‘Still, you don’t want to lose me, Alban,’ she says gently, and looks over
at him for long enough that when she looks back to the road she has to make a
small adjustment to the steering.
‘No,’ he says. ‘I don’t.’
He watches her face, side on, for a moment. He loves this woman, he
realises, but he doesn’t know how to tell her exactly how much without
sounding either mealy–mouthed or just too cold. He has never been
head–over–heels in love, not even with Sophie, in a sense. Sophie is so long
ago, and what happened between them occurred at such a young, even formative
age that she forms this awful, unstable, hopelessly compromised foundation for
all his feelings for all the women he’s ever felt anything for since.
256
But no, he does not want to lose Verushka.
‘Why?’ he asks, keeping his voice even. ‘Am I in any danger of losing you?’
‘No,’ she says. ‘Not that I can see. But I don’t know what’s going to come
out the other side of this long weekend, when you see your old girlfriend,
your long–lost love, the gal what popped your cherry’ She looks over, an
unfunny, even sad smile on her face. ‘What’s worrying is I don’t think you do
either.’
‘Maybe that’s why I feel so nervous,’ he confesses.
‘Really?’ She sounds concerned.
He pats his belly through his shirt. ‘Really.’
‘Oh, come on,’ she chides. ‘It’ll be all right. You’ll probably have a great
time. You’ll persuade them all to join the Scottish Socialist Party and send
the Spraint guys back off to California tarred and feathered and questioning
the very laws of capitalism itself. Sophie’ll have just the sweetest guy in
tow and twins she’s been keeping secret for the last year and she’ll thank you
for introducing her to the mysteries of lurve and say it’s time you both moved
on and you and her husband will bond amazingly well and, oh, all that shit.
Even your granny will be nice.’
‘She’s often nice. Just never without an ulterior motive.’
‘But don’t be nervous. It’s only family.’
‘Don’t be nervous,’ he mimics, muttering half to himself. ‘It’s only
nuclear’
They leave the main road at the village of Sloy in the shadow of the
mountain called Quinag and take a right, heading over a low rise towards Loch
Glencoul and the road round to Loch Beag and the great estate of Garbadale.
They turn in through the grand gateway and past the gatehouse. Alban looks
back at the waters of the loch and the humpback bridge carrying the road over
both the River Garve and the path that leads from the house down to the loch’s
head. The Forester crunches up the drive between rows of Western Red cedars.
257
‘And thar she blows,’ Verushka says, chin on steering wheel, gaze upwards,
diverted by the sight of the house starting to appear over and through the
curving avenue of tall trees.
The house is revealed in sunlight. There are a dozen or so cars and a couple
of white vans parked outside. They drive into the shadow of the south wing,

drive out again. ‘Aye, here’s oor wee hielin’ hame,’ Alban says.
‘What a fucking monstrous pile,’ Verushka breathes. ‘Did anybody ever need
that many turrets?’
‘It’s for sale,’ he tells her. ‘You always wanted a pied–a–terre somewhere
up here. Even comes with its own mountains. You should make us an offer.’
‘Na,’ she says, pulling in between a brace of Range Rovers. ‘Thanks all the
same but actually I was looking for somewhere a little bigger.’
‘Well, it’s a disappointment, but I understand.’
Alban! Hello. Will you stop doing that? Please! At least inside?’ ‘Hi, cuz.’
Alban raises one hand. ‘Hi, ah, small children.’ They’re met in the grand hall
by Haydn, who has been drafted in as the family member least likely to make a
terrible mess of the accommodation and general hospitality arrangements, even
though the house does have a manager who is perfectly used to doing this sort
of thing. As they enter, four or five waist–high children of indeterminate
gender are in the act of running hollering down the stairs, circuiting a
large, sturdy octagonal table in the centre of the hall and then dashing out
through the front doors. Alban watches them go, hand still raised in
unacknowledged greeting. He shrugs.
Haydn blinks through his glasses at Verushka, who stands on her heels, hands
behind her back, smiling at him, bathed in late–afternoon sunlight filtered
through the double–height stained glass windows. ‘And this must be . . .’
Haydn looks down at his clipboard, riffling through pages.
‘It’s all right, I’m not staying,’ Verushka says, stepping up to him
258
and sticking out her hand. ‘Verushka Graef. You must be Haydn. How do you do.’
‘Yes. Pleased to meet you. So, you’re not staying?’
‘Just passing through.’
‘I’m staying,’ Alban says helpfully, watching a couple of workmen move a
large plant in a weighty pot to the stairs and then start heaving it upwards,
one deliberate step at a time.
‘Yes,’ Haydn says, looking at his clipboard list again. ‘Bad news or good?’
he starts to ask Alban, then looks, surprised, at Verushka. ‘Passing through?’
he asks, incredulous. ‘To where?’
‘Further north,’ she tells him. ‘This is only Sutherland, after all.’
‘Huh,’ Haydn says, unclipping a pen and scoring Alban’s name through. ‘But
it was the Vikings called it that.’
‘And Greenland Greenland,’ Verushka agrees, staring up at the panelled
ceiling with its emblazoned shields and pendulous gilded doodahs like giant
pine cones. ‘Those wacky Vikings.’
‘What was that about bad news, Haydn?’ Alban asks, putting his bag down on
the parquet.
‘Oh, you’re sharing with Fielding.’
‘Does he know?’
‘Not yet.’
‘Does he snore?’ Verushka asks.
‘Not as far as I know,’ Haydn says.
She nods her head at Alban, says, ‘He does,’ and walks off a little way to
admire a huge brass dinner gong, flicking it with one blunt fingernail. ‘Do
you get gong tuners?’ she murmurs.
‘Do I snore, really?’ Alban asks, genuinely surprised.
The workmen get the giant plant to the top of the stairs and start rolling
the pot along the gallery.
‘Well, that’s Fielding’s problem,’ Haydn says.
Verushka glances back at Alban, waggles one flat hand. ‘Very softly. Quite
sweet really. Can’t imagine you’ll wake up because Fielding’s trying to
smother you with a pillow.’ She looks at Haydn, frowning. ‘You have any spare
ear plugs?’

259
Alban crosses his arms, looks at her. ‘So. Don’t let us keep you.’
She gives him her best shit–eating grin. ‘You’re welcome, it was on my way.’
He smiles and walks up to her, taking her in his arms. ‘Yeah, thank you for
the lift. Seriously. It was great. Very much appreciated.’
‘My pleasure,’ she says, and kisses him. He kisses back.
‘I’d say get a room,’ Haydn tells them, walking past, ‘but I can’t help.’ He
sits down heavily on a padded leather chair with corkscrew wooden uprights. He
looks through the sheets of paper, shaking his head.
‘Problem?’ Alban asks.
‘Trying to keep the older people on the ground or first,’ Haydn says. ‘But
it’s a struggle.’
Alban disengages himself from Verushka and walks over to Haydn. ‘We must
have a belfry you could allocate to Win, no?’ he suggests (Verushka notices he
takes a very quick look round the hall, stairs and gallery before saying it).
The workmen with the plant have disappeared.
Verushka considers saying something on the lines of, I’m a mathematician;
maybe I can help, but decides against it on the grounds that this sort of
levity has been taken seriously in the past and led only to embarrassment and
disappointment all round.
‘Ha, ha,’ Haydn says, though he takes a look round, too.
Verushka shakes her head, unseen.
All the Americans arrive tomorrow,’ Haydn says, looking at his last sheet on
the clipboard. ‘I’ve tried to give the Spraint people the rooms with the best
views.’
What,’ Alban asks, ‘to compensate for theirs?’
Haydn frowns, blinks, opens his mouth to speak, but then both men look
towards the far side of the main staircase from Verushka as a door creaks
open. Two enormous shaggy grey dogs – Irish wolfhounds, Verushka is fairly
sure – lope in, heads down, and go snuffling up to Alban and Haydn. Haydn
grimaces and holds his
260
clipboard up out of the way. Alban grins and ruffles their ears and coats. One
animal sees her and pads across.
‘That’s Gilbey,’ Alban tells Verushka. ‘Or Plymouth.’ He looks at Haydn.
‘Jamieson; he still around?’
Haydn shakes his head. ‘Dead.’
‘There you are; a spirit now. Anyway,’ Alban says, ‘they’re harmless.’
‘Uh–huh.’ Verushka pats the giant hound on the head, which is about level
with her sternum. She has seen full–grown dogs smaller than this thing’s head.
Shetland ponies are a couple of hands smaller, if also broader. The first dog
raises its nose then goes bounding upstairs. Hers chooses to wander off. It
collapses untidily behind the giant gong and starts snoring almost instantly.
Ah, Lauren,’ Haydn says. ‘Oh! Win. There you are.’
An oldish woman and a very old woman appear from the same direction as the
wolfhounds. Lauren is a reasonably preserved sixty, in slacks and a navy
sweater, still with a hint of brown in her hair. Win, the soon–to–be birthday
girl, is frail–looking with thin white hair, clad in a loose tweed twin set.
She’s stooped and clutching a tall wooden walking stick in her right hand.
Lauren leaves Win’s side, greets and quickly kisses Alban and then asks,
‘Did a plant come through here? And two chaps?’
Alban and Haydn both point. ‘Upstairs.’
‘Damn.’ She shakes her head, and with one hand on the banister rail runs up
the stairs. Halfway up, she sees Verushka looking at her through the
banisters; she smiles briefly and mouths Hello, then she disappears along the
gallery, brogues clumping.

Alban, Alban,’ Gran Win says, straightening a little and accepting a kiss on
both cheeks. ‘You’ve come. Thank you so much. Will you be here for my
birthday, too?’
‘Of course, Gran. That’s the main reason.’
‘Oh, well, people say that, but . . .’ Win catches sight of Verushka, turns
her head a fraction more and frowns. ‘Yes? Can we help you?’
Verushka walks forward and smiles generously. ‘Oh, I doubt it.’
Win looks to Alban.
261
‘Win, this is my good friend Verushka Graef. She very kindly drove me all
the way here from Glasgow.’
Verushka nods. ‘How do you do.’
Win looks uncertain. ‘Yes, hello. Haydn, do we–?’
‘I’m just passing through, ma’am,’ Verushka says, before Haydn can answer.
‘Mountains to climb.’ Win looks at her in a way that causes her to add,
‘Literal rather than metaphorical.’
‘Oh. I see,’ Win says. ‘Well, can you at least stay for dinner?’
Verushka glances at Alban and says, ‘Thanks. I kind of have my heart set on
a foil pouch of reconstituted chicken curry spooned through a midge net, but .
. ."
‘Oh, please, do stay for dinner,’ Win says, her hand on the stick shaking
slightly. She glances at Haydn, who is starting to look worried. ‘And I’m sure
we can put you up for at least one night . . .’
Alban is smiling at her. Good enough, Verushka decides. ‘Well, that’s very
kind,’ she says. ‘I’d love to.’
Behind his glasses, Haydn closes his eyes. His jaw clenches tight. Then his
eyes flick open. He glances at his clipboard. Verushka is ahead of him.
‘Inverlochy,’ she tells him.
‘Yes, of course! Fielding’s not here until tomorrow!’ Haydn says.
‘Splendid!’ He looks up at Verushka, gaze swivelling between her and Alban,
worried again. ‘How good friends . . . ?’
‘Sufficiently,’ Verushka assures him, taking Alban’s arm.
From the room, high on the fourth, attic floor, where once the house’s
servants lived, the view extends across the back lawn, over the old walled
kitchen garden on its southerly slope to the woods, looking down the glen
between the twin lines of hills disappearing to the south–east, the landlocked
loch – Loch Garve or Loch Garbh according to which map you chose to consult –
unseen throughout the milder months from April to October behind a screen of
leaves. In the winter, through the net of bared branches, it glitters
sometimes under the slanting low–season light.
262
To the north is a steep hillside of grass and scree and a slanted line of
cliff, hiding the upper ramparts of Beinn Leoid. A stream runs off the edge of
the furthest, highest part of the cliff. Today, the waterfall catches the
light against the darker rocks beyond. Alban remembers looking at the
waterfall once, in spring, half a dozen years ago, in a momentary break of
ragged sunlight between crushing falls of pounding rain and sleet with a storm
blowing a high wind up the glen and howling around the old house.
The wind caught the waterfall that day, bending it back on itself and
forcing the water rearing up in a great wind–supported near–circular wave,
dumping it in unsteady, billowing veils and lumps back on to the moor it was
attempting to fall from. It was like the most fabulous elemental battle
between air, water and gravity and he recalls standing at the window in the
drawing room, watching this chaos with a feeling of almost sexual excitement.
Part of him wanted to run out into the storm, let the rain soak him and the

wind buffet him and be part of it all. A more sober part was deeply glad of
the roof over his head, the fire in the broad grate and the ancient bulk of
the cast–iron radiators sited under each window, the pipes as thick as his
arm, gurgling with water and rust or sand or something in them that made them
tinkle and rustle.
Then, the family had been at Garbadale for a similar reason to the one that
had brought them here, now.
Then it had been about selling off just part of the company. Should they
sell any of it, and if so, how much? At the time he’d been against any sale,
but was already starting to question his own commitment to the family and the
firm. Leaving – resigning – had been on his mind lately. It was obvious early
on that a majority of family members/shareholders were quite gung–ho for
selling anything up to a 49.5 per cent share to Spraint Corp, and he had kind
of withdrawn from the argument. His last contribution had been to suggest that
they didn’t sell more than 20 per cent.
Subsequently he’d spent a couple of the discussion sessions and
263
Spraint presentations away from the house, out on the hill with Neil McBride,
the Garbadale estate manager.
‘Ah, it’s all changing. We can see it here. The salmon and brown trout,
they’re mostly gone. And we don’t get the winters we used to. I’ve got clothes
and winter gear I just never wear – well, maybe a day a year or something –
because it’s milder all the time. Windier, too, and cloudier, less sunlight.
I’ve spotted that, here; with this. Having a hard time persuading any bugger
it’s actually happening, but I’m sure it is.’
Neil was a shortish guy with a ruddy, outdoors face and hair –and a
flourishing moustache – the colour of old bracken. He was in his late fifties
and his face looked it because he’d spent so much of his life outside, though
he moved like a man half his age.
‘That what this does?’ Alban asked.
‘Aye. It measures sunlight, basically’
They’d driven Neil’s battered Land Rover up a short track off the road to
Sloy to the top of a small rise where the estate’s weather station was
situated. The sun had just set. The day had been breezy but the evening was
becoming calm. Long, soft–looking lines of clouds led off across the dappled
scape of mountains and hills and moor and loch, going pink as the sunset
swivelled west over the Atlantic.
Neil had been taking the rainfall, barometric pressure, wind and sunlight
measurements here since shortly after he started work at Garbadale,
twenty–five years earlier. He logged all the data – in a set of old ledgers,
at first; more recently on a PC – and sent the results to the Met Office
daily.
Alban liked the sunlight–measuring device. It was a post with a spherical
metal cage on the top at about chest height. A sphere of glass sat in the
centre of the cradle. Behind the orb, situated with its centre near due north,
a long strip of special light–sensitive paper lay inside a curved glass cover
wrapped around the framework. The glass sphere acted as a lens, concentrating
the sunlight that fell upon
264
it and directing it on to the paper so that it burned a brown trace across the
time–graphed surface, providing a record of how much clear sun there had been
that day.
It was, Alban thought, like something out of a magician’s workshop, an
ancient instrument that worked to this day, that still did good science and
provided reliable data and yet looked like it could have come straight from an

alchemist’s secret chamber.
‘I thought the world was warming?’ he asked, studying the instrument
carefully as Neil changed the paper.
‘It is. Certainly warming here. But there’s more cloud, so it’s dimming,
too. Cloud keeps the heat in, so it’s all of a piece.’ Neil put the strip of
paper for that day into an envelope and stuck that in his ancient waxed
jacket. He clipped a new strip of paper into place. ‘There.’ He looked up and
around at the hills and moors. The sea was just visible, off to the north–west
beyond the low hills.
‘Aye, I remember sitting up . . . There,’ Neil said, turning and pointing at
a hill a kilometre or so away to the south. ‘Summer I first started.
Seventy–nine, I suppose. Delighted to be here. Knew I’d stay till I was
pensioned off or thrown out or died on the job. Loved the place. Running away
from the big bad city I was; never liked cities, crowds. Came here, thought,
well, whatever else they might do to concrete over the fields and parks and
knock down all the lovely old buildings and cover the cities with smog, at
least they’ll never touch here. The hills will stay the same as they’ve always
been – I mean, I wasnae daft, I knew they’d been covered in trees once and now
they were bare, but I meant the hills themselves wouldn’t change – the
weather, the climate, the rain and the wind, none of that would change. That
gave me heart. That really did. You felt, well, something’s secure,
something’s not going to get changed.’ He shook his head, took off his
worn–looking cap and rubbed his balding head with one hand before replacing
the cap. ‘But you wouldnae credit it, the stuff that’s changing now. The
different birds, the game fish disappearing – that’s mostly the fish farms and
them being caught out to sea, mind, but all the same – the warmer winters,
wetter winters,
265
higher wind speeds. Lot less snow. It’s all changing. Even the sky.’ He nodded
up. ‘We’re changing the sky and the weather and the sea. I’m telling you,
we’re screwing up the whole bloody planet. We just don’t know our own
strength.’
‘We certainly don’t know our own stupidity,’ Alban said.
‘Aye, we’re too daft to know we’re daft.’
‘The hills will be the same, though,’ Alban said. ‘The rock; that won’t
change. There might be trees again or different ground cover, but the shape of
the hills themselves, the geology; that won’t change.’
Ah well, that’s about the only thing that won’t.’
‘Might not even be us who’s doing it,’ Alban suggested. ‘There are natural
cycles of climate change. Could just be one of them.’
Aye, maybe.’ Neil sounded sceptical. ‘But I keep up wi’ all this stuff,
Alban. It’s part of the job to look ahead, especially when you’re planting
trees that might last for centuries, but I find it interesting anyway, and
I’ll tell you; the people who’ll tell you the jury’s still out on this stuff
are clutching at straws, or they’re the kind of people that just can’t stand
to admit they’ve been wrong. Either that or they’re just outright liars, back
pockets stuffed with dollars from the big oil companies.’ He gave a snort.
‘There’s just a tiny wee chance, getting tinier and weer all the time, that
they’re right, and if we all try to cut back hard on greenhouse gases and all
that, then we’re going to waste a lot of money for no good reason.’ Neil
shrugged. Aye, well. What a shame. But if they’re wrong, we waste the whole
fucking planet – scuse my French – and the way it works, once your positive
feedback kicks in and it all goes runaway, no amount of money will put it back
together again. That’s what’s so stupid, that’s what’s so short–sighted about
it. All about the short term. All about increasing shareholder value. Cannae
do anything that goes against the shareholders, eh?’
‘We do tend to panic otherwise.’
Neil let slip a small smile. Aye, well, I won’t tell you my thoughts on the

shareholders.’
Ah, go on. Won’t go any further. Promise.’
266
‘Well, I don’t mean people like you, not the family firm and such, but
sometimes I think, Fuck the shareholders.’ He gave a slight forward nod, as
though to say, There you are.
‘Fuck the shareholders? Never had you down as a revolutionary Communist,
Neil.’
‘Aye, well, I’m no’ that either. And I’m sure there’s much cleverer folk
than me who’d explain how shareholders are just the total be–all and end–all
of everything and they’re the ones who’ll make it all all right again, through
the market, and all that.’
‘I don’t doubt there are,’ Alban agreed.
‘Still think it’s probably shite, though.’ Neil smiled grimly.
Alban wondered at the regretful anger that Neil seemed to be trying to
control. ‘Well, you could be right.’
‘You don’t have any children, that right?’
‘None I know of,’ Alban said. ‘You’ve got a couple, haven’t you?’
‘One of each. Grown up now. Kirsty’s just made us grandparents again.’
‘Oh. Congratulations.’
Aye, thanks. But they’ll be the ones that have to clean up the mess we
make.’
‘Jeez, Neil. I was thinking of having kids myself one day. You’re putting me
off here.’
Neil slapped him on the arm. Ah, dinnae mind me. Come on; I’ll let you buy
me a pint at the Sloy Arms.’ They got back into the Land Rover.
Verushka slides her arms round his waist as he stands looking up at the thin
little waterfall high on the cliff. (Gravity always won, the water always won;
the wind only blew the water back up to where it must fall from one way or the
other, between gusts or after the storm had abated.)
‘You okay?’
‘Yeah. You?’
‘Exceptionally. Sure you don’t mind me staying?’
267
‘Mind?’ He turns to her to put his arms round her, hug her. ‘Fucking
delighted.’ He nods at the two single beds in the room. ‘Sorry it’s a twin.’
‘Hey–ho. I suspect we’ll manage.’
‘Do I really snore?’
‘Gently. Melodiously. Charmingly. You reassured yet? I could go on.’
As well as Win and Haydn, Verushka is introduced to Aunt Clara, Uncle Kennard
(Managing Director) and his wife Renee, Uncle Graeme and his wife Lauren,
cousin Fabiole and his wife Deborah and their children Daniel and Gemma,
cousin Lori and her husband Lutz (from Germany) and their children Kyle and
Phoebe, Aunt Linda and her husband Perce (Brand Manager), cousin Steve (the
container port cranes guy – just flown in for the weekend from Dubai, where he
lives and where he works almost all the time now), Aunt Kathleen (Finance
Officer) and her husband Lance, their daughter Claire, her partner Chay,
cousin Emma, her husband Mark, their children Shona and Bertie, as well as
corporate lawyer George Hissop of Messrs Gudell, Futre & Bolk, his legal
assistant Gudrun Selves, Neil McBride the estate manager, Neil Durril the
house manager and Sandy Lassiter, head cook.
Andy (Company Secretary) and Leah, sis Cory and her husband Dave plus their
children Lachlan and Charlotte, Aunt Lizzie (twin of Linda), Fielding with
Beryl and Doris plus cousin Rachel with her husband also called Mark and their

two children Ruthven and Foin and cousin Louise, plus cousin Steve’s wife
Tessa, her son Rune, his partner Penning and their baby Hannah, not to mention
at least two Spraint high–ups – probably two guys called Feaguing and Fromlax
– plus their highly pared–down micro–retinues of two flunkies each are all due
to arrive tomorrow.
‘Got all that?’ Alban asked her, looking up from Haydn’s clipboard,
grinning.
‘Yup.’
268
He took a step back. ‘Really?’
‘Course not,’ Verushka said, going to slap him on the upper arm but pulling
the blow at the last moment. ‘You think because I’m a mathematician I’ve got a
photographic memory or something?’
Verushka and Aunt Clara are talking:
‘I don’t understand. What can that mean, "Where are the numbers?’"
‘I think it means, Do they exist as abstract entities – like physical laws,
as functions of the nature of the universe; or are they cultural constructs?
Do they exist without somebody thinking them?’
‘This sounds awfully complicated.’ They are sitting together at dinner that
evening. The dining room is wood–panelled, quite high–ceilinged, and very
long. Verushka thinks it’s a little like being in an enormous coffin, but has
thought better of actually saying this aloud. ‘Awfully complicated,’ Clara
says again. ‘My husband might have understood this, I doubt I shall.’ Clara’s
husband James had died of a heart attack in 2001 and Clara inherited all his
shares.
‘I don’t know about complicated. Esoteric, maybe.’
‘Esoteric,’ Graeme Wopuld says. Alban’s Uncle Graeme, the Norfolk farmer and
husband of Aunt Lauren, has been trying to get Verushka to talk to him for the
last twenty minutes, without noticeable success. ‘What a wonderful word, don’t
you think?’ Graeme is a craggy–looking fellow with wispy, sandy hair,
extensive eyebrows and full lips he feels the need to lick rather a lot.
‘Isn’t it?’ Verushka agrees, glancing at him before turning back to Clara,
who says,
‘And so, what do you think?’
‘About where are the numbers?’
‘Yes. What’s your answer?’
(What was the question?’ Graeme asks.)
‘I think I have to put it in the form of another question,’ Verushka tells
Clara.
‘I was somewhat afraid of that.’
269
‘Alban got me thinking about it this way.’
‘Alban? Really?’
‘Yes. He said, "Where you left them," which is pretty much just flippant,
but there’s a wee grain of possibility there and so my answer to the question,
"Where are the numbers?" is, "Where do you think?" See what I’m doing there?’
‘Not really. That sounds flippant too.’
‘Well, it sounds it at first, but if you take it out of the context of
flippancy and treat it as a new question in its own right, you’re asking,
Where does your thinking happen?’
‘In your brain?’
‘Well, yes, so if you use one question as an answer to the first, you’re
saying that the numbers exist in your head.’
‘Mine feels rather tight at the moment. Like it’s about to burst with
numbers and odd questions.’

‘Yeah, I get that a lot. Anyway. It’s more interesting than just saying,
"The numbers are in your head," because otherwise why put it in the form of a
question at all? Why not just say that?’
‘You mean, say, "The numbers are in your head"?’
‘Yes. Because then it becomes a question about boundaries.’
‘Boundaries.’
When you think about numbers, are you using a little bit of the universe to
think about it, or is it using a little bit of itself to think about itself,
or, even, about something – about these entities called numbers – that might
be said to exist outside of itself, if one uses one of the less ultimately
inclusive definitions of the word "universe"?’ Verushka sits back, triumphant.
‘See?’
‘Not really,’ Clara admits. And my old head is rather starting to spin.’
Well, to be fair,’ Verushka agrees, ‘it’s an incomplete answer. But I like
the direction it’s going in.’
‘This all sounds very fascinating,’ Graeme says.
‘It is, isn’t it?’ Verushka says brightly before turning back to Clara as
she says,
270
‘And you do this for a living?’
‘Not this part, no; this is just for fun.’
‘Good heavens.’
‘May I?’ Verushka offers to top up Clara’s glass of red.
‘Oh, thank you.’
‘Any left?’ Graeme asks, holding out his glass. Verushka hands him the
bottle.
‘Sophie’s your daughter, isn’t she?’ she says to Clara.
‘Yes, she is. Arriving tomorrow, we’re told.’
‘She and Alban. They were . . . They were fond of each other once, weren’t
they?’
‘Yes. Well, they thought they were. They were far too young of course. And
they are first cousins, and, well, there are sound reasons for not breeding
that close. I’ve been breeding Labs since I lost James – my mother did the
same – and you learn the pitfalls.’
‘You think there was a danger of them breeding?’ Verushka says, putting her
hand to her mouth and widening her eyes to indicate shock.
‘My dear,’ Clara says, and pats the other woman’s forearm, ‘it’s all a long
time ago and a lot of water’s flown under the bridge since then. It’s not
really a subject I care to talk much about. There’s really no point.’
‘I see.’ Verushka smiles. ‘Well, I’m leaving early tomorrow so I probably
shan’t get to meet Sophie, but you must be looking forward to seeing her
again.’
‘Oh yes,’ Clara nods slowly. Her face is deeply lined, her red hair
thinning, scalp visible beneath, though she is not yet in her seventies.
‘Though in a way I stopped recognising her a long time ago.’
Verushka hesitates at this, but then leans close to the older woman, gently
holding one elbow. ‘I’m sure she’s looking forward to seeing you again.’
‘I do hope so.’
*
*
*
271
Alban was standing minding his own business in the drawing room after the meal
– VG was talking animatedly with Kennard, Haydn and Chay – when Aunt Lauren
came up to him.
‘Alban?’
He was half in, half out of the curtains shielding one tall window, looking
up at the distant, moonlit cliff and the white trace of the waterfall. The

forecast wasn’t good. The weather hadn’t broken yet, though he could see a
deep shadow of black cloud spreading slowly from the west. He let the curtains
fall back.
‘Lauren. Hi.’
‘Won’t you come and talk to Win? She’d love to see you.’
Win was sitting over by the fire at one end of the room.
‘How could I disobey?’ he sighed. He followed Lauren, pulled a seat over and
sat by Win in her easy chair. Lauren turned to talk to somebody else. Aunt
Linda – a vision of florid pink corpulence who always reminded Alban of the
late Queen Mother, though her tipple was brandy rather than gin – was sitting
in the matching wing–backed easy chair on the other side of the fireplace from
Win, but she seemed to have fallen asleep.
‘Ah, Alban.’ Win held out her almost empty whisky tumbler. Would you be an
absolute dear and refresh this for me? Indulge an old woman.’
‘Of course, Win.’
He returned, presented her with the glass.
‘Oh, Alban,’ she said, ‘are you trying to get me drunk?’ She shook her head.
He held his hand back out towards the glass. ‘I’ll drink some of it for you
if it’s too much.’
Win tutted. She tested the whisky. ‘It might need a little more water,’ she
said. She held the glass out to him. ‘Would you mind –’
‘I have some here,’ he said, holding out his own glass. He’d switched to
water.
‘Oh. Well. If you– All right.’
Once she was happy with her drink, had been reassured that her walking stick
was to hand, a log had been added to the fire and
272
Alban had removed the brandy ballon from Aunt Linda’s slack fingers – in case
it fell and smashed on the hearth – Win was finally ready to talk.
‘Your young lady seems perfectly pleasant,’ she said.
Actually she’s a couple of years older than me,’ Alban told her.
‘Really? Well, one’s tastes change over the years, I suppose.’
And how are you keeping, Win? I didn’t really get a chance for a full update
on all the latest aches and pains.’
‘Now, Alban. You don’t really want to hear an old woman complaining about
all the things wrong with her.’
He smiled with his mouth. ‘Sorry to be giving up the old place?’ He looked
away to the far end of the room, over most of his family, chattering and
drinking.
‘I’ll miss it,’ she said. ‘I wish we’d buried Bert somewhere else, now.’ Old
Bert’s grave was on a small circular island at the near end of the loch, just
a few metres offshore. Alban remembered that Neil McBride had been unhappy
with the choice; he was fairly sure the island had been the site of a Bronze
Age crannog and should be left undisturbed until it was properly excavated,
but Win had wanted her husband buried there and there hadn’t been a lot Neil
could do about it. ‘Maybe Lydcombe would have been better.’ She sighed.
‘Still. His tomb will stay here. We’ll have some sort of continuing presence,
something to show for our ownership. We did build the place after all. I’ve
put it into the conditions of sale that it’s never interfered with. The grave,
I mean.’
Any such proviso in the contract with Spraint?’
‘None that I know of, dear. Why, do you think there ought to be?’
‘Not particularly. They’d baulk.’
‘They will be paying us for our name, if the sale goes through. That will go
on.’
‘For a time, I guess.’
‘I am minded to vote against, you know, Alban,’ she told him. ‘Don’t cast me
as the wicked witch, dear. I’ve done what I could

273
to muster support for at least showing a bit of resistance. It’s mostly your
generation that’s showing all the enthusiasm for selling.’
He looked back at the rest of the room. ‘I kind of thought you’d be on their
side.’
‘Did you? Well, I’m glad that even at my advanced age I can still surprise
you.’
‘You’ve always been good at that, Win.’
‘Have I? I’ve always tried to be rather predictable and dependable, to tell
the truth. I didn’t think being surprising was really one of my strengths.’
‘The Spraint people, what time are we expecting them tomorrow?’
‘I think they’re expected about noon. They’re arriving by helicopter,
apparently. That should be exciting.’
‘What about the rest of our lot?’
‘Oh, I dare say they’ll appear in dribs and drabs over the course of the
day. I think everybody’s flying to Inverness and then taking cars. Then
there’s Fielding and the two old girls. Haydn has a better idea of who’s
arriving when.’
‘We are going to have a chance for a private meeting, just the family, the
shareholders, before the EGM, aren’t we?’
‘Do you think we should?’
‘Yes, I think we should, or have a formal part of the EGM without the
Spraint people present; whatever.’
The Extraordinary General Meeting was scheduled for the Saturday evening
before dinner, with the Spraint people present. Alban wanted to be able to get
everybody in the family together – certainly all the voting shareholders – so
they could discuss the proposed sell–out together before the EGM, without the
Spraint guys around. It seemed blindingly obvious to him that they should all
have some sort of idea what they felt individually and in groups – pro, anti,
undecided, whatever – before it all kicked off in public, just to see what
sort of united front it might be possible to present to their potential
buyers, but when he’d talked to Haydn about this he’d seemed distracted and
vague and suggested taking the matter up with Win.
274
‘Yes, a sort of meeting before the meeting,’ Win said. ‘I suppose we ought.
Yes, I’m sure we can arrange that.’
‘And would you say something?’
‘What, in front of everybody?’
‘Yes.’
‘Oh, I don’t think so. What do you think I ought to say?’
‘Say what you feel, what you think. Say whether you’re for or against the
sale.’
‘I’ve told you – I’m against it. Well, I think.’
‘You kind of have to make your mind up, Win, by tomorrow.’
‘Don’t rush me, Alban, please. I’m old. I rather want to see how everybody
feels. I mean, if they’re all going to say yes, what’s the point in me jamming
a spanner in the works?’
‘They’re not all going to say yes. I’ve already talked to a few people.’
‘You have? Well, yes, of course you have.’
‘It’s not a done deal, Win.’
‘I suppose not.’ Win looked thoughtful.
‘If you feel the family should keep the firm, Gran, say so; tell people.’
She turned to him and smiled. She looked old but still bright, her skin
wrinkled but soft in the firelight. Well, I shall, perhaps, I dare say’
Win,’ he said, clearing his throat, ‘you’re sort of the keeper of the family
archives and photographs and so on, aren’t you?’

‘Oh, I suppose so. What about them?’
‘I’d like to take a look at some of them.’
‘Really? Which ones?’
‘From when Irene and Andy first met, when all the brothers were in London
and you were there too, back in the late Sixties.’
‘Oh,’ Win said, and looked up and away for a few moments. ‘I think they’re
all packed up already. I’m so sorry. Perhaps once I’m settled again.’
Ah,’ he said. ‘That’s a pity’
275
Win was gesturing to somebody. Aunt Lauren came over and stood, bending, at
Win’s side. ‘Lauren, dear,’ Win said. ‘I’m ever so tired now. This fire is so
hot. I’m sweltering. Do you think you could see me up to my room?’
‘Of course, Win,’ Lauren said.
‘I’m sorry, Alban,’ Win said as Lauren helped her from her chair and he
presented her with her stick. ‘Thanks, dearest,’ she said to Lauren.
‘Good night, Gran,’ he said.
‘Night–night, Alban.’
He’d already talked to various of his relations before dinner. After a little
thought, he’d deliberately targeted the ones that were least likely to be
fully in play following the meal. Now he started doing something he kind of
hated, which was working the room. It was a horrible–sounding phrase and it
could be a pretty grisly process at the best of times. He wasn’t sure if
having to do it with your own family – well, with his own family – made it
better or worse. During this process he kept bumping into Aunt Lauren, who
appeared to be doing something very similar.
He saw Neil McBride and decided to take a break from the family business
stuff.
‘Neil. How’s the sunlight?’
What’s that?’ Neil looked merry. He was holding a large whisky. Neil was
dressed in his Sunday–best suit, tie still knotted.
‘The sunlight. That funny glass thing that tells you–’
‘Oh, I was right! Did you no’ see the Horizon programme? About Global
Dimming?’
‘Missed it. Sorry. Why, were you on it?’
‘No! Dinnae be daft. But I was right. No’ the first to spot it –some bloke
down in Australia noticed it before I did – but the point is it’s accepted
now, it’s science, no’ just some daft punter in a deerstalker on a Highland
estate havering about it. So there you are.’
‘They should call it the McBride effect.’
276
‘Aye, that’ll be right.’ He drank from his glass. ‘So, you still foresting
away? I’ve got a few hundred Sitka need chopping if you’ve brought your
chainsaw.’
‘I got invalided out, Neil.’ He held up a couple of fingers. ‘White finger.’
‘Christ, you’re kidding.’
"Fraid not.’
‘I thought it was all done with dirty great machines these days, no?’
‘Yeah, a lot is, but not all, and we were the steep slope specialists.’
‘Must have had ye on hell of an old gear. I’ve an old Huskie that vibrates
like a bastard – scuse my whatsit – but I’ve never had any problems.’ Neil
looked at his own right hand with an exaggeratedly worried expression.
‘Aye, but you’re not handling one of the things day–in, day–out for months
on end. I worked out there was one time in Kielder we were cutting every
single day, uninterrupted, for eighty–five days solid; twelve weeks without
even a Sunday off

‘Jesus! Must have been a hell of a bonus at the end of that one.’
Aye, well. That and we’d all got barred from the only pub within twenty
miles on the second night.’
Neil laughed. ‘So what’re you going to do with yourself now then?’
‘Don’t know. I was doing chainsaw sculptures and sold a few; that’s out the
window now.’
Anyway, Alban, nobody makes a living selling chainsaw sculptures.’
‘No, I guess not.’
‘Back to the family firm?’
‘We’re probably going to be selling up to these Spraint people.’
‘They might still want you.’
‘I doubt that, and anyway I’m not interested. Had my fill of life in a
suit.’
277
‘Aye.’ Neil nodded. ‘I see you couldn’t be bothered with a tie this
evening.’
‘Only comes out for funerals.’
‘Think they’ll – well, you’ll – sell, then, aye?’
‘I think it’s going to be tighter than some people were expecting, but . . .
I wouldn’t be surprised. What about you? You staying with the estate?’
‘Ah, we’ll see. It’ll be up to the new owners.’
‘You going to be okay? I mean, if they want to bring in somebody else?’
‘I’ll be fine. Got a great reference from the old girl if I need to
relocate, and I’ve always got the house in Sloy; that’s no’ tied. Spare room
if you ever want to come stay’
‘Cheers. Might well take you up on that. That’s very kind. Surprised they
haven’t asked you to put people up this weekend.’
‘Na, no need. You could always just open up the north wing.’
‘They’re not using that?’ He’d thought that even though what felt like half
the developed world seemed to be staying at Garbadale this weekend the old
place ought to have been big enough to swallow everybody without Haydn having
to do any room–juggling. Now he thought about it, he’d never been in the north
wing, not even as a child.
‘Bit damp,’ Neil said, nose wrinkling. ‘No central heating. Liable to wake
up to the sound of wee scampery things scurrying about during the night. You’d
have to start setting traps, and making fires in grates, and then it’d be pot
luck which chimneys are blocked by bird nests. You’d have to be pretty
desperate. That your bird, by the way?’ Neil nodded at Verushka, standing
laughing with Aunt Kathleen.
‘Close personal friend.’
‘Your bird, then,’ Neil said.
‘Yeah, my bird.’
‘She’s a cracker. I’d hold on to that one.’
‘I bet you would.’
278
‘Haw haw.’
‘Anyway, thanks for the advice.’
‘Any time.’
‘To trade fairs, not fair trade.’
Win raised her champagne flute. It glittered in the light of the circular
private dining room. Alban looked around the slick facets of the carved
crystal held in his grandmother’s hand, gazing out through the tall
floor–to–ceiling windows into the warm darkness of the Johannesburg night and
the lines of golden light beyond; the startlingly bright clusters of towering
sodium vapour masts and curved, swooping highway lines of new development

crowding out a distant hillside picked out with tiny scattered lights, all
random and dull.
There was a murmur round the circular table and much clinking of glasses.
After she’d drunk to her own toast, Win looked at him. ‘Alban. You’re not
drinking?’
‘Sometimes I just don’t have the stomach for it, Gran. You’ll have to excuse
me.’
‘Have I?’ She smiled frostily. Well, if you’re not feeling well . . .’ She
nodded and he realised he was being dismissed. He wondered if she thought he
meant ‘excuse me’ in the sense of ‘I have to go’. Or if she was getting rid of
him for not presenting a united front; for dissent. It didn’t matter. He
didn’t care. He wanted away from this crowd of ghastly boring loud–mouth wanks
anyway. Seize the chance.
He patted his belly as he rose, placing his napkin on the table. ‘Bit
unsettled. Think I will have an early night.’ He nodded at their host, a
Spraint high–up called Hursch. ‘Thank you for dinner.’
The next morning he was summoned to her suite for breakfast. The room looked
out over Sandton Square and the spread of clean, sparkling buildings clustered
there then – beyond – the view took in distant townships grouped around the
highways out of greater Johannesburg, indistinct in the hazy light of a warm
new morning.
279
A couple of hotel staff were quietly setting out breakfast. He took a seat,
smiled at the two servants.
Win appeared from her bedroom after the two staff exited. She was dressed in
a crisp–looking business suit and a silk blouse, her hair freshly done and her
make–up film quality. She stood behind her seat, looking at Alban, who made a
noise of apology, got up and held her chair for her. Win sat down, flicking
her napkin as though trying to create a sonic boom. Alban resumed his seat.
They looked at each other across gleaming crockery, cutlery and a large
central dome of chromed steel.
Eventually, Win said, ‘I am, in case you’re wondering, rather expecting an
apology.’
Are you? For what?’ He could feel anger rising inside him, and a sort of
ancient legacy of shame. Part of him wanted to start shouting at her now,
while another part, a part he thoroughly despised, wanted to say sorry as
quickly as possible and as sincerely as he could this side of abjection, just
so that everything would be all right again.
Only everything would never really be all right again. At Garbadale, a few
months earlier, he’d lost the argument about selling out to Spraint. The
family firm was now 25 per cent owned by the big US software Corp, and
whatever connection and commitment and loyalty he’d felt towards the company
was all starting to trickle away now. Lately the trickle seemed to be swelling
into a flood.
How quickly all that stuff dissipated. And how depressingly little it all
seemed to have meant. He could still do the job, though these days he was just
going through the motions and didn’t really believe in what he was doing any
more, but even that was no source of relief. On the contrary, discovering that
it was perfectly possible to do his job without really caring about it in the
least made him feel disillusioned about all the years he’d spent doing it when
it had meant something to him. What did it say about his position in the firm,
what did it say about him, when any insincere corporate grin–pedlar could have
done it just as well all these years? What had been the point?
280
He’d been made Brand Manager as well as Head of Product Development, with
more money, more shares, bigger potential bonuses and a greater say in the

running of the company – partly, he suspected, to compensate him after being
on the losing side of the Spraint battle – but even that had felt hollow, like
he was being thrown a few disposable scraps; an acknowledgement that none of
it really mattered anyway.
He knew in himself it was only a matter of time before he left. He’d already
written a series of draft resignation letters, though he’d always deleted them
without saving them to disk. Maybe he’d be fired instead. Win was just the
girl to do it. It was late 1999 and the last thing he felt like doing was
partying.
‘For what?’ Win quoted back at him, eyes wide. ‘For not joining in a toast,
for that weaselly smart remark about not having the stomach for it. For your
whole attitude throughout the meal. In fact, for your attitude this weekend,
and recently in general. I think an apology is required. I’d love to hear your
reasons to the contrary, if you’d care to air them.’
At moments like this, Alb an thought, Win did not look her seventy–four
years. She looked ten, maybe twenty years younger. It was as though anger and
indignation energised her, kept her young. He did something he’d been doing
with her for the last few years at such moments, stepping back inside himself
and looking at her as objectively as he could, ignoring the perfect make–up
and the power–dressing suit (a bit Eighties, anyway, he thought, almost
slightly Dallas, if you were inclined to be particularly critical, which he
was). He looked, instead, at the loose, chickeny skin at the foot of her
throat, the wrinkled hands and wrists, the slight sag under the eyes (though,
annoyingly, if also impressively, the consensus amongst those in the family
who knew and cared about such things was that the old girl had never had any
cosmetic surgery). And that looked like make–up on the backs of her hands.
Maybe Win was disguising liver spots. Had he been displaying a bad attitude
during the weekend at the
281
trade fair? He didn’t think he had, any more than he thought he’d been
anything other than good company at the dinner, right until he jumped ship
after the cruel and unusual toast. The only even vaguely controversial thing
he could recall saying earlier was something to the effect that if one was
being excruciatingly politically correct one would choose the locally–produced
wines to go with dinner from post–apartheid vintages. He hadn’t even pitched
it as a recommendation, let alone a criticism, just an early observation,
mostly to see how the assembled Spraint–ocrats would react and so gauge their
position on the political spectrum (they’d looked mystified, so default right
wing as well as rather dim).
On the other hand, if anybody was going to notice a lack of conviction in
one of her family and/or one of her company underlings, it was Win. This, he
was all too painfully aware, went right back to Lydcombe, to the looks he and
Sophie had been exchanging over the dinner table, thinking, stupidly as it
turned out, that their gran would be as oblivious as James and Clara to what
was going on under their noses. They’d been woefully wrong then and you could
argue that they’d both been paying for it one way or another ever since. Maybe
he hadn’t been hiding his disillusion with the job so well after all and Win,
predator that she was, had spotted a weakness in the herd. He was the
wildebeest she had singled out and was going to try and bring down.
Yes, well. Maybe, he thought, he should have done the Kruger National Park
after the trade fair, not before.
Anyway; the dear, vicious old thing was waiting on an apology or reasons for
not issuing one. He ought not to disappoint.
He did his best to look and sound reasonable. ‘I have to say I thought the
toast to trade fairs, not fair trade was uncalled for.’ He took a sip of
orange juice.
‘That is not what I said.’
‘Oh, I think you’ll find it was exactly what you said.’

‘I said, To trade fairs, not just fair trade.’
‘I don’t think you did, Win.’
282
He lifted the giant chromed bowl to reveal a steaming assortment of cooked
breakfast material being kept warm by little burners. A slightly sulphurous
scent of imperfectly combusted fuel wafted across the table. He set the
chromed hemisphere down on the floor. ‘Shall I serve?’
‘Don’t try to distract from what actually matters here,’ Win said. ‘This is
not about a single remark, it’s about your whole attitude. You were
ungracious, even rude. You’d been making anti–American remarks all evening.’
‘No I wasn’t. I like America. The country’s breathtaking.’ Alban took his
time inspecting the fare on offer and helped himself to a couple of thick
strips of bacon. He didn’t really have an appetite, but it had to be done.
‘Plus I rather like Americans.’ He added some mushrooms and scrambled egg to
his plate. And if they vote for that nice Mr Gore I fully intend to go on
liking them for some time to come.’ He waved one hand at the breakfast stuff.
‘Sure I can’t tempt you?’
Win waited a little, looking at him without obvious expression, before
saying, ‘You know, you are not remotely as funny as you think you are, Alban.’
‘I’m not trying to be funny, Win.’ He nodded at the breakfast. ‘Seriously.
Would you like me to serve you? Otherwise, frankly, mine’s getting cold.’
‘Bacon, chop, kidneys,’ Win said. ‘Please,’ she added.
Alban obliged, holding his tongue over remarks apologising for the lack of
sheep’s eyes or gorilla testicles.
Win looked, unimpressed, at the plate he presented her with. ‘It’s a little
dull–looking,’ she said. ‘Perhaps some tomatoes.’
‘Presentation matters,’ he agreed, and obliged.
‘I worry about you, Alban,’ Win said, after they’d both taken a few silent
mouthfuls.
‘Do you, Win?’
‘I always have. And I still do.’
‘What is it that you worry about?’
283
‘I can’t tell you everything that I worry about in regard to you, Alban.’
Win was, Alban decided, in one of her more portentous moods. ‘But believe me,
I do.’
‘Okay,’ he said.
‘Have you ever really known what you’re doing?’
Alban sat back. Well, he thought, now there’s a question. ‘You mean, more
than anybody else?’
Win ignored this and just said, ‘Have you?’
He wondered about meeting this head on. What sort of question was that,
anyway? How many people could answer with an honest, ‘Yes’?
‘Win,’ he said, putting his knife and fork down and sitting back. ‘What are
you looking for from me?’
At the moment, an answer to my question.’
‘Then the answer is yes. Yes, I have always known what I was doing. How
about you?’
‘This is not about me, Alban.’
‘It seems to me it’s about your attitude to me, Win.’
And it seems to me it’s about your attitude to your job, to the firm, to the
family and to your life.’
‘Well, that’s fairly comprehensive.’
‘Have you ever known what you’re doing?’
‘Win, what sort of question is that?’ he protested. ‘I mean, yes, I think I
have. I’ve kind of known what I’ve been doing since I was at school, since I

stuck in and made sure I passed my exams. I chose my Uni course knowing
exactly what I was doing and then I joined the firm. I thought I’d done a good
job. I still think I’ve done a good job.’
‘I never thought you’d join the firm,’ Win told him. She put down her
cutlery. She was finished. Somehow she’d eaten everything on her plate apart
from the tomatoes.
Well, I did,’ he told her.
‘I never imagined you’d do Business Studies, and then when you started that
course I was certain you’d chuck it in and do something more artistic’
284
‘Artistic?’
‘You used to write poems, didn’t you?’
‘I was in my early teens. I thought it was mandatory.’
‘Well, you surprised me,’ Win admitted. She dabbed at the corners of her
still perfectly lipsticked mouth with the edge of one starched napkin. ‘I even
wondered if you joined the firm because your cousin Sophie did.’
Christ, you fucking old bitch.
He laughed, looking away and making it obvious he was having to stifle the
laugh to hide quite how preposterous this obviously was. It was, of course,
completely true. That was why there was absolutely no possibility he could
ever admit it to anybody, least of all to Win. He cleared his throat and sat
up, arms folded. Well, no, Win. I was over Sophie some time before I decided
what I was going to do with my life.’
‘Really.’ There was, somehow, no question in Win’s voice. Her expression was
unreadable, too. ‘I thought you still felt something for her for a long time
afterwards. Even up until a couple of years ago, which would imply you still
might, to this day. If you’re going to carry a torch for the girl for a dozen
years, why not two more?’
He hated the way Win did this, starting with a supposition at one end of a
sentence and ending up with it having become a given by the end, and attached
to something you had to tackle. Thing was, how much did the old bat know? Had
Sophie said something about the debacle in Singapore? He’d opened his heart to
the girl and admitted he still loved her, told her she was the love of his
life –she still was; she always would be – but had she then told Win that?
Had he blown it by being drunk? Of course he’d been drunk; he was too
terrified of rejection to be able to tell Sophie he still loved her when he
was sober. The point was that he’d needed the drink to be able to tell her, to
overcome this Brit reserve he’d managed to pick up from his family or school
or through the water or his genes or something. The drink hadn’t had anything
to do with the feeling itself, just with the ability to express it; the
feeling was there
285
all the time, drunk or sober, asleep as well as awake. He just couldn’t admit
it. Not without being out of his head. Of course, the chances were he’d
overdone it and come across as pathetic, needy, adolescent and immature.
He’d managed to push the incident to the back of his mind very successfully
and very quickly, within a day, by the simple expedient of getting utterly
mashed on a cocktail of drink and dubious drugs with Fielding. As a way of
forgetting what had happened between him and Sophie, of smearing it into
something too vague to be made out in his memory, it had worked almost too
well. The incident was so close to the demented swirl of humid day–glo idiocy
he and Fielding had indulged in that it seemed, in retrospect, like part of
it; not wholly real, and the tatters of what seemed like genuine memories
associated with it themselves not completely reliable either.
Had Sophie told Win? Was she that cruel, did she want to humiliate him that
much? Or did he mean so little to her that she hadn’t even thought about how

telling Win what he’d said to her would hurt, even shame him?
Tell a half–truth. They were the easiest lies to defend. ‘Win,’ he said,
smiling, and sounding, he hoped, eminently reasonable, ‘Sophie’s always going
to mean something to me. I mean, she was my first love. Puppy love if you want
to call it that, but it still felt intense at the time.’
‘Yes, so I saw,’ Win said acidly.
He knew they were talking about that last evening at Lydcombe, and Win and
James discovering Sophie and him in the grass. That feeling of old shame – and
an anger at feeling it – built up in him again. He controlled his breathing,
tried to think his heart calm. Jesus, he’d thought this was long since brushed
under the carpet; ancient history not worth raking over, by mutual consent.
‘Anyway,’ he said, puffing out his lower lip, sitting back and gesturing
with his hands, spreading them a little before clasping them again. ‘Water
under the bridge.’
‘It’s one of those things you’re not supposed to say these days,
286
apparently; people just sneer at you or simply laugh, but it really was for
your own good.’ She raised her head to him a fraction, defiant, as though
daring him either to sneer or laugh. ‘I knew that then and I know it now. You
must have hated me, Alban, I understand that.’ A wintry smile. ‘I suspect
somewhere deep inside, you still hate me.’
Deep inside? Just under the surface, actually. And all the way through. ‘Oh,
Win, really–’ he started.
‘It would only be natural. I’m not stupid, Alban.’
No, sadly, you’re not, are you?
‘But I did it for the good of both of you, no matter what you might think.
I’m sorry it seemed so brutal at the time. James overreacted, arguably. On the
other hand, that was the worst of it over with.’
Oh no it fucking wasn’t. You have no idea.
‘Well, it’s history now,’ he told her.
She arched one eyebrow. ‘Yes, as though history doesn’t matter.’
‘Henry Ford thought it was bunk.’
‘Yes, but then that remark has become part of history.’ Win shrugged
delicately. ‘He may not have meant what he appears to have meant, but if he
did then he was a fool.’ Alban looked appropriately surprised. Win smiled.
‘Oh, I’ve met plenty of rich and successful fools, Alban. You must have
encountered one or two yourself. Usually one of the things that shows how
stupid they are is that they don’t understand how big a part luck played in
their success.’
From which I’m meant to take the point that you’re no fool. ‘History
matters,’ he agreed. ‘But I am over Sophie.’ He looked her in the eyes and
thought, I’m lying. I am so not over Sophie. I hate you for getting me right.
I hate you for reading me like a fucking poster, you old hag. Are you reading
this now? I still hate you. I’ll always hate you just as I’ll always love her.
Call it balance. He thought it very carefully, articulating the thoughts, the
words in his mind, as though daring her to read the truth through his eyes or
somehow tele–pathically intuit what he was thinking.
287
‘Well, perhaps that’s the reason, then,’ Win said. ‘But I can see a change
in you, Alban.’
‘Well, we’re all getting older. Everybody changes.’
‘Yes, of course,’ Win said, one hand waving dismissively, ‘but as well as
that.’
Hell’s teeth, maybe he should just come clean. Maybe the right thing to do
was just to admit it, get it out in the open and say yes, he had changed, he
was different, he didn’t feel the same any more and he was already thinking

about quitting. Maybe he should just say all this and hand in his resignation
now, here. He’d probably have to say it some time, why not now?
Because he’d always feel he’d been bounced into it by Win, that was why.
He’d never be entirely certain that it had really all been of his own
volition. Well, he refused to surrender control to her. She’d taken over that
time at Lydcombe, making him feel humiliated, ashamed and powerless, and he
wasn’t going to let her do it again. He wanted to make the decision himself
and go in his own time.
Well, they’d circled round this enough. ‘Anyway,’ he said, ‘I’m sorry if I
gave you any . . .’ He smiled. ‘Just cause to doubt me. That wasn’t my
intention.’ And that, he thought, is as close to an apology as you’re going to
get, old girl.
Win looked momentarily very old, he thought. It was just for a second or so
– as though some mask of will had slipped briefly from her face, only to be
snatched back into place again – then the image of constructed self was back,
the calculated, calculating facade all accounted for once more. He wondered if
she’d seen something similar happen with him. He wondered if that was what she
saw all the time, and if this explained her uncanny – and also deeply canny –
ability to read people the way she did.
‘Accepted,’ she said.
He waved at two silvery pots. ‘Tea or coffee?’
He’d decided to do Business Studies fully expecting to change his course. He’d
come to the conclusion that he had to compromise
288
with his family and their expectations of him. He’d seem to go along with what
they expected and then change tack when they’d been bought off. If he started
with Business Studies, gave it a good enough go and then switched to something
that actually interested him –English, history, even art – then at least he’d
have shown willing. That ought to keep them off his back until he graduated.
This seemed like a good plan and a not remotely crazy way of making one of
life’s more important decisions.
Then, a few months into his course, when he was almost enjoying it and even
getting reasonable marks for a couple of essays, just because he knew he
wouldn’t be doing this for very much longer, he heard that Sophie had changed
her mind about her own academic course. She was doing Business Studies, too.
She was committed to a commercial career, with the family firm if the right
opening was there.
Jeez, he’d thought. Was she doing this just because he was doing something
similar? Was this a kind of public yet hidden signal? They hadn’t been in
touch since the sweet and wonderful but also mildly disastrous time in San
Francisco, months earlier. He sat in his room in Bristol, looking out at the
unleaved trees of Castle Park and the slow grey swirlings on the broad curve
of the Floating Harbour, the river that was barely a river, its surface brown
and pewter under a low fleet of clouds dragging long trains of rain under
their ragged hems.
He remembered the startling desert brightness of the Mojave, the
pore–sapping dryness of the air, the squinting glare of the rows and rows of
pale, abandoned jets under the peeled–open sky, the little plane landing,
Sophie – albeit an altered, mutated Sophie, a Sophie making a sort of phase
change of herself – stepping out of the plane. He remembered Dan’s apartment,
the crackly noises from the old vinyl records, the feel of her dancing up
close to him, the smell and feel of her hair, the sheer naked pleasure of
bedding the girl after so many al fresco couplings. He tried to forget about
the scene in the laundry, the weak sun and the artificial smell of fabric
conditioner.
289

For a moment or two, in the hazy San Franciscan morning chill, in the taxi
heading for the railway station, he’d felt pretty good about it all. He’d seen
her again, after all; he’d won at last, eventually surmounting all the
obstacles the family had put in his way (even if it had happened by chance –
that didn’t matter) and finally got to meet her again. And they hadn’t fought,
they hadn’t blamed each other for everything that had gone wrong and the years
they’d been forced to spend apart; they’d connected, they’d made love again.
She’d wanted him. It didn’t matter that she’d later said it had been a
mistake, it didn’t matter that she was with another guy; these things
happened. She’d wanted him. He hadn’t forced himself on her, he hadn’t seduced
her. It had been mutual. Unpressured. And she had suggested dancing, not him.
Still, she’d more or less thrown him out. He believed her that she wasn’t a
good liar and it would be easier to deceive Dan if he wasn’t there, but all
the same. Ejected again; torn apart once more. It wasn’t a good pattern.
There was an early train leaving for LA just twenty minutes after he arrived
at the station. By the time he’d bought his ticket and found the right train –
surprisingly busy, full of suits and families –he was away from the city
almost before he knew he’d been there.
Gulls moved over the Floating Harbour, banking and wheeling across the
banked–up, cradled waters.
Now and again, just sometimes, if he’s really drunk or stoned and feeling
nostalgic or soppy or whatever you might want to call it, he still whispers to
himself: They’ve all bloody gone, Fell off me ‘oss, didn’ I?, Blimey, I didn’t
enjoy it that much, and – now – Not a flippin’ fing.
Cuz, cuz, sweet cuz.
He’d tried getting back in touch with Sophie after meeting her in
California, but without much success. He’d got her address in New York from
cousin Fabiole, sent her a carefully considered letter – friendly, even
loving, but not weird or anything – and received in
290
return a terse note saying that she was very busy and didn’t think it was a
good idea they stayed in touch. She was sorry if she’d hurt him.
That had been two months ago. Now this news that she was doing Business
Studies.
He decided that probably it wasn’t a deliberate thing, Sophie taking up the
same kind of course as him, but that possibly it indicated a desire that she
might not know she had herself to somehow track him, keep parallel with him.
That would do, he guessed.
He stuck in. He determined that he’d do his best to enjoy the course he’d
embarked upon. He made new friends, had various relationships – never really
committing, often talking to his girlfriends about Sophie, his childhood
sweetheart (that was how he had started to refer to her) – and spent a year
during the four–year degree course working for the family firm on Product
Development. He’d kind of hoped that being at Bristol, so close to Lydcombe,
he might be invited back – he’d like to see how the gardens were doing, apart
from anything else – but he never was.
At the next family gathering – Grandpa Bert’s funeral, at Garbadale, in the
early spring of 1990 – he’d asked Aunt Lauren about Sophie not receiving his
letters. Again, she professed to be as surprised as he was. She had certainly
forwarded the letters. She’d suggested that maybe Sophie telling him that she
hadn’t received them was just her way of trying to protect his feelings.
He’d hoped Sophie would be there for the funeral, but she’d been too busy
with her studies in the States and everybody agreed that it was a long way to
ask somebody to come just to pay their last respects to an old fellow who’d
been little better than a vegetable for the past decade anyway.
‘And how was he?’ Grandma Win said when he mentioned seeing Blake in Hong
Kong. She was dressed all in black and looked, Alban thought, like a crow. She

carried a handkerchief balled up in one hand and her eyes looked a little red.
She looked hurt, now. He was
291
already starting to regret telling her he’d seen Blake; another painful
memory, dragging up the past of a familial black sheep. He’d only done so for
something to say. He’d rather not have talked to her at all but his parents
had insisted. He was so relieved she didn’t ignore him or say something
horrible about him and Sophie that he’d relaxed, never imagining he might
upset her by telling her he’d paid a visit to her son.
‘He was fine,’ he told her.
‘And what did he want?’
‘Nothing. Didn’t want anything. I mean, he’s really rich. Honest, he was
okay, Gran. He showed me around Hong Kong. It was brilliant. And he gave me
money.’
‘I bet he did,’ Win said, sounding unimpressed. ‘And? So? What did he have
to say for himself?’
Alban had to think. ‘Nothing in particular. He just showed me around,
introduced me to people. He seems to know everybody. I met the Governor and
everything. Uncle Blake’s seriously rich, Gran. He’s got this skyscraper. I
mean, it’s really his.’
‘Well, bully for him. How much money did he give you?’
‘I can’t remember,’ Alban lied.
‘Did he talk about the family?’
A bit. He was okay, Gran. Honestly. I think he’d like to see, well,
everybody –’
‘Indeed. Well, I don’t want to see him again,’ Win told him.
‘Oh,’ Alban said. ‘Okay. I’m sorry.’
‘Yes,’ Win said, with a tone of finality, and turned away.
‘And so I had a look for myself, but of course everything Bunty had said was a
complete and utter fib: instead, there the fellow was with a Playboy in one
hand and his John Thomas, thoroughly engorged, in the other. So I closed the
door pronto and turned round to find Sister glowering down at me, saying,
"Yes? And?" and I naturally didn’t have the first idea what to say until
suddenly I had a brainwave and said, "Well, Sister, I think he’s preparing to
discharge himself!" Ha ha ha!’
292
‘Ha ha!’ agreed Doris, after a modest delay.
Fielding paused as he poured the last of the dessert wine into Beryl’s
glass, smiling broadly at first and then joining in the laughter when it
showed no particular sign of subsiding especially quickly. He sat back in his
seat, sighing mightily and taking a surreptitious glance at his watch as he
lifted his water glass to his lips. Still not even eleven. He’d hoped it might
be close to midnight.
One of the Inverlochy staff appeared at the table, refilling his glass.
Doris and Beryl were slapping each other on the forearm and holding napkins to
their mouths as they giggled, glancing round the now nearly empty dining room.
Most of the other guests at the hotel had moved through to the lounge or the
main hall for coffee.
‘Discharge himself! D’you see?’ Beryl said in a sort of subdued shriek.
‘Yes! Oh yes!’ Doris coughed. She drained her Sauternes, then looked at the
empty half–bottle sitting on the table. ‘My, that was lovely,’ she told
Fielding. She gazed mournfully at her now empty glass and the equally defunct
bottle. ‘They are such terribly small bottles though, aren’t they?’
Fielding smiled the smile of a tired, tired man who can associate every bend
and straight on the road between Glasgow and Fort William with some confused

phrase or cross–purposed exchange of geriatric garrulity and has come to
accept that he is not going to see his bed this side of the witching hour. He
signalled to the hovering waiter, raising his eyebrows, and held up the sticky
emptiness of the Sauternes bottle.
‘What are we all going to do if everybody does sell their shares to these
Sprint people?’ Great–Aunt Doris asked suddenly, watching the waiter exit,
defunct bottle in hand.
‘Spraint, dear,’ Beryl corrected. She smiled at Fielding, who seemed
oblivious, fiddling with his napkin. ‘Spend our ill–gotten gains on wine,
women and whatever, one imagines,’ she told Doris.
Doris looked suddenly alarmed. ‘You wouldn’t up
sticks
and
293
abandon me and move to your own desert island or that sort of thing, would
you, old thing?’ she asked Beryl, blinking furiously.
Beryl smiled. ‘No, dear. If there were any desert islands on the cards, I’d
take you with me.’ Then the smile faded a little and she looked down at the
table, letting a silence descend.
Fielding was trying to do origami with his napkin. ‘Some people would use
the dosh to do things they’d always wanted to,’ he said absently, frowning as
he tried to tuck one corner of cloth inside another. ‘Fund projects, use as
seed capital.’ The bits of cloth weren’t fitting together quite properly. He
wished he had three hands. ‘Dreams, really,’ he muttered. He glanced up to
find both the old girls looking at him. His gaze darted from one to the other.
‘Probably,’ he added. ‘I mean, possibly.’ He cleared his throat, shook his
napkin flat again. ‘Maybe.’
‘Is that what you would do with yours, dear?’ Doris asked.
Fielding shrugged. ‘Well, I don’t know. I suppose. I was just talking
hypothetically. I mean, I, I personally don’t have anything–’ The waiter
reappeared. ‘Ah, more wine!’
‘Oh!’ Doris said, turning in her seat. ‘Did we order more? I suppose we
must. Oh well, then.’
Beryl smiled sadly. ‘Jolly–D.’
The years passed. He got a 2.1 and took up the post waiting for him in Wopuld
Games Ltd. Sophie had already started with Wopuld Games Inc., the company’s US
subsidiary. He felt that basically he was over her, though she was never far
from his thoughts and he still hoped they might meet up now and again, through
business if nothing else. Then, well, who knew?
He knew about playing a long game.
In third year he had shared a flat in St Judes with three guys who were
really into playing the board version of Empire!. Because his surname was
McGill and he’d never mentioned anything to the guys about the family firm –
they were all doing English or art and weren’t really interested in his course
– they didn’t realise he was
294
part of the family who owned the rights, made the games, took the profits.
He knew all there was to know about how to play the game, though that still
didn’t mean he won all the time. Empire! wasn’t chess; it depended on luck on
occasion, both in the initial set–up and then in the playing. Still, you could
get a lot better at playing it with lots of practice, and he’d spent a fair
bit of his childhood playing the board version.
One of his flatmates was Chris, whose board it was and who thought himself a
pretty damn shit–hot Empire! player. Chris, Alban was fairly sure, had assumed
that he would be the ace game–player in the flat. He dismissed Alban’s first
few wins as beginner’s luck, which let Alban know that Chris wasn’t that
clever. They’d agreed at the start of the semester that they’d have a league

that ran all that academic year, and as Alban gradually built up a lead over
everybody else, Chris started to realise Alban was more than just lucky.
After a while Alban noticed Chris beginning to change his game–playing
style. Now, he would always choose to attack Alban whenever Alban’s forces got
to a level Chris regarded as being too great, even though they might pose no
obvious tactical or strategic threat to Chris’s homelands, territories or
expeditionary forces. Alban still won sometimes, and Chris improved his record
only slightly, while occasionally other people used the opportunity to gang up
on Alban, or attack Chris while he was busy trying to whittle down Alban’s
forces. Initially Alban just accepted this, but, after one game when he was
left relatively powerless and two other players tussled it out inelegantly,
inexpertly, for a win they were each too crap and stoned actually to
accomplish – it ended in a smoky stalemate and an agreed draw – Alban decided
to change the way he responded to Chris’s policeman role.
Next time Chris attacked him, committing a sizeable but restrained amount of
forces to the battle, Alban went after him with all he had. He defeated Chris
but left himself hopelessly weakened. They
295
were both taken out of the game in the next round. This time one of their pals
actually managed to win the game.
Chris protested during the game and at length afterwards when they sat
around drinking and watching telly with the sound down.
‘Why did you do that, man? I wasn’t trying to put you out the game! I was
just trying to reduce your power a bit.’
‘Yeah, I know,’ Alban told him, opening a couple of cans and passing one to
Chris. Chris was a gangly guy with frizzy dark hair and bad skin.
‘So why did you go fucking mental, Al?’
‘I don’t like you doing that.’
‘But it’s all part of the game, man.’
‘I know; so’s what I did.’
‘Yeah, but it’s just to stop you getting too powerful.’
‘Oh, yeah, I know why you’re doing it. I just want you to stop.’
‘Well, I ain’t gonna,’ Chris told him, laughing. He accepted a joint from
one of their flatmates, took a shallow toke and passed it to Alban.
‘Well then,’ Alban said, shrugging.
‘But you lost, Al!’ Chris pointed out. ‘You got me, but you fucked yourself
‘Yeah, and I’ll keep doing it until you stop attacking me when there’s no
good reason to, apart from this taking–me–down–a–peg thing.’
What? You’re kidding!’
‘No, I’m serious. I’ll keep doing it.’
‘You’ll keep on going after me, after me homelands and everything, just cos
I attack one block?’
‘Yeah.’
‘That’s crazy! You’ll get me out but you’ll put yourself out as well!’
‘Yeah, I know. Until you stop doing it.’
‘Well, what if I don’t?’
Alban shrugged.
296
‘But you lose the game, man!’ Chris pointed out, struggling to see the logic
of this.
Alban clinked cans. ‘Cheers.’
Chris attacked him in just the same way for just the same reasons in the
next two games, and Alban reacted just as he had before.
Chris told him he was crazy, but in the next game, didn’t try the same
manoeuvre. Alban explained one drunken night, just in case Chris hadn’t got
it, that there was the game, and then there was the meta–game. Even without a

league lasting all year long, there was always the meta–game, the game beyond
the game; you had to think of that, too.
Chris told him he was still fucking crazy.
‘You take care.’
‘You too.’
‘I’m serious. The weather forecast looks pretty shitty for tonight and
tomorrow. Don’t take any stupid risks. Please. Come back safely.’
‘Depend on it.’ Verushka, already kitted out, booted and fleeced, goes up on
tiptoes to kiss his forehead, then crunches back on to the gravel flat–footed
and plants another squarely and long on his lips. ‘I’m serious too,’ she
whispers, hugging him close. ‘You take good care. You don’t take any stupid
risks.’
‘Promise,’ he says.
She pulls back, studies his eyes in turn. ‘You don’t remember last night, do
you?’
He raises his brows, tips his head to one side.
She smiles. After that. You were talking about your mother. In your sleep.’
He looks shocked. ‘I was? I never do that.’
‘Unless there’s somebody else called Irene, or Mummy.’
‘Jesus,’ he breathes, looking away down the drive towards the unseen sea
loch. He looks at her. ‘Wait a moment. I remember you waking me up.’
‘Yeah.’ She nods.
297
He looks away again. ‘Oh well.’
‘Anyway,’ she says, with one last kiss. ‘See you on Monday morning. You go
in and get some breakfast.’
‘Hey. Listen,’ he says, still holding one hand. ‘If you get rained off or
just think the better of it, come back. Okay? At any point. We’ll decamp to a
room at the Inchnadamph if we can’t stay here together, or Neil McBride and
his wife would put us up.’
She stops, puts her head back, eyebrows raised. ‘Not rather be here with
your family?’
‘Hey, we could just break into the north wing with a few logs and get a fire
going,’ he tells her. ‘But no. You come back if you need to. If you want to.
Don’t hold off’
‘Deal,’ she says, and, grinning, holds her hand up for him to kiss.
She slides into the Forester, fires it up and takes off down the gravel
drive, one hand waving from the window. He waves back, watching until the car
disappears behind the screen of trees.
He turns and walks back into the great house.

298

8

‘I
used to have a hearty dick,’ Blake told him. ‘Now I’ve got a dicky heart.’
Alban smiled and tried to look sympathetic at the same time. ‘Is it really
that bad?’
‘Bad enough. Docs say I should lay off the booze.’ Blake held up his glass
of whisky and soda and stared at it with a look of accusatory sorrow, as
though it was a trusted friend who had let him down. ‘May need a triple
bypass.’
‘Well, they’re pretty routine these days.’
‘Hmm. Maybe so, but I still don’t like the sound of it. They cut through
your breastbone and prise your ribs apart, did you know that? Big steel clamp
things. Grisly.’ He shook his head. ‘And there’s a risk with any operation.
Things go wrong. Mistakes get made. Infection.’
‘I’m sure you’ll be fine, Blake.’
‘Huh.’ Blake drank some more of his whisky and soda.
Alban hadn’t seen Blake since his visit during his gap year. This time, he’d
been in Hong Kong to meet with some product development people and factory
owners from Shenzen, preparing the ground for a redesign of the Empire! board
and pieces. Hong Kong was both highly altered and just the same. The new
airport had
299
taken the fun/terror out of flying into the place, buildings Alban was sure
had been a block from the sea were now six or seven blocks away as more land
was reclaimed and immediately built upon and the last of the junks and sampans
had long since disappeared from the harbour.
On the other hand, it was still stiflingly hot and humid and berserkly
crowded at ground level, the Chinese still spat everywhere and were not in the
least shy about coughing and sneezing right in your face, everybody constantly
pushed and shoved and jostled everybody else as they walked around – and
kicked and elbowed you out of the way if you stopped in the street for any
reason – the tall, teetering, anorexically narrow wooden trams were still
liable to burst into flames at the drop of a match and the racket of rattling
that issued from mah–jong parlours if you happened to be passing when the
doors opened was exceeded only by the choking super–dense cloud of cigarette
smoke that pulsed out at the same time.
‘Anyway,’ Blake said, ‘it was kind of you to look me up. No one else in the
family ever does.’
‘I’m sorry to hear that,’ Alban told him.
Blake made a desultory flapping gesture with one hand. He was as tall and
thin as ever. When he’d first greeted Alban he’d been wearing a large floppy
hat that made him look like an Anglepoise lamp.
They were sitting in the rooftop garden of Blake’s skyscraper. This was
still near the harbour; the land immediately offshore hadn’t been reclaimed.
Not yet, anyway. They were a hundred and something metres up, shaded by a
broad canopy and with a moderately strong breeze blowing, but it was still
uncomfortably hot. Drinking, reclined, was fine, but just the thought of doing

anything more energetic, like getting up and moving around, was enough to
bathe you in sweat all by itself.
Alban wondered whether to try and get Blake to talk more about the family
and the reasons he’d left it. He was, after all, on the brink of doing
something similar himself. It was a month or so after the
300
breakfast telling–off he’d received from Win, and in his heart he was moving
closer all the time to just chucking it in. He carried a copy of his letter of
resignation around with him in an envelope all the time now, like a suicide
pill. Maybe he needed one last push, a final prod to make him take the leap.
Would comparing notes with Blake do that? Not that their circumstances were
that similar; Blake had been thrown out for embezzlement, whereas he was just
thinking about resigning after doing a good, conscientious job for the last
few years. It wasn’t like he’d be punished or sent into exile by the family.
He was looking at the equivalent of an honourable discharge, not a
dishonourable one like Blake’s.
‘Do you ever try to contact other people in the family?’ he asked Blake. He
sipped on his iced water. He was in shirtsleeves, tie loose, shoes and socks
off. Blake was even less formal; barefoot too, baggy shorts and a loose silk
shirt. The warm breeze brought the scent of jasmine to them; the roof garden
held dozens of the plants.
‘Not really,’ Blake admitted. ‘I’m something they’d rather forget. Your
grandmother especially.’ He looked briefly at Alban. ‘She’s top dog now, isn’t
she?’
‘Has been for a while,’ Alban agreed. ‘Family and firm.’
‘No love lost there,’ Blake said. He sounded sad. ‘Anyway. I have my own
life here; always have had. Been a good life, I’ve done well. No complaints.
I–’
Blake’s mobile, sitting on the low teak table between them, vibrated.
‘Excuse me,’ he said to Alban. ‘Yes?’ He listened for a while, then said, ‘No.
That’s not remotely good enough. Tell him that’s positively insulting. We’ll
go elsewhere.’ He listened some more. ‘Yes, well so have I, and mine tells his
what to do, so inform our friend he’s welcome to try’ Blake shifted almost
without a pause into what sounded to Alban like convincingly rapid Cantonese
and spoke that for a minute or so, sounding fairly animated, then said, ‘Do
that. Yes, later. Goodbye.’ He put the mobile back on the table. ‘Sorry – deal
about to happen, or not. Can’t turn the damn thing off. Do you like mobiles? I
have to have one like everybody else
301
and they’re very handy sometimes, obviously, but I sometimes feel I absolutely
hate them at the same time. Do you know what I mean?’
‘Yeah, I do,’ Alban said. ‘It’s being at everybody’s beck and call.’
‘Quite.’ Blake nodded, then sipped his drink.
‘You can always turn them off,’ Alban pointed out.
‘Yes,’ Blake said. ‘But then you worry you’re missing something important.’
He looked at the phone. ‘Still. Could see the damn things far enough.’ He
looked out over the hazy city. Slim shapes that were distant jets slid
minutely across the sky, descending towards the now far distant airport.
‘You’re, what, thirty now, aren’t you?’
‘Near enough,’ Alban said.
Blake was silent for a while, then said, ‘Do you ever get a sort of feeling
of wondering what it’s all about?’ He looked over at Alban, who looked back,
not sure at first whether Blake was being entirely serious, and realising that
he was. ‘About why we bother?’ Blake’s expression was positively mournful. He
looked away again. ‘Maybe it’s just an age thing. I don’t remember feeling
like this when I was younger. Seems to have crept up on me without me

noticing, like this heart thing. Do you ever get that?’
‘What, suspecting everything’s pointless?’
‘I suppose that’s what it is.’
‘Not particularly. Kind of had that more when I was younger. Sort of thing
you discuss when you’re a student.’
‘Maybe just me then,’ Blake said glumly, and drank.
‘Not just you, Blake. Lots of people feel like that, at least now and again.
I suppose it’s one of the main reasons so many people turn to religion.’
Blake nodded. ‘I’ve started praying again, but I just feel foolish. I
realise I’m just talking to myself He shook his head. ‘Silly, really.’ He
glanced at Alban. I thought I’d have all this stuff figured out by now. I feel
rather cheated that I don’t, that I’m having to start thinking again about
things that – as you say – one might have expected to leave behind in one’s
teens.’ He held his glass up to the light. ‘I think I am like a lot of people,
you know: I’ve spent my life
302
waiting for my life to start. It’s as though one needs permission from
somebody – parents, God, a committee of one’s peers; I don’t bloody know – to
finally take responsibility for one’s own actions, one’s own life. Only the
permission never comes, and gradually – well, gradually for me, I can’t speak
for others; maybe their realisation comes in some sort of sudden revelation
and a blinding light or whatever – gradually you realise that it never will
come, that the way you’ve lived your life, stumbling through it, winging it
half the time, is all there really is, all there ever was. I feel cheated,
because of that. I feel, sometimes, like I’ve cheated myself though I can’t
see how I could have done much different. And I have a horrible feeling that
even if I had a time machine and could go back to visit my younger self to
warn him, or at least advise him about all this, he’d – I’d – have no idea
what my future self was talking about. I’d think he was an idiot. I’d ignore
him. I’d ignore myself
‘Blake,’ Alban said, trying not to sound too amused, ‘you sound like
somebody who hasn’t achieved anything. I kind of had the impression you’d done
pretty well for yourself.’
‘Oh,’ Blake waved one hand, then ran it through his white hair – it looked
longer than the time Alban had been here before – ‘I’ve done very well for
myself. I’m not complaining about that for a moment. Though, ha, mind you, the
commies could take it all away in a moment, on a whim, if they really wanted
to. Well, not everything, obviously, but almost all my property is here, in
Honkers. Can’t stuff a building or a plot of land in an offshore account. But
. . . Oh, look, you don’t mind me talking about all this, do you?’
‘Course I don’t mind,’ Alban said.
This wasn’t strictly true; he was finding Blake’s late–onset existential
angst a little wearing. The guy was a multi–squillionaire and still he was
finding stuff to get all morose about. Alban felt almost puritanical about
this sort of thing; of course being rich didn’t mean you suddenly no longer
had anything to worry about, but you ought at least to have the decency to
keep quiet about it. Oh well. He’d chosen to look Blake up. It had seemed the
right thing to do then
303
and would seem like the right thing to have done later, when he’d be sitting
on the plane back to the UK. Visiting the exile, keeping this one distant
offshoot of the Wopuld clan from detaching from the family tree completely.
Sometimes, Alban felt like he was the family social worker.
‘It’s just,’ Blake said, waving one hand again, ‘even having, you know, made
a bit of money and so on, even that doesn’t seem like so much. You meet other
people who’ve made even more and you think, Well, this person’s clearly an

idiot. I mean, I’m not saying one should base one’s estimation of oneself or
anybody else purely on how much money you’ve made or they’ve made, but it’s
hard not to compare these things sometimes, and you think, Well, what does
having made a bit really mean, or say about one, if this pillock can make even
more than I’ve made? D’you see what I mean? It’s quite depressing, really. Do
you understand?’
Alban sighed. He understood there was nothing worse than the very rich
feeling sorry for themselves. ‘There’s always somebody with more, I guess,’ he
said, trying to sound more sympathetic than he felt.
‘But if it’s not about money,’ Blake persisted, ‘or prestige or your
immortal soul or whatever, then what?’
‘Some people put a lot of value on children,’ Alban said. ‘Or just on
another person.’
Blake looked at him and snorted. ‘Yes, well.’ He drank from his glass. ‘I
never did quite meet the right girl.’ He studied his empty glass. ‘Actually,
that’s not true. Arguably I met too many of them.’
‘You never married, Blake?’ Alban knew Blake wasn’t married now, but he
didn’t know if he ever had been.
‘Thought about it a few times,’ Blake said. ‘Never did.’ He nodded at
Alban’s glass. ‘Fancy another?’
Alban too looked at his glass of water, now nearly empty. Why not? Might
even have a proper drink this time.’
‘Good man,’ Blake said. He put his fingers to his mouth and produced a
disconcertingly piercing whistle. He shrugged at Alban
304
and said, ‘Quickest way,’ as a barman in a white jacket appeared around the
side of some jasmine plants to take their order.
‘You could still have children, Blake,’ Alban told him. ‘Get yourself a
young wife, start a family.’
At my age?’ Blake looked pained.
‘Blake, you’re not short of the money for a nanny. You won’t have to be the
one getting up in the middle of the night to warm the milk.’
Blake shook his head. ‘I’m too old,’ he said. And then what if it didn’t
work? What if I didn’t like the child, or its mother for that matter? What if
I realised she only wanted me for my money? What if the whole experience was
just another cause for realising the essential futility of everything?’
‘Jesus, Blake, in the end, you’re sitting in the sunshine with people
running after you, on top of forty storeys of hi–tech building occupying some
of the most prime real estate in the world. And, yes, there’ll be women
desperate to throw themselves at you for your money. Well, that’s not the
worst thing that ever happened, either.’
‘I know,’ Blake said. ‘I have this talk with myself all the time, telling
myself exactly that. I should be grateful. I should feel lucky, I should feel
blessed. I should feel ... I should feel good about ray life.’ He looked
across the rooftop garden. ‘I stand over there, some nights,’ he said, looking
at the glass wall topped with teak which ran around the edge of the roof. ‘I
look down on all these tiny brown and white dots; little guys in loincloths
running around like blue–arsed flies in the middle of the night, busy
collating copies of the South China Post and pushing and pulling handcarts
full of chickens. And I actually envy them. It must be such a simple – Ah.’
This last word was directed at the servant bringing them their drinks.
Blake exchanged a few words in Cantonese and an insincere smile with the guy
in the white jacket as their drinks were served.
‘Well, there’s always this stuff,’ Alban said. He held up his G&T. Better
this than explain to Blake what a dingbat he had to be to envy guys with no
economic choice but to run around in loincloths
305

in the wee small hours collating outsize papers or transporting fucking
chickens.
Blake looked into his whisky and soda. ‘I probably drink too much already.
So the docs say, anyway.’
‘Drugs?’ Alban said, feeling his patience starting to wear thin.
Blake drank, looked at him. ‘Do you mean prescription?’
Alban raised his eyebrows. ‘Or the other sort.’
Blake looked away. ‘I don’t think you’re being entirely serious, Alban.’
‘I guess not,’ Alban agreed. They both drank. ‘Do you ever think of trying
to mend fences with the rest of the family? I mean, making a real effort,
trying to woo them back?’
‘Yes, I do,’ Blake said. ‘But it never takes much thought for me to realise
that there’d be very little point in doing so.’
‘You seem very sure.’
‘I am. We parted ways a long time ago.’ Blake looked at the sky again.
‘Grown too far apart, basically. I have my life here. You lot, well, you have
your own lives. I won’t pretend I’m not interested in hearing about people,
but it all seems slightly unreal. Anyway, even if I did wish to . . . resume
relations, I don’t think I’d be welcome. Takes two to tango, and all that.’
Alban just nodded. He hadn’t even mentioned Blake’s name to Win since that
time at Bert’s funeral, nine years ago now. He hadn’t needed to to form the
strong impression it wouldn’t be a good idea. Blake was still very much the
black sheep. ‘PNG, dear boy,’ Uncle Kennard had said when he’d mentioned this
to him. Kennard didn’t seem as viscerally opposed to any contact with his
brother as Win had, but he still hadn’t actually been in touch with him for
all these years, either. ‘Definitely PNG’
‘What?’ Alban had asked, confused. (Papua New Guinea? What the hell did that
have to do with anything?)
‘PNG – Persona Non Grata,’ Kennard had explained. ‘Not welcome, in other
words. Old Foreign Office phrase,’ he’d explained wisely, then somewhat
spoiled the effect by adding, ‘or something.’
306
Alban looked at Blake, sitting in the hazy, saturated sunshine of Hong Kong,
a couple of years after the handover, not long before the millennium
celebrations, and, for the first time, did genuinely feel sorry for the man.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘people might still mellow, over the years.’
Blake looked at him. ‘Would you say Winifred has mellowed at all?’ he asked.
Alban had to look away for a bit. ‘Well, no,’ he admitted.
‘Keep in touch,’ Blake said coolly, looking away at the distant planes
again. ‘If she ever does, let me know.’
She’ll die first, Alban thought, and knew it was true.
He resigned from the firm a week later.
The weather was awful; a strong west wind dragged a lumpen blanket of thick
grey cloud over the whole west coast, bringing sheets and squalls of cold,
buffeting rain. Alban thought of Verushka, sheltering in her tent, rain
drumming on the bright, paper–thin nylon, or –worse – actually out in it,
trudging up a hill through the rain and mist, pack heavy on her back. The
weather was so bad he told himself it was a good thing; even VG wouldn’t stay
out in a heaving wet gale like this. The worse it got the more likely she was
to come back, so in a way the worse it got the better it was. Unless she was
so stubborn or determined or so set on keeping out of his family’s way that
she had resolved not to come back no matter how bad the weather got, in which
case the worse it got, well, the worse it was. Maybe, he told himself, looking
out from the drawing room at the cliff and the mist–shrouded waterfall (blown
sideways, not back up), she’d give in and go somewhere else rather than come
back here. Maybe she’d just bail out to the nearest hotel.

Meanwhile, the Spraint guys had landed at Inverness but their helicopter was
grounded while the wind was so strong and the cloud base so low. They might
have to hire a car, too.
Alban was still talking to people; over breakfast, then while people were
hanging around waiting for the weather to improve or the
307
others to arrive. A morning’s fishing on Loch Garve had been arranged, but
that too had had to be shelved due to the weather, so everybody was kind of at
a loose end. The children were entertaining themselves noisily in the old
library/games room, playing pool and table tennis. Those adults who could be
bothered were reading the papers Spraint had sent supporting their bid. People
mostly gravitated to the drawing room with its multiplicity of seats, chairs
and couches and a roaring fire that served as an antidote to the sheets of
rain beating against the windows.
Aunt Kathleen was studying her laptop, sitting at one end of the long table
in the kitchen with a bacon roll and a mug of tea. Kath was a comfortably
upholstered fifty–one, currently wearing a sea–blue blouse and the skirt of
her business suit, jacket slung over the seat back. Brown, greying hair in a
long ponytail. She was about the only relevant person he hadn’t yet spoken to
about the proposed sale to the US corporation.
Aunt Kath, you’re not frittering away what may be our last few hours as an
independent company doing anything as frivolous as playing a game, are you?’
Alban asked, sitting across the corner of the table from her.
‘Hi, Alban,’ she said. She swivelled the laptop towards him briefly, then
back again.
He looked surprised. ‘They have games that look like spreadsheets now?
Whatever next.’
‘Just reviewing the current state of the Wopuld Group’s finances,’ she
explained.
And how are the dear old books – still in the black?’
‘Black as the ace of hearts,’ Kathleen said, then smiled thinly over the top
of her glasses at him. ‘Joking. Accountant’s humour.’
‘Really? Well, good just to know it exists at all.’
Anyway, we’re still solvent.’
All the better for Spraint to gobble us up.’
‘You’re against, then,’ Aunt Kath said, peering at the screen rather than
looking at him. ‘Thought you would be, heard you were.’
308
‘Well, if it was up to me alone, I’d be completely agin it, but as it is I
just want people to make the right decision. Eyes open, you know?’
‘Well, my eyes are open.’ Kath blew on her mug of tea, then sipped it. She
took a bite from her bacon roll.
‘And you’re for the sell–off,’ Alban said.
Aunt Kath nodded for a bit until she’d swallowed. ‘Yes, though not at the
price they’re offering right now,’ she said. ‘And my eleven thousand shares
speak rather louder than your . . .’ She performed a few key strokes. One
eyebrow went up. ‘Hundred,’ she said. ‘Well, that’s about as nominal as you
can get. Or did you just forget to sell the last few?’
‘Sentimental attachment. Those last hundred are like an old Premium Bond.’
‘I’m sure. Well, they’ll get you into the shareholders’ meeting, I suppose.
I hear you want a chance to address the troops later.’ She ate more of the
bacon roll.
‘I thought I’d get everybody together,’ Alban said, ‘before the EGM itself.
Make sure we’re all rapping from the same rap sheet, you know? I mean, we
won’t be, obviously, but we should at least establish the differences. And it
wouldn’t just be me who gets to talk. Anybody can. You could, Kath. You could
put the pro–selling argument.’

‘I don’t have your charisma, Alban,’ Aunt Kath said, more or less
expressionless.
‘Well, somebody has,’ he said, ‘and I want it back.’ Aunt Kath looked at
him. He smiled broadly. ‘Ex–forester humour.’
‘Really.’ Aunt Kath went back to her roll and her tea.
Alban stood up. ‘Well, I’ll leave you to it,’ he said. As he turned to go,
Aunt Kath looked at her watch. ‘Three whole minutes in the kitchen and not a
word about cooking the books,’ she said. ‘Well done.’
He looked back, but could only make as gracious a gesture as he could, and
left.
*
*
*
309
Sophie arrived first, driven by taxi all the way from Inverness. Alban,
mooching around the hall at that point and taking occasional peeks through the
front doors, hoping to see the red Forester coming fast down the drive, was
the first out to the taxi, struggling to control an umbrella against the
squalling sheets of rain being curled round the jumbled architecture of the
house and sent slamming down from a variety of directions. According to Aunt
Lauren, some of the older children were supposed to be doing this
umbrella–holding, bag–carrying thing, but they’d managed to make themselves
scarce in the interim. Alban was so busy trying to prevent the umbrella
blowing inside out while opening the taxi door at the same time that he only
realised who the passenger was as she was getting out.
‘Oh, Sophie. Hi.’
‘Hello, Alban.’ Sophie was blonde and slim as ever, dressed in jeans and an
ivory cashmere sweater over a pink blouse. Her hair looked perfect, her face
looked unchanged from the last time he’d seen her, her skin appeared flawless
and her eyes were still – thankfully, redeemingly – the same fabulous,
sparkling green they always had been. ‘Thanks,’ she said as he held the
umbrella over her. No kiss.
He saw her into the house – Aunt Lauren was there, doing the whole greeting
thing – then returned to the taxi to get her bags. He followed Aunt Lauren as
she showed Sophie to her room on the first floor.
‘Good grief, no, not a thing packed,’ Lauren said in reply to a question
from Sophie as they walked along the corridor. Then Lauren seemed to stiffen
and her head jerked as though she was about to look back at Alban. She said
hurriedly, ‘Well, actually, no, no, that’s not true. A few things have been
packed up for the move. Some, ah, old things. Precious, well, family – things
of sentimental value, some of those. Ah! Here we are.’
‘Right,’ Sophie said. She stood on the threshold.
‘Bathroom is third on the left,’ Lauren told her.
Sophie looked less than impressed that her accommodation was
310
not en suite. Alban put her bags down near the old free–standing wardrobe and
turned to go while Aunt Lauren was still blushing and apologising for the
weather and saying how much Win was looking forward to seeing her. Sophie had
her wallet out. She started to reach into it for something, then collected
herself, looked embarrassed and shot a glancing smile at Alban, who just
nodded and left.
He spent the rest of the day in a similar role, still in or near the front
hall, hoping to see the Forester, greeting people, helping with bags, getting
to see everybody as they arrived, which was good, but feeling menial and
put–upon and slightly sick all the time, telling himself he was worrying about
VG, but knowing it had more to do with the presence of Sophie and the way she
had treated him. Every nuance of the few minutes they had spent in each

other’s company seemed to fill his thoughts, demanding attention and analysis
and dissection.
She hadn’t even started to kiss him, hadn’t even thought about it. She
hadn’t even shaken hands. She’d nodded to him. She’d said, ‘Hello, Alban,’ and
that was all. And had she really been about to tip him? She’d had her wallet
out. Why? She’d already paid the cab. Had she really – just arrived, maybe a
little distracted, possibly even a little flustered (by seeing him?) – been on
the brink of offering him money to say thank you for helping her with her
bags? What did that say about how she felt about him subconsciously?
‘Darling! Oh, you’re so sweet!’ Leah said as he saw her into the house. He
put an arm round her shoulder to keep her within the shelter of the umbrella.
The wind whipped rain round their legs on the few steps to the porch and the
hall.
Alban,’ Andy said, and – already holding a bag – gave him a one–armed hug.
Andy and Leah were followed in quick succession by most of the rest of the
family: cousin Steve’s wife Tessa, their son Rune, his partner Penning and
baby Hannah, sis Cory, her husband Dave and their children Lachlan and
Charlotte, cousin Louise, her sister Rachel
311
with her husband Mark and their children Ruthven and Foin, and Aunt Linda’s
broad, booming twin Lizzie (unexpectedly, amazingly, with a man in tow, a Mr
Portman, her companion, who would of course be requiring a room. Alban foresaw
problems for Haydn).
Fielding arrived with Beryl and Doris after lunch.
‘Alban, dear, are we north of Aberdeen?’ was the first thing Beryl said as
he helped her from the Mercedes.
‘Quite a bit north, and way west,’ Alban told her, kissing her and then
Doris as he tried to keep them both dry under the same umbrella and shepherd
them to the front door.
‘But not in the Arctic Circle?’ Doris asked.
‘Well, no,’ Alban said, laughing.
‘You see?’ Doris said to Beryl. ‘I told you!’
‘I never said we were in the Arctic, I said we passed an artic. An
articulated lorry. A pantechnicon,’ Beryl said, sounding exasperated. ‘For
goodness’ sake, we passed an Iceland lorry; that doesn’t mean we’re in bloody
Iceland.’
‘But I did tell you . . .’ Doris was saying, oblivious, as Alban handed the
old girls over to Lauren, gratefully.
‘Thanks, Al,’ Fielding said once the bags were out of the car and sitting in
the main hall. He handed Alban the keys and turned to hug and kiss Aunt
Lauren.
Fielding obviously expected Alban to park the Merc, which he duly did,
shaking his head at Fielding and himself and – in his imagination – not
parking the car at all but taking it north to look for any signs of red
Forester estates or solo female climbers.
The umbrella finally blew inside out and then out of his hands as he exited
Fielding’s car after parking it behind the outbuildings beyond the north wing.
He started to chase the umbrella, then gave up as a powerful gust of wind
picked it up – it was already plainly broken, two ribs badly bent – and blew
it up and over the old coal store and away towards the trees lining the head
of Loch Garve. He gave up on it and trudged back to the house in the rain. The
side doors he tried to get back in were all locked and he ended up having
312
to traipse all the way back round to the front door, getting drenched in the
process.
Just as he got there, two people–carrier taxis arrived and disgorged a bunch

of tall, well–dressed, well–groomed people. He guessed they were the Spraint
execs. Aunt Lauren, Aunt Kathleen and her husband Lance, plus Gudrun the legal
assistant, were out with umbrellas to meet them.
Alban – wet through, head down, trudging back to head for his shared room
and a change of clothes – was hardly spared a second glance.
Dinner was full–scale but not formal; Alex the cook would have the kitchen and
waiting staff of the Sloy Hotel to help him produce the dinners for the next
two evenings, but for tonight he’d managed a buffet with just a couple of
assistants. People chose their own places to sit at a dozen tables scattered
through the length of the dining room.
The place was noisy with family members who hadn’t talked properly for years
provisioning themselves with gossip and news. Alban sat with Andy and Leah,
Cory and her family. He’d caught up with Cory – she was working for Apple now,
very excited about stuff in the pipeline she couldn’t possibly talk about –
and chatted with her husband Dave, an industrial chemist and a nice enough guy
but with a sadly inexhaustible supply of stories about paints, pigments,
volatiles and finishes.
‘I didn’t say anything to upset you, did I? I mean when we were talking
about Irene last week,’ Andy said. He raised his glass between him and Alban.
‘You know, I probably ought not to say anything when I’ve a drink in me. I
always worry I might have offended people. Bane of my life.’
‘Course not,’ Alban said. ‘Anyway, I raised the subject. I think we both
needed a drink before we could face it.’
‘Perish the thought a couple of guys can talk about important emotional
stuff when they’re actually sober enough to make sense
313
of it,’ Andy said ruefully. He sighed. ‘But I still always worry I’ve offended
people.’
‘You worry too much about that sort of stuff, Dad.’
‘Hmm.’ Andy sounded unconvinced.
‘Remember that time after I got back from my world trip? About a week before
I went to Uni. We were sitting in the garden. Very hot. Drinking Pimm’s, and I
mentioned seeing Blake in Hong Kong and how he’d said, Always look out for
number one. Be selfish.’
Andy nodded. ‘Vaguely.’
‘We got to talking about how some people were selfish and some weren’t, and
the difference between right–wing people and left–wing people. You said it all
came down to imagination. Conservative people don’t usually have very much, so
they find it hard to imagine what life is like for people who aren’t just like
them. They can only empathise with people just like they are: the same sex,
the same age, the same class, the same golf club or nation or race or
whatever. Liberals can pretty much empathise with anybody else, no matter how
different they are. It’s all to do with imagination; empathy and imagination
are almost the same thing, and it’s why artists, creative people, are almost
all liberals, left–leaning. Hard–headed people –business people – didn’t have
that sort of imagination; it’s all directed at seeing business opportunities,
identifying gaps in the market, spotting weaknesses in rivals. Blake and Win –
and quite a lot of our family – were like that, you said. It was just the way
they were.’
‘Did I really say all that?’ Andy asked, frowning.
‘Yes, you did,’ Alban told him. ‘The point is, it was really useful to me,
it made sense of a lot of stuff I’d been puzzling over, but then you spent the
next half–hour or so apologising, saying you didn’t want to criticise the
family. I almost forgot what it was you said in the first place.’
Andy shrugged, grinned. ‘Sorry. Sorry for being sorry’
Alban smiled, shook his head.
Anyway,’ Andy said. ‘Getting back to this thing with Beryl. Did you find out

anything else?’ He drank from his glass.
314
‘No,’ Alban said. ‘No, I didn’t.’ He looked at the table where Win was
sitting with Aunt Kathleen, Uncle Kennard and the two Spraint Corp execs and
their assistants. ‘I suppose I could ask Gran.’
Andy coughed. ‘Excuse me. Yes, I suppose.’
‘Well, she was around back then, in London. She might know something.’
‘Yes, you should talk to her, I suppose. Other things on her mind this
weekend, mind you. As have we all.’
‘Yeah, well, we’ve already had words this weekend. Not about that though.’
‘I’ve brought some flowers,’ Andy said quietly, turning ever so slightly
away from Leah.
‘Flowers?’ Alban asked.
‘For Irene,’ Andy said, almost whispering. ‘I thought I’d take them down to
where she died, maybe tomorrow morning, scatter them on the water. What do you
think? Would you like to come?’
Part of Alban wanted to say, No, I’d rather do anything than come to where
she died, with or without you, Andy, because it means too fucking much to me.
What he said, naturally, was, ‘Yeah, of course, Andy. Maybe after
breakfast?’
‘Yeah, good idea,’ Andy said gently. ‘Good idea.’ He patted Alban’s arm.
‘Well, mister, you’d better pray there’s no Godl’
Alban stared at the guy. ‘What?’ he said.
Somehow, in the drawing room after dinner, he’d got into a theological
debate with this Anthony K. Fromlax guy, Vice–President, Mergers and
Acquisitions, of the Spraint Corporation, Incorporated under the laws of the
state of Delaware, United States of America. Even calling it a theological
debate was dignifying it a little; basically they were disagreeing about the
very existence of God, groups of gods and so–called higher beings in general.
Tony Fromlax was a tall, muscular, lithe–looking guy of about Alban’s age
with wide,
315
enthusiastic eyes. A sharp–looking haircut ascribed a veneer of order to
naturally unruly fair hair. He had a degree in physics as well as an MBA and
Alban had half hoped, on being introduced to him by Win, that he’d prove to be
one of those Americans who hadn’t been born again. This had proved –
perversely – to be a pious hope.
It wasn’t that Alban went looking for this sort of argument, just that he
always seemed to get involved in them. People said something that made it
obvious they’d fabricated some assumption that was completely wrong either
about Alban or about the way he looked at the world and he seemed to be
constitutionally incapable of letting these things go, of treating them like
something embarrassing just tripped over and best ignored; he always had to
turn back and pick it up, inspect it, shake it, worry it, make an issue of it,
demand an explanation. In this case it had been Tony wondering aloud about
where people would be worshipping come Sunday. From that had spread a whole
escalating avalanche of argument, assertion, counter–assertion and nonsense.
‘Pray there’s no god? Did you hear what you–?’
‘I’m sorry for you, Alban, in your pride and your arrogance, that you can’t
see that Jesus is reaching out to you, that He would be your friend, your
saviour, if only you’d listen.’ Tony sat forward on his couch, hands splayed
in front of him, reaching out. ‘There is no way you can be right, but even if
there was, think what a terrible place the world would be without the Word of
God to guide us. That’s what–’
‘Now, Tony, how are we here? This looks like it’s lively. Talking share

price, yeah?’ Larry Feaguing, Senior Vice–President, Mergers and Acquisitions,
clapped Tony on the shoulder and sat down by him on the couch. Feaguing was a
chunky guy, not much shorter than Fromlax, about twenty years his senior, with
endearingly black hair. He had a deep, serious tan that Alban already imagined
was visibly fading in the mellowing light of a Scottish October. He had a
deep, serious voice, too, and used it to good effect. ‘How’re you guys getting
on?’ he asked. ‘Okay?’
316
‘Mr McGill believes we’re descended from monkeys and Christians are no
better than Muslims,’ Fromlax told his boss, who at least had the decency to
look pained.
‘Or Jews, to be fair,’ Alban said reasonably as Fromlax’s eyes widened. ‘I’m
an atheist, Mr Feaguing,’ he said, turning to the other man. ‘I was trying to
explain to Tony here that, from where I stand, Judaism, Christianity and Islam
don’t even look like separate religions, just different cults within this one
big, mad, misogynist religion founded by a schizophrenic who heard voices
telling him to kill his son. And I do indeed believe in evolution rather than
magic. I take a pretty firm line on lightning not being divine thunderbolts,
too.’
‘Well, a man’s beliefs are his own business, I guess,’ Feaguing said,
looking at both men in turn. ‘The most important thing is being able to talk,
come to agreements, where agreements are possible.’
‘The most important thing is to live in peace/ Alban said, hoping this in
itself sounded like agreement – it wasn’t particularly meant to be.
‘Tony,’ Feaguing said, putting his hand between the junior exec’s shoulder
blades, ‘would you have a word with Mr Percy Wopuld–’
‘It’s Schofield,’ Alban said. ‘Uncle Perce married in.’
‘Schofield, of course, I beg your pardon,’ Feaguing said, nodding and
holding up one hand, glancing at Alban and then smiling back at Fromlax.
‘Percy’s the Brand Manager? Guy with the glasses over there, sat next to the
fire with Winifred? He has some questions.’ Feaguing patted his junior’s back.
Would you do that?’
‘Certainly,’ Fromlax said, and – with a last, part dark, part pitying look
at Alban – got up, retrieved his laptop from the narrow table behind the couch
and went over towards the group of people gathered round the fireplace.
Feaguing watched as Fromlax joined them. ‘She’s a very special and wonderful
lady, your grandmother,’ he told Alban.
‘Oh, she’s something,’ Alban said. He decided he was getting rather good at
this seeming–to–agree ploy.
317
‘You’ll have to excuse Tony,’ Feaguing said. ‘The guy takes his religion
pretty neat.’ He grinned broadly. He was dressed in slacks and a shirt and
sweater and held a tumbler with whisky and ice. ‘You kinda have to make
allowances for some of these younger guys, cut them a bit of slack.’ He held
up one hand. ‘Not that he’s any younger than you, Mr McGill. But you know what
I mean.’
‘Of course.’
‘Me,’ Feaguing said, gesturing at his chest with his whisky glass, ‘I’m a
devout capitalist.’
‘Please, call me Alban; after all, Tony and I were on first–name terms and
we were close to blows.’
Feaguing grinned, sat back. ‘I understand you’ve been speaking up for the
family firm staying with the family,’ he said. He held up one hand as though
to forestall something. ‘I just want to say, I completely understand. In your
position, I’d have mixed feelings myself.’
Alban thought of saying that his feelings weren’t mixed, they were totally

against the takeover, but this wasn’t strictly true, he supposed, so he
didn’t.
‘It’s a big decision,’ Feaguing said, sitting forward, cradling his glass in
both hands, looking thoughtful. He nodded, also thoughtfully. ‘And I know and
respect what your family has done with the heritage that Empire! and the other
games represent. It’s a record to be proud of. Your family should be proud.’
‘There haven’t been too many sins this family hasn’t indulged to the hilt,’
Alban said. ‘I doubt we missed pride.’
Feaguing grinned again, flashing very white teeth. ‘Now, look, obviously,
I’m here to close the deal’ His hands were spread wide. ‘But I want to tell
you about the corporate attitude at Spraint, about the way we work, about our
philosophy. I did say to call me Larry, didn’t I?’
‘Yes, you did,’ Alban told him. ‘Larry, you want to buy the family firm
because you think you’ll make more money owning what we own rather than
licensing it. It then becomes a question of how many of us value our holding
above whatever your best offer turns out to be. I don’t see how philosophy
really comes into it.’
318
Larry looked pained, scratched behind one ear. ‘Well, we’ve kind of made our
best offer,’ he said. Alban didn’t even bother to do anything with his
expression. ‘But anyway,’ Feaguing went on, ‘I want you to understand that I’m
sincere here, Alban. Don’t be over–cynical, please. Different companies do
business in different ways. If that wasn’t true, your family firm wouldn’t
have succeeded so well over the last century and more. If it wasn’t true then
there’d be no winners and losers, just everybody doing pretty much the same,
and life is certainly not like that. At Spraint we believe in the long term,
we believe in commitment, we believe in shared values. It’s not just about
money.’
‘I thought you had a duty to increase shareholder value.’
Absolutely. But there are as many ways of doing that, once you include all
the variables, as there are, well, say, of becoming better educated. What
classes do you want to do? What do you invest in? Both simple–sounding
questions, both infinitely complicated answers.’
‘But it is still about money.’
‘You know,’ Larry said, sitting back, frowning, ‘this might sound like a
strange thing to say, but in a way money is kind of irrelevant.’
Alban widened his eyes. ‘Really?’
‘What I mean is, it’s just how you keep score. Like a ball game. The
scoreboard, the numbers on it; they’re just things. It’s what those numbers
buy you, what they get you that matters; not the numbers themselves.’
‘I wish I was an economist,’ Alban said, ‘we could debate this properly’
‘What matters is how people feel,’ Feaguing said. ‘Do people feel good
having a bunch of money in the bank, or in stocks? Do they feel better owning
a Harley or a Lexus or a Sunseeker or a Lear Jet? How many of those can you
use? Do they feel better being involved with a company that is simply trying
to give them the figures to buy the same sort of stuff they could buy with
shares in any other company, or – and here’s the thing – do they feel better
investing in a company that shares the values they hold themselves?
319
Values of long–term commitment to worthwhile projects, the very real worth of
excellence for its own sake, a proven long–term commitment to extensive
charitable works, a belief in the future of science and technology allied to a
recognition of the basic human need for diversion and game–playing and all the
life–enhancing lessons that the best scenarios and games are able to teach.’
Alban sat in his seat, looking at Larry Feaguing. Alban had his legs
crossed, one elbow on his knee and his chin on his fist. He had the distinct

impression he was getting a regurgitated, slightly jumbled version of a more
coherent – and doubtless more inspiring – speech Feaguing had once been on the
receiving end of. Alban shook his head. ‘Well, they do say Europe and North
America are growing further apart all the time. You have to hope they’ve left
enough slack in all those transatlantic cables.’
Larry sat back and looked pained again. Alban, I’m just trying to tell you
that companies have characters, like people do, and I feel proud of the
character of Spraint Corp. That is not bullshit. Excuse me, but I mean this
sincerely. We honour what you’ve done with Empire!, and the other games and we
think we’ll be worthy inheritors of that heritage. Your family has done
wonderful things with those games in the past. Together we’ve done wonderful
things with the various properties over the past six years, but it’s our
belief that there’s an even greater potential in the titles that we’re
confident can only be realised if we are allowed the privilege of taking over
their stewardship.’
Alban shrugged. ‘I won’t argue you’re not sincere, Larry. But ultimately of
course this is all about money’
Feaguing shook his head. ‘I wish I could make you believe otherwise, Alban,
I really do.’
‘Maybe we’re both getting this the wrong way round,’ Alban suggested.
‘Perhaps you’re right about the character and morals of Spraint Corp, but
you’re giving the Wopuld clan way too much respect for their beliefs and
collective character. Maybe all we’re interested in is money’
320
‘Do you really believe that, Alban?’ Feaguing asked quietly.
Alban looked around the room at all his many, many relations, this
widespread but, for now – briefly – concentrated family, which he had loved
and hated and served and exiled himself from and longed for and come to an
accommodation with and still half loved and half hated sometimes, and then he
looked back at Feaguing with a small smile. ‘I don’t know,’ he said. ‘But if I
were you I’d treat it as a decent working hypothesis.’
Fielding snored, Alban discovered. It was so bad that he ended up having to
pad along to the nearest bathroom and make a couple of little wads of toilet
paper to stuff in his ears as plugs. He lay awake for a while after that,
thinking of VG, wondering where she was laying her tousled head that night,
how she was sleeping. The rain and the wind had barely slackened all day.
A gust – which he heard over Fielding’s snoring and through the improvised
ear plugs – shook the windows in their frames.
He was struggling to make his way down through the upward stream of water,
blown this way and that by the pummelling wind and rain. There was somebody
down there, somebody ahead of him, somebody who’d fallen through the rushing
stream in front of him. He’d ivatched her go and then realised he had to save
her and so thrown himself in too but then the water hadn’t let him, it was
rushing back up at him, flowing the wrong way, forcing him upwards so that he
had to struggle against it and fight his way down.
‘Alban!’
The voice sounded distant, underwater. For a few moments he thought it might
be her voice, but it wasn’t. It was too deep.
‘Alban!’
He woke up tangled in damp bedclothes, as though the stream he’d been
fighting had suddenly set, coagulating around him into a twistedly solid form.
‘You okay?’ It was Fielding.
321
Alban realised he was at Garbadale, in a single bed, sharing a room. He took

one of his ear plugs out, cleared his throat and ran a hand over his sweaty
face. ‘Sorry, yeah.’ He kicked at some of the sheets, releasing a trapped leg,
sticking it out to cool. ‘Sorry about that.’
‘Nightmare?’ Fielding asked, his voice sounding normal now, not underwater.
‘Kind of Alban looked around. The room was perfectly dark. He couldn’t see a
thing. He twisted his head and looked at the little bedside cabinet, just to
see the sea–green glow of his watch dial, hovering in the darkness like the
face of a tiny, constant ghost.
‘Sounded like it,’ Fielding said.
‘Sorry if I woke you up.’
‘Never mind. Try and get back to sleep. No more nightmares.’
‘Yeah. Thanks. No more nightmares.’
He lay awake for a while after that, staring at the unseen ceiling,
listening to the wind and the rain and trying to recall who it had been he had
thought he was trying to rescue.
Breakfast was another straggled, well–spaced affair. Alban spent a couple of
hours in the dining room, taking a very long and leisurely breakfast and
talking to most of the people he hadn’t managed to talk to already. He got the
impression that a lot of people were assuming everybody else was all for the
sale, while they themselves weren’t, but still expected to lose the vote. A
surprising number were against the sale at any price, or so they said.
The weather was starting to improve and there was talk of some of the adults
forming a shooting party after lunch, to cull a few hinds. Various males were
already committed to spending most of the day in front of the big plasma
screen in the TV lounge, watching sport. Andy came down late for breakfast,
looked at the still falling rain and suggested tomorrow might be a better day
for Alban and him to scatter the flowers on the loch. Alban agreed.
A treasure hunt in the gardens had been arranged later in the
322
afternoon for those children who didn’t think such childish pursuits beneath
them. Alban helped set the treasure hunt up during the hour after his
elongated breakfast, hiding prizes and instructions, most of them rain–proofed
in plastic kitchenware boxes, amongst the trees and bushes and lawns of the
garden, all according to a plan drawn up by Aunt Lauren.
He wandered a little, visiting parts of the gardens the treasure hunt wasn’t
supposed to reach, taking in the pinetum, the arboretum and the old walled
kitchen garden, its long–vanished glasshouses present only in the ghostly form
of marks on the walls and the channels of the flues for the fires that had
heated the plants in the winter.
The rain had almost ceased now, the wind shifting, blowing in clear from the
north–west. He walked under the fine, tall trees he remembered from earlier
visits – various pines and firs plus a number of Western Hemlock and
WeUingtonia – letting the few fat heavy drops of leaf–filtered rain fall on to
his face. Too many places were choked with rhodies, he thought. The place was
ideal for them –peaty, acidic soil, lots of rain – but it needed a clear–out.
He was surrounded by the signs of autumn – the leaves were turning, the
deciduous trees beginning the process of drawing the goodness inward, leaving
the leaves to yellow and redden and brown and fall.
He returned to the house as the last of the rain cleared and blue skies
appeared between the mountains to the north–west. The temperature had dropped
a couple of degrees, but it still felt mild.
Sophie met him in the cloakroom as he took his jacket off. ‘Alban, would you
come fishing with me?’
‘Fishing?’ he said. ‘What, on Loch Garve?’
‘Yeah. Care to?’ she asked. She wore chunky black boots, black jeans, a
green blouse that matched her eyes and a grey sweater. She stood, arms folded,
leaning back against the wall by the door into the rest of the house, one leg

up behind her.
‘You’re not shooting, then?’ he asked.
‘Not a great fan of guns,’ she told him. ‘But I’ve kinda taken up
323
fishing back home. I asked your pal Neil McBride and he said you knew the loch
pretty well and you might take me if I asked you nicely.’
‘Well, he’s the real expert,’ Alban said, hanging up his jacket. ‘But I’ve
got a rough idea of the best places; the ones Neil’s told me about, anyway.
Anybody else coming?’
‘Just us.’ She smiled. ‘That okay?’
‘Course it’s okay,’ he said. He looked at his watch – it was nearly noon.
‘Give me half an hour to get everything together. You want to eat before we go
or take a packed lunch down the loch?’
‘I’ll organise some food to take with us. Neil’s sorting us a boat.’
‘Good man. We’ll need to be back about five at the latest, that all right?’
‘Sure.’
He scratched the nape of his neck. ‘We will be out in this wee boat for
several hours; I’d schedule a toilet break before we head off’
She hoisted one eyebrow. ‘Aye–aye, cap’n.’
‘Okay then.’
‘Okay’
Neil had the boat started and idling at the jetty for them. ‘You’ve got a full
tank,’ he told Alban, ‘and there’s a can of fuel under the bow seat, though
you shouldn’t need it. Already mixed, but you might want to give it a good
slosh around before you pour it in, if you do have to. Funnel’s in the wee
crate under the back seat there, with the rest of the bits and bobs.’
‘Cheers, Neil.’ Alban stepped in and started stowing the fishing gear in the
little boat. Sophie had one of the rods, a fishing bag and the cool box with
the food.
‘Forecast is fine,’ Neil told them. ‘Clear. Wind’s to stay the same or
freshen a bit. Three to a four.’
‘That all?’ Alban said. ‘Good as dead calm by Loch Garve standards.’
‘Want a suggestion?’ Neil asked.
324
‘Sure.’
‘Try down at Eagle Rock, under Meall an Aonaich. Do you know that bit?’
‘Nearly at the head?’
‘Aye, about a mile this way. There’s a buoy off the bit of shore between the
two burns. Tie up there and use fly for brownies. The wash–off from the burns
pushes them out that way after heavy rain. If that doesn’t work ‘cause there’s
too much chop I’ve put a couple of wee rods in for spinners.’
‘Okay.’ Alban turned to Sophie as she handed him the stuff she’d been
carrying. ‘It’s a fair distance to get there, but I guess we’ll get a couple
of hours in.’
‘Fine by me,’ she said. Sophie wore a dark blue jacket over what she’d been
wearing earlier, with a canvas gilet over that, much pocketed. Neil helped her
slip into a slim, self–inflating life–jacket, then she put out one hand and
Alban held it while she stepped into the boat, taking a long stride to bring
her foot down in the centre of the bottom boards.
‘Well, have fun,’ Neil told them.
‘See you later,’ Alban said.
‘Thanks again,’ Sophie told Neil. ‘Hope the shooting goes well.’
‘For everybody but the deer, aye,’ Neil said, casting them off.
Loch Garve was nearly twenty–six kilometres long and nowhere wider than two.

At nearly two hundred metres in places it was deeper than the North Sea; a
steep–sided inland loch bordered and hemmed in by tall mountains and shaped
‘like a dug’s hind leg’ according to Neil McBride.
The wind was behind them as they headed south–east in the slim,
clinker–built boat, the little four–horsepower two–stroke droning away at
their backs. He didn’t need it for the temperature, but Alban pulled a thick
ski glove over his hand holding the motor’s throttle tiller. These old
two–strokes were rattly, buzzy old things.
‘You want to sit up the front?’ he asked Sophie, raising his voice
325
over the noise of the engine. ‘Keep us better trimmed. Kind of hard to talk
over the sound of this thing anyway.’ He patted the motor’s tiller. The handle
of the starting lanyard was protruding a little; he pushed it fully into the
cowling. ‘We can gossip all we like once we’re moored and the engine’s off.’
‘Okay,’ she said. She moved to the front, keeping low, taking care to avoid
stepping on the oars and rods in the bottom of the boat, swinging her legs
over the midship seat and taking up her position on the little seat nubbed in
across the angle of the bows, looking back once at him – they exchanged smiles
– then facing forward, away from him and towards the loch and the mountains
ahead.
He’d watched the material of her jeans tighten and stretch over her trim
little behind as she made the manoeuvre.
Was this no more than it appeared to be? He didn’t know. He was happy to be
with her, and she seemed to be genuinely interested in fishing, and maybe this
was partly her way of letting him know they were okay now, that they could be
friends, even if not especially close ones . . . Still, he’d felt surprised
when she’d first suggested this little expedition, and almost instantly
suspicious. He had Sophie down as one of the definite Fors, a certain Yes. She
was almost certainly going to vote to sell to Spraint, even though she was
employed by the US side of the family business and wasn’t guaranteed a job
with Spraint if they did buy them out.
From what Alban knew, Sophie was good at her job of Retail Liaison Officer,
even if he’d never entirely worked out exactly what this job description
meant. If he’d been Larry Feaguing he’d have had a word by now and made her a
verbal promise she would be found a post within Spraint. Though without, of
course, putting anything in writing or necessarily meaning to make good on the
promise.
Was she going to try to persuade him not to make his pitch at the meeting
before the EGM? Was she going to try to get him to change what she – or
whoever might have put her up to this – thought he
326
was going to say? He looked out across the hull–slapping waves of the loch and
then up at the distant, darkly towering mass of Ben More Assynt coming into
view round the shoulder of a nearer hill, both peaks starting to appear as the
mass of clouds lifted. Or, he thought, perhaps he was just being too
suspicious.
He thought of VG again, maybe now climbing in the dry at last. He knew
exactly what she’d ask. What did he really want? What was he really attempting
to achieve?
Oh, how the hell should he know? He wanted to be happy but he didn’t even
know who he wanted to be happy with, or even if he really needed somebody else
around to be happy with. Why should he know? Nobody else seemed to know, or if
they did, they weren’t acting on it in any obviously sensible way. He wanted
peace and love and all that shit for the whole fucking world and you’d imagine
that sort of stuff would be fairly near the top of everybody’s wish list, but
it was all going in the other direction, descending into madness and

barbarism, reverting to a mind–numbing, morality–sapping set of cruel,
mutually intolerant superstitions and authori–tarianisms. Stupidity and
viciousness were rewarded, illegality not just tolerated but encouraged, lying
profoundly worked, and torture was justified – even lauded. Meanwhile the
whole world was warming up, getting ready to drown.
Everybody should know better. Nobody did.
Every fucker was mad, nobody paid any attention whatso–bleeding–ever to
whatever was in their best interests, so how the hell was he supposed to be
any better or different?
He shifted his position on the thin cushion covering the wooden seat. The
little engine revved high, wasting fuel. He turned and adjusted the throttle
friction control. He turned back and watched the rear of Sophie’s head, her
neat, shoulder–length blonde hair barely moving as the boat almost kept pace
with the wind at their backs.
What did she want? What was her goal?
Maybe the girl just needed to get some quality time in. Perhaps
327
she wanted to do some fishing and soak up some of the tranquillity of the old
family estate before it was all sold off. Maybe it wasn’t even anything to do
with him – with their history together – at all; perhaps it was just her being
sensible, going with somebody who knew the loch rather than taking a boat out
herself. On the face of it Loch Garve was no more treacherous or difficult
than any other inland loch, but it would be an especially unforgiving place to
get into difficulties because there was nowhere except the foot of it –the
Garbadale end – to go for help; there was no other house or shelter, and no
road or even forestry track on either shore, just a rough path on the
north–east side which was more or less passable in a well–driven quad bike or
an Argocat. Even that was probably a no–go on a day like today, with multiple
fording points blocked by streams and burns in spate after all the recent
rain.
After about half an hour they made a shallow turn round the shoulder of
Mullach and were out of sight of the house. A minute or two later Sophie came
swivelling back towards the stern of the boat, still keeping low. Alban
watched the bows rise slightly as the boat adjusted to the weight transferral.
The waves had grown a little since they’d left Garbadale, partly because
they’d left the lee of the trees and the shallow rise the house was built on,
but mostly because of the reach becoming greater; the wind had an increasingly
long stretch of water to work on, gradually pushing up fractionally taller
waves. They were still going with the wind and the waves, however, and so
their progress was almost stately. It would feel a bit choppier coming back,
but the waves weren’t near breaking and the forecast was good; there shouldn’t
be any drama.
‘Okay?’ he asked Sophie as she sat next to him, raising his voice over the
sound of the outboard.
‘Fine.’ She leaned closer, nodded at the insulated box. ‘Want some coffee?’
‘Good idea.’
They sat together on the transom seat, holding cups of coffee.
‘Thanks for coming with me,’ she said.
328
‘No problem; good idea. I guess we won’t be able to do this again once the
place is sold. Glad you suggested it.’
She looked back and down, frowning at his hand holding the engine’s throttle
tiller. ‘Why are you wearing just one glove?’
He shrugged. ‘I can stick this one in my pocket,’ he said, holding up his
hand with the coffee cup. Not a lie, he told himself, and it saved a lot of
boring explanation. They sat together within the companionable noisiness of

the engine’s monotone drone for a while.
Now she was staring at his left hand. ‘Oh my God, what happened to your
little finger?’
‘Oh, chainsaw accident,’ he said, looking at his half–finger. ‘Few years
ago.’
‘Jeez, Alban.’
‘Only a nuisance when I’m trying to get wax out my left ear.’
‘Thanks for sharing that,’ she said.
‘Welcome,’ he told her. ‘Oh. Should have checked this before we started out,
but do you know how to work the engine? Just in case I fall overboard – you
know, trying to land a marlin or a great white or something – or lapse into a
coffee–induced coma or whatever.’
She looked back at the engine. ‘It’s a two–stroke. There’s no little window
so I guess you add the oil to the gas before you put it in the tank.’ Then she
pointed as she said, ‘Starting lanyard, choke, twist throttle, throttle
friction whadaya–callit –’
‘Okay’ He touched her forearm. ‘You’ve passed.’
They rinsed the cups over the side, then she went back to sit up front. He’d
switched hands – and glove – once so far, and was about to do so again when he
remembered an old trick.
He took some care to make only the most minute adjustments to the tiller to
keep their course straight – substituting small increments and patience for
coarse inputs and quick results – and waited until the bearing the bows
indicated on the mountains far ahead didn’t seem to have changed for a minute
or so, then he carefully let go of the tiller and stood up, moving forward
towards the widest part of the boat, feet planted as far apart as the inner
hull would allow.
329
Sophie felt something change in the attitude of the boat and looked back.
Her eyes widened deliberately. ‘You going to test me on what to do if you
fall overboard?’ she said.
He shook his head. ‘If you get the engine set just right,’ he said loudly,
‘and the wind’s behaving itself, you can steer like this.’ He leaned to the
right, tipping the boat a few degrees. Their heading started to change
fractionally to starboard. He gave a big grin. ‘See?’
‘I see.’ She smiled broadly, too. ‘You’re showing off.’
‘Nah, me bum was getting sore,’ he said, gesturing.
She nodded. ‘Well, if you are going to fall overboard, be sure to give me
plenty of warning.’
‘Will do.’
She turned to face the wilderness of water, hill and sky that was all that
was ahead of them.
They ate their lunch while still under way, to make more time for fishing when
they stopped.
Half an hour later they moored at the little sun–bleached, pale orange buoy
floating fifty metres or so off the portion of shore between the two burns
draining the north–west slope of Meall an Aonaich. The sky was almost clear of
cloud, though they were in the shadow of the long western ridge leading to Ben
More Assynt, so the air felt cool. The wind had dropped a little here in what
was essentially a wide bay between the two mountains. Almost the only sound
was of waves slapping against the clinkered planks of the boat.
After he’d shut down the outboard, the silence had rushed in like something
more than absence, like some anti–sound that was still somehow as loud as the
noise it had suddenly replaced. He remembered the burglar alarm, heard from
his bedroom during that summer night in Richmond, twenty years earlier. He
recalled it as though it was for the last time, gently pushing it away as if
it was something that he could now safely consign to the shadowy depths

beneath their little boat.
330
Alban closed his eyes at one point to concentrate on what he could hear. He
heard the sound of Sophie’s clothes sliding over each other as she reached
back and forth, arm swaying, casting. He heard the faint, rasping sound of the
reel. Somewhere a seagull called, sounding plaintive and lonely and lost,
unechoing.
He opened his eyes, glanced at Sophie – she didn’t seem to have noticed him
closing his eyes – and felt – even though there was a hint of sadness in
there, too – oddly, almost blissfully happy.
‘Bit choppy for fly fishing,’ Sophie said after a few casts.
Alban was inclined to agree. They switched to spinners, using the smaller
rods, casting differently, further, reeling in smoothly.
‘How close do you think this vote’s going to be?’ Sophie asked him, flicking
the rod back and then snapping forward, sending the little spinner up just far
enough to rise above the ridge shadow and into the sunlight, making it glitter
briefly before plunging first into the shade and then into the deeper darkness
of the loch.
‘Closer than most people think,’ Alban said, reeling in with a slow,
measured motion. ‘Close enough to make Spraint raise their offer.’
Sophie glanced at him. ‘You reckon?’
‘If they see the way the wind’s blowing they’ll raise it before the EGM. If
they’re as smart as they should be.’
‘They have the authority for that?’ Her voice was quiet. They were both
speaking very softly now with so little other sound around them. Stuck out in
the middle of a chopping loch in broad, slightly chilly daylight it gave their
conversation an oddly enclosed, even intimate feeling.
‘Up to some unspecified point, allegedly,’ Alban said. ‘Feaguing’s senior
enough to double their initial offer, I’d guess. Aunt Kath feels the same way,
and Win. She insisted they send people who could negotiate on the ground
rather than just some ceremonial team with a rubber stamp, a crate of bubbly
and some pious words about the proud family tradition being safe in their
hands. Above a certain point – which they’re not giving away, obviously – they
331
have to phone home, but even if they seem to do that it could be a ploy. You
know, like when a car salesman says he has to go and talk with his manager to
discuss what you’re asking for your trade–in and just goes for a coffee or a
dump instead and then comes back shaking his head and saying, sorry, if it was
up to him, but, gee, his boss is such a hard–ass.’ Alban retrieved his lure,
cast it again.
Sophie nodded slowly, gathering her own small silvery spinner back in. ‘I
think I’m going to vote no,’ she said.
Alban looked at her. ‘Well, that’s a surprise. I was sure you’d be for
selling.’
‘They’ve offered me a job,’ she told him.
‘Spraint.’
‘Yeah. Say they’ll keep me on, with promotion, more money, stock.’
‘You got that in writing?’
‘No.’ She sounded amused.
And? What? That made you change your mind? Somehow that offer was
counter–productive?’
‘No, but it got me thinking.’
Always dangerous.’
She grinned. ‘I realised I like what I’m doing just now. Maybe in five or
ten years’ time I’d be ready to take on something like what they’re offering,
but right now I’m happy enough. And in addition I don’t know that we have the

right to sell out the firm when there’s another generation that might
criticise us for it.’ She glanced at Alban.
‘Getting broody?’ he asked, making a wild guess.
‘It’s something I’ve thought of/ she admitted. ‘There’s a guy I’m seeing,
back home.’
Ah–ha.’ He still got this odd feeling when she said ‘home’ and meant the US.
‘Same guy I’ve been seeing all this time. Same guy I switched courses for,
way back.’
332
Ah–hah, he thought. ‘Wow,’ he said. ‘You have been patient.’ Maybe, he
thought, too patient; like me.
‘Yeah,’ she said ruefully. ‘You’re not kidding. He’s been married, had two
kids and divorced again in the meantime, but,’ she sighed, ‘we’re back
together again. After all that.’
Dear God, he thought. I knew nothing of this. What a gulf, what an ocean,
what an Atlantic between us. If we are so much the sum of what we’ve done and
what’s been done to us, I barely know this woman at all. Who – where – is the
Sophie you think you know?
‘I guess we’re pretty serious,’ she said. ‘We’ve talked about marriage,
kids. I’ve always been, I don’t know; unsure, but, hey,’ she glanced at him
again, ‘just getting to that age, you know? Don’t want to leave it too much
longer.’
‘I’m sure you’d make a wonderful mother,’ he told her.
‘Gee, thanks.’ She said it like she thought he’d meant to be sarcastic.
‘Seriously,’ he said.
She looked at him again, then lifted the dripping lure from the water, swung
it back, clicking the reel and casting again. The spinner headed high and
struck sunlight once more, glinting briefly. ‘Sorry,’ she said. ‘Okay. But.
So. I think I’ll vote against.’
‘Me and my pitiful hundred shares will be with you. Much to my surprise.’
‘Yeah, I think Win was surprised too.’
‘You told her?’
‘She just plain asked, dude,’ she told him. ‘Came right out with it, as
though she was confused and thought I’d already told her, which I hadn’t. And
I’m pretty sure she knew I hadn’t. Good acting, though. She’s a manipulative
old bird, isn’t she?’
Alban laughed. ‘Yes. Yes she is. I thought I was the only person who felt
that way.’
‘No, I wouldn’t put much past her.’
‘Same here.’
‘We’re sure nobody’s done any private deals with Spraint?’ Sophie asked.
333
‘Hard to see how they could. The family trust has first refusal on any
proposed share sell.’
‘Okay’ She was silent for a moment. ‘Is it true you and Fielding made up
some sort of road show, drumming up support for the Anti cause?’
‘Yeah, at Win’s suggestion, too, apparently.’
‘Uh–huh. I had her down as a seller, too.’
‘Not that we had much effect, far as I could see,’ Alban said.
‘No?’
‘Well, not much.’ He stopped reeling in, letting his spinner sink a little.
‘Though it did occur to me,’ he said, ‘that what we were really doing was
upping the price.’
Sophie glanced at him.
He shrugged. ‘Maybe Win does want to sell, but not at the current price. She
reckoned we were rolling over for them too low, so she thought she’d try and

up the numbers who’d vote against. The idea being that Spraint realise there’s
more opposition than they were expecting so they have to offer more. Win gets
her way. But what she wants is just a higher price, not outright rejection.’
‘Hmm.’ Sophie did not sound as impressed with this bit of vicarious
Machiavellianism as Alban had hoped. ‘But you’d think she would be the one
person who wanted to keep the family firm together,’ she said. ‘She’s the
matriarch, this is her watch. She ought to be the guardian of the family
values. And the family valuables.’
‘I think Win’s secretly – actually, not that secretly – an egomaniac,’ Alban
said. ‘Everything has to revolve around her. Soon she’ll be dead, or so infirm
she won’t be able to control the family and the firm any more, and she hates
the thought of somebody else being in charge. Better to sell up, liquidate it
all, dissolve it into some big corporation. So she gets to be like a bookend,
founding father Henry being the other. A fitting sense of finality for her.’
‘Okay,’ Sophie said, nodding slowly. She seemed slightly more taken with
this piece of analysis. ‘Well, I suppose.’ She looked at
334
Alban. ‘What if it’s worked too well? What if nobody wants to sell now?’
‘Well, some people definitely do; Aunt Kath for one. But I’ve been doing the
arithmetic and it’s tighter than anybody was expecting.’
‘Interesting,’ Sophie said.
‘Oh,’ Alban sighed, reeling in, ‘isn’t it all?’
They were both standing up, letting their feet take their weight for a change,
confident that the boat’s gentle rocking wasn’t close to tipping them
overboard and used enough to the motion by now to be easy with it, casting
smoothly without disturbing the boat appreciably. They’d caught a couple of
slim, glistening brown trout each. They had been borderline small so they’d
thrown them back.
He’d wondered if they’d talk much about the old days, about what they’d
meant to each other, but they hadn’t. They’d mentioned Lydcombe a couple of
times, San Francisco just once:
‘I’m not sure I ever apologised to you properly for getting you into trouble
with your boyfriend,’ he’d said.
‘Dan? Yeah, that was a tad embarrassing.’ Her eyes had gone wide. She’d
shrugged. ‘My own fault. I got us both drunk, I’d been thinking about our
grass–flattening escapades at Lydcombe. I just felt horny and you were there.’
She’d smiled. Also, I was kind of doing it for closure, though I somehow
neglected to inform you of this at the time. I always worried you were doing
it because you wanted us to be together for ever or something.’ She made a
snorting noise.
I did tell you you were the love of my life, he’d thought. He hadn’t said
it.
‘Scarred me for life,’ he’d said instead, in a manner to make light of it.
Well, up until you told me to get out of your sight that time in Singapore.’
‘Yeah,’ she’d said, turning to him, eyes big again. ‘You were so drunk
then!’
335
Yeah, he thought. Just drunk. Not sincere or ruined for other women or still
burning for you or anything. Just drunk.
Oh well. The stiffened breeze blew some of his hair into his eyes. He
brushed it away again.
Alban checked his watch. ‘Want to do the last hour or so trawling? We can
keep the engine on idle and start to head back up the loch.’
Sophie nodded. ‘Yeah, okay. Want me to cast off?’
‘Thanks. If you would.’

He put his rod down in the boat, turned and squatted to face the engine,
pumped the bulb on the fuel line, adjusted the choke and then grasped the
plastic handle of the starting lanyard and began a strong, smooth pull. ‘This
old thing usually takes a couple of–’ he was saying when the starting lanyard
broke and he went flying backwards, staggering, falling across the midships
seat and whacking his head on the bottom boards.
He looked up. Sophie was looking down at him, a concerned look on her face;
her arms were outstretched as she balanced in the rocking boat. ‘You okay?’
The back of his head hurt a bit. He was lying in the bottom of the boat with
his legs up over the central seat, as though preparing to give birth. He
looked at his right hand, which was still holding the lanyard’s handle. He
listened; waves slapping hull. No engine sound. Shit.
‘I’m okay,’ he said, and accepted Sophie’s hand, lifting himself back up and
turning to sit down on the seat.
‘Garbadale we have a problem?’ Sophie said, squatting in front of him.
He stared at the lanyard. Looked like it had broken near the engine end.
Frayed, worn–looking fibres waved in the breeze when he held them up. He felt
like throwing the damn thing overboard, but didn’t.
‘Will we have to row?’ Sophie asked.
‘Christ, no,’ Alban said. ‘I’ll just take the top of the engine off and
reattach the lanyard.’ He turned, hoisted his feet over the seat
336
and knelt on the boards in front of the transom seat. ‘There’ll be a . . .’
His voice trailed off as he looked and felt under the seat. ‘A fucking
tool–box, which is not here,’ he finished. There was a small plastic crate
under the seat. He brought it out. It contained the fuel funnel, a little
hand–bailer, a small first–aid kit, a reel of floating line and an empty
cardboard spark plug carton. Alban sat down on the bottom boards, looking
round the boat to see where else the tool kit might be. Not anywhere else,
really. He put the lanyard in the crate with the other stuff.
‘So now are we going to have to row?’ Sophie asked.
Alban looked at his watch. ‘It’ll take us till fucking midnight to get
back.’
Sophie had her phone out. She started pressing buttons, then stopped. Ah,’
she said.
‘You’ll be lucky,’ Alban said. ‘Barely works at the house. Nothing down here
at all.’ Alban sat up on the seat and turned to the engine. He took the
plastic top cover off. There were eight twelve–mill bolts that had to be
removed before you could get at the drum that housed the starting lanyard. He
tested them, on the highly unlikely off–chance they were only finger tight,
but they were solid. He looked at his Swiss Army knife. That wasn’t going to
be adequate.
They checked beneath the bottom boards, in case the tool kit had got down
there somehow; all they found was dirty water. Sophie’s fishing paraphernalia
had nothing any more hardcore than Alban’s knife.
He caught a glimpse of the pale orange buoy, some distance off. They were
cast off. He looked up to check their position. They were drifting slowly down
the loch, further away from the house all the time, heading for the south–east
edge of the wide bay. He checked his watch again. It was quarter past three.
The EGM was scheduled for six, with the closed session part a half–hour
earlier.
They’d be rowing into a moderately stiff breeze for over twenty kilometres.
He hadn’t rowed any distance for years and Sophie looked gym fit but was
probably less powerful than he was. The
337
only alternative was to go ashore and start hiking. Either way they’d never

make it in time; it could easily be dark by the time they got back to the
house. Realistically, they’d be relying on somebody raising the alarm and
coming to look for them in another boat.
Alban felt a growing, gnawing sensation in his guts, a terrible feeling of
powerless anxiety, of failure and inadequacy and helplessness.
‘Well,’ he said, doing his best to display a confidence–inspiring smile to
Sophie. ‘I guess rowing is what it has to be.’ He gestured for her to sit on
the rear seat. ‘I’ll start off/ he told her. ‘You can spell me for a bit if
you like.’
‘Sure,’ she said. He placed the rowlocks in their holes, put the oars in
place and started push–pulling to bring them round almost one–eighty degrees.
‘You done much rowing?’ he asked.
‘Kayaks,’ she said, an apologetic expression on her face.
‘Better than nothing,’ he said. ‘Piece of piss, really.’ There wasn’t even
room in the slim boat for them to take an oar each.
When the stern of the boat was starting to point in the direction they’d
been drifting, he began rowing. The oars weren’t quite matched with the
rowlocks and kept jumping out. ‘Bit rusty,’ he said. ‘Soon get into the
rhythm.’
Sophie smiled thinly. She checked her life–jacket.
He looked behind him. The wind was already an appreciable force against the
boat and once they rounded the headland formed by the base of Assynt they’d be
straight into the teeth of it.
This was going to be a long pull.
Sophie was looking at her watch. ‘We going to make the EGM?’ she asked.
‘Umm, probably not as currently scheduled,’ he admitted. Alban reckoned
they’d require a complete about–turn in the wind and the services of an
Olympic oarsman to get back before coffee and petits fours.
‘Shit,’ she said. Anything I can do?’
338
He thought. ‘Come to think of it, you can pull the engine up out of the
water. No sense dragging that through the loch.’ He felt like an idiot. He’d
only been rowing for a minute, but it was something he should have thought of
immediately. He wondered what else he might have missed.
Idiot, he told himself. Idiot, idiot, idiot.
‘Let me know when you want me to take over,’ Sophie said.
‘Will do,’ he said. ‘Shout out if we look like we’re about to go aground.
Ideally we want to just miss that headland.’
She looked round him at the view ahead, nodded.
He settled into a sort of rhythm, though the feeling that the oars were
always about to jump out of the rowlocks was constantly unsettling. There was
no purpose–built footboard to brace your feet against when rowing, so you had
to use the ribs of the boat, which was okay as it was quite narrow, but he
seemed to be just the wrong height, slightly too long in the leg for one set
of ribs and too short for the next set sternwards. Plus his hands were already
starting to chafe. Fuck it; his fingers and palms used to be calloused and
hard. He’d been out of work for barely two months and already it felt like he
had the hands of Marcel Proust. He’d put the gloves on soon.
He tried to empty his mind and settle to the task, into the simple push and
pull of rowing. He did his best to feather the oars with each return stroke,
rolling the blades of the oars flat to cut through the oncoming breeze. This
was the proper way to row and would make a significant difference heading into
the wind over the sort of distance they were looking at, but he’d never
managed to incorporate the motions required into what passed for his natural
rowing technique and he doubted he’d keep it up.
Oh, fuck, this was going to be hellish.
He smiled at Sophie and she smiled back, but she looked concerned and he
felt the same way.

What was to be done? What else was there to do?
The phone? No chance. On the other hand, you never knew. Mobile phone masts
could leak signals through unlikely little corridors in the
339
hills. If nothing else, this would give Sophie something to do. ‘Keep trying
the phone for signal, every few minutes,’ he told her. He shrugged. ‘Just in
case.’ An oar jumped out and he rolled his eyes and said, ‘Shit.’
He looked round at the headland they were aiming for. It didn’t look much
closer. It looked darker than it had, though; high clouds were closing in from
the north–west, putting the surrounding landscape into shade. It was going to
get dark even earlier if the cloud cover kept building up.
He stopped, shipping the oars.
‘My turn?’ Sophie asked.
‘No, just putting these on,’ he said, pulling out his gloves. He settled
back into the rowing. The gloves made it all feel kind of mushy and distant,
but at least they should save his skin.
What are we trying to do? he asked himself. Concentrate; what am I trying to
do?
Get back to the house. So. Rowing looked like the only way. It was, wasn’t
it? Hiking would take at least as long.
Think out of the box. Think the way VG would think if she’d got herself into
this pickle. (Would she have? Would she have been paranoid enough to have
checked the tool kit was there? Never mind. Work with what you have, just
watch out for assumptions.)
What assumptions was he making about hiking? Well, direction, for one.
Maybe there was another way out. Could they head in the other direction and
tramp out via the head of the loch? He knew there was a track that,
eventually, led down to Benmore Lodge and Glen Oykel, but he couldn’t remember
how far that was. He could visualise the relevant map only vaguely, and seemed
to recall it looked like a pretty long walk. Plus, both while they were rowing
to the head of the loch and while they were hiking this unknown path, they’d
be heading away from any help that might come from Garbadale.
So, rowing.
340
Was there any other way to start the engine?
It was a pull–start. No electric starter. You used the lanyard or nothing;
that was it.
He thought on. If your car wouldn’t start you could jump–start it. Well,
that was a non–starter in every sense. The only electrical stuff they had were
their watches and Sophie’s phone. Not enough power there to turn an engine
over, even if you could somehow connect the phone’s battery to the spark plug
(and you’d probably need to start dismantling the engine to do that, too).
You could push–start a car. Could you tow–start a boat? In theory, he
supposed, if you could row at ninety knots or something you could restart the
engine by just putting the fucker into gear and dropping it into the wash. In
practice that was completely useless as an idea, too.
Think think think.
Oh, VG, he thought, I need you here now.
What they really needed was to get the engine going, the piston going up and
down, driving through the simple gearbox to the prop shaft and then the prop
itself.
Any other way to get the engine turning? Any other way to get the prop
turning?
Both oars popped out of their rowlocks. He nearly lost hold of one.
‘You okay?’ Sophie asked, looking alarmed.
‘I’ve just had a fucking brilliant idea!’ he told her. He frowned. ‘I

think.’
He rowed them into the nearest stretch of shore, finding a patch of beach
composed of pebbles and sand and rowing the boat up on to it.
‘What’s the idea?’ Sophie asked. ‘Is there a path? Are we hiking?’
‘Wait, wait,’ he said, digging in the plastic crate for the broken starting
lanyard. ‘Might not work.’ He held up the lanyard. ‘But it might. No idea but
it’s worth a try.’
‘What?’ Sophie asked.
341
‘Show you,’ he said.
He jumped out into the startlingly cold water, up to his thighs in a deeper
bit than he’d been anticipating.
He swung the stern of the boat round so it was at about thirty degrees to
the little beach and he could get at the prop. He stopped and thought for a
moment, then wound the lanyard clockwise round the propeller.
‘Okay, drop the engine,’ he told Sophie.
When she’d done that he asked her to check the bulb on the fuel line was
full and to set the choke and throttle. Sophie had worked out what he was
doing. ‘This is safe, isn’t it?’ she asked. ‘You aren’t going to get chewed up
or anything, are you?’
‘Just put it into ahead; I’ll be okay’ He watched her pull the gear lever
towards herself. ‘Okay,’ he said, bracing his free hand on to the transom of
the boat and trying to find a firm footing on the sand and pebbles beneath his
feet while the waves lapped round his thighs and soaked the crotch of his
jeans. He looked at Sophie. ‘You ready to put it into neutral if it catches?’
‘Yeah.’
‘It’s going to jerk you towards me if it does because it’s in gear.’
‘I know. I’m ready. Just do it.’
‘Here goes.’
He pulled hard on the lanyard, making the prop rotate as the rope unwound
from it and forcing it, in turn, to spin the drive shaft and – through the
gearbox – set the engine in motion.
The engine seemed to catch, then died again.
‘You fucking beauty!’ Alban yelled. ‘This is going to work! Lift it out
again V
He wound the lanyard round the prop again, Sophie dropped the engine into
the water, put it into forward gear and kept hold of the gear lever.
This time the engine caught and held, revving noisily and sending the wash
back at his legs in a froth of smoky, bubbly water until Sophie knocked it
into neutral and adjusted the throttle. He threw
342
the lanyard into the boat and waded out of the water, pushing the boat out by
the stem, stern first into the waves. He leapt in.
Sophie held out one hand to let him sit at the stern, then, as he sat,
grinning, taking hold of the throttle tiller, she bowed and applauded. ‘Well
done,’ she said. She stepped up to him and planted a modest kiss on his right
cheek.
‘Home, Jemima, I rather think,’ he said grandly, dropping the engine into
gear and gunning it to send them curving out into the bay, heading for the
foot of the loch and Garbadale.
They were within sight of the jetty and the grey roofs of the house were
appearing over the still green treetops when Sophie looked round at him, then
down at the lanyard, lying on the bottom boards where he’d thrown it after the
engine had started. She picked it up and inspected the frayed end. Then she
placed it back on the boards. The expression on her face had stayed thoughtful

and serious while she was doing this. She looked into his eyes. Her eyebrows
rose in a question.
He shrugged, keeping his expression neutral.
She gave a wry smile, checked her phone once more, then shook her head and
turned away again.
He took the starting lanyard with him when they left the boat tied up at the
jetty, stuffing the handle and length of grey rope into a jacket pocket.
They loaded up with the gear they needed to take back to the house.
‘Wouldn’t be impossible, would it?’ Sophie said quietly as they walked up
the path through the trees.
‘Does seem slightly extreme,’ he said.
Wasn’t cut.’
‘No, that would be a bit obvious. All the fraying looks very fresh though.’
She glanced at him. ‘Should we say anything?’
343
‘Leave it with me.’
‘Gladly, cuz.’
They walked on back to the house. Halfway there, they found the wreckage of
the umbrella that had blown inside out and then away the day before, hanging
from a tree a little way off the track. He climbed up and retrieved it and
stuffed it into one of the bins at the back of the kitchens.
Sophie went for a bath before changing for the meeting and then dinner. Alban
left his jacket in the cloakroom. He thought about taking the starting lanyard
with him, but left it in the jacket pocket. He checked the television lounge,
saying hi to the various guys and some of the older children. There was an
argument going on about having to stop playing computer games and switching to
a TV channel with the football results. Fielding told him the deer–hunting
party had phoned to say they’d be back at the house in half an hour. Staff
from the Sloy Hotel were helping to prepare the ballroom for the EGM. Alban
found Aunt Lauren in the kitchen with cousin Steve and his wife Tessa, who was
dandling their granddaughter Hannah on her lap.
‘This is something called Ba’Aka honey,’ Lauren was telling them as one of
the waitresses from the Sloy Hotel enfolded some warm toast in a napkin and
added it to a large tray set for tea and holding various little jugs and pots,
one of which Lauren was pointing at. ‘It’s from Northern Congo. Awfully hard
to get hold of. Very stimulating. So I’m told.’
‘What, you haven’t tried it?’ Tessa asked.
‘Well–’ Lauren began.
‘Hi, Alban,’ Steve said. ‘How was the fishing?’
‘Didn’t catch much,’ Alban admitted, smiling at Tessa and making a big–eyed
face at the baby so that she gurgled and held out one chubby hand towards him.
‘Oh, Alban,’ Lauren said, ‘we were hoping for enough to make a first
course.’
344
‘Sorry,’ he said. He nodded at the tray. ‘That for Win?’
‘Yes,’ Lauren said. ‘I was just about to take it up to her.’
‘Allow me.’
‘That’s very kind but–’ Lauren began, but Alban had already lifted the
tray. ‘Oh, all right then. I’ll come with you.’
‘No need,’ he said, heading for the door.
‘I can open the doors.’
‘Whatever.’
‘Win, it’s–’ Lauren began. Alban slid past her, tray over her head, into Win’s
sitting room. The old girl was sitting on a chair by a low table, dressed in

her most exemplary tweeds, reading from a sheaf of papers.
‘Me,’ Alban said. ‘Hi, Win.’
Grandma Win took off her reading glasses and looked at him, then at the tray
he held. Alban,’ she said smoothly, ‘that’s very kind.’
He’d been hoping for something more dramatic, like a swoon or a dropped
glass, or at least a look of surprise. He glanced at the windows of the room.
Bugger. He’d forgotten. They faced towards the loch. She might have been able
to watch them coming back. Or – of course – it was entirely possible he was
just being paranoid about what had happened with the starting lanyard.
‘My pleasure,’ Alban said.
Will you stay for a cuppa, dear?’ Win said, switching to little old lady
mode. Alban put the tray down on the table.
‘I’ll get another cup, shall I?’ Lauren said.
‘Actually, Lauren,’ Alban said, ‘I’d like a word with Win in private.’ He
glanced down, smiling, at his grandmother. ‘That be okay?’
‘Well,’ Lauren said, looking uncertain.
‘That’s all right, Lauren,’ Win said.
‘Oh,’ Lauren said. ‘Oh, all right then. I’ll . . . I’ll be in the kitchen, I
should think.’
Aunt Lauren let herself out.
345
‘So, Alban,’ Win said as he poured their tea. ‘Do I detect a note of
urgency?’
‘We need to talk, Win.’
‘Well, do we now?’ She squinted at her wrist–watch. ‘How long till your
little talk before the EGM?’
‘About forty minutes.’
‘Really? Then I suppose I should feel privileged.’
He handed her a cup. ‘What sort of price do you think we should sell the
firm for, Win?’
‘Would you put some sugar in there, dear? My hands are so shaky’
‘Okay, Win,’ he said, taking the cup back. ‘Milk?’
‘Just a little . . . A spot more. There.’
‘There’s some toast here,’ Alban said pleasantly. ‘Would you like some? With
some of your special honey?’
‘Oh, yes, please, Alban. Thank you so much. Oh! Butter first, dear.’
‘So,’ he said, ‘this price. What do you think?’
‘Well, I don’t know that we should sell, at all. What do you think?’
‘I think it’s going to be a close call. I think – unless the Spraint guys
have worked some sort of magic on the people who went shooting – they’ll know
by now their offer of a hundred and twenty isn’t going to fly. I think they’ll
move to one–forty with the implication they might just go to one–fifty if we
really press them. Their real ceiling is probably two hundred.’
Win crunched into her toast and honey. ‘That is an awful lot of money.’
‘Mind if I have some toast?’
‘Please do.’
He took some of the honey, too. ‘Of course, if they really do value us so
highly, the implication is we’d make the same sort of money eventually through
royalties and licence fees by just holding on to what we’ve got. Might be
worth pointing that out to those who’re determined to think with their
wallets.’ He bit into the honeyed toast and munched away. ‘If,’ he said at
last, ‘one wanted to put that sort of view across.’
346
‘Yes, but what do you think, Alban? People – well, some people – seem to be
looking to you for guidance. You need to sort out what you’re going to say,
don’t you think?’

He finished his first slice of toast. ‘This is really very good. Mind if I
have another bit?’
‘Oh, please,’ Win said. She looked a little less gracious than she sounded.
‘What good taste you display, Alban. It is particularly rare and expensive
honey.’
‘Better not finish it, then, eh?’
Win gave a small, uncertain laugh as Alban spooned the firm, dark honey
thickly on to the toast.
‘Weren’t you fishing with Sophie?’ Win asked.
‘Yes. Not very successfully’
‘It’s so fascinating that you two seem to be getting on better again.’
‘Isn’t it? Listen, Win, I want to offer you a deal.’
What?’ She sounded almost alarmed.
‘Ultimately, I think we’re going to sell. If we are, we should get the best
price. I’d suggest telling Spraint it’s one–eighty Take it or leave it. The
only negotiation should be over the mix of cash and stock. I’m prepared to say
that, even though in my heart I’d rather we kept control. But I am prepared to
say it. That would be my head talking, not my heart. At the moment, I’m not
sure what to say’
Win sat looking at him, blinking. ‘Oh,’ she said.
‘I think one–eighty’s a fair price,’ he told her. ‘But I want to know
something before I recommend it. I mean,’ he gestured with his hands, ‘I may
have less influence than either of us thinks and perhaps in the end it’ll make
no difference what I say, but, working on the assumption . . .’ he let his
voice trail off.
Win shook her head. ‘Yes, Alban? I’m a little confused . . .’
‘Win,’ he said, sighing, ‘I really don’t think you are.’
‘Oh, no,’ she said. ‘I assure you I am.’
He smiled, took a breath. ‘Let me tell you a little story.’
He told her about what Aunt Beryl had told him, about Irene
347
and what she had said. Win sipped her tea and took another spoonful of the
exotic honey, putting it directly into her mouth and then replacing the spoon
in the still half–full honey bowl. She looked more and more troubled and
unsure as Alban went on.
‘Anyway,’ he said, ‘I think maybe you know what Irene was talking about.’
‘Do you, dear?’
‘Yes, Win, I do. And if you do, and you’ll tell me, then as a mark of my
gratitude I’ll deliver whatever sort of speech you’d like me to deliver. As I
say, I can see merit in either approach, but if you’re prepared to trade, I’ll
take my lead from you. Because I think you do want to sell, certainly at a
price of one–eighty. If I’m wrong, do tell me. Am I wrong?’
Win sat quite upright in her chair, the fingers of one hand tapping on the
open palm of the other. ‘It would be a good price, I suppose,’ she said,
sounding distracted.
‘But I do need to know whatever you might know about what my mother was
talking about.’
Win sat slowly back in her chair, her hands folded on her narrow lap, frail
and pale on the dark, autumnal tweed. She looked straight at him for some
time.
‘First, I have a question I must ask you,’ Win said.
‘Okay’ He sat back, too.
She took her time, then said, ‘What are your feelings now for your cousin
Sophie? Please, be completely honest.’
He looked down, thinking. Then he met her gaze and said, ‘I still feel a lot
for Sophie. In a way I’ll always love her, but I know she’s never felt the
same about me. I’ve accepted that. We seem, just as of today, funnily enough,
to be getting on really well again – at last. Had a bit of a drama, down the

loch. Came through it together. So, we seem to be . . . Well, as good as we’ve
ever been, since Lydcombe. Even now, I think I could easily imagine spending
my life with her, growing old with her, but I know that’s never going to
happen. I guess we’ll stay distant cousins, occasional friends.’
348
Win nodded towards the end of this, a small smile describing itself on her
lips. She kept nodding after Alban had finished speaking.
‘I see,’ she said. She looked at the tray on the table. ‘Would you mind
adding some hot water to the pot and pouring me another cup?’ When he had done
this and handed her the cup and saucer, she said, ‘All I can tell you, Alban,
is that your mother was a very . . . Depressed. She was a very depressed kind
of person. I have always worried that you might have inherited that trait, but
you seem to have escaped it, largely. The treatment for postnatal depression
is so much better nowadays. Looking back, I don’t think that inviting your
mother and father up here was such a good idea after all. This can be a bleak,
lonely old place, especially if you are in a state of mind to be receptive to
feelings like that.’ She sipped her tea, looking at the cup. ‘Your mother was
very sensitive and easily . . . Not led, perhaps, but prone to moods,
influences. She often seemed a little confused, the way sensitive people do
sometimes. Confused about her own life, about what she really wanted.’ Win
sipped her tea again. She shook her head. ‘I really can’t think of any more
that would be of benefit to tell you.’
Alban sat looking at her for a while. He sighed. ‘Okay,’ he said. He looked
at his watch. ‘I’d better go.’
He rose from his seat.
‘I’m sorry if this hasn’t been as helpful as you’d hoped,’ Win said. He
looked down at her. She went on, ‘I’m afraid you must just say as you see fit
at the meeting, Alban; tell it like it is, isn’t that what they say?’
‘Yup, Gran,’ he told her. That’s just what they say. Will you be saying
anything?’
‘I don’t think so, dear.’
Alban,’ Neil said. ‘You all right?’
‘Fine,’ Alban told him. He’d found Neil just as he was locking the gunroom.
‘You?’–
349
‘Aye, good,’ Neil said, checking the lock one last time then placing the key
carefully in his pocket.
‘How was the shoot?’
‘Fine, aye. Couple of hinds.’ He tested the handle of the door, giving it a
few twists. ‘No escapees or bad shots. A success.’ He glanced up briefly. ‘You
and the fishing?’
‘Couple of trout. All too small.’
‘Uh–huh. That all?’ Neil said, making to walk past Alban up the corridor to
the hall.
And a wee bit of drama,’ Alban said, not moving to let Neil past. ‘Though we
coped.’
Neil met his gaze for a moment, then said, ‘Good. Scuse me, squire.’
Alban let him past and waited until Neil was half a dozen steps away before
he said, not too loudly, ‘How badly do you need that reference, Neil?’
Neil stopped mid–stride, making an awkward half–step, his head coming up
slightly, then he turned with a smile and said, ‘Sorry?’
‘Nothing,’ Alban said.

350

9

‘T
his is not intended to be just a diatribe against the US in
general and Spraint Corp in particular, though I do feel I have to explain a
little of why I feel the way I do about the choice that we’re being presented
with here today.
‘Personally, I believe that when faced with an imperial power –and let’s not
kid ourselves, that’s exactly what the USA is – one ought to do everything
non–violent that one can to resist it, just on principle. The USA is a great
country full of great people. It’s just their propensity as a whole for
electing idiots and then conducting a foreign policy of the utmost depravity
that I object to. You could argue that Bush junior has never been fairly
elected at all, but, in the end, at the last election, faced with a choice
between the guy with the purple heart and the guy with the yellow belly, the
half of the US electorate that could be bothered to vote appears to have
plumped for the latter.
‘Now, Spraint are not a direct part of this; they’re just another US–based
company, halfway to being a multinational. Their record on working practices
and unions is actually reasonably good from a human–rights point of view, and
their main shareholders do give a lot to charitable causes. Well, good for
them. Ultimately, the employees have to do whatever they can to uphold
shareholder
351
value, with all that can imply, but then that’s just them playing by the rules
of capitalism as they’re currently written. It’s a pity that, the way these
rules work, they have the effect of putting the fat boys in charge of the tuck
shop, but that, for the moment at least, is what we’re stuck with.
‘Spraint want to buy the Wopuld Group because they can; they have the cash
and the high–value stock to do it without making any great dent in their
bottom line. Also, we represent a loose end for them; as long as the Wopuld
family own the majority of the firm, they’re not in complete control of one of
their more profitable assets. That makes them uncomfortable; it’s untidy, it’s
unfinished business. As long as they don’t have to pay silly money for the
seventy–five per cent they don’t yet own, it makes sense for them to have

complete control. Of course, the definition of "silly" here can vary. Maybe
the urge to be tidy here is itself a symptom of a kind of autocratic hubris,
but then that’s the kind of whim you can pursue without immediate penalty when
you have overweening power.
‘Personally, I don’t think we should sell. Why do I think we shouldn’t sell?
Purely because of the politics of it. Resist imperialism, whether it’s
military or cultural. It has nothing to do with the family. Actually, I think
it might be best for us as a family to dispose of the firm that bears our
name. Maybe, if and when we do sell the firm, that’s when we’ll have a chance
to be a normal family again. Well, as normal as any family is; the more I’ve
seen of this family and everybody else’s, the more I’ve realised there’s no
such thing as a normal one. They’re all slightly mad.
‘But – and this is the real point – at least we’ll have the chance to
discover what we’re really like as a group of people tied together by blood,
rather than by blood and money. Maybe we’ll discover things about ourselves
that we wouldn’t have discovered otherwise. Maybe we’ll discover things about
ourselves that we wouldn’t have wanted to discover, but – as a rule – I think
it’s always better to know the truth.
‘Cards on the table: I’ll be voting, with my hopelessly puny
352
hundred shares, against a sale at any price. However, if we do sell, and I
expect that we shall, I’d suggest putting a price of one hundred and eighty
million dollars US on the three–quarters of the firm that we still
collectively own and accepting no further negotiation except regarding the mix
of cash and stock. And there, I’d suggest no more than fifty per cent in the
form of shares. In fact, I’d suggest putting that proposal to the vote here
and now, or as soon as the formal EGM comes to order, and presenting that to
Mr Feaguing and Mr Fromlax as a take–it–or–leave–it choice. First, though, I
believe Aunt Kathleen would like to say a few words as well. Thanks for
listening.’
Some polite, restrained applause sounded in the slightly chilly ballroom as
Alban resumed his seat beside Great–Aunt Beryl.
‘Well, I for one thought that was awfully well said,’ she told him, patting
his hand.
He smiled. At least it was over.
Aunt Kathleen was rather more businesslike. She mostly just ran through the
figures, which she’d printed on to a couple of sheets of A4 she referred to
once or twice. She professed pleased surprise at Alban’s little speech, which
she had decided to treat as basically pro–sale. Her own thoughts were that
they ought to ask for two hundred million on a take–it–or–leave–it basis and
negotiate down to one–eighty as a last resort only if Spraint absolutely
refused to swallow two hundred.
Aunt Kathleen was standing on the small dais at one end of the room by
herself. Behind her lay the long table where Win, Kennard, Andy, Haydn,
Fielding, Perce and she would sit shortly, when the Extraordinary General
Meeting would be formally called to order.
She asked if there were any objections to a show of hands on whether a
motion to the effect she had just outlined should be put to the meeting as
soon as it began.
Alban abstained. Pretty much everybody else voted yes, though Uncle Kennard
voted each way by mistake.
*

*

*

353
Texan oilmen generally believe that you can tell a lot about a man by his
closest friends, so they take particular care only to buy the best. Before

being head–hunted to join Spraint Corp, Larry Leaguing had been in the oil
industry, based in Texas, and knew the Bush clan reasonably well. The remark
about only buying the best friends was one that some drawling Houstonian
sophisticate had either made up or repeated as their own to him at some
Republican fund–raising event when he had still been relatively wet behind the
ears. He recalled being shocked at the implication, and dismissive of the
–probably closet Liberal – cynic who had expressed it. Subsequent experience
in the state and the industry had only shown how disil–lusioningly true the
epithet actually was.
Until this weekend the Bush family had provided Larry’s definition of lucky
avariciousness and well–connected guile, but now he was beginning to think the
Wopulds might have the edge.
‘Did I hear that right?’ he said quietly, leaning over to speak into
Lromlax’s ear.
‘Yes, sir. Two hundred million.’
‘Jesus H. Christ.’
‘Sir, please.’
‘Huh? Oh, yeah. Sorry.’
Two hundred was the limit they’d been given authority to go to, depending on
the cash/stock mix. Leaguing knew the board was prepared to go as high as
two–fifty, at a pinch, though he personally thought that was far too much; at
that price it would be a vanity purchase, not good business. Anyway, it didn’t
matter. Two hundred? He wasn’t just going to say yes to that, certainly not
without putting up some sort of fight. He didn’t want to go back to the States
having been taken right up to the limit he’d been given, not unless the only
other option was not making the sale at all. It would look bad. He might look
weak; gullible, even. It would not do his standing in the firm and on the
board any good. Yes, he’d have successfully negotiated the purchase of the
Wopuld Group and secured the Empire! property, so it wouldn’t do him any harm,
as such, but if he could
354
come back, in effect, with change, it would look even better. At the very
least he was going to make the greedy bastards sweat a bit.
The motion passed as near as dammit unanimously on a show of hands. Feaguing
was so annoyed he had to be reminded by Fromlax that he had a vote, too. Shit,
he represented the biggest single shareholding by a long way. They’d tot up
the shares belonging to each of the people voting, but as no individual owned
more than six per cent of the whole, that would make no difference. Motion
carried before he’d even had a chance to put his pitch, the devious Brit
bastards.
He was offered the opportunity to say a few words, for whatever it was worth
after that ultimatum of a vote. He’d had a big speech prepared but there was
little point in going through the whole thing now. He left out the spiel where
he flattered them and their stupid little company and just told them how great
Spraint was and what a good deal one–twenty represented, then added that he
was deeply worried they were asking for an unrealistic amount of money, but
that, unless they reconsidered, he would communicate the offer back to the
main Spraint board this evening; although it was the weekend, all the board
members were anxious to hear whether they’d been successful and various
weekend leisure activities would have to be disturbed. He only hoped they
would consider it at all rather than dismiss it out of hand. He thanked them
for their time and sat down to surprisingly warm applause.
Two hundred mill. A fifth of a billion bucks. The greedy fucks.
‘Well, Alban, you had your say,’ Win said to him after dinner that evening.
He’d been wandering round some of the various family members gathered in the
drawing room rather than working the room this time, just batting around from
little group to little group, talking, accepting both restrained praise and

severe criticism for his address before the EGM. He fetched up at the
fireplace, Win’s usual hangout, and wondered which he’d receive from her.
‘Yes,’ he agreed. ‘I did, didn’t I?’
‘Was that what you always meant to say?’ Win asked. She was
355
sitting holding her tumbler of whisky, surrounded by Kennard, Renee, Haydn,
Linda, Perce, Kathleen and Lance.
‘Pretty much,’ he told her.
‘I thought the political stuff was completely unnecessary, I must say,’ she
said.
‘People usually do. It’s generally the most important content people are
either embarrassed by or can’t see is relevant.’
‘Still, you got it off your chest.’
‘From spleen via chest to cuff,’ he agreed.
‘You are one for going against the flow, aren’t you, Alban?’ Uncle Perce
said. He was Brand Manager these days, husband of Aunt Linda; a tallish,
balding, slightly chubby guy with inordinately thick–lensed glasses which gave
him a perpetually goggling look. He had a hoarse, slightly breathless voice.
‘I suppose I am,’ Alban agreed. He felt tired. He’d been more keyed up than
he’d have liked to admit before saying his piece at the meeting and the whole
business with the boat trip had been surprisingly tiring, too. He was looking
forward to going to bed.
Larry Feaguing had communicated the good/bad news to the rest of the Spraint
board before dinner, and some of the family were talking about waiting around
into the small hours, hoping to hear something definitive from the US. Alban
wasn’t going to bother. He felt drained and just wanted to sleep.
‘There will always be people who believe in making life difficult for
themselves,’ Win said to Perce and the others. Alban was treated to a
sustained round of tactfully subdued head–nods, muffled noises of agreement
and some slightly sozzled knowing looks following this gritty little pearl of
wisdom. Win smiled at Alban. He smiled back, then excused himself and went off
to talk to somebody – anybody – else.
When Fielding finally came to bed – a bit drunk, stumbling around, apologising
– a little after three, Alban was still awake. He asked Fielding if there had
been any word from Spraint, but there hadn’t.
356
Alban lay awake, listening to Fielding snoring softly, snufflingly,
intermittently.
Had he said the right thing to the meeting? He’d tried to say what he felt,
what he believed. He’d probably been too political, too self–indulgent, but
when else was he going to get a chance to say stuff like that to an audience
willing to listen? He’d needed to explain that his reluctance to sell was not
about the family, that it was about principle, and he had wanted to make the
point that the family might gain more than just money if they chose to sell.
He hadn’t been sure how that would play, but it seemed to have gone down
fairly well. A number of people had come up to him at the dinner or afterwards
and said they agreed with him. They’d all been from the younger levels of the
family: people like sis Cory and cousins Lori and Claire and Steve. They’d
understood; the older generations hadn’t, not really.
Well, the ball was in the Spraint court now. Alban expected they’d be left
to twist in the wind for a bit. There was no percentage for Spraint in coming
back with an immediate yes, not unless there was some other suitor on the
horizon, and there’d been no sign of that.
With any luck they’d hear something tomorrow. He still thought they’d settle
on one–eighty, though obviously the family would be even happier with two

hundred. Academic. Just figures. Feaguing was right in a way. And it affected
him personally, materially, only to the most trivial degree.
He still didn’t know about the whole thing with the boat and the frayed
lanyard. Anyway, they’d got out of the situation so it didn’t really matter.
He’d probably never trust Neil McBride again, and that was the worst of it
(he’d never trusted Win).
His attempt to trade with the old girl hadn’t gone the way he’d hoped. He’d
thought that maybe she’d be unsettled because he was – unexpectedly, he was
sure – back on time from the fishing trip. He’d even hoped that she might have
had some sort of attack of conscience that would make her prepared to be
generous, but no. Maybe Win had guessed that what he intended to say at the
meeting wasn’t as against her true interests as she’d initially supposed.
357
Anyway, it hadn’t worked and he had the distinct and nagging impression that
more than he’d realised had hung on exactly how he’d answered her question
about how he now felt towards Sophie.
Ah yes, then there was Sophie. He still didn’t know what to think about her,
about his feelings for her. Was he now properly, officially over her? Had it
been a cathartic, cleansing experience? Or had the whole boat trip and the
little drama of the broken lanyard somehow kept the flame alive, even
rekindled it, so that he was still not free of this ancient, immature
infatuation? He didn’t know, not yet. He felt torn, able to see both ways of
looking at the matter. He could make an argument to himself for either point
of view and he couldn’t easily choose between them on merit.
What did he want to be the case?
He wanted, he supposed, to be free of her. It was a stupid, adolescent
fixation, well past its sell–by date. He wanted to be able to go to VG and
just say, Whatever you want, however much of me you want, you’ve got. I’ll
accept whatever degree of proximity and commitment you want to offer or ask
for.
Part of him howled at this. Some sort of old–guard element of his being went
into fits of apoplexy at the very idea of abandoning his eternal love for, and
obligation to, Sophie. He had promised himself he would always love her, he
had made that solemn pledge in his heart, back when he was just starting to
become who he was. He had built his world around her, even if it had been done
from a distance, even if it was without her knowledge or consent, even if the
image that he had of her was based on a ‘her’ that had changed utterly, that
had matured and grown and developed away both from him and from her own
earlier self, and even if the whole doomed undertaking had been carried out in
the teeth of all common sense and rational self–interest.
It was love. It was romantic, pure and perfect love; it wasn’t supposed to
make sense or be rational. It was the core of him, this passion, this purity
of feeling and commitment. How could he think
358
of abandoning it and her? That pledge had been his foundation for all these
years. Could he renounce it now? Should he?
He remembered lying in bed at Lydcombe, pledging himself to his real mother,
to Irene, swearing to her memory that he would never call Leah ‘Mum’ or
‘Mother’ or anything like that. . . Then he remembered renouncing all that,
because Leah was nice, because he couldn’t hate her, then couldn’t feel
indifferent towards her, then admitted he liked her, and sometimes calling her
‘Mum’ just seemed right. He’d felt guilty and mature and pragmatic and like he
was betraying Irene, all at once. So, he had form. He’d done this sort of
thing before.
Hard to see how you could do otherwise, if you were stupid enough to go
around making childish pledges to yourself.

Apostate, he thought. Serial betrayer.
Sophie was his religion, he thought, with a kind of shock. He’d built a
temple round her image, her idol, her fixed, unchanging, incorruptible icon.
The worship of that symbol had become what mattered, rather than the girl as
she actually was or the woman she’d become. She represented his faith in his
own trueness of spirit, his ability to keep on believing in something. If he
could believe in his love for Sophie, he could believe that he was a good
person, a worthwhile person, a decent man. He was an atheist and a secularist,
but now he had to confront his own idiot faith, this slightly mad belief
system that he’d carried with him all this time, and accept it for the
nonsense it was. Maybe it had been a useful nonsense, in a state of relative
ignorance, the way conventional religions could be, but it was still a
nonsense.
He’d once characterised religions as reason abatement societies. Shit, he
hadn’t realised with what authority he’d been speaking. Maybe he owed Tony
Fromlax an apology.
In his mind, he could feel a particularly non–violent and well–spoken mob
politely storming the temple complex that held the graven image of Sophie. He
could almost hear the wailing of the priests, the lamentations of the faithful
as the great washed,
359
the well–scrubbed crowd of intellectuals – waving scrolls (closely argued, ink
still damp) rather than burning torches – defiled the sacred ground with their
presence and their doubt and their faithless, argumentative lack of certainty.
The inquisitive, terribly polite mob dragged some of the precious texts out
of the dark temple into the cold light of day and reason, the powerless
priests wailing and tearing their hair out in their wake.
‘They’ve all bloody gone . . .’ ‘Fell off me ‘oss, didn’ I guv?’ ‘Blimey,
Uncle, I didn’t enjoy it that much . . .’ ‘Not a flippin’ fing . . .’ (Plus,
the avariciously faithful aspect of him, the obsessive–compulsive part of his
personality that collected these little relics had been going to add ‘Aye–aye,
cap’n’ to the canon, as of just today) All shown to the sun, all shrivelling
in the strength of daylight and being made to look sad and pathetic and
risible. How shallow had been the foundations of his faith, he realised now.
How inadequate the cornerstones of his custom–built, home–grown personality
cult.
‘Cuz, cuz, sweet cuz.’
He whispered it, very quietly, to the perfectly dark room as Fielding snored
obliviously away.
A kind of valediction.
Of course, the mistake would be simply to replace Sophie with Verushka. He
knew there was a danger of that. He could easily worship her, she was already
a kind of rival religion in his head; a new, shining, more effective, more
earthy and hip cult compared to the ancient adoration of Sophie.
That would be pretty stupid. If she ever found out, VG wouldn’t thank him
for being venerated like that, and – in the end, he had no doubt – to do so
would destroy whatever he and VG had and whatever they might have together.
‘Just love her, you idiot,’ he said in a normal speaking voice, and was
shocked anew. It had sounded so loud in the room. He hadn’t meant to say it
aloud.
Fielding had suddenly stopped snoring. Alban turned to look at where he knew
his cousin was, but could see nothing because the
360
darkness was complete. Then he heard Fielding shift, maybe turning over in
bed. Soon he went back to snoring again. Alban looked up once more at the
unseen ceiling.

Love her, he told himself. If that’s what you feel, if you can start to work
out what it is you really feel for her now that you’re free of this absurd
worship of Sophie – maybe, probably – then just be adult about it, be sensible
about it. Take it as it comes. See how things work out with her. Okay, so she
doesn’t want children, and she’ll probably never want to live with you. Just
give all you can offer, and be honest. And if somebody else comes along that
offers you all the things you want, or think you want, then at least VG should
understand. She’s said so often enough.
Arguably, nobody ever completely knows themselves, so she could be wrong
about that and maybe if it ever comes to it she’ll feel more jealous than she
expects to feel, but of all the people you’ve ever known she’s the one least
likely to be that self–deceptive. In the meantime, make the most of whatever
time you have together. And if it’s effectively for ever, for the rest of your
lives, can you think of anybody else you’d rather spend that time with?
Well, no.
He so hoped that she was all right, that she was well and healthy and
looking forward to seeing him . . . Tomorrow, if you counted this as today
rather than last night. Tomorrow; he’d see her tomorrow. Fate willing, he told
himself. Chance allowing.
Finally, he fell asleep.
He was up before six, fully awake but knowing he’d be tired again by the
afternoon. He had breakfast alone, helping himself in the kitchen and packing
food for lunch, then – borrowing an old fishing bag from the cloakroom as a
day pack and leaving a note on the octagonal table in the front hall
describing his intended route – he left the house, feeling oddly relieved and
even exultant that he’d got away from the place without anyone seeing him.
He hiked through the gardens and woods in light drizzle from a
361
few small, high clouds which soon disappeared to reveal a sharp, clear blue
morning. He made a shallow ascent along the path heading north–west along the
shoulder of Beinn Aird da Loch, looking down on the place where his mother had
died, watching seagulls wheel and dip over the calm, black waters. He only
remembered then that Andy had wanted to scatter some flowers on the loch this
morning. He thought about going back, but decided not to.
The path turned the corner after a while, taking the sight of one dark loch
away, replacing it with another.
He descended again, towards the head of Loch Glendhu, between tipped,
parallel lines of cliffs. He crossed the river by the small bridge just
upstream from a small, stony beach and followed the track up the far side of
Gleann Dubh, the cliffs and walls of rock creating a gloomy canyon of stone it
was a relief to hike up out of, towards the blue richness of the sky above the
greens, yellows and browns of the encircling hills.
Free of the steep–sided shade of the narrow glen, he struck off the main
path and along the north shore of a small loch he’d have to look at the map to
remember the name of, making heavy going over coarse, hummocky ground until –
skirting the base of Meill na Leitrach, leg muscles complaining – he met the
path from Loch More. He followed it for the remainder of its descent to the
side of the burn which fed the small loch he’d passed and then stopped for
lunch. He sat on a rock, watching a pair of eagles slide across the sky above
Ruigh’ a’ Chnoic Mhóir like a pair of light aircraft with feathers. He drank
water he’d bottled at the house, ate his sandwiches and fruit, then continued
up the path to the pass, striking out to the right towards the summit of Beinn
Leòid. Throughout, he’d been looking for interesting plants – anything beyond
the usual heathers, grasses, ferns and wind–stunted trees – but the most
exotic species he’d spotted so far had been a couple of small clumps of autumn
gentian.
A cool, strong breeze met him at the trig point, and he stood there with his

back against the concrete pillar and the wind, breathing hard after the last
push to the top.
362
He gave a small laugh, remembering VG being scurrilous about an ex–colleague
she’d dated a few times and then severely fallen out with. ‘Ever been walking
in the wind and the rain and come up to a trig point on a big, featureless
summit, and you just want to get whatever shelter you can from the gale so you
can hunker down and eat your sandwiches? Well, I felt about his cock the way
you would about that trig point: you’re glad it’s there, you’re happy you
don’t have to share it with anybody, but you can’t help wishing it was just a
bit bigger.’
He’d felt vaguely treacherous laughing at this, and got an internal shiver
wondering what she’d say about him to some future lover –perhaps, one day –
but then she had never been so defamatory or indiscreet about anybody else; he
reckoned the guy had probably deserved it.
He looked out across the revealed tops to the north, bright and sharp in the
clear northerly airstream, wondering where she was now. Standing on one of
those far summits looking out across that same waste of air towards him?
Probably not, but the residual romantic in him would still like to think so.
Just come back safely, VG, he thought. Just come back safely to me.
He ate some chocolate then headed cross–country, down then back up to the
nameless top from which he could at last look down on Loch Garve, the estate
and the house. The best part of three kilometres away, seven hundred metres
down, the great grey house, hardly hidden by the trees from this angle, looked
tiny and lost and insignificant from here; a vaguely geometrical,
human–created interruption in the burgeoning sweep of landscape formed by the
long dark lochs and the rock–broken pelts of the arrayed and jumbled
mountains, a cheap charm on a thread of road overhung by the surrounding rocky
slopes.
It all looked inviolable and changeless from here, yet that was just wrong.
Centuries ago there would have been almost nothing to see but forest; now, as
ever, the ground cover reflected the use the
363
land was put to, in this case providing a vast, half–vertical paddock for deer
and game birds, all there to be shot at by people of means.
Alban tried to see the place as it might be, as Neil McBride might see it;
threatened, on the brink of irreversible change. Suppose that some of the
great ice sheets melted; that was supposed to be entirely possible before the
end of the century. One scenario the climatologists seemed to find eminently
plausible had sea levels rising by seven metres. How would that alter the
landscape he was looking at? Well, a hell of a lot less than if he was looking
out over a bit of East Anglia, or Holland, or Bangladesh, that was for sure.
But even here, amongst these sparsely populated mountains, the change would be
severe. Harbours, coastal villages, roads along the shore, much of the best
arable land; they’d all go. Garbadale House had been built on the remains of
glacial till banked up at the end of the great scoured trench that was Loch
Garve. It was about eight or nine metres above sea level; close enough for
salt spray to buffet the windows on stormy days if Greenland melted. If the
Antarctic ice sheets went the same way, then Loch Garve would be a sea loch
and the house would simply disappear under the grey waves. Though that, of
course, would be utterly insignificant compared to losing every coastal city
in the world, and several entire countries.
He thought of Neil McBride’s children and grandchildren and the world they
would be bequeathed. It was, arguably, in a bit of a mess. He remembered
talking with Sophie, back in the garden at Lydcombe, about how the world their
generation was inheriting appeared – at the time – to be in just as big a

mess. Sometimes it seemed that all that ever went on was each new generation
trying to fix the mistakes and problems caused by the previous one – not to
mention those accumulated via still earlier forebears. And this never really
seemed to be possible, not as a finished result. It always seemed to be
required and it certainly was always worth trying, but if you set your heart
on fully achieving such a goal, you were bound to be disappointed.
He recalled Verushka talking about some people seemingly being forever in
search of the East Pole. She meant that they had simply
364
misunderstood how things worked. It was as though, having heard of the South
Pole and the North Pole, they assumed there must be a West Pole and an East
Pole too, and so set off confidently expecting to find one or other of them,
never knowing they were inevitably destined to fail.
Some hopes and ambitions were manifest only as a direction, not a
destination. Maybe the trick was to realise you were involved in a process,
not aiming at a completely achievable end result, and accept that, but travel
hopefully anyway.
The trouble was that so many people seemed to feel a need for certainty, for
clear paths leading to set objectives with tickable goal–boxes, for the
assuredly do–able with guaranteed happiness or fulfilment or enlightenment
apparently promised as a result. And so many other people were determined to
offer them just those things, through schemes or programmes or sets of rules
or institutions or tribalistic, other–excluding, difference–fearing cliques,
but always through some sort of faith; whether it was faith in the person
peddling their patent fix or whether it was faith in a full–blown religion or
whatever secular belief system had partially replaced such primitive creeds
and was currently in vogue – once Marxism, now the market.
Always flocks, always priests.
He shook his head.
Still: to travel hopefully.
He looked down at the house, waiting for some sort of movement there, for
the glint of sun on moving glass or just one barely discernible speck
millimetring its way across the roads or paths or lawns, but he saw nothing
for the perhaps five or ten minutes that he watched. For all the life he knew
the place contained, there was no sign of it in this early afternoon, the
distance and the scale of things reducing whatever might be happening down
there to a cheerful triviality.
He hesitated before the descent. There were two obvious approaches to the
house from here. The slow, sensible route was a narrow,
occasionally
indistinct path describing a
series of gentle
365
zigzags down the steep grass slope to his right. The quick way meant a
scramble round some car–sized boulders at the side of the cliff beneath him
and then a fun but frantic bit of scree–running, following the giant fan of
fallen grey stones all the way down to the dark mass of spruce trees making up
the south plantation.
Scree–running was exciting but dangerous; there was always the chance of a
trip or a sprain or even getting hit by a faster–moving rock dislodged from
further up. There was even a degree of guilt involved – you were, after all,
helping to wear away the landscape. He’d only ever done it twice. Both
occasions had been here, once with his dad about twenty years earlier, once
with Neil McBride maybe five years ago. He knew that the prudent course –
especially given that he was alone – was to take the shallow, zigzag route,
but the sheer rattling, flailing madness of taking the scree approach had its
own wild attraction.
Whatever; while he’d been pondering his choice of route, he’d had an idea.

An idea that might winkle some sort of truth out of Win, if she had any to
surrender. He’d have a nap this afternoon, sleep on it that way, then see what
happened at Win’s big party in the evening.
He turned away from the shallow path, pulled the strap of the old fishing
bag as tight as he could across his shoulder, then rounded the side of the
cliff and clambered past the giant boulders. He looked down the steep grey
pitch of scree towards the treeline, the gardens and the house, then with a
whoop jumped on to the slope, surrendering himself to it, running down,
heart–hammering, legs pumping, feet sinking into the loose, tearing grey
surface, sliding in a barely controlled, tipped–back stagger, limbs falling
into the imposed, shared rhythm of the stones all bustling and tumbling along
with him, dropping so fast he could feel his ears pop.
Breathless, laughing, legs quivering, he arrived at the trees in a rattle of
stones within a couple of minutes of jumping on to the great grey slope of
fractured rock.
*

*

*

366
‘Brig–a–fuckin’–doon, yeah right,’ Larry Feaguing said. ‘I’m telling you, man,
this place is the crock of shit at the brownbow’s end.’
‘Maybe we should buy the estate, too,’ Fromlax suggested. He’d estimated
that there was no further point in protesting at his boss’s expletives, given
that the last time he had, a couple of drinks ago, Feaguing had fixed him with
an unsympathetic look and told him to pull at least one of his fingers out of
his ass. Larry was displeased that the board had agreed to buy the Wopuld
Group for two hundred million.
He’d done a pretty good job of disguising his displeasure at the dinner for
the old grandmother’s eightieth birthday, when he’d clinked his glass and
stood up after the other speeches had been completed and told them the sale
had been agreed, subject to some negotiation over the cash/stock mix and the
usual lawyerly picking–over, blah–de–blah–de–blah (great had been the cheer,
manifold the rejoicing, sincere the praise and shockingly unrestrained the
consumption of alcohol thereafter), but Fromlax knew Feaguing was privately
annoyed at having failed to secure the purchase for less than the maximum
amount he’d been allowed.
There was even a hint that some of the board felt that as Larry had been
granted authority to just say yes at that price he had rather been wasting
their time coming back to them to double–check. So now Feaguing in turn felt
that the board had let him down by refusing to play ball and say no, at least
initially, to the two hundred mill price, depriving him of any lever with
which to prise the price downwards. They were surrendering but he would be the
one looking weak.
‘What?’ Larry asked. ‘Buy what?’
‘Buy the estate; buy this place,’ Fromlax said, leaning close to his boss so
that nobody else could hear. Given the amount of talking and laughing going
on, and the ceilidh band playing enthusiastically on the dais at one end of
the ballroom, this was probably an unnecessary precaution. ‘It, uh, is for
sale.’
Feaguing looked at him as though he was mad. ‘Buy Garbage–dale.
367
Yeah, okay; you suggest that to the board/ he said, turning away and shaking
his head. His expression flowed into a professional smile as two of the Wopuld
women – aunt whatever and niece blank – came up to ask them to dance something
called a Dashing White Sergeant. They had no choice but to agree, though, to
Fromlax, all these whirling, prancing, Scottish group dances seemed to have
been explicitly designed to make foreigners who were ignorant of the

complicated steps and bewilderingly intricate movements look and feel clumsy
and stupid. They were swept up into the orderly riot on the dance floor once
again.
‘What were you guys on, that time in Singapore, remember?’ cousin Steve, the
container port crane guy, asked Fielding. They were standing at the temporary
bar at the far end of the ballroom from the band, sweating after an especially
spirited dance. They were both wearing formal Highland gear, each dressed in
the full Prince Charlie outfit, kilts and sporrans and everything else – save
their jackets, which had been sweatily abandoned after the first energetic
dance. Fielding had forgotten how warm this attire could make a person. Not
all the Wopuld males had chosen to go down this Caledonian wedding route –
about a third were in normal black tie – but the family had purchased a
lairdship or something when Henry had bought the estate, they had their own
tartan, and the men were therefore entitled to wear heavy, pleated skirts,
shoes with girlie laces crisscrossed up their thick white socks – socks that
were stocking–length if you rolled them right out, frankly – and sport wee
(technical term) knives. Apparently.
‘Singapore?’ Fielding pretended to have to think about this. He shook his
head, went to drink some of his champagne – there was a lot of champagne being
drunk tonight, as well as copious amounts of whisky – then stopped and wagged
one finger. ‘Oh, yes, that.’ He drank. He fixed Steve with a look. ‘You could
tell, could you?’
‘Looked like more than just drink and dodgy prawns,’ Steve said, nodding.
368
‘You’d have to ask Alban,’ Fielding said. ‘I can’t remember.’
‘But you were ripped?’
‘Off our tits,’ Fielding agreed.
‘Where were you today?’ Haydn asked Alban, plonking himself down at the table
and nearly spilling the flute of champagne he’d brought with him. Haydn was
also dressed in full Highland regalia, and had for some time been in the zone
of alcohol saturation where he no longer felt in any way self–conscious
sporting such dress. Alban wore a kilty outfit too, though it was less formal:
sensible shoes, plain leather sporran, a toned–down version of the family’s
slightly tech–nicolour tartan and one of those pull–on shirts with big droopy
sleeves and laces at the collar.
‘I was walking,’ Alban told Haydn.
‘What, on the road?’
‘No, in the hills.’
‘What, just for fun?’
‘That’s right.’
‘We thought you’d stormed off home in a fuss or something,’ Haydn told him.
‘There was talk of search parties. Your man Neil Mc–thingy was all set to call
Mountain Rescue.’
‘I know. Apparently the kids were having a paper plane competition from the
gallery across the hall to see who could get a plane to fly outside through
the main doors. The note I left got made into a dart or something and was
later discovered on the gravel under a Range Rover.’
‘Ah–hah.’ Haydn looked woozily around the assembly of bouncing, dancing
people. ‘Everybody seems very happy,’ he observed.
‘Should think so too,’ Alban told him. Aren’t you?’
‘Bloody ecstatic’
‘You going to stay with the firm once it’s sold?’
‘They want me to,’ Haydn said, looking out at the swirling mass of people as
though hypnotised. ‘Mean moving to the States.’
‘Whereabouts?’

369
‘Manhattan?’ Haydn drank from his flute. ‘San Francisco?’
‘There are worse places.’
‘You bet.’ He looked at Alban. ‘What would you do? In my situation?’
‘Me? Oh, I wouldn’t move to the States now any more than I’d have moved to
Germany in the mid–Thirties. But that’s just me. If I was you, I’d probably
go. You’re not Muslim, which is the new Jewish, so you’ll probably be safe.’
Haydn stared one–eyed at him, then remembered binocular vision. ‘Win’s
right. You really take this stuff to heart, don’t you?’
‘I know. It’s a failing, frankly.’
And people say you and Win never agree on anything.’
Are we all going to be horribly rich?’ Doris asked Beryl, raising her voice
over the noise of the band. They were sitting at the table they shared with
Andy and Leah, Alban, and Cory and her husband and children. Not that any of
the children had actually sat down or been there much; they all seemed to be
playing games in the games room, computer games in the television room or off
exploring parts of the house that hadn’t been open until tonight, now thrown
wide to all and sundry in some excess of celebration.
What’s that, dear?’ Beryl asked.
Are we all going to be horribly rich?’ Doris repeated.
Well, I am, dear,’ Beryl said. ‘You don’t have any shares, old girl.’
‘That’s rather beastly of you.’
Beryl patted Doris’s hand. We shall both be rich, my sweet. Though I was not
aware of feeling any great lack in our lives as they have been, ah, ah, what’s
the word? Heretofore. Yes, heretofore.’
Doris nodded slowly. She was thinking, obviously. ‘I think,’ she said
firmly, ‘that we ought to buy a racehorse.’
Beryl, paused with her drink raised halfway to her lips, looked moderately
startled, then said, ‘Do you know? I think that’s a jolly good idea.’
*
*
*
370
There is a pattern to the patterned dances. After every two or three or four,
the band plays a slow waltz or foxtrot to let people cool down, sit down or
just have a chance to dance as a couple rather than as a company.
Alban danced gentle, delicate waltzes with Beryl and then Doris and later
with Win, because it was her birthday after all.
‘So, we got an extra twenty million, thanks to Kathleen,’ Win pointed out.
Held, even at the prim remove dictated by the dance, Win seemed almost
unbearably slight and fragile. Alban, sporran on one hip to avoid prodding
one’s dancing partner in unfortunate places, was very aware of his height and
strength compared to this little old woman who was getting littler with every
year now, compressing and concentrating like something being reduced on a
stove or a fruit air–drying. He had, of course, absolutely no illusions
regarding this in any way symbolising Win’s grip on life – or on the family –
weakening.
‘Yes,’ he agreed. ‘There you are. I’d have had us settling for a paltry one
hundred and eighty million US dollars and reducing us all to penury. Thank
goodness Aunt Kathleen was there to save us.’
‘It’s rather more than ten per cent of a difference, Alban. Hardly trivial
or worthy of that sarcasm you’re obviously so proud of gracing us with.’
Win sounded a little drunk, Alban decided. She rarely let herself achieve
this degree of inebriation, in public anyway. Well, he told himself, it was
her party, and the whole family had just been handed a gigantic present in
return for the family firm. Win was quitting the house and estate and the
overseer–ship of the company while still pretty much in possession of all her
marbles and – he seriously suspected –on something very close indeed to what

her own terms had been all along. Always good to celebrate when one had
outlasted all rivals, seen off all challengers and achieved what one had long
desired. Who wouldn’t be triumphalist and feel justified in having a few
sherbets?
‘And I’m sure everybody will be rather more than ten per cent happier than
they would have been otherwise,’ Alban agreed.
371
‘Well, at any rate,’ Win said, in a sleepy–sounding, little–old–lady voice
that instantly warned Alban something acidic was on its way, ‘I’m pleased that
you were able to play your part.’ Win smiled sweetly.
He didn’t doubt he had been meant to feel insulted. ‘Happy to have been of
service,’ he told her.
They danced on. I think I might try my plan, he thought.
Alban danced with Gudrun Selves, the legal exec with the cool name and the
pretty wonderful body. She had short, blue–black hair, was the same height as
him in her heels, wore a little black number and had great legs. She was much
in demand and happily uninterested in talking about law.
He danced with Leah, who was dressed in a rather matronly blue gown she
wouldn’t suit for at least another ten years and who was quite tipsy in a
vague, happy–but–slightly–sad–too kind of way, sorry to see the family firm
being sold off but pleased that everybody else seemed so elated. She told him
they should have insisted that Verushka attend the party; he looked happy when
he was with her. He said he was glad to hear that.
He danced with Sophie, resplendent in a silvery sheath dress like a glitter
ball stretched over her body. He asked her for a favour.
She pulled back as they danced. ‘Maybe we should sit down,’ she said.
‘Maybe we should,’ he agreed. He steered her to a vacant table not far from
where Win sat with her little circle of family elders and willing
functionaries. He sat so that he could see Win over Sophie’s shoulder. She
wasn’t looking at Sophie and him, but he had the impression they hadn’t gone
unnoticed.
‘First, I’d better give you some background,’ he said.
‘No,’ Sophie told him, leaning towards him with a grin. ‘First you should
get me some more champagne.’
‘Okay’
He thought she seemed quite merry already but he went to the bar and brought
back a couple of glasses. He leaned in and kissed
372
her cheek as he put the glasses down, seeing Win from the corner of his eye.
Sophie’s eyes narrowed. He hesitated as he was about to sit down, then
extended his free hand and said, ‘Actually, let’s sit somewhere else.’
‘What the hell are you playing at, Alban?’ Sophie asked, following him to
the far end of the room and another empty table near a corner of the ballroom
not far from the band.
Once they were sat down he said, ‘Sophie, I want you to give Win the
impression you love me.’
She laughed. ‘After everything?’
After everything,’ he said. ‘Let me give you the background. May I?’
‘Background away,’ Sophie said, waving one hand and drinking her champagne.
He told her something of Irene’s troubling, un– or semi–conscious words in
front of Beryl in the hospital, his admittedly half–hearted attempts to find
out more, and the way Win had expressed herself the day before when he’d
confronted her in her sitting room over tea and toast.
‘Yeah,’ Sophie said, frowning fractionally. ‘I heard about this honey. Is it
true it’s like cocaine?’
‘Sophie, are you listening to what I’m telling you?’

‘I’m very sorry about your mother,’ she said, suddenly serious again. ‘Why
do I have to pretend to Win that I love you?’
‘Because of what she asked me yesterday’ he explained. ‘I got the
impression, thinking about it later, that if I’d told her I still thought we
had a future together then she might have spilled the beans. Like an idiot, I
told the truth and so she clammed up.’
‘And what is the truth again?’ Sophie asked, leaning one champagne–twiddling
arm along the table, brows creased in a pretty frown.
‘That you were my first, adolescent, love, that I’ll always think fondly of
you – always worship you, I told her – but that was all.’
All? That sounds like quite a lot.’ Sophie sounded wary. ‘This
373
isn’t all just some roundabout way of trying to get back into my,’ she cast
her gaze ceilingwards and muttered, ‘be polite,’ then looked into his eyes
again and said, ‘affections, is it?’
He put his hand on his chest. ‘I swear. Nothing like that. It’s all about
trying to prise some information out of Win.’
‘Promise?’
‘Promise.’
‘Seriously?’
‘Seriously.’
‘You sure?’
‘Absolutely. Trust me; I’m a man.’
When they’d both stopped laughing, Sophie leaned closer and said, ‘So, what
do I have to do?’
Alban spotted Aunt Lauren drifting past not far away, not looking at them.
He leaned in still closer to his cousin. He could smell her perfume, heady and
warm and intense. ‘Just, at some point, get talking to Win,’ he told her.
‘Give her the impression you think I’m rather wonderful, you’ve decided maybe
we were wrong to stay apart all these years; you want to see more of me, maybe
give us another chance.’
‘You know,’ Sophie said, frowning, leaning so close to him that they were
almost nose to nose – Alban could still just about make out Aunt Lauren in the
background – ‘if this is a complicated seduction technique,’ she whispered,
‘it’s not working, not going to work, and it’s basically doomed.’
‘Fully aware of that, cuz.’
‘Good,’ Sophie said, winking slowly. She pulled back and took up her
champagne glass again. She raised her flute. ‘To being fully aware.’
‘Fully aware,’ he said, clinking. They drained their glasses and got up to
complete their dance, catching only the end of the waltz, then joined the same
group for some up–tempo, insanely energetic Strip the Willow and Gay Gordons
floor–bashing before finally having a whole slow dance together, all of this
being agreed to help convince Win that what Sophie was seemingly about to let
slip was actually plausible.
374
They parted, he for a pee, she to get a very large glass of water from the
bar and then call at the court of Win.
After visiting the loo he went through the main hall and stood outside the
front doors for a while, just to get some fresh air. It wasn’t very smoky in
the ballroom – few people seemed to smoke these days – but it was surprisingly
hot for a room with such a high ceiling. He’d been hoping to see stars out
here, but the night was dark and a very fine rain was starting to fall. The
windows of both wings of the house were fully lit and a couple of floodlights
high on the main frontage bathed the various cars and other vehicles in a
sharp, hard light the gently falling drizzle did little to soften.

He caught a whiff of tobacco smoke, heard the small crunching noise of a
foot on gravel. He saw Tony Fromlax appearing from round the side of one of
the Range Rovers. ‘Evening,’ Alban said.
‘Oh, hi,’ Fromlax said.
‘I remember the old days,’ Alban said. ‘People used to sneak out for a quick
joint. Now it’s cigarettes that are socially unacceptable.’
‘Yeah, well, my last vice,’ Fromlax said, looking decidedly embarrassed.
‘Your secret is safe with me.’
Fromlax held up and then holstered a mobile phone. ‘Calling my brother,
too.’
‘Yeah, the reception’s not the best here.’
‘I call him every day if I can. He’s in Iraq.’
‘Army?’
‘Yeah.’
‘I hope he comes home safely.’
‘Well, we all do. But there’s a job to be done first.’
‘You’re right. The profits of Halliburton and Bechtel have to be protected.’
Fromlax looked down at the stones on the drive, then back up at Alban.
‘Don’t you despair sometimes, Mr McGill, being so cynical?’
‘Don’t you despair? Always getting it wrong?’
375
‘We’re avenging what was done to us and we’re trying to give these people a
chance for a better life. We have the right to do one and the moral obligation
to do the other. I don’t understand how you can find anything wrong in that.’
‘The Iraqi state had nothing to do with nine–eleven, if that’s what you
mean. Just nothing. And if you want to give "these people" a chance of a
better life, get the hell out of their country. Stop interfering.’ Alb an
could see Fromlax was about to reply, but he just kept on talking; warming to
his theme if you were being polite, or just having got to a straw/camel’s back
tipping–point of extreme impatience with naive Americans if you were being
honest. ‘Jesus,’ he said, ‘you’re constantly making fresh mistakes to
compensate for the mistakes you made before, aren’t you? You don’t like the
left–wing nationalists elected to power in Iran so you stage a coup and put
the Shah in charge, then get all upset and surprised when it turns out the
Iranians don’t like unelected US–supported despots and so the mullahs take
over; you turn a blind eye to the barbaric, medieval bastards of Saudi Arabia
for decades because they happen to be sitting on a desert full of oil and you
don’t bother your sweet asses they’re using their slice of the profits to
promote their dingbat fundamentalist Wahhabiism across the whole Muslim world,
then you have the cheek to be stunned with fucking amazement when it’s
cockpits full of Saudi zealots who fly into your buildings on nine–eleven; you
back Saddam Hussein against the mullahs in Iran and can’t see how that might
go wrong; you back the mujahideen in Afghanistan and you get Bin Laden; you
back–’
‘Yeah? And who would, who do you–?’
‘No, wait a fucking minute,’ Alban said, taking a step forward and pointing
at Fromlax’s chest. ‘I’m not finished yet. The point is you’re still doing it.
Now you’re backing Musharraf in Pakistan because he might help you catch Bin
Laden. All in the cause of democracy, only Musharraf had to stage a coup to
get where he is; he’s an unelected despot too, a military dictator except his
state already has nukes and
376
the opposition is getting even more fundamentalist on his ass specifically
because you guys support him.’ Alban took a step back, put his weight on his
back foot and inspected Fromlax over crossed arms. ‘Well, gee, what could
possibly fucking go wrong with that scenario?’

Fromlax shook his head. He held up both hands, palms flat. ‘Mr McGill,’ he
said, looking at the pebbles in front of Alban’s feet, ‘I’m here on your
territory, your estate, your family home, just trying to negotiate the best
deal we can for all of us. I think you’re a very aggressive and disturbed
individual and I would just like to return inside now and I would ask you not
to stand in my way.’
Alban looked at the man for a moment. He shook his head fractionally, then
stepped aside, taking another step back to completely clear the doorway.
‘Mr Fromlax?’ he said, just before the American disappeared into the hall.
The other man turned to face him, looking wary. ‘I was for the war, too,
initially,’ Alban told him. ‘My girl and I nearly split up because of it. I
had my reasons, and I could argue them, but do you know what she said to me?
I’ll quote: "Trying to justify this war is like trying to justify rape; you
can dress your excuses up as fancy as you like, but in the end you should just
damn well be ashamed of yourself." I spent a year – in denial, basically –
trying to find an answer to that, but I never did. How about you?’
Fromlax stared into his eyes for a moment or two, then shook his head and
went back into the house.
It took Alban another five minutes standing in the open air to calm himself,
to get his breathing back to normal and let his heart rate subside.
Finally he took a deep breath and went back in.
When he returned to the ballroom – more mad dashing around as whole great
gyrating circles of whirling people danced the Eightsome Reel – he was met by
Aunt Lauren.
‘Lauren,’ he said. ‘You dancing?’
377
‘Perhaps later,’ Lauren said, taking his arm. ‘Win would like to speak to
you,’ she said.
‘Excellent,’ he said. ‘Bring her on.’
‘She’s in the drawing room,’ Lauren told him, and they turned for the doors
again. ‘Alban, she does seem rather upset.’
‘Really?’ he said. Obviously my night for upsetting people, he thought.
‘Yes, it’s very . . . She was in such a good mood. Well, of course she
should be, shouldn’t she?’ Lauren said as they walked down the hall to the
drawing room.
‘Birthday,’ Alban agreed. ‘Big birthday. And all that money. Did she like my
card?’
‘I’m sure she did.’ They were at the double doors into the drawing room.
Lauren opened them. The place was mostly dark, just a couple of small table
lamps illuminating one long wall each, and the fire – banked, flameless –
producing a red glow at the far end. The room appeared empty of people until
Alban made out the small figure taking up less than the whole of one of the
winged seats by the fireside. ‘There she is,’ Lauren whispered. ‘I’ll be
here,’ she said quietly, indicating a seat by a table to the side of the
doors. Alban left her there and walked to where Win was waiting.
The old woman was staring into the shining spaces in the banked–up blackness
of the fire; a tiny landscape of little red and yellow caves puncturing a hill
of fine dross. Deep red light reflected from the metal coal scuttle to one
side of the hearth and made Win’s thin grey hair look rosy, like a pink lace
skullcap.
‘Win,’ he said. ‘Hi.’ He sat down opposite her.
She took a moment before she deigned to look at him. There was a glass of
whisky on the table at her side. She looked into his eyes for some time. Then
she glanced up the room to where Lauren was sitting, well out of earshot. She
raised her glass and drank a little. ‘I understand you and Sophie have
rediscovered something we all thought was long gone.’
‘You might say that,’ he said. He wondered exactly how Sophie

378
had expressed what he’d asked her to put across. He’d have liked to have had a
word with her first, but Lauren had intercepted him.
Win put her glass down on the table a little unsteadily, watching her hand
do this as though it belonged to somebody else. ‘You really think you might
have a future together?’
‘It might be worth a try,’ he said, trying to sound unconcerned, even happy.
‘I’ll always love her, Win; I told you that. I thought she felt quite
differently, but, as you’ve obviously heard, apparently not. We might have a
chance of finding some happiness together. That can’t be so terrible, can it?’
‘Yes, it can,’ Win said, still looking at her own hand, which was holding
the glass as though securing it to the table. She looked up at him again. ‘It
can’t happen, Alban. It can’t be allowed to happen. I won’t let it happen.’
He shook his head. ‘I’m sorry, Win, but you can’t really stop us.’
She looked at him and he saw, to his astonishment, that she was crying. A
couple of tears had filled her eyes, glinting in the firelight. One tear began
to flow down the side of her nose. She either somehow hadn’t noticed or didn’t
care because she made no attempt to wipe the tears away.
‘Will you, please, just take my word that this can’t happen?’
‘No,’ he said, as softly as he could. Why the hell was she crying? Jesus,
he’d dreamed of reducing the old bat to tears for a couple of decades but now
that she was actually blubbing in front of him he felt awkward and disturbed
and just wanted her to stop. Still, this was what he’d planned, wasn’t it?
‘No, I’m afraid you can’t stop us this time, Win. We’re both adults. We’ll
take this as far as we please and there’s not a great deal you can do to get
in our way.’
Win nodded. One of the tears had reached the end of her nose and hung there,
bobbing as she nodded, a tiny droplet reflecting the firelight. He wanted her
to wipe it away, or he wanted to do it himself. Could you get so old and
insensitive that you didn’t know you were crying and couldn’t feel there was a
teardrop hanging off your nose?
379
‘The one thing you and Sophie can never do is have children,’ Win said
quietly.
He frowned. He allowed a small sort of part–laugh into his breath as he
said, ‘Well, Win, we may be getting a little ahead of ourselves here, but I
think we’ll be the judges of that.’
He opened his sporran. He had a handkerchief in here. He’d offer it to her;
anything to get rid of that damn stupid tear hanging like snot off the old
girl’s nose. She was probably leaving it there as a prop, as a piece of stage
management. A lot of men were completely useless in the face of a woman
crying. He wasn’t one of them.
‘The reason that you can’t have children with Sophie is that you two are
more closely related than you know, Alban.’
He was still looking in his sporran for the handkerchief. He looked up.
‘What?’ he asked.
‘Your father – Andrew, Andrew McGill – is not your biological father,’ Win
told him, her voice small and tired–sounding.
He was aware of having frozen. One hand held the sporran open, the other was
poised inside. What? What had she just said?
‘They’ve both been good parents to you, Alban, but neither of them is your
real parent. Not Leah – you know that. But not Andrew either.’
His hands were shaking. He put them together on his lap, clasped them. ‘So
who the hell is then?’ he asked.
‘Blake is,’ Win said, her voice going out like a sigh between them. ‘Blake.
He’s your real father, your biological father’
‘What?’ he exclaimed. ‘Blake?’

‘Please keep your voice down,’ Win said, seeming to collapse in on herself.
She reached for the glass of whisky again but her hand didn’t seem to be able
to lift it. She looked down at it, seemingly forgetting about him.
‘Blake?’ he said, sitting forward. ‘That’s–’ he began, then sat back again.
Blake? Blake was his fucking father? That was insane. He sat forward once
more. ‘How? But he–are you saying–? So is Irene–?’
380
‘Irene was your mother. Blake is your father.’ Win sounded infinitely tired.
She continued looking at the hand, seemingly trying and failing to lift her
whisky glass. ‘They were lovers, very briefly, in London, after she’d met
Andrew. I wish I could tell you it was rape, which might sound like a terrible
thing to say, but . . . Nevertheless. It wasn’t, as far as we know. Blake
didn’t rape his own sister, he seduced her. She was at least partially
willing, at the time. Though she did come to regret it.’ She looked up into
his eyes. ‘Well, obviously.’
That bit came out strongly. Her voice found some extra strength for that. He
shivered, even in the heat of the fire, head swimming as he suddenly saw his
recurring dream again. Gone these last few weeks, not even disturbing his
sleep while he’d been staying here at Garbadale – he’d been worried that it
would – now it flash–backed through him. Irene taking the coat from the
cloakroom and walking out of the house, ignoring his dream–self, leaving him,
walking down through the gardens to the dark loch and collecting stones as she
went and walking out into the waters and drowning.
‘That’s crazy,’ he heard himself tell her. ‘You can’t know that.’
‘It’s the real reason Blake was thrown out of the family and the firm. It’s
why we exiled him, why he fetched up in Hong Kong. He wasn’t embezzling
anything, but he was guilty of incest. The money that went missing was the
money we gave him to start a new life out there. Our accountants redated the
books. They understood.’
‘But Andy–’ he began, hearing a weird roaring noise in his ears. Jeez, and
now he was getting tunnel vision; he might be about to black out. This was
madness. This couldn’t be true. He just didn’t believe it. Apart from anything
else, Andy had said Irene was still a virgin when they first went to bed . . .
But that didn’t mean anything. Win had just said they became lovers after
Irene and Andy met. But it still couldn’t be true.
‘For God’s sake, Alban,’ Win said, sounding angry now, though her voice was
still frail, ‘that’s why Irene tried to kill herself in London. That’s why she
walked out in front of that bus.’ Win had
381
tipped forwards in her seat and now sat, shaking slightly, her fierce, sharp
little gaze directed straight at him. ‘Just the shame would be sufficient, you
might think, but as though that wasn’t enough she was terrified she was
carrying some inbred monster. Don’t you understand?’ Win fell back into the
seat. ‘Then you were born and at least you were healthy and whole, but the
guilt was still there. Andy married her knowing it was – knowing you were –
somebody else’s. As far as I know she never told him who the real father was.
I’d suggest you don’t tell him either.’
He sat up in his seat, tried to control his breathing. He was not going to
do anything as ridiculous as faint. This was nonsense, impossible, absurd.
This was just an evil old woman trying anything to stop him being happy for
some sick reason of her own. ‘I don’t believe you,’ he told her.
‘Well, you will,’ Win said, finally succeeding in grasping her whisky glass
and bringing it carefully to her lips. ‘You will be prepared to believe a DNA
test, I take it?’ she said, and drank.
Christ.
‘I suppose so. Yes. Yeah, I’ll believe it. Just tell me when and where I’ll

have to–’
‘Oh, it’s already been done,’ Win said, with a kind of tired contempt.
‘What the hell are you talking about?’
‘You went to see Haydn in Paris that time, remember?’
Paris. Haydn. His special–agent–for–the–firm days, the night out in Paris
and the beautiful – oh, fuck.
He stared at her. Something in the fire collapsed and a new cave of fire was
revealed, sending sparks flying up into the darkness in an orange curve and
causing a few brief flames to lick against the remaining scree slope of
crushed coal. His mouth was open. He swallowed, cleared his throat and said,
Are you –?’
‘I don’t know what name the girl used,’ Win said. ‘I do know she was one of
the most expensive whores in Paris.’ Win put her glass down and smiled thinly.
‘If I am going to invade a chap’s privacy,
382
at least give me credit for doing my damnedest to spoil him as it’s done.’ The
small smile remained, wavering only slightly while she said, ‘A sample was
procured from Blake in a similar fashion. It was worth it to know, and the
technology had become available.’ She looked down at the fire, expression sad
again. ‘Personally, despite all of what one might call the circumstantial
evidence, and two confessions, I always hoped your mother had just got her
dates wrong and Andrew really was your father. I suspect he’s always hoped
that too. I’d even hoped that Irene had been more promiscuous, and there was a
third party involved.’ She looked up at him again. ‘No such luck, I’m afraid.
Blake, and his sister, Irene, are your parents. You are very lucky not to show
any signs of inbreeding, Alban. But, do you see? The chances of two first
cousins producing a child with some sign of inbreeding are about one in four.
You’re related to Sophie twice – as her first cousin, twice over. So the
chances are at least fifty–fifty that any child of yours would be deformed or,
well, just inbred in some fashion. And that, my dear,’ Win said, with another
great, deep sigh, ‘is why we reacted the way we did when we discovered you in
flagrante in the garden at Lydcombe. As though being first cousins and
under–age was not enough.’
He saw. He understood. The world and his life seemed to be spinning away
from him, but he was beginning to understand. He swallowed a few times until
he felt able to speak.
‘Who else knows?’ he asked. His voice sounded hollow, even to him.
‘Kennard and Kathleen,’ Win said. ‘They say they haven’t told anybody else.’
He glanced towards where Lauren sat, near the doors.
‘Not Lauren,’ Win said. ‘She never needed to know. She does what I ask her
because she trusts me.’
He sat looking away into the darkness for a while. He felt like he was going
to black out again. He was searching for flaws, running it all through his
head, trying to spot something, anything, that didn’t fit.
383
It didn’t work. Everything fitted together. Guilt, attempted suicide, actual
suicide, the disproportionate hysteria that had greeted him and Sophie having
sex, even what had been the sheer unexpected blissfulness of his night with
Kalpana – and the fact that she insisted on using condoms, of course – even
some of the things Blake had said to him in Hong Kong.
Oh dear fucking God. He so did not want any of this to be true, but it made
more sense than anything else he could think of. Oh dear holy shit.
‘I’ll arrange for the DNA test reports to be sent to you,’ Win said. ‘Oh;
and you can have back all your love–letters and poetry – all the things you
sent to Sophie. Lauren was under instructions to send them to me. I’m sorry,’
she told him. ‘If it’s any comfort, I haven’t read them. They were never

opened.’
‘Be careful what you wish for,’ he said quietly, more to himself than to
her.
‘Hmm?’ Win said. ‘Yes. Well.’
He tried to summon up some hatred for Win, or even feel some resentment
towards her. How dare she manipulate his life and Sophie’s like this? And yet,
she’d done what she thought was the right thing. There might still have been
other ways – he’d have to think about this – but once the family had decided
to keep the whole thing secret he supposed there hadn’t been much choice for
her. He couldn’t blame her. He felt he ought to, somehow, but he couldn’t.
Blake, he thought. Blake?
Andy and Leah would always be his parents, always be his mum and dad. But
now he had another father as well as an extra mother. Well, he had long been
half used to this. It was symmetrical if nothing else.
‘Please say you won’t . . .’ Win began. She stopped and tried again. ‘That
you and Sophie won’t–’
‘No–no,’ he said quickly. He held up one hand. ‘No, don’t worry about that.
Forget all about that.’
384
Win let out what sounded like a long–held breath. ‘Well,’ she said, sighing
deeply. ‘That’s enough from me. I’m tired out. This has been an eventful day.
You’ll excuse me.’
‘Let me,’ he said, seeing her reach for her stick, resting against the edge
of the fireplace. He helped her up as Lauren came up to them, walking the
length of the drawing room.
‘Bedtime?’ she said brightly.
‘I think so,’ Win said.
‘Thank you, Alban,’ Aunt Lauren said, letting Win take one arm. ‘Might see
you later.’
‘Yeah, sure.’
‘Don’t forget to put the guard on the fire, all right?’
‘Okay’
‘Good night for now.’
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘good night.’ He stood by the fire and watched the two women
go. After a few seconds he said, ‘Thank you.’
They both stopped. Win turned a fraction, looked at him for a moment, then
just nodded. She and Lauren continued to the doors and exited. He looked down
at the table and the glass she’d left. There was some whisky left in it. He
picked it up and drank it. He put the fireguard in front of the fire in case
it sparked.
He sat down again and stayed for a while by the fire.
He’s with her as she comes down from her room, down the wide, gleaming
staircase under the tall, south–facing window. She walks across the creaking
parquet of the main hall towards the kitchen, and he’s there as she turns into
the short corridor that leads past the gunroom and the inside log store and
the drying room to the cloakroom, and he watches as she stops and chooses what
to wear to go outside.
Irene is dressed in brown Clark’s shoes, a pair of white socks, jeans, a
brown blouse and an old white roll–neck jumper. White M&S underwear. No watch
or rings or other jewellery. No cash, chequebook, credit cards or any form of
identification or written material.
He watches her choose the long dark coat with the poacher’s pockets.
385
It’s huge and almost black, its original dark green–brown weathered and worn
and grimed over decades on the estate to something close to the darkness of

the brown–black water in a deep loch. He stands in the gloom, surrounded by
the pervasive smell of wax. Rain patters on the shallow, high–set windows. He
watches her go to the coat and take it off the wooden peg.
The coat is too big for her, drowning her; she has to double back the cuffs
of the sleeves twice. The shoulders droop and the hem reaches to within
millimetres of the flagstones. She rubs her hands over the waxy rectangles of
the flapped external pockets and looks inside at the poacher’s pockets.
Then she goes through the outside door of the room, into the shining grey of
the early afternoon. The door swings shut behind her, leaving him there,
silent.
‘Alban? Alban?’ He’s being shaken awake, somebody waggling his right elbow.
He opens his eyes.
He’s sitting by the fire in the drawing room at Garbadale, at night.
Something had happened, he knew. Something momentous, awful. Then he
remembers.
Blake? Blake?
‘Alban? Alban?’ The person shaking his arm is Chay, cousin Claire’s partner.
He shakes himself, tries to wake up. ‘Sorry. Chay; hi. What?’
‘Phone call for you.’
‘What? Phone?’
‘Yeah. For you.’
Alban looks at his watch. Ten past four in the morning. A phone call for
him, here?
Oh no, not – VG.
‘Who–?’ he starts to say, then coughs. He struggles to his feet, leg muscles
complaining.
Oh please no, not VG, not if it was the police, not if it was the
386
Mountain Rescue people or a hospital. Please, not her, not that, not after
what he’d just learned. He couldn’t take it. He tries to tell himself it had
all been a dream but he knows it wasn’t.
Please not VG. Please not.
‘Who is it?’ he asks Chay at last.
‘Dunno. Some guy from Hong Kong.’
He follows Chay down the corridor to the office of Neil Durril, the house
manager. They pass the ballroom, where a disco is playing, not especially
loudly but with lots of flashing lights. Looks like about half the people are
still up, though only a dozen or so are dancing, caught in frozen strobed
poses in the walking glimpse he gets.
At least it’s not VG, at least it’s not about her. Just time difference,
that’s all.
‘Cheers,’ he says, sitting down behind Neil D’s desk and lifting the
receiver resting on the surface. The office is small: filing cabinets,
computer, photocopier, box files everywhere. Chay closes the door behind him,
leaving Alban alone.
‘Hello?’
‘Alban?’ comes the voice. There is something flat about the way the word is
said that sends a shiver down his spine.
‘Blake?’ he says. He can feel himself starting to choke up. This is so
pathetic, but he can’t help it. He tries to pull himself together all the
same.
‘Hello, Alban. I’m told you’ve . . . You know the truth.’
Ah, well, yeah, I guess.’ He doesn’t know what to say. He’s assuming that
somebody – Lauren? Win herself? – has phoned Blake so they’re all working from
the same set of assumptions, but he’s not sure. How can he be sure?
‘I just wanted to say how sorry I am,’ Blake says. His voice is reasonably
clear, though Alban can tell he’s using a mobile.

‘That’s . . . That’s all right. Ah, obviously I’m a bit, well, still in
shock, but–’
‘I always wanted you to know, and I never wanted you to know, do you
understand?’
387
‘Yeah, I guess I do.’
‘It’s all too late, though, I think. It’s a relief that you know, but it is
unbearable as well. Don’t think badly of me. I’ve spent all my life since
regretting what happened. I’m very glad I met you. You’ll – oh, sorry, hold on
. . .’ his voice disappears and Alban can hear the sort of broken, close–up
rubbing noises you hear when people press their phones against their clothes
or try to hold their phone tight to their shoulder.
‘Still there?’
‘Still here,’ Alban says.
‘The little coolie chaps are all gone. Nearly lunch–time. Lots of people and
traffic . . .’
‘Look, ah, Blake,’ Alban says, ‘I suppose – I mean, I think – we ought to
meet up. If you like I can–’
‘Sorry,’ Blake says. Alban can hear his breath, loud against the microphone
of the mobile. I’m afraid I don’t think I could bear that. I’m so sorry.’ He
makes a strange noise as though he’s just hurt himself. There’s a noise like a
sigh, then the breaking, rubbing noise again. The noise of the sigh begins to
sound like the breeze, like the wind.
‘Blake?’
‘Sorry,’ Blake says, loudly. The wind howls across his voice. ‘You’ll be all
right.’ The sound of the wind rises to a scream, and perhaps is one.
Alban starts to realise what might be happening. The hair on the back of his
neck rises, then that on his scalp.
‘Blake?’ he shouts.
‘–orry, son.’
Then just the noise of the wind.
Then a thud then nothing.

388

10

W
ho’d have thought I’d end up with Big Mifty? Life is bizarre to the max
sometimes, I’m telling you. The weans still miss their dad a bit (fuck knows
why mind you on account of the fact the bastard used to knock seven bells out
of them), but they’ve taken to me and the older one, Moselle, is starting to
call me Daddy, which I don’t mind telling you is a bit freaky but also gives
me the choke, quite frankly, and, seriously, like, I’d do anything for those
kids.
So anyway. We’ve just went to Al’s place and come back after a highly

convivial evening, thank you very much. Have to say, what a house. Still in
Perth like, obviously, but one of those posh one’s on the far side of the
river from the Inch – you know, the big long green bit like a park – just ten
minutes walk from the city centre and posh as feck. Seems we’re welcome any
time, even the weans. And we can bring pals. House rule’s are a wee number’s
okay but no cunt allowed liable to shoot up on the premises. Bit severe,
maybe, in some ways of looking at it, but I suppose the guy has his posh
neighbours to think of.
Met the girlfriend. Big Al’s, I mean. Highly fucken tasty, and real nice.
Big Mifty thought she was a bit up herself at first but it’s just she speaks a
bit hoity – well, Al does too a bit, to be fair – but they
389
had a chat over a game of snooker and subsequent to this the Big M decided the
Verushkoid is actually pretty cool. Uses a lot of big words and talks over
your head a bit, but she’s not trying to impress, that’s just how she speaks.
You canny blame a body for that.
Anyway, the blessed Al of Ban obviously has the total dotes for her and it
was great seeing the man with a smile on his face, because that’s what he has
when she’s around.
He’s away a lot in Glasgow, at hers, and you’d think the way they get on and
are always laughing together and touching each other and such like and
generally behaving like young lover’s dream that they’d do the decent thing
and get shacked up the–gether, but apparently not. Quite happy with the
current arrangement, we’re told. Nothing weird as folk, sure enough.
So, the man’s doing well. Relative or two died and left him pots of money
(we always kind of knew he was a toff, though a nice one though but).
Plus he’s related to those Wopulds that have that computer game ‘Empire’
which I used to play with Burb before his games machine got wheeched. Big Al
even thought of changing his name to Wopuld, I mean like his second name, his
sir–name, which would be a bit of a strange thing to do you’d think, good
Scotch name, McGill, for goodnes’s sake, but that was knocked on the head too
and he’s stuck with McGill. Think so too, what would his ma and pa have
thought? (Met them one time I was out walking the dogs and stopped in for a
cup of tea at Alban’s place – Nice couple.)
Anyways, the guy is casting around for something to do and hasn’t quite
found it yet, but I’m sure he’ll think of something. Currently talking about
getting a place with lots of trees and a loch somewhere a bit west of here but
not too far aways to start up one of those Outward Bound type places for
disadvantaged city kids or something, which sounds like a heap of trouble to
be putting yourself in the way of (and he’s trying to rope yours truly in on
it as well, which must make me as daft as him as apparently I’ve said yes – Oh
feck).
Anyway, but; we’ll see.
390

