PostFlesh
by Paul Jessup
****
Paul Jessup has been published in many magazines, including Fantasy
Magazine, Farrago’s Wainscoat, Post Scripts, Electric Velocipede,
Pseudopod, and more. In 2009, PS Publishing will publish his collection of
short stories titled Glass Coffin Girls as part of the PS Showcase series.
****
1. Captain Found Us a Ghost World.
Shadrim. It was a grave of space, a planet of bones. It was the
endless all and everything. Shadrim. When we discovered it, we found it full
of ruins and corpses. Shadrim. When it discovered us, it was thinking.
Shadrim. It had sepulchral thoughts. Thoughts that only the dead could or
would want to think. Filtering through the entire planet.
When we found it we were lost. It sent out beacons, psychic signals
across the radio waves. Old Gray Mack thought it was perverse. We all
laughed at his thoughts. Mack could fly the darkness like no one else. But
he didn’t know anything about the human mind—the world between the
waves.
When we landed we saw the big bronze skull city-states; we saw the
machines that they had left behind. Large spider beasts. Evolved,
transfigured. Machines with alien skin stuck to the grindbones, scuttling
through those ruins and making the corpses dance. First time we saw that
sight we wanted to leave. Big alien bones with zombie skin still stuck on
them, prancing around in nightmare waltzes. We ran like hell away from
them. They didn’t follow. They stayed behind, dancing and staring with
ghost eyes.
When we got back to the ship it was dead. Buried in the ground with a
grave on top. All that was left was ash and skeleton. A breathing thing that
had sustained us now gone and deceased. Like manhome itself.
Carit wept, and Sunday Jay said a prayer in Pascal. It was the way
Sunday Jay talked to the onboard systems. Sure, it was an old language,
but we are an old people, wandering the restless void of space and

searching for ourselves in the reflection of the cosmos.
The next day we found that dog that did our ship in. Giant machine
thing that kept piecing itself together out of the ruins of the world around us.
He was a sea of corpses and machinery. He looked at us with alien eyes,
and Good Day just smiled at him and offered him a smoke.
Carit cursed it. Claimed it killed the ship and kept us trapped here.
We couldn’t look at that alien thing, covered in ship blood and the strings of
organic machinery. It kept trying to talk to us, talk to us over the radio
sounds of the dead. It was so lonely.
But we couldn’t. Not now. Even though it promised us so much.
Faster than light travel. Becoming transhuman. Existing beyond the realm of
mortality. We couldn’t let it know how we felt. How it hurt us and stranded us
in the depth of space. The captain even went out and got the zox box and
shocked it around. This machine seemed to love it. It squealed with delight
and then asked us if we had eaten anything yet for dinner.
Good Day stepped forward and told it we were all starving. The
creature had a few nanokin whip us up some good stuff. It tasted all right
for alien metal food. And we thought, this giant postflesh spacecat
couldn’t be all that bad. Sure he killed our ship, but that space trawler was
dying anyway, maybe it was a mercy killing.
Later that night we slept under the frozen purple light of fourteen
distant suns. They were moon-sized in the distance, spread across the sky
and shouting out the light of the stars. The pull of this world was dizzying
and complex; it weaved through the orbits of so many planets and suns. It
was like a drunk fractal nightmare of astronomical physics.
When we dreamed, we dreamed in ghost voices. We dreamed of
ghost algebra in a ghost planet. This world, it spoke in our sleep and
screamed in our waking hours through the radio towers broadcasting
around us. The bones are restless, dancing. When the last hour of sleep
washed away, we were greeted with the beating of techno drums and the
dancing of the alien corpses.
And this time, they sang.
****
2. We Discuss Ghost Dreams

Spillgal was the first to do it. She just sat up like a white cat with black
eyes, stretched out her tail and started talking. Her voice meandered at first,
wandering over our heads. But then we realized what she was talking about,
and we leaned in and listened.
Even that big A.I., that giant shipkiller corpse monster, it bent the
massive head down, dripping with columns and garbage and rotting alien
flesh, and listened. We had to filter out the screams of the dead in order to
hear her properly.
Her voice was like static, noise in the broadcast of Shadrim. “I dreamt
of endless space, and vacuum tubes. I dreamt of a doll without eyes and a
lady without teeth. I dreamt that I licked the feet of secrets, and they gave
me bones to pay for a ship. I think I dreamed memories, but I can’t be sure.
So many voices, lost in my head. Even as I am awake now, I am almost
certain I am still dreaming.”
We talked about her dream for a bit, discussing its contents but
coming to no conclusion. Whisper Kid went next, talking about smoke and a
guy named Kagaratz. Each of us went in turn, and each dream was
discussed but without any answers. Finally, at the end, the captain sat up
and proclaimed that he would build us a new space ship, one to take us
home.
The dead aliens scuttled away screaming. Our dreams were a gift.
They felt insulted that the captain would not stay and experience more of
them. The giant machine that was our host ticked his head to the side and
sighed, getting the nanokin to make us a meal of tin and scrapskin. It tasted
worse than it looked, but we ate it.
After that, we were less welcome on the planet of the dead. Our host
kept ignoring us, and the broadcast screams of the lost world got so loud
we became just static and noise in the background. It was hard to think like
that, but we had to. It was a learning process, a way of filtering ourselves
out from the void that tried to swallow us.
****
3. Skullchic Finds Material
We scavenged the world for parts and pieces, but of course we
couldn’t go too far. There were a lot of alien machines, but we couldn’t
make sense out of any of it. And our host wasn’t talking to us anymore. He
kept towering over us, watching and recording us with thousands of

nanocams. We could seem them scuttle about his massive body like living
dust.
And the corpses—they were mad. They hung out on the edge of our
vision, running through the ruined city and howling in a dead tongue, their
voices projected just barely above that loud broadcast of ghost voices and
ghost memories.
And we starved. Hunger laced through our veins, spilling over into our
thoughts. All we dwelled on was the memory of food. Of great things like
pancakes and waffles and syrup and strawberries and tomatoes. No
vegetation was on this planet, nor any living meat we could kill and fry up.
In the hour of our greatest hunger, Skullgirl found some parts. At first
we weren’t sure what she had—it looked like some skeleton from an alien
body with a glowing orange heart. But metallic and carved with cold foreign
pictographs.
The captain knew what it was, knew what to do with it.
He kissed her in joy and we all screamed. The voices got louder, and
that A.I. started to crumble into smaller pieces around us. We fitted each
part in and assembled it right and proper. The captain got Old Grey Mack to
study the controls, and then to figure out a way for us to interface with it.
Old Grey Mack was great at that sort of thing. He was a
xenoarcheologist, a regular alien retrofitter. He could sew these things into
the right pieces of his mind, find out exactly how their propulsion system
differed from our ion drives. He was used to this sort of thing—rearranging
his mind into alien shapes and geometry.
Soon we had a working model up and running. Time for a test drive
and then off to freedom.
****
4. We Gasp, We Sigh, We Say Goodbye
It was a rough-looking space vessel, made from the alien boneparts
we found and some old stuff from our ship, strapped on so that Old Grey
Mack could pilot it without a problem. More like a shambling half-dead
animal than a cruiser, it spun around the atmosphere and screamed as it
flew in chaotic messy lines. Our host watched, his body slinking into sludge
parts, the air filtered with his nanodust. He tried to get the alien corpses to

dance a goodbye dance, but he could not get them to come near us.
On the moment of the test departure, those dancing corpses came
out again, screaming and running toward us. Mack was flying low in the sky,
looking down. The machine worked, leaving trails of blue light behind it in
whirling vapors. Mack smiled and gave us the thumbs up to say that
everything was okay. He flew a little lower, getting ready to find some open
ground to land on.
Our host collapsed into thousands of tiny bodies, trying to restrain the
living dead’s nanosystems. They surged and came forward, crying out and
scurrying across the floors of the world with many thin and angular limbs.
Like undead spiders with big bulging eyes and tiny puckered lips.
The planet shook; the radio systems picked up. It was all one voice
now: the voice of Shadrim, that zombie planet that wanted us to stay and be
assimilated into its nightmarish ecosystem. The voice of the planet spoke in
strange tongues, and the nanomachines obeyed. We tried to get Mack to
land, to drop down something we could cling onto and escape. He only
hovered low, a look of shock and horror on his face.
The dust of the world poured into us. Living things, tiny A.I., pieces of
that host that had kept us here for so long. Mack just circled about and
watched as we were dissembled, our parts and pieces connected to the
ruins now. They strung up our bodies like art, our intestines and bones
collected with bacterial computers and nanomachines that somehow
preserved us and made us do what the world told us to do.
In our mind we could hear it all the time. The thought running through
our veins like the whispers of space. Commanding us. Telling us what to
do. Our we had gotten bigger, engulfed us. We had one mind now, the
mind of the world. The mind of the ghost planet. It sung in our skin, set our
nerves on fire.
And now we danced. We danced, and our voices broadcast from
those old radio waves. This was the radio song, the voice of planet
Shadrim. This was us and who we were. Mack sped off, and we would
have, too. But now we were dancing, our corpseskin cold. Soon we would
transcend. Transcend and be like our host, postflesh.

