Chenting, in the Land of the Dead
Kij Johnson
This story was first published in the magazine Realms of Fantasy, November 1999.
In the end, the only job that presented itself was the governorship of a remote province in the land of the
dead. Chenting was the name of the place, and the scholar and his concubine Ah Lien talked of it often
as they lay entangled in their sweaty robes after lovemaking.
It would be a place of fields, he said. The peasants will farm rice and raise oxen. The air will smell a bit
like the smoke from the fake money that is burned to give one influence among the dead; but it will also
be rich with perfumes, the scents that only dogs and pigs can smell in this world.
No, she said. It will be like distant Tieling, where the fields lead up to the mountains, except that the
mountains will never stop but will go up and up; and snow will blow like dust across the fields, and the
sky will be the purple-black of a thundercloud's heart or a marten's wing. And it will be lonely, she said,
and held him tighter, pressing her face against his neck.

He was dying; they both knew that. The man with the eyes of smoke, the man who had come to tell him
of the post at Chenting, had said so.
"But I'm waiting to hear how I did at the examinations!" the scholar had said to him. "I was hoping for a
position, ah, somewhere."
The man bowed again, as he had at the start of the conversation: as before, the bow seemed both
perfunctory and punctilious. "And well you might hope. Hope is the refuge of the desperate. But let me
be candid here. You're poor, and can't afford the bribes or fees for anything better than, let us say, a
goatherdship. And this governorship in Chenting, in the land of the dead, is available immediately."
The scholar stroked his chin. "But I'm not dead."
"You will be soon enough," the man said. "It is as certain as, well, taxes."
The scholar frowned. "Are there no other candidates for this position, that you're looking for a living man
to fill it?"
"As I have said, you will not live for much longer, making this point moot. "
"Are there other dead candidates?—Or soon to be dead," the scholar added.
"Well, yes, there are always candidates. But I expect you could get it." The man with eyes of smoke
made a gesture like two coins clinking together.
"But—" the scholar began and stopped. "I must consult."
The man bowed yet again and left.
"Well?" the scholar said to the empty room. There was a soft brushing of fabric and Ah Lien glided from
behind the patched screen with the painted camellias. She was better than he deserved, the lovely Ah
Lien, with eyes as narrow and long and green as willow leaves—better than he could afford; but her birth
was common and the eyes were considered an eccentricity for a woman in her position.

"You heard." He said. A statement, not a question. Of course she had heard: she was one ear, he was
the other.
"Chenting," she whispered. "In the land of the dead. When must you leave, my lord?"

And that was that. There was no choice about his dying, only about his position in the scheme of things
after his death, and both knew it was better to be a dead governor than a dead scholar.
But he lingered for a time with her, and they talked often of Chenting.
The governor's palace, he said, will be built of white stone and then plastered over, so even where the
plaster has cracked the walls glow like bleached silk. And the roof is covered with ceramic tiles the color
of daylilies. The gardens are countless enclosed roofless areas, each filled with hanging baskets containing
small pines whose needles chime when one passes.
No, she said, the gardens are cold and abandoned. Winds blow through the empty rooms, and
sometimes one sits by an unglazed window, watching the patterns made by dead leaves blown in the air.
It can't be like that, he said. It must be as I see it.
If it is, she whispered, summon me to your side and I will go.

They had already decided she couldn't accompany him. The man with eyes like smoke had said nothing
of her, and Ah Lien was understandably reluctant to die. She loved the scholar dearly, but she had aging
parents to consider, and an ancestral shrine to tend. Still: she was willing.

His death when it came was a comparatively simple one. He coughed a bit as the winter began to take
hold. Ah Lien held him close and warmed him when chills shook him. Then they talked of Chenting.
The bedrooms of the governor's palace, he said, and he paused to catch his breath. The bedrooms have
braziers of porcelain shaped like horses, and each horse bears a silver saddle on its back, and each
saddle holds a fire of charcoal. The smoke that curls up smells of sandalwood and jasmine. And the bed
is soft, covered with silk, with pillows carved of black wood. And the pillow book there has positions we
have never imagined!
No, she said, the beds at Chenting are cold and narrow and hard, made of wheat husks in hemp bags.
The smoke smells of funeral biers, but the fires are cold and colored the blue of foxfire in the marshes at
night. "Do not leave me, my love," she said.
"I will send for you," he promised, and died.

When he awakened in Chenting he was amazed at first at how well he felt. There was no pain, no trouble
breathing, no aches from holding a brush too tightly or walking in new shoes. And Chenting was
everything he had imagined and more. The fields were lusher than he had expected, and seemed to be
near harvest. The air smelled as rich as he had dreamed. And he had much money to spend, for Ah Lien
had sold her hair ornaments to buy paper money, and burnt it so that it would follow him.

He missed her and wanted her beside him, and since Chenting was warm and beautiful and not like the
cold visions she had predicted, he sent a message to her. "Come," it read. "I have seen Chenting and it is
as fair as I envisioned. The birds are the colors of flames, and their songs are sharp as the crackling of
fire. Come be beside me." He sent a messenger off with an entourage, to show her the honor she
deserved.
The messenger returned. "She is coming," he said.
Many days later, the entourage at last arrived, brilliant with tassels, loud with flutes. The governor of
Chenting straightened his cap and calmed his heart, and descended the red stairs leading to the courtyard
where his entourage milled around the sedan-chair he had sent for her. He brushed aside the chair's
gold-thread curtain. "Ah Lien—" he began.
For an instant he heard Ah Lien sobbing, and then that was gone. The sedan-chair was empty and silent.
The governor of Chenting stormed and raged and ordered great punishments for the entourage, who had
failed to keep her safe. But even as he wept and cursed, he knew what had happened.
He had found Chenting just as he had expected, a place where an old man's pains were eased. But she
had imagined another Chenting, a place where youth is irrelevant and even beauty is lonely. He didn't
know the Chenting she had gone to, but he knew it was not his.

