Unnamed Malady

The town was a small one, lazy and leisurely in the afternoon sun. Lane was watching
the people on the sidewalk as he waited for the light to change. Suddenly a man
stopped, opened his mouth, and appeared to be gasping for breath. He staggered, then,
and began to beat the air before him. His eyes went panicky and he made terrible
choking sounds.
Jerking his head from side to side, his mouth open, the man fought crazily against
nothingness.
Lane jumped out of the car and ran toward the suffocating man. He had seen the
animals die like this, but never before a human being, a person like himself....
The Gold Medal seal on this book means it has never been published as a book before. To select an
original book that you have not already read, look for the Gold Medal seal.

WAR WITH THE GIZMOS
A Gold Medal Original by
MURRAY LEINSTER
GOLD MEDAL BOOKS

Fawcett publications. inc.
FAWCETT BLDG.,FAWCETT PLACE, GBEENWICH.CONN.
Copyright 1958 by Fawcett Publications, Inc.

First Printing, March 1958

All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof.
All characters in this book are fictional and any resemblance to persons living or dead
is purely coincidental.
Printed in the United States of America

PROLOGUE
The first battles of the war with the Gizmos took place in deep wilderness, and human
beings knew nothing about them. Cities were not attacked, in the beginning. The initial
skirmishes were fought by bears and wildcats and mountain sheep, and other creatures
blood-kin to men. Those battles were often magnificent, but they were usually
disastrous, and few of them were ever reported.
There was, though, a bear found dead in the high Sierras, killed after a fight of epic
proportions, as was shown by torn-up earth and crushed brushwood and toppled
saplings. There was a mountain lion found slain in Colorado after no less desperate a
conflict. A slaughtered wildcat's furious struggle for life was noted in northern
Michigan, where the signs of the conflict were clear. And a fisherman on a stream in
Pennsylvania saw the death of a four-point buck. It fought with splendid courage. It
used horns and hoofs and pure desperation against an invisible antagonist, but it finally
sank to the ground and died while the angler looked on, appalled and unbelieving.
These were battles with Gizmos. The signs were unmistakable. The dead creatures
had not a wound or a mark upon them. The battlegrounds showed plainly their tracks,
but no trace of a thing or things with which they had fought. In one case, as was noted, a
man saw the fighting, but he didn't see the buck's antagonist. He only saw that the buck
deer died. Its murderer could not possibly have been anything but a Gizmo.
There is no point, now, in reviewing the controversy about the Gizmos' origin. Some
still insist that they came from outer space. This is hard to believe, because a spaceship
under Gizmo control is almost impossible to imagine. Some authorities consider that
Gizmos are native to Earth. They point to primitive fears of evil spirits as proof of their
presence on Earth since time beyond remembering. But the objection to this is that
primitive man could not have survived had he been attacked by the Gizmos who made
war on us. In effect this argument is that since our ancestors were not exterminated by
Gizmos, there were no Gizmos in ancient days. Yet the legends of fiends and djinns and
efrits and ghuls, and of eerie inhabitants of remote, are singularly convincing when one
considers them in connection with Gizmos.
In any case the Gizmos seemed to appear with the suddenness of a thunderclap. They
had the enormous advantage of being totally unreasonable. These days we believe only
in highly scientific things. Highly scientific opinions change continually, and so do the
things we believe in. But Gizmos were not flesh and blood, and therefore not scientific,
so we would not notice such signs of their presence as must have existed before the war.
However they appeared, they were able to marshall their forces without interference;
they established bases in our forests, pickets in our woodlots, and observation posts in
the parks of towns and cities. Gizmo patrols moved wherever they pleased without
anybody crediting their reality—even when they committed atrocities. They had every
possible advantage in their preparations for war.
In military terms they secured almost complete surprise. Apart from atrocity reports

there is no evidence that anybody noticed anything the Gizmos did not want noticed.
Even the word "Gizmo" was a slang term applied to blips on radar screens for which no
cause could be established. We knew that these blips were not caused by solid objects;
we also knew that the blips moved independently of the wind. Some radar stations
observed many of them, and others very few. There was a flying-saucer scare, once,
when six unidentified flying objects were reported over Washington, D.C. Armed forces
radar stations admitted reluctantly that they had been detected. But, said the armed
forces, they were only Gizmos. It was guessed that they were areas of excessive
ionization in the air, of no importance.
This was the error of the century, but a very natural one. A Gizmo had been spotted
by radar over a flying field in Texas. It hung stationary over the center of the installation
at fifteen hundred feet, as if leisurely surveying the activities below. Nothing was visible
where the radar insisted the Gizmo was. A plane took off and, guided by instructions
from the ground, dived squarely through the space occupied by the Gizmo. Neither the
plane nor its pilot detected anything at the moment of impact. The Gizmo vanished.
After that, it seemed reasonable to disregard Gizmos altogether, which was a
catastrophic blunder.

Chapter 1
Dick Lane was the first man to be attacked by Gizmos —it was undoubtedly a small
patrol of them—and to live to tell about it in intelligible terms. It happened one day
when he trudged a dim trail through mixed mountain laurel and oaks and pine trees on
the downward slope of a mountain nobody had ever bothered to name. This was in the
mountains of western Virginia, some ten miles from Murfree's courthouse. He'd been in
other places on his present errand, and his bafflement had been as great as it was here,
which meant that his frustration was complete. He'd been tracking down the stories of
inexplicable deaths of game animals, and some suspected deaths of men. He'd learned
nothing tangible. He had dark suspicions, but nothing to justify them, and on this hot
summer afternoon he was discouraged, uneasy and depressed.
To a sportsman, and especially a professional writer about field sports, as Lane was,
the matter was important; to the rest of the world it was not. But fishermen and hunters
made much of good hunting dogs who'd gone apparently crazy and fought empty air,
snapping at it while screaming horribly. Most of them died. And there was a pheasant
hunter in New Jersey, last fall, who was found dead beside his dead dog in the center of
a patch of brush that had been leveled in some sort of frenzy. Neither man nor dog had a
single wound of any sort. There were four fishermen found in the Dakotas, alleged to
have died of poisoned mushrooms gathered in the wilds. But at least one of the four
loathed mushrooms; he wouldn't have tasted them. And there were cases of experienced
guides, scouting the prospects for next-season hunting, who did not return from
territory that was wholly familiar to them. One or two were found dead in their scattered
blankets, by the ashes of dead fires; others were not found at all. And there were many
tales of game animals found dead with the signs of battle all about them. Something
unknown was taking toll of game and men.

It was Lane's profession to go to places where there was good hunting and fishing,
and then write articles about it, mostly for the magazine Forest and Field. Before this
recent spate of murders in the wilderness, it had been a pleasant one. But Lane was a
sportsman before he was a writer, and he was upset by the wanton killing of game—not
killing for food, but scornfully leaving the murdered creatures to rot after they had
defended themselves gallantly. Forest and Field had taken note of the matter. It was a
sportsman's magazine only, so it was not moved by reports of a ten-year-old boy's
having been found suffocated in Euclid Park, in Cleveland, and of the death of two
children picking blackberries on the outskirts of Englewood, New Jersey, and of an
elderly couple's having been found dead in an open car near Sarasota, Florida. These
human deaths seemed accidents. Nobody connected them with a common cause. It was
Lane and his fellow sportsman who insisted that what was happening to wild creatures
and good hunting dogs needed looking into. As a public service, Forest and Field had
commissioned Lane to find out what was going on. He'd been at it for months, now, with
no results—not even credible suspicions.
So on this summer afternoon he trudged along a sloping mountain trail without
expectation of success. He'd come to Murfree County because here the reports were
especially persistent and detailed. There'd been a case only ten days ago. A man's cattle
had acted as if insane in the middle of the night. They had fought frenziedly in their
stalls and broken down the walls of the barn in their struggling, and then had crashed
through the barnyard fence and fled through the night. Eight animals had been involved.
Next morning six of them had been found unharmed, but two were dead, without a
mark on them. There were also local reports of dead foxes and wild turkeys and
raccoons and opossums. Something was killing a lot of game in Murfree County.
Hunting wouldn't be so good this fall. If whatever was happening kept up, there
wouldn't be any hunting.
He'd asked questions and searched for clues here as in other places. He found
nothing.
This afternoon found him making his way on foot to ask questions at the last place in
Murfree County where he could hope to learn anything new. There was a field
biological expedition in the county just then, sponsored by Gale University, and the
local citizens observed sardonically that it was studying turkey buzzards. The woman
professor in charge was not approved of by Lane's informants. She wore pants all the
time and hadn't the build for it. Undaunted, Lane was on his way to ask if the expedition
had made any observations that might bear on his mission.
The day was singularly perfect. All about him the excessively tumbled mountain
country seemed to bake quietly under the sun. The mountains themselves were dark
green under a totally blue sky. There had been rain the night before and brooks sang
merrily, but the sunshine breaking through the leaves was startlingly hot.
Lane scrambled down a steep slope, with pebbles loosened by his feet bouncing and
sliding. He saw the deep valley at the foot of this mountainside, and there was a veiling
of faintest green above the red clay of ploughed fields down in the valley. Then he saw
the glint of metal in the distance. That would be the trailer —the expedition's
trailer—that he was looking for. It vanished behind a spur of stone as he went on, partly
downhill and partly at an angle along the mountain. Presently the ground grew level for

a small space. He came to a small natural clearing filled with tall grass, and saw a glint
of gray fur in the center of it.
The world was very still. There was next to no air movement. No birds sang. He did
not consciously note the fact, but there were not even insect noises in the air: no gnats or
mosquitoes hummed around him. He could tell that a vast gulf dropped away to his
left, and that to the right the ground sloped up. Above him was a dense forest, whose
trees were gnarled and crooked because of the rocky ground. In the clearing it was
baking hot.
He felt no uneasiness, no premonition, no hint of danger. He moved toward the bit of
fur in the vast stillness. Had it been nighttime, it would have been appalling. But Lane
heard the rustling of grass about his feet, and it did not occur to him that the general
silence was ominous.
Something invisible touched his face. Again, in darkness this would have been
horrifying. But the sun was bright. He brushed the air before him. It felt like a thread of
gossamer floating in the sunshine. The touch came again. He brushed impatiently,
staring down at his feet. The sight, considering what he'd been working on, was almost
familiar—but it was far from gratifying.
There were twenty or thirty dead rabbits in an untidy mass, lying on the ground.
They had been dead for days, but there were no flies about them. There were no
brilliantly colored butterflies fluttering above the small corpses. They had not been
touched by buzzards. This was remarkable. Lane raised his head. The thing he mistook
for gossamer touched him a third time. He took out his handkerchief and wiped his face,
as he stirred one of the carcasses with his foot.
He heard a faint whining sound he could not identify. The rabbits were dead. That
was all. There were no wounds. He stirred another. Discoveries like this had been made
before.
He felt eerie, delicate fumblings at his face. He wiped it again with his handkerchief.
He stared down at the small dead creatures. It is not natural for rabbits to gather in so
close an assembly, especially to die. There is no natural enemy of rabbits which rounds
them up to murder them. But he suddenly realized fact that these little furry bodies had
received no attention from flies and such things whose function it is to keep the
wilderness sweet-smelling and tidy. Nothing had touched these small corpses at all.
Then it occurred to Lane, startlingly, that there was no taint in the air. He puzzled over
that. The gossamer touches stopped.
Something closed smotheringly over his face, sealing his nostrils and his lips. His
forehead was touched by something which pressed against it gently. The contact was all
over his face and throat, as if he were enmeshed in invisible cobwebs.
The whining sound he'd heard was sharply distinct— and he couldn't breathe.
He gasped, or tried to. He could not gasp. Blind panic yammered at him. But one
cannot be wholly panicked when blankly amazed. Lane stood still for an instant, trying
to fill his lungs with air. He could breathe out. He did. But he could not breathe in. Air
would not enter his nostrils and something invisible blanketed his face. He could feel it,
though it was neither warm nor cold. He could not breathe through it. He was
suffocating.

He staggered, dazed, and beat the air before him. He went stumbling and lurching,
his whole conscious purpose that of inhaling, which was impossible. He crashed into
brushwood and tripped and fell headlong. His face buried itself in fallen leaves—and
here he could breathe! He gasped a deep lungful of air, scented with acrid
woods-mould and the odor of dry foliage. Then he struggled up on hands and knees,
and his breath shut off. Something blanketed his face once more. It sealed his lips and
nose. He fought, and toppled again—and he could breathe.
He lay still, panting, with his face buried in the fallen stuff. An incredible surmise
began to form. He felt more fumblings on his neck and ears, delicate touches which
made his spine crawl. There was something which wanted him to lift his face so that it
could stop his breath.
But he was alone!
Despite the shock of near strangulation, he was filled with a sort of blank
astonishment. He lay still, and something fumbled at him; he knew that it wanted him to
look up, to rise. It whined impatiently for him to stir. He knew that it intended to kill
him, and that he frustrated it by keeping his face buried in dead leaves. It was an
invisible thing, and it did not bite or claw or sting, but it fretted because he did not stand
up to be suffocated.
Sweat poured out all over him. This was the killer of the wilderness.
The touches stopped.
He lay still and tense. Now, for the first time, he realized the unnatural stillness of the
world about him. It was horrifying, this quietude. He strained his ears for sounds of
movement by the thing which a moment before had been whining beside his ear. He
heard nothing at all. No—very, very faintly he heard the bubbling of a brook nearby.
That was all. . . .
A long time later he moved cautiously. There was still no bird call or insect hum.
There was no sound at all but the small rustlings his own body made as he moved in the
brushwood.
He sat up and stared about with hunted eyes. He was ashen-white. He stared in every
direction, slowly and furtively, his eyes assuring him that there was nothing near but
tree trunks and brushwood stalks. He got to his feet and began to creep away.
His breath cut off.
There was no warning. There were no fumbling touches, this time. Something clung
to his face, whining shrilly, and he could see through it but he could not draw breath,
and horror filled him. He staggered back to where dried leaves lay thick upon the
ground. He flung himself down and buried his face in them again, and breathed deeply
of the leaves.
Presently, his eyes strained, he stood up once more. He held double handfuls of
dried leaves before his nostrils and lips. He breathed through them. The smell of
woods-mould was strong. He waited, in a sort of desperation. Whatever meant to kill
him knew him to be afoot and moving. He could not slip away unperceived. But
nothing happened. After a time he dared to move onward down the hillside.

There was no other attempt upon him by anything visible or otherwise. He heard no
more high-pitched whines, but the unnatural stillness remained. . . .
A mile away, he was still pale. Two miles away, he was still shaken. He hadn't fully
recovered his normal color when he came out upon a shelving slope and saw the
aluminum trailer less than half a mile away. It glittered in the bright sunshine, and
beyond it the valley spread out, its trees minute so far below, and all the world very
beautiful and serene.
He moved on, and saw something else. There was a curious, foot-high construction of
wire screening on the ground. An ample female form in riding breeches lay at full
length, squinting through one surface of screening to the other. As Lane drew near, he
heard a contralto voice saying disgusted things in pseudoprofane terms.
He coughed, and she raised her head to stare at him. He recognized her. "My name's
Lane," he said shakily. "Dick Lane. I think you're Professor Warren. Over in Murfree
they told me I'd find you here and you might know something I need to find out."
"It's not likely," said Professor Warren irritably. "But what is it?"
She looked at him peculiarly as he hesitated. Happening upon the dead rabbits had
confirmed his darkest suspicions—even those he would not fully admit to himself. He
had no explanation yet, but he had a clue which was completely incredible. If he told
anybody what he'd experienced, he'd be thought insane.
He named his profession and his connection with Forest and Field, and explained that
he was trying to track down something important to sportsmen. Game animals were
being killed in a strange manner. Something new and deadly was responsible. He had
an extremely improbable idea about the matter, and he hoped that as a biologist and a
scientific observer she might have noticed something.
She regarded him oddly. Then she pointed.
"Is that the sort of thing you mean?"
He looked. There was a tiny, pitiful heap of draggled feathers about a tiny skeleton
with a sharp beak. There were eggs, befouled by rain. "A partridge," he said, "dead on
its nest. Yes." He approved of Professor Warren. She noticed things.
"There are half a dozen others like that," she said, still regarding him with a peculiar
expression, "within a quarter of a mile. It struck me as strange. In fact—" She looked at
his hands.
Lane realized that he still gripped the clumps of dead leaves he'd held before his face
when leaving the clearing of the dead rabbits. He dropped them and said awkwardly: "I
had a good reason for that—just now. But I suppose I look like a lunatic."
Professor Warren grunted inelegantly. "Not quite," she said. "Of course, holding
bouquets of trash while introducing onesself isn't normal, but I never heard of a lunatic
who thought his actions strange. You do. And if you're concerned with wild life you
may be able to help me in some trouble I'm having with buzzards. This business is part
of it," she added dourly, with a wave of her hand toward the enigmatic arrangement of
copper screen wire. "Come down to the trailer and have some coffee. What do you know
about the manners and customs of buzzards?"

"Very little," admitted Lane. He knew how they nested—hollow stumps, mostly—and
how they defended their nests against intruders. The last was hardly a pleasant subject.
"Come along," said Professor Warren. She strode briskly downhill, speaking over her
shoulder. "I've been doing some research on intrasensory substitution. Cases where one
sense substitutes for another. Pit-vipers have a heat nerve in their foreheads so they can
detect the most trivial of temperature variations, and so find warm-blooded prey in
pitch darkness where their eyes can't work. That's heat perception instead of light. Bats
feel obstacles with their ears. Buzzards have some superior substitute for smell. Put out
a dead animal, even covered over with brushwood, or in a pit where it can't be seen.
Buzzards come from everywhere, immediately, even from upwind. They couldn't
possibly smell it upwind. And when they arrive, why then they try to find it with their
noses! When the first buzzard comes downwind to bait that's barely cold, he didn't smell
it! He saw the odor. It's the only possible explanation. He simply has to be substituting
some operation of his optic nerves for the sense of smell. You see?"
Lane hardly heard. Two miles back, something had tried to kill him, and his mind
had not yet recovered its "balance. He'd seen nothing. It was impossible, yet it had
happened.
"I was getting good results," said Professor Warren vexedly, "but about ten days ago
the buzzards went temperamental on me! Now they float up there, looking for food, and
I put out bait which ten days ago they'd have flocked to. And they ignore it. It's
ridiculous! I've good proof that a good reek of organic decay can be detected optically.
But I have to check through buzzards that it's really done. And there are dead chickens
in a barn yonder —" she waved a large hand— "and the buzzards aren't interested!
There's a dead cow in a pasture, and they pay no attention! Temperament among
buzzards? Or is it those damned dynamic systems I only halfway believe I've
discovered?"
She turned to scowl at him. He'd stopped. He was staring at a mole—a gopher. It had
burrowed up to the open air and died. It looked pathetic, a mere shapeless blob of fur
with tiny pinkish claws barely showing. It was untouched by flies or beetles.
"That's been there for a week," she said curtly.
"The buzzards," said Lane painfully, "hadn't been at some dead rabbits I passed. No
blowflies have been at this mole. There was no taint in the air where the rabbits were.
But there was something else."
"What?"
"I know what happened," said Lane wryly, "but I can't believe it. It's too crazy! But it
fits too well into what I asked you." He stopped. Nobody would believe—
"Hah!" said Professor Warren. "I don't mind making a fool of myself! It looks to me as
if there are some gaseous dynamic systems operating around here in what ought to be
good, healthy smells! Only they act like something more. They act like pseudoliving
things. And I'm wondering if they're what's keeping my buzzards aloft. Dynamic
systems, consuming the smells that buzzards ought to see!"
Lane swallowed. Then he said: "What's happened to the flies around here? And the
mosquitos?"
"There's not one," said Professor Warren. She stopped short and stared at him. "That's

queer! There haven't been, not for ten days or so!" Her expression showed puzzlement.
"Queer I didn't realize it!" She abruptly resumed her march toward the trailer.
Lane followed her, frowning. A shadow swept across the ground before him. He
jumped. The shadow swept on. It was a buzzard. It swooped on in a long, beautiful
glide and swung outward where the next spur jutted from the mountainside. He saw it
float out over the broad, sunlit valley floor.
When they were a hundred yards from the trailer, a dog came out from under it and
ran toward them. It was not a beautiful dog. It had started out to be a foxhound and
apparently had changed its mind on the way. Its tail drooped. It carried its head low,
without spirit.
"That's the Monster," said Professor Warren briefly. "He's not ours. He belongs to a
poor white family that fled in terror of their own imaginations last week. The Monster
stayed behind when they left, probably because we feed him. I don't think they did."
The dog cringed a greeting. Professor Warren strode on past him.
"Wait a minute!" said Lane. "They fled from what?" "Nightmares," boomed the
professor. "They said things sat on their chests and took their breaths. They spent their
nights with their heads under the bedcovers. Two of their dogs and all their chickens
died, and then their cow. Old age, probably, but they ran away whining of magic."
"Good God!" said Lane, stunned. "Eh?" demanded the professor. She saw his
expression. "What's the matter?"
Lane saw much—too much. He put things together. They fitted. The result was
impossible, but so were the facts.
"They—this poor white family," said Lane, "begin to seem to me very sensible people.
I think I can tell you, after all."
He told her exactly what had happened to him near the pathetic small heap of dead
rabbits. It was his profession to tell what he had seen and done; he made a living at it.
He knew better than to add details which might make his story more plausible. He told
it baldly, factually, without explanation or theory.
"Which," he finished, "is why I carried dead leaves when I spoke to you. It was the
equivalent of having a sheet ready to pull over my head."
Professor Warren blinked at him. Then she grunted. "Hah! It fits in. Have to be
checked, of course. But idiots have called me wildly imaginative before now. I'd enjoy
proving something so wild they couldn't imagine it!" Then she grunted again. "Mr. Lane,
I am a desperate woman, just desperate enough to test this absurd story —which I
implicitly believe—in the hope of finding out why there has been an outbreak of artistic
temperament among the local specimens of Cathartes aura—buzzards to you, sir! You'll
stay to dinner and tell me what you know." She raised her voice in a bellow. "Carol!" she
roared. "Carol! We've got company!"
A door opened at one end of the giant aluminum trailer. A girl appeared carrying a
wicker bird cage. Her face was troubled. Lane saw her with a sudden, extraordinary
clarity. It was as if, somehow, he saw her and the mountains and the sky and valley with
much more than the customary vividness.

Lane had come a long way across the mountains, reviewing his own bafflement on the
way. Then he'd had an experience which still made his flesh crawl; he was disturbed
because he couldn't believe what he remembered. But now this girl Carol looked
completely as a girl should look, and remote from terror and bewilderment and unease.
He felt a surprised gratitude that she was here to remind him that the world was good to
live in. He regarded her with an astonished satisfaction.
"Aunt Ann," she said uncomfortably, "I put Pogo outside in his cage because it's
stuffy in the trailer. Then I looked out and didn't see him on his perch. I went to see, and
he was lying on the bottom. There are feathers all about as if he'd been beating against
the bars! He's dead!"
Professor Warren glanced at Lane with startled eyes.
"Pogo," she said, "is our canary. Or was." An instant later she said in a brusque voice:
"Too bad! I'll look him over. Carol, this is Dick Lane. He's having dinner with us. We're
going to talk biology and dynamic systems and ha'nts and goblins and what the hell
happened to the mosquitoes that were so bad when we set up camp here. We may touch
on why the old cow died. Mr. Lane, this is my niece, Carol Warren."
The girl nodded to Lane.
"I have a firm conviction," boomed Professor Warren, "that this young man is going to
write, and I'm going to make a learned report on, some theories so wild that they'll make
Baron Munchausen's best effort sound like a Sunday-morning chapel talk by the dean of
women." She rubbed her hands. "I'll stir 'em up! If they don't try to have me certified
insane, they'll get me thrown out of the society for—"
The Monster uttered a sound like a despairing scream. Then he snarled, facing empty
air. It was unnatural and horrifying to see him bare his fangs at emptiness while he
trembled horribly. He turned slowly, yelping, as if something unseeable moved. Then
he snapped and growled furiously. But he was terrified. His yelps were cries of fear.
Suddenly he screamed and bolted blindly, snapping at the emptiness about him. He
dodged and twisted crazily, making an outcry which was hysteria and fear and the
ultimate of panicky ferocity.
Lane felt all his muscles go rigid. Without any doubt, he knew that the Monster heard
faint whining sounds, and perhaps had felt faint touches upon his fur, though there was
nothing at all to be seen.
"It followed me!" Lane said savagely. Then he snapped to the girl: "Get inside! Fast!
Get in the trailer!"
He pushed at the professor while the Monster rolled over, snapping, and then
plunged crazily into a tangled mass of briars. There he continued to yelp. Seconds later
he scuttled out the far side of the briars and bolted desperately for the trailer. He flung
himself through the opened door, almost upsetting Carol as she stood there.
"Inside!" raged Lane. "Get in! Quick! Before it follows!"
His hair stood on end. He thought he heard a faint, shrill, venomous whine. He had
the feeling of horror he'd felt back by the dead rabbits, but now he thought of wild
things fighting hopelessly in the wilderness, and of the corpses he'd seen. The sound of
whining increased, as if it came from more than one source.
He thrust Professor Warren frantically before him as he ripped off his coat and flailed

the air with it. Invisible or not, he would know of anything his coat might touch.
"Quick!" he panted. "Hurry! Get inside!"

Chapter 2
Inside the trailer, nothing happened. Lane went grimly through it, making sure there
was no opening to the outer air. The ventilator above the small cook-stove was open. He
closed it. The result of these precautions was stifling heat, but Lane felt cold chills down
his spine simply by thinking of invisible stranglers trying to worm their way in to where
the three humans were. There were times, too, when a deep and bitter rage took
possession of him.
"Be still!" said Professor Warren irritably, as she paced up and down the confined
space of the trailer's living section. "You make me hot to look at you! I have to think
things out. Either we are all quite insane, or the people who used to own the Monster
were much more sensible than we've been!"
Carol sat quietly, looking from one to the other—her buxom aunt in khaki riding
breeches, and Lane seething in citified tweeds. Outside the trailer there was a rocky
shelf which loomed over a valley to the east.
"They said that things sat on their chests and stopped their breaths," Professor Warren
went on, "so they ducked under the covers and the ha'nts went away. I was scornful! But
now I think that they may have been right!"
Lane forced himself to sit down. He lighted a cigarette. "There was something that
tried to strangle me," he said savagely, "and it whined while it did so. I heard the same
sound just outside, and the dog saw something. But whatever attacked me and the
Monster was invisible! And that's impossible! Real things can't be invisible!"
"Not quite invisible," the professor said calmly. "What do you think I was trying to do
with screen wire set up on the two sides of a bit of buzzard bait? I was trying to see what
kept it from reeking to high heaven! Didn't you ever hold a match six inches from your
nose, and look at the world through the hot gases above the flame? Things wobble and
waver when you do. How do you think I made up my mind there were gaseous
dynamic systems around here? When you look through one of them, things waver and
wobble! The things you're talking about are just as invisible as the column of hot air
above a match, which means they're not easy to see—you have to know what to look
for—but they can be seen!" "Then what tried to kill me?"
"Certainly a dynamic system," the professor insisted. "It had to be. A dynamic system
is a parcel of matter using energy in a patterned way. A whirlwind's a dynamic system.
So's a gasoline engine. Or a rabbit, or a man. Whatever attacked you and the Monster
had to be a dynamic system because it used energy in a patterned fashion. Look here!
Blow a smoke ring."
Lane blinked. The professor gestured impatiently. He blew a smoke ring. It went
slowly across the stifling hot interior of the trailer, expanding as it went.
"That," said the professor, "is a very simple dynamic system. It's a quantity of air

which happens to have a toroidal motion. It isn't alive. It's only a vortex ring. You can
see it because the air of which it's composed happens to contain smoke. But a vortex ring
can exist in plain air just as—"
"Aunt Ann! Look at the smoke ring!" It was Carol, her voice strained.
The professor blinked. Then she looked at the thin, drifting ring of smoke. It was
deformed. It was bent on one side exactly as if it had struck something solid.
The professor said, "That's it! There's one now! You can see the ceiling waver through
it."
There was a sudden motion of the air. The unseeable something which had deflected
the smoke ring moved. The tendrils of smoke wavered and curled through the space
from which they had previously been barred.
"It's one of them!" exulted the professor. "Right in here! But why doesn't the Monster
react? Fetch him out."
Lane dragged the dog, cowering, from underneath a stool. He held the dog up. The
brute panted and wriggled. He gave no sign of fright. His tongue lolled.
"If there is something here," said Lane, "he doesn't smell it. And it can't be seen or he'd
see it. It—"
There were now flat layers of tobacco smoke in the air, made visible by sunlight
striking into the room through closed glass windows. There was no air movement
except the extremely slow general turnover of air in a closed room, but something
passed swiftly through those tranquil layers of vapor, disturbing them. It was startling.
It was appalling. Lane did not see any wavering of the background behind it.
"Item!" said the professor with satisfaction. "We have a good observation indicating
that there are sometimes dynamic systems in air which can move through smoke layers
and disturb them. Perhaps we should provide ourselves with sheets to pull over our
heads."
She beamed at Lane, who looked warily at Carol.
"It got in, probably when the dog did," he said grimly.
The professor rubbed her hands. "Of course!" she said zestfully. "But we know how to
keep it from harming any of us! I'm going to catch this specimen and find out a few
things about it!"
Lane's eyes went back to Carol. She was watching all the interior of the trailer with
steady, intent eyes—beautiful eyes, Lane thought, but troubled now.
"If it's what we think, it's dangerous," Lane pointed out. "The first thing should be to
get her away from this place. I feel responsible. I let the thing in here."
"Pooh!" said the professor.
She went to a cupboard built into the wall of the trailer, and took out some folded
sheets. She shook one open, lengthwise, and tossed it to her niece. It spread out in the
air.
The Monster snarled. He cried out at the sheet, barking and snarling and yelping all

at once, his voice rising in pitch. The professor's mouth dropped open. The sheet fell
almost upon Carol, but it didn't reach the floor everywhere. One edge was caught up
upon a stool. Besides, there was a spot where something writhed and squirmed and
whined shrilly beneath it. That something was roughly rounded and somewhat more
than a foot in diameter. It was caught under the cloth, and apparently could not lift it.
The Monster went mad with terror. He made a tumult of fear and ferocity together.
He screamed at the somehow horrible shapelessness beneath the white cloth. Yet he
cringed away from it as he made his high-pitched din.
But one edge of the sheet was caught on a stool. The throbbing thing seemed to fight
its way toward that upraised edge. Suddenly the sheet sagged. Whatever had been
trapped was trapped no longer. It seemed to Lane that its whining became a sound of
maniacal fury. The Monster dived out of sight and moaned in terror.
Carol made a convulsive movement. Lane jerked his eyes to her. Her eyes were wide
and terrified. Her mouth was open. She tried to gasp. She choked, suffocating, beating
the air before her with her hands.
Lane plunged toward her, snatching up the cloth, which ripped because one of his
feet was on it. He did not notice the resistance. He flung it over Carol's head in
instinctive use of the professor's dictum that a sheet over one's head would be sound
sense at such a moment.
Then horror filled him. The sheet did not fall naturally about her. It draped over her
head, but it enclosed something else. Something huge and invisible clung to her,
whining and throbbing.
It was so completely revolting that at any other time Lane would have felt sick. But
now he thrust out his hands. Something pulsating stirred his fingers through the cloth.
He found Carol's face while she struggled and put his hands together, scooping away
the thing that clung to her. It filled a great part of the remains of the sheet. He clenched it
tightly until he'd made the cloth into a bag whose neck he held fast. It was like a rubber
balloon imprisoned in the sack, but no balloon ever fought against a cloth that held it,
nor emitted a shrill bloodcurdling sound.
Lane's hair felt as if it were standing straight on end, and horror flowed up his wrists
from his hands and fingers. But he twisted the cloth, and twisted it again, compressing
the captured tiling into a smaller and smaller space.
And suddenly there was nothing imprisoned in the cloth. It collapsed, and there was
a reek of carrion in the air.
Professor Warren was pounding on his shoulders.
"Stop it! Stop it!" she cried furiously. Then she swore briefly. "Too late! You've killed
it!"
Lane said thickly, "I'll burn it—"
"Oh, Carol's all right," said the professor. "And it's dead. But we learned some
interesting items."
"I'm going to make sure it's dead!"
Professor Warren shrugged her shoulders. The Monster moaned and whimpered in

his hiding place.
"Hush!" said Professor Warren angrily. She listened, with her head cocked on one
side. There was a sound outside the trailer, now. It was a thin, high-pitched whine, save
that it was made of many voices and was loud. It gave the impression of a frenzied
anger shared by many things.
"Hm," said the professor after a moment. "After all, it was a brilliant idea to insist that
we close all the windows. It sounds as if our guest had friends, and they've come to help
him or her or it to murder Carol."
"How can I make sure this thing is dead?" demanded Lane. He still held the limp sack
of cloth in his grip. But he was looking at Carol, who had buried her face in her hands.
"If," said Professor Warren, with a fine air of competence, "if you took a jellyfish and
put it in a cloth bag and twisted until you'd wrung the jellyfish out through the cloth, I
don't think you'd be worried about whether it was dead or not. That's what you did with
this thing." She added exuberantly: "It was alive. It had a certain degree of intelligence.
Perhaps a considerable degree. It's amazing! And if you sniff you can't help knowing
something about its metabolism! No wonder the buzzards were temperamental! There
were no smells for them to see!"
She stood still a moment, gloating over her discoveries. Then she moved to the other
end of the living space and struck a match. She put water on the small, bottled-gas stove.
"For coffee," she said beaming. "To celebrate. I'm going to make some notes while the
water boils. Wildly imaginative, am I? I'll show them some wild imagination! A dynamic
system of gases, unquestionably living because it has undetermined but demonstrable
intelligence, emotional reactions, and at least some degree of communication with its
fellows! We irritated it and it called the others while it attacked! Let 'em try to classify a
Gizmo like that!"
She sat down and pulled out a notebook. She began to write, absorbedly and swiftly.
The Monster moaned. There remained a raging, whining noise in the air outside. Lane
listened. He'd been trying for a long time to find an unknown killer of game and men.
He'd found a something which not only tried to kill him, but the girl. It had been filled
with fury toward a human being. Now others of its kind shrilled the same insane anger.
"Don't worry!" said the professor, without looking up from where she scribbled. "The
thing inside here couldn't lift a sheet. They can't turn over the trailer."
Lane glared out a window. He saw the strained shapes of trees as they grew on the
rocky ground. He saw blue sky, very bright as compared to the shadowed
mountainside. He moved to the other side of the trailer and looked away, down into the
valley. He saw the blurred edge of the mountain's shadow cast on some of the isolated
small fields below. Far out he saw a buzzard in leisurely and effortless flight. The tree
branches were still, their leaves motionless. It was a moment of late hot afternoon in
which the air should have been filled with the triumphant stridulations of insects and
the cries of birds. But there was no sound except the venomous shrill whining of things
no man had yet seen, yet which were murderers.
Carol stirred, and he turned to her. She was white and shaken.
"You're all right?" asked Lane awkwardly. She nodded. But her hands trembled.
"Drink of water?" She shook her head.

He sat down beside her. "We've got to find a better way of killing them," he said
grimly, "and then we'll take you somewhere where you'll be safe."
She tried to smile. He felt a certain lifting of the spirit. She was exactly what a girl
should be. He found himself marveling at the fact that her cheek curved so exactly as it
ought, and her lips were exactly as they should be, and that the line of her throat was
absolutely the only perfect way that a throat should curve. He had the sensation of
discovery which is pure satisfaction. He was delighted to look; he did not wonder where
this delight might lead. She, being a woman, probably did. "We'll have to try fire," he
said sagely. "And there'll be odors they can't take. And there'll be weapons we can make,
especially to destroy the organization of the gas they're made of. We'll beat them."
"Of—of course," she agreed. She hesitated a moment. "Fire might do. I know what
Aunt Ann thought about them. She's said that they're probably ghosts—or the origin of
ghost stories. She says they're almost certain kin to will-o'-the-wisps and corpselights
and such things that float over swamps, shining faintly in the dark. They exist, but
nobody's ever caught one. They must use energy to keep themselves in existence. Aunt
Ann has been guessing that the things she's discovered may use the gases of decay as
will-o'-the-wisps use marsh-gas, to supply the energy that maintains them. As we use
food. If she's right, fire might bother them."
Lane listened with a sort of urgent respectfulness. But he also listened to the whining
noise outside.
"Savages," added Carol, "cover their faces when they sleep. And it's rare they'll sleep
without a fire going, Aunt Ann says. They believe that ghosts and devils are afraid of
fire, and they cover their faces lest evil spirits bother them. If the—things like those that
tried to kill us are the things that savages really fear, their superstitions protect them by
what they make them do. And the things, if they learned that humans were always
protected, would tend to ignore men and attack only lower animals."
"Except," growled Lane, "that now they've found we aren't savages and so aren't
protected. But there's more than that. They must be much more numerous than they've
ever been before. Or a new and deadly kind may have appeared . . ." He listened to the
whining outside. "These things could have started the tales of fiends and devils; the old
stories told of devils tearing people to bits. These don't even wound animals, but their
victims have been found in the middle of destruction. The effect is of violent murder,
but the cause could be the violent death struggles of the victims."
Professor Warren slapped her notebook shut. "Hah!" she said triumphantly. "I'll pin
their ears back! Imaginative, am I? Wait till I march into the Biological Department with
some of these things trapped in jars. A gaseous organism with a gas metabolism! … I've
got to get bigger jars!"
"I'm trying," said Lane, "to figure out a way to kill them. They're waiting outside by
the dozens now. Maybe hundreds." It did not occur to him—not yet—that there might be
thousands. Or more.
"We can protect ourselves," said Professor Warren zestfully, "with sheets over our
heads. If they can't stop our breathing, they can't do any damage."

Lane was unconvinced. Angry as he was, he could not but remember that there had
been a thing—a gas entity— a Gizmo in the trailer. It had made no whining sound. It
acted as if guided by cunning, calling no attention to itself until discovered by accident.
Perhaps it had meant to wait until the occupants of the trailer were asleep. An attack in
darkness and during slumber could be irresistible. In short, the Gizmos might be
cleverer than Professor Warren credited. The attempt to kill him had been shrewd, after
he escaped the first assault by tumbling into deep dried leaves.
"If you want to try sheets as a protection," he said shortly, "I'll try it. I'm responsible
for their being here."
Professor Warren snorted. "Nonsense! Before you got here the buzzards stopped
coming to bait because the Gizmos were consuming the gases they looked for. They
were here then. And what happened to the gnats and flies and mosquitoes? And the
rabbits and the hen quail on their nests? Don't be absurd! They were here before you
came. They didn't attack us; the one you killed attacked only after it was trapped. But
they were around before you got here."
Lane said grimly: "That's part of my point. If these things are the foundation for
legends of devils, they have the necessities of devils, the first of which is that nobody
shall believe he exists. Now that these things know that we know of their existence, they
need to kill all of us."
Professor Warren raised her eyebrows. "I know they're impossible," she protested,
"even if they're true. But are you suggesting they're intelligent?"
"I'm afraid so," said Lane. "If they were the devils of old legend, they contrived deals
by which they were worshiped and supplied with the smells of burned flesh and
spilled, rotting blood. The pagan deities—"
Professor Warren grimaced. "Don't tell me I've discovered a pantheon! If they're
intelligent, where's the evidence?"
"I've got an idea how to get it," said Lane, "if they haven't the information to keep
them from revealing themselves."
He gathered up the sheet which had been the means of capture and execution of one
of the creatures the professor called Gizmos, among other things. He spread the sheet
over one of the closed trailer windows. Carol saw what he was about, and came to help.
They draped the window so that it was completely covered by the closely woven cloth.
Lane knotted it at the corners so that it was tight, yet there was a fullness in the center of
the window opening. He made use of that fullness to slide aside the window and open
it slightly.
Nothing happened. The distinctly audible whining sound died as soon as he began to
fumble at the window. There was no sound at all—no birdcall or chirrup of insects.
There was not even the whisper of wind among the trees of the mountainside. In bright
sunshine, the unnatural stillness was horrible.
They waited, staring at the curiously draped window. Nothing happened at all. Lane
shrugged.
"I thought I'd provoke a mass attack by opening the window. If they were stupid, I
thought one might try to poke inside. But if they were intelligent, I thought they'd try to
storm the trailer in a rush we couldn't possibly handle. I was wrong."

Then the Monster yelped in terror. His hackles rising, he backed into the farthest
corner of the trailer, snarling at the open window.
"You were right," said the professor.
Things hit the draped cloth, which billowed out tautly. It almost seemed to stretch
with the violence of massed Gizmos pushing against it. They tore and tugged at it, their
whining filling the interior of the vehicle. It was unspeakably horrible that they should
rave so terribly at so flimsy a barrier, and not be able to rend it.
Lane leaped toward the window. The sheet could not be torn. But the tuggings and
throbbings of the individually weak murderers were loosening the cloth from the
corners of the window frame. One edge billowed momentarily, and a vicious whine of
triumph flashed past Lane. He heard Carol cry out.
He thrust back the barrier. He beat at the cloth with his fists, as if to destroy the
yielding things by blows. Carol cried out again: "Aunt Ann! Here! Come here!"
There were strugglings. The Monster screamed and snapped. It fought madly against
unseeable nothingness. Another part of the cloth barrier bulged to its very edge.

Chapter 3
Professor Warren was chalk-white when the window was safely shut again and the
two Gizmos which had got inside were destroyed. Carol herself had killed one by the
exact method Lane had used earlier—plucking it from its victim by forming a sack of
cloth about it, and then wringing that cloth until there was nothing left inside it to
struggle. The professor had been the one attacked. The second Gizmo she'd located by
its raging whine and the Monster's snarls in its direction. She drove it by a lucky stroke
of a whipping cloth into the flame of the stove. It died in that flame, itself a pale and
lambent flicker of fire as its complex hydrocarbon gases burned.
Now there was darkness outside, and silence again. The inside lights were on and
Professor Warren sat weakly still. Carol had recovered much more quickly from the
similar attempt to suffocate her. But a younger girl is always more resilient than an older
woman; Professor Warren had had security and prestige and authority for so long that
she was dazed at the idea of an attempt upon her life. That it had been made by what
she considered a biological specimen stunned her. Carol had been able to realize her
danger more promptly, and more quickly accept the fact of safety regained.
"It was—stupid of me," said Professor Warren in a trembling voice. "I couldn't really
believe there was real danger. Even when Carol was—attacked, you got the thing off her
so swiftly that I did not truly realize ... I am a very stupid old woman. I thought of these
horrors as things to be studied, and nothing more."
"They're a lot more," Lane told her. "They've been cagey, but I'm sure they've killed
people before."
"Appalling!" said the professor. She shuddered. "The only parallel I know to such a
clanger appearing suddenly, is the appearance of rabies among bats in the Southern
states. That's been taken care of. The public has been warned. But here—"

Carol said quietly: "That's not too good a parallel, Aunt Ann. Bats were known, and
rabies was known. It had only to be proved that the two had gotten together. This is
more difficult. You have to prove that these— things exist. And people who've never
encountered them are going to find it hard to believe in them."
"I'll take care of that!" said the professor. "Let me get to a telephone."
"I'm afraid," said Lane, "that that's a problem. How do we get to a telephone?"
The professor gaped at him. "What do you mean?" Then she said angrily. "Do you
mean that these—these creatures—these Gizmos—" She stopped short. She seemed to
shrivel a little.
"If they're not too intelligent," said Lane, "we will probably be all right. They'll get
tired of hanging around outside. But if they're really smart, I don't like the prospects."
He moved to a window. There was only night outside the trailer, now. He screened
his eyes with his hand to peer out into the moonlight. There was the dark mountain
against a star-studded sky. To the east and below there was a filmy, glamorous mist
which obscured the valley. The darkness was a very picture of tranquility. But it was
deathly quiet—until he strained his ears and heard a faint whining, fainter than the
humming of a mosquito. But it came from many sources. The Gizmos were waiting. He
turned away. Carol searched his face. "You say they've killed animals all over the
country. Maybe someone else has found out what they are. It might be on a radio news
broadcast."
Lane turned on the trailer's radio. There was a hum and then the last notes of a
hillbilly ballad. An announcer drawled:
". . . And that ends the Gourdvine Boys program for today and this is—" a burst of
static— "your friendly station in Danville. News follows in a moment, but first—"
Lane breathed, and was astonished at his relief that the situation here was not typical
of that of all the world. He sat down. He listened to a commercial for a brand of
fertilizer, delivered with immense enthusiasm. Then the news.
He felt better when the news bulletins began with international events. The news was
reassuring because it was given first place, and disturbing because such pettinesses
were capable of destroying the peace of the world. Political news. Then the day's
assortment of freak items. Radar stations all over the United States were reporting an
extraordinary number of "Gizmos." They were believed to be the basis of many
flying-saucer stories. It had been guessed that they were actually areas of extra-high
ionization in the air.
Professor Warren said shakily: "Gizmos. That's what I called these creatures.
But—but—if there's metabolism in gas, there has to be ionization! They can be talking
about these horrors!"
She listened tensely, but the subject of Gizmos was dropped. There was local news. A
truck driver had been found dead in his truck, ten miles out of Danville. Apparently
he'd pulled off the road for a nap, and had never wakened. But the windshield and side
windows of the truck's cab were broken.
The professor wrung her hands. Outside Pittsburg the bodies of two children,

missing for a week, had been found. Apparently they had died of exposure shortly after
their disappearance, though the weather had been warm and there had been no rain.
Professor Warren wrung her hands. "Gizmos!" she said bitterly.
There was an extraordinary movement of game out of certain forests in Aroostook
County, Maine. Wild creatures were found on the highways in flight from their natural
habitat. A commercial jet-liner, equipped with radar, had arrived in Kansas City with its
pilot and copilot in a cold sweat. Its radar had repeatedly reported flying objects in its
path, and the pilot had had to dodge all over the sky to avoid collisions—but he'd seen
nothing. This seemed to check with ground radar reports of Gizmos in much greater
than their usual number. . . .
"Gizmos," said Professor Warren, as Lane turned off the radio. "They're ionization in
the air. But they are so much morel The—horrors are alive and they feed on the gases of
decay. To use such gases for energy at less than flame temperature, there has to be
ionization. I wonder what they'd say if I told them that their radio Gizmos are living
dynamic systems in gas? Probably what doctors said when it was suggested that
diseases could be caused by germs!"
She relapsed into silence. Carol said quietly: "If they can't pass through sheeting . . ."
Outside the trailer the Gizmos waited, ghostly in their tenuousness. They were very
frail, in a way. A thousand of them, weighed in air, would hardly move the pointer of a
scale. But they were cunning and very deadly. They were also in very many places
where their existence was unsuspected.
In New York, for example, there was a pigeon fancier with a small building for nests
and a screened exercise pen for his flock of two hundred homing pigeons. Tonight, as
Lane and Carol consulted together in western Virginia, there was a small tumult on the
roof of the New York apartment house where the pigeon fancier lived. The roof, of
course, was deserted at this hour. Nobody noticed the disturbance. It began with very
faint whining sounds which the traffic noises of the city drowned out. Presently there
were scufflings and frantic flappings. A pigeon fought madly against suffocation. It
fluttered desperately against the screen of the enclosure. Presently it was still. A little
later another pigeon fought as crazily in the same confined space. The whining sounds
grew louder. Other unseeable horrors—Gizmos—floated through the air toward the
spot where the struggles went on. They drifted over the rooftops and above the streets
which, like canyons, divided the city. They came from nearby parks and
shrubbery-filled squares. They clustered about the pen in which pigeons fluttered
helplessly and died. Undoubtedly the Gizmos took a certain pleasure in their murders.
Dogs enjoy hunting; so do men. But Gizmos had to kill for a relatively long time before
they could feed on what they killed. Therefore they secured a delectable pleasure out of
the act of murder, which only later would provide them with food. It was a necessary
provision of their nature.
There were two hundred pigeons in this particular enclosure. Nobody heard what
took place there. Nobody came to investigate. After a certain interval there was a carpet
of strangled birds on the floor of the exercise pen. Feathers from their wings, beaten off
in their struggles, lay all about. But there was no longer any motion on the rooftop
except that whining things which could not be seen drifted away again through the

darkness above the buildings and the brightly lighted streets. . . .
Within minutes of the finish of the pigeon massacre, a man turned into his own
driveway in a suburb of Memphis, Tennessee. There was much shrubbery on the lawn,
and the driveway was bordered by many bushes. The smell of growing things and
honeysuckle was in the still air.
There was a movement at the end of the drive. The man's small white dog had
recognized the sound of his master's car. He came joyously to meet the man. He was
clearly visible in the headlights as he trotted, tail wagging, to meet the car. Halfway
down the drive, the dog stopped short. He faced the thick brushwood on one side. He
bristled. As the car drew near, he snarled. The man braked and opened the car door.
Snarling over his shoulder, the dog jumped in. He hopped up on the front seat beside
the man. Whining anxiously, he licked his face and then growled ferociously at
something in the brushwood.
The man drove on. There were lights in his house. A lamp outside the door winked to
brightness. His wife, also, had seen the coming car. As he drove into the garage she
appeared in the doorway, smiling. Lights shone upon her, and on the steps, and on the
smoothly cropped lawn nearby. It showed the vague shapes of blossoms on the nearer
blooming shrubs. She waited for her husband as he and the dog moved toward her.
Then the man felt something like gossamer touch his face. He brushed it away. He
heard a thin whine he attributed to a mosquito—and the dog leaped up upon him,
snarling and barking and yelping all at once.
The man gasped. His wife cried out. The dog leaped and snapped furiously at the air
before his master's face. Then he turned from the man and made crazy rushes, snapping
at empty air. Something seemed to be offering battle. It could not be seen. The dog
screamed at it between his growlings. But he fought.
The man's wife cried to him to come into the house: that the dog had gone mad. He
did go into the house, but he looked out at the dog. He almost believed that it had
something to fight—but not quite, because the lawn was lighted and there was
absolutely nothing to be seen but the frantic, snapping dog.
Then the dog died. . . .
Hundreds of miles from New York and from Tennessee, a young farmer drove his
sweetheart homeward after a country dance. He had a reasonably new car whose motor
purred satisfactorily. The highway ran near a patch of woodland. Behind this forest there
was more and more; for thirty miles northward there was wilderness. But the road itself
ran between fields of half-grown corn which stirred and rustled in the moonlight as the
car purred on.
The man saw rabbits first, hopping on the road's hard surface. One often sees a single
rabbit when driving at night, but here were many. Then a woodchuck appeared in the
headlight beams, waddling across the road. A hundred yards on there was a fox, which
turned luminous eyes upon the car and hurried away into the corn. There were more
rabbits, squirrels mixed in with them. He saw a second fox, paying no attention to its
natural prey. He saw a doe, which the headlights bewildered so that it stood as if
fascinated until the car had passed. He saw a skunk. Two fawns, shivering and afraid,
fled ahead of the car along the highway. They disturbed a weasel before they rushed out
of the light into the brush. There were a brown bear, and a buck deer, gazing about him

with a hunted air. He snorted and vanished. He saw more rabbits, by hundreds,
hopping across the Toad.
In a mile the speed of the car was reduced to a crawl, and the farmer and his
sweetheart were in a state of purest bewilderment. Before them on the concrete—even
beyond the headlight rays—there were what seemed to be thousands of shining jewels.
They were the eyes of creatures who should have been deep in the woodland. They
stared at the car's lights and flowed across the highway. For nearly ten miles the young
farmer and his sweetheart drove at a snail's pace along this strangely crowded highway.
It seemed at times as if the road were carpeted with the animals, large and small, which
had lived in the forest to the north. They would have covered square miles if gathered
into a single mass, but moving without plan as they did, sometimes half a mile of
highway showed only a few of them, while other parts were black with moving, furry
bodies.
The young farmer caught his breath as a consequence of this migration struck him.
"They'll eat up all the crops!" he said anxiously. "All these things feeding will be worse
than locusts! They'll eat up everything!" But somehow he could not bring himself to
speed up the car and so diminish the number of wild creatures who migrated into the
province of men.
This matter was, of course, one to which official attention would be given. An
invasion of fields on which crops grew would not be dismissed as unimportant. But
there were innumerable other matters which would be ignored: the deaths of cats in
towns and cities; the finding of many dead rats upon city dumps, unwounded, yet stiff
and cold with bared fangs; and there would be some disturbance over race horses found
dead in their stalls. . . .
Lane and Carol discussed possible weapons and possible protection against the
Gizmos who definitely had not gone away from the trailer. Professor Warren slept a
troubled sleep on a couch which opened into a double bed. There was no thought of
relaxation in the ordinary sense. The trailer was beleaguered by things which could not
be seen at all unless one knew where to look and understood the significance of a very
slight wavering and wobbling of the background behind them.
Presently Lane spoke coldly of the grisly possibilities if there were enough of them,
and if they were as cunning and as persistent as they seemed to be. The air in the trailer
seemed to grow stale. He felt an angry uneasiness for Carol. He felt that there was
something he had neglected which amounted to a near and present danger.
He got up abruptly and went about the living quarters of the biological laboratory
vehicle. He checked the doors, as if the Gizmos had strength to move them. He verified
that the windows were tightly shut. He made certain that the ventilator above the stove
had not been disturbed. Anything that a smoke ring could pass through was suspect. He
found nothing wrong, but the hunch persisted. He could not believe all was right. He
went into the laboratory end of the trailer and turned on the lights.
There were gossamer touches on his face. He dragged the door shut behind him,
because it would have taken longer to close it if he'd passed through first. He dragged at
his coat, shouting: "Carol! Professor! Watch out! Gizmos are in!" A steady whining noise
sounded all about him. He saw the laboratory clearly, neat and compact. There was a

camera mounted on a stand, with an extraordinarily long-focus lens attached to it; it
could take a close-up picture from an incredible distance. It pointed at a small opening
in the trailer wall. During travel, that opening was closed by an aluminum-faced cover.
During the time when such a camera was in daily use, a cardboard shield covered it. The
cardboard was one of those convenient makeshifts often used without thought.
Without thought. Because now the cardboard was toppled to the floor. Perhaps the
moving of that cardboard by Gizmos was comparable to the shifting of a locomotive by
the strength of men, but it had been accomplished. The laboratory was filled with faintly
whining things.
Dick Lane leaned back against the door, frantically making sure that it was tightly
shut. He gasped his lungs full of air before it could be denied him, and got his coat
before his face. Then he shouted again to Carol and the professor that they must not
open the door.
He almost exulted in the rage that filled him, because he was confident that now he
knew how to handle the beasts. He heard Carol, anxious and frightened. The professor
urged him to protect himself as he'd done near the dead rabbits.
Again he shouted through the muffling cloth. The Gizmos couldn't harm him through
cloth. True, there were whining noises in his ears, and gossamer touches upon his
forehead and hair. But he glared vengefully above his wadded coat at the seemingly
empty room. He shouted again, confidently. He was going to attack the Gizmos with
something he'd pick up and use like a flail. They could tack a sheet around the
doorway. When he'd cleared the laboratory—or thought he had—he'd open the door,
step into the space enclosed by the sheet, and close the door behind him again. It would
be like an airlock. If any surviving Gizmo should enter the lock with him, it could be
spotted and destroyed. Meanwhile he was safe. There was no hurry.
He stepped forward. He felt stirring resistance, a horrible sensation. He flailed out
with one arm, the other holding his coat before his face. Something gave. There was a
sickening reek of carrion. He struck again.
Then he realized he was not moving in free air, in which Gizmos floated. He was
submerged in Gizmos which had replaced the air. There was no air except what was
entrapped by his coat. It was like being in a room packed tightly with balloons filled
with unbreathable gas. He could break them, but he could not get air. There was no air.
There were only Gizmos. His lungs starved. He panted in the air he had already
breathed. It would not support life. It would not let him keep his senses. He began to
feel dizzy.
He began to fight blindly to break through the yielding, implacable barrier about him.
He heard things smash, but only dimly. It was laboratory apparatus. He heard a window
break, but it meant no breath for him. He fought in a dimming horror, panting,
struggling with less and less purpose.
He fell, and something whined shrilly, and then he couldn't even gasp in air that did
him no good at all. Consciousness went. . . .
But a long, long time later he was dully aware that he was still alive. He was outside
the trailer, and there were stars overhead. He could breathe. He heard Carol sobbing

quietly. He stirred faintly, and the professor exclaimed: "He's alive!"
He mumbled. Presently he could sit up. He heard winnings, but nothing touched
him. He said thinly: "What happened?"
"If you want to hear it—" snapped the professor— "if you want to!" She raged. "We've
been taken prisoner by the Gizmos! They're intelligent, and we're their prisoners, and
they haven't killed us yet because we're something new! We're human beings who know
they exist! So they're going to experiment with us. We're guinea pigs for these damned
Gizmos to do research with!"

Chapter 4
The situation, the atmosphere, and the facts were straight out of an outrageously
unreasonable nightmare. There were bright stars overhead. Low on the horizon there
was a gibbous moon, risen long after sunset. There were strained, contorted tree shapes
on the mountainside. There was the aluminum-bodied trailer, glittering on its
moonward side and abysmally black where it cast a shadow. And there was
silence—almost.
Winnings sounded very close to his ear, and the hair tended to rise all over his scalp.
Carol, straining her eyes to see him, said swiftly: "That's a signal. A steady whine is
when they're angry. But little whinings—they want us to do something."
Lane ground his teeth. "Well?"
"You've been unconscious a long time. We were sure you were dead. We've learned
some things. They expect you to move away from them when they touch you."
There was an infinitely gentle touch at the back of Lane's neck. He said grimly,
unmoving: "Something's touching me now."
"Obey it!" said Carol urgently. "Get up! Move!"
Lane sat more grimly still and the touch at the back of his neck was repeated.
"Why?" he demanded.
"They're studying us," said Carol. "And Aunt Ann's studying them! We've got to find
out what they want, how intelligent they are, how we can fool them or escape them . . ."
"If they're studying us," said Lane furiously, "they're too intellig—"
His breath cut off. He sat fiercely still, not trying to breathe. The impulse was defiance
in the total absence of hope. But as he sat immobile, fiercely ignoring the thing that acted
to suffocate him, he realized that to a nonhuman creature the action would be baffling.
No lower animal, no bird or beast or insect, would react otherwise than directly to the
stoppage of its breath. They would fight for air. A Gizmo would judge of the death of a
victim by the cessation of its attempts to breathe. So if Lane held his breath, to a Gizmo
he would seem dead-yet not dead, either.
He sat utterly still, his hands clenched.
The blanketing thing moved away. He had not tried to breathe, and therefore it was

not necessary to deprive him of air any longer. Lane gasped silently and drew pure air
into his lungs. There were thin, elfin sounds in the night. Not whinings, these, but
musical notes.
"I held my breath," he observed coldly, "and it went away."
Professor Warren said in a strained voice: "Splendid! But don't overwork it! Carol,
you understand the trick?"
Carol said coldly, "Something wants me to get up. I'm going to do it."
She rose, in the eerie light of the distorted moon. She moved forward, stopped,
backed, then turned.
Professor Warren's voice, strained as before, shook with her anger and humiliation.
"Damn them!" she said bitterly. "I can't be sure whether they're actually studying us, as
we'd study them with half a chance, or whether they're simply playing with us like a cat
with a mouse."
"Possibly both," said Lane. "Or it could be something else entirely. An animal doesn't
think like a man."
"They're not animals!" snapped the professor. "They're gas. They're not even
protoplasm! How could they be animals?"
The singular, tense rigidity with which Carol obeyed the orders of invisible things
ceased. She came back to the others, trembling.
"They let me go," she said shakily. "I hate them!"
The professor said, "Did you understand the trick of holding your breath? A
carnivorous animal keeps up its attack until its prey ceases to offer resistance to being
eaten. These creatures aren't carnivorous. They're foetiverous—a good term. It would
mean an cater of foul smells. They will keep up their attack until their victim is ready to
decay. So when one stops trying to breathe—" She stopped, and filled her lungs. She
said curtly: "I'm getting orders now. I shall try it."
She sat immobile. There was silence. The professor was perhaps five yards from Lane,
who sat with clenched hands in the somehow grisly moonlight in a silent world. Nor
was there any movement. The professor sat stony-still, while something whined faintly.
Lane watched with burning eyes. Carol pressed her hand to her mouth, watching.
After an inordinately long time, the professor breathed again.
"It worked," she said unsteadily. "Now they'll talk that over and try to figure out how
we can stop breathing and then start up again. At least I suppose they'll talk it over!"
Carol said, in a faintly apologetic tone: "When you stopped fighting, Dick, back in the
trailer, Aunt Ann and I got desperate. So we put sheets over our heads, with holes for
our eyes, and we—went in the laboratory to try to help you. We had a sheet to put over
your head, too. But there were too many Gizmos. We could breathe, but they closed us
in. They even got underneath the sheets, making that awful whine . . ."
The professor added: "They drowned us—stifled us, by keeping air from us. I
collapsed, and Carol did a moment later. Apparently they drew back and let us recover.
I thought they'd gone away, satisfied that we were dead. We dragged you out to the

open air. We heard no winnings. We tried to make you breathe again. Then they closed
in on us once more . . ." She shuddered. "Three times they stifled us! Three times they
drew back before we quite died!" She added abruptly, "They had us, even in the trailer."
"I believe they did," agreed Lane slowly. "The way they got me, in the laboratory just
now—" He stopped short. There were whinings at his ear. Something touched him. He
said very grimly, "They know I'm breathing again. I'm obeying, this time, just to make it
confusing."
He rose. He was urged forward. He was halted by a touch on his forehead. He
obeyed, while shame filled him that he obeyed even to gain time. He stumbled and fell,
and his hands touched dry grass. He seized it, and when he rose, he stuffed dry grass
into his pockets.
"I gathered some dry grass," he said coldly, as he allowed himself to be directed to
the right. "I have a lighter. Gather dry stuff if you can. We burned a Gizmo in the trailer!"
Carol began to fumble about her, as the professor gave an inarticulate sound of
comprehension. She began to scrabble for dead grass, too.
Lane halted in obedience to a touch on his forehead. He walked backward, at another
touch. He heard the rustling of dry straw being gathered.
"I'm wondering," he said tautly, "if they are trying to train us. They could be trying to
panic us. They might want us to run and exhaust ourselves, to make our suffocation
easier. If we're out of breath—"
Something sealed his nose and mouth, somehow deliberately. He dropped to the
ground. He lay with his nose against the earth, his arms moving out to gather straw.
There were no more touches. No more whines. It seemed as if the Gizmo which had
exercised him had contemptuously flung him to the ground. He shook with fury. But he
gathered straw as he went back to the others.
"Here's my straw," he said briefly. "I've got matches, too, and here—my lighter's
dependable. But we haven't enough burnable stuff . . ."
Carol crawled a little distance away. He heard additional rustlings. He stared up at
the sky. Stars twinkled. Then he saw a star which wavered and wobbled without
twinkling at all. Once he had seen that, he could perceive the distortion of the star field
in a nearly circular space. He could see that the wavering moved. He could see, in fact, a
Gizmo.
"There's gasoline in the trailer," said the professor. He heard her also at work in the
tall grass about them. "It's for the light generator. Two gallons."
"It'll help," said Lane.
They crawled, pulling dry grass. Their small pile became a larger one. There were no
more winnings, but there were muted fluting sounds in the air.
"They're talking us over," said the professor. With a pile of straw before her, she grew
vengeful. "What is the time?"
"Four," said Lane. "I think this straw will do. Better twist some for handling. I doubt
they'll let us live to daybreak. There've been daylight killings, but usually—"

"Yes, they'd hunt by night and feed by day, normally," Professor Warren said. "The
gases they feed on would naturally develop more quickly in hot sunshine."
There was a sort of moaning somewhere in the night. It could have been made by
voices which ordinarily whined. It could have been a sudden sweep of wind among
many branches. But it had too unearthly a quality to be anything so natural.
"That," said Lane, "could be a decision, if they've been discussing us."
The three humans tensed. Lane twisted masses of straw into bundles whose farther
ends were loose and frayed, but which had a tightly bunched end to serve as a handle.
"I think they're moving," said the professor tautly. "In a body. Toward us."
"Maybe," said Carol unsteadily, "they—sent word about us somewhere and waited
for orders. And now they've got them."
"Ridiculous!" scoffed the professor.
Lane inconspicuously snapped his cigarette lighter. He held it ready, its flame very
small, rising undisturbed in the still air.
He saw the stars waver, toward the south. He looked uphill. Stars wavered there, too.
To the east and the north. Overhead there were moving areas in which the stars did not
seem to stay still, but to waver erratically to and fro, exactly as if masses of hot gases
moved about between the people and the sky.
"They're closing in," said Lane curtly. "Overhead and all around."
He saw a little flare. Professor Warren, bent over, absorbedly struck a safety match on
the cover of its packet. Carol waited, her body tense.
Things touched Lane, and the air about him ceased to be. He felt even his clothing stir
all over his body as invisible things pressed against it, throbbing and suddenly emitting
spiteful, snarling whines. His face and neck felt ticklings like thousands of spider webs
thrown to cover and enmesh him. He saw nothing. He heard only the whines. And he
could not breathe.
The hand that held the cigarette lighter was untouched. He moved it, to a torch of dry
straw. The straw caught and flames leaped up, and the winnings about him seemed to
become shrieks, unspeakably eerie and horrible. The air—the Gizmos—touching his
body acquired the feel of a ghastly, throbbing wall. The violence of its movement almost
toppled him. He waved the torch savagely, and sparks flew in every direction, and there
were more ghostly, keening, wailing sounds. Then he could breathe, but the air about
him was foul with mephitic odors. He turned triumphantly to the others, to see how the
fire was aiding them.
Carol sat tensely with a flaming torch before her. The professor had fallen. Her first
match had gone out. Her hands still tried desperately to strike a second, but the brittle
bit of cardboard had bent in her grasp.
Lane strode to her and waved his grassy flare about her like someone making mystic
conjurations. But it dripped sparks. Things fled, uttering tiny, unearthly shrieks. "I
think," he said savagely, as Professor Warren gasped for the breath that again became
possible, "I think we fooled them this time!"

His torch was already down to the hard-twisted handle. He plucked another from his
belt and lighted it. It crackled and blazed brightly, and he waved it above his head. The
look of things was lunacy: three human beings on the spur of a mountain, menacingly
waving torches at the moonlight all about.
"The trailer," snapped Lane. "We've got to get set before we try to get far away." Carol
helped the professor to her feet. "And I thought," panted the professor, "that they were
interesting things to study!"
They made their way toward the trailer. Its electric lights still burned. There was a
thin chorus of awful fury all about them. Lane's torch had burned out, and Carol waved
hers until he could light another from it. Then the professor marched ahead, scattering
sparks lavishly. They reached the trailer and entered it. They waved torches all about its
interior, hearing more small shrieks. Once there was a small impact as something in
frantic flight bounced against Lane's cheek. The professor lighted all four burners of the
bottled-gas stove.
"I feel a fondness for flames, now," she said sardonically.
There was a whimpering, and the Monster crawled from under the couch. Its daytime
cover reached down to the floor, and even so slight a barrier had kept Gizmos from
entering the space beneath. The Monster, though, was in a pitiable state. He trembled
and moaned.
"Temporarily," said Lane coldly, "we are on top. But I'm wondering how long we can
stay there."
"We have to warn the public," said the professor. "We have to tell about the existence
of these Gizmos and how dangerous they are. That is our first duty. If we can capture
one to demonstrate—"
"We did," said Carol. "We did that once, Aunt Ann!
And it made noises and others came running. We don't want to keep a horde of them
about us, trying to kill us for our prisoner's sake! That would be too much proof!"
"True. Then we go and make our reports—I to the University, and Dick to his
sportsmen's magazine. They'll alert the authorities, and there will be a prompt handling
of the whole situation!"
Carol looked at Lane. He shrugged.
"We'll see. I'll make some firepots. We can't depend on two gallons of gasoline to last
forever, but we can pick up sticks and stuff to keep pots going. Where's a can opener?"
Carol found one and helped him. He opened three cans of food at random. A firepot
is a tin can with its top off, a draught hole in one side near the bottom, and a handle
made of wire to sling it from. Small boys make them every fall by some mysterious
instinct, and gloriously carry them about for no reason whatever until their parents
make them stop for fear of arson. Lane quickly made three of them.
"You can whirl it about your head," he observed, "with the draught hole forward to
blow up the fire. I don't think Gizmos can face such things as this."
He demonstrated the whirling of a firepot at the end of its two-foot wire handle. He
found a wooden packing box in the trailer and kicked it into pieces no bigger than his
hand. Using those fragments, he started a fire in one of the tin firepots. He gave it to

Carol. He started a second small blaze in a similar contrivance for the professor. He
needed a third for himself. He slung the gasoline can over his shoulder and stuffed his
pockets with bits of broken wood. They went out of the trailer, leaving it brightly
lighted.
They looked unusual as they struck out across the mountain—a young man in
tweedy city clothing, a slim young girl in slacks, and an ample older female in riding
breeches and puttees. From time to time they whirled their firepots angrily about their
heads, and more than once they stopped and gathered about the Monster, who had
rolled over on his back and screamed and snapped at nothingness. At such times they
grimly passed small containers of glowing coals close to his body until he whimpered
and got to his feet again. Also they gathered earnestly about deadfalls and broke off
bark and bits of branches to be carried with them for later use in the firepots.
The mountains reared upward as they trudged. The professor was now filled with
vengeful thoughts concerning the doom she would presently bring upon Gizmos. Carol
absorbedly kept her firepot alight, though she was instantly attentive to any word from
Lane. He led the way, and tried to compose a reasonable account of what he'd learned
which would convince people who had not been attacked by Gizmos.
They talked very little as they made their way along the trail. There were places
where trees closed overhead and hid the heavens. Here the darkness was intense, and
the tiny draught holes of the firepots let out dullish red glows which had to guide them
past fallen tree trunks and boulders resting in the way. There was the feel of ghastly
things lurking among the trees, and the Monster yelped and howled as he trudged with
them, panting, and though there was no sound of movement, they knew that
things—Gizmos—accompanied them malevolently through the blackness, hoping for
the fires in the little tin cans to go out.
After a long time they came to open spaces, where innumerable stars shone overhead,
and they could look for miles across mountains lighted by the misshapen moon.
Sometimes they felt the small puffs of an errant night breeze, and in every case its
touches seemed like signs of an attack by monstrous, unsubstantial fiends, and they
flung their firepots about and scattered sparks in all directions.
They saw no other lights, though it was not likely that they looked out over only
uninhabited ground. But also they heard no night birds until a grayish glow appeared
very, very far away at the horizon. Carol noticed it first.
"Day's coming," she said quietly.
Then they heard, with infinite faintness, the lonely cry of a bird very far away. It had
not been murdered, like all things of flesh and blood in the area they had passed
through.
"I'm surprised that we've lived this long," said Lane grimly. "I don't think our troubles
are over yet, though."
The professor said firmly, "I shall get a research team down here immediately. These
things are dangerous! They must be taken in hand immediately!"
She made the statement with that unconscious confidence in superiority which human
beings have inherited through some thousands of generations. But Lane did not fully

share it. He knew that there must be Gizmos nearly everywhere. How many? And
would those fragile horrors gain strength in numbers?
Some time later, sunlight glowed upon the mountains, and they cast vast shadows
upon each other, and little white clouds in the sky were brilliant in sunshine that still
had a trace of pink in it. Grass and foliage glittered with dew, and the air smelled fresh
and glorious. Now, birds called to each other from the mountainsides. Somewhere a dog
barked. Even insects buzzed in the dawn light.
Professor Warren surveyed the scene. The three had come out of a thicket of
mountain laurel, and before them there was a gravel road which seemed to come from
nowhere and to lead on to the same destination. There was no house in sight, but there
was a steep, grass-grown hillside with patches of red clay showing, which could have
been a pasture. A catbird perched on a branch less than thirty feet away and uttered its
raucous cry.
The professor looked about her with great satisfaction.
"Birds singing," she said appreciatively. "I hear bugs. This territory, anyhow, is not
occupied by Gizmos. And now we've got to get to a long-distance wire and get things in
motion." She said in sudden indignation: "The nerve of those Gizmos!" She dumped the
smoking embers of her firepot. "I've felt silly all the time I've been carrying that! But now
we're safe! Which way should we go?"
Carol started a little at her aunt's action. She looked mutely at Lane. He shrugged.
"Murfree's courthouse should be somewhere over yonder," he said, nodding toward
his left. "We're probably still five or six miles away, though."
"And my feet hurt!" complained the professor. "I—"
There was a noise in the distance. She stopped, looking avidly toward the source of
the sound. It increased and was plainly the motor of an automobile traveling on this
highway. It came into view. It was a battered, dark-green car five or six years old.
"We hitch a ride," said the professor with authority. "I've got to get somebody down
here with equipment to make a proper study of those monstrosities!"
She waved her arms. The car braked and stopped. The man who drove it regarded
them with lively interest.
"Can you give us a lift?" asked Lane.
It would not be wise to start a conversation with a sane person by trying to explain
the emergency behind the request.
"Where d'you want to go?" asked the man. "Hop in."
"We want," said the professor firmly, "to get to a telephone. A pay telephone, because
we have to make some long-distance calls."
She climbed into the car. There were many parcels in the car, and she rearranged them
to make room for herself in the back seat. Carol looked mutely at Lane, indicating the
firepot in her hand in which coals still smoldered. He glanced at the Monster; the dog
was exhausted from past terror, but he did not seem frightened now.
"I guess it's all right," he said slowly. "I've still got the gasoline and my lighter. And

this car will travel fairly fast."
She dumped the coals, and he emptied his own. It did not occur to either—not even to
the professor—to abandon the queer objects which had been such effective defenses
against the Gizmos during the night. The Monster had to be lifted into the car, and then
Lane and Carol climbed in. The driver watched them wisely. He shifted the gear lever
and the motor roared. The car jolted into motion and its clamor grew less.
The driver said brightly, "You'll be that professor that's studying turkey-buzzards
back that way. Right?"
"Right," said the professor.
"And she's your niece," said the driver, "and he's that fellow that writes pieces about
hunting." "Right," said the professor.
"My name's Burke," said the driver. "Glad to meet you. You found out what killed
those cows and partridges and foxes and coons and such?"
Lane didn't answer, and the professor only grunted. She was beginning to realize that
in bright sunshine, with birds and insects filling the air with sound, the idea of living
creatures which were not flesh and blood, and which suffocated more normal things so
that they might gorge on the odors of decay—in bright sunshine an average person
might tend to be skeptical. But . . .
"I found out," said Burke. "I'm not sure I believe it, but I found out. So I'm leavin'
these parts. Got my luggage right here with me. I'm goin' some place else."
"What did you find out?" asked Lane.
"Never mind!" said Burke. "Never mind that! You wouldn't believe me if I told you!"
He pressed the accelerator. The car picked up speed. It ran onward through the new
morning with the hillsides echoing back its roaring. The highway swung right to encircle
an out-jutting part of a mountainside, and ran over a narrow bridge spanning a brook all
of five feet wide. It turned left again, and then Burke swung off the gravel road and went
bumping and bouncing down a still narrower road with a bed of powdery dust. The
dust rose in a reddish cloud behind the car. "Nearest telephone's along this way," said
Burke.
"That's a new road we were on. This fellow built a fillin' station where he thought the
new road would come, an' then the highway folks didn't build it there. He got fooled."
Lane said in a low tone to Carol: "We should be safe now. It's unthinkable that
Gizmos could travel really fast. Even if they trailed us from the forest, they'd have been
left behind now."
Carol nodded. But her features looked oddly pinched, as if she had a premonition she
could not bring herself to mention.
The car swerved around the curving boundary of a cornfield, its trail of swirling dust
conspicuous behind it. It swung in to a modern filling station which seemed to belong
on a well-traveled road instead of a dusty dirt one. Burke braked on its concrete apron.
"Telephone here," he reported. "Hi, Sam! I brought you some phone customers."
The filling station proprietor came out, leisurely. A cat accompanied him. The

professor got out of the car and nodded briskly. She could see the phone. She went
inside, fumbling in the pockets of her breeches for coins. The Monster lay on the floor of
the car, panting. The filling station operator said humorously:
"Seen any more ha'nts?"
Burke said primly: "Hell! I didn't say I saw anything! Y' can't see 'em! They'll move
danglin' strings, an' they make noises, an' they'll make tracks in flour sprinkled over a
buried dead chicken. But y' can't see 'em!"
Lane and Carol exchanged startled glances. Then Lane's face went expressionless. He
could see Professor Warren inside the plate-glass window of the filling station. She put
coins into the instrument.
"When I see 'em," said Sam, "I'll think about believin' in 'em."
Professor Warren greeted someone on the telephone. She began to speak, crisply and
with authority, into the instrument. She evidently spoke with great precision and with
scientific terminology.
"They've been killin' things," said Burke sagely. "They're what's killed off the game
people've been talkin' about. They killed those cows in the courthouse a while back."
Sam said humorously: "They ain't killed me yet."
"They'll get to you," said Burke firmly. "They've been leavin' us humans alone—so
far. I'm not stayin' around till they start killin' people. I'm gettin' out."
"Scared?" asked Sam incredulously. "Scared of something you can't see?"
"Yep," said Burke. "I'm scared of anything I can't fight. And how're you goin' to fight
somethin' you can't see?"
Inside the station, Professor Warren's expression turned to one of shock, her face
bewildered and crimsoning. Then she bellowed infuriatedly into the transmitter. A
sound came through the plate glass. It was the professor's voice, expressing a violently
disparaging opinion of the person at the other end of the line. Then she stopped and
jiggled the hook furiously. She slammed down the receiver and came out, raging.
"Idiot!" she barked. "Lunatic! Fool! Imbecile! He pretends to think I'm joking and says
it's bad taste to get him out of bed to listen to a joke! He hung up on me! He says he's
going to complain to the dean!"
She stamped her feet, ready to weep from pure frustration. But at this instant the
Monster whimpered. Then he yelped. Then he screamed, and tried to burrow beneath
one of the seats of the car. He scratched desperately to make a place to hide, while he
howled ever more shrilly and horribly.
By instinct, Lane swept his eyes about as his hand went to the two-gallon gasoline can
which so far he had not used at all. Carol gasped and pointed.
Back along the dirt road on which the car had come to this place, there was a
cloudlike stirring of the air. Over the top of the growing corn they saw a great movement
of dust. At first glance—but only at first—it looked as if another car were on the way
here. But this dust cloud was larger than a car could raise, and it was not stirred up to
float and then settle back again. This cloud moved as a unit, and it did not merely sweep
along the highway. It rolled. It was a monstrous ball of airborne reddish powder which

rolled swiftly and terribly onward, at the height of a six-story building. It was unnatural.
It was artificial. It was organized. It was horribly, terribly purposeful.
It came swiftly toward the filling station.

Chapter 5
Lane jumped out of the car, unscrewing the top of the gasoline can as he moved. He
began to pour recklessly, making a fifteen-foot circle of wetness on the dry ground.
"Firepots!" he snapped. "Carol, get 'em, quick! Get inside this circle! Get the others in
it!"
He lighted the gasoline he'd spilled. The flame ran around the ring of oil-soaked
ground.
The gigantic dust ball swept on. It turned in its path, following the roadway, rolling
up to and over the filling station. There it ceased to roll. Instead, it hovered. Dust
poured down from it in a blinding, choking downpour. There was a shrill sound in the
air, like the keening of a storm wind. There were eddies and currents and violent gusts,
in which the gasoline flames leaped and gamboled. There was a duststorm of a
thickness and intensity to overwhelm anything, but it was strictly localized. A hundred
yards from the filling station in any direction, the air was perfectly calm. There was no
stirring of dust. There was no disturbance of the early-morning tranquility. But in the
center of the dust cloud ...
"In here!" rasped Lane. "Come in here!"
He dragged at Carol, bringing her into the ring of fire. The professor came, stumbling.
Lane plunged out through the flames and brought in Burke. The filling station
proprietor was down, fighting madly for breath, flailing his arms crazily, suffocating and
half buried in dust. Lane broke out again, holding his breath, and dragged at him. The
strangling man fought as if he were drowning. And things tugged at Lane. His garments
quivered. Gizmos as individuals were the weakest of creatures, but here they seemed to
have formed themselves into a greater dynamic system whose parts were Gizmos.
Swirling currents composed of the whining horrors twisted and spun madly in a
complex fashion which combined their separate strengths into the power of storm winds
close to hurricane force.
The owner of the filling station fought the tumbling dust as if it were water in which
he was drowning. He caught Lane by the body and tried to climb. Lane himself was
strangling. . . .
The reek of burning gasoline struck his nostrils. Carol had scooped up gas-soaked
dust in a firepot and bent over him with it. His mouth and nostrils were unsealed, while
the squealing about him grew more shrill. But what stuff he had to breathe was an
intolerable reek of pure foulness.
He staggered back to the ring of flame, dragging the other man. Carol swung her
tin-can torch. They got through to the center of the ring of fire. Dust drifted down in
palpable masses. Any other source of flame would have been put out, but the gasoline

wetted the dust which fell into it, and flamed even higher as it spread out. The
professor, with shaking hands, filled a firepot with burning, gas-soaked dust and
whirled it about her head, shouting indistinguishable things above the uproar.
"It'll burn out soon!" panted Carol in Lane's ear.
"I know!" he gasped. "Come with me! Swing the firepot! I'll pump gas out on the
ground and light it."
She caught his hand lest they be separated, and they plunged through the smoky
yellow flames. Instantly they were in a monstrous tumult and a storm of blinding,
stifling dust. It was partly pure good fortune which made Lane stumble into Burke's car
in the midst of the screaming obscurity about him. Its wheels were already hub-deep in
dust. He dragged Carol around the car and fought his way to the gas pumps. He pulled
loose a hose and flipped the switch arm so that the pump would start. He lurched away
to the limit of the hose's length-breathing through doubled folds of his coat while Carol
swung a firepot—and spurted out a flood of gasoline, letting it pour at full volume on
the ground.
Carol cried in his ear: "The firepot's burned out!"
Things tugged at him. He began to suffocate, even with the coat letting him breathe
after a fashion, because he was submerged, enclosed in a fiercely clinging mass of
Gizmos.
Then he snapped his lighter. Incredibly, the spilled pool of car fuel caught. There was
something like a booming roar, and flames leaped up crazily downwind, and there was
a shrieking and a wrenching twist of the massed Gizmos nearby as yellow fire leaped up
twenty and thirty feet into the air.
Lane gasped for breath. Carol staggered, panting. He steadied her, and then took the
burned-out firepot from her hand and dribbled gasoline into it and lighted it at the
booming pond of fire, and threw the flaming sand to right and left. There were more thin
screamings.
"That's the trick!" he panted.
He flung more burning gasoline-soaked dust. Flames went soaring through the
close-packed Gizmos of the cloud formation. The greater dynamic system was
wounded, as parts of it were ignited and tended to pass their own destruction on to
others. Then, still unable to speak for lack of breath, Carol pointed. Lane struggled to
drag the gas hose nearer to the ring of fire he'd first made, and made another leaping
pool of flame, and a third. . . .
The squealing cloud began to thin. The globular cluster of Gizmos seemed to
evaporate, because it ceased to exist as a unit. The dust the separate creatures had
carried now drifted downward. The Gizmos themselves became invisible, as before they
made themselves into a jinnlike swirling cloud. Perhaps they fled, or perhaps they
continued to hover nearby. Lane knew only that they no longer whined and whirled
about the filling station, and that the towering mass of dust was now settling tranquilly
to the ground.
The scene of the attack had changed remarkably within the past ten minutes. When
the car had arrived, there'd been a dusty dirt road leading past a gas-pump platform of

concrete. There'd been a very neat, modern filling station, with a workshop and a
greasing rack and plate-glass windows all tidy and bright and businesslike. Now there
was a great splotch of fallen dust upon the landscape, like a miniature Sahara. From four
different spots, four fountains of smoky yellow flame roared upward. Dense black soot
rose in columns from the tops of the flames. The filling station was smeared with dust. A
dune ran into the workshop. There were rust-red hillocks, one of which almost enclosed
the car, and an area a hundred yards across in which no green thing showed: it was pure
dry powder, fine as talc.
Staggering, nearly knee-deep in the impalpable stuff, the professor and Burke hauled
at something so covered with dust that it was unrecognizable until they had it in the
clear. It was Sam, the filling-station proprietor. The professor began to apply artificial
respiration, unskillfully but with great earnestness. At her command, Burke helped her.
There was a tiny stirring somewhere and the station cat broke the surface of the dust. It
sneezed and spat and moved daintily away to more solid ground.
One of the fires began to burn low. The flame ring Lane had made first now went out.
They smelled burned gasoline. Lane looked anxiously at Carol. She nodded
reassurance. Together, they waded through the yielding dust to where the professor and
Burke labored over Sam.
"This affair," panted the professor, "is a great deal more serious than I imagined. I'm
afraid this poor man is dead!"
Burke, working beside her, said profoundly: "You folks must've worked things out
even better than I did. I wouldn't've thought of fighting ghosts with fire. But it sure
chased 'em!"
"And things like this," the professor panted, "are apt to happen all over the country. I
am beginning to feel genuine alarm. We simply have to alert the authorities. We have to
set research teams at work to solve the problem these Gizmos present. They—why, they
are a menace to everybody! They can do incalculable harm!"
She worked resolutely at the task of trying to revive the owner of the filling-station,
Burke, at her side, working with a precision indicating practice at this task.
"If you don't need help just yet," said Lane, "I'll try the phone again. May be able to
get a doctor."
He waded through the dust to the station again. Carol, as if automatically, went with
him. He used the telephone, first to try to get a doctor for the owner of the station, and
then for long distance. It was incongruous to have so desperately urgent a task to do,
and to have the telephone operator break in from time to time, demanding more coins in
the phone lest she break off the connection. Toward the end, Carol was handing Lane the
coins he needed. Once, he heard the ringing of a cash register bell.
He hung up, his face dark.
"It's not good?"
"It could hardly be worse," he said bitterly. "No doctor. There are only two in
Murfree. They're both out on emergency calls. People dead or believed to have died in
their sleep. I tried for other doctors nearby. There were a dozen sudden deaths in the
county last night, in four families. All the doctors are busy trying to find out what they
died of, because it looks contagious." His voice was ironic. "They're trying to find out

how to protect the other members of the families involved, because they must have been
exposed! A sudden disease is a better explanation than mine for the things that
happened everywhere last night. It's easier to believe, anyhow!"
He started for the door. Carol said: "Dick, I had to take change from the cash register,
for the telephone."
He handed her a bill, and she put it in the cash drawer, closed it, and followed him
out. The professor had ceased her efforts at artificial respiration and stood wringing her
hands. Burke had heaved Sam's limp form over his shoulder and was struggling
through the dust toward the station.
"He's dead," said the professor unhappily. "We tried, but— We just thought to look.
And he'd breathed in dust. He drowned in dust. He gasped for breath and his lungs
filled with it as if it had been water. Nothing can be done—nothing!"
Burke said, "His number was up, that's all. Those things came, carryin' dust, an' they
dropped it. They'd've managed to put out any fire we made except a gasoline fire. That's
what they had the dust for." He added, "Somebody must've fought 'em with fire before,
and they figured out what to do about it."
"We did," said Lane grimly. He spoke to the professor. "Gizmos aren't a local product.
They're nation-wide. There were sudden deaths everywhere last night—hundreds of
them. What's happened here has been happening everywhere, with variations. The
official reaction is that some new disease has developed among animals, and that now
it's attacking humans. It's called a plague, which so far has hardly appeared in cities.
People are advised to get rid of their pets, to stay away from any place where there's
wild life, and to wait for bacteriologists and epidemologists to track down the germ and
develop immunizing shots against it."
The professor was appalled. "The idiots!" she raged. "The fools! We've got to tell
them—"
"No," said Lane. "We've got to show them."
Burke waded past him with his burden. He put the proprietor inside his filling
station. Then he went out to the car and examined it carefully and brushed a six-inch
mass of dust from the top of the hood. He brushed at the radiator, then climbed in and
started the motor, listening with a critical ear. He nodded, and put it in gear. The car
moved slowly through the dust, which flowed almost like a liquid. Its exhaust left a trail
on the surface. There were monstrous frozen dust waves made by its wheels. The
dunelike coating on its roof slipped and slid and poured downward.
Once clear of the thicker dust deposit, Burke stopped the car again. He got out and
came back to the filling station. He came out with a brush and cloths. He began to clean
the car, and then wipe the windows to transparency once more. When he had finished,
he beat at his own clothing to rid it of dust.
"I'm known to sportsmen as a reasonably truthful writer about hunting," said Lane,
"but that's not a quick channel to acceptance of our information. This is too serious to
waste time persuading people about. Have you better contacts than that?"
The professor wrung her hands. "If they've got the idea that it's a plague," she said
bitterly, "it'll be ten times harder to make them see sense! There's nobody as hidebound

as a researcher! They talk about teamwork, but it means that nobody dares think
anything the rest of the team won't accept! And I've got a reputation for imagination,
which is the one thing that scares a scientific mind! They'll believe anybody but
me—anybody with a doctorate, at least!"
Burke approached, still brushing at his clothing. He had an odd air of combined
apprehension and zest.
"Me," he said, "I'm leaving. I figure you people kept me from getting what he got—"
he gestured toward the filling station—"and you know plenty that I'd like to know. You
knew what to do when they came in a cloud. I've got to figure things out, and I want all
the information I can get. Want to come along with me?"
"We certainly don't want to stay here," Lane said. He turned to the professor again.
"Your best bet, of course, is to get back to the University with your facts."
"Facts? What good are facts? I've got to show Gizmos —alive, dead, stuffed and made
into microscopic slides for histological examination before anybody with a scientific
reputation will agree that a thing can be alive without being flesh and blood. But I've
had 'em try to strangle me! Those things are dangerous!"
"Look," said Lane. "I've got some friends—a mixed bunch. Some will believe me, but
as mere businessmen who hunt and fish, nobody will listen to them any more than to
me. But there's one man—he's head of a pharmaceutical laboratory in New Jersey. They
make antibiotics and such things. We've hunted and fished together. It's not likely he'll
accept all we've learned without some proof, but he'll let me show him the proof—if I
can get it to him." The professor shrugged.
"One more phone call, then," said Lane, "and we'll start." To Burke he said: "We'll ride
with you and tell you what we know. When you want to split off, you'll let us out at the
nearest airfield or railroad station. Does that suit you?"
"You made a bargain," said Burke expansively. "I'll fill up the car."
Lane went back into the filling station, Carol following. He heard a curious scratching
sound. Instantly tense, he went to see. It came from an overturned oil drum. He dragged
at it and the Monster crawled out: cringing: moaning: trembling in every muscle. He had
fled to the darkest, remotest place his terror-stricken instincts could suggest. He had not
been killed. The Gizmos this time had concentrated upon the humans.
Lane fumbled for more money for the phone. Matter-of-factly, Carol pressed the "No
Sale" button on the cash register. She handed him coins.
"It looks," said Lane wryly, "as if you agree with Burke that property rights may soon
seem ridiculous."
He dropped a coin into the phone.

Outside, Burke filled the tank of the car. He hunted in the stockroom and found half
a dozen of the one-gallon emergency tanks designed to be carried in case one runs out of
gas. He filled each one, carefully, and also carried out an armful of cans of motor oil.
"I've got ideas," he said. "I'm gettin' ready for 'em!" Lane heard him in the workshed as
the phone connection through Richmond and Washington and Philadelphia went
through to New Jersey. The connection was completed. It was twenty minutes before
Lane hung up. His jaw was grimly set and his eyes burned. Burke was sitting at the

wheel of the car. When Lane came out he said with relief: "I was scared they were comin'
back with a new trick. If they had, I'd've had to go off and leave you."
Lane did not answer. The professor was already in the car. He held the door for Carol,
who urged the Monster to climb in. She had practically to lift him. Burke started the
motor, and the car moved off.
"They'll figure," Burke said zestfully, "that we'll head back to get to a hard surface
road. I'm goin' to fool 'em. No runnin' into an ambush for me! Those critters are smart!"
He added: "I bet they're Martians! They could've landed a long while ago and been
building up their invasion army and studyin' us, and now they're ready to take over. But
they don't know us humans!"
The professor said querulously: "Dick, you heard news on the telephone. What was
it?"
Lane ground his teeth. He had heard the sort of information which would be sent first
to laboratories turning out biologicals. It was news of an outbreak of the plague now
believed in, duly credited first to lower animals, and now to men. Lane had heard the
official report on an outbreak of sudden death in the village of Serenity, Colorado. And
he knew that village.
Some three months back he'd been on the West Coast in his hunt for the uncanny
cause of deaths among wild creatures. He'd stopped overnight in the tiny village of
Serenity because there'd been several reports of inexplicable forest tragedies nearby. The
village nestled in a valley whose floor was higher than the highest tips of the Virginia
mountains, and the peaks about it were crowned with eternal snow. Lane remembered it
distinctly. Some few miles from the houses, there'd been a grizzly bear and her two cubs
found dead in a half-acre of crushed underbrush and toppled small trees. Lane had gone
over the battlefield very painstakingly with a Colorado game commission man. They'd
found no solution to the death of the bear.
Later, they'd dined in the village on mountain trout and listened to local opinions
about that killing and other improbable occurrences the inhabitants of Serenity could
report. Lane and the game commission man left the village next morning without even a
tentative idea of the cause of any of the occurrences, including the death of the grizzly.
Now, Lane interpreted the news he'd heard in pictures of intolerable detail. He
remembered the village: about a hundred houses and three stores. He could see it in his
mind's eye, nestling among the mountains. He could envision it as of the night just past:
lights shining in the houses, stars and a slanting moon overhead. There was that tranquil
medley of night noises which to all men is assurance of peace and security and calm.
The lights in the houses had almost all winked out when the first disturbance came.
At eleven o'clock Mountain Time there were sudden sounds outside the houses. Pet cats
fought and spat and clawed. Dogs barked frenziedly, and snarled and yelped as if in
terror. There was an extraordinary clamor, quite enough to wake all the inhabitants of
the houses.
Lights came on. People went outside with lanterns and flashlights to see what caused
the uproar. But the sound grew less as lights began to flicker on, and as moving lanterns
shone outdoors. By the time all the village was awake and looking for the cause of alarm

among their pets, there was no noise. There was only the sound of human voices calling
to dogs and cats, and asking fretful questions of other human voices.
Then someone found his dog. It was dead—unwounded, but with bared teeth and
glazed eyes. Someone else found his. Most people did not discover their pets, but all
who found a dog or cat found it dead. Every domestic pet left outdoors had
died—unnaturally. Nobody thought of the months-past similar death of a grizzly and
her cubs.
There was angry discussion across property lines in the village of Serenity. It looked
like poison; the few owners who identified their own animals leaped to that conclusion
immediately. The inhabitants of Serenity raged at the unknown person responsible for
such happenings. But it was near the middle of the night. Citizens growled furiously
over the carelessness of somebody who'd left poison about, or the unthinkable villainy
of anybody who'd distributed poison to pet animals. Angrily, they went back to bed.
They fumed as they went to sleep.
These things were known because a rural mail-carrier left the village at a quarter to
midnight, himself growling over the loss of a good dog. He drove through the darkness
over mountain trails to a mail distribution center for the semiweekly mail. By going at
such an hour, he could be back with it near sunrise and be able to join two friends on a
fishing trip into the wilds. He didn't make it.
Lane saw the later event, in his mind's eye, as clearly as if he'd been present. Much
later in the night, when the village slept again, there were whinings in the air about the
houses of Serenity. There were then no lights, so no lights wavered as if units of heated
gases passed before them. Stars, though, did shift slightly in their places as faint, shrill
whinings moved among the houses. These whinings descended chimneys, and entered
open windows, and penetrated screens—as a smoke ring can pass through a screen
without destruction—and hovered invisibly in the darkness inside the village homes.
Then there was silence, as if by agreement all must wait until an appointed instant.
That instant came. Abruptly, noises rose everywhere. There were shouts among the
houses. There were gaspings. Windows smashed here and there as if blindly fighting
human beings tried to get the air they were denied by smashing windows. The noise
was not at great as when the pets of the village died. It did not even last as long.
Presently there was absolute silence once more.
But presently there was a glimmer of light inside one of the houses. A tiny night-light
had been overturned. After a while there were flames. They rose, and in time they licked
through a roof and leaped and roared in the silent human settlement.
But nobody stirred anywhere, nor called to ask what was the matter. That single
house burned to the ground, there among the high mountains, and nobody moved in
any of the other silent buildings.
The rural mail carrier found out what had happened when he came back shortly after
sunrise.
And Dick Lane, riding in the mountains of western Virginia, swallowed hard as he
pictured the reality of what he had been told on the telephone. Hatred filled him, as well
as indignation. He would have felt anger if he heard of fish caught wantonly and flung
ashore to be left to rot. That would have seemed unconscionable. But the village of
Serenity had been destroyed so that men and women and children would serve the

Gizmos in that revolting fashion. And Lane, two thousand miles from Serenity,
Colorado, trembled with disgust and horror.
Carol looked anxiously at his face.
"Dick—is there something else you're worried about?"
He shook his head, struggling to bring his hatred under control. Presently he heard
Professor Warren explaining just what had been found out. Burke asked surprisingly
shrewd questions which had a peculiar slant to them. Burke was a leathery-faced
individual with incongruously bright blue eyes. He nodded, as Professor Warren
explained.
"First they tried to kill Mr. Lane," he said with something close to zest, "and when he
fooled 'em with dead leaves they followed him. They hadn't had anybody beat 'em
before. And they knew he knew. You see what I'm drivin' at?"
"No," said the professor.
"Suppose they're Martians," said Burke, with enthusiasm. "Or that they come from
Jupiter, or Venus, or somewhere. Suppose they landed in a forest. What'd we do if we
landed on Mars or Jupiter and found there was forests with animals in 'em."
"Let's not suppose anything of the sort," snapped the professor. "The facts are
preposterous enough!"
Burke grinned. "You don't get me," he said. "If we landed on Mars or Jupiter, we'd be
cagey. We'd kinda hide ourselves and do some scoutin'. We wouldn't go around saying,
Take us to your leaders.' We'd make ourselves a hide-out and study what we were up
against. We'd try out our guns on the animals. We'd find out if they were good to eat. If
we found there were Martians or Jupiterians that were civilized, we'd send back for
more men. We'd build up an army. Bein' a long way from home, we'd live off the
animals in the forest where we landed, to save transportation so we could bring in more
men. When we got pretty strong, we'd put out some outposts to keep an eye on the
natives. We'd make a plan of campaign. We'd keep out of sight till we were ready to
take over. Ain't it so?"
"No," said the professor indignantly. "If we landed on another planet and found
civilized inhabitants there, we'd try to make friends!"
Burke said ironically: "Yeah? That's what folks did with the Indians, near four
hundred years ago? What they did in Africa? Australia? They had natives in those
places. Us civilized folk made friends with them?" "It's not a parallel," Professor Warren
said shortly. "But it might be, to those critters you call Gizmos," argued Burke. "Just
suppose they came from somewhere off Earth, and they've been layin' low, buildin' up
their strength and living off wild game as much as they could to save supplies bein'
brought in. Suppose they've been putting advanced bases in the bigger forests. Outposts
on the edges. Observation posts in woodlots. If they got a big army here already, they'd
have to send out foragin' parties. Now and then there'd be sentries and little patrols of
Gizmos out, hunting food with orders not to bother humans if they could help it, but not
to let any get away that suspected there was such things as them."
"That," said Professor Warren with asperity, "assumes that the Gizmos are not only
intelligent like lower animals on Earth, but intellectual, like men, and that they can
reason."

"Right!" said Burke. He went on with the same peculiar relish: "They'd have to be
smart to get here from another world. And you check what's happened against that idea!
Mr. Lane beat off an attack by a foragin' party with dry leaves. He went off and the patrol
followed him. But some of 'em sent off for orders what to do about a man who found out
they couldn't strangle him if he kept dried leaves before his face. They got orders to wait
a good chance and kill him when he wasn't expecting it. They sneaked a spy into the
trailer. But you caught and killed that one. Then they tried to break in an' kill you
regardless, but they'd got reinforcements by that time. After a while they did manage to
break in. They got all three of you alive. They made up their minds to study you, findin'
out how fast you learned and so on, and keepin' you alive till they found out all they
could. And you turned that trick on them, with fire."
Carol shuddered; the Monster, lying at her feet, whimpered to himself. "You got
away," pursued Burke, with an odd air of enjoyment. "You waved fire around your
heads and they couldn't face it. Then I came along. And what were the Gizmos doin'?
They were sendin' back to headquarters sayin' you were even smarter than they'd
expected. And they hadn't a big enough force to handle you, anyway. Maybe Mr. Lane
hit on a squad of Gizmos, first. Maybe a battalion was sent to the trailer. But they
must've sent a division to make a dust storm that'd put out the kind of fires you'd made,
and to kill us all because we knew too much."
He paused. The car went thumping along a long straight stretch of mountain
highway. This was a valley among the mountains, and there were pastures and
occasional cornfields in view. The sky overhead was very bright and shining.
"The question," said Burke zestfully, "is how many divisions have they got? How
good is their communication system? Have they got a beachhead just here in Murfree
County, or are they ready for a general offensive?" He rolled out the technical military
terms with satisfaction.
"I've read a lot about wars and fightin'. I'm guessing we've got a war coming with the
Gizmos. It's goin' to be a tough fight. There's going to be a lot of people killed before it's
over. We could even lose! But there's going to be a lot of advantage to them that know
from the start what the Gizmos are and what they can do and what they can't. I want to
be one of those that know. Somebody's got to lead guerrilla fightin' against them,
wherever they've occupied the country. I'm aimin' to be qualified to do just that!"
He preened himself at the wheel of the clanking car. Lane understood. Burke was one
of that considerable part of humanity which enthusiastically believes in anything that's
sufficiently dramatic. In Burke, however, his imagination did not exaggerate the drama
he believed in. His assumption of an extraterrestrial origin for the Gizmos was based on
pure guess, and an unlikely one at that. His description of a military organization
among the Gizmos was pure, exciting fantasy. But, however wrong his assumptions, his
estimate of the danger was correct.
"Where's the proof?" Professor Warren demanded. "Reason requires a nervous
system. What kind of nervous system could a Gizmo have? They've got something
—they find prey, they use cunning. But is it a nervous system?"
Carol stirred. She looked steadily ahead, far down the sunlit valley. Suddenly she
gasped. She pointed with an unsteady hand.

Lane ground his teeth. There was a dust cloud moving out from behind a
mountainside ahead. It grew thicker as it went rolling across cultivated fields. It moved
as an entity, as a dynamic system with every appearance of volition and purpose.
Burke braked, his eyes wide and frightened. He brought the car to a stop. A second
dust cloud began to form itself to the left. It began to roll down the mountainside.
It was even larger than the one that had overwhelmed the filling station.
Burke frantically put the car in reverse, to back around and flee in the opposite
direction.
"That's no good," said Lane. "Ahead's the best bet. Look back there!"
Two more of the impossibly dense dust clouds were already visible behind the car.
One came rolling terribly along the way the car had come; another was gathering
substance from a dirt road as it swept across the valley bottom.
The four dust clouds moved to converge upon the stopped car.

Chapter 6
The Monster uttered a howling sound which was at once so despairing and so frantic
that Lane felt an urge to kick him. But instead he said to Burke: "Give me the wheel. I
know how to handle this!"
Burke yielded with alacrity. He fairly popped out the door on the driver's side and
agilely exchanged seats with Lane. His teeth chattered as he cranked the front window
tightly shut. Lane put the car in gear ahead and moved toward the giant dust spheres, of
which one was already astride the highway a mile ahead as the other rolled horribly
downhill to meet it.
"What you going to do?" demanded Burke agitatedly. Lane sent the car ahead at a
speed far below its maximum. "I'm going to bet that these Gizmos never drove a car in
traffic."
He was moving more slowly than the pair of globular whirlwinds behind. One of
them was already opaque with its burden of dust, while the other rapidly gathered
substance as it billowed and whirled across the valley along a twisting dirt road. They
seemed to be overtaking the car steadily.
"They're catching up!" protested Burke shrilly. "They think so—if they think," said
Lane. The sphere ahead and to the left on the mountainside seemed to pause in its
rolling, while dust swirled up to thicken it. The one ahead advanced, still blocking the
way.
"God!" insisted Burke, "they're all four goin' to hit us at the same time!"
Lane grunted. He held down the car to twenty-five miles an hour, while the four
globes of destruction accommodated themselves to its pace, maintaining an inexorable
rate of closing upon it. Each rolling dust cloud was a full hundred feet in diameter.
There were veinings of greater or lesser dust content, where madly moving streams of
Gizmos, forming the spheres, were more or less closely packed in their spiraling. The

spheres themselves were dynamic systems, as a charging herd of beasts can be. They
were organizations capable of greater deadlines than the sum of the deadlinesses of
their parts. They were, apparently, even capable of acts of coordination when acting as
groups, comparable to the cooperation of individual wolves when running down a deer.
Professor Warren said crisply, "I begin to see the structure of these things. I wish we
had a movie camera."
"If you' going to let 'em bury us all in dust," chattered Burke, "you let me outa here!
You let me—"
Carol reached past his shoulder and locked the car door.
"Dick knows what he's doing," she said. "Be quiet, or he will let you out."
Burke's mouth dropped open. Then he realized. A man on foot might not be pursued
by a dust cloud composed of a hundred thousand Gizmos. But there were filmy tendrils
of lesser denseness clustered about the greater ones. They would be smaller swarms of
Gizmos speeding to incorporate themselves in the larger ones. Any of those could
separate itself to trail and suffocate a single fugitive. Burke subsided.
"If that thing ahead," said Lane, "should stop stock-still and drop its load of dust, it
would block the highway with a drift we couldn't possibly get through. That's why I'm
driving slowly,—to keep it coming toward us."
He sounded calm enough, but his knuckles were white on the steering wheel. He
turned his head to estimate the looming red monstrosity on the mountain above. He
glanced in the back-view mirror to gauge the speed of the one in pursuit. The fourth,
rolling across the lateral dirt road, abandoned the road at a curve and came sweeping
across partly green, partly red-clay pasture land.
"I hope," Lane added, "that this car has a good pick-up, Burke. Our lives depend on
it."
Burke said, "It's okay," in a strained voice.
The situation was as nightmarish as any that had gone before. Ahead there was a
rolling, writhing rust-red globe the height of half a dozen houses piled one atop the
other. It was not a solid thing, but a cloud, and one could see into it a little way. There
were veins and cords of circulation; what looked like nerves and sinews and a
circulatory system, branching and rebranching and re-combining again. They were,
though, merely thicker and denser swirlings of the powdered soil that made the whole
thing visible.
It loomed ahead, so close that Lane could not see its top through the windshield. To
his left an even greater and more revolting monstrosity rolled down the mountainside.
To the right and behind yet other giant ghastlinesses closed in. It seemed that their
bulging middles were about to close over the car, to roof it in—and then solid masses of
dust would come plummeting down, to bury the car in powder.
But Lane stepped on the accelerator. As the car plunged forward he pressed down
harder, and as it still gathered speed he pushed the gas pedal down to the floor board.
The car leaped to forty-five, to fifty, to sixty miles an hour. It passed the point toward
which the four spheres tended—what should have been a meeting place of the car with

all the rolling monstrosities. It swept past that spot into the dust-streaming base of the
globe which blocked the highway. But it was swallowed up by one, not overwhelmed
by four.
Inside the sphere, there was howling wind and the shrieking whine of Gizmos in
uncountable number. The car shuddered. Its windows showed only earth outside, as if it
had instantly been buried deep underground. Its throbbing clamor was muted, muffled,
dulled. Its wheels rolled over softness. Its windshield wipers flicked back and forth, but
their clicking was inaudible in the tumult of squealing of gas horrors and the roaring of
many winds
—and now, also, the frantic howling of the Monster, who heard Gizmos on every
hand and tried to scream and snap and bite in all directions at once.
The car reeled. There was a hissing of dust grains against glass seen in a brownish
obscurity, which deepened to pure pitch-black and then became brown again; and then
the car came out into the open air, streaming dust on every hand. Lane sent it hurtling
down the highway past the mountain.
Those in the car did not see the simultaneous collision of four dust-laden
monstrosities because the back window was almost opaque. But they did crash together,
and in crashing fused into one, and a sort of writhing chaos rose and wavered and
spread out in continuing contortions. It was the height of a ten-story building at its least,
and at its greatest it was twice as tall, and as it subsided it covered a space a quarter of a
mile square—and the highway was closed by a mass of dust whose dunes rose to thirty
feet in height.
On the road beyond, however, the car's windshield wipers clicked and clacked,
making a streaky transparency by which Lane could steer. Here, in the path of the
monster he'd bored through, there was dust all over the highway. Everywhere the road
was slippery with the fine stuff. But Lane drove like a madman. He could not look
behind. He swung around a curve in the road, and the backtrail of the monster ended,
and he knew that the car hurtled onward with no longer a betraying plume of dust
behind it. Even the Monster's howling ended. He lay limply, exhausted, on the floor of
the car.
Lane said over his shoulder: "Burke, crank down the window and see what you can
see behind."
He drove across a bridge spanning a shallow stream some forty feet in width. The
road slanted upward along the side of the mountain, leaving the valley below it.
Burke, his teeth chattering audibly, lowered the window and squinted to the rear.
"There's what looks like smoke back yonder," he reported in a trembling voice. "It
ain't stirring much. Looks like it's settling."
Lane observed, "That may mean that the Gizmos are confused, or it may simply mean
that they're coming after us without bothering to bring dust with them. They can always
pick that up where and when they need it."
"The Monster doesn't agree," the professor said. "He's quiet. Ergo, no Gizmos—at
least not angry ones. And after all, Dick, there must be a limit to the speed the creatures
can make. They assuredly aren't streamlined, and there is a limit to the effort they can
make."

Lane kept the accelerator down to the floor. The car went up and up, nearing the end
of a two-mile climb. Carol said, "Are you wondering about their communication system,
Dick?"
"I am," he said with some grimness. "They're everywhere—I've had proof of that. And
they've proved that they can call enormous numbers of others overnight, anyhow. If they
can send messages for help—and we've had three examples of it—can they send
messages of warning that we must be killed?"
"It is not likely," said the professor with authority. "It is most improbable."
Burke pulled in his head from where he had been staring anxiously to the rear.
"They're out of sight now," he said with relief. "Maybe we lost 'em. Mr. Lane, d'you
think they can send word on ahead for other ones to watch out for us?"
"Most unlikely!" repeated the professor firmly. "Even lower animals can summon aid.
Ants can call other ants when they find booty too large for them to handle alone. Other
creatures even post sentinels and combine for their mutual defense. But no creature
lower than man can transmit the idea of an individual identity."
Burke was suddenly garrulous with relief because there were no longer any dust
clouds in view. "But are Gizmos lower than humans?" he demanded zestfully. "If they
came here from Mars or somewhere, they've got to be smart. They could be smarter than
people."
"Mr. Burke," said the professor, "there is a limit to what even I will believe without
evidence!"
The road leveled. It ran through a cut between hillsides which rose still higher,
though the valley bottom behind it was deep. A few hundred yards on, it disappeared
in a downward curve. When they reached the spot where the landscape spread out to
their view ahead, the effect would have been breathtaking under other circumstances.
They had crossed the last of one range of mountains, and they could see for scores of
miles. Everything was green and beautiful. They could sec farmhouses and highways
and woodland and villages. To the north a small town—it would be Murfree—sprawled
out over a square mile or more. The spires of churches rose above its tree-lined streets.
There were rolling pastures, speckled with moving dots of grazing cattle. On the
highways there were crawling motes of cars.
Lane started the car down the steep incline. "Either the Gizmos are intelligent, and
after us individually for a very good reason, or they're a weird kind of beast. As beasts
of the forests, they may have multiplied until they can't stay in the wilderness, and have
to move out to get food. If the first is true, we've got to get mixed up in traffic so they
can't identify us. If they're really intelligent they might or might not try to wipe out all
traffic to get us."
"I think," said Carol, looking at him, "that you've got to risk it, Dick. If we made sure
we were alone when we were killed, our death would do no good to anybody. But if we
force the Gizmos to kill us—if they can—in a way that proves they do exist, at least that
will be a warning to people who don't suspect a thing. Even if we have to risk other
people's lives with our own, we've got to make sure that the danger from the Gizmos is
realized!"

Lane knew he would have to pass through Murfree if he meant to go on to the north.
But he had no choice.
Even at the risk of provoking a mass attack by Gizmos on the little town, he had to
reach some source of authority—governmental or scientific—which could make use of
what he'd discovered. Meanwhile he could make no specific plans without news of the
state of things in general,—without news of atrocities that might have been committed,
or discoveries about Gizmos that might have been made. He turned on the car radio. It
gave forth hillbilly music exclusively. He snapped it off and drove downhill toward the
valley.
It was time to go beyond the mere facts that he and the professor and Carol had been
forced to learn in order to survive. So far the Gizmos had surprised them in every
encounter. Not once had Lane anticipated the next action of the ghostly killers. In each
assault the Gizmos had used what should have been an adequate force and a suitable
stratagem to accomplish their destruction. In all instances they had increased the force
applied and used a new tactic for which the humans should have been unprepared. It
was time to try to guess what they might do next.
But that would depend on how intelligent they were, and Lane had no certain
knowledge about that. If one considers any living creature by itself, he is apt to assume
that it has intelligence close to genius. The lowliest of annelid worms, regarded by itself,
performs actions to secure food and to avoid capture and to propagate its race which no
mere human intellect could improve upon. Ants show amazing abilities in agriculture
and mycology. The leaf-cutter ant cultivates a fungus underground which appears to be
as artificial as a grapefruit: it is found nowhere but in the cities of leaf-cutter ants. In fact,
ants have not only technologies but a social system with divisions of labor and a
hierarchy of functions for different individuals. If human beings knew only one variety
of lower animal, on the evidence they would have to believe it as intelligent as humans
so far as its interests ran. That posed the problem here. For their own purposes
Gizmos acted intelligently. But so do all creatures. And the behavior of Gizmos could
not be compared to that of flesh-and-blood animals. If what Gizmos did was an
instinctive pattern, they were beasts no matter how brilliant their behavior. If what they
did was for the attainment of purposes invented by themselves, it was intelligence in the
human meaning of the term. In either case, things looked black. If there had been
Gizmos from time beyond remembering, as ancient tales of ghosts and devils seemed to
prove, then something had multiplied their numbers so that now they menaced
humanity. If Burke was right and they had landed on Earth from some other world, then
they must be more intelligent than mankind, and humanity was doomed.
But Lane doggedly would not credit their extraterrestrial origin. It would require
them to have ships in which to travel, and it was unthinkable that Gizmos could create
or control machinery, or that swarms of spaceships bringing them would have avoided
detection by radar. Gizmos themselves were detectable by radar, but as phantoms on the
radar screens they were single, they moved at low speed, they were not reported from
great heights. More convincingly, creatures capable of using tools and spaceships would
be capable of making weapons. Gizmos would not combine themselves into gales of
whirling dust if they could commit murder neatly and efficiently with suitable tools.
Gizmos did not come from outer space. They were creatures of Earth. But even if Burke's

dramatic description of bases and outposts and foraging parties were correct, it could
still be such an organization as an ant city or a swarm of bees.
There was a last possibility, which was most disturbing of all. The Gizmos might be
Earth creatures with an unfortunately high intelligence and a long and dishonorable
record of having used it. If ancient Gizmos had passed for gods and exacted tribute of
burnt victims and spilt blood and foulness in general, their descendants would be no
improvement. It was proven they were as ruthless as their forbears. They were lovers of
corruption and decay. Current events suggested strongly that they planned to make all
Earth a stinking Olympus for their monstrous feasts.
This seemed as plausible as any other idea, though Lane would not give full assent to
it. But it seemed quaint, with that theory in mind, to drive presently into a sprawling,
sunlit, tree-shaded country town while consciously assuring onesself that one was not
being trailed by the spawn of Ares and Vulcan and Ashtaroth, and Baal and Loki and
kindred fiends from all other imagined kinds of hell.
In this particular case, there was ground for some sort of uneasiness, anyhow. Lane's
apprehensions increased when he saw a dead cat in a gutter of Murfree's principal
street. He drove steadily on into the business part of town.
Suddenly the professor broke the silence.
"Dick, I want to buy something. Will you stop?"
He parked the car and the professor climbed out and vanished into a grocery store.
As they waited Burke seemed to be struggling with strong thoughts.
"I got it worked out, Mr. Lane," he said at last. "These Gizmos've got communications,
and reserves, and those dust balls are their mobile armor. They got a chain of command,
and division commanders, and they got to have a general staff and a overall plan of
campaign. The way they operate is strictly military! You know what they'll do next, Mr.
Lane?"
"I've been trying to guess," Lane said wearily.
"When an army's going to smash an enemy," said Burke, his eyes very bright, "first
they got to smash the defenses that are set up, ready to use. But we haven't got
any—only us four suspect anything at all. So the invading army can go right on and grab
all the territory it can. And then what does it do?"
"Tell me," said Lane.
"It smashes what it can't grab!" Burke told him. "It attacks what'd be needed to
organize a counterattack.
Factories, railheads, warehouses, communications—it grabs what it can and smashes
what the invaded country would need to start to fight back with. That's strategy! The
atackin' army makes the defendin' army helpless to fight back. Y'see?"
Lane shook his head.
"These Martians—these Gizmos," said Burke. "They're going to grab all the ground
they can. With people scattered like they are nobody can fight 'em. They won't even
know they're there! So the Gizmos take over all the ground outside the cities. Either
they've done it or they're doing it! But the scientists who'd have to find out that there are

Gizmos and what they're like live in the cities. It's in the cities that there're chemicals and
explosives and things to make flame throwers. It'd be in the cities that counterattacks
would be figured out and started."
"Well?" asked Lane.
"The Gizmos got to hit the cities now," said Burke. "They got to smash our industrial
potential." He savored that phrase with pleasure. "Yes, smash our industrial potential.
Turn all the people into refugees. Fill the roads with folks running away from what they
think is plague. Keep the government busy trying to organize the evacuation of the
cities and trying to feed everybody and lick the plague at the same time, not guessing
that what they're up against is invasion and war!" He said raptly: "They could smash
civilization that way! The cities'd be empty and the highways would be full, and the
factories'd stop and people'd die in their refugee camps and they'd break out and go
somewhere else, and they'd die along the Toads, and they'd try to stay by themselves.
They'd go back to bein' savages! And when it was all over and the Gizmos ruled the
earth, they'd go whinin' through the forest, hunting people. Maybe they'd have kind of
hunting preserves for people to live in and be hunted when the Martians felt like it. . . .
Maybe they'd keep the empty cities for that, picking out and strangling the people that
tried to hide in all empty buildings."
"That couldn't happen," Carol said curtly. "It's impossible!"
"It could happen," insisted Burke. "Some places-most places—it will. But there'll be
some places where folks will find out how to defend themselves. Maybe it'll be only one
place, but that'll be enough. There'll be a little town where folks are smart enough to
make flame throwers and explosives, and they'll study the Gizmos scientific-like and
learn how to kill 'em. And so they'll stand off the Martians—the Gizmos. And there'll
come a time when they've learned plenty and can take the offensive. They'll go
sweeping over the world, fighting the Martians on the land and on the sea, and kill 'em
and kill 'em, getting even for the cities the Gizmos destroyed and the countries they
murdered."
Professor Warren came bustling back to the car, carrying filled brown paper bags. She
said crisply: "Dick, there's a hardware store right across the way. Can't you think of
something that would be of use to us in a hardware store?"
Lane started. He got out of the car.
"I'll be right back," he said. "You have matches handy?"
"I bought cartons of them," said the professor. "And some things to make sandwiches
with and lighter fluid for you. I was thinking of a possible gasoline torch. Have you
money?"
He nodded and went across the street, pausing twice to let a car pass him. His eye
caught the waverings of objects seen through the film of hot air next to the hot metal of a
car hood and his blood stopped. Only thermal refraction, he decided, but startlingly like
a Gizmo.
He went into the hardware store. It was cool, air conditioned. Normally he wouldn't
have noticed even that.
He bought two gasoline blowtorches. The clerk was mildly surprised that he bought

two. On the way to the front of the store he saw a portable brazing torch—a tank of
compressed gas with a spark maker near the tip. One had only to turn on the gas and
strike a spark, and a blue-white flame leaped out. There was even a trigger by which the
flame could be increased or diminished. He bought two of those, also. Then he invested
in pocket lighters and more fuel for them.
"Is there something else?" asked the clerk.
"I'd like," said Lane dryly, "to buy some Very pistols, but I'm afraid you wouldn't
have them on hand."
He went out. Somehow he had a feeling of extreme urgency. He hurried back across
the street. It had the leisurely atmosphere of almost any small-town business district.
The professor, looking embarrassed, put something out of sight when he appeared.
Lane automatically chose Carol as the person to whom to show the mechanism of the
brazing torches. Burke watched, but appeared absorbed in other thoughts.
"I see," said Carol. "It works like this."
She lighted and handled the torch with competence, and Lane approved of her
warmly.
"I forgot," he said suddenly. "We need a garbage can."
He went back across the street. His unreasonable feeling of urgency made him short
with the clerk who insisted on wrapping the can for him. Back at the car, he learned the
professor had gone to another store. Carol said:
"She went to buy some pillowcases. When you mentioned a garbage can she realized
that a pillowcase was the thing to use with it. She may get a sheet or two, besides."
Lane got into the driver's seat. All about him the people of Murfree went about their
business with a comfortable lack of haste. The business district was contained in four
blocks, the only part of the town without shade trees. Here the sunshine was already
baking hot.
Sitting in the car, Lane felt what amounted to truculent uneasiness, although there
had been no sign of Gizmos since the ear came over the pass from the next valley to the
east. He waited with growing impatience for the professor's return. He wanted to get out
of town, now. He'd gotten equipment with which they could defend themselves more
adequately than before. He didn't want to be attacked—if they were to be attacked—in
the middle of a town whose people would not know what was happening, but only that
they died.
A dog trotted across the street, wisely watching the traffic and moving with that
matter-of-fact acceptance of the ways of men which is so casual among dogs, and of
which no other lower animal seems capable.
Carol followed his eyes. The dog paused in the middle of the street to let a car go by,
and trotted the rest of the way. A man on the sidewalk spoke to the dog. It was one of
those trivial incidents which seldom happen in a city where dogs have only their
masters, no other human acquaintances, to greet them. The dog politely wagged his tail
and trotted on.
Lane was still uneasy, but it was necessary to wait. He opened his mouth to speak—
The man on the sidewalk opened his mouth to gasp. He staggered. He beat the air

before him. His eyes went panicky; he choked, and fell to his knees. He jerked his head
from side to side, his mouth open, fighting crazily against nothingness.
The Monster howled.
"Shut the windows," snapped Lane.
He was out of the car, rushing for the fallen man. Other people were hurrying to help.
Somebody bent over the victim as he collapsed to the street. Lane thrust other figures
aside. He snapped his lighter before the face of the semiconscious, panic-crazed man.
There was a leaping, momentary, lambent flame. There was a horrible odor. A thin shrill
shriek ended before it was well begun. The fallen man could fill his lungs. He did. He
gasped for breath which now he could draw in.
The Monster howled again.
Lane said sharply. "I've seen this before. If it ever happens to you again, or to
anybody else, make a flame. Wave it close! You'll be able to breathe! Pass it on!"
There was a small crowd of two dozen people, already gathered about the prostrate
figure. Others were hastening to see what was the matter. Lane looked about him, and
saw blank incomprehension on every face. The group was merely astonished and
concerned over what they assumed to be a stroke of some sort, happening to a friend. To
them, what Lane had done was completely without rational connection to the emergency
it had met.
Then one of them gagged and struggled to breathe. He flailed his arms crazily. He
fought against suffocation with stark terror in his eyes. Lane pushed toward that man
and waved a flame before his face and behind him somebody else collapsed and there
were startled cries. One of the figures hurrying to this spot stopped short and began to
fight for breath. And the Monster screamed in the car, and tried to find a place to hide.
He found himself cursing at the things which now, very obviously, descended upon
Murfree with lethal intentions. Flight was the only possible recourse, leaving these
people to the fate the Gizmos would deal out. But it did not occur to him. Someone
collapsed two yards away. The crowd was still bewildered, still unable to realize that
danger existed for them as well as the two-no, three—no, four—struggling figures on the
ground. Lane flung himself to his knees beside the nearest, and waved the lighter flame,
and then his own breath stopped and he waved the small blaze before his own face. But
there was another person down, a woman this time, and whinings were loud all about
him.
He knew what would come, yet it was impossible not to try to do what he could. He
was actually trying to fight a swarm of Gizmos with a pocket lighter. He swept his
absurd little flame about and other small flames rose and tiny shrieks sounded.
Then the professor waded into the extremely small space of crazed confusion. Of all
imaginable things, she flourished a pillowcase. By her expression she was holding her
breath as she thrust the open end of the pillowslip down upon the contorted face of a
fallen fat man, now turning purple. The pillowcase billowed. Something was caught in
it, throbbing and fluttering horribly inside the cloth. The professor closed the open end
of the bag, squeezing it with an air of intense satisfaction modified by the look of
someone trying not to breathe. She held the trapped Gizmo triumphantly aloft. It made a

frantic whine.
Lane freed his own lips and nostrils of a Gizmo, by burning it. His eyebrows were
singed by the flare-up, but the stuff he drew into his lungs was unbreathable. His senses
reeled, yet he knew such hatred that it seemed he could go on forever, destroying
Gizmos one by one, living on hatred only.
But of course it was not so.

Chapter 7
Blue-white flame flashed before Lane's face. There were small shriekings, and Carol
gasped, "Back to the car! Aunt Ann has a prisoner! They'll follow—maybe— if we drag
him out of town!"
She tugged at Lane's shoulder; again there was a flashing of bluish flame. She'd
turned on a brazing torch and worked its spark igniter, and extended the flame to the
limit. She cleared space before Lane's nostrils and lips. A brazing torch was supposed to
burn for two hours on a tank of compressed gas, so she used it lavishly. Lane took it
from her hands. There were human screams in the street now. A few people ran in panic,
with no idea of what they fled from. Some few beat at emptiness, struggling to breathe.
There were some already on the ground, strangling. And above there was now a loud
whining sound, louder than the human voices. It was overhead, as loud as a storm wind,
and of a quality that made the flesh crawl.
Lane fought his way to the car, leaning against violent wind-gusts. The Gizmos were
forming themselves into that overwhelming whirling formation, that globular
organization which they'd used before to carry dust as a weapon. Against it, Lane
played the long flame like a scythe. Once, apparently, the blade of fire penetrated to one
of the currents which had been visible in the dust clouds. Fire leaped along that flow.
This swarm was no dust cloud, but it was not quite invisible because the appearance
of minor waverings produced by a single Gizmo was multiplied by their number. The
tops of nearby houses became blurred. Into that squealing organization of spinning
Gizmos, Lane probed fiercely, as whalers in ancient days probed with lances for the vital
parts of whales. Once he hit what in a roll-tag dust cloud looked like a surface vein; then
the dying Gizmos carried the pale thin flame for forty feet. Suddenly now he struck an
artery, and the thinnest and palest of conflagrations leaped along that whining wind and
flared up beyond where he could see it. But the swarm broke up.
A horse tied to a farm wagon reared and kicked and fell to the ground. Somebody ran
crazily, whipping the air before his face. Someone else, on his knees, battled nothingness
and toppled to the sidewalk.
"Open!" cried Carol fiercely. "Open the door!"
The professor was gasping for breath, an expression of complete revulsion on her
face. The odor of burned Gizmos was awful. She still had the improbable, inflated,
frantically throbbing pillowcase.
Carol beat upon the door of the car. Burke, inside it, tried with shaking hands to fill

the gas cup of a blowtorch. He heard nothing, he had closed and locked the car doors in
terror. Lane struck the door with the tank of the brazing torch, and the glass cracked,
held together only by its shatterproof constitution.
"Open up!" raged Lane, "Or I'll bum a way in!"
Burke jerked his head up and reached over, his fingers all thumbs. It was seconds
before he could pull up the tiny knob which worked the door locks. Carol snatched the
door wide.
"Down with the window, Carol," commanded the professor. "Dick, you're taking the
wheel again. This idiot has cost lives!"
Lane crowded Burke out of the way and started the motor. The professor seated
herself stolidly beside the other front door, holding the shrilling, fluttering pillowslip
outside.
"Use the flame, Carol," she snapped. "The monsters are trying to tug my fingers loose.
And—"
Her voice cut off. Carol carefully swung the flame that Lane had surrendered to her.
She speared the place before her aunt's face. The professor breathed, squeamishly.
The car moved. It pulled out into the street as the Monster howled and howled.
"Now," called the professor over the dog's outcry, "now we make this creature
squawk. Keep them from suffocating me, Carol."
She caught the neck of the pillowslip with her other hand. She twisted it, confining her
prisoner more tightly still. And it uttered a frantic buzzing, whining sound which rose in
pitch, and rose again.
"Hal" said the professor with confidence. "Now we can make time! I think they'll
follow us!"
Lane swerved to avoid a stopped car. The traffic in the town had been considerable,
but the tumult had lasted only minutes. There was a strong tendency for cars to stop to
see what was the matter, rather than to flee the spot where other humans might be in
trouble. But Lane was leading that trouble away—he hoped. Once, where
double-parking blocked the road, he jolted up on a sidewalk and went around the
jammed place. The car lurched down again to the pavement of the street
"Look behind," Lane ordered, "and see if people are still being attacked."
"One man's getting up," Carol reported, "with people running to him to ask why he
fell. There's another man being helped up."
"How badly are things blurred?" demanded Lane. "If the whole swarm's following us.
. ."
There was a pause. He drove at twenty miles an hour. Trees appeared ahead now; the
business district was behind them.
"They're following," said Carol, composedly. "They aren't thick at the ground level. I
can see clearly there. Most of them are higher. Housetops are fuzzy to look at. Probably
most of them are higher still."

Trees closed over their heads. The car rolled on.
The professor asked, "Do you think I'd better squeeze this thing tighter, Dick? They
seem to be with us. I can feel them touching my hands and wrists. And Carol's keeping a
flame playing out the window that seems to be popping them off at a good rate. But
they keep after the squalling thing in the pillowcase."
"Maybe I can speed up a trifle," said Lane. He did so. It did not occur to him to be
astonished at his or the professor's composure. When one is busy, though, panic is rare.
To be doing something about any situation is an excellent tranquilizer.
"Twenty-five miles an hour," said Lane a moment later. "We'll time their maximum
flight-speed. When they stop fumbling at your hands, we'll have hit their speed limit."
The car left the green-shaded streets of Murfree. The cloudless sky and brilliant
sunshine on the open fields was an almost dramatic change. Rolling valley and towering
mountains made an amazing difference in the feel of the world. There were, now, small
buff tings of breeze in the opened front windows of the car, which continued to gather
speed.
"They're barely able to keep up, now," said the professor briskly. "How fast?"
"Thirty-two, no, thirty-three miles an hour."
The dusty car rattled less loudly and roared at a lessened tempo. The professor
grunted: "Hm. They're back in force now. I don't like the feel of their fumbling at my
hands. They are nasty creatures, Dick! Carol, is the main swarm still following?"
"They're still following," said Carol.
"Find out from Burke," Lane told her, "where we can stop their chasing us, without
being near any town they can vent their spite on."
Burke had not spoken once since the others forced him to open the car door. He still
trembled. Now he said, dry-throated: "I'm—sorry, Mr. Lane, that I didn't help much back
yonder. But I didn't understand what you were plannin' to do."
"That's all right," said Lane, with politeness. "The Gizmos attacked Murfree. Professor
Warren caught one, and we're making the others follow us because of its squealing.
While they follow us, they can't kill people we've left behind. Now we want to know
when to make them stop following us. Somewhere as far as we can get from a village,
and, if possible, even a dwelling."
"Y-yes," said Burke. But he sat still, frozen. The Monster howled.
"Slap the Monster," said Lane irritably. "Make him shut up! And tell me where to
dump our whining friends."
"I'll—try to think, Mr. Lane," said Burke.
Lane drove on. Clouds banked up ahead. There were flickerings of lightning.
"Looks like a thunderstorm," said Lane. "I might manage to drive through it. What do
Gizmos do in thunderstorms?"
The professor chortled. "It should be a beautiful thing, Dick! A gas metabolism means
ionized gases. But when you want to de-ionize a gas you bubble it through water! Rain
ought to cut them down to size!"

Lane saw the gray front of falling water appear through a lower place in the westward
rampart of the mountains. It advanced over other crests, presenting a long, drapery-like
curtain of rain that moved into the valley. The highway forked, and Lane chose the
turning that would take the car nearer to the rain.
"Maybe," said the professor hopefully, "if the rain lets us lose the others, we can keep
this one."
"For a pet, no doubt," said Lane. "Is it in extra good voice just now, or are the ones
behind us getting nearer?"
"Some," Carol told him, "are going on ahead."
"Which we can't allow," said Lane. "I don't know how smart they are, but if they're
smart enough they might blind me with dust and get me ditched." He increased the car's
speed a trifle and headed for the center of the storm area.
Presently there was a rush of wind, bearing dust in curling masses before it; then a
gray curtain marched across the land. The car rumbled and rattled between ranks of pine
trees which hid everything but the dark clouds overhead and the way ahead.
With a sudden rush the rain arrived. It pattered loudly on the car roof, and washed
reddish streaks of wet dust down the back window, and the windshield wipers swept it
from one side to the other. The professor cranked up the window beside her, cramping
the open end of the pillowcase tightly into place. The inflated bag of cloth flapped and
wobbled outside, becoming spotted by the rain. Carol turned off the brazing torch with
which she'd been protecting her aunt against attack.
The sound of all the world changed as the car was closed. Rain fell in seeming
streaks. The highway surface turned dark and glistening, and a two-inch mist seemed to
carpet it. The woodland on either side became almost black. Thunder roared and
lightning flashed, and the tires sang and the windshield wipers clicked and the air
inside the car became dank and somehow fragrant with odors brought in by the wetness.
"We ought to bring our prisoner in," said the professor uncomfortably. "We can
probably get it into the little garbage can you've provided. I've decided. Dick, that if I
can take this to Washington and show it to some government biologists, there'll be no
difficulty in having this affair taken care of."
"Perhaps," said Lane. "But I'm not worried too much about the Gizmos' health. Let's
let it stay outside."
He went on. The road curved to the right and went steeply down, returning toward
the broader bottom of the valley. There was rain in solid masses, falling on pastureland
which now appeared.
They had ridden for a good two miles beyond the last patch of pine trees before,
abruptly, they ran out of the rain. Then there was wet red earth on either hand. Ahead,
the storm marched toward the north and east. They followed it. The world appeared
exactly as usual. But the pillowcase, bouncing and flapping outside the front right-hand
window, did not look as resilient as it had some time before.
"I wish you'd stop," said the professor uneasily, "and let me see what's happened to
my specimen. It doesn't look as lively as it did. I do want to get this to Washington!"

Lane braked and stopped the car.
"Watch the landscape behind," he said briefly to Carol. "I'll watch ahead." As he heard
the professor cranking down her window he reflected that Burke, who owned this car,
was reduced to the status of a passenger without voice in the conduct of affairs. He said:
"Burke?"
"Y-yes, Mr. Lane," said Burke, still shakily.
"Haven't heard from you in some time," said Lane. "What's your opinion of the state
of things now? Still believe in a military organization of the Gizmos?"
"It looks mighty like it to me, sir," said Burke unsteadily. "They—wouldn't want a
prisoner carried off that we could learn things from. It'd make 'em stop an attack to try to
keep us from carryin' away a prisoner."
Professor Warren broke into lamentations. The pillowslip was soaked by rain; the
only dry spots were the places where it had been clamped by the window. Now, inside
the car, the pillowslip was limp. It was not totally empty; the wet cloth still contained
bubbles. None of them, however, was big enough to be a Gizmo.
"It's dead!" lamented the professor. "And it could have solved everything! We'll have
to catch another!"
She opened the neck of the sack. An intolerable odor of carrion came out. She hastily
threw the pillowcase out of the window and panted for clean air. Lane put the car into
gear and went on.
For almost an hour there was no tangible evidence that Gizmos existed anywhere but
in the area they had left, though Lane knew better. Then they came to a place where they
saw four dead cattle on a hillside. The animals were definitely dead, not peacefully
reclining and chewing the cud. But that was no positive sign of Gizmos. Lane stopped
the car and cut off the motor. He listened. The universe was without sound. No insects.
No bird songs. He started the motor once more.
"Not proven," he said wryly, "but I'd bet that they're either here or they have been.
And it ought to take a lot of Gizmos to kill all the things that chirp and twitter."
Professor Warren stared at him as if appalled at the idea. And it was a startling thing,
once one considered it. Any insect-eating bird captures bugs by hundreds or thousands
every day, and there is no acre of open ground without its numerous feathered foragers.
Woodlands shelter many more. Swifts and swallows carry on their hunting until late in
the twilight, and bats carry on through the dark. It's hard to realize the number of insects
devoured in one acre in one day, and yet the number of insects is not diminished. To
depopulate a field of its insect inhabitants is incredible destruction. To destroy also its
birds, its field mice, its rabbits, its moles . . .
"I didn't realize, Dick," said the professor querulously, "how many Gizmos there must
have been to destroy even the gnats where we had our trailer. Those dust spheres must
have had hundreds of thousands of Gizmos in them. Altogether there must be—it is
inconceivable how many there must be! And any one of them can kill a human being.
Dick, this is a serious business."
"I've been suspecting it for some time," said Lane dryly, "even if I don't agree that they
are Martians."

Burke spoke with a sudden return to his former manner of complete confidence and
zest.
"Yes, sir! Those Gizmos are Martians, or Jupiterians, or something from space. It
stands to reason they don't belong on Earth! And they're smart as men. Maybe there was
gas-creatures on Earth before they came, like there'd be meat-creatures in the woods on
Jupiter or Mars if we went there. But these Gizmos come from off of Earth. They're smart.
They've got a civilization, they've got military tactics, they've got over-all strategy. They
got a general plan for conquerin' Earth, and it looks bad."
"I'll agree that it looks bad," said Lane. "How bad I don't know. But if they can appear
in swarms everywhere, it certainly doesn't look good!"
The car now moved in a generally northeast direction between lines of green-clad
mountains. It had left the thunderstorm far behind. It went along a gravel-surfaced road
between strong, tight fences with here and there a farmhouse. Several times they saw
cattle alive. Once more Lane stopped the car and the motor, to listen. The sounds of the
countryside were perfectly commonplace. Birds flew up from the top strands of the wire
fences as the car came near.
"There are birds and bugs again around here," said Lane.
"And Gizmos," said Carol quietly.
She pointed. A living partridge flapped and flailed upon the ground. As they
watched, it lay still. And Lane, coldly searching, saw grass beyond it quiver slightly, as
if there were a bubble of heated gases above the dying bird. He started the motor again.
The death of that particular partridge was an extremely minor episode in the
developing state of things. There had been other incidents which were equally
indicative of something startlingly unusual.
In a backwoods settlement in Alabama, a colored farmer had secured an herb doctor
to put an end to an epidemic among his chickens. Herb doctor is the polite term used by
witch doctors when they advertise their services in newspapers. It is commonly believed
that they can relieve all situations not caused by a judge or a grand jury. At midnight of
the night before, this herb doctor had burned a particularly offensive mess of feathers,
roots, gums, dusts, and grisly oddments within the affected chicken house. As it burned,
the herb doctor recited mysterious words learned by rote and without individual
meaning. Actually they came from the Gulf of Guinea by way of some generations of
thaumaturgists, and their original significance was bloodcurdling. A truly horrible reek
came out of the musky chicken house. A completely offensive aroma stayed behind. The
herb doctor came out of the structure and, coughing, said that thereafter the farmer's
chickens would be completely safe in their shelter.
And they were. The herb doctor had cast a spell to drive away the spirits, the demons,
the invisible fiends who caused healthy chickens to be found dead under their roosts
each morning. His spells and the fumigation left the living fowl stupefied where they
roosted, but his professional assurance was well-founded. Those chickens were now
safe against Gizmos. They and their dwelling stank of odors even Gizmos disliked. So
the herb doctor had done an efficient and highly professional job of chasing the Gizmos.
There were other irrelevant happenings. There was a sufferer from asthma in Tarzana,

California, who waked in the night with a familiar sensation of suffocation, his breath cut
off. He felt the wild terror which suffocation produces, but he was more or less
accustomed to it. If he heard a thin whining in his ears, he paid no attention. This was a
very bad attack. But instead of futile beatings at the air before him, he groped beside his
bed as his senses reeled. He had readied a tiny glass capsule placed upon a clean
handkerchief. He crushed the capsule and thrust the handkerchief to his face. The
pungent smell of amyl nitrate filled the air. Then he could breathe again. There was no
gradual improvement in his breathing, as usually happened. One instant he was
suffocating, the next instant he was breathing perfectly. The smell of amyl nitrate was
objectionably strong. He lay back, wide awake but reassured. His ears rang and his heart
pounded from his fright, but he was accustomed to attacks of asthma.
He did not hear a high-pitched whine rise in tone until it was an infinitesimal shriek.
It did not occur to him that a Gizmo had shared the fumes of amyl nitrate with him; he
had never heard of Gizmos. He probably did not even know that amyl nitrate in the least
possible concentration will make an internal-combustion engine backfire itself to
destruction. Certainly he did not reason that an entity of gas, with a gas metabolism,
would react to the smell of amyl nitrate as a human would react to a bath in nitric acid.
The asthmatic man dozed off presently, very grateful that so severe an asthmatic
attack had been so brief.
Such incidents were not numerous. It was typical of the over-all situation, however,
that grim occurrences such as the fate of the village of Serenity and slaughterings of
domestic animals, were as consistently misunderstood as affairs connected with herb
doctors and attacks of "asthma."
There had been migrations from the forests in Maine and Minnesota and Georgia and
Oregon—that is, migrations that had been observed as they took place. Elsewhere,
people in innumerable places had seen foxes slinking harriedly through fields of soy
beans, and deer warily following each other in places where deer had not been seen in
years. There can be no question but that many wild creatures fled from the forests to
human-occupied land as if choosing a peril they knew—men—rather than invisible
horrors which whined in the wilderness.
And at about the time that Lane drove away from a newly murdered partridge, some
thirty miles or so from Murfree, in western Virginia, there was a considerable group of
human beings in Minnesota surveying the area the refugee animals occupied.
The news of the exodus had traveled far, long before dawn. There were farmers
whose fields had been uninvaded, and there were those whose crops were partly but not
wholly ravaged, and some who had found bears in their barnyards that morning. They
had come to where county agents were gathering to confer on the problem of what could
be done. Valuable crops were endangered by rabbits and woods-mice and deer and
groundhogs and hordes of every kind of herbivorous animal. There were fish and game
officials, and representatives of the SPCA. There was even a Department of Agriculture
man, roused in his hotel room and driven eighty miles to arrive at dawn. He faced a
kind of emergency even the Department had never had dumped in its lap before. And of
course there were reporters. Most of them were for local newspapers, but there were one
or two press association men, come in hope of a news story.

It was a somehow appalling spectacle in the early light. There was a giant cornfield,
with green, straight, leafy stalks rising well over a man's height in mathematically exact
furrows which seemed to reach to the horizon. There was a road blocked to traffic by a
state policeman's car parked crosswise. Behind this barrier there were other cars, on the
road and off it, with still other cars arriving and people moving forward from them on
foot. News of the animal migration had traveled fast.
And there were animals in the com. Rabbits nibbled, and groundhogs gorged, and
bears waddled recklessly among the stalks, stripping off half-ripe ears to feast on. Timid
deer surged here and there, sometimes brave enough to crop the tenderer corn-leaves,
but much more often driven in small bands of spasms of terror in which they knocked
down and trampled dozens of times as much as they could have consumed. Here a fox
could be seen, dining daintily off something small and bloody, while others of its
victim's kind eddied and hopped within yards. Skunks moved irritably in the press,
their plumelike tails already warning of tempers frayed by crowding.
There were noises in the cornfield—animal noises. There were panics and frights and
moments of precarious calm at one spot or another. But the cornstalks went down, and
the farmer whose crop was vanishing before his eyes talked desperately with the county
agents and fish and game officials and the representative of the Department of
Agriculture. His family had been evacuated from the farmhouse far up the road. Stock in
the barn and barnyard was at the mercy of predators who moved about in bewilderment
and suspicion at the quantity of prey about. His hens were subject to weasels. And the
tassels of his very fine corn crop dipped and dropped, and there was a steady sound of
munching, and small squealings, and gruntings, and hoarse noises which no animals
should have made at all.
There was no action. There was only steady, progressive destruction. The humans,
both official observers and gaping curiosity seekers, could do nothing but stare. They
could say nothing to each other except more or less varied expressions of amazement,
surprise, and bewilderment. When the change came, the humans did not notice it at first.
It did not begin where there were people. Perhaps only a small part of the animal horde
heard the first thin whinings.
The killings of the animals began three-quarters of a mile from the parked state police
car. It began in a clump of half a dozen deer, who abruptly went mad with desperation
and charged crazily through the crowded rows of corn. They carried vicious,
high-pitched whinings with them. Then a bear reared up and fought nothingness. More
whinings came, and rabbits kicked convulsively, and skunks used their weapons of
defense, and foxes snapped and gave battle to unseen things, and field mice and ground
squirrels tried to squeak as they strangled, and even weasels rolled over and over with
their demoniac fangs rending only air.
The humans realized what threatened when a spitting fury—a wildcat—plunged
blindly through their midst, giving battle to emptiness. Then rabbits hopped among the
cars and onlookers, and died in convulsions. Foxes ran blindly among the people, biting
furiously at invisible things, and then they collapsed and died as the humans scattered.
The people did not hear the whinings which were all about them. The animals made a
dismal, widespread din of despair and defiance and utterly desperate ferocity. But the

people made an uproar, too. The congregation of onlookers was instantly a confusion of
shouting, struggling participants in the panic. They fled to their own cars, or fought to
get into any other they could reach.
They cranked up windows and started motors, and there was immediately a chaos of
snarled traffic. Fenders clashed. Horns bellowed. Then cars deserted the roadway and
crashed through fences and cut wide swathes in the com, to get around the jam.
In minutes there were only frantic, fugitive dust streaks racing away at top speed,
except that there were some stalled cars, and some with tangled bumpers. Their owners
struggled to escape by riding upon any one which managed to get into motion.
In half an hour, the press association men were indignantly swearing at staff men in
the cities. They'd gotten to the nearest telephones to phone in their stories. The office
men regarded the subject of the tales as freak stuff, of no earth-shaking importance. The
scale of the phoned narratives made them something else, but by precedent such
accounts should later be discredited or at the least scaled down to the possible. But the
field men furiously insisted that animal husbandry departments of governments and
colleges be queried about this massive outbreak of an animal epidemic. Department of
Agriculture offices must be questioned on crop damage. Game officials must be
hounded into committing themselves on the danger to human beings from carnivores
like wildcats and bears which abandoned their natural haunts. Above all, health
departments must be urged into statements on the danger of this animal plague to
humans.
As the press association reporters squabbled with skeptical office men, undeniable
cases of deaths among the onlookers came to them. A state policeman brought out
bodies. Later he would feel cold chills down his back when he realized the chances he'd
taken. People who'd gone to see an incredible thing they'd heard about on a party-line
phone had died of their curiosity. Their faces were purple and their tongues protruded:
they had suffocated.
This was the thing which forced belief. While doctors tried to establish some physical
condition which would have caused human beings to suffocate of themselves— because
there was no mark of exterior violence on any of the victims—the press association wires
began to hum with the story. Helicopters took off with photographers to snap the death
scene from the air. Health department emergency crews went racing to find out what
had really happened. They would wear respirators and carry elaborate equipment for
the securing of biological specimens for research upon the germ or virus responsible for
the deaths. The mass of dead animal bodies called for the dispatch of bulldozers to
cover up the bodies lest the contagion spread.
But the significance of this happening in Minnesota, to Lane and Professor Warren
and Carol in Virginia, was mostly in the lurid headlines it produced. They saw the
headlines on a rack outside a drugstore. Lane swerved into a filling station to fill up the
car's tank, and while the pump clattered he went across the street and bought papers.
"I'm going to telephone again," said Professor Warren desperately, when she'd read
the account and seen the pictures. "Those men who run the bulldozers to cover up the
carcasses, and those who look for bacteriological material—they'll disturb the Gizmos at
their feeding, as you did those about the dead rabbits. They'll be angered and attack the
men. Somehow I've got to make somebody see sense. Sending unwarned men to bury

those animals is murder."
Lane grimaced. Something had drawn his eyes to a distant mountainside, clearly
visible from this place on the edge of this small town. He watched the mountainside.
There was a vague blurring of the details of the forest on the mountain. The blurring was
greatest in the center of a roughly spherical area. It moved, slowly but definitely, far
away.
"I'm afraid," said Lane detachedly, "that their danger is almost unimportant compared
to the danger to the rest of us. Look there!"
He pointed. Carol drew in her breath, sharply. The professor looked, and tears of rage
and frustration came into her eyes.
"Yes, Mr. Lane," said Burke, with a complacent and yet uneasy satisfaction.
"Everybody's in plenty of danger. These here Martians or Jupiterians or whatever, are
carryin' out a first-class military plan! That thing on the mountainside is a corps of
Gizmos, movin' to get ready for G-day—Gizmo day. That's going to be something, when
it comes!"

Chapter 8
The Gizmos did not attack. On the morning Lane spotted a mass formation of them in
motion down a mountain chain, radar throughout the United States reported an
unprecedented number of slow-moving blips which did not represent aircraft. They
were then explained as areas of extra-high ionization in the atmosphere. And this
explanation was quite accurate so far as it went, but like a deplorable number of
scientific explanations it did not go far enough. It described the proximate cause of an
observed phenomenon and blandly stopped there. There was something more than a
condition of ionization involved.
This morning, areas of ionization were numerous and many were extraordinarily
large. For a time, there was some concern lest they interfere with regular radar
operation. But the Gizmo masses moved at a maximum speed of a little over thirty miles
an hour, plus or minus the pull of the wind where they were. A moment's inspection
could distinguish between such a blip on a radar screen and a spot made by a
fast-moving plane.
But there were more than five hundred such blips on screens at one time, counting all
radar stations. Nobody can guess how many separate groups were involved, though
assuredly the total was high in the thousands. Certainly there were massings of Gizmos
all over the nation; rather, there was distribution of masses of Gizmos everywhere. But
there was still no association of such radar phenomena with outbreaks of plague among
domestic and wild animals, the death of the village of Serenity, the slaughter of pets
nearly everywhere, and such oddities as an unusual asthmatic attack experienced by a
man in Tarzana, California.
The blips made no sort of sense, even when correlated with each other. Had they been
spotted in strategic fashion—concentrated at key railroad junction cities, near industrial
centers, even near the larger centers of human population—somebody would have

suspected a military purpose. Invasion would have seemed credible, though Gizmos
themselves were still unknown. But the massing of Gizmos at it appeared on radar
screens, with a pattern changing frequently through the day, did not fit into any specific
design, and so was not accorded any serious attention.
Near noon, Lane stopped at a country store and put through a call to the friend who
headed the research department of a pharmaceutical house. He put it on record that if
men did seek bacteriological specimens or move bulldozers to cover up the multitude
of dead animals in Minnesota, some of them would fall victims to a supposed plague.
He observed that some of those who wore respirators—biologists seeking tissue
specimens—would be victims of the death they tried to interpret. But he prophesied that
no one would be attacked by the plague if he held a lighted cigar or cigarette in his
mouth.
It was a highly reasonable prophecy, but he did not dare say more. After all, less than
twenty-four hours had passed since his own first contact with Gizmos, and the actual
history of those hours was too fantastic to be believed.
After the phone call, Lane headed east. They traveled a graveled highway, from
which the world looked utterly commonplace and comfortable. They saw birds fly up
from the roadside, cattle grazing tranquilly on the rolling fields. There were buzzards
soaring lazily and effortlessly against the blue.
He looked at Carol, beside him on the front seat, and she smiled at him without
words. He looked in the back-view mirror and saw the professor leaning back in her
corner, her eyes closed wearily. He saw that Burke's lips were pursed together and his
expression was one of meditation.
"Do you," asked Lane of Carol, "do you really believe that all this is true?"
"I was just doubting it," admitted Carol, "but your eyebrows are singed, and there's a
burned place on your shirt." She smiled again, wryly.
"Mr. Burke thinks we may be lower animals, compared to Gizmos."
Lane grimaced. "Burke intends to live out an imaginative novel of which he is to be
the hero. Of course the hero of a novel never gets killed. I suspect Burke is casting
himself as a sort of dragon slayer who'll lead devoted, admiring followers to victory
against the whole tribe of Gizmos." He raised his voice: "Burke?"
"Yes?"
"You've been thinking hard. What's turned up in your mind?"
Burke said zestfully: "I don't know where the Gizmos are goin' to start, but I figure it'll
be all of a sudden. It'll be a surprise attack, smotherin' the cities with rollin' masses of
Gizmos that'll sweep in and scatter and swarm into the houses, and folks won't know
what's happening till they're massacred."
"You suggest," asked Lane mildly, "that the human race will be wiped out?"
"Mighty near," said Burke with vast confidence. "Mighty near! But there'll be some
that'll live, and when the Gizmos come after 'em they'll have machine guns shooting fire,
and they'll spray 'em with incendiary bombs and flame throwers." He grinned. "They'll
give fireworks to the kids to kill Gizmos with! They'll make out all right."
Lane said to Carol: "Fireworks aren't a bad idea for emergencies. But we need

something even better."
"You don't think—" Carol hesitated. "You don't think it will be too bad?"
"It's already too bad," said Lane. "For even one human being to be killed by those
beasts—for even one good hunting-dog to be killed to make carrion they'll feed on is
intolerable."
The professor spoke, her eyes still closed. "The problem is to find their former place
in an ecological system we never guessed at, and then find out what happened to it.
Obviously, they are natives of Earth."
"Dick thinks they're the originals of pagan gods," Carol said.
The professor opened her eyes. "It's very likely. Remember, Carol, that the myths of
Greece and Rome were cleaned up before they were taught you as a dainty cultural
subject! The old pagan gods were just as foul as the Gizmos. They're very likely their
ancestors!"
The car rolled on. It was one of forty or fifty-odd million motor vehicles in the United
States. This not being a weekend, the majority of them remained at home, but many
trucks used the highways, singly or in pairs or in long strings of grumbling might. But
where Lane drove there appeared ahead a long trailer-truck backing across the highway
to make a turn toward them. Lane slowed. With much effort, the truck managed to make
the turn with the aid of a road leading toward a farmhouse. The truck came rumbling
back toward Lane. It passed him, the driver waving some cryptic warning.
The meaning of the signal became clear when, just beyond the truck's turning place,
there appeared a barrier in the road. There was a state police officer on guard, and he
came to the car as Lane braked to a stop.
"The road's closed," he explained. "There's a bad smashup down in the hollow
yonder. A big trailer ran off the road, banged into trees, and blocked the way. Then
another one ran into it. You'll have to go back and take another road. Where are you
headed?"
"North," said Lane. "New Jersey."
The officer shook his head.
"Sixty's blocked too. Another big smashup. You'd better go back through Clifton
Forge and take Two-twenty. You ought to do all right that way."
"Thanks," said Lane. He turned to back into the farm-read to make his turn as the
truck had done. Then he culled, "Aren't there more accidents than usual today?"
The cop said harassedly: "It's the worst day I ever heard of! There've been six bad
ones in this county! Worse still, deeper in the mountains. It's as if everybody driving is
drunk!"
The professor put her head out of a back window. "Anybody killed yonder?"
The cop spread out his hands. "Everybody," he said. Then he added, "And somebody
came by and got out of his car to try to help. And he had a heart attack and died, too."
Lane looked wryly at the professor. Then he shrugged.

"Look!" he said curtly. "We were in Murfree this morning when a funny thing
happened. A man dropped down on the street, strangling. It looked like a heart attack,
but it wasn't. Somebody rushed over and waved a burning cigarette lighter before his
face. Instantly the choking man could breathe. While that was happening, three or four
other people began to choke. The man, whoever it was, cured them the same way. He
said that any time such a thing happened, flames would stop the choking, and it did, in
Murfree. Something strange is causing what looks like heart attacks. Flames near your
face stop them. Try it. The man said nobody ever gets an attack like that if he's smoking,
either. He said to pass the word along."
The state cop looked unbelieving, but he nodded. Lane gunned the motor. When he
was headed back down the road along which he had come, the professor said bitterly:
"He didn't believe a word! And I'm guessing at something more ridiculous still!"
Lane said, "Burke, it looks like you read it wrong. The Gizmos aren't attacking cities.
Not yet. They're wrecking trucks and cars, and killing people who get out to help."
Burke's expression was at once scared and triumphant.
"They're smashing communications," he said, "just as I told you. They'll block all the
roads with wrecks so the people in the cities can't take to their cars. They'll have to stay
right where they're helpless."
Lane nodded gravely, but he didn't believe it. In some ways the Gizmos acted with
remarkable intelligence. To round up small animals like rabbits, for example, and kill
them only when a considerable number were gathered in a small place, was intelligent
behavior. It brought a large store of food to a small area, where many gas-creatures
could feed to repletion. More, the area swept clean of game would not remain empty.
Other animals would move in, to be rounded up and slaughtered in their turn. Lane
began to entertain a suspicion that the Gizmos' touches upon the three of them outside
the trailer might not have been deliberate study. It could have been merely an attempt to
round them up, according to Gizmo custom.
But any way you looked at it, such practices were intelligent in their own frame of
reference. If Gizmos were free to choose less effective stratagems for their purposes, then
to choose the best was intellect, and men had rivals —or superiors—in the Gizmo race.
But if Gizmos knew these devices only by instinct, they could not act otherwise.
But in any case there is a vast difference between a beast and a man, and Lane had a
stubborn streak. He did not want to admit that anything not human could be his equal
as a human. The appalling thing about a ghost or devil, after all, is revolt against the
notion that something which is not a man can think. So Lane bogged down on Burke's
basic assumption that Gizmos were thinking beings.
"I tell you, Mr. Lane," said Burke, with profound gravity and shining eyes, "we better
make some better plans than you've got! You don't want to go to New Jersey!
Pennsylvania's the place for us! Find us a little town with some coal mines we can
prepare for the women and children to stay safe in, and you and I can teach the men how
to fight Gizmos. We can hold out forever!"
Lane grunted. "I believe it's military theory that a strong offensive is the best defense.
If you want to go to Pennsylvania, I'll find an airport or a railroad station and we'll say
good-by."

Burke squirmed. "But I need you to help train the men to fight Gizmos! And I need
Professor Warren and Miss Carol, too! You got to help me train the folks to stay alive
through what's coming! You and me and the ladies can fix up a town so it can defend
itself!"
Lane felt amusement. To Burke, the most dramatic and therefore the most fascinating
thing imaginable would be a small town filled with embattled heroes, defying a
continent of Gizmos, imagining himself as the leader of the valiant fighting men; Burke
was fascinated by such superb drama. He would try ineptly to realize it without ever
suspecting that anything could be more important.
"I'm afraid," said Lane with polite regret, "that we can't join you. We have the answers
to some questions nobody is ready to ask yet. We have to carry on until somebody is
desperate enough to accept what we want to give them."
"But-"
"Stay with us," said Lane, "and we'll give you all the information we have and get. But
we'll leave you whenever you say."
Near Tacoma, Washington, a diesel trailer-truck with a total weight of thirty-odd tons
was passed by another truck going in the opposite direction. The driver of the thirty-ton
truck was madly fighting nothingness in his cab, ignoring the wheel. The other truck
barely got by him before the undirected thirty-tonner crashed across a sidewalk and
through a plank fence and hurtled into an excavation for the foundation of a building.
No one was hurt—not even the driver. At least, there was not a scratch on him. But he
was dead.
Outside of Detroit, a convoy of fourteen new cars, each with its own driver, moved
sedately along. The driver of the lead car in the convoy died, and his car went off the
road. Ten of the thirteen other drivers lost control of their slowly-moving cars, too. They
crashed. At so conservative a speed, none of the cars was badly damaged, but all the
drivers perished seemingly from heart attacks or shock at sight of their dead friends.
In Albuquerque, New Mexico, a freak windstorm was credited with a dust heap
across a heavily traveled road, in which cars could be seen with their tops barely
breaking the surface. The cars were empty of humans, who had struggled out of the
windows when the cars stopped. But none of them escaped. They were found in the
dust pile, suffocated.
An inter-city bus pulled into its terminal in Atlanta, Georgia, with a load of hysterical
living passengers and three apparently dead men in the back. The three had collapsed,
one after another, following a stop by the bus driver to survey a three-car wreck.
Passengers had opened windows to look out. Within minutes, one passenger flailed his
arms wildly, his face grew purple, and he fell, unconscious. Other passengers tried to be
helpful, but it was evident a doctor was needed. The bus driver pushed his vehicle to its
topmost speed, to get his stricken passenger to medical care. But before he reached help,
two other passengers went into comas after passing through the same symptoms. The
rest of the bus occupants were nearly out of control when the bus reached its terminal,
where doctors were available.
By midday the reported number of traffic deaths in the United States was put at six

hundred, which was par for a long holiday weekend, but not for a midweek forenoon. It
was considered very probable that the tally was far from complete. When Lane drove
into Clifton Forge for the second time and stopped the car at a restaurant, there was a
considerable amount of speculation on the increasing traffic accidents on the radio news
broadcasts.
Lane listened grimly, at the restaurant table. There was a phone booth in the
restaurant, and while the others ordered their meals, he called again to New Jersey, to
the Diebert Pharmaceutical Company, Inc. His friend, the research director, was not
available.
"I want to leave a message," said Lane. "This is important. Write it down word for
word, please. This is the message. 'No excess single-car accidents happened while the
driver was smoking.' It's from Dick Lane. Can you read it back?" He listened. "Right. It's
important!"
He went back to the table. He told the professor what he'd done.
"That's just what I should have done!" she explained. "Instead of letting that idiot back
at the University think I was a practical joker, I should have made predictions. But I
didn't know what to predict."
"You could ask for checking observations," suggested Lane. "Wire to any biologists
you know that sportsmen report unusual numbers of game animals found dead.
Buzzards are not touching what would ordinarily be most attractive food to them. Say
there appears to be a correlation of high mortality in game and a refusal of buzzards to
approach bait, all in the same areas. Ask them to verify, and suggest an answer. Have
'em send their answers to my friend, since we're headed for his laboratory."
The professor's expression grew bitter. "I should have realized it," she protested. "I've
been saying for years that your typical scientist sees and hears no theory but his own,
but he speaks his theory to distraction! I've been wanting to tell people what I've found
out, when what they want to do is tell me! Oh, Dick, I'm afraid I'm a typical scientist! I'll
make out a list of people to wire!"
She began to scribble names on the back of a menu, eating abstractedly when her food
came.
Carol smiled at her, and then met Lane's eyes. But Burke said uneasily: "I don't get
that, Mr. Lane. What's smoking got to do with automobile drivers? And what have dead
animals got to do with it?"
Lane explained that if a flame would destroy a Gizmo, a glowing coal should at least
discourage one. The lighted end of a cigar or cigarette being smoked would project into
the space a Gizmo must occupy while strangling someone. Hence it would be nearly
impossible for a Gizmo to suffocate a man who happened to be smoking.
Burke said, relieved, "I see! That's important."
"Dick," said Carol hesitantly, "wouldn't an increase in Gizmo food supply increase the
number of Gizmos?"
"Probably," he agreed. "Fish and game outfits work as hard at keeping up the food
supply for wild life as at anything else."
Carol hesitated, as Burke got up and went over to the cashier's desk of the restaurant.

Then she said diffidently: "I'm wondering . . . I've read about a species of parrot in
Australia that somehow developed the habit of pecking at sheep's backs until they got
through to the sheep's kidneys, which they ate, though their normal food was merely
what parrots usually eat. They killed thousands of sheep."
Lane nodded again. Professor Warren looked at her niece with a sudden expectant
intentness.
"What's up, Carol?" she demanded.
"I've been wondering," said Carol, looking from her aunt to Lane, "if that species of
parrot multiplied very fast when it found out the unlimited supply of food it could get
by killing sheep."
"Out of the mouths of babes," exulted the professor. "She's got the answer, Dick! No
physical mutation, only an instinctual one! The parrots needed no new equipment. Any
parrot could do the same, but only those parrots did, so they multiplied out of all
reason, and killed sheep out of all conscience. They had to be wiped out! That's the
mechanism by which the Gizmos have appeared, Dick. Carol, you've solved the
problem of the ecological imbalance which has made the Gizmos what they are."
Her gaze was warmly triumphant, bent upon Carol. But Carol looked uncertainly to
Lane for approval. He grinned at her.
"Smart girl!" he said. "Now figure out some more!"
She flushed. Burke came back with his pockets stuffed with cigars. He sat down at the
table again.
"I got some cigars," he said. "You'll find me puffing pretty steady from now on. You
better get yourself some too, Mr. Lane. I don't know what the ladies'll do, but if they stay
close to us, and we keep puffing—"
"I have a hope in that line," the professor said darkly, "that may prove even more
repugnant. But right now I gloat over what Carol has suggested. Do you see the picture,
Dick? The Gizmos were a foetiverous race of foul descent, consuming bad smells. Then
one of them, undoubtedly, found out that the process by which they drew evil smells
out of carrion could be used to draw foul breath out of an animal's lungs, and that the
animal would die immediately, when an enterprising Gizmo could continue happily to
feed. It is an exact parallel to a parrot's discovering that he could kill a sheep and have a
meal. The kidney-eating parrots increased to a multitude; the strangling Gizmos have
multiplied into hordes. How or why they contrived their dust clouds I do not know, but
from the tales of jinn traveling in clouds like theirs, it is not a novelty to their kind."
Carol said gently: "But I didn't say all that, Aunt Ann!"
"It was all implicit in what you did say. Dick, can we send my telegrams now?"
They sent the professor's telegrams and headed back toward Covington. Highway 220
was not far from Clifton Forge. They had passed over this road only a couple of hours
earlier, but much had happened in that interval. There was a station wagon against a
tree beside the road, stalled by an impact not even great enough to dent its bumper. Its
windows were open, but no one could be seen inside. Lane stopped.
"There are blurrings," he said grimly. "Give me one of the torches, Carol. We might as
well try out our armory again."

She gave him a blowtorch which had not been used there. It was filled, and its
pressure pump worked, but it was not lighted. He checked it and got out of the car, and
walked toward the stalled station wagon.
There were very familiar sounds in the air about him. He plucked out his cigarette
lighter and snapped it alight, and out again. His breath cut off. Something vicious
whined.
He burned the thing with the flame of his lighter. There was a tiny shriek and he
grimaced at the smell. He went on, and looked through the car window. He swore, and
raised the torch, turning it on. This torch burned gasoline. A small air-pump built up
pressure in its tank, which would feed the fluid through a preheated burning tube. But it
was not preheated now, so a fine thin stream of gasoline sprayed out for several feet.
Most of it evaporated before it touched the ground. Lane snapped his lighter under the
near end of the stream.
There was a whoosh and an uprush of fire. He had touched off not only the liquid
gasoline, but the vapor of that which had evaporated. There was a stirring of air as
invisible things fled away, with thin shrieks.
He opened the station wagon door and made sure of what had happened. He made
flashes within, clearing it of Gizmos. He closed the car windows and felt fury as he
started heavily back to the car. Halfway there, he heard sounds about him again. He
stood still, holding his breath. He felt fumblings all over his body before he sprayed
gasoline again and again set it off. There was a flicker of unbearable heat and a dull
booming sound, and he stumbled out of the vitiated air and caught a deep breath of
something breathable while the high-pitched small screams still sounded.
He reached the car. Burke stared at him, puffing furiously upon a cigar, his face very
pale. Carol said anxiously: "Dick! What was it? Were they—" "Yes," said Lane thickly.
"All dead. I won't tell you any more."
He climbed into the driver's seat and drove away, his face a mask of fury, his hands
trembling.
"You killed a lot of them," said the professor, forlorn because she could offer no other
comfort. "I should have tried to catch one. But you killed a great many. I saw them flare
up."
"I didn't kill enough," said Lane.
Within a mile there was another wreck. Before he turned north he had passed four
more.
It was well into the afternoon before he reached Hot Springs. The highway had been a
shambles all the way. On the outskirts of Hot Springs there was a barrier across the
highway. Men with shotguns and improvised surgeon's masks waved him to a halt.
"No traffic!" called one of them from a safe distance. "Quarantine! You can't come
through! We're keeping the plague out of this town! Go back!"

Chapter 9

Reaction of the general public and the authorities was absolutely rational, even when
it led to moderate-sized towns blocking themselves off from the rest of the world as
defense against a nonexistent contagion. For months it had been known that something
was killing game. It was guessed to be a disease. It seemed reasonable that the "disease"
might spread to domestic animals: dead pets and cattle suggested that it had. In the
past, at least in the case of spotted fever, an animal disease had gone on to attack human
beings. So as a matter of routine there had been research on the problem. This was
wholly rational, as was the concentration of research upon disease.
By definition a Gizmo would be in the class of things like an ignis fatuus—a
will-o'-the-wisp. The idea of a Gizmo was akin to the idea of a ghost or a devil or any
evil spirit. Nobody seriously engaged in research on a supposed disease which might
be important in animal husbandry would be apt to suspect that a spook might be more
deadly than a germ.
Especially, such a thought would not occur at the beginning of real apprehension.
The tragedy of the village of Serenity was not yet twenty-four hours old. The attack on
Murfree was still hopeless confusion in the minds of those who had witnessed it.
Migrations of animals from the forests had only recently been reported, and the death of
rounded-up furry fugitives in Minnesota had happened this same day. Now the
highways were dotted with wrecks: now cattle were found dead in their pastures and on
the open range: now cats and dogs were found suffocated. It was perfectly sane and
reasonable that newly disturbed authorities should reason as the fish and game officials
had reasoned before. They looked for a plague, the more plausibly because Gizmo
swarms in different localities made Gizmo-caused deaths occur in patterns strikingly
like contagion from sporadic cases of infection. The reaction of people everywhere was
absolutely rational.
Cursing, Lane backed the car and turned it away from the barricade outside Hot
Springs. Presently he found a highway to the left, toward the east, and turned into it. He
passed hills and hollows and fields and cozy farmhouses. He chose his turnings wisely,
and presently he was back on Route Two-twenty on the near side of the tiny Hot Springs
settlement. In the long detour he saw no sign of any unusual happening.
Beyond Hot Springs he turned in at a gas pump in the hamlet of McClurg. He had
ideas, born of the barricade and the shotguns, that he should not let his fuel supply get
too low.
Nobody came to attend the pump. He stopped the motor and got out of the car. There
was a sign: Hens for Sale. Fresh Eggs. Vegetables. The gas pump stood in front of a
dingy small store. Still nobody came to wait on him. He listened. There was a
horrendous squawking of chickens somewhere behind the store. Sounds of panic among
chickens do not necessarily mean anything at all, but Lane said over his shoulder: "I'm
going to see what's the matter."
He went around to the back of the store. There was a chicken house there, of that
modern variety which includes a fowl-run under its roof. This allows electric lights to
delude the chickens into getting up in the middle of the night to eat an extra meal and so
be inspired to lay more eggs. Behind the coarse wire of its front there was a hysterical
tumult. Lane thought he caught the sound of whinings in the uproar.
He called back to the car:

"Looks bad! Get set!"
He moved forward. Chickens fluttered in a snowy confusion inside. The chicken wire
bulged where they threw themselves against it. A man shouted angrily at them.
Lane jerked open the door and went in. A bald-headed man slapped hurtling,
squalling chickens aside to get at one of three or four which flapped convulsively on the
floor in front of the roosts. He picked up one struggling chicken. To Lane's experienced
eye it was obviously strangling. Lane shouted in his turn, but the man's face contorted as
he found himself unable to breathe,—while the chicken suddenly struggled free and
flapped outside.
Lane waved his cigarette lighter. There was a flame and a horrible stench. The man
gasped and stared at Lane.
"Come on out!" shouted Lane. "Come out!"
The man blinked, but the din of squawkings continued without a pause. Something
bumped against his foot. A white chicken writhed on the floor, suffocating. He bent
down.
Lane forestalled him. When the lighter came near the strangling chicken's head,
something caught and burned momentarily with a pale bluish fire. The chicken was
instantly its insane and hysterical self again, and proved it by joining in the panic.
The man gaped; he was totally unable to accept so irrational a happening. Lane shook
him, and he said some bewildered words which were lost in the confusion of noises.
There were two more chickens suffocating on the floor. Lane bent to one, picked it up,
held the lighter to its head—and there was a momentary flame and a chicken no longer
in distress. He picked up the last and rescued it in the same fashion.
"Now come out!" snapped Lane. "It's dangerous here! Come on!"
He pulled the bald-headed man outside.
"What—what the hell did you do?" demanded the man blankly. "What the hell's
happenin'?"
"Something's after your chickens," said Lane furiously, though his anger was not with
the man. "It killed four of them. One of them had you! Come on, now, and let me show
you how to protect yourself."
He heard many whinings. The death-shrieks of Gizmos were evidently signals other
Gizmos could hear despite, louder simultaneous sounds. Lane seized his companion by
the arm.
"Come on!" he snapped. "Run!"
But the bald-headed man instinctively resisted. And then it was too late. There were
awful sounds in the air all about them. Gizmos arrived, and Lane felt them touching all
over his body in that dense aggregation which would drown him if it did not suffocate
him. A wild fury filled him. As the bald-headed man fought crazily, his face contorted in
the struggle for breath, Lane forced his arms through the fluttering resistance of the
Gizmos. He put a cigarette in his mouth. When his lighter flared, flames leaped upward
palely, causing screams ten feet above his head. He breathed malodors and lighted the
cigarette. Then he took it in his left hand and stabbed and stabbed at the empty air.

It was not sensible. It was only partly effective. The glowing tip of the cigarette killed
Gizmos, to be sure, but not fast enough. But Lane was not acting as a rational human
being; he was too enraged to realize his own folly.
The professor came running.
"Dick!" she called. "I want to catch one! Let me catch one! I need a specimen for
Washington."
She waved a pillowslip and an unlit gasoline blowtorch in the sort of insanity which
comes of obsessive zeal. She saw Lane as the center of separate, leaping, bluish flames.
She hardly noticed the struggling, strangling bald-headed man. She dropped the
blowtorch and waded into the viciously whining atmosphere about Lane. The Gizmos
were dense enough to blur the sharp edges of treetrunks nearby.
"Got him!" whooped the professor.
Then Carol came running with a brazing torch. Lane picked up the gasoline burner,
and he felt wrath as, holding his breath or gasping the unbreathable, he sprayed
gasoline and Carol fired it, and flames leaped up and shriekings sounded while
Professor Warren sturdily twisted a pillowcase in which something throbbed and made
shrill noises. In the car on the far side of the store the Monster's muted howling could be
heard.
It lasted for a long, long time. It was intoxication to kill the things that had no
substance until a flame touched them.
But presently the throbbing thing in the pillowcase squealed alone. The outline of
trees and leaves and branches was quite unblurred. Carol took her finger off the trigger
of the brazing torch, looked at Lane and swallowed audibly. Wind came from
somewhere and blew away the odor of dead Gizmos. The Monster howled on. Lane
took a deep breath; then he looked at the bald-headed man, who stirred only feebly.
"I've been pretty much of a fool," said Lane.
He bent over the semiconscious owner of the chickens, which in their house had now
regained a composure as insane as their former panic.
"We wiped out a whole swarm, Dick," said the professor, beaming. "Not a big swarm,
maybe, but we wiped them out! They can't help coming to one of their number who's
screaming bloody murder instead of practising it! And I've still got my specimen!"
The bald-headed man panted and opened his eyes. They filled with fright.
"You're all right now," Lane told him. "When you get your breath I'll explain what's
happened and how to keep it from happening again."
"I had a heart attack!" gasped the man on the ground. "Get me to a doctor! I had a
heart attack! Get me to a doctor!"
Lane growled. The owner of the chickens remained fanatically still, panting his own
diagnosis of his condition. He couldn't believe what he remembered, and anyhow most
diseases had their publicity men in all popular advertising media: in case of a heart
attack, the patient must be kept still and a doctor summoned immediately. The
bald-headed man desperately demanded the approved and publicized treatment for his
imagined ill.

"We'll take him to a doctor, then," grunted Lane after a moment. "No sense leaving
him alone! This could happen again! I'll get the car."
He went to the front of the store. Burke was in the driver's seat of the car, ashen with
fear, racing the motor, his hands frozen on the steering wheel, and puffing agonizedly on
a cigar. Every window in the car was shut tightly. On the floor of the car, the Monster
howled despair past even defiance.
Burke looked at Lane with panic-filled eyes. It took long seconds to get him out of his
paralysis of fear. Lane knew that if he'd really been able to move, Burke would have
driven crazily away the instant he knew a multitude of Gizmos was nearby. He'd have
left them, and he'd never have stopped the car until the gas gave out.
Now, Lane filled the tank with gasoline. He pushed Burke into a back seat. He drove
the car painstakingly near to the bald-headed man, still flat on the ground. It occurred to
him that here was a possible chance to prove the existence and characteristics of Gizmos
so the facts would get on the news wires. They had a Gizmo, captive. They could call
others at will. There could be a public demonstration for police and newspapermen and
public health authorities somewhere. It would end with just such an attack on their
audience as had taken place in Murfree. And they could end that attack as they'd ended
the one on this man.
They loaded him into the car, because he pathetically insisted that he must remain
absolutely quiet lest another heart attack strike him dead. In a consciously feeble voice
he gave directions for finding a doctor.
Burke whimpered as the car sped along the highway and the conversation among
Lane and Carol and the professor—raised above the Monster's continuing howls —made
it clear that they intended deliberately to call such an aggregation of Gizmos as had
attacked Murfree and made dust clouds and murdered people in the wrecked cars
they'd passed this day.
"But Mr. Lane!" Burke protested, practically wailing. "This here Gizmo in this
pillowcase—right now it's calling its friends to come help it!"
"True," said the professor briskly. "And if they come, it will be a consummation
devoutly to be wished."
"But they could be dust storms," wailed Burke. "God, Mr. Lane! You're telling 'em to
come after us!"
"Exactly," said Lane, "Just as the men in that small town you're going to organize will
tell them to come-to be killed."
He heard a chattering between the Monster's doleful, hopeless howls. It was Burke's
teeth. But Lane entered into a professional discussion of the methods to be used when
they staged a demonstration of the calling of Gizmos for destruction. Suddenly
Professor Warren said apologetically: "I'm ashamed to admit it, Dick, but I want to make
a hopelessly unscientific experiment. Insofar as I'm a typical scientist, I writhe. But let
me make it, eh?"
"Go ahead," said Lane. Then he saw a wreck beside the road ahead. He said, "Carol,
will you help your aunt?"

The professor dived down among the wildly assorted parcels in the back of the car.
She came up with the paper bag she'd filled in a grocery store in Murfree, minutes
before the Gizmo attack.
"I want to try a—a ghost-repellent," said the professor abashedly. "It might work on
Gizmos."
"Science is wonderful!" said Lane. He drove past the wreck, which Carol did not see.
"Apparently it concocts things to repel even the ghosts it doesn't believe in!"
"Nonsense!" said the professor. "This is not science; it's superstition. But old wives
among the Boers were putting bread-mould on wounds for generations before penicillin
was thought of! This is a superstitious practice against ghosts and devils. I—"
She brought out a clove of garlic. Clothed as it was in its pearly skin, it was wholly
inoffensive. "Ghosts," she said defensively, "were always said to hate the smell of
asafetida and garlic. People used to wear asafetida in bags around their necks, probably
because it smelled even worse than garlic. I've got some garlic. I'm going to see if it stirs
up our discontented prisoner."
With Carol holding the neck of the pillowcase, she thrust in her hand. The captive
thing throbbed and whipped about inside its prison of percale, but its whining did not
change pitch.
The professor withdrew her hand, while Carol kept the prisoner fast. The professor
broke the clove of garlic and rubbed it over her skin. Then she inserted the
garlic-smeared hand into the bag again.
There was something like a Gizmo convulsion. The thing in the pillowslip made a
noise so shrill that it was almost a whistle. It beat back and forth inside the confining
cloth. It raged. It fluttered. The professor withdrew her hand and it continued to bulge
and beat the cloth wall about it.
"Garlic was said to drive away devils," observed Professor Warren with satisfaction,
"because it actually drove away Gizmos. We have an item of evidence that ghosts and
devils and Gizmos are alike. Do you realize, Dick, how conclusive our research becomes
almost minute by minute? Now we have a complete defense against Gizmos! There's
wild garlic everywhere! If people simply smear it on themselves it will be a perfect
protection! Asafetida should do as well or better! Dick, this is a great moment!"
"The revival of the use of the asafetida bag should be a great scientific triumph,"
agreed Lane mildly.
The Monster screamed horror of the new noises the imprisoned, garlic-wounded
Gizmo made. Carol carefully knotted the neck of the pillowcase and passed it to Burke
over her shoulder. She bent down to try to comfort the dog, but he would not be
comforted. The thing in the bag made noises like shrieks of rage which scared the
Monster terribly.
Burke whimpered. The car rolled on. The bald-headed man moaned feebly, "Get me
to a doctor. I had a heart attack . . ."
Then Lane looked attentively in the rear-view mirror and said: "Docs the way behind
look a little bit blurry, Carol?"

Carol turned about to stare. She nodded gravely. "Yes. A swarm of them is following,"
she said composedly. "They were called by our little friend, no doubt. But we can
outrun them."
Burke jerked the cigar from his mouth. Frantically, he pressed its burning end upon
the pillowcase prison of the Gizmo. The cloth scorched and gave way. There was a flame
and a small shriek and a vile smell.
"I—I killed it!" panted Burke. "You can't call Gizmos into my car!"
Lane said nothing. The thing was done. There was nothing to say. He drove on. The
professor compressed her lips and looked volumes at the terror-stricken Burke. Carol
cranked down a window until the air inside the car was clean again. Then Lane said
coldly:
"Still following?"
"Not now," said Carol. "I can see the blurring, but it's stopped. It isn't coming after us
any more."
"Then that's that," said Lane levelly. A little later he said: "I think this will be the
doctor's house."
It was very near to sunset, now. Following the bald-headed man's directions, he
turned into the driveway of a doctor's neat home set well back from the road, just where
the outskirts of a small village began. The world was filled with an odd, beautiful
carmine light which sometimes shows at sundown.
The professor got out of the car. Scowling, she beckoned to the bald-headed man, who
was so invigorated by the nearness of medical attention that by error he got out
unassisted, and then was astonished that he did not drop dead.
"Come along!" growled the professor. "Dick, you keep an eye on Burke. I'm going to
see if anything at all can be done. We know how people can protect themselves, now.
They've only to use what their great-grandfathers believed in!"
Lane nodded. The professor seized the bald-headed man's arm and marched him
toward what was obviously the office part of the building. Her manner and grip
suggested marching a malefactor to jail than one taking a patient to a doctor. She
vanished through the doorway, thrusting the bald-headed man before her.
Lane lighted a cigarette. Carol looked at him unhappily. Burke squirmed in the back
seat. To the west, the crimson of the sky grew deeper above shadowed mountainsides.
Impulsively, Carol touched Lane's hand.
"I know," said Lane. "Thanks for sympathizing, but we'll make out. Don't worry. One
Gizmo doesn't make a dust storm, but the trouble is that we needed that one. Our
difficulty isn't a new one. Plenty of people think they're what the Gizmos consider
them—lower animals. They don't want to think about anything but their own skins and
their own stomachs and their own vanity. That's about all a lower animal does think
about. Except dogs. If humans were as intelligent and as loyal as dogs ..."
He brooded. Carol watched his face. But there was nothing to be gained by
upbraiding Burke. He was the way he was. Presently Carol sighed, and Lane patted her
hand. He didn't take his hand away. In the back seat, Burke was desperately anxious not
to call further attention to himself. When his cigar burned short he took out another and

lighted it.

The sun set. There were small twilight noises. A dog barked, a long distance away.
A bird called in the lonely half-light. The car, cooling off, made small snapping sounds.
A vagrant night wind, blowing over newly cut grass, brought fresh, fragrant, cool air to
the car. Night fell, while Professor Warren and the bald-headed man remained in the
doctor's office.
Sunset moved across the nation. Everywhere the situation was confused; there were
numerous places where no one at all had seen anything out of the ordinary. There were
other places where dogs and cats and canaries lay dead, and people were perplexed and
grieved. These things happened where humans lived—even in their homes.
There was still no search for an explanation; veterinary surgeons puzzled helplessly
over dead farm animals which had simply stopped breathing, fought crazily, and died
of suffocation. Animal husbandry departments of agricultural colleges were kept busy
on telephones, explaining harassedly that the described symptoms were familiar but so
far unexplained. They'd been reported in isolated cases for two or three weeks. During
the past few days they'd increased markedly. Yesterday and today the animal
plague—and it could be nothing but a plague—had flared up with explosive violence
until it began to seem a threat to the meat and dairy industry of the nation. As a matter
of precaution it was advised that the drinking of fresh milk be stopped. Many calves had
died.
But nobody thought of Gizmos, because people thought rationally. And it was not
rational to think of Gizmos as the cause of traffic accidents and the depopulation of
Serenity, Colorado, and the plague which first drove animals out of forests in Minnesota
and Maine and Georgia and Oregon, and then caused them to die in fighting
convulsions.
Professor Warren had taken on a large assignment in essaying to save at least some
few lives by convincing a country doctor that there were Gizmos, and explaining their
actions. But there was a bald-headed man whose life Lane had saved once, and she was
averse to having him go back and risk his life again when he could so easily be
protected. And there were other lives which might be saved, too.
So she did not come out of the doctor's office immediately. Lane and Carol waited for
her, while the sunset colors reached their greatest intensity, and faded, and there was
night. Somehow, they were acutely aware of the presence of Burke in the back of the car;
his cigar was not fragrant, and from time to time he stirred unhappily.
But for him, the young night might have seemed enchanted. The only light was from
the stars and the bright rectangles of windows in the doctor's home. Glimmers from
other houses of the village were widely separated and indistinct.
Somehow they were not impatient to go on. They talked very quietly. Neither of them
could have told how it happened, but they were closer together than they'd been on the
move. And of course they said nothing that Burke could not hear. He heard everything.
Yet once, without any reference to Burke or his doings preceding it, Lane said angrily
under his breath: "Damn Burke!"

In the obscurity of the unlighted car Carol smiled at him. Her fingers, now
intertwined with his, tightened just a little.
Eventually the doctor's office door opened wide, pouring lamplight out into the
darkness, and Professor Warren emerged, seeming very weary. She came to the car and
got in.
"You can go on, Dick," she said drearily. "I convinced the doctor. He had a dozen
frantic calls while I was in there—it seems as if I talked for ages—and he gave good
advice to his patients about Gizmos. I couldn't have bettered it, knowing what I know.
It'll do some good. I meant for him to check my results, but he believed me. He's
actually read some of my published papers. Quite a biologist. So he called the editor of
a Roanoke paper whom he knows personally. He told the man who I was, and that what
I said was true."
Lane started the motor and drove out on the highway, heading north. He'd been on
the go for something over thirty-six hours, without relaxation. There was a place called
Monterey which would be a good stopping place for tonight. He estimated the distance.
Perhaps an hour. Possibly more.
"What about the newspaper?" he asked the professor.
"I was interviewed," said Professor Warren bitterly. "On the doctor's telephone. Quite
a clever young reporter! He got all my facts straight, but didn't believe one, and then he
asked to talk to the doctor again, and the doctor swore at him and said the story of a
patient of his bore out what I said, and his experience of today convinced him I was
right—about car wrecks, anyhow. The traffic deaths for today are over a thousand, Dick,
and the total's not nearly in yet! The reporter got the editor on the wire to the doctor
again. My story's preposterous. That it happens to be true doesn't matter. It will be
printed in tonight's and tomorrow's papers. The wire services will pick up some sort of
garbled version of it. It will be printed as a freak. But, Dick—"
"What?" asked Lane. But he could almost guess.
"The headline," said the professor bitterly, "will be, Spooks At War With Humans,
Says Scientist." Then she said more bitterly still: "I wish I could resign from the human
race!"
But it was an entirely rational, scientific attitude to take, at that. The newspaper
couldn't be blamed.
Tonight, though, a new sort of evidence appeared to make it rational to look at
Gizmos differently. The new evidence was indisputable. With what Lane and Professor
Warren and Carol had to say, it probably determined the outcome of the war.

Chapter 10
The confusion in human affairs reached a new high during the night. Hot Springs, Va.,
was not the only town to shut its figurative gates. It did react early, because Hot Springs
is a resort catering to visitors who arc heavy spenders. By quarantining the outer world,
Hot Springs became apparently a safe place for them to do their spending. So long as

that state of affairs lasted, everybody would be happy. But other communities shut
themselves off from the world with the same firm resolution.
Some were mere villages. Most were relatively small towns. Cities could not
barricade themselves against infection without starving. So municipal councils of sizable
places met and disputed at length. They tried to compromise between the presumed
need to keep out infection and the certain need to bring in food. Some of the
compromises were peculiar.
Albany, New York, adopted emergency regulations which made it an offense for
anybody to open a store or leave his own home. Reno, Nevada, passed a municipal
ordinance which imposed splendid sanitary precautions on all its permanent residents,
but excused all visitors from any quarantine measures whatsoever. Tucson, Arizona,
established a three-man board with authority to do whatever was necessary to protect
the public health. Athens, Georgia, forbade groups of more than three, except for the
purpose of public worship.
On the other hand, the national government sanely put all laboratories manufacturing
biologicals on twenty-four-hour standby readiness, so that they could begin to turn out
immunizing shots as soon as the "virus" causing the trouble should be identified.
Meanwhile it sent teams of investigators to beard the plague in its lair, so to speak, and
at the risk of their lives gather specimens for examination. A good many of those
investigators died. It is probable that some of them guessed at the actual nature of the
death-causing agent before they died of suffocation. It is also rather likely that few of
them believed it.
But one indisputable set of observations was made in Chicago, at the airports and the
weather bureau and nearby air force radar stations. They were painstaking, official
observations of arbitrary, unreasonable, preposterous facts that could not be explained.
They were revealing, but it wasn't possible to conclude anything from them for lack of
the information that Lane and the professor and Carol were desperately trying to
convey.
The first official observation was probably made at the main Chicago airport, some
time after midnight. The field lights glared beneath a cloudless night sky. The curious
shapes of radar scanners moved restlessly above their appropriate buildings. There was
a distant droning in the air. A winking, alternately red-and-white light appeared against
the heavens and drifted among the stars. The buildings of the airport were starkly
lighted, with extraordinarily deep shadows where they were in darkness. Windows
glowed. A visual beacon rotated sedately, sending its beam into the night. Headlights
moved along the airport highways.
Off in the darkness twin landing lights appeared. Something which roared loudly
came slanting downward behind those yellow, glaring eyes. When it touched ground
the field lights showed a gigantic aluminum cigar with stubby wings. It roared and
slowed, and then turned on the ground and came rolling clumsily toward the terminal.
Everything was normal everywhere. The sky-glare from the city was very bright
above the horizon. Lamps glowed like earthbound stars along the roads. There was
nothing unusual to see or hear—except on the radar screens.
Somebody looked at one of them, and stared blankly, and called other men, and they

gaped at the screen and someone plunged to a telephone and frantically dialed the
number of Civilian Air Defense. An instant later someone was calling the air force
station, and a man went running down a corridor to tell what he'd seen in the
dispatcher's office. There was incredulity, dismay, bewilderment and apprehension
everywhere. There were also outbursts of frantic fury. The radar screen reported a state
of things which seemed either impossible or a realization of that emergency the Distant
Early Warning radar system had been built to give warning of.
Radar said that something was moving toward Chicago, flying upwind across Lake
Michigan. According to the radar, it was impossibly large and it moved with unlikely
deliberation. Its speed was roughly thirty miles an hour. It had a shape—a bulbous head
and a trailing, tenuous tail which frayed away to nothingness and reappeared without
any discoverable organization in its parts. On the screens it actually looked like nothing
on earth, but it would have been very like a crawling slug leaving bits of slime behind it
which gathered together and followed while changing form and density. But it was
flying—it was in mid-air. By its trailing tail it seemed to have moved over the lake from
the most thinly inhabited parts of Wisconsin. But it headed upwind for Chicago.
Telephones hummed; short-waves flickered through darkness. A voice said
authoritatively that it was a Gizmo, meaning a radar blip with no known cause except a
belief that it was an area of extra-high ionization in the air. But it was the
great-grandfather of all Gizmos. Its bulbous head was a good two miles in diameter,
flattened to rise no higher than four thousand feet, and descending no lower than two.
Its tail was ten—twenty—thirty miles in length, depending on the tenuity at which one
ceased to measure it. It moved on a specific course. It would presently arrive at Chicago
unless it sheered off. And there was nothing in the heavens or on earth or in the sea
which should produce such an image on a radar-screen.
So much was undeniable from the beginning. And this was no observation by a mere
human, who might delude himself. This was a report from complex electronic devices. It
was images formed on phosphors coated on radar screen tubes, excited by accelerated
electrons whose pattern of impact was governed by echoes from the original of the
image. Phosphors do not imagine. Electrons are not affected by panic. As a radar image
it was a faithful report—in its own terms, without interpretation—of something which
actually was.
Not only airport radars revealed it; at air force installations the image appeared. The
weather bureau cloud-pattern radar showed it, from a different angle and in different
perspective, but absolutely the same thing. And nothing like it could exist. A bomber
fleet would appear as specks; this was like a cloud or a solid object of preposterous
size—yet it could not be solid. It was too big. It could not be a cloud because it had
movement of its own. It did not float with the wind. Its motion was affected by the wind,
but was still its own.
Pilots went running to their planes. There were thunderous roarings down runways
and planes lifted and snarled away into the night. And the radar report was not one to
call for a mere investigatory scramble. There was an emergency alert at all fields within
striking distance. Half the available striking force of nearby airfields went aloft and
toward the deliberately moving incredibly huge source of the alarming radar reflections.

They found it, and they found nothing. Their own radars pinpointed its borders. They
fired rockets into it. Ultimately they plunged into it, backwards and forwards and
sidewise. There was no nucleus, no solid object, no perceptible thing to cause the
phenomenon. Some pilots expressed the opinion that when in the strange reflecting
object their jet motors operated a little differently; some thought better, some thought
worse. Some pilots returned to their bases to be replaced by others with full fuel tanks.
The radar-perceived object was too huge to be affected by planes flying through it. It
moved on toward Chicago. Once a pilot reported that the jet flame of other planes than
his own seemed to be longer than usual. But he was not sure of that, either. It is not
likely that the observation was accurate. Gizmos flying in swarms needed space
between individuals, just as birds in a flock need it. Radar would not pick up millions
of small things separately, but report the mass. This night, radar did.
And at twenty past two o'clock in the morning, the Gizmo swarm reached Chicago.
Sirens throughout the city had roused the citizens. Radio and television stations which
had gone off the air went back on to give due notice of the coming of the inexplicable
thing, with encouraging statements that nothing was actually expected to happen, but
with warnings that traffic jams must be avoided. Citizens of Chicago were told to stay
home. They would be told everything that happened; they would have the best advice
on measures to be taken for their own protection, if protection was needed.
The Gizmo swarm descended upon the stockyards.
Even roaring jet planes, circling desperately in the invisible cloud, had their thunder
drowned out by the noise from the penned beasts when the Gizmos arrived. Confined in
pens, the doomed cattle bellowed as whinings descended upon them. Their composite
cry of despair carried all over the city. There was no one in Chicago, wakened by sirens
and terrified by broadcast warnings, who did not hear it. A watchman in the stockyards
used the telephone in a glass-enclosed booth from which he viewed the cattle pens. He
told of whinings that rose to a shrill keening. He babbled of the beasts below him
fighting madly, climbing upon each other, flinging their horns about, uttering cries no
creature had ever uttered.
Suddenly his voice broke off and there were sounds of things being smashed. The
line went dead.
When morning came the stockyards were filled with murdered animals. Cattle,
sheep—the sheep had fought terribly—and swine were all dead. A few human beings
died with them, but less than twenty—guards and watchmen and the like. It is on
record, however, that there were workmen making repairs on the inside of a
cold-storage room, in one of the larger packing houses. They worked comfortably
through the whole episode, not having heard the sirens or the broadcasts nor even the
ghastly outcry of the dying animals. When their work was finished they came out to an
astonishing stillness. Day was breaking. They looked upon acres of massacred hoofed
animals. They met masked police and firemen and doctors from the hospitals, gingerly
examining the scene.
This produced the greatest series of separate insanities in the history of human
reactions. It was past all doubt that something existed which nobody had guessed
at—invisible, lethal and purposeful. There was a body of vociferous persons who

demanded that war be immediately declared upon Russia, because the Russians must
have done it. There was a smaller, louder group which in a strangely exultant fashion
insisted that flying saucers were now proven, that the cattle in Chicago had been killed
by invaders from space, and that the air force pilots who denied seeing flying saucers on
the way to Chicago should be court-martialed. Of course less indignant but firmly
convinced individuals maintained that the cattle had been killed by spores of a disease
which were carried upon a wind current. The fact that the radar cloud moved against the
wind did not shake their conviction. They considered that the observations of the wind
and its velocity must have been wrong.
The newspapers ran out of space for large-type headlines and had more or less to
confine themselves to printing the facts. It was quaint, though, that a small news story
from Roanoke, Virginia, was crowded out of type altogether. Even the later editions had
no room for it. They had to report public reaction in Chicago, and related happenings.
That reaction was remarkable. One of the most astonishing things about the human
brain is its ability to hold firmly to two mutually contradictory beliefs at the same time.
The death of Serenity and the astonishing number of people who died in their sleep on
Tuesday night had been followed by the murder of refugee animals in a Minnesota
cornfield and an astronomical increase in traffic deaths on Wednesday, and the Chicago
cattle-massacre in the small hours of Thursday morning. The existence of a lower-animal
plague—an epizootic— which could also kill men seemed to be established. But also
something which in the Chicago manifestation was definitely not a disease was no less
established. The similarity between the Chicago affair and the murder of animals in
Minnesota was complete, so far as the manner of death was concerned. That motorists
were suffocated obviously fitted in. It had been noted, by the way, that the victims of car
accidents had rarely been traveling at high speed when the accidents took place. They
were driving at a leisurely pace—often under thirty miles an hour—with the car
windows open. It would seem that anybody should have concluded that there was only
one inimical agency at work.
Maybe some people did, but they were in an unheard minority. Public opinion
believed with passionate unanimity in an unknown disease which killed men and
animals indiscriminately, and also in something else which might be Russian—or from
outer space—but was alive and deadly and killed animals and men. Death was assumed
to be abroad in the land, at once a disease to be avoided and an entity to be fought. So
small towns barricaded themselves behind barriers, and enacted strict quarantine laws
which had very little sense behind them, and demanded the stationing of antiaircraft
batteries at every crossroad post office. Larger towns took even more stringent
measures. Guided missile defenses were especially in demand. If there was anybody,
anywhere, who pointed out that the cattle in Chicago did not die of disease, he was
denounced for his denial of the general belief that they had. But anyone who observed
that if the cattle had died of plague antiaircraft batteries would be useless was regarded
as subversive.
The confusion might have been instructive, Lane considered sardonically, if it didn't
make for inconvenience to people on important business like himself and his party.
They spent the night at the only motel in Monterey, with the Monster in the room
occupied by Carol and the professor, and Burke snoring heavily between nightmares in

the room with Lane. When morning came, it developed that there had been so many
traffic accidents in Virginia that the governor of West Virginia had ordered the border
between the two states closed to traffic. It was illegal, but it was enforced.
Lane abandoned Route Two-twenty and headed east for the Shenandoah Valley. He
was stopped by a barrier and guards at Staunton, and navigated narrow country roads
around it to be stopped again at Harrisonburg, where a trigger-happy guard put a bullet
through the top of the car's windshield. Burke fainted.
They made a tedious, time-consuming detour around Harrisonburg, and lost three
hours trying to get up on the Skyline Drive, which did not pass through any towns and
might give them a clear run for a reasonable distance. They didn't make it. They
plodded through more back-country lanes, instead. New Market was tranquil. There
were dogs and children in plain sight, and people moved naturally about; there was no
sign of anything inconsistent with a perfectly commonplace small town on a
commonplace summer day. But Luray was blocked to traffic. Again they wandered
interminably along trails with tire-tracks on them, but which had never seen a bulldozer.
More than once they forded small brooks and followed meandering signs, only to arrive
at a farmhouse beyond which that trail did not go. Then they had to backtrack and try
another fork. They had been traveling fourteen exhausting hours when they found
Strasburg. It was untouched by the alarm that filled so many other places. They slept
there, but at four next morning they were on their way. The only news they heard was
from the car radio, which pictured public confusion many times confounded. It
developed now that Chicago had not been the only target of a radar-reflecting
cloud—Gizmos. The Kansas City stockyards were a shambles. Shipping pens in Texas
had been visited by whinings heard in the midst of the bellowing of maddened steers. In
the corn belt, cattle fattening for market died in the center of patches of torn-up ground.
The St. Louis hog market posed a problem at once in the disposal of dead swine and the
defense of the city's population, should the plague return.
They'd planned to head for Winchester and so to Washington. Professor Warren's
professional reputation was sound. She should have only to explain and offer to
demonstrate her discoveries, and everything would be taken care of. But Lane still held
his own contact in reserve.
As they pulled out of the sleeping town of Strasburg at four o'clock in the morning,
however, an all-night radio reported that the Rock Creek Park Zoo, in Washington, had
been visited by a radar-reflecting cloud which came upwind along the Potomac and
wiped out the entire display of animals. There were also no pets left in an entire quarter
of Washington. The news broadcast said that inhabitants of the city were already
streaming out on every highway. They seemed to be especially worried by the fact that
planes had tried to break up the cloud with explosives before it reached Washington,
and had failed. Bridges and highways were already filled with traffic. Measures were
being taken to check the exodus.
When the news report ended, Lane said grimly: "That changes our plans. We don't go
into Washington."
"But," said the professor, "I need to go to Washington, Dick. Let me have half an
hour's talk with a competent biologist in the Department of Agriculture and I

guarantee—"
"You didn't hear why Dick doesn't want to go into Washington," Carol said.
"There'll be martial law by daybreak," Lane said dryly. "They'll call it a Civil Defense
emergency. But they're going to have to stop people running out of the city. Probably all
cities."
"Day before yesterday," said Lane, "there were well over a thousand victims of traffic
accidents which we know were caused by Gizmos. Yesterday was certainly no better.
Did you hear any reference to traffic accidents in that broadcast?"
"No." The professor was appalled. "Do you think it was so bad they're censoring the
news? They're afraid to let people leave the cities, and afraid to tell them why?"
"I think," Lane told her, "that I don't envy anybody in authority the decisions he has to
make. It's going to occur—it's already occurred to a lot of people that the radar-reflecting
clouds which kill beasts in stockyards and zoos can also kill human beings. People have
been killed in cities, so they'll want to get out. If Gizmos arc killing people on the
highways, they should be made to stay at home, but if you tell them the reason, they'll
feel that they're doomed either way."
Carol said, "Aunt Ann might call in and have someone come out to meet her and get
her information and see what proof we can find."
Professor Warren said, fuming, "I didn't think! Of course I can't take Carol into
Washington if the people there are going crazy with fear!"
Lane said carefully, "Not all of them will react that way. There's a part of the
population which will react in an acceptable way to a situation which distresses them.
Unfortunately, some of them may have to make decisions and they'll want to be calm
when they make them."
The car rumbled on for a moment. Carol said unhappily: "Tranquilizers?"
"Exactly," said Lane. "Precisely like the old tales of seamen breaking into the whisky
stores in time of shipwreck. Very helpful, at a time when brains are needed!"
He stopped short. This was half-past four in the morning. There were hours yet to
sunrise. The headlight beams bored on ahead. This was Route Eleven, not notable for
heavy traffic. They were perhaps ten miles out of Strasburg, and they had not yet met
more than two pairs of headlights all the way. Here the highway dipped down, to rise
again two hundred yards farther on, a brook and a bridge across it at the bottom of the
depression. It was a commonplace spot on an ordinary highway; this was very early
morning and a predawn chill was everywhere. There was actually a vague mistiness
down in the hollow.
But Lane noticed that the mistiness was not still. It writhed and stirred in a boiling
motion. His eyes glanced sharply at the rising part of the road beyond. In the headlight
rays it was blurred and wavery. The headlight beams from the car passed through
something that distorted the light, like small columns of heated gas. They were doubly
disturbed when reflected back.
"Torches!" snapped Lane.
He pressed down on the accelerator, and the car went downhill, gathering speed. It

went through the beginning of the mist and the fuzziness. Instantly angry whinings
sounded all about. But the car gathered speed on the level bottom place, while the
whinings grew shriller and more angry. But sparks flashed inside the car from a brazing
torch.
Carol waved it and something flickered into blue flame. There was a stench, and the
whinings grew to a keening howl. Something clapped itself over Lane's nose and lips.
He held his breath and drove on furiously, and the car breasted the rise beyond the
hollow and roared away on the level highway. Its speed went up and up. It was fifty
miles an hour when Carol speared the place before his face, and something screamed
and flared.
"Thanks," said Lane, gasping, as wind whipped away the reek of carrion. "They may
follow for a little way, but we're all right. See how things are in the back."
The professor wailed: "I could have caught another specimen! But I didn't have a
pillowcase ready!"
"Burke?" said Lane sharply. "You okay?"
Carol swung the torch about. She used it, stabbing emptiness before Burke's
contorted, fear-crazed face. His breath stopped. There was a flicker of light, then, and he
collapsed into shuddering limpness.
"That," said Lane, "is how people in cars on the highway get killed—not in hollows,
but anywhere. It disposes of the idea that Gizmos are intelligent and purposeful, but it
doesn't make things look any brighter."
It didn't. It only made them more understandable. Now that Gizmos had acquired the
instinct to hunt instead of scavenging only, their pattern of action was clear. They were
social creatures in the sense that they moved and fed in groups or flocks. As is usual
among all social creatures, at any moment there were individuals separated from their
fellows, and they would commit individual atrocities. Some, on the other hand, would
be surfeited, not interested in hunting. But they all would tend to hunt by night and feed
by day. In their native forests they drifted in grisly, faintly whining masses, flowing
invisibly between the trees and through the underbrush. In a sense they grazed, in that
they sought their subsistence on a broad, deep front, on which they murdered every
bird, every animal, every insect. When they found running animals in any number, it
was their custom to round them up into terrified groups whose frenzy made them
mutually prevent each other's escape. Then the Gizmos killed them.
It was an admirable device for food gathering. Lane pictured the over-all situation as
one in which such masses of invisible horrors flowed slowly and terribly everywhere.
They would be attracted from many miles by the scent of the stockyards. They would go
blindly to that scent of prey. They had attacked this car because it had disturbed them,
but, mindless as they now appeared to be, they killed human beings. They were capable
of rage. They furiously attacked any place where one of them was held captive. They
acted as if they were capable of enormous vindictiveness.
Rage, indeed, might have substituted for reason to make them trail Lane and the
others across the mountains to where Burke had picked them up in the car. Fury over
the death-cries of their fellows might have produced the cloud formation over the filling
station. It need not have been hatred against them as specific persons; it could have been
anger at prey which had turned upon them. They had no fangs to bare, nor any claws to

extend. They could perform mass-movements out of emotion as other creatures
crouched to spring.
Lane, driving through the dark, did not think of such fine details. He imagined
creeping, crawling crowds of Gizmos flowing across the countryside, killing every
living creature. If such a swarm should flow into a city . . .
The first report of such an event came from St. Joseph, Missouri.

Chapter 11
The St. Joseph incident did not get into the news reports. But on the outskirts of the
town there was a gigantic poultry farm devoted to the raising of fowl for meat rather
than the production of eggs. The chickens therefore ranged outdoors, with small
buildings in which to roost at night. The fowl-runs extended in a long row beside a
highway, to make the maximum display to motorists who passed. There were signs
advertising live fowl, dressed fowl, plucked fowl, frozen fowl, and fowl in sections.
There was even a group of roasting spits in a window of the sales building where one
could order fresh-roasted chickens.
At nine o'clock in the morning frenzy struck the chickens in the farthest of the
fowl-runs. At one end of that wire enclosure, chickens suddenly flung themselves
crazily about, tumbling end over end, flapping hysterically. Others flapped and
squawked madly away from that part of the run. Attendants at the farm went hurriedly
to find out what was the matter. Up to this moment, the doings of the Gizmos had been
matters St. Joseph had only read and heard about. People were jittery, but not quite
scared.
A helper opened a gate into the last yard and went in. Struggling, frantic fowl were
piled deep against the end of this particular enclosure. He heard whinings in the air, but
he moved to clear away the panicky pile-up of chickens, which might suffocate in the
press. He grabbed a flapping, frantic, but silent hen to toss it away from the fence. It did
not writhe, it squirmed, its beak open but no sound coming out of it, its eyes glazing. At
the same time, the helper heard a strident humming whine very close to him. The
chicken in his hands ceased to struggle save for convulsive, dying shudders. There was
no reason for it to die, but it seemed to do so.
Then something brushed against his face. Instinctively, he swiped at it with the
feathered object in his hand. There was a frantic, high-pitched buzzing whine, and then
his breathing ended. He tried to gasp and could not. He stood paralyzed by fright and
shock, with the flapping chickens hurtling crazily about him. One struck him in the face
and saved his life. Because at the impact the angry whining in his ears rose even higher,
and he could breathe.
He fled.
He was incoherent, but he babbled that things tried to choke him, and the chickens in
the next to the farthest run began to die as those in the farthest grew still. Invisible death
came very slowly and very deliberately along the long line of fenced enclosures, and
foot by foot the chickens in them died.

There were too many witnesses and the succession of events was much too clear for
this to be taken for a plague. Those who had stopped to buy chickens, the men who
worked at the farm, even a state patrolman saw it. He was the one who linked the
whining with the deaths, and he concluded that the chickens were being killed by a
cloud of insects which were too small to be seen clearly. His premise was wrong, but his
reasoning was sound. He concluded that if one breathed through a cloth, the insects
would be kept out of one's lungs. He tried it, to drive the onlookers out of danger; he
was an intelligent and a courageous man, that trooper.
The creeping cloud of suffocation enveloped the entire poultry farm after the state
patrolman had gotten the people out of its way. It went on, invisibly, terribly, into the
heart of the suburb whose edge touched the farm. There were two human deaths in that
suburb. The patrolman tried to alarm everybody. He sent those he warned to warn
others. Two stubborn, suspicious individuals refused to stir. He saved all the rest.
Two-thirds of a new housing development was enveloped by something nobody could
see but which could be heard as a thin, hungrily complaining sound as its cause moved
murderously onward.
It occupied six blocks of brand-new houses, with only two human fatalities. But then,
as blindly and as mindlessly as it had entered the suburb, the swarm of monsters flowed
in its grisly, slow-motion fashion off into woodland nearby, where it killed innumerable
wild bees, rabbits, grubs, ants and beetles. Later there was another gruesome find there,
too, but it had nothing to do with the Gizmos.
This did not get into the newspapers because the public was already jumpy enough.
There were elaborate precautions in force to prevent further alarm. Preventing panic was
something that could be done; they couldn't think of anything else that seemed practical.
But the means chosen for the prevention of terror had some odd side effects. For
example, it was not possible for Professor Warren to reach anybody in Washington to
tell them something even more useful to do.
The acceptance of telephone calls from the country districts—in fact all long-distance
calls other than official ones—were stopped. This was to keep panic from being
conveyed into the cities from the open country. When Professor Warren tried to make a
call to Washington, she was politely told that no trunk lines were available. The same
thing happened each of the other six times Lane stopped the car at a back-road garage or
store where a telephone might be found.
"We just heard a news broadcast," he said dryly, when she came out to the car after
the seventh attempt. "Now there's no reference to the trouble in St. Louis or Kansas City.
Maybe they think people will forget if they ignore it. And the business in Chicago is
played down. It's said that bacteriologists think they've isolated a suspicious germ. Last
night it was thought to be a Russian trick! There's still no mention of any unusual
number of traffic deaths. Two-thirds of the broadcast dealt with foreign news."
"And I can't get a line to Washington," said the professor bitterly. "I don't think we'd
be allowed to enter the city anyhow. Drive on, Dick. I give up on trying to attend to this
affair reasonably. But we have to do something!"
"We will do something," promised Lane. "We'll stay out of cities."
The professor's latest failure happened a few miles out of Winchester. She tried yet

again in Martinsburg, where there appeared to be no inclination to keep anyone from
driving through. They got a meal there which was a very belated breakfast, but no
telephone line to Washington.
This was the third day of their attempt to complete what should have been one day's
long drive. It was almost a repetition of the first. They could not go through
Hagerstown. They lost hours finding a way on unmarked roads to circle it.
Chambersburg was blocked, too, and they had again to make a long detour. Lane was
tempted to try the Pennsylvania Turnpike, but he bought gas in a crossroads group of
houses called Green Village, and was informed that the Turnpike was closed.
"Quarantine or something," said the man who worked the gas pump.
Lane asked questions. Dairy farms in Chippensburg had lost all their cattle during the
night past. Two men had lost their lives with the animals. It occurred to Lane that the
relatively small loss of human life was due to the exact fact that the Gizmos were
mindless. As scavengers, they'd found food in the carcasses of dead wild creatures. As
hunters, they still associated food with fur or feathers or the chitinous shells of insects.
They would attack men, but their first instinct and preference was for lesser creatures.
Lane turned east, avoiding main highways. When a good highway appeared, Lane
doggedly turned aside or else crossed it quickly and dived into obscure lanes again.
Three times he passed through areas in which no bird called or insect sang. Once he
passed the still-smoking embers of a farmhouse which had burned without any attempt
by anybody to salvage anything. There was a dead horse in the pasture to its left.
In late afternoon squadrons of planes appeared overhead. Once Lane heard a faraway
droning, and presently discovered a helicopter hovering in the air. A little later the car
reached a hillcrest, from which he saw a billowing puff of smoke spouting up from a
highway which was black with cars beyond it.
"Stopping traffic," observed Lane, "probably from Harrisburg. They would pick a
four-lane highway! They're being stopped so they won't be killed on the roads. Of
course, if a feeding horde of Gizmos came on them stopped as they are—"
He searched out a way and then drove on. Presently he scuttled across the empty part
of the blocked road and dived into a dirt lane on the other side. This was between
Harrisburg and York, Pennsylvania. The highways nearer Lancaster were practically
empty. Either the police had acted more quickly, or there were fewer exit highways to
block.
He got northward of the Turnpike by pushing through a minor underpass, and
headed east again. It was not sensible to try to pass through Philadelphia or to try to get
into New Jersey to the south of it. Near Reading he came upon solid masses of cars
crawling away from Philadelphia.
"I've got a hunch," said Lane. "Counting what the news reports have told—and what
they haven't—I have a hunch that my prophecies to Jim Holden have him pretty well
convinced that I know what I'm talking about."
"Holden?" Carol said.
"Friend of mine," explained Lane. "We've hunted together more than once. He's head
of research at Diebert Laboratories. He's the one we're headed to see."

"Jim Holden?" Professor Warren said excitedly. "Is that Dr. James Holden? The one
who made the report on adaptation of living tissues for transplanting? Good heavens,
Dick! Do you know him?"
"I suppose it's the same man. Why?"
"Why didn't you tell me?" demanded the professor. "We've wasted time. If I can talk
to him for half an hour—knowing my work as he must—he'll put his laboratory and his
staff at my disposal. And with such a team we'll have a definitive, documented report on
Gizmos ready within days, and the whole business will be ended!"
Lane turned in his seat to stare at her. He was honestly amazed. Professor Warren had
shared every experience with Gizmos that he had. She'd seen all the horrors he had seen,
yet it was suddenly and startlingly clear that as a biologist her concept of Gizmos was
totally unlike his. She probably knew more about their metabolism than he could guess,
and undoubtedly had a clearer idea of the pattern of motion which kept their gaseous
dynamic systems in being. It would be a highly complex system, vastly more
complicated than a smoke ring. It could vary for locomotion, for hunting, and in
response to stimuli from without. When she thought of Gizmos, she thought of them like
that. Lane was a hunter and a fisherman; he thought of the way creatures acted. In
consequence, while the professor looked forward to a completed examination of
Gizmos, Lane was guessing what they would probably do next.
And it seemed to him the most obvious thing in the world. From the facts that deaths
among game animals had been rare in the beginning, and more and more frequent later,
Lane had formed an opinion. That really alarming phenomena attributable to Gizmos
had turned up within the past week confirmed it. He made a grim evaluation of the fact
that until three days ago only people interested in game conservation and animal
husbandry were concerned with Gizmo affairs; now there was censorship of news
concerning them, restriction of civilian movements, and frantic scurrying for promising
courses of conduct, and all the phenomena of war.
The state of affairs made it look as if the Gizmos would be forced to attack cities and
human lives everywhere within hours.
The reasoning was absolutely simple. Living creatures with ample food and no
enemies increase in number by geometrical progression. If there had been only a
hundred Gizmos in the forests of America six months ago, then five months ago there
might have been ten thousand, four months ago a million, and three months ago a
hundred million. Two months ago ten thousand million Gizmos might have gone totally
unseen in the wildernesses of North America. Now a hundred times as many could not
stay in the wilds. There wasn't enough food for them. They had to come out.
Domesticated animals would stay their hunger only so long, because it was very highly
probable that as they fed they multiplied. All the animals of ploughed ground and
pasture would feed them only briefly. Not months. Not weeks. Days. And two
days—three—were already gone.
"I was thinking," said Lane in a careful tone, "that I might possibly be able to reach
him before I can get to his place. People might not be allowed to telephone into the cities
to tell of tenor outside, but it is conceivable that one can telephone from one small town
to another. I'm going to try."

He stopped at a closed-up country store. Its windows were barred. Its doors were
padlocked. A dog growled from under its porch, and a window opened on the floor
above. A shotgun barrel peered out. The dog barked angrily.
"Store's closed," snapped a Pennsylvania Dutch voice. "Everything is all. Go away or I
shoot!"
"Ten dollars," said Lane, "to use your telephone. You can hold your gun on me while
I do it. I do not want to buy anything. I only want to use your phone."
There was some argument, and it was Carol who made the conclusive appeal. She did
not look like the companion of a suspicious character. The professor was the picture of
adamant virtue. No woman traveling with undesirable characters would be gotten up
like the professor.
Lane made his call. The storekeeper let him in alone, with his shotgun at full cock,
and stayed right there while Lane talked. Lane got the Diebert Laboratories through
three separate small-town exchanges, and talked to his friend Dr. Jim Holden over a
connection which sang and hummed and was otherwise unsatisfactory, but did let him
hear the explosive relief in his friend's voice when he recognized Lane.
Lane's prophecies had been borne out. All manufacturers of biologicals had been kept
informed of all events, for their information when a break in the situation came. They
could ask questions. On the basis of Lane's prophecies, Holden had.
Lane's prediction that some men would be stricken while operating bulldozers in
Minnesota had been borne out. But men smoking cigars or cigarettes were immune
while smoking—but only then. Lane had predicted it. This was so far beyond reason
that when proved true that the head of the laboratories feverishly waited for more
information from Lane.
Lane talked incisively. Holden was eager to listen, prepared to try out anything Lane
might suggest. The phone connection was bad and grew worse. The singing of the wires
sounded like Gizmos on the line. But Lane was able to tell much, and to give assurance
that he was on the way.
When he went back to the car, a housewife was talking to Professor Warren from the
upstairs window. As he settled into the driver's seat again, the woman said with
satisfaction:
"Ja. Garlic. My grossmutter used to say that spirits would run from garlic. I try it.
Danke!"
Lane started the motor while the Professor muttered defensively:
"It's true whether it's scientific or not. And if she calls up her friends and tells them, it
may save some lives." Carol looked hopefully at Lane.
"Holden said," he told her, "that there've been animal deaths near his plant. He'll try
to catch a Gizmo, with everybody smoking cigars. Once he does that, everything's in
line. But we want to get there. Fast! I've warned him that a swarm will come running if
one Gizmo's trapped." He looked at the sky. "It's late!"
He sent the car down the road with a cloud of dust following it. It was now close to
sunset; the time for Gizmos to hunt food was nearer. Their loathsome appetite was

greater today than yesterday, and greater tonight than today. By tomorrow—
The urgency which possessed Lane should have been cured by his having reached
someone who could do something with what he'd learned. But he seemed to feel
continuously more uneasy. The situation was better in one respect; the public might
believe in an animal plague, but it also believed in a deadly entity which reflected
radar-waves and destroyed animals and men. Therefore there were not many cars
moving in the darkness. Fugitives from cities, blocked on the highways by implacable
armed men, were afraid to be alone in their vehicles. They gathered in groups. They
broke fences and built fires. Others came to them, and more fires were needed, and
made. Along the highways on which men were forbidden to flee, those who had tried to
run away clustered about great, leaping flames and took comfort from the light and their
own numbers. This was a wise thing; the fires did deter the Gizmos—and the smell of
men was not their first choice of prey.
So Lane in the old car went hurtling along back roads, and hummed through silent
villages, and flung through the darkness on an absurdly roundabout way to the north of
Philadelphia, and into New Jersey by a most unlikely way, and then down into the
Trenton area by a deserted truck route that nobody seemed to guard.
And they came to the Diebert Laboratories, thirty miles from Trenton. Burke slept
noisily in the back seat. But the Monster suddenly gave tongue to terror. He howled in
the closed car.
"Holden must have things stirred up," said Lane. "It does seem as if we ought to be
somewhere near the plant." He peered into the light cast by the car's headlights. "That
sign says to make a right turn." He swung the car. "There are the buildings ahead, I'd
guess. Only—"
He whistled softly. There were the buildings of the pharmaceutical laboratories
ahead, with lights inside. The headlights faintly showed the modernistic main building
—but it seemed to be blurred and out of focus. The private industrial roadway led
straight to the plant, but nothing was distinct. The buildings looked like drowned things
regarded through rippling water. Yet there were lights.
Carol lighted a brazing torch. She turned its flame on the perforated burner of a
gasoline blowtorch, brought it up to temperature, and turned on the gasoline. It caught
with a roar and a fierce blue flame. She handed it to the professor and then prepared a
second.
"I don't know how much longer the torches will run," she said absorbedly, "but the
gasoline ones will run for two hours."
"I," said the professor firmly, "shall get out a pillow easel."
Lane drew a deep breath and headed for the building structure housing hundreds of
people immersed in a Gizmo horde many times greater than even the Chicago swarm.
They enclosed the entire structure. The humans inside the building would suffocate.
"I think," said Lane regretfully, "we've got to open the car windows. These torches
probably give off carbon dioxide. We'd better not breathe too much of it, if we can help
it."
The car went on. The air seemed thick and viscous. It was the Gizmos, of course,
drawn to the building in numbers and in density and in sheer monstrous masses such as

even Lane had not imagined before.
Carol cranked down the right-hand front window. She thrust a flame out of it.
It leaped up and forked and spread horribly; it seemed that the very sky took fire.
And there was suddenly a screaming, unearthly outcry. The air about the car was
convulsed as close-packed Gizmos strove to flee, creating whirlwinds and gusts which
shook the car. And always there was a gout of fire coming from the right-hand front
window, and that flame rose to the burning sky and masses of flame raced madly in all
directions. Above all there was a whining and a keening and a sound of horror through
which the Monster's howlings were hardly able to be heard.
Then there was a horrible reek of dead Gizmos, and there ceased to be an upward
spout of flame from the torch Carol kept roaring out of the window.
The car went on to the buildings in an enormous silence. Lane honked the horn.
Lights came on, outside a door. The four of them got out of the car.
Doctor Holden appeared when the door opened as the bearers of torches reached it.
"It looks like a trick we didn't think of," he said blandly. "We've been working on
something more technical. We loaded a dead cow on a handler-truck, with all of us
smoking cigars, and we left it a while and then brought it into a small laboratory we had
ready. There were Gizmos —your term, Lane—feeding on the carcass, and we had them
where we could work with them. They protested, and their friends gathered. They've
been protesting for hours, and their friends are still coming. We hadn't quite solved the
problem of the ones outside when you turned up. Come in! Let's get this business going
all over the country. I like the way you do things, Lane."
Lane heard Professor Warren snort. Carol pressed his arm, confidently, smiling up at
him. He introduced Professor Warren.
"How do you do?" said the professor briskly. She extended an object she'd brought
from the car. "I have a present for you. A Gizmo, freshly caught in a pillowcase and now
confined in a small garbage can. It's in very good voice. . . ."
It was a near thing, of course. It has since been demonstrated that Gizmos multiplied
by an involved sort of gaseous fission, so that when a single Gizmo settled down to a
meal of their awful nourishment, two Gizmos rose up at the meal's end. Their rate of
increase was astronomical. When Lane and his party arrived at the laboratories it was
literally the last minute when it could be hoped to prevent at least a holocaust of human
beings and possibly the complete extermination of animal life.
But it was extraordinarily simple to handle the matter, once it was attacked by
technical means—which made it convincing—instead of grimly personal battle with
flames and torches. At the laboratory they already had tape recordings of the cries of
Gizmos held captive and enraged, and Holden had an open wire to the authorities
who'd asked him to stand by. He passed on answers in quick, minute-by-minute
succession.
It is a matter of record that Lane arrived at the laboratory a little after eleven p.m.
Eastern Daylight Saving Time. Much that Lane had reported was already passed on. By
midnight, transcriptions of the Gizmo cries were being made at army bases and military
installations and air force fields and civil defense headquarters all over the country. By

twelve-thirty those hair-raising noises were being played over public-address systems
and wherever loudspeakers could be set up. Loudspeaker trucks posted themselves at
the edges of cities and played the siren song of rage.
And Gizmos came. And then they were worked upon by flame throwers, torches, and
fireworks. Later the speakers were mounted near great fans whose revolving blades cut
through the whirling gaseous dynamic systems and chopped them to bits. That they
were lethal to Gizmos was demonstrated by the awful reek downwind. On airport
tarmacs, loudspeakers called Gizmos from the sky to be shattered by the blades of
idling propellers.
Swarms were tolled to destruction in Newark and Poughkeepsie and Yonkers and
Hartford and Boston and Pittsburg. There were monstrous stenches—at which wise men
rejoiced—in Tallahassee and Laramie and Salt Lake City and Missoula and San Diego
and Omaha and Houston and Cincinnati.
Nobody has ever estimated the maximum number of Gizmos. They were very
difficult to wipe out. For weeks, helicopters droned above wildernesses giving out the
sounds which, because they expressed frenzied rage, brought frenzied invisible
monsters to join them—and to die. There was a report of an isolated band of Gizmos in
the Dakotas more than three months later, but they were adequately taken care of.
The war with the Gizmos ended in a victory for the humans, of the only kind which
amounts to anything in these modern days. One side was exterminated, which ended
the matter. There were some very trivial things which turned up later. Burke, for
example, proposed honorable matrimony to Carol. Carol declined. The professor wrote
a magnificent book on the fourth kingdom of nature—gaseous—which is sometimes
criticized for her indignation at any suggestion that she is imaginative. . . .
When the tumult was over, Lane asked Carol where she lived.
"With Aunt Ann," said Carol, "wherever that may be." Lane grimaced. "What," he
asked, "would be a good alibi for me to go wherever that might turn out to be? If-"
Carol said carefully: "I'm not engaged. Or anything."
Lane drew a deep breath. "Swell!" he said. "We've only known each other three days,
but I'm concerned about the Monster. Somebody ought to make a home for him.
I'll—well—I'll make some temporary arrangement for him, while I hang around. . . . Er,
my intentions are honorable."
He grinned, suddenly, and she smiled back.
THE END of a Gold Medal Original by Murray Leinster

A CHILLING OF TOMORROW CREST
BOOK THE 27th DAY (s209)
by JOHN MANTLEY
The incredible story of five ordinary human beings who were abducted into the

unknown and returned to earth with the power to destroy it
". . . high class science fiction with Alfred Hitchcock type of suspense-laden
atmosphere . . . a standout novel."
Boston Herald
A CREST BOOK NOW AVAILABLE WHEREVER PAPERBACK BOOKS ARE
SOLD-35¢
If this CREST BOOK is not obtainable at your local newsstand, send only 35¢, plus 5¢
for postage and handling, to CREST BOOKS, FAWCETT PUBLICATIONS, INC.,
GREENWICH, CONN. Please order by number and title. Canadian orders cannot be
accepted.

