Singing the Fat Man
by
Robert Boyczuk
When they burnt Rodny:One I knew they were scanning me. Tight.
Like a coating in my throat. Like skin over bones. Like the Fat Man's thick
sausages pressing into my neck tendons, not hard like, but persistent,
constant, moist.
"Higgily piggily, Rodny, for goodness, gosh sakes," wetly he says,
drip, drip, dripping of sewer walls, "I need a little favour."
Flesh, mounds of it, moved beneath, rocked like a boat I was,
anchored by that damp, greasy grasp, a doll, Fat Man's doll on his knee. I
stayed zipped -- except for squeaking a bit.
"There's a leaky pipe, my boy." Shivers and shakes: laughing. "I
need a filter." Stroking the back of my head gently, lightly, soft touching
finger tips, lap dogging me, then stuck them fingers in his maw, sucking
busily and noisily on the meat to hint me.
Scooped and pan fried, Rodny:One was.
I am Rodny:Two.
His number one Joey in sight, behind, round the Fat Man. I had evil
in my pocket, that weighed heavy and stone like, rock hard rock to smash
against blubbering meat. But the Joey:One full of evil and ready to do the
Devil's work. Bang, bang, bang went my evil against my thigh as the Fat
Man shook, shook, shook.
I remembered Rodny:One.
I let it bang.
"Tiddley piddley, boy, tiddley piddley. What do you say. Are we
on, ok?"
Just a Fat man, asking a Fat question. A man who loves his food,
and some friends who love him as he devours them like his food, Joey
friends, who keep funny notes and run funny errands, who have friends too,
Billys and Daveys and Lillys all, who have friends again and again and so
forth, etcetera, till there's no knowing where an idea came from except to
guess somewhere near the street where it happened. Where things (surprise,
surprise!) happen the way the Fat man wants. But it isn't the tangle it seems,
only means to look that way.
1

Me squirming: "Let me down, Fat, ok? Pleeeease?"
"Come, come, now," laughing Santa Claus. "I need an answer."
Stroking, wetly probing clammy fingers touching. "You wouldn't want old
Fat to worry? And I could be ever so grateful. Ever so grateful," repeating to
a dumb Rodny, so he sees, see? Dumb Rodny me.
But I ain't so dumb, sometimes. "Favours, favours. What's a
favour?" says I. "Like you want that Rodny covers the paper route?"
Laughter, big and rolling, a barrel on a runway. "HO HO HO! HE
HE HE!" Shaking he shakes me.
"No, ho ho ho," smaller barrel, "Oh no. Joey does that just fine and
dandy. Fine an dandy, don't you Joey?" Melon head swinging round.
Squirming to see past the mountain of meat, behind to the thin
hungry figure, but nothing (too late?), no motion, or maybe a dark shrug.
But Joey eyes like dying coals for me. Evil for me. Why does Fat tell me
Joey does the route? Knowing is danger: too much knowing is death.
Shouldn't have looked at Joey:One. I am dumb. Fat's shaking me other
ways, too, I know.
"Grateful?" I say to keep the uneasy sea rolling.
Smile large as a canyon, dark deep abyss, no bottom. And
movement. Not large. Little, small shift. But I know it. He knows Rodny
knows it. Any Rat would. And me, not your average Rat, knows it too
much.
"Silly Billy. Grateful is the word, yessss," ssssing like a snake, hand
on my shoulder now, resting, not measuring, feeling, weighing. Friendly
like. "Oh gosh, yes! My yes!" Leaning over, too close, lips dripping into an
ear I shouldn't move, whispering wetly, sadly, "Who to trust? Who is selling
out old fat?" Then, closer: "Wherever might I find a new Joey? Hm?
Wherever?" But loud enough so Joey:One behind can capture it, too close to
my Rodny:Two ear so I can't see him digging it behind Fat's melon. I hear
Joey:One shift his weight. Adjust his gear. Things like that, I hear things.
"Joey? A leaky pipe?" I whisper, softly, softly, hoping Joey ears
don't hear, wondering at Fat's game. Someone turning the trick on Fat,
selling him down and out. And me a Rodny rat, to snuffle through his
garbage and find him out.
"Oh ho! No, no!" He laughs and his flesh flows and ebbs.
"Joey:One here is a good boy. A nice boy. He'd never blab on old Fat," lip
smacking, wetting wetly with tongue. "He'll give it to you straight."
Three Joeys there are.
So I say, "Joey:Two?"
The melon bobs, like on a thick, flat metal spring.
"And :Three?"
Nods again. Looking behind his pie eyes, the promise hangs
between us, a thick-linked heavy chain, pulling our heads closer, me actually
thinking about working for Fat permanent-like: freelance no more, me a new
Joey (number unknown?) while the old leaky Joey:? pipe is plugged up,
2

disappearing like he never was and never will be.
"Dear, dear!" A rush of dank air, a sigh, a sigh. "Oh my! Poor old
Fat! What am I to do? Who else could it be, who else? My, my, my."
Leaning over again, conspiratorial like. "You just run a little filter, yes, a
little scan on Joeys(:Two and :Three). I want to know who's a nice boy and
who isn't. It won't do to have naughty children, oh no!"
Tight scan on Joey(:Two and :Three). And if they come to know ....
No choice, I know, no none. Ask Rodny:One. Who I now know,
some time ago, had this same talk with Fat.
So I nod ok, scared, but not showing, and thinking about me, a
dumb Rodny, being Fat's Joey, if I don't get burned, and go on nodding like a
dumb Rodny till the Fat Man stretches out his lumpy leg and I slip down the
slide of flesh to the floor.
Only one Fat Man, there is.
Later, when I can know again, Joey:One has me somewhere outside,
upside, klicks from where he dug me up before, and hustling, bustling,
bumping, pushing me, while I think, think, think, and try to ignore my evil.
"Here."
Into my hand slides a set of addresses. Good numbers. Clobbering
numbers. Numbers to make it easier to put hooks into :Two and :Three.
Joeys that is. I could probably do it without, but I ain't telling. But lots
easier, anyway.
I turn and look at Joey's face, dark cloud warning, an angry horizon,
thin where the Fat Man's is round and full.
"Rats should stay underground." Voice like a knife of ice. Like I'm
a dumb Rodny again. "I don't like Rats." Push and twist and I stumble away,
Joey:One at my back, hearing him finger his evil, but muffled sound in his
pocket, only in his pocket. So mine stays put, waiting for the sound, waiting.
But it doesn't come, and I have my skin still -- and Joey:One brought
me here.
He is too shook to fry me?
Or Fat is playing him too?
Or he is playing Fat playing him?
Naw, to the last -- he's a dumb Joey.
Or a very good Joey.
Me a Joey?
Too many thinks.
And when I turn round, Joey:One is gone -- only dying trees and
shadow buildings on a dark tumble street I don't know, the sounds of
scurrying under gutter garbage tickle my ears with the clicking of tiny claws.
Find a hole, I keep thinking, a nice safe hidey-hole, a warm dry nest
full of happy things, cuddly things. I gotta hole nobody knows, not even Fat.
I think. Good idea I keep saying to myself, but I know when I come out for
3

air, and I'm going to have to sooner or later ... well, you can't fool the Fat
Man.
So Up I go to do his work.
To do Fat's job I need the BIG machine. The connected machine.
So I need to go on the Up. TomDickandHarry who work the BIG machine
dig Rats like me hanging round. Like status or something. Like they wished
they were Rats, but they're too scared of tunnels, too scared of traps that will
fry them clean down to the bone, too scared, maybe, of stuff they shouldn't be
knowing, or each other, or maybe what they might find out about themselves.
Anyway, I make the call.
"Hi. Todd there?"
"I'm sorry, he's out of his office at the moment. May I take a
message?"
"Sure. Could you tell him Jerome called, and that I'll be at the Cafe
at five?"
"Ok. Jerome called, cafe at five, right?"
"Right. Thanks. Bye."
"Bye."
Then I giggle in the dark, like always, cause the voice is not mine,
but Homer's I mined and refined from an old show when I was a kid. Then
stop giggling when I remember howcum I called, the shadow of Fat weighing
down on me.
Later, when I watch Todd drift by the scan, all angles and elbows,
lanky and tweed, going into the place, I really go Up, like right Up, and into
that box like I belong to it and it belongs to me. And I shiver inside stepping
up to the door when I think, maybe it will, just maybe it will, when I'm a
Joey.
When I'm a Joey.
"Hey, Todd!"
"Jerome, good to see you," he says, not knowing my Rodny, cause
he's a Todd double d and on the Up side where they all think their names are
their own. "How've you been, man? It's been months since I've heard from
you."
"Good. How about you, man? How are things in academe?" I say
cause that's what he waiting for, what he has ears to hear for.
"Not bad," he says, smiling his I'm important smile. "I got my
grant."
I know this already, knew before he did cause I unravelled it:
expedited it, as ole Toddy might say, gave him his plum, with a bit o' bit
twiddling on one of my favourite lines. But act surprised anyway: "Great!
That mean you're staying at the College then?"
"You bet. I'm in there for the duration. I'll tell you," he lowers his
voice, and gets close like, "now I can really do what I want with my project."
"Glad to hear I'm not going to lose another friend to the Corpse."
That's the way they say it, TomDickandHarry, like with an e on the end,
4

when they look up with little nervous eyes at the ice towers in the skies. Do
they giggle, too, in their florescence, like us Rats in the dark?
"Naw," he says leaning back, working the salt shaker to keep his
busy hands busy. "I'm really not cut out for the real world. This is where I
belong."
"You'd only be wasted there anyway," I say, cause he wants to hear
that, listening to it inside my head in my Goober voice, so I can swallow it
though it tastes like stone.
But instead of thanks says, "You're right," uncertain smile around it,
running tongue over lips, tasting the change, almost believing himself,
surprising me. Be careful, I think, don't give him too much line or he'll try to
cut me free. Or strangle himself. An ambitious TomDickandHarry associate
might unwind him.
I nod, anyway, cause I can't think of what else, and he says, "So
what have you been up to lately?" making me a happy Rodny.
"I've been working on some really interesting stuff. You might want
to take a look sometime."
He nods, and a smile turns the corners of his mouth, a smile full of
knowing, plain for anyone to see, and inside I think to me: hope no one's
watching. But I doubt it. He's a TomDickandHarry and there's no getting
around it. "Listen, I've got the whole weekend pretty well free. How'd you
like to drop by the lab and we can have a look at some of your stuff."
Wince so hard it almost shows on the outside, but plug the crack and
smile anyway, somehow, and nod "Ok, sounds good to me," and talk of time,
place, of other things, anything, but no more cracks, no, not here, for Fat, or
another Rat, or anyone who might be watching, to see.
So, anyway, there's Mother.
Big and grey and cold.
Furious little particles tickling her cold heart. In almost silence. Up
boys can't hear it. But I can hear: singing to me of Fat and Joeys and Pipes
and Filters. Veins spilling out all over. Spaghetti lines, allover everywhere,
like no one cares or knows, or could know, where they go, what they say,
when they say, who they say. Cause they can't hear like I can.
And there's Todd, smiling his Todd smile, little Todd eyes on my
box of tricks.
So I give him a new toy, and he jacks in on one deck, me on
another, making Momma sing for him, slipping something nice and soft into
her so she hardly feels it. She knows me, knows my touch, from the before
times.
Hello.
Hi, I say back.
How are you Rodny? she asks.
Ok, I say.
Who's your friend?
5

You know him, Momma. That's Toddy.
Oh. (Disappointment?) What's he doing?
I've brought some tricks for Toddy, Momma. Can you play with
him for a while?
I'd rather play with my Rodny.
Later, Momma. I've business.
Later?
Later.
You don't know how later later is Rodny honey.
I don't say anything, cause I don't know what to say when she says
stuff like that, but in a sec, like usual, she says, Ok, making it a sigh through
my skin.
Momma sees Todd is busy, playing with her and with my SimRodny, so I get busy too, running through the spaghetti, setting free happy
little animals that skip and tumble back to my home, so I can visit Momma
from a safe hidey-hole, on the outside, for a while anyway.
Todd glances over from his playtime, grin faced, so I grin back to
think him I'm playing with him and not with the spaghetti, and his thumb
goes up.
Yeah, I think: thumbs up.
Back in my hidey-hole I do some B & E.
Hi, Momma, I wave as I scoot by, sliding along strands of spaghetti.
Hi, Rodny she says, and starts to say something else about Toddy but
I've gone by. Hold on, Momma, I think, cause I know I'm gonna need you if
I run into eeevil.
Pretty soon I'm sliding along other spaghetti: Registrar's Office.
Lots of spaghetti here. Sloppy. But nothing much to see. Zip and I'm
through to Physical Plant, stop to drop the temp in Todd's office for fun, then
skipjump through the NET to Dr. Physics in the Material's Lab, and settle
back to wait for my Hook. It's 10:55.
11:00.
Line's up, just like every night, like the next tick on the clock, and
I'm in.
Thank you, Hook, whoever.
And as Dr. Physics and he make chat, I sneak into Hook's grey
matter, with its so ver-r-r-y interesting Big Brother agency connections, and
begin to do my damage, to play with the Joey address, snuffling along dark
tunnels, digging at dank holes, scratching through garbage, sifting, sorting,
gathering. Like only a Rat can. Staying Rat scared like I haven't been in a
long long long, little heart beating double time quick, watching, watching,
watching, for a Rat trap.
Then I find what I want, a place where I can sink my teeth from the
outside, and scurry out of there as fast as my little Rat legs will take me,
6

scared of Joey(:two and :three)'s eeevil, so scared I almost bump into Dr.
Physics as I shoot by, scooping up my droppings as I go along, so no one can
sniff me back to my happy hidey-hole.
What I see for Joey:Two:
Nice box, a thought, sliding the thin line in, finding the weak link,
the key, looking over his hidey-hole for places to put in my own filters. Some
good work here (done by a Rat), but old, years too old, lots of slack to play
with. Unless ... unless. There's always the Unless. Unless it only looks old
to put a Rat's mind at ease, to let him to scurry into holes which disappear
behind him, and tunnels that close up like tighter than a boxer's fist. But the
sim-board is green, I see, and I'm in the know -- as much as anyone since
Rodny:One got fried. So I dig into the main circuits, all cold and steel with
no feeling: simple, brutal, efficient. Like Joey:Two.
Joey:Two:
Nasty Rasty name of Sully FitzPatrick. Sully. I wonder if he likes
Joey better? I see what he's been up to. His stuff is happy to talk to my
tricks. The important stuff isn't there, only small time trash. I know him
from a bit of nasty badness before which doesn't show at all. He'd be a dumb
Joey to leave it there. I knew it wouldn't be that easy. So I file tidbits, and
decide to sit on him, sick my watchwatch dog on his, and double watch to see
if he's been yapping. You been blabbing on Fat you bad Joey?
Joey:Three:
Painted silks, bamboo bird cages, rice paper screens, delicate teak
furniture, small silver bells, incense. Code like that too. Great swirling
ideographs, tinkling sounds, long-necked long-legged birds flapping off the
surface of lily ponds, many chambered house of deceptive size. But under its
ornamental oriental surface is a hard and polished knot, like a knot of wood.
This is him: subtle and calculating, surface calm and placid, reflecting
outside but showing nothing of its inside, its undercurrents, its movements. I
don't know the code, but I've seen similar once before and know how to swim
through it now: sideways, on your back, in a large slow spiral, but never,
never, straight to where you want to go. Slow, oh so slow, patience.
And when I get there (my lazy strokes almost stroke me past before I
know I'm there) I leave watchdogs again, but this time they're more bird like,
long lanky birds that flap through and back to me like symbols, leaving only
a little ripple on the surface, the memory of a feather.
Waiting time now. Nothing to do. Bug in my ear, waiting for noise,
for Joey(:Two and :Three) to light up my board. Waiting for them to step
into the pit. Everywhere they go, every place they see, I am with them too, a
guardian angel, me. Their stuff watches them, guards them, all the time
from their hidey holes; only I am along for the ride now too.
7

So I can curl up and sleep, and let my watchdogs watch, snarling to
me if anything interesting happens, and dream the dreams of a Joey to be,
full of possibility and fear.
Fat towers above, a wall of flesh. "Pooh Beary berry," wriggling
worm fingers crawl on my back, "Come now, see now: you wouldn't lie to old
uncle Fat would you?"
Little Rodny head swinging No, Oh No: something that couldn't be
thought in such a small space.
"Nothing at all my dear dear boy?" worms working inside collar,
while my Rat head goes a spinning No No No.
Hook is inside my shirt, choking poor dumb Rodny, pulling, lifting,
off the floor, up at The Fat Man's round face. "Are you absolutely positively
positive," he asks, like he wants to know if I'm sure I made that croquet
stroke, old boy.
"H..o..n..e..s..t.......F..a..t," my own voice hissing, whispering,
squeaking out, slow like, wheezing old through shirt constricted larynx, Fat
becoming a big blurry blob through my bulging teared with sweat poor eyes,
the room turning on a slow uneven tilt.
Then, distant words through buzzing ears: "Ok, Rodny. I believe
you."
I'm a pile of rags on the ground. Lumbering, unhappy mountain of
flesh waddling back to his throne: a big special chair that I'd have to
scramble up to reach its seat on which four Rodnys could stand side by each.
I think a thought, all sweat and shaking and fear, what I've wondered before,
but shouldn't wondering now.
Why Fat? Why so big big big? I should be thinking fear and alarm,
running, dodging and hiding, but instead I watch: heaving tossing pile of
flesh, dragging down down down dragging. What do you need to be so big
for? What could make a man want to be so big Big BIG? Funny time for
this unhappy thought when I should be worried for my own little shape, but
there it is, small grey animal snuffling inside my head it won't go away. So I
watch fat, sad Fat: Why Fat, why?
And then, for a sec, I know why the little animal is there: just a
flash, an afterimage of a light that wasn't there, I can see through his sitting
there unhappy face a pouting little boy, his friends making fun of him, a sad
little fat boy: Fat. Then it is gone, and he is the Big Fat again.
"Come here, Rodny."
Slowly, crawlingly pick myself up, edge closer, sucking in quieter
ragged breaths, feeling not seeing red marks on my neck, watching the
wormy fingers still upon his sack of thighs. There's no Joey there behind him
now, but Fat has his own ways of evil: you can't fool The Fat Man.
"Closer ..."
So I go.
"Now turn around."
8

When I make uncertain motion, he smiles his Fat smile: "It's Ok."
And it is, I know knowing, so I turn around beside his throne, so I can't see
him, except for black balloon trousers and huge leather circus shoes stretched
past me like small boats.
"I'm tired Rodny, tired," he wheezes, tired sounding but a big tired,
not like my small tired. "I cannot conduct business properly if I don't know
who my friends are. You're my friend, aren't you Rodny? Yes, I know you
are," me imagining him smiling a big fat tired smile on lips wide across as
my hands.
"I'm a lucky man, Rodny, a lucky man. I've many friends like you
who all want to help me. And you are going to help me still, aren't you?"
I nod. "Sure." But the words don't even convince me.
For a time, quiet. Then, all of a sudden, from where it comes I don't
know: "My dear dear Rodny. Things aren't always as they seem. Like this
room, Rodny. We are not alone. Oh no, not at all. Why even old Fat isn't
sure how many eyes are watching and ears listening. Joey:One's back there
watching and pacing, watching and pacing (itching to do you, you know?),
and another's watching him (Oh yes, Joey, don't think you're alone either),
and who watches behind? And behind that? These walls. An infinity of
watchers watching." Breeze as his meaty wormy hands wheel out behind to
his sides: and there I see what he's talking about: mirrors, though in the
gloom I didn't know before, not in this light, thinking the dark darting
shadows something else and not us. Mirrors on all the walls, reflecting
darkness. It is a small room, I know now, much smaller, I think, than I
thought -- or maybe not.
"And I watch you dear Rodny, watching me. What's behind our
eyes, eh? There's just no telling anymore." A gentle wind tousling my hair,
warm and moist: Fat's sigh.
Quiet again, and his hand is there, covering my Rat head, a
comfortable old hat, resting lightly above, stroking gently stroking,
scRatching a Rat the way he likes to be scRatched, behind his ears, mind
underneath thinking NO NO NO RUN RUN RUN but sighing my own sighs,
shivering but not from scared, or at least I don't think so. But from
excitement, drifting as long as I can, happy like, under the great wide
warmth of The Fat Man's touch, brushing away my scared.
So I go back to work for him, and I don't know why: I know I could
cut and run and he'd probably leave me be. He hasn't told and I didn't ask.
Sure, I want to be a Joey still, but it's, well, something else now. Like there's
this thing between us, big and sad, that makes me want to help old Fat, find
his bad Joey that's been piping, and close that pipe down on that bad bad boy.
And not so scared now, no not at all. Still scared sensible, but a Joey scared
not a Rodny scared, in right balance.
Bored watching. Board watching.
9

I put extra sneaks on Joeys(:Two and :Three), but they still say the
same thing: not a pip anywhere, anywhen. I sit in my Rat hole, waiting for
the thing to happen.
But what happens is a big nothing.
I watch the Joeys as they go out and walk about. I watch crimes, but
crimes for Fat. A movement of a Joey hand, a nod of a head, and the motion
spreads out to become exaggerated, to grow into a quickly turned blade, a
swift exchange of envelopes, a transaction duly recorded, electronic digits
tumbling into place, people moving in and around and about, motion centred
on the Joey. Elegant, efficient, an intricate waltz -- the subtlest gesture, a
single note, sets the dancers whirling in motion.
My files are large now, and grow every day as the dance proceeds.
I know past knowing the Joey lives; I see Fat's movements each day
as his little Joey's trickle down to their lesser names the ideas that move and
turn things. Joey jobs -- watching learning -- now I know why fat wanted me
to be a Joey, he'll need a new one, soon, and who'll know better than me what
he does. I'm watching them now, and hoping to learn the things not to do,
another valuable lesson courtesy of the Fat Man.
Why is no one blabbing? Could I have missed something?
No.
Above the world moves and hisses along, Fat's fat fingers moving
round and round stirring this pot and that, putting the scare into this him and
her. And everyone knows when he is an unhappy Fat, because his
unhappiness spreads out like an echo in the sewer, back and forth, forth and
back, through empty chambers, bouncing round corners and running down
long dark corridors, till it comes back to where I sit, a thousand different
smaller voices all crying his unhappiness.
And still I sit in my hidey hole, watching my own nest come
unravelled while I do nothing but Fat's business, betting my nest stuff against
a Joey job.
Something happened. The day Joey:One rattled me, I began to think
bad thoughts.
This is when it happened:
"Nothing?"
I shook my Rat head, every sound of his making little hairs go up on
the back of my neck.
"You're lying," with a reach into his pocket, tendons in arm talking.
"No," shaking my head still, like it isn't mine no more, shaking it so
much that's all I do now the whole time I see Joey:One. But my hand's still
mine, curled round my own evil, before Joey:One even touched his. He
knows this, too, disappearing tendons.
"Did you know they dusted Coulter yesterday? She was holding a
big load, I mean the biggest. They knew when they dusted her that it was the
jackpot. And :Two and :Three knew, cause Fat told 'em, just them and no
10

one else." He looks evil my way, and says, righteous like, "Fat didn't tell
me," like its a sign of trust, an act of faith, Fat not telling him so everyone
knows he couldn't be the blabber, which makes me smile inside.
A think comes into my head and I ask "When," though I know the
answer already.
"When what?"
"When did Fat tell them."
"Two days ago."
I say "No," again, the only word I ever say to Joey:One, my head
still no no noing.
"No?"
"They haven't peeped since then. Not one word. I've watched and
listened and followed everywhere, everywhen, awake, asleep, inside, out: No.
Not them." Saying it, and knowing it at once, like it's just come to me, like a
switch just turned, cause I didn't stop to think before, so I say it again: "No.
They didn't."
Joey:One shrugs an I don't care, and says "You missed something,
or they fooled you," but I know I didn't and I wasn't. Joey:One doesn't care
cause he's only worried about his own Joey skin. But now I think again: No.
Not them: who, who can it be then? Of a sudden, dumb dumb Rodny that I
am, I get scared, real scared, that Joey:One here might be thinking the same
think, thinking I mean him maybe if not them (who else?), but he's still a
dumb Joey and doesn't see it -- I think. I shrug a Maybe when I know there
isn't one, and look like Ok, maybe, maybe they fooled me, when I know they
didn't, cause I don't want him thinking his evil thoughts about me, thinking I
shouldn't see Fat again to tell him my nothing, nothing that might mean
something bad for Joey:One.
But Joey:One's thinking elsewhere, thinking how he's the one Fat
trusts, yeah, his happy boy, his Joey, and me watching his face real close,
remembering his face a minute ago, but seeing nothing like I should have
seen if he was the one blabbing when I said my nothing to him. Unless he's
Rat like, and doesn't let it show. But he is a dumb Joey, I think again: too
dumb to be blabbing.
"Fat ain't going to be happy. You know that Rodny," looking like he
can see Fat dangling me again, grinning the thought.
I shrug back at him, not caring as long as he doesn't think the
thought. "Ok. I've got some other stuff I'll put on them," I say, even though
I've already used my best stuff, but wanting Joey:One to think as happy
thoughts as he can about dumb Rodny.
"I don't know why Fat wastes his time ..." shaking head side to side,
side to side, me thinking the same thought, and others, lotsa others, waiting
for Joey:One to leave, so I can do some real thinking.
When Joey:One is gone I wonder: who? Not Joey:Two. Not
Joey:Three. No. I know with all knowing now. One? No, I think he's just a
11

dumb Joey, but, better to take care, I decide to check anyway, hoping in a
funny way that he's the one, scared if he is he'll have to do me now, but even
more scared, still, if he isn't ....
Rat droppings.
At first I thought it was a Rat trap: I'd seen plenty before, but know
them all. So I cut out quick as I could from watching Joey:One, tail between
my legs, scurrying for cover. Then, when the panic goes out, and my little
Rodny heart beats normal once more from safe and warm in my hole, I bring
it back into my imagining think it again: was it a trap? Puzzle enters my
head, cause it didn't look like any of the other traps: a bad patch looking like
a lazy maintenance job, kind of thing a Rat loves to sink his teeth into ...
which shuts clank clank around him steel jawed teeth. Ok, I think, going
back for another look won't hurt, couldn't hurt, as long as I don't touch.
Going back I see it is not a Rat trap at all, but Rat droppings instead.
Stuff another Rat left when he heard me bump bump bumping along. Stuff
he left from when he was watching Rodny:One. A Rat. And now I'm not
sure what to do: who should be ratting on Joey:One.
Me.
And only me.
Then a thought comes sneaking in.
I check, careful oh so carefully, Joey(:Two and :Three), but this time
not using the addresses Joey:One gave me but my own, keys collected not to
use (too scary to use) but to have, just because having is something. Only
now I use them. I check stuff I shoulda checked long before but didn't, cause
who would Rat on a Joey except a crazy Rat? And I begin to smell
something I don't like at all: other Rats, two, maybe three, circling, circling,
watching, waiting. Each Joey with two Rats sunk into him -- except for
Joey:One, with three little Rats slinking round him. Three Rats.
Two, if I had not decided to rat him too. Two on each Joey.
Symmetry I don't like. Unnatural, unlikely symmetry. Unhappy
symmetry.
Everything is coming unwound.
Buzz wink, and everything fell apart.
It buzzed and buzzed and buzzed, buzz buzzing, a bee I couldn't get
outta my head, when it had never peeped before. Sitting in my hidey hole,
watching it buzz, watching the little red eye wink wink wink, ten times,
twenty times, thirty times, more. Buzz wink buzz wink buzz wink buzz wink
...
Address no one has, a number no one can get, a Rat's biggest secret,
waiting for connect.
Not by mistake, not by chance, but ringing all the same.
One hundred and still counting.
They know.
12

I cover my little Rat ears and close my eyes, but still it buzz-winks
there.
So I do what I must (what else can I do?) though I know things will
never be the same.
I open into the circuit.
Hello, Joey, says Mothers voice just like it sounds when I jack
straight in, real pleasant like. How have you been.
And when I don't say something: "Why don't you talk to me
anymore Joey?"
Joey?
"No, no, Momma, it's only Rodny, little Rodny ..."
Oh. Pause. Are you sure?
"Yeah, Momma, I'm sure," but thinking, all the same, maybe not so
sure.
Whatever you say Joey darling.
"Rod ...." I start to say back, but she just talks on:
Toddy asked me to call. He'd like to talk to you.
"Toddy?" I ask of nothing, of a dead circuit, of silence. "Toddy," I
say again, but to emptiness, to void, like nothing was ever there, like it never
rang, like it never happened.
I sit there, too stupid to move, waiting and listening, but nothing
more comes. When I go to unplug I see my hand like something apart, a
frightened small animal, shaking, thinking maybe it should be in a little cage
somewhere, can't help it, shaking.
What is happening?
Bohemian Cafe.
Warm, moist night. Like underneath Fat's arm. Like inside the
box, only this time I don't know what's there, who's waiting for me. My hand
on the door knob, leaving print of wetness and fear.
"Hi Jerome," from a spot near the door, not the usual table, but
smelling of something different. This time Todd has the seat, so I only nod,
waiting to see what's what, shoving hands into pockets so he can't see the
small unhappy animals they've become. "Sit down," sweeping gesture to
empty seat (me remembering Fat's great hands motion), generous like,
welcoming, promising happy things and play time.
Slouch like into the chair, the only way to sit with hands in pockets,
looking at Todd new, looking at new Todd, watching him he knows my
hands, restless in my pockets, knows their fear. Smile, he does, like he too
much enjoys this.
"So," I say, and know it is wrong, know the change now, have lost
it, can see it in the Todd face.
"Jerome," (smile smile) "we'd like to thank you for your help," just
like that, no pretending, no masks, no front or back, simple, plain, edge hard:
we. We?
13

"Fat's going down, boyo. The big slide. No way back up. No small
thanks to you" (wink this time). "With what you got us on his Joey's we
think we'll be able to persuade him to be more, ah, co-operative, shall we
say."
Tightening caught in my throat like a thick rope: Toddy the
Corporate Cat, I think, losing it, room moving, head full of swirling whirling
moistness (can he see me swaying as the room turns round and round?), a
Rat, small and scared and lost.
"We're very happy with what you've dug up so far, and we'd like to
show our gratitude. But your loyalties, are, to say the least, somewhat
suspect ...."
I am caught, feeling the trap's steel bar across my broken spine, tail
lashing, frothing mouth, anger, scared, then anger, crying, dumb dumb dumb
Rodny, dropped into Todd's mouth, between rows of nasty white smiling
teeth.
"But if you continue to help us, well, we can be grateful," hearing
the words (again?) (before?) (when?), different place, different time, but who
will be grateful? Rodny caught in a trap, shivering and crying: Mother, how
could you?
"We want you to rat on Fat for us."
"Fat?" Stupid words, feeling my forehead moist and gleaming,
feeling it under my arms and on my back, shivering it out, shaking out loud
now up from my shaking hands ... wet ... knowing I'm being scanned ... can't
stop sweating though ... (Fat?) ... breaking my Rat coolness ... the more
knowing it the more losing it, like I'd stepped beyond and couldn't find my
way back.
"Yeah, Fat."
I can't. No, let them do me. Can't.
"Well, what do say?"
Head shaking, back and forth, No, No, No, but sounds don't come
out.
Todd shrug: "Ok. But Fat isn't going to be happy about the ratting
you've done on his Joeys."
No. No. No.
"That's too bad. We could use someone with your talents, Jerome.
And it doesn't have to stop with Fat. There are a number of other interesting
projects on which we'd like to bring you in from time to time. On a contract
basis, say. In the future there'll be plenty of opportunities for a mutually
beneficial relationship."
No.
"Think about it, Jerome. With your help, he'll be out permanent.
One way ticket. No one to bother Rodny anymore. And nice comfy place for
you, Jerome -- and some tricks into the bargain."
It's cold, cold like the shivering space between the emptiness,
beneath the shadow of the corpse that'll fall across Fat.
14

"Jerome?"
Stumbling, falling out of the chair, keeping my hands in pockets
still, I don't own them anymore, arms against stained dripping sides, trickle
of fear running down jaw line, backing away, away, away, someone else, not
me, squeaking something I can't hear over thump thump thumping of my
little Rat heart, running out, banging through the door into the quiet street,
curious stares, chased down the street, stumble running.
Who squeaked? Me? Could it have been my voice, my word, that
last sound, my "Ok"?
Ratting Fat.
Rat to Corporate Cat.
Hands shaking, new beads of fear, crown of diamonds on my
forehead, and I think it again: ratting on Fat.
You can't fool The Fat Man.
Hands, trembling hands, hold addresses I must use. I have no
choice. No way out.
So I jack into the circuit, and right away Hello, Joey, faster than
should be, closer than should be, working to make me a smaller Rat than
already I am.
Me, ignoring the Joey: "Mother, you've got the list."
Don't you want to play a little first, Joey? Toddy won't mind.
Soft click in background, click, click, click. Is that Mother
laughter?
"No. Later. Connect me."
Ok, like a sigh. So she does, leaking her click click clicking into my
hearing as I rush by. Click ...
... and suddenly I drift before Fat's wall, all Fat like, with code
blocks as solid and big as Fat is himself, stretching upabove and downbelow
as far as you can see, looking like a forever wall, the end of the road, the edge
of the world. So I move in for a closer look, and check its mortar, seam by
seam, looking for a place, the tiniest of imperfections, the telltale edge of a
backdoor, careful, oh so careful, not to miss a thing ... and I smile as I see it,
have to look twice to be sure, invisible to all but those in the know, small
small small, a hairline crack in the mortar that glues Fat's program together.
As small as it looks, I know I can get through, if I can make myself thin
enough to slide through the crack, careful stepping to avoid quiet traps, the
pikes and daggers buried in the mortar, the invisible razor blades that line the
edge of the bricks.
So I turn myself into ooze, and flow over the wall, surround then
cover the crack, slow and slug like, leaving a shiny trail behind, patiently
pushing myself through, atom by atom, until I am completely enveloped in ...
... the wall, inbetween everywhere, and I feel strangely safe here
with Fat's thick wall everywhere around me, not anywhere, and alone, no
noise, no nothing, just me and the thick comforting wall like a suit of
15

armour. But I know that I have to go on, that this is only the start. What is
ahead? How many more walls? How many razor edges along which I must
crawl?
I grit my teeth and squeeze hard to pop out, a pressurized bubble
escaping now, on the other side.
And stop, dumb Rodny that I am. In front of arrays and arrays of
data, a quiet nest of data bubbles stacked like rack after rack of brown eggs.
That's it, nothing else. All this time and fear are nothing. Fat's nest lies
before, exposed brown-pink eggshell flesh, helpless, unknowing. All that is
Fat is there, all time and details, everything, there for the taking, all along
sitting like a treasure on the beach everyone was too scared to pick up
because of a curse, but there all the time, only our own fears walling us off, a
bigger wall than Fat could ever hope to build. Lying there inviting me,
reclined on a couch, come to me, come to me. Too easy.
Can it be this easy? I stand still like, thinking, what have I missed?
"Ok, we're in!"
What?
A rush, four, five Cats sliding in on my tail, ignoring me, dumb
Rodny, each cold-efficient, each with his own path, breaking off to each their
own task, lights streaking from a roman candle spreading out, three four five
six ... swift and cool, no hesitation, machine smooth, machine fast, talking to
itself, coordinating itself:
"Let's do it."
"Steve?"
"I'm there."
"... twenty-seven hundred here. Moving to the next quartet."
Lines snaking in and around, sinking into quiet eggs.
"... hold, Celsa. Get what you can. Don't rattle anything."
"Got you, Syl."
"Try the bubbles -- careful, you're in there pretty tight."
"... board's green, go for it."
And I know by the way they clatter and bang and talk over each
other without care that they're Cats, clumsy unknowing Corporate Cats that
rode my tail in, sucking Fat's eggs.
"Here goes ..."
"We've got a fault on bank twenty-three. Slow down, you're
overloading it."
"Got the hook in. Flushing it down channel six."
"Release and run, your going yellow."
" ... covered."
Behind me, along the thin black trail I've left, I can feel the data
coursing out tearing down my tail at terabit rates. They were here all along,
used me, used me, to get them in. How could I know? Unguarded nest, eggs
lying unknowing, yielding up their contents, silently, obediently, puzzled, but
not complaining, curious, but not objecting.
16

"No," I say.
A little ripple in the pattern.
"Who's that?"
"It's that damn Rat. Somebody shut him up."
"Never mind, keep digging, Syl." Then to me: "Quiet!"
"No!" I say again, louder this time, bigger ripple, reaching behind to
the wall, grabbing hold of a seam, pulling it back a bit.
"What?"
Pulling harder and harder, crack of outside light breaking through,
and I can feel the wall, Fat's wall of code, the thin crack inching up along the
surface, going faster and faster now, cracking ...
"Who's said that?"
... until the light floods through and the wall begins to tumble down,
brilliant searing cleansing, a hot knife slicing through butter...
"Mother, pull his plug! Moth ..." But it's too late, cause we've lost
her, bells and whistles are going off all over, light burning through
everything, raging through my head, and the weight of the wall behind is
falling, falling on us, me and scrambling Cats, flying balls of fur, bouncing
off the walls, wishing a way out where there is none, trapped, in Fat, trapped
like drowning rats, while Fat's program closes in on us.
And me standing there, like some blind wonder, bringing the temple
down round me: "No," only this time no one is listening to me anymore, but
running, clawing, screaming.
Not scared anymore, though. Not scared, watching from a distance,
not here, but like far away, peeking through the end of an impossibly long
cable ....
Joey, I hear whispering through my fingers, My Joey ...
"Bye" I say, and pull the last pin left, my last trick, and am picked
up and spun away from the noise and chaos by a wave of light, from
underneath the collapsing wall, pulled out by my last Rat trick, rushed away
from the light into grey and greyer grey, flecks of black on black, rushing
round and round, sucked down an endless drain full of darkness, nothing but
spinning mad darkness, blurring until, finally, all is quiet black black and
peace.
In places downbelow, in my tunnels and warrens, there used to be a
darkness darker than dark. A lightless dark where only Rat eyes glimmered,
where bright peering prying eyes were blind. But now I know this is not so,
was never so, but was a lie to my eyes to seem so. Now the dark Uplight is
everywhere, piercing every curtain of comforting darkness so there is no
more hiding, no more downbelow. The lightless shining of the Fat Man has
turned on me and filled my Rat head with suited fear. There is no peace in
the dark any more, no safety -- only a not seeing, a not knowing.
There is no knowing.

17

Being still alive, I waited.
Nothing happened.
So I waited some more.
And still there was no Fat and no Corporate Cat.
And when nothing was still happening I thought, what to do?
Where to go? Stay down, lay low, curled in my nest, in my little hidey hole,
but my shaking hand said No, no, it is not mine anymore -- too many other
smells had crept in and stayed. Unhappy smells. No, not mine anymore.
So I went to Fat's hidey hole, not scared like anymore, only numb,
cause they knew me inside out, those Corporate Cats that slid in on my tail
would be out for me now, would want to do me like I had done them, them
already knowing my hole, Cats who could sniff me out anywhere, so there
was nowhere else to go, nothing else to do.
I went in the rain, cold grey sad, crying for poor little Rodny.
I'd never come here while knowing, having been away for a time
from the Joey who brought me, out for the count till Fat's big funhouse came
into focus. And afterwards, later, coming back to the know klicks away,
always different places, always different times, left only with a swirl of dark
rooms and mirrors and Joey's cold hand pressing something even colder on
the back of my neck .... But I know where his box is now from when I broke
the wall, so I went, wondering why they left me, why, walking and
wondering why I could wonder why?
Standing, cold wet hands in pockets now (not cause they're shaking,
just cause) across from Fat's, three stories of lights out, curtains drawn, doors
locked, reminding me of my house when I was a kid, red brick rowhouse,
walkup, wrought iron railing, (missing it, feeling the small prick of sad for
that other life) thinking this a mistake, not Fat's place, but someone else's,
sad little mustached man like my father, any minute coming home to wife
and kids. Not like I expected. Like all else I knew now, everything I'd
known since lately: I knew nothing, thinking it was down in the ground,
buried very deep, not this house, sun searing eyes, poor Rat eyes that couldn't
see anyway. Not this small, narrow, harmless, family home. But it is Fat's,
cause the door's wider than any of the others on the street, wider than it
should be, the stairs too, cement where others are wood, solid, heavy,
weighty, Fat's ....
When Todd's car pulls up beside the house up I don't notice, but he
waves, happy like, grinning his face at me, and I see him then, and watch,
just watch ....
"Jerome!"
He comes spring stepping across the street. "Jerome. Good to see
you," he says, just like in the coffee shop, like it used to be. "I was worried
you might stay buried for a while. Or, perhaps... " small tick pause, " ...
permanently," giving me his concern.
I shrug a maybe, not really caring.
"You're just in time, Jerome. We're going to open Fat's box."
18

"Huhn?" I say, smart like, but before I can say anything else another
car comes up, only this one is full of suits carrying big dark cases, solid cases,
square reinforced metal corners for big lugging equipment.
"Fat's cut out. Present whereabouts unknown. His counter program
fried some of the guys, but they managed to squeeze enough information out
before they were sizzled to make Fat a very sad man."
"But there was no counter program, just a big, stupid wall...."
Todd smile, sly smile, "Good thing you got out in time, Jerome, you
could have been fried too."
"But ..." But my but is lost in a Todd wink, fore finger pressed
firmly to his lips.
"Jerome, Jerome." He sighs a soft sigh. "I told you I'd help you.
But you've run out of favours. Your time would be better spent worrying
about Fat. He's still around somewhere, you know, and he and his associates
are not very happy, not very happy at all....
"We'll find him eventually, because there are still lots of things we
need to talk to him about, and when we do we'll straighten out this," pause
scanning words, "misunderstanding between you two. We'll find him, don't
worry. He's a hard man to miss." A throat choking sound, a Todd chuckle.
"But in the meantime I'd suggest you scoot while the scooting is good. Time
to take a trip, relax ... we'll talk when you get back."
Reassuring nod, like he knows what is best, then hand on shoulder,
squeeze, reassuring again, but it is empty and cold, lifeless act, not meant, me
remembering Fat's hand on my head, warm, moist -- consoling.
"I've got to go, Jerome." Grin again. "Take care of yourself." And
he is bouncing back across the street, a ball of Todd, up to the big wide front
steps, taking them two at a time, catching up with one of his Cats at the door,
walking through, those two, side by each, still dwarfed by the frame: what is
wrong, I think, with this picture ...
Still raining.
Turned up collar against the seeping, creeping cold, fingers of icy
water touching, here and there, the landscape of my back. But I won't go
hide, even to get out of the rain, cause there in nothing left for me anywhere,
just empty spaces, humming to a cold beat I can't understand anymore.
When I was little Jerome, back before Rats and Joeys, before tunnels
and hidey holes, when I was a sad little Jerome not knowing, I had a place I
went. It was a place for sadness and thought, a place to go when there was
no other.
So I am here now, still the same rough wood planks beneath thighs,
legs dangling over the edge, watching the lap lap lapping water cut by
wooden piles of the pier, expanding circles where drops of rain patter across
the restless surface, washing along pieces of sticks, plastic bags, oil, a broken
doll ... smelling the damp wood, the fuel, the dead fish ... and sometime later,
me not really noticing, the rain falters, then stops, water now throwing little
19

swords of light into my eyes, sun dancing through the cloud, flicking burning
yellow at me from the lap lap lapping water, dampness steaming from clothes
across my shoulders and on wet back.
Still later, I hear something.
Creaking, complaining, old wooden planks, step creak, step creak,
step creak ...
I shiver when a shadow slides over me, eclipsing the sun, leaving
me in a hole of darkness, but I don't turn to watch cause I know who it is,
will always know who it is, cause no matter how hard you try, you just can't
fool the Fat Man.
"Hi ho, Jerome. Hi ho."
I don't look back, can't look back.
"Poor sad Jerome, poor poor Jerome," hand settling softly, oh so
softly, on my little head. "Tell Fat what's bothering you."
I wait, but so does that patient hand, resting gently on me like a
shroud. After a while I think, why bother, so I say it: "Fat, I did you."
"Well," he says, quiet like, "there's doing and there's doing."
"But I led Toddy's Cats into your net, and I left Toddy at your house
just a while ago ..."
"Well," he says again, "fisherman get caught in their own nets
sometimes. And a box holds only what you place in it."
Afraid I understand, I don't say anything.
"Don't be a pouty face, Jerome, cheer up. I owe you, don't I? Fat
promised, and he always comes through."
"Promised?"
"Yes indeedy, quite right. A promise is a promise, nothing more,
nothing less."
"But I didn't find your blabbing Joey."
"Piddly diddly, Jerome," a Fat sigh, then a throaty chuckle.
"Perhaps there was none to be found."
"But ..."
"Shhh," he says, hissing like a huge lazy snake. "Shhh."
No blabbing Joey?
No blabbing Joey.
And I think, of a sudden, did Fat want this, I mean all of this? Even
to be standing here now -- was thinking this months ago in his Fat way,
sitting in his throne in his Fat house? Or is he do doing this now cause he
means it somehow else? I shiver again, thinking there is no knowing
anymore.
And I can feel the hand lifting from my head, not a Rodny Rat head
anymore, not a Joey head either, but a Jerome head cause that's all that's left.
I turn around and look, but I still can't see him, only his towering wide shape,
black against burning yellow of light, shadow hand open, his arm a tunnel of
darkness extended towards me: "Come along, come along, no time to dilly
dally. It's time to go home."
20

"I ... I don't know Fat, I don't understand ..."
"Tish tosh, pish posh. Let old Fat do all the worrying."
"Wait, I need to think...."
But I know I am only talking, not meaning what I say, cause now I
am standing next to him, my little Jerome hand lost, forever gone, my little
claw up to its bony wrist in his dark hand, in his sweaty overgrown one, and I
feel with the closing of his fingers I have lost myself and should never know
again, round fat fingers gripping it firmly, gentle darkness, dragging me
softly away from the edge of the pier, away from the lap lap lapping of the
sea I can no longer see, and to where, I can't know.

21

This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0
Human-readable License:
You are free:




to Share  to copy, distribute and transmit the work
to Remix  to adapt the work

Under the following conditions:



Attribution. You must attribute the work in the manner specified by the
author or licensor (but not in any way that suggests that they endorse you or
your use of the work).



Noncommercial. You may not use this work for commercial purposes.



Share Alike. If you alter, transform, or build upon this work, you may
distribute the resulting work only under the same or similar license to this one.

For any reuse or distribution, you must make clear to others the license terms of this
work. The best way to do this is with a link to this web page.
Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get permission from the copyright
holder.
Nothing in this license impairs or restricts the author's moral rights.

Legal License in Full:

CREATIVE COMMONS CORPORATION IS NOT A LAW FIRM AND DOES
NOT PROVIDE LEGAL SERVICES. DISTRIBUTION OF THIS LICENSE
DOES NOT CREATE AN ATTORNEY-CLIENT RELATIONSHIP.
CREATIVE COMMONS PROVIDES THIS INFORMATION ON AN "AS-IS"
BASIS. CREATIVE COMMONS MAKES NO WARRANTIES REGARDING
THE INFORMATION PROVIDED, AND DISCLAIMS LIABILITY FOR
DAMAGES RESULTING FROM ITS USE.

License
THE WORK (AS DEFINED BELOW) IS PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THIS
CREATIVE COMMONS PUBLIC LICENSE ("CCPL" OR "LICENSE"). THE WORK IS
PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT AND/OR OTHER APPLICABLE LAW. ANY USE OF THE
WORK OTHER THAN AS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS LICENSE OR COPYRIGHT LAW IS
PROHIBITED.
BY EXERCISING ANY RIGHTS TO THE WORK PROVIDED HERE, YOU ACCEPT AND
AGREE TO BE BOUND BY THE TERMS OF THIS LICENSE. TO THE EXTENT THIS
LICENSE MAY BE CONSIDERED TO BE A CONTRACT, THE LICENSOR GRANTS YOU
THE RIGHTS CONTAINED HERE IN CONSIDERATION OF YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF
SUCH TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

1. Definitions
22

a."Adaptation" means a work based upon the Work, or upon the Work and other preexisting works, such as a translation, adaptation, derivative work, arrangement of music
or other alterations of a literary or artistic work, or phonogram or performance and
includes cinematographic adaptations or any other form in which the Work may be recast,
transformed, or adapted including in any form recognizably derived from the original,
except that a work that constitutes a Collection will not be considered an Adaptation for
the purpose of this License. For the avoidance of doubt, where the Work is a musical
work, performance or phonogram, the synchronization of the Work in timed-relation with
a moving image ("synching") will be considered an Adaptation for the purpose of this
License.
b."Collection" means a collection of literary or artistic works, such as encyclopedias and
anthologies, or performances, phonograms or broadcasts, or other works or subject matter
other than works listed in Section 1(g) below, which, by reason of the selection and
arrangement of their contents, constitute intellectual creations, in which the Work is
included in its entirety in unmodified form along with one or more other contributions,
each constituting separate and independent works in themselves, which together are
assembled into a collective whole. A work that constitutes a Collection will not be
considered an Adaptation (as defined above) for the purposes of this License.
c."Distribute" means to make available to the public the original and copies of the Work
or Adaptation, as appropriate, through sale or other transfer of ownership.
d."License Elements" means the following high-level license attributes as selected by
Licensor and indicated in the title of this License: Attribution, Noncommercial,
ShareAlike.
e."Licensor" means the individual, individuals, entity or entities that offer(s) the Work
under the terms of this License.
f."Original Author" means, in the case of a literary or artistic work, the individual,
individuals, entity or entities who created the Work or if no individual or entity can be
identified, the publisher; and in addition (i) in the case of a performance the actors,
singers, musicians, dancers, and other persons who act, sing, deliver, declaim, play in,
interpret or otherwise perform literary or artistic works or expressions of folklore; (ii) in
the case of a phonogram the producer being the person or legal entity who first fixes the
sounds of a performance or other sounds; and, (iii) in the case of broadcasts, the
organization that transmits the broadcast.
g."Work" means the literary and/or artistic work offered under the terms of this License
including without limitation any production in the literary, scientific and artistic domain,
whatever may be the mode or form of its expression including digital form, such as a
book, pamphlet and other writing; a lecture, address, sermon or other work of the same
nature; a dramatic or dramatico-musical work; a choreographic work or entertainment in
dumb show; a musical composition with or without words; a cinematographic work to
which are assimilated works expressed by a process analogous to cinematography; a work
of drawing, painting, architecture, sculpture, engraving or lithography; a photographic
work to which are assimilated works expressed by a process analogous to photography; a
work of applied art; an illustration, map, plan, sketch or three-dimensional work relative
to geography, topography, architecture or science; a performance; a broadcast; a
phonogram; a compilation of data to the extent it is protected as a copyrightable work; or
a work performed by a variety or circus performer to the extent it is not otherwise
considered a literary or artistic work.
h."You" means an individual or entity exercising rights under this License who has not
previously violated the terms of this License with respect to the Work, or who has
received express permission from the Licensor to exercise rights under this License despite
a previous violation.
i."Publicly Perform" means to perform public recitations of the Work and to
communicate to the public those public recitations, by any means or process, including by
wire or wireless means or public digital performances; to make available to the public
Works in such a way that members of the public may access these Works from a place

23

and at a place individually chosen by them; to perform the Work to the public by any
means or process and the communication to the public of the performances of the Work,
including by public digital performance; to broadcast and rebroadcast the Work by any
means including signs, sounds or images.
j."Reproduce" means to make copies of the Work by any means including without
limitation by sound or visual recordings and the right of fixation and reproducing
fixations of the Work, including storage of a protected performance or phonogram in
digital form or other electronic medium.

2. Fair Dealing Rights. Nothing in this License is intended to reduce, limit, or restrict any uses free
from copyright or rights arising from limitations or exceptions that are provided for in connection
with the copyright protection under copyright law or other applicable laws.
3. License Grant. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, Licensor hereby grants You a
worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, perpetual (for the duration of the applicable copyright)
license to exercise the rights in the Work as stated below:
a.
b.

c.
d.

to Reproduce the Work, to incorporate the Work into one or more Collections, and to
Reproduce the Work as incorporated in the Collections;
to create and Reproduce Adaptations provided that any such Adaptation, including any
translation in any medium, takes reasonable steps to clearly label, demarcate or otherwise
identify that changes were made to the original Work. For example, a translation could be
marked "The original work was translated from English to Spanish," or a modification
could indicate "The original work has been modified.";
to Distribute and Publicly Perform the Work including as incorporated in Collections;
and,
to Distribute and Publicly Perform Adaptations.

The above rights may be exercised in all media and formats whether now known or hereafter devised.
The above rights include the right to make such modifications as are technically necessary to exercise
the rights in other media and formats. Subject to Section 8(f), all rights not expressly granted by
Licensor are hereby reserved, including but not limited to the rights described in Section 4(e).

4. Restrictions. The license granted in Section 3 above is expressly made subject to and limited by
the following restrictions:
a.

b.

You may Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work only under the terms of this License.
You must include a copy of, or the Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) for, this License
with every copy of the Work You Distribute or Publicly Perform. You may not offer or
impose any terms on the Work that restrict the terms of this License or the ability of the
recipient of the Work to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the
License. You may not sublicense the Work. You must keep intact all notices that refer to
this License and to the disclaimer of warranties with every copy of the Work You
Distribute or Publicly Perform. When You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work, You
may not impose any effective technological measures on the Work that restrict the ability
of a recipient of the Work from You to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under
the terms of the License. This Section 4(a) applies to the Work as incorporated in a
Collection, but this does not require the Collection apart from the Work itself to be made
subject to the terms of this License. If You create a Collection, upon notice from any
Licensor You must, to the extent practicable, remove from the Collection any credit as
required by Section 4(d), as requested. If You create an Adaptation, upon notice from any
Licensor You must, to the extent practicable, remove from the Adaptation any credit as
required by Section 4(d), as requested.
You may Distribute or Publicly Perform an Adaptation only under: (i) the terms of this
License; (ii) a later version of this License with the same License Elements as this
License; (iii) a Creative Commons jurisdiction license (either this or a later license
version) that contains the same License Elements as this License (e.g., AttributionNonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 US) ("Applicable License"). You must include a copy
of, or the URI, for Applicable License with every copy of each Adaptation You Distribute
or Publicly Perform. You may not offer or impose any terms on the Adaptation that

24

c.

d.

e.

restrict the terms of the Applicable License or the ability of the recipient of the Adaptation
to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the Applicable License.
You must keep intact all notices that refer to the Applicable License and to the disclaimer
of warranties with every copy of the Work as included in the Adaptation You Distribute
or Publicly Perform. When You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Adaptation, You may
not impose any effective technological measures on the Adaptation that restrict the ability
of a recipient of the Adaptation from You to exercise the rights granted to that recipient
under the terms of the Applicable License. This Section 4(b) applies to the Adaptation as
incorporated in a Collection, but this does not require the Collection apart from the
Adaptation itself to be made subject to the terms of the Applicable License.
You may not exercise any of the rights granted to You in Section 3 above in any manner
that is primarily intended for or directed toward commercial advantage or private
monetary compensation. The exchange of the Work for other copyrighted works by means
of digital file-sharing or otherwise shall not be considered to be intended for or directed
toward commercial advantage or private monetary compensation, provided there is no
payment of any monetary compensation in con-nection with the exchange of copyrighted
works.
If You Distribute, or Publicly Perform the Work or any Adaptations or Collections, You
must, unless a request has been made pursuant to Section 4(a), keep intact all copyright
notices for the Work and provide, reasonable to the medium or means You are utilizing:
(i) the name of the Original Author (or pseudonym, if applicable) if supplied, and/or if the
Original Author and/or Licensor designate another party or parties (e.g., a sponsor
institute, publishing entity, journal) for attribution ("Attribution Parties") in Licensor's
copyright notice, terms of service or by other reasonable means, the name of such party or
parties; (ii) the title of the Work if supplied; (iii) to the extent reasonably practicable, the
URI, if any, that Licensor specifies to be associated with the Work, unless such URI does
not refer to the copyright notice or licensing information for the Work; and, (iv) consistent
with Section 3(b), in the case of an Adaptation, a credit identifying the use of the Work in
the Adaptation (e.g., "French translation of the Work by Original Author," or "Screenplay
based on original Work by Original Author"). The credit required by this Section 4(d)
may be implemented in any reasonable manner; provided, however, that in the case of a
Adaptation or Collection, at a minimum such credit will appear, if a credit for all
contributing authors of the Adaptation or Collection appears, then as part of these credits
and in a manner at least as prominent as the credits for the other contributing authors. For
the avoidance of doubt, You may only use the credit required by this Section for the
purpose of attribution in the manner set out above and, by exercising Your rights under
this License, You may not implicitly or explicitly assert or imply any connection with,
sponsorship or endorsement by the Original Author, Licensor and/or Attribution Parties,
as appropriate, of You or Your use of the Work, without the separate, express prior
written permission of the Original Author, Licensor and/or Attribution Parties.
For the avoidance of doubt:

i.Non-waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in
which the right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory
licensing scheme cannot be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive right to
collect such royalties for any exercise by You of the rights granted under this
License;
ii.Waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in which
the right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing
scheme can be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive right to collect such
royalties for any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License if
Your exercise of such rights is for a purpose or use which is otherwise than
noncommercial as permitted under Section 4(c) and otherwise waives the right
to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing scheme; and,
iii.Voluntary License Schemes. The Licensor reserves the right to collect
royalties, whether individually or, in the event that the Licensor is a member of
a collecting society that administers voluntary licensing schemes, via that
society, from any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License that

25

f.

is for a purpose or use which is otherwise than noncommercial as permitted
under Section 4(c).
Except as otherwise agreed in writing by the Licensor or as may be otherwise permitted by
applicable law, if You Reproduce, Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work either by
itself or as part of any Adaptations or Collections, You must not distort, mutilate, modify
or take other derogatory action in relation to the Work which would be prejudicial to the
Original Author's honor or reputation. Licensor agrees that in those jurisdictions (e.g.
Japan), in which any exercise of the right granted in Section 3(b) of this License (the right
to make Adaptations) would be deemed to be a distortion, mutilation, modification or
other derogatory action prejudicial to the Original Author's honor and reputation, the
Licensor will waive or not assert, as appropriate, this Section, to the fullest extent
permitted by the applicable national law, to enable You to reasonably exercise Your right
under Section 3(b) of this License (right to make Adaptations) but not otherwise.

5. Representations, Warranties and Disclaimer
UNLESS OTHERWISE MUTUALLY AGREED TO BY THE PARTIES IN WRITING AND TO
THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, LICENSOR OFFERS THE
WORK AS-IS AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND
CONCERNING THE WORK, EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE,
INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR THE ABSENCE OF
LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OF ABSENCE OF
ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT DISCOVERABLE. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW
THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES, SO THIS EXCLUSION MAY NOT APPLY
TO YOU.

6. Limitation on Liability. EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW,
IN NO EVENT WILL LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY FOR
ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR EXEMPLARY
DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS LICENSE OR THE USE OF THE WORK, EVEN IF
LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
7. Termination
a.

b.

This License and the rights granted hereunder will terminate automatically upon any
breach by You of the terms of this License. Individuals or entities who have received
Adaptations or Collections from You under this License, however, will not have their
licenses terminated provided such individuals or entities remain in full compliance with
those licenses. Sections 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 will survive any termination of this License.
Subject to the above terms and conditions, the license granted here is perpetual (for the
duration of the applicable copyright in the Work). Notwithstanding the above, Licensor
reserves the right to release the Work under different license terms or to stop distributing
the Work at any time; provided, however that any such election will not serve to withdraw
this License (or any other license that has been, or is required to be, granted under the
terms of this License), and this License will continue in full force and effect unless
terminated as stated above.

8. Miscellaneous
a.
b.
c.

d.

Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work or a Collection, the Licensor
offers to the recipient a license to the Work on the same terms and conditions as the
license granted to You under this License.
Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform an Adaptation, Licensor offers to the
recipient a license to the original Work on the same terms and conditions as the license
granted to You under this License.
If any provision of this License is invalid or unenforceable under applicable law, it shall
not affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of the terms of this License, and
without further action by the parties to this agreement, such provision shall be reformed to
the minimum extent necessary to make such provision valid and enforceable.
No term or provision of this License shall be deemed waived and no breach consented to

26

e.

f.

unless such waiver or consent shall be in writing and signed by the party to be charged
with such waiver or consent.
This License constitutes the entire agreement between the parties with respect to the Work
licensed here. There are no understandings, agreements or representations with respect to
the Work not specified here. Licensor shall not be bound by any additional provisions that
may appear in any communication from You. This License may not be modified without
the mutual written agreement of the Licensor and You.
The rights granted under, and the subject matter referenced, in this License were drafted
utilizing the terminology of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works (as amended on September 28, 1979), the Rome Convention of 1961, the
WIPO Copyright Treaty of 1996, the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty of
1996 and the Universal Copyright Convention (as revised on July 24, 1971). These rights
and subject matter take effect in the relevant jurisdiction in which the License terms are
sought to be enforced according to the corresponding provisions of the implementation of
those treaty provisions in the applicable national law. If the standard suite of rights
granted under applicable copyright law includes additional rights not granted under this
License, such additional rights are deemed to be included in the License; this License is
not intended to restrict the license of any rights under applicable law.

Creative Commons Notice
Creative Commons is not a party to this License, and makes no warranty
whatsoever in connection with the Work. Creative Commons will not be liable to
You or any party on any legal theory for any damages whatsoever, including
without limitation any general, special, incidental or consequential damages arising
in connection to this license. Notwithstanding the foregoing two (2) sentences, if
Creative Commons has expressly identified itself as the Licensor hereunder, it shall
have all rights and obligations of Licensor.
Except for the limited purpose of indicating to the public that the Work is licensed
under the CCPL, Creative Commons does not authorize the use by either party of
the trademark "Creative Commons" or any related trademark or logo of Creative
Commons without the prior written consent of Creative Commons. Any permitted
use will be in compliance with Creative Commons' then-current trademark usage
guidelines, as may be published on its website or otherwise made available upon
request from time to time. For the avoidance of doubt, this trademark restriction
does not form part of this License.

Creative Commons may be contacted at http://creativecommons.org/.

27

