PROLOGUE

Luke Skywalker was surprised to see the moisture
vaporator standing beside Ben Kenobi's abandoned hut
on Tatooine. Given that over three years had transpired
since Ben left the desert planet, Luke had assumed the
vaporator would be long gone, scavenged by the Jawas
or Sand People. Incredibly, both the vaporator and
Ben's hut appeared to be in good shape.
The sun-bleached dwelling hugged a remote, stony
bluff in the Jundland Wastes with a sweeping view of the
Western Dune Sea. Luke had landed his X-wing
starfighter nearby, and was eager to get out from under
Tatooine's blazing twin suns. But as he trudged across
the rocky ground and drew closer to the plasteel door
that was the entrance to Kenobi's hut, he sensed a
strange tension in the air. It reminded him of the disturbing sensation he had felt on Dagobah, at the cave
that was so strong with the dark side of the Force. But
while that cave had radiated cold and death, and seemed

1

to challenge and beckon Luke to enter, this was an
entirely different feeling — as if the entire property
were saying Go away.
However, Luke also sensed that the message was
not for him. He wondered if Ben had used the Force to
protect his home, and figured he'd find out soon
enough.
The plasteel door was unlocked. Luke slid it open
and stepped inside. The air was musty, but the shadowy
interior offered at least some relief from the heat.
Looking around at the various relics that rested on small
tables and shelves, and the animal pelts stretched out on
the semicircular couch that had also served as Ben's
bed, Luke couldn't see that anything had been damaged
or stolen. The only obvious evidence of Ben's absence
was the thin dusting of sand that covered everything.
Luke moved down into the small living area, where
he found a vacuum-seal chest on the floor beside a structural column. It was from this chest that Ben had
extracted Luke's first lightsaber, the same lightsaber
that Ben claimed had previously belonged to Luke's
father.
Luke brushed the sand from the chest's lid, then
lifted it and looked inside.
It was empty.
Luke sighed. He hadn't expected the chest to contain a second lightsaber, but he had hoped to find
something useful. If not a datatape or holographic

2

recording, at least some kind of clue that might answer
the questions that had been gnawing at him for months,
ever since his duel with Darth Wader on Cloud City.
As he thought of that devastating encounter, which
had cost him not only his inherited weapon but his right
hand, he suddenly felt an aching sensation at his wrist.
Phantom limb pain, he recalled. That was the term that
the medical droid had used to describe the occasional
ache that Luke might feel from time to time.
Luke flexed the lifelike, mechanical fingers of the
prosthetic hand that the droid had so carefully attached
to the end of his right arm. Veins, muscles, and bones
had been replaced with wires, pistons, and metal, and
sensory impulse lines even made his cybernetic fingers
touch-sensitive. Despite the fact that Luke's original
right hand had been lost in the reactor shaft at Cloud
City, the medical droid — an expert with highly specialized techniques of genetic
reconstruction — had
replicated a perfect synthetic duplicate, right down to
the fingerprints.
But the medical droid couldn't do anything about
the phantom pain. Luke would have to live with that.
He continued his inspection of Ben's home. It didn't
take long to find the trapdoor in the floor that led to the
cellar. A short series of steps, hewn from bedrock,
descended into darkness. Luke pulled a small glowrod
from his belt, activated its light, and climbed down the
steps. The cellar wasn't entirely dark, as a scant, eerie

3

light emanated from luminescent stone that was set in
one wall.
Ben had used the cellar for food and water storage,
and a small variety of dried fruits, vegetables, and
meats — all of which now looked like collapsed bits of
leather — remained strung to a metal pipe that traveled
to a cistern. Luke also found a workbench that had
been constructed from scrap metal. Tools were neatly
arranged on shelves, but a few select tools rested on the
workbench, as if waiting for their owner's return.
Then Luke spotted the box. It was an intricately
carved boa-wood box, resting on the floor between the
workbench and small auxiliary generator. Luke was
moving the glowrod closer to the box when a sudden
sound came from above.
Thud!
In a swift, fluid motion, Luke spun to his left as he
reached fast for the blaster that was bolstered at his
right hip, and then sprang back toward the cellar steps.
He brought his blaster up fast so that its barrel was
angled up through the open trap door. An instant later,
the air was filled by a panicked, electronic shriek.
The shriek came from the domed head of Luke's
astromech droid, R2-D2, who had traveled with him and
helped to evade the Imperial blockade around Tatooine.
The startled droid unleashed a flurry of angry beeps as
he peered down at Luke, then he stomped his treads at

4

the edge of the trap door's opening, kicking up the layer
of sand that rested on the floor of the upper room.
"Sorry, Artoo," Luke said as he lowered his blaster.
"Guess I'm a little jumpy." As he returned his weapon
to its holster, he muttered, "I'll probably stay that way
until we find. . . Han."
Luke's throat was already dry from the desert heat,
but as he said Han's name, he felt as if he might choke.
He had no idea where his friend Han was, only that
the armored bounty hunter Boba Fett had taken Han's
carbonite-frozen body from Cloud City. Various reports
confirmed that Boba Fett intended to deliver Han to
the Tatooine-based gangster Jabba the Hutt, but so far,
Boba Fett was a no-show. It was Luke's other friend,
the Alliance leader Princess Leia Organa, who had
instructed him to hide out on Tatooine and wait for some
sign of Han.
Unfortunately, Luke had never been very good at
waiting.
From above, R2-D2 emitted a series of soft electronic beeps and a short whistle. Recognizing the
whistle's lilt as a concerned question from the droid,
Luke replied, "I'm fine, Artoo. Go make sure the
X-wing's camouflage net is secured, and I'll be up in a
few minutes."
R2-D2 chirped a hesitant response, but then his
motor whined and he backed away from the trapdoor.

5

The movement pushed some sand toward the trapdoor,
sending it streaming down into the cellar. Luke shook
his head. One way or another, sand found its way into
just about every place on Tatooine.
While R2-D2 headed back outside to inspect the
X-wing, Luke returned to the boa-wood box and
crouched down in front of it. Examining the box more
closely with the glowrod, he noticed a tight cluster of
buttons, and realized that the box was a keypad safe.
Luke stared hard at the keypad. Ben had never mentioned this box in his basement, and Luke could only
imagine what the access code might be. Struggling to
recall whether Ben had ever hinted at the code, Luke
thought back to that fateful day when Ben — in the room
just above Luke's head — had revealed himself to be a
Jedi Knight and told Luke about the Force. Luke seriously doubted that Ben would have programmed any
obvious letter combination, like JEDI or THE FORCE. He
wished he could somehow ask Ben himself, but after
their last exchange, that seemed very unlikely.
Since Dagobah, Luke had been on his own.
For a moment, he considered breaking the box open,
using a small prybar he had noticed on the workbench,
but then he dismissed the idea. As much as he was curious about the box's contents, he didn't want to damage
it. He reached cautiously toward the box, brushing the
tips of his fingers against the keypad.
Snap!
6

Luke flinched and pulled his fingers back as the keypad automatically slid aside on an inlaid track to reveal
a thumbprint clasp. He wasn't sure what had just happened, but somehow, he had bypassed the keypad. He
hesitated for a moment, then thought, Here goes nothing. He pressed his right thumb against the clasp.
Clack!
The clasp yielded to his touch, and Luke saw a thin
black slit appear along the lower edge of the box's lid.
He lifted the lid slowly with one hand, adjusted the glowrod with the other, and peered inside the box. The first
thing he saw was a flashpacket, an explosive device that
had been affixed near the back of the keypad.
Luke eyed the flashpacket warily. It certainly
appeared that Ben had rigged the box to explode, but
for whatever reason, it hadn't worked. Luke thought,
Maybe it's a d u d . . . .
Another possibility suddenly struck him. Maybe Ben
not only left this box behind for me, but also set it to
explode if anyone else attempted to open it. But how?
Did Ben somehow obtain my fingerprints? Did he foresee that I would lose my hand? Or was the clasp
engineered to recognize me by the Force? Luke was
mystified, but if it turned out that his fingerprints had
been all that prevented the flashpacket from detonating,
he would have another reason to be grateful to the medical droid who had recreated his hand.
Peering past the flashpacket, Luke saw that the box

7

contained some rectangular objects. He recognized
them as books. Although he was far more familiar with
datapads for information storage, he had seen enough
books in his lifetime to know how what they were and
how to use them. The largest book was a leather-bound
volume that appeared quite ancient. Luke picked it up,
and noticed that it too was sealed by a thumbclasp.
He pressed his right thumb against the clasp. The
clasp yielded without a sound.
Luke wasn't surprised to find another flashpacket,
this one affixed behind the book's front cover. Nor was
he surprised that the explosive didn't detonate. What
surprised him were the handwritten words on the book's
first page.
Luke,
The flashpackets were a necessary precaution. I trust you will dispose of them properly.
The future of the Jedi Knights is in your
hands. Read these books and use them wisely.
May the Force be with you.
— Obi-Wan Kenobi
Luke blinked at the words as if to confirm they were
real, that he wasn't just having a dream. The book felt
suddenly heavy in his hands. He set it down carefully
upon the workbench and, by the light of his glowrod, he
began turning the pages. Every page was filled with

8

handwritten text, and his heart began pounding harder
as the various words and phrases caught his attention.
Jedi C o u n c i l . . . Old Republic . . . Battle of Naboo . . .
Sith Lords . . . Jedi Temple . . . Separatist M o v e m e n t . . .
Battle of Geonosis . . . the Clone Wars . . .
Luke stopped to catch his breath. He knew he should
start at the beginning, but the book was so thick, and
he was impatient to find two names in particular. He
began flipping through the pages even faster, scanning
the text for the names — Anakin Skywalker and Darth
Vader — that he believed were the keys to the answers
he sought.
Ever since the duel on Cloud City, his thoughts had
been dominated by two questions:
Is Darth Vader really my father?
And if he is, why didn't Ben tell me the truth?
The dull ache returned to Luke's right wrist, and he
stopped turning pages. He hadn't found the names
he was looking for, but had come to a section that
contained Ben's instructions for the construction of
lightsabers. The section included numerous illustrations
by Ben himself.
Luke hadn't considered the possibility of building
a lightsaber. Only after he lost his lightsaber at Cloud
City did he realize that he had no idea where to obtain
another one, let alone how to go about making one from
scratch. Now, thanks to Ben's book, it seemed he might
actually stand a good chance at replacing it.

9

A skilled Jedi can complete a basic lightsaber in a few days if necessary, but creating one
for the first time can take many months. The
most essential component is the focusing crystal, preferably a natural jewel, which can be . . .
Luke was transfixed, nearly forgetting his intent to
find information about his father's identity. He flipped
back a few pages and began reading from the beginning
of the entry.
Like most Jedi younglings, I constructed my
first lightsaber at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant.
Although it was merely a competent weapon, I
would be a liar if I said I built it purely for training exercises. I crafted it with much thought and
care, and dared to imagine that it would serve
me well in the future.
In fact, I did use the weapon during my
earliest missions with my Master, but it was
not u n t i l . . .
Seeing the word Master, Luke skimmed ahead.
He suspected Ben was referring to Master Yoda, but he
didn't see Yoda's name written anywhere. Luke went
back to where he had left off.
. . . but it was not until after we went to Ilum,
10

when I was still in my thirteenth year, that I
learned the true power of a lightsaber.
Luke turned the page. He had expected the journal
to provide details about what Kenobi had experienced
in his thirteenth year that made him learn "the true
power of a lightsaber," but as he read through the next
few pages, it appeared that the elder Jedi may have kept
that information to himself. Ben had also mentioned
being "on Ilum," but there wasn't another mention of
Ilum either, at least not that Luke could plainly see.
Luke frowned. Although he was eager to read the
entire book, he also believed that building a new lightsaber might be his first priority. According to Ben's
instructions, first-time efforts at lightsaber construction
could "take months." Luke and his allies didn't know
Han Solo's current whereabouts and had yet to formulate a rescue plan, but if they were going up against
Boba Fett or Jabba the Hutt, Luke had a feeling that a
lightsaber would be useful.
As Luke reexamined the instructions for lightsaber
construction, his thoughts returned to Obi-Wan at age
thirteen. What was he like then? Luke wished he could
have known more.

11

CHAPTER

ONE

Although the Jedi Order had deliberately banished
Ilum from all standard star charts for many centuries,
almost every Jedi trainee dreamed of visiting the sacred,
secret planet in the Unknown Regions. That was because
many generations of Jedi had gathered crystals from
Ilum to energize their lightsabers, and some Jedi maintained that Ilum crystals were the finest in the galaxy.
Constructing a lightsaber on Ilum was not regarded
as the most challenging trial for a Jedi apprentice, but
to Obi-Wan, it was confirmation that he would become
a Jedi Knight. And if anyone appreciated the opportunity to become a Jedi, it was Obi-Wan. Less than a
year earlier, when he was still just a few weeks shy of
his thirteenth birthday, he was nearly convinced that no
Jedi Knight or Master would ever choose him as an
apprentice.
But those days were behind him now. The Jedi
Knight Qui-Gon Jinn, with some encouragement from

13

Master Yoda, had taken Obi-Wan as his Padawan.
Granted, they had gotten off to a rough start, and it only
became rougher when Obi-Wan temporarily renounced
the Jedi Order to join the revolution on the planet
Melida/Daan, a decision that he quickly came to regret.
Qui-Gon had forgiven him and accepted his return, but
there remained an uneasiness between them. Still,
despite their disagreements and conflicts, a bond had
developed, and both were confident this bond would
grow stronger over time.
And so it was that Obi-Wan and his Master, traveling in a small transport ship on loan from the Galactic
Senate, had made the pilgrimage to the snow-covered
world of Ilum. As Obi-Wan meditated over the blue
crystal he had just harvested from the frigid cavern,
Qui-Gon stood a short distance away, watching.
Using the Force, Obi-Wan Kenobi maneuvered the
components of his lightsaber so that they hovered in
the air in front of him. The blue crystal rotated slowly,
then drifted into place within the lightsaber's energy
chamber. Focusing all his attention on the components,
he sealed the compartment, and then adjusted a locking
mechanism. The lightsaber's assembly was complete.
With his lightsaber still floating before him, ObiWan shifted his gaze to his Master. Like Obi-Wan,
Qui-Gon was wearing an insulated robe to protect him
from the cold. Qui-Gon's eyes were on the floating
lightsaber, but Obi-Wan thought he detected something

14

distant in the man's expression, as if his thoughts were
elsewhere.
Obi-Wan's lightsaber wavered slightly. Obi-Wan
waited a few seconds, then said, "Are you not supposed
to say a few words, Master?"
Qui-Gon's eyes flicked to Obi-Wan's. "Ah, yes," he
said. Returning his gaze to the hovering lightsaber,
he recited, "The crystal is the heart of the blade. The
heart is the crystal of the Jedi. The Jedi is the crystal
of the Force. The Force is the blade of the heart. All are
intertwined: the crystal, the blade, the Jedi. You....
are one."
Obi-Wan heard Qui-Gon's hesitation in the final
sentence, and thought he detected a hint of sorrow or
regret in his Master's voice. As he reached out to grasp
the floating lightsaber and lower it to his side, he said,
"Have I done something wrong, Master?"
"No, Padawan," Qui-Gon answered. "You've done
well. I regret it is I, for a change, who is not being mindful of the moment." Then Qui-Gon looked away, letting
his gaze sweep over the cavern's interior. "It is unfortunate that such wondrous surroundings could become
diminished by foolish memories."
Obi-Wan shook his head. "I am sorry, Master, but I
don't understand."
Qui-Gon returned his gaze to Obi-Wan and said,
"The last time I stood in this chamber, it was with
Xanatos."

15

Obi-Wan swallowed hard. Xanatos had been QuiGon's previous Jedi apprentice. Strong with the Force
and a brave warrior, Xanatos had served alongside QuiGon on numerous missions, but ultimately left the Jedi
Order to ally with his biological father, a corrupt governor who had initiated a civil war on their homeworld,
Telos IV. Qui-Gon had been forced to kill Xanatos's
father, an act that did nothing to stop or divert Xanatos
on his path to the dark side.
For years afterward, Qui-Gon had maintained that
he might never take another apprentice, and that he
eventually did was much to Obi-Wan's credit. But
shortly after Obi-Wan became Qui-Gon's Padawan,
Xanatos reemerged, seeking revenge against his former
Master — and nearly destroying the Jedi Temple in
the process. Obi-Wan had been with Qui-Gon when
they caught up with Xanatos on Telos IV, and neither
was able to stop the dark, former Jedi from deliberately
ending his own life by plunging into a boiling black
pool of acid.
"Xanatos wasn't your fault," Obi-Wan blurted out
without thinking. Qui-Gon had not asked for his opinion, and he felt his face flush.
"Perhaps you're right," Qui-Gon replied. "But for a
time, Xanatos was my responsibility. And he was also
my friend."
Obi-Wan had no response for this. He had come
to regard Xanatos as an embodiment of evil, and had
16

a hard time believing that he could have ever been a
friend to anyone.
Obi-Wan also felt a bit stung. The trip to Ilum was
important to him, and he hadn't expected his Master's
thoughts to dwell on Xanatos. He almost wished that
Qui-Gon's memory of the failed apprentice had dissolved along with Xanatos himself on Telos IV, but he
immediately buried the thought and banished it from
his mind. Such a line of thinking could only lead to the
dark side — Obi-Wan didn't need Master Yoda, QuiGon, or anyone else to remind him of that.
Qui-Gon sighed. "You have worked very hard
toward this day, and I regret I allowed unpleasant memories to intrude. Forgive me, Obi-Wan."
Obi-Wan was taken aback by his Master's request
for forgiveness. Although he wasn't sure whether to
speak, he said, " I . . . I forgive you, Master."
"Then all is well," Qui-Gon said, smiling as he
placed his broad hand on Obi-Wan's shoulder. "Come
now, let us see the result of your handiwork, this blade
you have created by the will of the Force."
Stepping back from Qui-Gon, Obi-Wan held his
lightsaber out in front of him and thumbed the activation
switch. The beam ignited, and the cavern's crystal-lined
walls reflected its brilliant blue light as they magnified
the sound of the weapon's distinctive hum.
Obi-Wan had been raised at the Jedi Temple and
had more experience with lightsabers than many
17

Padawans his age. Still, his eyes went wide with surprise as he beheld the brilliant beam that extended
before him. He had expected that the Ilum crystal would
produce a more intense beam than the weapon's previous crystal, which he had selected from a supply at the
Jedi Temple's lightsaber crafting facility. But he was
not prepared for the way the Ilum crystal would make
the weapon feel in his grasp.
It was different somehow. He tested it, sweeping the
blade through the air. The blade was still pure energy
and without weight, but it seemed more precise and
focused.
Obi-Wan looked to Qui-Gon, who smiled as if he
could read his Padawan's thoughts. Qui-Gon said,
"Some Jedi claim that Ilum crystals make one feel more
connected with the Force."
Before Obi-Wan could comment, a beeping sound
came from the comlink at Qui-Gon's belt. ObiWan deactivated his lightsaber as Qui-Gon removed
the comlink, listened briefly, and then said into it, "On
our way."
"What is it, Master?"
"A mission," Qui-Gon said, returning the comlink
to his belt. "We're to go to Ord Sigatt."
"Ord Sigatt?" Obi-Wan shook his head. "I've never
heard of it."
"It's in the Outer Rim Territories."

18

Obi-Wan lifted his eyebrows. It wasn't every day
that Jedi were assigned to the Outer Rim. He said, "Isn't
that a little out of our usual jurisdiction?"
"Not when a Republic refinery ship and its crew
goes missing there."
Qui-Gon turned and headed for the mouth of the
cave. Obi-Wan clipped his lightsaber to his belt as he
followed, walking fast to keep up with his Master's long
strides. They returned to their transport, set the coordinates for Ord Sigatt into the navicomputer, and lifted
away from the frozen world. Minutes later, they were
racing through hyperspace to the Outer Rim.
Twelve thousand years before Obi-Wan's lifetime, when the Galactic Republic was attempting to
expand its government beyond the more traveled
trade routes, the Republic established advance military
and scout bases on several remote worlds. These
planets and moons were designated as Ords, an abbreviation of Ordnance/Regional Depots. Over time,
the Jedi Order replaced the Republic militia, and some
of the Ords evolved into weapons disposal centers
and storage facilities, while others were adopted by
colonists.
Ord Sigatt was a small, rocky planet with mostly
barren terrain and a few scattered lakes. For centuries,
its modest population consisted of people who stayed

19

only until they found somewhere else to go. Some longtime colonists lived on the outskirts of the main
settlement, but most lived close to the spaceport, the
energy station, or the water treatment facility that made
up the main settlement. As for tourism, most travelers
regarded Ord Sigatt as little more than a place to rest or
refuel their ships. But all that changed after a prospector's recent discovery of a large deposit of carvanium, a
metal used in alloys such as durasteel.
Almost overnight, Ord Sigatt was transformed into
a mining world. Many colonists became instantly
wealthy when they sold their properties to offworld consortiums. Mammoth vehicles were delivered to excavate
the carvanium, and the spaceport expanded to accommodate the refinery ships. The settlement's population
increased rapidly with migrant laborers and soldiers of
fortune, and a sprawl of temporary housing had sprung
up for the new arrivals.
Obi-Wan reviewed these details during his journey
with his Master through hyperspace, the time-space
dimension that allowed for faster-than-lightspeed
travel between planets. Studying transmitted data from
the Jedi Temple, Obi-Wan said, "The missing refinery
ship was the Hardy Harrow from Denon, and is owned
by Denon-Ardru Mutual. The ship had been scheduled
to pick up a shipment of carvanium two days ago, but
when it failed to return to Republic space, a Denon
Senator notified the Council."

20

"Any comment from Ord Sigatt Spaceport?" QuiGon asked.
"They say the Hardy Harrow never reached Ord
Sigatt."
"What about recent acts of piracy or space weather
anomalies in the system? Has anything been reported?"
"No, Master." A signal light flashed on the transport's console and Obi-Wan looked to a sensor screen.
"We're coming out of hyperspace."
There was a slight shudder as the transport dropped
out of hyperspace and entered realspace. Outside the
transport's cockpit transparisteel window, a rush of
bright light washed away from view and was replaced
by a solitary planet amidst a field of distant stars. ObiWan confirmed that the planet was Ord Sigatt, then said,
"I'll notify the spaceport that we'll be arriving in —"
"Easy, now, Padawan," Qui-Gon interrupted. "For
all we know, the spaceport authorities may have something to do with the missing refinery. Let us arrive
unannounced. We'll land in one of the public hangars
on the outskirts."
After gaining clearance from the spaceport, they
landed their transport in an open-roof hangar. Obi-Wan
was somewhat relieved to learn that Ord Sigatt's climate was considerably warmer than Ilum, but as they
stepped down the transport's landing ramp, he realized
the air was not nearly so clean.
A starship maintenance droid directed them to the
21

hangar's exit. They had almost reached the exit when
two uniformed security guards stepped out from the
shadows to block their path. Both guards had blaster
rifles slung over their shoulders, and their hard expressions indicated that they were prepared to use the
weapons if necessary. One of the guards looked at QuiGon and snarled, "Either of you carrying weapons?"
Qui-Gon raised his right hand slowly and made a
slight sweeping gesture with his fingers as he said, "We
don't have any weapons."
Both guards were unaware that Qui-Gon was using
the Force to manipulate their minds. The guard who had
addressed Qui-Gon nodded and said, "No, you don't
have any weapons."
"We're just harmless traders," Qui-Gon added.
"You can let us go on our way."
"Totally harmless," the guard answered. "Go on,
then." He and his partner stepped aside, allowing the
two Jedi to move through the exit.
They stepped out onto a busy street, filled with
pedestrian traffic and lined with merchant stalls. They
walked past the stalls, keeping their lightsabers concealed within their robes. As they moved along, Qui-Gon
leaned close to Obi-Wan and said in a low voice,
"Notice anything unusual about the locals?"
Obi-Wan surveyed the area. He saw a mix of
humans and aliens from various worlds, and most wore
work clothes and coveralls. Some were seated at tables

22

with food set out in the shade of a nearby hangar. All of
the merchants seemed very focused on their customers.
Obi-Wan shrugged. "Well," he said, "it doesn't
seem much different from any other spaceport on a
backwater world. Except that people around here
look glummer than most." It was true. No one appeared
to be very happy about being on Ord Sigatt.
Qui-Gon said, "There's also the fact that no one is
carrying any weapons."
As Obi-Wan's eyes flicked from one person to the
next, he quickly confirmed his Master's observation.
Except for the security guards that they'd left behind in
the hangar, not a single being was wearing a holster or
bearing weapons of any kind.
"That is unusual," Obi-Wan said. "Nothing in the
report from the Jedi Council mentioned that blasters
were prohibited. Maybe it's just the way the locals
maintain peace."
"Maybe," Qui-Gon said, but Obi-Wan could tell that
his Master was skeptical.
A trio of spacers walked by, and the Jedi watched
the men enter a nearby bar, one of the older-looking
buildings on the block. Qui-Gon said, "I might be able
to pick up some information in there. You wait outside.
I'll be back in a few minutes."
A few seconds after Qui-Gon entered the old
building, Obi-Wan heard a loud crash. It had sounded
from the alley right around the corner, which ran
23

perpendicular to the main street. After a quick glance
back toward the door of the bar, he walked around the
corner and found himself looking at a burly Besalisk.
The four-armed alien wore a stained apron and held two
trays in his lower hands. A clutter of empty bottles lay
scattered around his wide feet. It appeared he had just
accidentally dropped the bottles.
Obi-Wan was about to turn back when the Besalisk,
grumbling to himself, stooped down and began loading
the bottles onto the trays with his upper arms. Obi-Wan
was amazed at how fast the alien's hands moved. The
Besalisk was reaching toward the last cup when he
looked up at Obi-Wan. Eyes wide with surprise, the
alien said, "Aw, nuts." Then he lowered the trays to
the ground, raised all four of his meaty, four-fingered
hands in the air and said, "I surrender."
Confused, Obi-Wan said, "You do?"
"I know better than to mess with Jedi," the Besalisk
said, his bristly whiskers trembling slightly. "Even
youngsters like yourself."
Suddenly self-concious, Obi-Wan glanced down to
make sure his lightsaber had not accidentally become
exposed. Seeing that it was still concealed beneath his
robes, he returned his gaze to the Besalisk and said,
"Who told you I was a Jedi?"
Arms still raised, the Besalisk chuckled, "You did,
son. For one thing, you've got a Jedi apprentice's braid
dangling down your shoulder. Also, maybe you don't

24

know this, the weave of Jedi robes is pretty distinctive.
The real giveaway was when you looked to your hip to
make sure your lightsaber wasn't showing. Anyway,
you caught Dexter Jettster fair and square."
Obi-Wan was astonished by the Besalisk's powers
of observation. Taking a step into the alley, he kept his
expression neutral as he said cautiously, "So . . . Dexter
Jettster . . . you must also know why I'm here."
"Gotta hand it to you," Jettster said, winking at ObiWan. "I knew I couldn't keep running blasters out of
my bar forever. I just never imagined Jedi would come
after me."
Running blasters? Obi-Wan was baffled by Jettster's
admission.
The Besalisk continued, "I won't beg for mercy. I
know I done wrong. But I swear, Denon-Ardru Mutual
and their security goons are the real troublemakers.
Bad enough they take over the local government and
confiscate everyone's weapons in the name of their law,
but when they go stealing land from colonists here, well,
I just had to do something. You'll find all the blasters in
the back room of the bar. Hadn't begun distributing
them to my friends yet."
As he listened, Obi-Wan's nimble mind began sifting through the information, connecting details that he
already knew. He said, "Where is the Hardy Harrow!"
"Hidden in a valley, about twenty kilometers north
of here," Jettster said. "It's not damaged. My friends

25

and I here, we captured the ship shortly after it arrived
in orbit and removed its transponder. We just wanted
Denon-Ardru to know that we weren't going to leave
Ord Sigatt without a fight."
"Did you harm the crew?"
"The crew?" Jettster wrinkled his brow at this, then
said, "Come on, you know as well as I do that the
Harrow is a drone barge, doesn't have a crew except for
the droids t h a t . . . t h a t . . . " Jettster gasped, then he narrowed his gaze at Obi-Wan.
"Go on," Obi-Wan said.
Jettster shook his thick head. "Son of a gundark," he
said. "You got me, Jedi. You tried to hide it, but I can
see it in your eyes right now. You had no idea that I
was up to anything but dropping bottles before I opened
my big mouth. Until one minute ago, I prided myself on
how well I kept secrets, but now —"
"Help!"
The cry — it sounded like a child's voice — came
from outside the alley, behind Obi-Wan. He turned his
head fast to see three security guards, carrying blaster
rifles and clad in the same uniforms as the pair who'd
stopped him and Qui-Gon at the hangar. One of the
guards was gripping the collar of a young boy, who
looked about nine years old. A younger child, a girl,
clutched at the boy protectively.
Obi-Wan shot a severe glance at Jettster and
said, "Stay here!" Then he ran out of the alley, where
26

pedestrians had already formed a small crowd around
the guards and the two children.
The guard who had grabbed at the boy growled, "I
saw you throw that rock at me, whelp! Now you're
going to pay for it!"
"Unhand him," Obi-Wan said as he moved toward
the guards.
Keeping one hand on the boy's collar, the guard
glanced at Obi-Wan and barked, "Back off, kid!" And
then he shifted his blaster rifle, bringing it up toward
Obi-Wan.
Obi-Wan's lightsaber flashed, sweeping through the
rifle's barrel. The guard released the boy, who fell
back into his young sister's arms as the shattered barrel
fell and rolled across the street. The other two guards
moved as if they were about to raise their own rifles, but
then they looked beyond the blazing lightsaber to meet
Obi-Wan's gaze.
"A Jedi," murmered a voice from the crowd. "He's
a Jedi!"
A silence fell over the street, all eyes on Obi-Wan
and the guards. Obi-Wan was about to order the guards
to drop their weapons, but before he could get a word
out, the entire crowd broke out in an exultant cheer.
Obi-Wan kept his eyes trained on the guards. As
the crowd continued to cheer for the Jedi, the guards
dropped their weapons. While the unarmed guards
shifted nervously in the middle of the street, Obi-Wan

27

felt a finger gently tapping at his right shoulder. He
turned to see Qui-Gon standing behind him, and quickly
deactivated his lightsaber.
Raising his voice so he could be heard over the
applauding crowd, Qui-Gon said, "Should I have
reminded you to stay out of trouble?"
Obi-Wan retorted, "You asked me to wait outside!" Remembering Dexter Jettster, he glanced back to
the alley, where he saw Jettster leaning against the wall
outside the bar. Jettster had joined in the applause, clapping hands with his two upper arms while using his
lower hands to point to the ground. Jettster had stayed
where he was told.
Obi-Wan thought, He's really not a bad guy. Quite
helpful, actually.
Returning his gaze to his Master, Obi-Wan said,
"Before you issue reprimands, shall I tell you where
we'll find the Hardy Harrow?"
Qui-Gon stared at Obi-Wan for a moment, then said,
"And just how did you come by this information?"
"A little four-winged bird told me."
Denon-Ardru Mutual had sent a small army of
security guards to Ord-Sigatt, but all of the guards surrendered without protest to the Jedi. After all, they had
been paid only to push ordinary people around. The
guards returned to Denon in the Hardy Harrow, but
without the carvanium shipment.

28

Neither the Galactic Senate nor the Jedi Council
was pleased by a Denon Senator's attempt to use the
Jedi to recover an unmanned drone barge, especially
when they discovered the same Senator had a controlling interest in maintaining Denon-Ardru Mutual's
secret monopoly on the carvanium from Ord Sigatt.
Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon remained on Ord-Sigatt for a
few days to help return the local government to normal.
They spent a good deal of time with Dexter Jettster,
who not only impressed them with his keen observational skills and memory, but with his excellent cooking.
It was during one meal that Jettster faced Obi-Wan and
said, "Do you know the true power of a lightsaber?"
"The true power?" Obi-Wan echoed. He looked to
Qui-Gon for support.
Qui-Gon said, "It's a fair question."
Returning his gaze to Jettster, Obi-Wan said, "Well,
I suppose it's the lightsaber's ability to cut through
almost anything."
Dexter beamed. "That's what I used to think," he
said as he pushed another plate of food toward Qui-Gon.
"But then one day, I saw a young Jedi named Obi-Wan
Kenobi activate his lightsaber on Ord Sigatt. And that
was when I learned the weapon's true power."
Obi-Wan shifted in his chair at the dining table.
" I . . . I'm afraid I don't understand."
"Cutting through things is merely a lightsaber's
technical function," Jettster continued. "But its real

29

power is in the eye of the beholder. The sight of a lightsaber can inspire great fear, but it can also inspire great
hope. It all depends on whether one regards the Jedi as
friend or foe." Reaching out with his right upper arm,
Jettster placed his hand on Obi-Wan's shoulder and
said, "With one quick sweep of a lightsaber, you gave
hope to everyone who saw your blade. Except for the
bad guys, that is. Your lightsaber brought them to their
knees, and without spilling a drop of blood."
"Well," Obi-Wan said, "I did destroy the one guard's
blaster —"
"Haw!" Dexter laughed. "That you did, but s t i l l . . .
consider this, my young friend. Many weapons can kill,
but only the lightsaber can inspire such extremes of
hope or fear. And I shall add that I will be forever glad
that only Jedi carry lightsabers." He raised his glass to
Qui-Gon.
As the Jedi prepared to leave Ord-Sigatt, Jettster
walked with them back to their waiting transport. As
they neared the hangar, Jettster pulled Obi-Wan aside
and whispered, "Listen, son. Thanks for not telling anyone how I blabbed about the blasters or the missing
freighter. You saved my reputation."
Obi-Wan grinned. "Take care of yourself, Dexter,"
he said, extending his hand.
"A handshake just won't do, son," Dexter said, and
he grabbed the boy and lifted him off his feet to embrace
him in a four-armed hug. "Until we meet again."

30

INTERLUDE

With Ben Kenobi's journal spread open before him,
Luke Skywalker reviewed the instructions for building
lightsabers. Ben's cellar workshop was equipped with
most of the tools he would need, but he would have
to collect most of the weapon's electronic and mechanical parts from dealers, which meant a trip to one of
Tatooine's spaceports. Mos Espa was closer to Ben's
house, but was also crawling with Imperial spies, so he
would have to go to Mos Eisley. Princess Leia, Han
Solo's first mate Chewbacca the Wookiee, and their new
ally Lando Calrissian were already in Mos Eisley, trying to gain information about the whereabouts of Boba
Fett. Luke was expecting his friends to arrive soon and
give him an update, so he could then ride back with them
to Mos Eisley.
As for the lightsaber's focusing crystal, that would
be the real trick. Because he didn't have any natural

31

jewels at his disposal, he would need to build or buy
a small furnace to create and form the jewel, and then
he would have to cut the jewel and polish it. There
was also the matter of installing the crystal and tuning the lightsaber's photoharmonics. Although Ben's
instructions were clearly written, it seemed the entire
construction process was an inexact science, and possibly dangerous. If Luke made even a minor error, the
lightsaber could explode in his hands.
Luke was sitting at the low round table in Ben's
living area as he prepared a list of components he
hoped to obtain in Mos Eisley. Lifting his gaze, Luke
saw R2-D2 standing on the other side of the table,
watching him. It had been in this same room that
Ben had first told Luke about how his father had been a
Jedi Knight, who was betrayed and murdered by Ben's
pupil, Darth Vader. Recalling Vader's contradictory
claim at Cloud City, Luke wished he knew the whole
story.
Ben had described Luke's
warrior and a good friend. On
had commented that Luke, like
anger" in him. Were they even
person?

father as a cunning
Dagobah, Master Yoda
his father, had "much
talking about the same

Luke wanted to read more of Ben's journal, but then
he heard a landspeeder approach. He peered out a
window to confirm the speeder carried Leia and the

32

others. He quickly returned Ben's journal to the boawood box in the cellar, then instructed R2-D2 to stand
guard while he went to Mos Eisley. As he left Ben's
house, he found himself wondering absently, I wonder
what my father was like when Ben first met him?

33

C H A P T E R TWO

Qui-Gon should have returned by now, thought ObiWan Kenobi. He sat in the bridge of the gleaming Naboo
Royal Starship, which had landed at the outskirts of Mos
Espa Spaceport on the remote planet Tatooine. ObiWan was now twenty-five years old, and in his twelve
years as Qui-Gon Jinn's apprentice, he had come to
know his Master's eccentricities well.
Although Qui-Gon was regarded as a most capable
Jedi Knight, he also had a reputation for ignoring rules
and following his own instincts. He routinely questioned
authority, including the Jedi Council. He had even
turned down at least one opportunity to join the Council
because he refused to be tied down to their "orthodox
philosophies." He had excellent manners but seemed to
prefer food that did not require utensils. He was almost
overwhelmingly empathetic with all life forms, even if
the creature happened to be some monster that was trying to take his head off.

34

But Obi-Wan had never known Qui-Gon to behave
quite so irrationally as he had over the past two days.
Looking out the bridge's viewport and seeing no sign of
Qui-Gon on the surrounding desert wastes, he thought,
What's taking him so long?
Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan were acting as emergency
guardians for Queen Amidala of Naboo. Their original
mission had been to dispel the Neimoidian Trade
Federation's illegal blockade of Naboo, but that was
before the Trade Federation's droids destroyed their
Republic cruiser and tried to kill them. Hoping to deliver
Amidala to Coruscant, where she could formally protest
the Trade Federation's actions, the Jedi had fled Naboo
with the Queen's entourage in the Royal Starship, only
to be immediately attacked by Trade Federation forces.
Had it not been for the swift action of the astromech
droid R2-D2, who managed to repair the ship's damaged shield generator while under heavy fire, they never
would have survived the escape. Unfortunately, the
starship's T-14 hyperdrive was damaged beyond repair,
leaving them unable to continue to Coruscant.
Seeking a safe place to land, Obi-Wan had used the
ship's navicomputer to locate Tatooine, a desert world
that was small, out of the way, and poor. These aspects,
along with the fact that Tatooine was controlled by the
Hutts, ensured that the Trade Federation had no presence on the world.
Shortly after their landing, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan
35

had both acknowledged that they felt a disturbance in
the Force. Obi-Wan had remained with the ship while
Qui-Gon led a small party to obtain a replacement
hyperdrive from a parts dealership in Mos Espa. After
that, the detour to Tatooine had taken a series of even
stranger turns.
Evidently, there was only one working-condition
T-14 hyperdrive available in Mos Espa, but its junkdealer owner — Watto, a Toydarian who was immune
to Jedi mind tricks — refused to accept the Republic
credits that Qui-Gon offered. But Qui-Gon had also
encountered a nine-year-old boy, a slave owned by
Watto, who wanted to help the Jedi. Much to Obi-Wan's
bafflement, Qui-Gon had endorsed the boy's plait to
compete in a Podrace so that he might win a cash prize,
which he would then donate for the purchase of the hyperdrive. Apparently, the boy's mother — also Watto's
slave — had supported this plan, too.
But that was only part of the story. The night before
the Podrace, Qui-Gon had discreetly acquired a blood
sample from the boy and transmitted the sample's data
to Obi-Wan. Using an analysis device in the starship,
Obi-Wan had confirmed that the boy had a midi-chlorian
count that was over 20,000 per cell, which was higher
than Master Yoda's.
Obi-Wan wondered how such a thing could be possible. Could the boy be stronger with the Force than
Yoda? Although he understood why Qui-Gon would
36

find the boy intriguing, he also wondered if the boy had
become a distraction to their mission.
What could Qui-Gon be thinking? Even with that
kind of midi-chlorian count, the boy's too old to
begin Jedi training. It's not as if we can do anything
beyond possibly liberating him from the Toydarian's
ownership.
As things had turned out, the boy won the Podrace
and also his freedom. Following the race, Qui-Gon had
returned to the starship and delivered the necessary
parts, but then declared that he was going back to Mos
Espa for "some unfinished business," and instructed
Obi-Wan to install the hyperdrive unit.
Which Obi-Wan had done. The ship was ready to
launch. They were just waiting for Qui-Gon.
Where is he?
The disturbance in the Force was almost tangible,
as if an ominous current charged the air. Obi-Wan
rose from his seat on the bridge and glanced at the
ship's pilot, Ric Olie, who had so skillfully guided
them through the blockade at Naboo. Olie appeared
relatively composed as he checked his instrument console, completely oblivious to the disturbance Obi-Wan
sensed.
Suddenly the door behind them slid open. Obi-Wan
turned to see a young, blond-haired boy in ragged clothes
lead the Queen's head of security Captain Panaka and
handmaiden P a d m é Naberrie onto the bridge.

37

"Qui-Gon's in trouble!" Panaka said.
Because the Queen's safety was the top priority of
the mission, Obi-Wan looked to Ric O l i é and said,
"Take off." As Olié's fired up the engines, Obi-Wan
hunkered down beside the pilot and peered through the
viewport. Outside, a short distance from the starship, he
saw two figures engaged in a lightsaber duel. One figure
was Qui-Gon. The other was a black-robed humanoid
wielding a red lightsaber.
"Over there," Obi-Wan instructed the pilot.
"Fly low."
The starship lifted off the ground and traveled fast
toward Qui-Gon's position. Olie retracted the landing
gear but left the portside hatch open and its boarding
ramp extended. Obi-Wan kept his eyes on the duel. The
sweeping blades had become a furious, deadly blur as
they smashed again a n d again at each other. He could
only imagine the identity and origin of Qui-Gon's opponent, or where the creature had learned to fight with a
lightsaber, but he had never seen Qui-Gon engaged with
such a deadly adversary.
Obi-Wan lost sight of Qui-Gon as the ship traveled
over the duelists, but t h e n Olie pointed to a monitor
and said, "He's onboard!" The monitor displayed an
interior view of the forward hold. Qui-Gon had leapt
onto the boarding ramp and rolled into the rapidly rising starship.

38

Obi-Wan raced for the forward hold, the boy following at his heels. Entering the hold, they found R2-D2
beside Qui-Gon's supine form. The boy cried out, "Are
you all right?"
"I think so," Qui-Gon answered breathlessly as he
pushed himself up to a seated position. Obi-Wan and
the boy crouched down beside him.
"What was it?" Obi-Wan asked.
"I'm not sure," Qui-Gon replied, still gasping, "but
it was well-trained in the Jedi arts."
R2-D2 emitted a worried beep, and then Qui-Gon
continued, "My guess is it was after the Queen."
The boy's eyes went wide with worry at this, and he
exclaimed, "What are we gonna do about it?"
Obi-Wan glanced at the boy. We?
Qui-Gon sighed, then faced Anakin and said, "We
shall be patient." Then he gestured from the boy to his
apprentice and said, "Anakin Skywalker, meet Obi-Wan
Kenobi."
"Hi," Anakin said as he pumped Obi-Wan's hand.
"Are you a Jedi, too?"
Obi-Wan smiled politely and nodded.
Anakin smiled back. "Pleased to meet you."
He looks so ... ordinary, Obi-Wan thought. Despite
the fact that Jedi were trained from an early age to know
that people as well as things were not always what they
appeared, Obi-Wan would never have guessed or

39

imagined that the boy beside him might be more powerful than Master Yoda.
After delivering Queen Amidala to Coruscant, ObiWan and Qui-Gon brought Anakin to the Jedi Temple.
There, the small, green-skinned Jedi Master Yoda, Mace
Windu, and their ten fellow members of the Jedi Council
were alarmed to hear Qui-Gon's account of his duel on
Tatooine. For a thousand years, the Jedi Order had
believed that their deadliest enemies, the Sith, were
extinct, but after listening to Qui-Gon, they suspected
that the Sith had at long last resurfaced.
The Jedi Council and Obi-Wan were even more
astonished when Qui-Gon asserted his belief that Anakin
Skywalker had been conceived by the midi-chlorians,
and that he was the Chosen One, a Jedi who would fulfill
an ancient prophecy to destroy the Sith and bring balance to the Force. Despite the fact that most Jedi were
brought into the Jedi Order at infancy, the Jedi Council
reluctantly agreed to test Anakin's powers.
While the tests were in progress, Obi-Wan and QuiGon adjourned to a Temple balcony. The sun was setting
over Galactic City, and there was heavy air traffic in the
sky. Obi-Wan said, "The boy will not pass the Council's
tests, Master. He's too old."
Qui-Gon replied. "Anakin will become a Jedi, I
promise you."
"Do not defy the Council, Master . . . not again."
40

"I shall do what I must, Obi-Wan."
"If you just follow the code, you would be on the
Council. They will not go along with you this time."
Qui-Gon placed his hand on Obi-Wan's shoulder
and said, "You still have much to learn, my young
apprentice."
Obi-Wan gazed out across the surrounding skyscrapers. "What if the boy decides he wants to be with
his mother?"
"That would be Anakin's choice," Qui-Gon said.
"However, I've already taken a step to help his mother.
I've arranged for a courier to go to Tatooine and deliver
a Tobal lens to Shmi Skywalker."
"A Tobal lens?" Obi-Wan said. "You mean the crystal used to convert heat to light, the type used to power
Renatta photon drives?"
Qui-Gon nodded. "The Toydarian who owns Shmi
won't accept Republic credits, and he would be suspicious, to say the least, if Shmi suddenly had any large
amount of currency to buy her freedom. However, I
believe that if Shmi acquired an item such as a Tobal
lens, she would recognize its value as a bargaining chip."
Obi-Wan shook his head. "You can be most baffling, Master."
Qui-Gon shrugged. "As I said, you have much to
learn."

*

*
41

*

After the tests were done, Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon
rejoined Anakin before the Council. As Obi-Wan had
predicted, the Council deemed Anakin too old to become
a Jedi. Yoda said the boy would not be trained.
"He is the Chosen One," Qui-Gon maintained. "You
must see it."
Yoda closed his large, wise eyes and tilted his small
head back. "Mmm. Clouded, this boy's future is."
Obi-Wan sensed what the members of the Council
were thinking. They all believe Anakin is dangerous.
"I will train him, then," Qui-Gon said, calmly but
still defiantly. Stepping beside Anakin, he placed his
hands on the boy's shoulders and proclaimed, "I take
him as my Padawan learner."
Indicating Obi-Wan, Yoda said "An apprentice, you
have, Qui-Gon. Impossible, to take on a second."
"The code forbids it," added Mace Windu.
Qui-Gon said, "Obi-Wan is ready."
Facing Yoda, Obi-Wan stepped forward to stand
beside Qui-Gon and declared, "I am ready to face the
trials."
"Our own counsel we will keep on who is ready,"
Yoda said.
Qui-Gon said, "He is headstrong, and he has much
to learn about the living Force, but he is capable. There
is little more he will learn from me."
Obi-Wan glared at Qui-Gon. First he says I still
have much to learn, and now he says this?
42

"Decided later young Skywalker's fate will be,"
Yoda said.
Mace Windu announced that the Senate was voting
for a new Supreme Chancellor, and that Queen Amidala
planned to return to Naboo and put pressure on the Trade
Federation to end the blockade. The Council assigned
Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan to escort Amidala home, and
allowed Qui-Gon to take Anakin with him.
As Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon prepared to board
Amidala's starship with Anakin and R2-D2, Obi-Wan
argued with Qui-Gon. "It is not disrespect, Master, it is
the truth."
"From your point of view," Qui-Gon countered.
"The boy is dangerous" Obi-Wan said. Referring
to the Jedi Council, he added, "They all sense it. Why
can't you?"
"His fate is uncertain. He's not dangerous. The
Council will decide Anakin's future. That should be
enough for you. Now get on board."
Shortly after arriving on Naboo, while Queen
Amidala sought military aid from the Naboo's indigenous Gungan warriors, Obi-Wan conferred with
Qui-Gon at the edge of a green forest. Obi-Wan said,
"I'm . . . I'm sorry for my behavior, Master. It's not my
place to disagree with you about the boy. And I am
grateful you think I'm ready to take the trials."
"You've been

a good apprentice,
43

Obi-Wan,"

Qui-Gon said with a smile. "And you're a much wiser
man than I am. I foresee you will become a great Jedi
Knight."
At Theed, a city on Naboo, Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon
became separated from Anakin when they were attacked
by the same black-clad warrior they had encountered
on Tatooine. The mysterious enemy, whose yelloweyed face bore jagged red and black tattoos, quickly
revealed that his lightsaber had not one blade, but two.
I
He spun and whipped at the Jedi with intense ferocity,
and it was all they could do to keep up with him.
The duel lasted several brutal minutes, taking the
Jedi and their deadly foe from the Theed hangar to
the city's immense power generator. As they moved
through a security hallway, the three combatants found
themselves temporarily barred from each other by a
series of energized barriers. The barriers lifted, allowing
Qui-Gon to catch up with their opponent at the edge of
he power generator's virtually fathomless core, but
before Obi-Wan could reach his Master's side, the
energy barrier reactivated to stop him in his tracks.
And then the creature drove his lightsaber straight
through Qui-Gon's chest. Obi-Wan shouted as he saw
his Master's body crumple at the core's edge. The
moment that the energy barrier dropped, Obi-Wan
raced forward to attack.

44

The enemy was incredibly fast. None of Obi-Wan's
training had prepared him to deal with an opponent
like this. They hammered and spun at each other
relentlessly, moving back and forth along the core's
edge. Although Obi-Wan wasn't certain that his Master
was dead, he tried to steer his opponent away from
the area where Qui-Gon lay motionless on the floor,
his lightsaber resting a short distance from his fingertips. Obi-Wan slashed through the handle of his
opponent's weapon, deactivating one of the blades,
but the black-clad figure held tight to his own lightsaber's still-operating half and continued fighting.
Then the foe used the Force to push at Obi-Wan,
striking him with such an impact that he released his
lightsaber as he tumbled over the edge and into the core.
Obi-Wan reached fast to grab a metal protuberance just
below the core's upper rim. He was still clinging to the
rung when his opponent kicked Obi-Wan's fallen lightsaber into the core. He watched helplessly as his
lightsaber fell past him and plunged into the core's
depths.
Obi-Wan dangled, his arms straining to maintain a
grip. Above him, the demonic figure chopped at the air
with his red-bladed lightsaber, taunting and daring ObiWan to make one final, desperate move. And then
Obi-Wan remembered Qui-Gon's position, and the
lightsaber by his side.

45

Using the Force, Obi-Wan summoned Qui-Gon's
lightsaber into the air at the same moment that he
kicked at the core's cylindrical wall, launching himself
up and out of the core. Obi-Wan caught Qui-Gon's
lightsaber and activated it as he sailed over his opponent. The dark figure spun as Obi-Wan landed and
swung Qui-Gon's blade, and the creature's evil, tattooed
face contorted into an expression of surprise. And then
it was the dark figure's turn to tumble into the pit, and as
he fell, his neatly cleaved body separated, bounced off
the core's walls, and vanished.
Obi-Wan ran to Qui-Gon and carefully elevated his
Master's head. Qui-Gon muttered, "No, it — it's too
late...."
"No!" Obi-Wan said, his own voice almost a
whimper.
"Obi-Wan," Qui-Gon gasped as his eyes locked on
his apprentice's face. "Promise — promise me you will
train the boy."
"Yes, Master."
Qui-Gon's fingers trembled as he reached up to
brush Obi-Wan's cheek, and then he said, "He is the
Chosen One. He . . . will bring balance. Train him."
Obi-Wan nodded. His Master closed his eyes and
died in his arms.
Obi-Wan had long known that all apprenticeships, one way or another, eventually came to an end.

46

He knew that Jedi were not immortal, that life was
unpredictable, and that death was inevitable. He had
even imagined the possibility that he would outlive his
older Master. But nothing in his experience or imagination had prepared him for Qui-Gon's last breath, to see
the powerful man's life end with such brutal finality.
Obi-Wan lowered his head. He felt stunned and
deflated, and uncertain of what to do next. For so
many years, he had followed Qui-Gon's lead, but now
he was without a Master—and much sooner than he
had ever anticipated. He had never felt so alone, as if
he had not only lost his closest friend, but his purpose,
too. All he could do was try to honor the Jedi who had
trained him.
Then he remembered the promise he had made to
Qui-Gon.
Obi-Wan realized that his Master had not left him
alone, and that he had an entirely new purpose to
fulfill.
After becoming separated from the Jedi on
Naboo, Anakin Skywalker unintentionally used his
temporary hiding space — the cockpit of an N-l
starfighter — to not only engage the Trade Federation
invaders but destroy their droid control ship in Naboo's
orbit. The loss of the control ship brought a swift end to
the battle.

47

Anakin rejoined Obi-Wan just as a transport from
Coruscant arrived at Theed. The former Chancellor
Palpatine, who had just been elected Supreme Chancellor, led Yoda and the other members of the Jedi
Council in a procession from the landed transport.
Stopping before Obi-Wan and Anakin, Palpatine said,
"We are indebted to you for your bravery, Obi-Wan
Kenobi." Then Palpatine lowered his gaze to Anakin
and added, "And you, young Skywalker. We will watch
your career with great interest." He clapped the boy on
the shoulder, then walked on to confer with Queen
Amidala.
Later, as the sun was setting over Theed, Obi-Wan
met with Yoda in a chamber at the Queen's palace. The
room was lined with tall windows that looked out upon
skies displaying a wide range of indigo, castle-like
clouds. Obi-Wan knelt on the ornately inlaid floor while
Yoda, holding a short walking staff, paced back and
forth.
Yoda said, "Confer on you, the level of Jedi Knight,
the council does." Stopping to face Obi-Wan, he continued, "But agree with your taking this boy as your
Padawan learner . . . I do not."
"Qui-Gon believed in him," Obi-Wan said.
Yoda sighed. "The Chosen One, the boy may be.
Nevertheless, grave danger I fear in his training."
"Master Yoda, I gave Qui-Gon my word. I will
train Anakin."
48

"Ohh!" Yoda grunted, then turned and resumed
pacing.
"Without the approval of the Council, if I must."
Facing away from Obi-Wan, Yoda said, "Qui-Gon's
defiance I sense in you. Need that you do not." He
paused, then added, "Agree with you, the Council does."
Turning to face Obi-Wan again, he said, "Your apprentice, Skywalker will be."
A funeral pyre was prepared for Qui-Gon Jinn on
Theed. All the members of the Jedi Council were
in attendance, as were Palpatine, Queen Amidala,
other dignitaries of Naboo, and the droid R2-D2.
Obi-Wan stood beside Anakin, who was unaware
of his recent conversation with Yoda. Anakin had
believed that Qui-Gon might look after him,
and Obi-Wan could tell from the boy's pained expression that he believed his own future had died with
Qui-Gon.
Lifting his gaze to Obi-Wan, Anakin asked, "What
will happen to me now?"
Obi-Wan had not changed his belief that the boy
was dangerous, but he also knew that Qui-Gon would
not have wasted his last words on anything insignificant. If Qui-Gon had believed that Anakin was the
Chosen One, then Obi-Wan felt compelled to at least
allow the possibility. He had to trust that Qui-Gon had
been right about Anakin, that the boy could be trained,
because otherwise . . . Obi-Wan suddenly realized he

49

couldn't even consider an alternative. I won't fail
Qui-Gon.
"The Council have granted me permission to train
you," Obi-Wan said solemnly. "You will be a Jedi. I
promise."
And with that, Anakin's fate was sealed.

50

CHAPTER

THREE

Obi-Wan was surprised and annoyed when he didn't
find Anakin in his quarters at the Jedi Temple on
Coruscant. He's supposed to be practicing his meditation exercises, Obi-Wan thought. Where could he be?
Several weeks had passed since Obi-Wan had taken
Anakin as his Padawan. Although Anakin was mostly
eager to please, his impulsive nature frequently tried
Obi-Wan's patience. Anakin had been repeatedly
instructed not to leave his quarters without first notifying Obi-Wan of his destination, but three Jedi Masters
had already found the boy wandering and exploring
various area of the Temple. There are some rules he
simply must obey, Obi-Wan thought. Why won't he listen to me?
Outside Anakin's quarters stretched a long corridor
with windows that overlooked the megalopolis of
Coruscant City. Obi-Wan had walked only a short distance through the corridor when he spied two figures

51

beyond an open doorway, standing on an outdoor balcony and facing away from him. One figure was Anakin.
The other was a lean male humanoid, about Obi-Wan's
height, who wore a bizarre, head-concealing goggled
mask, and a belted tunic over arm and leg wrappings
that left no flesh exposed; attached to his belt were two
lightsabers.
As Obi-Wan approached the balcony, he caught
Anakin in the middle of asking a stream of questions
while the masked figure stood silently, watching the
stars emerge over the vast cityscape. "You're from
Tatooine, too?" Anakin said to his unresponsive companion. "Can you understand Basic? You might not
believe this, but not too long ago, I actually saved a
Tusken Raider's life! I found him when I was out in the
Xelric Draw. He was a bit bigger than you. Maybe he's
a friend of yours? Do you know where the Xelric Draw
is? Or maybe your people have another name for it? Did
you ever see — ?"
Obi-Wan stepped out onto the balcony and said,
"Good evening."
Both Anakin and the masked humanoid turned to
face Obi-Wan. Anakin said, "Hello, Obi-Wan —
I mean, Master." Then he exclaimed, "Oh! I'm sorry I
didn't tell you where I was. I just wanted to, uh, stretch
my legs, but then I met, um —" Anakin gestured to the
masked figure beside him.

52

Obi-Wan bowed slightly and said, "I am Obi-Wan
Kenobi."
Before the figure could respond, Anakin interjected,
"I think he's a Tusken Raider from Tatooine!" Pointing
to the weapons at the Tusken's belt, Anakin added, "But
he's a Jedi too, like us. Only he has two lightsabers."
Indeed, the quiet figure on the balcony was, by all
appearances, a Tusken Raider. Obi-Wan could see his
own reflection as he peered into the red lenses of the
Tusken Jedi's goggles. "Please forgive my impetuous
Padawan's manners," Obi-Wan said. "We welcome you
to the Jedi Order, A'Sharad Hett."
The masked figure bowed back. Anakin looked at
Obi-Wan and said, "You know his name?"
Obi-Wan nodded. He had already been briefed
about the recent mission of the Jedi Ki-Adi-Mundi,
who had been sent to Tatooine to investigate a report
of a Tusken Raider who wielded a lightsaber. The
"Tusken" was in fact Shared Hett, a Jedi of almost legendary status who —along with his illustrious
lightsaber — had mysteriously vanished just over fifteen years earlier. According to Ki-Adi-Mundi, it was
by the will of the Force that Sharad Hett wound up
on Tatooine, adopted the ways of the Tusken Raiders,
lived with them, and ultimately became a tribal
leader. He also sired a son, A'Sharad Hett, whom
he trained in the ways of the Jedi.

53

Tragically, during Ki-Adi-Mundi's mission, Sharad
Hett was mortally wounded by the bounty hunter Aurra
Sing. Sharad Hett's last request was for Ki-Adi-Mundi
to take fifteen-year-old A'Sharad back to the Jedi
Temple to complete his training.
Obi-Wan said, "Your father was a great Jedi,
A'Sharad Hett. Your loss is our loss."
A'Sharad Hett bowed his head in return. Through
his breath mask, his reply came out as a low rasp. "Thank
you, Master Kenobi."
"He talks!" Anakin said. Obi-Wan glared reproachfully at Anakin, who quickly added, "Sorry. It's just
that, well, he hadn't said a word up till now."
"I doubt you let him get a word in edgewise,"
Obi-Wan said. "And speaking of remaining silent,
you should be meditating right now, not bothering
A'Sharad Hett."
"The boy does not bother me," A'Sharad rasped in
a flat, lifeless tone. "He is from Tatooine. To hear
him speak of our home world . . . his perspective . . . it
is interesting."
Obi-Wan smiled at this. "As you were, then," he
said. "But just for ten more minutes."
As Obi-Wan left the balcony, he heard Anakin
resume speaking. "So, did you ever watch the Podraces?
Believe it or not, I won the Boonta Eve Classic! I think
some Tuskens shot at me during the race, but I'm

54

guessing that wasn't you, right? Hey, did you ever see a
krayt dragon . . . ?"
More than fifteen minutes passed before Anakin
finally returned to his quarters, where he found ObiWan seated in a chair, waiting for him.
"Sorry I'm late, Master," Anakin said as his door
slid shut behind him. "You know A'Sharad Hett's
teacher, Ki-Adi-Mundi? Well, he came out to talk with
us. They're going on a mission to Malastare! But the
reason I'm late is that when Ki-Adi-Mundi found out
that I know all about the Podraces on Malastare, he
wound up asking me a whole lot of questions about the
Phoebos Run. That's the biggest race they have on
Malastare, and . . . "
Obi-Wan remained silent but lifted his eyebrows
slightly, waiting for Anakin to finish.
"And . . . anyway," Anakin finished, "I just wanted
to help."
"I'm sure Ki-Adi-Mundi appreciated that," ObiWan said. "I also hope you have found a new friend in
A'Sharad Hett. He seems to be a very good listener."
"You can say that again."
Obi-Wan was about to reprimand his Padawan for
skipping his meditation exercises when he noticed
Anakin's expression change, a certain sadness about in
his eyes. Anakin said, "I was just thinking about

55

A'Sharad Hett, wearing that mask and having all his
skin covered up . . . never being able to touch things
with his fingers or feel air against his face. Why would
anyone do that?"
"You know more about Tuskens than I," Obi-Wan
said, "but I believe it's simply their tradition."
"But he's a Jedi now."
Obi-Wan shrugged slightly and said, "Then I suppose it's his choice."
"Well, I know I could never live like that."
"No one's asking you to," Obi-Wan said with a grin.
"However," he continued, more seriously, "I am asking
you to keep up with your meditation exercises. They are
very important. And so long as it is my duty to train you,
so it is your duty to learn from me. Agreed?"
There was a moment of awkward silence, and then
Anakin replied, "Yes, Master."
Obi-Wan wasn't sure, but he thought he detected a
hint of resentment in Anakin's voice. He hadn't considered that Anakin, because of his experience on
Tatooine, might be sensitive to calling anyone Master.
Obi-Wan sighed, then said, "Please don't think it gives
me pleasure to admonish you, Padawan. I can only
imagine what it was like for you to grow up as a slave,
and I —"
"Do you ever miss your mother?" Anakin
interrupted.
The question caught Obi-Wan off guard, but he

56

recovered fast to answer, "No. No, I don't. I never knew
her, not really. I was still an infant when I arrived here,
at the Temple."
"Then maybe we can make a deal," Anakin said,
and Obi-Wan could tell that the boy was trying to keep
his voice from trembling. "You won't feel sorry for me
because I was once a slave, and I won't feel sorry for
you because you don't miss your mother."
Again, Obi-Wan was not quite sure how to respond,
but he decided it was not the time to discuss the dangers
of forming personal attachments that might impair a
Jedi's judgments and actions. Instead, he rose from his
seat and said, "You have reminded me, Padawan, that
we have much to learn from each other. For now, please
trust that I do not feel sorry for you about your past, or
for anything else."
"Then it's a deal," Anakin said, extending his hand
to Obi-Wan.
Obi-Wan still questioned the logic of Anakin's deal,
but smiled as he shook the boy's hand anyway. "The
hour is late," Obi-Wan said. "Perhaps tomorrow you
can tell me some Podracing stories."
Immediately brightening, Anakin said, "Maybe we
should go to Malastare too!"
"Patience, Padawan," Obi-Wan said. "Patience."

57

CHAPTER

FOUR

Reflecting on his apprenticeship with Qui-Gon Jinn,
Obi-Wan Kenobi knew that he had not always been the
most obedient student. In fact, he had even been occasionally foolhardy. Now, ten years after Obi-Wan had
begun training Anakin Skywalker, he appreciated
Qui-Gon as a teacher even more. As stubborn and independent as Qui-Gon had been regarding the Jedi Code,
he also had been patient and generous, two attributes
that Obi-Wan found himself increasingly lacking.
Sometimes, it seemed difficult to teach Anakin
anything. He had recently turned twenty, and despite
Obi-Wan's training, Anakin still let his emotions —
especially fear and anger — get the better of him. The
faintest praise could make him beam with pride, while
the slightest criticism would make him petulant and
resentful. Obi-Wan was even more concerned when
Anakin confided that he had been having nightmares
about his mother dying on Tatooine.

58

More than once, Obi-Wan mused, If only Anakin
had begun his training as an infant.
It didn't help that every Jedi at the Temple was
aware of Qui-Gon's assertion that Anakin was the
Chosen One of prophecy. This made Anakin the focus
of more scrutiny than any other Padawan in recent history. Although Anakin never claimed to be the Chosen
One, it helped even less that he appeared to enjoy the
attention he received because of his association with
the prophecy. Ever since the Battle of Naboo, even
Supreme Chancellor Palpatine had taken a strong interest in the boy.
Initially, Obi-Wan considered training Anakin as
his debt to Qui-Gon. However, over the course of
time and numerous missions, Obi-Wan came to regard
Anakin as something more than his own personal
responsibility. Anakin — impossible as he could be —
had become Obi-Wan's friend.
After a mission to Ansion, Obi-Wan and Anakin
had just returned to Coruscant when the Jedi Council
instructed them to proceed to a high-security Senate
apartment building. There, they were scheduled to meet
with a Galactic Senator who had recently survived an
assassination attempt that had left six others dead. Their
assignment was to serve as guards to protect the
Senator.
As a lift carried the two Jedi to the skyscraper's
59

uppermost floors, Obi-Wan noticed that his tall apprentice was nervously fidgeting. Obi-Wan said, "You seem
a little on edge."
"Not at all," Anakin said as he smoothed out his
long Jedi robes.
Unconvinced, Obi-Wan said, "I haven't felt you this
tense since we fell into that nest of gundarks."
Anakin scoffed, "You fell into that nightmare,
Master, and I rescued you, remember?"
"Oh . . . yes," Obi-Wan replied, and then he chuckled at the memory. Anakin laughed too, but Obi-Wan
sensed that his apprentice's anxiety was increasing as
they ascended the skyscraper. "You're sweating," ObiWan observed. "Relax. Take a deep breath."
"I haven't seen her in ten years, Master."
Obi-Wan grinned and shook his head. The Galactic
Senator whom they had been instructed to protect was
P a d m é Amidala, the former Queen of Naboo. Amidala
had been in her teens when she had been elected Queen,
and was only a few years older than Anakin. Obi-Wan
was aware that Anakin had maintained something of a
crush on Amidala for the past decade, and could not
help finding some amusement in seeing his apprentice
looking so jumpy.
When the lift doors slid open, they were greeted by
their old friend Jar Jar Binks, a lanky Gungan they had
met just before the Battle of Naboo. Because Obi-Wan
now wore a beard and Anakin had grown considerably

60

taller, Jar Jar did not recognize the Jedi at first, but then
he locked onto Obi-Wan's eyes and said, "Obi? Obi!
Mesa so smilen to seein yousa!"
"Good to see you again, Jar Jar."
Jar Jar turned and called out, "Senator Padmé! Mesa
palos here! Lookie, lookie, Senator. Desa Jedi arriven."
Obi-Wan and Anakin followed Jar Jar into a luxurious suite, where they were greeted by P a d m é and two of
her aides. "It's a great pleasure to see you again, milady,"
Obi-Wan said as he shook Padmé's hand.
"It has been far too long, Master Kenobi," Padme
replied. And then she lifted her gaze to the tall young
man beside Obi-Wan. "Ani?" she said with obvious
delight. "My goodness, you've grown."
"So have you," Anakin said sheepishly, then hastily
added, "Grown more beautiful, I mean."
Obi-Wan glanced at his awkward apprentice, whose
gaze was hopelessly locked onto Padmé's eyes. Anakin
continued, "Well, f-for a Senator, I mean."
Padme laughed. "Ani, you'll always be that little
boy I knew on Tatooine."
As the group proceeded to discuss the recent attempt
on Padmé's life, Anakin was hardly cooperative.
Although he and Obi-Wan had been instructed merely
to protect Padme, he openly promised to find the assassins who had tried to kill her. When Anakin questioned
the logic of the Jedi Council's directives to watch over
Padme, Obi-Wan was compelled to reprimand his

61

apprentice before the group, which prompted Anakin to
glower.
He's not thinking like a Jedi, Obi-Wan thought ruefully. He's letting his emotions interfere with our
assignment.
Obi-Wan wondered if the Jedi Council had made a
mistake when they had assigned him and Anakin to
protect Padmé, but then it hadn't been entirely the
Council's decision. It had been Supreme Chancellor
Palpatine's idea.
In recent months, numerous former-member worlds
of the Republic had allied with the Separatist movement. The Separatists were led by a former Jedi, the
charismatic Count Dooku. Dooku expounded that
the Galactic Senate was corrupt beyond repair, and
promised a new unified government throughout the
galaxy. Because many Senators from the remaining
Republic worlds believed they would soon be vulnerable to the Separatists, they endorsed the creation of an
army to defend the Republic. The reason that Padmé
Amidala had traveled to Coruscant was to cast her vote
against the Military Creation Act because she knew that
the formation of an army would almost certainly lead to
civil war.
R2-D2 had remained with Padmé since the Battle
of Naboo, and the astromech droid had accompanied

62

her to Coruscant. As events turned out, R2-D2's presence in Padmé's suite was most fortunate, for while
Obi-Wan and Anakin argued about their orders and the
best way to protect Padmé, it was the R2-D2 who alerted
them that the suite had been infiltrated.
A mysterious assassin had released a pair of small,
deadly arthropods into Padmé's bedroom. Using his
lightsaber, Anakin swiftly killed the creatures, and then
both he and Obi-Wan raced out into the night to pursue
the assassin.
The Jedi became separated and Anakin dropped his
lightsaber during the dizzying, perilous chase that carried them across and through multiple levels of Galactic
City. Obi-Wan was able to recover his apprentice's
weapon, and caught up with Anakin outside a gambling
club called the Outlander. Pointing into the Outlander's
wide, brightly illuminated doorway, Anakin said, "She
went into the club, Master."
"Patience," Obi-Wan said. "Use the Force. Think."
"Sorry, Master."
"He went in there to hide, not to run."
"Yes, Master."
Obi-Wan held up Anakin's lightsaber and said,
"Next time, try not to lose it."
"Yes, Master."
"This weapon is your life."
Anakin took the weapon and said, "I try, Master."

63

As Anakin followed him into the Outlander, ObiWan muttered, "Why do I get the feeling you're going
to be the death of me?"
"Don't say that, Master. You're the closest thing I
have to a father."
Anakin's words did not make Obi-Wan sympathetic.
Without breaking his stride into the crowded club, he
said, "Then why don't you listen to me?"
"I am trying."
They stopped to survey the crowd. The patrons were
talking and drinking, gambling and playing hologames.
Obi-Wan asked, "Can you see him?"
"I think he is a she, and I think she is a
changeling."
"In that case, be extra careful." Then Obi-Wan tilted
his head to Anakin and added, "Go and find her."
"Where are you going, Master?"
"For a drink," Obi-Wan replied. Leaving Anakin, he
stepped over to the bar and signaled the bartender. A
moment later, the bartender placed a small glass filled
with luminescent blue liquid in front of Obi-Wan, who
said, "Thank you."
A young humanoid, a Balosar with flexible antenepalps that extended from his stylishly filthy hair, edged
up beside Obi-Wan and rapidly stammered, "You wanna
buy some death sticks?"
To any respectable person, the Balosar would have
been an annoyance. To Obi-Wan, he was only a slight
64

distraction, but hardly a welcome one. Obi-Wan did not
want to endanger the Balosar by allowing him to remain
by his side, nor encourage him to peddle his wares elsewhere. Obi-Wan kept his eyes forward, but made a
slight gesture with his right hand as he replied, "You
don't want to sell me death sticks."
The Balosar was unaware that Obi-Wan was manipulating his mind. He looked slightly confused, then
thoughtful as he answered, "I don't want to sell you
death sticks."
"You want to go home and rethink your life."
"I want to go home and rethink my life." The Balosar
stepped away from the bar, leaving his unfinished drink
behind. As he walked away, Obi-Wan's eyes flicked
over the patrons in front of him, and left his back
exposed. He did this deliberately. Let her think I can't
see her coming.
Despite the noise, the crowd, the lights, the strange
mix of smells in the air, and every other distraction,
Obi-Wan sensed the danger that approached him from
behind. He drew his lightsaber and activated its blade as
he spun, neatly cleaving through the assassin's right arm
before she even had the chance to fire her blaster. Her
forearm, still holding the blaster, sailed to the floor as
she cried out and fell back against the game table.
Anakin moved fast to Obi-Wan's side and leveled
his gaze at the astonished patrons. "Easy," he said. "Jedi
business. Go back to your drinks."

65

The assassin wore a visored helmet and a dark violet
form-fitting bodysuit with a flexible armorweave jerkin.
She appeared to be a human female. Anakin opened a
back door that led to an alley and Obi-Wan hauled her
through the doorway and outside. Anakin glanced up
and down the alley as Obi-Wan eased the woman's body
onto the hard ground. Obi-Wan asked, "Do you know
who it was you were trying to kill?"
The woman groaned, then said, "It was a Senator
from Naboo."
"And who hired you?"
"It was just a job."
Anakin leaned down and said in a gentle, soothing
tone, "Who hired you? Tell us." But when the woman
did not immediately reply, Anakin's face contorted
with anger and he snarled, "Tell us now!"
She said, "It was a bounty hunter called —"
Before she could finish, a small, dart-like projectile
buried itself suddenly into her neck. Obi-Wan and
Anakin turned their heads to gaze up in the direction of
the projectile's trajectory. They saw an armored figure,
a man wearing a jetpack, launching up and away from a
distant rooftop before he vanished into the night sky of
the city.
The bounty hunter?
Obi-Wan returned his gaze to the woman he held,
and saw that Anakin was right: she wasn't human. She
was a changeling, a shape-shifting Clawdite. Her face

66

reverted to its relaxed state, revealing somewhat
lumpy, heavily scarred features. She gasped, "Wee
s h a h n i t . . . sleemo." Her wide, heavy-lidded eyes
fell closed and she died in Obi-Wan's arms.
Obi-Wan pulled the projectile from her neck and
held it out so Anakin could examine it, too. It was a
nasty piece of work, an injector-needle tip with stabilizing fins for long-range shots and embedding prongs to
anchor into the target. "Toxic dart," Obi-Wan said. He
looked back toward the distant rooftop that had served
as a launch pad for the Clawdite's killer, and he thought,
He could have shot us, too — if he'd wanted.
Obi-Wan turned to Anakin and said, "Her last words.
Did you understand them?"
"She spoke in Huttese," Anakin said. "She said,
'Bounty hunter slimeball.'"
Obi-Wan had no idea of the armored bounty
hunter's identity, but he did not question the fact that the
man was very, very dangerous.
Obi-Wan was not surprised when the Jedi Council
instructed him to track down the bounty hunter and
identify his employers. However, their decision to have
Anakin escort Senator Amidala back to her homeworld,
for her own safety, did cause him some concern. It
would be Anakin's first assignment without his Master,
and despite all of his abilities, he was also arrogant, and
Obi-Wan didn't think he was ready. But the Council

67

was confident in their decision, and Obi-Wan personally escorted Anakin, Padmé, and R2-D2 to the Coruscant
spaceport and waiting freighter that would take them to
Naboo.
Obi-Wan began his investigation by trying to identify the toxic dart that he had removed from the
Clawdite's neck. After the analysis droids in the Jedi
Archives failed to provide any useful information about
the dart, he realized he would have to consult a different sort of expert.
Obi-Wan had kept in touch with Dexter Jettster over
the years, and he was fortunate in that he did not have to
go far to find the well-traveled Besalisk. Dexter was
currently the proprietor and head cook at Dex's Diner in
CoCo Town, a commercial district in the upper levels of
Galactic City on Coruscant. Dexter greeted his old
friend with a big hug. After they settled down in a diner
booth that looked out on a busy street, Obi-Wan placed
the dart on the table in front of Dexter.
"Well, whattaya know!" Dexter exclaimed as he
picked up the dart. "I ain't seen one of these since I was
prospectin' on Subterrel, beyond the Outer Rim."
"Can you tell me where it came from?"
"This baby belongs to them cloners. What you got
here is a Kamino saberdart."
Obi-Wan had always been amazed by Dexter's powers of observation as well as his keen memory. He said,

68

"I wonder why it didn't show up in the analysis
archives."
Brushing his thick fingers along the dart's stabilizing fins, Dexter said, "It's these funny little cuts on the
side that give it away. Those analysis droids only focus
on symbols. Huh! I should think that you Jedi would
have more respect for the difference between knowledge and . . . " Dexter chuckled before he finished, " . . .
wisdom."
Obi-Wan grinned and replied, "Well, if droids could
think, there'd be none of us here, would there?" Taking
the dart back from Dexter, he continued, "Kamino. I'm
not familiar with it. Is it in the Republic?"
"No, no. It's beyond the Outer Rim. I'd say about,
uh, twelve parsecs, outside the Rishi Maze. Should be
easy to find. Even for those droids in your archives."
But Dexter was wrong about Kamino being easy to
find. After Obi-Wan left Dex's Diner, he returned to the
Jedi Archives and quickly ascertained that there were no
records for Kamino at all. However, when he examined
holographic star charts to find the location that Dexter
had described, he did detect an apparently invisible source
of gravity where a solar system should have been.
But solar systems don't just disappear. What happened to it?
Obi-Wan decided to consult Yoda. He found Yoda
teaching a class of young Jedi initiates. They were

69

learning how to use the Force, testing their developing
skills with lightsabers against hovering remotes. After
Obi-Wan explained his dilemma about the missing solar
system and planet to Yoda, Yoda encouraged him to
display the holographic star chart on a map reader for
the entire class to see.
Obi-Wan placed a small, silver ball on the map
reader, and a three-dimensional view of hundreds of stars
filled the central area of the room. He pointed out the
approximate location of the missing solar system. Yoda
said, "Hmm. Gravity's silhouette remains, but the star
and all the planets . . . disappeared they have." Facing
his students, he asked, "How can this be? Hmm?"
It was one of Yoda's pupils, a little boy, who
answered. "Master? Because someone erased it from
the archive memory."
Obi-Wan smiled. The boy had arrived at the most
logical solution, but it was one that Obi-Wan hadn't
even entertained. Only a Jedi could have erased the
memory. Who would have done such a thing? And why?
Obi-Wan used a Delta-7 starfighter to travel to the
"missing" solar system, where he found the waterworld of Kamino. He landed his starfighter on a
rain-spattered platform close to the administrative center of Tipoca City, a cluster of enormous domed
structures that were elevated by massive stilts above
the constantly stormy sea.

70

The Kaminoans were long-necked amphibians.
Obi-Wan was surprised when he was told that Kamino's
prime minister, Lama Su, had been expecting a Jedi to
arrive. He was led to Lama Su, who revealed that ten
years earlier, the Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas had commissioned the Kaminoans to produce, train, and outfit a
clone army for the Republic. According to Lama Su, the
Kaminoans had been waiting for the Jedi to take delivery of Sifo-Dyas's order ever since.
Obi-Wan found this information baffling. He
recalled that Sifo-Dyas had been killed almost a decade
ago, and could not imagine why Sifo-Dyas or any other
Jedi would have made such an arrangement with the
Kaminoans. Even if Sifo-Dyas had anticipated the threat
of the Separatist movement, he certainly didn't have the
resources to finance a clone army! But Obi-Wan also
sensed it was best to play along for the time being, and
pretended that he had indeed arrived on Kamino to
inspect the clones.
As Lama Su guided Obi-Wan on a tour of the vast,
multi-level cloning facility, Obi-Wan saw thousands of
clones. All of them appeared to be identical dark-haired
human males, at various stages of growth up through
age twenty. Lama Su explained that growth acceleration
allowed the clones to mature faster while genetic modifications made them less independent than the original
host, the man who had served as the clones' template.
"And who was the original host?" Obi-Wan asked.
71

"A bounty hunter called Jango Fett," Lama Su
replied.
Believing that he was closing in on the man who'd
fired the saberdart on Coruscant, Obi-Wan asked casually, "And where is this bounty hunter now?"
"Oh, we keep him here."
Obi-Wan readily accepted the offer to meet Jango
Fett. Although he knew it was highly probable that Fett
was the same bounty hunter behind the attempted assassinations on Coruscant, he did not believe he would
require any reinforcements.
A few standard days after his first encounter with
Jango Fett, and many light-years away from Kamino,
Obi-Wan found himself suspended in the air, trapped
within a force field chamber of a droid factory on the
planet Geonosis. He thought, Now would be a good time
for some reinforcements to arrive!
On Kamino, Obi-Wan had met Jango Fett as well as
the man's "son," an unmodified ten-year-old clone
named Boba. Obi-Wan had quickly determined that Fett
was indeed the armored bounty hunter he'd seen on
Coruscant, but had been unable to stop the Fetts from
escaping Kamino. Fortunately, he had secured a tracer
beacon onto Fett's starship, a Kuat Systems Firesprayclass interceptor, which enabled him to follow the ship
to Geonosis.

72

A red, rocky planet ringed by asteroids, Geonosis
was inhabited by the semi-insectoid Geonosians. ObiWan had stealthily infiltrated a towering Geonosian
hive to discover the Separatist leader Count Dooku
engaged in a secret meeting with officials from various
worlds. He learned that the Neimoidian Trade Federation
was behind the assassination attempts on Padmé
Amidala, and that the Commerce Guilds and the
Corporate Alliance had pledged their armies to Dooku.
He had also learned that the Trade Federation would
soon take delivery of a massive droid army from a
Geonosian factory. He had even managed to send
a transmission with most of this information to Anakin,
who — for reasons unknown to Obi-Wan — had left
Naboo and gone to Tatooine.
But then Obi-Wan had been attacked by droids and
was captured.
Now, suspended in a force field with energy binders
wrapped around his wrists and ankles, Obi-Wan wondered if Anakin had managed to relay his transmission
to the Jedi Council. As he hung in the air of the hive
chamber, all he could do was wait.
Little did he know that within a few short hours, the
Jedi would arrive with clone troops from Kamino, and
the Clone Wars would begin.

73

INTERLUDE

Ben Kenobi had told Luke Skywalker that he had
served with Luke's father, Anakin, during the Clone
Wars, so when Luke finally found an entry about the
Clone Wars in Ben's journal, he became so excited he
almost forgot about the furnace he had set up inside
Ben's hut. He was using the furnace to create the gem
for his new lightsaber, and really couldn't hurry the
process, so he had been reading Ben's journal while
waiting for the furnace to reach its full temperature.
Luke's knowledge of the Clone Wars was relatively
limited. Most of the "facts" came from old datatapes,
but only those that had been authorized by the Empire.
Still, he knew that the Jedi Knights had led clone armies
on behalf of the Galactic Republic against the Confederacy of Independent Systems. In the end, the
Confederacy lost, the Jedi were accused of attempting
to take over the Republic, and the Republic's leader,
Palpatine, was proclaimed Emperor. According to Ben,

74

it was Darth Vader who helped the Empire hunt down
and destroy the Jedi.
After checking the furnace, Luke returned his attention to the journal and the entry he had found, and
started reading it from the beginning. Ben had made a
notation that indicated the entry was almost twenty
years old.
Officially, the Clone Wars began at the Battle
of Geonosis, for it was there that the Jedi Knights
first utilized the clone troops that had been commissioned to fight on behalf of the Republic
against the Separatists' droid militia. Although
the Separatists were defeated at Geonosis, they
quickly regrouped as the Confederacy of Independent Systems. The galaxy plunged into a
civil war that would last over three terrible
years.
My fellow Jedi and I were conscripted as
generals for the Grand Army of the Republic.
Like the worlds of the Republic, the Jedi were
also soon divided, as some refused to fight and
abandoned the Jedi Order.
Unofficially, the Clone Wars began at least
ten years before the Battle of Geonosis, when —
I eventually realized — the Sith Lords began
taking measures to ensure that the Republic
would one day have reason to require an army.

75

The Sith Lords engineered every aspect of the
Clone Wars, controlling both the Republic and
the Confederacy and pitting them against each
other, all in an effort to annihilate the Republic
and the Jedi Order and claim galactic conquest.
If my words sound like the ravings of a paranoid, crazy hermit, consider the fact that the Sith
Lord Darth Vader serves the Emperor, and the
Jedi are all but gone.
Luke was disappointed that the entry ended there.
While he set the book aside and checked on the furnace
again, he wondered why Ben hadn't written more about
the Clone Wars. It never occurred to him that Ben might
have sometimes wished he couldn't remember the Clone
Wars at all.

76

CHAPTER

FIVE

Clone Commander Cody shouted, "Incoming!"
Jedi General Obi-Wan Kenobi already heard the
deadly crescendo of approaching missiles. His division
of the Republic Grand Army, the 7th Sky Corps, had
just gained ground at a public park in a city square. They
were on Farquar III, a planet that had recently allied
with the Confederacy of Independent Systems.
Cody's helmeted head turned to see Obi-Wan's hand
signal: right hand extended, two fingers aimed at the
sky, followed by a swift chop in the direction from
which the missiles were fired.
Cody swung his gaze up at the armored clone troopers who were positioned on the wide roof of the building
behind him and Kenobi. Holding his blaster rifle in his
right hand, Cody signaled with his left to the antimissile unit to train their laser cannons at the incoming
missiles, and then directed a second unit to target and
fire at their attackers.

77

The first unit calculated the speed and approach of
the missiles as they raised their cannons. The second
unit did the same as they bounced a signal off two airborne Republic dropships to pinpoint their enemy's
position.
The incoming missiles — seven total — entered
visual range. Both of Kenobi's anti-missile units fired at
their respective targets. A moment later there were five
simultaneous explosions overhead. The first unit had
missed two missiles.
Obi-Wan dived for cover behind a statue of a poet
he had never heard of and threw his gloved hands over
his ears. One of the enemy missiles took out Obi-Wan's
second anti-missile unit, while the other missile struck
an adjacent apartment building. Fragments of missiles,
ferrocrete, and clone armor sprayed past Obi-Wan's
position.
Uncovering his ears and springing to his feet, ObiWan heard a ripple of distant explosions, and hoped his
now-decimated second unit had hit their enemy target.
Turning to Cody, he shouted, "Status!"
"Scored and burned!" Cody shouted back, but before
Obi-Wan could issue his next command, a squad of battle droids marched out of an alley and lurched toward
the park. Obi-Wan activated his lightsaber. The droids
opened fire, launching a hail of crimson energy bolts
into the city square where the 7th Sky Corps had landed
less than three minutes earlier.

78

The Republic's objective was to destroy a Trade
Federation-financed droid factory. Unfortunately, the
Confederacy had somehow anticipated the Republic
Army's arrival. Even worse, during their descent to
Farquar III, Obi-Wan had become separated from
Anakin as well as Jedi General T'Teknulp, who led their
reinforcements.
Obi-Wan leapt away from the statue, rolled across a
plot of rubble, and came up standing to swing his lightsaber at the fired energy bolts. His blade became nothing
more than a blur as he batted away, smacking the bolts
back at the approaching droids, cutting them down with
their own barrage. But another squad of droids was
close behind, marching forward from the same alley.
Obi-Wan thought, not for the first time, Where are
Anakin and T'Teknulp?!
"Sir!" Cody cried out from behind, jolting ObiWan's attention back to the latest round of battle droids,
just as they opened fire. Again, Obi-Wan's blade swept
and smacked at the energy bolts, sending them back at
the droids. He was still swinging at the bolts when six
large wheel-like droids rolled out from the alley and
spun toward Obi-Wan's position.
Droidekas!
Bouncing over rubble and the remains of the fallen
battle droids, the droidekas whipped around to arrange
themselves in a circular formation on the ground, then
rapidly transformed, activating their spherical deflector

79

shields as they unfolded their double-barreled blastercannon arms and dug their tripod foot claws into the
street.
The droidekas opened fire into the square. Knowing
that neither his lightsaber nor blaster bolts would penetrate the droids' shields, Obi-Wan swung at the incoming
bolts, batting them so that they exploded into the ground
at the droids' perimeter. The clone troops followed their
general's lead, training their DC-15 blaster rifles at the
areas of ground around and between the droidekas.
The clone troops maintained fire, hammering at the
ground as crimson laser bolts whizzed past them and
glanced off their armor, while on the roof behind them,
the surviving anti-missile unit reloaded their cannons
and waited for their general's order.
Obi-Wan hoped to blast the ground out from under
the droids and send them crashing below street level.
Over the roar of blasters, he angled his arm to the antimissile team and shouted "Fire!"
Responding with hair-trigger efficiency, the antimissile team fired their cannons. Four missiles streaked
down between the droidekas. The missiles detonated
on impact, but instead of tearing a wide hole in the
ground, the explosion merely sent ferrocrete flying and
knocked the shielded droids away from each other.
Launched off their feet but safely contained within their
spherical shields, the droids rebounded off the walls of
the surrounding buildings like toy bouncing balls, only

80

to roll back to the scorched, battered surface of the street
and reassume their deadly circle. The droidekas began
firing again.
That didn't go well!
Two clone troopers were hit and went down on
either side of Obi-Wan. Wondering what had become of
Anakin and their reinforcements, Obi-Wan snapped the
comlink from his belt as he ducked behind a wide pylon
at the park's entrance gate. He used the established code
names for the mission as he said into the comlink, "Kay
Six to Tee Eight! Kay Six to Tee Eight!"
"Tee Eight here!" a strangely jovial and high,
squeaking voice answered from the comlink. It was
General T'Teknulp, a Chadra-Fan Jedi, who always
sounded happy no matter what the circumstances.
T'Teknulp continued, "Wild greeting! See you in minus
five! Tee Eight out!"
Obi-Wan flicked off his comlink. Wild greeting
meant T'Teknulp's division had encountered enemy
forces in planetary orbit, but Obi-Wan couldn't worry
too much about that. T'Teknulp had dealt with more
than a few wild greetings in recent weeks, and had not
once been injured. If T'Teknulp said he would be at
Obi-Wan's position in less than five minutes, as he had
indicated via the comlink, then Obi-Wan trusted
T'Teknulp would arrive within five minutes. What
worried Obi-Wan was that he doubted his own division
could survive for even one more minute.

81

And then he glanced up and saw Anakin.
Anakin was standing in the open hatch of a Republic
gunship that was coming in low and fast from the south.
Smoke billowed out from the gunship's left stabilizer.
His ship has been hit! Another enemy missile suddenly
appeared in the sky, traveling fast from the city's business district. Obi-Wan's eyes went wide as the missile
struck the side of Anakin's gunship.
"Anakin!"
The gunship erupted but Anakin had already leapt
away from it. As the shattered gunship spiraled downward, Obi-Wan kept his eyes on his apprentice, watching
Anakin's form as he rotated in midair, activated his own
lightsaber, and landed on his feet on the roof of a building that adjoined a theater. The ruptured gunship fell
sideways and crashed onto a water fountain, killing the
vehicle's clone pilot instantly. A split-second after
the crash, the gunship exploded, and the power of the
blast nearly knocked Obi-Wan off his feet.
The droidekas hit two more clone troopers. ObiWan was planning his next move when he saw Anakin
run and leap from his landing point to the rooftop of the
neighboring theater.
An immense, eight-meter-wide octagonal marquee
was affixed to the theater's outer wall above the main
entrance, which overlooked the droidekas. As Anakin
jumped over the edge of the roof with his lightsaber

82

extended, Obi-Wan — once again batting at the
droidekas' fired bolts — realized that Anakin was going
for the marquee's structural supports.
Three more clone troopers went down.
Obi-Wan moved quickly. Darting away from his
position, he ran fast, weaving back and forth across the
park, drawing the droidekas' fire. Lightsaber extended,
he continued batting at the energy bolts as he ran, but
now, his only intention was to keep the droids occupied
and distract them from Anakin's action outside the
theater.
Anakin had landed on a window ledge. He gripped
his lightsaber in his right hand, and Obi-Wan was glad
for the fact that his apprentice had adjusted so well to
the prosthetic that had replaced the right arm he'd lost
to Count Dooku on Geonosis. Balancing on the ledge,
Anakin brought his blade through two of the marquee's
thick plastoid anchors. There was an ugly cracking
sound as the enormous marquee tilted away from the
building. Anakin leapt fast for another ledge and repeated
the action with his lightsaber on more anchors. The
marquee began to fall to the street below.
The droidekas were still firing at Obi-Wan when the
marquee came crashing down on top of them. Although
the droids' deflector shields were invulnerable to
energy weapons, they could not repel the crushing force
of the heavy marquee. The six droids were smashed flat.

83

At the moment of impact, the clone troops stopped firing. Except for the whooshing sound of the fires that
burned amidst the wreckage in the city square, the area
was silent.
Anakin scrambled down the side of the theater and
landed on top of the fallen marquee just as Obi-Wan
arrived beside him. Both had deactivated their lightsabers. Catching his breath, Obi-Wan said, "Well done,
Padawan."
Anakin gestured to the marquee beneath them and
said, "I'd say it was a smashing performance."
Despite all the destruction and carnage, Obi-Wan
couldn't help grinning. But he wagged a finger in mock
reproach and said, "Points off for puns."
Anakin scanned the area and said, "Where's
T'Teknulp? He was right behind my gunship."
"He had a 'wild greeting,' but he's on his way."
Seeing Commander Cody approach, Obi-Wan said,
"Cody, inform General T'Teknulp he needn't hurry on
our account."
Cody removed his helmet. By now, Obi-Wan was
so familiar with Cody that he no longer thought anything of the fact that the clone's features were identical
to Jango Fett's. Cody replied, "Sorry, sir. Just received
word from the fleet. General T'Teknulp and his division didn't make it."
Obi-Wan was stunned. He lowered his gaze to the
ground, then looked up to face Anakin, who was
84

equally staggered by Cody's report. Anakin shook his
head and said, "He . . . T'Teknulp . . . he was right
behind me."
Cody's eyes flicked from Anakin back to Obi-Wan,
then he said, "Orders, sir?"
Obi-Wan thought of all the Jedi who had already
died since the Battle of Geonosis. He hoped it wouldn't
be long before he and Anakin tracked down Count
Dooku and General Grievous, who always seemed three
steps ahead of the Jedi.
"Let's get moving," Obi-Wan answered grimly.
"We have a droid factory to blow up."
During the Clone Wars, Obi-Wan noticed that
Anakin was becoming more focused as a Jedi. One reason for Anakin's change in behavior was that he no
longer suffered from nightmares about his mother
dying. However, the reason for this was most tragic.
Just before the Battle of Geonosis, Anakin's recurring nightmares had prompted him to disobey orders
and travel with Padmé Amidala from Naboo to
Tatooine. On the sand planet, Anakin learned that his
mother had been freed from her Toydarian owner several years earlier, and that she had married a moisture
farmer named Cliegg Lars. The farmer and his family
informed Anakin that Shmi had been abducted by the
violent, nomadic Tusken Raiders.
Anakin had been unable to save his mother, but
85

recovered her dead body from the Tusken Raiders' camp
and buried her at the Lars homestead. When he left
Tatooine, he took C-3PO, a protocol droid that he had
constructed in childhood.
Although Obi-Wan had never really known his own
family, he did have sympathy for Anakin's loss. And as
Anakin's powers grew stronger, Obi-Wan began to
believe that his Padawan may have been transformed by
the tragedy for the better.

86

INTERLUDE

Reading Ben Kenobi's journal, Luke Skywalker
found another entry that mentioned the Clone Wars. It
also mentioned Anakin Skywalker and Darth Vader.
Ben had written the entry after the shorter one about the
Clone Wars.
Two days ago, on one of my walks, I came
across the twisted, withered husk of a short desert plant that had grown in the shadows of a
dusty rock formation. Yesterday, I passed the
same plant again and noticed it had flowered
small white petals, flecked with dark grey. This
morning, I was surprised to find the entire plant
had vanished. Even though I knew some creature had probably eaten it, I felt a sense of loss
that surprised me. And I thought of Asajj
Ventress.

87

I've already written instructions for how to
build a lightsaber. Now, I find myself compelled
to write something of the enemies who use
them.
From what I remember from the history
databooks, the Sith have wielded lightsabers for
at least four thousand years. They were long
believed to have been extinct until just sixteen
years ago, when my Master and I dueled with an
Iridonian Zabrak who used a double-bladed
lightsaber. This Sith killed my Master, and then
I killed him in self-defense.
Ten years later, my apprentice Anakin
Skywalker and I dueled Count Dooku at the
Battle of Geonosis. The leader of the Separatist
movement, Dooku was a former Jedi Master
who — we realized too late — had turned to the
dark side. This was most unfortunate, not only
because Dooku had been a revered Jedi, but also
because he was a master swordsman. Dooku
escaped at the Battle of Geonosis, but not before
he informed me that a Sith Lord was manipulating the Galactic Senate. Three devastating years
later — after Anakin defeated Dooku in orbit
above Coruscant — I would learn that he was
telling the truth. The Sith Lord was Supreme
Chancellor Palpatine.

88

Soon after the Battle of Geonosis, Anakin
and I had our first encounter with Asajj Ventress.
She was a humanoid, hairless with pale skin,
who wielded two lightsabers simultaneously.
These lightsabers could also be joined at the
handles to create a double-bladed weapon.
Before she attacked, she told me that she had
emerged from misery and suffering, only to find
the Jedi she had once worshipped were nothing
but "weak, misguided fools." She added that she
agreed with Count Dooku, that the galaxy was in
need of a Jedi purge.
Asajj Ventress escaped that day, but not
before she killed one Jedi and maimed his
apprentice. It was obvious by her technique that
she had received training from Dooku. Over the
course of the Clone Wars, Anakin and I had
faced off against Ventress on other worlds.
But despite all her fury and murderous inclinations, I always sensed something within her that
distinguished her from the Sith Lords: an underlying fear. Mostly, it was a fear of being alone.
And I sensed that there was some good in
her, some part that had not been corrupted by
Dooku. Where the Sith Lords were unquestionably evil, Ventress was simply a slave to the
dark side.

89

She wasn't the only one. General Grievous—
another of Dooku's disciples in lightsaber
combat—was in command of the Confederacy's
droid armies. Grievous was a cyborg who had
killed a number of Jedi and taken their lightsabers
as trophies. He was capable of wielding four
lightsabers simultaneously. All in all, a most
unpleasant fellow. I defeated him on Utapau.
And then the Purge began. I would soon
learn that I was among the few Jedi to survive,
and that Palpatine had taken a new apprentice:
my former student, Darth Vader. And because
of Darth Vader, Anakin was gone as well.
Eventually, I learned some details of
Ventress's history. She was born on Rattaka, an
Outer Rim world, so remote that it was unknown
to the Republic. She was still a child when her
parents were killed by one of the many local
warlords. After a Jedi named Ky Narec became
stranded on Rattaka, he found the orphaned
Ventress and realized she was Force-sensitive.
Narec trained Ventress as his apprentice, and
apparently trained her relatively well, for
together they defeated many criminals.
Tragically, a group of warlords killed Narec, and
rather than honoring the ways of the Jedi,
Ventress sought vengeance. And once again, she
was alone. Is it any wonder that she developed

90

such a supreme hatred for the Jedi Order that
"abandoned" her Master?
In hindsight, Vader and Ventress had some
similar characteristics. Both knew of the loss of
loved ones, and had reason to distrust the
Republic and the Jedi Order. But when I finally
caught up with Vader, I sensed nothing but pure
evil about him. For unlike Ventress, Vader was
not a victim of unfortunate circumstances. Yes,
he had his struggles and his shortcomings, but
he was not a weak being who feared abandonment. He was a powerful man who had been
given opportunities to better himself, yet he only
craved more power, and chose his own path to
betray the Jedi and become a Sith. He was my
greatest failure.
My duel with Vader was awful in its savagery. In the end, he was more determined to kill
me than defend himself, and was blind with fury
when I felled him. I left him maimed and burning on the shores of a lava river. To have dealt
him a killing blow might have been the merciful
thing to do, but I had no mercy for Vader.
Because I am a Jedi, not a coldblooded murderer, all I could do was leave Vader to his fate.
Had I killed then and there, I believe I would
have taken a step onto the same dark path that he
had found so impossible to resist. But by leaving
91

him for dead, I fear I failed yet again, for I soon
learned that Vader had survived, in a fashion.
Like the late General Grievous, he is mostly
machine now, a malevolent construct of pistons
and gears, plastoid and wires, his mortal remains
fueled by the dark side. The galaxy will never
know peace until Darth Vader and the Emperor
breathe their last.
It is hard for me to see what the future holds.
Fortunately, I have my mission and my ongoing
studies of the Force to help me be mindful of the
present, as well as the daily rigors of survival on
Tatooine. Whatever tomorrow may bring, I must
be ready for it.
By the time Luke reached the end of the entry, he
realized he'd been holding his breath for over a minute.
Exhaling slowly, he returned to the beginning, scanning
the text to see if he had missed something. He had never
heard of Asajj Ventress, Count Dooku, an Iridonian
Zabrak, or any of the battles that Ben had mentioned.
But these revelations barely even registered — Luke
was frustrated that Ben hadn't written more about
Anakin and Vader.
He reread aloud the two lines that had especially
commanded his attention: "'... Palpatine had taken a
new apprentice: my former student, Darth Vader. And
because of Darth Vader, Anakin was gone as well.'"

92

The words sounded hollow in his mouth. Although
Ben had not written in so many words that Darth
Vader had killed Anakin, that was what Ben had told
him had happened. He wondered just how carefully Ben
had chosen his words when he had written that Anakin
was gone.
And then he read again about how Ben — or rather
Obi-Wan — had left Vader to die.
Luke had no illusions that Darth Vader was a killer.
Vader had also tortured both Princess Leia and Han
Solo on different occasions. On Cloud City, Vader had
maimed Luke before inviting him to join the dark side
and help him overthrow the Emperor. But despite all the
horrible things Vader had done, and despite the fact
that Ben had no mercy for Vader, Luke was surprised
that he felt something other than horror or anger at the
thought of the armored Dark Lord of the Sith.
I feel sorry for him.
As the phantom pain chewed at his right wrist, Luke
wondered what exactly had happened all those years
ago on an unidentified world, along the shores of a
lava river.

93

CHAPTER

SIX

"It's over, Anakin!" Obi-Wan shouted from the
upper slope of the lava river's shore on the volcanic
planet Mustafar. "I have the high ground!"
Anakin was indeed below Obi-Wan's position,
standing atop what was left of a floating mining platform that glided over the lava. Glaring at Obi-Wan,
Anakin growled, "You underestimate my power."
Obi-Wan had escaped Utapau when his own clone
troops — obeying Palpatine's secret Order 66 — had
opened fire on him. Leaving Utapau in General Grievous'
starfighter, he had followed a coded signal to find temporary refuge on the Tantive IV, the consular starship
owned by Bail Organa, a Senator from Alderaan, who
was an ally to the Jedi. The Tantive IV had also harbored
Yoda, who had escaped a similar assassination by clones
on the Wookiee homeworld, Kashyyk. Organa delivered
Obi-Wan and Yoda back to Coruscant, where they found

94

the Jedi Temple in ruins, and all the resident Jedi —
even the youngest initiates — lying dead.
And then they had viewed a recording that revealed
Anakin was responsible for the slaughter. They also
discovered Senator Palpatine was a Sith Lord, and that
he had enlisted Anakin to the dark side, and dubbed his
new apprentice as "Darth Vader."
Obi-Wan had gone to Padmé to warn her about
Anakin, and then stowed away in her starship when
she went in search of Anakin. They had landed on
Mustafar, where Anakin had just butchered the leaders
of the Confederacy. When Anakin saw Obi-Wan, he
had become enraged with Padmé and accused them
both of conspiring to kill him. He had tried to strangle
Padmé, and then his fight with Obi-Wan had begun.
The long, grueling duel had carried them far from
the landing pad where Padmé's ship had landed.
Now, the battle had neared its end.
Obi-Wan realized what Anakin was about to do, and
despite all that had recently transpired, he pleaded,
"Don't try it."
Gripping his lightsaber, Anakin leaped high into the
air over Obi-Wan. Obi-Wan's lightsaber swept out at
his attacker, swiftly severing Anakin's left arm above
the elbow and both legs at the knees.
Anakin shouted and lost his grip on his lightsaber as
his maimed body crashed upon black, smoldering sand

95

and tumbled down the slope. Obi-Wan watched in
horror as Anakin came to a rest near the edge of the
lava river, and lifted his head to face his former
friend and Master. Anakin's eyes were filled with inhuman rage.
"You were the Chosen One!" Obi-Wan shouted.
Anakin retained his prosthetic right arm, and as he
struggled to pull himself away from the lava, his eyes
continued to blaze with fury at Obi-Wan.
"It was said you would destroy the Sith, not join
them!" Obi-Wan continued. "Bring balance to the Force,
not leave it in darkness!" Unable to look at his former
apprentice, he turned away. He spied Anakin's fallen
lightsaber, and bent down to pick it up before he turned
to look at Anakin again.
"I hate you!" Anakin roared.
Obi-Wan stood in silence, stunned as he faced the
seething, ruined remains of Anakin. "You were my
brother, Anakin," Obi-Wan said, "I loved you."
Anakin's clothes caught fire, and he screamed as he
was suddenly engulfed in flames.
For a moment, Obi-Wan hesitated. He's gone, ObiWan thought. Anakin is gone.
Obi-Wan finally turned away.
Anakin kept screaming.
As Obi-Wan staggered back to Padmé's starship,
he was greeted by two droids: R2-D2, who had
arrived on Mustafar with Anakin, and Anakin's gleaming,

96

gold-plated protocol droid C-3PO, who had accompanied Padmé from Coruscant.
"Oh, Master Kenobi," C-3PO said as he came down
the ship's landing ramp. "Urn, we have Miss Padmé
on board."
As Obi-Wan quickened his step, C-3PO continued,
"Yes. Please, please hurry. We should leave this dreadful place."
Obi-Wan was very concerned about Padmé because
he knew she was pregnant. He also knew that Anakin
was the father.
Leaving Mustafar, Obi-Wan and the droids brought
Padmé to a research base in the Polis Massa asteroid
system, where Obi-Wan and Bail Organa were waiting
for them. Padmé was unconscious, and Obi-Wan carried her directly to the base's medical center.
A medical droid delivered the terrible news in a flat
voice. Padmé was dying. She had lost the will to live.
The droid added that they would have to operate quickly
to save Padmé's babies — Padmé was carrying twins.
Obi-Wan was in the operating room for the delivery
of Padmé's babies. She named her son Luke and her
daughter Leia.
As Obi-Wan held Luke in his arms, Padmé beckoned, "Obi-Wan?" He met her gaze, and she said,
"There's good in him." She gasped, then continued, "I
know. I know there's . . . still —"

97

And then Padmé Amidala died.
Obi-Wan just stood there for a moment, holding the
baby boy in stunned silence. He had felt so utterly powerless as Padmé breathed her last, and not just because
he couldn't stop her from dying. Even though he
believed that there wasn't a trace of goodness left in
Anakin, he also knew that it would have been a kindness
on his part if he had somehow assured the dying woman
that he shared her conviction. All it would have taken on
his part was a smile or a slight nod, and she might have
died in peace. But in the end, he had been powerless to
even manage that.
Leaving Polis Massa on Bail Organa's consular starship, Tantive IV, the group transported Padmé's body
back to Naboo. While Organa's aides attended to
Padmé's newborn babies, Obi-Wan met with Yoda and
Bail in the Tantive IV conference room to discuss the
fates of Luke and Leia.
Yoda sat at the head of a long table, with Obi-Wan
seated to his left and Bail to his right. Yoda said,
"Hidden, safe, the children must be kept."
Obi-Wan agreed. "We must take them somewhere
where the Sith will not sense their presence."
"Hmm," Yoda murmered. "Split up they should be."
"My wife and I will take the girl," Bail volunteered.
"We've always talked of adopting a baby girl. She will
be loved with us."

98

"And what of the boy?" Obi-Wan asked.
"To Tatooine," Yoda said. "To his family send him."
Obi-Wan considered this, then said, "I will take the
child and watch over him."
Bail and Obi-Wan exchanged glances, then rose
from their seats. Yoda said, "Until the time is right, disappear we will."
Bail exited the conference room. Obi-Wan was
about to leave, too, when Yoda said, "Master Kenobi,
wait a moment." The elderly Jedi gestured for Obi-Wan
to return to his seat, then continued, "In your solitude on
Tatooine, training I have for you."
Not sure that he had heard correctly, Obi-Wan said,
"Training?"
"An old friend has learned the path to immortality,"
Yoda said. "One who has returned from the netherworld
of the Force. Your old Master."
Astonished, Obi-Wan gasped, "Qui-Gon?"
"How to commune with him, I will teach you."
R2-D2 had been to the Lars family moisture farm
just prior to the Battle of Geonosis, and was able to provide the farm's coordinates to Obi-Wan. The starfighter
that Obi-Wan had taken from the late General Grievous
had remained in Tantive IV's docking bay, and ObiWan planned to use the starfighter to take Luke to a
spaceport at Nar Shaddaa, a moon in a space sector controlled by the Hutts. As Obi-Wan carried Luke into the

99

starfighter's cockpit, R2-D2 beeped a farewell message
to the Jedi. There was no point in Obi-Wan saying goodbye to C-3PO, for Bail Organa had already taken the
security precaution of having the talkative protocol
droid's memory erased.
Holding Luke Skywalker's swaddled form against
his chest, Obi-Wan Kenobi sat in an uncomfortable seat
on a crowded, Tatooine-bound starcruiser. The Jedi
Master had little experience holding babies, but he did
his best to look comfortable with the child in his arms.
Bail Organa had provided a supply of untraceable
credits for Obi-Wan to pay for the journey to the sand
planet. To further maintain secrecy, Obi-Wan and Luke
were traveling to Tatooine via an indirect route starting
from Nar Shaddaa on a series of public transports. During
a layover at a space station, Obi-Wan witnessed a group
of travelers at a HoloNet kiosk, watching a broadcast
about recent events on Coruscant. Obi-Wan had cringed
when he saw a hologram of Emperor Palpatine urging
viewers to report anyone whom they suspected of being
a Jedi or having "supernatural powers." Palpatine's
words had prompted one traveler to remark, "Thank
goodness those terrible Jedi were stopped!"
Obi-Wan had remained silent and kept his head low
as he carried Luke. The Tatooine-bound starcruiser had
been delayed, but he did everything he could to keep the
baby comfortable. Unfortunately, the final flight turned
100

out to be a nightmare. Most of the other passengers were
either Podracers or obnoxious Podrace enthusiasts.
Even more distressing, Obi-Wan was running low on
the baby food supplements and sanitation material that
the Polis Massans had provided. All in all, he was beginning to wonder if avoiding a more direct route had been
a mistake.
Luke made a burbling sound. Obi-Wan patted the
baby's back and said in a soothing tone, "Easy, young
one. Easy now."
One of the Podracers, a nimble-handed Dug with
goggles on his head, was exercising his arms by walking back and forth across the headrests on the seats in
front of Obi-Wan. Without breaking his stride, the Dug
turned to someone seated up ahead of him and shouted,
"Hey, Bumpy! Your nose still hurtin' since the last time
you punched Ben's Mesa?!" Then the Dug broke out
into a wheezing laugh.
Keeping his eyes on
arm around Luke to a
thought, If that downfalls
know what a punch feels

the Dug, Obi-Wan shifted his
more protective position and
on top of us, so help me, he'll
like.

Several seats ahead, a Nuknog — presumably
"Bumpy" —jumped up and hurled an unopened bottled
beverage at the Dug. The Dug saw the incoming bottle
and jerked his body to the side to avoid getting hit,
allowing the bottle to arc past his body and fall straight
toward Luke.

101

Just as the Dug rapidly turned his pronounced snout
around to see where the bottle would strike, Obi-Wan's
right hand flew up and away from Luke to catch the
bottle in midair. Obi-Wan held the bottle out to the Dug
and said tersely, "I believe this was meant for you."
The Dug just looked at Obi-Wan for a moment,
before muttering a half-hearted "Thanks." He took the
bottle, opened it with his teeth, and then turned and
whipped the bottlecap back at his would-be attacker.
Returning his attention to Obi-Wan, he said, "You move
fast for a human."
Obi-Wan felt a chill travel down his spine. Oh, no.
The Dug's mouth twisted back into a vicious leer,
"In fact," the Dug continued, "the only kind of humans
I've ever heard of that can move that fast are —"
"Aren't you tired?" Obi-Wan interrupted, his gaze
riveted to the Dug's eyes.
The Dug blinked, and his eyelids became suddenly
heavy. He looked at his bottle, and then back to ObiWan. "Now that you mention it," the Dug said with a
wide yawn, "I am tired."
"Forget you ever saw me, and take a long nap."
"I didn't see anybody," the Dug muttered as his eyes
closed. And then he fell backward, spilling the remaining contents of his bottle as his slumbering form tumbled
onto the passengers seated in front of Obi-Wan.
Obi-Wan silently cursed himself. He couldn't have
let the thrown bottle hit Luke, but his Jedi reflexes had

102

nearly given him away. Just one wrong move, he thought.
All it takes is one wrong move.
Luke wiggled against his chest.
I must be more careful.
Obi-Wan pulled his cloak down lower over his face.
Except for a few soothing words to Luke, he spoke with
no one else for the remainder of the flight.
The data provided by R2-D2 allowed Obi-Wan to
find the Lars Homestead without difficulty. Obi-Wan
was glad and relieved that Beru and Owen agreed to
raise Luke, but his mission did not end there, as it was
also his duty to watch over the boy. He had thought that
his ongoing presence would be some comfort to Owen
and Beru.
He soon learned that he was mistaken.

103

CHAPTER

SEVEN

Not long after delivering Luke to Owen and Beru,
Obi-Wan was riding his eopie east across the desert. He
had acquired the eopie just after his arrival to Tatooine,
when he needed a method of transport to deliver Luke
to the Lars homestead, and the beast had continued to
prove itself useful. It was while riding the eopie that he
had found shelter for himself, a small hovel — at least it
had a secure door — that had been carved out of a
nearby canyon wall before it was abandoned by some
unknown transient. The eopie also allowed him to check
on the Lars homestead twice daily, at sunrise and sunset, which had become his routine.
Whenever he rode, he was always mindful of his
surroundings and on the lookout for danger. He had
already seen various signs of Tusken Raiders, and was
fairly certain that at least one Tusken tribe had become
aware of his presence.

104

Recently, while exploring the vast area around the
Lars homestead, he had come upon what appeared to be
the ruins of a camp in a canyon in the Jundland Wastes.
He had traveled close enough to the ruins to see a cluster
of bantha-rib arches sticking in the sand, all that remained
of several small huts, the kind used by the nomadic
Tuskens. Seeing the ruins, Obi-Wan had been suddenly
overcome by a feeling of loneliness and despair, which
ended a moment later, when a distant, blood-chilling howl
echoed down from a nearby clifftop. Suspecting that he
may have strayed into an area that was somehow sacred to
Tuskens, he had proceeded past the ruins quickly.
Sometimes while riding, his thoughts would stray to
Padmé on her deathbed. Speaking of Anakin, her last
words had been, "There's still good in him."
And then he would think of how he had left Anakin
to die on Mustafar.
He tried to suppress such thoughts. The problem
was Obi-Wan remembered so many good years with
Anakin, and really had loved him like a brother. It was
still so hard for him to believe that Anakin had turned to
evil. And even after all the unforgivable things he had
done under the name of Darth Vader, Obi-Wan still
found himself missing his friend Anakin Skywalker.
He also thought of Qui-Gon Jinn. Yoda had explained
to Obi-Wan that Qui-Gon's consciousness had survived
as a spiritual entity, and described his own exchanges with

105

Qui-Gon's disembodied voice. Yoda had also instructed
Obi-Wan how to communicate with Qui-Gon, but so
far, Obi-Wan had yet to hear from his Master's spirit.
The suns had almost set as he approached the perimeter of the Lars homestead. As usual, the security lights
were already switched on and a few KPR servant droids
were patrolling the area around the underground compound. On previous evenings, Owen had emerged from
the entrance dome to check the droids before returning
below ground for the night. Obi-Wan had come to interpret Owen's action as a signal that all was well, and that
it was time for him to make his way back to his hovel.
But on this night, Obi-Wan found Owen standing several meters away from the entry dome, carrying a blaster
rifle, and waiting for him.
Owen held the blaster rifle so it was aimed at the
ground. Obi-Wan wasn't surprised to see the weapon,
as Owen always carried it when he stepped outside at
nightfall. But even without Jedi powers, Obi-Wan could
see the man looked jittery.
"Hello, Owen," Obi-Wan said as he brought the
eopie to a halt. "Is something wrong?"
Owen nodded once. Obi-Wan began to dismount,
but Owen held up one hand and said, "Don't bother.
What I have to say won't take long."
Obi-Wan kept his eyes on Owen as he shifted his
weight back onto the eopie.

106

"I'm not sure how to put this," Owen continued, "so
I'm just going to say it. The way you come around my
place . . . it bothers me."
Obi-Wan sighed. "I'm sorry, Owen. But as I told
you, I need to make sure that the boy is —"
"Wait," Owen interrupted. "My wife and I are the
ones raising Luke, right? That's what we agreed to?"
Obi-Wan nodded as he wondered where the conversation was going.
Owen said, "Well, I didn't agree to you checking on
us daily, let alone twice a day. I don't mean any disrespect, but I've been keeping Tuskens off my property
for years, and . . . well, I think you coming here so often
is just a bad idea!"
Keeping
assure you,
the Tuskens.
Tuskens I'm

his voice calm, Obi-Wan said, "Owen, I
I don't question your ability to handle
But as we've already discussed, it's not the
worried about."

"Oh, right," Owen said. "It's the Empire. But then
let me ask you something." Owen swallowed hard
before he continued. "If you're so concerned about the
child's well being, why don't you try staying away from
us? Didn't you ever think what would happen to Luke if
the Empire tracked you down and found you living in
my backyard?"
Owen's words left Obi-Wan momentarily dumbstruck. Then he shook his head and said, "Forgive me,

107

Owen. You're absolutely right. I'll be more careful.
More discreet."
"That's a start," Owen said. "Again, I don't
mean any disrespect, b u t . . . my wife and I can't raise
Luke in any ordinary way if we know you're always
lurking about. Understand?"
"Yes," Obi-Wan said. He expected — maybe even
hoped — that Owen was going to say something
more, but when he didn't, Obi-Wan said, "Good
night, Owen."
Owen nodded once again, then turned and headed
for the entry dome. Obi-Wan turned his eopie around
and guided the creature back across the desert.
Obi-Wan continued to monitor Luke, but from
greater distances and without any obvious routine. He
had no reason to remain in the hovel near the Lars
homestead, so like the transient who had lived there previously, Obi-Wan moved on.
He eventually found a slightly more spacious
derelict structure in the Jundland Wastes, a small,
domed-roofed hut that sat on a bluff at the southwestern
edge of the Dune Sea. Like so many other buildings on
Tatooine, it was made of synstone, a mixture of crushed
local rock and dissolvants that could be cast into almost
any shape. The hut was approximately 136 kilometers
from the Lars homestead — farther than Obi-Wan
would have preferred, but probably still too close to

108

satisfy Owen Lars. From what Obi-Wan could see, no
one had lived in the hut for a very long time. An old
moisture vaporator stood beside it. Obi-Wan checked to
see if the vaporator worked. It didn't.
To confirm whether the hut was indeed abandoned,
Obi-Wan traveled to the property bureau in Tatooine's
capital city, Bestine. Inside the bureau, on the wall
beside the information desk, there was a holographic
map of Tatooine. Obi-Wan's eyes happened to fall on a
broad, flat-topped mountain that the map identified as
Ben's Mesa.
That sounds familiar, Obi-Wan thought. Then he
recalled the loudmouth Dug who had been on the same
flight that had brought him to the sand planet.
An antique, oval-faced droid clerk wobbled up
behind the information desk, looked at Obi-Wan through
tarnished photoreceptors and said, "May I help you,
Mister —"
"Ben," Obi-Wan replied flatly. "I'm interested in a
piece of property. The location coordinates are
Alpha-1733-Mu-9033."
The droid clerk turned his photoreceptors to a databank monitor and entered the coordinates. A moment
later, he replied, "There are no filed claims or liens for
the property at Alpha-1733-Mu-9033, Mr. Ben."
Not sure he understood, Obi-Wan said, "In other
words, the place is available?"
"No one lives there," the droid answered curtly.

109

"No one wants to live in the Jundland Wastes." But
then the droid's head made a clicking sound as it evaluated the situation, and added, "Do you want to file a
claim, sir?"
Obi-Wan considered making a claim under an
assumed name, but then decided against it, knowing that
he had a better chance of maintaining a secret presence
on Tatooine if he stayed off of any official records. "No,
thanks," Obi-Wan said as he moved toward the exit. "I
think the property should remain as it is."
"As you wish, sir," said the droid, not really caring
one way or the other.
Obi-Wan's next stop was a hardware shop, where he
used most of his remaining credits to buy all the tools
and supplies that he could afford and his eopie could
carry.
Excluding the hovel he had lived in during his first
weeks on Tatooine, Obi-Wan had never inhabited a
place by himself for any great duration. Like most Jedi,
he had lived much of his life at the Jedi Temple on
Coruscant. Now, living in an area on a world where
even the most basic supplies were difficult to obtain, he
was hardly prepared for the work required to restore the
abandoned hut. But while he monitored Luke over
the months that followed, he also threw himself into
making the hut as livable as possible. He had no idea
how long he might reside on Tatooine, but he wouldn't

110

be a very useful Jedi if the roof over his head came
crashing down on him.
There was a surprising amount of wildlife in the
Jundland Wastes. By watching various creatures, including his own eopie, Obi-Wan learned where to gather
berries and vegetables. By watching womp rats and
other omnivores, he also determined which animals
were edible. His Jedi reflexes enabled him to catch the
fast-running, two-legged rodents called scurriers as easily as most people could pull an amphibious gorg from
its primal root puddle. But if he had to choose, he preferred the taste of gorgs.
For all of Obi-Wan's self-sufficient achievements,
there were some things he simply couldn't do on his
own. He required special tools and materials to fix and
clean the moisture vaporator beside the hut, the stove in
his living area, and the water cistern in the cellar. He
was fortunate that a passing clan of Jawa traders took
notice of him one day and parked their massive sandcrawler near his hut. Evidently, the maroon-cloaked
creatures had become aware of the strange man who had
moved to the Jundland Wastes, and were impressed by
the fact that he had survived as long as he had. The
Jawas were happy to share their tools and some spare
supplies with Obi-Wan, especially after he offered to
share some food with them.
Obi-Wan further gained favor with this clan after he
noticed three young Jawas had taken a liking to his

1ll

eopie, which he encouraged them to take as a gift from
him. The Jawa leader responded by chittering and gesturing at the sandcrawler to convey that he would be
happy to give Obi-Wan rides to the cities or settlements,
which was exactly what the Jedi had hoped he would
do. After all, Obi-Wan no longer required an eopie on a
daily basis, and sandcrawlers traveled faster.
"Thank you, my friend," Obi-Wan answered the
Jawa chief. "I just might take you up on that offer.
Please, call me Ben."
Not long after befriending the Jawas, Obi-Wan rode
with them to Anchorhead, a wind-scoured settlement
about twenty kilometers east of the Lars homestead.
Anchorhead was a small community and trading post,
with about a dozen pourstone stores and two small cantinas. One of the larger buildings was Tosche Station,
which supplied energy to most of the area moisture
farms. Obi-Wan had told the Jawas that he was in search
of either parts or a replacement for his hut's moisture
vaporator, as he still hadn't managed to get it working
properly, but he had another reason for making the journey. Using the Force, he had anticipated that Luke was
heading into Anchorhead with his aunt and uncle.
Obi-Wan was in one of the cantinas, The Weary
Traveler, having a drink of water as he watched Owen,
Beru, and Luke. They were at the provisions store across
the street from the cantina. Beru was carrying Luke in a

112

sling that she wore over her chest. Obi-Wan had been
careful to position himself so the Lars family would not
see him. He was glad to see they all looked healthy and
happy.
The cantina had an old hyperwave repeater that was
broadcasting intermittent HoloNet displays of recent
news reports from across the galaxy. Obi-Wan was
looking at Luke when he thought he heard a female
HoloNet reporter say the word "Jedi."
Obi-Wan looked to the cantina's HoloNet display,
but a sudden burst of static interrupted the broadcast. He
turned to human man seated two tables away and said,
"What was she saying?"
"Band of Jedi were killed on Kashyyyk," the man
replied.
Oh, no, Obi-Wan thought.
The broadcast resumed. The Empire claimed
Kashyyyk had been plotting a rebellion. Imperial forces
not only killed the unidentified Jedi but also thousands
of Wookiees. Hundreds of thousands more Wookiees
had been imprisoned.
Obi-Wan's mind reeled as he thought of the slain
Jedi. What were they thinking? They should have gone
into hiding, not drawn attention to themselves! Couldn't
they foresee what would happen to the Wookiees?
The HoloNet display squawked and flickered again,
then displayed an image of a dark figure, someone clad
in black armor from head to toe. Although the audio

113

transmission was garbled, the images conveyed that this
armored being or thing played a major role hunting
down and executing the Jedi.
Then Obi-Wan heard the reporter say the name
Darth Vader.
A few minutes and another glass of water later, ObiWan picked up his rucksack and staggered out of the
cantina. Although he had not forgotten that he had come
to Anchorhead to check on Luke, his mind was no longer focused on staying out of sight from Owen Lars. His
thoughts were on Vader.
He couldn't believe it. Somehow, Anakin had survived the duel on Mustafar, and had resumed his Sith
title of Darth Vader. Obi-Wan had concealed his lightsaber beneath his robes, and as he walked along
Anchorhead's main street, his right hand's fingers
wrapped around the weapon protectively.
Did I drive Anakin deeper into the dark side by
abandoning him on Mustafar?
Could I face Anakin again?
If I did, could I kill him?
Across the street, he saw Beru, carrying Luke as she
walked beside Owen, moving from one store to
the next. Fortunately, there were a few dozen other
people walking about, and Owen and Beru were still
unaware of Obi-Wan's presence. But as Obi-Wan's
eyes locked onto the Lars family, the Jedi felt more
uneasy than ever.

114

Should I warn them about Vader? Should I take
Luke away from them? Hide him away on an even more
remote world?
Obi-Wan had been trained to be fearless. But as he
thought of Luke's safety, he was almost overwhelmed
by the anxiety that swept over him. And then, from out
of nowhere, he heard a disembodied voice — sounding
not through his ears, but directly into his thoughts —
that caused him to stop in his tracks.
"Obi-Wan."
Recognizing the voice immediately, Obi-Wan
stopped in his tracks. "Qui-Gon! Master!"
Obi-Wan was suddenly, acutely aware that anyone
on the street might think he was talking to himself. Not
wanting to be branded as a lunatic, he quickly moved
into an alley between two stores. Although he had many
questions for Qui-Gon, the HoloNet broadcast prompted
him to first ask, "Master, is Darth Vader Anakin?"
"Yes," Qui-Gon's voice replied. "Although the
Anakin you and I knew is imprisoned by the dark side."
Standing in the alley, Obi-Wan scowled. "I was
wrong to leave him on Mustafar. I should have made
sure he was dead."
"The Force will determine Anakin's future. ObiWan: Luke must not be told that Vader is his father until
the time is right."
"Should I take further steps to hide Luke?"
"The core of Anakin that resides in Vader grasps
115

that Tatooine is the source of nearly everything that
causes him pain. Vader will never set foot on Tatooine,
if only out of fear of reawakening Anakin."
Genuinely relieved to hear this, Obi-Wan said,
"Then my obligation is unchanged. But from what Yoda
told me, I know that I have much to learn, Master."
"You were always that way, Obi-Wan," Qui-Gon
said, his words unexpectedly fading out. But Obi-Wan
knew they would speak again.
Though he was not fearful anymore, Obi-Wan stayed
to watch over Luke, Beru, and Owen for a while longer,
until it was time for them to return to their respective
homes.
The next time Obi-Wan visited Anchorhead to
obtain supplies, he found an unusual rectangular-shaped
item in a junk shop. The shopkeeper was apparently
unfamiliar with the item's function, and was using it as
a shelf to display a small selection of used power
couplings. But Obi-Wan — now known locally as
Ben — recalled handling similar objects in the collection of the Jedi Archives, and recognized the "shelf as
an ancient, leather-bound book.
Obi-Wan moved the power couplings aside and
opened the book. Incredibly, only a few pages were
slightly discolored, and all were blank. He had never
considered writing a journal before, but suddenly

116

realized that a journal would be a good way to preserve
information about the Jedi.
Information that Luke might need someday.
Holding the book up for the shopkeeper to see, ObiWan said, "Do you know if this thing will burn
properly?"
The shopkeeper shrugged. "Beats me what it's good
for, Ben," he said. "But it's yours for a credit."
Ben did not haggle.

117

CHAPTER

EIGHT

Ben Kenobi had been on Tatooine for nearly two
years when he learned about an unusual increase of
atrocities committed by Tusken Raiders. According to
fragmented reports, the Tuskens had attacked three
moisture farms and left seven colonists dead in a single
day. But what disturbed Kenobi even more than the killings was the unnerving disturbance in the Force that
came with them. It was as if a dark presence had touched
upon the desert world, creating an almost tangible trace
of evil in the air.
Could it be the Sith? Ben didn't know. All he could
do was keep a closer eye on Luke.
Leaving his home in the Jundland Wastes, he found
a bantha that had strayed from its herd. Because taming
such beasts was a simple task for a Jedi Master, Ben was
soon riding the bantha, heading southwest. He had
intended to travel directly to the Lars homestead, but
was just a few kilometers into his journey when he

118

neared the ruins of the Tusken camp—the same one he
had discovered not long after his arrival on Tatooine,
from the back of his old eopie—and he came to a stop.
The camp ruins always emanated a dreadful feeling
whenever Ben traveled near it, and he had never felt
compelled to inspect it more closely. On this particular
day, the feeling was worse, practically sickening, and
yet Ben sensed that the place was somehow beckoning
him. He tried to urge the bantha forward, but the bantha
took only two cautious steps before it came to a halt,
then snorted at the sand and refused to budge.
Because the Tuskens had used bantha ribs as supports for their huts, Ben could hardly blame his mount
for wanting to keep her distance from the ruins. He dismounted, leaving the bantha as he walked closer to the
ruins.
Amidst the remnants of one hut, he noticed a bantha
rib arch with dark spatters on it, the kind of spatters only
blood could make. Then he saw two rawhide strips that
dangled from the arched ribs. Noting the height and
position of the rawhide strips, Ben knew immediately
that they had been used to secure a captive human's outstretched arms.
And then it hit him.
This is where Anakin's mother died.
Ben didn't just sense it, he knew it for a fact. For a
moment, he resisted the urge to tear his eyes from the
rawhide strips because he feared that if he looked away,

119

the ruins might disappear along with the knowledge that
came with them. When he did finally pry his gaze from
the bloodstained arch, he saw the numerous bones that
poked up through the sand around and throughout the
ruins, bones that were much too small to have come
from banthas. Shmi Skywalker had not died alone.
Ben did not have to guess who had slaughtered the
Tuskens.
"Now you know," said Qui-Gon Jinn's disembodied
voice.
Ben was still so stunned that he didn't even slightly
flinch when he heard Qui-Gon, whose voice sounded as
if it came from above and behind Ben's head. Ben said,
"Why didn't you tell me about this?"
"You weren't ready," Qui-Gon said. "You're still
not ready."
"Not ready?" Ben echoed. He swallowed hard before
he continued, "Master, if you mean that I'm not ready to
understand what happened here, then I believe you're
mistaken. Anakin killed an entire tribe of Tuskens out
of vengeance, and then kept it a secret from everyone.
Apparently, you were aware of this, and yet you still
maintain he is the Chosen One. What more is there to
know?"
Qui-Gon answered, "That Anakin did not keep it a
secret from everyone."
Ben sighed. "Of course. He would have told Padmé.
And Palpatine. And I suspect that if he didn't actually

120

tell Owen Lars, then Owen figured it out for himself. If
Owen has the impression that Jedi are prone to murder
in the name of revenge, that would certainly explain
why he's so cautious of me." Ben returned his gaze to
the leather strips.
"And why did Anakin keep his secret from you?"
Ben was about to reply, Because he was afraid he'd
be banished from the Jedi, but instead he shook his head
and said, "It doesn't matter whom Anakin told. What
matters is that he was a Jedi, and that he became a
butcher."
"You should not judge when you fail to understand."
Exasperated, Ben demanded, "Understand what,
Master?"
"As I said, you're still not ready."
Ben sighed. "Well, when I am ready, I hope you'll
let me know." He turned and began walking back to the
waiting bantha.
"For now, Obi-Wan, know this," Qui-Gon said
gravely, his voice sounding as if it were traveling alongside Ben. "Anakin revealed his secret to one other."
"Master, please," Ben said without breaking
his stride. "If this is another guessing game, I don't
think I —"
"A'Sharad Hett."
Ben stopped in his tracks. Since his arrival on
Tatooine, he had thought of the Tusken Jedi on various

121

occasions. He had assumed that Hett was among the
many casualties of the Jedi purge. He said, "I don't
believe you ever met A'Sharad Hett, Master."
"No," Qui-Gon replied, "I never did. But I did know
his father. The Force was strong in the Hett family."
Glancing back at the ruins, Ben said, "The Tuskens
that Anakin killed . . . were they Hett's tribe? Are you
telling me that A'Sharad Hett is alive, that he's involved
with the recent killings on Tatooine?"
"I cannot say," Qui-Gon answered vaguely.
Just then, a hot wind gusted across the ruins and
swept over Ben. He was about to ask whether Qui-Gon
was unable or unwilling to reveal certain details, but
then his Master said, "May the Force be with you,
Obi-Wan."
A moment after Qui-Gon's words trailed off with
the wind, Ben turned away once again from the ruins.
He climbed onto the bantha's back and rode off.
Ben rode the bantha all night. When he arrived at the
outer perimeter of the Lars homestead, he released
the bantha and continued on foot. As he walked past one
of Owen's moisture vaporator towers, he saw a KPR
droid peek out from behind the vaporator.
Ben ignored the droid. Let Owen know I'm coming,
he thought. He suspected that Owen would rather see
him than the Tuskens, at least.

122

He stopped half a kilometer from the domed entry to
the Lars family's subterranean home, and pitched a low,
sand-colored tent. He kept his cloaked body close to the
ground, watching the horizon and listening for any rising dust or movement that might indicate incoming
Tuskens.
Two days and nights passed. On the third morning,
Ben finally saw someone approach. It was Owen Lars,
walking straight toward him from the entry dome.
As usual, he was carrying a blaster rifle.
Rising up from the sand, Ben bowed his head and
said, "Good afternoon, Mr. Lars."
Owen's rested the blaster rifle against his leg, the
barrel pointed toward the ground. "I guess you heard
about the recent attacks?"
Obi-Wan was slightly taken aback — he had
expected Owen to immediately reprimand him for trespassing. Gesturing to his tent, Ben said, "That's why
I'm here. Forgive me, Owen, I know you don't want me
on your land. I tried to be discreet."
"Yeah, well, I've been keeping watch, too. And just
so you know, I saw you arrive three days ago."
Ben was pleased that Owen had been monitoring the
KPR droids, but he had the feeling that Owen wasn't in
any mood to hear him say so. He noticed that Owen's
eyes were somewhat bleary, probably from lack of
sleep. Ben stayed quiet, waiting for Owen to continue.

123

Owen glanced back to his own home, then returned
his gaze to Ben. "Normally, I'd tell you to get lost. But
I just got word from a friend in Bestine. The Sand People
attacked another farm." Owen looked away again. "Only
one survivor," he continued. "A little girl. But she didn't
last long."
Ben sighed. "I'm sorry, Owen."
"I'm not finished!" Owen roared, his eyes now blazing at Ben. The edge of Owen's upper lip quivered
nervously.
He's not just angry, Ben realized. He's terrified.
Owen licked his lips before he continued. "The little
girl. . . she said she saw one of the Sand People, maybe
their chief. She said he . . . he used two 'laser swords.'"
Over the past three days since Ben's last exchange
with Qui-Gon Jinn's spirit, Ben had had plenty of time
to consider the possibility that A'Sharad Hett was
involved in the recent killings. Still, hearing Owen's
description of the marauder's leader made him feel suddenly queasy.
Oblivious to Ben's discomfort, Owen said through
clenched teeth, "I don't suppose you've heard about any
missing lightsabers on the planet, Mr. Jedi?"
"Get hold of yourself, Owen," he said, keeping his
voice calm. "You know I had nothing to do with the
attacks."
"Maybe not!" Owen said bitterly. "But I have some
idea of what Jedi are capable of!"

124

"You're talking about Anakin," Ben said, "About
what he did after he learned that his mother had been
taken by Tuskens." It wasn't a question.
Owen winced, and then he scowled at the ground.
"Shmi Skywalker was a good woman," he said. "We
tried to rescue her, but my father..." The words caught
in his throat, and he left the sentence unfinished. Tilting
his chin in the direction of the entry dome, he continued,
"When Anakin brought Shmi's body home, I'll never
forget the look on his face. If killing me would have
brought his mother back to life, I know he would have
killed me then and there. I could see it in his eyes."
Ben grimaced. "Anakin never told me what really
happened, Owen. Please trust that what he did that day
was not the way of the Jedi."
"Well, I'm not so sure if that's a relief," Owen said.
"Much as I didn't like the way he looked at me, I like
the idea of Tuskens with lightsabers even less. There's
not a person on Tatooine who wouldn't be happy if all
the Tuskens were dead."
Ben offered no response. He knew that the deaths
of Tuskens would not bring him any happiness, but
he didn't believe there was any reason in explaining this
to Owen.
Owen returned his gaze to Ben and said, "Look, I
didn't mean anything bad against Jedi. I just figured you
should know about this Sand Person out there, because
maybe you're the only one who can stop him."

125

Owen looked away again. Ben thought, He doesn't
want to ask for my help. He's just too proud and stubborn. "If it's all right with you," Ben said, "I'd like to
stay close to your farm for a while. Just in case."
"Fine," Owen said flatly. He gestured to the nearest
moisture vaporator and said, "If you need some water,
help yourself." Then he turned and walked back to the
domed entry to his home.
The Tusken Raiders arrived the next morning, at the
strike of dawn. Instead of approaching from the east,
which would have made them more difficult to see
against the blinding, rising suns, they rode their banthas
in from the west. Ben would have noticed them had they
come from any direction across the desert, but he did
briefly wonder why they chose their approach as they
had. Then he dismissed the thought. There's just no predicting Tuskens.
Ben had moved closer to the moisture farm during
the night. As the bantha-mounted Tuskens drew closer,
they saw his cloaked form silhouetted against the sunrise. A breeze blew out from across the desert, and Ben's
robes flapped against his body, revealing his lightsaber
at his belt.
Most of the Tuskens were carrying gaderffii, long
club-like weapons that some colonists referred to as
"gaffi sticks." The Tusken on the lead bantha came to a
stop a short distance away. The Tusken brayed in his

126

native, guttural language to address his tribesman, then
dismounted his bantha and walked slowly over to Ben.
Attached to the Tusken's belt were two lightsabers. The
moment Ben saw the weapons, the Tusken's identity
was confirmed.
It was A'Sharad Hett.
Ben did not know whether Hett was aware that
Anakin Sky walker had become Darth Vader. But if Hett
knew—as Qui-Gon's spirit claimed—that Anakin was
responsible for killing the Tuskens who tortured his
mother, Ben could only imagine what Hett might do if
he discovered the existence of Anakin Skywalker's son.
Ben suspected that Hett knew nothing about Luke, if
only because Luke was still alive. If Hett's sole purpose
on Tatooine had been to kill Luke, Luke would probably
be dead already. Now, as Hett approached, Ben banished all thoughts of Anakin and Luke from his mind.
Hett stopped in front of Ben, standing so close that
Ben had to be careful not to inhale too deeply, for the
stench of Hett's filthy robes and wrappings was almost
overwhelming. Gazing into the red lenses of the Tusken's
goggles, Ben said, "Master Hett."
"The Force be with you, Master Kenobi," replied
Hett, his voice remarkably calm. "So, you too survived
Order 66. I thought I was alone. What brings you to
Tatooine, let alone these trackless wastes?"
"You do, Master Hett," Ben said without hesitation.
Keeping his eyes fixed on Hett's goggles, he continued,
127

"You lead these Tuskens as their warlord. Not something a Jedi should do."
"Do not lecture me, Obi-Wan," Hett replied, still
calm and without any hint of threat. "We were both generals in the Clone Wars, 'warlords' for a republic that
turned on us." Hett shifted his feet slightly and turned to
look past Ben and let his gaze travel across the moisture
farm. "The Tuskens have been hunted and killed by both
settlers and farmers. Jedi defend those who need help.
Sometimes you defend life by taking the life of the
aggressor."
"Past mistakes do not justify current ones," Ben
said, not letting his eyes stray from Hett. "The danger is
in becoming what you fight. It was the trap that the Jedi
fell into. It is the trap that takes you now. It must stop.
You must see that, A'Sharad Hett."
"I do not," Hett replied grimly. "I was raised to manhood amongst Tuskens by my father, Sharad Hett, the
greatest Jedi of his age. He taught me to think and act as
a Tusken." He remained facing the farm but gestured to
the mounted Tuskens, and raised his voice as he said,
"These are my people! Will the settlers stop killing
Tuskens?"
Ben did not answer. He believed that the Tuskens
could kill every settler on Tatooine and their hunger for
violence would still be unsatisfied.
Taking Ben's silence as a negative response,
Hett said, "Then blood calls for blood! The settlers

128

will be forced to abandon the l a n d . . . or be buried
beneath it!"
"I cannot permit that," Ben said as he drew his lightsaber. "You were a great Jedi, Hett, and the son of a
great Jedi, but you have given yourself over to revenge.
It stops here." Ben ignited his lightsaber.
"You will have a Jedi funeral, Master Kenobi," Hett
said. "That I promise."
Hett's hands dropped to his belt and the two lightsabers practically leapt into his gloved hands. He ignited
both weapons at once, unleashing their identical green
energy beams. He swung fast with the lightsaber in his
right hand but Ben blocked it. The lightsabers sizzled
loudly as they clashed.
It was fortunate for Ben that he had continued his
Jedi exercises on Tatooine, that he had not allowed
his reflexes to become dull. He did not think about how
long it had been since he had last used his lightsaber in
combat. Nor did consider that he was older than Hett by
at least a decade, or Hett's considerable skills with his
own weapons, and that the Tusken was far more experienced at fighting in the desert. Ben knew that any such
thoughts would probably only get him killed.
As prepared as Ben was for many things, he was not
ready to die. Not yet. Not today.
Hett brought his other lightsaber in at a sharp angle,
forcing Ben to lurch back. Ben gripped his own weapon
with both hands as he swung at Hett's legs, but Hett

129

blocked the swipe. There was another loud sizzle as the
blades dragged across each other.
Ben gasped as Hett launched a powerful kick to his
midriff. The kick knocked Ben off his feet, and as he fell
back through the air, Hett hurled one of his lightsabers
at Ben's body. Ben clung tight to his own lightsaber as
he twisted his body in midair to avoid being struck by
the spinning blade of Hett's weapon. The moment Hett's
lightsaber whipped past Ben's head, Hett used the Force
to retrieve it, drawing it back to his waiting left hand.
As Hett caught the lightsaber, Ben rolled up from
the ground and swung out again. Hett blocked the strike
with his right lightsaber, then threw his left arm forward
to smash his other lightsaber's handle into Ben's jaw.
Ben ignored the painful jolt to his head and reflexively brought his blade up high, forcing Hett to block
the blow with his right lightsaber and leaving his own
midsection briefly exposed. Before Hett could strike
with his other lightsaber, Ben kicked him hard in the
stomach.
Hett grunted, but he didn't go down. He lashed out
again at Ben, kicking up sand as he moved in for the
kill. Not one of the mounted Tuskens so much as flinched
as they watched the duel, nor did they rally for their
chief. They merely watched in silence, waiting for the
outcome.
Ben blocked each blow, but he wasn't doing it with
ease. Hett was far more experienced at fighting on the

130

sand and in the desert heat. Ben knew that his opponent
would never surrender, let alone withdraw. As much as
he hoped to avoid killing Hett, he also knew that they
couldn't keep fighting indefinitely.
But in the end, Ben knew he wasn't fighting for his
own life. He was fighting for Luke's.
Quickly raising his left hand, Ben used the Force to
push out at Hett, shoving him back through the air as
Ben's lightsaber swept up and through Hett's right arm.
Hett shouted as his arm fell away from his body.
As Hett stumbled back, Ben used the Force to tear
Hett's other lightsaber from his left hand's grip. Both
of Hett's lightsabers deactivated as they sailed past Ben
and landed in the sand behind him.
Hett crumpled to his knees. His tribesmen watched
as Ben stepped forward, leaned down to grip the top of
Hett's facemask, and then pulled the mask off his head.
The fallen Jedi cradled the wounded stump of his
right arm as he lifted his gaze to meet Ben's. Hett's
unmasked face was that of a human, but covered with
black, angular tattoos.
Ben had no idea whether Hett's species or tattoos
were an exception or the norm for Tuskens. Ben held
the mask out before him, and then dropped it onto the
sand in front of Hett's kneeling form.
Without a sound, the mounted Tuskens slowly
turned their banthas around and began heading away
from the moisture farm. Hett did not watch them depart,

131

but continued staring at the sand in front of him. Ben,
still wielding his activated lightsaber, remained standing near Hett, waiting for his next move.
"I am finished," Hett said, still averting his gaze.
"You have disgraced me before my people. With one
hand, I can no longer wield a gaderffii. I am now an outcast among the Tuskens." He said all this without a trace
of emotion, and then added, "I am a dead man. Finish it.
Kill me."
"No," Ben said as he deactivated his lightsaber. "But
you can no longer stay on Tatooine. You must leave and
give your word, by your father's honor, to never
return."
Hett's brow furrowed.
Ben said, "Swear it."
Hett glowered, refusing to look at Ben, but then he
finally muttered, "I so swear . . . "
Clipping his lightsaber to his belt, Ben said, "The
Tuskens were once your people, but so were the Jedi.
You have forgotten our ways. Perhaps, with meditation,
you will remember them and yourself."
Hett offered no response.
"I hope you will," Ben said. "May the Force be with
you, A'Sharad Hett." Then Ben turned and began walking toward the entry dome of the moisture farm. He was
halfway to the dome when he glanced back to where
he'd left the former Jedi, but Hett was already gone.

132

Owen Lars, still carrying his blaster rifle, was waiting for Ben in the doorway of the entry dome. Ben
wondered if Owen had seen any of the vicious fight that
had just occurred on his property. He hoped that he
hadn't, and wasn't sure what to say. He just wanted to
assure Owen that the Tuskens were gone. Before he
could speak, Owen said, "It's over now, is it?"
"Yes," Ben said. The word almost cracked in
his throat, and he suddenly realized just how thirsty
he was.
"Well, then," Owen said. "You'd best be going."
Then Owen turned and closed the door behind him.
Ben brushed the dust off his robe. After gathering
his camp gear, he began the long walk back home.
He never saw A'Sharad Hett again.

133

CHAPTER

NINE

Luke is in danger.
This awareness came suddenly and unexpectedly to
Ben Kenobi. He had just stepped outside of his home
and was carrying a compact toolkit to run a maintenance
check on his moisture vaporator when the sensation hit
him, a definite disturbance in the Force.
Ben froze in his tracks, stopping just shy of the
vaporator. His grip automatically tightened on the toolkit's handle. He had been living on Tatooine for thirteen
years, and although he had sensed disturbances in the
Force before, he had never felt one quite like this.
Did Luke generate it? Ben wasn't sure. Luke was
thirteen now. To the best of Ben's knowledge, the boy
still knew nothing of the Force, but it was possible that
Luke was unwittingly acting like a transmitter.
With his free hand, Ben reached up to pull his hood
back, exposing his head to the blistering heat. A warm,
steady wind gusted up from the desert floor, carrying
134

with it dust and the distinct sound of an incoming Jawa
sandcrawler that had not yet come into view.
Ben knew he had to stay calm. Taking a deep breath,
he closed his eyes. He relaxed his mind, tuning out the
noise of the sandcrawler's engine, and opening himself
to the Force.
Almost immediately, he had a vision of flowing colors, a formless rush of tans and brown and . . .
Sandstorm!
. . . green . . . a dewback, running fast, leaving Luke
and another boy behind it. Ben couldn't distinguish the
other boy, but sensed he was one of Luke's friends . . .
and not Biggs Darklighter.
An accident, Ben realized. Caught in a sandstorm . . .
the dewback tossed them . . .
The boys were surrounded by high walls.
. . . in a canyon. Where?
Eyes still shut, Ben felt his feet shift beneath him,
turning him until he stopped, facing southeast. He
ignored the heat from the suns that bristled against the
back of his neck. Seconds later, through closed eyes, he
visualized a distinctive, jagged rock formation that
loomed over the winding channels of a dried river bed.
Ja-Mero Ridge.
Ben sighed as he opened his eyes to gaze out across
the Jundland Wastes. A hazy cloud was suspended
over the area of Ja-Mero Ridge, just over seventy kilometers away. Because people had been known to lose

135

their way in the twisted canyons even in clear weather,
and because darkness would fall within a few hours, he
knew that Luke and his friend might need help sooner
than later.
Of all the times not to own a landspeeder!
Ben rapidly calculated how many hours it might
take him to reach Ja-Mero Ridge if he traveled by foot,
and checked his utility belt to make certain he carried
adequate rations. As he walked around to the front of his
house and placed the toolkit on the ground near the front
door, it occurred to him that he might attempt to contact
Owen Lars, but then immediately dismissed the idea.
The Lars Homestead was easily another seventy kilometers beyond Ja-Mero Ridge, and Owen would just
insist he didn't need Ben's help. The stubborn fool
would probably go searching for Luke and get himself
lost or killed.
Ben knew that both Owen and Beru would be worried sick if they had any idea of Luke's predicament, but
there was nothing he could do about that now. Luke was
in danger, and there was no time to waste. If he had any
chance of finding the boys by nightfall, he would have
to do it on his own.
Ben started walking away from his house. "Seventy
kilometers," he muttered as he brushed the dust from
his beard. "I don't suppose I'll have an easy time finding a taxi."
Just then, the Jawa sandcrawler came into view. The
136

mammoth vehicle was traveling west across the Xelric
Draw, heading for Mos Espa.
"Ah," Ben said with a wry smile. "My taxi!"
The sandcrawler was moving fast, and Ben imagined the Jawas were eager to reach their destination.
Reaching out with the Force, he visualized the chief
Jawa on board the sandcrawler, and then projected a
thought: You should stop to check your engines.
As if in response, the sandcrawler rumbled to a stop
near the base of the bluff below Ben's house, and then
several Jawas scurried out of the vehicle. Ben trudged
down the bluff to meet the Jawas, who told him they had
stopped to check their engines. Ben was not surprised
that they found nothing wrong.
Ben conferred with the chief Jawa. A few minutes
later, the sandcrawler pulled away from the bluff, carrying Ben with it. When the sandcrawler turned around to
head into the Jundland Wastes, most of the Jawas were
baffled by their change in course, but the chief Jawa
insisted that it would be their pleasure to take Ben to
Ja-Mero Ridge.
The wind was wailing when the sandcrawler came
to a stop a short distance from the mouth of a narrow
canyon. Ben climbed out, pulling his cloak up over his
head to keep the stinging sand out of his face. As the
sandcrawler turned around and drove away, Ben moved
ahead, proceeding into the canyon.

137

As much as he looked forward to the day when he
might meet Luke, he had no idea whether this would be
that day. He had to allow the possibility that Luke and
his friend could find their way out of the canyon without
assistance, and saw no reason to reveal his presence to
Luke unless it was absolutely necessary.
Ben kept moving. As he ventured deeper into the
canyon, the air became noticeably colder. The sandstorm's gusts made it difficult to see more than a few
meters in any direction. With the suns setting, he estimated total darkness in less than thirty minutes. He
wondered just how well Luke was prepared to survive
away from the Lars Homestead. If he's as impulsive as
his father, he'll think he's prepared for anything, even if
he isn't, he mused.
Some stones on the canyon floor had been recently
disturbed, possibly kicked up by a large animal, maybe
the dewback that Ben had visualized earlier. He followed the vanished animal's path until he met a fork in
the canyon. Something in the air told him to take the left
fork, which wound up leading him around a bend that
brought him to another fork.
It's like a maze down here, Ben thought as he took
the right fork, which was slightly wider than the other.
Squinting his eyes, he glanced straight up and beyond
the looming canyon walls, past the streaking gusts of
sand, where a sliver of purple sky displayed a glimpse
of a few dim stars. He didn't need to use the stars to get

138

his bearings, but Luke might, as it would be easy for
anyone to lose all sense of direction on the canyon
floor.
Lowering his gaze, he continued into the encroaching darkness. Through the wind, he heard occasional
sounds of creatures within canyon. None of them sounded
threatening, but Ben had to concentrate to filter out the
more distracting noises as he searched for the boys.
A small, unseen lizard, concealed within one of
the many cracks in the wall to Ben's right, let out an
anxious chirp. A moment later, Ben heard a swiftly
approaching humming sound, and he ducked fast as
several sketto whipped through the air. The four-winged,
flying reptiles tore past him, angling back the way he
had come until they vanished around a bend. Ben knew
that the sketto normally stayed put during sandstorms,
and he wondered what, if anything, had spooked them.
And then he heard a blood-curdling roar. Loud as
thunder, it seemed to come from just around the next
turn in the canyon. Ben recognized the cry instantly.
Krayt dragon!
His eyes went wide with alarm, but he was already
moving, running as fast as he could around the turn. But
when he emerged at another fork, where two ravines
intersected, he stopped sharply. There was no sign of
the beast.
An echo, he realized, at the same time sensing that
Luke was still alive . . . frightened, but still alive. Ben

139

almost cursed himself for not having discerned the
roar as an echo before he went bounding into action
like an overeager amateur. He stood frozen at the canyon's natural intersection, waiting for another sound
to follow, and hoping that it wouldn't be human
screams.
A moment later, there came a loud thud, something
like a battering ram hitting a canyon wall. The crash
reverberated down from the ravine at Ben's left. He ran
into the ravine with his eyes forward, moving surely
over and past jagged stones. As he ran, his nostrils flared
slightly as he picked up the ugly scent of gored flesh,
and then he almost ran straight into the source. It was a
dewback's carcass.
Ben did not pause to examine the slaughtered dewback that practically filled the path before him. He
scrambled over its body and kept running. He heard a
steady thumping sound, but it was several strides later
before he realized with some annoyance that the sound
came from his own heart, which was pounding unusually fast. Getting old, he thought ruefully.
He focused on his heartbeat, slowing and stabilizing
it as he ran on. The passage between the walls delivered
Ben to the top of a ledge that overlooked a wider but
still enclosed area. Looking into the gloom, he saw a
krayt dragon — a canyon krayt, wild with hunger and
rage — running straight for the mouth of a crevice. And
inside the crevice were two cringing figures.

140

"Luke!" Ben shouted, without thinking or caring
about whether he revealed his presence or awareness of
Luke's identity. The dragon's massive horned head
slammed into the crevice's outer wall, and stones
exploded at the impact.
From inside the crevice, Luke's friend screamed,
"We're dead!"
Not quite, Ben thought with immense relief, but
then the krayt backed up and prepared to charge again.
Using the Force, Ben reached out to the krayt dragon's
primitive mind.
The monstrous beast suddenly stopped and roared,
baring its long, yellowed teeth. Then it shook its wide
head as if it were trying to shake something free, and
snorted hard before it backed away from the crevice.
Try as it might, and hungry as the krayt had been, it
couldn't get rid of the thought that had suddenly entered
its brain: it was tired. Very, very tired.
Sleep.
As gusts of sand continued to blast through the area,
the krayt lowered its body onto the canyon floor, closed
its eyes, and began to snore in great, long rasps.
Ben eased himself down from the ledge and stepped
past the slumbering krayt to approach the crevice. As he
neared the position of the two hiding boys, he heard
Luke's friend whimper, "We're never going to find
the way home! They'll find our bones one day . . . just
old bones . . . "

141

Ben cleared his throat, and both boys jumped within
the crevice as they turned their heads to face him. Both
boys had sand goggles draped around their necks and
were similarly attired in the faded white tunics and leggings that were typical of most moisture farmers. When
Luke's eyes met his own, it suddenly occurred to Ben
that Luke was the same age he had been when he made
his first journey to Ilum.
Ben decided that this was, after all, the day he would
finally introduce himself to Luke.
"I'm Ben Kenobi," he said. "We don't have much
time if I'm going to get you boys home."
Luke gasped, "Do . . . do you know the way to the
Lars homestead?"
Knowing that the less Luke knew of his purpose on
Tatooine, the better, Ben appeared thoughtful and said,
"Lars? Now, would that be Owen and Beru Lars?"
Luke nodded.
"It's been a very long time since I've seen them,"
Ben said, "but yes, I think I know the way."
He motioned for the boys to put their goggles on and
follow him. Exiting the cramped crevice, they walked
after Ben as he led them around the sleeping krayt.
Although the boys had no idea where they were headed,
they trusted Ben and kept up with him through the meandering turns in the canyon.
The winds began to die down as they exited the

142

canyon, and the night sky was mostly clear above
the area where Ben had parted ways with the sandcrawler. Luke's young friend was apparently stunned by
the abrupt change in weather, for he stammered, "What
happened?"
"We're in the eye of the storm," Ben said, his eyes
on the clouds that seemed to be churning against the
horizon.
"If we keep a quick pace," Luke said, "we can travel
with it long enough to find a safe shelter."
Luke's friend shook his head, and then sagged to his
knees. Ben crouched down to examine the boy and confirmed that he was just exhausted. Lifting his gaze to
Luke, Ben said, "I can carry your friend if you can keep
pace, young man."
"Luke," Luke said. "Luke Skywalker."
Ben looked at him quizzically, wondering if the boy
had heard when he'd called out his name in the canyon.
If Luke had heard, he didn't mention it, but instead gestured to the other boy and said, "My friend is Windy
Starkiller. We sure were lucky that krayt fell asleep
when it did."
"Yes," Ben said as he lifted Windy up onto his back.
"Lucky." Although he knew that luck had nothing to do
with the krayt, he saw no point in telling Luke more
than he needed to know. He's not ready for the truth,
Ben thought. As he walked off with Windy on his back,

143

Luke at his side, and the stars above his head, his
thoughts strayed to the dewback, who certainly hadn't
been lucky that day.
Perhaps Luke won't ever be ready.
Ben glanced at Luke and saw his lower lip was trembling. "Something wrong, young Luke?"
"I was just thinking about our dewback," Luke
replied. "He belonged to Windy, but we both took care
of him. His name was Huey."
Ben found it interesting that he and Luke had been
thinking of the dewback at the same time, but he stayed
silent as he walked alongside Luke, waiting for the boy
to continue.
"It's my fault he died," Luke said. "Windy and I
were bored, and some of the older kids had been calling
us 'small fry,' so . . . we decided to ride Huey out into
the Wastes."
Ben nodded slightly to show that he was listening.
Luke said, "I got him killed because I wanted
to prove that I wasn't a 'small fry.'" He kicked at the
sand. "It was stupid coming out here alone, and Huey
paid for it."
Adjusting Windy on his back, Ben replied, "My
young friend, you have learned a valuable lesson about
responsibility. Always keep this memory. Events in our
lives have consequences that ripple through the lives of
others."
Luke gave Ben a sidelong glance, and Ben realized
144

from the boy's somewhat baffled expression that his
words may have overwhelmed the boy. Ben added, "All
life is connected."
Luke seemed to think about this for a moment, then
he nodded in agreement. Ben thought, At least he
listens.
As Ben felt his back begin to ache from the strain of
carrying Windy, the wind started to pick up again. Ben
jutted his bearded chin toward a looming butte, which
resembled a silhouette of an enormous tree stump against
the dark storm clouds. "I know a safe place up ahead,"
Ben said. "We'll take shelter there."
While the winds wailed outside Ben's old hovel,
Luke and a recovered Windy sat inside with Ben. Ben
had secured the hovel's camouflage door, and the boys
were happy to share the rations that he offered. After
swallowing a nutrient tablet, Luke asked politely, "How
long have you lived on Tatooine, Mr. Kenobi?"
Ben stroked his beard as he replied, "Longer than
some, I suppose, but not as long as others."
"Oh," Luke said, apparently not noticing that Ben
hadn't even slightly answered his question. Eager to learn
more, Luke continued, "Do you have family here?"
Ben shook his head. "Just myself."
"Huh," Luke said. "I live with my aunt and uncle.
Beru and Owen Lars. You said you know them?"
Knowing that Luke might relate their conversation
to Owen, Ben said cautiously, "I recall whereabouts
145

they live, but I regret I never really got to know them.
Not well, anyway."
Luke's eyes brightened as he replied, "I'm sure
they'll be happy to see you, especially after Windy and
I tell them how you helped us."
That would be pleasant, Ben thought, but he doubted
that Owen would ever be entirely happy to see him.
"My parents will want to thank you, too," Windy
chimed in. Ben just smiled in return.
"If you don't mind my asking," Luke continued,
"what were you doing out in the Jundland Wastes
tonight?"
Ben said, "That's where I live."
Luke gaped. "You live in the Wastes?" He and
Windy exchanged astonished glances, then Luke
returned his gaze to Ben and added, "All by yourself?"
Ben gave a shrug, then said, "Well, a fellow has to
live somewhere.'"
"Don't you get ever get lonesome?"
"Not at all. As long as I have the suns in the morning
and the moons at night, I'm reasonably content."
Windy said, "Do you live in a house, or a place like,
um . . . ? " Moving his hands, he gestured at the hovel's
interior.
Ben chuckled. "In fact, young Windy, I do live in a
house."
Luke said, "Maybe we could visit you some time,
Mr. Kenobi?"
146

"I'd enjoy that very much," Ben said. "But please,
call me Ben."
"Sure . . . Ben."
"But before any of us go making more travel plans,"
Ben said, "let us try to get some rest. We can talk more
in the morning."
Windy's worried parents were already at the Lars
homestead, standing beside Owen and Beru, when Ben
arrived with the two boys. Owen was clutching his
blaster rifle. Windy ran straight to his mother who
wrapped her arms around him.
"This is Mr. Kenobi!" Windy gasped. "He saved us
from a krayt dragon!"
Windy's mother looked up to Ben and said, "Thank
you, Mr. Kenobi!" Windy's father patted his son on the
back as he smiled gratefully at Ben.
Ben returned the smile sheepishly, then looked to
Owen. Owen glowered at him.
Luke arrived at Beru's side and exclaimed, "Mr.
Kenobi told us stories about living out on the Dune
Sea . . . it was great! Can he stay for a while?"
Without hesitation, Owen answered firmly, "Mr.
Kenobi has to leave now."
There was a moment of awkward silence. Then
Beru, clearly outraged, glared at her husband and said,
"Owen Lars!"
Ignoring his wife, Owen stepped forward and
147

grabbed Ben's upper arm. "I want you off my property,"
Owen said, "and don't come back!" He gave Ben a
shove.
Ben stumbled back but instantly regained his balance. Looking away from Owen, he faced Luke. Ben
had hoped to talk more with Luke, who looked positively stunned by Owen's behavior. Now, all Ben could
manage was a slight, sad smile for Luke before he turned
and walked away.
Back home to the Jundland Wastes.

148

CHAPTER TEN

One day, during Ben Kenobi's nineteenth year on
Tatooine, he felt an overwhelming urge to go for a walk
in the canyons of the Jundland Wastes. As much as he
enjoyed walking for exercise, he couldn't explain why
he felt so compelled on this particular day, but decided
to follow his instincts.
He was just a few kilometers from his home when
he sensed danger in the canyon up ahead. More precisely, he sensed Luke was in danger.
What's that boy doing out here? Ben knew that Luke
owned a skyhopper and had gained a local reputation as
a talented pilot, but he also knew that Owen had recently
grounded Luke after a reckless race at Beggar's Canyon.
Before Ben could further ponder why Luke was so far
from home, he smelled something in the air. Tusken
Raiders! There was no mistaking their scent.
Ben pulled his cloak up over his head and quickened
his pace. As he rounded a bend in the canyon, he saw

149

three Tuskens rummaging through a landspeeder that
was parked beside some large boulders. He recognized
the speeder as Luke's, and then saw Luke himself lying
motionless on the ground near the Tuskens. It appeared
they had knocked him out cold.
Without breaking his stride across the canyon's
stony floor, Ben performed his best imitation of a krayt
dragon's hunting cry. The long, high-pitched howl
echoed loudly off the canyon walls, prompting the
Tuskens to grab their weapons and flee, leaving Luke
and the landspeeder behind.
Ben moved swiftly beside Luke's unconscious form,
bent down, and checked Luke's pulse. As he confirmed
Luke was all right, he heard an electronic moan to his
right, followed by a short beep. Ben paused, then pulled
back his hood and turned to his right to see a blue-domed
astromech droid cowering in the shadows under a rocky
ledge.
Goodness, Ben thought. It looks just like R2-D2. He
smiled at the droid and said, "Hello there!" Waggling
his fingers in a beckoning gesture, he encouraged,
"Come here, my little friend. Don't be afraid."
The droid emitted a series of concerned-sounding
beeps.
"Oh, don't worry," Ben said as he gestured to Luke,
"he'll be all right."
Luke stirred, then slowly opened his dazed eyes to
look up at Ben. Ben helped him rise to a sitting position.

150

"Rest easy, son," Ben said, "you've had a busy day.
You're fortunate to be all in one piece."
Luke rubbed the back of his head and then focused
on his rescuer. "Ben?" he said. "Ben Kenobi? Boy, am I
glad to see you!"
The astromech droid wobbled out from under the
ledge and approached Luke and Ben.
"The Jundland Wastes are not to be traveled lightly,"
Ben said as he pulled Luke up to his feet. "Tell me,
young Luke, what brings you out this far?"
"Oh, this little droid!" Luke said, gesturing at the
astromech who beeped in response. Luke continued, "I
think he's searching for his former master, but I've
never seen such devotion in a droid before . . . "
Ben smiled again at the astromech, who beeped at
him. Ben returned his gaze to Luke, who said, "Ah, he
claims to be the property of an Obi-Wan Kenobi. Is he
a relative of yours? Do you know who he's talking
about?"
Ben's smile melted away. He kept his eyes on Luke
and tried to remain calm, but the boy's words had practically stunned him. Catching his breath, Ben eased
himself back to rest against a boulder. "Obi-Wan
K e n o b i . . . " he said. "Obi-Wan?" His gaze drifted to
the ground. "Now that's a name I've not heard in a long
time . . . a long time."
"I think my uncle knows him," Luke said. "He said
he was dead . . . "
151

"Oh, he's not dead," Ben said, rolling his eyes with
mild amusement. "Not yet."
"You know him?"
"Well, of course I know him. He's me!"
The astromech chirped as he rotated his dome to
study Ben more closely.
Glancing at Luke, Ben said "I haven't gone by the
name Obi-Wan since, oh, before you were born."
"Well, then, the droid does belong to you."
"Don't seem to remember ever owning a droid,"
Ben said, eyeing the blue astromech more carefully. As
improbable as it seemed, he realized the droid was
R2-D2. He recalled that R2-D2's counterpart, C-3PO,
was supposed to have had a memory wipe, but he didn't
know whether R2-D2 had undergone the same treatment, and thus wasn't certain if the droid even recognized
him after so many years. I've certainly aged more obviously than R2 has. Ben kept his musings to himself, but
muttered, "Very interesting . . . "
An inhuman braying sound echoed through the canyon. Ben looked up at the overhanging cliffs and said, "I
think we better get indoors. The Sand People are easily
startled, but they will soon be back. And in greater
numbers."
Ben began moving toward the landspeeder and Luke
followed, but then R2-D2 let out a pathetic beep, prompting Luke to exclaim, "C-3PO!"
What! Ben was astonished. C-3PO is here, too?
152

They found the protocol droid sprawled on some
nearby rocks. Wires dangled out from the open socket at
C-3PO's left shoulder, and his left arm lay on the ground
a short distance away. Ben and Luke lifted the droid
to a seated position.
In a dazed voice, C-3PO asked, "Where am I? I must
have taken a bad step . . . " C-3PO turned his head from
side to side, but when his photoreceptors saw Ben, he
did not recognize the white-haired man.
"Well, can you stand?" Luke said. "We've got to get
you out of here before the Sand People return."
"I don't think I can make it," C-3PO said. "You go
on, Master Luke. There's no sense in you risking yourself on my account. I'm done for."
"No, you're not," Luke said sympathetically. "What
kind of talk is that?"
Remembering the Tusken Raiders, Ben said,
"Quickly . . . they're on the move."
Ben and Luke helped C-3PO to his feet, gathered up
his left arm, and returned to the landspeeder. After they
loaded the droids onto the vehicle, they sped off, heading out of the canyon and to the safety of Ben's house.
On the way back to the Ben's house, Luke explained
how his uncle had bought the two droids from Jawa
traders. After they arrived at the house, they went inside
and Ben let Luke use his toolkit to repair C-3PO.
Luke and C-3PO were seated on the couch beside a low

153

round table across from Ben, who sat in a chair and
watched as Luke quickly mended and reattached wires,
and secured the droid's arm into place. R2-D2 stood
near a storage chest on the floor and peered over the
round table to watch the repair job.
The boy's as good at fixing things as his father was,
Ben thought. Just then, R2-D2 beeped with what sounded
like approval at Luke's technical skills, and Ben thought,
If you have any memory of Anakin, you're probably
thinking the same thing.
"Tell me, Luke," Ben said. "Do you know about
your father's service in the Clone Wars?"
"No, my father didn't fight in the wars," Luke said
as he reconnected another wire. "He was a navigator on
a spice freighter."
"That's what your uncle told you," Ben said. "He
didn't hold with your father's ideals. Thought he should
have stayed here and not gotten involved."
Luke turned to face Ben. "You fought in the
Clone Wars?"
"Yes. I was once a Jedi Knight, the same as your
father," Ben said, easing back into his chair.
Luke looked away. "I wish I'd known him."
"He was the best starpilot in the galaxy and a cunning warrior." Ben paused and smiled at Luke. "I
understand you've become quite a good pilot yourself."
Luke shrugged at this, but grinned sheepishly.

154

Ben smiled as he looked away. Remembering
Anakin, he added, "And he was a good friend. Which
reminds me . . . "
Ben pushed himself up from his seat and walked
past R2-D2 to raise the lid on the storage chest. "I have
something here for you." As he removed the shiny relic
he had taken with him from the planet Mustafar, he said,
"Your father wanted you to have this when you were
old enough, but your uncle wouldn't allow it. He feared
you might follow old Obi-Wan on some foolish idealistic crusade like your father did."
Still seated on the bed, C-3PO turned to Luke and
said, "Sir, if you'll not be needing me, I'll close down
for a while."
"Sure, go ahead," Luke said.
C-3PO remained seated as he switched himself off.
His photoreceptors dimmed and his head slumped forward. Luke rose from the couch and stepped over beside
Ben to see the object he had taken from the chest. Luke
asked, "What is it?"
"Your father's lightsaber," Ben said, handing it to
Luke. "This is the weapon of a Jedi Knight. Not as
clumsy or random as a blaster."
Luke's fingers found the activation plate, and the
lightsaber's blade blazed to life. He appeared fascinated
as he tested the weapon, listening to its hum as he moved
the blade back and forth through the air.

155

"An elegant weapon for a more civilized age," Ben
commented as he returned to his chair. "For over a thousand generations the Jedi Knights were the guardians of
peace and justice in the Old Republic. Before the dark
times, before the Empire."
Luke deactivated the lightsaber and carried it with
him as he sat back down on the edge of the bed. Facing
Ben, he asked, "How did my father die?"
Ben glanced away from Luke. Choosing his words
carefully, he returned his gaze to Luke and said gravely,
"A young Jedi named Darth Vader, who was a pupil of
mine until he turned to evil, helped the Empire hunt
down and destroy the Jedi Knights. He betrayed and
murdered your father."
Luke looked stunned.
"Now the Jedi are all but extinct," Ben continued.
"Vader was seduced by the dark side of the Force."
"The Force?" Luke said.
"The Force is what gives the Jedi his power," Ben
said. "It's an energy field created by all living things. It
surrounds us and penetrates us. It binds the galaxy
together."
R2-D2 beeped loudly, calling attention to himself.
Rising again, Ben stepped over to R2-D2 and said,
"Now, let's see if we can't figure out what you are, my
little friend. And where you come from."
As Ben touched R2-D2's dome, Luke said, "I saw
part of the message he was —"

156

"I seem to have found it," Ben interrupted, for
R2-D2's hologram projector had flicked on, causing a
flickering hologram of a young, white-robed woman to
appear atop Ben's round table. Ben returned to his seat.
"General Kenobi," said the woman's hologram,
"years ago you served my father in the Clone Wars.
Now he begs you to help him in his struggle against the
Empire. I regret that I am unable to present my father's
request to you in person, but my ship has fallen under
attack, and I'm afraid my mission to bring you to
Alderaan has failed. I have placed information vital
to the survival of the Rebellion into the memory systems of this R2 unit."
Ben glanced at R2-D2, then back at the hologram.
"My father will know how to retrieve it," the woman's hologram continued. "You must see this droid
safely delivered to him on Alderaan. This is our most
desperate hour. Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi. You're my
only hope."
The woman's hologram glanced over her right
shoulder, then bent as if she were adjusting something.
Watching the hologram's movement, Ben suspected she
must have turned in response to someone or something
behind her before she bent to manually switch off
R2-D2's holorecorder. The hologram flickered off.
Ben sat back in his chair and tugged at his beard,
thinking hard. The compulsion to walk to the canyon,
the reunion with the droids and Luke, and now this
157

message. Obi-Wan did not believe in such things as
coincidence. It must be by the will of the Force.
Luke said, "Who is she?"
On the subject of the hologram, Ben knew it was
best to keep details to a minimum. He kept his expression impassive as he said, "She is Princess Leia Organa
of the Royal House of Alderaan, an Imperial Senator
and, unbeknownst to the Empire, a leader of the Rebel
Alliance. She's grown into a remarkable young woman."
Turning to Luke, he said, "You must learn the ways of
the Force if you're to come with me to Alderaan."
"Alderaan?" Luke said with disbelief. Rising away
from Ben, he added, "I'm not going to Alderaan." He
moved toward the door, nervously shifting his lightsaber
from one hand to the other. "I've got to get home. It's
late. I'm in for it as it is."
"I need your help, Luke," Ben said. Nodding his
head toward the table that had displayed the hologram,
he added, "She needs your help. I'm getting too old for
this sort of thing."
"I can't get involved!" Luke protested. "I've got
work to do! It's not that I like the Empire . . . I hate it!
But there's nothing I can do about it right now. It's such
a long way from here."
"That's your uncle talking."
Luke sighed. "Oh, boy, my uncle," he said as he
clutched the lightsaber tight with his right hand. Raising
his left hand over R2-D2's domed head, he said, "How
158

am I ever gonna explain this?" He brought his hand
down on top of the droid's head with a slight whack.
"Learn about the Force, Luke."
Luke moved anxiously toward the door again, then
stopped and turned to Ben. "Look, I can take you as far
as Anchorhead," he said. "You can get a transport there
to Mos Eisley or wherever you're going."
Ben looked away from Luke and said, "You must do
what you feel is right, of course."
"What I feel is right?" Luke said, exasperated. "Ben,
I'd like to help you, to help her, but is it right to run out
on Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru? They're all the family
I've got, and I'm not going to let anything happen to
them! If that's not right, then maybe I'd rather be
wrong!"
Ben nodded his head. "Yes . . . of course. Sometimes
even the best intentions may be contradictory. Perhaps
your answer lies with the Force, within you." Rising
from his chair, Ben said briskly, "Very well, I shall take
you up on your kind offer. I must make my way to
Alderaan as quickly as I can."
Ben wondered if Luke would change his mind about
leaving Tatooine by the time they reached Anchorhead,
but he could not sense anything of the future. Events are
moving too fast, Ben thought. And today, the will of the
Force is just too strong to resist.
As Luke reactivated C-3PO, Ben discreetly secured
his own lightsaber to his belt before donning his heavy
159

robe. Suddenly, Ben realized that he might never return
to his home in the desert, and that he had one thing left
to do before leaving. Turning to Luke he said, "I think I
might have an extra belt ring for your father's lightsaber.
May I have the lightsaber for a moment so I can make
sure the ring fits?"
"Oh, sure," Luke said, handing the lightsaber to
Ben. "I'll load the droids onto the speeder and meet you
outside."
As Luke and the droids headed out the door, Ben
brought the lightsaber down into his cellar. He held the
weapon carefully so he wouldn't smudge the fingerprints
Luke had left on it. Moving quickly to his workbench, he
used a small scanning device to record Luke's right
thumbprint from the lightsaber, then transferred the
print onto the access clasp for his journal. After placing
the journal inside the boa-wood box, he transferred the
same print onto the box's clasp. He set the scanning tool
aside, and thought That's that. Remembering what he'd
told Luke, he picked up a spare utility ring that he knew
would fit the lightsaber. In less than two minutes, he
was back upstairs and walking out the front door.
The droids and Luke were waiting for Ben at the
landspeeder. As he climbed into the front seat beside
Luke, he said, "Here you are," and returned the lightsaber along with the extra belt ring.
"Thanks!" Luke said as he took the lightsaber and

160

ring. Then he started the speeder and zoomed away from
Ben's home, heading southeast.
Ben never looked back.
"I really do wish I could do more for you, Ben,"
Luke said as he guided the landspeeder along the edge
of the Jundland Wastes. "But the sooner I get these
droids out on the south ridge working on those vaporators, the less of a skinning I'll catch from Uncle
Owen."
"Luke, I'm afraid the droids will have to come
with me."
"What?" Luke exclaimed as he gave Ben a quick
sidelong glance. "But they cost my uncle nearly —"
"Surely you don't think I can leave them behind?"
Ben interrupted. "You heard that message. This matter
is too vital to risk losing Artoo-Detoo, and for security's
sake, See-Threepio must come along as well."
"But what'll I tell Uncle Owen?"
"I shall leave that to your conscience, son. But here's
another thing to consider: There will almost certainly be
Imperial agents seeking these two droids, people of the
most violent and ruthless sort. Taking them back to your
farm would only expose your uncle and aunt to dreadful
danger."
"Oh," Luke said. "Oh, yeah. I'll . . . I'll think of
something, I guess."

161

"Good," Ben said. "I know you will." Just then, he
saw a rising smudge of darkness against the cliffs at the
edge of the Wastes. He nudged Luke with his elbow as
he pointed toward the cliffs and said, "Smoke!
"What?" Luke followed Ben's gaze. "Where? I
don't see any . . . yes! There it is! You've got good eyes
for . . . uh, I mean . . . "
" . . . an old man?" Ben said with a grin. "Powers of
observation lie with the mind, Luke, not the eyes.
Perhaps we should take a look and see what it is."
Luke steered toward the fire, and they soon arrived
beside what was left of a Jawa sandcrawler. Smoke billowed from fires that still burned inside and around the
bulky, rusted vehicle. Dozens of Jawas lay dead, their
small forms scattered across the sand.
At Ben's instruction, Luke stopped the landspeeder
so they could examine the wreckage. The sandcrawler's
hull was riddled with blaster-fire damage, and it appeared
the entire Jawa clan had been wiped out.
"It looks like the Sand People did this, all right,"
Luke observed. Picking up a Tusken's weapon from the
ground, he said, "Look, there's gaffi sticks, bantha
tracks. It's j u s t . . . I never heard of them hitting anything this big before."
"They didn't," Ben said. "But we are meant to think
they did." Gesturing at the bantha tracks, he continued,
"These tracks are side by side. Sand People always ride
single file to hide their numbers."

162

Luke studied the small corpses that lay at his feet.
"These are the same Jawas that sold us Artoo-Detoo and
See-Threepio."
Ben pointed at the scorched dents in the sandcrawler's hull. "And these blast points, too accurate for Sand
People. Only Imperial stormtroopers are so precise."
"But why would Imperial troops want to slaughter
Jawas?"
Ben did not reply as Luke's gaze traveled to R2-D2
and C-3PO, who stood next to the parked speeder.
Stepping toward Ben, Luke said, "If they traced the
robots here, they may have learned who they sold them
to, and that would lead them back . . . home!"
Luke bolted for the landspeeder.
"Wait, Luke!" Ben shouted. "It's too dangerous!"
Ignoring Ben, Luke jumped into the landspeeder,
punched the ignition, and sped away from the burning
sandcrawler.
When the speeder was no longer in sight, Ben turned
to face the two droids. C-3PO said, "Where's Master
Luke going, sir?"
"That I cannot tell you," Ben replied. "It's tied in
with a great many things to be determined now by the
Force."
C-3PO appeared nervous as he shifted from one
foot to the other. R2-D2 emitted a low, whimpering
whistle.
Ben surveyed the slain Jawas. "The poor little
163

creatures," he said. "Their lives were arduous and meager enough without being ended so brutally." Returning
his gaze to the droids, he said, "We'll gather fuel and
prepare a funeral pyre."
The suns were beginning to set and cast long shadows across the desert when Luke finally returned to the
ruined sandcrawler. Ben watched Luke climb out of
the speeder and walk past the droids. From Luke's
anguished expression, Ben knew instantly that Owen
and Beru were dead.
Ben's memory flashed to Anakin. Anakin had just
turned twenty when he lost his mother on Tatooine, and
now his nineteen-year-old son had lost his own surrogate parents on the same blasted planet. Recalling how
Anakin had been transformed by his loss, and wondering if Luke might follow his father's path, Ben suppressed
a shudder.
Eyes downcast, Luke staggered over to stand before
Ben. Ben said, "There's nothing you could have done,
Luke, had you been there. You'd have been killed, too,
and the droids would now be in the hands of the
Empire."
Luke lifted his gaze to Ben. "I want to come with
you to Alderaan. There's nothing for me here now. 1
want to learn the ways of the Force and become a Jedi
like my father."

164

Ben responded with a nod. He sensed Luke's sincerity, and hoped to teach him as much as he could. But
then he thought again of Anakin . . . and Darth Vader.
As much as he hoped Luke would become a Jedi, he
was also determined to do everything in his power to
make sure Luke would not become a Jedi like his
father.
After the last Jawa had been placed on the pyre, the
two men loaded the droids onto the landspeeder and
drove off, heading east. Glancing up at the darkening
sky, Luke said, "I'm afraid we won't reach Mos Eisley
before dark."
Despite the urgency of their mission to Alderaan,
Ben knew that both he and Luke required rest. The day
had been extremely draining, mentally as well as physically. And because Imperial forces were now added to
the list of perils on Tatooine, he also knew it was even
more unwise to travel after sunset. He said, "We can be
in Bestine soon enough. We'll find shelter there for the
night."

165

CHAPTER

ELEVEN

Leaving Bestine early the next morning, Ben, Luke,
and the droids proceeded to Mos Eisley. On their way,
Luke stopped his landspeeder on a high, craggy bluff
that overlooked a wide canyon. The droids followed
Luke and Ben to the edge of the bluff and gazed out
over a wide, haphazard array of runways, landing pads,
craterlike docking bays, and semi-domed structures that
sprawled across the stark canyon floor.
"Mos Eisley spaceport," Ben said. "You will never
find a more wretched hive of scum and villainy."
Glancing at Luke, he added, "We must be cautious."
Ben and Luke got the droids onto the back of the
landspeeder, and then the group resumed their journey.
Familiar with the route to Chalmun's Cantina on the
far side of the city, Ben directed Luke through the dusty,
busy streets of Mos Eisley Spaceport. Traffic consisted

166

of not only landspeeders and swoop bikes but large
quadrupeds, including dewbacks and long-necked rontos. While Ben was not surprised to see the wide variety
of life-forms and transport that flowed past them, he
realized with some amusement that Luke was trying
hard not to gawk.
Approaching a congested intersection, Luke slowed
the landspeeder to allow some pedestrians to pass.
Suddenly, five white-armored stormtroopers emerged
from the shadows of the buildings at the sides of the
road. All carried blaster rifles. One stormtrooper — a
squad leader with an orange pauldron over his right
shoulder — waved at Luke, signaling him to pull over.
Luke had driven straight into an Imperial checkpoint.
Ben noticed that the stormtroopers were looking at
C-3PO and R2-D2, who were in plain view on the landspeeder's rear section. He glanced at Luke, who appeared
extremely anxious as he clutched the speeder's steering
wheel. Ben offered a reassuring smile to the boy, and
then looked up at the squad leader who now loomed
beside Luke's side of the speeder.
Facing Luke, the squad leader said, "How long have
you had these droids?"
"About three or four seasons," Luke blurted out.
Keeping his eyes on the squad leader, Ben
grinned affably and said, "They're up for sale if you
want them."

167

Behind Luke, C-3PO trembled.
The squad leader said, "Let me see your identification."
In a calm, controlled tone, Ben said, "You don't
need to see his identification."
The squad leader turned to his fellow stormtroopers
and said, "We don't need to see his identification."
Ben said, "These aren't the droids you're looking for."
"These aren't the droids we're looking for," the
squad leader repeated to the others.
Luke glanced at Ben, who gave him a slight, knowing nod. Ben returned his gaze to the squad leader and
added, "He can go about his business."
The squad leader looked again to Luke and said,
"You can go about your business."
"Move along," Ben said.
"Move along," echoed the squad leader, gesturing
with his hand for Luke to proceed. "Move along."
Luke drove the landspeeder away from the checkpoint. Ben directed him along a curving street, and then
they parked in front of Chalmun's Cantina. The moment
the speeder stopped, a Jawa trotted over and ran his
small hands over the vehicle's hood. C-3PO muttered,
"I can't abide those Jawas. Disgusting creatures."
Ben and Luke climbed out of the landspeeder.
"Go on, go on," Luke said as he shooed the Jawa
away. While C-3PO helped R2-D2 off the back of the
168

landspeeder, Luke turned to Ben. "I can't understand
how we got by those troops. I thought we were dead."
"The Force can have a strong influence on the
weak-minded."
Luke glanced at the cantina's run-down exterior.
"Do you really think we're going to find a pilot here
that'll take us to Alderaan?"
"Well, most of the best freighter pilots can be found
here," Ben said. "Only watch your step. This place can
be a little rough."
"I'm ready for anything," Luke said.
Ben led Luke and the droids into the cantina. Like
many buildings in Mos Eisley, the cantina was essentially a hole in the ground that was covered by a domed
roof. Its interior was dark, and the air was filled with
thick smoke and fast music. Beyond the entry lobby, an
arched doorway led to a short flight of mud-packed steps
that descended into a crowded room. A disheveled,
middle-aged man with hardened features stood behind
the U-shaped bar that dominated the room's center,
and the walls were lined by small booths that offered
some slight possibility for private conversations. Most
of the patrons were aliens, as were the Bith musicians
who performed at the bandstand to the right of the bar.
While Luke stood gawking in the entry lobby with
the droids behind him, Ben stepped down and made his
way over to the bar, where he found a human spacer
with a drink already in his hand. "Excuse me, my friend,"

169

Ben said, "but I wonder if I might have a word
with you."
The spacer eyed Ben suspiciously and replied,
"Well?"
Examining the design of the spacer's pressure
suit, Ben continued, "You're a Corellian spacer, are
you not?"
"What about it?"
"I'm in the market to charter a fast starship," Ben
said, "and I've been told by those in the know that the
Corellian vessels are among the very best."
"You heard right," the spacer replied. "'Cept that
Corellians aren't among; we are the best."
"Ah, splendid," Ben said, beaming. "And would
you by any chance know of a starship that's available
for hire?"
The spacer's shoulders seemed to sag within his
suit. "If you'd've come in here yesterday, you could've
had mine, but now I'm committed to a charter. I raise
ship tonight."
Ben grimaced. "A pity," he said. "Perhaps you could
recommend someone else?"
"Well, there aren't too many other Corellians in port
just now, and anybody else'd just be a second-rater."
Scratching his chin while thinking, the spacer said,
"Let's see, now . . . Oh, yeah, there's the Falcon."
"Falcon?"
"The Millennium Falcon. Her skipper's Han Solo."
170

"And would this — Han Solo? — be available at
present for a job?"
"Haw!" the spacer laughed, nearly spilling his drink.
"I'd be surprised if he wasn't. Han ain't been doing so
well lately. He was around here a little while ago. In
fact, his first mate, Chewbacca, he's . . . " The spacer
glanced to his left and continued, "He's right here."
Ben followed the spacer's gaze to see a hulking, furcovered alien who had moved up beside the bar.
Chewbacca was a male Wookiee, about 2.25 meters tall.
An ammunition bandolier was wrapped around the
Wookiee's shaggy torso, and a laser-firing bowcaster
was slung over one arm. Ben smiled and thought, I
haven't seen a Wookiee in a long time.
Chewbacca nodded at Ben. The spacer stepped away
from the bar so Ben could speak directly with the
Wookiee.
Just then, Luke and C-3PO started down the steps
from the lobby. A signal chimed behind them, and Ben
heard the bartender bellow, "Hey, we don't serve their
kind here!"
Luke replied, "What?"
"Your droids," the bartender said. "They'll have to
wait outside. We don't want them here."
Ben watched as Luke dismissed C-3PO, who turned
to exit the bar with R2-D2. Assured that no harm had
occurred, Ben returned his attention to the Wookiee
while Luke moved to stand beside him at the bar. Facing

171

Chewbacca, Ben said, "The Millennium Falcon, is that
the name of your ship? I was told she's fast."
Chewbacca replied with a series of low barks and
grunts. Fortunately, Ben understood enough of the
Wookiee language to reply, "No, that will be more than
satisfactory. I'm not looking for anything elaborate,
Chewbacca, just quick passage to Alderaan —"
Before Ben could finish, Luke's right shoulder
bumped into his side. He turned to see Luke face-toface with a surly Aqualish, a tusked humanoid alien
with bulbous black eyes. The Aqualish spat out combatively, "Negola dewaghi wooldugger?!?"
Luke looked away from the Aqualish, trying to
ignore him. Ben watched as the Aqualish took a step
back, allowing room for another thug to move in. Ben
thought, Oh, bother.
The Aqualish's companion was a ghastly-looking
man. The man's right eye was blinded and the flesh
around it severely scarred. His nose looked as if it had an
unfortunate encounter with a meat shredder. He tapped
Luke's left shoulder — hard. Luke looked at the disfigured man, who gestured at the Aqualish before he leaned
in close to Luke and snarled, "He doesn't like you."
Luke mumbled, "I'm sorry."
"I don't like you either," said the man. "You just
watch yourself. We're wanted men. I have the death
sentence on twelve systems."

172

Luke replied, "I'll be careful."
The man seized Luke's arm and snarled, "You'll
be dead."
That's quite enough, Ben thought. Stepping away
from Chewbacca, he moved behind Luke to face the
disfigured man. Speaking calmly, Ben said, "This little
one's not worth the effort. Come, let me get you
something."
The disfigured man moved with alarming speed and
strength, flinging Luke away from the bar. As Luke
crashed into a nearby table, the man and the Aqualish
reached for their blaster pistols.
"No blasters! No blasters!" the bartender shouted
too late as he dropped behind the bar and the band
stopped playing.
Ben's hand darted to his belt and he drew his
lightsaber. The blade ignited and swept past the blasterwielding criminals. The disfigured man fell back against
the bar, a deep slash across his chest. The Aqualish
screamed and his right arm — severed at the elbow —
fell to the floor, still clutching the blaster.
Everyone in the cantina was silent. The entire fight
was over in less than five seconds. The only sound to be
heard was the hum of Ben's lightsaber. He stood his
ground, holding his lightsaber out from his body as
he stared at his two defeated opponents. Then he
glanced out across the room. If anyone else had been

173

looking for a tight, the look in Ben's eyes was enough to
discourage them.
Ben deactivated his lightsaber. Almost immediately,
the band started playing again, and the patrons went
back to their drinks and conversations. It was business
again as usual in the Mos Eisley cantina.
Chewbacca followed Ben over to Luke, who
remained sprawled on the floor. As Ben reached down
to help Luke up, Luke said, "I'm all right,"
Ben nodded at the Wookiee and said to Luke,
"Chewbacca here is first mate on a ship that might
suit us."
Chewbacca moved off to briefly confer with his
captain, then guided Ben and Luke around the bar to a
booth that had a circular table with a cylindrical light at
its center. The booth was against the wall opposite the
band, so they would be able to converse without shouting. The booth also offered a clear view of the entry
lobby. Chewbacca sat with his back to the wall so he
could watch the entry. Ben and Luke sat with their backs
to the bar and faced Chewbacca.
They were soon joined by a tall, lean man with dark
hair. The man wore a white shirt with a black vest, pants,
and boots. As the man moved past the table, Ben noticed
he had a blaster pistol in a quick-draw holster against
his right thigh.
The man sat down beside Chewbacca, pointed to
himself and said, "Han Solo. I'm captain of the
174

Millennium Falcon. Chewie here tells me you're looking for passage to the Alderaan system."
"Yes, indeed," Ben said. "If it's a fast ship."
"Fast ship?" Han said, sounding offended. "You've
never heard of the Millennium Falcon?"
Ben asked, "Should I have?"
"It's the ship that made the Kessel run in less than
twelve parsecs!"
Ben was not impressed with such obvious misinformation, and gave Han a look that said as much.
Han continued, "I've outrun Imperial starships, not
the local bulk cruisers, mind you. I'm talking about the
big Corellian ships now. She's fast enough for you, old
man. What's the cargo?"
"Only passengers," Ben said. "Myself, the boy, two
droids, and no questions asked."
Han grinned broadly. "What is it? Some kind of
local trouble?"
Ben said, "Let's just say we'd like to avoid any
Imperial entanglements."
Narrowing his gaze on Ben, Han said, "Well, that's
the real trick, isn't it? And it's going to cost you something extra." His eyes flicked to Luke. "Ten thousand,
all in advance."
"Ten thousand?" Luke gasped. "We could almost
buy our own ship for that!"
Han raised his eyebrows. "But who's going to fly it,
kid? You?"
175

"You bet I could," Luke said angrily. "I'm not such
a bad pilot myself!" He looked to Ben and started to
rise. "We don't have to sit here and listen —"
Ben touched Luke's arm, urging him to remain
seated. Then Ben returned his gaze to Solo and said,
"We can pay you two thousand now, plus fifteen when
we reach Alderaan."
Han did the math. "Seventeen, huh?"
Ben nodded.
Han thought about the offer for a few seconds, keeping his steely eyes locked on Ben. "Okay," Han said.
"You guys got yourselves a ship. We'll leave as soon as
you're ready. Docking Bay Ninety-four."
"Ninety-four," Ben repeated.
Han looked past Ben to the bar and said, "Looks like
somebody's beginning to take an interest in your
handiwork."
Ben glanced at Luke, who turned to look at the bartender. Ben heard the bartender mutter something, then
the stormtrooper's digitized voice replied, "All right,
we'll check it out."
Facing Ben, Han said, "I suggest the backdoor,
gents. Right over there." He tilted head slightly in the
direction of the door.
By the time the stormtroopers arrived at Han
and Chewbacca's table, Ben and Luke were gone.
Outside the cantina, Ben raised his hood to cover his
head as they walked fast for where they'd parked the

176

landspeeder. C-3P0 and R2-D2 stood beside the vehicle, waiting for them.
Ben considered Han's fee, then said to Luke, "You'll
have to sell your speeder."
"That's okay," Luke said as they neared the droids.
"I'm never coming back to this planet again."

177

INTERLUDE

"Tell me something, Artoo," Luke said as he worked
on the components for his new lightsaber. "Did you
ever think we'd wind up back on Tatooine again?"
The astromech droid was standing on the other side
of the living area inside Ben's hut, and responded to
Luke's question with a scathing beep. Then R2-D2
opened a slot beneath his domed head and loudly
ejected some sand that had found its way into his cylindrical body.
"Yeah, that's how I feel, too," Luke replied. Although
his life had changed dramatically in the past three years,
and although he had a reason for returning to Tatooine,
he still felt like something of a failure now, as if all his
accomplishments had led him back to where he'd started
from. He had sincerely believed on the day that he had
left Tatooine on the Millennium Falcon with Ben that he
would never set foot on the sand planet again.

178

In fact, after Luke had boarded the Millennium
Falcon with Ben and the droids, he hadn't been sure
whether he would ever set foot on any planet again.
First, a squad of stormtroopers had tried to stop the
Falcon from leaving its docking bay at Mos Eisley, and
then, as the Falcon raced away from Tatooine, it had
drawn fire from a blockade of Imperial Star Destroyers.
Fortunately, Han Solo had managed to evade and
escape the blockade by launching the incredibly durable
Falcon into hyperspace,
But after the Falcon emerged from hyperspace,
Luke's group had immediately discovered that their
destination, Alderaan, no longer existed. They were still
pondering what could have caused the destruction of an
entire planet when Solo began pursuit of a passing
Imperial TIE fighter, which had led them directly toward
a moon-sized battle station. Luke had been genuinely
frightened when he first saw the Death Star. And when
the Falcon was captured by the Death Star's tractor
beam, he had thought that they were all goners.
But Ben had remained calm as he quickly improvised a plan to infiltrate the battle station. He had
instructed Han Solo to jettison some of the Falcon's
escape pods and make an entry in the ship's log, claiming in the entry that the crew abandoned ship right after
takeoff. Then Ben had instructed Luke, Han, Chewbacca,
and the droids to hide within the ship's sensor-proofed

179

concealed compartments, which Han had previously
used for smuggling.
After the tractor beam had deposited the Falcon into
a Death Star hangar, Han and Chewbacca subdued a
scanning crew and two stormtroopers. Luke and Han
had then disguised themselves in the fallen stormtroopers' armor, which allowed the group to sneak into a
nearby control room. Once inside, R2-D2 had accessed
a computer outlet to gain data on how to shut down
power to the tractor beam and allow the Falcon to
escape.
Ben had insisted on going to the tractor-beam power
coupling alone.
To this day, Luke wondered if Ben ever had any idea
that he wouldn't be leaving the Death Star on the
Millennium Falcon.

180

CHAPTER

TWELVE

Inside the control room that overlooked Docking
Bay 327, the hangar that held the captive Millennium
Falcon, Ben rapidly studied the schematics for the
power generator terminal that R2-D2 had displayed on
a viewscreen. The terminal was located in sector six of
the spherical battle station's northern hemisphere.
Instantly memorizing the location, Ben turned to Luke
and Han and said, "I don't think you boys can help. I
must go alone."
"Whatever you say," Han replied as Ben headed for
the door. "I've done more than I bargained for on this
trip already."
Ben had just reached the door when he was stopped
by Luke, who said, "I want to go with you."
"Be patient, Luke," Ben said. "Stay and watch over
the droids."
Gesturing to Han, Luke said, "But he can —"

181

"They must be delivered safely or other star systems will suffer the same fate as Alderaan," Ben
interrupted. "Your destiny lies along a different path
from mine." He pressed a button on the doorway, and
the door slid fast up into the ceiling. Facing Luke, he
added, "The Force will be with you . . . always!"
Ben left the command office and moved down the
corridor. A moment later, he heard the door slide shut
behind him. Although he was reluctant to leave Luke
alone with the brash Han Solo, he believed Luke would
remain safe if he stayed where he was, at least until the
tractor beam's power was deactivated.
He also believed it was best to put some distance
between himself and Luke, because he knew something
that the boy didn't. Shortly after they had arrived within
the battle station's hangar, while still hiding within the
Falcon's smuggling compartment, Ben had sensed a
most particular presence.
Darth Vader.
Ben knew that if he had sensed Vader, it was most
likely that the Dark Lord had sensed him, too. Ben was
not afraid of confronting Vader again, but he didn't even
want to think about what would happen to Luke if he
failed to shut down the tractor beam.
Ben was careful to avoid detection as he made his
way through the battle station's maze of corridors and
lift tubes. Moving stealthily from a lateral transport to a
long, empty corridor, he clung to the shadows until he

182

finally arrived at his destination: a narrow bridge that
spanned a wide, deep shaft that delivered him to the
tractor beam power terminal, a cylindrical structure that
stood atop a thirty-five-kilometer-tall generator tower.
A narrow ledge wrapped around the terminal. Ben
stepped carefully onto the ledge and moved around the
power terminal until he could reach the generator controls. He pressed one lever, then edged further around
the terminal until he found the controls for the tractor
beam power coupling.
He heard footsteps approach. Ben maneuvered his
body around the terminal to conceal himself from a
detachment of stormtroopers as they crossed the shaftspanning bridge. Two stormtroopers remained behind
while the others proceeded.
After Ben readjusted the generator controls and confirmed that the tractor beam was disabled, he used the
Force to make the two remaining stormtroopers think
they heard a muffled explosion. While the stormtroopers were distracted, Ben stepped back onto the bridge,
then moved quickly away from the terminal. He darted
into another corridor, and began making his way back to
the control room to rejoin his allies.
Ben eventually arrived at the battle station's equatorial area, and then to the same level as Docking Bay
327. He was moving through a corridor when he heard
more stormtroopers approach, and he ducked into a dark
alcove. As the stormtroopers passed his position, one

183

trooper commented, "We think they may be splitting
up. They may be on levels five and six now, sir."
Splitting up? Ben wasn't certain, but he suspected
that the stormtrooper was referring to Luke and the others. All he could do was hope that Luke was all right.
Once the stormtroopers were gone, Ben emerged
from the alcove and drew his lightsaber from his belt.
He did not activate the blade but held it ready. He had a
feeling he would be using his weapon sooner than later,
and he had a feeling he would be using it against
Vader.
Ever since he had first sensed Vader's presence on
the battle station, he had become increasingly certain
that Vader knew he was on board. He had even allowed
the possibility that Vader had let him deactivate the tractor beam, all in an effort to lure him into a trap. Ben had
no fear of whatever Vader might have in store for him,
but he still had to do everything in his power to make
sure Luke would escape safely.
If Ben failed that, he believed all his years on
Tatooine would have been for nothing, and all would
be lost.
He proceeded through the corridor, but with less
caution. For now he knew he was destined to encounter
Vader, and that it would be their final reunion.
Ben was still clutching his lightsaber when he
reached an access tunnel that led back to Docking Bay
184

327. As he entered the tunnel, he sighted a tall, shadowy
form at the tunnel's other the end. Even if Ben had never
seen Darth Vader's cybernetic incarnation via a HoloNet
broadcast on Tatooine, he still would have sensed the
power of his former apprentice, now concealed within
black armor.
Vader had already activated the red blade of his
lightsaber. For a moment, he stood as still as a statue.
Then he moved forward, his black cape sweeping behind
him as he practically glided across the tunnel's floor
toward Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Obi-Wan activated his lightsaber and stepped slowly
forward. He'd fought Vader before, and he hadn't been
afraid then, either. As Vader drew closer, Obi-Wan
thought with morbid amusement, He's taller than I
remember.
"I've been waiting for you, Obi-Wan," Vader said
as he stepped even closer. "We meet again, at last. The
circle is now complete."
Obi-Wan angled his lightsaber to assume an offensive position.
Vader continued, "When I left you, I was but the
learner; now I am the master."
"Only a master of evil, Darth," Obi-Wan said. He
used Vader's Sith Lord title mockingly, as if he were
addressing an unfortunately named child. He had hoped
the insult might catch Vader off guard, and followed
with a sudden lunge, but Vader easily blocked it with

185

his own weapon. There was a loud electric crackle as
the blades made contact.
Obi-Wan swung again and again, and Vader parried
each strike.
Vader said, "Your powers are weak, old man,"
Although Obi-Wan could only imagine what was
left of Vader's features behind the black mask, he somehow suspected that Vader was smiling. "You can't win,
Darth," Obi-Wan said. "If you strike me down, I shall
become more powerful than you can possibly
imagine."
"You should not have come back."
Their lightsabers clashed again and again. And as
their battle continued, they moved closer to the main
doorway that led directly to the Millennium Falcon's
hangar.
Obi-Wan risked a glance through the hangar's open
doorway and saw four stormtroopers guarding the
Falcon. He also sensed that Luke was nearby. Hoping to
cause a distraction that would allow Luke to board the
Falcon, he attacked Vader more vigorously. The noise
of clashing lightsabers echoed into the hangar, attracting the stormtroopers' attention.
With his peripheral vision, Obi-Wan saw the stormtroopers leave their stations beside the Falcon and run
toward him and Vader. He continued his attack on
Vader, and several exchanges later, he sensed Luke's
movement and knew his plan had worked. He risked

186

another glance into the hangar to see several figures racing for the Falcon's landing ramp: the droids, Chewbacca,
Han Solo, Luke, and — Leia!
Obi-Wan hadn't known that Princess Leia was on
the battle station, but he recognized the girl in the white
dress from the hologram that R2-D2 had displayed. ObiWan did not believe in luck or coincidences, and seeing
Luke unwittingly reunited with his twin sister, he knew
that it was not a tractor beam that had brought him to the
battle station, but the will of the Force.
His fleeting glance also registered that Luke had
paused behind his friends. Luke stood a short distance
from the landing ramp and was staring straight at him,
gaping.
Obi-Wan realized there was only one way Luke,
Leia, and the others would escape the battle station
alive. He smiled as he looked away from Luke, then
closed his eyes and raised his lightsaber up before him.
Darth Vader did not hesitate to strike.

187

INTERLUDE

Luke Skywalker recalled the last moment he saw
Ben alive, fighting Darth Vader on the Death Star. Ben
had glanced at him from across the hangar, and then
closed his eyes as he turned to face Vader. Vader's
lightsaber cut right through Ben's robes, Ben's body
had
vanished...
And then he told me to run!
Luke didn't know if he would ever completely understand the Force, but he was relieved to know that
somehow, it had kept Ben alive. Ben's voice — his
spirit — had aided Luke when he'd flown his X-wing
starfighter on the mission to destroy the Death Star.
Without Ben's help, Luke doubted he ever could have
accomplished that.
Luke had not yet finished reading Ben's journal,
and wondered if he'd find anything in it about Jedi

188

spirits. Do all Jedi become spirits like Ben? Or was it
something Ben learned how to do on his own? Luke had
no idea.
And again, he found himself wishing Ben were there
to answer his questions.

189

CHAPTER

THIRTEEN

Thanks to the teachings of Qui-Gon Jinn, Obi-Wan
Kenobi was one with the Force.
Where he had been once but an isolated drop of
water in a great sea, he was now the sea itself. It was a
sea that had no surface or floor, which flowed everywhere and through everything. The Force transcended
time and space. Civilizations would rise and fall, stars
would form and die, but the Force would never end.
As a spiritual entity, Obi-Wan was not hampered by
the laws of physics. He could travel across the galaxy
from one world to another by merely thinking of the
journey. He could not only communicate with the living
but manifest an illusion of his former physical self. He
could even communicate with fellow spirits, should
they be mutually inclined.
After the destruction of the Death Star, Obi-Wan
limited his communication with Luke Skywalker. This
was not because Obi-Wan's powers would have been in

190

any way diminished by further communication, but
because he knew that there were a great many things
that Luke could learn only from the living — not only
his friends but his enemies as well. More precisely, there
were things Luke had to learn for himself, and sometimes on his own. Ben was a guiding spirit, not a
meddling one.
But Obi-Wan's spirit always remained watchful.
After Luke accidentally became catatonic while attempting to use the Force to meditate, Obi-Wan entered
Luke's dreams and guided him to conquer his innate
fear of Darth Vader. And when the very unprepared
Luke and Leia — still unaware of the fact that they were
siblings — actually confronted Vader on Mimban, ObiWan again intervened, bolstering Luke's abilities to
help him defeat the Dark Lord.
Vader should have died on Mimban, Obi-Wan
thought ruefully. Just as he should have died on
Mustafar, Yavin, and more places than I can name.
And yet Darth Vader lived.
As powerful as Obi-Wan was in spirit, he had no
influence over the Sith Lords. In fact, to be anywhere
near their proximity was a draining experience for any
entity.
And there were other dangers to consider. Yoda had
told him that ancient Sith Lords had at least once developed a weapon called the Thought Bomb to destroy Jedi
and capture their souls. Obi-Wan did not know whether

191

Palpatine or Vader possessed or were capable of creating a Thought Bomb or if such a weapon could consume
an already existing spirit, but he knew that if he allowed
himself to be lured into any Sith-set trap, he would be of
little use to Luke.
It was three years after the Battle of Yavin, when the
Rebel Alliance had relocated to the ice planet Hoth, that
Ben manifested himself as a vision to Luke. Luke had
escaped the clutches of a bloodthirsty wampa on his
own, but he was also injured and lost, far from the Rebel
base. Exhausted by his struggle to survive and by the
sub-freezing winds that tore at him from all directions,
Luke collapsed against the hard, snow-covered ground.
Obi-Wan spoke. "Luke . . . Luke."
Slowly, Luke raised his head as if it were a massive weight. Obi-Wan appeared as a shimmering,
spectral form a short distance in front of him. Obi-Wan
could see in Luke's confused expression that he was
wondering whether he was hallucinating. Luke said
aloud, "Ben?"
Ben said, "You will go to the Dagobah system."
"Dagobah system?" Luke repeated, still confused.
"There you will learn from Yoda," Obi-Wan continued, "the Jedi Master who instructed me."
Luke groaned. "Ben . . . Ben."
Obi-Wan knew that Luke was in shock. But he also
knew that help would arrive within seconds, in the form
of Han Solo riding a tauntaun. Han Solo would believe

192

that he had arrived upon Luke's position by pure luck,
but it was Obi-Wan who had steered Han's mount to the
north of the wampa's ice cave.
Obi-Wan dematerialized just a moment before Han
arrived upon Luke.
Obi-Wan's spirit monitored Luke's recovery in the
bacta tank at the Rebel base, and through the terrible
battle at Hoth. When the Rebels were forced to evacuate, he watched Luke's progress. He did not intervene
when Luke crash-landed his X-wing into the Dagobah
swamp — Obi-Wan did not want Luke to leave before
his training was complete.
Obi-Wan was a secret witness to the moment Luke
unknowingly met Yoda, who was reluctant to introduce
himself until he was convinced of Luke's conviction to
study the ways of the Jedi. Obi-Wan even watched
with some amusement as Yoda offered to take Luke to
meet "the Jedi Master" he sought, only to bring Luke
to his own low-ceilinged hut under the large roots of an
ancient tree.
Addressing Luke as he prepared some food in a
steaming pot, Yoda said, "Why wish you become
Jedi? Hm?"
"Mostly because of my father, I guess," Luke
replied.
"Ah, father," Yoda said with interest. "Powerful
Jedi was he, mmm, powerful Jedi, mmm."

193

"Oh, come on!" Luke said angrily. "How could
you know my father? You don't even know who I am.
Oh, I don't know what I'm doing here. We're wasting
our time."
Yoda looked away from Luke and leaned his weight
onto the gimer stick that he used as a walking staff. ObiWan sensed the aged Jedi Master's disappointment even
before he said, "I cannot teach him. The boy has no
patience."
"He will learn patience," Obi-Wan said aloud, his
voice echoing slightly within the hut.
Startled by the disembodied voice, Luke glanced
around the hut, searching for Obi-Wan.
"Hmmm," muttered Yoda. He turned slowly to face
Luke. Speaking to Obi-Wan, he said, "Much anger in
him, like his father."
Obi-Wan's voice replied, "Was I any different when
you taught me?"
"Hah," Yoda said. "He is not ready."
Luke finally stopped looking for Obi-Wan
and looked into his host's wise old eyes. Luke
gasped, "Yoda!"
Yoda nodded.
"I am ready," Luke protested. " I . . . Ben! I . . . I can
be a Jedi. Ben, tell him I'm ready." Luke started to get
up, only to smack his head in the hut's ceiling.
"Ready, are you?" Yoda said with disdain. "What
know you of ready? For eight hundred years have I
194

trained Jedi. My own counsel will I keep on who is to
be trained! A Jedi must have the deepest commitment,
the most serious mind." Tilting his head back to address
the invisible Obi-Wan, Yoda continued, "This one a
long time have I watched. All his life has he looked
away . . . to the future, to the horizon. Never his mind
on where he was. Hmm? What he was doing. Hmph."
He raised his gimer stick and jabbed Luke. "Adventure.
Heh! Excitement. Heh! A Jedi craves not these things."
Then he lowered his gimer stick, glared at Luke and
said, "You are reckless!"
Obi-Wan said, "So was I, if you remember."
"He is too old," Yoda said firmly. "Yes, too old to
begin training."
Luke said desperately, "But I've learned so much."
Yoda sighed. Again addressing Obi-Wan's spirit, he
asked, "Will he finish what he begins?"
Luke did not wait for Obi-Wan's answer, and said,
"I won't fail you."
Yoda returned his gaze to Luke, who added, "I'm
not afraid."
"Oh," Yoda said, his eyes widening slightly.
Lowering his voice to a threatening tone, he said, "You
will be. You will be."
Luke's training was brutal. Not just the obstacle
courses that had him climbing vines and leaping through
the swamp with Yoda secured to his back, but also the
195

meditation exercises to open himself to the Force.
Luke obeyed Yoda's every instruction and never
broke down.
Obi-Wan's spirit silently watched Luke's progress
as the young man tackled every challenge. Every day,
he's getting stronger, Obi-Wan thought.
Still, Luke was limited by his self-doubts, and his
impulse to confront danger. He had entered a cave that
was inexplicably strong with the dark side of the Force,
only to have a nightmarish confrontation with an apparition of Darth Vader. He had refused to believe the
Force could be used to elevate his sinking X-wing until
Yoda showed him that it was possible. Even more crippling were his fears, especially after meditation had
yielded a vision of the future, of a city in the clouds,
where his friends Leia and Han would meet with pain.
"I've got to go to them," Luke said.
Yoda sighed. "Decide you must how to serve them
best. If you leave now, help them you could. But you
would destroy all for which they have fought and
suffered."
And yet Luke decided to leave Dagobah. As darkness fell, Luke put on his orange flight suit and checked
his gear while R2-D2 positioned himself into the
X-wing's astromech socket.
"Luke!" said Yoda, watching from a nearby knoll.
"You must complete the training."

196

"I can't keep the vision out of my head," Luke
replied as he hastily inspected his ship. "They're my
friends. I've got to help them."
"You must not go!" Yoda said desperately.
Luke faced Yoda and said, "But Han and Leia will
die if I don't."
"You don't know that," replied the disembodied
voice of Obi-Wan's spirit. If Yoda can't convince Luke
to stay, perhaps I can.
Turning in response to Obi-Wan's voice, Luke
watched as a slightly shimmering light began to glow in
the air behind Yoda. Then the light materialized into the
form of Obi-Wan, who said gravely, "Even Yoda cannot see their fate."
"But I can help them!" Luke said. "I feel the Force!"
"But you cannot control it," Obi-Wan said. "This is
a dangerous time for you, when you will be tempted by
the dark side of the Force."
Yoda said, "Yes, yes. To Obi-Wan you listen. The
cave. Remember your failure at the cave!"
"But I've learned so much since then, Master Yoda,"
Luke said as he returned his attention to his X-wing. "I
promise to return and finish what I've begun. You have
my word."
Obi-Wan said, "It is you and your abilities the
Emperor wants. That is why your friends are made to
suffer."

197

"That's why I have to go," Luke said.
"Luke," Obi-Wan said, "I don't want to lose you to
the Emperor the way I lost Vader." To himself, ObiWan added, The way I lost Anakin.
"You won't," Luke said.
Yoda said, "Stopped they must be. On this all
depends. Only a fully trained Jedi Knight with the Force
as his ally will conquer Vader and his Emperor." As
Luke stowed the last of his gear onto the X-wing, Yoda
continued, "If you end your training now, if you choose
the quick and easy path, as Vader did, you will become
an agent of evil."
"Patience," Obi-Wan said with emphasis, hoping
Luke would carry the word with him.
"And sacrifice Han and Leia?" Luke snapped. He
was anything but patient.
Yoda answered, "If you honor what they fight
for . . . yes!"
Luke reached for the lower rung of the X-wing's
retractable ladder and looked away from Obi-Wan and
Yoda. Obi-Wan said, "If you choose to face Vader, you
will do it alone. I cannot interfere."
"I understand," Luke muttered. Then he climbed the
ladder to the starfighter's open cockpit and said, "Artoo,
fire up the converters."
As the X-Wing's engines fired up, Obi-Wan
said, "Luke, don't give in to hate — that leads to the
dark side."

198

"Strong is Vader," Yoda added. "Mind what you
have learned. Save you it can."
"I will," Luke said as he pulled on his helmet. "And
I'll return. I promise." The cockpit canopy lowered,
and the X-wing lifted off from the ground and ascended
into the night sky.
As Yoda raised his gaze to watch the departing
X-Wing, Obi-Wan's luminous apparition faded into the
darkness. Yoda sighed, looked down at the ground, and
shook his head sadly. "Told you, I did," he said.
"Reckless is he. Now matters are worse."
Obi-Wan's disembodied voice said, "That boy is
our last hope."
Yoda returned his gaze to the sky and said, "No.
There is another."
Obi-Wan knew Yoda was speaking of Luke's sister,
Leia. Although Leia shared Luke's bloodline and was
certainly strong-willed, and although Obi-Wan had
always respected Yoda's beliefs, he somehow remained
convinced that only one person could defeat the Sith
Lords, and that person was Luke.

199

CHAPTER

FOURTEEN

Luke Skywalker made the final adjustments to his
new lightsaber. He was sitting at the table in the living
area of Ben Kenobi's hut on Tatooine. Ben's journal
rested on the table, its pages opened to the section on
lightsabers. R2-D2 stood across the room, silently
watching Luke.
I wish Ben were here, Luke thought absently, and
not just because he had questions about Darth Vader.
Sometimes, he just missed Ben.
Ben's spirit had not communicated with him since
Dagobah, which did not surprise Luke. After all, Luke
had ignored Ben and Yoda's cautions, and had gone
directly to the Bespin system, and straight into Darth
Vader's trap.
Ben had been good to his word. When Luke chose to
face Darth Vader, Ben's spirit had done nothing to interfere. In hindsight, Luke realized that Ben and Yoda

200

were right, that he should have stayed on Dagobah, for
he accomplished very little by going to Cloud City.
I didn't stop Boba Fett from taking Han. I only
endangered Leia and the others when they circled back
to Cloud City to get me. I didn't rescue any of my friends.
They rescued me!
And what did I accomplish? All he could think
of was his confrontation with Vader, not just that
he had survived the duel but that he had gained some
information. As for the value of that devastating information . . .
Is Vader really my father?
Again, Luke felt the phantom pain at his right
wrist.
R2-D2 saw Luke staring blankly at nothing in particular, and the droid chirped in concern.
Luke looked up at R2-D2 and said, "Don't worry,
I'm fine." Returning his attention to the lightsaber, he
added, "Well, I guess I'd better test it." He got up, carrying the lightsaber as he headed for the door. The
astromech droid followed him outside.
It was early evening, with only a few stars visible
in the sky. Luke held the lightsaber in his right hand.
He was nervous. Even though he had followed
Ben's instructions to the letter, and had checked and
re-checked every part of the lightsaber during its construction, he still allowed the possibility that the weapon

201

might explode. It was this uncertainty that had prompted
him to test the weapon outside. If it did explode, he
didn't want to destroy Ben's house along with it.
Watching Luke, R2-D2 beeped anxiously, and then
extended a manipulator arm in his direction.
"You're offering to test my lightsaber?"
R2-D2 whistled affirmatively.
"Thanks, Artoo, but I wouldn't be much of a Jedi if
I let you or anyone else do that."
R2-D2 retracted his manipulator and trembled, kicking up dirt.
"Go back inside," Luke ordered.
R2-D2 protested with a loud, blurting noise.
"Go on," Luke said. "If something happens, I need
you to tell Leia." Luke thought, Yeah. Tell her Luke, the
galaxy's biggest idiot, flash-flamed himself into a black
crisp because he couldn't follow an elementary circuit
diagram.
R2-D2 stomped off back to the house, protesting all
the way.
Luke relaxed and let his breath out. He waited until
R2 had entered the house, then took another deep breath,
held it, and pressed the lightsaber's activation plate.
VMMMMM —!
The lightsaber's gleaming green blade extended to
its full length, just under a meter. Luke moved it back
and forth through the air, listening to it hum.

202

Luke released his held breath. He hadn't really
expected the lightsaber to explode, but was still relieved
that it hadn't. The weapon felt comfortable in his hand,
even better balanced than his previous lightsaber.
But will it cut? Luke walked over to a thin spire of
rock that jutted up from the dry ground. He swept the
blade down at an angle through the top of the rock. He felt
no resistance as the blade traveled through the rock, but
there was a loud crack as the rock separated and the top
piece slid down the smooth surface of the angled cut.
Holding the lightsaber, Luke felt grateful to Ben
for having left his journal behind. I never would have
gotten this far without Ben, Luke thought. And then,
because he had learned that lightsaber construction
was a rite of passage for a Jedi, he wondered, Am I a
Jedi now?
Luke was unaware that Obi-Wan's spirit, even now,
could hear his thoughts.
Obi-Wan's spirit knew that Luke had to complete
one final task before he could call himself a Jedi.
Liberating Han Solo from Jabba the Hutt wasn't
easy, but Luke Skywalker and his allies pulled it off.
Part of their daring rescue plan had included R2-D2
smuggling Luke's new lightsaber into Jabba's palace
and delivering it to Luke when a signal was given. The
plan had worked extremely well.

203

Immediately after the rescue, Luke returned with
R2-D2 to Dagobah. Luke had hoped to resume his training with Yoda, but by the time they arrived on the
swamp world, the aged Jedi Master was close to death.
Luke was with Yoda when he died. Night had fallen,
and Yoda had been lying under blankets on his small
bed when he breathed his last. Just seconds later, Luke
watched as Yoda's body dematerialized and vanished.
After 900 years, Yoda had finally become one with the
Force.
But moments before he died, Yoda confirmed the
truth about Darth Vader. Vader was Luke's father, and
only by confronting him again could Luke become a
Jedi. Yoda also disclosed that there existed another
Skywalker.
Leaving Yoda's hut, Luke stepped out into the darkness and readied his X-wing to leave Dagobah. But then
he looked to R2-D2 and said, "I can't do it, Artoo. I
can't go on alone."
It was then that Obi-Wan chose to speak: "Yoda will
always be with you."
Luke turned. "Obi-Wan!"
Obi-Wan's shimmering apparition materialized
before a nearby grove of trees. He moved away from the
trees to stand facing Luke.
Advancing toward Obi-Wan's spirit, Luke said,
"Why didn't you tell me? You told me Vader betrayed
and murdered my father."
204

"Your father was seduced by the dark side of the
Force," Obi-Wan replied. "He ceased to be Anakin
Skywalker and became Darth Vader. When that happened, the good man who was your father was destroyed.
So what I told you was true . . . from a certain paint
of view."
"A certain point of view?" Luke echoed. The look
on his face made it clear to Obi-Wan that he found the
words distasteful.
"Luke, you're going to find that many of the truths
we cling to depend greatly on our own point of view."
Obi-Wan shifted his apparition, easing himself to sit on
the moss-covered trunk of a fallen tree. "Anakin was a
good friend."
Luke sat down beside Obi-Wan's apparition. ObiWan continued, "When I first knew him, your father
was already a great pilot. But I was amazed how strongly
the Force was with him. I took it upon myself to train
him as a Jedi. I thought that I could instruct him just as
well as Yoda. I was wrong."
"There is still good in him," Luke said.
Unconvinced, Obi-Wan said dismissively, "He's
more machine now than man. Twisted and evil-"
Luke shook his head. "I can't do it, Ben."
"You cannot escape your destiny. You must face
Darth Vader again."
"I can't kill my own father."
Obi-Wan looked away from Luke. "Then the
205

Emperor has already won," he said with a sigh. "You
were our only hope."
"Yoda spoke of another."
Obi-Wan returned his gaze to Luke. "The other he
spoke of is your twin sister."
Luke looked baffled. "But I have no sister."
"To protect you both from the Emperor, you were
hidden from your father when you were born. The
Emperor knew, as I did, if Anakin were to have any offspring, they would be a threat to him. That is the reason
why your sister remains safely anonymous."
Luke's eyes went wide with realization. "Leia!" he
said. "Leia's my sister."
"Your insight serves you well," Obi-Wan said.
Making sure Luke had his complete attention, Obi-Wan
continued, "Bury your feelings deep down, Luke. They
do you credit. But they could be made to serve the
Emperor."
Luke nodded in agreement.
And then Obi-Wan vanished into the darkness.
Obi-Wan's spirit was invisible but present when
Luke arrived in the Endor system, where the Empire
had constructed a new Death Star battle station. When
Luke surrendered to Darth Vader on the Endor forest
moon, he listened as Luke maintained his belief that a
remnant of Anakin Skywalker remained within Vader

206

and had not been entirely consumed by evil. Luke urged
his father to let go of his hate.
Vader said, "It is too late for me, son." Then he signaled to two stormtroopers to escort Luke to a waiting
shuttle that would carry them to the Death Star. As the
stormtroopers moved up behind Luke, Vader added,
"The Emperor will show you the true nature of the
Force. He is your Master now."
Luke stared at Vader for a moment before he said,
"Then my father is truly dead."
Obi-Wan's spirit wished he had convinced Luke of
this fact earlier.
After Vader delivered Luke to the Emperor's throne
room on the Death Star, and the black-cloaked Emperor
orchestrated a lightsaber duel to test father against son,
Obi-Wan became even more resolved that Luke had
been unprepared for the confrontation. He's afraid of
what will happen to Leia if he fails to defeat Vader, ObiWan thought. He must kill Vader.
But when Luke finally managed to disarm and subdue Vader, Obi-Wan's spirit practically cringed when
the Emperor fixed his yellow eyes on Luke and said,
"Good! Your hate has made you powerful. Now, fulfill
your destiny and take your father's place at my side!"
Obi-Wan feared that he would lose Luke as he had
Anakin. But then Luke deactivated his lightsaber, faced
the Emperor, and said, "Never!" He flung his lightsaber

207

aside. "I'll never turn to the dark side. You've failed,
Your Highness. I am a Jedi, like my father before me."
The Emperor scowled. "So be it . . . Jedi."
And then the Emperor raised his gnarled fingers and
unleashed his wrath on Luke, launching bolts of blue
lightning at him. Luke screamed and writhed in agony,
and then the Emperor released another barrage.
Vader was lying near the throne room's elevator
shaft, where he'd collapsed during his duel with Luke.
While the Emperor continued his assault on Luke, ObiWan's spirit monitored Vader as the injured figure
staggered to his feet and returned to the Emperor's side.
"Father, please," Luke groaned. "Help me."
Obi-Wan knew that Vader would never help, and he
felt almost overwhelmed by a sense of dread. Luke
would soon be dead, and Vader would remain the
Emperor's puppet. In fact, Obi-Wan was so convinced
of Vader's nature that he was stunned by what happened next.
Vader grabbed the Emperor and lifted him off his
feet. The deadly blue lightning fell away from Luke and
arced back from the Emperor's fingertips and crashed
down upon the Sith Lords. Vader carried the Emperor
across the throne room and hurled him down into the
elevator shaft. A moment later, the Emperor exploded
in a great release of dark energy.
Vader collapsed near the edge of the elevator
shaft. Luke went to his side and eased his armored body

208

to the floor. A thin, wheezing noise hissed from the ventilator on Vader's mask. His breathing apparatus was
damaged.
Had Obi-Wan's spirit not witnessed Vader's action,
he never would have believed it. Vader, the same monster that Obi-Wan had left to die on Mustafar, had
sacrificed himself to save his son. And suddenly ObiWan realized where he had failed. For unlike Luke,
Obi-Wan had not only believed that Anakin was completely consumed by the dark side, but had actually
refused to believe that any goodness could have
remained within Vader. And by refusing to allow that
possibility, Obi-Wan had condemned not only his former friend but his own capacity for hope.
Fortunately, Luke's unwavering faith in his father's
innate goodness had proved to be a stronger force than
the power of the dark side.
Obi-Wan recalled what Qui-Gon Jinn's spirit had
told him so long ago, when he said that Obi-Wan was
not ready, and that he failed to understand. For so many
years, Obi-Wan had thought Qui-Gon meant that he
wasn't ready to comprehend details about Anakin's
conversion to the dark side. But now, he finally understood his Master's words.
I wasn't ready to forgive Anakin. And he won't be
entirely free unless I do.
Unfortunately, just as Obi-Wan realized that Anakin
Skywalker lived, he also knew that Anakin would not
209

live much longer. As Luke hauled his dying father
toward a shuttle, Obi-Wan's spirit shifted his own
psyche to another realm. And he waited.
After Anakin died in his son's arms, Obi-Wan called
out into the void, "Anakin."
A moment later, Obi-Wan heard a familiar voice
return from the darkness. "Obi-Wan? Master, I'm so
sorry. So very, very —"
"Anakin, listen carefully," Obi-Wan interrupted.
"You are in the netherworld of the Force, but if you ever
wish to revisit corporeal space, then I still have one
thing left to teach you. A way to become one with the
Force. If you choose this path to immortality, then you
must listen now, before your consciousness fades."
Obi-Wan sensed confusion and remorse in
Anakin's psyche, then Anakin answered, "But
Master . . . why me?"
"Because you ended the horror, Anakin," Obi-Wan
said. "Because you fulfilled the prophecy. Because you
were . . . and are . . . the Chosen One."
But Obi-Wan knew in his heart that those were not
the only reasons. He added, "Because I was wrong about
you. And because I am your friend."
Anakin answered quietly, "Thank you, Master."
Luke Skywalker managed to haul his father's body
into an Imperial shuttle and escaped the Death Star
210

before his Rebel Alliance allies destroyed the battle station. After landing on the forest moon, he gathered
deadwood to build a funeral pyre to cremate Anakin's
armored remains. As he watched the flames rise into the
night sky, he wished he had somehow been able to help
his father sooner.
When the pyre burned no more, Luke rejoined his
friends. The Rebels were having a victory celebration
with their new allies, the diminutive fur-covered Ewoks,
at the Ewoks' treetop village. Shortly after Luke arrived,
he looked away from his jubilant friends to see the spectral, luminescent forms of Obi-Wan and Yoda appear
nearby, against the darkness of the forest canopy. A
moment later, a third spirit appeared beside the others.
It was Anakin Skywalker.
The Jedi had returned.

211

EPILOGUE

Obi-Wan Kenobi saw Luke Skywalker standing a
short distance from the entry dome of the Lars family
homestead on Tatooine. The twin suns were closing in
on the horizon and cast long shadows across the desert.
Luke was facing the sunset, his back to Obi-Wan. A
warm, gentle wind was blowing in from the west.
But neither Obi-Wan nor Luke was really on
Tatooine.
It was five years after the Battle of Endor. Luke
Skywalker was in his modest apartment at the former
Imperial Palace on Coruscant, where he had reluctantly
taken up residence after the Rebel Alliance defeated the
Empire and formed the New Republic. Lying on his
bed, he was sound asleep, and dreaming of Tatooine.
Obi-Wan said, "Luke?"
Luke turned away from the suns. "Hello, Ben," he
said with a welcoming smile. "Been a long time."

212

"It has indeed," Obi-Wan replied. "And I'm afraid
that it will be longer still until next time. I've come to
say good-bye, Luke."
The desert landscape and the sky itself seemed to
shimmer and shudder, and Obi-Wan realized that Luke
was now suddenly aware of the fact that he was dreaming. Luke's smile melted, and he looked at Obi-Wan
cautiously.
Sensing Luke's thoughts, Obi-Wan said, "No, I'm
not a dream. But the distances separating us have become
too great for me to appear to you in any other way." He
gestured at the surrounding dreamscape and added,
"Now, even this last path is being closed to me."
"No," Luke said. "You can't leave us, Ben. We
need you."
"You don't need me, Luke," Obi-Wan said, lifting
his eyebrows slightly as he smiled. "You are a Jedi."
Then his smile faded. "At any rate, the decision is not
mine to make. I have lingered too long already, and can
no longer postpone my journey from this life to what
lies beyond."
Luke looked away from Obi-Wan, who sensed the
young man's thoughts had turned to Yoda. Despite all
that Luke had learned about the Force, he remained
deeply saddened by the deaths of his friends.
"It is the pattern of all life to move on," Obi-Wan
said. "You, too, will face this journey one day. You are

213

strong in the Force, Luke, and with perseverance and
discipline you will grow stronger still." Obi-Wan's gaze
hardened as he added, "But you must never relax your
guard. The Emperor is gone, but the dark side is still
powerful. Never forget that."
"I won't."
"You will yet face great dangers, Luke." Then ObiWan's expression softened, and his smile returned as he
continued, "But you will also find new allies at times
and places where you expect them least."
"New allies?" Luke said, genuinely curious. "Who
are they?"
Knowing that it was best not to reveal everything to
Luke, Obi-Wan chose to ignore the question. As he felt
himself begin to slip away from Luke's dream, he said,
"And now, farewell. I loved you as a son, and as a student, and as a friend. Until we meet again, may the Force
be with you."
"Ben — !"
Obi-Wan's form had vanished, but his psyche lingered long enough to sense Luke think to himself, Then
I am alone. I am the last of the Jedi.
"Not the last of the old Jedi, Luke," Obi-Wan said,
his voice trailing off across the dimension of dreams.
"The first of the new."
And Obi-Wan finally moved on.

214

ABOUT THE

AUTHOR

Ryder Windham's many books for Scholastic include
Star Wars: The Rise and Fall of Darth Vader and junior
novelizations of the Star Wars Trilogy, Indiana Jones
and the Raiders of the Lost Ark, and Indiana Jones and
the Last Crusade. He is also the author of Star Wars:
The Ultimate Visual Guide (DK) and Star Wars: Jedi
vs. Sith: The Essential Guide to the Force (Del Rey). He
lives in Providence, Rhode Island, with his family.

