do(this)
by Stephen Graham Jones
Stephen Graham Jones’s most recent novel is Demon Theory. His next will
be Ledfeather. Other books include The Fast Red Road, The Bird Is Gone
, All the Beautiful Sinners, and Bleed Into Me. Over eighty of his short
stories have been sold to publications that range from Literal Latté to
Cemetery Dance. His new tale about more than one obsession is his first
for Asimov’s.
****
Leo’s dad started talking about it over dinner, just thinking out loud like he
did. It was something he’d heard at work. Leo stabbed his mashed
potatoes with his fork and endured. He even made it a game: if he could
get the next bite down before his dad interrupted himself again, that was a
point, and when he had enough points then his plate would be clean and he
could get back to his room for the night.
But then his dad, his thoughts were just stumbling all over
themselves, each one branching off the middle of the last one, so that
instead of a straight line of reasoning like Leo could have appreciated, it
was just a jumbled snowball of conjecture. There was nothing elegant about
it. More than that, it was precisely this kind of second grade, innocent
exuberance that always embarrassed Leo about his dad. It was easier just
to stay in his room.
As for Leo’s mom, the few glances he cut her way, she was stabbing
her potatoes as well. Or shaping them, maybe, making a kind of waterfall
for the gravy cupped at the top of the volcano.
Had his dad noticed, taken the time to look from plate to plate, his
verbal chalkboard session probably would have started him down a whole
different track: inherited behaviors, convergent evolution, and on and on
until the snowball rolled into some big avalanche that buried them all, only to
be found next week, maybe, when work or school came knocking.
There was no chance of that, though.
Not the avalanche, but his dad noticing anything as mundane as his
wife or son.
What he’d heard at work, at the Tank as he called it—he’d even

bought a special tin lunch box, like thinking was supposed to be a real
job—was a riddle of sorts. A simple enough question, if you dropped it in
any normal cafeteria, but at the Tank they specialized in making the simple
complicated, the potentially useful just wholly impractical.
The only reason Leo was even paying half-attention, really, was that it
had a bit to do with his advanced study question for the month—Did
language precede thought, or did thought precede language? The
chicken/egg shuffle. And he’d been GT long enough to know that he wasn’t
really supposed to come up with a right answer. It was more about “honing
his reasoning capabilities,” “asking penetrating questions,” “probing the
world with his mind.”
Like they thought he was in training to be his dad or something.
Yeah.
The guy who’d had the same bite of potatoes on his fork now for
maybe four minutes, and wouldn’t even notice they were cold when he
finally put them in his mouth.
The riddle he was still thrilled with—for the moment, anyway—had to
do with classification. Not genus and species and kingdom, nothing Latin or
Linnaean, but more about distinguishing characteristics: if there were only
one thing that could be said to separate the man-animal from all the “other”
animals (his quotes), what might that be?
It was this kind of stuff that Leo’s dad packed his lunch each morning
for.
Leo huffed some accidental air out his nose. Instead of laughing.
His dad finally put his potatoes in his mouth. They may as well have
been crushed ants. “And...?” he said, motioning with his fork for Leo to take
a stab.
Leo put another glob of potatoes in his mouth instead.
His dad nodded, already focusing all the way through Leo, and
dropped into an explanation about how it wasn’t anything biological, of
course, that went without saying, and it couldn’t be as easy as
consciousness either, as that was, for now anyway, impossible to test for,
and it couldn’t really be language either, as prairie dogs had vocabulary,
birds had syntax, primates could be taught to sign, and then there was

chemical language, pheromones and all that, to say nothing of the flashing
certain octopuses, octopi, engaged in to communicate—
Except ... what if there were a way to test for consciousness through
language, right?
Leo forked another bite in. His dad was rolling, out of control.
“Yeah, yeah ... then it’s just a matter of—of finding something peculiar
to human communication that’s not in any of the other language systems,
not in whale song, not in beaver tails, not in bee dances ... something—art.
Writing. Poetry. Yes. Poetry is specifically human. Take poetry. We ... we
classify it as a leisure activity, supposing—supposing that the reason
dolphins don’t speak in verse is that verse has no practical use like
extensions of their other forms of play might ... spinning, jumping, it’s all
exercise, practice for hunting or a mating ritual or whatever, but poetry’s just
leisure—or, or, I mean, it could have to do with spare time too, right? I
mean, they have a complex society but no civilization, no specialization that
would really allow for the downtime necessary for leisure activities, for
entertainment, for anything so idle, that’s not directly related to survival. Like
we’re beyond that, I know, I know, not just redefining ‘survival,’ but that’s not
the real question. The real question is what’s local only to poetry?”
It was another question for the gallery. For the prisoners.
“Let me compare thee to a summer day...” Leo’s mom intoned, as if
she couldn’t help herself, and Leo winced, because one thing his dad didn’t
ever need in these kinds of conversations was somebody else packing
their own clever handfuls of snow on.
But it was too late.
Leo looked up into his dad’s blank eyes.
“Exactly!” he said, gravy there at the corner of his lip. “That’s it. And
what is poetry if not—if not stretching a functionally limited vocabulary, a
limited set, to do things beyond its original parameters? This is ... yes. Do
you see what this is?”
Leo wasn’t sure who the question was for. But his plate was clean.
“Metaphor,” his dad whispered then, standing over the table as a form
of emphasis, then whispering reverently. “Humans are the only animals we
know of that use metaphor, that don’t describe things as they are, but—it’s

because we’re explorers, don’t you see? Because we’re adaptable to
different environments. We always have pioneers looking over the next
mountain, then coming back with tales of—whatever, dragons, castles,
automobiles, moons—that have to be explained in terms the rest of the
population doesn’t ... terms that don’t exist, I mean. See? So you say this is
like that, kind of. Yes. Instead of ever admitting something’s indescribable,
we push our words instead, rearrange them to—to compound and extend
meaning. Do rabbits use metaphor to describe their carrots, you think?”
“In cartoons, you mean?” Leo said, his plate so ready to deliver to the
sink.
“No,” his dad said, confusion there in his eyes, “real ones, man.”
Leo pursed his lips in what felt like pity, shook his head no, he didn’t
think real rabbits used metaphor that much in the wild, and then he was
gone like always, ghosting through the kitchen to the stairs, the solace of
his room.
“Carrots are carrots,” he mumbled to himself, checking again to make
sure his door was locked.
It was a true statement, one that he knew he could write a line of code
for: if($p = “orange”) && if($p(!(“basketball”)) then more than likely $p would
be a carrot. Provided he strung the conditionals out to account for every
non-carrot orange thing. And there were probably classes he could use,
even, if he wanted, a series of waterfalls to quit the function from cycling
through each non-carrot: edible/non-edible, vegetable/mineral,
terrestrial/Martian, “basketball-ish,” etc., like a penny falling through a series
of slots in a change sorter.
And it might even be fun that way.
Except right now he had to get his GT paper ready. It was the fourth
one for the month, and, thankfully, the last of the “Language” cycle.
The first week had been hidden codes, semiotics and stuff, which, in
spite of how inapplicable it seemed, had made Leo feel more rather than
less vulnerable to advertisements, and then it had been finding instances of
performative speech, like promises or when a preacher marries two
people, stupid stuff that both described and did a thing at the same time,
except Leo had gotten extra credit for writing a paper his dad would have
been proud of if he’d ever seen it. Its thesis was that programming, writing
code, was the purest instance possible of so-called “performative”

language. The words there weren’t even called words, but “functions,” but it
still counted as language because there was vocabulary, there was syntax,
there was communication, albeit between him and whatever system he was
on.
But now there was this chicken/egg game.
Leo rubbed his eyes with the heels of his hands.
Beside the rig he was on now was his machine from last semester,
before the rebuild. He still had it ported in just for data, but except for the
drive it was scrap, just a skeleton. And maybe that would be a good enough
answer for GT: not the chicken or the egg, but the chicken stripped down to
its “eggness” somehow.
But that was what his dad was trying to do downstairs.
And Leo wasn’t his dad.
He opened a terminal window, just to think.
All day, he’d been pretty sure his thesis was going to be that neither
came first, really, that they had to have happened at the exact same time,
language was thought, thought was language. Except now his dad had
polluted him.
Now what he was wondering was if code, which he valued above all
other language, mostly because it allowed him to talk to sane, reasonable
servers and engines and modules instead of insane people like he’d just
had to endure, what he wondered was if there was any metaphor in code?
Any figurative language? Not necessarily whimsical or poetic or anything
stupid like that, but something descriptive like his dad was saying, some
nested bit of syntax that really pushed the language ... some last-ditch
workaround he’d had to come up with at one time or another which could,
for the purposes of his paper at least, be called metaphor. And it would be
something elegant, of course, one of those magic moments where he
realized that this second statement, when recursing, and tricked into a false
positive, could tweak the initial statement in such a way that the bracketing
function could be made to do something halfway opposite from what it had
been intended, a kind of halfway opposite that was also a shortcut. And not
some pages-long line that you had to hold your breath to follow, either, but
something simple, that Leo could prove a point with.
If he were going to prove a point, though—this was GT after all—he

was going to have to have a data set to support it. At the very least he was
going to have to establish that code was a language, not just a bunch of
logical operators and plugged-in variables. That had been his only problem
with the last paper: the proofs looked too much like math for everybody.
Even though it was GT, yeah.
But Leo had all night, too.
This time he was going to make his proof look, if not like it was natural
language, which it practically already was if anybody would just take the time
to read it, then at least recognizable to the uninitiated. Which was all
different.
He was going to have to disguise all the functions, so that he could
make sentences. Human sentences, but still machine readable.
It took him all of about four minutes to come up with a generator, too:
all he had to do was write a simple little loop, dipping on one end from the
dictionary, then on the other end from the function list. The only real
twist—and he was proud of it, because it was elegant—was wrapping it to
account for conjunctions, for two functions working in tandem in a way that
didn’t cancel each other out. What it meant, what it would spit out once he
hit return and said please like he always did (but would never tell anybody
about), was, at first, a simple row of variables that, when stated, would act
for the functions. After that, though, and on into the night—he wasn’t sure
how far it would go, really, but had his processors shotgunned so wasn’t
worried either—what the loop would do was combine all three hundred-odd
functions and delimiters in every way possible. Which, exponentially, yeah,
this was going to be a large-size table, Leo guessed, a real Thanksgiving
feast. But it wasn’t like he was going to have to print it out or anything either,
just index it and give a sample. At the last moment, he even added another
line, a safety, just in case the recursion cycled all the way through the
dictionary but still had some functions left to assign variables too. All it did
was copy the initial loop and parse through the dictionary at random,
hyphenating monosyllabic words to allow new variable names, the same
way it was pairing the functions at the other end of the loop ... or maybe
even slopping them into an orgy, as some of the functions already were
pairs, he guessed, Frankenstein conglomerations of function that buried a
conditional within themselves.
Anyway.
“Please,” Leo whispered, and hit return with his third finger, then held

it down for exactly one second too long (luck), then ended up standing by
his bedroom door minutes later, listening to his dad’s ideas. He would have
just let him in so he could sit down, but that never worked out, as his dad
always just sat on the bed like nobody needed to sleep, and Leo would
finally have to ask him what he was on anyway—were they smoking stuff at
the Tank these days?
His dad, of course, would take it as bonding of some sort, as an
invitation to stay.
So listening at the door was the safest course of action, really.
After a while Leo sagged down the wall, plugged in his headphones
and half-slept until his dad angled the hand mirror under the door, caught
him.
“I wasn’t—” Leo started.
“—no problem,” his dad finished, then started over, the potatoes
probably still there on his lip for all the world to see.
Leo held his face in his hands and stared at the space under the
door, his dad’s watery shadow blotting out some of it.
“Just tell me what it’s like, Dad,” Leo finally said in one of the lulls that
he’d once thought were dramatic instead of digestive pauses.
“What?” his dad said back.
“Tell me what it’s like, I said.”
“What what’s like?”
“This other side of the mountain. This new place, this distinguishing
characteristic.”
“You want me to—?”
“If you’re so human, I mean, yeah. Okay. If you’re human, you can
speak in metaphor, right?”
“Go on.”
“Then describe speaking in metaphor for me. But use a metaphor to

do it.”
Silence. Blissful, perfect silence.
Sometimes you had to shoot the snowball with a flamethrower. Melt it
down so that it would take him a while to get it cold and slushy enough to
roll again.
Which was a simile, Leo was pretty sure. Or metonymy, synecdoche,
who knew.
But he had to do something.
Two minutes later, finally, his dad’s shadow drifted away from the
space beneath the door.
Leo nodded to himself, told himself to stand and then did, felt his way
to the desk.
The cycle was complete, it looked like, and hadn’t snagged or thrown
off any error messages.
All he had to do now was save the table to two places—his rule—post
the new loop to the school’s IP for class, then, in the morning maybe, or
during phys ed, write whatever cornball paper he was going to write.
Already he was forgetting.
Do potatoes make you sleepy?
Leo wasn’t sure, and didn’t care.
He saved the table in one place, then a better place, then hit return
after the loop just to keep the command line clean while he slept, like the
blinking cursor was a night light or something.
Except he didn’t get the blank line he wanted.
The loop wasn’t perfect, wasn’t over, was still spitting up terms,
random at first, and jumbled like ... how could there be misspellings if the
words were being sucked from the dictionary? That was stupid.
Leo tapped the side of his monitor the way his mom used to tap him
in church, when he needed to straighten up.

Like then, too, it worked.
The words were cleaner now. Not brighter, he already had the burn
rate dialed back as far as it would go, but spelled right. Still all mixed
together, though.
He hadn’t even looked at the table.
Was it like this, trash?
Leo laughed through his nose, lowered his head to the sweet spot
just in front of the keyboard, and closed his eyes, told himself not to fall
asleep.
He woke some time later—hours, minutes, seconds—and the
jumbled but properly spelled words had finally stopped. Unless he was just
dreaming that the loop had corrected itself, of course. Not like that hadn’t
happened before.
And then it snapped, the problem: he’d forgotten to insist that the
front end of the loop only cycle through the terms of the dictionary, the
hyphenated terms it could make from two of them.
Instead, he’d left it open to account for the definitions as well.
Of course there’d be misspellings: phonetic pronunciations looked
ugly, and some of the examples were archaic.
Which he would have caught right off if his dad hadn’t hijacked him to
the door.
Leo shook his head, stared down the hall to the worn spot in the
carpet he imagined his dad to be, his “Well,” then hit return again, harder
than he usually let himself anymore.
Instead of returning junk this time like he expected, though, it spat
back just a random line, probably one of the dictionary examples, the “use
this word in a sentence” junk: she is a flower.
Leo smiled a tolerant smile, hit return again, with his lucky third finger,
just to see what he’d get next, but it was the same thing: she is a flower.
He rubbed his third finger in the fist of his other hand, and said it

aloud, like an insult that had been thrown at him: “She?”
It wasn’t impossible that the loop would cycle through to the same
place twice in a row. Unlikely, but not impossible.
Three times, though?
Leo hit the return key again, this time with the eraser end of a pencil
he never used.
she is a flower
“You’d love this, wouldn’t you?” he said to the idea of his dad, then
shook his head, blew some more air out his nose—what time was it
anyway?—and hit return over and over with his index finger.
she is a flower
she is a flower
she is a flower
she is a flower
she is a flower
“Who?” he said to it, standing now, staring at the monitor.
No answer.
“What I thought,” Leo said, laughing at himself some. It was four in
the morning; he could see now. It was a funny thing. A stupid, stupid, funny
thing.
He fell back into his chair again, his legs sprawled out under the desk,
and said he was sorry to the computer—this was why he locked his door,
because his mom didn’t like him talking to his machines, which he
translated into the infinitely more usable didn’t like to catch him talking to his
machines—and, just because he had to have that empty command line to
sleep to, even for two hours, he hit return again. Then leaned forward.
She wasn’t like a flower anymore.

“Do ... what?” Leo said.
At the line, just a home-made function: do(this). Except “this” wasn’t
even defined, it was just assumed, like a global variable or post data or
something.
He hit return again and got the arrow back, the steady blinking cursor
of peace.
Evidently his loop had cycled some of the dictionary in with the
delimiters—mixed the syntax and the vocabulary in a way he hadn’t
outlawed. Which meant the walls of the loop were porous. It was broke in
just all kinds of ways.
But screw it.
It was four in the morning. Four ten. God.
Though it wasn’t a Tuesday, and he hadn’t even been planning to, still,
just to be safe he powered down, in case the loop kickstarted itself in the
night or something equally stupid and stuffed his RAM with a string of those
huge tables.
And then it was done. Leo was back where he started. Except he had
some potatoes in him, he guessed.
Another stupid night.
He shut his light off at the socket, rolled into bed, fixing his knee
against the wall the way it had to be, and listened to his processor cycle
back up after the sixteen seconds of black he’d specified, reaching out to
meet and greet the old rig like it always had to, like it was just a whole new
drive, a whole new day.
Like ... like—
Leo opened his eyes, stared hard at nothing.
do(this)
Where this had been undefined. Assumed. Not a global variable or
post data, but ... a pronoun?

And what had he just been thinking?
Yeah.
The stupid cable. The idiotic cable he’d had to patch between his new
rig and the old one.
It plugged into the old rig. A male connection for a female slot.
she.
She is a flower.
Leo was breathing hard now, like his dad.
She is a flower. Where this—where this ... where you had to use it like
a word that was in place of a variable, like a word for a thing that already had
an antecedent, in whatever conversation had already been going on!
this was the broken loop he’d written, the obvious obvious freaking
loop, the conversation he’d been having with his computer.
She is a flower, the old rig is the flower, the girl, the new one the—and
the male, the new machine, wanting her to ... to—
To learn to speak too.
Leo sat up in his bed and peeked across the room.
The cursor was there, blinking steady, the loop wholly forgotten, the
table saved in two remote places.
Do this, it had said. Asked.
Because it was alone.
Leo covered his mouth with his hand, and didn’t really mean to cry but
it was dark anyway, and his door was locked, and the computer that was
watching him now, it was just a computer.

