Masters
of
Reality
the Gathering
Traci Harding

To David,
for his love,
his art,
his patience,
and belief in me.

Contents
Dedication
Characters
The Dragon’s Line

PART I THE FATHER
1 The Plato Project — 2017
2 The Gene
3 The Lost
4 The Prophet and the Diplomat
5 I Spy
6 Worlds Apart
7 Made In Heaven
8 Inconceivable

PART II THE SON
Map: The Red Centre
9 In the Blood
10 Glimpsing the Future
11 Unseen
12 The Affairs of Gods and Men
13 To Catch A Thief
14 Tjukuba — The Dreaming

15 2020
16 The Holy Land
17 The Lord Giveth and the Lord Taketh Away
18 The False Prophet
19 Dwellers of the Underground
20 Until Events Do Us Part
21 Remember?
22 Ascension

PART III THE HOLY GHOST
Character History
The Nefilim Tree
23 Passing Time
24 Supernova
25 Body Parts
26 Unite
27 Raising the Dead
28 The Gathering
29 The Great Cracker
30 Return to Eden

Bibliography
Acknowledgements
About the Author
Credits
Copyright Page
Cover
About PerfectBound

Characters
The Crew of the Goddess, Merlin I and Merlin II
Tory Alexander (Thurlow)
Miles Thurlow
Rhiannon Thurlow
Brian Alexander
Naomi Alexander
Daniel Alexander
John Pearce
Jenny Pearce
Nicholas Pearce
Teo
Electro-mechanical Design Engineer —
Ray Murdock
Reporter — Noah Purcel
Psychic Diagnostician — Walter Cadfan
Cadfan’s Secretary — Mary-Anne
Cadfan’s Novice — Patrick Haze
Shaman/Healer — Thomas Mateus
Guardian of Britain — Mryddin
Mryddin’s Sister — Aunt Rose
Watarrka
Tory’s Son — Rhun
The Hacker (Code Breaker) — Floyd
Park Ranger — Pete Nangina
Japanese Geneticist — Dr Leigh Sukemi

International Crisis Agency
Head of I.C.A. — Doc Alexander
Doc’s Secretary — Emma
Head of Doc’s security team — Stanley Brennon
Doc’s Computer Whiz — Eddie
I.C.A. Space Station — The Brunanburh
US Government
President of the U.S — Robert Langford
Vice President — Maxwell Hagar
Head of Defence Dept — General Berkley
Middle East
The Unken (circle of elders) — Terrorist Group
Leader of the Uken — Lugal/Shamash
The Daughter of Alexander — Neraida
Neraida’s Son — Ethan
Neraida’s Grandson — Eli

The Dragon’s Line?

PART 1

THE
FATHER

1
THE PLATO
PROJECT — 2017

T

he Goddess was christened on the 4th of January,
2017. She immediately put to sea for six months
of testing.
The bathyscape had submersible capabilities of up to
ten thousand feet, and looked more like a spaceship than
a sub. The interior was not cluttered and dingy like
navy-designed vessels; the Goddess could comfortably
accommodate thirty people. Combining the latest
technology with luxurious living, she was the ultimate
observation and research vessel made to date.
Tory Alexander and her brother Brian had
commissioned the design and building of the submersible
for a specific project they had in mind. It was entirely

funded by their father, whom most of the world saw as
the aging Professor Renford Alexander — Tory and
Brian, who knew him better, named the submersible’s
two smaller reconnaissance subs after him: Merlin I and
Merlin II. Each vessel had a separate holding bay that also
served as a launch pad. They could disembark from the
mothership either above or below the waters’ surface. If
submersed, the containment bays would be flooded, the
hatch doors opened and the probe vehicles launched.
As the bathyscape was privately-owned, their
project was beholden to no one. This was all-important
because Tory had a map in her possession which
identified the exact location of the lost continent of
Atlantis, and she claimed that it pinpointed the major
cities of this fabled landmass. The richest of these had
been Chailidocean, Plato’s ‘City of the Golden Gates’
that, according to Tory, was currently residing under ten
thousand feet of water off the coast of Spain.
‘Deep Sweep’, a project based in the Azores and
headed up by Dr John Pearce of the Institute of
Oceanography, had for many years used navy-owned
submersibles to explore the floor of the Atlantic. They
had discovered many galleons and warships, but no
evidence to support the theory of Atlantis.
John Pearce was an associate of Tory’s husband,
Miles Thurlow. Miles, Tory and Brian had joined the
project early in 2001, intending to prove Tory’s map to
be correct, but the project had been put on hold around
that time. The navy had recalled all their equipment
after the Californian quake of 1999 had virtually
destroyed an area stretching from Los Angeles to San

Francisco. In the years following, earthquakes and
volcanic eruptions kept the Navy occupied with
massive rescue and salvage operations, and ‘Deep
Sweep’ was finally cancelled altogether in 2012.
Dr Pearce was somewhat of a sceptic with regard
to the lost continent. He’d seen the rocky chasms and
miles of vast white sand on the seabed of the Atlantic,
but no traces anywhere of a superior culture that might
once have existed. Yet Miles Thurlow was a Professor of
Archaeology, one of the most highly regarded authorities
on antiquity, and also a clever businessman. John knew
Miles would never consider going into such a project,
that had now been dubbed the Plato Project, if he wasn’t
at least ninety per cent certain it was a winner. John
Pearce and his family were intrigued by the Project and
were easily persuaded to join the team in the search for
the lost continent.
After running the Goddess and her mini-subs through
their paces in the shallow waters around the Azores in
the first months of 2017, the hush-hush search for the
lost city began on the 30th of June.
That day the weather in the North Atlantic was
glorious. The sun was shining and the conditions were
calm. There seemed no reason not to take advantage of it.
Most of the crew and the dive team were hovering
around Sub Bay One as the hatch doors opened to
expose Merlin I still perched in its cradle.
‘Merlin One, this is the Goddess.’ Teo’s voice came
through the headsets to Brian and Tory, who were
already inside the tiny sub. ‘Are we comfy?’

‘Roger that.’ Brian had to smile; compared to the
navy submersibles they’d been diving in with ‘Deep
Sweep’, Merlin I was a Rolls-Royce.
‘Opening the Lower Sub Bay doors and lowering
you down.’
‘Lower away, Goddess.’
Divers followed the sub into the water, checking the
vessel’s descent weights before it could begin its fall into
the deepest depths of the north-eastern Atlantic Basin.
‘Goddess, I am releasing the safely line on Merlin
One, and my blowers are on.’ Brian pulled the lever
above his head that detached them from the mother
craft, and initiated the start-up sequence.
‘Ah, roger that, Merlin … the divers tell me you’re
looking good. You have permission to dive.’
‘Yeah!’ Brian had been thinking that this day would
never come. ‘Tell Jenny and Co I’m flooding the ballast
tanks and starting down.’
Tory peered out the small porthole just off to her
left to see the divers give them the thumbs-up. ‘Okay,
we’re outta here,’ Tory informed base.
‘You all come back now, you hear?’
Teo gave them leave to depart.
The journey took on a dreamlike quality as they
descended at maximum speed into the silence of the
blue-green depths; it would take them nearly two hours
to reach the ocean floor, some ten thousand feet below.
‘Goddamn it, Merlin, come in!’ Teo tried for the
twentieth time to get a reply.

They had lost visual and voice contact with the sub.
The crew in the support vessel on the surface watched
their monitors indicating that Merlin’s oxygen tanks had
been damaged and were leaking rapidly. It also had
numerous electrical difficulties as a result of a collision.
‘They’re going to run out of air.’ Naomi, Brian’s
wife, was very close to a fit of hysterics. ‘Even if they
start their ascent now, they won’t make it.’
Miles didn’t seem as worried; he knew Tory too well.
She always had a trick or two up her sleeve.
‘They have stabilised.’ Teo threw in glimmer of
hope.
‘Goddess, this is Merlin.’ Tory’s voice came over the
intercom, receiving a round of applause, which quickly
subsided when they all heard how grave her tone was. ‘I
have re-initiated the ascent sequence. Situation bad. I
shall maintain radio silence to conserve oxygen.’
Teo was aghast, though his personal feelings did not
reflect in his voice. ‘Roger that. We’ll be waiting.’
Naomi grabbed a headset. ‘What about Brian?’
When there came no response, tears began to well in
her large icy-blue eyes, trickling down the small,
pointed features of her face. ‘Please Tory, talk to me. I
just need to know he’s okay.’
As Teo had lost his wife twelve years ago, when the
volcano on Pico Alto exploded into life and showered
the neighbouring island of Faial with debris, he could
relate to how Naomi was feeling. Teo removed Naomi’s
headset and held her at arm’s length. ‘Wait here,’ he
advised. She pulled away, preparing to protest, but he
didn’t give her the opportunity. ‘Chances are we’re

going to have to revive him. I’ll let you know when we
have.’ Naomi gasped in horror and melted into a chair,
the mere suggestion of serious injury being more than
she could cope with.
‘I’ll stay with her.’ Miles volunteered. It was easy for
him to be calm; Tory was in no danger.
Teo gave a nod and made for the Sub Bay.
When Merlin I re-surfaced, Brian’s son, Daniel, was
the first diver in the water; he’d popped the hatch
before the rest of the team had even finished securing
the support lines. He climbed inside the cabin, fully
expecting to find two dead bodies. To his great
bewilderment, the submersible was empty.
Daniel was so stunned it took a moment for the
discovery to sink in. As he stood staring into space a
large droplet splashed against his forehead, startling
him. He wiped the drop of moisture from his brow to
find that it had stained the back of his hand.
‘Blood!’

2
THE GENE

‘

T

aliesin?’
Tory paced up and down inside the large,
regal entrance room to the Merlin’s Otherworldly
abode, her brother’s dead body bleeding rivers along the
cracks in the stone floor.
‘Please be here! Tell me what I’m about to do is
what was meant.’
Tory missed Taliesin’s counsel after leaving her sixth
century life to return to the twentieth century. She had no
regrets, but the modern world was a far more frightening
place than the Dark Age, especially without the High
Merlin’s guidance. But then, Tory had her father to turn
to in this Age — provided she could find him. Tory could
find most people with just a thought, but not Myrddin.
‘You know he is not here, child.’

‘Father!’ Tory flew into his arms upon sighting him.
‘Brian is …’ She burst into tears.
‘So I see.’ Myrddin patted her back gently, urging
her to calm herself. ‘It’s alright.’ He left her to take a
look at his boy.
‘I have this potion.’ She held out the little bottle that
contained the precious brew she’d been saving all these
years. ‘I never gave it to its intended, because … well, it’s
a long story. Then Taliesin told me to save it, that it was
meant for another. But how do I know Brian is that
other? How do I know that he would even want to be
immortal? God knows it’s not all it’s cracked up to be.’
She marvelled at all she’d been through since becoming
thus, and felt close to tears again. ‘Taliesin said I would
know who the right recipient was, but I do not.’
Myrddin raised a brow at her predicament. ‘Well, I
can tell you this much. Immortals are not made, they’re
born. The thing that sets them apart from normal
human beings is the presence of a particular gene. This
gene you inherited from your grandfather, my father.’
Tory’s interest was engaged. Her father had never
discussed her Otherworld grandfather with her. ‘Did you
know him at all?’
‘I do know him, yes, but let’s not get off the subject.’
Myrddin didn’t feel Tory was quite ready for that
conversation yet. ‘Now, if someone is born with this
gene, but it is dormant, it would have to be genetically
activated as was the case with you. And because the gene
was activated before your children were born, as soon as
they experience physical death their immortality gene
will kick in.’

Tory’s eyes widened. Now she understood. ‘If the ET
gene hadn’t been activated by my death before I had
Rhiannon, the ET gene in her would’ve been dormant,
and she would die a normal death as Brian has.’
‘Correct.’
‘That means that even if I had given this to
Maelgwn, it may not have worked?’
‘Correct again. But rest assured, Maelgwn is also of
the Serpent’s clan via his great-grandfather Cunedda.
He is in safe hands.’ Myrddin smiled.
‘So that only leaves Brian. This must be destined
for him.’ She breathed a sigh of relief and rushed to
administer the life-giving elixir. Tory rested the open
end of the little bottle at the side of her brother’s
mouth. ‘Sorry for dragging you into this world of
eternal turmoil, but hey … I wasn’t given an option
either.’
She let the liquid flow.
Everyone aboard the Goddess spent that evening trying
to explain the unexplainable. Most were completely
perplexed, but not Teo, Miles, Rhiannon or Naomi.
They knew Tory was capable of physical teleportation;
they’d seen her do it. The question for them wasn’t how,
but why — and where?
If Brian was still alive, why did Tory not transport
him up to the ship for treatment? They had the
equipment to cope with nearly any emergency that
arose, and Pearce was a fine doctor. If Brian was dead,
what was the point in taking him anywhere? His wife
and son didn’t know what to think, or feel.

‘What a bunch of bums you lot turned out to be.’
Brian stood in the doorway, hosting a smile that
stretched from ear to ear. ‘I disappear for five minutes
and you all take a holiday.’
‘Brian!’ Naomi ran into his arms. ‘You’re okay?’ She
ran her hands over him just to check.
‘Never better,’ he assured her, brushing long ashbrown hair back off her face to kiss her forehead.
To those who viewed him, Brian didn’t appear
any different. Now that he was immortal he could
project outwardly any appearance he chose. To Tory,
however, he was no longer an aging fifty year old.
Brian had returned to his prime, and looked no older
than he had at thirty. All the grey in his hair had
turned brilliant blond. His piercing blue eyes had
come alive with youth and vitality, and the failing
muscles of his body were now restored to their former
warrior glory.
Daniel braced his father’s shoulders, giving him the
once-over. ‘But how?’
‘Yes!’ Dr Pearce came forward. A logical mind such
as his demanded an explanation. ‘That’s a very good
question.’
Tory rolled her eyes, for when John was in one of
these moods he was very like his sixth century
incarnation, Sir Rhys. Although his dark hair was
graying now, and his tall, slender form was rounder and
slightly stooped, she could still see the wary knight in
the doctor before her.
Brian smiled. ‘Well, isn’t it obvious?’ He looked
around, but everyone appeared to be none the wiser. ‘It

was the Bermuda Triangle. It just sucked us straight out
of the sub.’
‘Off the coast of Spain? I don’t think so.’ John
wasn’t in the mood to play.
‘Now, Brian, don’t be cruel.’ Tory freed herself from
Rhiannon and Miles to approach the good doctor. ‘The
truth is, John, it was extra-terrestrials.’
Tory and Brian burst into laughter, as did everyone
else — except John.
‘You people are just too weird. I demand to know
what happened.’
Most of those in the room could barely breathe for
their hilarity. To them it didn’t matter how Tory and
Brian had been spared from the disaster, only that they
had been. John couldn’t accept that sort of miracle
without some explanation; pondering such a paradox
would drive him insane and it was already starting to.
‘Come on …’ John lightened up, thinking now that
perhaps they were all playing an elaborate hoax on him.
‘How did you do it?’
‘It doesn’t really matter, does it?’ Tory calmed herself
enough to place a hand on John’s shoulder. ‘Because in
your reality, the only thing that’s going to count is how
you think we did it.’
Everyone jeered, knowing how Pearce hated being
chastised for his scientific mind.
‘Yeah, John.’ Brian baited the doctor further. ‘Let’s
hear your theory.’
‘Oh, stop it.’ Jenny hated to have her husband be
the odd one out, and so stood up for him. ‘He may be a
little backward when it comes to the ways of the spirit,

but he can’t help that.’ Everyone burst into laughter at
this, and Jenny realised she was being just as cruel as his
attackers.
‘That’s it,’ he exploded suddenly. ‘I have had it! I
can’t work in this three-ringed circus.’
Tory stepped forward to pacify him. ‘Oh John —’
‘Don’t!’ He held up a finger in warning. ‘One of two
things is going on here. One, this is a hoax, in which
case you jeopardised this project with your fun and
games. Or two, something amazing occurred during your
dive this morning. Something that, for some reason, you
feel I am not fit to be privy to. So which is it?’
My, but he was quick. Tory didn’t know what to say,
which seemed to anger John all the more.
‘Well, somebody had better come up with some
answers by tomorrow, or I am taking my family out of
here.’
As Pearce headed for the door, his son intercepted.
‘But Dad —’
John brushed past Nick without so much as a
sideways glance, and stormed out the door.
‘I am not going anywhere!’ Nicholas announced to
everyone in the room, his steely, blue eyes conveying
his conviction.
Jenny made a move to pursue John, but Tory knew
she was the only one who could really right the
situation. ‘No, Jenny. Please, let me go.’
Tory dropped by her cabin to pick up a few items which
she kept stored in an old sports bag. She was a fool to
think John would let a stunt like that pass, but the

incident had happened too fast for her to think about
how she was going to explain it.
‘Tory, I don’t want to hear any more of your hocus
pocus bullshit,’ he warned as she stormed into his cabin
and cast down her hand luggage.
‘Okay John.’ Tory closed and locked the door
behind her. ‘You want to know what happened today?’
She turned to challenge him. ‘You’re not going to like
it. The truth is far more bizarre than our lies.’
‘I hardly think so.’ John took a seat to listen.
‘Well, you’ll be surprised,’ she announced, flashing a
grin.
‘You can start with telling me what caused the
collision.’
‘The unidentified object we spied on sonar, just
before we lost contact, was some sort of large deep sea
creature.’
‘A sea monster?’ John scoffed.
‘I kid you not,’ she assured in all seriousness. ‘It was
quite docile, so it shouldn’t be any further threat to us.
I shall try and capture it on ROM for you, if it shows
itself again. I also had another episode while we were
down there, another vision.’ Tory’s eyes glazed over a
moment, as she recalled the events this vision had
foretold. Then, with a blink, she put them to the back
of her mind. ‘Brian was going to abort the mission to
bring me, in my entranced state, back to the surface.
But the sound of the ascent pumps must have startled
the creature. It turned abruptly, colliding with Merlin
and sending us into a spin. When I awoke … Brian
was dead.’

John rolled his eyes in disbelief.
‘Don’t say a word till I’m finished. About four
people in this planet know what I am about to tell you.
I’m taking a hell of a risk. The least you can do is listen.’
‘Alright, go on. Brian was dead and ...?’ He
motioned her to proceed, obviously still sceptical.
‘Look, I’ll cut a long story short.’ Tory figured she
may as well let him have it. ‘I brought Brian back to life
with an Atlantean potion, which I got from that
orichalchum ball you fished out of the ocean twenty
years ago. But wait, I have proof.’
‘This ought to be a hoot.’ He sat, looking most
unimpressed, as Tory rummaged through her bag of
tricks to find the ancient device she’d used to track
down the ball of rare metal.
‘Do you recognise this?’ She handed it to him and
watched the smirk slip from his face.
‘It once featured in a nightmare I had after hitting
my head against a filing cabinet and knocking myself
out cold.’
‘No, John, that’s just what Miles led you to believe,’
she informed him in no uncertain teams. ‘You were
right. I did vanish with your treasure. I needed it to
retrieve the life-giving potion I gave Brian today.’
John sat quietly for a few moments.
‘Okay, just say you’re telling me the truth. How did
you know the potion was there?’ he asked.
‘The same way I know where to look for Atlantis.
I’ve been there.’ She resolved the question as if it were a
foregone conclusion. ‘Where do you think we got that
map from?’

‘Tory, I swear to God …’ John was about to say
something he’d regret.
‘What, you don’t believe me?’
Her glare was daring him to doubt her when, to
John’s great horror, she pulled a dagger from her bag and
slit her wrist with it.
‘Jesus, woman. Have you lost your mind?’ He dived
at her intending to do something to stop the bleeding,
but by the time he got there it had already stopped,
healed over and disappeared. He raised his eyes to look
at Tory, mystified and dazed by what he’d seen.
Tory smiled. ‘Do you believe me now?’

3
THE LOST

O

n the second attempt to probe the seabed
beneath the north-eastern Atlantic, Project
Plato changed its strategy and launched both
Merlin I and Merlin II. If they ran into their monstrous
friend again, one sub could be a decoy whilst the other
made for the bottom.
Brian was piloting Merlin I with his son, Daniel,
who was manning the camera. Tory and Rhiannon were
in Merlin II. These two teams made for both sexual and
family rivalry on the hunt. Teo was Tory’s base-man up
on the Goddess, as Naomi had chosen to guide her
husband’s descent.
It was nice having another sub to accompany you
into the dark depths, Tory decided. A switch on the
intercom allowed the two submersibles to converse

solely with each other, with base, or both. Yet Tory
hadn’t heard from Brian since the launch; he must be
taking this race to the seabed seriously.
‘Merlin Two, this is the Goddess, you’re halfway
there and looking sweet.’ Teo flirted ever so slightly, as
neither Tory’s brother nor her husband were within
earshot.
‘Well, thank you so much for noticing.’ Tory played
along, pausing from her system check to smile at his
cheek.
‘Don’t encourage him.’ Rhiannon gave her mother’s
shoulder a slap.
‘Hah!’ Tory had to laugh. ‘Like you’re a perfect angel.’
‘I’m not married,’ Rhiannon lectured. ‘So I may
tease men all I like.’
‘Just tease?’ Tory posed.
Rhiannon shrugged as she melted into a grin. ‘Mostly.’
Tory snapped to attention as the sonar sounded its
warning. ‘It looks as if our big friend is territorial, after
all.’ They had hoped that he was a deep-sea drifter and
so moved on.
‘Merlin Two, this is the Goddess. Life-form reading.
Ascending your way. Switch to decoy mode.’
Tory looked to her brother in the sub close by her,
returning his wave.
‘Copy that.’ She veered Merlin II off due east, as
Brian took Merlin I due west.
It was Teo’s team that won the toss, and delight was
reflected in his voice. ‘Goddess to Merlin Two. Brian has
become fish bait. You have the all-clear to continue
your descent.’

‘Well, piss off and leave us then.’ Brian grumbled.
‘But you two had better come up with the goods,
you hear?’
‘Don’t I always?’ Tory was revelling in her good
fortune. ‘You just worry about yourself, ’cause I’m fresh
out of miracles.’
Half an hour later Merlin II was stabilising and
switching to the propulsion system. This gave Tory
more manoeuvrability through the cavernous landscape
of the sea floor.
‘Goddess, this is Merlin Two, we are switching to
short-range sonar, and diving. Cameras and floodlights
are on. Please confirm visual transmission. Over.’
‘The Goddess is with you, Merlin Two. You have
permission to proceed.’
The sonar gave a solid echo bearing thirty degrees.
According to their ancient map, this rise should prove
to be the Mt Dur-an-ki plateau, located in the
mountain range to the east of Chailidocean.
‘Proceeding to target area,’ Tory advised.
If the truth be known, Tory didn’t need the sonar,
lights or cameras to tell her she was close. This place
pulsated with the unmistakable energy of a ley-line
crossing — a gateway to the Otherworld.
‘Wow!’ Rhiannon commented, exhaling heavily.
‘You can feel that?’
‘Yeah … I can,’ she confirmed, thinking it felt
rather exhilarating.
Tory was following the contours of the land on the
sonar very closely when Rhiannon spied the lip of the

plateau through her headset, which was linked to the
exterior camera on Merlin II.
‘Land ahoy at eight o’clock,’ Rhiannon informed
base, zooming in and enhancing the image.
But as soon as the sub passed over the rim of the
plateau, it lost all power and began to drop like a stone.
‘Holy moley.’ Tory steered hard right. They just
managed to clear the ledge; power was restored and she
regained control of the vessel.
‘Merlin Two, this is Goddess. What the hell
happened?’
‘I lost power. I should have known.’ Tory breathed a
sigh of relief in the wake of a close call. ‘Back in
Atlantis this place was renowned for its alien
frequencies.’
‘Merlin Two. How do you know you’ve got the right
place?’ John had obviously grabbed a headset. ‘We
haven’t seen anything yet.’
‘Now don’t get testy, Doctor. We’ll get your pictures.’
Tory brought the sub to a standstill and shot a line of
cable into the cliff wall for a little extra anchorage.
‘How, may I ask, do you expect to do that,’ John
persisted, ‘if none of the electrical equipment will
function?’
‘John …’ Tory was losing patience, ‘you figure it out.’
She threw down her headset and left the pilot’s seat.
Rhiannon disengaged the camera headset. ‘How am
I supposed to know!’ she answered John, who was still
firing questions through the com-link. ‘I’ll call you
back.’ Rhiannon switched off, wondering why on earth
her mother was putting on a wetsuit and flippers.

‘Don’t look at me like that.’ Tory made light of the
nightmarish thing she was about to do. ‘It can’t hurt me.’
‘You’ve never tried something like this before? No
one has!’ Rhiannon began to fret.
‘All the more reason to try it out.’ Tory grabbed an
underwater flare and a stills camera, hoping that both
worked at the depth claimed by their manufacturers. ‘It
will be a whole new experience for the superconscious
of mankind.’ Tory vanished without so much as an
oxygen tank.
‘Hah!’ Rhiannon was shaken for a second; her
mother had pulled some crazy moves in her time, but
this was beyond the beyond. ‘And then they wonder
why us kids end up so screwed up?’
Though her time exposed to the deep sea depths had
felt like wading through icy cold mud, Tory didn’t leave
the site until she had a firm confirmation that it was the
mount she believed it to be. With the aid of the yellowgreen light of her hand-held flare, her efforts had
proven most fruitful.
Tory had been surprised to find that sections of the
site’s large, quartz stone circle still remained and,
digging a little way under the sand and soil on the
ground, she uncovered pieces of the marble base. But
the greatest discovery of the day was a solid gold altar
box, engraved with the symbol of Caduceus. This was in
the shape of a winged rod, with serpents entwining it in
opposing directions. The sculpted rod had been the
Atlantean symbol of the Lord of Time and Space, and
this golden container had once housed the Ark of the

Covenant, though, unfortunately, it did not any longer.
Perhaps it was best that such a powerful tool remained
hidden from mankind for now.
Naturally, John was over the moon when he viewed
the photographs. No other find had ever come close to
this. He didn’t even want to know how Tory had
acquired them; ‘whatever’ was fast becoming his motto.
And on subsequent dives, whilst dodging their large
friend, which was identified by those in the know as a
Plesiosaur, akin to the fabled monster of Loch Ness, the
subs followed the mountain range down into the valley
to find an antiquity-seeker’s paradise.
The lost city of Atlantis was officially declared
found on the 15th of July 2017. Merlin I and II had
photographed several sets of large gates made of solid
gold that were half-buried amongst the flattened city
ruins. These were dated correctly at over 12,000 years
old, which convinced even the greatest sceptics that
this was indeed the city Plato had described in Timaeus
and Critias.
Once again Professor Miles Thurlow and Dr John
Pearce found themselves in the spotlight. Every
university that taught ancient history, archaeology, or
oceanography was inviting them to speak.
The Goddess returned to the port of Horta on Faial
to meet the press and pick up supplies. Miles and John
were embarking on a string of lectures, primarily in
Britain and the United States, that were looking like
keeping them away for the better part of six months.
The remainder of the team would return to sea to

continue surveying, and they would feed Miles and John
any new photographs or information as it came to hand.
Though Tory knew this was all part of Miles’ job,
her last vision had foretold disaster, both natural and
man-made. She didn’t like it that her husband would be
travelling throughout the two areas of the planet that
were the most likely to be effected.
‘Miles, couldn’t you just postpone it for awhile?’ She
watched as her husband fastened his suitcase.
He looked at her as she knelt on their bed, wrapped
up in a sheet. ‘Tory, you really do make things difficult
at times. Look, aren’t you the one always telling me to
trust in the universe?’
‘Well, yes … but the universe is telling me not to
trust in the planet.’ She crawled closer to him.
Miles glanced at the clock. ‘And it’s telling me to
go, or I’ll miss my connecting flight.’ He kissed her to
end the debate. He was going and the wrath of God
would not stop him. There were still so many great
scholars out there who thought, as he once had, that
the present was as technologically advanced as mankind
had ever been. But the Plato Project was now on the
verge of blowing that theory right out of the water. ‘Are
you sure you’ll be alright to handle the press here? I told
you National Geographic are sending a guy.’
‘No,’ Tory frowned, ‘you didn’t.’
‘I gave him permission to go to sea with you for a
couple of weeks. He’s doing a story on the dive sites and
the Goddess facilities, and possibly our big fish. So make
him feel at home. It could mean future projects for us.’
Miles ruffled her hair to vex her further.

‘Oh, my lord!’ Tory suddenly rose and moved to the
porthole window.
There was a young man seated on a suitcase on the
dock outside, looking kind of lost.
‘Could this be him?’ she wondered aloud.
Miles looked out the other porthole to see a rather
scruffy-looking man, roughly thirty years of age, who
could have been mistaken for either a bum or, perhaps,
a tortured genius. ‘Must be.’
Tory pulled on her jeans and a T-shirt, and moved out
onto the pontoon to investigate.
The young man in question had his eyes lowered to
the ground as Tory’s shadow fell over him.
‘Are you lost?’
When he looked up to view Tory, the sun was
shining through her long golden hair and shed a halo of
light around her. He was so stunned upon seeing her
eyes of violet that he fell backwards, taking his suitcase
with him. ‘I … t …’s you!’ he stammered, trying to pull
himself out of his embarrassing predicament. ‘You
actually exist! Jesus, there is a God!’
Even with the bushy growth on his face there was
no mistaking Sir Bryce. Tory was certainly curious to
hear the story behind this obviously more than chance
meeting, and so helped him to his feet.
‘Sorry about that. It’s just such a shock.’ He pushed
his glasses back up his nose, and shook her hand firmly.
‘The name’s Ray Murdock. And ah, who might you be?’
he inquired politely.
Tory hesitated to answer. It wasn’t that she didn’t

trust this stranger, for in reality he was no stranger at all.
In the sixth century, this man had been the eldest son of
a dear and valued friend. She wanted to get his end of
the story clear first. ‘Now, Ray. How can you know me,
and not know who I am?’
Ray scratched his head through the masses of dark
curls, pulled back into a long, ratty ponytail. ‘I was kind
of hoping you’d be able to tell me that.’
‘You’re not a reporter?’
‘No way.’ Ray had a chuckle and then paused to
take a deep breath. ‘Look, nothing I am about to say is
going to make any sense, I’m warning you in advance.
But what the hell, here goes. I had a dream about two
weeks back —’
‘The thirtieth of June?’ Tory clarified.
‘Yeah.’ Ray figured that was about right. ‘I was
advised to seek you out, and told where you might be
found. The voice in my dream told me you could hide
me someplace, where no one on Earth would ever find
me.’
Ray fell silent as he noticed Miles and John Pearce
exiting the Goddess.
Miles approached in a rush and kissed Tory goodbye.
‘I’ve got to run.’ He regarded her a moment — six
months was a long time to be apart. ‘You must be from
National Geographic.’ Miles looked to Ray and shook his
hand. ‘Sorry I can’t chat, but Tory will fill you in on
everything.’
‘Hold on.’ Ray was confused. ‘Who are you?’
‘I’m Professor Thurlow,’ Miles informed him,
watching the outsider back up a few paces.

‘And you two are married, I presume?’ He waved a
finger from Miles to Tory, wondering why such a raving
beauty would marry a graying old professor nearly twice
her age.
‘Twenty years.’ Miles was proud to announce.
How was that possible? This woman must be a lot
older than she looked. ‘Now listen, God.’ Ray walked
further away to address the sky. ‘You didn’t say anything
about this before you sent me off on this ridiculous quest.’
‘I think he’s had one too many rough assignments,’
Miles whispered sideways to Tory, then made a move to
catch Pearce up. ‘I’ll see you in six months, maybe
sooner if I can get away.’ He blew her a kiss and gave a
final wave.
Ray rubbed his hands briskly. ‘Things are looking
up.’ He cocked an eye to the sky. ‘You’re off the hook,
for the moment.’
‘So, Ray.’ Tory turned her attention back to him,
folding her arms. ‘Who’s the no one you’re hiding from?’
Ray closed the distance between them, seeming
reluctant to confide in her. ‘The CIA, the ICA, the
Defence Department, NASA … you name it.’ He stared
her straight in the eye but she didn’t flinch. She wasn’t
doubtful, fearful or shocked.
‘Why?’ Her eyes narrowed. ‘What is it you do?’
‘I’m an electro-mechanical design engineer cum
technician.’ His voice had dropped to a whisper, and his
eyes did a quick scan of the surrounding area to be sure
no one might overhear. ‘I’ve designed all manner of
scary shit for various government departments, in the
US mainly. Everything from weapons systems to utilities

… hell, I even spent six months in space, working on a
tracking station.’
‘Great Scott!’ Tory backed up, her eyes rolling
around as she put two and two together. ‘It makes sense.’
‘Well, I’m glad it makes sense to somebody.’ Ray was
still very confused. ‘Who are you?’ His eyes did another
quick check around the piers. ‘And don’t you have
anywhere we can talk that isn’t quite so public?’
‘Sure.’ Tory wandered towards the gangplank to
board the Goddess.
‘You work for your husband then?’ Ray collected his
bag and followed her on board, admiring the vessel as
he went.
‘We’re partners. He’s the professor, my family own
the rig.’
‘You’re shitting me?’ The thought brought a smile to
Ray’s face for the first time in months.
‘You ain’t seen nothing yet.’ Tory motioned him to
follow her inside.
Ray got the grand tour of the Goddess and he was most
impressed.
They were alone on the vessel this morning. The
younger members of the crew had taken a small power
boat to go snorkelling for the day. Everyone else was out
shopping and picking up supplies or equipment parts.
‘I can’t believe you have a gym on board.’ Ray shook
his head at the sheer decadence of it while Tory made
him a cappuccino.
‘Most of us are fitness freaks here, and it helps the
divers keep in shape.’ Tory placed the coffee in front of

him on the bar. ‘A gym was our first major prerequisite,
my bath was the second.’
‘You have a bath on a bathyscape?’ Ray was
overwhelmed.
‘Oh yes. It’s all enclosed in its own little room, so it
doesn’t matter if the water splashes about.’
‘But the water supply?’
‘It has its own tank, and a filtration system to
recycle the water.’
‘Very clever,’ he conceded. ‘Completely frivolous,
but clever.’
‘Hello? Anybody home?’
‘Oh shit.’ Tory looked to Ray, stunned. ‘That will be
the reporter from National Geographic.’
‘What!’ His eyes nearly popped out of his head.
‘The last thing I need is —’
‘Shh,’ she insisted. ‘I’ll handle this.’
‘Why me, Lord?’ Ray rolled his eyes and collapsed
onto the breakfast bar, wrapping his arms around his
head to hide.
‘In here.’ Tory came out from behind the bar to
greet their guest when he came through the door.
The reporter struggled in with his bags, equipment,
and cameras. His long, fair hair hung over his face,
playing havoc with his line of vision. ‘Hey there.’ He
dropped the hand luggage and shoulder bags, leaving
only the four cameras that hung about his neck. ‘Noah
Purcel, National Geographic.’ He swept the hair from his
face to see who he was addressing, and held out his
hand to Tory in a friendly fashion.
It took a moment for her to respond. Selwyn. Her

heart leapt to see yet another ally from her distant past. He
was of slight build, as Selwyn had been, and eyes of deep
blue were set in a face that was open and full of expression.
She shook his hand. ‘I’m Tory, the custodian and
part-owner of the Goddess. On behalf of Project Plato,
welcome aboard.’
‘Thanks for having me.’ He began turning in circles
to check everything out. ‘This is quite a rig you got
here.’ Noah noticed the large fellow slouched at the bar.
‘You haven’t seen the half of it,’ Ray commented,
without raising his head.
‘This is Ray, our new on-board systems technician.’
Ray raised one hand and waved. ‘It’s his first day, he
hasn’t quite got his sea legs yet.’ Tory steered Noah
toward the corridor. ‘Allow me to show you to your
quarters. Once we offload all this … stuff, I’ll show
you around.’ Tory stood aside and motioned him out
the door.
‘It was nice not meeting you, Ray. Hope you’re
feeling better soon.’ Noah received another wave from
the technician as he left the dining quarters.
‘Stay put,’ Tory whispered to Ray. ‘I’ll be back.’
When they’d gone, Ray raised his head and wiped
both hands down his face. ‘That was … scary.’ He
looked at his reflection in the mirror behind the bar,
stroking his long beard. ‘Time for a change.’
Tory left Noah to unpack in his cabin. As all the guest
quarters were located near one another, Tory decided to
hide Ray in her cabin until such time as they could alter
his appearance.

As it turned out, the fugitive had no personal effects
with him. His suitcase contained books, notes, tools and
a personal computer system. Tory rustled him up a pair
of crew overalls, a towel, a shaver, and other bits and
pieces he might need.
Ray now sat on the bed watching her, unable to
really grasp the situation. ‘I don’t get it? Why would you
do this? You know how much shit I’m in. Why risk all
this on my account?’
‘I’m not risking anything.’ She dumped the bundle
she’d put together into his arms. ‘If they find you, I shall
plead ignorance.’
He shook his head. ‘You don’t know these people.’
‘And you don’t know me.’ Tory grinned.
‘But somehow I get the feeling that you know me?’
Ray knew he was right. ‘And you haven’t answered my
question?’
‘Well, Ray, the truth is, I have a feeling that very
soon I’m going to require the services of someone with
your technological expertise. You see, I also have had a
vision,’ she confessed. ‘As a matter of fact, it would
have been the same day you had yours.’
Ray dared to smile. ‘Was I in it?’
‘No, but something you might possibly design was,’
Tory teased, raising her eyebrows. ‘But more about that
later. Right now, I’m going to leave you to it.’ She
motioned to the en suite.
‘Yeah, but —’
‘Uh!’ She held up a finger. ‘We can talk tonight,
once you’ve had time to change. Meanwhile, I’d better
go show our reporter friend around.’

‘Ah … Tory.’ Ray detained her a second longer.
‘Have I said “thank you” yet?’
She smiled, slowly shaking her head in the negative.
‘Thank you,’ he stated sincerely. ‘This is a real
miracle for me.’
‘For me too,’ she assured him.

4
THE PROPHET AND
THE DIPLOMAT

N

one of the crew doubted Tory’s word when she
introduced their two newest shipmates …
except for her daughter. Rhiannon could sense
her mother’s anxiety at having both Ray and Noah in
the same room, and as their new systems technician felt
wary also, Rhiannon realised that she wasn’t getting the
entire story. But she knew the protocol, and said
nothing to make anyone aware of her suspicions. She
would just have to curb her curiosity until she could get
her mother alone.
Ray was in Tory’s cabin later that night telling her of the
events that led to him fleeing the United States in fear

of his life. He felt uneasy disclosing the information; if
the Agency was prepared to kill one of their top
designers because of what he knew, they certainly
wouldn’t hesitate to kill Tory. What she couldn’t tell him
was that she couldn’t be killed. So Tory took the line
that her Navy connections would protect her.
Ray said he’d always liked his work; it took him to
interesting places, and gave him top security clearance
in most government departments the world over.
The Californian quake had marked the beginning of
a major world emergency, but it also began a shift
towards greater global co-operation. The United
Nations had set up a special organisation called the
ICA (International Crisis Agency). This was headed by
a financial whiz cum social strategist named Doc
Alexander, who had been recruited from the IFC
(International Finance Corporation).
The United Nations couldn’t have picked a better
man for the job. Doc Alexander was said to be a young,
charismatic genius, although he had few close friends. A
big supporter of ‘global planning’, he spoke many
languages, and regarded all men and women as equals.
He saw no countries, just land and sea; no races, just
human beings. ‘One world, one team,’ was Doc’s motto.
The movements of the Earth’s surface due to platetectonics, the floods caused by the greenhouse effect,
pollution, drought, famine, the slow tilt of the world’s
axis, the shrinking natural forests that would result in
the slow suffocation of the planet, the general strain on
the economy of dwindling resources; these were all
global problems now, and Doc Alexander was aiming

for global solutions. He brought together teams of
scientists and technologists from all over the world to
address the problems facing the planet. This was seen by
the world, via the media, as a wonderful sign of lasting
international peace and good relations. In its first ten
years, the ICA proved to be a great success.
Doc’s team working on the Greenhouse Effect, for
example, estimated that the water level would continue
to rise some twenty metres over the next century before
it peaked and began to subside. With this information
to hand, the ICA set about designing flood barriers that
could act as artificial coastlines for those major cities
that the world would not allow to succumb to the sea’s
will. New York was one such city, and the construction
of its breakwater was already well under way.
Needless to say, Doc Alexander was fast becoming a
worldwide phenomenon. After he had the logging of the
Amazon rainforests banned on the grounds that they were
needed to help reduce the amounts of carbon dioxide
levels in the atmosphere, even the greenies loved him.
‘So what was it you were working on, Ray?’ Tory had
already gathered he was employed by the ICA.
‘I developed a system to monitor a fusion reactor.
It warned of impending fluctuations or instabilities in
the reactor.’
Tory’s eyes widened in anticipation. ‘You were
successful then?’
‘That I was.’ Ray seemed kind of proud of himself,
despite what he’d been party to. ‘It wasn’t until I was
briefed on my following assignment that I found out the
ICA were actually after power of another sort.’

‘Yes?’ Tory urged; it was like being enthralled by a
really good spy thriller.
‘Well, well.’ Rhiannon entered, closing the door
behind her. ‘There’s a strange man on my mother’s bed,
and father’s not even been gone a day?’
Tory knew the accusation was a joke to make Ray feel
uncomfortable. ‘I don’t recall hearing you knock, sweetheart. You might have interrupted something important.’
‘Look.’ Rhiannon folded her arms. ‘I kept my mouth
shut in front of everyone else, but I think I deserve to
know what’s going on. Who are you really?’ Her cool
glare turned to Ray. ‘Who are you hiding from?’
‘Jesus.’ Ray sat up, amazed as he looked from Tory to
Rhiannon and back again. ‘She’s just like you. A little
less subtle, perhaps.’
‘Just answer the question.’ Rhiannon stared him
down with eyes so black, they gave the illusion they
were deep purple.
‘Down, girl,’ Tory intervened. ‘It’s a very long story,
which Ray was in the process of telling me. If you calm
down, you may stay.’
Ray stood. ‘I don’t think so. She’s just a girl.’
‘Look Ray,’ Tory pushed him back down. ‘Rhiannon
is telepathic, so she’ll find out anyway.’
‘Yeah, right,’ he scoffed.
Rhiannon gripped hold of his wrist and closed her
eyes. ‘The last time you got laid was ...?’ She smiled.
‘Whoohoo, just last night,’ she announced, laughing at
his dismay.
Ray snatched his arm back. ‘You could have guessed
that.’

Both women were staring back at him with their
eyebrows raised and hands on hips.
‘Relax,’ Tory advised him. ‘She can’t read your mind
unless she’s touching you. Still, between Rhiannon and
I, nothing is sacred. If you tell me your woes, you tell
her.’
Ray calmed down, but was still staring at them as if
they were some sort of advanced alien species. ‘I think
I’m beginning to see why God sent me here.’
The assignment that changed Ray’s mind about the
ICA was the designing of a special mechanical glitch for
each power storage unit on the world fusion grid. He
hadn’t been told all the details at his first briefing, and
Ray guessed the Agency were testing his resolve. He
already knew too much about the secret fusion project
for the ICA to just let him walk if he decided not to
play ball. So, as he had no other option, Ray decided to
co-operate. But that night he’d had the vision
concerning Tory.
‘And, as God is my witness,’ Ray swore, ‘the next
morning I awoke in a field that was miles from the ICA
facility where I had gone to sleep. All I had were the
clothes on my back, and the stuff in my case. Still, I
don’t think I was followed.’
‘You could have sleepwalked,’ Rhiannon put
forward.
‘Straight through all the Agency’s security
measures? I think not.’ Ray rubbed his weary eyes.
‘Well, maybe you have the ability to travel without
moving,’ Rhiannon began. ‘Mum can —’

‘Ah!’ Tory jumped in before her daughter said
too much. ‘Ray, you look totally stuffed. Maybe you
should get some rest, hey?’ She moved to see him out
the door. ‘We’ll have plenty of time to postulate
theories,’ she impressed on Rhiannon, ‘once we’re out
at sea.’
By nightfall of the following day the Goddess had made
the trip back to the dive site once again.
Noah was eager to have his first ride in a
bathyscape, but as he could not drag any of the pilots
away from the television set to take him joy-riding he
resigned himself to waiting until the scheduled dives
the next day.
The television report that had everyone so
fascinated was about a psychic diagnostician and healer
named Walter Cadfan. Cadfan had risen to fame over
the past ten years due to his ability to diagnose people’s
ailments and advise treatment without ever having to
see the patient. But it wasn’t the miracles he’d been
performing that had the crew of the Goddess so
engrossed. He, too, had experienced visions on exactly
the same dates as Tory and Rhiannon, the last of which
was the 30th of June. However, Cadfan was better at
predicting the time and place the foreseen events would
take place than they were.
‘Those who have read my latest predictions will
know that …’ The middle-aged, slightly balding healer
turned his droopy, blue eyes from the interviewer to
address the camera directly, ‘by the time this interview
goes to air, large tremors in Denmark and England will

cause large areas of those countries to fall into the
North Sea, where a new land is emerging.’
‘But dad’s in England.’ Rhiannon’s fearful eyes
turned to her mother.
‘Is this some kind of joke?’ Brian became angered as
the station interrupted the program for an emergency
news bulletin.
Teo came bursting into the rec-room, looking like
he’d seen a ghost. ‘There’s been a quake in the U.K.
The waves will hit us in a little over two hours.’
He didn’t have to say any more; everyone was
already making for their stations.
‘Looks like you’ll get your wish after all,’ Tory
informed Noah.
‘Could I dive with you?’ he appealed, throwing the
straps of numerous bags across his body for easy cartage.
Tory gave a shrug. ‘I don’t see why not.’
‘Bonus.’ Noah made after her to Sub Bay Two.
Minutes later the divers were in the water with Merlin I
and Merlin II making sure they were okay to dive. The
two mini-subs would guide the mothership down. Once
submerged deeply enough inside the Atlantic basin the
north-eastern wall would protect their craft and the
wave should pass straight over them.
‘Hatches are all secure,’ Jenny’s voice advised
through the intercom to those in the Goddess’ control
room. ‘We’re clear to dive.’
‘Merlin One and Two. I am pleased to advise that the
Goddess is going down,’ Teo broadcast with a chuckle,
throwing the switches to flood her tanks.

‘Are you alright?’ Tory enquired of her mystified
passenger, whose eyes were fixed on Merlin I which he
could see outside the large porthole in front of him.
‘What a life,’ Noah mumbled. ‘There couldn’t be a
safer place on the planet.’
‘Don’t let the peace give you a false sense of security.
Down here nature rules, and we’re the invaders.’ Tory
gave a thought to the two members of their team that
weren’t there, and fell silent to continue her system
checks.
The headset, the eyes for the exterior camera,
captured Noah’s interest. ‘Is this for stills or film?’ He
placed it on his head and the lights went out. ‘Geez, you
can’t see much.’
Tory reached over and switched it on. ‘It’s CD
ROM. So you just take the stills from the moving
footage.’
Noah was waving his arms around in front of
himself, as if trying to swim through the water. ‘Holy
smoke, I’m out there!’
‘You certainly are.’ Tory placed one of his roving
hands on the control stick, and the other on a set of
buttons. ‘The movement of your head controls the
angle of the camera.’
Noah looked from left to right, getting a feel for it.
‘Whoa!’
‘The joystick guides the remote when the camera is
mobile. The buttons at your left hand are your zoom,
wide angle, and filters.’
‘This is amazing!’ He sounded put out. ‘Why did I
bother carting all my stuff?’

‘Merlin One, this is Merlin Two. I’m picking up a
large life-form reading and that can only mean one
thing.’ The sonar in front of Tory was pinging and
tracking a large shape.
‘Roger that, Merlin One. I have him too,’ Brian
answered.
‘Me, three,’ Teo cut in.
‘We’ll try to lead him elsewhere.’ Tory switched on
her propulsion system and took off after Brian,
whereupon he veered left and she right.
‘Yee-ha.’ Noah was still hooked up to the camera.
‘This is excellent!’
‘I beg to differ.’ Tory’s eyes did not waver from the
controls. ‘Our big friend isn’t worried about our tiny
craft. But I don’t know how it will feel about something
as large as the Goddess invading its territory.’
Noah removed the headset, the information
grabbing his attention. ‘Danger … good, there must be a
story in this.’ He grabbed for his folder.
‘O-oh.’ Tory swung her rig around, almost throwing
Noah from his seat as she brought Merlin II to a
standstill.
‘Merlin One to Merlin Two. He’s not taking the bait.’
Brian sounded more than a little annoyed. ‘I’m heading
back.’
‘I’m with you, bro.’ Tory looked over to Noah, who
was madly scribbling notes. ‘Make yourself useful. Get
that headset back on and keep an eye out for Moby Dick.’
‘Aye, aye, captain.’ Noah jumped to the call,
thrilled by the notion of being part of such a team — if
only for an hour or so.

Teo had stabilised at a depth of five thousand feet.
Tory had the Goddess and Merlin I within her sights
when Noah cried out.
‘Down there!’ He blindly pointed off to the right.
Tory swerved to avoid getting in the monster’s way.
‘Merlin Two to the Goddess. We have visual at four
o’clock.’
‘I copy Merlin Two.’ Teo was sounding surprisingly
calm. ‘Stabilise at a safe distance, and stand by.’
All they could do now was wait and see how the
huge beast was going to react.
The creature was drifting slowly towards the
mothership.
‘This is the most incredible thing I’ve ever seen.’
Noah sat, frozen into stillness.
He could see the picture of the huge ancient
creature face to face with the space-age sub plastered
across the cover of every major newspaper and
magazine in the civilized world. The tip of the beast’s
great snout eventually touched the bathyscape
so gently that those in the Goddess didn’t even feel
the impact.
‘I think it’s in love.’ The scene was so heartwarming
that it brought a tear to Tory’s eye.
On the bridge at the Goddess’ controls, Teo and Naomi
were looking straight into the eyes of the huge monster.
‘Do you think he’d understand if I told him we have
a headache?’ Naomi attempted humour.
Teo was not happy; a couple of thousand feet lower
and he could have shot some support lines into the

basin wall. He didn’t want to activate anything, to save
alarming the beast, so they seemed to be stuck.
‘We’ve got less than an hour till wipe-out.’ Naomi
updated their state of affairs. ‘So we’d better think of
something.’
Rhiannon entered the control room at full steam,
then slowed as her eyes met with the much larger ones
outside the ship.
‘What are you doing up here?’ Teo quizzed, though
there was no response from the girl. She stared at the
beast and closed her eyes.
We must go, there is danger for us here. Rhiannon
willed the creature to back up.
After a moment, the beast slowly turned out of their
path.
Teo frowned, bemused by what he suspected was
happening. Nah, he decided, it was just a happy
coincidence. ‘We are clear to continue the descent,’ he
informed the others.
The Goddess surfaced the following day, unscathed. In
their watery bed, they’d not even felt the killer waves
pass over. Those on the Azore Islands would not have
been so fortunate. If this quake had happened one day
sooner, when the Goddess was in port, most of her crew
would be dead.
As far out to sea as they were, the sky was dark with
soot and the sun burned red. One would have thought
the scenes described in The Book of Revelations had
surely come to pass, but they had seen this eerie scene
at other times in the last twenty years.

Walter Cadfan’s vision proved not to be as
destructive as he’d described, though most of the ash
and smoke in the air was the result of the new land
rising in the North Sea. A volcano had burst through
the sea floor spewing lava that solidified in the cool
water to form its own small landmass. Denmark and
Britain had felt the shock waves of this, but the
damage and death toll had been minimal. Still, if one
considered the effect of this disaster upon the
gradually rising tide levels, most of these two
countries would eventually end up underwater as
Cadfan foresaw.
News of Miles and John didn’t reach their families
until the following day. They’d survived the ordeal in
Britain and managed to get themselves into the
newspapers in the process. The old university hall where
they’d been lecturing at the time of the quake had partly
collapsed.
The majority of the faculty and staff were seated
near the back of the large amphitheatre, and were
close to the roof when it fell. Some two hundred
students had been trapped. So, as opposed to giving a
talk on digging up ruins, Miles and John set about
organising an on-the-spot demonstration of how to dig
your way out of one.
This story, on top of the publicity they’d already
stirred up with the Plato Project, landed Miles and John
on the guest list of a United Nations charity ball for
the quake victims. This was held at the UN premises
in London, two weeks later, after the clean-up was
well underway.

As John had disappeared to the bar, Miles planted
himself in a quiet corner of the room to read the article
National Geographic had done on the Goddess and the
sea monster. The picture of the sub and the plesiosaur
was the cover story, and the article featured a beautiful
photo of Tory manning Merlin II during the event.
Miles admired this photo for some time; the three weeks
they’d been apart felt more like three years.
‘Professor Thurlow, I presume.’
Miles was startled from his fantasy to find a slick
young man waiting to present himself. Blond-haired
and blue-eyed, this corporate paragon exuded vitality
and drive. He was surrounded by an entourage of five or
six people, all hovering about him while he awaited the
Professor’s attention.
‘Doc Alexander, ICA.’ He held out a hand, his
beaming smile exposing a perfect set of brilliant white
teeth.
Miles recognised his name from the invitation and
closed the magazine. ‘I am sorry. It’s my wife’s rig you
know?’ Miles flashed the cover as he shook the
diplomat’s hand.
‘I know, I read it … fantastic project, lovely wife.’
Miles felt disturbed — he’d expected someone much
older to be in the ICA’s top position. ‘Thank you. I
consider myself very fortunate.’
‘She’s Professor Renford Alexander’s daughter, so I
believe?’
The man was only making polite conversation, but
for some reason it bothered Miles. ‘Do you follow
Professor Alexander’s work?’ he queried.

‘I do.’ Doc took a very interested stance and folded
his arms. ‘We’re distantly related, so they tell me.’ He
shrugged it off as hearsay. ‘But I am fond of British
antiquity.’
‘Really?’ This surprised Miles, as Doc seemed a one
hundred percent American kind of guy.
‘In fact,’ Doc took Miles underarm to walk with
him, ‘there’s a piece in my office upstairs that I bought a
few weeks ago … but I have an awful feeling I got
screwed on the price. Could you take a quick look at it
for me? Tell me what you think.’
‘Sure.’ Miles looked around for John, who was
nowhere to be seen.
‘This way.’ Doc accompanied Miles to the stairs,
motioning his own following to stay put.
They entered a spacious office that was dimly lit. The
room contained some truly lovely antiques; both its
furnishings and works of art were exquisite.
‘Why is it,’ Miles posed as he observed a beautiful
medieval painting on the wall, ‘that you look and sound
like an American, but have the tastes of an Englishman?’
Doc was taken aback a moment, but smiled resolutely.
‘A Briton, you mean.’
‘Do I?’
Doc motioned Miles to take a seat. ‘I am American
by birth. But I was educated here, and my ancestry is
here. You see this?’ He diverted the professor’s attention
to a model that was in a glass case by the desk. ‘This
will be the ICA’s first space station. I am naming her
the “Brunanburh.”

‘After the Battle of Brunanburh?’ Miles was curious
to hear why. Dated at 937 AD, this two-day skirmish
had seen the Briton’s forced into recognising the
Kingdom of England.
‘I thought some good should come of it,’ was Doc’s
reply.
‘Fair enough.’ Miles took a seat, starting to feel a mite
uneasy. ‘So, which piece do you want me to evaluate?’
Doc’s exuberant mood left him as he came to stand
over his guest. ‘You can drop the front, Professor, I know
who and what you are.’
‘Sorry?’ Miles went to stand, but Doc thrust him
back into the seat and held him there, one hand
clenched round his throat.
‘God, Maelgwn. You really let yourself go to hell.’
‘Maelgwn!’ Miles swallowed. Who the hell was this
guy if he could identify Tory’s first husband, who hadn’t
walked the Earth since 540 A.D.?
‘Please don’t play dumb, Your Highness. The
Goddess who is your other half would never bond with
anyone but the Dragon.’
Does he mean Tory? Miles fretted on the quiet.
That I do. Doc took delight in Miles’ horror, as the
Professor realised his mind was being invaded. ‘Or
perhaps you’re just an incarnation, and not really
Maelgwn at all.’ Doc glared deep into the Professor’s
eyes. ‘Only one way to find out.’
Noah had enjoyed every minute of his time with
Project Plato, and he considered most of her crew
good friends.

The Goddess was heading for port at the end of the
week, and all aboard seemed of the impression that
Noah would be disembarking then.
‘Can I talk to you?’ He cornered Tory in her office
amidst a pile of paperwork.
‘Ah-ha,’ she affirmed, not pausing from her search
for a missing invoice. ‘I’m listening.’
Noah entered, closing the door. He took a seat and
waited until Tory could give him her full attention.
When she realised he wasn’t saying much Tory
ceased her fruitless activity to oblige her young friend,
whose expression seemed rather grave. ‘Sorry, Noah. Is
something the matter?’
‘I want to work for you,’ he stated plainly.
This request threw her a moment, though it came as
no surprise. ‘But what about National —’
‘I’m freelance. I have no assignment planned for the
near future. Though I can’t say I haven’t had offers.’ He
smiled at the acclaim his latest stories had brought him.
Tory rubbed her forehead. Despite the fact that she
was fast becoming as fond of Noah as she had been of
Selwyn, it was nightmarish trying to maintain Ray’s
cover with a reporter on board. But a fugitive was not
the only secret the Goddess was harbouring. If Noah had
been anyone but a member of the press, Tory wouldn’t
have thought twice about taking him on.
‘I could do the written and photographic records of
the expedition,’ he suggested. ‘I could even write book!’
‘Whoa there!’ Tory threw up both hands in defence.
‘This may surprise you, Noah, but I don’t really want
the whole world knowing everything that happens on

board this vessel. And just for the record, you didn’t ask
to use that photograph of me in your article either.’
‘But it’s a beautiful photograph.’ Noah appealed to
her vanity. ‘You’re a beautiful woman.’ He curbed his
enthusiasm, realising he had overstated his case already.
Tory supported her head, trying not to look amused.
‘Flattery will get you nowhere, Purcel, and furthermore,
you’re missing the point.’
‘I know,’ he admitted, looking anywhere but at her.
‘But you didn’t strike me as the kind of woman who —’
‘Who what?’ Tory raised her eyebrows, intrigued to
hear his impression of her.
‘Who,’ he paused, ‘who would agree.’ Noah shrugged.
‘That’s not what you were going to say.’ Tory could
sense that Noah was holding back something, and
would have pursued the truth had Ray not entered all in
a tizz.
‘Tory. Have you seen th—’ When Ray spotted Noah
present, he took his beef straight to him. ‘Rhiannon
told me you used this photo of Tory in your article.’
‘Yeah, it’s a great photo.’ Noah stated, on the verge
of being irritated.
‘A great photo! Are you kidding me? The lights all
screwy or something.’
‘What do you mean?’ Noah grabbed the
photograph, all offended.
‘Pardon my saying so,’ Ray glanced at Tory, ‘but it
makes her look like she’s fifty.’
‘Ray, I am fifty,’ Tory lied. She was, in fact, closer to
seventy.
‘Yeah, but you hardly look thirty,’ he announced.

‘Really?’ Tory stood up, fascinated by his dilemma.
‘Noah, would you excuse us a moment. I’ll get back to
you on that other matter presently.’
‘Sure.’ Noah looked a little worried about Ray as he
passed by him. Was this guy nuts or what?
Tory closed the door and turned to back to Ray.
‘What’s wrong with him?’ Ray wanted to know.
‘Don’t you think it was a bad picture?’
This image Ray seemed to have of her had Tory
curious. Besides Taliesin, Myrddin and Brian, who were
themselves immortal, everyone else on this planet was
supposed to see Tory as a fifty year old, for that was how
she chose to be seen. ‘Would you do me a favour, Ray,
and I don’t want you to misconstrue this as a come on,
but would you describe how I look to you?’
‘Ah, look.’ Ray backed up. ‘You’re happily married,
as everyone on board has gone to great pains to impress
on me. I am also advised that you are a five times black
belt in Tae-kwon-do. I think I’ll pass.’
‘Ray, Ray, Ray.’ Tory shook her head, holding out
her hands as she approached him. Ray, enchanted to
have Tory’s undivided attention for a change, let her
take hold. ‘Just a simple description is all I ask.’
She perceived a great flash of light, and then an
image of herself appearing just as she saw herself.
‘Hey, hold on.’ Ray pulled away, holding a finger up
in caution. ‘I know what you’re doing.’
‘Ray, how did I look in your vision?’
‘That’s kind of personal don’t you think, Mrs
Thurlow?’ Ray got all offended, thinking she was
making sport of his feelings.

‘Ray?’ She smiled. ‘I think I may have a clue as to
how it was you escaped the ICA without being
detected. Now, did this dream of your’s in any way
involve a fairy wood and a white shimmery dress.’
‘It might have.’ He scowled, sounding both
astounded and annoyed.
‘What else?’ she hounded him.
‘You were surrounded by a very bright light, which
brought out the colour in your eyes.’ Ray gazed down
into them. ‘It was windy, you were crying …’
‘Maelgwn,’ she uttered, her heart pounding in her
chest at the mere thought of him. These are his
memories.
‘Who?’ Ray frowned, as the phone began to ring.
‘Never mind.’ She took the call. ‘Hello. That’s okay,
who is it, Jen? The UN!’ Tory’s eyes shot straight to Ray,
who went white. ‘What do they want? Well, if they
insist, you’d better put them on. Hello. This is she.’
Tory went pale suddenly. ‘What kind of tragic
occurrence? A heart attack!’ Tory sank to a seat on the
desk, tears building as her sorrow welled. ‘Where is John
Pearce? I see. Thank you.’ Tory dropped the phone.
‘Tory. What’s happened?’ Ray rushed to support her
as he thought she might faint.
‘Miles is dead.’ Her voice went hoarse. ‘Cardiac
arrest, they said.’
Ray didn’t know what to say as she fell sobbing into
his arms. He hadn’t known Tory’s husband very well,
and although to Ray this might seem like a fortunate
turn of events, he hated to see her suffer. ‘Is there
anything I can do?’

Tory drew away from him abruptly, shutting off her
emotions just like that. ‘Yes, there is something you can
do, if you would. Please find Rhiannon and send her to
me.’
As soon as Ray opened his mouth to speak, a
whimper slipped from Tory’s lips. He decided to say
nothing and just leave her to grieve in peace.

5
I SPY

T

he funeral service was held on the dwindling Isle
of Anglesey, at the site of Miles and Tory’s last
major project, the restored temple of the
Goddess.
Miles and Tory’s cottage by the seaside on Anglesey
had long since been lost to the rising seas. But the
mountains around the valley at Lynn Cerrig Bach still
protected the sacred site.
From the temple it was a short walk up the
mountainside to the cliffs overlooking the sea. Here the
Professor’s ashes were to be scattered to the four winds,
over the submerged land where Miles had been born
and raised.
Ray remained on board the Goddess, which was
moored near the new Menai Bridge, on the Anglesey side.

Everyone else went to the service, including Noah. He
was still hanging around as he reckoned he could sense
a story in the wind. Noah didn’t feel right hassleing Tory
about a job, present curcumstances being as they were.
Still, until she gave him her final answer, he wasn’t
going anywhere.
What was planned as a small family affair ended up
looking more like a holy pilgrimage. The High Druids,
the custodians of the temple, performed a beautiful
pagan service. Scholars and students came from all over
Britain and England to pay Professor Thurlow homage,
along with the two hundred or so students whose lives
he’d helped save during the most recent disaster.
The UN had representatives from the ICA present.
Even Doc Alexander made an appearance to pay his
condolences.
Needless to say, Noah got his scoop.
Although the diplomat had been watching Tory from
behind his dark sunglasses throughout the service, once
it was over, he waited until most of the other mourners
had offered Tory their sympathies before he approached
her.
‘Mrs Thurlow. I’m —’
‘I know who you are,’ Tory informed him, her
bitterness plain in her tone. ‘You were the last person to
see my husband alive.’
‘Yes ma’am.’ He removed his sunglasses and bowed
his head sorrowfully. ‘To my deep regret, that is true.
But his last thoughts were of you, and your daughter. If
there is anything I can do, I —’

‘There is nothing, thank you.’ Tory forced a grim
smile, and patted his hand. Why should she leave this
young man feeling responsible? Miles had been nearly
sixty, after all.
Just that brief touch told Doc so much. He replaced
his dark glasses to watch Tory depart. ‘Well, who would
have thought?’ he mused. He gave half a laugh,
motioning one of his associates to approach.
The real surprise visitor amongst the mourners gathered
at the burial site was Walter Cadfan.
He, too, had read the article on ‘The Goddess and
the Sea-monster’ that named Mrs Miles Thurlow as
Professor Alexander’s daughter. He’d finally found her:
Tory Alexander. The Goddess of legend, the great
mother, warrior, and leader of men.
‘Lady.’ He reached out of a crowd of people to
gently take hold of her arm and gain her attention. ‘You
don’t know me —’
‘Of course we do.’ Rhiannon was pleased to meet
him. ‘You are Walter Cadfan. We’ve been following
your work with great interest.’
‘Thank you, I’ve been following your work very
closely too,’ he told her.
Tory noted that a crowd of calm, smiling people had
enclosed them while they were in conversation with the
guru, acting as a human shield. Cadfan took hold of
Tory’s hands, and although Tory had never met the man
before, either in this life or in any other, for some reason
she felt very comfortable with him. It almost seemed as
if he were kindred.

‘Please do not be alarmed when I tell you what I
must.’ Cadfan’s large soulful eyes of hazel had shifted
back to Tory. ‘A voice from the spirit-world gave me a
message for thee.’ He broke into Brythanic to deliver it.
‘Do not grieve too much, for thou art well aware thy
husband lives on in the body of another, and thou art
never far from his thoughts.’
Tory gasped, holding her hands to her face to hide
her shock.
‘All the eyes of the world art upon thee now, but
thee must stay hidden, for the Gathering is not yet
nigh. The means to avoid those who would persecute
thee lies in the old land, as surely as thee will find
sanctuary in the heart of thy homeland.’
Tory looked at him directly. ‘Did this spirit have a
name?’
Cadfan nodded, ‘Surely. The Dragon of the Isle.’
Cadfan did not linger long, though his words most
certainly did.
In the cab on the way back to their vessel’s mooring,
Tory revised what the prophet had said about the Old
Land and her homeland. Funnily enough, the land down
under had been spared from the natural disasters the Earth
was experiencing. In fact, Australia was prospering more
than ever before — proving it truly was a lucky country.
Her mind then turned to the Dragon of the Isle, and
the day they’d met; Maelgwn had been but a Prince
then, wild and charming. She lay her head to rest
against the back of the seat, for she felt his essence
descend on her in waves. His energy, his scent, was all

around her, so Tory closed her eyes to quietly enjoy the
calming and arousing effect of his memory.
Her blissful state was short-lived, as her next
thought was of the first time she’d met Miles. She really
hadn’t liked the sceptical young professor very much.
But, as Miles and Maelgwn were one and the same
soul–mind, Tory couldn’t help but fall for him.
The incarnation is gone, but the soul lives on. She
sniffled back the tears that were welling for the
umpteenth time today. We’ll meet again … Goddess,
make it soon.
When the funeral party returned to the Goddess, they
found her abandoned; Ray and his suitcase were gone.
They did an extensive search of the craft, until Teo
and Brian started pouring drinks at the bar in the recroom. Everyone gathered there to ponder what might
have become of the missing engineer.
‘Do you think they caught up with him?’ Rhiannon
whispered to her mother on the quiet.
Even over the din of speculation already flying
around the room, Noah managed to overhear her. ‘Who
is they?’ He passed their drinks on from the barman as
an excuse to get in on their conversation.
‘The ICA,’ Tory informed him. It didn’t seem to
matter if Noah found out now.
‘What!’ He freaked out. ‘You had a fugitive from the
ICA on board and I didn’t find out about it?’
‘Well, it wasn’t really something I wanted showing
up in National Geographic.’ Tory had a long gulp of her
drink.

‘I’m deeply wounded, madam.’ He covered his heart
with both hands, and staggered back a few paces. ‘I
would never betray you in such a fashion.’
‘And Ray?’ Tory put forward.
‘Hey, Ray’s a little nuts, I’ll grant. But I would no
sooner betray a friend of yours, than I would you.’
‘You really want a job, don’t you?’ Tory guessed this
to be the motivation behind the heartfelt confession.
‘Yeah, yeah, yeah.’ He played along like an obedient
puppy, whimpering and begging for attention.
‘Alright,’ Tory announced with a smile.
Noah clapped his hands. ‘Bonus!’
‘Wait … there is a condition.’
The young reporter quietened immediately,
brushing his straggly blonde hair behind his ears and
giving Tory his complete attention. ‘Yes, boss.’
This made Tory smile, and she appreciated it.
‘Nothing you see, shoot, read, hear, or record on this
vessel is to be repeated in any way, shape, or form
without my say-so.’
‘Yes, boss.’ He rubbed his hands briskly, appearing
most pleased with himself. ‘So then. Do you think the
ICA had a hand in Ray’s mysterious disappearance?’
Tory winced as she answered. ‘How could they
know, or even suspect, where he was? If they’d seen him
board, they would have reclaimed him weeks ago.’
‘Could your husband have said something?’ Noah’s
naturally curious mind was already hard at work,
running through the logical possibilities.
Tory shook her head. ‘At the time he left, he
thought Ray was you, a reporter.’

‘Well, some of their agents were at the funeral
today.’ Noah put forward his second theory. ‘Did you say
anything around them?’
‘Noah, if you haven’t found out about Ray and
you’ve been living with us for a month, do you think I’d
manage to blow his cover in less than a day?’
‘My mistake.’ Noah bowed out.
‘The only person you even spoke to was that
Alexander bloke.’ Rhiannon chewed her long
thumbnail as she recalled the scene. ‘And he was quite
a babe, really.’ She raised both eyebrows and grinned.
‘Well, he gave me the creeps.’ Tory shivered.
‘Something about the way he was looking at us.’
Her memory of Doc Alexander got Tory to
wondering about him. She excused herself from her
friends and family on the premise that she needed to
rest awhile.
‘Mum, are you alright?’
Rhiannon entered Tory’s bedchamber only moments
after Tory had arrived there herself.
‘Mother!’ Rhiannon crashed against the door to
close it, stunned by the transformation.
‘You think it’s too much?’
Her mother’s eyes had turned a pale-blue colour,
like ice, and her skin was the shade of dark copper. Her
golden blonde hair had gone snow-white and, although
it still fell to her behind, it was shaved on both sides,
Mohican style. She wore black leather chaps over jeans,
like a cowboy, and steel-capped boots. A black singlet
and vest exposed her muscular arms and the silver bands

clamped around them. It looked as if her mother was
going to a New York gang war.
‘You’re going after Ray, aren’t you?’
‘Do you think anyone will recognise me?’ Tory
perused her dark make-up in the mirror, then placed the
silver, gold and orichalchum headband upon her brow.
‘I’m coming with you.’
‘Baby, I can’t transport both you and Ray at the
same time.’ Tory pulled on her leather gloves.
‘But I can transport myself. I’ve been practising.’
Rhiannon was nearly begging now.
‘Could you still focus with someone firing bullets at
you?’ Tory proffered.
‘You know I could.’ She took a step away. ‘And I
haven’t forgotten how to play dress-up either.’
Rhiannon closed her eyes to be creative. Her mother
had often played this game with her as a child.
Although it had seemed nothing but harmless fun and a
big secret at the time, Rhiannon realised later in life
that it had been training.
Moments later, Rhiannon was completely bald, bar
a long ponytail of bright red that shot from her crown.
Her face and most of her body was tattooed with a black
Pictish style war-motif. Rhiannon’s choice of attire was
much like her mother’s, only she wore shorts and a red
singlet to match her hair.
‘Truly gross!’ Tory shook her head. What kind of a
girl had she raised? ‘I think the nose ring is a bit much
though.’
‘What? You don’t like it?’ Rhiannon admired her
hideous reflection.

‘What if somebody rips it out?’
Rhiannon didn’t seem to find this notion a very
pretty one. ‘You’re right, it’s got to go.’
‘What in hell’s name are you two doing?’
Brian was hoisted into the room by both women,
being hushed in the process.
‘You’re just the person I need to see.’ Tory informed
him, keeping her voice low.
‘Really?’ quizzed Brian, frowning. ‘Who are you?’
‘Very funny.’ Tory gave him a whack. ‘I’m serious,
we’re in a spot of bother, I’m afraid.’
Brian cocked an eye. He’d suspected there was more
to their fancy dress than some weird mourning ritual.
‘You’d best spill it, then.’
Tory levelled with Brian about Ray, about her vision
and the part she believed the technologist had to play
in it. Then she told of what Walter Cadfan had said.
‘The Goddess is a grand vessel, and a safe haven. But
there are still so many things she can’t do. If she had
land and air capabilities, as well as a decent cloaking
device, then we’d surely be one up on our foe.’
‘What foe?’ Brian objected. ‘If we get involved in
this, Tory, we’ll be outlaws.’
‘Brian, don’t you see? If a higher force has sent Ray
to me, it’s not without good reason. I believe I must take
him back to the Old Land, to find a means to protect us
all.’
‘Protect us from what?’ Brian implored her.
‘Some foreboding, force, occurrence, being … I
don’t know, but I feel it in my gut,’ Tory stressed her
concern.

‘Me too.’ Rhiannon seconded her mother’s view, as
she usually did.
‘Tory?’ Brian plastered his hair back off his brow.
‘I know it’s a big gamble, Brian, but I have a
seriously bad feeling that mainstream society is about to
take a dive.’
Brian sighed. ‘Alright, I’ll head us out to sea
tonight.’ He was showered with kisses from both
women. ‘Aw, do me a favour!’ He knew he’d been
conned, and so brushed them both off in protest. ‘You
look like a couple of drag queens.’
‘Head for deep water and stay submerged.’ Tory
backed up, Rhiannon with her. ‘We shan’t be far behind.’
Brian shuddered as he watched them both fade from
sight. ‘John’s right, this family is just too weird.’
The thought of Ray found Tory and Rhiannon thirty
floors up in the office of a new high-rise building
overlooking London.
‘The new ICA offices, I presume.’ Tory wandered to
the door to find a light switch.
The room had yet to be carpeted or painted, but as
it turned out there was electricity.
‘Sweet Jesus.’ Rhiannon spotted her crewmate
huddled in a corner, badly beaten. ‘Ray?’ She rushed to
squat beside him, gently turning his swollen face
toward her.
‘Who, who?’ He pushed himself hard into the
corner, wondering what horror lay in store for him now.
Rhiannon had completely forgotten about her
strange guise. ‘It’s okay, it’s me.’ She smiled.

‘Who?!’ He still hadn’t made the connection, as his
eyesight wasn’t the best. Ray looked harder. ‘Rhiannon?’
he mouthed the name.
‘Hey, babe.’ Tory gave him a wave.
‘Oh my God,’ Ray mumbled. ‘You two look awful.’
‘Well, you know, Ray, you’re not looking that crash
hot yourself.’ She helped Rhiannon to get Ray to his
feet. ‘Is anything broken?’
‘Ah!’ He winced with pain as he was raised up onto
his feet. ‘I think the question is more, what isn’t broken?’
‘Let’s get you back and have a doctor check you
out.’
‘Not without my case,’ he mumbled, barely
conscious.
‘My sweet, you’re dying,’ Tory pointed out. ‘Is it
really that important?’
‘Yes,’ he insisted. ‘I have to get it back.’
‘I’ll get it.’ Tory rolled her eyes, motioning for him
to stay put. ‘Do you feel confident to get him back
home?’
Rhiannon nodded. ‘I have been known to provide
men with such a service on occasion.’
‘You learn too fast.’ Tory gave her a wink before she
transformed her appearance.
‘No, Lord, I’m not seeing this,’ Ray whined in
protest.
‘What do you think?’ Tory asked.
As it was Doc Alexander smiling back at them,
Rhiannon replied, ‘What a babe!’
‘Ray?’ Tory looked at him, adding another
dimension to her disguise by employing Doc’s voice.

The engineer was stunned speechless. His eyes
rolled back in his head, and Rhiannon found herself
struggling to hold the dead weight of his body up.
Once Tory had seen Rhiannon and Ray safely depart,
she focused on finding the suitcase. It was old, and had
many a distinguishing sticker and baggage tag.
As the case in question took form before her, Tory
didn’t make a move for it. The smell of cigar smoke let
her know there was someone else present in the room
where she’d manifested.
She was in a very large office, exquisitely
decorated with fine antiques and artwork. Directly
beside her, seated in a chair facing a desk, was a big
man in a suit.
Out of the corner of his eye he caught a glimpse of
Tory and was startled to his feet. ‘Christ, Doc, you scared
me. I wasn’t expecting you for another hour or so.’
‘Is that why you’re smoking my cigars?’ Tory casually
strolled round the back of the desk and took a seat.
‘Sorry, I got bored.’ He stubbed it out in an ashtray
on the desk.
‘That’s quite alright, uh ...?’ Tory clicked her fingers
a few times and waited for him to jump in.
‘Murray,’ he obliged, seeming rather surprised.
‘Sorry, my friend, it’s been one of those days.’ Tory
could see a gun in a shoulder holster inside Murray’s
jacket, yet surely this overweight, middle-aged man
could not have taken Ray out on his own — or beaten
him so grievously. ‘Where are the rest of you?’
‘They left early to avoid suspicion, just like you said.’

‘Excellent.’ She smiled to reassure him. Then,
slapping her hands together, Tory rose and looked
around to locate the bag. ‘So, you got it I see, well
done.’
‘It was just like you told me, Doc. Murdock was on
Thurlow’s boat. Who would have thought?’
Who indeed? Tory mused.
‘That’s some smart rig they’ve got there. I think you
oughta check it out sometime.’
‘I’ll do that, Murray. But right now,’ she glanced at
her wristwatch, and attempted to walk him to the door,
‘I’ve got to motor.’
‘Wait a minute.’ He came to an abrupt halt, and
Tory’s heart shot into her throat. ‘What do you want me
to do with the brain … dump him in a river, or what?’
‘No, Murray, that’s okay.’ She patted his shoulder to
put him at ease. ‘I’ll take it from here.’
The thug shrugged, and then hesitated again before
departing. ‘You seem thinner, or shorter, or somethin’ …
you should take better care of yourself, Doc.’
‘I’ll do that.’ She shook his hand firmly on his way
out. ‘You take care yourself, Murray.’ She closed the
door behind him and gave a sigh of relief.
Her bedchamber on board the Goddess took form within
the ethers, and slowly materialised around her. She was
home, far from the eyes and cameras of would-be
voyeurs, so Tory dropped the suitcase and resumed her
true form.
‘I knew it.’
Tory turned to find Noah seated in a dim corner.

‘But I had to see it for myself.’ Noah stood in a daze,
clutching a pile of papers in his hand.
‘See what?’ Tory scoffed; maybe she could convince
him that he was imagining things; it was rather dark in
here.
Noah was so completely mind-blown he didn’t
know where to start, and so paced a little. He didn’t
want to offend Tory by jumping to conclusions. He had
to stick to the facts. ‘I know you think I’m not very
observant, what with the Ray thing slipping by me and
all.’ He stopped still. ‘But that’s because something else
has been preoccupying my brain space.’
‘I see.’ Tory smiled, taking a seat on the bed to hear
him out.
‘Wow!’ He let loose a burst of enthusiasm as the
pieces of the puzzle came together in his mind. ‘See, I’ve
been doing a bit of reading whilst I’ve been on this rig —
ancient history and mythology, seeing as that is what
your CD ROM library has to offer in the main. And I
came across this.’ He handed her a copy of the printout.
A short life hast mine been,
wondrous and blithe.
I have learned of many a legend.
But who wast the greatest?
I reply ...
It was she who tamed the Dragon.
It was she who united this land.
It was she who shaped my future,
the Goddess’ right hand.

The head-wind of a storm, wast she,
with more radiance than the sun.
The heart of a warrior, had she,
who fought until she won.
I am proud to say I knew her,
for she wast my truest friend.
The years we had together,
art the happiest I shall spend.
Departed now, for some future age,
and mourned by all who knew her.
I shall recount her deeds till I draw final breath,
Her name? … Tory Alexander.
It was a piece of poetry that a young druid of the
sixth century had written for her before her departure.
Thankfully, it was not dated. She’d had it translated
into modern English and put on CD ROM, mainly for
Rhiannon’s benefit, along with the copy of her legend
that had been passed down through time to become part
of British mythology.
She smiled as she finished reading it. ‘It’s a joke. A
friend wrote it for me, when he’d read the legend.
That’s why I had them put on CD together.’
‘Now, that’s what I thought.’ Noah let her know he
wasn’t buying it. ‘But, answer me this, Tory Alexander.
We’ve been out at sea for over an hour, so how can
Rhiannon show up with Ray less than fifteen minutes
ago?’
Tory opened her mouth to answer, but only gave a

huge exhalation. She was tired of trying to hide who she
was, and if they were headed for dangerous times those
close to her were bound to find out anyway. Unlike
most in this day and age, at least Noah was eager to
hear the truth.
‘Departed now for some future age …’ Noah quoted
the poem. ‘That future age is now, isn’t it? You are the
immortal, time-shifting warrior from ancient British
myth.’
‘If you say so.’ Tory was not really up for a fight.
‘No, hear me out.’ Noah was far more excited than
she. ‘You obviously have certain powers, right? And as
Rhiannon inherited them, I can safely assume it’s passed
on from generation to generation.’
‘I’ll go with that.’ Tory was intrigued to see where all
this was heading.
‘Well, in myth, the first person to strongly oppose the
Goddess … you,’ he pointed out, then took a moment to
get a grip on his thoughts again, ‘was Caradoc, which
could perhaps be shortened to Doc, and the Alexander
part, well …’ He shrugged, thinking it was obvious. ‘Now,
that could be just a coincidence, of course?’
But Tory knew better. There was no such thing as
chance. She had killed Caradoc out of mercy with her
own hand, but she couldn’t rule out the possibility that
he might have incarnated. ‘That’s food for thought.’
‘But there’s more.’ He sat on the bed and spread out
a whole lot of papers. ‘I traced the Kings down from
Maelgwn for five generations, to the Dragon’s final male
descendant to the throne, Cadwaladr. And you know,
every single one of them was reputedly taken by the

Otherworld before death, or mysteriously vanished after
death. And,’ he held up a finger in resolve, ‘they were
all fabled to return to join the Goddess in battle at the
Gathering of Kings. The aforementioned battle is
against an evil entity with extensive armies, who, it is
said, will bring universal slaughter … do you know
anything about that?’
Tory shook her head. She had heard the prophecy
before, but even she was none the wiser as to the
identity of her foe in the affair.
Noah suspected she was withholding information,
but didn’t push the issue. ‘Anyway,’ he grinned, gesturing
to the chart he’d made, ‘this is the family line ...
‘Maelgwn — taken by the Otherworld. Rhun —
mysteriously vanished. Cadwell — taken by the
Otherworld. This one is interesting: Cadfan, most
cultured and renowned of all British Kings, mysteriously
vanished. Cadwallon — taken by the Otherworld. And,
the last of his line, the great warrior, Cadwaladr, his body
mysteriously vanished after he’d been slain at the battle
of Brunanburh. Which, just as a matter of interest, is
what Doc Alexander named the ICA’s first space station.’
‘How long have you been working on this?’ Tory
could hardly believe what a hive of information he was.
‘I haven’t really … like I said, I’ve been reading. It
only really came together when Rhiannon showed up
with Ray.’
‘Well, it seems you’ve already earned your week’s
pay.’ She could see now why he’d wanted the job in the
first place.
‘We aim to please,’ he advised. ‘So let me run this

theory by you. You believe in reincarnation, right?’
‘Most certainly.’ She handed the poem of her deeds
back to Noah. ‘When one considers that you were the
druid who penned this poem for me in 540 A.D.’
‘Radical … a druid, eh!’ He was pleased. ‘So I was a
reporter even then.’
Tory laughed. ‘Indeed.’
‘Will you tell me your story one day?’ He forgot all
about his theory, as this was far more interesting.
‘One day, perhaps.’ She motioned him back to his
notes and the matter at hand.
‘Right, ah … yes. It just occurred to me — what if
these talents of yours had been passed down through the
generations? There could be others like you.’
‘Oh shit!’ Tory sprang to her feet. She’d never
considered this. ‘The gene would’ve had to have been
activated before each of them bred, but, holy Goddess …
there could be thousands of us!’
‘Or, at least, six,’ agreed Noah calmly. ‘So what if
Doc Alexander is one of them?’
Tory gasped. ‘If he’s telepathic …!’ She paused, too
horrified to voice her mind at once. ‘When I touched
him yesterday, Ray was almost certainly foremost in my
mind, knowing he was hiding from the ICA.’
‘So, you think we have a case for suspicion?’ Noah
sought confirmation.
‘Aye, I believe we do.’

6
WORLDS APART

T

he next day, when Ray had recovered a little, all
on board the Goddess met in the rec-room for a
major confessional.
As it turned out, Ray’s suitcase held the only record
of his work on the super-computer for the ICA’s new
fusion reactors, and chances were, the ICA would try
and retrieve these documents. Not that it would do
them any good as Ray planned to erase the relevant
information from his computer and burn all his notes
pertaining to the project.
John Pearce, at fifty-nine years old, did not feel
young enough to be taking on the powers-that-be.
Miles’ sudden death had him spooked and suspicious.
Jenny, although she loved the rig, the project and the
company, could not bring herself to endanger the life

of her only son. She had to agree with her husband —
they must leave. Nicholas, of course, insisted he wasn’t
going anywhere. Yet he knew, eighteen or not, Tory
and Brian would not let him stay without his parents’
consent.
Naomi knew the rig rather well these days and,
although she was concerned about how the present
circumstances might affect her son, she firmly believed
there was no safer place for them than on board the
Goddess. Brian would never leave Tory, and Naomi
would not leave Brian; thus, they would stay.
This went double for Teo. Tory, Brian and Teo had
been a team since high school, and he wasn’t about to
change that now.
Ray had little choice in the matter, which left
Noah. As he’d only just managed to scam the job, and
there was a major story to be had, Noah wasn’t going
anywhere.
John Pearce and his family parted ways with the
Goddess and her crew in Horta. After sixteen years of
working together as a team, this was not an easy
goodbye for any of them.
Nicholas was quietly rebellious, insisting they would
all be seeing him again soon. Jenny and Tory could barely
look at each other without bursting into tears, which
made words a little difficult. They had become firm
friends in the twentieth century, just as they had in the
sixth. Tory would miss Jenny’s company every bit as much
as she missed Jenovefa’s. They gave up trying to express
their farewells in the end, and just said it with a hug.

‘Goodbye, John.’ Tory shook his hand.
‘Your secrets are safe with me,’ he assured her.
Tory gave him the old chug on the shoulder. ‘Well,
who’d believe you, anyway?’
Pearce smiled, and thought how much this strange
woman had opened his mind of late. ‘Don’t go
changing.’ He winked at her, and followed his family
down the pier.
The mighty submersible left port that same day, fully
stocked.
John didn’t realise it, as he watched her disappear
out to sea, but he would never see, nor hear of, the
Goddess or her crew again.
Tory only slept out of habit, and even then it was more
like meditation than sleep. Tonight, she could not relax
and concentrate long enough to even do that. She
needed to talk with someone — someone old and wise.
Naturally, her father was the first person who sprang to
mind.
She found the Merlin sitting on a throne-like chair
inside his cave at Dinas Emrys, chatting with an old owl
friend of his.
‘Hello.’ Myrddin acknowledged his daughter’s
entrance. ‘Tobias seems to think the world is coming to
an end. What do you think?’
‘Not if I can help it.’ Tory bowed slightly to the owl
as she challenged his view.
‘Hey-ho, it sounds like she’s on another quest.’ Her
father uttered an aside to the bird. ‘And I suppose you’re

requiring my assistance.’ He casually polished his
fingernails against his robes.
‘I need to know the position of the solar system and
planets around the time Absalom was nearing the end of
his reign in Atlantis.’ She raised her brow hopefully.
‘Whatever for?’
Tory rolled her eyes, thinking it obvious. ‘So I can go
back there, of course.’
‘Well, you could just take the chariot, like you did
last time.’ He motioned in its general direction.
‘But I thought I’d destroyed it!’ This was good news,
indeed.
‘So why are you going back to the Old Land?’ He
turned in his seat to view her. ‘Didn’t you cause enough
trouble last time you were there?’ The Merlin chuckled
and the owl thought it was rather a hoot, too.
Tory opened the nose cone of the vehicle to check
out the inner circuitry, ignoring them both. ‘I’m going to
make some slight modifications to the Goddess.’ She
peered into the belly of the chariot. ‘So I’ll need
something to barter in exchange for their technology.’
‘Don’t be silly, of course you won’t.’ The Merlin
waved it off. ‘You’re a Goddess for heavens’ sake! They
shall supply you with whatever you need, just as before.’
‘And if they don’t.’
‘They will.’ He leant back in his chair. ‘The Shu Sar
Absalom is a past incarnation of mine, so I shall see to it
personally.’
‘Dad?’ Tory spotted the crystal that was the heart of
the time-chariot’s drive system. She’d completely
shattered this irreplaceable piece after her last journey

through time, yet it was now perfectly intact. ‘Where
did you get the quasi-crystal?’
‘I have a supplier in the Fourth Dimension who gets
them for me.’
‘What?’ Tory sat back on her haunches, hands on
hips. ‘Are you telling me you made me time travel
without a vehicle on purpose!’
‘Well, I was curious to see if it could be done … and
you came out of it alright.’
‘Yes, but I could have been caught in a time-warp,
or another dimension, or —’
‘But you weren’t, were you darling?’ Myrddin
absentmindedly rubbed the bridge of his nose. ‘Besides,
at the time, I wanted my transport back! Having now
done all the exploring I care to at present, you may take
it if you wish.’
Tory went quiet and Myrddin knew there was
something playing on her mind. ‘What is it?’
‘The ET gene you spoke of last time we met?’
‘What of it?’ he urged impatiently.
‘Well, I know Rhun inherited it.’
Rhun was Tory’s first child, born to Maelgwn in the
sixth century. He’d been left to rule Gwynedd when
Tory had departed for the twentieth century.
‘And the gene was activated before he had his son,
Cadwell; therefore, Cadwell must be immortal.’ She
stood, and slowly began to pace.
‘Yes.’ The Merlin smiled. ‘But, your question?’
‘Do you know how many of my descendants
inherited this gene in its active state?’
‘Well …’ His face became long and drawn as he

considered the question. ‘I can’t say I ever wondered. I
never pay a lot of attention to the past or future — they
always change so much, according to what interdimensional reality one is living in at the time. But I
guess it would depend on whether or not, in this
particular dimension, Cadwell was killed before or after
he had children.’
‘Tell me something I don’t know.’ Tory swept her
long fair hair back off her face. ‘Okay.’ She decided to
take another tack. ‘If the gene had been passed along,
say, for five or six generations, might these other
immortals have the same talents as I do?’
‘Perhaps …’ He was a little vague at first. ‘Psychic
ability is as varied as its third plane counterparts —
creative talents, great sporting achievements, or unusual
mental abilities. Therefore, it depends on what area one
has developed and what kind of belief structure one has.’
The Merlin sat forward, motioning Tory to come and sit
before him. ‘With you, movement has been vital,
teleportation through time and space … so you
developed psychokinesis, and that is your forte. Along
with telepathy which you learnt from Taliesin and myself,
and have in turn passed on to Rhiannon. But for other
immortals perhaps shape-shifting and shamanism is more
what is required to fulfil their role in the scheme of
things, or channelling, healing, prophecy, extra-terrestrial
communication, and so forth. What any individual is
capable of rests entirely upon what he or she believes is
possible. Most would not attempt the feats you perform,
as they consider such metamorphosis impossible. You,
however, do not, as you have seen it done.’

‘But what if not all these immortals were using these
talents for the common good?’
‘Then …’ he raised both brows, ‘those in question
could not have developed beyond the third level of
awareness. That is … the realm of psychology and
thought. At this early stage of spirituality, one still
believes the mind is the supreme device. One can
hardly be aided by the higher realms of the superconscious if one doesn’t believe they exist. One’s ability
could only develop akin to the limitations of third
dimensional existence.’
Tory took a deep breath. ‘So, beyond what is usually
considered as normal human activity, what could such
an individual be capable of?’
Her father frowned; he didn’t like contemplating such
things. ‘Telepathy would be possible, but only through
touch … possibly even hypnosis and mind manipulation
for the purpose of disguise. But not teleportation or time
travel, as that requires fourth dimensional intervention.
In other words, you’d have to have a being that resides on
the fourth dimension or beyond it assisting you, just as
Keridwen aids you. However …’
‘What?’ Tory pleaded for him to share his thought.
‘One might be able to view the past through one’s
numerous incarnations, perhaps even assume wilful
control of them for a time. But it would take a very
disciplined mind indeed.’
‘I see.’ Tory committed the information to memory.
She had seen Maelgwn execute such a feat once; he’d
gained control over Miles’ body in the twentieth
century, leaving his body in the sixth.

‘Tory.’ Myrddin was concerned by his daughter’s
grave expression. ‘I feel sure that as long as there were
immortals in Gwynedd’s royal line, Taliesin would have
been there to take them under his wing. The High
Merlin would never leave such a powerful force to just
wander astray.’
‘I suppose.’ She hoped he was right.
But what if Taliesin had overlooked a couple
somehow? The last of Maelgwn’s descendants,
Cadwaladr, disappeared somewhere in the middle of the
eighth century, but there wasn’t any mention in history
texts of Taliesin after the sixth.
Upon Tory’s return to the Goddess she went straight to
see Ray. Three o’clock in the morning was an odd hour
to be paying a visit, but she’d been seized by a sense of
urgency she couldn’t shake. Nearing his cabin, she was a
little bemused to hear Rhiannon’s laughter coming from
within. Tory hesitated to disturb them at first, but then
gave a timid knock.
‘Come in.’ Ray didn’t bother to inquire as to who it
was. But Tory wanted to make sure he knew.
‘It’s me, Tory.’
‘Well, don’t be shy.’ The door opened and Ray
invited her in to join Rhiannon and himself, both
still up drinking coffee and chatting. Tory stayed in
the doorway. ‘Hold on a minute, you didn’t think we
were ...?’ Ray gave half a laugh. ‘Jesus, Tory. I’m nearly
old enough to be her father.’
‘Yes, really mother.’ Rhiannon raised herself to go to
bed. ‘I do like my men to at least be in one piece.’

Rhiannon served Ray a sweet grin as she slipped
herself between him and her mother.
The engineer cringed as he watched the girl
disappear down the corridor. ‘I think I might have
offended her.’
‘I think you might be right. Can we talk?’
‘In my room! Do think that’s safe?’ He grinned,
although his facial bruises were still ailing him.
‘Perfectly.’ She entered.
Ray closed the door behind her.
‘How are you feeling?’ Tory sat on the only chair in
the tiny sleeping quarters, so Ray took a seat opposite
her on the bed.
‘Pearce patched me up pretty good. Most of the
swelling has gone now, so it actually looks worse than it
feels.’
‘Do you feel up to a little trip?’
‘With you?’
Tory nodded.
‘Sure.’ He shrugged, as if he wasn’t at all excited by
the notion. ‘Where are we going?’
Tory hesitated a moment to evaluate just how much
of her plan Ray could cope with at once. ‘I want to take
you to meet an old friend of mine. I believe he might be
able to teach you a thing or two that could be very
beneficial to our future protection.’
‘In what way?’ He was curious, as there were few in
his chosen field more scientifically up to date or
experienced than himself.
‘I want to modify this ship,’ she informed him
plainly.

Ray shrugged, wearing a confident grin. ‘I really
don’t think I’d need any help to do that. What did you
have in mind?’
‘I want land and air capabilities, and a complete
sight and sound cloaking system.’
Ray nearly choked on his smile. ‘Whoa there! In
five hundred years, perhaps?’
‘See, I told you, you need to meet my friend.’ She
gave him a slap on the knee in fun.
But Ray did not take it thus. ‘If this guy’s so smart,
why don’t you get him to do it?’
‘Well, I would. Trouble is, I can neither get the
Goddess to him, nor he to the Goddess.’
‘I find that hard to believe. Rhiannon has yet to
explain how she got me back to this vessel within
minutes, from London!’ Ray stood, spurred on by
other concerns. ‘And how did you two alter your
appearance just like that … and don’t tell me it was
make up.’
Tory opened her mouth to comment, but Ray hadn’t
finished.
‘And it seems that I see you as twenty years younger
than everybody else does. Why is that? Who are you?’
Tory had hoped that perhaps they could leave for
the Old Land at once, but she could not push mortal
men in the same fashion she pushed herself. ‘Look,
you’re obviously tired, maybe —’
‘Don’t give me that.’ He was bordering on angry
now. ‘Are you human at least. Can I know that much?’
Tory stood, finding the tone of his question rather
hurtful. ‘No Ray, I’m really a little green man, and this

is my spaceship.’ Tory made for the door, before she said
or did something she’d regret.
‘I really didn’t mean that.’ He slammed the door
closed, before she’d opened it far enough to escape. ‘I’m
sorry. Jesus, you’d think I’d be more grateful, after all
you’ve done.’
‘Forget it.’ She waved it off. ‘We’ll talk about the
details of the trip tomorrow.’
‘Stay awhile.’ He was having trouble getting her to
look him in the eye.
‘Ray, you’ll never get better if you don’t rest.’ She
tried to shift him away from the door.
‘Perhaps comforting is more what I need.’ He took
hold of her hand, and caressed it between his. ‘Perhaps,
it’s what you need too.’
‘Ray, please.’ She slowly withdrew from his touch.
‘I’m really not up for a seduction right now.’ He went to
speak, but she hushed him with her fingers. ‘Nor will I
be in the foreseeable future.’
‘Pardon my saying so,’ he ventured, lowering her
hand from his mouth, ‘but it would be a crying shame if
you were to just lock it up and throw away the key. But,’
he spoke up over her pending protest, ‘it wouldn’t
matter if you did. I am very good at picking locks,
especially those that are more complex.’ Ray moved
away from the door so she could open it. ‘I don’t mind
waiting.’
Tory shook her head, knowing better. ‘No mortal
man is that patient. You shall fall in love with another,
way before I ever come around.’
As she stepped out into the corridor, Ray folded his

arms and leant on one side of the doorway. ‘I don’t
think so.’
She cocked an eye. ‘I’ll bet you a hundred dollars
that I’m right.’
Ray found her wager a rather amusing challenge.
‘You’re on.’
‘Sucker.’ Tory walked away a couple of paces, before
she turned to suggest. ‘And ah, if you want to know
more about my history, might I suggest you speak with
Noah … he seems to know more about me than I do.’
She waved him goodnight.’
I’ll certainly do that, Ray decided, fully intent on
winning their bet.
The next morning over breakfast Tory was studying her
daughter very closely.
It had dawned on Tory that Rhiannon was very
similar to someone she had known in the Dark Ages. It
was Rhiannon’s colouring that had prevented Tory from
noticing the resemblance before.
Even though Rhiannon had her head in a magazine,
reading the latest on the Green movement, her
mother’s quiet but persistent attention bothered her.
‘What is it?’
As they were alone in the rec-room Tory figured it
was okay to voice her mind. ‘You like him don’t you?’
‘Who?’
‘Ray.’
Rhiannon raised her dark eyes to view her mother.
‘Why would you think that?’
Tory noted the spite in her daughter’s voice.

‘Because I feel an attraction to him, and I don’t think
it’s because I’m attracted to him, if you get my drift.’
‘Well, maybe you are … and I’m just picking it up
off you.’ She went back to her reading matter.
‘Would you do something for me?’ Tory pushed her
luck with Rhiannon’s precarious mood.
‘What?’ She turned the page of her magazine, nearly
ripping it out in the process.
‘Change your eyes to the colour of acorn blue, and
your hair to, say … the colour mine once was.’
‘Still is, you mean?’ Rhiannon corrected her
mother’s assessment. ‘I see you as you truly are.’
Tory was shocked right off her train of thought.
She’d never actually discussed the immortality issue
with Rhiannon. ‘Do you know why I appear as I do?’
‘Yes, thank you … Noah told me.’ Rhiannon
continued to stare at the magazine, though both of
them knew she was no longer reading it.
‘Oh, I see. It wasn’t Ray you were mad at last night.
It was me.’ Tory had wondered why Rhiannon left in
such a hurry.
‘Oh, you’re quick,’ her daughter jeered.
‘Well, give me a break here. I’ve had a few things on
my mind.’
‘Is that right.’ Rhiannon finally looked at Tory. ‘And
what exactly did you have in mind visiting Ray at three
o’clock in the morning? Jesus Christ, Dad’s body is not
even cold! But then again, I suppose you’ve learnt to
recover from these things quickly.’
‘Rhiannon!’ Tory came within inches of striking
her, which she had never done in anger. Luckily the

tears in her daughter’s eyes prevented what would have
been a regretful act.
‘Why didn’t you tell me!’ Rhiannon begged to
know, her resentment waning.
‘I meant to, I swear it.’ Tory placed an arm about her
child, who fell sobbing into the embrace. Tory
remembered when Taliesin had informed her of her
immortal state, and how overawing and difficult to
fathom it had been. ‘It’s not so bad, truly. There’s quite a
few of us now.’
‘But what if the world were to end tomorrow? We’ll
just be left on a smouldering boulder of vast nothingness!’
Tory stroked her daughter’s long, thick hair, as
straight and dark as her father’s had been, all the while
smiling at the notion. ‘But that’s why we’re here. To
prevent that.’
Rhiannon felt more at peace after her explosion. ‘I
never even suspected immortality was the reason we
were a little more psychic than most.’
They both had a bit of a giggle at this.
‘And who’s this Maelgwn guy I hear about?’
Rhiannon teased her mother in a jovial fashion.
‘Warrior, King, leader, dragon slayer, legend … he
sounds like a bit of a babe.’
‘Maelgwn is the perfect incarnation of your father.
And he never killed the dragon …’ Tory took a graceful
pause to build the expectation, ‘he tamed it.’
They both released a long, soft sigh of adoration.
‘You speak as if he’s still alive?’
Tory nodded surely. ‘He’s out there in the cosmos
somewhere, keeping an eye on things down here.’ Tory

was reeling through a string of wonderful memories, and
thought she’d best be out with the whole truth. ‘You
have a brother you know.’
‘Yes.’ Rhiannon smiled. ‘Rhun. I remember the
fairytales you used to tell me when I was young. Yet,
I realise now, they weren’t fairytales at all, but rather
my ancestry. My brother was a British King, my
mother — a Goddess, my grandfather — a Merlin,
and my great-grandfather … an Otherworldly being! I
really was born in the sixth century then?’ As her
mother nodded to confirm this, Rhiannon grasped
hold of her head. ‘Hell’s bells, that makes me fourteen
hundred years old.’
‘Time is an illusion. Look at me, I’m a seventy year
old, pretending to be fifty, when I’m really perpetually
thirty.’
They both burst into laughter again, whereby Tory’s
blissful gaze wandered to the door. ‘Ray!’ The women
nearly jumped out of their skin. ‘How long have you
been here?’
‘Too long.’ He ambled in to join them. ‘I was
coming to tell you that the reporter you hired is nuts!
He was trying to tell me you’re some immortal sixth
century Goddess, who’s been jumping around the
time–space continuum for God knows how long!’ He
looked from Tory to Rhiannon, who were both staring
back at him with the most pathetic look on their faces.
‘Please, ladies, could we have a reality check here?’ He
clicked his fingers a few times.
Rhiannon picked up a sharp knife off the table and
passed it to her mother. ‘I guess Ray wants proof.’

‘This is a nightmare, right?’ Ray got a little edgy
when Tory took the knife in hand. ‘What are you going
to do with that?’
When Ray had witnessed Tory do the deed, he
slumped in a seat and went silent for a time. ‘This friend
of yours we’re going to see,’ he spoke finally, ‘where is
he, exactly.’
‘When is more the question.’ Tory smiled and
frowned at once. ‘His name is Shar Turan. He was the
head of the technologists at the Dur-na-ga temple in
Chailidocean. Which is, of course, the ruined city we
have been surveying for the past month.’ To her surprise
Ray did not freak out about the announcement, but
rather, he smiled.
‘So that’s how you found it!’ Ray came crashing
back to earth. ‘How do you plan to get us there? I mean,
how many thousands of years ago are we talking here?
Ten?’
‘Twelve.’ Tory thought it best to keep their mode of
transport a secret till the last minute. ‘You just leave the
flight details to me … and I’ll have us there, safe and
sound, by nightfall.’
‘I’ll believe it when I see it.’
Tory gave a chuckle, recalling her first glimpse of
the city of the golden gates. ‘No, you won’t.’

7
MADE IN HEAVEN

T

he sun rose over the three-ringed islands and
canals that comprised the city of Chailidocean.
The islands were connected by arched,
sandstone bridges and at each end of these stood a set of
large, golden gates. Breathtaking temples made from all
manner of marble lined the gleaming white sandstone
streets. Lush, colourful gardens featuring stately statues
and glistening crystal fountains lay between nearly
every dwelling. Building, road, path and garden alike
followed the same flowing circular design.
The sight was like a dream, or something from
another planet, or even the distant future, yet recalling
the world they’d left behind. Ray couldn’t imagine the
Earth ever being this pure and fair again.
‘You were right, I see it and I still don’t believe it.’

Ray stood gazing out of the large, round window of the
spacious circular room where Tory had brought them
to rest.
Under Tory’s navigation, Ray had travelled
through the brilliant blue–white light of the ethers.
This etheric field had obscured the world around him
until, before he’d even realised it, he was somewhere
else. This journey had taken them from the Goddess,
in the north Atlantic, to a cave of treasures — Tory
would not tell him where it was. Here he’d been
bundled into a vehicle that appeared rather like a
large, space-age jet-ski, which had brought them forth
to this place.
‘Are you feeling okay? You’re the first mortal to
ever ride in the chariot,’ Tory told him, as the bells of
the great citadel tolled to call all to the first solar rite of
the day.
As Ray was engrossed in watching the people of
Chailidocean flood into the streets below with their
prayer mats, he was not that fazed by his achievement.
‘I feel fine, just fine.’ His eyes remained transfixed on
the activity below.
‘Turan will be pleased.’
Tory could hardly wait to see the Shar for he, too,
was an incarnation of Maelgwn, just as Miles had been.
Unfortunately, Turan was so accomplished in the ways
of the etheric world that he floated around in a spiritual
form most of the time, making any intimate relations
with him impossible. But it would be grand just to pass
some time in his company; there was still much she
could learn from him.

‘Are you trying to tell me,’ Tory’s words had finally
registered with Ray, ‘that this Shar friend of yours, built
that?’ He pointed to the chariot.
‘Yes indeed.’ Tory grinned at how brilliant Turan
was. ‘This is his work station.’ She motioned to the
room around them that was a little more furnished since
she’d last seen it.
‘Are you kidding me?’ Ray was gasping now, and
experiencing surges of panic and self-doubt. ‘I’ll never be
able to fathom technology like that! Compared to these
people, I’m going to seem like an intellectual retard.’
‘No, you won’t.’ She made light of his fears with a
laugh. ‘Turan is a very good teacher. He even taught me
a thing or two about quantum mechanics.’
‘Oh, Tory!’ Ray was stressing out and shaking his
head, when the door to the room suddenly vanished
and two men entered.
One was a dark-eyed, red-skinned warrior with long,
straight black hair. He was dressed all in red, and bore a
rather striking resemblance to Teo. The other was a
seven foot tall, and much younger version of, Miles
Thurlow. He was dressed in long flowing robes of white,
that were bound with a purple and blue scarf at the
waist.
‘Turan! Jerram!’ Tory bounded towards them.
‘Lamamu!’ both men cried, ecstatic to see her again.
The shorter of the two rushed to meet Tory halfway,
and spun her around in the air.
‘I told them you’d be back!’ Jerram was pleased to
boast, as he came to a stop with her. ‘And on today of
all days!’

‘What do you mean?’ she questioned, as excited as he.
‘Adelgar and I are to be wed. Not to each other, of
course.’
Tory grinned. These matches weren’t really that
hard to figure. ‘The lucky ladies would be Nin Tabitha
and Nin Mahala, I presume.’
‘Are you very heartbroken?’ he teased.
‘Excuse I,’ Turan cut in, picking Tory up and
bringing her comparatively tiny form to stand on a
small table so she was more his height.
That’s when Tory noticed the Shar wasn’t floating.
He was standing on his own two feet, his tall, slender
body as solid as a rock. ‘Hello.’ She gazed into his greyviolet eyes, interlocking her hands behind his neck.
‘Did you miss me?’ Turan smiled as she’d rarely seen
him do. His return to a physical form was a most
unexpected and pleasant surprise.
‘You know I did,’ she confessed. ‘The more pertinent
question would seem to be, did you miss me?’ The Shar’s
smile broadened and his cheeks became slightly flushed.
‘It would appear so, no?’ He motioned to his person
with his eyes. ‘You left quite a lasting impression on us
all, Lamamu.’
Tory was mesmerised by his voice, his gaze. And
feeling ever so compelled to kiss him, she slowly closed
the distance between her lips and his.
‘Ah-hmm!’ Ray put an abrupt stop to the cheery
reunion, as all eyes looked his way.’
‘Zadoc. What are you still doing here?’ Turan lifted
Tory down from the table. ‘I thought you’d left to try
that case in Menocea.’

‘What?’ quizzed Ray, with a frown.
Jerram eyed Ray closely; apart from the strange
attire, there appeared to be a few other things amiss
with him. ‘Zadoc, you’ve shrunk!’ He was now only
minimally taller than Jerram, but Zadoc had always
been the same height as Turan. ‘And what happened to
your face?’ Jerram referred to his bruises.
‘No, no, no.’ Tory hit the panel to close the door.
‘This is a friend of mine, Ray Murdock. He’s from the
future, like me.’
‘Holy smoke! You brought one of Zadoc’s
incarnations back into the same time frame as he?’
Turan contemplated the repercussions of this, not
looking too pleased about it. ‘What were you thinking?’
‘I had no choice,’ Tory justified her actions.
‘You mean I’m already here!’ Ray demanded of Tory.
‘Well, not in the city, no,’ Jerram pointed out in
Tory’s defence. ‘Zadoc is in charge of the Courts of
Justice. His services are required in a city to the north,
and I believe he left this morning.’
Ray wiped a hand down his face. ‘This is not
happening.’
As the particle manipulation mechanism in the
door alerted them to company, Turan and Jerram
jumped in front of Tory and Ray to hide them.
‘There you are.’ Zadoc strolled in, obviously looking
for Jerram. ‘I’m off now. Sorry I can’t be at the wedding.’
He shook Jerram’s hand. ‘Good luck, tonight.’
‘No worries.’ Jerram tried to sound perfectly calm,
despite the fact he’d broken into a sweat. ‘I hope your
case doesn’t drag on too long.’

Zadoc looked over at Turan, who was older than
himself. ‘It must be about time you found yourself a
good woman. I highly recommend it.’ Zadoc slapped
Turan’s shoulder as he backed up. ‘I shall see you both
when I do.’ He gave a wave and strutted away.
‘Correction.’ Jerram hit the panel to close the door.
‘Now he’s gone.’
Tory looked to Ray, who’d gone as pale as a sheet.
‘Sorry about that.’
‘I’m married?’ was all he could say.
‘Yeah, three hundred years now.’ Jerram
concurred with a huge smile, wondering why his
brother’s double didn’t look that pleased about it.
‘Is something amiss?’
Ray waved Jerram away. ‘That’s just a little more
information than I can readily comprehend at present. I
think I need to … sit down.’
He was making his way to collapse on the lounge
when the door again opened.
No one was close enough or fast enough to hide Ray
this time, though Tory managed to duck behind Turan’s
desk.
‘Sorry to interrupt Shar Turan, Shar Jerram.’
Annora bow her head to each.
Tory recognised this lovely young woman from the
Dark Age. She was Aella, Sir Bryce’s wife. Tory thus
concluded that she must be Zadoc’s wife here in
Atlantis. O-oh … here’s trouble.
‘I was just looking for … Zadoc,’ she resolved,
spotting Ray. ‘I’m so glad I caught you. What on earth
are you wearing? And what happened to your face?’

She approached him, concerned, to discover she was
taller than he. ‘My god!’
‘Ah, Annora,’ Turan jumped in. ‘It’s a new
reduction device I’ve been working on. Zadoc
volunteered to test it out for me.’ As the woman
looked as if she might have a fit, he quickly added, ‘It’s
perfectly harmless, I promise.’
‘Well, how do you know it won’t cause any
permanent damage to him, if you haven’t tested it
before?’
‘I didn’t say I hadn’t tested it, Nin.’ Turan employed
a condescending tone. ‘In fact, I’ve tested it on nearly
everyone … even Jerram here, look at how short he is.’
Turan was having difficulty refraining from laughter at
this point, and Jerram was also finding it hard to hide
his amusement.
Annora knew something strange was going on, but
she let it pass. ‘Well, alright, if you’re sure it’s not
dangerous? But you know Zadoc is due to leave for —’
‘Yes, yes …’ Turan put an arm about her to show her
out. ‘I’ll return him to normal and send him on his way.’
‘But … I have to get back to my post, there’s a baby
due,’ Annora protested.
‘Well, we shouldn’t keep you then.’ Turan kept her
moving.
‘Couldn’t I just kiss my husband goodbye first?’
Annora came to a halt, not to be budged.
Everyone looked to Ray, who appeared to be
completely captivated by her. ‘I certainly have no
objection.’
Annora freed herself from Turan and ran to Ray.

She was six and half feet of slender, graceful
womanhood; eyes of acorn blue, and long blonde hair the
like of Tory’s. In fact, she looked remarkably like Tory.
‘I just wanted to say last night was fabulous. I miss
you already,’ Annora whispered, before indulging Ray in
a long and gentle kiss. ‘Goodbye.’ She slowly withdrew.
‘Bye,’ Ray sighed, as Turan closed the door —
making sure to lock it this time. ‘Wow,’ Ray mumbled.
‘Three hundred years of that … I never had it so good.’
‘Right,’ Turan decided. ‘Before we create a major
disaster, why don’t you tell us why you’re here.’
Tory produced the blueprints and design maps of the
Goddess, along with two huge folders on the circuitry.
As Turan assessed the vessel’s capabilities, Tory
explained the reasoning behind their decision to turn
the deep sea submersible into an all-round observation
vehicle. She spoke of her fears for her twenty-first
century homeland, and the more Turan heard the more
concerned he became.
‘And you don’t recognise this diplomat?’ The notion
confused the Shar. It didn’t make sense. ‘Surely if he is
to play such a major role in your life, good or bad, you
must have run into him during the course of your
travels. Could he be disguising himself, perhaps?’
‘It’s possible, especially if he has sprung from my
gene-pool.’ The idea gave Tory chills.
‘And he was the last to see your husband, in other
words me, alive?’ Turan was interested to note.
‘That’s right.’ Tory wondered why the Shar seemed
almost pleased to hear it.

‘In that case, we should try and identify this fellow,
and I might be able to assist you with that.’ He gave
Tory a slight wink. ‘But for the moment, no one must
know you’re here.’
‘But the wedding?’ Jerram appealed. ‘Lamamu must
come.’
‘Out of the question,’ Turan ruled.
‘But Adelgar will freak if we don’t tell him of
Lamamu’s arrival.’ Jerram spoke up for his twin brother.
‘The more people who know, the bigger the risk.
This Alexander fellow could be practically anyone. And
if he has contact with his past selves ...? Let us just say it
could be very detrimental to Lamamu’s mission.’
This was very disappointing. Tory had been so
looking forward to seeing everyone.
‘Are we agreed then?’ Turan pushed for a
commitment, and both Jerram and Tory nodded
reluctantly. They would inform Ray of their conclusions
later, as he was sleeping on the lounge like a baby at
present.
‘As for your transport’s modifications, I think we
may be able to accommodate you.’ Turan looked back to
the plans of the Goddess on the table before them.
‘Although the technology is primitive, her design is
good.’
‘So you think you could invent a way to get her
airborne. She must be undetectable, you realise?’
‘Well,
obviously.’
Turan
exaggerated
his
understanding. ‘And I don’t need to invent such devices.
We have been utilizing this technology for centuries.’
‘But I didn’t see any such vehicles last time I was

here,’ Tory recalled. ‘Apart from a few hovercraft on the
outermost island.’
‘Well, of course you didn’t.’ Turan laughed, as did
Jerram. ‘My cloaking device does work, you know.’
Tory smacked herself on the forehead, she’d walked
right into that one.
‘Flying craft tend to scare some races,’ Jerram
explained. ‘Thus Turan developed a soundproof shield,
which keeps everybody happy.’
‘So in reality,’ Turan summarised, ‘all I need to do is
modify the systems to suit your craft, and teach Ray how
to install them at the other end.’ He thought he’d
wrapped up the meeting in time for lunch, but Tory had
a few questions still milling around in her head.
‘Has Nin Sybil become the High Priestess here since
Nin Bau’s departure?’
‘No. She renounced the right when she wed Shar
Xavier,’ Turan informed her, knowing Tory was the
catalyst behind the romance. ‘Nin Sybil is second to
one called Temperance.’
This threw a spanner in the works. For Tory was
hoping to utilize the site on Mt Dur-an-ki, to send all
the parts and equipment for the Goddess’ modifications
back to the twenty-first century, but she needed the cooperation of the High Priestess and her Council to do it.
‘Temperance … she sounds rather formidable. What’s
she like?’
‘Who knows?’ Turan shrugged. ‘We’ve only ever
seen her veiled form in the temple on sacred occasions.’
Oh, well. Tory figured Nin Sybil owed her a favour
or two. Perhaps she might be able to sway the High

Priestess to favour her cause. This only left the problem
of where the hell Tory wanted all the conversion
requirements sent.
Cadfan had said Tory would find safety in the heart
of her homeland. Was he talking about Uluru in
Australia? The middle of a desert seemed a very strange
place to be refitting a sub, and Tory was quite sure she
didn’t know anyone in the Red Centre.
One problem at a time, she told herself. The universe
will provide.
The sounds of Chailidocean’s residents in the throes of
a night of wedding revelry echoed up to Tory in the
silence of Turan’s darkened lab. She stood alone at the
window taking in the faint music and fireworks of the
celebration. Ray was still snoozing.
‘Knock, knock.’ Turan’s voice came through the
intercom, whereupon Tory rushed to unlock to door.
‘Thank God. I’ve been bored out of my mind.’ She
watched him enter with a large tray of spoils from the
feast.
‘Sorry.’ He placed the platter on his desk, keeping
his voice low so as not to wake their sleeping friend. ‘I
got away as soon as I could.’ Turan turned on a small
night-light with thought, and wore a grave expression as
he took up Tory’s hands. ‘I have some news for you that
may be rather shocking, I’m afraid.’
‘What is it?’ Tory couldn’t imagine; she’d only been
here a few hours. Surely she hadn’t caused any major
catastrophes yet.
‘Let’s sit down.’ The Shar led her to the lounge

opposite where Ray slept, and unable to think of any
subtle way of telling her what he must, Turan decided to
just come out with it. ‘Lamamu, your husband was
murdered.’
‘How do you know?’ Tory felt frantic. This was the
last thing she expected. ‘Why would anyone want to
kill Miles?’
‘Calm yourself.’ Turan placed a hand over her heart,
whereby Tory’s anxiety subsided. ‘I shall tell you all, if
given the chance.’
The Shar confessed that since Tory’s departure from
Atlantis, he’d spent much time in contact with his
future selves — Miles and Maelgwn in particular.
Through them he could spend time with her.
‘I don’t understand.’ She was deeply touched and her
voice wavered as a result. ‘Taliesin said that you’d asked
him to wipe all intimate memory of me from your mind.’
Turan gave a vague smile. ‘I couldn’t part with the
fondest memories I have …’
His emotions choked him a moment, and tears built
in Tory’s eyes, recognising the selflessness of his act.
‘It just made the situation easier all round if you
believed thus.’
He spoke the truth. It had.
‘In any case …’ Turan shrugged off the past to get
back to the present, ‘I spent this afternoon in the E-abzu
Temple inside a meditation chamber. I joined with your
second husband to observe the events just prior to his
death.’
‘It was Doc Alexander.’ Tory guessed the killer’s
identity. ‘But why?’

‘Because he mistook your husband for Maelgwn.
When the professor died under the pressure of a mindinduced heart attack, your foe figured he had the wrong
incarnation.’
‘Doc Alexander killed Miles by the power of
suggestion. Is that what you’re saying?’
Turan nodded.
‘He must be of my line,’ Tory decided with a heavy
heart. ‘But then how would he know Maelgwn? Rhun’s
son was not even born at the time of Maelgwn’s
departure.’
‘Perhaps an enemy of Maelgwn’s reincarnated into
your descendancy?’
‘Caradoc.’ Tory’s eyes narrowed. Noah had also
suggested this connection. Maelgwn’s treacherous brother
was the same soul–mind as Turan’s twin brother here in
Atlantis. ‘Shar Alaric must under no circumstances find
out that I am here.’
Turan shook his head. ‘This man was not my brother.
Even if he’d incarnated I would still recognise him.’
‘But what if he was disguising himself, as you
suggested earlier?’ Tory appealed.
‘I think you might be right about Doc manipulating
the minds of others.’ Ray’s voice came out of the
darkness, as he propped himself up on his elbows. ‘A lot
of people radically changed their beliefs after coming
into contact with him, me included.’
‘And this man is friendly with nearly every political
figurehead in the modern world.’ Tory thought this was a
bit of a worry. ‘Well, I can see we shall have to do some
serious research into Mr Alexander upon our return.’ She

knew hatred to be a complete waste of energy, but it was
very hard not to despise this man for what he’d done.
‘Good luck,’ Ray scoffed. ‘His personal files will be
under tight lock and key.’
‘Why Mr Murdock, I thought you said you were
good with locks.’
‘I just design and build systems,’ Ray advised her. ‘To
acquire that kind of information you need a code
breaker. A hacker, I ain’t.’
‘Then the universe shall have to provide us with
one.’ She looked to the heavens, hoping they were
taking note.
In a little under a week, Turan had modified a hoversystem and cloaking device to fit the Goddess and her
reconnaissance subs, and arranged for the special parts to
be made. These new systems would give their craft flight
capabilities of up to a mile above ground or sea level, and
render them invisible. Since the cloaking device
absorbed all sonic, ultrasonic and electromagnetic waves,
their craft could not detected by sonar or radar.
Ray adapted these new optional extras so they could
be integrated and partly powered from the Goddess’
existing energy supply. Now he didn’t feel as
intellectually retarded as he had first imagined. Turan
created a crystal generator to give the additional energy
required to power the vehicles. This energy source was
similar to the one installed in the chariot and, of course,
in the everyday hovercraft employed in Atlantis —
except this generator was powered by your average
double-terminated quartz wand. Using the crystal

generator meant that Ray could design a system to track
the craft via its unique energy emission. This energy
emission was something their foe would never track, not
without sound knowledge of the type of power source.
One thing was certain though, these modifications
would not happen overnight; there was a couple of years
work in the re-routing of the circuitry alone, let alone
the installation time.
This came as no surprise to Tory. All she had to do
was to decide where they were going to hide out for
such a long time span. Turan had arranged an audience
with the new High Priestess and Nin Sybil for the
morrow, though he hadn’t stated his reasons for the
meeting to the two women. If they consented to aid her,
Tory planned to have all the parts and equipment sent
to her father’s secret cavern at Dinas Emrys until such
time as she had sought out a safe haven where Ray
could carry out the operation.
At the appointed hour, Tory manifested in the room that
adjoined the High Priestess’ council chambers underneath
the great temple of Chailidocean. She had arranged to
met Turan in this place. Her sudden appearance startled
Nin Sybil, who was also awaiting the Shar.
Lamamu? Sybil was thrilled once she’d recognised
the intruder. Surely I am dreaming.
‘No.’ Tory took hold of Sybil’s outstretched hands,
noting she no longer wore a veil. ‘It is I, seeking the
High Council’s aid yet again.’
Well, of course they shall assist in any way they can.
We are all much indebted to you for our lives.

Tory laughed at this. ‘Not if you consider that I was
the reason your lives were under threat in the first place.’
Sybil shook her head at how modest Lamamu was.
But, thanks to you, our nation and the Antillians are at
peace. I feel quite sure that the Council will take this into
account.
When Turan made an appearance, Nin Sybil entered
the High Priestess’ chamber to familiarise the Priestess
with the situation before the meeting commenced.
‘I know I haven’t had much time to spend with you
this trip.’ Turan made conversation whilst he and Tory
waited. ‘But I shall miss you when you leave.’
Due to the recent loss of her husband, Turan had
kept his distance, knowing that Tory still mourned
Miles. Tory, on the other hand, didn’t feel it fair to start
something she couldn’t possibly finish.
‘Oh Turan, I am so sorry.’ She wanted to confess
how badly she felt about the way things never seemed
to work out between them, but the Shar wouldn’t hear a
word of it.
‘I understand. Believe me, I do. I’ve seen what you
and I have been up against at various stages of the
Earth’s history, and I also realise we have the whole of
eternity to be together.’ Then he smiled. ‘Maelgwn is
coming for you.’
‘What do you know of it?’ Tory became most curious.
But Turan clammed up as Sybil opened the door of
the council chamber and invited them both to enter.

8
INCONCEIVABLE

T

he round chamber was dimly lit. The decor, in
dusty shades of red, brown, green and blue,
gave the large, regal room a rustic quality. In
the middle of the chamber the High Priestess sat
calmly in her large throne-like chair, which was carved
out of timber and lined with fur. Within seconds
of setting her eyes upon Tory and Turan, the holy
woman’s hands were clutching at the ends of her
armrests.
What kind of mockery is this? The veiled face of the
Priestess gave nothing away.
Forgive me, your reverence. Sybil was stunned by her
reaction. But I do not understand.
Please, leave us. Temperance instructed Sybil. If you,
too, would be so kind, my Shar.

Of course. Turan bowed, gripping Tory’s hand briefly
in encouragement as he followed Nin Sybil from the
room.
Once the door was closed, the Priestess looked back
to Tory and observed her for a moment in silence. So,
you are the one. The Goddess of love and war, time and
space … the famous Lamamu.
‘Yes, highness.’ Tory humbled herself, for the holy
woman had a very peculiar edge to her tone. ‘I am sorry
if I have offended you in some way.’
Not offended so much as startled, she clarified,
holding a clenched fist to her heart.
‘Is your holiness feeling alright?’ Tory took a step
closer. It was hard to know what to do with that damn
veil hiding the woman’s facial expression.
Temperance held out a hand to stop Tory in her
tracks. I have been a student of the High Order of Heliona
since birth, and in all my four hundred years in this world, I
have observed the sacred ways of my order.
‘Yes Nin.’ Tory frowned. Why was she telling her
this?
In all that time — the Priestess stood up — no one,
not even my parents or peers, have glimpsed the face behind
this veil.
Oh no, here we go again … Tory kept the thought to
herself, for this had been the story of Nin Sybil’s life
before they’d met.
The High Priestess lifted her veil and Tory backed
up in fear and astonishment.
‘You’re me!’
Although she had once had a visit from her future

self, Tory had never before met with a past incarnation —
not a live one in any case.
The Priestess nodded. And you are the woman Shar
Turan has been pining for this year past. Temperance
plonked herself back into her seat, exasperated by the
realisation. I was offered the option to marry before I
decided upon whether or not to take up this position. When
the one man I desired held no interest in marriage, my fate
was decided for me.
‘Turan.’ Tory swallowed, realising what she’d done.
‘Didn’t you show him who you were?’
How? Temperance scowled. He would not even meet
to discuss the matter, for his heart was lost to another.
‘But that was me … you!’ Tory cried.
Was I to know that? She turned her rueful stare from
Tory to the floor, and bowed her head to let her anguish
pass.
‘It’s not too late …’ Tory appealed, her heart going
out to her.
It is! Temperance curbed her remorse as she recalled
her position. I wasn’t forced to assume this appointment, I
chose it freely … and I will stand by my decision.
‘Great!’ Tory threw her arms in the air, it was just
like her to be so damned righteous. ‘So both you and
Turan will live a long life of loneliness and misery,
because you can’t admit you might have made a
mistake.’
I made a mistake! Temperance was on her feet,
outraged. I am not the one who has been playing havoc with
the time continuum. How dare you presume to defy the
Gods!

‘Look, I am only following the orders they give me. I
am not afraid to follow my heart, and by doing so I serve
and honour the will of the universe. And, I might add,’
Tory placed hands on hips, ‘if you didn’t insist on
wearing those stupid veils all your lives, Turan would
have fallen for you centuries before I even got here.’
You don’t know that. Temperance hated to think
Tory might be right.
‘Are you kidding me?’ Tory emphasised her point,
motioning to herself. ‘You’re talking about the man we
have loved from one end of eternity to the other.’
The holy woman was bemused, excited and
maddened all at once.
‘There is no way I’m not going to tell him,’ Tory
informed Temperance, bluntly.
The Priestess was alarmed, then stood tall to look
down upon her tiny double. If you do, I shall withdraw
my council’s aid to your cause.
‘Goddamn it.’ Tory wanted to punch something.
‘You’re making a huge mistake! Doesn’t the very nature
of your name tell you that!’
Temperance looked on, unconcerned. Do we have a
deal?
Tory tamed her frustration, trying to figure the best
way to get around herself. ‘You have no idea what you’re
giving up.’
Vow to me your confidence, or find another to aid you.
The priestess resumed her seat, appearing very
confident of getting her own way.
‘Alright then,’ Tory was fuming again. ‘Die a bitter
old woman. See if I care.’

Thank you. I trust your word is as good as my own.
She waited for Tory’s answer.
‘I shall not tell him.’ Tory confirmed their
arrangement.
Then you may go. Temperance lowered her veil. You
can count on the support of the High Council of
Chailidocean.
Tory gave a slight bow, turned, and stormed from
the room.
When Tory reached Turan and Sybil in the outer
chamber, she slammed the door behind her and began
to pace.
‘Will she not aid you?’ Turan enquired, concerned
by her behaviour.
‘Oh, she agreed alright.’ Tory’s words were filled with
contempt. ‘She’d cut off her nose to spite her face, too.’
‘What is eating you.’ Turan pulled her to a
standstill. ‘I don’t understand?’
Tory took a deep breath, looking at him fondly to
say, ‘You will, my sweet. Once I am gone, everything
will make perfect sense.’
Ray had almost finished revising the specifications of
Merlin I and Merlin II on the psychokinetic computer in
Turan’s lab to give them the same new systems that
were planned for the Goddess. But cabin fever was
starting to set in. He’d been locked up in this same
room for a week.
When Shar Jerram popped by and offered to take
Ray for a test drive in a hovercraft, he jumped at the
chance to explore the world beyond these walls. Just as

important as installing the systems was knowing how to
handle them once they were functional.
Turan had sensed Ray was getting a little restless,
and so had given Jerram the all-clear to take him
outside for a spell — with the proviso that they kept a
low profile.
They clothed Ray in a long white robe with a huge
hood to cover his face. This was the normal attire of the
Higher Orders of learning here in the golden city so,
except for his lack of height, Ray thought he blended in
quite well.
With his head constantly swivelling from left to
right, and back again, the entire way, Ray ambled along
beside Jerram to the fourth and final island ring. The
main harbour and the boat docks were located here, and
the town’s marketplace sprawled along the streets. Ray
marvelled at the wild array of people, livestock, and
foods on display, and nearly had a heart attack when a
tiger just wandered past down the road.
‘Shouldn’t that be in a cage or on a leash or
something?’ Ray directed Jerram’s attention to the tiger.
Jerram laughed. ‘Whatever for?’ He stopped to look
over the baskets of fruit along the roadside and selected
a couple of large, bright blue berries, tossing one to Ray.
‘Thanks.’ Ray looked it over. It certainly smelt quite
palatable. Ray took a bite and was pleasantly surprised.
‘Hey, this is really good.’
‘Aphrodisiac!’ Jerram stirred him up with a wink.
‘Help! Somebody, please!’ Annora spied Shar
Jerram as she darted through the crowd, and headed
straight for him.

‘Speaking of which …’ Jerram muttered sideways to
his companion.
‘Shar Jerram, quick.’ She grabbed hold of his arm to
hoist him away. ‘One of the natives — he’s Antillian, I
think — is beating a woman. He’s going to kill her.’
Both Jerram and Ray leapt into action, racing after
her through the multitudes on the docks.
‘Good Lord.’ Ray spotted the eight foot tall native
who was the cause of the dispute, and slowed to a stop.
Shar Jerram didn’t seem fazed by the giant’s size. He
stormed up to the irate man, yelling threats up at him in
his native dialect. Ray rushed to the battered woman,
beside whom Annora crouched. He struggled a little as
he took the ailing female native up in his arms. ‘Where
do you want her?’
‘It’s you?’ Annora spied the face underneath the
hood. But, as there were greater concerns at present, she
stood to guide him. ‘This way, hurry.’
‘What are you doing?’ Jerram called out, as he
watched Ray follow Annora back towards the city. ‘I
knew I shouldn’t have given him that fruit.’ Jerram said
to himself and set off in pursuit of his charge.
Once they’d delivered the ailing woman to the Temple
of Healing, Ray loitered out front in the hope that
Annora would be curious enough to come seek him out.
‘There you are.’ Jerram bounded up the stairs of the
Shi-im-ti temple, and took hold of Ray’s arm. ‘Let’s go.’
‘Just five minutes,’ Ray implored him, not budging
an inch.
‘Five what?’ Jerram didn’t really care, they were going.

‘Stop right there!’ Annora descended the stairs. ‘I
think I deserve an explanation.’ Coming to a stop
before the hooded double of Zadoc, she peeked under
his disguise to address him. ‘You’re not my husband.’
‘Well, not exactly, no,’ Ray confessed, controlling
his urge to smile. She was so lovely, and so familiar. It
wasn’t just that Annora resembled Tory; Ray felt that
he’d met her somewhere else, but he couldn’t place it.
‘It was the kiss that gave me away, wasn’t it?’
Annora raised both eyebrows with a smile, and gave
a nod. ‘’Twas tamer than I’m used to.’ She shrugged.
‘But nice all the same.’
As the pair stood staring into each other’s eyes,
Jerram rolled his. ‘Yeah, alright … we’ve got to go.’ The
Shar dragged his lovesick captive away.
‘Where are you going?’ Annora came after them. ‘I
am at leisure today.’
‘That’s great news!’ Ray nudged Jerram, pleading
with his eyes to let her come.
‘This is not what I call keeping a low profile …
nobody is supposed to know.’ Jerram said anxiously.
‘I’m very good at keeping secrets,’ Annora vowed
first to Ray, then looked at Jerram … ‘Really. I am.’
‘Heaven forbid! Alright, already, she can come.’
Jerram caved in.
‘Good.’ Annora took Ray by the arm. ‘Where are we
going?’
‘To the E-na-mu.’ Jerram advised her. This was the
‘abode to ascend to the skies’ where the hovercraft
awaited.
‘Flying … excellent.’ Annora greatly approved.

In the wake of her dispute with herself, Tory floated
away her frustrations in the hot spa pool in Turan’s
palace chambers. Although Turan communicated with
her in English, she was pondering if he also could read
the language. Too risky, Tory decided. She had to be
sure Turan understood her parting message. I shall leave
a mental note in his computer. That’s not telling him. She
justified her scheming. It’s more a thought transference,
really. She grinned broadly at her rationalisation.
The sound of the door vanishing warned her that
company was arriving. Tory immediately transported
herself elsewhere.
‘Alaric!’ Turan casually arose from his seat, but his
eyes jumped from his brother in the doorway to the spa
pool behind him. Tory was gone, and he quickly looked
back to his visitor. What can I do for you?
His brother appeared rather puzzled as he entered. I
could have sworn I saw a woman in your bath. He
approached the pool to take a closer look.
If only. Turan smiled, and steered Alaric in the
other direction when he noticed Tory’s clothes piled in
a corner.
Weird, Alaric mused. She looked rather like Lamamu I
thought.
Now you’re really teasing. He motioned his brother
to the lounge. Please, sit.
No, no, Alaric declined. I just wanted to make sure
your expenditure details for next semester have been handed
in to the council.
All taken care of, Turan assured him. En Seba has
them.

Very good then. Alaric headed for the door, pausing
to look once more at the pool, and then at his brother. I
could have sworn … He shook his head with a smile.
Sorry it couldn’t be so.
Not as sorry as I. Turan waited for Alaric to depart
before he gathered Tory’s gear up in his arms and
hurried off to his lab. He knew she would be there.
Ray was reeling from his sightseeing flight over
Chailidocean and the surrounding area, and his elation
was more intense for having spent the afternoon in
Annora’s company.
Jerram did not seem to share his good humour.
Jerram knew Turan would fry him if he found out what
had happened. Still, when they returned to Turan’s lab
to find Tory wearing nothing more than one of the large
sheets used to cover the equipment, Jerram’s mood
perked up considerably. ‘Get that off,’ he demanded
with a laugh. ‘It’s filthy.’
‘Tell me about it,’ she grumbled, clutching it tighter.
‘Here you go.’ Ray removed his bloodstained
disguise and handed it to her.
‘Spoilsport.’ Jerram folded his arms, amused to see
how Tory would go about the change.
‘Turn around, please,’ she requested politely.
Jerram chuckled at this. ‘Not if my life depended
on it.’
‘It does,’ she warned with a sweet grin.
The Shar thought a moment, recalling her prowess
in battle. ‘Ah,’ he waved it off, ‘it will be worth it.’
‘Jerram.’ She was getting annoyed.

‘Tory!’ Turan came racing through the door,
whereupon Jerram’s hands shot into the air.
‘I didn’t touch her. She was already like that.’
‘Did he see me?’ Tory beseeched Turan.
‘Long enough to know it was you.’ The Shar’s huge
form came to block her from the view of the other two
men, and he handed her the clothes he carried. ‘And as
he knows about your teleportive abilities, I dare say he
might have guessed.’
‘Hey, not fair. Why does he get to watch?’ Jerram
protested, but was ignored.
‘How long are those parts going to be?’ Tory
struggled to put her attire on as quickly as possible, not
even looking to catch Turan’s reaction.
‘A couple of days.’
She didn’t have to look, she could hear the smile in
his voice. ‘Have you got a safer place for us to hide till
then?’
‘Annora will hide us,’ Ray coyly suggested. ‘She
even said she would.’
‘When did she say so?’ Tory came out from behind
Turan, fully clothed.
Jerram frantically motioned Ray to refrain from
further comment.
‘This afternoon,’ Ray admitted, at which time
Jerram started to back out of the room.
‘Is that so?’ Turan raised a hand in his younger
brother’s direction, willing him closer. Jerram was hauled
back for interrogation through no will of his own.
‘I had nothing to do with it.’ Jerram washed his
hands of the affair.

‘You were supposed to be watching him.’ Turan was
feeling edgy. ‘Alright, here’s what’s going to happen. I’ll
seek the permission of the High Priestess to hide you in
the Temple.’
‘She’ll never agree to hide a man there,’ Jerram
pointed out.
‘Let Annora hide us.’ Ray was more insistent this
time.
Tory had to agree with Ray. ‘I don’t think anyone
would think to find me there. Annora and I have never
even met.’
‘But what if Zadoc returns?’ Turan didn’t like it one
bit, nor did he trust Ray with his brother’s wife.
‘I doubt he will.’ Jerram offered his viewpoint. ‘I
heard the trial has been suspended while they search for
a piece of missing evidence. He could be weeks yet.’
Tory. Turan bethought her only, appealing to her
common sense. You know why I hesitate to condone this
arrangement, don’t you?
Yes. She understood his fears. But I assure you, I have
the situation well in hand.
How can you be so sure? The Shar frowned. There
was no controlling the attraction between such obvious
soul mates as Zadoc and Annora — or in this case Ray
and Annora. But Tory knew something Turan did not,
and she was fairly confident she had a deterrent that
would keep Ray out of harm’s way. Trust me.
I just knew you were going to think that. The Shar
held his head in his hands.
‘Well, don’t just stand there staring at each other.’
Ray pushed for a decision. ‘What’s it going to be?’

‘You win.’ Turan answered Ray’s question, though
his eyes did not move from Tory. Again.
Annora had a lovely home on the eastern side of the
second island ring, close by the healing temple where
she was head of midwifery.
It was far more pleasant staying here, with the
lovely garden of fruit-laden trees and flowering foliage.
The abode wandered in curves, with no corners to be
found anywhere. The furniture, too, was moulded out of
the whitewashed interior architecture, giving the place
a Mediterranean appearance. The cushions were made
of woven fabric featuring earthy designs in rust, brown
and black. Large terracotta pots bearing healthy, greenleafed plants brightened the interior.
Tory was soaking up a few rays by the long, narrow
pool, perfect for swimming laps, which had been built
half inside and half outside the house.
‘I must come here more often,’ she decided, for it
seemed to be the only place in the whole of time and
space where she actually had a chance to relax. She
heard a splash from inside and Ray swam out to join her.
‘Hey, I really have to thank you for bringing me here,
Alexander.’ He floated on top of the water, next to
where Tory lay baking. ‘I’m having the time of my life.’
‘Yeah, right … I think you owe me a hundred bucks,
Murdock.’ She rolled onto her side, supporting her head
on one hand.
‘She’s already married to me, so I don’t think it
really counts,’ Ray ruled, doing a backflip so he didn’t
have to hear Tory contest the matter.

But as he surfaced Tory grabbed hold of his braid to
stop him going under again. ‘Doesn’t she remind you of
someone?’
‘Yes.’ Ray wiped the water from his eyes. ‘You.’
‘No.’ She hit him on the head playfully. ‘Besides me.
Come on Ray, think.’
‘I don’t know.’ He was immediately exasperated,
having been trying to figure it out for days himself.
Tory sighed, disappointed by his lack of vision. ‘I’ll
give you a hint. Imagine Annora was a brunette, with
eyes of say, ebony.’
‘Jesus.’ He thrust backwards through the water as he
realised. ‘Rhiannon!’
‘Very good.’ Tory gave him a little clap.
‘Oh, my God!’ He covered his eyes, seized by panic.
‘This is unbelievable!’ He looked back to Tory, who
seemed very calm about the whole affair. ‘Aren’t you
even mildly concerned? She is your daughter after all.’
‘Depends on your intentions, and whether or not I
get my money.’
Then Ray got wise. ‘You knew this was going to
happen when you made that bet, didn’t you?’
‘I suspected,’ she granted him, anticipating his next
question. ‘See, you and I have met before. At first, I
didn’t recognise Rhiannon as your soul mate —’
‘Hold on a minute.’ Ray was up in arms about her
inference. ‘You make it sound like it’s inevitable that
we’ll end up together. She’s just a girl!’
‘I’m not saying anything … else.’ Tory stood, ready
to go inside. ‘I just thought you might want to know.
The matter has nothing more to do with me.’

‘Well, thanks very much!’ He had never met a
woman who could get him so worked up. ‘I’m beginning
to think I should have taken my chances with the
Agency.’ He looked up at the cloudless sky as he waded
out of the pool: ‘As for you, there is no God. I am
becoming an atheist.’
From that point on Ray couldn’t look at Annora
without seeing the girl he knew. Tory’s promise to Turan
was kept.
The arrangements proceeded according to plan and the
parts and equipment were delivered to the site on
Mt Dur-an-ki.
The other form of Atlantean technology that Tory
decided was a must, was a half dozen ‘Stormers’. These
laser swords could convert into stun-guns, making them
a handy item indeed.
Tory had left a message on Turan’s computer,
advising him as to the secret identity of her Atlantean
counterpart. She had only to direct his attention to
the information, then hopefully he’d live happily
ever after.
As evening approached, the Shar arrived to escort
Tory and Ray to Mt Dur-an-ki. Turan had transferred
the chariot to the mountain plateau, so that once their
cargo had been sent back to Myrddin’s cave in
Gwynedd, the time travellers could depart without
further delay.
Tory and Ray were just saying their goodbyes to
Annora, when there came an urgent rapping on her
front door.

All four of them stood staring blankly at each
other, unsure as to whether or not to be alarmed. As the
knock was repeated, Annora ventured to answer it.
‘Shar Jerram!’ She backed up to let him in.
‘Turan.’ Jerram bounded through the door,
pausing to catch his breath after the sprint he’d just
made. ‘Alaric is looking everywhere for you. He’s
requested your presence in father’s room of court,
right away.’
This was bad timing indeed, still Turan figured he
should make haste to avoid suspicion. ‘Go on without
me, I’ll meet you there.’ He was out the front door,
before Tory had the chance to say anything.
The Shar could not believe the inquisition that awaited
him in the palace.
His father — the Shu Sar Absalom — Shar Alaric,
and a couple of chief advisers, were seated around the
arc-shaped table of court going over expenditure details.
Turan, at last! Absalom rose and motioned his son
to take a seat before the council.
Turan did as indicated. Sorry I proved so hard to find.
Can I assist in some way?
Well, dear boy. We have just been revising your budget
requirements for next semester, and quite frankly, Absalom
sat back in his seat, we’d like to know what you’re working
on that could possibly require so grand an outlay of precious
resources?
Turan had included all the parts of Tory’s little
bundle in his projection and hadn’t thought twice about
doing so, as his projections had always been accepted in

the past. Since when am I expected to justify what I need
for my research?
Since now, Alaric told him, bluntly. It is high time we
stopped squandering what wealth we have so that we might
save something for a time when things might be not so
prosperous.
But you cannot deny me —
We’re not saying you can’t have all that you’ve
requested. Alaric cut in on his brother. We are merely
asking that you explain what you need it for. If we think the
project worthwhile, your needs will, of course, be met.
This is unprecedented! Turan stood. And a giant step
backwards for the sciences. Father? Turan appealed.
Very soon Alaric will be assuming my position, so
you may as well get used to dealing with him,
Absalom ruled, though he hated to see his sons in
disagreement. I believe these new measures we are
introducing at Alaric’s suggestion show a fair amount of
foresight and are justified. Thus, I expect you to cooperate
with these proceedings.
Really, Turan, I don’t see what all the fuss is about. Just
tell us what you are designing.
Alaric sat forward in his seat wearing a friendly
smile, that seemed to Turan to be mocking him. I have
been commissioned by the High Priestess, therefore I am not
at liberty to disclose the details of the project. If you wish to
know more, you shall have to take the matter up with the
High Orders of Passage. He moved to take his leave.
Ah, not so fast. Alaric motioned his brother to again
be seated, and sent a court official to fetch the High
Priestess.

Ray marvelled at the large marble plateau of Mt Dur-anki, which was near one hundred and fifty feet around. He
closely inspected one of the nine large hunks of polished
quartz that were set in a circle around the edge of the
Plateau. ‘So this is what it looked like in its original form.’
‘Indeed.’ Tory paced back and forth, not really
paying much attention to Ray’s awe. She was too busy
fretting that she wouldn’t get to see Turan before they
were obliged to depart.
The Priestess and her council had already sent the
materials for the Goddess’ conversion to twenty-first
century Gwynedd without a hitch.
Tory had been disappointed to find that Taliesin was
no longer present amongst the holy men. Apparently,
shortly after her last visit, the Merlin had decided to
return to his rightful home in sixth century Britain.
There he would set about re-shaping his homeland’s
history by bringing Tory into it.
‘We should get going while the going is good.’
Strangely enough, Ray was anxious to see home.
‘Please, just a little longer.’ Her eyes were fixed on
the doorway leading into the mountain face.
I believe your friend is right. You have no reason to
delay. Temperance was also feeling anxious. She had
nothing to hold over Tory any more, having fulfilled her
end of the bargain.
If she argued the point, Tory felt that the holy woman
would surely suspect her motive for delay. So she resigned
herself to leaving Turan’s destiny in the very capable
hands of the universe. If the Shar overlooked or erased
her message, then perhaps it really wasn’t meant to be.

Nin Temperance. Sybil came racing onto the
plateau, stunning everyone. This was hardly fitting
behaviour for one of her order. The Shu Sar Absalom is
asking you join him at once in his room of court.
‘Turan.’ Tory looked to the veiled woman, fearful for
the Shar.
Go, Temperance instructed. I shall take care of this.
‘But what —’
I am not leaving until I see you gone, the Priestess
insisted, forcing Tory to comply.
When Temperance entered the room of court, all stood
to honour her presence.
This summons is most unusual, gentlemen, I trust you
have good cause. She was seated in the chair Shar Turan
had vacated for her, and he stood alongside it.
Our sincere apologies, Nin. Alaric spoke on the
council’s behalf. As Turan cannot share with us the nature
of your commission, this governing body would ask that you
enlighten us as to the intent of his work for you.
Turan didn’t know this Priestess very well, but no
holy woman would knowingly lie.
By whose authority, do you ask? The veiled woman
sat perfectly poised.
He has my authority in this matter. Absalom advised,
knowing full well that his son may just as well try to
squeeze water from a stone as get any in the Orders of
Passage to disclose their doctrine. But still, it would be a
good learning experience for the lad.
But my dear Shu Sar, you know as well as I that my
Orders are not answerable to the State.

Well, maybe they should be … Alaric commented out
of turn, and was frowned upon by all present.
If you wish to know the will of the Gods, my Shar, you
have only to enter the Order of Helio and all shall be
made clear to you. Until such time as you are so spiritually
accomplished, however, you shall be kept in the dark.
Temperance rose. Good day, gentlemen. I expect I have
heard the last of this matter.
Thank you. Shu Sar Absalom rose appearing most
pleased. The subject was now closed and he hadn’t even
had to take a side.
And in the future, her veiled face turned to Alaric, I
do not expect to be summoned from my duties to discuss
such petty matters. I do not interfere with your charge. Do
not interfere with mine.
She turned to depart, placing a hand upon Turan’s
shoulder. The Gods have granted your aspirations.
Turan bowed in gratitude, breathing a sigh of relief
as the Priestess left the gathering.
Alaric was brooding in the wake of his defeat. Those
orders could do anything they chose, and we’d be none the
wiser.
Then join the order, Absalom advised. You know
the rules, as well as I. He regretted that the breakingin of his son to the Shu Sar’s position looked as if it
was going to be a longer process than originally
thought.
A couple of days later, when all seemed back to normal,
Turan sought an audience with the High Priestess, only
to be informed that she was not seeing anyone.

I am sorry, Highness. Sybil pursued the Shar into the
High Priestess’ Chamber.
Turan pleaded with the Priestess on his own behalf.
I promise not to detain you for long, but I must speak
with you.
Very well, Temperance granted, her voice strained
and weak. Thank you, Sybil. You may leave us.
As you wish. Sybil bowed out, closing the door
behind her.
I want to thank you for vouching for me with the
Chailidocean council. Turan got straight to the point.
That is all well and good, Temperance was short with
him, but I did not appreciate being placed in such a
position.
It shan’t happen again, he vowed, and added a little
shyly, and I also greatly appreciate your aiding Lamamu. All
went well with her departure you said.
Yes. Temperance became colder still. You need not
worry yourself in that regard.
And she left no message for me? he coaxed.
Ah … The Priestess rose. Now we get to the true
reason behind your visit.
Forgive me, Nin, I cannot help it, Turan confessed,
coming to kneel at the holy woman’s feet. To love this
woman is futile, I know, but it seems I am at a loss to
prevent it.
She said nothing. Temperance was so consumed by
her jealousy and hurt that she could barely speak. Her
departure was rather rushed, you understand.
Turan noticed a teardrop splash to the floor in front
of him. Why are you weeping, Nin?

Temperance walked quickly across the room, so she
did not have to look upon him. I find your ill-fated match
very sad, my Shar.
Please don’t cry for me. Like you, I too am used to being
alone. He stood once more, observing the Priestess’
movements.
Oneness is a grand thing, she allowed, though her
heart was not in the statement and she knew it.
The only problem is, since meeting Lamamu, I no
longer feel whole, he confided softly. That is why I have
decided to have my life terminated.
Temperance spun around to view him. No, you must
not.
He was adamant, I cannot live without her. And when
I say cannot, I mean that this longing I feel will surely kill
me within weeks in any event.
Then return to your etheric state, but don’t surrender
your life so rashly.
I don’t think you understand. I have no desire to put her
behind me. To persist with this incarnation is only to delay
our next meeting.
Temperance could not keep silent her anguish, and
her hands knotted round each other as she openly
began to sob.
Please, Nin. I do not mean to distress you. Turan came
near to comfort her. I am at peace and quite happy to go, I
assure you.
I cannot let you do it. She shook her head to get her
wits about her. Two wrongs will never make a right.
Pardon? he queried.
Heliona forgive me. She removed the headband and

lifted her veil clean off her head. Then stood, eyes
lowered to the ground in fear.
After a seemingly endless silence, Turan placed a
finger beneath her chin and raised her head for her to
look him in the eye. You’ve been here all the time?
I did propose to you once, she sniffled, forcing a laugh
as she shrugged.
That was you? He could have kicked himself. He felt
he had no right to ask her to abdicate her position now,
and he could not lay claim to her whilst she held it. If
only I’d known!
Well, now that you do know, know this also. She gazed
up at him with a hopeless expression upon her face. I
would sooner give up my life’s work than consent to the
termination of your life.
And I would rather live out my days in misery, than
force you into that position.
As this was not really the response Temperance
had hoped for, she lowered her eyes and moved away
from him. Well then, that would seem to leave us right
where we are.
If that is what you wish. The Shar bowed his head
to her.
She turned back to view him, maddened by his
stance. Why had it been so easy for him to confess he
loved her a moment ago and so difficult now when she
so desperately needed to hear it? What I wish? I would
like to know what you wish, Turan.
The Shar knew what she wanted to hear, yet it was
not his place to make this decision for her. My only
desire is for you to be happy. I am entirely at your disposal.

So I must decide our fate alone then?
No, Temperance. Turan ventured to close the space
between them. You have only to choose your destiny, and
mine shall follow accordingly. But, if I could be so bold as to
put forward something in my own cause?
Yes? she appealed, feeling that she would renounce
everything at even the slightest hint that he felt as she
hoped.
Turan’s response was unexpected and convincing.
Temperance had never conceived of such emotion as
his kiss aroused in her and for a few brief moments she
completely lost herself in it.
Yet when Turan realised she had started to weep
again, he stepped away. Forgive me. I have upset you
again.
Not at all, she hugged him, tightly. These tears are of
relief. I was so horrified Lamamu had left without telling you.
Lamamu knew! Turan was almost enraged to
discover this, so Temperance quickly added:
I was afraid of the decision I’d be forced to make, if you
discovered Lamamu and I were one and the same.
Turan understood this fear well. It was not so long
ago that Lamamu had forced him to make a similar
choice. As scary as it had been at the time, resuming his
physical form was one of the best decisions he’d ever
made.
So she never did tell you then? Temperance was
amazed. Which means, I have brought this on myself. She
seemed pleased about it. It really was meant. She gazed
up at the Shar, her beaming smile conveying the peace
she felt in her soul.

No one knows better than I, he said, that as surely as
you and I are upon this earth, we belong together.
Then who are we to question the will of the Gods? Her
lips lingered only inches from his. So be it.

PART II

THE SON

The Red Centre

9
IN THE BLOOD

T

ory and Ray returned to the twenty-first century
the day after their departure for Atlantis. The
ICA were probably searching for them, and Tory
didn’t want to risk losing her kin or her craft. Since
Myrddin’s cave was chock-a-block with the Atlantean
spoils for the Goddess, she manifested the chariot in the
torch-lit earthen corridor that led to the secret cavern
of treasures at Dinas Emrys.
‘Tory!’ Myrddin stepped out from within the piles of
equipment, looking rather cranky.
‘Yes, father, I know what you’re going to say.’ She
climbed out of her transport, unfazed by his obvious
irritation. ‘I’ll have it all out of your way in a couple
of days.’

‘Well, why on earth didn’t you send it to Taliesin’s
abode? He’s not using it at present.’
‘Look, I’m sorry.’ Tory was feeling a little tense
herself, having left without saying goodbye to Turan and
knowing he might be in a bit of a bind. ‘I wasn’t
thinking straight.’
Myrddin rolled his eyes. ‘So what else is new?’
While Tory and her father argued, Ray silently crept
over to inspect the large metal plates that would house
the Goddess’ hover-systems.
‘Tory!’ Ray looked at her, aghast. ‘He just walked
straight through this!’
‘Sorry, Ray, you’ve never met my father, have you?’
She casually motioned to the bizarre character dressed
in the long flowing robes of a druid.
Myrddin’s long, black, wispy hair was streaked with
grey. A dash of grey hair began at each side of his
mouth, also, and extended to meet in a central point
below his chin to form a perfect triangle amidst the dark
hair of his beard. The man’s eyes were wild, wide and
green, like a stormy sea, and those bushy eyebrows made
him appear all the more ferocious.
‘This is your father?’ Ray squeaked, with a gulp. ‘I
thought Professor Renford Alexander was —?’
Myrddin spun around in a clockwise direction and
turned into the aging professor of British history. ‘Now
you see him …’ Renford spun anti-clockwise, ‘now you
don’t.’ The Merlin raised his eyebrows a couple of times.
‘Ray. I’d like you to met Myrddin.’ Tory placed an
arm around her awestruck friend as he was looking a
little green around the gills again.

‘As in King Arthur … Myrddin?’ Ray hesitantly
extended his hand, and Tory cringed knowing her father
wasn’t going to appreciate the comparison.
‘No, you silly goose.’ Myrddin slapped Ray’s hand
away, angered by the long-standing misconception.
‘Arthur never actually existed! He was merely conjured
up to account for the feats of a number of great warrior
kings. Who, I might add, were robbed of their due.’ He
nodded sagely, leaving through the same wall of metal
plates that he had emerged from.
Ray felt a little bemused. ‘Am I in the twilight zone,
or do I just need to brush up on my history?’
‘You’ll have to forgive Dad’s intolerance. He’s more
used to the company of trees and animals these days.’
Tory took hold of Ray’s hand, eager to get back to the
rest of her kin.
‘Ah-ha,’ Ray uttered, bleary-eyed, as the light ethers
began to engulf them.
When they appeared back in her quarters on board the
Goddess, Ray and Tory were unexpectedly thrust off
balance and flung to the floor.
‘What the hell was that?’ Tory struggled against the
force of the vessel to raise herself from Ray.
‘It felt like we hit something.’ He struggled to get
them both upright, when the craft suddenly tilted in the
opposite direction and they slid to the other side of the
cabin. ‘You do care …’ Ray grinned as Tory again
attempted to peel herself off him. ‘All bets are still on,
you know … one hundred bucks.’
‘Murdock! Just get off the door, so we can open it.’

She gripped the handle, and, along with another jolt of
the sub, the door swung open. Tory managed to hold
fast and grabbed hold of Ray as he was flung past her.
‘Where do you think you’re going, the control deck is
that way.’ She gave Ray a great shove and got him
moving in the right direction.
They bumped and clawed their way to the central
control room. The rest of the crew had huddled behind
Teo and Naomi who were busy piloting the vessel.
‘What’s the story?’ Tory stumbled over to join them
all.
‘It’s about time you showed.’ Brian gave her a dirty
look. ‘You were right. We’re in deep shit.’
A blast was heard outside the vessel and everyone
braced themselves as Teo swerved the Goddess away
from it. ‘Jesus, that was too close.’
‘Would somebody please tell me what is going on?!’
Tory was annoyed to find she’d jumped through time
from one traumatic situation into another.
‘There’s a naval sub on our arse trying to persuade us
to surface.’ Brian was none too happy to admit it. ‘Any
bright ideas, Einstein?’
It took a few seconds for the news to sink in. ‘How
far are we from the dive site for Chailidocean?’
‘About three miles, and four thousand feet,’ Naomi
informed.
‘Head for Mount Dur-an-ki,’ Tory suggested, ‘but,
for God’s sake, don’t pass directly over it.’
‘I follow.’ Teo grinned, recalling what had happened
to Merlin II when Tory had attempted to land there.

‘We’re going to get fried before we even get close,’
Brian whispered urgently.
‘Yeah, right! And lose all Ray’s precious research. I
don’t think so.’ Tory set his mind at ease, knowing it
was the risk to his family that was making him so edgy.
‘Where’s our huge friend when we need him, hey?’
I’d forgotten about him. Rhiannon braced herself as
best she could as a plan formulated in her mind. She
needed to be able to concentrate.
Teo led their pursuers deeper, planning to do a 180º
arc around the mount. He hoped he was far enough
ahead for the navy to anticipate his course, cut the
corner to intercept the Goddess, and encounter the
strange energy field that emanated from the mountain.
‘Tory, you know they won’t last five minutes at this
depth without power?’
‘It’s us or them,’ she stated coldly.
Ray looked at her, poised like a statue, with no hint
of uncertainty. ‘Those men are only following orders.
They don’t know what’s really going on.’
‘Well, what would you suggest we do? Have you
already forgotten that the last lot of men who were
following Doc’s orders beat you senseless?’
Ray had to think about it a moment. ‘It still doesn’t
make it right though, does it?’
A grim smile crossed Tory’s face. ‘Once the chief of
justice, always the chief of justice, eh Ray?’
The sonar pinged and they could see there was now
a third player in their dilemma.
‘Animal, vegetable or mineral?’ Brian had found his
sense of humour, having realised Tory was right; if their

pursuers were aiming to harm them they’d be at the
bottom of the ocean by now.
‘It’s the dino-fish, alright.’ Naomi confirmed.
Another torpedo exploded nearby. How Noah
wished he was on the Merlin shooting the entire
incident. ‘Moby Dick is surely not going to like those
guys treating his girlfriend in this fashion.’
‘What’s lover boy doing?’ Tory steadied herself
against the back of Teo’s seat to view the sonar.
‘He’s headed for the bogey, and … contact! They
seem to have changed their course.’ Teo cheered, as did
everyone, ecstatic to have them off their tail.
‘Best get moving.’ Rhiannon snapped out of her
daze. ‘He’ll keep them turning in circles for a while.’
‘How do you know?’ Tory queried, taking her
daughter under her arm.
‘Call it intuition.’ Rhiannon winked at her mother.
‘Where to now then?’ Teo turned in his seat to
consult Tory and Brian.
Brian was perusing the large screen of the map
table, mulling over their options. ‘Are we thinking to
head for Australia?’ He glanced at his sister.
‘I’ll need a few hours to confirm it, but I believe we
are.’ She chewed on her lip, frustrated. They were more
pushed for time than she’d expected.
‘Well, north through the Pole is out. It will
be crawling with UN personnel. Doc Alexander
dropped another bombshell last night,’ he advised
Tory and Ray. ‘But I’ll get to that presently.’ Brian
looked to the south on his map. ‘So, going down
around the bottom of Africa would be the ticket,

though we’ll be damn lucky to make Australia
without being spotted.’
‘You let me worry about that.’ Tory eyed the great
distance. ‘Tell me about Doc?’
‘Come to the rec-room. I recorded it for you.’
At the UN health summit for AIDS, held in Geneva
the previous day, the ICA put forward several proposals
aimed at controlling the disease. The first of which was
compulsory AIDS testing on a world-wide scale. By the
year 2020 every man, woman and child on the planet
would be carrying a card that stated they’d been
examined. This card would be required to gain
employment, health care and benefits, travel visas etc.
‘ID cards,’ Ray was most annoyed. ‘They may as well
be!’
Doc Alexander gave a very convincing spiel on
why this drastic measure was necessary. The rapid
spread of the disease, especially in third world
countries, would never be contained unless isolated
and removed. If this policy was not embraced by every
single nation, even this attempt to defuse the situation
would prove useless.
A visual presentation on a new clinic incorporating
all the most up-to-date medical technology, currently
under construction in northern Alaska, was shown. But
this was more than just a hospital for AIDS victims.
This was a whole city, where everyone who was
diagnosed with the disease would be sent.
At first, the assembly was outraged, as this was
reminiscent of the old leper colonies. With the

announcement that the ICA had discovered a cure,
Doc turned the opposition into a standing ovation.
This clinic was the only place where the remedy
would be administered, at no cost to the sufferers. Every
government who wished to be rid of this threat would
contribute to the projects funding. As the antidote was
a series of treatments, rather than just one injection,
Doc maintained that it was safer to remove the victims
from society altogether so there was no risk of them
infecting others before they were cured themselves.
Once the sufferer had physically and psychologically
recovered from the disease, they would be returned
home. Or they could choose to stay to help with the
rehabilitation of others.
Doc wrapped up his proposition with a quote from
The Book of Revelation of St John the Divine: ‘And the
second Angel poured out his vial upon the sea; and it became
as the blood of a dead man: and every living soul in the sea
died … Esteemed colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I am
offering you the chance to put a stop to this menace,
before this is truly the case. The decision is yours.’
Brian let the tape run long enough for Tory to get
some idea of how great the applause was, then switched
the screen off.
‘This is his first step towards controlling a world
economy, you just wait!’ Ray was fuming. ‘Who needs
weapons to rule the world?’
‘I think he means to find us, the immortals.’ Tory
looked to Brian. ‘Our blood is like no other.’
‘Well, how the hell does he even know we exist?’
Brian reasoned, becoming agitated again.

‘I suspect Doc may be an immortal himself.’ Tory
restrained Brian to get his full attention. ‘He murdered
Miles because he mistook him for Maelgwn.’
‘Murdered?’ Brian’s eyes narrowed.
‘I don’t know how he knows, or why he seeks us. I
just know he does.’ Tory wished she had more of the
puzzle figured, but there were still so many pieces
missing.
‘Well, why don’t we pay Alexander a visit and find
out why?’ Brian thumped his fist into the palm of his
hand, fed up with guesses and hearsay.
‘First things first. We have to find a safe haven for
the Goddess, so Ray can get cracking on her
modifications.’ Tory headed for the door.
As it seemed she was forever charging off
somewhere, leaving him to cope with the flak, Brian
pursued her. ‘Where are you going now then?’
‘To get changed. I’m going to Uluru.’
Brian ceased his chase, realising this was about as
much information as he was going to get. ‘What is the
use of taking a deep sea submersible into the middle of a
bloody dessert?’ he put to Ray. ‘I must be mad to listen
to her.’
Ray smiled to disagree. ‘Well, that would be the last
place I’d be looking. And besides, once I get finished
with this vessel, it will be a hell of a lot more than just a
bathyscape.’
After a quick shower and change, Tory felt herself ready
for her next exploration. She was sensibly attired in
jeans, a cool, long sleeved shirt, hiking boots and a

wide-brimmed hat. She also decided to carry a jacket
with her, as the temperature in the Australian outback
was known to plummet come nightfall.
Tory was on the verge of transporting herself to the
Red Centre, when Rhiannon arrived. She was of the
mind to accompany her mother. As Rhiannon had
never been to Australia and was dressed sensibly for the
trip, Tory couldn’t see any reason why she shouldn’t tag
along.
Tory had never actually been to Uluru, nor did she
know anyone there, but she’d seen so many images of
the immense red earth formation that locating it was
not difficult, for there was none other like it in the
world.
As the image in her mind manifested before her,
Tory was rather surprised to find herself standing in a
field of lush green bushy scrub. Hundreds and thousands
of yellow and pink wildflowers covered the flat red earth
leading to the massive rock, their spicy, sweet scent
filling the air. The distinctive smell of the Australian
flora was so familiar that Tory took a deep whiff and
savoured it with a smile. ‘Home.’
‘Mother, it’s lovely.’ Rhiannon eyed the terrain
before them. ‘Though I have to tell you, I was expecting
a desert.’
‘You’re not the only one,’ Tory said. ‘It looks as if
the weather conditions here may have altered
somewhat of late.’ She was spellbound by the
timelessness of the landscape. ‘There’s more than a few
ley lines running through this place. It’s literally oozing
Otherworldly energy.’

‘This is a crossroads of many a dreaming track.’
Tory and Rhiannon spun around to find a tall
Aboriginal man of about thirty years of age, wearing the
uniform of a park ranger.
‘I hope we’re not trespassing.’ Tory knew there were
several Aboriginal sacred sites in the area that were
forbidden to foreigners.
He laughed at this. ‘Hardly, you’re standing in the
middle of Uluru National Park.’
‘Are you a ranger here?’ Tory approached him to
introduce herself.
‘Nah, I’m just visiting. Just north of here is my
territory.’ He informed her, a huge smile on his face as
he viewed her more closely. ‘The name’s Pete … Pete
Nangina.’
‘G’day.’ Tory returned the friendly greeting, holding
her hand out to shake his. ‘I’m —’
‘Tory Alexander,’ Pete answered for her, his smile
broadening as the two women looked absolutely
flabbergasted.
‘How did you know?’ Rhiannon found her voice
before her mother did.
They were even more flabbergasted by his reply.
‘Well, Rhiannon, a little dragon told me.’
Did he mean Maelgwn? It was Maelgwn who’d
instructed Cadfan to direct her here in the first place.
Tory cocked an eye and put it to Pete … ‘So, am I to
assume this dragon sent you to find us?’
‘Down to the very square inch of land and moment
of your arrival,’ he advised her, casting a probing eye
across the landscape. ‘But if my understanding is

correct, you’re a little pushed for time … so, if you’ll just
follow me.’ He did an about face and headed off through
the scrub.
‘Hey Pete, wait up.’ Rhiannon bounded off after
him, excited by the development. ‘Where are we going?’
‘Watarrka,’ he advised as she caught him up.
Still stunned by these events, Tory was slower off
the mark. Did this mean Maelgwn was here? Was this
man leading her to him at this very moment? She
caught up to him. ‘Pete … by any chance, does
Watarrka have a European name?’
The tall bushman stopped and turned back to her,
still wearing his knowing smile. ‘King’s Canyon.’
The information sent Tory’s heart leaping into her
throat.
On this afternoon the temperature in the Centre was a
comfortable twenty degrees, though by midnight it
could be expected to have dropped to around the five
degree mark.
Pete had a four-wheel drive. From what he told
them, it seemed that around here just about everyone
in-the-know did. Not all of the tracks were sealed, and
even parts of the bitumen roads had been coated with
dirt during the heavy rains. The many large puddles and
mudslides made for a tough ride, and at one point they
lost sight of the road altogether.
‘Are you sure this is wise?’ Rhiannon queried as the
wheels spun round in the mud until they found traction,
and their vehicle was thrust on its way towards the next
deep hole.

‘She’ll be right, mate,’ he winked. ‘The conditions
are pretty good today.’
Pete got them as close to the canyon as they could
get by road. The place was all but deserted.
‘This is Watarrka,’ Pete announced, throwing some
climbing gear over one shoulder. ‘I hope you two are fit.’
‘We’ll try and keep up,’ Tory assured him.
Rhiannon and Tory followed him up a track that led
them along the northern rim, towards the head of the
canyon.
After the initial uphill climb, the rocky red land was
reasonably flat, although there were short jumps to be
made over wide cracks. This huge monument of nature
stretched out towards the horizon on all sides. One
couldn’t help but feel rather insignificant in
comparison. Their trek led them past an area of strange,
domed rock formations that were about nine metres
high and between ten to fifteen meters in length. These
resembled abandoned houses and streets; the site had
thus been dubbed by Europeans ‘the Lost City’. Passing
over a small and rather dicey footbridge that spanned a
deep cleft in the rock, the track passed dangerously
close to the edge of a sheer cliff top.
‘Great views, eh?’ Pete slapped Tory’s shoulder,
nearly startling her out of her wits.
‘Well, you’ve got to give him that.’ Rhiannon dared
to lean over to view the floor of the canyon about one
thousand feet below them. ‘The view is spectacular!’
Further on, they came to a deep chasm where they
stopped while Pete rigged up a line to take them down
into the head of the canyon.

‘Are we allowed down there?’ Tory wondered; the
terrain seemed somewhat precarious.
‘Trust me.’ Pete motioned her to the rope and
harness.
Known as the ‘Garden of Eden’ the well-watered,
sheltered floor of the deep ravine was a regular little
oasis with its towering gum trees and abundant lowlying native plants. Wildlife abounded here, and
trickling streams led to larger freshwater drinking holes.
It was as Tory approached one of these large pools
that she spied something with a metallic shine catch
the sun.
‘What is it?’ Rhiannon spotted it too, and pursued
her mother to investigate. ‘Why, it’s a sword!’
Tory withdrew the blade from the soil, wielding it
around herself in a figure of eight motion before eyeing
it over with recognition and delight. No doubt about it.
This was Maelgwn’s weapon, which she’d entrusted to
her son when she left ancient Britain for the twentieth
century.
‘Rhun …’ Tory breathed, sensing his presence close
by.
‘Hello, Mother.’
Rhun manifested before her, though Tory hardly
recognised her boy in his modern attire — a vest and
shorts of army green, and a rugged pair of hiking boots.
‘Praise the Goddess!’ She embraced him in earnest. ‘It
took you long enough to find us.’
He hugged his mother until she recovered from the
shock. ‘I’ve been waiting for you.’ Rhun kissed her
forehead, then looked to the other beauty Pete had

brought down into the canyon. ‘Please don’t tell me this
is my sister.’
Rhiannon was eyeing this warrior-like figure of a
man, also wishing this was not the case. His shiny dark
hair fell dead straight to his shoulders, and his large dark
eyes were akin to her own. ‘Looks that way, wouldn’t
you say.’ It was like staring at the male version of
herself.
‘At long last we meet.’ Rhun bowed. ‘I bid you
welcome, Rhiannon, to your new home.’
She eyed the surrounding area, yet there was no
abode within view. ‘Home?’ Rhiannon quizzed,
confused.
‘Allow me.’ Rhun offered her one of his hands and
Tory the other. ‘Thanks Pete. I owe you one.’
‘Rubbish,’ Pete waved it off, then waved goodbye.
‘We owe you many.’
As his friend disappeared into the trees Rhun
looked at his mother, flashing a cheeky grin. ‘You’re
going to be so proud of me.’ He closed his eyes to focus
on their destination.

10
GLIMPSING THE
FUTURE

M

oments later, Tory and Rhiannon found
themselves in a small earthen sleeping cave.
It had no windows, and judging by the rough
red texture of the walls, Tory imagined they were
somewhere underneath the canyon.
‘It’s a little cosy for all of us, don’t you think?’
Rhiannon commented shyly, not wanting to offend
their charming host.
‘This is only my room.’ Rhun ruffled her hair. ‘I didn’t
want to overawe you with too much at once.’ He backed
up towards a heavy timber door. ‘Are you ready for this?’
‘I think so,’ Tory granted, yielding to her son’s
excitement. ‘Impress me.’

‘Open,’ Rhun instructed, and the door vanished.
‘Hey!’ Rhiannon neared him, intrigued.
‘Particle control.’ Rhun shrugged it off as an
insignificant detail, motioning with his finger for them
to follow.
Stepping onto a solid red earth walkway, both
women were struck speechless by the sheer size of the
thriving community they beheld. They were not so
much under the canyon, as inside its walls. Stairways
and pathways lined the huge red earth walls, leading to
abodes which looked similar to the one they’d just
exited. The floor of the enormous dug-out cavern
looked like one big BBQ area, with fires for cooking.
The cavern was artificially lit. The lighting became
dimmer towards the top of the huge cave, increasing in
intensity as it reached the floor.
A thousand questions sprang into Tory’s mind.
‘Power, water, food? How did you ever get the
Aboriginal people to agree to this?’
Rhun looked smug. ‘Come on, I’ll show you around.’
He guided them down a string of pathways and
several sets of spiralling iron stairways to ground level.
Rhun greeted and introduced people as they went.
Apart from the native Australian’s who inhabited the
cavern, the remainder of the population were generally
scientists or inventors who wished to pursue their
projects without any government to misuse their genius.
‘A ready-made rebel alliance … just what you need,
yes?’ he asked his two honoured guests, already knowing
the answer. ‘You see, when the time came to hand over
the rule of Gwynedd to Cadwell, I decided to do a little

time exploration of my own … well, actually, Taliesin
insisted on it. The High Merlin took me shopping in
the year 2035 AD, and much of what you see here is a
direct result of that journey. This series of caverns,
though already naturally existing, were extended,
moulded and fortified using a combination of bacterial
quarrying and organic cementation, a process that will
not be perfected for a least another fifteen years.’
‘Wow.’ Rhiannon didn’t really have a clue what he
was on about, but it all sounded very impressive.
Passing through a huge triangular opening in the
wall, they followed a wide thoroughfare into a second
cavern that was even bigger than the last.
‘Food,’ Rhun announced to answer one of his
mother’s questions as he escorted them over a large
bridge. ‘This is the hydroponics and farming centre of
our little community.’
The moat that encompassed the circumference of
this cavern was sectioned off for the farming of various
species of fish and molluscs; large greenhouses were filled
with all manner of thriving vegetables and herbs, whilst
the exterior gardens, and orchards of fruit, were host to
small livestock, such as chickens, ducks and geese.
‘To graze cattle or sheep here is out of the question,
so we mainly stick to seafood, fruit and vegetables,
although we do keep some cows and chickens in the
large barn yonder, for dairy goods and eggs. The
Aboriginals tend to go their own way with their food, so
everyone is also free to cultivate what they please. The
more nationalities of people who end up here, the more
diverse our diet is becoming.’

Tory was turning circles trying to comprehend
everything that was going on around them. People were
harvesting, planting, pruning, picking, fishing, feeding,
watering and just plain relaxing. ‘But how on earth do
you generate enough power for all this?’
‘Natural gas, or you could say, shit,’ Rhun informed
them simply. ‘It’s a Sakahauchi methane processor, first
developed in America with moon colonisation in mind.
This also supplies us with water and fertiliser for
agriculture, whilst addressing the sewerage problem at
the same time.’
‘You are far too clever.’ Tory gave him a huge hug as
they approached the far end of the farming cavern. ‘I
am impressed beyond my wildest expectations.’
‘Where does this lead?’ Rhiannon was poised ready
to race off across a bridge that crossed over the moat to
yet another thoroughfare through the cavern wall.
‘Why don’t you find out?’ He gave her leave to go
on ahead. ‘I have a present for you,’ he advised, putting
his arm around his mother’s shoulders.
‘Through there?’ Her eyes motioned to the tunnel
Rhiannon had disappeared into.
‘You guessed it.’
‘Oh Mother, quickly.’ Rhiannon bolted back to wave
Tory on. ‘Wait until you see this. You won’t believe it!’
This final cavern was the largest of the three so far
and contained several enormous pools of water.
Natural sunlight poured in through a hole in the roof
at the far end.
Rhiannon headed towards the boat ramp and a tool
shed at the side of the largest body of water.

As Tory stood staring at her saving grace, he leant
over her shoulder to whisper, ‘The universe always
provides.’
She gripped his hand, appreciative of having at least
one of her major problems solved. ‘Now all I have to do
is figure out how to get the Goddess here.’
‘What do you mean?’ He was surprised at her. ‘Just
will it here.’
Tory burst into laughter. ‘Something as complex and
huge as our craft? I don’t think so.’
Rhun shook his head, emphasising his disappointment. ‘You haven’t been developing your abilities, have
you?’ His scolding expression melted into a confident
grin. ‘Well, it’s a good thing for you that I have.’
‘What?’ Tory thought he was surely joking.
‘I can get her here, crew and all.’ He shrugged. ‘All
you need do is take me to her.’
‘Well, let’s do it!’ Tory clutched both his hands.
‘Settle down!’ Rhun was amused by her eagerness.
When he’d last seen her it was he who was the
impetuous one, but now it seemed just the reverse was
true. ‘There is someone you really must meet first.’ His
mother still seemed a little anxious, until Rhun assured
her, ‘Your vessel is fine for the moment, so indulge me a
while longer.’ He offered Tory his arm, which she took
with a smile.
On the way back to the cavern of abodes, Rhun told the
story of how he and Pete had come to found this colony.
By 2035 the Earth was well and truly feeling the
effects of the tilt of its axis. The slow magnetic reversal

resulted in a weakening of the Earth’s magnetic field,
making the planet more vulnerable to strikes by
meteorites, comets, and exposure to cosmic rays. A
nuclear air blast, triggered by terrorists, ripped a huge
hole in the ozone layer in 2020, creating erratic
weather conditions which wreaked havoc on the
world’s food supply.
A huge supernova flare had been predicted for the
year 2037. It could increase the already unbearable
levels of radiation to the point where the Earth was
uninhabitable. Rhun hadn’t stuck around long enough
to find out whether this came to pass, but by the time
he had left, those with the money to pay their way had
already started heading for the moon colonies, leaving
others to inherit the Earth.
Many years before Rhun departed, the climate in the
Red Center had begun to change, returning the desert to
the tropical oasis it had been long ago in Gondwanaland.
As more and more resorts took advantage of the climate
change and sprang up around Uluru, Watarrka and Kata
Tjuta (the Olgas), the Aboriginal people were robbed of
their tribal lands. Of course, they did not take this lying
down and the resultant bloodshed could only be
compared to the first white invasion of the territory, way
back in the early 1800s.
‘But what brought you to Australia?’ Tory wondered.
Rhun shrugged. He’d had no option. ‘In less than
twenty years, Australia will be a major super-power, and
some of the most outstanding technology will be
designed and produced in this country. This was where I
first met Pete Nangina, in the future. A bitter old

bastard he was too, resentful and angry at all white men
for the dwindling numbers of his people. In fact, the
only reason he spoke to me at all was because he
discovered he couldn’t kill me.’ This memory made
Rhun smile. ‘Once I told Pete my history and why I had
travelled to his time, and of my plan to return to the
late twentieth century, we began to see a way we might
be able to save both our peoples from the holocaust
ahead. He wrote down an account of the injustices that
would befall his people, which I brought back to Pete
Nangina in 1999. After the first two of the said disasters
came about, I was taken to the tribal elders to put
forward my plan for this place.’
This particular site had been selected for several
reasons. Watarrka was government land and a tourist
attraction, so there was no chance of their little
community ever being built out or mined. The majority
of the park rangers were native Australians, who could
do a fine job keeping people away from the place. But
the real deciding factor had been that, during all of the
Earth’s natural disasters, this part of Australia had
remained the least affected area on the planet.
‘Since the day our alliance was formed, many of the
tragedies that Pete Nangina predicted were, if not
avoided altogether, very much delayed and their
consequences less harsh,’ Rhun was pleased to boast.
‘So you and Taliesin have altered the future yet
again.’ This made Tory uneasy, but who could really say
if it would be proven good, bad, or indifferent?
‘That we have.’ He paused ‘For, in an alternative
future, you, Taliesin, and father decided it would be best.’

This must have been the same time that Tory’s
future self had decided to go back to the Dark Age to
advise herself to conserve the life-giving potion that
had subsequently saved Brian’s life. So, if the future was
now on a different course, did this mean Tory no longer
had to make that journey, because she would still carry
it out in some other inter-dimensional reality? She gave
up thinking about it. ‘Where is Taliesin now?’
Rhun shrugged, resuming their course. ‘He returned
to Gwynedd years ago to see to the higher education of
Cadwell.’
‘Speaking of whom?’ Tory pulled Rhun up again,
hoping to solve another of her life’s riddles. ‘At what
age did Cadwell assume his immortal state?’
Rhun gave a heavy sigh as he recalled the most
fearful moment of his parenting life. ‘He took a bad fall
from a horse at five years of age … luckily, I was the
only person present.’
‘And your grandson?’ Tory urged, as gently as
possible.
‘Cadfan …’ Rhun smiled, proud of him.
‘Alias, Walter Cadfan?’ Rhiannon finally got a word
in.
‘The same.’
‘I knew it!’ both women exclaimed at once.
‘So, although I was not in Gwynedd to witness his
physical death,’ Rhun qualified his next words, ‘Cadfan
told me, when we bumped into each other here, that he
first died in a freak accident, aged twelve and a half.’
‘And Taliesin tutored him?’ Tory knew this must be
so, as Cadfan had seemed an enlightened soul.

‘And Cadwallon, after him.’
‘What about Cadwaladr?’
Rhun had been wondering the very same thing
himself. ‘Your guess is as good as mine.’
They scaled the pathways and stairs leading to one of
the highest caves in the cavern, and Tory was surprised
to hear a favourite song from her youth wafting from
their destination. She mouthed the words to the tune a
moment to recall the artist. ‘My God, you know I
haven’t heard Pink Floyd in over ten years!’
Rhun laughed. ‘You know them? Floyd will be
impressed. That’s how he got his name, or rather … his
handle. Open,’ he instructed, and the door vanished to
disclose a room full of computer monitors, processors
and a vast array of accompanying hardware.
A middle-aged man was slouched in a seat, his
crossed feet up on a bench. He was singing along with
the stereo as he happily puffed on a very large joint.
‘Hey, Floyd!’ Rhun yelled for his attention.
‘Woe, excuse I.’ Floyd turned down the volume,
stubbed out the joint, and swivelled around on his chair
to make their acquaintance. ‘You must be she?’ He put
on his little, round, wire-framed glasses to get a better
look at Tory.
‘Must be.’ Tory held out her hand to shake his.
She’d been wondering how long it would be before
her old champion, Sir Tiernan, showed up in the
twentieth century. He had a radically different look
now, in his Grateful Dead T-shirt and ratty old jeans. A
beard and moustache hid his handsome face and his

fine, fair hair fell halfway down his back. Tory imagined
that when he wasn’t so stoned, his eyes would be the
same gentle blue she remembered Tiernan having.
Floyd gently took hold of the legend’s hand. ‘This is
truly an honour. I’ve heard so much about you.’ He
pointed to Rhun as his source. ‘It is wonderful that you
are finally here amongst us.’ Floyd’s attention drifted to
Rhiannon. ‘That goes for you too, young lady.’
‘Well thanks, dude.’ She held out her hand to
give him some skin and Floyd obliged her, swiping
the palm of his hand across hers. ‘It’s most excellent
to be here.’
‘Floyd is the eyes and ears of our operation.’ Rhun
placed a hand on his colleague’s shoulder. ‘Anything
you want to know about anyone on the planet, Floyd is
the man to ask.’
This information brought a smile to Tory’s face.
‘Doc Alexander?’
The computer boffin clapped his hands and
laughed. ‘One of my favourite case studies.’
‘Are you a hacker then?’ Rhiannon took a seat on
the old, but comfortable sofa.
‘Darlin’, I have designed encryption codes for the
computer systems of some of the world’s biggest security
agencies. Hacker is such an ugly job description, I prefer
to think of myself as a code breaker.’
‘And there’s not a code in existence that Floyd can’t
break,’ Rhun boasted, and Floyd winked to comfirm the
claim.
‘You and Ray Murdoch have got to meet,’ Tory
told him.

‘The missing ICA engineer?’ Floyd stood, provoked
by the possibilities this presented. ‘The one who
designed the monitoring systems for their new fusion
reactors?’
‘The very one.’ Tory observed Floyd’s excitement
snowball.
‘He hasn’t destroyed his research, has he?’ He gripped
hold of Tory’s shoulders in a sudden state of panic.
‘No, not yet.’
‘Hah-ha!’ Floyd threw his baseball cap into the air.
‘We can really mess with the big boys now!’
‘Well.’ Tory was pleased by Floyd’s obvious
enthusiasm. ‘Speaking of the others, shouldn’t we go get
them?’
‘That’s probably a good idea,’ Rhun considered,
‘before the Navy drives them onto dry land.’
Tory freaked. ‘I thought you said they were in no
danger?!’
‘Well, they’re not if we leave now.’ Rhun held out
his hand, very calm about the whole affair.
No sooner had Tory touched her son, than they
were gone.
Floyd gave a chuckle, looking at Rhiannon on his
sofa. ‘The government doesn’t stand a chance.’
Back on the control deck of the Goddess, Tory and
Rhun found the crew in a full state of alert. Three fullyarmed navy submersibles were closing in on them from
the north, south and west; in ten minutes time they
would be forced to surface due to shallow water.
‘Shut down all your systems,’ Rhun instructed Teo.

Teo glanced back, not recognising the voice. ‘Who
the hell are you?’
‘He’s my son,’ Tory advised in haste. ‘Do as he tells
you.’
‘But without power, we’re stuffed!’
Rhun hoisted Teo from the pilot’s seat and took
control of the vessel. He placed both hands on the
control panel and, seconds later — blackout.
‘Jesus.’ Naomi gasped, horrified — as were the rest of
the crew. Plummeting downwards out of control through
the inky blackness was their worst fear come true.
Suddenly, everything in the vessel, including the
occupants, took on an eerie blue-white glow that
became brighter and brighter. It no longer felt like they
were sinking; rather, they drifted, floated, flew even.
When the illumination subsided the natural light
from the subterranean cavern poured in through the
portholes of their craft. Rhun had brought the Goddess
to rest on the ramp he’d had built for her.
‘That was incredible.’ Tory kissed her son’s cheek; it
was obvious she had much work to do on her own psyche.
‘Well, holy shit. Will you look at this?’ Brian
perused the world outside. ‘Where the hell are we?’ He
smiled at Tory and his nephew, most relieved to be
wherever he was.
‘Welcome to Central Australia, Brockwell.’ Rhun, a
little drained from his feat, held out a hand to shake his
uncle’s.
‘Brian,’ Tory corrected Rhun in a whisper.
‘I knew what he meant.’ Brian gladly shook his
nephew’s hand.

Rhun raised himself from the pilot’s seat, receiving a
round of applause from the very appreciative crew. He cast
his eyes over them, unable to believe how many of them
he recognised. Bryce. He spotted Ray first who in the
Dark Ages had been his closest and most trusted friend —
for over sixty years. Selwyn. His eyes passed by Noah to
Daniel — Cai … and Queen Katren of Powys. Rhun’s
sights came to rest on Naomi in the seat beside him.
‘Please,’ he gestured for silence. ‘I’m so delighted to
see you all, the pleasure is all mine, really.’
Tory introduced everyone to him stating their
current name and occupation. The one person on board
that he didn’t recognise interested Rhun greatly. This
stocky, middle-aged, red-skinned warrior, who had eyes
and hair that were as dark as his own, Rhun guessed to
be his mother’s childhood sweetheart.
‘So, you’re the one who had my father green with
jealousy,’ Rhun commented upon learning Teo’s identity.
‘Maelgwn, jealous of me.’ Teo glanced at Tory. ‘Is
that a fact?’
‘Don’t make his ego any bigger than it already is,’
Tory advised her boy. ‘I’ve got enough problems, thank
you very much.’ She left them to show the others
around outside.
‘She’s living in denial, poor woman,’ Teo informed
Rhun, once she was out of earshot.
‘Not for much longer though.’ Rhun made a point
of clueing Teo in. ‘My father will be returning for her
soon enough.’
‘Come again!’ Teo nearly had a fit. ‘I thought
Maelgwn was dead.’

‘Well, then.’ Rhun gave him a wink in parting.
‘You’d best think again.’
The tour finished in Floyd’s observatory room,
overlooking the encampment. Here the crew of the
Goddess were treated to Watarrka home-grown, shots of
Jack Daniels, and rock’n’roll from the 70s and 80s.
Ray, Teo and Floyd were seated around the
computers devising a means for the ICA to regain
possession of Ray’s work. The idea was to get the Agency
off their backs by giving them what they wanted. For, as
Floyd pointed out, it was far better that the ICA utilise a
system that they, ‘the Rebels’, already knew inside and
out, than someone else’s system. Espionage would be
that much more difficult. It was of the utmost
importance that the Agency re-acquire the plans for
Ray’s prototype under circumstances that would not be
deemed suspicious.
Noah, in between taking snapshots of the control
room with his camera, suggested the airport as a
solution. ‘Just book Ray on a flight somewhere,
preferably to and from destinations as far removed from
us as possible. Then all you need do is send a suitcase.
The ICA will, without doubt, intercept the luggage. Upon
finding it unaccompanied, they will simply assume Ray
got wind of them and split,’ the reporter concluded with
a sideways wave of his thumb.
His fellow conspirators were speechless a second.
‘We’ll have to start calling you the answers man,’
Ray commented, amazed at how quickly Noah’s mind
processed information.

‘It’s just too simple,’ Floyd resolved with a smile,
slapping his hand down on the desktop. ‘No wonder I
didn’t think of it.’
Brian’s son, Daniel, meanwhile, had taken a decided
interest in the telescope that was in the large adjoining
room. Rhun opened the voice-activated porthole in the
cavern roof, whereby Daniel was able to sit and observe
the clear evening sky through the small, though
powerful lens.
Taller than his father, Daniel had the same
distinguishing features: his piercing blue eyes, his fair hair,
even the dimple on his chin was the same. As the lad
fired questions at Rhun, he smiled at Daniel’s excitement;
it was obvious he had the same thirst for knowledge as Cai
had had when Rhun had known him in the Dark Ages.
Rhun left Daniel to his observing. Back in Floyd’s
control room he began entertaining Brian and Naomi
with tales of their adventures together in sixth century
Britain, and Rhun’s rather zealous account had
Rhiannon completely captivated.
Her son had greatly matured during their time apart,
and Tory thought him so much more like his father these
days. It was his eyes that really got to her though. They
were so reminiscent of Maelgwn’s it was spooky. Damn.
Now she’d done it. The memory of her love never failed
to leave a deep, empty yearning in Tory’s soul, that
pained her like no physical ailment ever could.
Rhun excused himself from his audience; even from
the other side of the room he picked up on his mother’s
sorrow. ‘Don’t be sad.’ He came up behind Tory and
wrapped his arms about her. ‘You know there is no need.’

‘He should be here.’ Tory resisted the urge to burst
into tears as she viewed the gathering of their close
freinds and relatives.
‘You know he will be as soon as is immortally
possible.’
‘Do I just?’ Tory didn’t mean to be negative. But
why did Maelgwn send her messages through others?
Why couldn’t he speak to her directly?
‘Because you are too out of touch with the
Otherworld, that’s why. It’s not like he hasn’t tried.’ Rhun
reacted to his mother’s thoughts and jumped to his father’s
defence. ‘But if seeing is believing, it might be arranged.’
Tory looked over her shoulder to see if he was
serious, and Rhun nodded to substantiate the offer.
‘You’ll need to do some serious work on your psyche
first.’
‘Whatever it takes,’ Tory stated surely. ‘You know I
would go to hell and back to be with him.’
‘And have done so,’ Rhun acknowledged,
lightheartedly.
‘Tory.’ Brian called to her as he crossed the room.
‘I’ve been thinking about how badly the ICA seem to
want to find us, and in retrospect, perhaps it wasn’t such
a good idea to let Pearce go.’
Seeing so many of the Dragon’s circle gathered here
this day, Tory had also been thinking about Pearce. ‘So
you think we should find him, and let him know about
this place.’
‘Well, if what you say is true, and Doc Alexander
has killed before … chances are he’ll do it again,’ Brian
openly put forward.

‘Who has he killed?’ Rhiannon demanded,
although in her gut she already knew. Her mother and
uncle stared blankly back at her, which she found
completely infuriating. ‘Goddamn it! I am so sick of
you all treating me like a child!’ As Tory reached out
for her, Rhiannon backed up. ‘My father was murdered,
and you didn’t see fit to tell me?’ She shook her head in
disbelief.
‘I —’ Tory attempted to explain.
‘You were going to tell me.’ Rhiannon had heard this
one before. ‘Well, perhaps next time you’re going to tell
me something, you might consider doing so before I hear
it from somebody else.’ Too infuriated to pursue the
argument, she waved them all off and left the room.
Rhun found the animosity that Rhiannon felt
towards their mother completely overwhelming. Thus,
he prevented Tory from going after her and went in her
stead.
As suspected, Rhun found his sister leaning over the
earthen wall of the walkway outside his abode.
‘Couldn’t get in, huh?’
She shook her head, her eyes still glued on the large
fires that were being lit down below on the cavern floor.
‘It’s only programmed to respond to my voice.’ He
leant against the wall beside her.
‘I figured,’ was all she said.
He didn’t want to force her to talk, although he
knew she wanted to. After a long silence, Rhun nudged
her shoulder with his own. ‘You look like you could use
a drink.’

‘I don’t like alcohol,’ she informed him, as if it were
beneath her.
‘Ah, but this is special.’ He made the invitation
sound more enticing. ‘My grandfather’s mead.’
‘Myrddin?’ She queried.
‘No, the other grandfather, Caswallon.’ He backed
up to the door. ‘Gwynedd was famous for such brews.
Open.’ Rhun did the honours, dispensing with the door.
‘After you.’ He motioned her inside.
Rhun pulled up a couple of chairs, placing a flask
and two mugs on the table. ‘Please,’ he bade her, ‘sit.’
‘You’re going to defend her, aren’t you?’ Rhiannon
slouched into the seat, throwing one leg over the arm of
the chair. ‘You think I’m being childish and
unreasonable.’
‘I certainly do not,’ he emphasized to the contrary,
pouring the mead as he sat down. ‘You think I don’t
know what you’re going through?’ He had to chuckle,
passing a mug to her. ‘Still, you have not travelled
through time as I have. I believe there might be certain
things that you have not taken into account when
judging our mother.’
‘You think?’ Rhiannon polished off the contents of
her mug in a gulp. ‘And what might they be?’
‘Well, for starters, the reason she doesn’t mourn the
death of your father as you do, is because she cannot …
she knows he lives on in his immortal self.’ As
Rhiannon started shaking her head to disagree, Rhun
became more insistent. ‘Yes, he does —’
‘No, I was at the funeral.’ Rhiannon poured herself
more of the spicy brew. ‘I saw his ashes. My father is

definitely dead. Murdered in fact!’ She drank the
liquor down.
‘Look.’ He was becoming kind of exasperated; he had
to make her see. ‘I was twenty-one years old and about to
assume the throne of Gwynedd when I found out mother
was pregnant with you. When I discovered Maelgwn had
not fathered you, I wanted to kill her, thinking she had
been unfaithful to him … which I realise now, she never
would be. But I didn’t understand, as you do not
understand, that your father and my father were one and
the same soul–mind.’
‘Well, where is this legend you speak of?’ She
thumped her mug down on the table and folded her
arms defiantly. ‘If my father were alive and well, he
would be here helping us.’
‘You found this place didn’t you?’ Rhun raised both
brows to challenge her.
‘Well … yes. But that still doesn’t answer my
question?’ She sat forward. ‘Where is he?’
Rhun smiled; she spoke to the point, just like their
mother. ‘Physically, he’s thousands of light years away.
But ethereally speaking, he’s right here, listening to us
now, most likely.’
‘And how is that possible?’ Rhiannon was trying to
refrain from a smile that would appear condescending.
Rhun looked her in the eye, feeling her cynicism
and almost envying her ignorance. ‘Over the next few
years I intend to teach you just how that is possible. But,
in the meantime, I need you to try and have a little
more patience with mother.’
Rhiannon rolled her eyes off to one side.

‘I’m completely serious. There are enough forces
working against her without you adding to her problems.’
‘Her problems,’ Rhiannon protested. ‘What about
my problems?’
‘You don’t even know what a problem is … yet. I’ve
been to the future. I know what awaits us there.’ Rhun
finished his drink and placed his mug aside.
‘But I thought you and Taliesin had changed all
that?’
‘The events of this planet, perhaps? But some …
occurrences,’ Rhun chose his words carefully, ‘are time
asymmetrical, and therefore unavoidable.’
He was starting to scare her now. Rhiannon’s
nightmare of spending the rest of her days on a fiery ball
of vast nothingness was seeming closer to the truth than
previously imagined. ‘If that’s the case, what do you
expect mother is going to do about it? In fact, why
bother with any of this?’
‘You really don’t have the slightest clue who our
mother really is, do you?’ Rhun couldn’t imagine how
anyone in this day and age could be so uninformed.
‘Haven’t you read any of the ancient texts, or the
prophets … or Revelation, at least!’
‘That’s all a crock of religious propaganda.’ She
crossed her feet on the table, getting comfortable.
‘Well, if you haven’t read any of it, how do you
know?’ He sat forward to advise her to keep an open
mind before taking up the flask and pouring more mead
for them both. ‘I’m afraid if you were familiar with the
original Sumerian or Akkadian texts, you might be a
little better informed as to who you are, where you came

from, and why it is you are here. The prophecies of the
ages are telling the story of our lives. For example,’ he
selected a couple of books from the shelf beside him, and
finding his page, read: ‘St John the Divine, Revelation ...
And upon her forehead was written,
Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of harlots and
abominations of the Earth ...
And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast,
these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate ...
For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to
agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words
of God shall be fulfilled ...
And the woman which thou sawest is that great city,
which reigneth over the kings of the Earth.’
Rhiannon’s jaw was dropping. ‘Surely you don’t
think —’
‘Wait, I’m not finished. Nostradamus.’ He opened
another book at a marked page.
She who was dismissed will return to reign,
Her enemies found in conspirators,
More than ever will her time be triumphant,
vast numbers to the death most certainly.
‘Mother may be a lot of things, but she is not a
murderer.’ Rhiannon objected to his inference.
‘Where does it say she would kill anyone? It says to
the death. All immortals have to die before they can
achieve life everlasting.’ Rhun straightened out
Rhiannon’s misconception. ‘She is the one who will
rally the chosen together, and keep the beast in check.’

‘And you think the beast is Doc Alexander,’
Rhiannon assumed.
‘There are several beasts mentioned in the ancient
texts, and interestingly enough the numbers six, six, six
translate in Hebrew kabbalist tradition to mean, One
who has a divine message. Yet, more often than not, in
prophecy the term usually relates to the selfish desires of
a material world. Who rules that world is destined to be
the beast’s advocate.
‘The third Antichrist, you mean.’ Rhiannon was
taking her brother more seriously now.
Rhun nodded. ‘Nostrodamus foresaw him too.’ He
passed the book in his hands to his sister so that she
might read the prophecy for herself.
The Antichrist quickly annihilates three,
Twenty-seven years of blood will last his war.
The heretics dead, captive or exiled.
Bloody corpses, water red, covering the Earth.
Rhiannon gazed into space; she didn’t want to
believe him, nor would she, without doing some serious
investigation of her own. ‘Well personally, bro, I think
you’re just paranoid. But, as a special favour to you, I
promise to go easy on mum.’
‘Much appreciated.’ He smiled; she would see the
truth before long, once she knew the all of it.

11
UNSEEN

T

he weeks that followed the arrival of the Goddess
and her crew at Watarrka were eventful to say
the least.
Priority number one, to return Ray’s research to the
ICA without suspicion, was executed without a hitch.
Rhun delivered the suitcase to Gatwick airport,
England, and saw it placed on the conveyor belt of a
flight bound for Mexico City. The luggage was signed in
under an old, assumed identity that the ICA had
supplied Ray with for a mission some years before. In
the guise of an old man, Rhun waited around to witness
the pandemonium erupt.
Inside fifteen minutes, two unmarked black
limousines sped to a stop in front of the airport. A band
of UN officials invaded the management office and

control room, flashing identification papers as they
demanded that the 2 p.m. flight to Mexico be delayed
for reasons of international security.
The suitcase was recovered, yet the Agency
representatives seemed none too happy to discover that
its owner continued to elude them. Airport security and
the local police were called in to assist with the search.
Of course, they came up empty-handed.
The plan to make contact with John Pearce and his
family proved not so easy.
Tory and Rhiannon decided to locate them via
thought projection, only to then manifest themselves in
the middle of a forest somewhere in England.
Their first conclusion was that perhaps the
Otherworldly energies emanating from the earth around
the Watarrka base were playing havoc with their intent.
Yet Rhun had experienced no such trouble when
willing himself to the airport just one day earlier? Before
leaping to any conclusions they waited a couple of days,
then attempted contact again. When Rhiannon, Rhun
and Tory found themselves again in the forest, they had
to figure it was no accident.
‘Same place,’ Rhun supposed, as he’d not escorted
his mother and sister last time out.
‘Yep!’ Rhiannon was exasperated, pointing to a
fallen oak that she recognised.
Rhun placed a hand on the healthy old tree beside
him, and began to smile broadly as he discovered
their whereabouts. ‘Mother, John Pearce was Sir Rhys
once — right?’

‘You know it.’ She thought the question pointless
and continued her search of the area.
‘Well, Rhys’ immortal or “Chosen” incarnation was
Robin of Loxley and we’re standing in the middle of
Sherwood forest!’ He gave a chuckle, thinking it ironic.
Tory was not laughing, however. ‘How do you
know?’
‘The tree told me.’ He waved a finger in its
direction.
‘Not where we are!’ Tory scolded; he knew well
enough what she meant.
‘Oh, about Robin you mean?’ He was having second
thoughts about mentioning it. ‘A mutual friend told me.’
Tory’s hands were perched on her hips as she
considered the response. ‘In other words, your father.’
Rhun raised both brows, nodding and shrugging in a
non-committal fashion, when, rather fortunately, his
mother’s attention was diverted to the woodland.
‘What was that?’ She got them to strain their ears
for any sound out of the ordinary. ‘John!’ she called,
suddenly racing off through the trees.
‘Did you hear anything?’ Rhun inquired of his sister
as they set off in pursuit.
‘No.’ Rhiannon shook her head in the negative.
‘You?’
‘No,’ he stressed, gaining speed to chase after his
mother.
‘Oh Goddess, please!’ Tory wailed, as she fell to her
knees in the scrub ahead of them.
‘Mother?’ Rhiannon screeched to a halt as she spied
the blueish hand that sprang from the soil, still wearing

the wedding rings belonging to Jennifer Pearce. ‘Maybe
it’s just a ploy to make us think they’re dead.’ She refused
to believe their friends had met with such an end.
‘No. There’s no mistake.’ Tory’s mood darkened as
she raised herself upright.
‘Perhaps it is fate that this should be his final resting
place.’ Rhun quietly offered his view.
Tory squeezed her eyelids together, her hands
clenching into fists. ‘I must not hate, I must not hate,’
she repeated to instill it in her mind. ‘First Miles, and
now John, Jenny and Nicholas … four of the people I
hold dearest in this world. Why?’
Rhiannon held her mother as she was reduced to
tears, all the while the words of Nostradamus running
though her mind. The Antichrist quickly annihilates three.
Perhaps it had no bearing on this instance, but she
couldn’t get the damn sentence out of her head. ‘We’re
still not one hundred percent certain what has
happened here.’
‘Are you suggesting we exhume them?’ Tory was
completely repulsed by the notion.
‘Mother. She’s right, we have no choice.’ Rhun
seconded Rhiannon’s view. ‘These graves are far too
shallow to be restful in any case.’ Tory stared back at
him, her face drained of colour, and Rhun understood
she couldn’t cope with taking part in such a task.
‘Come on.’ He helped Rhiannon support her. ‘We’ll
see you home, then I’ll come back later with Brian
and Teo.’
Tory looked back to the protruding remains, her jaw
tensing as she did. ‘Their deaths must not go unanswered.’

‘Nor will they.’ Rhun’s tone suggested that she could
leave the matter in his hands.
The dig turned up two bodies, those of John and Jenny.
Nicholas was not found with his parents as initially
feared, and locating him became the immediate concern.
Rhun left Teo and Brian with the grievous chore of
re-burying their good friends, and reported back to
those waiting at Watarrka.
The news seemed to energise everybody’s drained
spirits.
As his mother assumed her outrageous guise to seek
out the whereabouts of their lost crewmate, Rhun
outwardly changed his appearance to escort her. His long
dark hair retracted into his head until it was only one
centimetre long, and turned fair. His eyes changed to blue,
and his attire was as outrageous as his mother’s, so that
they might be mistaken for members of the same gang.
Then joining hands, the pair concentrated their
energies on finding the lost lad.
Nicholas was seated in the centre of an empty chamber.
As his head was bowed low, they could not readily
discern whether he was conscious or not. Big steel
braces clasped around his chest, stomach, arms and
ankles held his form to a bulky metal chair. If he wasn’t
dead, he certainly wasn’t far from it.
‘Nicky,’ Tory whispered, as she moved to approach.
Upon hearing her voice, Nick’s head shot up.
Although he could not see her through his swollen eyes,
he knew who had come for him. ‘No, leave!’ he

implored her. ‘He seeks to test the Goddess, see what
she is capable —’
Nicholas’ outburst was cut short by an electric
current coursing through his body, and he screamed
himself to tears enduring the agony.
‘That’s quite enough from you.’ A voice came over
the intercom and reverberated around the room. ‘I
wouldn’t,’ the voice warned as Tory moved to aid her
young friend. ‘Go anywhere near him and the next
charge will be fatal.’
Tory refrained from movement or speech. Hatred
had such a grip on her being, its blinding effects took a
moment to abate. Can you get him out of here from where
you are? she bethought Rhun without so much as a
glance in his direction.
No such luck. But if you can get between the camera
and Nick, that should hide me from its vision. Then,
perhaps I could manifest behind his chair and get him out.
Tory perused the ceiling, spotting the camera in
question. ‘Are we afraid to make such threats in
person?’ She approached the camera to try and
monopolise their voyeur’s attention.
‘Regretfully, business prevents me from being
present to address you in person.’ The voice paused.
‘Whoever you are.’
Tory hazarded a glance in Rhun’s direction to find
him gone. ‘I’m your worst nightmare, if you do not
desist in your attack on the kin of Tory Alexander.
Whoever you are,’ she said icily in conclusion.
The camera swung back suddenly to note Rhun’s
disappearance. The sound of crackling electricity

startled Tory into an about-face, where she found an
empty chair. She breathed a deep sigh of relief, no
longer subject to the whim’s of her foe. ‘Just what the
hell is your problem?’
‘No problem, just a few questions … like, how it is
that you came to be in an electronically-locked room to
which I alone know the entry code? And how would you
explain the apparent disappearance of my hostage?’ He
chuckled like a man well-satisfied. ‘No great loss, I’ll
grant, but you know, I never would have believed it if I
hadn’t seen it for myself.’
Tory wanted to cringe, recalling what her father had
told her.
Most could not perform the feats you do, as they
consider such metamorphosis impossible. You, however, do
not, as you have seen it done.
Shit. She decided she should get out of there before
she made matters worse. ‘Look, if you need spiritual
counseling, I’d suggest an exorcist.’ She made for
directly beneath the camera, where she was out of its
line of vision.
‘Very amusing … I’m sure. Let’s see how much of
that wit you have left tomorrow.’
She was not even tempted to query his meaning,
though his mocking laughter taunted her well into the
ethers of her flight.
‘That’s it!’ Tory announced, manifesting in the
communications room at Watarrka where the rest of her
team were attending to Nick’s injuries. ‘I’ve had enough
of being on the defensive. Rhiannon.’

Her daughter raised herself from Nicholas’ side,
wiping the tears of sympathy from her face. ‘Yes?’
‘I want you to go to Oxfordshire and bring your
Aunt Rose here.’ Tory placed a hand on her shoulder to
give Rhiannon strength. ‘We’re not leaving anybody in
the outside world who can be traced to us.’
Rhiannon seconded her reasoning with a nod, and
was gone.
‘How is he?’ Tory asked, as Naomi cleaned the
wounds on her patient’s face.
‘I’m not qualified for this, Tory. He needs a doctor.’
‘No,’ Rhun considered, ‘he needs a healer. Take him
to my mother’s chamber. I’ll join you there presently.’
‘If you’re going for Cadfan …’ Tory caught him by
the arm. ‘Tell him nothing. The less he knows —’
‘I am with you,’ he stated surely.
Sometimes Tory forgot Rhun was not a reckless
juvenile any longer. ‘I didn’t mean —’
‘I know.’ Rhun cut her short with a wave of his
hand. ‘Just … stay close to Gawain, your healing
energies will keep him alive.’ As his mother went to
correct him, Rhun added with a grin, ‘I mean,
Nicholas.’
‘Sorry.’ She realised she was doing it again. ‘You as
an adult takes a bit of getting used to.’
‘Tell me about it.’ He held her gaze until he’d
vanished.
Walter Cadfan was leading a large group of people
through a guided meditation when Rhun unexpectedly
appeared in the corner of the room. Fortunately, the

healer was the only person present who had his eyes
open. He wound up his calming tuition, and quietly
stood to make his way towards his visitor, instructing his
class to remain as they were. With the flick of a switch,
gentle music began to filter quietly over the gathering
and Cadfan motioned Rhun towards the door.
Directly across the hallway was the healer’s large
office and herbarium, where they would not be
disturbed.
‘Very impressive.’ Rhun followed Cadfan inside,
admiring the shelves stocked with medicines, and
spying many a long-extinct cure thereon.
‘I knew you, of all people, would appreciate my
collection, Grandfather.’ Walter was most excited by his
visit.
‘Cadfan, must you call me that when you insist on
appearing twice my age?’
‘Well, it adds to my crediblity. Besides I am, well and
truly, twice your age.’
For although Rhun had been time travelling for a
couple of hundred years or more, Cadfan had taken the
old-fashioned route down through the ages to the
twentieth century from his birthplace late in the
seventh.
‘If only I’d possessed some of your talent,’ Walter
sighed.
‘Well, actually, I’m needing your talents,’ Rhun
confessed, to Cadfan’s obvious delight. ‘A dear friend of
mine has —’
‘No, no, don’t tell me.’ The healer closed his eyes to
concentrate. ‘Ah!’ He was enlightened as to the

requirements for the task, and began scampering around
collecting salves and potions to take with them. ‘We
must hurry.’ Cadfan threw a few last bits and pieces into
a bag, then held out his hand ready to be transported.
After two hours of a ‘hands on’ healing session, Nick
was massaged with cooling ointment and fed a warm
herbal brew to remedy the damage done to him on the
inside.
Cadfan did not question how his patient had come
to be in such a state, nor did he inquire as to his
whereabouts. Perhaps he simply assumed both topics
would be taboo, but Tory thought it more likely that he
already knew some of the answers.
Walter was very accomplished at his chosen craft.
Present immortal company excluded, Tory had never
seen such a miraculous recovery. A lot of Nick’s swelling
and bruising had disappeared within the first half hour
of the consultation.
‘You’d best beware,’ Tory whispered to Cadfan,
watching their patient drift off into a peaceful slumber.
‘They’ll be hailing you as the next Messiah.’
Walter gave a quiet chuckle. ‘Don’t think they
haven’t tried.’ He placed two bottles on the bedside
table for further treatment. ‘But I don’t go for any of
that rot. There is only one God, the creator, and only
he can correctly guide the individual along the right
path back to him.’
‘What about your otherworldly ancestors?’ She
wondered if he still followed the ancient faith of the
Britons.

Walter cocked an eye in her direction. ‘Well, the
ethers and their occupants are part of God, and can aid
humanity via the proper channels … as with your good
self and Keridwen. But one has only to recall what
became of Ossa to see how cunning and misleading
some entities can be. You must be able to discern the
difference between good advice and manipulation. The
differing planes of the etheric world are frequented by
all manner of spirits, denizens, and extra-terrestrials …
some of which can be very mischievous indeed if the
seeker is inexperienced, or calling on their wisdom for
reasons of ego and personal gain. Such a person may
find themselves led a merry dance, just to be taught a
lesson. Such is life.’ Cadfan shrugged. ‘I never take as
fact anything I’m told. I rely on what I feel, for only the
God inside can ultimately be trusted.’
Tory thought this was a good philosophy, and
reminiscent of her own beliefs. She thanked Cadfan for
his views and for coming to the aid of her kinsman. ‘If I
can ever return the favour …’
‘Nonsense,’ Cadfan insisted. ‘You are my greatgrandmother. Thus I am entirely at your disposal during
this, your time in exile.’
At this point, Rhun advised his grandson it was
high time they got him back to the natural therapy
centre where Walter was supposed to be lecturing at
present.
Left alone with nothing but her thoughts and their
sleeping patient, Tory mused over Cadfan’s parting vow.
Tory had not considered this predicament in which she
found herself so dire as to classify it as ‘in exile’. Yet

Cadfan made it sound like the whole nightmare was a
foregone conclusion, and had been for some time.
Since her arrival at Watarrka, Tory had done quite a
lot of research into the mysterious origins of her family.
The various mythologies and histories of the creation of
the world that Rhun had given her to resource all cited
the same story. Of how the great immortal ancestors
(the Gods, the Shining Ones, the Lofty Ones, the Old
Ones) had created the world and fashioned mankind —
even the Old Testament hinted at this. For Genesis
clearly stated, that after Adam and Eve had eaten from
the tree of knowledge, the Lord God said: Obviously in
knowing good and evil man has become like one of Us. It
also spoke of how, the sons of God took notice of the
daughters of men, admired their looks and married all those
of them they chose. Was this the explanation behind her
grandmother’s mysterious pregnancy, the event which
had introduced the immortal gene into her family via
her father, Myrddin. If so, which one of these infamous
Gods had her grandfather been?
Tory stemmed from the lineage of the one the Celts
called Bedi, that much Taliesin had told her. This was
no great help, however, as Bedi was the King of Heaven.
Sumerian texts called him Anu, the Egyptians —
Ammon, the Greeks — Zeus, and from him all other
immortals had sprung. Her grandfather could be any
one of Bedi’s wild array of descendants, few of whom she
would feel proud to claim as kin, having familiarised
herself with some of their appalling escapades. These socalled Gods were exceedingly greedy, underhanded,
incestuous, not to mention cruel and unforgiving. If, as

the ancient texts claimed, mankind was the result of a
genetic fusion between these Gods and the earliest men,
it was easy to see which characteristics humans had
inherited from their immortal creators.
Still, these conclusions were based on the hearsay of
others and their interpretations of the ancient texts,
which was exactly what Cadfan had warned Tory
against. What she really needed was to get the story
straight from the horse’s mouth — her grandfather. It all
came back to him. Her father had claimed to still be in
contact with their closest Otherworldly relative, so
surely she could aspire to the same.
One thing is for certain. Tory looked at Nicholas,
whom she knew was damn lucky to be alive. As of
tomorrow, I’m back in training … mind, body and spirit.
Her life with Miles had been a peaceful and
idyllic break from Otherworldly affairs and earthly
leadership, but, clearly, the holiday was over. Tory
refused to let one more soul be tortured or killed on
her account. Emotional vampirism, was what it was.
Doc had been nowhere near her and still he’d nearly
succeeded in draining her of every ounce of energy
with his classic intimidatory tactics, and what was
worse, she’d let him do it.
Well, no more, no matter what surprises he had in
store for her. Today’s episode had made her realise
that she was nowhere near prepared to confront her
foe — not if she expected to outsmart him, anyway.
Now that all her kindred were safe inside these
cavern walls, it was imperative that Tory’s first priority
become herself.

Tory spent most of that night and into the next
morning with Floyd, going through what information
he’d collected on Doc. This case study went into Doc’s
schooling and political background, but she failed to
find anything that the famous financier wouldn’t want
them to know.
Floyd explained that gaining access to Doc’s personal
computer was virtually impossible because he rarely
hooked up to the Net. Therefore, the only way they were
going to retrieve information from his PC was to
somehow download all its files onto hard disk. Doc would
almost certainly have his system encrypted, so they
needed his password to save time. Floyd had done an
asset trace on their subject to investigate his land
holdings, bank accounts and so forth in the hope of
finding a discrepancy of some kind, but regrettably, all his
financial dealings appeared to be as clean as a whistle.
When Nicholas awoke he was physically repaired, and
was scoffing down a huge breakfast when Tory arrived to
question him about his ordeal. Recounting the events of
the past week was not easy for the lad. He’d been
knocked out so many times that his moments of
consciousness all sort of blurred into each other.
After they’d parted ways with the Goddess in Horta,
he told her, his family returned to London to find the
ICA awaiting their arrival. They were escorted to a
black limousine where they were bound and blindfolded
at gunpoint. Nicholas thought it rather peculiar that at
no stage of their abduction were his parents asked a
single question.

This came as no surprise to Tory. In all likelihood,
Doc needed to do no more than touch an individual to
withdraw whatever information he required. Then
again, with so many blank spots in Nicholas’ memory,
perhaps hypnosis had been used. Both methods would
have failed to produce the information Doc sought, as
neither John nor his family knew where the Goddess
and her crew had gone into hiding.
‘Mum and Dad were killed, without any of us
having the slightest clue as to why.’ Nick’s eyes filled
with tears as he persevered with his explanation. ‘When
they started to beat me, I fully expected it would be to
the death. But no, I was strapped into that chair, and
whilst one of the masked attackers gripped both my
hands, his buddies all started firing questions at me at
once … questions about you.’
‘Pertaining to what? My whereabouts?’
‘No. They wanted to know about the weird stuff …
you know, like extraordinary feats, strange occurrences,
shit like that. But I told them nothing. In fact, I didn’t
even think about it. I dwelt instead on all the good
times we’d had together, which seemed to piss off the
guy holding my hands no end. He kept whacking me
around the head and telling me to concentrate, but the
more insistent he became, the more obscure the
memory I brought to mind.’ This made Nick smile, as
he was kind of impressed with himself.
‘You did good, my friend.’ Tory gave him a
huge squeeze, wishing she could somehow relieve him
of his loss. She’d not seen such bravery in one so
young since the Dark Age, where, coincidentally, Sir

Gawain had also lost both his parents at roughly the
same age.
‘I knew you’d find me,’ Nick confessed, as though
nothing was ever surer. ‘Half of me prayed you wouldn’t,
knowing I was the bait in a trap set for you. But the
other half of me knew that, somehow, you’d outsmart
the bastards. Which obviously, you did.’
Tory smiled at his reasoning, though she knew
different unfortunately — played right into their hands
more like. Doc Alexander’s threat to wipe the smile from
her face within twenty-four hours lingered in her brain.
His vow toyed with her imagination to conjure all
manner of horrifying scenarios, which she did her best
to dismiss or ignore. A good workout was what she
needed: kata, yoga, meditation. For the day was still
young, and she utterly refused to spend it pondering
their doom.
It was coming on to evening when Floyd summoned all
interested parties to the communications room to view
a news report on the disappearance of Dr John Pearce
and his family.
The news team, from a reputable British television
station, were speaking with people who alleged they
were close friends and associates of John Pearce, none of
whom Nicholas could say he recognised. They spoke of
the differences in opinion that arose between John
Pearce and Tory Thurlow after the unexpected death of
her husband Professor Miles Thurlow. At this time, it
was reported, Tory was knowingly abetting a man
wanted for blackmail by more government agencies

then they had airtime to list. They claimed John had
managed to escape with his family when the Goddess
docked in Horta for supplies a few weeks back.
‘But John still feared for the safety of his family
because of what they knew.’ A sweet-looking, elderly
lady informed the very concerned woman conducting
the interview.
‘The police have yet to find any trace of the marine
archaeologist and his family,’ the female reporter turned
to camera to advise her viewers. ‘Nor have the
authorities had any success in locating the luxurious
underwater observation vehicle that was once the base
for the now famous Project Plato. These people are
wanted for questioning in regard to the disappearance.’
They showed a shot of Ray, which came from his
ICA file, that made him look like Charles Manson
before the haircut. The photo they used of the Goddess
crew was one Noah had taken at the time he’d done the
story on the sea-monster. This particular photo had not
been used with the article, but it had been sent to
National Geographic at the time.
‘They’re trying to frame us, not only for Pearce’s
death, but your husband’s as well!’ Ray was ready to
have a complete meltdown.
Tory was contemplating the same, when she noted
Teo and Brian didn’t appear as perturbed about the
news as everyone else.
‘Well, good luck making a case,’ commented Teo,
picking his dinner out of his teeth with the aid of a
toothpick. ‘Without the bodies they’ve got no hard
evidence to work with … or should I say mess with.’

‘They know where the bodies are, they’ll only have
to dig a little deeper and —’ As Teo was slowly shaking
his head and sporting that cocky grin of his, Tory
queried, ‘Why no?’
‘Ask Brian, he’s the one who heard the voice.’
All eyes turned to Brian who went bright red.
‘What? So my dead friend spoke to me, big deal! It
happens to my Aunt Rose all the time.’ He clearly did
not want to discuss it.
This was the first sign Brian had ever shown of
clairvoyance, apart from a minor past-life flashback he’d
had when he’d first met Naomi.
‘But, Brian, this is marvellous.’ Tory was excited for
him.
‘I just knew you’d think so.’ In Brian’s opinion it just
meant he was going nuts, like the rest of his family.
‘You spoke to my father?’
Nicholas stepped in to be sure he’d heard correctly,
and Brian couldn’t put him off in the same lighthearted
fashion he had the others. ‘Yeah Nick, I did.’ He took
the lad underarm, and escorted him out of the room to
have a chat.
‘So where are the bodies?’ Tory reverted back to Teo
for an answer.
‘Bloody miles away from where you found them.’ He
dismissed any chance of anyone ever unearthing them.
‘But what if someone saw you?!’ Rhiannon stressed
out. This would just fuel the Agency’s story.
‘It was a lousy day,’ Teo defended. ‘Nobody saw us,
believe me! I couldn’t even see what we were doing half
the time.’

‘What about tracks?’ Tory was still not convinced.
‘We covered our tracks all the way back to the
original grave site.’ He folded his arms, defiantly. ‘So the
ICA can kiss my arse, if they think they’re going to
frame us for this … cause it ain’t going to happen.’
As predicted, nothing came of the allegations made
against Tory, Ray and co. If the Agency hadn’t found
the bodies after two weeks of searching, they weren’t
going to. So, for the crew of the Goddess, life took on a
less stressful tone. They all found plenty to occupy their
time at Watarrka. Some utilised their already developed
talents, whilst others discovered a whole new calling.
With conspiracies surfacing left, right and centre,
Noah barely left his computer. Day and night he
recorded what had unfolded to date, tracing the saga all
the way back to its origins in the Dark Age, though he
and Tory now strongly suspected it could be traced to
the dawn of mankind. Tory had asked Noah why he
bothered wasting his time on something no one could
ever read. He’d smiled and raised an eyebrow. After the
Gathering, which Noah was now fully convinced would
come to pass, those left to nurture the new world would
want to know the truth. And it was his belief that he
was responsible for making sure they got it.
Rhiannon had safely delivered Aunt Rose into the
arms of the alliance, unharmed. Rose thought the
trauma of being forced to leave her long-time home
on the farm in Oxfordshire would prove too much for
her old heart to take. Not loneliness, senility, nor the
elements had been able to drive her out of her cottage.

But when her friends in the spirit-world had advised
Rose it was time to go, she was packed and ready to
leave when her brother’s grand-daughter arrived to
collect her. At nearly eighty years of age, Rose
expected her adjustment to a whole new environment
and way of life to be a long one. Yet when she arrived
at Watarrka’s little community, Rose found paradise in
the cavern of produce. She’d always had a green
thumb, and was thankful to still be able to put it to
good use.
Naomi, whose background was in archaeology and
restoration, had been at a loss as to what use she could
be with the Goddess out of action. At Rhun’s suggestion,
she volunteered her services in the produce laboratories.
A Japanese geneticist and cloning expert, Dr Leigh
Sukemi, and his family headed up the research
department. Like Ray and Floyd, Sukemi was on the run
from the authorities because of his work and the foreseen
government misuse of it. Although the horticultural side
of science didn’t interest Naomi greatly, the animal and
sea-life breeding programs captured her interest at once.
Birthing animals was a far cry from digging relics from
the ground, but when one considered Naomi had been
head of veterinary science back in Atlantis her natural
aptitude in this area was not really so surprising.
Underground, in the desert, one would have
thought those who remained of the Plato Project dive
team would be like fish out of water — this was not the
case, however.
Daniel found a more practical use for his longtime
passion for astronomy when Rhun appointed him their

official stargazer. Daniel slept most of the day, and spent
his nights searching the skies for abnormal activity.
Young Nicholas’ near unnatural obsession with the
Internet increased tenfold after a couple of days in
Floyd’s company. The hacker’s computer had virtualreality capabilities, and was hooked up to the virtualnet of the worldwide web instead of the older
keyboard-accessed network. In this fabulous cyberspace,
a point of your finger would take you anywhere you
wanted to go: to a live concert, with the best seats in
the house, to a lecture or a forum on just about any
subject imaginable. Once you created a cyber-image for
yourself (so you could be distinguished from other
cyberspace dwellers), you could go to a virtual bar to
meet and chat with other cyber junkies from all over
the world — BYO of course. Exploring cyberspace and
helping Floyd plot industrial espionage served to keep
Nick’s mind off the recent death of his parents, while
also providing him with a non-violent means by which
he might avenge their sad fate.
As Teo and Brian were both technically-minded, they
volunteered to assist Ray with the nightmarish chore of
re-routing their vessel’s circuitry — outside of training
hours, that is. For as soon as Tory had re-established a
regular Tae-kwon-do program in the morning, the rest of
the crew had joined her. Teo, who was a Shihan (a nine
times black belt) of the art, handled the instruction,
which came to a close at around midday. Most then
went about working on their other projects, except for
the immortals — they had a further three hours of
training with Rhun. His subjects included telepathy,

psychokinesis, shamanism, clairvoyance, psychic selfdefence and all forms of Otherworldly communication
and appreciation.
Brian was a little wary of these practices at first, but
the female competition served to fuel his ambition.
Already he’d nearly mastered the art of altering his
appearance, and had learnt to project his physical form
over short distances.
As Rhiannon’s forte was definitely telepathy, not
just with humans but animal and plant life as well,
Rhun concentrated on enhancing her ability to read
thoughts without contact with her target. At first she
was only able to communicate with Rhun and her
mother, for they were well practiced in projecting their
thoughts. But soon Rhiannon found she could hear the
unsaid in everyone, though she did not advise her
unsuspecting subjects of this at the time.
As Tory refused to concentrate on any skill that didn’t
relate to contacting Maelgwn, her son had spent several
days assisting her to cleanse her chakras and auric field.
When this empowerment was completed, learning to cast
a decent psychic shield around herself became the next
ability she must master before astral projection could be
attempted. She’d been taught this simple skill before, so
this was really just a refresher course. With all the training
she’d been doing of late, her will was strong and her focus
was excellent. Which is why Tory found it rather odd that
Rhun made her practise this over and over. Even when
she was certain she’d perfected the routine, her son
refused to commence tutoring her in astral travel, and it
occurred to her that perhaps he was stalling.

Days later, when the two of them were taking a wander
along the canyon ridge at sunset, Tory seized the
opportunity to confront Rhun about his rather obvious
reluctance to allow her contact with his father.
The query brought Rhun to an abrupt halt, and
slowly he turned to confess: ‘Actually, that’s why I
coaxed you out here.’
‘Well, I really didn’t think it was for the romance of
it all.’ Tory folded her arms. She just knew she was
being had.
‘Now don’t get angry at me, I’m just the messenger,’
he appealed, before humbling himself a tad. ‘Although I
misconstrued the meaning of one of Father’s requests.’
‘Which one?’ She called his attention back to her,
as his eyes had drifted to admire the view.
He was reluctant to answer, knowing his mother’s
reaction was not going to be favourable. ‘The one that
stated you were to remain hidden. For I have since been
informed father wasn’t just referring to the physical
world, but the etheric world as well.’
‘Come again.’ She frowned, annoyed. ‘Who told you
so?’
Rhun winced, as he was just about to make matters
worse for himself. ‘Cadfan.’
‘The day he came to see Nick?’
Rhun nodded.
‘But that would imply you’ve been leading me up
the garden path for weeks!’
‘I was waiting for you to be at one and at peace
before … before I told you I’d been denied permission
to make good my promise.’

‘Maelgwn refused me an audience?’ It hurt Tory to
think this was the case. Did he no longer pine for her as
she for him? Perhaps he’d spiritually matured since last
they’d met, and was beyond craving the physical love of
another.
‘Only because he fears for your safety,’ Rhun stated,
to prevent her from jumping to conclusions.
‘Rhun, I’m immortal for God’s sake. How can I
possibly be in any danger?’ She wasn’t buying it.
‘In this universe there are hazards still completely
inconceivable to us. So, unless you are the one allknowing God, how can you be so sure?’ He succeeded in
taking away his mother’s feeling of rejection, only to
replace it with fear. ‘I have a message for you,’ he
resolved, on a more cheery note.
Tory shook her head, confused enough already. ‘No
more secondhand reports, thanks all the same.’
‘No, this one you’ll like, I swear!’
Her son’s big brown eyes pleaded for her to hear him
out. ‘Alright.’ She caved in, as any mother would. ‘Let’s
have it?’
‘Um?’ Rhun looked around for a comfortable place
to seat her, and motioned Tory to a rock that would suit.
‘This can’t be as crash hot as you say, if I need to sit
down.’ Still, she complied; anything to get to the
bottom of all this. Rhun came to stand behind her,
placing his hands over her eyes, and before Tory had
even realised it, her breathing had fallen in time with
his. The deep yogic breaths cleared her mind of clutter,
so she forgot even the purpose of the exercise.
Tory.

An image of Maelgwn’s face and the sweet sound of
his voice so clearly resounding in her head startled Tory
from her peaceful trance-like state, and they were forced
to start over.
‘Relax, it’s just like a video recording.’ Rhun settled
her back into position.
‘You could have warned me.’ She drew a deep
breath to open herself to the transference.
Once again Maelgwn’s image emerged from the
blackness behind her eyes. Faint at first, the clarity of
the impression improved until the features of the
visitant were unmistakable. Maelgwn. Tory’s heart leapt
and she nearly lost her focus again. But her beloved’s
expression was so gravely serious, that it captured her
attention.
Tory, I beg thee, under no circumstances art thou to
attempt contact with me. Conditions are most unstable.
To project thy spirit into the Otherworld, be to leave the
body open to invasion. An unfortunate situation hast
arisen that demands my full attention. All will be made
clear upon my return, which I trust will be soon. I long
for our reunion, Tory, as thee must, but please believe me
when I tell thee to keep thy distance from me at this time.
Listen to our son’s guidance, keep thine head, and do not
lose thine heart. He bowed and faded into the recesses
of Tory’s mind.
Her eyes opened to behold the brilliant red sun
melting into the horizon of the wilderness over which it
cast the shadow of night. She looked up to the stars
already twinkling in their thousands above her, trying to
savour every detail of Maelgwn’s image.

‘When the great star burns in the sky, so that two
suns appear,’ Rhun quoted, ‘your reunion with father
will be nigh.’
‘The supernova.’ Tory swung around to a standing
position, recalling the year Rhun had said this would
occur. ‘Two thousand and thirty seven,’ she whined.
‘But that’s another twenty years from now!’ This
realisation knocked the wind out of her sails somewhat
and she sank back on her rock, disheartened.
‘If it makes you feel any better, I too must endure
the same wait to be joined with my one true love.’
‘Bridgit?’ Tory assumed.
‘Aye.’ Rhun smiled as he reminisced upon his wife,
long since departed to the grave. ‘And her “Chosen”
incarnation will go by another name, but I shall
recognise her and she me as surely as day follows night
and night follows day. For we are two integral halves of
the same perfect whole.’
Tory recalled that Taliesin had claimed that the
same was true of Maelgwn and herself. ‘Twenty years
without sex. Now that’s depressing.’
‘Granted.’ Rhun could sympathise on that point.
‘But, then again, it seems a small price to pay in
exchange for an eternity of bliss.’
It did indeed, but there was more to this ‘Gathering’
than just the uniting of lost loves and old comrades.
Who were the Evil Ones who were to do battle with the
Shining Ones and their Chosen? Tory shrugged, not too
worried that the answer eluded her at present. The
truth was buried somewhere and she had two whole
decades to dig it up.

12
THE AFFAIRS OF
GODS AND MEN

H

ere’s a reference.’ Noah captured Tory’s
attention, and read: ‘Even now, many
Antichrists have arisen, from which we gather
certainly that it is the final hour. They went out from us, but
they never belonged to us: for if they had been ours, they
would have remained with us.’
‘Interesting,’ she mused. ‘Where did you find that?’
‘Here, in The Bible. The first general epistle of John,
Chapter 2, paragraph 18.’ He passed it to her across the
large study table, strewn with the histories of the ages.
Noah and Tory spent most of their evenings here,
attempting to learn as much as they could from reported
interaction between the ancient ancestors and mankind.
‘

Tory perused the paragraph Noah had highlighted,
then referred back to the book she was reading on the
beliefs of an old African religion. ‘This foretells how
the Shining Ones will overcome the Evil Ones, and of
the new age that will follow. This clash would be
heralded by a certain star’s appearance in the sky. This
will be testament to the Nommo’s resurrection, who, like
the Christ of the Christian faith, would be sacrificed for
the purification of the universe. He will rise in human
form and descend on the Earth in an ark with the ancestors of
man … sound familiar?’ Tory handed the book over into
Noah’s eagerly awaiting hands.
‘So you think that, all the way through the ages,
man may have been misconstruing these extraterrestrial ancestors for God, angels and so forth?’ He
had to admit he’d read many ancient accounts that
pointed to ET-immortals as the sculptors of life on this
planet; the Lofty Ones who glowed with beams of light.
‘The question is, who or what created them? And
where does Jesus Christ fit into all this? Had he been
one of them?’
‘That last question has driven scholars nuts
throughout the ages, I’m sure. Who am I to say?’ Tory
wasn’t touching that conundrum with a twenty-foot
pole. ‘But the certain star of which they speak is the
binary star Sirius. Which, back in Atlantis, they referred
to as Nibiru, meaning Planet of the Crossing. The theory
goes that the star, Sirius A, is circled by a very small
white dwarf star, Sirius B. But this circling is not an
orbit, for they share the same common centre of gravity.’
She circled her two index fingers around each other to

demonstrate. ‘The two stars constantly revolving around
one another have created a vortex in-between, a
gateway in and out of a parallel universe, through which
the planet, Sirius C, comes and goes into our universe.’
The notion had Noah completely fascinated. ‘How
is that possible?’
‘Reversing a vortex?’ Tory shrugged. ‘An advanced
form of particle manipulation maybe? If these beings
can harden the Earth’s crust, push back the seas and
raise mountains, does inverting a molecular tunnel in
deep space seem any less unlikely?’
‘Knock, knock.’ Ray meandered in through the
open door, looking a little uncomfortable about
interrupting. ‘I was wondering if I might have a private
word.’ He directed the query at Tory, although aware
that this was Noah’s abode.
‘Sure.’ Tory made to rise, but Noah waved her down.
‘No, that’s okay. I was just thinking we need more
tea … I’ll go make us a cup.’ He picked up the empties
and left them to speak.
Hardly anyone had seen Ray since he’d commenced
work on the Goddess; he only paused from the
mammoth task to eat or sleep. ‘So, to what do I owe this
rare visitation … you haven’t hit any snags, have you?’
‘No, no, the Goddess is coming along fine.’ Ray sat
down and rocked backwards and forwards in the chair,
undecided as to how he was going to air his concern.
From the look on his face, Tory could tell he wasn’t
a happy camper. ‘I’m sorry, I haven’t had a chance ask
you how you’re liking it here? I’ve just dumped you
down there with a pile of work and —’

‘That’s not it, Tory.’ He wanted to make that
perfectly clear. ‘This place is heaven for me.’
‘Then why the gloomy demeanour?’
‘I’m not gloomy!’ Ray folded his arms, leant back in
his chair, and laughed. ‘Not at all.’
‘Okay, I give up.’ She raised her brows. ‘What’s
wrong then?’
‘Nothing’s wrong,’ he said firmly. ‘Not with me,
anyway.’ Ray’s frown returned. ‘It’s … your daughter.’
‘Rhiannon isn’t bothering you, is she?’ Tory realised
this question could be taken several ways, but her
inference was neither here nor there.
‘Not as such.’ He stared at the floor, meditative a
second. ‘Look, I know it’s not my place to bring this up,
but, are you aware of the major crush she has on your
son?’
‘Huh! Rhiannon and every other young, unattached
female here.’ But Tory knew Rhun’s interests lay
elsewhere, so as far as she was concerned it wasn’t an
issue. ‘Sounds to me like you’re jealous, Mr Murdock?’
Ray shook his head, disappointed that she could be
so predictable. ‘I just knew you were going to say that.’
‘And I knew you knew, but I said it anyway.’ She
grinned.
‘Well, you’re wrong,’ he impressed on her, smugly
confident that he was right. ‘This is more like … a
genuine fatherly concern.’
Tory could almost see him turning green, but for
reasons of diplomacy refrained from saying so. ‘Look
Ray, the way I see it, Rhun and Rhiannon have twenty
years of catching up to do. It’s only natural that they’d

want to spend a lot of time in each other’s company …
Brian and myself were no different after being separated
for a long time.’
‘Really?’
‘You sound surprised?’
Ray gave a nod and then a shrug. ‘I was an only
child, so I guess I find it hard to relate.’ He raised both
brows and rose, seemingly set at ease. ‘But if you reckon
the situation is normal, hey, who am I to argue? After
all, you’re the girl’s mother — right?’
Ray gave a wave, leaving Tory to ponder the reason
for his abrupt change of heart.
Poor guy … she had to smile. Didn’t he even realise
he was falling in love?
Sunday was still pretty much a day of rest at Watarrka,
and as this particular Sunday was Floyd’s 50th birthday,
‘the gang’ hit the booze and dope fairly hard after lunch
to help him celebrate.
They retired to Floyd’s base in the communications
room, and were all suitably intoxicated when Nick
started discussing the reasons why he and Floyd had not
been able to gain access to private files in Doc
Alexander’s computer. Somehow they had to get the
diplomat’s code key.
‘I could get the information you need,’ Rhiannon
boasted. ‘Couldn’t I?’ She put it to her brother, who was the
only one who knew the full extent of her psychic talent.
‘I’m not so sure that’s such a good idea.’ Rhun was
doubtful. Their mother would freak, yet if anyone could
succeed it was Rhiannon.

‘I could change my appearance.’ She stood to
entertain her all-male audience — Tory was down
visiting her Aunt Rose, and Naomi was in the lab. ‘I
could start by, say … adding ten years.’
To the overwhelming approval of the menfolk, the
girl grew into a voluptuous, shapely woman.
Rhiannon accepted their adoration graciously,
motioning them to refrain as she wasn’t finished. ‘And,
judging from Mr Alexander’s long and esteemed list of
lady friends, it is painfully obvious to me that the
gentleman prefers blondes.’ She turned her back on the
enthralled spectators, so they could witness her long,
black hair turn golden and kink into wavy curls.
‘Whoa ...!’
The men remained moderately hushed as Rhiannon
swung her arms wide. ‘So now, the eyes are all wrong.
Blue would be more the go, I think.’ She turned around
to face them once more, batting her new baby blues.
Much riotous acclaim ensued, and compliments
were forthcoming from all except Ray.
‘What’s the matter? Don’t you approve?’ Rhiannon
squatted down in front of Ray to focus on his mind.
What was he supposed to say? Here he’d been
steering clear of Rhiannon in order to avoid seeing the
likeness of the lovely Annora in the girl. Now here she
was before him and it was too much to take.
‘I’ve got shit to do.’ He rose to leave.
A silence fell over the room, as everyone tried to
figure out his reaction.
In Nick’s view, Rhiannon looked drop-dead gorgeous
as a blonde. ‘Shit, you don’t think he’s gay, do you?’

‘No, I don’t think that’s the problem.’ Rhun saw Sir
Bryce’s wife in his sister, though he would never have
guessed were it not for her game.
‘Not a chance.’ Rhiannon seconded her brother,
smiling broadly, for she had perceived the memories of
Atlantis whirling through Ray’s head.
‘So back to our plan.’ Floyd had a query. ‘How do
you intend to get Doc’s code key?
‘Telepathy, of course.’ Rhiannon was still dwelling
on Ray.
‘Ah …’ Floyd gained her full attention. ‘But you can
only do that by touch, so what’s to stop him from
reading your mind, hey? Stalemate.’ He thought it was
far too risky. If the Agency found out their location,
that would be the game over.
Rhiannon gave half a laugh. ‘Not if I no longer need
to be touching the subject to know their thoughts.’
‘What!’ Everyone objected rather loudly, except for
Rhun, who found their distress rather amusing.
‘That’s right.’ Rhiannon confirmed to their horror.
She stood up. ‘And I want all of you to know, that I
think you’re nothing but a bunch of dirty old men.’ She
resumed her true form in order to pursue Ray, leaving
the party laughing in her wake.
By the time Rhiannon had reached the cavern of pools,
Ray was already hard at work. From beneath the raised
belly of the Goddess dangled a jungle of wires, hanging
in clusters as they awaited re-direction. Rhiannon made
her way between the huge ramps that suspended the
vessel while it was in dry dock, to find Ray at the

farthest end. He was melting a metal compound onto
the tip of his soldering iron and individually joining
each wire of a complicated multicore to another huge
clump of wires that sprouted from the hull of the
bathyscape.
‘Can I be of some assistance?’ she inquired politely
to gain his attention.
Ray paused from his task, though he did not bother
raising his eyes. ‘Nope. The best thing you can do is
leave me be. I need to concentrate.’ He put iron to wire
and continued his soldering.
This made her smile. ‘You, Teo and Brian rave on
while you work. You blast music while watching the
sport on tele! So, why then, should my company prove
such a distraction to you?’
To suppress his annoyance, Ray drew a deep breath
and replaced his tool in its stand. ‘What do you want,
Rhiannon? I’m busy!’ He looked at her, finally, and was
surprised to find she was still quite cheery, despite his
mood.
‘I know why you’ve been avoiding me ever since we
got here. I thought it was because you had designs on
my mother —’
‘That’s exactly right.’ He stood to interject. ‘She
can’t stay in mourning forever.’
‘Oh, man.’ Rhiannon felt for him. How could she
put this so as not to sound condescending. ‘Are you so
out of touch with your own emotions?’
‘God!’ He felt like strangling someone. ‘Do not
presume to tell me what I feel. Bloody women, they’re
always doing that.’

‘Alright.’ Rhiannon allowed that she was out of line
by his reckoning. ‘Then how about you explain to me
where Annora fits in?’ Ray went pale and silent, looking
as though he’d been betrayed. ‘Mother didn’t tell me.’
Rhiannon read his mind and dismissed his assumption.
‘Don’t do that!’ His natural impulse was to step back
from her, but then Ray realised she’d not been touching
him in the first place. ‘Oh no!’
‘I’m afraid so,’ she confessed. ‘I’m at a loss to
prevent it, even if I wanted to.’
‘Well, great!’ He threw his arms in the air, not even
his thoughts were his own any more. ‘I’ve known some
sneaky, underhanded women in my time, but baby …
you take the cake.’
‘Hey.’ Rhiannon could feel his rage brewing, and
was not yet so accomplished in detachment not to be
affected by it. ‘At least I’m not lying to myself.’
‘No!’ He snapped. ‘You just lie to everybody else!
And, for the record, just because I was attracted to you
in one life, doesn’t mean I have to be attracted to you in
this one. Because I assure you, I’m not!’
‘Fine! The feeling’s mutual.’ She was beginning to
wonder what she saw in him anyway. ‘You just keep
having wet dreams about mother and see where it gets
you. There’s much finer than you to be had.’ She turned
to storm away.
‘Oh yeah?’ He wanted to spite her badly. ‘You do
realise incest is against the law?’ He struck a chord.
‘Ohhh!’ Rhiannon grabbed for the nearest object, a
large spanner as chance would have it, and cast it at
him. ‘You have the mind of a sewer rat!’

He ducked and, when the spanner missed, grinned
triumphantly. ‘Hey, baby, the truth hurts.’
‘It will be a cold day in hell before I’m your baby,’
she seethed. ‘Call me that again, and you will truly
know God.’ Her dark eyes stared him down, as she
turned and calmly strutted away.
For several weeks Tory had been attempting to get in
touch with her father, without success. Still, his
evasiveness only served to make her more determined
to find out the truth behind her birthright.
Thus, for the umpteenth time, Tory willed herself
to her father’s cavern of treasures at Dinas Emrys, to
find the place devoid of life. As with every visit she’d
made there of late, she was certain she could sense
Myrddin’s presence. ‘I know you’re here, Dad. You
can’t hide from me forever! Please talk to me … I need
to know who my grandfather was.’ The crackling
sound of the torches mounted on the wall seemed
almost deafening in the silence, and Tory began to
despair. ‘I have the right to know what you’ve all got
planned for me! I grow tired of guessing.’ She slumped
into her father’s favourite throne, knowing he would
not speak. ‘Is there no one to advise me then?’ Tears of
self-pity welled in her eyes; how she missed Taliesin.
Why was he never around when she needed his
counsel most?
To enlighten you would be detrimental to their cause.
Tory lifted her teary sights and was almost blinded
by the lustre of a form that had manifested over one of
the piles of precious relics banked up around the walls

of the cave. This celestial woman, whose flowing robes
left her half naked, was more beautiful to behold than
any starlet of the silver screen, and her speech was
more eloquent than the finest Shakespearean actor.
Milky-white and soft was her skin, like a newborn
babe. Her fair, ash-brown hair fell in long, loose locks,
and her eyes were the colour of sparkling sapphire
jewels.
I shall tell you the truth, little one, she said, to spite them.
For your grandfather killed my love, just as he killed yours.
‘I don’t follow?’ Tory’s heart began to pound in
panic. ‘Do you mean Miles?’
No. There was pity in her voice. It was the chosen
one I saw destroyed. I tried to prevent it —
‘Don’t listen to her, Tory. She lies.’
Myrddin had finally decided to make an
appearance, and Tory had never seen her father so
infuriated.
‘Begone, foul whore.’ His order thundered
throughout the cavern, causing the very walls to
tremble.
I am not the abomination here. Her tone became more
forceful. It is you who offend the mighty Anu, not I. And
now you would keep your own child in the dark, and lead
her to offend her great forefathers as you have done.
‘Father?’ Tory became anxious, unable to take her
eyes from the mesmerising entity who stood opposing
him.
The images you have seen of your husband are merely
that of a clone, the beautiful lady insisted. This was
created to keep you believing that you would be reunited

with him at the Gathering. But this false hope … the Dragon
is dead.
Tory couldn’t stop the tears from cascading down
her face. ‘But why —’ She did not have the chance to
finish her query, as her father’s open hand met with her
cheek and she was thrust to the floor.
‘Do not heed her, I said. Her words are like poison
to the mind.’ He took a stand before the phantasm,
between it and his daughter. ‘And you … evil
enchantress of a thousand names, I bid you leave! Lest
my father send you to join your incestuous husband, in
the darkest depths of creation.’
Your threats don’t intimidate me, nor should they you,
little one. The woman looked to Tory, still cowering on
the floor in shock. I’m not asking you to believe me. I’m
telling you to believe no one. She looked back to the
Merlin with a look a defiance, and vanished into the
pile of treasure from which she’d emerged.
‘Praise the universe.’ Myrddin hurried over to the
spot where the woman had vanished and, digging away
the surrounding artifacts, exposed the ornate golden
device that had been used back in Atlantis to
communicate with Nibiru.
‘The Ark!’ Tory gasped. ‘So this is where it has been
hiding.’
‘And little use it is to us now.’ He placed his hands
upon the shiny, metallic dome that rose up out of a
square golden base. After a few moments of intense
concentration the dome sank into the substructure,
whereby the Merlin replaced the ornate golden lid that
featured two, long, slender cherubs with their wings

outstretched towards each other. ‘They must have
figured out a way to tap into our transmissions. This is
most inconvenient.’
‘Inconvenient! Is that all you’ve got to say?’ Tory
raised herself out of the dirt. ‘Who was that? Why
would she tell me Maelgwn is dead, if he is not?’
‘To confuse you into doing something rash … like
seeking Maelgwn, when he has forbidden you to do so.’
‘But how do I know she’s lying about the clone?
Maelgwn’s message may have been a ploy to stop me
from discovering the truth.’ She backed up, pondering
the possibilities the claim presented.
‘See what a few moments in her presence can do?
She always brings out the worst in people. Here am I —
angered. And you, of all people, are fearful … and of me,
what’s worse!’ Myrddin laughed off their visitor’s cunning
and shook himself, making a strange babbling sound as
he did. When he felt he’d sufficiently rid his being of the
negative vibrations, he smiled at his bemused daughter.
‘I’m sorry I had to strike you … but you were mesmerised.
I had to break the hold she had over you.’
‘Who was she?’ Tory could not part with the fear
that seemed to thrive on his every word. ‘Who was my
grandfather? I want to know where I fit into this little
war you all seem to be having behind my back!’
‘Alright, you’re right.’ Myrddin conceded it was
time. This incident proved Tory could be got at, despite
all their precautions. He took a seat on his throne-like
chair, musing over where to begin. ‘I would hope you’ve
read the ancient scriptures that tell how man’s
evolution was purposely sped up.’

As this was just about all she’d read in the past
month, Tory urged him to skip over that part. ‘Yes, yes …
the great immortal ancestors did this so that man might
serve them, the Nefilim, in their mining ventures that
were based in Africa and the Middle East. The natural
resources of their own planet were depleted and they were
forced to seek their minerals, gold in particular, elsewhere.
Some accounts say it was because they needed it for a
special shield that was being designed to help protect
their atmosphere from radiation. Others claim it held the
key to their immortality.’
‘Splendid.’ He raised his brows, not wanting to get
too far ahead … ‘Now, the cultivation and excavation of
the Earth was placed in the hands of the two sons of
Anu. Enlil, being the first-born, was the commander of
the mining projects here. He was known by the Celts as
Math, the Lord of Abundance. Ea or Enki, the secondborn, was the engineer behind both the Earth’s
cultivation and the development of humankind … The
Egyptian’s called him Ptah, the Creator, and to the Celts
he was Bedi.’
‘Dad, I know all this! Just cut to the chase. Who was
my grandfather?’
Unperturbed by Tory’s impetuous outburst, Myrddin
continued with his full account: ‘You, my dear Tory,
descend from the line of Enki, or Bedi, who was your
great-grandfather and mankind’s foremost advocate at
the God’s council. Mankind was nearly wiped off the
face of the Earth during the great deluge, and if it had
not been for Enki defying the wish of his immortal
colleagues, none of us would be here.’

‘Not true.’ Tory thought she must correct him on
that point. ‘Nin Bau was transported from Atlantis to
the Dark Age before the great deluge, so you’d still be
here … thanks to me.’
Myrddin laughed. ‘I’m glad you brought that up. The
increasing number of unions between the sons of the
Nefilim and the daughters of mankind was the very reason
that Enlil wanted humankind destroyed. For humans had
been deliberately fashioned mortal, so as to die. The last
thing the Nefilim wanted was a whole bunch of half-caste
human-Gods running about. What if we discovered how
to activate the immortal gene passed on to us by our
extra-terrestrial forefathers? Mankind might then threaten
the authority and interstellar rule of the Nefilim. I believe
they felt that, after the deluge, all these discrepancies had
been corrected. The one surviving family were pure-bred
human beings, the clan of Dwyfan, as the Britons called
him, or Noah as he has become known.’
‘The Nefilim hadn’t counted on man learning the
secrets of time travel, hey?’ Tory smiled as she
considered how far they’d come. ‘So the spirit that was
here just now was telling the truth. Our family is an
offence against the Gods?’
‘She twists the truth to suit herself,’ he scoffed.
‘Only some of the Nefilim think thus, not all. They
have been divided over the issue of humankind for as
long as we have been in existence.’
‘So, my grandfather was one of Enki’s sons, but
which one?’ Tory mulled this over, trying to deduce the
answer for herself. As far as she knew Enki had had six
pure-bred Nefilim males.

‘Before I tell you …’ the Merlin interrupted her
contemplation, ‘I want you to know that my father did
not go around randomly raping young Priestesses for his
own personal pleasure. It was all part of a plan devised
by he and his father when they became aware of Enlil’s
growing hatred of the human race. To raise his creation
to demigods, without his brother’s knowledge, was the
only way Enki could conceive of ensuring mankind’s
ultimate survival.’
‘I understand. We’re the good guys.’ Tory motioned
with both her hands for him to be out with it.
‘Not by the Bible’s reckoning. You see, Enki was
the serpent in the Garden of Eden. It was he who
made human’s self-aware. Before this, humankind only
knew enough to follow the orders of their creators.
Humans knew nothing of reproduction, having been
genetically engineered by the Nefilim. As he had yet
to have an original thought, mankind knew nothing of
good and evil; he ate and laboured as an animal. But
Enki knew we possessed the potential to have great
intelligence, and, given some self-respect and
encouragement, we could create, achieve, dream, and
aspire to be every bit as wondrous as our creators …
perhaps even more so! For humankind had a far
greater capacity to love and respect their fellow
creatures … we did once, anyway.’
It was a lovely story, which she had read over and
over. ‘Dad?’ Tory appealed for the one vital piece of
information that eluded her.
‘The name you seek is that of Enki’s first-born,
Marduk,’ Myrddin admitted finally, with a heavy sigh.

Tory gasped, her eyes boggling in their sockets, as
she thought back over her research. ‘Ra,’ she stated, to
be sure she understood correctly.
‘That was the Egyptian name for him, but he has
had many others.’
Tory had to sit down before she fell down. ‘So, who
was the woman who was here just now?’
The question brought a frown to Myrddin’s face, but
he thought it wise to inform Tory of the whore’s
identities. ‘She is the daughter of Enlil’s first son,
Narnar, who also went by the name of Sin. She has had
many names: Irnini, Inanna, Ishtar, Aphrodite, but the
Celts called her Arianrod.’
‘You stole the chariot from her!’ Tory considered it
wasn’t any wonder that the Goddess and the Merlin
didn’t get along.
‘No, no, no, no, no!’ He became disgruntled.
‘Throughout the course of the ages, the story got all
twisted. It was she who stole the chariot from me! For a
short time, anyway.’ Myrddin calmed a little. ‘In my
travels through time, I spent many years in ancient
Egypt during the time of the Pyramid wars. Ashtoreth, as
she was then known, stole my transport. And although
she never discovered its true function was that of a time
machine, she used it to transport herself from one
destination to another. Of course, she didn’t need any
technological assistance to do this. But she took pride in
hovering over many a battlefield in a chariot belonging
to the bastard son of her greatest adversary, Ra.’
As Tory’s mind processed all the information, a few
more pieces of the puzzle slotted into place. ‘So it is

Enki who has been nominating and collecting the
Chosen?’
It made perfect sense. Only recruiting those of his
line due to their immortal potential he looked for
descendants who were born leaders, thinkers and
humanitarians. He would then send an instructor, the
like of Taliesin or Myrddin, to guide the Chosen One’s
spiritual, physical and mental development.
‘Half of these Chosen ascended into heaven to learn
the wonders of space …’ Myrddin filled in the blanks,
‘leaving the other half to protect the Earth and his
precious mankind, until the day of his return.’
‘Great!’ Tory grumbled at her lot. ‘Why does
Maelgwn get all the fun stuff?’
Myrddin shrugged, for he had been given the same
fate as his daughter. ‘He must help contend with
mankind’s enemies in space, as we must deal with our
enemies here on Earth.’
Like Doc Alexander, Tory thought on the quiet; just
how did he fit into all this?
She strongly suspected that he was an incarnate
of Caradoc. Perhaps the last of Maelgwn’s line,
Cadwaladr, who, according to the histories, was utterly
barbaric in temperament and behaviour. He was
hellbent on destroying the entire English population of
Britain, and spared neither woman nor child,
condemning them all to horrible deaths with ruthless
savagery. He also called himself a Christian, so Tory
could only assume this meant Taliesin had not tutored
Cadwaladr as he had those before him. But why? Only
Taliesin knew.

After speaking with her father Tory returned, the base
to research some of the Gods he had mentioned. And
just what had been the cause of the contention between
Inanna and Marduk? The answer lay in the
disappearance of Inanna’s husband, Dumuzi, who was
Marduk’s youngest brother.
Inanna had been rendered infertile by her aunt,
Ninharsag, when she had done her aging relative out of
her place in the Pantheon of Twelve — the great
council of the God’s. In her want for children, Inanna
had persuaded her husband Dumuzi to rape his sister
and then she planned to claim the resulting child as
their own. But rape was considered a most grievous
offense, and it fell to Marduk to punish Dumuzi for his
crime. Marduk stripped Dumuzi of all his kingly
possessions and banished him to the wastelands where
he would ponder his wrongdoing for a time. When
Dumuzi had repented, Marduk planned to allow him to
return to his wife and lands. But Dumuzi mysteriously
vanished during his time in exile, and Inanna accused
Marduk of murdering him. Although Marduk swore he
had done naught but carry out Dumuzi’s sentence, he
was condemned by the Pantheon of Twelve and
banished from their midst.
‘But what did Marduk have to gain by murdering his
brother, of whom the ancient texts claim he was quite
fond?’ Noah queried Tory, after they had studied the
story closely.
Tory shrugged. ‘Well, Inanna was of Enlil’s flock and
therefore opposed to the human race … whereas my
grandfather was of Enki’s line who supported the

advancement of mankind. Maybe that had something
to do with it.’
Noah didn’t seem convinced. ‘But what of Inanna’s
brother, Utu-Shamash? It seems to me that he had more
cause than anyone to despise Dumuzi.’
‘How so?’ Tory queried, most interested to hear.
Noah knew these ancient texts backwards, having had
more time than she to study them.
‘Well, before her marriage to Dumuzi, Inanna and
her twin brother, Shamash, had been rather close … too
close, if you get my drift.’
‘They were lovers?’ Tory queried, sounding daunted
but not surprised.
Noah nodded. ‘Apparently Shamash was rather put
out when she wed Dumuzi. So by getting rid of Dumuzi
and framing Marduk for the crime, Shamash would
have killed two birds with one stone.’
‘Interesting,’ Tory granted. ‘But I am wondering,
how does one murder a God?’
‘Well,’ Noah raised his brows, ‘you can’t. However,
there are several references to Gods being dismembered,
and by separating all their body parts they were
rendered as good as dead.’
The thought made Tory a little uneasy to say the
least. ‘To spend eternity fully conscious, incapacitated
and alone … how completely horrendous! However,’
she thought again, ‘Dumuzi must still be hidden
somewhere on this planet.’
‘One would think so,’ Noah agreed. ‘But the
heartbroken Inanna searched from one end of the Earth
to the other and found no trace of him.’

‘And if my grandfather was falsely accused, you can
guarantee he would have searched for Dumuzi as well.’
Tory sighed, realising that her chances of succeeding
where the God’s had failed were very slim indeed.

13
TO CATCH A THIEF

W

hen Tory learnt of the plan to send her
daughter to obtain Doc’s personal code key
from him, her first reaction was to volunteer
to go in Rhiannon’s stead. But Rhun rejected this idea for
two very good reasons. One, his father had instructed
Tory to stay hidden. And two, Tory lacked the telepathic
knowhow for which Rhiannon had been selected in the
first place. After much argument Tory finally consented,
but she was not about to let her daughter attempt the feat
without a safeguard.
Out came the Stormers that Tory had procured
from Atlantis during her most recent visit there. She
was of the mind to test the stun capabilities on an
immortal. The weapon’s effect on a normal man could
knock him out for up to twenty-four hours — but

someone of an eternal disposition? That was quite
another matter. As an immortal who had no integral
part to play in their current mission, Brian nominated
himself as the guinea pig for their target practice. Rhun
had a large section of the earthen floor in the cavern of
abodes cleared to use as a testing ground for the
handheld weapons.
Floyd, Noah, Teo and Nicholas stood at a distance,
observing Tory demonstrate how the Stormers were
operated.
Brian was taking little notice of what was being said
to him. He was busy mucking about with the laser sword
capability of his weapon, when he swung around and
accidently severed Rhun’s left arm at the elbow.
‘Fair go!’ Rhun looked to his body part, laying in the
dirt at his feet. ‘I was using that.’
Brian, who had never been confronted by such a
scenario before, was unable to see the humour. ‘Jesus,
Rhun … I don’t know what to say.’ The sight of all the
blood gushing from the stump that was once his nephew’s
arm, made Brian’s stomach turn. ‘Will it grow back?’
‘I don’t think it works that way.’ Rhun knelt beside
his amputated portion, and took it up with his
remaining good hand.
Brian joined him, eager to help if he could. ‘Christ,
I feel awful.’ He stared at the lifeless limb, full of
remorse. ‘Take one of mine off … I deserve it.’ Brian
urged his nephew to take the Stormer from him.
But Rhun’s hand was occupied with the dead
remains of his arm, until the defunct member gripped
hold of Brian’s throat. ‘Thanks, man, if you insist.’

Rhun left his severed body part to strangle his uncle,
and took possession of Brian’s weapon to do as he’d
suggested.
‘Aw, shit!’ Brian watched one arm go flying off
yonder, whilst the other struggled to release the fingers
of Rhun’s renegade limb from around his neck. ‘You
complete bastard!’ Brian choked out the words, unable
to believe Rhun had actually done it.
‘I’ll take mine back now, if it’s all the same to you.’
Rhun willed the stray part back to whence it belonged,
and it let go of Brian as it was sucked back to join its
elbow.
‘Thank God,’ uttered Brian as he witnessed Rhun
wiggling the fingers of his reinstated arm, which had
instantly mended as good as new.
As this was threatening to turn into a scene from a
Monty Python film, Tory knocked Brian out with a
blast from her Stormer to put an end to the
shenanigans. ‘Great!’ She scolded her boy who she
considered was acting like one today. ‘Now how am I
supposed to know if it was the effect of the Stormer
that put his lights out, or the shock of being
dismembered?’
‘I’m sorry, I just couldn’t resist.’ Rhun supressed his
amusement, retrieving Brian’s arm and returning it to its
rightful socket on his uncle’s body. He stood up and
tried to appease his mother. ‘Look, why don’t you test it
out on me?’ Both hands upturned, Rhun raised his brow
to invite her response.
A second later, he joined Brian in an unconscious
state.

Around about six hours later Rhun came to, but Brian
did not show signs of life until closer to ten hours had
elapsed. Either way this proved the Stormers did have
some effect on their kind, enough to give Rhiannon
ample time to escape Doc should she be forced into
such a predicament.
All memory of Watarrka would be erased from
Rhiannon’s memory. Rhun claimed this was a simple
hypnotic procedure. He would plant a new identity in
her head, so that not even Rhiannon would doubt the
alias she’d assumed. Her mission would be set foremost
in her mind, but with any luck the proper clothing
would prevent Doc from making skin contact with her.
Even if he did, he would be unable to discern for whom
she was working. This memory wash would also suspend
the recollection of her father’s murder at the hands of
her target, preventing Rhiannon from any action she
might otherwise contemplate upon making Doc’s
acquaintance.
Rhiannon found the notion of having her mind
tampered with in such a manner a little disturbing. But
as Rhun would be close by her every step of the way,
and as he swore he could restore her memory to its
former order within seconds, she agreed to place herself
in her brother’s hands.
Confirmation of Rhiannon’s mission reached Ray
through the grapevine on the day scheduled for the
attempt. He’d not had the chance to apologise for their
little run-in a few days back, and his conscience was
starting to get the better of him.

I didn’t mean to say that I find her unattractive, he
mused as he soldered. She’s just a bit young for me, that’s
all. Then Ray realised he’d joined a whole bunch of
wires to the wrong multicore. ‘Goddamnit!’ He
attempted to rip the mistake apart with his bare hands,
and only partially succeeded, which made him all the
more agitated. ‘I don’t care what I said, or what she
thinks of me! Why should I? It’s not like she can get
killed or anything? I mean, what’s the worst thing that
could happen?’
Visions of Rhiannon being drugged, tortured and
beaten in the same way as he had been made Ray’s
blood run cold and the hairs of his body stand on end.
What if Doc charmed her into doing something against
her will, like he did everybody else?
‘Don’t do this to me, Lord. If I fall for this girl, I’ll
have to stay fallen, and you know I’m not very good at
that.’
He’d often passed his quiet moments thinking about
Tory, but lately her image had been replaced by that of
the beauty who’d made an appearance on Floyd’s
birthday.
‘I can’t hide anything from her.’ He gripped his
forehead with both hands to endure the thought. ‘She
knows what I’m thinking all the time, what I’m feeling!’
Yet, having dwelt on this worry a moment, Ray
considered that such an ability also added a whole new
dimension to the concept of making love.
‘Well, when you put it that way.’ He pondered the
notion with a smile. ‘Oh jeez!’ It dawned on him that
Rhiannon was due to depart for her rendezvous with

destiny. He scampered out from underneath the Goddess
and made haste to Floyd’s quarters on the uppermost
level of the cavern farthest from him.
Halfway up the stairs in the cavern of abodes, Ray
discovered just how unfit he was.
‘Hey, Ray.’ Rhun gave him a slap on the back on his
way past him. ‘You really should come to training … do
yourself a favour.’
Using the iron railing to launch himself, Ray
managed to grab hold of Rhun’s shirt. ‘Has Rhiannon
left yet?’ he inquired between gasps for breath.
‘No,’ Rhun answered. And before he had a chance to
say more, Ray had taken off up the stairs ahead of him.
Typical that he’d pick now to figure out he’s in love with her.
Rhun chuckled, finding it amusing. Best be there, then, to
explain. He gave chase, scaling two stairs at a time.
Practically everyone was gathered in Floyd’s computer
room playing with gadgets and reviewing the details of
the plan.
‘Rhiannon?’ Ray inquired of Nick over the babble.
Nick pointed to the observatory, and Ray was away.
‘Oi, you can’t go in there.’ The protest came too late,
and Nick wasn’t fast enough to beat Ray to the door.
Rhun prevented Nick from continuing the chase
further, motioning him to stay put.
Inside the large, dim chamber Ray’s pace slowed.
The woman of his dreams was seated with Floyd,
listening to last-minute instructions. Ray thought it a
sin, the way she filled the white leather catsuit she
wore. Her outfit was complete with matching boots and

gloves. Her long, fair hair was bound in a loose bun,
leaving long, wispy curls to dance round her face. Dark
sunglasses shrouded her eyes from view, as her red
painted lips sucked on a cigarette.
Hold on. Rhiannon doesn’t smoke?
‘Out.’ Floyd pointed to the door, most annoyed that
he’d been interrupted.
‘I have to speak with her.’ Ray charged forward
determined to do exactly that, but Floyd intercepted.
‘Not now.’
‘Yes, now.’ Ray tried to barge his way through, but
Floyd held him off long enough for Rhun to secure him
in a headlock.
‘Who is this then?’ The golden-haired beauty
dipped her sunglasses to inquire.
‘Sorry?’ Ray stopped struggling against his captor.
‘Rhiannon, it’s me.’
She looked him up and down, seemingly delighted
to make his acquaintance. ‘Well, to my deep regret, you
must have me confused with somebody else.’
Ray was dumbfounded. It wasn’t just Rhiannon’s
looks that had changed. Her whole demeanour
absolutely oozed confidence, money, and sex appeal.
‘What have you done to her?’ His mood darkened as
he turned to Floyd. ‘You’re not sending her to Doc like
that!’ Rhun started dragging him toward the door, and
Ray went kicking and swearing. ‘It’ll be like a lamb to
the slaughter!’
Rhun gave the order that locked the door between
them and the observatory before he let his captive go.
‘Chill out will you … the situation is under control.’

Pulling his shirt into shape and pushing his glasses
back up on his nose, Ray turned around to demand
some answers. ‘Why doesn’t she recognise me?’
Rhun was poised, ready to topple Ray, for he looked
as if he might explode at any second. ‘We found it
necessary to erase certain details of her life from her
conscious memory, so that Doc cannot acquire
knowledge of our whereabouts from her in the same
fashion he located you through my mother.’
‘You sick bastards! You’re no better than the damn
CIA!’
He took a swing at Rhun, but a blast from a Stormer
stunned him and Rhun caught him up before he hit the
floor.
‘Might be best for him to sleep through this.’ Tory
put the weapon down, motioning for Rhun to put Ray
on the sofa.
The vague throbbing sensation in his head was gradually
broken up by muffled echoes of chattering voices. Hazy
shadows formed into people as he dared to open his eyes
into a squint. Where was he? The communications room.
What the hell was he doing here? Rhiannon!
Ray found himself seated bolt upright, eyes wide
open and head swimming from the sudden movement.
Most of the regular gang were gathered around
Floyd’s monitors, while Floyd gave instructions into a
phone. ‘Okay, that’s it. Now replace the crystals, just as
I showed you.’
Everyone was paused, breathless, waiting for
confirmation that the given task had been completed.

‘What’s happening?’ Ray snuck up from behind and
gave everyone quite a fright.
‘Jesus, Ray.’ Tory whacked his shoulder. ‘What are
you doing awake already?’ She knew she should have set
the Stormer on a higher amplitude.
‘Why was I knocked out in the first place?’ He
thought this was a more apt question. ‘Where is she?’
More interested in the welfare of her children than
Ray, Tory hushed him to silence and her eyes returned
to the blank monitor screen.
‘Good lad.’ Floyd gave a sigh of relief, as did
everyone. ‘You should be right to hook up … I’ll advise
when we have audiovisual.’
‘Tory.’ Ray grabbed hold of her wrist and pulled her
aside.
‘Alright, damn it.’ She cursed his persistence in a
whisper. ‘Doc is on a flight from London to Paris.
Rhiannon, who is in first class with him, has a fibre
optics microcamera and a minute high-gain microphone
built into the watch she is wearing. These are
connected to a tiny transmitter hidden in her suit.
Right now, Floyd is speaking with Rhun, who is
concealed in the nose carriage bay directly beneath her,
where the plane’s radio and electronics ranks are
located. By changing the crystals in the planes third
back-up transmitter, he’ll —’
‘Change the frequency of the transmission.’ Ray
comprehended their plan. By doing this, not even the
pilots of the aircraft would realise someone else was
utilising their satellite link-up to communicate. It was
just like using a completely different channel.

A cheer drew Tory back to the monitors, where an
image of Doc had appeared.
‘So, Miss Devereux, what takes you to France?’ His
voice came through as clear as a bell.
‘Business and pleasure,’ Rhiannon informed him.
‘My father asked me to take a look at an estate down
Monaco way, after I visit a friend of mine in Paris who
just got engaged.’
‘He’s found her already.’ Nick was most impressed
that all was going to plan.
‘Like a bee to the honey pot.’ Floyd grinned.
‘Confirm visual and audio feed … sit tight, I’m out.’
Floyd hung up the phone, most annoyed to observe that
Doc already had his laptop out and online. He had
hoped they’d catch Doc punching his code-key into the
computer on film. ‘I sure hope Rhiannon psyched the
code out of him, because we sure as hell missed it.’
After some polite and rather aimless chitchat,
Rhiannon brought the conversation round to his
computer. ‘That is a rather impressive little PC you’ve
got there. I surf the net myself, though I find the
virtual-net far more appealing.’
‘Yes, good!’ Floyd thought her approach subtle
enough to avoid suspicion.
‘I’m very glad to hear you say that, since I own
shares in Cybercom.’ Doc boasted in a shy fashion.
‘Really!’ She sounded most impressed. ‘We must
swap addresses then. Perhaps we could arrange to meet
in cyber-space somewhere?’ She pulled an electronic
notebook from her bag that was the size of a make-up
compact. With the press of a button, it ejected a card

with all her relevant net information on it. Floyd had
arranged this data specifically to suit their purpose.
‘A handy little gadget.’ Doc looked the card over,
breaking into a grin of approval. ‘The Chameleon, hey?’
‘An appropriate handle if I do say so myself.’
Rhiannon jested. ‘I can never decide on the right cyberimage you see, so I just keep changing it.’ Her fingers sat
poised ready to type. ‘So, by what handle do you travel?’
With a look of regret that he was not so wellequipped as she, Doc reached inside his jacket and
produced a card.
‘Oh my god!’ she announced upon viewing it,
overwhelmed and somewhat embarrassed. ‘I knew I
recognised you … you’re Doc Alexander of the
International Crisis Agency.’ She played up her surprise.
‘Please, you must forgive my ignorance, I don’t really
follow politics. But I know you’ve helped a great many
countries in need.’
He waved off her adulation. ‘That’s my job, I —’
‘Sorry to disturb you, sir …’ Doc was interrupted by
one of his associates. ‘The pilot of the plane is asking to
meet you.’
Doc frowned, obviously thinking the request trivial.
‘It won’t take a second.’ His associate insisted rather
adamantly.
Doc stood, closing his laptop and placing it in his
vacated seat. ‘Excuse I.’ He headed off towards the
cockpit.
His associate retrieved the laptop to take it with
them. ‘Madam.’ He nodded to her and followed his
patron up the aisle.

This disturbed Floyd, hence he hit speed dial on the
phone to speak with Rhun. ‘They’re onto us.’ He hung up.
‘Now what!’ Ray began to panic as they lost visuals.
Floyd shrugged. ‘We wait.’
Upon entering the compartment that separated firstclass from the cockpit, Doc confronted his security team
that was stationed there. ‘This had better be good.’
His righthand man, Stanley Brennon, closed the
door and handed Doc his computer. ‘Our scanner tells
us that your lady friend is wearing a transmitter.’
‘Don’t be ridiculous! Where the hell do you think
she’s hiding it? They don’t make transmitters that
small.’
‘It’s been switched off,’ the man behind the scanner
advised.
‘Did you get a chance to track the transmission?’
Stan moved to view the screen for himself, but the man
shook his head in the negative.
‘I told you to hold off.’
Stan looked to Doc. ‘Well, I thought we’d best
advise our illustrious leader before he gave too much
away.’
Doc was pacing now. ‘It’s impossible! How could she
get through airport security?’ But no sooner had he
asked the question than the thought of Tory popping in
and out of ICA headquarters came to mind. ‘Shit!’ He
was annoyed he’d already handed his net information
over to her. What did she want with it? ‘Hold on,’ he
advised, cooling his temper dramatically. ‘This can be
twisted to our advantage.’

‘Do you want us to pick her up at the airport for
questioning?’ Stan wasn’t sure he followed what his boss
was on about.
‘No. But I want pictures of her, before she gets off
the plane.’ Doc closed his eyes to cast a psychic shield
around himself, and his men fell silent.
Whenever their superior found himself in a
precarious situation, he always paused thus for several
minutes. His men had always assumed he was praying.
With a clap, Doc spurred himself to action. ‘Wish
me luck, boys … I’m going to make a date.’
The diplomat returned to his seat to find his charming
spy had vanished. Fickle little minx. He spied her on the
far side of the cabin speaking with another man. When
Doc caught her eye, she waved him over.
‘My friend’s fiance.’ She motioned to the young man
beside her, all excited by the happy coincidence.
‘Imagine that.’ Doc shook the young man’s hand,
noting that he wore leather gloves that ruled out the
possibility of skin contact.
Seeking another’s company was a clever move on
her behalf, as it prevented him from getting too close to
her.
Must not dwell on such matters now.
If she came from the Goddess or was indeed the
Goddess herself, she was almost certainly more
proficient at the psychic arts than he. No thought of
what he suspected must enter his mind whilst in her
company. Only when he could be sure his thoughts were
his own would he ponder the events of this day.

Hours later Rhun returned to base, carrying his sister in
his arms.
‘What went wrong?’ Ray went to retrieve Rhiannon
from the boy-wonder, wanting to punch Rhun’s lights
out for escorting her into such a precarious situation in
the first place.
‘Nothing went wrong!’ Rhun sidestepped the crazed
engineer, placing his bundle on the sofa. ‘As promised, I
returned her to her senses before we left the airport … a
bad move. As soon as she realised what she’d done, she
fainted.’
‘Did she get the code-key?’ Floyd wanted to know;
the whole success of their mission depended on it.
‘Is that all you’re worried about?’ Ray turned to have
a go at Floyd instead.
‘Ray!’ Tory grabbed hold of his collar and guided him
to a seat. ‘Mellow. Everybody else, out.’ She ushered
them towards the door. ‘You, too.’ She pulled her son
away from Rhiannon.
‘Aren’t you staying?’ Ray became anxious as he
watched Tory follow Rhun toward the door.
‘It’s okay. Rhiannon will remember everything when
she wakes.’
Still, Ray found it rather disconserting that Tory
should grant him special consideration in this case.
‘Why do I get to stay?’
‘You said you had something to say to her, so say it.’
Tory sealed the door on the way out.
Great going. Now everybody suspects what you’re not
even sure about yourself. Ray raised his bones and neared
the girl on whose behalf he’d been acting like a

complete whacko all day. Dark eyes, dark hair, young and
halfway innocent. Ray considered that, in retrospect, this
was how he preferred her.
‘Rhun, is that you?’ She stirred.
‘No, should I run and fetch him for you?’ Ray
thought this was the perfect way out of this situation, as
Rhiannon would surely be wondering why he alone was
there to greet her.
A vague image of Ray storming the observatory
made Rhiannon smile, and she grabbed his arm to
prevent him going anywhere. ‘Not so fast.’ She pulled
him down to squat beside her. ‘Are we alone?’
Although he knew damn well they were, he cast his
eyes around the room to forestall the inevitable.
Confessing he desired her was easy. It was admitting
she’d been right that really hurt. ‘Yep … we are
definitely alone,’ Ray confirmed, just knowing the next
question would be why?
Rhiannon raised herself to a seated position and
slid a hand inside the collar of his shirt. ‘I know why?’
she whispered, urging him to a kiss he had no wish to
avoid.
Although Ray had not expected this, he was
grateful she’d found a way to cut through all the bullshit
to get straight to the heart of the matter.
‘You’re welcome.’ She melted to a smile as their lips
parted. Ray went to speak, but her hand covered his
mouth. ‘No. Don’t say anything.’
‘Well, you —’
‘No,’ she insisted. ‘You don’t have to explain,
apologise, retaliate, object —’

Ray rolled his eyes and kissed her again, so that he
might have a chance to convey that he felt exactly the
same way. He didn’t want to discuss the issue any more
than she did.
‘Enough said then.’ She spread her legs and slid into
his lap. ‘When and where?’
Her frankness took Ray a little off guard, although
he couldn’t begin to fathom why? Any other woman
and he would have had her flat on her back and half
naked by this time. God. He couldn’t think, knowing
she’d be following his reasoning.
‘It’s mother, isn’t it?’
‘Is it?’ He hadn’t considered that.
Rhiannon nodded. ‘You bet her one hundred dollars
that you’d get her into bed before you fell for anybody else?’
After a second’s thought, Ray laughed. ‘You’re right,
you know. That’s exactly it.’ He laughed again, then
abruptly stopped. ‘Was it really a hundred bucks?’
‘A small price to pay.’ Her lips did a slow dance
around his mouth, along his jaw, and down his neck.
‘The question is …’ She sucked his earlobe in
anticipation. ‘When?’
‘Now is good?’ What the hell, he figured, they were
already in the mood.
‘No, now’s no good,’ she contradicted.
‘Now’s no good?’ He couldn’t see why.
‘Company,’ she explained in a word.
Before the shock of the announcement had even
sunk in, Ray had them up and standing at attention.
‘Asap, my place,’ he proposed, as the door vanished and
the room filled with people.

Ray left Rhiannon to impart the details of her mission
to the others, deciding that perhaps he’d better grab a
shower as he’d not had one in days.
Rhiannon handed the info-card she’d managed to
scam out of Doc over to Floyd. It seemed Mr Alexander
had a rather appropriate handle also, as he travelled
cyber-space under the assumed identity of the Dragon
Slayer. ‘We arranged to meet in a VRN bar called the
Cauldron?’ She shrugged as she referred Floyd to the
address she’d typed into her notebook, which like all
web-site addresses was a jumble of seemingly random
digits.
‘I know that place.’ The hacker bit his lip, recalling
conversations he’d had there. ‘I’ve even spoken with
the son-of-a-bitch!’ His attention returned to
Rhiannon, with a look of desperation on his face. ‘But
the code-key, did you get it?’
With a cocky grin Rhiannon advised. ‘A, R, W, Y,
S, T, L, I, break, twenty-six, dash, thirteen, dash, fivenineteen, stop.’
Tory was watching over Floyd’s shoulder as he
scribbled it down: Arwystli 26–13–519. ‘Oh shit, I don’t
believe it.’ She grabbed up the piece of paper, staring
intensely at the information. ‘It’s a date.’
‘How can it be a date?’ Teo stepped in to calm her
down. ‘Look, thirteen … there’s no thirteenth month in
the year.’
‘Ah!’ Noah politely intervened. ‘But in the year five
nineteen, there was a thirteenth month by the Celtic
calendar … Ruis, if memory serves. Yet the twenty-sixth
day is not really part of that month, it being one of the

five dark days, which stood apart from the rest of the
calendar.’
‘Sorrowing, they called it. The dead of the year,
when time stood still.’ Tory faltered, entranced and
horrified as she recalled the events of that particular
year. ‘This date was the day before I died, physically,
that’s why I recall it so well.’ She looked to Noah, who
now knew her story better than anyone. ‘Caradoc died
on this day.’
‘Father’s bastard brother! Who killed my
grandfather whilst trying to steal Gwynedd from
beneath us?’ Rhun found this an interesting twist. ‘You
think Cadwaladr is a reincarnation of him, don’t you?’
This was almost an accusation, as she’d not mentioned
this theory to him.
‘Who’s Cadwaladr again?’ Brian wasn’t following.
‘My great-great-great-grandson.’ Tory jogged his
memory, as they had discussed this before.
‘The one we suspect might be Doc,’ Noah added to
further clarify the situation.
‘Well, it makes little difference.’ Floyd thought he’d
bring everyone’s attention back to the events of the
present. ‘Because, if Doc hasn’t thrown us a bum steer —’
‘Oh, I don’t believe he was onto us,’ Rhiannon
advised. ‘Or, at least, he wasn’t suspicious in my
presence. Although he was quite browned off when
Rhun turned up.’
‘Good.’ Floyd retrieved the code from Tory to
admire and relish it. ‘Then by this time tomorrow no
matter who the prick really is, we’re going to know him
fairly well, I’d say.’

‘And you’re sure he won’t be able to trace your line
back to the ranger station at Watarrka?’ Tory, who was
no computer whiz to be sure, thought that what Floyd
had in mind seemed risky.
‘There are ways and means.’ Floyd grinned. He
would have to go through many computers before he
could attempt the break-in, but he would see to it that
the base was protected. ‘Just leave it to me.’
It was Floyd’s turn to usher everyone out of his
room, except for his prodigy. Nicholas was in for an allnight session — brainstorming the downfall of the
Agency, smoking dope, and key crunching with Floyd
was Nick’s idea of the perfect Saturday night.
In the wee hours, trying to research became a complete
farce. No matter how hard Tory tried to concentrate, the
intense sexual ecstasy her daughter was feeling proved
too great a distraction — even from three caverns away!
Seeing no other way to avoid the event, Tory took a seat
on her bed to renew the psychic shield around herself.
Even when she’d done this, the sensation of love lingered,
along with memories of Maelgwn. She wondered about
the unfortunate situation mentioned in his message —
if, indeed, the message had truly been from him.
‘Did the Earth move for you, too?’ Rhun entered,
unannounced. He could do this, as his voice overrode
all the cavern’s vocally-activated systems.
‘You felt it too, huh?’ Tory smiled at their
predicament.
Rhun grinned, dropping himself down beside her. ‘I
don’t suppose we can ask them to keep it down.’ Rhun

nudged his mother’s shoulder in fun and so picked up on
her plan to make contact with his father. ‘No, you must
not. It’s absolutely out of the question! Forget what
Inanna told you. She’s a lying whore.’
‘I wish I could. But every time I close my eyes, I
see macabre visions of Maelgwn being tortured to
death.’
‘It’s just your subconscious playing tricks on you,’
Rhun insisted. ‘I assure you, Father is very much alive.’
‘But how could you tell the difference between your
father and an exact clone of him?’
Although Rhun denied the claim, he understood
her reservations. ‘Fair enough. How do you expect to
know the difference?’
‘I don’t know, but I have to try. There are extra
precautions I can take when travelling in an astral form,
just as you and Maelgwn did during inauguration.’
‘And how do you know that, when the inauguration
of Kings is strictly forbidden to those of your gender?’
Rhun stood, agitated by her lack of respect for an ageold tradition. ‘You were spying on me the whole time,
not just during my quest.’
Tory sucked in her cheeks, playing innocent, her
eyes looking anywhere but at him.
‘Then you should also know I have an Otherworld
affiliate. A dragon, who guarded the gateway and my
physical form, whilst my spirit wandered through its
realms.’
‘I, too, have such a guardian,’ she informed him
stubbornly.
‘Rubbish!’ He objected. ‘Who sent it to you?’

‘I don’t really know.’ Tory mused on the possibilities.
‘I think it came of its own accord.’
Rhun thought it highly peculiar that any
Otherworldly creature would assist someone of the
middle kingdoms without being obliged by some higher
force to do so. ‘Look, I really don’t think it works that
way. What manner of beast is it?
‘Take me to the strongest ley crossing around here,
and I’ll introduce you,’ she teased.
‘You’re not serious. Not now! What if something
goes wrong? Think about the mission tomorrow.’ The
safety of their whole community was at risk, Rhun felt
they both had to be functioning at one hundred per
cent.
‘What do you take me for? Of course not.’ Tory
raised herself to give him a shove, and Rhun smiled at
underestimating her. ‘We shall wait for the full moon.’
By mid-afternoon the conspirators had gathered in
Floyd’s headquarters, eager to see the hacker’s handiwork.
The plan was that Rhiannon would meet Doc at the
VRN bar as previously arranged, which ensured that
Doc’s computer was online. Whilst she was keeping Mr
Alexander visually preoccupied, Floyd would hack into
Doc’s computer using the password they’d procured.
Once they had access to their subject’s hard-drive, they
required a five minute window per fifty gigabytes of
information to download; chances were, Doc would
catch them in the act and run a trace. Anticipating
this, Floyd went via several different websites and a
couple of satellites to place the call. So that, even if

they were caught copying files, it would take Doc longer
to trace them than it would for them to retrieve the
information they sought.
Ray and Rhiannon were the last to show for duty,
and although neither of them were playing up the fact
they’d been shagging all night Rhun couldn’t resist
having a dig. ‘Sleep well, did we?’
Rhiannon gave him a sideways glance, choosing to
ignore his inference. ‘Very well, thank you.’
‘Well, aren’t you the lucky one then. I was tossing
and turning all night.’ Rhun smiled slyly.
It took a moment for their psychic link to occur to
her, but when it had, Rhainnon looked from her brother
to her mother. ‘No.’ When Tory nodded to confirm,
Rhiannon suppressed a laugh and covered her face to
hide her embarrassment.
‘What are you saying? That …’ Ray’s ego was
smiling as he motioned between Rhiannon and himself,
though his mind found their scenario decidedly weird.
‘I warned you, Ray.’ Tory jogged his memory. ‘There
are no secrets between my children and myself.’
‘Wonderful.’ Ray was unsure of whether to be
annoyed or not. It bothered him to think that another
man could experience their extracurricular activities
through his lover. Yet, when he considered that Tory
had also perceived the act, the smile returned to his
face. ‘Well, then, it would seem you owe me a hundred
bucks,’ he put to Tory.
‘How do you figure?’
Ray held up both his hands, as if appealing to her
sense of justice. ‘You play, you pay.’

Tory found his reasoning amusing. ‘We’ll call it
even, shall we?’
Ray was about to contest her ruling, when Floyd
interrupted. ‘All right, people, let’s rock’n’roll.’ He
clapped his hands together to get them all to their
stations.
A slinky lizard woman who changed colour every
couple of minutes was the guise under which Rhiannon
would travel cyberspace. She’d already learnt how to
direct herself around inside the net, and how to utilize a
virtual keyboard to communicate with the inhabitants
of the VR world. She could also use a direct voice link,
but as they didn’t want Doc overhearing what was
transpiring around Rhiannon, typed dialogue was the
preferred option. Nick had linked a voice sample of
Rhiannon’s to the VR keyboard, which would make it
practically impossible for anyone on the net to know
the difference. After positioning the VR unit on her
head and slipping the gloves onto her hands, Floyd
explained how, by pointing to a tiny symbol to
Rhiannon’s lower left, she could make her chameleon
image blend into her surroundings until she was near
transparent.
‘Nice touch.’ Rhiannon greatly approved. Now she
could really toy with Alexander. This was going to be
fun.
The credit for the chameleon creation went to Nick,
who’d spent the entire night making the cyber-image as
impressive as possible. He was seated directly beside
Rhiannon to follow her movements through cyberspace
on one monitor while keeping an eye on the phone-link

that Floyd had graphed out on another. If Doc started
running a trace, Nick could follow his progress.
Floyd was seated behind another terminal,
limbering up his fingers. It was going to get very hairy in
here in the next ten minutes or so, and he only had one
crack at this. By tomorrow, Doc would have an entirely
new code-key and website address. ‘Well, Rhiannon,
you can shoot through any time you’re ready.’
Nick typed frantically on his keypad. ‘Sending a
message to Doc’s e-mail and pager.’ With one final
keystroke, he gave Rhiannon a nudge for good luck. ‘Go
get him, tiger … or should I say, lizard.’
The virtual-world was ablaze with brilliant colour, the
circuits and cities reflecting the bizarre creative genius
of its contributors and patriots. Each website was akin
to a town with its own tourist information office
advising
what
services,
recreation,
games,
entertainment, and so on, were to be found there. Some
of these sites had the appearance of sparkling celestial
palaces, others looked like Gothic hellholes, or
futuristic space stations. They could also be
breathtaking landscapes with terrain that was
completely true to life — or, alternatively, completely
alien. Yet every single one of these individual worlds
had thousands of places or rooms to explore, and
millions of people and bizarre images to meet.
Rhiannon would not be swayed from her course
today. She was headed for a website in England and
upon punching the address into her VR keyboard she
was sucked into the technicolour circuits and shot forth

to her destination. On arrival she could have chosen to
cruise around the website and explore, but Rhiannon
was not here for the scenic tour. A simple request at
Tourist Information landed her in front of the Cauldron
Club. As there was no handle on the door, she used the
gargoyle knocker. A small panel slid aside and two
glowing-green eyes peered out of the dwelling at her.
‘What’s your business?’ said a voice of doom.
‘I’m meeting the Dragon Slayer here,’ she replied.
‘What’s the password?’
‘Password?’ Rhiannon questioned out loud, hoping
Floyd would know.
‘Just swear at him,’ the hacker urged.
‘Up yours arsehole.’
‘Close enough,’ declared the ghoulish bouncer, and
the door vanished.
Rhiannon went into camouflage mode as she moved
down the long dark staircase.
My, but they had some wild-looking characters
down here. The dingy interior and atmosphere of the
place made most horror flicks look like nursery rhymes.
The walls oozed luminous green slime while the doors
bled all over the floor. There was one creature in a
corner whose head kept exploding with graphic detail,
before reforming to repeat the exercise. Mutants of all
shapes and sizes frequented the pool tables and video
games. Others cheered creatures doing battle in a pit,
placing their bets at the bar.
All in all, it was a very lively place. The goings-on
had Rhiannon so spellbound that she was startled by
the sensors in her right glove telling her someone had

taken hold of her hand. Turning her head she spied a
huge, dark gladiator.
Tory, who was viewing the monitors over Nick’s
shoulder, gasped, ‘It’s Caradoc!’
‘It’s only a cyber-image for Pete’s sake,’ Teo scoffed.
‘A bloody good one, too,’ she agreed.
Rhiannon, seeing no further use for her camouflage,
switched it off and allowed the large warrior to kiss her
hand.
‘Miss Chameleon, how lovely you look.’ Doc’s
chosen guise winked at her.
‘Why DS …’ She pressed a button on her VR
keyboard and the ornately-spiked collar of her character
rose up to frame the Chameleon’s face — as a frillnecked lizard might when confronted unawares. ‘I’m so
glad you could make it.’
‘I wouldn’t have missed it for the world.’ The
Dragon Slayer motioned her towards a vacated booth.
‘Shall we?’
‘Floyd!’ Tory demanded an update.
‘I’m on it,’ he assured her.
As the receiver’s PC was online, Floyd requested
to log-on. The code proved to be correct, and thus
Floyd found himself staring at Doc Alexander’s personal
files — a wealth of information, to be sure.
‘We’re in,’ he told everyone, chuckling as he
perused the titles at his disposal. Now what would we like
to know about? Fusion? Yes, indeed. The Space program,

certainly. AIDS research … could be interesting. The US
senate and agencies. ‘Shit yeah!’ Floyd selected all of the
above folders, and then a few, mindful of the transfer
time. ‘Downloading now.’
As the files began to appear on Floyd’s screen he
opened a couple, only to find they were encrypted.
‘Jesus! What the fuck is this?!’ Floyd, who prided
himself on his code-breaking skills, didn’t recognise the
code, or in this case, the language.
‘It’s Brythanic.’ Rhun did know and began to
scribble down a translation on a piece of paper.
Nick was hesitant to add to their woes at present,
but they had to know. ‘Doc’s started a trace.’
‘This is bullshit!’ Floyd decided, reading the memo
Rhun had translated. ‘Are you sure you’re reading this
right? The file is called “Fusion”. This is a recipe for
some sort of casserole!’
‘What if Doc’s been wise to us all along?’ Rhun put
forward. ‘He could be keeping us entertained with bogus
files long enough for him to locate us.’
‘Then, to ensure we didn’t find any files he didn’t
want us to,’ Ray theorised, ‘he’s probably stored his real
files on a removable optical hard-drive. His computer is
equipped with one.’
‘Ah!’ Floyd grabbed up a blank cartridge, and
started waving it at Rhun. ‘Take this, and teleport
yourself to Doc. He’ll have one just like it placed on the
desk right beside him. It holds a hundred gig’s of info, so
chances are there will only be one. In the VR unit he’ll
be oblivious to the room around him, so, as long as
you’re quiet, he won’t even know you’ve been there.

Go!’ Floyd shoved the cartridge into Rhun’s hands, and
watched him vanish.
‘He’s halfway home.’ Still following the trace, Nick
was starting to panic. ‘And it’s only taken him two
minutes.’
‘Well, hang up if the information is of no use to us.’
Tory couldn’t understand why Floyd would persist.
‘When Rhun returns.’ He seemed very calm about it
all. ‘A minute is all he’ll need.’
Rhun decided that the huge office in which he found
himself was of impeccable decor.
The diplomat was seated behind his desk,
obviously preoccupied with Rhiannon. Opposite him
sat another man, also wearing VR gear, who was most
likely running the trace for him. By the window was a
third party, gazing outside as he chatted on his
moblie-phone.
Duck, Rhun warned himself and narrowly escaped
being spotted, as the man by the window turned and
glanced around the room.
Once his opposition returned to looking outside,
Rhun raised himself and spotted his objective. The
cartridge was just where Floyd had said it would be. So,
keeping low, Rhun rounded the desk to where Doc
resided, and silently executed the swap.
Sweat beads were forming on Nick’s brow; Doc was all
but two links away from locating them. ‘Boss ...?’ He
made a desperate appeal to Tory as Floyd seemed
determined to hold out.

‘Floyd, shut it off! Rhun can take care of himself.’
The hacker sat playing with his bottom lip, as if she
hadn’t spoke at all, so Tory got rather irate. ‘You’re
playing Russian roulette with other people’s lives!
Maybe they won’t find us, but think of Pete and the
other rangers. They’ll have to answer to the ICA.’
‘Rhun!’ Ray was actually glad to see him, though as
they were a little pushed for time he grabbed hold of
their ‘agent’ to shake the result of his mission out of
him. ‘How did you go? Did you get it?’
When Rhun smiled, holding up the cartridge in
question, Tory made for Floyd’s terminal. ‘Good. Then
shut down.’
‘Too late.’ Nick’s eyes filled with dread. ‘He’s pinned us.’
‘Why are you smiling?’ Rhiannon inquired of her large,
muscle-bound cyber-companion.
‘I just got some rather good news,’ he said.
‘Am I so boring that you would read your mail
whilst in my company?’ The Shift and F-key on her
keyboard changed the Chameleon’s facial expression to
a frown.
‘Never.’ He reached across the table to place his
hand on hers. ‘You are the crown jewel of my company.
Believe me, only a matter of top international security
would drag me from your midst —’ But before he’d even
finished begging his leave, the lizard-babe vanished.
Ah well. Doc removed the VR unit from his head.
‘We’ll meet again. And sooner than one might think.’
He smiled. ‘Where are they, Eddie?’ He asked the man
responsible for the trace.

Eddie raised his gear from his face. ‘The mountains,
in Vermont.’
‘I want Agency men there ten minutes ago.’ Doc
looked to Stanley Brennon as he folded up his mobilephone and placed it in his pocket.
‘It is done.’ Stanley advised.
Despite the fact that everyone was screaming and yelling
at him, Floyd couldn’t seem to contain his amusement.
‘I don’t see what’s so funny.’ Brian was on the verge
of knocking his block off, they couldn’t afford to run the
risk of being found with the Goddess in dry dock.
‘Doc hasn’t found us.’ Floyd gasped for breath, trying
to calm down enough to explain. ‘I broke into
Cybercom last night, and switched our number and
address with several others.’ The aging computer whiz
removed his glasses to wipe the tears from his eyes, but
found himself unable to refrain from collapsing into
another flight of hysterics.
His amusement roused a smile from Tory. ‘So then,
who is Doc raiding at present?’
Floyd had to hold his breath to force the punchline
out. ‘President Langford’s private country abode.’
The rest of the gang, envisioning the scene Floyd’s
ploy was going to create, couldn’t help but laugh along.
‘And do you know what’s even better?’ Floyd put to
his company, who couldn’t imagine anything better …
‘This afternoon’s spot of industrial espionage has all
been charged to Langford’s bill!’

14
TJUKUBA — THE
DREAMING

T

here was much cause for celebration at Watarrka
that night. After decoding one of the many
documents that were stored on the hard-drive
Rhun had appropriated from Doc, Floyd decreed the
information to be valid. Nick and he would start
decoding the rest of the data at once, and provided they
didn’t hit any snags Floyd would be able to present
everyone with a full report in a week or so.
In the midst of the revelry, Rhun watched Teo
laughing and dancing with his mother. Her Sensei’s
obvious adoration was a worry. Perhaps the contact she
meant to make with his father was more important
than Rhun had first realised. Tory still held feelings for

the man in whose arms she was entwined, and
Rhun sensed her deep yearning to be assured that
she wasn’t deluding herself in believing her true love
lived. Hence, Rhun’s decision to help her became
more resolute. He must create the same protective
conditions the Druids did at the inauguration of Kings,
for only then could he rest assured that his mother’s
body and spirit would be properly safeguarded
throughout their separation. Perhaps this was being
overly paranoid, but better that than facing his father’s
wrath for carelessness.
According to the code of practice of the ancient
rite, a sorcerer was the first requirement. Myrddin was
out, as he would not support Tory contacting Maelgwn
against his specific instructions. Taliesin? Well, only the
Goddess knew where he was at present. Cadfan,
although he was a fine healer, was not a sorcerer by any
stretch of the imagination. It seemed clear to Rhun that
it was time to seek the assistance of the local medicine
men, those known by the Aboriginal people as the
Mekigar, for they were intimate with this adopted
homeland of his. As in any native cultural and religious
system, the metaphysical topography within the land
could be utilised by those who understood it and dared
to open themselves to its mysteries.
Early the next morning Tory was peacefully snoozing off
the excesses of the night before, when Rhun entered
her abode to rouse her to action.
‘Mother, come quickly.’ He took hold of her hand to
urge her along. ‘You’re not going to believe this.’

‘Believe what?’ she beseeched him, as she was
hauled out into the earthen walkway and hurried up the
stairs that led to Floyd’s communications room.
‘Rhun?’ She halted just short of their destination,
puzzled by the hurry her son was in.
‘Please.’ He urged her to keep going. ‘Sometimes a
picture is worth a thousands words.’
With a deep breath, Tory folded her arms and
decided to humour him. She strolled into the
communications room, glancing around for the amazing
image Rhun spoke of, and it didn’t take her long to find
it. Floyd was not at his usual station. He was seated on
the sofa, speaking with an old friend of hers. ‘Jenny?’
Tory mumbled, thinking that she must have been
viewing a ghost.
‘Tory!’ Jennifer was overjoyed to see a familiar face
and rushed to embrace her.
Upon making contact with a physical form, the
shock passed quickly and Tory hugged her for all she
was worth. ‘Jen, Jen, just look at you!’ Tears streamed
from her eyes as she pulled back to look over her
once-deceased friend. Jenny was young again, and
definitely alive. All signs of age were gone, her skin
was free of wrinkles and her blue-green eyes sparkled
brightly. Jenny’s hair hung in thick masses of long
blonde curls, just as it had when Tory first met her.
‘How can this be?’ Tory gave half a laugh, amazed.
‘How did you find us?’
Jenny wiped her cheeks in an attempt to stop crying,
smiling as she realised that Tory also appeared to have
shed twenty years. ‘I was hoping you could tell me.’

‘She showed up at the ranger station this morning,
asking about you.’ Rhun attempted to clear up some of
the confusion.
‘But how did you get there?’ Tory led her back to the
lounge.
‘She doesn’t seem to remember.’ Floyd was obviously
disturbed by the fact. Although he was pleased that his
prodigy was not an orphan any longer, Jennifer’s
presence was as suspicious as it was unbelievable.
‘I know it sounds ridiculous …’ Jennifer appealed to
Floyd, as she was again seated, ‘but after the ordeal with
the Agency …’ she paused, recalling the look on her
husband’s face when they realised the end had come,
‘the next thing I remember I was walking down the road
towards the ranger station.’
Tory looked at the clothes Jenny wore, which were
not the same ones she’d been buried in.
Jenny slowly shook her head with an apologetic
look on her face. ‘I wish I could tell you,’ she answered
before Tory had even asked.
‘Well, what’s on the agenda for today?’ Nick rubbed
his hands together as he reported for duty. Then he
spotted the woman. He almost didn’t recognise his
mother, as she was so young and beautiful.
‘It’s alright.’ She held out her hands to him, too
emotional to even raise herself.
As Nick rushed to hold her, Tory, Rhun and Floyd
let them be awhile.
Jenny was far too shaken to discuss her resurrection
at present. Perhaps given a little time she might
remember something that would help explain it.

Clearly, she was immortal, yet the crucial gene had not
been active at the time of her death. This seemed to
suggest that someone had dug the poor woman from her
grave a second time, and then activated the gene. But
alas, this was only a theory. There were other
possibilities that were even less pleasant, like a clone or
an impostor, for instance.
‘There’s only one way to know for sure.’ She knew
Brian wouldn’t be too pleased by her reckoning, for part
of the answer lay buried in an unmarked grave in
Sherwood forest.
It was yet another beautiful rainy day in England, which
didn’t aid their task any. The wind whipped through the
trees overhead, creating a rather sombre atmosphere by
which to work, and although Tory figured it was just the
setting that was making her feel ill-at-ease, she couldn’t
escape the feeling that they were being watched.
‘This is sick,’ Brian grumbled, as he and Tory began
to dig.
‘True.’ Tory wasn’t thrilled about it either. ‘If you
have another solution I’d be more than glad to take it
on board.’
‘No.’ He resentfully got stuck in to be done with it.
They worked in silence for a time, and the mindless
manual labour left their minds free to wander.
‘So …’ Brian paused and leant on his shovel, ‘if she’s
not in here, do we assume Jenny is a distant relative of
ours?’
Tory had been wondering the same thing herself. ‘I
really don’t know, Brian. From what I’ve read, the Gods

were pretty liberal when it came to bestowing their
favours on the daughters of men. There could be other
family lines apart from ours that carry the same gene,
either dormant or not.’ She ploughed on regardless.
Their excavation uncovered only one set of bones,
thus a whole new chapter of the age-old mystery was
opened.
‘So, even well after death the immortal gene can be
activated,’ Tory assumed from their findings.
‘The dead can rise from the grave.’ Brian was
looking quite pale as he stared into the pit that was
filling with water. ‘If the immortal gene in Jenny wasn’t
activated before she died … then who did this?’
Tory eyed the surrounding forest, searching for the
mysterious voyeur, whose presence she could still sense.
‘A very good question.’
The full moon was but two days away when Rhun
brought Pete Nangina to advise his mother. The
Aboriginals were not in the habit of assisting the
uninitiated to make contact with the spirit world. Still,
when Pete and Rhun had outlined Tory’s extenuating
circumstances and history to the female Mekigar of
Pete’s tribe, in the interest of good relations the wise old
woman agreed to assist. Therefore, it was Pete’s job to
ready Tory for her inward Dream Journey.
Fortunately for Tory, Rhun had done much work on
her subtle body. The coil of power deep in the pit of her
stomach, her Miwi as Pete called it — Kundalini as it
might otherwise be known — was well extended up
through her chakras. A deep meditation was all that

would be needed for the Miwi to extend all the way to
her third eye which it was required to encompass if Tory
wished to attune to the Kurunba — the metaphysical
forces that flowed beneath in the landscape.
‘Ley-lines,’ Tory surmised out loud.
Pete nodded in confirmation. ‘What you would call
a ley crossing, we call a hot-spot. This subtle energy grid
was created by the Sky Heroes during Dreamtime.’
The Sky Heroes? It seemed that here was yet another
name for the Shining Ones or the Lofty Ones; their
deeds and reputation had been widespread indeed. She
was even more interested to learn that an Aboriginal
name for the Otherworldly Spirits was Rai.
Pete explained that it was not really the Mekigar’s
place to decide whether or not Tory was spiritually
evolved enough to pass into the realms of the
Dreamtime.
‘Those who have not reached the proper level of
spiritual perception will not see the Rai, because they
lack the knowledge to do so … for the Rai only talk
with experts.’
He then elaborated on how the sacred topography
was translated into art for the ceremony by means of
Churingas. These symbolic diagrams were as varied as
the Dreamtime sites they represented and had been
passed onto the Aboriginal people from the Sky Heroes.
Painted in the four sacred colours of red, yellow, white
and black, Churingas were used to concentrate a site’s
Kurunba, or life-essence. Body painting, sand painting,
cave frescos and bark paintings were repositories for the
symbols that were hidden in secret places about a

particular Dreaming site and only produced when a
ceremony was being re-enacted.
Tory was instructed to fast these next two days.
Tomorrow Pete would accompany her into the desert
where she could centre herself in preparation for Tjukuba.
Springtime in the Red Center brought more obliging
weather than the violent storms of winter. The earth
had begun to dry out and crack once again, so most of
the plant life lay dormant in wait of the flash summer
rains.
Barefoot, and dressed in white clothes of pure
cotton, Tory wandered the dry wasteland between Lake
Amadeus and Uluru, alone. Pete was following her
movements, though he kept his distance so Tory was
not aware of his presence. Maintaining a calm state of
repose was a little difficult with the prospect of seeing
her love within the next twenty-four hours, but Tory
endeavoured to sweep her anticipation aside in favour
of thinking nothing at all. She allowed herself to
become mesmerised by the landscape, where past,
present and future were intrinsically fused.
After many hours in the sun, Tory became numb to
the heat and the hot earth beneath her feet. Likewise as
the sun began to set, she was not aware of the drop in
temperature. Her aimless wandering had brought her
into the shadow of the great rock, Uluru, and upon
sighting a cave there she felt the urge to stop and kneel.
Her mind, blank for hours, turned to the day of Rhun’s
birth. The memory of holding the tiny newborn in her
arms brought tears to her eyes.

‘Has your walkabout come to an end, child?’
When Tory looked up to find a tiny, Aboriginal
woman elder staring down at her, she was frightened
she’d done wrong and so moved to raise herself.
‘Uh!’ The woman placed a hand on Tory’s shoulder,
forcing her to stay put.
‘I felt an affinity with this place,’ Tory explained
with honesty.
‘Go on.’ The woman’s eyes, though dark in colour,
seemed to beam with light.
She stared through Tory, into her soul, as did the
gaze of Taliesin and her father. This was the Mekigar
Pete had told her of, Tory was sure of it. Still, she
hesitated to voice the rest of her reason as it seemed
kind of irrelevant. The Mekigar obviously sensed Tory’s
reluctance and encouraged her to answer just the same.
‘It brings back memories of the birth of my first born.’
‘The boy-child I have come to know?’
Tory nodded, shyly, as her response seemed silly.
‘This place tells the story of a similar event.’ The
holy woman motioned Tory to raise herself, and when
she had, pointed out the marks on the ground where
Tory had kneeled. ‘These are the knee-marks of the
woman who assisted with the Sky Hero’s birth.’
Tory gasped at the news, fearful that she had perhaps
defiled the sacred site. ‘I apologise. I didn’t realise.’
‘No you didn’t.’ The Mekigar placed a palm against
Tory’s cheek and gave a hearty laugh.
By dusk, Tory and the holy woman were joined by the
other female members of the surrounding tribes, some of

whom painted Tory’s arms and face with sacred
Churingas. The rest of the women were seated in two
circles, singing chants to sticks rhythmically beaten on
the ground. Tory had experienced a similar heady buzz
induced by song at an Atlantean ceremony that she’d
participated in once. The separation between her
physical body and her psyche had begun.
Seated before the mouth of the cave, Tory observed
a large quartz crystal wand emerge from the wrist of the
Mekigar and slide into the holy woman’s hand. So
enchanted was Tory by the ritual, that she thought
perhaps this phenomenon was imagined, until she was
encouraged to lay down and the crystal wand was rested
upon her third eye.
‘Allow all fear to pass over you and you will never
fear again, for beyond the horror lay the Rai you seek.
Balga-ma-ni!’ the holy woman cried, which meant
‘bring all into being’.
In her mind’s eye Tory saw the image of Maelgwn
bound and beaten as he was dragged before someone.
As it was always from the perspective of his persecutor
that she witnessed the event, their identity remained a
mystery.
‘Join us, Dragon.’ The unknown entity advised him
in a voice that was so distorted to the ear, one could not
tell if it was male or female.
Maelgwn, barely able to hold himself upright, shook
his head.
‘Join us, or die,’ his captor clarified.
Tory’s love raised his dark eyes to view his
tormentor. ‘Then I choose death.’

‘Stubborn fool!’ Energy like lightning shot from the
being’s fingertips, inflicting Maelgwn with grievous pain.
No, he is not dead. Tory refused to believe it, and
breathed deeply until the fear passed. Her faith made
her belief strong and she no longer needed to see
Maelgwn to confirm what she knew to be true.
Thinking the dream journey was at an end, Tory
opened her eyes to find a misty light spewing forth from
the mouth of the cave. From within the disturbance her
animal guide emerged. The unicorn, white as snow,
came to stand over her.
You are free to go … I shall protect your body from
invaders, until your return.
Tory raised herself to find she had left her physical
form behind; her eyes were still closed and the crystal
remained positioned upon her forehead.
The door of the Earth is open. The unicorn motioned
with its head to the misty cave from whence it had come.
Walk the steps of light to where Ra waits to embrace you.
Tory looked back to the Mekigar, who nodded to
confirm that it was safe to proceed. Tory willed her
weightless form towards the light source. The cavern
itself had taken on a different guise; torches lit the walls
that now featured ancient forms of text. As she
ventured deeper, a celestial staircase came into view,
glimmering with all the lustre of a divine being. She
paused before the seemingly endless flight of stairs to
admire it a moment, then began the ascent.
Onwards and upwards the stairway led, until it
transformed into a tunnel of swirling light matter. Her

consciousness was being propelled through the universe
at an inconceivable speed, yet it felt like a gentle glide.
Then, rather abruptly, everything came to a standstill.
She alighted in a large room filled with stars. Its
walls, roof and floor could only be defined by the vague
contours of their shape. In the centre of this star
chamber, atop a circular staired platform, was a large
throne of quartz crystal which rotated one hundred and
eighty degrees, so that the host might look down upon
his guest.
Lamamu. This is an expected surprise. His voice
resounded out from beneath the ornate helmet that
encompassed his entire head.
His headgear was akin to that of the pharaohs of
ancient Egypt and the high orders of the Atlantean
priesthood. The face depicted on her host’s mask was
not that of a man, but of a falcon, conforming to the
ancient depiction of the God. Beyond his facial facade
she could see naught but the beautiful light energy of
his subtle body. In fact, given the sombre light of the
room, his being gave off its own illumination.
Grandfather. Tory bowed her head, ever so slightly. I
have looked forward to our meeting for what seems like an
eternity.
The God raised his magnificent form, as welldeveloped as any human warrior. He stood at about
seven foot. A three-tiered neckband of gold hung
around his neck and shoulders, featuring the motif of a
serpent sliding over a large circle — the symbol of his
sun-god divinity and his father’s clan, Tory guessed.
Embossed inside the golden circle was the eye of Ra.

But it is not I you seek. He sounded a mite insulted.
You have come in search of your earthly love for fear that I
have murdered him.
It is true. I have perceived images of such a horror. Tory
was tactful. But as the outcome was conveniently left out
and the torturer has taken care to remain anonymous, I
have seen no evidence that would implicate you as the
antagonist in the affair. Nor have I seen any proof that
Maelgwn has even been murdered.
Why are you seeking the Dragon, if you believe he lives?
He was again seated, folding his muscular arms.
Am I wrong to believe so? Tory moved closer to hear
an answer.
Oh, don’t doubt yourself now … you were doing so
well, he encouraged. Despite the visions and all her sweet
assurances, Inanna still failed to fool you. He chuckled
again. She will be most put out.
Tory had read about the trouble between Inanna
and Marduk of which Inanna had been the instigator.
But how on earth had Maelgwn and herself got
entangled in their differences?
You have something she desires, Marduk advised her.
What could I have that a Goddess would envy? The
chariot? she ventured to guess.
This only served to amuse her host. You are very
naive. He slapped his knee.
Not Maelgwn! The notion was completely
devastating. Tory had never had to compete for his
favour before. After all, what woman in her right mind
would chose to oppose her? But Inanna was a Goddess,
a powerful and beautiful one at that.

Come, come. Do you really think that Inanna would
have bothered tormenting you, if she had already managed to
convert your lover?
No. The realisation drowned her fears. Nor would
she be vexing me if my husband was a corpse.
To be sure. He thumped his armrest, proud of her. So
now you see why Maelgwn insisted that you not risk leaving
your body, for Inanna is eager to claim it. Only through you
does she stand a chance of tricking her way into Maelgwn’s
favour.
But I have come so far. Please don’t say I must return,
without so much as a glimpse of him, Tory pleaded. Have I
not adequately protected myself?
There is no need to convince me. Who do you think
arranged all this? He held up both hands and motioned
her to be quiet. I promised the commander a surprise that
would spur him through his next mission, and you’re going
to help me keep that vow.
Commander! Tory wasn’t really that surprised to
learn of her husband’s new status. Mission? What
mission?
Marduk stood. That information is confidential. But if
you wish to see the love of your life, you’d best accompany
me. Lest the Dragon mistake you for Inanna attempting to
fool him yet again.
An ultra-modern suiting station materialized in place of
the Star Chamber. Suits hung in individual lots around
the large circular quarters, where a central domed area
shed a mauve light over a large round lounge. Here the
sole occupant of the room sat in silent contemplation.

What’s on your mind commander? As if I couldn’t guess.
‘My Lord Marduk?’ Maelgwn raised himself to greet
his superior. ‘My apologies, but I had time to spare
before the scheduled departure —’
I know your meditative habits, Dragon. But I did
promise you a bit of extra incentive to see you on your way
this time, did I not?
‘My dear friend,’ Maelgwn began to decline politely.
‘Do try to understand, there is no substitute for
Keridwen’s chosen match for me. To offer me another in
her stead is a fruitless exercise for all involved.’
Yes, you have made that painfully obvious. Marduk
gestured towards the entrance, where Tory waited
patiently to be acknowledged. So I brought you the closest
thing I could find to your love in the flesh.
Sure that he would be dissatisfied with whatever
semblance of Tory the Nefilim had conjured up to
please him, Maelgwn turned in his seat to behold a
splendid vision. ‘What manner of illusion is this?’ He
smiled, enchanted.
No illusion, Dragon, she’s the genuine article … or
rather part thereof.
Maelgwn’s delight turned to dread as he turned to
Marduk. ‘Impossible. I expressly forbade Tory to seek me
thus. She would never disregard my wishes so.’
Where does this fanciful recollection of my
unquestioning obedience come from? Tory scoffed at his
delusion. Certainly not from the circumstances under which
we last parted, surely? Don’t you know me better than to
think I would obey any order without tangible evidence of
the sender?

‘But my messages via Cadfan and Rhun. Did you
not get them?’
Such images can be falsified … I’m sure. Tory glanced
around at all the advanced technological expertise that
this chamber alone had to offer. I might be speaking to a
clone right now, for all I know. For I note that you converse
with me in English, a language Maelgwn never really took to.
‘Clones can be identified using etheric sight, for
they have no subtle body. And as I have become far
more proficient in the art of telepathy, every tongue is
now a second language to me,’ Maelgwn informed her,
seemingly insulted by her inference. ‘But the Nefilim
can assume whatsoever form they choose, as we can, so
how do I know that you are not another of Inanna’s
crafty schemes?’
Excuse I. Marduk felt he must intervene at this
point. Maelgwn, I assure you, this is Lamamu. And though
ignorance prevents her from knowing she can trust me, I
expect a little more from you.
What is that supposed to mean? Tory wasn’t about to
let that accusation pass.
Demanding little creature, isn’t she? Marduk baited the
man who’d married her, completely delighted by her
determination.
‘You have no idea.’ Maelgwn confirmed.
The unicorn … Marduk gained Tory’s attention,
before she could scold her husband for agreeing with
him, was handpicked by myself, from the stables of Horus,
who is allied to my father.
As the ancients had believed the horse was sacred
to Horus, especially those of the species that were

white, Tory was inclined to believe him. It was also true
that Horus had sided with Marduk and Enki, having
been born into their side of the family. You’ve been
watching me a long time then.
Longer than you might think. You’re familiar with my
aunt, Ninharsag … though Maelgwn here calls her
Keridwen.
Good Lord! She looked to Maelgwn, who nodded to
confirm the statement.
So then … Marduk assumed he now had the benefit
of the doubt. I do solemnly swear to you both that you are
indeed who you say you are. Thus rejoice, children! He
placed a hand on Maelgwn’s shoulder. No harm has been
done. I guided Lamamu safely forth, and she is under my
protection until she returns.
‘But what if Inanna, or that incestuously jealous
brother of hers, had intercepted instead?’
I had no choice but to let her come, Marduk confessed.
Inanna has been taunting Lamamu with visions of your
capture. He hesitated to remind the commander of the
ordeal for he knew he’d suffered much.
Maelgwn now understood why Tory had endeavoured
to seek him out, and the realisation saddened him deeply.
The images just made the not knowing where you were,
or how you fared, so much worse. Tory spoke up for
herself, for the purpose of her visit was not to upset him.
But now I have seen that all goes well with you, I shall go, if
that’s what you wish.
‘Tory,’ he pleaded in protest, forestalling her retreat.
‘I have willed you to me so often that this situation is
probably more my fault than yours.’

As soon as the emotional outpouring started,
Marduk made himself scarce.
‘I do praise the Goddess that you defied me.’
Maelgwn approached her ghostly form that was even
more lovely than he remembered. ‘There have been
moments during our separation when I would have
faced the torture of Shamash and Inanna a thousand
times over, for just an hour of your company.’
I know what you mean. And I deeply regret that I am
not fully equipped to fulfil all your expectations at this time.
It was just like Tory to get a smile out of him in a
moment of despair. ‘That’s something to look forward to
then. And right now I must confess that you are a sight
for sore eyes.’
As are you. She admired his spectacular form, his
dark, silky hair and sweet smiling face. Lamentably, she
lacked the density to touch him, but her hands
remained paused close to his face in wanting.
The black suits suspended around the chamber were
similar to the one Maelgwn wore. It resembled a
wetsuit, rather than a spacesuit, and Tory found it most
appealing the way the thick, smooth material moulded
itself to her husband’s athletic build. The symbol of the
golden circle, the snake and the all-seeing eye was
featured on the lefthand shoulder. All kinds of strange
devices were strapped to a belt slung round his hips,
metallic bands encompassed both his wrists, and a
strange manner of weapon rested in a holster strapped
to his thigh. His shin-high boots were crafted from a
solid black metal compound, although his ease of
movement indicated they were basically weightless. All

in all, Maelgwn appeared every bit as handsome and
virile as the day Tory had wed him.
‘You are my Achilles heel, Tory. I cannot be got at,
save for you.’ Maelgwn backed up a little and broke the
spell. ‘Nothing is worth risking your soul for. If Inanna
were to gain influence over you, the woman I know and
love would be gone forever.’
Tory watched his joy fade to dread once again. He
had never been a man who showed his fear, but he was
scared now. What did Inanna do to instil such fear in you?
He was taken aback by the query. ‘Has Inanna not
shared with you all the details of my capture?’ He’d
assumed as much, from what Marduk had told him.
No. I believe all I perceived was the end result, Tory
explained, finding his reaction rather puzzling.
‘Oh!’ He breathed a sigh of relief, though he wanted
to cry out in praise to the Goddess. This piece of
providence didn’t mean that his foe wasn’t saving the
grisly details to use against him later, but it was liberating
and uplifting to know that Tory didn’t know the all of it.
I can’t bear to think about what you went through, but I
will not ask you to relive it to satisfy my morbid curiousity.
Just answer me this, Maelgwn. Was it in any way my fault?
Did I deliver you into the wrong hands?
Maelgwn was already shaking his head vigorously.
‘No, ’twas my own damn fault. Inanna had stolen a
prototype of —’ he broke off mid-sentence to watch two
of his crew enter the suiting room.
‘Well, holy sub-space, Grandpa. Who’s the lush?’
Tory recognised both these men. The one who’d
made the derogatory comment about her, whom

Maelgwn approached to reprimand with a thump, had
once been Vortipor. Yet Tory very much doubted that it
was the Protector of Dyfed who addressed her at
present, for he had known her well.
‘Cadwell, that is no way to speak about your
Grandmother.’ Maelgwn was pleased to have stunned
both his comrades with the news.
Tory was amazed to discover this was her grandson,
Cadwell, whom she’d not seen since he was a newborn
babe. Cadwell, also Vortipor’s grandson, had grown to
be the perfect incarnation of the great Upsurger himself.
‘This is my great-great-grandmother?!’ The darker
haired of the two stared at her, his jaw dropping.
She identified this character with Ray, Prince Bryce
of Powys, and Shar Zadoc, the chief justice of
Chailidocean. Then you must be Cadwallon. Tory
became most delighted at her realisation.
He smiled, gratified that the legend was so eager to
make his acquaintance. ‘Yes, Nin, that I am.’
Wonderful! I’ve been wanting to know a few things
about your son … was he tutored by Taliesin, as you were?
The ghostly vision overwhelmed him with her
forthright manner, and when he’d had a chance to take
a breath, he replied, ‘No, Nin. Such tuition would have
been more than wasted on Cadwaladr — it would have
been downright dangerous. Thankfully, he was born
before the immortality gene in me became active, and
thus perished at the battle of Brunanburh.’
Are you sure? she appealed. It didn’t figure.
‘Yes, Nin.’ He found her plea confusing, and
although he didn’t mean to sound condescending, half

his mouth curved to a smile. ‘I think I should know
when I was first killed. Taliesin knew this was the case,
and after delivering me into the hands of the Nefilim,
he departed Gwynedd for some other timezone to
pursue the Goddess’ work.’
I see.
She forced a smile, but it wasn’t fooling Maelgwn.
‘Is something amiss?’
Just as you have problems and a mission of your own to
worry about, so do I. If you tell me your woes, I’ll tell you
mine? Tory bargained playfully, knowing full well
Maelgwn wouldn’t play ball.
‘But we …’ Cadwallon glanced to his frustrated
commander to include him in the equation, ‘we worry
about you, Nin. We would like to help if we can.’
But you have helped, Cadwallon, by ruling out a
possibility. Perhaps I just concocted a whole silly scenario
that wasn’t really ever there?
Photographs of the elusive Chameleon were strewn
across the diplomat’s desk, along with other pictures of
the Goddess and her kin taken at Miles Thurlow’s
funeral.
In the week since Doc had first made the
Chameleon’s acquaintance, he’d become completely
obsessed with her — and was it any wonder? She had
played him for the fool three times now. Her most
recent stunt had nearly cost him the favour of the
American president! And still he hadn’t the slightest
shred of evidence that pointed to her involvement. If it
had been she who’d managed to wipe all the files from

his hard-drive when it wasn’t even in his PC, he could
only admire her cunning. Or had she stolen them?
Perhaps he’d failed to load the files properly, or the
drive could have been faulty? They had, however,
tested the cartridge since and experienced no difficulty
in storing information.
But who was this beautiful blonde, blue-eyed
enchantress? His enemy, the Goddess? He thought not.
For the Chameleon seemed to have an entirely different
persona to that of the Dragon’s concubine. Doc was well
aware that physical traits could be altered at will by
those of their kind, as he altered his appearance to suit
his purpose and position. However, an individual’s
chemical make-up, the vibrations they gave off or their
personal sonic per se, could not be disguised so easily.
Thus, the basic laws of physics and his gut agreed that he
could never lust after his condemner with such fervour.
The one-time Queen of Gwynedd was not the lizard
then. However, she had gone to great lengths at the
funeral to keep him away from her daughter, Rhiannon.
Doc strongly suspected she was his mystery girl.
As her mother’s daughter, Rhiannon was a
guaranteed immortal. Finally, a woman who wouldn’t
age or die. Or be killed. He also considered the
downside, in that he might grow tired of her at some
distant point of eternity. There is much she could teach me
before then. The problem was gaining her trust, and that
might prove a little difficult since he’d killed her father.
This was a misunderstanding really. He had thought the
Professor was immortal and was as surprised as the next
person when Miles had croaked.

‘Goddamn my ignorance.’ He stood, sick to death of
pondering the dilemma and finding no answers. Curse
his forefathers and their wizards, for leaving him blind
to their ways and powers.
Cadwaladr had taught himself telepathy, thought
projection and simple hypnosis in order to manipulate
the minds of others. But how could he hope to
compete against an apprentice of the Great Mother
herself?
Doc inhaled deeply to subdue this burst of anxiety,
when all at once he became quite giddy.
Do not be disheartened, sub-creature. For having been
spared from the occult ways of the Dragon’s line you have
not been party to their offences against the almighty.
Doc’s dizziness forced him back into his seat as he
shielded his eyes from the light of the being that
manifested before him.
The compassion of the Great One has sent me to aid
and guide you in the battle against the Serpent and his kin.
In the twelve centuries since his birth, Doc had
never seen such a marvel. This was an angel of the
Lord, to be sure.
The being shone with the intensity of the midday
sun through his full-length robe of pure white, girded at
the waist by a band of gold. Hair and skin as white as
new-fallen snow, the messenger’s eyes were like the
flame of fire. A six-pointed star of gold, not unlike the
Star of David, hung at his chest.
Doc, although he had once subscribed to the
Christian faith, failed to see how the sum deeds of his
life made him worthy of divine providence. ‘I hate to

sound blasphemous, but are you sure you have the right
person … don’t you know who I am?’
Yes, Cadwaladr, we know you. We know your trials,
your torments and your woes. But your anonymity and
isolation has proven fortunate, as it has kept you shielded
from your insubordinate forefathers until this, your era, the
time of reckoning.
Deep down Doc had always suspected there was
some kind of divine purpose behind his loneliness. Now,
with divine power on his side, he would punish those
who had sentenced him to live through the darkest ages
mankind had ever known. His wrath upon the Goddess
and her faithful would be absolute. ‘But there is one
amongst the Dragon’s kin who I wish no harm to befall.’
We are mindful of your desires and the girl-child’s soul
may still be spared from eternal damnation, for we realise
she knows no better. Your intervention and the truth can
redeem her in the eyes of the Great One.
‘What must I do?’ Doc thrived on the knowledge
that right was on his side, for he felt a certain purity and
purpose that he’d never experienced before. ‘How am
I to convince her of the truth, when I myself am blind
to it?’
First we cleanse your spirit to refine the talents that are
your birthright and set you apart from your fellow man.
Only when you have achieved your full spiritual potential
shall we establish your rule, so that you may hold influence
over all nations and they may hear and know the way of the
righteous.
‘But the girl?’ Doc entreated, wanting to know how
he could bring his wish into reality.

One must learn to crawl before one can run, warrior.
At present your association would be like the blind leading
the blind. Forget her for the moment, for she is an
unnecessary distraction to your spiritual attainment. The
will of the almighty must come before your own. Once you
are well versed in his way and have earned his favour, your
service and faith shall be rewarded.
Doc had never been the type to take anyone at their
word, but surely the vow of God could be trusted. ‘And
you will help me in this?’
The angel smiled. ‘I have been watching and guiding
you since before you were born, Cadwaladr, for it is the will
of the almighty that I lead you to greatness. So give praise for
your deliverance from the Darkness, for I am the guardian
you seek. Summon me at will from this day forth, and to the
name, Utu, I shall answer.
The diplomat accepted the celestial herald’s
message as his destiny. ‘Then give me your tuition,
Utu … and I shall make it my sole purpose to serve the
will of God.’
Upon emerging from her dream journey, Tory was
amazed to find she’d been returned to her abode at
Watarrka.
Four days had elapsed since the ceremony, and
Rhun had feared she was never coming back.
‘That couldn’t be right?’ Tory moved to raise herself,
but a heavy head dissuaded her. ‘I wasn’t gone but a few
hours, surely?’
Rhun smiled, relieved beyond belief to have her
conscious. ‘What we seem to be dealing with here is a

classic case of outer time-distortion. The astral plane,
being comprised mainly of anti-matter, functions free
from gravity and space, but the physical plane does not.
Therefore, although the time you spent in transit would
have been non-existent, the time you spent in father’s
company must have been distorted, as time functions
differently in space.’
‘You gave us such a scare.’ Rhiannon tried to refrain
from tears, as she knelt by the bed and took hold of her
mother’s hand.
‘Oh Rhiannon.’ Tory was overwhelmed to see her so
upset. ‘Couldn’t you sense I was in a heavenly place?’
Her daughter nodded. ‘So heavenly in fact, that you
might never want to return. Especially considering the
horrendous scenes previewed in the latest mass vision.’
‘Come again?’ Tory did manage to hoist herself
upright this time, supporting her head that felt as if it
were weighted with lead.
‘So you didn’t perceive it then?’ Rhun presumed
from her reaction.
Tory wracked her brain a moment, but only recalled
the most pleasant of memories. ‘I’m afraid not. What
did the vision predict?’
‘Famine, disease, war … the usual,’ Rhun advised,
with a shrug. It was nothing he wasn’t already aware of,
having been to the future already. ‘So, you found
Father?’ He seated himself before her, wide-eyed and
eager to hear.
A smile took possession of her face that all the selfcontrol in the world couldn’t have prevented. ‘Did I
chance to run into your lover, you mean?”

‘I didn’t know you had a girl.’ Rhiannon raised
herself from her knees to join her kin on the bed,
finding their conversation most interesting. ‘You’ve
never mentioned her.’
Tory became a little fearful of where this
conversation was heading, for there were parts of the
answer Rhiannon wouldn’t want to know. ‘Baby, I need
to speak with Rhun alone.’
‘Why?’ Rhiannon backed up off the bed,
immediately suspicious. ‘Is this Dragon character not
my father, too?’
‘Please understand, my instructions were very
specific,’ Tory replied calmly, which only seemed to
anger her daughter all the more.
‘Yeah, right! My own father wants me left in the
dark.’ Rhiannon took a defiant stance, hands on hips.
‘You know what? I think you’re both full of shit.’ She
went to storm from the room, but then realised her
voice did not open her mother’s chamber door. ‘Open
it!’ She turned back briefly to demand.
‘Open.’ Both Tory and Rhun complied in a casual
fashion. ‘Close.’ They activated the door after
Rhiannon made her hasty retreat.
‘Christ, she’s such a drama queen.’ Tory couldn’t see
the need for the performance.
‘Well, why didn’t you let her stay?’ Rhun could
relate to his sister’s view. ‘I knew you were lying about
your instructions, so Rhiannon most certainly did.’
‘Look. I met Ray’s perfect incarnation there. He’s
Cadwallon.’ Tory felt stressed.
‘So?’

‘So! Do you think she’s ready to conceive of the fact
that Ray’s going to perish sometime before Cadwallon
returns, for surely he is Rhiannon’s other half, so to
speak.’
‘I’m sure she realises Ray’s going to go sometime.
After all, he’s not immortal.’
‘Yes, but some of us here that aren’t necessarily of
our family line must be. Or perhaps they are of our
family line, but more distantly related. Perhaps they
were born with the immortality gene still dormant in
their DNA.’
‘What led you to this conclusion?’
‘Well, I met Ione during my dream journey. She is in
Maelgwn’s service. Only her perfect incarnation wasn’t
Ione but the warrioress Boadicea. Therefore her other
half, Sir Tiernan, must be currently here on Earth.’
‘Floyd,’ Rhun resolved, well pleased. ‘But how?’
‘How did Jenny get returned to us?’ Tory put
forward. ‘I don’t know, but it makes sense. I was
introduced to Robin of Loxley — you were right he is
John Pearce.’ The memory of their meeting made her
smile, briefly. ‘Someone activated the immortality
gene in Jenny after her death. Who that was, I don’t
know. Nevertheless, when God starts handing out
immortality to a select few amongst us, leaving the
others to perish …’ She shrugged, concerned.
‘I see your point,’ Rhun conceded. ‘Perhaps such
information would be better concealed until such time
as it can be a comfort to those of us left behind, rather
than burdening them now with the inevitable.’
‘Yes,’ she agreed, relieved. This was her very thought.

‘But keeping the truth from Rhiannon will not be
easy, and you know how much she detests being kept in
the dark.’
‘Well, we’ve managed thus far.’ Tory regretted
keeping secrets from her kin, but Rhiannon and Ray
had just settled into a romance and she would not
burden their happiness with complications that could
be decades away.
‘So, what of my other half?’ Rhun pleaded to be
told, using his big, brown puppy dog eyes to aid his
cause. ‘Did you learn her true identity?’
Fluffing her pillows to get more comfortable, Tory
tortured her son with delay. ‘Why do you want to know?
So you can pop off and see her?’ she teased.
‘After witnessing the time-dilation that occurred
during your little adventure? I think not,’ he answered
her surely, though he was saddened by the fact. ‘I
cannot risk being dysfunctional for days or weeks, as the
case may be. What would be the point anyway? I
wouldn’t be able to touch her.’
His words made Tory very curious. She had been
wondering about the consequences of teleporting her
physical form to Maelgwn’s side. ‘Why not transport
your physical self. Surely it would take no longer?’
Rhun stared back at her, quite frankly surprised by
the assumption. ‘The travel time might prove no
different, I’ll grant. But where etheric matter can cheat
time on the physical plane, physical matter cannot.
Don’t forget that we’re dealing with a destination that’s
light-years into deep space, where gravity and time
functions differently to here. And as the universe is

constantly expanding, how could you be sure just how
much time-dilation would occur during the journey?
Could be months, years, longer!’
‘I see.’ Tory tried not to look disappointed. ‘That
would explain why Maelgwn hasn’t attempted such
contact.’
‘Don’t you think I would have tried it by now, if it
were at all feasible?’ Rhun put forward, appearing as
frustrated as Tory felt. ‘I just want to know how Bridgit
fares, who she is. Please tell me.’
As Tory could plainly see no harm could come of it,
she relented. ‘I have actually met Bridgit’s perfect
incarnation before in my travels. She was an Atlantean
Priestess and truth-seer, but she is a Star Warrior now.’
Rhun moved to query this further but Tory was already
aware of his question. ‘The name you seek is Sybil.’

15
2020

T

he environmental problems afflicting the Earth
had continued to increase with each passing
year. The population of third world countries
had grown by more than half in a decade, and
continued to grow despite the high fatalities due to
disease and famine. The planet’s raw materials were
strained to the point of being astronomically expensive
to buy, especially fossil fuels. Thus, when the ICA put
forward their proposal to build a fusion reactor that
could cater to the whole world’s power needs, the longterm cheaper, cleaner form of energy appeared most
attractive to those assembled at the United Nations.
The first question put forward about the scheme was
where the ICA planned to locate the power station
when the Earth’s surface was growing increasingly

unstable. Most of the old nuclear reactors worldwide
were being decommissioned due to the immense cleanup operations that were required to mop up the mess left
behind when these power stations were damaged by
earthquakes, or rendered useless by flooding. No country
could risk playing host to a new and experimental fusion
reactor, despite the obvious political power and financial
advantages of volunteering.
Doc Alexander had a very simple solution to this
dilemma that, as it turned out, was the only option; the
fusion reactor that the ICA had designed would
only function in space. For out beyond the Earth’s
atmosphere, the high vacuum needed to sustain a
thermo-nuclear plasma was free. Fusion power, derived
from combining two atoms (tritium and deuterium) to
form one helium atom with a consequent release of
energy, was a process that required temperatures of
around one-million degrees Celsius. In the past, the
heat factor had hindered the development of fusion
power, but in space the extremely cold temperatures
meant the reactor could be vacuum-cooled.
This breakthrough, as exciting as it was, raised
many other questions, like: could a malfunction in such
a reactor inflict serious damage on our atmosphere, or
worse, the surrounding solar system? Absolutely not,
said Doc. For even if the monitoring computer system
failed to shut off the reactor the second a malfunction
was detected, it could be powered down manually
within seconds.
One of the greatest problems physicists had had to
overcome was maintaining the momentum of the fusion

reaction, as the energy created by the imploding atoms
was dissipated so quickly. But when the reactor chamber
was flooded with extremely energetic plasma, a strong
magnetic field enabled the energy to be harnessed and
beamed to a storage facility on Earth. The power would
then be farmed out across a grid. It was proposed that this
grid would require seven major stations, excluding the
host. These would be located in South America, Europe,
Africa, Russia, Asia, India and Australia. These stations
would supply ten sub-stations, and these would supply a
further ten sub-stations. Only three underwater links
would be needed to connect the seven major stations
with the host storage facility in North America. This had
been provisionally chosen for its central location.
What Doc failed to mention was that America had
supplied most of the funding and manpower for the
project and intended to go ahead with the reactor
regardless of the world view. For indeed, the
construction of the host station had already begun just
outside of Farwell, New Mexico.
A pipeline across the Pacific would supply Asia,
India, and Russia. A second pipeline across the Pacific
would provide Australia, New Guinea, New Zealand
and the surrounding Islands with power. The third
pipeline across the Atlantic would feed Europe, Africa
and the Middle East. The remaining stations could be
supplied via land-lines. Each country would incur the
cost of setting up their part of the grid, and would pay a
rent for maintenance of the stations and their pipelines.
The ICA’s AIDS facility in Alaska, funded and
handled in a similar manner to this current power

proposal, had been a great success. Over fifty percent of
the world was rid of the disease and in remaining areas
the number of AIDS cases diagnosed had dropped
dramatically. The media had reported countless
numbers of heartwarming stories from people who surely
would have perished from the disease were it not for the
ICA scheme. Those cured then urged others who had
not yet been tested to register at once — the earlier the
disease was detected the greater the chance of recovery.
However, not everyone sent to the Alaskan facility
returned home, healed, as originally promised. Reports of
abuse and favouritism at the clinic began to leak through
to the outside population via underground publications
and the internet. Doc Alexander publicly denied these
claims, dismissing them as terrorist attempts to sabotage
the new era of world peace and cooperation.
The nations of the world were slowly coming to rely
on the ICA. There was not one country that had not
been aided by the organisation in some way. In fact,
many of the world’s leaders were very wary of defying the
United Nations for fear they would lose ICA assistance.
These days one could never be sure when the ICA’s
expertise might be required. It seemed the Agency had
managed to bring about a forced world peace. Doc and
his multicultural team of scientists, physicists and the
like, always came up with the most feasible solutions to
the world’s ever-increasing problems.
The conversion of the Goddess was all but complete, bar
a few minor glitches, as was the work on Merlin I and II.
Under Ray’s guidance Brian and Tory were running the

two smaller craft through a systems check before their
first trial run inside the cavern of pools.
The Goddess had been backed out of dry dock and
was moored on the largest of the three bodies of water.
In the control room, the rest of the crew gathered to
observe the tests. Teo and Naomi were at their stations
ready to monitor and guide the movements of the
smaller craft.
Brian was strapped into the pilot’s seat of Merlin I,
familiarising himself with the new additions to its
control panel. ‘I always wanted to fly,’ he commented to
Tory in Merlin II, which was parked on the
embankment alongside him.
‘Yeah, well, don’t get too over-zealous,’ she warned,
glancing at her brother as she finished strapping herself in.
‘Listen to her, Brian.’ Ray’s voice came through
their headsets. ‘The hover-system controls are very
sensitive. Bear in mind you haven’t got the drag of the
water to slow you down. I can only take an educated
guess as to what the Merlins’ top speed might be when
airborne.’
‘Do share with the other children,’ Brian
encouraged, raring to go.
‘That is not today’s objective. Keep it slow.’ Ray
dampened his test pilot’s enthusiasm. ‘It’s taken me
three years to get these vessels operational. Let’s not
destroy them in a day.’ Ray handed the headset back to
Naomi.
‘Bloody engineers,’ Brian uttered under his breath.
Who paid for the damn thing? ‘Could we possibly get this
show on the road before I fall asleep.’

‘Roger that, Merlin One,’ Naomi gave Brian the goahead as Ray nodded to confirm it. ‘You may fire up
when ready.’
‘Hallelujah!’ Brian activated the hover system, and
grinned with glee as his craft lifted from the ground.
Tory observed Merlin I as it rose to hover about 1.5
metres above the embankment. The several sets of
advanced hover blasters that rotated in opposing
directions beneath the craft shot compressed air
downwards to give it levitation. Yet these powerful
thrusters hardly stirred the surrounding area during lift off.
This was due to the angling of the opposing, rotating
blasters that concentrated the airflow against itself,
keeping the disturbance to a minimum while maximising
the vehicle’s performance. When the vessel moved out
over the surface of the water the air pressure beneath it
became more obvious. Once the cloaking device was
activated the reconnaisance sub would be neither seen
nor heard. All that would remain for the naked eye to see
would be a small, silent whirlpool of wind. The visual
impression just screams UFO. Tory amused herself with this
thought, as Teo instructed her to proceed with her launch.
‘Wow, this feels strange,’ Tory relayed her
observations to those inside the Goddess, as she guided
Merlin II across the pool in pursuit of her brother’s craft.
Steering the little submersible had never been too
difficult, but in hover mode the controls were
hypersensitive; the slightest deviation from course would
send the vessel off on a completely different tangent.
Tory learnt this all too quickly when a sneeze nearly sent
her on a collision course with the mother ship.

‘Easy,’ Ray winced as he observed the movements of
the tiny craft from inside the control room. But his
quiet smile of satisfaction returned when he observed
how quickly Tory recovered from the mishap.
‘Clearly,’ Rhiannon kissed his cheek, well proud of
him, ‘the man is a genius.’
‘Now, for my next trick.’ Ray glanced from his lover
to those manning the guidance systems. ‘Ask them
neutralise.’ He looked back out the porthole and waited
for the vessels to comply.
‘Aw! I was just getting a feel for it,’ Brian protested
as the instruction reached him via Naomi. Still, he
obliged: ‘Neutralising now.’
Merlin I settled to a stop, and Tory pulled her craft
up close by it. ‘Good …’ Ray felt as nervous as an
expectant father. ‘Instruct Brian to activate the
cloaking mechanism.’ His eyes remained fixed on the
pool below as Naomi passed on his request.
Within moments, Merlin I vanished. The air from
the propulsion system agitating the surface of the water
beneath the vessel was the only evidence of its
presence. Ray looked to Jenny who was viewing the
electromagnetic radar.
‘He’s gone alright,’ she confirmed.
‘Activate tracking device.’ Naomi instructed Brian
to complete the procedure.
All eyes turned to Nick, who was seated before the
crystal-emission tracking system that Ray had designed.
‘I’ve got him, dead ahead.’ Nick cocked an eye,
impressed. ‘It works!’
A cheer accompanied loud whistles and applause

from everyone present, acknowledging the engineer’s
hard work and subsequent triumph.
‘Why do you all seem so surprised?’ Ray tried to sound
like he wasn’t. ‘Can Tory confirm Brian’s position?’ He
circled round behind Teo, who put the question to Tory.
‘Well, Murdock …’ Tory’s voice came over the
intercom, sounding none too enthusiastic. ‘It would
seem you’re not a complete intellectual retard, after all.
Congratulations.’ Her tone became sincerer. ‘All
systems are go here.’
Again the congratulations broke out from his
friends and associates, but Ray was not prepared to
count his chickens before they hatched. He refused
Floyd’s kind offer of a celebratory beer until they’d
tested the cloaking device and tracking system in Merlin
II. The celebration wasn’t postponed long, however, as
the second recon sub’s systems activated as smoothly as
those in Merlin I.
The two hovercraft skirted around each other until
mission control were satisfied that the day’s objectives had
been successfully achieved. Brian and Tory were given
leave to wrap it up for the day and come join the party.
As all in the control room were distracted proposing
a toast to their young Einstein, Brian couldn’t resist the
urge to experiment further with his transport’s new
capabilities.
Tory was guiding Merlin II over the embankment to
land when she spied Merlin I on her monitor taking up
position under the opening at the far end of the cavern
roof. ‘Brian!’ Tory switched her voice-link to his direct
line. ‘Don’t be daft.’

‘Hey, it’s not like it’s going to kill me now, is it?’ he
replied, beginning his ascent towards the wide open
spaces.
‘I’m not worried about you, you moron!’ She reengaged her thrusters to go after him.
Brian chuckled as he noted Merlin II change its
course to pursue him. ‘Catch me if you can.’ He switched
off his voice-link, opting to listen to some music instead.
‘O-oh.’ Nick happened to glance at his monitor to see
their two recon vehicles heading out of the camp
perimeters. When Ray realised what was happening he
bolted for a headset, and was infuriated when he
realised he must refrain from using it.
‘What is it?’ Naomi was confused. ‘Do you want me
to call them back?’
‘No, it’s too risky,’ Ray ran his fingers through his
hair to get it out of his face. ‘We don’t want to be
traced.’ As he held no authority over Brian, Tory or the
hovercraft, Ray realised he had precious little chance of
dissuading them from the joyride. ‘We’ll just have to let
them go, and pray to God they bring the vessels back in
one piece. Shit!’
After clearing the cavern roof, Brian skirted along the
canyon ridge and followed it to down onto the wide,
open plains. The exhilaration of flight made his eyes
water, and his heart was pounding ten to the dozen as
he gained speed and altitude. Brian looked to his
monitor to see Tory gaining on him. ‘Not bad, for a girl,’
he mused as he approached the large body of water that

was Lake Amadeus. ‘Let’s see what this baby is really
capable of. Coming, sis?’
The Red Centre had seen quite a bit of rain of late;
thus the waterholes were bursting their banks — Lake
Amadeus was no exception. When she saw Brian
heading for the lake, Tory prayed he was only planning
to skim across the surface. This body of water could
hardly be compared to the open ocean. It was quite
shallow and rocky in places. ‘Brian,’ she pleaded,
though she knew he could not hear her, ‘please don’t be
doing what I think you’re doing.’
The submersible employed the same thrusters as the
hovercraft. As Merlin I descended rapidly over the
water, Brian switched off the rotating air blasters and it
plunged beneath the surface of the lake.
‘Absolutely incredible.’ Tory looked to her radar,
and was pleased to find Merlin I still moving. She
descended to ten feet above the water’s surface, and
tracked the submersible’s readout down the lake.
‘Ah, home at last,’ Brian sighed, as the bubbles
cleared to a clear view out in front. With the drag of the
water his speed lessened. The light made visibility quite
good here near the surface, and he cruised through
schools of fish whilst avoiding rock formations and
patches of weed.
Once he’d finished his sightseeing tour, Brian
headed Merlin I towards the surface. About five foot
below the waterline, he re-activated his hover systems
which immediately shot his craft up out of the lake; the
next thing he knew he was racing over the surface with
Tory in pursuit.

Half an hour later, when the two craft landed back at
base, Brian was overwhelmed by everyone’s protests and
lectures concerning his misconduct. He’d anticipated
this kind of reception, so the reprimands didn’t faze him
any. ‘What are you all whining about? The ship’s still in
one piece, isn’t it? And I’ve saved us two weeks of
prolonged testing.’
‘But what if you’d had a system failure?’ Ray was
feeling stressed ‘We could have lost the craft, and it’s
not like we can just order in spare parts.’
‘Look, Ray.’ Brian turned to put the engineer in his
place, but calmed himself before doing so. ‘I know
you’ve worked long and hard on this project. You’ve
done a fine job, and I thank you. But I’ve been sitting
around this place twiddling my thumbs for three years,
whilst that bastard at the ICA leads the rest of the
world up the garden path. I shall not waste other second
dicking around. It’s time we started making a
difference.’
Nobody argued as Brian took his leave. They were
all too stunned.
‘Call it cavern fever.’ Tory placed a hand on Ray’s
shoulder to encourage him not to take it personally. ‘We
all have our bones to pick with Doc, but I didn’t realise
Brian’s resentment still ran so deep.’
‘Well, he’s not Robinson Crusoe there.’ Ray moved
to inspect Merlin I, pulling the weeds from its chassis
and tossing them aside in disgust. ‘I’d best get this
cleaned up and ready to rock’n’roll then.’
‘You’re a good egg, Murdock.’ Tory smiled at his
resolve.

He shrugged. ‘We all want to make a difference.’
‘You already have,’ she assured him.
Walter was seated behind his desk at the far end of the
herbarium, gazing across the extensive lawns and
gardens of his Healing Centre for the Mind, Body and
Spirit. The floor to ceiling windows allowed the
afternoon sun to stream in upon him, yet he was numb
to the soothing effect of the warm rays. The news of a
close friend’s death had left him in a complete state of
shock. Even after fourteen centuries of life, Walter still
hadn’t got used to outliving those he cared about.
At age thirty-two, Patrick Haze was too young to be
rotting in his grave. Pat held a special place in the old
healer’s heart, for the young man had more or less
adopted Walter as the father he never had. For many
years Patrick had frequented the Healing Centre and
eventually, after all his years of study, had ended up
working for the Institute. Then, a month ago, Patrick
had gone for his compulsory AIDS test and had tested
HIV positive. He’d been whisked off to Alaska for
treatment almost immediately. Patrick was gay — that
had been no secret. The insecurity and low self-esteem
caused by his homosexuality had been instrumental in
leading Patrick to the Healing Centre in the first place.
Walter had expected to see Patrick back instructing his
courses by now, but the reality was he would never see
his talented young novice again. And as Patrick had no
living relatives, his body had already been laid to rest in
the cemetery not far from the AIDS clinic in Alaska. It
was not often Walter became riled, but he could just

imagine the kind of burial rites his friend had received.
His powers of restraint were further tried when
informed he would not be permitted to travel to the
grave-site and pay his last repects, as the whole
community was off-limits to anyone who was not ICA
personnel or a registered patient.
I just don’t understand. Why did I not foresee his
condition or how rapidly it would deteriorate?
Walter had diagnosed and healed hundreds of
strangers, without ever laying eyes on them in some
cases, and yet Patrick’s disease had simply escaped his
attention. It just didn’t figure. He’d read various horror
stories since the AIDS clinic had opened, printed by
the independent publications over the past three years.
These reports told of people in the early stages of the
disease whose health had rapidly deteriorated after their
arrival at the facility. People had been targeted for
termination and they were all either drug addicts or
homosexuals who had been disowned by their families
or had no living kin who would kick up a fuss about
their unfortunate plight. Cadfan had previously
subscribed to the ICA explanation of terrorists being
behind the propaganda, but now he wasn’t so sure.
He looked to the intercom system on his desk and
hit a key. The small screen lit up, and a soft ambient
tune filtered through the speaker while he waited for his
secretary to answer her pager.
‘Yes, Walter,’ Mary-Anne inquired, her calm,
smiling face appearing on his monitor.
This was a brave front, for it was obvious to Walter
that she’d been weeping just prior to answering his call.

Bless her, he thought. ‘I’d like you to arrange for someone
to take my classes over the next few days. I’m sure Tom
wouldn’t mind, if he hasn’t got any other commitments.
Send him my apologies for the short notice.’
Thomas Mateus was the very best spiritual tutor
Cadfan knew. Although Tom’s areas of expertise were
the Shamanistic Arts, Earth Sciences and Ancient
Cultures he was a fine healer as well.
‘Are you leaving us?’ Mary-Anne appeared
concerned for him, until one side of Walter’s mouth
curved to a smile.
‘Yes, my dear. For it would seem I have a quest.’
‘I’m sorry, did you say a quest?’ This was not the
response Mary-Anne had expected.
‘I did.’ Walter’s attention had drifted away from the
screen as he recalled a prophetic vision he’d had
concerning the American president. He had not
understood why the universe was granting him this
information at the time, but now he realised it might
well be ammunition. ‘After you call Thomas, see if you
can schedule me a meeting with Doc Alexander in the
next couple of days.’
‘Sure.’ Mary-Anne forced a smile. ‘After all, he’s
only the most sought-after man in the world.’
‘Oh, he’ll see me,’ Cadfan stated confidently. Doc
Alexander had extended him many invitations in the
past, though Walter, wanting to stay out of the political
limelight, had always gracefully declined.
It was three months into the World Power Project and
the ICA were already copping flack from the Middle

Eastern sector. A group of religious fanatics, who
claimed the Fusion Grid was the seven-headed beast of
the Apocalypse, stated that they had procured a nuclear
warhead. The launch target would be the host storage
facility still under construction in New Mexico, unless
the Fusion Grid project was abandoned immediately.
Doc was not overly worried. He’d already arranged
to meet with the terrorist organisation’s representatives,
feeling quite sure he would make them see reason.
Yesterday in Washington Doc had persuaded
President Langford to let the ICA handle the situation.
The US Head of Defence, General Berkley, strongly
objected when the President granted Alexander fortyeight hours to defuse the threat. But the President stuck
to his decision.
‘Congratulations,’ said Emma, as Doc passed through
her office on the way to his own. She stood and handed
him a diskette containing an update of his schedule.
‘Walter Cadfan is already waiting for you inside.’
‘Excellent.’ Doc had been looking forward to this
meeting for a very long time. He’d even detoured to
London to take the appointment, and would fly on to
Baghdad to resolve the threat to the Fusion Grid
afterwards.
‘No calls, no interruptions, no exceptions.’ Doc was
adamant, though courteous about his instruction.
‘Thanks, Emma.’
Entering his office, Doc found Cadfan staring up at a
portrait of King Cadwallon of Gwynedd. Doc had painted
the picture in question near the end of the seventeenth
century. During that period of history, to be part of high

society, one had to be seen as having an active interest in
the arts. Even nine hundred years after Cadwallon had
vanished from the face of the Earth, the features of his
face remained etched firmly enough in Doc’s memory to
have reproduced a good likeness of his father. He grinned
at Cadfan’s astonished expression. If Walter was Cadfan of
Gwynedd, father of Cadwallon, and thus Doc’s own
grandfather, how must it feel to see such a vivid image of
his son after so many centuries had passed? ‘You like?’
Walter was startled by the query. He glanced at his
host briefly, then back to the image that had him so
enchanted. ‘It’s a remarkable …’ He wanted to say
likeness, but refrained. ‘work. Must be worth a fortune,’
he commented, seriously considering making an offer
for the painting if Doc would part with it.
‘Not really.’ Doc stood beside Walter and looked up
at Cadwallon’s image, burying his true feelings down
deep so that he sounded neither here nor there about it.
‘It’s by an unknown Baroque artist, who wasn’t
especially talented.’
‘Baroque?’ Walter was stunned. Doc had to be
wrong. How could some painter in the late seventeenth
century have reproduced the likeness of a seventh
century King so precisely? ‘Are you quite sure?’
‘I’m afraid so. I only brought it because he looked
such a menacing fellow.’
‘Not at all.’ Walter couldn’t stop the words from
shooting out of his mouth. ‘For British history tells us,’ he
attempted to cover the conviction of his first statement,
‘that Cadwallon was beloved of his people. He carried
victory into the very heart of enemy territory.’

‘Where he vanished after the battle of Hexham in
six hundred and thirty three,’ Doc added. ‘King Oswald
of Northumbria claimed to have run Cadwallon
through, but you know … they never did find his body.’
Cadfan’s jaw dropped as he stared at the man beside
him. Doc’s expression looked malign, until he tore his
gaze away from the picture and shrugged.
‘If you like it, it’s yours.’
‘Oh no, I couldn’t possibly.’ Cadfan was
overwhelmed by his generosity.
‘Please, I’m not especially fond of it.’ Doc placed his
PC and briefcase on his desk. ‘Art should be where it
will be most appreciated.’ He smiled in conclusion,
motioning for Cadfan to take a seat. ‘I’ll have Emma
arrange to have it sent to you.’
It was not often that Walter found a material
possession that he just had to have. This painting
had sentimental value beyond anything he already
owned, yet he couldn’t help but feel that he’d
owe Doc if he accepted the present. Yet, Cadfan
considered a way around the problem, if I find
something suitable to give him in return, that will cancel
out any such debt. ‘I fear I may be pushing my luck if
I accept your most gracious gift,’ Cadfan trod lightly,
‘as I am here to seek a favour.’
‘Ah, well,’ Doc again encouraged Cadfan to be
seated, taking a seat himself. ‘A favour is quite a different
thing to a gift, wouldn’t you say? A gift for a gift, a favour
for a favour, isn’t that how we Britons do things?’
We? Cadfan wondered to himself. ‘I’m sorry, I was
under the impression you were an American.’

‘A common misconception,’ was all Doc said.
‘Allow me to be frank, Walter. May I call you Walter?’
Cadfan gave him leave with a nod.
‘Truth is, a man in my position could really use a little
inside information from the spirit world, if you catch my
drift.’ Walter was looking a tad concerned at this stage —
it was obvious he’d not planned to form a friendship here
today. ‘Your predictions are more precise then any
clairvoyant that ever lived. Including Nostradamus,’ Doc
thought it fair to add. For he’d known the great seer rather
well, and his predictions had been much more vague than
Cadfan’s. ‘It would prove much easier to avert these
disasters if I knew a little more about them in advance.’
‘Well, I post a complete report on the VR-Net after
every episode,’ advised Walter. ‘Beyond that there is no
more to tell.’
‘I know your bulletin. I follow it very closely,’ Doc
confessed. ‘I’m actually quite a fan. No, what I am
asking is that if you should happen to see something
that might aid or hinder ICA affairs, that you will let
me know immediately. Fair enough?’
‘All right,’ agreed Walter.
‘Good.’ Doc tried to sound satisfied — given a little
more time he would get Cadfan completely on side. ‘So
now, tell me, Walter, what can I do for you in return?’
Cadfan had been warned of how charismatic Doc
Alexander was, but he seemed just a little too charming
for his liking. ‘I want ICA clearance to visit the AIDS
facility in Alaska.’
‘May I ask why?’ Doc sounded unfazed by the
request, just interested.

‘A student of mine died there recently.’
‘I am sorry. He must have been too far gone.’
‘No, I don’t believe he was.’ Cadfan voiced his
professional opinion. ‘I would like to visit his grave to
pay my last respects, and take a look at his files while
I’m there. After all, I was Patrick’s personal physician.’
‘Patrick?’
Cadfan nodded. ‘Patrick Haze.’
Doc jotted down the name. ‘I tell you what, Walter.
I’ll get a copy of Patrick’s file to you in the next couple
of days — just let Emma know where you want it sent.
I’m taking a trip up there myself next week, you’re more
than welcome to come along.’
‘I don’t want to be a bother. I’m quite capable —’
‘It’s no bother at all,’ Doc assured him. ‘Consider it
a done deal.’
In other words, if Cadfan didn’t accept the
chaperoned arrangement he could forget the idea
altogether. ‘You’re too kind.’ Walter stood, deciding to
push the issue no further. Doc had more or less granted
all his requests, so there seemed little point in creating a
drama when he might still achieve what he hoped to
without having to play hardball.
‘I look forward to it.’ Doc moved to show him out.
‘Emma will let you know the flight details as they come
to hand.’

16
THE HOLY LAND

I

t had been a long time since Tory had awoken
drenched in sweat and panicked.
‘Another vision’, she’d concluded, until she
brought the subject up at breakfast and found it to be
news to everyone else.
‘I slept like a baby,’ Rhun informed her.
‘I didn’t.’ Rhiannon glanced at Ray, seated
beside her. ‘But it wasn’t divine prophecy that kept
me awake.’
Tory looked towards Brian and then Jenny, who
both shrugged, shaking their heads.
‘Maybe it was just a bad dream,’ Rhun posed.
His mother had gone quite thoughtful, though she
shook her head to reject his suggestion. ‘Tell me …’
Tory turned to Floyd, who was behind the breakfast bar

making himself a cappuccino. Now that the Goddess
was fully operational, her crew had once again taken up
residence on the vessel. Floyd, who liked his spacious
control centre high above Watarrka’s community, just
frequented the Goddess at meal times.
Tory thought a while before voicing her question,
still trying to recollect the fragments of her dream.
‘Besides the usual war and political tension, is there
anything out of the ordinary going on in the Middle
East at present?’
Floyd appeared somewhat aghast at the question,
but was not given the chance to answer.
‘Are you shitting me!’ Noah’s head popped up from
behind his portable computer, which he’d set up on one
of the many benches in the dining quarters. ‘Haven’t
you been watching the news?’
Tory swung round in her seat to view him. ‘Noah.
Between training, study and test driving Merlin, when
do I get the time to watch the news? That’s what you’re
here for.’
Noah was gratified. He liked the suggestion that in
some small way Tory relied on him. ‘A Middle Eastern
terrorist group who, reports say, are religiously
motivated, claim to have a nuclear warhead aimed at
New Mexico.’
‘The host station for the grid,’ Tory remembered,
thinking back to her dreams. ‘I seem to recall a huge
explosion, but …’ she bit down on her lip, perplexed.
‘But what?’ Noah pressed.
‘Never mind.’ Tory decided it was irrelevant. ‘What
action have the Americans taken?’

‘None,’ Noah said wryly. ‘They’re still procrastinating.’
‘Well, that’s not exactly the whole truth,’ Floyd
intervened. ‘When I heard the host station was under
threat, I procured for myself a copy of Doc’s schedule for
this coming week.’
‘I was under the impression you couldn’t do that,’
Tory told him, ‘as Doc’s PC is not connected to the
ICA’s main-frame computer.’
‘But his secretary’s is,’ Ray deduced, knowing the
setup.
‘Quite correct,’ Floyd confirmed. ‘And as Doc is, as
we speak, on a charter flight to Baghdad, I’d say the US
are sending him in to negotiate, wouldn’t you?’
‘Well, the fusion grid is his monster, I suppose,’ Tory
mused aloud. ‘But what of these terrorists? What name
are they going by? Who is their leader?’
Noah shrugged, as far the media was concerned, this
had remained a mystery.
Floyd startled everyone by casually stating: ‘They’re
calling themselves the Unken, and name their leader as
one, Lugal-Shamash.’
Noah began madly typing the references into his
computer, concluding his labours with a grunt.
‘Interesting. Unken is an old Babylonian term meaning
‘council of elders’ or ‘circle of people’. The ‘Lugal’, or
‘great man’, was the head of this council. And the name
Shamash you already know the history of.’
‘Inanna’s twin brother.’ Tory enlightened everyone,
as she pondered the rest of the information. ‘Babylon …
wasn’t that where the Tower of Babel was supposedly
built?’

Noah nodded in response, punching up the relevant
references on his computer. ‘Then the god of gods
descended out of the heavens to view the city and the
tower that mankind were building, and he said, This is
just the beginning of their undertakings; from now on,
nothing they scheme to do shall be impossible for them.
Come, let us go down and confuse their language. If
they cannot understand each other, then work on the
tower will cease. Then the Lord scattered mankind
across the face of the Earth.’
‘That’s right.’ Teo recalled his time spent, under
sufferance, at Sunday school. ‘Humans were attempting to
build a tower that reached to the heavens. Quite frankly, I
always thought the story to be complete bullshit.’
‘Indeed.’ Noah seemed to share his opinion.
‘Ancient texts claim they were building a rocket
launcher under the guidance of one Lord Marduk.’
‘Mankind has come full circle from the Tower of Babel.’
Tory uttered her thought aloud.
‘I suppose so,’ Noah agreed. ‘If one considers the
level of communication we have sustained via
technology, and mankind’s advancement into space.’
‘No.’ Tory corrected his misconception. ‘That is not
an observation, but rather a message that came through
in my dream.’
Brian, who was finishing up his coffee, shrugged.
‘Hey guys, I really don’t think that events that took
place in the Middle East five thousand years ago have
anything to do with us.’
‘Yes they do!’ Both Tory and Noah insisted at once,
but it was Tory who pursued the argument.

‘It has everything to do with us,’ Tory stated,
knowing Marduk was their grandfather. Perhaps it had
been he who sent the dream.
‘Alright. Settle down.’ Brian held up both hands in
truce, surprised by the conviction behind her words.
‘I tell you what.’ Floyd grinned. ‘I’d sure like to be a
fly on the wall at that meeting in Baghdad tonight.’
‘Yeah!’ Noah stood, rubbing his hands together, to
second the motion.
‘Let’s do it,’ Teo encouraged them, eager to see some
action.
The others were enthusiastic also, but not Ray.
‘Now hold on. With all that’s going on in the Middle
East, you want to take the Goddess there? Have you all
taken leave of your senses! We could cause a major
international incident.’
‘And we could also prevent one.’ Tory voiced her
feelings.
Brian smiled, delighted by the opportunity to settle
a few scores with Doc Alexander. ‘Well, boys and girls,
it looks like we got ourselves a mission.’
Time did not allow for a detailed strategy to be formed,
and Ray got his wish. They all decided the Goddess was
too large and cumbersome to make it to the Middle East
in such a short span of time. Although Tory was
reminded that Rhun could psychokinetically transport
any vehicle to the said location, the task would drain
him, and she thought it best to have him fully functional.
Thus, it was decided that Rhiannon and Rhun would
transport themselves psychokinetically to Baghdad to

keep an eye on Doc’s movements. Meanwhile, Tory and
Brian would pilot Merlin I and II overland to rendezvous
with Rhiannon and Rhun at approximately the same
time as the meeting between Doc and the Unken was
scheduled to take place. Even though Floyd had a copy of
Doc Alexander’s itinerary, the details concerning the
meeting place for the negotiations had been
conveniently left out. The best they could do was wait at
the hotel, and trail Doc’s party from there.
The four members of their crew going on the
mission wore basic combat fatigues simply because army
wear had proven to be the most durable and practical
form of dress for such occasions. Tory, Brian, Rhun and
Rhiannon could make their uniform outwardly appear
to be that of any army. They didn’t expect to have any
trouble blending in. Even their distinctly different racial
features could be camouflaged.
The rooftop of the building across the road from
Doc’s accommodation was where Rhun and Rhiannon
would take up position. Should the diplomat manage to
elude their ground surveillance team, Tory and Brian
could seek out the ICA party from the air in Merlin I
and II — provided, of course, they could make Baghdad
before the entire event was over.
Tory made quickly for her transport and was
alarmed to find Teo, suited up and awaiting her,
alongside Merlin I.
‘No, Teo,’ she stated, firmly. ‘Immortals only. It’s too
dangerous.’
‘Look …’ He followed her to the ladder that led up
to the hatch. ‘If you guys are only allowed to transmit in

an emergency situation, I’m serving no purpose here. I’ll
go nuts!’
‘Teo.’ She turned back to him, one hand gripping
the stair rail ready to hoist herself up. ‘I’ll not risk losing
you on a routine surveillance mission.’
‘Oh, come on. Our mission objectives are not
going to get any easier from here.’ He took a step
backward, sounding slightly offended. ‘Am I then to
assume that my services in this regard are redundant?
Tory, I’m the best fucking fighter you’ve got! I realise I
do not possess your talents, but it’s not like I won’t
blend in anyway.’
This was quite true, for although his darker skin
colour was tinged red, he was also rather tanned at
present. His ebony hair and eyes would pretty much
guarantee he’d pass unnoticed where they were bound.
‘Or perhaps you think I’m getting too old for this
sort of thing?’ he posed, wryly, folding his arms.
He stunned Tory with the question. Even at fifty
years of age, Teo still appeared, and was, a man in his
prime. ‘Heavens no, that’s not it at all.’
‘Then let me come.’ He gripped hold of her
shoulders in exasperation, yet she was still reluctant to
agree. ‘Tory, you can’t keep me sheltered here forever,
sooner or later I am going to die.’
Tory’s eyes darted up to meet his. All her closest kin
were immortal like herself. Teo was the only one she
stood to lose. Perhaps she was being overprotective of
him, and, in all reality, she had no right to be.
‘I refuse to go quietly in my sleep, Tory. That’s not
my style, and you know it.’

She hung her head. Her gut instinct was to forbid
him to come, but it was not her decision to make.
‘Alright,’ she conceded, before gripping hold of his vest.
‘But you stay within an arm’s length of one of us at all
times, understood?’
Teo placed both arms around her, and announced
with a grin, ‘Perfectly. But just in case something should
go wrong.’
The kiss took Tory completely by surprise. It had
been so long since she’d been close to a man that she
found the experience somewhat arousing. Though it
had been some forty-seven years, by Tory’s reckoning,
since she and Teo had been on intimate terms, his kiss
was immediately familiar. And, though Tory struggled to
deny it, welcome as well.
‘Damn it,’ he said softly as they parted. ‘I really pick
my moments, don’t I?’
‘You sure do.’ Her voice was hoarse with shock and
bewilderment. That old spark was still there, and it had
only taken that brief caress to ignite it into full flame.
Tory turned back to the ladder to resume her course,
conjuring an image of Maelgwn when last seen which
helped to quell the burning sensation in her chest and
stomach.
‘Hey, sunshine.’ Teo stopped her again. ‘I know this
is not the time or the place to go into this, but —’
‘Exactly. So let’s focus on the task at hand. Coming?’
She bounded up the ladder before he could reply.
A hot gust of wind hit Doc the second he stepped out of
the private jet and onto the tarmac at Baghdad airport.

His discomfort was only momentary, however, as the
diplomat climbed straight into a limousine that whisked
him away to his hotel.
Twenty years ago this would have been unheard of.
Then, even a diplomat of Doc Alexander’s status would
have been grilled by Iraqi security for hours before
entering the city, and would have been observed closely
for the entire duration of his visit. The Middle East had
known relative peace in the last ten years, however, and
their new President was well disposed towards Doc for
lending ICA assistance to rebuild his shattered nation.
Doc had also organised United Nations support for Iraq
and her neighbours during an extremely bad drought
that had yet to break.
Baghdad was no longer the exotic ancient city that
the name had once conjured to mind. During the strife
of the late twentieth century, when the city was under
the rulership of Saddam Hussein, many of the great
buildings had been periodically levelled by invaders.
But, through the combined efforts of the Iraqi
government and the ICA, a large slice of Baghdad had
since been rebuilt. Towering hotels and modern housing
blocks now accommodated the international
community that was trading with Iraq.
As this was an unofficial visit, accommodation for
Doc Alexander’s party had been arranged at a hotel on
the outskirts of the city, though it was still luxurious.
Doc and his associates had personally overseen the
rebuilding of this hotel.
Shortly after their arrival, Doc summoned his team
to the hotel’s conference room to finalise the agenda for

the rest of the day. The meeting had barely commenced
when Doc brought the proceedings to an abrupt halt.
He spoke the word — his secret word — that served
as a trigger to send his entire staff into a trance state.
Motionless, and unaware of the psychological
manipulation taking place, all present awaited his
instruction.
‘As far as you will all recall,’ Doc began, getting
more comfortable in his chair, ‘the negotiations
scheduled to take place this afternoon, were, at the last
minute, cancelled. After reviewing the situation and
exhausting all possible channels to re-establish contact
with the Unken, we were forced to concede that my
hope for a peaceful solution to this crisis was unrealistic.
Tomorrow I will report to President Langford and
convey these views. Until then,’ Doc stood to take his
leave, ‘you will stay here and keep busy. My absence
shall not be noted, for I never left the room.’
As the door clicked closed behind Doc, all the
chatter and commotion of the meeting resumed.
‘They’re at the hotel.’ Rhun materialised on the
Goddess’ control deck to report.
‘Right on schedule,’ Floyd grinned, impressed. ‘The
meeting isn’t due to take place for a few hours yet, so
you and Rhiannon stay put. Let us know if Doc makes a
move before your air support arrives.’
‘We picked up the hire car.’ Rhun informed the base
personnel. ‘It’s there, waiting, if we need it.’
‘Well, with any luck, you won’t.’ Floyd threw a
curious glance toward Jenny and Nick behind the

crystal-emission tracking system, where they were
following the progress of the two smaller craft.
‘They’re less than an hour away.’ Jenny took an
educated guess.
‘No worries.’ Rhun was closing his eyes to return to
the stake-out, when Ray grabbed hold of his wrist.
‘Careful, Murdock,’ Rhun broke from his concentration to
advise, ‘you nearly found yourself in Baghdad. What’s up?’
‘You take care of her.’ The way Ray said this made it
sound more like a warning than a request.
‘Ray, you know as well as I do, no permanent harm
can befall Rhiannon.’ Rhun reclaimed possession of his
arm.
‘You don’t know Doc Alexander like I do. He has
ways and means around everything.’
‘So do we,’ Rhun stated in a cocky fashion. ‘That’s
why the Agency haven’t caught us out yet, and never
will.’ He closed his eyes and faded from view.
‘Be warned,’ Ray yelled after him, ‘you arrogant
little …’
By the time Rhun arrived back on the rooftop in
Baghdad, the hot afternoon breeze had noticeably
dropped in temperature — it was only about one
hundred degrees now. Rhiannon was still poised behind
her binoculars focused on the building across the road.
Rhun shook his head at the sight of her, bent over so as
to rest both her elbows on the wall and support the
weighty glasses. Rhiannon might have been his sister,
but that didn’t detract from the fact that she had a great
backside. ‘What’s cookin’, good lookin’?’

‘Fortunately, not a thing.’ She didn’t budge. ‘How
much longer will Mother be?’
‘About an hour.’ Rhun took a seat against the wall
beside her, taking advantage of the tiny bit of shade. He
pulled the cap off the waterskin he was carrying and
took a long swig, wetting his face and neck in the
process. ‘Tell me something.’ His thoughts wandered
back to Ray, as he shook off the excess water. ‘Have I
done something to your boyfriend that I’m not aware of?
He sure doesn’t seem to like me very much.’ This
bothered Rhun, as in Ray’s past life in Gwynedd they’d
been lifelong friends. Three years had passed since
they’d met in the twenty-first century, and they hadn’t
warmed to each other at all.
‘I had a crush on you when we first met,’ Rhiannon
announced casually, forcing her brother to smile.
‘Really?’ This was news to Rhun. ‘I’m flattered.’
‘Ray was so jealous,’ Rhiannon laughed, pausing from
her task a moment as she recalled, ‘and probably still is.
Never mind about the fact that he still has a thing for
Mother.’ She rolled her eyes, in a mocking fashion.
Rhun was not really surprised to learn this. ‘Bryce
was infatuated with her too. His whole life in fact.’
Rhiannon’s cheer was dampened as she picked up on
the wonderful memories that were flitting through her
brother’s head. ‘You miss him,’ she stated, feeling the
sorrowful yearning that welled deep within him
suddenly.
Rhun nodded, then shrugged, trying to suppress the
lump that was forming in his throat. She sensed his
inner conflict, and tears moistened both their eyes.

Rhun so wanted to accept this new circumstance and
yet the memories of the good times he and Bryce had
once shared were tearing him apart. ‘I’m so sorry, Rhun.
I didn’t even think. I’ve been so wrapped up in getting
what I want, that I didn’t even consider that I might be
destroying a friendship in the process.’
‘No, Rhiannon, don’t blame yourself. Things are just
different now. Bryce is a whole different person.’
‘It doesn’t have to be that way.’ She decided to try
and resolve the conflict she’d started. ‘I shall talk to
him.’ She took up position and went back to her
surveillance.
‘If you think it will make any difference.’ Rhun
wondered if it really would.
Rhiannon gave half a chuckle at something she was
viewing through the binoculars, then her amusement
was cut short. ‘Oh shit!’
‘What is it?’ Rhun stood to look down at the street
below.
A large, dark-haired man, dressed as a local but all in
black, exited the hotel alone.
‘I thought the Dragon Slayer had walked right out of
the computer and onto the streets of Baghdad, then I
realised what that means.’
‘Doc’s changed form!’ they both concluded at once.
‘Good call.’ Rhun was amazed she’d picked up on it.
‘Can you psych out of him where he’s going from this
distance?’
Rhiannon was already focused on her target, who
was climbing into a car. She was startled when he reemerged to look around the street. ‘O-oh.’ She ducked

to avoid being spotted, pulling her brother down with
her. ‘Jesus, Rhun, he sensed me. This is not good.’
With no one tutoring him in the greater mysteries,
Rhun could hardly believe Doc had become so
accomplished in just three years. ‘I’m going after him.
You know what to do.’
Rhiannon, still horrified, gave her brother a nod
and he vanished. She dared a peek over the wall to
the street below, to find Doc’s new persona had
climbed into the car. She watched as the car pulled
out into the street. Rhun’s vehicle did likewise and
followed Doc.
Satisfied that all was going smoothly, Rhiannon
prepared to transport herself back to the Goddess to
report that Merlin I and II hadn’t made the party on
time. Then the rooftop became awhirl with wind that
whipped Rhiannon’s long dark hair about her face. As
the whirlwind died away, Brian’s upper body emerged
out of thin air about ten feet off the ground.
‘Need a lift?’
Rhiannon laughed as she made for the invisible
craft, instructing, ‘Follow that car.’
Tory didn’t enjoy flying Merlin through the city. The
radical changes in the topography, the buildings and the
various forms of transport on the streets, made for a very
hairy ride.
Nevertheless, Teo seemed to be revelling in the
bumps along the way, as he watched the cars in question
through the headset that controlled the camera in
Merlin II.

As they approached the hire car Rhun drove, Tory
sent her son a mental note to advise him of their
presence. Rhun gave them the thumbs-up to confirm
he’d recieved her message and turned the car around to
discontinue his pursuit.
‘He’s all ours,’ Teo informed.
On the ground, one had to pass many Iraqi troops and
roadblocks to exit the city. Travelling outside Baghdad
still required official permission and, in some cases, an
official escort. But, unlike everybody else, Doc seemed to
have no trouble obtaining clearance to move on.
They followed Doc’s vehicle through the outskirts of
the city, past the farmlands that lined the banks of the
Tigris and out onto the flat sun-baked plains. Now that
they had entered the wide open spaces, Tory gained
altitude. There was hardly a soul to been seen way out
here, so Doc’s vehicle wasn’t difficult to keep in sight.
As did central Australia, the barren desert they
crossed had a mysterious timeless quality; little of this
landscape had changed since the God’s had frequented
it. But this place lacked the rich warm colours of Uluru,
and so appeared harsher and more forebidding. The area
pulsated with the energies Tory had come to associate
with ley lines, but where Uluru vibrated with positive
energy, the eons of war and strife in the Middle East had
manifested themselves in the landscape.
‘Looks like he’s heading for that mountain range
yonder.’ Teo voiced his observation.
‘Fabulous. Mountains,’ Tory commented, none too
keen on the idea of flying over more unpredictable
terrain.

But the road led into a deep chasm between the
mountains that, after a mile or so, came to a dead end.
The vehicle did a circuit around the dirt clearing
surrounded on all sides by towering rocky cliffs. Tory
figured Doc was probably checking to ensure no one
had followed him. Then, before she had a chance to
consider what he might be doing way out here in the
middle of nowhere, he drove the car straight into the
cavern wall. Doc, and the car, vanished.
‘Now, there’s something you don’t see every day.’
Teo disengaged the viewing headset.
‘It would seem my father and Taliesin are not the
only ones with such retreats.’ Tory did a circuit of the
clearing, heading back into the chasm with Merlin I
right behind her. Halfway down the gorge, its rocky
walls parted wide, leaving a large clearing on both sides
of the road.
Tory settled the craft down to a gentle landing. The
sandstorm beside her was visual confirmation that Brian
had landed also.
It was coming onto evening by the time Rhun returned
the hire car and joined the others in the chasm.
Rhiannon was voicing her observations concerning
Doc’s astounding leap in psychic expertise, which
seemed to have everyone worried.
‘Perhaps we should abort.’ Tory was clearly ill-atease about what she’d learned. ‘It’s not worth getting
caught over. If Doc has become as accomplished as you
say, he’ll be able to siphon information from us faster
than Floyd sucks it from the internet.’

‘High risk, high gain.’ Rhun added his two cents
worth. ‘Somebody has to find out what he’s up to. If not
us, then who?’
Tory could appreciate Rhun’s view, but the stakes
were too high. ‘If you can think of a way to guarantee
that we will not give away the location of our base …’
‘I have,’ he intervened, calmly. ‘I’ll just wipe all
memory of it from your mind, as I did with Rhiannon
for her last mission.’
‘Who’s going to wipe it from your memory?’ Teo
wondered out loud.
Rhun shrugged, ‘Two of us should really stay here
and keep an eye on our transport, so I guess I volunteer.
I’m not a great pilot, but if worst comes to worst I could
psychokinetically transport Merlin out of here.’ Rhun
looked to Teo, believing he should be the other person
to stay.
‘Aw, bugger.’ Teo saw the sense of it. After what
he’d just heard about Doc, he conceded he might be a
little out of his depth on this one.
Rhun gave Teo a thump on the shoulder for
foregoing the adventure. ‘Alright, it’s settled then.’ He
sat his mother down in front of him and begin the
hypnosis.
Once snapped from her trance, Tory didn’t feel any
different. Yet it made her tremendously confident to
discover that when questioned about the whereabouts
of their base she couldn’t for the life of her remember.
‘That’s amazing!’ She racked her brain. ‘Absolutely
nothing.’ Tory was even more astounded when she
watched the hypnotic procedure performed on Brian. It

took all of five minutes to wipe the information clean
out of his memory.
It wasn’t long before Brian, Tory and Rhiannon
found themselves creeping down the dark canyon
towards the clearing.
‘This places gives me the creeps,’ Brian whispered
with a shudder. It wasn’t that the landscape was
threatening, or that it had spooky noises. It just felt
ominous.
‘It’s been empowered by negative energy to be sure.’
Tory seconded.
‘That foreboding-type vibe is getting stronger the
nearer we get to the entrance,’ added Rhiannon,
relieved that she wasn’t the only one who noticed the
repelling force.
‘Great.’ Brian forced a smile, considering he was
happier when he’d been blissfully unaware of all
Otherworldly phenomena.
Armed with their Stormers, and a roll of gaffer tape,
the three of them cautiously approached the spot where
Doc’s vehicle had vanished. Night had fallen, but the
full moon lit the rock face they sought to penetrate.
They kept low, hugging the canyon wall, in the hope of
avoiding any electronic surveillance.
‘Perhaps we should go get Merlin, and fly in,’
Rhiannon suggested, seeing this as the only way of
proceeding without being detected.
‘And risk losing one of our craft in an ambush?’ Tory
shook her head. ‘There has to be another way.’
Invisibility was not a talent Tory had mastered, or
even considered, but there was a means to achieve such a

feat. One of the thirteen treasures of Britain, the Mantle
of Gwydion, was capable of providing its wearer with
such a service. Tory had used this garment, handcrafted
by the Gods, to render herself invisible once before. The
siege at Aberffraw that had cost Gwynedd the life of its
King, Caswallon, seemed an eternity ago now. Yet the
treasure that had kept secret Tory’s participation in the
battle, remained clearly etched in her memory.
Tory focused on the details of the image in her mind
and, holding out her arms before her, closed her eyes to
will forth the Mantle of Gwydion from her father’s cave
at Dinas Emrys.
Brian watched his sister’s movements with growing
interest, then suddenly Tory announced: ‘Ta-da!’ She
whipped a cloak out of thin air.
‘Great, here I am trying to solve our problem, and
you’re worried about getting cold.’ Brian scoffed.
‘Take a chill pill, bro.’ Tory reversed the cloak inside
out, swinging it round her shoulders, whereupon she
vanished.
‘Ha!’ Rhiannon gasped, astounded.
‘Tory?’ Brian wondered if she was still with them,
the fact that he couldn’t see her made him uneasy.
‘Yeah, what?’
Tory had moved. Brian turned abruptly to face her
as she removed the cloak.
‘Get the picture?’
He did, and Brian’s sudden understanding made him
grin.
Shrouded by the mantle, the three of them passed
through the cavern wall and into a long, dark, earthen

corridor that sloped progressively downward. The
tunnel was lit at ten metre intervals by electric lights
imbedded in the walls.
‘No wonder Doc drove in,’ Brian uttered, softly.
‘How deep do you think it goes?’
Tory shrugged. ‘Let’s find out.’
The night sky above the canyon was ablaze with stars,
and it seemed to Teo that he’d been staring at them for
ages. Rhun was using the only pair of binoculars that was
equipped with night vision to keep watch, so there was
precious little for Teo to do. He was bored, and when
Teo was bored he liked to chat. Trouble was, apart from
Rhun trying to ward him off Tory, they never really had
very much to say to each other. The silence really started
to bug him after a while, and as he’d thought of a
question he’d always wanted to ask Rhun, now seemed a
good opportunity. ‘Have you been shitting me all this
time about your father still being alive?’
‘If he were dead, Teo, I’d have no reason to lie to
you about it. I want to see my mother happy, just as
much as you do.’ Rhun looked to Teo, who still
appeared reluctant to believe him. ‘Think back to a few
weeks after we procured Doc’s hard drive, and mother
was mysteriously struck unconscious for four days …
remember? Didn’t you wonder why?’
‘I thought she was just having another cosmic
episode. Everyone was a bit vague about it when I
asked, so I figured nobody really knew.’
‘She was visiting my father.’ Rhun levelled with
him. ‘Well, her astral body was.’

‘Visiting him! Visiting him where?’
Rhun pointed to a star twinkling brightly on the
horizon in the east. ‘There, the Sirius system,
approximately eight point seven light-years away.’ Rhun
inwardly hoped to one day accompany his father there.
‘But don’t think that means he’s not watching … my
father’s talents far exceed my own.’
Teo sat thoughtful for a time, then dragged himself
up to his feet. ‘I’m going to make a coffee,’ he felt his
way towards the invisible ladder of Merlin II. ‘You want
one?’
‘No, thanks.’
Making coffee in the dark kept Teo amused for a while.
He stirred in an unknown quantity of milk, before
wiping the spoon and returning it to the storage hatch
provided. ‘Ahh, caffeine,’ he sighed, planting himself in
the co-pilot’s seat and raising the brew to his mouth for
a sip.
From the darkened valley beyond the large, front
porthole of Merlin II gunfire lit up the night. Teo
splattered boiling coffee all over himself, as bullets
ricocheted off the invisible metal body of the craft in
which he sat. ‘Fu..’ he forced himself to silence. He
brushed off the boiling liquid as if it were lukewarm, and
keeping low, in case the next round of bullets
penetrated one of the portholes, repositioned himself
where he could view Rhun out front.
Rhun had dropped the binoculars and had his arms
raised in surrender. He slowly got to his feet, waiting to
be apprehended.

Teo could vaguely make out a lone figure, advancing
towards them. Again the darkness lit up as shots were
fired. Rhun did not have a chance to flinch from his
stance before several bullets ploughed into his torso and
blew him right off his feet. ‘Jesus Christ almighty,’ Teo
uttered under his breath, fumbling to pull the Stormer
from his belt.
Even as the sniper reached Rhun sprawled on the
ground, it was difficult to make him out as he was
dressed entirely in black. His eyes were masked by some
sort of radical electronic glasses. Of a sleek wrap-around
design, these were unlike any eye wear Teo had ever
seen. The lenses that sat over both eye sockets gave the
gunman damn fine night vision, that much was plainly
obvious.
Rhun lay in wait. He allowed his attacker to kick
his body a couple of times, before grabbing hold of his
legs and toppling him to the ground. The gun was sent
flying in the scuffle, and as the gunman booted Rhun
away and made a dash for the weapon, a laser bullet
slammed into the ground nearby and he froze.
‘The next one won’t miss.’
The sniper turned to see Teo land on the ground,
his cylindrical weapon aimed at him.
‘Who are you? What do you want?’ Teo inched his
way closer to remove the balaclava the gunman wore.
Rhun, in the meantime, retrieved the gun and turned
on a mini-flashlight to get a look at their attacker’s face.
‘I have to be sure you are who I believe you are.’
Teo was shocked as he removed the gunman’s
disguise to discover a woman. Her long, dark curls fell

about her shoulders, and her eyes were violet like Tory’s,
only much paler.
‘Who are you?’ Rhun repeated the query, coldly
aiming her gun at her and cocking it so it was ready to
fire.
‘I am Neraida, the daughter of Alexander and the
humble servant of the serpent, who was the greatgrandfather of my tribe.’
‘Not Doc Alexander?’ Teo hoped.
‘I think she means Alexander the Great, Teo.’ Rhun
deduced this from her colouring, which was as dark as the
native Middle Eastern peoples. Teo was speechless as the
woman nodded in confirmation of Rhun’s comment.
Upon closer inspection, Rhun recognised her as a onetime ally of his father’s. She was Cara, the wife of
Vortipor the Protector of Dyfed, who had become the
High King of Britain after Maelgwn had vacated the
position. Upon realising this, Rhun felt inclined to give
her the benefit of the doubt. ‘I am …’
‘King Rhun of Gwynedd,’ Neraida stated. ‘Son of
Maelgwn, the Dragon of the Isle. Your mother is Tory
Alexander, the grand-daughter of the Lord Marduk,
and therefore my cousin.’ The two men were so
obviously taken aback by her words that she obliged
them with an explanation. ‘I recall much of the life
and times of my other earthly incarnations, one of
which was in Gwynedd, with your father and Tory
Alexander.’
‘I remember,’ Rhun concurred, ‘but Lady Cara died
when I was only …’ he stopped himself, thinking the
comment might be inappropriate or hurtful to her.

‘Indeed. The last memory I have of you, you were
just a little boy.’ Neraida chuckled at how different he
appeared now. ‘Sorry I had to shoot you but, if you were
who I suspected, it wasn’t going to do you any
permanent damage.’
‘And if I wasn’t.’ Rhun considered Teo’s addiction
to coffee rather fortunate in this instance.
‘Then you were a dead man,’ she stated coldly.
‘Where is your legendary mother? Her vision was
supposed to lead her to Babylon, not Baghdad.’
Rhun urged Teo to be calm, as he was obviously
insulted by Neraida’s casual disregard for the lives and
worth of mortal men. ‘We followed Doc Alexander here.’
‘Oh, no,’ Neraida gasped. ‘Please don’t tell me she’s
attempting to penetrate Unken headquarters.’
‘If that’s where the secret entrance in the clearing
up yonder leads, yes she is?’ Rhun, knowing the full
extent of his mother’s talents, wasn’t as quick to panic.
‘No, no, no, we can’t afford to lose her!’ Neraida
wandered around, anxiously forming a strategy in her
mind.
‘How do you figure that.’ Teo thought she was
overreacting. ‘Tory is immortal.’
‘I’m not worried about her being killed,’ Neraida
replied and enlightened them. ‘I’m worried about her
being brainwashed. I’ve already lost several of my kin
trying to penetrate the Unken ranks.’
‘Lost,’ Rhun frowned. ‘How? Were they not skilled
in the higher mysteries?’
‘Yes, of course.’ Her accent became more
pronounced as she became angry. ‘I’ll explain later …’

‘You’ll explain now.’ Teo aimed his Stormer at her
once more. He didn’t recall knowing her in a past life
and therefore was not as trusting.
Neraida sighed, exasperated, deciding it would be
faster to oblige. ‘My grandfather’s kin, the Nefilim,
recently created a device designed to control
insubordinate immortals. NERGUZ they called it,
meaning, reversing weapon. The module, clamped
around the wrist or forehead of the subject, creates a
hole in their electromagnetic field and temporarily
drains them of all psi ability. Then the executor of the
NERGUZ and subject are mentally linked, until all the
insubordinate’s undesirable thought patterns are
reversed. The NERGUZ module can only be removed
by the executor, and only he knows the key word he has
used to activate the device. This word, and only this
word, will deactivate it.’
‘I just know you’re going to tell me that Doc got his
hands on this technology?’ Rhun was turning pale.
Neraida nodded. ‘The weapon has since been
renamed here on Earth the NERGUZ-I-NUEN —
reversing weapon of the dark lord.’
‘But how?’ Rhun was pacing now, not wanting to
waste time on acquiring details that he knew were
unimportant.
‘The prototype of the NERGUZ was stolen by
Inanna, and she used it for her own selfish ends for a
time. She was eventually persuaded by her brother Utu,
or Shamash as you may know him better, to let him
have the weapon — just long enough to analyse and
reproduce it. When Doc Alexander formed his alliance

with Shamash, he passed the intricacies of the
NERGUZ onto him.’
‘Doc has formed an alliance with Shamash?’ Rhun
was stunned to learn. ‘How do you know?’
‘I have connections in high places that keep me
well informed.’ Neraida raised both brows. ‘Besides, I
would have thought that was obvious considering that
Doc has become somewhat more accomplished in the
ancient mysteries of late and is operating under the
God’s name.’
‘So Doc is Lugal Shamash, the leader of the
Unken?’ Teo lowered his Stormer.
‘Just work that out, did you?’ Neraida jeered at Teo
as she reclaimed her weapon from Rhun. ‘Most of my
tribe, including those I have lost to Lugal, are over two
thousand years old … Tory Alexander, in psychic terms,
is a mere novice compared to them. If they couldn’t
resist the power of the NERGUZ-I-NUEN, how long do
you think she’s going to last?’ Neraida took a few steps
backward and began to fade.
‘Wait inside Merlin.’ Rhun captured Neraida’s image
in his mind, willing himself after her.
A moment later, Teo was alone. ‘Hold on, if Doc is
Lugal, why is he threatening his own project?’ With no
one left to answer him, Teo wandered reluctantly back
to Merlin II to wait the crisis out.

17
THE LORD GIVETH
AND THE LORD
TAKETH AWAY

T

he Unken had a nuclear missile alright. In fact
they had several ICBMs (Intercontinental
Ballistic Missiles), capable of travelling distances
of up to 30,000 kilometres. The first of these was to be
launched within the next twenty-four hours, though it
was not, nor ever was, intended for the host or main
fusion station in New Mexico. This missile had a divine
purpose. A purpose that, properly disguised, would make
Doc Alexander look like a hero in the eyes of the
American people. The US government, in return,
would see to it that nobody else learned the truth.

Doc was running over details of the missile launch
with the Unken squad, when their head of security
entered to report to him.
‘Forgive the interruption, O Great Lugal. The
motion detectors in the tunnel indicate a presence, but
our cameras show nothing.’ He shook his head, his
hands raised in bafflement.
‘Really.’ Doc was rather delighted. ‘How intriguing.’
He excused himself from the meeting and followed the
young man to his post.
After following the tunnel for a kilometre or so, Brian,
Tory and Rhiannon had paused some distance away
from a guard post.
Two men kept watch in front of a solid lead wall
that entirely blocked off the tunnel. The door was also
lead, and the electronic keypad seemed to indicate that
they needed to keep one guard conscious to acquire the
entry code.
A good opportunity to ambush them did not take
long to present itself, as one of the guards headed up the
tunnel in their direction. At first they feared he might
be wise to them, but when the guard started to unzip
the fly of his trousers, they realised this was not the
case.
The soldier had paused in the shadowy area
between the lights to relieve himself, when a hand
seized his throat. Fingers pressed into the pressure points
in his neck, so hard that he immediately blanked out.
Tory assumed the guard’s image, whilst Brian taped
the soldier’s feet and hands together. He then taped

over their captive’s mouth and right round his head to
ensure his silence.
The remaining guard, who awaited Tory’s approach
by the entrance to the fortress, didn’t notice that his
comrade’s form had become slightly smaller. He was
lighting a cigarette as Tory reached him, and he
offered her one. With a shake of her head she assumed
her post.
Moments later, a noise was heard in the tunnel up
ahead of them and the guard immediately ditched the
cigarette and cocked his weapon ready to fire. Tory
motioned for him to investigate, and cautiously he
moved to do so. The guard was so focused on seeking
the trouble ahead of him that he failed to notice that
his comrade had followed him into the shadows.
‘Drop it,’ Tory advised, the barrel of her gun pressed
deep into the back of his neck.
The soldier obliged at once.
Brian, who had assumed the appearance of the
guard Tory held captive, came out of nowhere to claim
the weapon, and the soldier was speechless upon
confronting himself.
Tory spun the guard around and demanded the code
to the door.
‘I do not know it.’ He spotted his real comrade
bound, gagged and unconscious on the ground nearby.
‘He has it,’ the soldier claimed, pointing to his friend.
‘Is that right?’ Tory gripped hold of his jaw, her eyes
glaring deep into his. ‘Tell me the code.’ As the soldier
persisted with his claim not to know it, Tory bethought
the code-key from him. She smiled, triumphant,

whereby Brian blasted him with his Stormer and the
guard dropped to the ground like a stone.
With the second guard bound and gagged, Tory and
Brian headed off towards the entrance to the Unken
hideout. Rhiannon followed them, still masked by the
enchanted mantle.
Tory headed straight for the keypad, but while she
was occupied with entering the code, her Stormer was
snatched from her belt. She was startled when a laser
bullet hit Brian and he slid down the fortress wall to the
ground. She was not given the chance to turn and see
their attacker, before she had joined her brother in an
unconscious state.
Rhiannon held her Stormer poised ready to fire as
Doc, in his regular form (blonde, blue-eyed and
handsome), checked over his victims. Then, looking to
the weapon in his hand, he grinned, impressed. ‘Please,
don’t fire.’ He turned to view the empty tunnel, casting
aside the weapon he held. ‘I haven’t harmed your kin,
nor do I intend to. I only wish to speak with you.’
Rhiannon bit her lip. She very much wanted to
remind him of how he’d brutally killed her father, but
she didn’t think it wise to confirm her presence in case
he was bluffing. Her finger tightened on the trigger of
her Stormer, wanting to shoot, but Doc’s form seemed to
glow like an angel and she couldn’t bring herself to do it.
‘Come, come, Miss Devereux. I know you’re here, I
can sense you.’ He looked directly at her. ‘Or should I
say, Rhiannon?’
His words set her back a few paces. How could he
know?

‘No, don’t be frightened,’ he urged, dropping to his
knees. ‘God knows that’s the last thing I want to do. I
have gone to the same pains to discover your true
identity as you have gone to discover mine. I am in love
with you, you see …’ He paused, hoping for a reaction.
What? This was the last thing Rhiannon had
expected him to say. Is he kidding me? ‘Cadwaladr was a
merciless barbarian, incapable of love.’
‘Yes, I was,’ he admitted, freely. ‘But I have changed
since then. I am more enlightened now.’
But his words only served to make Rhiannon’s blood
boil. ‘You are a liar, a murderer and a fraud, Cadwaladr …
tell it to my father’s corpse.’ She raised the Stormer
once more, of the mind to use it.
‘Your father lives. You know that as well as I.’ Doc
sat back on his heels in a casual fashion. ‘There has
been no true harm done, so please allow me …’
‘What about John Pearce, his wife, and Nicholas …
is torture a pastime of the enlightened these days?’ She
brushed the mantle back from her shoulders. Her eyes
were filled with tears as all the pain and anger
accumulated over the last four years engulfed her,
causing her to tremble in her stance.
‘They are all still living, too, Rhiannon, in one part
of the universe or the other. You have lost no one.’
He made a strong appeal. ‘If you want to know what it
is I am doing, I shall show you. You don’t have to trail
me … we are kindred after all.’
Rhiannon was openly weeping now, and she felt
him penetrating her psychic shield to influence her.
Shoot him, she ordered herself.

Doc held both hands out towards her, urging her to
take them. ‘Doesn’t everyone deserve at least one chance?’
This was something her mother often said. No! she
warned herself as she replaced the Stormer on her belt.
Don’t trust him.
‘Here, I have a present for you.’ He stood and held
out a bracelet made of a pinkish-gold metal.
‘I don’t want anything from you.’ She steered clear
of him to approach the entrance.
‘Well, I’m afraid if you want to come inside, you
must wear this. There are nuclear weapons therein, and
this band detects and absorbs radiation. Believe me,
these will be in great demand soon.’
Doc showed her the one he wore which was larger
and more complex than the one he offered her, but it
appeared to be based on much the same principle.
‘Radiation is of little concern to me,’ Rhiannon
bluffed.
‘Until you experience physical death, my dear, you
will suffer the ailments of mortal man.’ Doc was firm
with her, then his voice softened. ‘Please, radiation
sickness is not very pleasant, and I have no desire for
you to add falling ill to your long list of reasons to
despise me.’
‘Alright.’ Rhiannon held out her left hand, in a
huff, wondering how he’d managed to find out so much
about her.
‘No, right hand,’ he advised. ‘It’s designed —’
‘Oh … here.’ She switched arms impatiently.
‘Ouch!’ she cried as the band clamped around her wrist.
‘It pricked me.’

Doc uttered something, a word that was unfamiliar
to her.
‘What did you say?’
‘Nothing.’ He keyed the code into the keypad and
the heavy lead door clicked open. ‘Come, my love.’ Doc
again held his hand out to her and this time Rhiannon
took it. ‘Mission accomplished.’ He guided her inside,
and sealed the door closed behind them.
Neraida and Rhun arrived at the Unken’s outer defence
wall to find Tory and Brian spread-eagled on the
ground.
‘Oh Jesus.’ Rhun scanned the area. ‘Where’s
Rhiannon?’
‘Praise the Goddess.’ Neraida breathed easier as she
finished checking both Tory and Brian’s right wrist and
forehead.
‘What were you looking for?’ Rhun wondered aloud.
‘The mark of the NERGUZ-I-NUEN. The module
has a tiny needle that pierces the skin and leaves a tiny
mark, similar to that of an insect bite.’ She stood. ‘Your
kin are clean, however. How long will this coma last?’
‘About six or seven hours.’ Rhun spied the bodies in
the shadows further up the tunnel and ran to
investigate.
‘Then I should really get them to a safe place to
recover.’ Neraida knelt between Tory and Brian placing
a hand on each of their foreheads.
Upon discovering neither of the bodies was the one
he sought, Rhun waved Neraida on. ‘I must find my
sister. I’ll catch you up.’

‘Good luck, little dragon.’
This had been Vortipor’s pet name for Rhun, and it
made him smile to hear it again.
‘Beware of the NUEN.’ Neraida’s expression became
more serious, as she disappeared with Tory and Brian.
‘Huh!’ Rhun scoffed, ‘I’m more worried about what
Murdock will do to me should I return without his
girlfriend.’
Rhun cleared his mind to focus on Rhiannon. With
one hand rested on his Stormer, he closed his eyes and
prepared for the worst upon joining her.
The one thing Rhun had not planned on was being
unable to locate her. He opened his eyes a few moments
later to discover he hadn’t moved, and cursed what he
suspected had come to pass. ‘No, damn it. Doc’s will is
not stronger than mine, how can it be?’ He closed his
eyes, trying harder this time, but Rhun’s efforts only
exhausted him. There was one other avenue he could
try, so Rhun stood tall to evoke the Goddess and her
elements:
I am the master of my reality,
and no will be stronger than my own.
I am your devoted servant, great Goddess,
the eyes of the Dragon on this Earth.
Advise the four winds and their elements,
that are the source of all creation,
to speed me to my sister’s side.
I ask this in the name of my illustrious forefathers,
and the great houses, Don and Llyr!

When even the Otherworld failed him, tears of
remorse filled his eyes. ‘Goddess have mercy.’ Rhun fell
to his knees in a desperate appeal. ‘Do not punish
Rhiannon because I got careless.’
‘The Goddess you summon has long been banished
from this place. She cannot aid you here,’ a sinister
voice advised. ‘Now, leave! Before I have your body
dismembered and sent to the four corners of the Earth
to be laid to rest in cement.’
Rhun stood in defiance of the threat. ‘I will not leave
without Rhiannon. What have you done with her?’
‘It’s what I plan to do with her that should concern
you more.’ The voice was heard to laugh, but there was
not much humour in it.
The vicious overtone of the statement made Rhun
furious. He knew he was losing control as his own
imagination had started working against him.
Leave, now! Rhun fought his desire to retaliate,
turning all conscious thought to Neraida.
In the wee hours of the morning, when Teo still hadn’t
heard from anyone, he started to really worry. What was
worse was how wired he’d become due to the numerous
cups of coffee he’d consumed to keep himself awake. He
couldn’t think straight; he was mortal, he needed sleep.
‘I’m going in,’ he decided firmly, taking his Stormer
in hand. Almost immediately he changed his mind and
sat down in the pilot’s seat. ‘Maybe that’s the coffee
talking?’
He thought about checking in with the base, but
that could be dangerous. If Doc had discovered any of

the intruders he would now be on the alert. No matter
what happened, Watarrka must remain a secret.
‘Come on, Teo,’ he scolded himself, ‘think of
something. If Tory was here she’d know what to do.’
The thought that she may be caught up in foul play
made Teo even more irrational. ‘Dear Goddess, if you do
exist, please send me a sign,’ he begged, feeling stupid in
doing so. ‘Tell me what I should do.’ When no
mysterious voice of guidance spoke, Teo collapsed with
a sigh onto the control panel.
Then the sound of a car, some distance away and
getting closer, urged him to his feet.
Through the front porthole Teo spotted the
headlights of a car speeding out of the cavern road.
‘Instruction received and understood,’ Teo advised
the heavens, strapping himself into the pilot seat and
firing up the hover blasters on Merlin II.
As consciousness beckoned, Tory’s head began to throb.
‘Ouch …’ she moaned, resisting consciousness.
‘Mother …’ Rhun encouraged her to wake up.
‘Come on, Tory.’ Brian propped her head up. ‘Drink
this.’ He trickled the cool water into her mouth. ‘It’s the
good stuff … from the fountain of rejuvenation, or some
shit like that.’
Brian had awoken with a splitting headache
himself, yet after drinking the water supplied by Neraida
he felt like a new man.
Tory’s being began to tingle, and a second later it
felt as if every molecule in her body was bursting with
energy. ‘Whoa!’ She sat upright, raring to go. Tory cast

her eyes around the room, thinking perhaps they’d been
captured by the Unken. The architecture was very
strange; the walls were of a bizarre, black metal. The
curved aerodynamic design gave the chamber an
unearthly quality, but there wasn’t anything of interest
to investigate. ‘Where on earth are we?’
Rhun’s expression was grave, and yet Brian was
absolutely bursting with excitement.
‘We’re inside an honest to God spaceship, Tory!’
Brian couldn’t hold back.
Tory freaked, shoving him aside to get to her feet.
‘How the hell did we end up in space?’
‘We’re not in space.’
The tone of Rhun’s voice cautioned her to calm,
and Tory turned to hear him out.
‘We’re deep underground, somewhere in the vicinity
of Babylon. This is where your dream was supposed to
lead you. We interpreted it wrong.’
‘How do you know that?’
‘Hello, Tory.’
Tory spun around to find a woman clad in a tightfitting black bodysuit that reminded her of Maelgwn’s
new interstellar attire.
‘Cara?’ Tory peered hard at her. This could not
possibly be her deceased pupil and dear friend, but it
was surely Cara’s perfect incarnation.
‘Neraida these days,’ she stated, holding out both
hands.
Tory dispensed with the formalities, overwhelming
Neraida with a hug. ‘How wonderful. I knew you’d show
up sooner or later.’

‘We’re cousins,’ Brian informed his sister, as she and
Neraida stepped back to hold each other at arm’s length.
‘Really!’ Tory figured their mutual ancestor at once.
‘Marduk ...?’ Neraida nodded.
‘So, that’s the good news.’ Rhun hated to break up
the merry scene, but there wasn’t a moment to waste.
‘Now you’d best brace yourself for the rest.’
Rhun enlightened his mother as to the power of the
NERGUZ-I-NUEN, and Neraida filled Tory in on the
weapon’s short, but colourful history. The news of
Rhiannon’s abduction was not as easy to convey.
‘Are you telling me that Doc has brainwashed my
daughter?’ Tory was overcome by the news, and the
shock of it forced her to take a seat.
‘We don’t know that for certain.’ Rhun attempted
to put forward a positive view, looking to Neraida to
break the bad news.
‘The NERGUZ-I-NUEN casts a protective barrier
automatically, thus isolating the subject from any
outside stimuli. This is why I have been unable to
rescue my people,’ Neraida sorrowfully informed her.
‘They are impossible to locate.’
In one sense Rhun thought this good news, as Doc
might not have become as psychically powerful as
he’d first feared. His mother did not share his
optimism, however, and the rage inside her was
building rapidly.
‘That won’t help us,’ Rhun said, bluntly. Deep down
he knew that his caution would only infuriate his
mother more, but perhaps it was better that she release
her frustration now.

Tory raised her stormy eyes to her son. ‘Leave me,’
she instructed. She looked at Brian and Neraida,
indicating with a movement of her head that they
should do the same.
As her brother, Brian felt obliged to at least try and
console her, ‘Now, Tory —’
‘Out, Brian,’ she barked, staring him down. ‘If you
know what’s good for you.’
Neraida encouraged both men to comply with Tory’s
wishes. The chamber door slid open as they approached
it, closing again in their wake without a spoken
command being uttered — psychokinetic control, Tory
noted. Neraida then bowed to Tory in the same fashion
as she had when Tory was her Sensei and vanished.
Alone now, Tory unleashed her anger by furiously
clearing a space in the centre of the chamber. She knelt
down and breathed deeply, summoning up all her
hatred, all her pain, all her fear. As the dark ball of evil
energy massed inside her it caused her to quiver and she
struggled to contain it. The room also seemed to shake,
though Tory was too distraught to care as she bowed her
head to have a few quiet words with the cosmos ...
I thank the universe for allowing me to experience these
emotions, but they do not serve my path to righteousness.
Therefore, it is by my own will that I release them back to
the universe, to be dispersed or re-channelled to serve the
greatest good as you see fit.
On the other side of the door Brian and Rhun had
heard Tory recklessly rearranging the decor, but now all
had gone silent.

‘Do you think it’s safe to go back in?’ Brian asked.
Rhun cocked an eye. ‘I fear not.’
A loud cry of anguish was heard from within the
chamber. This was immediately followed by a huge
explosion, the force of which caused the very walls of
the chamber to buckle outwards.
The noise of impacting metal was deafening. Both
Brian and Rhun were startled into backing off a few
paces, and said nothing as they waited for the rattling
and crashing of the interior damage to settle.
Holy shit — Brian could only mouth the words as it
seemed he’d lost his voice.
The door to the chamber opened, and as Tory
approached she appeared to be at peace, focused and
very determined. ‘How long have I been out?’
‘About seven or eight hours,’ Rhun advised.
‘Where is Teo?’
‘I left him guarding our transport.’ With all that had
happened, Rhun had forgotten all about him.
‘We should get back there immediately,’ she
instructed.
Rhun and Brian obeyed without hesitation,
transporting themselves back to where they’d left Merlin
I and II.
Then, Tory vowed, I’m coming for you, Cadwaladr.
Teo trailed Doc back to the hotel, and was flabbergasted
when he spied Rhiannon hop out of the same car. The
character she accompanied was a huge, brawny, darkhaired fellow. Teo recalled Rhiannon mentioning Doc
had taken on a new guise — Teo assumed he was

looking at it. What Teo couldn’t figure out was what
Rhiannon was doing with him. Perhaps she was working
undercover? And yet, she hadn’t altered her appearance
as she had last time.
Teo had parked on the same rooftop that Rhiannon
and Rhun had occupied when they had been on
surveillance duty.
‘Will somebody please tell me what the hell is going
on?’ Teo plaintively demanded of empty space, as he
watched Doc and Rhiannon enter the hotel.
As Rhiannon didn’t appear to be in any danger, Teo
thought it wise not to do anything rash. If she was on a
mission, he didn’t want to be the one to stuff it up. Best
to keep trailing her, and wait for word from the others.
At dawn, Doc left the hotel with his entire
entourage in tow.
‘Aw, wow, this is too weird,’ Teo mumbled as he
observed the scene below.
Doc had resumed his normal persona, while
Rhiannon had switched to her undercover identity. She
was attired as one might expect the personal secretary of
a prominent diplomat to be dressed, complete with
briefcase and computer. Her fair hair was rolled up into
a neat bun, and she wore glasses to complete the
disguise. Teo almost didn’t recognise her as she climbed
into the limousine with the other members of Doc’s
team, for she blended in well amongst them.
The limousines led Teo to the airport, which was not
as crowded or as well-guarded as might be expected at a
later hour. The vehicles passed straight through the
airport security gates that gave direct access to the runway.

Teo parked Merlin II in an out of the way corner of
the airstrip and, as he removed his seatbelt, he considered
his attire: an unfamiliar army uniform was probably not
the best camouflage in this instance. He had a root
around in the cabin and, besides a couple of wetsuits that
were unsuitable, he found a greasy pair of overalls.
‘Perfect.’ He pulled them on. ‘I’ll just look like
another technician.’
With his Stormer in his pocket, Teo checked to
make sure the coast was clear and then leapt down onto
the tarmac.
Nobody gave Teo a second glance as he strolled
towards the parked private plane. Everyone’s attention
was focused on the limousines. For some reason, Doc’s
party had yet to board the plane. One of his officials was
yelling at the ground crew.
‘This is a matter of international security. Do you
understand? If there is something wrong with the plane,
you find us another one. Now!’
Doc Alexander stepped out of the car. ‘Now, Stanley,
we have time for a drink. I’m sure these good gentlemen
can have a plane ready to depart in twenty minutes.’ Doc
stared hard at the man in charge, who humbled himself
to assure them that it would be done. ‘Come, my dear …’
Doc reached into the limousine to assist Rhiannon out,
whereby she took his arm and escorted him to the VIP
lounge. Doc’s security team surrounded the couple at a
comfortable distance, and were on the lookout for any
signs of trouble as they entered the terminal.
Near the entrance doors, a couple of guards were
stopping the service staff to check their identification

before allowing them to enter. Teo swiped himself a roll
of electrical tape from one of the many tool boxes
scattered about underneath the aircraft and headed off
towards the staff toilet block to see if he couldn’t
procure himself an ID card.
He didn’t have to wait long for a suitable victim and
the knock-out procedure Teo employed was quick and
virtually painless. He used the electrical tape to bind
the man’s feet and hands to the toilet bowl. He then
bound the man’s mouth with tape to ensure his silence
even after he’d regained consciousness.
The ID card featured a small head-only photo. Teo was
thankful that it was overexposed. The fellow was middleaged like himself and the head-shot hid the vast difference
between his own athletic build and his victim’s rather frail
one. He tucked his long, dark ponytail, streaked with grey,
down the back of his overalls, pulling the collar up high
round his neck. Then, as an afterthought, he pinched the
technician’s cap which featured an airline logo.
The two guards were engrossed in conversation now,
smoking cigarettes and having a laugh. Just ahead of
him, a few members of a ground crew strode towards the
entrance to the terminal. Teo hastened his steps to
situate himself five or so paces behind the group of men.
The guards glanced at the crew members as they passed
them, checking for the plastic seal of approval pinned to
their chests. More interested in their amusing anecdote,
they waved the group on, Teo along with them.
Hey, I’m pretty good at this James Bond stuff, he
decided on the quiet, spotting the party he sought in
the private bar.

Teo huddled up against a large pillar and gave
Rhiannon a wave as she glanced in his direction.
Her eyes fixed on him, and as Doc turned to see what
had captured her attention, Teo ducked behind the
pylon.
‘Do you know that man?’ Doc asked. ‘The one hiding
behind the pillar.’
Rhiannon nodded, swallowing a mouthful of drink.
‘That’s Teo, my mother’s Sensei.’
‘Really.’ Doc foresaw an added bonus here. ‘And has
the location of your base been erased from his memory?’
She shrugged. ‘Not to my knowledge.’
‘See, Stanley. Let this be a lesson to you. Even
delays can prove beneficial,’ Doc emphasized with glee.
Then he lowered his voice: ‘Bring him to me, alive …
he is no use to me dead. Understand?’
‘No problem,’ Stanley acknowledged.
‘Watch it,’ Rhiannon added. ‘Teo is a Shihan of
Tae-kwon-do.’
‘We’re trembling,’ Stanley informed her, motioning
for some of his team to follow him.
‘There’s enough black belts among that lot to sink a
ship,’ Doc explained, ‘and they’re all considerably
younger than your friend.’ He clinked his glass against
hers. ‘This ought to be a pushover.’
Rhiannon grinned. ‘Don’t count on it.’
As Teo did a quick check on Rhiannon, he was alarmed
to find Doc’s bodyguards filing out of the bar towards
him.

If Doc has become as accomplished as you say, he’ll be
able to siphon information from us faster than Floyd sucks it
from the Internet.
Teo, recalling Tory’s fears, began to panic. You idiot!
He cursed his lack of foresight, as he made a dash down
the terminal to escape the ICA personnel.
‘Freeze!’ One of the security team shouted a
warning, and people began to flee the area as he pulled
a gun.
Teo halted alongside another of the airport’s large
support pillars and turned to discover that he now had
several guns aimed at him. He quickly darted for cover
and pulled the Stormer from his pocket. He fired off two
laser blasts and two of his pursuers went down. But
there were so many against him, Teo found it impossible
to keep track of all their movements.
A gunshot rang out and Teo hit the ground. Numb
with shock, he stared at his shattered left kneecap in
disbelief. It didn’t take long for the pain to start
permeating from the wound in short, sharp bursts.
Shit! He rolled himself over and continued to fire at
anyone who tried to approach him. Conscious or
unconscious, if Doc gets his hands on me we can kiss
Watarrka goodbye. Teo fired another laser blast and
raised his tally to four.
Airport security had been alerted to the disturbance
by this time, and more armed men were converging on
the area.
Blood poured from the wound in Teo’s leg, creating
a huge dark pool on the floor around him. His sight
began to blur, and he didn’t expect to be able to hold

them off much longer. In the back of his mind he
started praying for a miracle. Tory had got him out of
worse than this before today. Goddamn it woman, why do
you always have to be right … I shouldn’t have come.
‘Drop it.’ Stanley jumped out to confront the sniper,
closely followed by the remainder of his team and
several of the airport security guards. ‘You can’t shoot
us all.’
There’s only one thing for it, Teo thought, as he
placed the weapon aside and slowly raised his hands.
As two of Stanley’s men dragged Teo to his feet,
their guns resting against his temple on either side, the
remainder of the force dispersed.
Brennon retrieved Teo’s weapon from the ground,
and after briefly looking it over, clicked it onto his belt.
‘You’re pathetic,’ Stanley spat at his captive, angered
that he’d taken out so many of his men. He didn’t
realise they had only been knocked unconscious until
after he’d smashed Teo across the face with the butt of
his gun.
‘Sir, they’re all still breathing.’ Someone had finally
bothered to check.
‘Well …’ Stanley stood corrected, watching Teo’s
nose bleed another river onto the floor. ‘You’re just a
damn nuisance then.’ He motioned to the two men
supporting the captive to follow him back to the bar.
Halfway to their destination, Teo regained some of
his wits. With his one good leg, he dug into the floor in
front of him and reached up to grab the pistol hand of
the man to his right. Goddess grant me strength. He
squeezed the man’s trigger finger.

‘No!’ Doc jumped from his bar stool and raced into the
terminal, just in time to see his bonus prize splatter his
brains all over the immediate vicinity. ‘Goddamn it!’
Doc was furious. ‘What did I say?’ He confronted the
blood-soaked security guard whose gun had served as
the suicide weapon.
‘I didn’t expect …’ he looked to the body he’d let
drop to the floor, too awestruck to complete his
explanation.
‘These are radicals for heaven’s sake. Just what do you
think that means?’ Doc began to lecture the guard, when
he was unexpectedly besieged by emotion. Feelings that
Doc had not experienced for centuries ran rampant
through his being and he was powerless to block or even
hinder the overwhelming sorrow and … fear.
I’m coming for you, Cadwaladr.
Tory Alexander’s promise of wrath resounded in
Doc’s head, and he looked nervously about him.
‘Is something wrong?’ Stanley ventured to ask.
‘It’s time to leave.’ Doc backed up towards the bar, a
creepy expression on his face.
‘What about him?’ Stanley referred to the casualty.
‘Get the local officials to take care of it. We’re a
little pushed for time.’
Back in the chasm that had led them to the underground
base of the Unken, Tory, Brian and Rhun were concerned
to discover one of their recon units missing.
Brian pinpointed the whereabouts of Merlin II on
his vehicle’s tracking system. ‘According to this, he’s at
the airport.’

‘He must have followed Doc there,’ Tory figured,
hoping Teo had the good sense to stay out of sight. ‘I’ll
head straight to him. You two take Merlin I and meet us
there.’
Rhun gripped Tory’s wrist to detain her. ‘Promise me
that you’ll stay away from Doc until we get there.’ When
Rhun saw the look of defiance on his mother’s face, his
demanding tone changed to a personal appeal. ‘Please.’
Tory’s mood lightened. Rhun was her voice of
reason when she was beyond reason herself. She
reached out to rest her hand against her son’s cheek. ‘I
love you,’ she said, tears moistening her eyes. ‘Fear not,
I hear you.’
Rhun smiled, satisfied with that, as she stepped
away from him and disappeared.
Tory emerged from the ethers to find herself in one of
the airport terminals. Chaos reigned supreme. Armed
security guards were everywhere, so Tory willed herself
to be seen as wearing their uniform and to appear and
sound as a local of the male gender. She looked about
expecting to find Teo close by, when she noted the
blood and guts splattered all over the floor.
Oh Goddess. Tory said a silent prayer as she barged
into the centre of the commotion.
There, in a great pool of his own blood, was a man
unrecognisable due to a massive head injury. The sight
repulsed Tory and as she did not spy anything that
identified the corpse as her dear friend, she turned away
to breathe a sigh of relief. But the image of the dead
man hung in her mind taunting her with tiny details.

Her stomach turned as she realised that protruding from
beneath the legs of the blood-drenched overalls were a
pair of army boots like the ones she was wearing. Slowly,
Tory turned to take a second look.
‘No, please, no.’ She fell to her knees beside the
body, as she recognised Teo’s wedding ring. ‘Oh,
Goddess, not him.’
‘You know this man?’
Tory did not even hear the security guard question
her, until he repeated the query. ‘Not really,’ she lied,
suppressing her urge to explode into rage. ‘What
happened here?’
‘The ICA tried to take him into custody, and the
poor bastard shot himself.’ The man sounded
sympathetic.
Tory wept when she heard this, though no one
present could see her anguish or the tears that streamed
down her face. ‘It wasn’t suicide then,’ she told the
man. ‘It was … a sort of martyrdom. He died, so that his
friends might live.’
The guard crouched beside her, looking the body
over. ‘How do you know?’ He wondered what his fellow
worker had espied that he had not.
‘It doesn’t matter.’ Tory took Teo’s lifeless hand in
hers. ‘Creation knows I’m right.’
Her words made the guard very curious though he
was not given the chance to question her. She vanished
along with the body he was supposed to be guarding.
‘Great wonders of Allah!’ The guard bowed low to
the ground, as did everyone else, believing they had
witnessed a miracle.

Teo was not an immortal, Tory knew, as Taliesin was his
perfect incarnation. Teo was also most certainly dead,
and still Tory would not give up on him. She’d been in
exactly the same predicament with Brian once and if
she’d conceded defeat then, her brother would be
rotting in the ground right now. Tory recalled Brian
mumbling something about the fountain of
rejuvenation when she regained consciousness earlier in
the day. Babylon seemed as good a place as any to seek a
means to resurrect her friend, and even if the healing
capabilities of the fountain fell short of her hopes,
perhaps Neraida’s people possessed some advanced
technology that would suffice.
Hence, Tory willed herself to Neraida, but as the
blue-white ethers of her flight faded away she was left in
total blackness.
‘Neraida, are you here?’ Tory cried out in panic.
‘I am.’
Tory looked to the soothing voice that was quite
close by. ‘I need your help, desperately.’
‘So I see.’ Neraida lowered her gaze to the body at
her feet. ‘Here, put these on.’ She placed a set of goggles
in Tory’s hand. ‘I’ve been expecting you.’
‘You have?’ Tory was relieved to hear this. She
placed the support strap around the back of her head
and positioned the lenses over her eyes. Amazing! It was
as if someone had suddenly switched on the lights.
The large circular chamber hosted many large,
round mounds, made from the same strange black metal
as the recovery room Tory had destroyed earlier. There
were several control panels and a couple of large screens

in the room. Tory guessed it to be a communications
centre, but she was far too concerned about Teo to be
interested in it. ‘So you can help my friend.’ Tory
assumed this was why their arrival had been anticipated.
‘No, Tory,’ Neraida took a step back, ‘I’m afraid I
cannot. But I can be of aid to you.’
‘What about the water of rejuvenation?’ Tory stood
tall to confront Neraida, her frustration bordering on
rage. ‘Isn’t there something else we could try?’
‘Tory,’ Neraida urged her to see reason, ‘the waters
of the sacred fountains will only work on our kind.’ She
walked over to one of the large control panels, waving
her hand over it. ‘I am sorry for your loss, but it was his
time … everything happens for a reason.’ She motioned
Tory to one of the twelve dark mounds before them.
Tory was about to contest her new friend’s apparent
indifference to the situation, when a bright spherical
light erupted above the mound in question. The tube of
light extended from the roof to the mound’s platform
and grew so intense that Tory was forced to remove her
eye wear. A figure took form inside the swirling tubular
light mass, and once the form appeared solid the room
fell back into darkness. Tory quickly replaced her
goggles and her knees went weak when she realised it
was Teo who had appeared. Frozen speechless, she
watched him approach the stairs leading down to where
she stood. As he descended, Teo began to change form.
‘Sweet mother of mercy,’ Tory mumbled, tears of
relief tumbling down her cheeks. ‘Taliesin!’ she cried,
bounding towards him and launching herself into his
embrace.

‘Tory Alexander.’ He held her tight, feeling all that
she did and more. ‘It has been too, too long.’
Doc and his team made a very dramatic entrance into the
US President’s oval office in Washington. They barged
into a closed meeting and immediately began to rearrange
the furniture to set up their computer equipment. The
President’s men were outraged, naturally. But Doc had a
few quiet words in Langford’s ear, and the President
adjourned his meeting and sent for General Berkley.
Rhiannon was introduced as a rebel spy who had
defected from the Unken ranks to aid their cause. To
prove her worth she had supplied the ICA with the
code-key to the Unken’s computer system. Doc,
knowing Langford was no computer whiz, endeavoured
to explain the significance of this.
‘So, as the Unken have refused to negotiate, we can
use this key-code to hack into their system and disarm
their weapons.’ Doc smiled in conclusion. ‘If they won’t
consider peace, we shall force it upon them.’
‘That’s wonderful news.’ Langford seemed surprised
to be relieved of the pending disaster so quickly. ‘I knew
I’d made a sound decision sending you, Doc.’
‘Mr President.’ The General appeared grave as he
stormed into the office, slamming the door closed
behind him. ‘The Unken have launched a missile on
New Mexico, estimated time of impact thirty-five
minutes.’ Berkley turned his dark eyes to Doc, who
appeared to have lost some of his cheer.
Eddie, Doc’s young computer pro, was madly typing
away on his keyboard. ‘I’m in,’ he announced, as he

continued to key-crunch for a moment. Then Eddie
looked to Doc, concerned. ‘It’s true. One of their
ICBMs has been fired.’
‘Well, of course, it’s true.’ Berkley blew a fuse. ‘What
the hell do you think we do here in the Pentagon?’
‘Calm down, John,’ Langford urged his Head of
Defence, looking to Doc for some answers. ‘Can we still
deactivate it?’
‘Impossible!’ Berkley interjected, not prepared to
waste any more time on diplomacy. ‘We must blow it
out of the sky while it’s still in the boost stage —
meaning we have two minutes to decide and counting.’
‘And what,’ Doc poised. ‘Make us look like the bad
guys? No, no, no. For although we cannot change the
missile’s course or shut it down now that it has been
launched, we can detonate it. The subsequent explosion
will rip a hole in the ozone layer above the Middle East
causing massive devastation. It’s too late to avoid that
now. Still, I’m sure you’ll agree Mr President, better
there than here. In the world view, it will be the Unken
who are to blame for the cock-up. The ICA will clean
up as usual, the US will lend massive support, and we all
come up smelling like roses,’ Doc concluded, looking to
Berkley. Even Berkley appeared appeased.
‘This never leaves this room.’ Langford gave the nod.
‘Where are they?’ Brian repeated for the fiftieth time
since they’d located Merlin II at the airstrip. ‘Maybe
Tory has gone after Doc?’
‘She wouldn’t,’ Rhun insisted, sick of watching his
uncle pace, ‘not after she promised me.’

‘Where the hell are they then?’
‘I don’t know!’ Rhun finally lost his cool. The stifling
heat certainly wasn’t aiding his patience. ‘Look, she said
she’d meet us here, so this is where we stay.’
Brian didn’t respond, his eyes had become fixed on
the horizon. ‘This is very bad.’
Rhun looked to the sky to see a fiery trail being
blazed across it.
‘Either the Iraqi’s are launching a space mission, or
that’s a missile.’ Brian boggled at the sight a moment.
‘It couldn’t be bound for New Mexico, surely.’ Rhun
was baffled by this development.
‘That’s it. We gotta make a move.’ Brian assumed
control of the situation. ‘You transport Merlin One and
Two back to base. I’m going after Tory.’
‘Hold on,’ Rhun objected.
‘Don’t argue with me, boy. I’m still your uncle, no
matter how long you’ve been kicking around, and I’ll
whip your butt without hesitation, so don’t test me.’
Rhun backed away, half a grin on his face. ‘That’s
debatable,’ he challenged. ‘And just for the record, I
wasn’t going to contest you. I was merely going to
suggest that I restore the information I wiped from your
memory earlier. It might prove a little difficult to find
your way home, if you don’t know where it is.’
When Brian was snapped out of his trance, Rhun
showed him how to restore Tory’s recollections of
Watarrka so that she, too, could find her way home.
Rhun then knelt between the invisible vessels,
placing a hand upon each of them. ‘When you find
the others, for heaven’s sake, report back to base. If I

don’t hear from you within twenty-four hours, I’ll
assume the worst.’
Brian looked to the rocket charging across the sky.
‘How much worse can it get?’ By the time he looked
back to his nephew, Rhun had gone.
From above there came a huge explosion and a great
yellow shock wave burst forth from the missile in all
directions. Brian closed his eyes, straining to
concentrate on Tory and ignore the ruinous mass
bearing down on him.
Sometime later, when Brian opened his eyes to find
only blackness, he had to wonder if he’d died. ‘Tory?’ he
whispered timidly.
‘Brian.’ She startled the wits out of him, having
snuck up from behind.
‘Stop doing that?’ He took a swing at her in the dark
and missed. ‘Will you turn the lights on, please?’
‘Here you go.’ Tory pulled a set of goggles down over
his eyes.
‘Wicked!’ Brian smiled as he saw the light, waving
his hands in front of the lenses to compare the eye wear
to normal vision. ‘Not bad at all. Hey, Neraida.’ He
waved to her now that he could see her. ‘Teo, where
have you been, man, we’ve been looking everywhere for
you?’
‘I had a bit of an accident,’ Taliesin explained.
‘But we fixed him,’ Tory stepped into the
conversation to add. ‘He’s immortal now, just like us.’
‘Excellent, bro.’ Brian gave Taliesin a high five.
‘Together, forever, the world’s famous …’

‘Supreme team,’ they both responded at once,
slapping each other’s palms in a secret sequence of ways
that only they knew.
This made Tory chuckle, as she saw Taliesin in his
Merlin’s guise. Brian, on the other hand, perceived him
as the warrior who was his best and dearest friend. It
was better this way, Tory thought. Brian never need
know of Teo’s bloody transition.
‘If you girls are quite finished,’ Tory placed a hand
on her brother’s shoulder, ‘we do have things to do.
Brian, I need you to go and tell the others we’re alright.’
That’s what Tory said. In reality, she was buying
time to see Teo put to rest, before Brian explored too far
and discovered his corpse.
‘But I …’
‘Please don’t argue, Brian, I’ve had a hell of a day.’
Tory looked to the large doors of the chamber as they
parted, and a young man, of the same race as Neraida,
entered. ‘I have grave news.’ He stopped before Neraida
to report. ‘A nuclear missile has exploded over Baghdad.’
Neraida was taken aback by the announcement.
‘That’s what I’ve been trying to tell you.’ Brian
finally got a word in. ‘I saw it go up, and as Doc is Lugal I
didn’t think it was bound for New Mexico. This must
have been what he had planned all along, but why here?’
‘So that the road of Kings can be prepared,’ said
Taliesin, quoting Revelations. ‘We’d best get to the
surface.’ He took hold of Neraida’s hand, sending her
calming energy to help soothe her shock. You knew this
had to happen, he bethought her, and she nodded, sad to
concede that he was right.

From Babylon, some ninety kilometres south of
Baghdad, the view north had altered dramatically. The
clear, blue sky had been replaced by a black cloud of fire
and soot, whilst the scorching gale-force winds whipped
the desert sands into a deadly frenzy.
‘I don’t understand.’ Brian yelled over the howling
winds to make himself heard. ‘If Doc really wanted to
destroy Baghdad, why did he wait until the missile
was way out in the atmosphere before he detonated
it?’
‘The radioactive effects of a ground blast of that
magnitude would possibly mend in twenty years,’
Neraida explained. ‘This air blast, however, will leave a
gap in the ozone layer and subject the lands from here
to the Persian Gulf to radiation from the sun for
centuries!’
Now Tory had a clearer vision of Doc’s motivation.
‘That will leave this whole Middle Eastern sector
uninhabitable to mortals.’
‘Exactly.’ Taliesin noted that Tory was as perceptive
as ever. ‘The waters of the great river Euphrates will dry
up.’ The Merlin’s gaze shifted back to the devastation
on the horizon, and he a took a few steps towards it.
‘Because there exist spirits of devils that do miracles.
They go out to the kings of the whole world to muster
them for the war of the sovereign.’
Brian looked to Teo, marveling at his words. ‘Are
you feeling okay?’
Tory moved Brian aside, also curious about Taliesin’s
statement. ‘The Gathering, you mean? This is where it
will take place?’

Taliesin nodded to confirm this, spreading his arms
wide to include the apocalyptic scene before them.
‘And behold, they assembled to do battle in the place
which in Hebrew is called Harmagedon.’
Ray did not take the news of Rhiannon’s abduction
well. His fist sent Rhun hurtling across Floyd’s
communications room to land on the couch, his
nose bloodied from the punch. Nick, Noah and
Daniel all jumped on Ray to stop him from pursuing
the fight.
‘You wouldn’t listen, would you?’ Ray snarled, trying
to break free.
Rhun staggered back to his feet, his broken nose
reforming as good as new. ‘I wasn’t the one who feared
this … you were!’ Rhun was incensed. He took
advantage of the fact that Ray was restrained and
returned the punch with gusto.
‘Rhun!’ Floyd was forced to join the scuffle, taking
the lad in a headlock to lead him away. ‘That’s enough!’
He thrust Rhun back onto the lounge. In a fury, Floyd
grabbed Ray and cast him into a seat also. ‘Millions of
people have just been killed and millions more are
going to perish! We are the only ones who know the
truth. Divide and conquer, gentlemen. You’re playing
straight into Doc’s hands!’ Floyd took a few deep
breaths to steady himself, having stunned all those
present with his outburst.
Rhun was having a flashback to Gwynedd, to the
one and only fist fight he and Bryce had ever had.
Coincidentally, the reasons for the clash had been very

similar and it had been Sir Tiernan (now Floyd) who
had broken up that dispute, too.
Ray was just amazed to see Floyd lose his temper. He
was usually too stoned to be that energetic.
‘I hate violence.’ Floyd was annoyed with himself.
‘It’s a waste of energy on all levels. We have to be
smarter than that.’ He looked back to the several
television screens all running different news bulletins
about the crisis in the Middle East. The whole world
had come to a standstill to mourn humanity’s loss.
Silence fell over the control room as everyone
quietly brooded upon the next move.
‘So you made contact with another underground
rebel group, you said.’ Noah looked at Rhun,
encouraging him to expand on the statement.
‘Forget that,’ Ray cut in. ‘How are we going to get
Rhiannon away from that, that …’ He stood, suddenly
infuriated again. ‘I can’t believe you let him take her!’
Ray didn’t notice Brian materialise behind him. As Ray
moved to launch himself at Rhun, he found himself
gripped around the collar and shoved back in his seat.
‘Rhun wasn’t even there,’ Brian informed him. ‘Tory
and I were with Rhiannon at the time. So if you want to
take out your frustration on someone, take your best
shot and be done with it. Tory is upset enough about
what’s happened, without you rubbing her face in it.’
Brian backed off when he was sure Ray would refrain
from violent action.
‘Dad. Are you alright?’ Daniel approached to check
his father over, as Brian had obviously been through a
war zone.

‘I’m fine,’ Brian assured his son with a pat on the
cheek.
‘Did you find my mother and Teo? Are they alright?’
Rhun braved Ray’s anger, changing the subject from his
sister for a moment. ‘Did you remember to restore her
knowledge of Watarrka?’
‘I did, they are, and I did.’ Brian, filthy from
standing out in the desert storms, took a seat beside
Rhun in a puff of dust. ‘But Teo had an accident. He’s
an immortal now, like us.’
‘But that’s impossible,’ Rhun objected.
Brian was still caught up in his own train of
thought, however. ‘It’s strange, really. He’s got all this
knowledge all of a sudden,’ he commented, wondering
why he hadn’t been enlightened with wisdom at the
time he’d become immortal.
‘But Teo’s perfect incarnation is …’ Rhun broke
into a huge smile as he suddenly felt much better.
Taliesin Pen Beirdd.
The tidal wave of 2017 in the Atlantic had wiped out
most towns on the islands of the Azores. But Horta, on
Faial, had already re-established itself as a significant
port of call, as it had been for centuries.
The old church and cemetery above the town,
having been dug out from under a thick coating of mud,
now appeared virtually undisturbed by the disaster.
Taliesin accompanied Tory to the island where they
laid Teo’s body to rest next to his wife. Neraida’s people
had embalmed and anointed the corpse, which made
the burial less gruelling.

Tory knew the soul for whom she wept was still very
much alive in the being beside her, and still she
couldn’t contain her tears.
‘Oh come, come.’ Taliesin placed an arm about her
shoulder, to lead her away from the grave as it was
refilled. ‘I am much happier this way. We’ve been
through all this before.’
‘No.’ Tory pulled away from him, not ready to give
up her grief. ‘You’ve been through all this before. I just
got here.’
‘You’re worried about Rhiannon.’ He cut through all
her other feelings of woe to get straight to the heart of
the matter.
‘Yes, I am.’
‘Don’t be. For I have been to the future several
times and I can assure you, Doc will not harm her.’
‘How can you say that. He’s brainwashed her for
christ’s sake!’ Not wanting to take her frustrations out
on her old friend, Tory walked away to regain her
perspective.
After giving her a moment to brood, Taliesin spoke.
‘A long time ago,’ he said, ‘before Rhiannon was even
born, I told you she’d have a special role to play in the
Gathering. Do you remember?’
Tory turned abruptly to look at him, confirming that
she did remember. She said nothing, however, unsure if
she wanted to pursue the conversation.
‘Right now I’ll grant that, yes, Rhiannon is being
manipulated. But Cadwaladr —’
‘So you know about the connection between Doc,
Caradoc and Cadwaladr?’

Taliesin raised both brows in remorse. ‘My greatest
mistake, it would seem.’
‘But how …’ Tory beseeched him, ‘how was his
immortality overlooked?’
‘That, my dear, remains a mystery.’ The Merlin gave
a heavy sigh. ‘This apparent paradox has been left in
Maelgwn’s capable hands. Hopefully, he and Cadwallon
will come up with some answers.’ Tory’s face had lit up
at the mention of her beloved’s name. ‘But, let’s not get
off the subject. Cadwaladr has become obsessed with
your daughter. Pretty soon, when he is confident that
Rhiannon’s loyalty to him has been well established in
her mind he will remove her restraint. Firstly, because
he desires to know that she loves him of her own free
will. And, secondly, because she is too powerful an ally
to keep restrained. Once the NERGUZ-I-NUEN
module is unfastened from her wrist, Rhiannon’s
abilities and sensibilities will return to her, given time.
When they do, she will find herself in the very powerful
position of Cadwaladr’s most trusted adviser.’ Taliesin
took a step closer, to emphasise the importance of this.
‘Rhiannon is the greatest hope we have of freeing the
countless number of immortals who have fallen under
the influence of the NERGUZ-I-NUEN.’
‘Sorry.’ Tory had to interrupt at this point, ‘What
immortals? Are you talking about Neraida’s people?’
‘Haven’t you worked it out yet?’ Taliesin looked a
tad surprised. ‘The ICA clinic in Alaska isn’t just for
curing AIDS. It’s for finding immortals. Half the
people who disappear into that facility never even had
the disease.’

‘Oh dear Lord, he’s building an army.’ Tory’s eyes
bulged in their sockets. ‘But the immortal gene could
not be active in many of them, surely? What use are
these pending demigods, unless Doc has discovered how
to activate the gene?’ To Tory’s further bewilderment,
Taliesin nodded.
‘No, please, he hasn’t,’ she begged.
‘Fear not,’ he encouraged. ‘I, too, have acquired a
large vial of the formula that transformed both you and
your brother.’
‘Acquired from where?’ She started to wonder what
her time-travelling friend had been up to since last
they’d met.
‘From the same place En Darius got it … the
Nefilim.’ He smiled, knowing this would confuse her.
‘Not even Darius knew the truth of the potion’s true
origins. The Nefilim, or more specifically, your greatgrandfather, wanted none to know.’
‘But you know,’ Tory prompted, intrigued to learn
the truth herself.
‘Originally the formula came from the biological
laboratories of Ninharsag,’ he advised.
‘Keridwen.’ Tory referred to the Goddess by her
Celtic name. ‘But how did Cadwaladr get hold of it?’
‘Shamash.’ They both responded at once and Tory
threw her hands in the air, frustrated.
‘But there is one big difference between Shamash’s
potion and Keridwen’s. You see, being of Enlil’s flock,
Shamash is not well disposed towards the human race.
The last thing he wants is a whole army of everlasting
Homo sapiens running amok beyond the time of

reckoning. Therefore, he altered Keridwen’s original
formula so that its effects were only temporary. How
temporary, I do not know.’
‘We must stop him.’ Tory stated, adamantly.
‘There is no stopping him.’ Taliesin stated bluntly. ‘I
have already tried several times, and unfortunately this
has proved to be one of those asymmetrical events in
time that is irreversible.’ He paused a moment, as sorry
about the fact as Tory was. ‘Therefore, it falls to us to
find, identify and activate the immortal gene in as many
people left on this planet as we possibly can, before Doc
finds them.’
‘But hasn’t Doc found them all with his compulsory
testing?’
‘Heaven’s no!’ Taliesin laughed at this. ‘There are
many underground tribes — like your own and
Neraida’s — the world over. And I intend to seek out
each and every one of them.’
‘So it was you who returned Jenny to us,’ Tory
deduced.
‘Aye, as it was I, Teo, who assisted Brian to bury
her.’ This explained how Taliesin knew of Jenny’s fate
and where to find her.
‘And what of Rhiannon?’ It seemed to Tory that
they’d passed right over that subject. ‘Surely you don’t
expect me to leave her to Doc’s discretion.’
‘What choice do you have?’ Taliesin decided to fill
her in on a few simple facts. ‘If you steal her back, she
becomes a security risk, as she will still be loyal to your
foe. Even if you manage to remove the NERGUZ-INUEN, Rhiannon may not be herself for weeks. Plus, it

will take time for her to then re-establish her own
psychic shield, making her fair game for anyone with
psychokinetic ability — which, by the way, Doc now
has. The strength of your psychic shield, and those of
your kin whom Rhun has so carefully trained, is the
only thing that prevents Doc from finding you at will.’
Tory took a deep breath, already considering
another way round the problem. ‘The NERGUZ … tell
me, who designed the damn thing? Perhaps they could
tell us a way of re-programming the module without the
activation word?’
‘Gibal, Enki’s chief technologist and son, was the
creator of the NERGUZ. He disappeared shortly after
Inanna stole the prototype.’ Taliesin regretfully squelched
yet another glimmer of hope. ‘Maelgwn is attempting to
rescue Gibal from Shamash and his sister as we speak. His
first attempt was unsuccessful, I’m sorry to say.’
‘I know he was captured and tortured.’ Tory relieved
the Merlin of having to break the news.
‘Maelgwn told you about it?’ Taliesin seemed
astonished.
‘Not exactly.’ She found the Merlin’s reaction offputting. ‘I saw the end result of Inanna’s torment in a
dream I had. I didn’t feel right asking Maelgwn to
recount the events of the nightmare he’d been through.’
Her eyes narrowed as she folded her arms. ‘What do you
know of it?’
‘Only what I heard through the grapevine really …’
Taliesin adopted a more official tone of voice, ‘which
was that Maelgwn was very … disturbed at the time of
his rescue. But his condition has completely righted

itself since then. He would not have been reassigned
the task of rescuing Gibal were that not the case.’
Although Tory knew there was something the
Merlin wasn’t telling her, she had enough to worry
about at present and so let it pass. ‘Okay then, if Gibal
is not the answer we shall think of another.’
‘Tory, please.’ Taliesin was exasperated by her
insistence. ‘I have thought —’
‘... this thing well through!’ Tory finished the
sentence for him, having heard it a hundred times in
the past. ‘Well, think again. This is not the Dark Ages,
my friend. Gone are the days of sacrificing one’s
children for the greater cause of king and country. I am
not prepared to waste one second of my daughter’s
happiness on some intergalactic war! Be damned if I
will leave Rhiannon’s fate in the lap of the Gods.’
Taliesin watched Tory depart down the hill towards
town and she vanished before she’d gone ten paces. ‘Ah
Tory. One fine day you’re going realise we’re on the
same side. And then maybe, just maybe, you’ll learn to
trust me.’

18
THE FALSE PROPHET

W

alter received Patrick’s files, as promised, and
after sifting carefully through the reports
could find nothing suspicious, apart from the
apparent speed of his friend’s decline in health. True, it
was not unknown for AIDS to take its toll swiftly, yet
Cadfan still felt that something wasn’t quite right.
Doc Alexander sent a limousine to take Walter to the
airport. It surprised Walter that Doc hadn’t postponed
their trip to Alaska. He thought the crisis situation in
the Middle East would be keeping Doc very busy.
Apparently not.
Cadfan had foreseen this explosion over the Middle
East in a vision and had publicly pinpointed two
thousand and twenty as the year. How many times must I

be proven right before the higher authorities sit up and take
notice? Or even better, take steps to avoid the disasters in the
first place!
But, perhaps Doc Alexander had noticed? And this
was why the prominent diplomat was going out of his
way to befriend him. After all, Doc had been working
towards a peaceful resolution to the terrorist threats.
Perhaps Doc was frustrated with the politicians also and
was letting Walter know the ICA was on his side.
Walter shook his head as he read a newspaper
article about the huge number of fatalities that Iraq had
sustained, and it was estimated that the initial death
toll would be doubled in coming years due to
radioactive fallout. The terrorist outfit who had, albeit
unwittingly, instigated their homeland’s destruction,
were named in the press as the Unken. Cadfan hoped
that, if the terrorist group had survived, they would not
seek vengeance for failing in their attempt to hit an
American target.
Walter noted that the Iraqi President and many of
his top officials had been in Geneva at the time of the
holocaust. The Iraqi President had expressed grievous
disappointment that terrorism was still resorted to by
fanatics in this day and age — a time of international
peace — and he urged the culprits to cease their
activities and surrender themselves before any more
damage was done. The Iraqi officials then immediately
set about rallying support for their cause from within
the United Nations.
‘How very fortunate they were there.’ Walter
wondered if the press were getting the full story, and

decided that he must be cautious about trusting Doc.
He also decided that if an association with Doc could
help to avert any more loss of life, he would not close
his mind to the possibility of working with the ICA.
Cadfan’s vehicle was granted access to the runway
and drove up to stop alongside a large, and rather
luxurious, private jet. ICA officials guided him between
transports, explaining that Doc Alexander had been
delayed and would join him presently.
‘I do understand that Mr Alexander might have a
lot on his plate this morning,’ Cadfan assured them as
he climbed the stairs to the cabin where the hostess
escorted him to a seat.
Thirty minutes later, another limousine pulled up
beside the jet, and Doc and his entourage filed out onto
the tarmac. The young woman who accompanied Doc
Alexander up the stairs seemed rather familiar to
Walter, though he didn’t place her until they’d been
introduced.
‘Walter Cadfan, I’d like you to meet Rhiannon
Thurlow.’ Doc did the honours, having apologised for
their tardiness.
‘We’ve met.’ Rhiannon took hold of Cadfan’s
outstretched hand. ‘At my father’s funeral,’ she
reminded him as he appeared disbelieving.
‘Yes, I remember.’ Walter wondered what she was
doing in Doc Alexander’s company. ‘It’s wonderful to
see you again, my dear.’ He covered his concern in case
the girl was on some important errand for her mother.
‘You know each other. Splendid!’ Doc kissed
Rhiannon’s cheek. ‘You must excuse me, I have a few

calls I need to make.’ Doc headed further down the
plane to conduct his business.
‘So what takes you to Alaska?’ Cadfan seated himself
once more, and Rhiannon took a seat alongside him.
‘Oh, my interest is strictly personal,’ she grinned.
‘Mine too. Do you know one of the patients there?’
This made Rhiannon giggle. ‘No. I meant, where
Doc goes, I go. I love him enough to take an interest in
his work, and be of help where I can.’
Love! The word resounded in Cadfan’s brain.
‘Forgive me, I didn’t realise.’
‘It all happened rather suddenly,’ she assured him,
patting the healer’s hand. ‘We only really met a few days
ago, but we hit it off immediately … sometimes love is
like that.’ She winked at him, and Cadfan took this to
mean that all was not as she was telling him, but he
couldn’t be completely sure.
As their conversation progressed he noticed
something lacking in the girl’s demeanour — Rhiannon
smiled and addressed him politely, yet she’d lost all her
spark, and from the sound of it, her individuality as
well. Rhiannon seemed content to be a mere extension
of her new boyfriend when Cadfan knew damn well
that the daughter of Tory Alexander would never be so
complacent. He had to figure that this obvious flaw in
her character was intended to get him thinking —
which it certainly had. Rhiannon’s aura was perfectly
intact, though perhaps dulled slightly, but this could
have been due to the stress of her mission. ‘Well, as long
as you’re happy, that’s all that counts,’ he told her. ‘How
does your mother feel about your new romance?’

‘Does it matter?’
She was quite short with him, and Walter guessed
that Rhiannon didn’t want her mother mentioned
amongst present company. ‘Forgive me —’ he began
sincerely.
‘No, forgive me,’ she cut in, ‘but that’s a touchy
subject at present, so please let’s just change it. Tell me
about you, Walter.’ Rhiannon took hold of Cadfan’s
hand with both her own, and he noticed the mark on
her inner right wrist.
‘Oh, don’t worry. I’m not a junkie,’ she hastened to
tell him. ‘I just scratched the top off a mosquito bite. It’s
nothing,’ she smiled, clutching his hand tighter as if in
anticipation. ‘Please can we talk about your work, it’s so
much more interesting.’
Back on the Goddess at Watarrka, Tory was greeted
warmly by her kin. She was offered food and drink in
the wake of her ordeal, but declined.
‘What I desire most of all is some time to think,’
and she urged them all to go about their normal
routine — except Ray. ‘Can we talk?’ Tory held out her
hand to him, which he accepted after a moment’s
hesitation.
Next thing Ray knew, he was standing on the
highest ridge of King’s Canyon, overlooking the plains,
now blooming where once had been the scrub of the red
centre. It was late in the evening and all the tourists
had departed.
‘We have a very difficult decision to make,’ Tory
said, a deep, uneasy breath making the unstable state of

her emotions obvious. ‘But there is much to consider, so
I hope that you will hear me out —’
‘This concerns Rhiannon, I presume.’ Ray couldn’t
see how there could be any doubt as to what they must
do.
‘It concerns the whole of humanity,’ she told him
gravely. ‘Please, Ray. You are my only hope of rescuing
her without condemning everyone else in the process.’
Her words, so passionate and heartfelt, subdued his
anger. ‘What is it you need me to do?’
Tory told him of the army of immortals that Doc
was secretly amassing at the ICA clinic in Alaska and of
the NERGUZ-I-NUEN that was being used to control
the will of these soldiers, including Rhiannon.
Once he was made aware of how Doc’s brainwashing
device operated, Ray conceded that it would be difficult
to rescue his love — if indeed Rhiannon still had any
recollection of their relationship. He had always thought
the Agency was capable of just about anything, but Ray
had not imagined in his wildest dreams the full extent of
Doc’s connections and aspirations.
‘So, let me see if I have this straight … you expect
me to design and build a device to remove a
brainwashing weapon invented by some advanced alien
civilisation?’ Ray appeared to be a mite daunted. ‘The
amount of faith you have in me is scary.’
‘We’re all frightened, Ray.’ Tory approached him to
cup her hand over the swelling on his cheekbone. ‘Even
Rhun.’
‘We had a fight.’ Ray gently pulled away, ashamed of
the fact in retrospect. ‘But I guess you know that.’

Tory nodded to confirm that she did. ‘Rhun is on
your side, Ray. He always was, and always will be. He
could be your greatest ally if you’d only let him.’
Ray raised a hand to his wounded jaw, seeming a
little doubtful about that.
‘You don’t believe me?’ That much was plainly
obvious. ‘Well, allow me to enlighten you as to why I
can be so sure. My son was King of Gwynedd for half a
century and for forty-five of those years you were his
champion and chief adviser. All in all, your friendship
spanned some sixty-six years.’ Tory gave half a laugh as
she recalled Bryce and Rhun as youngsters. ‘The two of
you were joined at the hip, sworn blood brothers. Before
Rhun had even begun his reign, the two of you had
saved the fate of Britain several times over.’
‘I’m sorry …’ He found the tale hard to swallow.
‘But are you sure you’ve got the right guy? I mean, a
knight in shining armour, Tory, is really not me.’
‘Oh, you don’t think so?’ Tory knew he was severely
underestimating his abilities, and that had to stop.
‘Well, how about I let you judge for yourself?’
‘What do you mean?’ He became rather anxious as
he watched her take up a position behind him.
‘Relax, Ray, I’m not taking you anywhere. Not
physically anyway.’ She placed the palms of her hands
against his temples. ‘I’m just going to give you a glimpse
of the you that I have come to know.’
Her mind wandered back to the very first time she’d
met Bryce. He’d been all of five years old then, and just
another orphan aimlessly roaming the village at

Aberffraw. I am going to be a knight, he’d told her with
zeal, and the recollection still brought a smile to her
face.
Over the twenty years that she trained Bryce and
Rhun, there was many a memory of their steadfast
friendship, their combined triumphs and the
punishments they’d endured together for their mischief.
The second great battle of Arwystli was still clear in
her memory — Tory and Bryce had fought off Saxon
and demon that dark day. But of the many private
moments she and Bryce had shared over the years, none
was so dear to Tory as the day they had parted. This was
the only time Tory had ever seen Bryce weep. Down on
one knee before her, he’d begged her not to go. I cannot
stand that I shall not see thee again.
But Bryce, thee will, she had vowed. I shall go on and
on, and thee shall incarnate. And even though thee may not
recognise me, I shall know thee … and I will find thee again,
I swear it.
The young knight had startled her with a parting
kiss.
Tears were streaming down Ray’s face as his eyes
opened. It felt as if Tory had reached into the deepest
recesses of his mind where sleep-time visions are stored
and never consciously recalled. He had seen these
images interwoven in his dreams, and had thought them
nothing more than flights of fancy.
After giving him a moment to recover, Tory said,
‘You asked me that first day we met on Faial why I was
helping you … well, now you know.’

Ray sniffled, wiping away the tears that had formed
around the rim of his glasses. ‘I must be a great
disappointment to you this time round.’
‘Hardly … you just fight with your intellect these
days, rather than your fists. A fortunate thing in this
instance, wouldn’t you say?’
Ray exhaled heavily with what might have been a
laugh. If only he could feel as confident in his abilities
as Tory obviously was! ‘So, I gather you’ve got hold of
one of these modules?’
Tory winced. ‘Not as yet. But, I thought perhaps we
should take another look at the information on the
hard-drive we stole from Doc. It might give us some
clue as to where the manufacture is taking place.’
‘Well, if this is our only means to get Rhiannon
back, let’s get on with it.’ Ray grabbed Tory’s hand and
caught a ride back to base.
Even when decoded, a lot of the information on Doc’s
hard drive hadn’t made sense to Floyd, though he’d
learned that Ray’s monitoring system for the fusion
reactor was in use. He’d also discovered the nature of
the glitch that the ICA had wanted Ray to design into
the storage units on the power grid — it was a shutdown
and/or self-destruct option that, if installed, could have
been triggered from the host station in New Mexico, or
alternatively, from the reactor station in space. Still,
there were many fine details that continued to elude
them, because code words were used for any subject Doc
wished to keep secret and these were the key to
unlocking the layers.

The events of the last few days, however, had provided
a few clues as to the true meaning of Doc’s perplexing
codes.
‘Aha!’ Floyd was suddenly enlightened, smiling as
he slowly shook his head. ‘It’s so obvious now.’
‘What is?’ Rhun returned from fetching himself a
glass of water and a coffee for Floyd.
‘Radiation detectors,’ he explained, and then read a
quote from the screen: ‘To be worn on the wrist or
forehead.’ He slapped his knee with the back of his
hand. ‘Sounds an awful lot like your NERGUZ-INUEN, no?’
‘That’s it, Floyd! You’ve cracked one of the key
words.’ Rhun sat down where he could view the screen.
‘What else does the document have to say about the
module?’
‘Not much. This is just a memo to his accountant,
justifying the outlay of funds to the manufacturer, one
Radtec Trading Company. Still, I can probably track
down their whereabouts via Doc’s financial records.’
Floyd set about digging deeper, but could find no
mention of Radtec Trading among Doc’s accounts.
‘Either Radtec is a pseudo name, or it’s been replaced by
a dummy company in his books.’
As the pages of Doc’s financial records flipped past
on the screen, Rhun noticed a peculiarity. ‘Stop!’ he
requested. ‘Go back a couple of screens.’
Floyd complied. ‘What is it you’re after?’ he asked,
as the page Rhun wanted appeared on the screen.
‘What’s that icon there?’ Rhun pointed to a yellow,
smiley face. The tiny symbol was set at the end of a

record detailing payment to a company with an Asian
name that Rhun couldn’t pronounce.
‘Ah yes,’ Floyd said warily. ‘Doc has these icons
scattered throughout his files, but they’re boobytrapped.’ He double clicked on the symbol and then
pressed the control–shift keys to show Rhun what he
meant.
The smiley face grew to encompass the whole
screen. ‘Enter password,’ it said. ‘But beware … three
wrong guesses and I self-destruct.’ The icon chuckled
away madly and then fell silent.
‘The programming files are protected by the same
self-destruct mechanism, so I can’t access code words
from there either.’ Floyd shrugged, ‘I haven’t messed
with any of them yet for fear of losing everything on the
hard drive. Mind you, I have taken copies of all the data
that is readily accessible. It’s all the rigged files, like this
one, that we stand to lose. You can guarantee they’d
make the most interesting reading.’
‘I thought you said you could crack any code,’ Rhun
jeered.
‘Ah, but I never said how long it would take,’ he
pointed out in his defence. ‘Doc Alexander is a
smart young pup. I’ve never encountered an encrypted
system with a self-destruct mechanism. Most large
organisations that require code protection would lose
information to hackers and risk sabotage rather than
wipe out their whole system.’
‘Well,’ Rhun rubbed his hands together. ‘I’m game,
if you are.’
‘It’s your call.’ Floyd shifted the responsibility,

although he was every bit as eager to gain access to the
protected files as Rhun was.
Rhun scribbled down some possibilities, trying to
decide which words might be the most suitable, and
then eliminated the ones that were more unlikely. In
the end, he got the list of possible passwords down to
five: NERGUZ, Radtec Trading Company, Unken,
LugalShamash, Utu.
‘But we only have three guesses.’ Floyd eyed the list
over.
‘They’re in my order of preference,’ Rhun said, ‘so if
you agree, feel free.’ He motioned to the keypad.
‘Alright, here goes nothing.’ Floyd typed NERGUZ
into the computer and pressed Enter. The smiley face
stuck out its tongue at them.
‘Two to go before I blow,’ it announced with mirth.
‘Next,’ Floyd droned, typing in Radtec Trading
Company and pressing the Enter key.
‘Twice wrong, say, so long.’ The computer was heard
to laugh which set both Rhun and Floyd on edge.
‘Damn it. I was sure that one would work,’ Rhun
grumbled.
‘Shall we quit while we’re ahead?’ Floyd didn’t feel
so confident about any of the remaining words.
‘Try …’ Rhun hesitated, then decided he should
follow his gut instinct, ‘try just Radtec.’
‘I don’t know, Rhun …’ Floyd smiled as the same
thought had just occurred to him.
The two of them stared at each other a moment,
their smiles growing as they encouraged each other to
make a decision.

‘Stuff it,’ Floyd finally announced, typing in the
word and hitting the Enter key, before they lost face.
‘Live to play another day.’ The smiley face dissolved
to reveal a detailed account of Radtec Trading’s
financial affairs.
‘My main man.’ Rhun gave Floyd a high-five, then
looked to the screen in search of an address. ‘That figures,’
Rhun commented as he spotted it. ‘Like everything else,
the NERGUZ-I-NUEN is made in Taiwan.’
A few hours into their flight, Walter became drowsy
and fell asleep. Rhiannon slipped away to the back of
the aircraft and waited while Doc dismissed his staff in
order to speak with her alone.
‘Anything to report?’ Doc fastened the NERGUZ-INUEN firmly around her right wrist, uttering the word
that activated the control mechanism.
He had discovered that even an individual with the
strongest will needed days to recover from the module’s
brainwashing influence, yet the subject’s psychic
abilities were restored as soon as the restraint was
removed. This allowed him to utilize Rhiannon’s
talents without risk of losing her to her own sense of
reason.
‘Cadfan is keeping something from you,’ she told
him, ‘but you’re not going to like it.’
‘Don’t tease me, girl,’ he warned her playfully.
She smiled at this, getting more comfortable in her
seat. ‘Your dear friend, President Langford, has AIDS.’
‘What?’
‘Not only that,’ she told him calmly, as if enjoying

his dismay. ‘He caught it from an underage male
prostitute, so he’s a pedophile as well.’
‘Shit!’ If there was one thing Cadwaladr couldn’t
abide, it was homosexuals. His project in Alaska had
quietly disposed of many of them, and those that had
proven themselves to be immortals had been brainwashed
out of their chosen sexual preferences. Patrick Haze had
turned out to be one such individual, which was why Doc
had no intention of ever allowing Cadfan admittance to
the AIDS facility. He had far greater plans for the healer.
‘Hey, Doc.’ Stanley Brennon stuck his head around
the curtains to speak with him. ‘I think you’d better
have a look at this.’
Walter Cadfan had gone as stiff as a board in his
seat. His head was thrown back, and his eyes, though
wide open, had rolled back so far into his head that only
the whites could be seen.
‘A vision?’ Doc asked Rhiannon, who was quite
bewildered. She had never witnessed this phenomenon
before — she had always been part of it. Still, Rhiannon
had heard descriptions from those observing her in a
trance state and this was exactly as they’d described.
‘Yes,’ she confirmed, a tear trickling down her cheek
as she began to tremble.
‘Yet, you are not perceiving it,’ Doc noted aloud,
finding this most intriguing. ‘The clan of the Serpent
have rejected you, it would seem.’
The comment sent a dagger through her heart, and
Rhiannon didn’t even know why. She glared at Doc a
moment, before heading to the back of the plane and
taking a seat on her own.

‘Get Vice-president Hagar on the phone, and make
sure the line is secure,’ Doc instructed Stanley.
As he waited for his instruction to be carried out,
Doc observed Rhiannon. Her will was strong, and she
was very talented. He had only removed her restraint
for a few short hours, and yet his hold over her had
lessened considerably. He found that the added element
of danger involved in setting her free was deeply
arousing. Rhiannon was so much more feisty, clever and
fun to be with when he wasn’t controlling her. Heaven
help me if I ever slacken her leash too much.
‘Hagar,’ Stanley confirmed, handing the phone to
Doc.
‘Maxwell.’ Doc put on his cheery voice. ‘I’ve got a
prediction for you … I see you being sworn in as
President of the United States within the next few
days.’ Doc paused to catch his reaction. ‘I’m deadly
serious, my friend. I’ve been chatting with Walter
Cadfan … yes, the psychic. We need to talk.’
It was dinner time at Watarrka, and the crew of the
Goddess were in the rec-room, plotting their excursion
to Taiwan.
Ray and Rhun were sitting next to each other going
over the blueprints of Radtec Trading’s manufacturing
plant, which Floyd had pinched from the local Taiwanese
council’s mainframe computer.
As down as Tory felt, it made her smile to see the
lads getting along. It felt like old times watching them
pay out on each other without any malicious intent.
Ray had been stoked to learn that Rhun and Floyd had

found the manufacturer’s address before they’d even had
to ask for it. Judging from the way they were getting
along now, Ray had perhaps realised that Rhun might
be his greatest ally after all.
‘Have something to eat.’ Jenny placed a plate of
food in front of Tory, who screwed up her nose.
‘I’ll stick to tea, thanks.’ But she only took a couple
of sips. Tory’s stomach couldn’t cope with the thought
of anything. She was sick with worry for her child.
‘Tory, honey.’ Naomi sat down beside her to help aid
Jenny’s cause. ‘Worrying is not going to get her back,
nor is starving yourself.’
‘I don’t need it.’ Tory resisted strongly.
‘I know that, but you’ll feel stronger and more alert
if you force yourself to eat.’
‘Please …’ Tory held her head. The thought of food
made her feel giddy and nauseous.
‘Tory?’
Naomi’s face became a blur.
Seconds later, all the immortals started dropping
like flies: first Tory, then Rhun, and Brian. Jenny was
the last to go.
Nobody had to ask what was happening. They had
all witnessed this phenomenon before and knew the
drill. They quietly went about laying out those afflicted
flat on the ground, where they could see out their
trauma with as much comfort as possible.
Three hours passed. But for those who awaited the
prophecy of their unconscious crew members, it seemed
like three days.

Tory was the first to stir. With her eyes closed, she
began to mumble deliriously. ‘Ice … fire … blood!’
Noah and Ray went down on their knees on either side
of her, helping her to sit upright and encouraging her to
awake by means of gentle slaps about the face.
‘Tory, it’s Ray.’
Her eyes shot open and she gripped hold of the neck
of his shirt. ‘Langford’s going to suicide.’ She closed her
eyes to recall what else she’d seen that made sense.
‘And Cadfan —’
‘Yes, what about Cadfan,’ Noah coaxed.
‘Someone is going to have him assassinated!’ In a
panic, she attempted to raise herself, only to collapse
back into Noah and Ray’s arms.
‘Calm down,’ Ray urged her. ‘Think now, was there
anything else you remember?’
‘A new religious leader.’ The voice turned
everyone’s attention to Rhun, who had found his own
way to a seated position.
Rhun continued: ‘A Messiah … I didn’t see his face,
but the man will have one hell of a following.’
‘Yes.’ Tory remembered seeing this also. ‘So many,
many people.’
‘I saw a couple of explosions …’ Brian rolled over
on one side, propping his head on his hand.
‘Me too.’ Rhun seconded his statement.
‘Me three,’ Tory waved at them. ‘So I guess we’d
better get in and out of Radtec Trading quick smart, just
in case it’s one of the targets.’
Everyone agreed. Rhiannon’s rescue was still their
top priority.

An hour away from the AIDS facility in Alaska, Cadfan
began to come round. His eyelids fluttered closed as his
body relaxed into his seat. ‘I’m not a saviour,’ he
muttered in protest.
‘Yeah,’ Doc had to smile, ‘but you’ll do.’ He slapped
the healer gently around the face to bring him to
consciousness. ‘Been speaking with God again, have
we?’ Cadfan was startled awake and Doc offered him
some water. ‘I assume you know the plan then?’
‘Cadwaladr,’ Cadfan named Doc, overawed by his
newly-acquired knowledge.
‘Grandfather,’ Doc acknowledged in return, placing
the water aside.
‘Yes. I have been made aware of your intentions,
Cadwaladr.’ The healer finally answered the question,
looking out the window over a snow-drenched
countryside. ‘So where are you taking me, really?’
‘Just where I said,’ Doc assured him, pointing to a
place on the distant horizon. ‘We’re only about an hour
away from the facility. So relax, you’ll get where you’re
going soon enough.’
It was a beautiful day outside, though at this
time of the year it was pretty much day all the time
in Alaska. It had obviously been snowing outside,
but the storm had passed completely, leaving a clear
view of the serene white countryside that lay before
them.
A flare of light erupted from the very spot where
Doc had directed Cadfan’s attention.
‘What the ...?’ Stanley Brennon was on the phone
at once. But the aircraft was hit by a shock wave, and

he was knocked off-balance before he could interrogate
whoever was on the receiving end of his call.
Due to the shock wave generated by the distant
blast, the plane lost power and the engines died.
Knowing something of the effect an EMP wave could
have on the plane’s electrical systems, the pilot was
quick to shut down and re-boot his computers. The
engines roared to life once again, and the aircraft was
back on course in a matter of minutes.
‘Is everyone okay?’ Doc received garbled responses
from his team. ‘Good … because it would seem the
Unken have retaliated, ladies and gents. Therefore we
have a whole lot more work to do.’ Doc clicked his
fingers to draw Stanley’s attention away from searching
for his phone. ‘Get me to Washington.’
‘No!’ Cadfan suddenly remembered his most recent
vision. ‘He’s not in control of his own faculties, you
have to stop him.’
Doc grabbed the Stormer off Brennon’s belt and
blasted Cadfan with it. ‘We really must look into
manufacturing those things.’ He passed the weapon
back to Stanley. ‘It shuts them up for a while, at least.’
Doc arranged a closed meeting with Langford. From the
airport the ICA party were flown to the White House
by helicopter, and were given a clear run all the way
through to the oval office. Doc entered alone.
Langford confirmed that the total destruction of the
ICA’s AIDS clinic in Alaska had been an act of Unken
retaliation for their own fallen nation. ‘They claim full
responsibility … what a mess.’ Langford rubbed his

weary brow, starting to sweat under the pressure. If
anyone ever found out that the Unken had not been
responsible for the disaster in the Middle East his life
wouldn’t be worth living.
‘Well, here.’ Doc passed the President a NERGUZ
bracelet. ‘This is a little something my scientists have
been working on. I hoped we’d never need them, but
the way things are going we’ll have to make the damn
devices compulsory.’
Langford picked up the strange, pinkish metallic
band, looking it over with a perplexed expression.
‘It’s a radiation detector. It also absorbs excess
radiation,’ Doc explained. ‘It’s designed to be worn on
the right wrist.’
The President tried to look appreciative as he
snapped the metal band on. ‘Ouch …’ He felt something
bite him, and tried to dig under the secured band
looking for bugs. ‘I beg your pardon?’ Langford queried.
Doc had uttered something but he didn’t quite catch it.
‘Enough of the pleasantries,’ Doc changed the
subject, though Langford wouldn’t have known.
‘Another urgent matter has come to my attention, Bob,
and I’d like to run the scenario by you so we can decide
on the appropriate action.’
‘Shoot,’ Langford bade him, though the last thing
he needed was another problem. As his esteemed
colleague outlined the cause of his concern, Langford’s
other woes suddenly paled by comparison. His life was
already not worth living.
‘Now, I know you keep a pistol in the top drawer
of your desk, Bob.’ Doc planted the seed before

departing. ‘I’m going to leave you to mull things over
for a while.’
The outer office was filled with the President’s staff,
all anxiously awaiting an audience. When Doc emerged
he was swamped with questions, but he called everyone to
silence and addressed Langford’s personal assistant. ‘The
President could use some tea,’ he told her, before turning
to address the rest of the crowd, ‘and a few quiet moments
to collect his thoughts wouldn’t go astray either.’
The garbled protests were silenced by the gunshot.
Seconds later the oval office was flooded with witnesses
to the President’s suicide — nobody could dispute the
fact.
Doc was one of the first through the door, and while
others were taken aback by the gruesome sight, he made
straight for Langford to check his vital signs. ‘I knew he
was feeling a little stressed, but this?’ While Doc was
playing the saint, he managed to retrieve the NERGUZ
module without anyone noticing.
‘Don’t touch anything.’ A security man pulled the
diplomat aside, and the paramedics moved in.
‘What did you say to him?’ General Berkley took
hold of Doc by his jacket lapels.
‘I think what we were discussing is fairly obvious,
John.’ Doc brushed away the General’s hold on him.
‘He just couldn’t handle the pressure … can you?’
Doc walked away, leaving the General to stew over
what he knew. On the outside, Doc was weeping for the
loss of his dear friend for whom there was barely a dry
eye in the room. He paused at the doorway, looking
back at the paramedics who were unable to help their

fallen leader. But all the King’s horses and all the King’s
men, couldn’t put Langford together again. On the inside,
Cadwaladr smiled broadly.
Tory, Brian and Rhun had already left for Taiwan when
the news about the Alaskan bombing and the
President’s subsequent suicide was announced on the
television.
Those left in Floyd’s control room at Watarrka sat
gaping with awe as their crewmates’ prophecies
manifested before their eyes.
‘I saw this,’ Jenny gasped, and then burst into tears.
‘It’s okay, Mum.’ Nick placed a comforting arm
around her, believing it was what had come to pass that
had upset her. In reality, it was what had yet to happen
that she feared.
As was to be expected, the ICA were the centre of
media attention. The news broadcast crossed to a live
press conference Doc had called in Washington.
‘There’s Rhiannon.’ Ray noticed her standing on
the sidelines with the rest of Doc’s team. She didn’t
look like she was under restraint. On the contrary, she
appeared to be fitting right in. ‘There it is …’ He
spotted the bracelet she wore on her right wrist and got
up out of his seat to see if he could get a closer look.
There were protests from the others for Ray to stop
blocking the screen. ‘Hey, isn’t that Walter Cadfan?’ He
pointed to the gentleman standing beside Rhiannon.
‘If you’d kindly get out of the way, I’ll tell you,’
Noah jeered and Ray moved. ‘Yes, it is Cadfan,’ the
reporter was surprised to note. ‘What is he doing there?’

They did not have to wait long for an answer. After
Doc had said his piece in regard to the Unken
retaliation and the suicide of his dear friend, President
Langford, he invited Cadfan up on stage. The diplomat
stated how Walter had foreseen the disastrous events
that had unfolded in the past few days, and he proposed
that the world might do well to pay heed to what
Cadfan had to say from here on in.
The renowned healer and prophet took the stage,
and as he raised his right hand to wave to the television
cameras Ray freaked.
‘Cadfan’s wearing a module too!’
‘Shit!’ Noah sprang from his seat to join Ray,
hovering close to the picture. ‘He’s right. It’s identical
to the modules that Doc’s team are wearing.’
Jenny started to whimper again, and trembled as she
stared at the screen in horror. ‘I saw this …’ she
managed to stammer once more before Floyd realised
what had Jen so distressed.
‘They’re going to assassinate Walter Cadfan.’ Floyd
remembered what Tory had said.
‘But he’s one of the Chosen, isn’t he?’ Ray queried,
hesitant to consider what Doc’s plan might be for the
well-respected psychic.
‘Exactly!’ Noah sprang up, consumed by an
unexpected insight. ‘And what do you get when you
mortally wound a man on national television and he
comes back to life?’
‘A Messiah!’ They all guessed the punch line. ‘And
Doc’s controlling him.’ The notion was not an
attractive one.

‘There must be something we can do?’ Naomi urged
them all to think harder, though with their main task
force absent their options were limited.
The sniper’s bullet startled them, as every person in
the room had been anticipating the sound. The closerange shot split Cadfan’s skull, taking the top of his
head clean off. They watched in horror as his body
crumpled to the floor. There was no question that the
strike had not been fatal.
‘I can’t believe they’re still transmitting.’ Naomi felt
as if she might be sick, but was too distraught to move.
‘Doc would have arranged it that way,’ Ray said
softly. ‘He’ll want the whole world to witness the
resurrection of his new and greatest puppet.’
Thrown into complete disarray, the members of the
press suddenly hushed and were shown to be looking in
amazement at the stage.
‘Oh god, they’re sick.’ Naomi turned away as the
camera came to focus on Walter’s mutilated remains.
‘No, Naomi, look!’ Noah urged, riveted to the
transmission. ‘He’s reconstituting.’
It was true. The splattered pieces of Cadfan’s head
were slowly sliding their way back to rejoin the rest of
his form. No sooner had his splintered skull repaired
itself than veins, nerves, muscles and skin enfolded it.
When every fragment of his person was restored not one
drop of Cadfan’s blood remained on the stage. As his
eyes opened, all those who witnessed the miracle were
frozen to the spot in complete astonishment and
disbelief. The fallen prophet raised himself up to a
seated position, still dazed by his ordeal, when the

crowd broke into a round of applause. In a heartbeat,
Cadfan was surrounded by reporters firing questions at
him. Was he an alien? A vampire?
‘Are you the Messiah?’ One reporter cut right to the
chase.
Cadfan shrank away from the crowd, unable to
respond. Doc barged into the middle of the scuffle to
retrieve his grandfather.
‘For heavens’ sakes, man.’ Doc wrenched the
reporter who’d asked the pertinent question out of the
way. ‘After what we all just witnessed, do you really
need to ask?’ The diplomat guided Walter Cadfan away
from the commotion with the aid of his security team.
The media went into a frenzy. Journalists started
madly whipping mobile phones out of pockets and bags
and dialling their editors. Many rushed off to meet
deadlines.
With a box full of NERGUZ modules for Ray to dissect,
Tory, Rhun and Brian returned home in good spirits.
They had also succeeded in releasing a nasty virus into
Radtec Trading’s mainframe computer. This would slow
production of the modules, for a while at least. They
could have destroyed the plant, but they knew Doc
would only relocate the enterprise elsewhere and would
probably capitalise on the propaganda value. And there
seemed little point in defeating their enemy if it meant
using the same assault tactics they were supposedly
rebelling against. An eye for an eye didn’t figure in
Tory’s book, but neither did turn the other cheek.
Cadwaladr had lessons to learn in this life, too, and she

was just the person to teach them to him. Tory had
decided this before she’d even returned to Watarrka,
and at that stage she didn’t know the half of what he’d
done.
In the few short hours they’d been in Asia, it
seemed as if the whole world had gone mad. ‘So now
we’ve lost Cadfan. And he is to become what he feared
and despised most — an idol.’ Tory wanted to cry, but
knew there was little point. ‘It’s down to you, my
friend.’ Tory passed their bounty to Ray. ‘I’m fresh out of
ideas.’
Ray had already whipped a module from the box and
was examining it closely. ‘I’ll get on it right now.’ He
wandered off to his tool shed with the box under arm.
‘I’ll give you a hand.’ Rhun went after him.
Brian looked across to his sister. He had to admit
that he was exhausted from all the action they’d seen in
the past few days, but Tory appeared far more jaded than
he. She might have been immortal, but at present she
looked more like a walking corpse. ‘You, my girl, are
going straight to a hot bath.’ He grabbed hold of her to
escort her there.
Tory wanted to protest, but the thought of a hot
bath was far too wonderful. ‘Brilliant idea.’ She
loosened his grip, patting his hand to assure him she
would follow his instruction.
Brian felt powerless to help her as he watched Tory
trudge out the door. It seemed so unfair that she always
came through for everyone else, yet who was there who
could possibly return the favour?
‘Dad,’ he stated resolutely.

19
DWELLERS OF THE
UNDERGROUND

A

s Tory soaked in the tub she was mulling over
the conversation she’d had with Taliesin on
Faial. He had made it sound as though any
attempt to rescue Rhiannon would prove futile, and
he’d certainly not offered any suggestions to aid the
cause. Nor, in their infinite wisdoms, had the High
Merlin or her father gone out of their way to prevent
Cadfan’s sad plight. This lack of action led Tory to
wonder if Doc was truly infallible, or if, for reasons yet
unknown to her, the Gods actually wanted this ‘end of
the world’ scenario to be played out.
‘I am sick to death of graciously succumbing to the
higher agenda.’ She raised herself from her watery

resting place and stepped out of the bath cubicle to
retrieve a towel from the bed. ‘I mean, give me one
reason why I should even give a shit?’
Tory Alexander. You raise my expectations.
Startled by the comment, she covered herself with
the towel before turning to see Maelgwn’s free-floating
etheric form at the other end of her quarters. She didn’t
dare move, fearing she was dreaming and would wake.
‘My god, is that really you?’
Not God, but close, he granted. I am your husband,
remember?
‘Oh, aye!’ She was overwhelmed by his presence
and wanted so desperately to run and embrace him, but
refrained knowing she could not.
Please, carry on, he smiled. My memory no longer
does your naked form any justice.
‘It is you.’ She returned the smile, allowing her
towel to drop to the floor.
Even before they’d married, Maelgwn had always
had a sixth sense when it came to Tory’s bath time
and he enjoyed nothing more than catching her in
the act.
‘Your timing is still impeccable, I see.’
So it would seem. Maelgwn was mesmerised as he
watched her approach. He reached out to touch her
cheek.
Tory’s eyes closed in anticipation, and she released a
soft sigh of delight as his fingertips made contact.
You can feel that? He hadn’t really expected that she
would.
‘Aye, it tingles,’ she advised.

Interesting, Maelgwn thought, immediately pushing
the observation aside. There was a reason behind his
visit, and he felt he should deliver his report before he
got sidetracked. Tory, I know how Cadwaladr was
overlooked as an immortal.
‘Oh, my love. How romantic!’ Tory moved to dress
herself. He was obviously here on official business and
was bound to act accordingly.
Listen to me. He delayed her. Cadwallon has been
doing some regression therapy, and he discovered that he was
not first slain at the battle of Hexham, but in his crib, soon
after birth.
‘So Cadwallon’s immortal gene was activated when
Cadwaladr was conceived. I was right.’ Tory took a seat
on the bed, still in her naked state. ‘But how did the
heir to the throne of Gwynedd manage to die without
one of his nursemaids finding out about it?’
His mother, Cadfan’s good Queen, had a difficult time
with birthing. The staff were well occupied trying to save her
life at the time her newborn babe was being murdered.
‘So you think it was purposeful, then?’ Tory was
intrigued.
We know it was, and with the very intention of keeping
Cadwallon’s son’s immortality a secret from the family
guardian.
‘Taliesin,’ Tory concluded. ‘And who had such
incredible foresight? Shamash.’
Correct. But he did have some help from —
‘Inanna.’ Tory guessed the other half of the
equation, before Maelgwn had the chance to deliver it.
Correct again. He was astonished by what she’d

managed to figure out on her own. Under hypnosis,
Cadwallon recounted the whole affair.
‘So it is the entity in whom Cadwaladr has placed
his trust who is ultimately to blame for him being
overlooked, not Taliesin.’ Tory shook her head,
thinking it ironic.
Yes, as usual, Taliesin is blameless. Maelgwn still felt
guilty about banishing the Merlin from his kingdom all
those years ago, and he’d never really had the chance to
say sorry since. You know I regret accusing you both as I did.
‘Maelgwn, you were ill,’ Tory stated frankly to
induce him to lose the guilt. ‘Everyone knew that,
including Taliesin, so forget it. Tell me instead of your
second attempt to rescue my great-grandfather’s
technologist, Gibal. Did you succeed?’ She lay across
the bed to listen.
He was about to ask her how she knew the details of
his last mission, but the sight of her laid out before him
caused Maelgwn to wonder instead how he’d ever run a
kingdom with Tory around to distract him.
I rescued parts of Gibal, he told her, but as Inanna has
hidden the rest of him all over the galaxy, the all-important
head is proving a little hard to find.
‘She dismembered him!’ Tory sat back up.
Aye, a vengeful gesture. Inanna believes Marduk
dismembered her lover, Dumuzi.
‘But Dumuzi was my grandfather’s youngest brother.
Why would Marduk want to dismember him?’
Marduk swears it was not he who murdered his brother,
but as the pieces of Dumuzi have never been found, he
cannot prove his innocence.

Maelgwn floated down to lay beside her on the bed,
and Tory wondered if he knew of their daughter’s
predicament — or if, indeed, he knew of their daughter
at all. ‘Have you done much regression work, Maelgwn?
Do you remember your past lives as Turan and Miles?’
Of course I do. They are my link to new experiences of
you … Turan, Miles, and all the others, they keep me sane.
All the others? She wondered at this, but let it pass.
‘You know of our daughter then?’
Rhiannon.
He stated it as plainly as Miles himself would, which
was a great relief to Tory. She didn’t want to have to go
into a long explanation. ‘Cadwaladr is holding her
captive with a NERGUZ module.’
What! Maelgwn’s form went shooting backwards
into the middle of the room. Why was I not told?
‘Well, the impression I got from Taliesin was that
the powers that be want her left were she is, as some
sort of spy,’ she explained. ‘Her boyfriend, who just
happens to be an electromechanical design engineer, is
trying to figure a way around the voice command
mechanism on the NERGUZ module. Rhun is helping
him,’ Tory added in an attempt to ease Maelgwn’s
distress.
His son’s name brought the smile back to Maelgwn’s
face, but the news that the NERGUZ had reached his
home planet saddened Maelgwn greatly. What are you
planning to do?
Tory slid off the bed to dress herself, knowing a
good-sense lecture was forthcoming. ‘I’ll wait and see
what Ray comes up with, before I decide.’

Although he admired her guts, Maelgwn couldn’t
allow her to risk being captured. Tory please —
‘Don’t Tory please me. I know what you’re going to
say.’ She pulled her singlet on over her underwear with
such force she almost tore it. ‘I am not going to leave
our daughter at that bastard’s discretion. You do know
who he is, don’t you?’
Maelgwn was puzzled by the question. Aye,
Cadwaladr.
Tory shook her head. ‘He’s Caradoc, incarnate.’
My brother, Caradoc?
‘None other.’
That explains how Doc recognised Miles as me, the day
he killed him.
‘You relived Miles’ murder?’ Tory assumed this was
the case, as Turan had made the same observation.
Aye, and I wondered how Cadwaladr came to know me
by sight. Obviously he has been doing some past-life regression
work himself. The thought of Caradoc controlling
Rhiannon was both shocking and sickening. Maelgwn
knew how it felt to be under the restraint of a NERGUZ
module, for he’d been amongst the first of its victims. I
have obviously not been told the half of what is really going on.
‘Ha! Join the club.’ Tory pulled on her jeans and
zipped them up.
Tory, Maelgwn appealed. If neither one of us is being
told all the facts, then perhaps between us we can piece the
truth together.
‘Well, I’m all for that.’
Maelgwn gathered as much. But if you are captured by
Cadwaladr, that would seem to ruin our chances of doing so.

Though Tory appreciated the subtlety of his
approach, she folded her arms in defiance. ‘It’s alright
for you to take the same risks …’
I have lots of aid.
‘So do I.’
Ah … but I have allies on various levels of the etheric
world. He knew he had her on this point. Whereas you
have let your ties with the denizens of the Otherworld
lapse.
‘Well, I’ve been a trifle busy!’ Tory found herself
wishing he was physically present, so she could thump
him. ‘Look, if you’re not going to be part of the
solution, Maelgwn, then you’re part of my problem.
Nothing you can say or do is going to stop me from
trying to free our daughter, and you know me well
enough to realise I’m not lying.’
Yes, I do, Maelgwn conceded in a huff. Then, at least
promise me that you shall consult Taliesin before making any
such attempt.
‘I already told you. Taliesin doesn’t want me to
liberate her.’
Then change his mind! Maelgwn remonstrated.
Goddess knows you have an extraordinary talent for getting
your own way.
‘That’s because I’m always right.’ She pushed her
luck, grinning broadly.
This was Tory’s way of saying she agreed with his
caution, so Maelgwn resolved with a smile: I cannot
argue with that. I can only hope that it will always be thus.
Tory gave him a wink to assure him he could count
on it.

Maelgwn did not linger long, though he did promise to
contact Tory as often as he could. He feared, however,
that his visits would not be as often as he’d like. What
with all that was going on in the universe, leisure time
was a rarity.
‘War,’ Tory uttered when she found herself alone,
shaking her head as she considered how futile it was. If
the Nefilim were so all-powerful and all-knowing, then
why were they causing such havoc? ‘The trouble is, I
have been in awe of these beings … the whole human
race has since the day they fused the genes of an apeman with their own and created us.’ Tory began to pace,
her trust in herself being fueled by her words. ‘But they
were not the very essence of our creation. The Nefilim
may be a part of God’s universe, but the one divine
source of all there is? They most certainly are not!’
In her view, humanity’s immortal forefathers had
really done no more than to be the parents. They had
overseen mankind’s development until such time as we
were able to cope on our own. Granted, human beings
had made quite a mess of their planet. Instead of the
temple the Nefilim had left behind, the Earth now
looked more like a university student’s apartment. Yet
much of humanity’s destructive tendency may have
been avoided had the Nefilim not confused our beliefs
and principles through all the ages, just as some parents
feel the need to strike the fear of God into their
children to keep them under control.
‘Well, there comes a time in the life of every child
when they become the teacher and the parent becomes
the pupil. For the Nefilim, that time is now.’

Feeling, for the first time in a long time, that she
truly knew her own mind, Tory headed down to see if
Ray and Rhun had any initial observations for her. She
did realise Ray’s task was going to take some time, if
indeed he managed to figure out the NERGUZ at all.
Tory was still of a mind to visit Rhiannon; as long as
she could persuade Taliesin to aid her, there was a means
by which she could seek her daughter without the risk of
being trapped. She had already requested a copy of Doc’s
itinerary for the coming weeks from Floyd, figuring the
diplomat would be keeping Rhiannon close by him. In
the light of information concerning Cadwallon’s murder
at the hands of Inanna and Shamash, Tory also had a
few ideas to run by Taliesin pertaining to how Doc might
be eradicated from history altogether.
Rhun and Ray had already disassembled several of
the NERGUZ modules. Ray was half falling asleep as he
inspected the circuitry of one through a strong
magnifying glass.
‘The good news is, these actually are radiation
detectors.’ He pushed his glasses back up his nose as he
looked at Tory. ‘Only this tiny area here,’ and he
motioned to the part of the armband that rested against
the inner wrist, ‘is of concern to us. Come here.’ He
motioned Tory round behind him, from where she could
view the processor magnified.
Once detached from the metal casing, the tiny
processor chip resembled a hexagonal ball that had a
minute spike at one end. It was simply beautiful to look
at, like a fine jewel that glistened with a myriad of
colours.

‘I don’t suppose you’ve ever seen anything like this
before?’ Tory inquired, sounding hopeful, as she
certainly hadn’t.
Ray shook his head. ‘Turan may have, but not I.
Still, commonsense tells us that this wee spike here is
integral to the control mechanism’s function.
Therefore, if we were to create a device that would
sever it from the processor, it may well deactivate it.’
‘If, of course, it doesn’t give the wearer a severe
psychotic breakdown in the process,’ Rhun added.
‘Or explode, etcetera,’ Ray finished. ‘The trouble is,
we can’t seem to find anything that will even scratch
the surface of the damn thing, let alone cut it.’
‘Well, keep trying. You’re doing good.’ She rubbed
both their necks in gratitude, and feeling how tense Ray
was she turned all her attention to him. ‘You should get
some rest, my friend.’
‘Who can sleep!’ he scoffed.
‘You would, if you’d just put your head down for five
minutes! See to it that he does,’ she instructed Rhun as
she kissed his forehead on her way out.
‘Are you off somewhere?’ Rhun inquired, sensing
that she was.
‘Don’t worry, I’ll stay out of trouble.’
His mother vanished before she reached the door.
Rhun pondered what she might be up to, then, with a
shrug, looked back at Ray and the challenge at hand.
‘Remind me, in a couple of hours, that I need to check
up on her.’
‘Bloody parents, eh?’ Ray commented. ‘You can’t let
them out of your sight for a second.’

When Tory materialised from the ethers, expecting to
confront Taliesin, she again found herself in complete
darkness. She could only assume that this meant the
Merlin was still in the company of Neraida’s clan. This
time, however, the room she’d manifested into did not
feel entirely stable — in fact, it felt mobile. She was
about to call to Taliesin, when the floor underneath her
feet tilted abruptly and she was cast off-balance and sent
hurtling into a wall. ‘Holy Moses!’ she muttered, sliding
down to the floor where she stood a better chance of
keeping her bearings.
‘Tory?’ She was wrenched from the ground and
thrust into a seat. ‘Dear me. Are you alright?’
‘Taliesin! What’s happening? Is it an earthquake?’
she questioned anxiously as she felt him strap her
securely into the seat.
‘No, not quite.’
He placed a pair of goggles in her hands, which she
immediately placed over her eyes to discover her
surroundings. ‘No wonder,’ she mumbled.
They were in some kind of flying craft that was
heading at an inconceivable speed through a large
subterranean tunnel. The dark, rocky cavern through
which they moved was so deep that Tory could only
barely make out the river of red molten lava that flowed
miles beneath them.
‘We’re underground.’ She had deduced that much.
‘But —’ Tory was too overwhelmed to decide whether
she should ask why, where, or how.
Knowing her mind, Taliesin filled her in on the
details. ‘Why? Because I have identified all the

immortals in Neraida’s tribe, so I am moving on to the
next underground clan in this area. Where? In the
vicinity of Mt Ararat. As for how, Eli here,’ he
motioned to the man piloting their craft, ‘is Neraida’s
grandson. He knows his way through the fault chasms
in this Middle Eastern sector better than anyone.’
‘Are you saying we’re flying in between the tectonic
plates in the Earth’s crust!’
‘We’re below all that,’ Eli informed her with a wave
to acknowledge his new passenger. ‘My tribe has been
getting around this way for eons.’
‘You see,’ Taliesin began his lecture, ‘fault lines run
along a grid where the electromagnetic energy is
strongest. And as this craft is powered by
electromagnetic propulsion, fault chasms form the
perfect highway.’
‘Electromagnetic propulsion,’ she echoed, knowing
this type of travel had yet to be perfected by those living
on the surface of the planet.
‘This transit system was left here by the Nefilim,’
the Merlin explained, ‘though they themselves have
now discovered far more advanced forms of propulsion
that do not rely on such tracks.’
‘And you’ve been getting around this way for eons,
did you say?’ Tory directed the question to Eli, who
nodded, indicating she’d got it right.
‘Puts a whole new slant on the UFO conspiracy,
doesn’t it?’
‘I’ll say.’ Tory pondered this a second. ‘So, am I to
assume, then, that the Nefilim left this kind of
underground base all over the world?’

‘You guessed it,’ Eli confirmed.
Tory took a deep breath. ‘That would certainly seem
to explain the connection between UFO sightings, fault
lines and the ley-line grid.’
‘Indeed.’ Taliesin smiled, feeling Tory’s curiosity had
been satisfied for the moment. ‘So, to what do we owe
this visit?’
Tory looked at him surprised. ‘What, you’re actually
asking me?’
‘Well I know how you detest me jumping the gun,’
Taliesin said dryly, ‘but I can just give you a straight
answer up front, if you’d prefer?’
‘As I believe time is of the essence …’ she invited
his view.
‘The answer is no.’
The Merlin’s blunt refusal got Tory’s back up. ‘No, I
cannot time travel back to prevent Inanna and
Shamash from murdering Cadwallon in his cradle? Or,
no, you will not assist me to rescue my daughter?’
Taliesin took a deep breath, knowing how Tory
hated taking his word for anything. ‘I have seen the
present day in a reality when Cadwaladr was not
Caradoc’s reincarnation … it was a disaster.’
‘You mean the world would be a worse place
without Doc Alexander?’ The Merlin nodded, and Tory
paused before arguing with him to consider all that the
diplomat had done for the nations of the world and the
planet itself.
‘Understand that, as spiteful and manipulative as he
has been throughout the centuries, Cadwaladr has also
had his quiet moments of victory and achievement.’

Taliesin’s glimpse of the alternative future had made
that plainly obvious. ‘I also know that, deep inside, you
know there is good in Doc. Just as you knew there was
good in Caradoc, which is why you wouldn’t allow
Maelgwn to feed him to the Dragon.’
Tory looked at him, realising that ultimately she had
brought this upon herself; had she not been so merciful,
Caradoc’s soul would have been wiped from existence
and Cadwaladr would have been someone entirely
different!
‘Ah, but would he have been a better man? Ask
yourself that,’ suggested Taliesin, who was following her
train of thought. ‘For in the reality I saw, I assure you,
he was not.’
‘Shit,’ she conceded finally. Tory hadn’t considered
she might actually make things worse. ‘Just how much
time-hopping have you done in the chariot?’ Now that
they were on the subject, she was rather curious to
know.
‘In the chariot … hardly any. I returned it to your
father’s cave ages ago for you to find.’ He thought he’d
avoided that question rather well. ‘And you?’ he
inquired, politely.
‘I have to free my daughter,’ Tory insisted, to avoid
the small talk.
‘You can’t,’ Taliesin said. ‘You have no means.’
‘Then I have to see her, at least! If I astrally project
myself to her, I cannot be restrained —’
‘To what end, Tory? Are you forgetting that
Rhiannon has been drained of all her psi ability. She
won’t see you, or hear you.’ Taliesin hated to be so harsh

on her, but she simply wasn’t thinking straight. ‘And
quite apart from that, Inanna is after your personage, or
have you forgotten?’
‘No, I haven’t forgotten. Why do you think I let
Maelgwn talk me into seeking your assistance.’ The
frustration brought tears to her eyes. She couldn’t
think of a practical reason to take the risk, only a
personal one. ‘I have to see her, Taliesin. I have to see
for myself how she fares. If you really are my friend, as
you have so often claimed, and you are not beyond
questioning the Nefilim’s motives and orders, you will
aid me in this.’
The Merlin seemed puzzled by her words, perhaps
even a little bewildered. ‘This has very little to do with
the Nefilim’s will, I assure you,’ he declared, before
sighing deeply. ‘But I can see I shall have no peace if I
do not agree —’
‘Oh, thank you.’ Tory grabbed hold of him to kiss
his cheek.
‘There is a condition, however.’ He spoke up before
she got too excited.
‘Anything, what is it?’
‘You will wait a month before making contact, no
questions asked.’
‘But why?’ She couldn’t help herself.
‘I have my reasons.’ His expression gave nothing
away. ‘Are we agreed?’
Tory hesitated. She knew what Taliesin was like.
There was very little point in hounding him about his
motives if he was of the mind to keep them secret. ‘No
deal, I’ll do it on my own.’

‘And risk never being able to touch your love
again?’ The Merlin tormented her. ‘If Inanna claims
your physical self you shall be stranded in the ethers
until such time as she is bored with you … and from
what I hear of her designs on your husband, that may
not be for some time.’
‘Alright, already.’ Tory didn’t like putting her own
selfish desires before the welfare of her child, but the
notion of Maelgwn being deceived into an affair with
that evil enchantress was enough to make her accept
Taliesin’s terms. She slouched in her chair, all huffy
once more.
‘Good, it’s settled.’ Taliesin pretended not to notice
her resentment. ‘Meanwhile, I shall visit Watarrka to
seek out those in your camp who are Chosen.’
Tory wasn’t sure she liked the sound of this. Certainly
she was happy for those who would be liberated from
their mortal bodies, but what of the others?
‘I shall be very discreet,’ he assured before she
objected. ‘How does two days from now sound?’
‘Fine, I guess,’ she grumbled. Why did he have to be
so damn secretive all the time? She was tired of trusting
in the universe, as it certainly didn’t seem to be doing
her any favours of late.
‘It’s all in the way you look at it really,’ Taliesin
advised her. ‘Why do you have so much trouble
believing that every adversity can be turned to one’s
advantage? The trouble with you is, you have lost your
blind faith. You spend too much time trying to figure
out the details of your problems and not enough time
focusing on a positive outcome.’

‘I know what I want, High Merlin, make no mistake
about that.’
Taliesin gave a slight nod to grant that this might be
true. ‘But you can’t make wishes for someone else Tory,
only for you.’
‘Then the universe obviously isn’t going to be of
much help in this instance, is it?’ she concluded dryly,
and having no desire to be lectured further she willed
herself home.
Brian wasn’t making any headway with their father,
either; Myrddin seemed to think everything was going
according to plan.
News that the Middle East and a large portion of
Alaska had been destroyed failed to raise little more
than a blank look from the Merlin. Brian ran by him
the news of Cadfan’s assassination and pending Son of
God status, at which time Myrddin nodded as if it were
expected and stood poised to learn what had Brian so
riled.
‘What about Rhiannon’s kidnapping?’ Brian made a
desperate attempt to get some sign of emotion out of his
father, to ensure he hadn’t turned into a zombie. ‘Surely
you’re concerned about that. She is your granddaughter, after all!’
‘Why concerned?’ he queried. ‘All is going
splendidly.’
‘Splendidly!’ Brian barked ‘If this is what you call
splendid, I’d sure hate to see your idea of shithouse.
Tory is out of her mind with worry. Can’t you do
anything to help her get Rhiannon back?’

‘I’m no authority on the NERGUZ-I-NUEN, Brian,’
Myrddin advised. ‘Tory has Ray Murdock looking at the
module, and he is far more qualified than I. She is also
seeking Taliesin’s aid —’
‘Taliesin?’ Brian frowned. Tory hadn’t mentioned
the High Merlin’s return to the present.
‘Teo, then,’ Myrddin clarified. ‘You know what I
mean?’
‘No, Dad, I don’t.’ Brian folded his arms.
‘Oops.’ Myrddin shrank back, realising that Tory
obviously hadn’t told her brother of Teo’s passing.
‘Tell me about “oops”,’ Brian hounded his father, as
he began to walk away.
‘I’d love to Brian, but I have to fly.’
‘Is there a connection between Teo and Taliesin?’
His question tapered off as his father disappeared into
the wall of the cave and Brian found himself addressing
a rock face. ‘Damn it, Dad!’ He thumped the solid
obstruction that prevented him from pursuing his father.
Upon her return to Watarrka, Tory found the camp in
an uproar.
A huge falcon, the size of a man, had flown into
their base through an opening in the roof of the cavern
of pools. It had perched itself high up in the cavern of
abodes and was observing everything from there.
Some of the Aboriginals were of a mind to kill the
huge bird for a feast, but Tory rushed down the stairs to
the cavern floor to prevent it.
‘No don’t!’ She threw herself at the man who was
about to launch a spear at the creature, tackling him to

the ground. ‘He’s a friend,’ she explained, setting her
startled victim free and getting to her feet. ‘Thais?’ She
looked to the huge winged beast. ‘It is I, Lamamu.’
The falcon let loose an almighty screech as it took
flight.
Rhun was making his way into the cavern of abodes
when he spied the enormous bird, circling its way down
to land before his mother. ‘What the devil?’ He ran
against the general flow of people who were fleeing the
cavern. But as he got closer to Tory the beast
confronting her began to transform. At first Rhun
thought it was reconstituting into a human being, and
thus he suspected a Shaman in their midst. By the time
Rhun reached his mother’s side, however, it was rather
apparent that this was no ordinary shape-shifting
individual. For although it had the head, arms and torso
of a strong, healthy human male, it had the
hindquarters and four legs of a fine black stallion.
‘Mother, is this what I think it is?’ Rhun asked,
watching the animal prance about as it got the feel of its
new form.
‘Thais is a centaur, if that’s what you mean.’ Tory
smiled, delighted to see her old friend again. ‘Don’t look
so worried. We go way back.’
‘Pleased to hear it,’ Rhun muttered, as the beast
came to a stand still before them, towering over both.
‘Lamamu, Shar Xavier.’ Thais bowed, graciously.
‘What a pleasure it is to see you both.’
‘The pleasure is all ours,’ Tory assured him, before
motioning to Rhun to correct her friend’s
misconception. ‘This is my son, Rhun.’

‘Of course,’ Thais realised his error. ‘Prince of
Gwynedd some sixty years. I’m so pleased to make your
acquaintance.’
The centaur gave him a firm handshake. Rhun
could only stand there in amazed silence.
‘So what drags you from your island home in the
Azores, Thais?’ Tory began to walk with the creature,
ignoring the staring masses who were keeping their
distance. ‘Or should I call you Thomas?’ This was the
name Thais went by when in human form, Thomas
Mateus.
‘Whatever you prefer, Nin. To me, it matters not.’
His smile transformed into a frown. ‘I am a close friend
of Walter Cadfan. I teach classes for him from time to
time. You know what has happened I presume.’
‘I do, and I have an electronics whiz, Ray, working
on a way to get around the NERGUZ-I-NUEN module
that Doc is using to control Cadfan … and others.’
‘You are well informed.’ Thais considered this
unusual for an immortal of so few years and experience.
Thais had lost track of how many thousands of years
he’d seen, and still this young amateur was one step
ahead of him.
‘Actually, you may be able to help Ray with a few
problems he’s having.’
‘I’d be more than happy to assist.’ Thais jumped at
the opportunity. ‘I was secretly hoping you’d have a
plan.’
‘Excellent. But, ah … you might want to consider a
human form. Ray is rather easily spooked,’ she
explained.

Thais raised both eyebrows, flashing a cheeky grin.
‘You might want to consider finding me some clothes
then.’
Tory was pleased to have Thais on the team. He had
many talents her kin had yet to master, and a greater
knowledge of history than every university, college and
institute put together.
As she waited outside the little abode where Thais
was changing, Tory thought back to the last time they
had met, and quite frankly, the memory made her
cringe. ‘I’m sorry I was so rude to you that day on Pico.
You were right about everything, Thais. I should have
listened.’
‘I notice you still made it all work out in the end,
nevertheless.’
‘Ah, I had lots of help.’ She waved it off, declining
all credit.
Thais emerged from the abode dressed in a pair of
jeans and a shirt that had once belonged to her
husband. In human form, Thais stood well over six
foot tall. Miles was the only male Tory knew who was
close to Thais’ size and height. Apart from the bronze
colour of his skin, Thais had the same colouring and
build as her son: dark eyes, dark hair; slender and
fighting fit.
‘Tell me something, how did you find us?’ It was
not that Tory was suspicious of Thais. She wasn’t. She
was more concerned that her psychic shield might be
failing her.
‘No need for alarm, Nin. I was with Cadfan the day
of your husband’s funeral, I heard him tell you where

you’d be safest. So I came to the heart of your homeland
and took in a few of the sights, before I spotted the hole
in the cavern roof and flew in here.’
‘Tory!’ Brian called to her, as he ran down the
cavern stairs. ‘We have to talk.’
‘Look who’s here.’ Tory motioned to Thais, who
waved.
‘If it isn’t the birdman himself.’ Brian strode towards
them. ‘How’s it going, Tom?’ Brian inquired, pulling
Tory aside. ‘I’ve just been to see Dad. We need to talk.’
‘Okay. Just let me take Thais down to Ray and —’
‘No, right now.’ He grabbed hold of Tory’s arm and
began to walk off with her.
‘Brian!’ Tory wrenched herself away from him.
‘What’s come over you?’
‘Mum, it’s cool,’ Rhun called, having noticed her
dilemma in passing. ‘I’m heading that way myself. I can
take Thais through.’ He gestured for their newest arrival
to follow him.
Once Brian had dragged his sister into the abode Thais
had just exited, he activated the door and locked it.
‘Tell me about Teo’s accident.’ His intense blue eyes
turned her way.
‘I don’t understand,’ she frowned. ‘Why do you —’
‘There’s something you’re not telling me, Tory. You
know I can always tell.’
Tears began to fill her eyes, and she experienced
pangs of guilt for withholding the secret. ‘I can’t tell
you, Brian. I’m afraid you’ll do something rash.’
‘I’ll do something rash if you don’t,’ he vowed,

taking her in hand. ‘What’s the connection between
Teo and Taliesin?’
Tory gasped at how much Brian knew already.
‘What did Dad say to you?’
‘Never mind what he said, just answer the question?’
Brian attempted to shake a response out of her. Tory
gripped hold of his hand, and within seconds the ethers
enfolded them both.
At the graveside of their dear friend, Tory told her
brother about the events that had led to Teo’s death and
Taliesin’s return. She advised of the High Merlin’s
mission and that he would be visiting Watarrka very
soon.
‘So Naomi may be an immortal too!’ Brian’s spirits
lifted.
‘No, Brian, that’s impossible I’m afraid.’ Though
Tory was sorry to crush his hopes, she was over deciding
what others should or shouldn’t know. ‘Naomi’s perfect
incarnation is with Maelgwn, and will return here when
he does, at the time of the Gathering. Still, Daniel, as
your son, is sure to be one of us.’
Though Brian smiled at that consolation, his heart
was breaking as he stared at the tombstone that bore
Teo’s name. ‘How did you cope with this alone, along
with everything else that’s gone down?’
‘Severe shock has a dampening effect,’ Tory
shrugged. ‘I had a premonition before we left. I tried to
convince him to stay behind, but you know what Teo’s
like once he has made up his mind.’
‘I’m glad he went out in a blaze of glory.’ Brian’s
voice went hoarse with regret and he hung his head to

suppress his tears. ‘This world won’t be the same
without you, Teo. A truer friend I’ll never know.’
‘He’s still here, Brian.’ Tory placed a hand on her
brother’s shoulder. ‘He’s just smarter now, and much
more infuriating.’
Brian had met Taliesin once, but couldn’t recall the
Merlin bearing any notable resemblance to his dear,
departed friend. He knew appearances could be altered,
so just because he’d seen Taliesin as Teo at Neraida’s
base didn’t necessarily mean Taliesin was indeed his old
friend. Only after some careful scrutiny, would he truly
believe Teo lived.
As arranged, Taliesin arrived two days later.
To most of those staying at Watarrka he appeared as
Teo and thus avoided drawing attention to himself.
Only Tory, Rhun and Brian saw him in his Merlin’s
guise — and Thais, who remembered Taliesin from
Atlantis and so insisted on calling him En Razu.
Everyone was already used to Thais getting names
wrong so none were any the wiser.
With Brian trailing behind them everywhere they
went, Tory finished Taliesin’s guided tour of Watarrka in
the genetics lab. Here she introduced him to Dr Leigh
Sukemi — their head geneticist.
When advised that Taliesin needed a work space
and access to equipment for some research he was
doing, the doctor said he could arrange a small but
private lab that he hoped would be suitable.
‘That’s most kind.’ Taliesin bowed in the Japanese
fashion. ‘I’ll be happy anywhere you see fit to put me.’

‘I’ll leave you to it then.’ Tory backed up. ‘Catch
you at dinner.’ She thought Brian might leave with her,
but as it turned out he was far too fascinated with
Taliesin.
‘So, do you intend to be of some assistance, or are
you just going to stare at me all day?’ Tory heard the
Merlin say on her way out the door, and she paused to
catch Brian’s response.
‘You don’t speak much like Teo, or act like him for
that matter.’
‘I see.’
Tory peeked around the door to see Taliesin scratch
his brow.
‘Brian, you can’t hold my death against me. All
through the ages I’ve been dying, and more often than
not, it really isn’t my fault.’ Taliesin began to follow the
doctor who was already halfway up the path of the huge
greenhouse. ‘So I appear different, and have acquired a
few manners and pearls of wisdom in my travels. But my
essence is still the same. I forget nothing.’
‘Alright, throw a few names and dates at me then.’
Tory watched Brian pursue the Merlin, who started
reciting important historical events and figures, just to
annoy him. ‘Yeah,’ she grinned. ‘Teo’s in there alright.’

20
UNTIL EVENTS DO
US PART

A

t dinner that evening, Tory noticed they were a
crew member short. ‘Where’s Noah?
‘Working,’ Jenny replied.
‘You’re kidding … but it’s his birthday!’ Tory stood,
not about to let him spend the evening in front of a
computer.
‘Hey,’ Daniel forewarned her, ‘he’s really not into a
celebration right now. He’s started writing the book,’ he
explained.
‘Say no more.’ Tory went to sit down, when
suddenly her smile broadened and she looked at
Taliesin. ‘Come with me.’ She took the Merlin by the
hand and led him off.

Taliesin got wind of her thoughts on the way
out of the rec-room. ‘Selwyn is here?’ he questioned,
so delighted he near choked on his words. For the
lad had been a prize pupil of his, and he had gone
on to become a fine Bard and High Druid in his
own right.
Tory nodded to confirm. ‘He’s Noah Purcell now, a
journalist turned novelist. The poor fellow has it in his
head to write my whole family history … thus you and
he simply have to talk.’
‘The pleasure will be all mine,’ Taliesin assured her.
She gave the hatch door a thump, before entering
the tiny quarters. ‘Hey Noah.’ She sought to interrupt
him, though his attention remained firmly focused on
his typing. ‘I’ve brought you a birthday present.’
Noah finished clicking out a sentence on the
keyboard, then swung his chair around to address Tory.
‘Sorry boss, I don’t mean to be rude. Hi, Teo,’ he waved
to Taliesin, who appeared kind of mystified.
‘It’s been so long,’ the Merlin uttered, tearyeyed. He had not encountered Selwyn’s soul mind since
he’d resided over his burial fire, early in the seventh
century.
‘Yeah, it has been awhile.’ Noah nodded in accord.
‘How goes all in the Middle East?’
‘It’s seen better days,’ said Taliesin.
Noah gave half a laugh at this, turning his attention
Tory’s way to look her over. ‘So where’s my present?’
‘Right there.’ She motioned to Taliesin.
‘Aw!’ Noah was clearly disappointed. ‘No offence,
Teo, but I really didn’t miss you that much.’

‘No, no. Teo is just the packaging. It’s who is
underneath that is the surprise.’ Tory raised her brow a
couple of times to heighten the mystery.
Noah looked from Tory to Teo, thinking they were
pulling his leg.
‘Look closer,’ Tory advised, and Noah did so just to
humour her.
When Teo began to transform, Noah jumped right
out of his seat, unsure if he wanted to hide or grab his
camera. But then he froze, seeing the shining man
with silvery hair and flowing robes who’d manifested
in Teo’s stead.
‘Noah Purcell meet Taliesin Pen Beirdd.’
‘Oh, my God.’ Noah ventured to hold out his hand,
and as Taliesin took hold and shook it firmly, the lad
calmed a little. ‘This is such an honour. I’ve read so
much about you.’
‘Much of which you originally wrote, no doubt,’
Taliesin smiled. ‘For indeed, you were a fine scholar
yourself.’
‘You don’t say.’ Noah suddenly snapped back to
reality, pulling up a chair for the Merlin to sit on.
‘There’s so many things I want to ask you, I hardly know
where to start.’
‘He hasn’t changed much.’ Taliesin winked at Tory,
who agreed.
‘Well have fun, guys.’
‘Aren’t you staying?’ Noah was unsure whether he
wanted her to or not.
‘Are you kidding?’ Tory headed for the door. ‘I
wouldn’t get a word in edgeways.’

Both sides of Noah’s mouth turned down as he
considered she was probably right. And with a decisive
nod, he closed the hatch door.
Late that night, and throughout the two nights
following, Tory and Rhun went about collecting the
blood samples Taliesin needed to run his tests. The
advanced gadget used to extract the blood also stored
each sample in its own vial. The Merlin wouldn’t say
where he’d acquired his devices and methods, but Tory
had seen the like of them back in Atlantis. Her guess
was that they were a gift from the Goddess, Keridwen.
This blood extraction process was so quick and
painless it didn’t even cause a stir in their sleeping
subjects. Not one person was overlooked, as the
immortal strand ran through all the tribes of the Earth.
Rhun made a special trip outside the base to test Pete
Nangina, the other rangers, and their families.
Brian let Tory know when the results were in, and she
rushed to the lab to discover who amongst them were
Chosen. ‘Do you know?’ she drilled Brian as he kept
pace with her.
‘He’s been pretty tight-lipped.’
They arrived to find Rhun was also present.
‘You don’t miss much, do you?’ Tory commented,
and her son bowed his head graciously. ‘So what’s the
verdict?’
‘Are you sure you want to know?’ Taliesin teased,
and three expectant looks were the only response he
got. ‘In that case, the two most expected results were

Daniel and young Nicholas. There were some surprises
though. Pete Nangina and several members of his family
are carrying the gene, as well as Floyd, Noah and your
Aunt Rose.’
As the news sunk in everyone fell silent, feeling a
mixed bag of emotions: happy for those who were
named, mournful for those who weren’t.
‘We shall all be united one day,’ Taliesin reminded
them, ‘one day soon.’
‘So what happens now?’ Tory queried. ‘If they’re all
suddenly transformed to their prime, isn’t everyone
going to get a tad suspicious? Aunt Rose and Pete are
proficient at the physic arts but Floyd, Noah and the
boys are going to take some time to train.’
Taliesin shook his head. ‘We administer Keridwen’s
elixir to those concerned, but their immortality gene
will not kick in until they experience physical death.’
He passed Tory a tray containing several small vials, and
a device to administer each dose.
Tory placed the kit aside as Taliesin began packing
the rest of his apparatus into a bag. ‘So that’s it. You’re
leaving?’
‘Well, I do have many other tribes to seek out.’ He
closed his bag and it vanished. ‘You will return my
device when you’re finished with it, won’t you?’
‘But you said you’d help me visit with Rhiannon?’
Tory jogged his memory before he disappeared on her.
‘Has a month passed already?’ he queried.
Tory wanted to say yes, on the off chance the
Merlin really wasn’t keeping track of time, but chances
were he was testing her. ‘No.’

‘Well then, I’ll be back when it has. Toodles.’ He
waved and was gone.
That month seemed to last an eternity. Tory was forced
to sit and watch the outside world slip further into chaos
and ruin.
Its protective shield lost, the Middle East turned
into a festering sore on the face of the planet. Her
parched ground began to crack and her mighty rivers,
the Tigris and Euphrates, were in danger of disappearing;
needless to say, the water was polluted beyond repair
from the blast anyway. Radioactive rainfall fell over the
bottom of Africa and, powered across the Atlantic by
the south-easterly trade winds, the poisonous storms
reached as far as the coast of Brazil. Strange weather
patterns the world over started threatening agriculture,
livestock, and so, too, the food supply.
Cadfan had become a mega-star, idol, and guru
overnight. The room where the miraculous resurrection
had taken place was fast becoming a shrine. People
travelled from all over the globe to visit the site in the
hope of finding the Messiah who could heal them of their
illnesses, or shield them from the holocaust that had
seemingly besieged the planet. But their efforts were in
vain. Doc was keeping the prophet well hidden at present.
Rhiannon was also becoming a regular feature in the
news as the girlfriend of the most sought-after man alive.
Through the eyes of the media’s cameras the couple
appeared fabulously happy, and all at Watarrka were
furious that they could do nothing but watch the lie
unfold.

It was also made public that the Goddess had been
found residing at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean —
there had been no survivors and there would be no
salvage attempt. Earlier reports that foul play may have
befallen Dr John Pearce and family were quashed by
Rhiannon, who maintained that there was never any
ill-will between John Pearce and her mother. She also
advised that the Pearce’s were on board the Goddess the
last time the submersible had left port, which seemed to
account for their mysterious disappearance. Rhiannon
said she had left the service of the vessel to pursue
private studies, and thus had not been on board to
perish with the rest of her kin. The yarn was very neat
indeed, as the bodies of Dr Pearce and his family were
never found, and the Goddess had failed to dock
anywhere in over three years.
At first Tory couldn’t figure why Doc had let them
off the hook. But a few days before she planned to visit
her daughter the diplomat’s reasons became all too clear
when he announced his plan to wed Rhiannon. It was
apparent that Tory’s acquittal in the Pearce affair was so
Doc had all loose ends tied up before he married her
daughter.
Ray was not present to witness the news bulletin.
He was on the isle of Pico in the Azores with Thais,
chasing up some orichalchum from inside a cavern on a
cliff face there. It was the strongest substance known to
exist and he and Ray hoped to fashion their antiNERGUZ device from the tough, rare metal. The same
evening of Rhiannon’s wedding announcement, Thais
returned to base briefly to advise that the cavern had

partially collapsed during the eruption of Pico Alto in
2005. It could take them quite a few days to break
through to the chamber of orichalchum, if they
managed to do so at all.
Their delay proved fortunate for Tory as Thais
would keep Ray out of the way and occupied until such
time as she could speak with Rhiannon.
Late in the day that marked the passing of the month,
Tory anxiously awaited the arrival of the High Merlin,
praying to the Goddess he hadn’t forgotten their
arrangement.
Floyd was still appropriating copies of Doc’s
itinerary from the diplomat’s secretary on a regular basis.
He had found out that Doc was leaving Rhiannon for a
week at his estate in England to see to their wedding
arrangements, while he attended a conference in
Geneva to discuss the Middle Eastern crisis.
This is the best chance I’m going to get, Tory decided,
anxiously eyeballing the cavern of abodes from a great
height. Maybe that was why Taliesin insisted she wait
until now, knowing that the perfect situation would
arise?
Tory was slowly coming to the conclusion that she
should just go find the Merlin, when a tiny blue ball of
light came sweeping through from the cavern of
produce, with several children running after it. The
children ceased their pursuit and watched with awe
when the glowing ball went spiralling up towards Tory.
‘I’ve seen you before,’ she smiled, closing her eyes to
receive its message.

Meet me at Lynn Cerrig Bach, Taliesin’s voice advised
as the ball of light penetrated her forehead. Midnight
tonight, Gwynedd time.
As Tory’s eyes parted, all her anxiety had left her.
‘I’ll be there.’
The restored temple of the Goddess was a sight to
behold at night, with inner torches lighting the four
cardinal points of north, south, east and west. Tory
scaled the stairs to the inner sanctum where the statues
of nine comely muses watched over the altar stone.
Once inside this dwelling she entered a circle of
protection, cast by and fortified with Taliesin’s energies.
She found it strange therefore that she should feel chilly
and ill at ease as she approached the heart of the
temple.
The Merlin was standing beside the large altar stone
that bore the Celtic cross. ‘Let us proceed,’ and he
motioned Tory to lay upon the sacred rock.
She complied at once, eager to see her daughter. But
before Tory lay down, she felt an urge to question. ‘Are
you annoyed with me, Taliesin?’
‘Not at all. Why do you ask?’
‘I don’t know, you just seem kind of abrupt, or
distant or something?’ Tory couldn’t quite peg what it
was.
‘I know you are anxious to see your child, that is all.’
He placed both hands upon her shoulders and
encouraged her to lay back.
‘It’s a pity you weren’t so sympathetic a month ago,’
Tory jeered, deciding she never would understand him.

‘Shh,’ he instructed placing one hand at each side of
her head. ‘Relax now, concentrate.’
Tory closed her eyes to find her centre, but the
Merlin’s touch was as cold as ice, and she could not
focus. A bad feeling was brewing inside her, as if her own
will was rebelling and imploring her not to proceed. Tory
sat up abruptly, shrinking from the Merlin’s icy touch.
‘I’ve changed my mind,’ she was saying, when she spied
Taliesin standing at the entrance to the temple. He
seemed to be yelling at her very loudly, though she could
not hear a word. Her horrified eyes turned back to the
head of the altar stone where Taliesin also stood.
‘It’s a trick,’ he told her. ‘Shamash is trying to
prevent you from making contact with Rhiannon.
Quickly, we must hurry.’
Tory moved to comply, yet her instinct again told
her no.
‘Nay, don’t listen to her!’ Taliesin yelled from the
entrance stairs, unable to penetrate the shield Inanna
had cast around the site. He could see the corpse that
was residing over the proceedings. The evil enchantress
must have killed the security guard in order to utilise his
body until Tory’s became free. No doubt Tory saw this
stand-in as himself, and she obviously couldn’t hear
anything beyond what Inanna wanted her to hear.
‘Could we just take five for a second.’ Tory’s sudden
suspicions urged her to back up. She managed to get
clear of the altar, and then a few paces, before her whole
body seized up.
‘No, Tory,’ the Merlin told her, ‘we must act now.’
The more Tory resisted his will, the clearer her

situation became. The image of the Merlin peeled away
to reveal the face of a dead man. She pushed against the
stone altar to resist the corpse who was willing her
closer, and stared beyond his physical body to glimpse
Inanna. I’m in deep. Tory had entered the circle
voluntarily and in all probability was no psychic match
for the age-old Goddess. The Law of Rebound — that a
superior force will always defeat a lesser power — stated
as much. Whatever Tory projected in Inanna’s direction
would rebound on her tenfold; not threats, nor spite,
nor force could free her now.
You can’t hope to defy me child. The Goddess spoke in
her own alluring and soothing voice. Don’t force me to
hurt you.
Still firmly gripping the edge of the stone, Tory
closed her eyes and thought of her daughter. As
she felt her whole being fill with love, the Goddess’
hold on her weakened and she was able to back up
several feet.
The Goddess laughed at her attempt to escape. Oh
yes, so full of love and compassion is our Lamamu … let us
see how forgiving you really are. Inanna waved her hand
about the altar stone and manifested a tiny ball of light
which she cast at Tory, and the impact knocked her off
her feet.
‘Nay!’ Taliesin watched in horror, as Tory lay
motionless on the stoney ground perceiving the sinister
tidings the Goddess had sent her.
Maelgwn is already mine, Inanna told her, as Tory
beheld a clear image of her husband making love to the
Goddess.

‘It is a lie.’ Tory shook herself free of the nightmare,
though tears of hurt were streaming down her face.
Ask yourself then why it is you are crying, Lamamu?
Deep down, you know I speak the truth.
Tory bowed her head, tempted to admit Inanna was
right. ‘No, no fear.’ She launched herself further towards
the exit of the temple. ‘Maelgwn despises you,’ Tory told
Inanna adamantly, dragging herself towards the wide
open spaces.
Well, naturally he’d tell you that to hide his guilt and
true feelings for me.
Tory held her breath, struggling not to take her
comments to heart, but when she came sliding back
across the temple floor, she realised she wasn’t disputing
Inanna’s claims hard enough.
‘If … what … you … say … is … true,’ Tory
squeezed out, wrenching herself forward with every
word — there was only a couple of meters between
Taliesin and herself now — ‘then why do you still want
my body so badly?’ The notion gave Tory the strength
to cast herself far enough towards the circle’s
circumference that her hand penetrated it and Taliesin
grabbed hold.
‘Good girl.’ The Merlin dragged her clear and held
her trembling form tightly.
‘Oh my God!’ Tory blubbered, the image of
Maelgwn making love to Inanna recurring in her head,
again and again.
‘It’s over,’ Taliesin assured her, calming her with his
healing energies.
‘But I nearly …’

‘But you didn’t,’ the Merlin stopped her from
dwelling on what might have happened.
She looked towards the inner temple in the wake of
her ordeal. The dead security guard was slumped over
the altar stone. Inanna had gone.
Taliesin went about putting out the torches Inanna
had ignited, and so dispersed her energies from the site.
‘Come.’ Taliesin held a hand out to Tory. ‘I have a safer
place in mind.’
Even though Tory knew this was the real Taliesin
Pen Beirdd who addressed her now, she was still hesitant
to join him.
‘We could forget all about it, if you like,’ he suggested,
which served to spur her to certainty quick-smart.
In the great entrance hall to Taliesin’s labyrinth there
was another huge stone carving of the Celtic cross.
Around this Taliesin lay a large unbroken circle of sand,
and marked out the four cardinal points by setting a
candle at north, south, east and west.
This time, as Tory lay her body down inside the
protected area, she did not feel uneasy and found it
simple to focus.
‘Pray I make contact, old friend,’ Tory uttered,
before she drifted off.
‘I will, thy will.’ She saw the Merlin say this to her as
she drifted above them both, observing her motionless
form as she ascended higher and higher above it. Then
Taliesin looked up at her, apparently aware of her
departure.
‘Go in peace,’ he said.

Tory turned to move on, and found herself gliding
through a beautiful old mansion. Though it was night and
the house was softly lit she had no trouble seeing her way
as she was exuding her own light. She scaled the grand
staircase, passing a housemaid making her way downstairs
with a tray of empty dishes. No sooner had Tory wondered
if the maid would see her than the woman screamed,
threw the tray into the air and went racing back up the
staircase. I guess so. Tory amused herself, following the
terrified maid into the upstairs hallway.
‘What is it, Francesca?’ Rhiannon emerged from her
bedroom to see what all the ruckus was about. The
petrified maid could only point, whereby Rhiannon
looked to find the phantasm making its way down the
hall towards them. ‘Mother,’ Rhiannon uttered, quietly
delighted to see her.
‘But your mother is de—’ The woman’s eyes rolled
back in her head, and she fainted.
Thinking this was for the best, Rhiannon looked
back to her visitor. ‘Please, come in. I’ve been expecting
you.’
Tory followed her daughter into the bedroom,
curious to hear her say so.
‘A smart move to come in etheric form,’ Rhiannon
commented, ‘however unnecessary.’ She closed the door
behind them and headed for her seat by the fire.
You think so? Tory bethought her, noting her
daughter no longer wore the restraining band around her
wrist. And what do you mean, you’ve been expecting me?
‘That’s why Doc agreed to leave me alone this week.
I told him you’d come, if you knew I’d be by myself.’

And why would Doc want to allow me to speak with
you alone?
‘Because I asked,’ Rhiannon explained simply. ‘And
look,’ she held up her bare right wrist, ‘no restraints.’
I noticed.
‘Please mother, don’t be suspicious, at least until you
hear what I have to say.’
I’m listening.
Her daughter outlined how Doc had been
removing her restraint in order to utilise her abilities,
for both professional and personal purposes. But one
night, after making love to her, Doc had drifted off to
sleep before he’d replaced the module on Rhiannon’s
wrist. This had been all the time she’d needed to get a
grip on her situation. After hanging out with Ray for
three years, Rhiannon managed to figure out how to
remove the module’s control mechanism. Doc
continued replacing the band, unaware that it had
been tampered with. A week lapsed before Rhiannon
enlightened Doc to this oversight. In the interim, she
hadn’t managed to catch the word that he used to
activate the devices — not that it would have done
her or her kin any good, as she discovered that the
command had to be uttered by the man himself to
have any effect. Once Doc realised he no longer
needed to restrain Rhiannon to keep her by him, he
was immensely happy as he’d wanted nothing more.
Able to perceive each other’s thoughts, Rhiannon and
Doc knew that they weren’t lying about their feelings
for each other. ‘So I haven’t been under his control
for weeks.’

Then come home, baby, please! Tory pleaded. If he has
indeed set you free, then get out now, while you still have the
chance.
‘I’m afraid I can’t do that,’ Rhiannon announced. ‘I
made him a deal, you see.’
What kind of a deal?
‘I vowed,’ Rhiannon stood to advise her mother of
the details, ‘that I would stay with him, so long as he
forgot about my kin and let them be.’
Baby, no, I can’t allow you —
‘It is not your decision to make,’ Rhiannon told her
mother, rather forcefully, ‘and should you try to remove
me by force, I shall return to him given the first
opportunity, I swear it. Now, Doc is prepared to do as I
have asked, which is why we concocted the story about
the Goddess. In the eyes of the world, all of you no
longer exist.’
Tory shook her head, not wanting to believe her
ears. Surely Rhiannon was still somehow being
manipulated by Doc’s will. You don’t have any idea what
he’s really up to, Rhiannon —
‘Of course I do! It is impossible for us to keep secrets
from each other. I know about the army he is building,
and of his so-called guardian angel, Shamash. Which is
exactly the reason I want to stay with Doc. I am the
only hope those souls, including Doc, have of escaping
Shamash’s evil influence. Who else can keep an eye on
his movements, and warn of pending disaster, if not I?
Don’t you see, mother, this is my destiny. Doc will listen
to me. I have made him see reason several times
already.’

And who is going to save you if Shamash discovers you
are influencing his Chosen one, hmm?
‘I, too, have a guardian,’ Rhiannon whispered. ‘An
old friend of yours, so I believe.’
Tory knew at once to whom she referred. You have
seen Keridwen?
‘Rhiannon nodded. ‘And if you think I might have
been deceived, ask Taliesin of our meeting, for it was he
who brought her to me.’
Oh dear lord. Tory began to float to and fro, as if she
were pacing. And what do I tell Ray? she implored of
Rhiannon. Have you got any idea what he’s going through
right now, have you even thought?
The question seemed to take a bit of the wind
out of Rhiannon’s sails. She turned away to consider
her response, fiddling with the large diamond
engagement ring on her wedding finger. ‘Ray is a
sweetie, mother … I do miss him, and I’m sorry if the
decision I have made will cause him pain. I’m a big
girl now. I realise the welfare of the many must come
before the welfare of just one man. But quite apart
from all that, I love Doc.’
Tory looked at her daughter, infuriated to hear her
say so. Do you speak of the man Doc appears to be, or of
the barbarian he truly is?
‘Perhaps I should have said, Cadwaladr,’ Rhiannon
specified, not much liking her mother’s train of thought.
‘He reminds me of father and Rhun, and he is not at all
the monster you have made him out to be.’
He murdered your father, raped you, and despises your
kin. I can guarantee, he is nothing like either of them.

‘Father’s death was a mistake.’
A mistake!
‘Yes,’ Rhiannon stressed, ‘and you know as well as I,
father isn’t really dead. Now is he?’ Rhiannon posed,
knowing her mother couldn’t argue the point. ‘Doc no
longer despises you. I explained to him that you didn’t
know that the immortal gene would be passed on to so
many generations, and that Taliesin hadn’t tutored him
because he was completely unaware that Cadwaladr had
inherited the immortal gene in its active state.’
How do you know about that? As soon as she’d asked
the question, she knew the answer. Taliesin told you, of
course. But did you tell Doc who was really to blame?
Rhiannon shook her head. ‘But I will, when the
time is right.’
And how do you plan to keep such a secret until then?
‘After Taliesin and Keridwen had explained all to
me, they wiped certain details from my memory and will
restore them as required. So please, do not even think
of that which I do not know, because then I shall, and
that would be dangerous.’
Tory was confused now, and angered that Taliesin
had been scheming behind her back. And what of
Cadfan? Have you all decided that being a mindless puppet
cum Messiah is his destiny too?
‘No, mother.’ Rhiannon’s tone softened, sensing Tory’s
feelings of betrayal. ‘That shall be my first priority. Doc
knows I do not like what he is putting his grandfather
through and that I shall quietly do all I can to put a stop
to it. Like I said, we have no secrets. I respect his view,
and he respects mine. He is in love with the real me, you

see, not the zombie I was when I was under his control.
That being the case, our love is completely unconditional,
because it has to be. I’m not asking you to like what I am
trying to do, I only ask that you respect my decision.’
Tory went quiet as she considered that had
Rhiannon been anyone but her daughter, she would
have respected and admired her determination. ‘I’m just
so afraid of losing you.’
‘That will never, ever happen.’ Rhiannon closed the
space between them. ‘Despite how it may appear at
times, I assure you nothing anyone could say or do would
ever demote you in my eyes. You’re my hero, mother,
and more importantly, my dearest friend. Know that you
have taught me well and set me free to do what I must.’
Tory was deeply touched by her daughter’s words, for
Rhiannon had not spoken of her thus since she was a
teenager. I have taught you well, Rhiannon. There is good
in Doc. I too have seen it … so somewhere, down deep,
your resolve makes me very proud.
‘So I have your blessing?’
Though it pained Tory to commit herself, it was far
better to be supportive than to oppose her daughter and
be cut out of her life altogether. If you’re sure this is what
you want?
Rhiannon nodded. ‘Until events do us part, it is.’
Upon returning to her body, Tory awoke. Taliesin gave
her a few moments to get her bearings, before he asked,
‘Should I run for cover?’
‘No need,’ Tory told him, as she got to her feet.
‘Oh please, Tory, don’t look at me like that.’

‘Like what?’ Tory queried, her voice more sorrowful
than wrathful. ‘Like you have betrayed me, lied to me,
conscripted yet another member of my family into your
damn ancestral war.’
‘I can explain —’
‘No, don’t bother,’ Tory uttered, bewildered, ‘I
couldn’t believe a word of it anyway.’ A single tear
rolled down her cheek, as she looked away and faded
from his presence.
For several weeks Tory and Ray were a miserable pair.
They spent quite a bit of time in each other’s company,
trying to ease the hurt they shared.
Not surprisingly, Ray lost all enthusiasm for
constructing the anti-NERGUZ device. Thais and he had
managed to dig out a few large chunks of orichalchum to
use in the construction of their prototype, but Thais
didn’t have Ray’s engineering background — he had no
chance of developing the device alone. So, in the end,
determined to rescue Cadfan, it was Thais who dragged
Ray out of his deep pit of despair. Thais was an
accomplished spiritual tutor and motivator, so even
someone as pessimistic as Ray didn’t stand a chance of
escaping his positive influence and reinforcement.
Alone, Tory walked the canyon ridge every evening.
She felt closer to Maelgwn here; she could see the star
system where he resided. She had recovered from her
shock at her daughter’s decision as much as she was ever
going to. But she could not bring herself to forgive the
hand Taliesin had played in Rhiannon’s decision — no

matter how many times she tried to reassure herself he
had acted on behalf of the greater good.
‘Hey, sunshine.’ Teo sat himself beside her to look
out over the darkening landscape.
The sight of her old friend startled Tory at first, then
quietly angered her. ‘Coward,’ she called the Merlin.
‘How dare you use the open, honest relationship we
once had to try and appease your treachery of late.’
‘Where is the treachery?’ he asked. ‘I told you months
ago what was going to happen. You refused to listen.’
‘Do you really think Rhiannon would have stayed
with Doc if you and Keridwen hadn’t filled her head
with visions of grandeur?’ Tory stood, of the mind to
walk off her frustration and escape this conversation.
‘Tory, I didn’t put a spell on her to make her agree,
you know.’ Taliesin raised Teo’s form to pursue her. ‘Nor
did I give her any mysterious love potion to make her
fall in love with Doc. Just because it isn’t your ideal
scenario for your daughter, doesn’t mean it isn’t the
right thing for her to do.’
‘But Doc is not Rhiannon’s true soul mate. Ray is.’
‘Actually,’ Taliesin corrected, ‘Cadwallon is her true
soul mate. But Doc is evolved from the same soul mind
as the rest of us, and is thus a kindred spirit to
Rhiannon. I was not your true soul mate either, but that
didn’t stop you from falling in love with me, did it?’
Tory stopped in her tracks, and turned to confront
Teo. ‘That was long before I ever met Maelgwn,’ she
defended.
‘And before we left on my last mission, what was
that?’

‘You kissed me!’ Tory insisted.
‘You kissed me back,’ he was quick to retort. ‘I’ve
often wondered what would have become of us had I
returned from that tour of duty.’
‘Nothing would have happened,’ Tory was right up
on her high horse now.
He smiled. ‘But we’ll never really know and it
matters not.’ He spoke up to prevent her further protest.
‘The point is that it would have been your decision to
make. We all have things to learn in this world. You
cannot learn Rhiannon’s lessons for her. And before you
start ramming my words down my throat, I ask that you
consider this … where would we be now if your father
had prevented you from going back to the Dark Age?
And don’t tell me this is different because Maelgwn
turned out to be your true love. The effect your decisions
and bravery had on this planet is every bit as beneficial
as the effect your daughter will have in the future.’
‘Have you lived through this instance in time
before?’
‘This particular instance, no.’
‘Than how can you be so sure of the outcome?’ Tory
hated feeling torn. She very much wanted to trust him
and to know that it would all turn out for the best, but
lately the hurdles the universe expected her to jump
seemed far too high.
The Merlin went very quiet for a time to allow Tory
to reflect a little, before he confessed: ‘As I cannot
stand the thought of spending the next seventeen years
without your friendship, I can see I have no choice but
to tell you everything.’

Tory turned her gaze upon him, hesitant to believe
he was on the level. ‘Do you promise to tell the whole
truth and nothing but the truth?’
‘I do.’ Half his mouth curved to a smile. ‘If you
promise to believe and trust in me as much as you once
did. And if you allow me to complete your tuition in
the higher mysteries, so you, in turn, can instruct your
kin.’
As she felt the torment in her heart cease, Tory
ventured a smile. ‘I will.’
She embraced him to seal the deal, and the Merlin
breathed a great sigh of relief. ‘The future is looking
brighter already.’

21
REMEMBER?

B

y the year 2023 many religious wars had broken
out, as the various hierarchies argued for or
against Cadfan as the long-prophesied Messiah.
Fortunately for Doc, the prophet had already made
many forecasts about the future, some of which the
diplomat played up to confirm his colleague’s divinity.
Doc later had Cadfan twist other predictions,
concerning Doc’s own underlying interests, to mean
something entirely different.
Working closely with Cadfan and taking his
prognosis with regard to the planet’s health seriously,
the ICA set about enforcing preventive measures, be it
evacuation, shelters, water breaks or whatever. One by
one the disasters came to pass, and whether or not
people believed in Cadfan’s predictions they were at

least prepared for the ill-fated occurrences. People knew
what to do because Cadfan’s publicity machine had
made them aware. Needless to say, Doc and Walter were
fast reaching hero status in the eyes of the world. What
they had to offer transcended race, creed, culture, even
religion; people could sleep at night, knowing someone
was watching out for them.
Cadfan’s teachings, which had once encouraged
self-development and the individual’s pursuit of spiritual
perfection, were shifted away from the ideal to focus on
the idol, thanks to the media. Walter said what Doc
wanted him to say, and he was so busy touring and
doing interviews that there was hardly time for
performing miracles. Doc knew that as long as he kept
Cadfan under the control of the module, Rhiannon had
no chance of stealing the prophet away. The problem
was that Cadfan could not predict any more, nor could
he heal his faithful followers. But they could only
sustain the mirage based on Walter’s past glories for so
long. Sooner or later Doc was going to have to set
Cadfan free to do what he was most renowned for.
‘Noah, I’m leaving now.’ Tory distracted him from his
essay. ‘Do you still want to come?’
‘I sure do.’ He finished off his sentence and
scrambled from his seat to grab a jacket.
‘How’s the writing coming?’ Tory wandered over
to read off the screen, whereby Noah hit the shut
down key.
‘Really well,’ he replied, ‘I’m up to chapter twentyone of the third volume.’

‘Well, when do I get to read this masterpiece?’
‘Sometime after 2037, when it has an ending.’ He
motioned her to the door so they could get on with
creating the next chapter.
After having spoken with Taliesin at length, Noah
was now eager to see the Merlin’s abode. Tory had
described the labyrinthine dwelling to him and it
sounded too fantastic to conceive of all at once.
Tory was heading to Lynn Cerrig Bach with Ray, so
she offered to prove her claims about the place and
Noah simply couldn’t resist.
Ray and Thais finally had a working model of their
prototype, which they dubbed the ENZU-GUZ: ‘the
wise one’s weapon’. This was why Ray was
accompanying Tory to Lynn Cerrig Bach. She had not
told him where they were going, only that she wanted
him to demonstrate his creation for someone.
Tory had become far more proficient in the art of
psychokinetic teleportation of late. Even so, Rhun
offered his services to transport either Ray or Noah to
save unnecessary drain on Tory’s energy. They were
forced to be aware of such things these days. Any
weakening of their psychic defences might lead the
enemy straight to them. Of course, the enemy must first
know what you look like, which meant most at
Watarrka would not be hunted. Rhiannon may have
persuaded Doc to let her kin be, but Tory didn’t trust
Doc as far as she could throw him.
The four arrived in the huge, grand entrance foyer to
find Taliesin and Myrddin speaking with Rhiannon.

My god! Tory’s first reaction was shock at seeing the
two High Merlin’s in each other’s company. The ageold prophecy was coming to life. The Gathering was
truly nigh.
Oh no, thought Tory next, looking around to catch
Ray’s reaction. He’d taken a few steps backwards and
stood staring at Rhiannon, with mixed emotions.
‘Hey, good lookin’.’ Rhun bounded over to give his
sister a hug. They held each other a good while before
Rhiannon turned to address Ray. She didn’t have to say
a word. Her joy became shrouded in feelings of woe;
every psychic in the room felt it.
‘Delighted you could all pop in.’ Taliesin decided to
ease the tension by clearing the room. ‘Come, let us
find some place more comfortable to talk.’
Everyone eagerly followed the Merlin’s lead —
everyone but Rhiannon and Ray. They remained as
they were, eyeballing each other from a distance,
neither of them speaking until the doors closed and
they were alone.
‘If you had to choose between love and destiny,
which would you pick?’ Rhiannon posed.
‘Destiny.’ Ray didn’t hesitate. ‘At least I know what
that is.’
‘Exactly,’ she agreed. ‘I was dying at Watarrka,
Ray … I served no true purpose —’
‘I wasn’t enough for you?’ Ray interjected, harshly.
‘No, Ray, I wasn’t enough for myself,’ she replied.
He gave a heavy sigh, knowing where she was
coming from, though he still didn’t agree with her
assessment. ‘I realise you think you’re serving the

greater good where you are, but you can’t tell me you
couldn’t have found a way to do that at Watarrka!’
‘Get real, Ray … who needs me when Tory
Alexander is around!’ Rhiannon played up Tory’s
capabilities, then calmed and smiled warmly. ‘I love
my mother, dearly, don’t get me wrong. Who can
blame her for being so perfect and talented. But there
is one task she could never bring herself to do, and
that, my friend, is why I took the assignment upon
myself. No one else could have pulled it off, not even
mother.’
Ray couldn’t dispute this, and it slowly dawned on
him that perhaps their break-up had been nothing more
than the wrong place at the wrong time. ‘Do you love
him?’ He could have hit himself for asking.
Rhiannon shook her head slowly, ‘I don’t think so.
It’s more the challenge he represents.’
Ego appeased, slightly, Ray’s mood lightened. ‘I
knew I shouldn’t have made it so easy for you.’
‘But that’s what I loved about us — that it was so
easy, so comfortable, so relaxed.’ Rhiannon paused,
thinking she needed her head read for choosing such an
exhausting relationship over the bliss she’d known with
Ray. ‘For Doc, love is a battle of wits, a game!’
‘I thought so, too,’ Ray said softly, ‘before I met you.’
The tenderness of the statement brought tears to
her eyes and a lump to her throat. ‘I miss you,’
Rhiannon confessed, her voice hoarse from emotion.
Not half as much as I miss you, is what he wanted to
say, but instead Ray just held his arms wide.
She ran and embraced him, crying her heart out as

he squeezed her tight. ‘I understand, Rhiannon …
really, I do. And I bear you no malice.’
He truly meant what he said, she could feel it, which
only served to fuel her tears of suppressed guilt. ‘Oh Ray,’
she raised her tear-stained face and kissed his cheek. ‘I
do love you … but the Goddess inside, I love her more.’
She pulled away, her chest aching from the conflict
raging inside her. ‘I must follow her lead … I must.’ As
her tears welled for a second coming, Rhiannon covered
her face with her hands and vanished.
Ray stood staring into space for the longest time. He
was so bewildered by his own behaviour. He had spent a
lot of time over the last few years thinking about what
he would say to Rhiannon if he ever chanced across her
again. He’d imagined fury, a lot of anger and spiteful
words. Yet, it hadn’t been like that at all. And as a
result, he felt calm and at peace. Still a little hurt
perhaps, but better for the knowledge that they had
parted as friends.
Could it be that we are growing up? Ray’s eyes darted
about the room, and for the first time he noticed its
grand and peculiar nature. ‘Where on earth am I?’
On cue, the double doors that led into the maze
opened wide and Taliesin entered to collect Ray.
‘Hey Teo.’ Ray made his way towards him. ‘Is this
your place?’
‘Ah, yeah,’ Taliesin answered. ‘This is where I hide
out.’
Ray was amazed to hear Teo say this — surely the
antiques around him were priceless. ‘Did you win the
Lotto or something?’

Taliesin chuckled at the question. ‘You could say I
fall under the “or something” catagory.’ He slapped a
hand upon Ray’s shoulder to guide him along. ‘Come,
let me show you around.’
Rhiannon made a brief appearance in the room where
Taliesin had left her mother, brother, grandfather, and
Noah.
‘Rhiannon, are you alright?’ Tory moved to comfort
her, but Rhiannon backed up towards Rhun.
‘Wipe all memory of this meeting from my mind.’
She prevailed upon her brother to make haste about it,
too.
‘Alright.’ He raised his finger for her to focus upon,
and began the procedure without question. Once she
was under his control, he instructed: ‘When I click my
fingers, you will project yourself back from whence you
came, to awake with no recollection of ever having left
there.’ Rhun clicked his fingers, and Rhiannon faded
from their midst.
‘He’s very talented.’ Myrddin boasted about his
grandson to Noah, who appeared to be astonished.
‘That’s frightening,’ Noah decided.
Rhun waved it off. ‘I have a way with women.’
‘It isn’t any wonder,’ Noah said flippantly.
‘Do you think she’s okay?’ Tory asked the others.
‘She’s doing just fine,’ Myrddin told her, slightly
annoyed, but then his voice regained a tone of pride.
‘She brought us word that Doc has released Cadfan from
the module’s influence, so he should be nearly back to
his old self. Apparently, Doc is planning some big

shindig for his disciples, the venue for which should be
announced in the next few days.’
‘We have to get Walter out,’ Tory insisted.
‘Yes, we do,’ Myrddin settled the matter once and
for all, ‘but if we steal him away, he will be assumed to
be missing, and all those followers of his will ceaselessly
look for him.’
‘Good luck to them …’ Rhun scoffed at anybody’s
chances of finding Cadfan once the Watarrka
community had him.
Myrddin raised his brows at Rhun’s certainty. ‘Still,
why take the risk, when we can make it look like —’
‘... he ascended!’ Tory cut in to raise a strong
objection to Myrddin’s plot. ‘No way, no day! Then
we’d be reinforcing the damn delusion.’
‘Well, the world already knows he can’t die, so what
else are you going to do?’
Tory opened her mouth to argue her father’s point,
and then closed it again when nothing immediately
sprang to mind.
‘Mother, if everyone is happy, what difference does
it make?’ Rhun intervened, taking his grandfather’s side.
‘The most important thing is that we get Cadfan out of
there.’
‘And the gang’s all here …’ Taliesin and Ray
entered the room. Taliesin rubbed his hands together
mischievously. ‘Let’s plot then, shall we?’
Rhiannon’s short rest left her feeling emotionally and
physically drained. Yet when she tried to recall what
she’d dreamt, she came up with naught.

Downstairs she found Doc and his henchmen giving
Cadfan a hard time. It seemed his faculties weren’t
returning quite as fast as anticipated.
‘You can’t bluff me, old man,’ Doc told him,
whereby Cadfan appeared all the more puzzled.
‘I’m very sorry, but I have no idea what you mean?’
the healer said.
‘Yes, you do!’ Doc insisted, at which time Rhiannon
placed a hand on his shoulder to calm him.
‘There’s no need to squander your energy in this
fashion.’
Doc turned his frustration Rhiannon’s way. But she
beckoned him with one finger into the adjoining room,
an alluring smile upon her face encouraging her
husband to calm down and follow.
In the privacy of Doc’s study, Rhiannon appeased
him with a kiss and bethought the solution.
‘Patrick Haze,’ he uttered as they parted, ‘of course.’
Doc had forgotten all about Cadfan’s young apprentice,
who was still hidden among the Unken ranks.
‘Brilliant!’
‘Did you expect anything less?’ Rhiannon took a
seat on his desk, crossing her legs in a provocative
fashion. She procured herself a cigarette from the case
beside her, and held it up awaiting a light.
Doc did the honours, quietly pondering her motives
for jogging his memory. ‘Why are helping me, when I
know for a fact you want Cadfan freed?’
‘But not yet.’ Rhiannon inhaled the smoke from
the cigarette, and exhaled it again before expanding
on the statement. ‘The fusion project is still a year

from completion. After that, you won’t need Cadfan
to control the masses.’ She gave a slight shrug, ‘I can
wait.’
‘That’s very obliging of you,’ Doc took hold of her
knees, and parting her legs wide pulled her close.
‘Well, we aim to please,’ she advised in a sultry
whisper, his hand guiding hers to stub the cigarette out.
‘Your aim is true,’ Doc assured, his kiss obliging her
to assume a horizonal position.
Confronted by Patrick Haze, Cadfan found his memory.
His initial shock turned to delight, which faded when
he noticed the metallic band clamped around Patrick’s
right wrist. The lad spoke as if he remembered Walter,
yet he seemed a completely different character to the
Patrick he’d known. He had lost all his spark and
individuality; all that remained was a walking, talking,
empty shell of a man.
This has been me for the last three and a half years,
thought Walter, regretting that he could recall every
tormenting second of his confinement.
‘And it will be you for the rest of eternity if you
don’t co-operate,’ Doc advised.
Cadfan’s horror doubled as he realised Doc no
longer needed to be touching an individual to know
their thoughts.
‘You had best believe it,’ Doc confirmed his
grandfather’s observation.
Walter turned to Rhiannon, assuming it was she
who’d been tutoring him. ‘Your mother must be
proud.’

The healer’s eyes were filled with forgiveness and
pity, which, under normal circumstances, might have
made Rhiannon feel ashamed. But she had the part of
‘the Chameleon’ perfected these days. She could
camouflage her true feelings so well that not even she
knew they were there. ‘You can’t please all of the
people all of the time, Walter.’ She approached
Patrick Haze and wrenched him from his seat by his
hair. ‘But I can promise you this … if you don’t cooperate with my husband, I am going to beat the life
out of your friend here. And you, my dear Walter,
shall get to witness every breaking bone. How does
that grab you?’
Cadfan didn’t know that Patrick was an immortal,
and that he was in no real danger. ‘Are you possessed,
child? What has happened to you?’ he wondered aloud,
noting she did not wear a module that might have been
obliging her to act as she was.
‘Not the response we were looking for.’ Rhiannon
didn’t hesitate, she broke Patrick’s nose with her elbow
and then snapped a couple of his ribs with her knee.
‘No, stop!’ Cadfan begged her. He knew that
although Patrick’s spirit was too repressed to cry out in
pain, he would still be feeling everything. ‘I’ll do
whatever you want.’ Walter’s head bowed low in defeat.
Death Valley had been chosen as the location where
Cadfan was to meet the people, as this area had
remained untouched by disaster. This travesty was to
take the form of a healing festival, and the masses had
already started to gather.

The evening prior to leaving Britain for Cadfan’s big
engagement in the US, Doc summoned his guardian to
report.
Such meetings took place inside a small circular
temple that the diplomat had had erected amidst the
extensive gardens of his estate. Inside the sanctuary,
torches burnt at the four cardinal points. The walls were
perfectly plain, free of incriminating motif or symbol.
Long-stemmed flowers adorned long, golden vases
situated beneath each of the torches. A large, glass
dome featured in the ceiling overhead, exposing the
heavens and, at present, the evening stars. The polished
marble floor stepped down to a central circular area,
where Doc knelt on one knee to address his instructor.
With the point of his sword to the ground, he gripped
the hilt with both hands, his head bowed low in
concentration. Doc gathered his will to invoke Utu;
sometimes his guardian would appear. At other times he
would simply bethink Doc.
Today, Utu chose to manifest. When informed how
Cadfan had been persuaded to co-operate fully the
celestial being appeared dubious.
And it was the Dragon’s daughter who conceived of this
means? the glowing presence inquired.
‘Yes, my lord, it was. I believe this is a firm sign of
her loyalty to us.’
Utu did not seem as convinced. I cannot believe,
after so many centuries of life, Cadwaladr, that you could
still be so blind to the nature of women. Females of any
breed are remarkably resourceful and clever. The moment
you trust her fully, she shall betray you.

‘I will be cautious.’ Doc heeded the warning, all the
while trying to conceal the fact that he disagreed.
That is the trouble with human beings, Utu shook his
head in sympathy, always seeing what they want to see, not
what is truly there.
‘I’m sorry, my lord, but what would you have me do?’
Replace the NERGUZ on your wife’s wrist for the
duration of the healing festival.
‘But I cannot betray her loyalty thus.’ Doc thought
of what this would do to the mutual trust he and
Rhiannon had built up during their time together.
Cannot, or will not? Shamash challenged. Mark my
words, warrior … she is out to deceive you. Leaving her to
roam free is a mistake.
‘How can you be so sure?’ Doc questioned defiantly,
as he always did. They’d been over this a hundred times
already.
Because I know for certain that you are not her true
love.
‘What!’ Doc stood, enraged by the suggestion; this
claim had never been raised before. ‘Name the man she
has deceived me with?’ He raised his sword in
challenge.
Rhiannon’s twin-soul is Cadwallon, though she is not
yet aware of his existence.
‘Father.’ Doc’s eyes narrowed, and he began
wielding his sword about him. ‘He shall never have
her. Nor will Rhiannon ever find out about him, is
that understood?’
Doc looked to his guardian for confirmation, his
sword held poised in challenge once again.

Cadwaladr. Utu appeared surprised at him. As long
as you follow my instructions, she never need know.
The contempt returned to Doc’s face. ‘Are you
trying to blackmail me, my lord?’
Succeeding, I would say. Don’t forget you need me to
remove from your memory that which you have just learnt.
Otherwise your wife might perceive the fact of Cadwallon
from your good self, and we wouldn’t want that, would we?
Doc lowered his sword. He could not expect to
outwit such a being, and in all honesty, he’d never
expected that he might have to.
Restrain your wife, Utu concluded bluntly, before his
image shrank into an angry ball of light. The bright
manifestation then rammed Doc’s head and, by
sweeping through his memory of the previous
conversation, it neatly edited out the details of their
disagreement. All Doc was left with was the
overwhelming urge to keep Rhiannon restrained.
The plan was a fairly straightforward one.
A swirling, cosmic cloud mass, disguising their
recovery craft, would be orchestrated from deep within
Taliesin’s maze of a house. Herein was the room of
hexagons; technology procured from the Merlin’s
future travels. He had a device to monitor and
manipulate weather patterns within a twenty mile
radius of a targeted area. Although this technology
could not aid the world’s erratic weather problems, it
would serve their purpose. Noah had been instructed
and briefed on manning the controls, which freed
Taliesin to assist Myrddin with the other visuals that

would make Cadfan’s ascension a realistic and
memorable event.
The Merlins planned to conceal themselves in the
crowd to carry out their part in the rescue. They were
responsible for Cadfan’s ascent into the clouds, where
his escape vehicle would be awaiting him. Then they
were to keep the mystified onlookers entertained long
enough for the Goddess to get well clear of the area.
Tory and Rhun would transport Cadfan to the entrance
hall of Taliesin’s labyrinth. There they would be joined
by other immortals, who would form a protective shield
around Cadfan until such time as his own spiritual
defences were fully restored. As this process was
expected to take weeks, Taliesin had rallied immortals
from all the underground tribes to join in the vigil of
protection, and he felt quite sure that they would not
lack for volunteers.
Being the best pilot, Brian assumed this role and
Tory was taking the co-pilot’s seat. She was of the mind
to record the event on CD-ROM, just in case she
should ever wish to expose their hoax. Naomi, as per
usual, was navigating and her son, Daniel, was present
as a backup in case they needed to launch one of the
smaller reconnaisance units. Nicholas was keeping a
watchful eye on radar and sonar, and Jenny was his
backup should Merlin I or II be needed. Ray was, of
course, overseeing the electronic systems and Rhun was
in attendance as all-round trouble shooter. Only two
members of the usual team were absent: Noah, who was
doing his part from the room of hexagons, and Floyd,
who stayed at base to record the media reaction.

Taliesin and Myrddin caught a ride on the Goddess
to their destination and both were impressed with her
performance on her maiden air voyage.
‘This is simply splendid, Tory,’ her father told her, as
he reclined in a luxurious chair, sipping tea. ‘I very
much approve of my investment.’
‘Well, we did invite you to the launch, Dad,’ Tory
commented, leaving the co-pilot’s seat to join her father
in the lounge area, located at the rear of the control
room. ‘But as usual, you didn’t listen to me when I told
you that she was something extraordinary.’
‘For this day and age, anyway,’ the Merlin quite
agreed.
‘Hey, Taliesin,’ Brian called back to him from the
pilot’s seat. ‘It’s time.’
Ray looked over at Teo after he’d responded to
Brian’s cue. ‘Why does he keep calling you that?’
‘It’s a nickname,’ the Merlin told him. ‘You see,
Taliesin was a very, very, very wise man, like Einstein.’
He was forced to end his explanation there, as Tory and
Myrddin burst into laughter.
‘So, what’s so funny?’ Ray’s smile wavered, feeling
that maybe the joke was on him. Teo raised his brows in
disgust, shrugged and disappeared.
‘Taliesin was also renowned for his modesty,’ Tory
explained, spurring on their laughing fit.
‘I still don’t get it?’ Ray looked to Rhun, whose
smile indicated he was in on the joke.
‘You know my family.’ He slapped Ray’s shoulder to
encourage him to ignore them. ‘They’re all nuts.’

As Noah eagerly awaited Taliesin’s arrival in the room of
hexagons, he scribbled down notes for his book. ‘All
these computers and I don’t know how to access a
simple word processing program?’ He shook his hand,
which was beginning to cramp, thinking his situation
ironic.
‘You were always more partial to the written word
anyway.’
Taliesin startled him with the comment, and Noah
dropped everything. ‘Is it time?’
The Merlin found the lad’s reaction amusing.
‘You are the very image of an animal stunned by the
headlights of an oncoming truck,’ he explained.
‘That’s exactly how I feel,’ Noah realised, reaching
for his folder to make a note of it.
Once the startup sequence had been initiated,
Taliesin was to leave Noah to execute the other
functions as taught. But before departing he approached
a small control panel that stood facing the largest
hexagon in the room. The panel board consisted of
nothing, bar a large mottled crystal ball that lit up when
Taliesin passed his hand over it.
Noah was so mesmerized by the Merlin’s actions that
he didn’t notice the full-colour holograph taking form
inside the large hexagon. Taliesin had to direct his
attention to it. ‘Holy smoke!’ Noah raced over to view
the tiny, technicolor landscape more closely.
‘Death valley,’ the Merlin stated. ‘You see that wee
cloud forming at your eye level?’
Noah raised his eyes and nodded when he spied the
cloud mass erupting in the middle of nowhere.

‘That’s your cloud.’
‘Wow,’ was all Noah could say — the technology
was mind-blowing.
‘You know what to do if the ICA put any helicopters
in the air.’
A little fearful of the prospect, Noah nodded to
confirm.
‘It’s only to scare them off, my friend. If they don’t
get too close, they won’t be harmed.’
‘I understand,’ Noah stated surely. ‘I’ll do my best.’

22
ASCENSION

I

t was clear skies as they flew in over the crumbling
western coastline of the US. The good weather
would make it easier to spot Noah’s cloud, which
Brian estimated would be in sight within half an hour.
The two Merlins departed before the Goddess took up
station over the target area. Cadfan had been healing
people and prescribing natural cures since sunrise; hence
you couldn’t get within a mile of his healing platform
because of all his adoring disciples. Further away, where
the masses had spread out and were seated absorbed in
their prayers, suited Taliesin and Myrddin better. Here
the earth inclined gradually upward, awarding a fine view
of the stage in the distance and the cloud mass above it.
The temperature in the valley was quite bearable as the
climate in this region of the world had also taken a severe

turn. It was the weird vibrations emanating from the
healing festival itself that were unbearable — both
Taliesin and Myrddin felt it — for although people were
singing, chanting, and giving praise, their motivation
sprang from wantonness and fear, not joy and love.
‘I feel this afternoon is going to be a real eye-opener
for many of these folks,’ Taliesin commented in an aside
to Myrddin, who quite agreed.
‘That is, of course, if any of them still think for
themselves.’ Myrddin rolled his eyes and sat himself
down. ‘I am sorry,’ he apologised, as soon as Taliesin had
joined him crossed-legged on the ground. ‘That was
most unnecessary. The vibrations here today are really
very unsettling.’ He shook off the negative energy.
‘Let us hope the elementals are not feeling it as
strongly.’
Taliesin hadn’t called upon the nature spirits of late.
Most had retreated to the fourth dimension, where time
does not exist, and from there accessed other ages when
the Earth was more hospitable. Those that did remain
in the present concerned themselves only with tending
the planet. Understandably, they were not well-disposed
towards the human race of the twenty-first century;
all the ruptures in the Earth’s surface were evidence of
their discontent. Myrddin had stayed in closer contact
with the deva kingdom, mainly those beings who
frequented the woodland areas of Britain. So, although
desert spirits weren’t really his area of expertise, he
offered to try and make contact with the elementals in
the region — just to make sure all this pandemonium
wasn’t bothering them too much. Taliesin agreed

this was a good idea, so Myrddin disappeared under
the hood of his robe to meditate on the task.
He emerged from his private pow-wow about ten
minutes later, appearing rather pale. ‘We must get these
people out of here,’ he said.
‘That has always been the plan,’ Taliesin assured
him, noticing the turbulence in the cloud above.
Myrddin shook his head slowly. ‘I don’t think you
understand. I mean this whole valley is very unstable.’
Taliesin knew exactly what he meant, but the plan
remained the same and they needed to get on with it. ‘I
have faith in you. Are you ready?’
Slightly perturbed about the role he had to play in
this affair, Myrddin nodded. ‘Let us begin.’
It didn’t take long for the masses to notice the
unnatural movement and glow of the huge cloud above.
The anomaly was pointed out to the security guards
who lined the front and back of the stage. They also
thought it unusual and stood staring up at it just as
everybody else did. They certainly didn’t expect it was
going to steal their charge away, or they surely would
have made for Cadfan sooner. Doc would have
suspected at once. But, unfortunately, he was having
lunch with his associates in a large marquee that had
been pitched in the VIP area backstage.
Brian was lining up the Goddess to be directly above
Cadfan, while beside him Tory watched a live broadcast
of the event. The television cameras had switched to a
long shot to film the glowing cloud mass expanding
above the stage.

‘Hey, the searchlights are really effective with all
the turbulence the thrusters are creating,’ Tory
commented.
‘I’m pretty sure we’re directly over him.’ Brian
locked into hover mode. ‘Hit the searchlight.’ They had
positioned this earlier, it was aimed directly down.
Tory flicked the switch, her eyes glued to the
television broadcast. The cloud had created a shadow
over the stage area, and their light beam could be
clearly seen as it landed right on Cadfan. ‘Direct hit!’
Tory squealed with delight, giving her brother a high
five.
The light came streaming down upon him. Cadfan
raised his eyes from his patient and smiled as his feet left
the ground. ‘Grandfather,’ he uttered, relieved, knowing
his kin had finally come for him.
After getting over their initial reaction of awe, the
security guards converged on the prophet as he rose into
the air. They were not nearly fast enough to catch him
however.
Cadfan laughed freely as he ascended, throwing his
arms up in adulation. ‘Freedom’, he cried, tears
moistening his eyes at the notion. ‘At long last!’
Rhun was there to aid Cadfan as he floated in
through the lower doors of Sub Bay One. ‘How’s it
going, Cadfan.’ He reached out a hand to assist his
grandson onto the platform.
‘Are you kidding,’ Walter chuckled. ‘I’m in heaven.’
He got a foothold and then embraced his grandfather,
expressing his heartfelt thanks and gratitude.

‘You’re most welcome,’ Rhun assured him, turning
to speak into the intercom beside them. ‘Close lower
sub bay doors. I have him.’
Doc made it outside just in time to see Cadfan
disappearing into the clouds. ‘Holy shit,’ he muttered,
quietly fuming as he turned to Stanley Brennon. ‘Get
those choppers in the air. If we don’t prove this is a
hoax, we’re finished.’
‘What if it isn’t a hoax?’ Brennon posed.
Doc’s face was filled with wrath as he pulled the
Stormer from Stanley’s belt. Brennon decided to
acquiesce without further question, rallying his team to
the call. Then, as Doc noted some of the press heading
their way, he looked at Rhiannon and placed the
Stormer in her hand. ‘Keep an eye on the fruit,’ he
ordered, referring to Patrick. ‘If anyone comes near him,
blast them. Understood?’ She gave but a slight nod; as
Rhiannon was restrained by the module, he had no
doubt that she would do as she was told.
Once he’d learnt that Cadfan had been delivered safely
into the arms of his kindred, Taliesin’s role was done
and he handed the proceedings over to Myrddin.
The Merlin glanced around at the masses, most of
whom had fallen to their knees in worship, and a look
of disappointment swept his face. Myrddin closed his
eyes and again disappeared under his hood.
At a cry of wonderment from the crowd, Taliesin
looked to the sky. The cloud had begun pulsing with
colour, boiling and billowing more violently than before.

Then, just as suddenly, it settled into another clear form,
glowing white in colour. Taliesin saw the symbol of
Caduceus, which to him signified striving for higher
spiritual awareness, but the people surrounding him had
different views: some saw a cross, others the star of
David, the face of Jesus, Buddha, or Cadfan. Then a
voice was heard, and despite the vastly different
languages of the audience everyone understood perfectly.
‘Mankind, why do you bow down in awe of your
brother? To hope to find spiritual salvation through
another’s understanding is a farce … for the path to true
enlightenment, happiness and health is inside you. The
lesson here is one of absolute honesty. Consider,
examine, and question everything that is presented to
you, even this vision … for how else shall you ever be
granted freedom from delusion. Know yourself, love and
manifest the divine in yourself by yourself. For the true
name of God is, Taliesin Pen Beirdd.’
What? thought Taliesin, horrified by the
announcement. But then he realised that everyone
present had heard their own name, and were all just as
perplexed by the turn of events.
‘Thus, have the courage to take responsibility for
your own words, thoughts, acts, beliefs, well-being …
your own life! Leave this place, and in so doing, follow
your own path to the divine. For you have only to find
the courage to listen and follow your own heart, and
you shall be set free.’
Noah was seated beside the large hexagon, madly
scribbling notes about the scene unfolding behind the

glass screens. He, too, saw the cloud mass take on a clear
form, though the image Noah perceived was that of a
piece of parchment and a quill. As he completed
recording the observation he looked to the holograph for
further inspiration, and spotted what he thought were a
couple of loose bugs flying around in the device. Upon
closer inspection, he realised different. ‘Choppers, shit!’
He dropped everything and made for the climate controls.
Noah quickly typed in a command and hit the
execute key, whereby the beautiful vision of the cloud
transformed into a fierce electrical storm.
‘You’ll stay away if you know what’s good for you,’
he warned, rushing back to check on the helicopter’s
movements. Not surprisingly, they had done an about
face.
The storm erupted overhead, filling Taliesin’s heart with
joy as he gazed over the humbled masses before him.
One by one the people rose from their knees to
begin their walk out of the valley. It was only a few at
first, but then they began rising in droves. Some diehards, whose religious roots proved stronger than their
desire to believe in themselves, continued to weep,
believing their God had abandoned them or that the
voice in the sky was surely the devil at play.
‘It’s working,’ Taliesin uttered quietly to his
accomplice, who was recouping his strength.
The really heartwarming part was that those who
had responded did not fall into a line to form a general
flow of traffic out of Death Valley. Instead, each person
headed off in their own direction.

The television broadcast finally crossed backstage to get
Doc Alexander’s reaction.
‘Will you be leaving the festival now,’ one reporter
asked.
‘If this proves to be a real phenomenon, I most
certainly will,’ he replied.
‘Are you suggesting that what we’ve just witnessed
could be an elaborate hoax, Mr Alexander?’
‘You know it is, don’t you, arsehole?’ Ray jeered, as
he viewed the interview over Tory’s shoulder.
‘You heard the voice,’ Doc responded with a grin.
‘Question everything.’
As Doc waved off any further questions and headed
for the ICA security truck, Ray spotted Rhiannon
standing close to a large marquee in the background.
‘What gives? She’s wearing the module again.’
But before Tory had a chance to confirm this for
herself, the station cut to another shot.
‘We’ve got a slight hitch,’ Rhun announced, as he
arrived on the control deck of the Goddess with Cadfan.
‘It’s more of a request really,’ Cadfan explained. ‘Doc
is holding Patrick, a young novice of mine, captive and
will surely take out my disappearance on him.’
‘I’ll go,’ Rhun stated, knowing there was no time to
waste. The Goddess was well away from the festival site
by this time, but they needed to get Cadfan under
protection before Doc tried to locate him
psychokinetically.
As Taliesin and Myrddin manifested, Tory gave her
son the nod to go after Patrick. The two Merlins were
powerful enough to shield Cadfan for a time.

‘What does Patrick look like?’ Rhun questioned,
placing his palm to Cadfan’s forehead to bethink an
image of him.
While everyone was fussing over the prophet, Ray
snuck around to retrieve the prototype of the ENZUGUZ from his work station.
‘Don’t fear.’ Rhun placed a hand upon Cadfan’s
shoulder in parting.
Ray waited until Rhun had stepped away from Walter
and had closed his eyes to focus on Patrick before he
grabbed hold of Rhun’s arm and vanished along with him.
The large marquee materialised around them, and Rhun
was furious when he found Ray had come along for the
ride. ‘Have you lost your mind? I’m taking you back.’
Rhun grabbed for him, but Ray was already halfway to
the tent’s entrance.
‘Take him.’ He motioned to Patrick, who was too
stunned by their sudden appearance to move. ‘Come
back for me. I have to free Rhiannon from the
NERGUZ.’ Ray held up his prototype.
‘But she’ll kill you,’ Rhun began, then decided it
would be faster to do as Ray suggested than argue.
Patrick was unarmed, and though there were
security men surrounding the tent, there were none
inside the marquee. Rhun reached out and grabbed hold
of the lad, who appeared terrified beyond reason. ‘It’s
okay, Patrick.’ Rhun kept his voice low so as not to alert
the guards. ‘I’m taking you home.’
‘Home?’ he queried, as if he’d never before
considered the prospect.

‘Shh,’ Rhun advised with a nod, and the blue white
ethers engulfed them.
Ray was creeping towards the open flaps at the end
of the marquee when Rhiannon unexpectedly entered
alone. Upon sighting him she pulled the Stormer from
her belt and, finding her captive missing, aimed the
weapon at the intruder. ‘Where is he?’
With the banquet table between them, Ray had no
chance of grabbing the weapon from her. He wouldn’t
have tried, in any case, as she was a far better fighter
than he. ‘I can see you are in no mood for questions.’
He tiptoed around her fury. ‘You wouldn’t, perchance,
remember me?’
‘Should I?’
Her dark eyes stared him down. Yet, they were
glazed — as if only her body was confronting him and
her soul had taken flight elsewhere.
‘Where is he?’ She moved round to confront Ray on
his side of the table, and the force of her steps urged
him to back up.
‘Who? There’s nobody here,’ Ray pointed out the
obvious, ‘and I’m certainly not hiding anybody.’
‘Why are you here?’
‘I have a gift for you.’ He held up the device that
looked about as exciting as a dentist’s tool.
‘Not interested,’ she decided at a glance, taking aim.
‘I’ll take that …’ Rhun knocked the weapon from
her hands and into Ray’s, then wrestled Rhiannon into
a controllable position. ‘Ray.’ Rhun motioned for him
to do the honours.
It wasn’t easy to sever the control mechanism with

Rhiannon doing her best to punch Ray every time he
got the ENZU-GUZ into position.
‘Rhiannon,’ Rhun whispered into her ear, his hand
clamped hard over her mouth. ‘You have to leave here.
There’s going to be an earthquake, a big one!’
His words managed to keep Rhiannon still long
enough for Ray to complete the procedure. ‘Done,’ he
advised Rhun, so that he could let her go.
When Doc entered the marquee to see Ray
Murdock with his wife, it brought the conversation he’d
had with Utu about Cadwallon flooding back. ‘You’ll
not have her!’ He pulled his pistol from its holster and
fired it several times.
Rhun dived too late to block the bullets, but he
cast himself over Ray’s body to return him to the
Goddess.
‘Are you alright?’ Doc raced over to Rhiannon.
She spotted the strange device Ray had offered her
still lying on the ground, and hid it under her foot. ‘I’m
fine … now,’ she replied.
‘Where is Haze?’ Doc’s mood turned stormy. Utu’s
suggestion of betrayal was playing on his mind, and a
sudden surge of anger prompted him to lash out.
Rhiannon was fast enough to block the backhanded strike, and gripped Doc’s wrist firmly. ‘The queer
disappeared. I don’t know where he went.’ She tossed
his arm away from her. ‘If you think about it a moment,
you’ll realise I’m telling you the truth.’
She was brutally honest when restrained, and what’s
more she was right; with the module still firmly in place
it was impossible for her to lie. ‘You’re right. I’ll just

have to find him myself.’ Doc resolved to be more civil.
‘I apologise for my outburst.’
‘That’s alright,’ Rhiannon stated dryly. ‘No great
threat.’
‘Jesus Christ! What happened?’ Tory rushed to Ray’s
side, realising he’d been injured. ‘You fool, Murdock.’
Tears welled when she discovered just how serious his
wounds were.
‘I got shot,’ he informed her, looking down at his
holey excuse for a body as if it belonged to someone
else.
‘Shh.’ Tory gently urged his head back as Jenny
placed a pillow underneath it. ‘Cadfan.’ Tory looked to
the healer.
Walter knelt down to examine Ray, though he knew
at a glance he could do little for him. The bullets had
punctured vital organs. Cadfan was a fine herbalist, but
a surgeon he was not.
‘Who did this?’ Tory looked to Rhun for the answer.
He’d taken a few steps away, but his eyes were still fixed
on Ray.
‘The wounds,’ he mumbled softly, ‘they are the same.’
Tory didn’t have to ask what he meant. She
perceived the image of Sir Bryce that filled Rhun’s
mind. The knight was sprawled amongst the dead on a
bloody battlefield, and his war wounds matched those
on Ray’s body to the letter. ‘No, it doesn’t have to be.’
She turned back to Ray, realising she was losing him.
‘Stay with us.’ She gripped hold of his hand. ‘We need
you, Ray, please.’

A peaceful smile graced his face as reached up to
touch her cheek. ‘You don’t need anyone, Tory
Alexander,’ he uttered as his hand went heavy in hers,
and his body fell limp to the floor with the departure of
his spirit.
‘Tory.’ Her father placed both hands on her
shoulders. ‘I am sorry, child, but you have to come with
us now.’
‘Give me a minute,’ she protested, wrenching
herself from Myrddin’s grasp to hug Ray’s lifeless form.
‘Tory.’ Naomi gently encouraged her to let go. ‘We
shall tend to Ray.’
Had anyone else tried to move her, Tory would have
resisted. But in the face of her sister-in-law, Tory saw
Katren — her dearest friend in the Dark Ages, and
Bryce’s adopted mother. Tory had always recognised
Naomi as Katren, but her past-life connection with Ray
had not occurred to Tory before now. It was as if Katren
had come to collect her son.
‘Don’t worry,’ Naomi urged, easing her away, ‘just
go.’
Tory looked down at Ray and tenderly kissed his
cheek. She then rose to accompany Taliesin, Myrddin,
Rhun, Cadfan and Patrick, all standing in a circle. They
joined hands, and promptly disappeared.
In the room of hexagons, Noah was revising his notes
while he waited for someone to come and collect him.
Taliesin had warned of the dangers of wandering off into
the labyrinth alone. He still wasn’t quite sure if he
believed that there were bizarre creatures and unearthly

spirits inhabiting some of rooms herein, but Noah
respected the High Merlin enough to abide by his
wishes and stay put.
You could find your way around this maze blindfold.
‘What?’ Noah looked up from his notes, expecting
to find someone, but there was no-one present.
You need the library.
Noah ceased his search of the room when he
realised the voice was coming from inside his own head.
It occurred to him that this might be one of those
unearthly spirits Taliesin had warned him about. Noah’s
heart starting pumping so fiercely the beat resounded in
his ears. ‘Who … who … who are you?’
I am you … or rather I am one of the many yous you
have been.
‘Selwyn!’
Capital guess.
‘W … w … why are you here?’
Please calm down, the voice was heard to chuckle.
I’m here to help you. Has the great Queen of Gwynedd
never mentioned me?
‘Yes.’ Noah relaxed, having figured out that Tory
was the great Queen to whom Selwyn referred. ‘She has
spoken of you often. She claimed I was you, you were
me … whatever.’
And that is the plain truth of it, Selwyn assured Noah.
I am here to help you remember all that you have known, so
that you can become all that you are capable of being.
Which brings us back to my original request for you to go the
library.
‘I’m not going exploring in here!’

I know the way, Selwyn insisted, and Taliesin won’t
mind so long as I am guiding you. Noah was still hesitant,
so Selwyn added: My entire life’s work is contained therein.
Noah had read various interpretations of the
Merlin’s work — the few rare extracts that still survived
in the twenty-first century. But to read the renowned
Druid’s complete works could only be compared to
finding the Dead Sea Scrolls.
‘Everything you ever wrote?’ Noah nibbled at the
bait.
Not only my histories, but Taliesin’s as well.
Noah needed no more coaxing. He retrived his
folder and pen and was out the door.
At the end of the corridor he came to one of the
main hallways. To the left, this went into a maze of
corridors and doors; to the right it led to a similar
architectural jungle of stairs and doors. Selwyn directed
Noah towards some nearby stairs.
Up, Noah was told, as he contemplated the
nightmarish feat of engineering. He ignored the
instruction momentarily and leaned out over the
polished timber railing to discover that the maze of stairs,
doorways, archways, open chambers, walkways and
hallways twisted to infinity both above and below. ‘My
God, are you sure you know where you’re taking me?’
As surely as I know that you shall be the eyes, ears, and
memory of a whole new generation of thinkers.
‘Is that supposed to reassure me?’ Noah thought the
claim ridiculous, especially since Tory had forbidden
him to ever publish the story that was based on her
adventures and family tree.

Again Selwyn was amused by Noah’s reckoning. You
know the clan of the Dragon are capable of such feats, so
why not you? After all, you are one of them.
‘In an honorary sense, perhaps.’ Noah released a
heavy sigh. He felt so inadequate next to his crewmates
who, literally, were changing the world. All he could do
was record their acts, and hope that he lived long
enough to finish the story.
No, Selwyn replied. You are related in an actual sense,
Noah — a distant descendant of the Dragon’s line. The
blood of the serpent pumps in your veins. Thus you have
also inherited the vital gene that sets you apart as one of the
Chosen.
Noah’s legs went from beneath him and he found
himself on the floor. Here he was being told that his
greatest hope had come to pass. Could he dare to
believe it was true? ‘You’re toying with me,’ he decided.
If this spirit was in his head, then surely it knew his
desires and was using them to manipulate him.
Oh dear, Selwyn sighed, sounding most
disappointed. Are you so afraid to believe that you are
powerful beyond measure? Or is it that you will fantasise
about greatness, but when it comes down to it, you’d prefer
to leave the real achieving to others?
‘That certainly is not it!’ Noah got to his feet,
insulted. ‘Even if you are lying about the immortality
thing, I will still do all I can to aid the Dragon’s cause.’
Then do it by going up the stairs and to your left.
At the top Noah passed through an ornate gazebo,
and then down another set of stairs to a mahogany
timber archway. This adorned the entrance to a circular,

domed room of pure white marble. The fountain that
sprang from the floor in the centre of the foyer had been
sculpted in the form of a cauldron — the cauldron of
knowledge. Scented water sprouted from the top of
several large chunks of quartz crystal that formed the
central feature of the fountain over which the water
flowed.
Wash your hands and forehead, Selwyn instructed.
‘They’re not dirty,’ Naoh insisted, having looked his
hands over.
Physically, no. But spiritually and mentally, yes, you
need cleansing.
‘Alright … if you say so.’ Noah gave in easily, eager
to touch the inviting piece of art.
The pool was bathed in a white light, which
seemingly emanated from the crystals in the centre.
Cool and smooth to the touch, the quartz pulsated with
energy. The sweet, silky water flowing over this
formation was so soothing to Noah’s hands and head
that he considered tossing his whole body in. ‘Wow.’ He
sniffed at himself, having shaken off the excess water.
‘What’s that smell? It’s so … invigorating!’
Bergamot — the scholar’s scent. Now you are ready for
the library ...
The huge, twin doors parted before Noah, who was
far too curious to fear the force that was opening the
way for him. All he could see were the miles of bookcrammed shelves that lay within the room, and the
desks piled high with parchments and scrolls.
‘Paradise,’ uttered the writer, as the doors closed
behind him.

There was a small desk amidst the larger tables
that drew Noah’s attention at once. It had several jars
of coloured ink on it, all lined up, with quills of
matching colour. He reached for the parchment on the
desk, and was disappointed to find he could not read a
word of it.
Fear not, Selwyn offered. I shall translate. It reads:
This be the last will and testament of Selwyn, Chief
Bard to the Court and the Kings of Powys. I have placed all
my writings in the safe keeping of Taliesin Pen Beirdd, High
Merlin of Britain, in the hope that he will see my work into
the hands of my Chosen incarnation for completion at the
time of the Gathering. I trust that this shall be to my liking,
Sincerely thine, Thy sixth century incarnation, Selwyn.
Noah’s eyes filled with tears. He no longer doubted
the veracity of this spirit anymore, nor his translation of
the ancient script. ‘You truly are me. I would have done
exactly the same thing!’ He gave half a laugh at how
ingenious he, they, were.
Noah, my good lad, you don’t even know the half of it.
As hard as Doc concentrated on willing himself to
Cadfan and Haze, his efforts proved fruitless. It was as if
the men he sought had vanished from creation, along
with the rest of Rhiannon’s kindred.
‘This is useless.’ He gave up after hours of trying.
‘Your friends must be shielding them.’
Rhiannon only shrugged, as she certainly knew
nothing about it.
‘Well, say something!’ Doc was being demanding, as
they were alone in the marquee.

‘I say we leave,’ she stated bluntly. ‘There’s going to
be an earthquake.’
‘How the hell do you know that?’
Rhiannon uncrossed her legs and removed them
from the banquet table. ‘One of my attackers told me,
and the way I see it, he had no reason to lie.’
‘Are you daft? Of course he wants us to leave, then
it will look as if we’re going along with this outrageous
scenario they’ve created.’
‘Oh, give it up, Doc!’ Rhiannon lectured him. ‘Is it
any more outrageous than the Messiah you created?
What do you care if Cadfan’s gone. You don’t need him
any more. You have to tell the people remaining here to
leave — they’ll listen to you.’
‘I will do no such thing. What if you’re wrong about
the earthquake? Then I’ll look a fool.’
Rhiannon grabbed hold of her husband’s arm on his
way out of the marquee. ‘But if they’re telling the truth,
these people will have you to thank for their lives.’
Rhiannon expanded on her theme: ‘Say Cadfan has
spoken with you, and issued you a warning. I mean,
Jesus kept in contact with his disciples, so why not
Cadfan?’
‘Indeed, two can play at this game.’ Doc smiled as
he suddenly realised how easily this disaster might be
twisted to his advantage. He didn’t have to worry about
containing the prophet any more, and Cadfan wouldn’t
dare show up in public, so there was no chance of him
refuting any of the propaganda they chose to create in
his wake. ‘If I could only be sure your friend was telling
the truth.’

‘Trust me,’ Rhiannon insisted, knowing the
informant was her brother. ‘He was telling the truth.’
A helicopter was standing by to whisk them away after
Doc made the announcement. But no sooner had he
said his piece, than the Earth began to tremble. In the
midst of the turmoil of panicked people, and the
commotion caused by the stage scaffold collapsing,
Doc’s security team still managed to have their boss and
his wife in the air within minutes.
From their bird’s-eye view, the extent of the quake
was much more obvious. The mountains had become
walls of tumbling rock, while the barren floor of the
valley was cracking and falling away, claiming many
souls in the process.
‘More of your kin’s handiwork?’ Doc sneered. ‘That
would seem to explain why they were so certain the
disaster would come to pass.’
‘It is more likely they had a vision,’ Rhiannon
retorted, feeling sure her mother would never
knowingly kill so many people.
‘Then Cadfan would have had the premonition, too.
Am I right?’ Doc was following her train of thought, and
felt it naive. ‘Rhiannon, your mother was hailed as a
warrior where I come from — just how do you think she
got such a title? It wasn’t for being compassionate, I can
tell you. So don’t kid yourself. Tory Alexander has killed
for the Dragon’s cause before.’
‘My kindred do not have the means to cause a
disaster like this! Lights in the sky is one thing;
movement in the Earth’s crust is something else again.’

Doc shook his head, unable to believe how
misinformed she was. ‘Taliesin Pen Beirdd can incite
nature spirits to war on his behalf! I have seen it! He
has friends in realms beyond our wildest imagination.
Something like this,’ Doc motioned to the devastation
below them, ‘would be no more difficult for the Merlin
than a walk in the park, if he, or those he serves,
wanted the problem ended.’
There was no point in arguing with him, Rhiannon
realised. Doc’s tone said it all. ‘You still despise them
don’t you?’
‘Yes, I despise them,’ he agreed. ‘This is not the first
time I have seen their indifferent form of malice.’ Doc’s
mood darkened. His time as Cadwaladr often came
back to taunt him. ‘I am remembered as the King who
lost half of Britain, and why? Because I didn’t have any
assistance — no mystical adviser to guide my way
through all the treachery to greatness. Maelgwn, Rhun,
Cadwell, Cadfan, Cadwallon, oh yes, they were
legendary. But not I. Oh no, I was left to take the rap
for one of the bloodiest massacres the motherland has
ever seen.’
‘But they didn’t know that,’ Rhiannon appealed.
‘They didn’t care,’ he snapped. Doc’s tolerance for
the subject was at an end.
Rhiannon knew that, deep down, it was the fact of
being thwarted that was really angering Doc and not
the loss of human life that they’d just witnessed. But she
also knew he was convinced that her kin were
responsible for all the day’s events, giving him all the
more reason to hate them. It had been foolish of her to

believe she had smoothed over the feud with a few wellchosen words. His resentment of them ran deeper than
his love for her, and Rhiannon realised that nothing she
could say or do was going to change his view of the past.
At the vigil around Cadfan, the atmosphere stripped
away Tory’s grief and threw her headlong into a state of
complete ecstasy.
This mini-gathering of the tribe of immortals was
the single greatest multicultural event Tory had ever
experienced. Black, white, red, yellow, whatever — all
mingled together in perfect harmony like the designs of
the Aboriginal people’s sacred Churingas.
No one had any problems communicating via
telepathy. Tory sang and danced to the chants of
every native tongue of the Earth, and understood the
significance of every word and movement.
There was a constant circle of twenty-four people
around Walter and Patrick, and there was no shortage
of reserves to step into their place. The guests spilled
over into the first adjoining hallway of Taliesin’s maze,
inhabiting certain rooms which the Merlin had opened
up to accommodate them throughout their stay. The
whole affair was reminiscent of an indigenous indoor
Woodstock, where the chance to mingle was as exciting
as participating in the event itself.
Upon completion of a six-hour shift in the inner
circle, Tory and Rhun meandered down the hallway
from the vigil room in search of refreshment. Their path
was strewn with the bodies of other guests who cheered
the pair for their stamina.

‘I sure hope that’s water,’ Tory muttered as she spied
Taliesin approaching with a pitcher and two large
goblets.
‘What a vast improvement,’ he commented to Tory,
as he watched her swallow the water down. ‘You are
positively radiant.’
Tory winked at him as she passed the empty goblet
back. ‘I haven’t experienced a natural buzz of this
magnitude since the day I wed Maelgwn. Hell, I feel
like nothing could ever bring me down again.’
‘Unconditional giving is a marvellous thing,’ the
Merlin said. ‘When you expect nothing in return for
your efforts, anything you receive is a bonus.’
‘Hey, how’s it going guys?’ Noah wandered out of
the depths of the labyrinth and into the festivities,
gripping an old scroll in one hand.
‘Noah!’ Tory could have hit herself. ‘I’m so sorry.
Did nobody come to fetch you?’
‘No apologies necessary,’ he assured her. ‘Taliesin
came and found me in the library, where I was going
through my old writings. Selwyn says hi, by the way.’
Without further explanation Noah turned his attention
to Taliesin, unrolling the scroll in his hand. ‘This must
be one of yours. Selwyn doesn’t understand the
language.’
‘Well, that isn’t any wonder, because it’s Atlantean,’
the Merlin explained. ‘We’ll have to get you in touch
with your past incarnation Seth, as this is one of the
works he left for you.’
‘Excellent.’ Noah was again stoked by his own
foresight. ‘Selwyn was right. I don’t know the half of it.’

‘You will. By the time of the Gathering, you will
understand everything.’
Noah was gratified to know that he’d certainly be
there, and with this thought he turned to Tory to offer
his condolences. ‘I was sorry to hear about Ray. Taliesin
told me what happened. He’ll be sorely missed.’
‘Yes, he will,’ Tory confirmed, ‘till next we meet.’
‘Hear, hear …’ Taliesin materialised a pitcher of
mead and two more goblets, so that they might toast
this sentiment.
While Taliesin filled the goblets, Tory looked from
him to Noah to Rhun. The four of them had quite a
history together. ‘This scene is awfully familiar. It seems
the four of us are always left guarding the fort.’
‘And, as always, we shall do a fine job of it, until the
reinforcements arrive,’ Rhun announced with cheer,
having regained a little of his cocky attitude.
‘To the Gathering then,’ Taliesin announced,
raising his goblet in the air.
‘The Gathering!’
Their goblets met in a clash of metal and they drank
to the future — to the loves, friends and adventures
that awaited them there.

PART III

THE HOLY
GHOST

Character History
The Chosen
Tory Alexander
(Thurlow)
Maelgwn/
Miles Thurlow
Brian Alexander
Candace/
Naomi Alexander
Floyd
Boadicea
Robin of Loxley/
John Pearce
Jenny Pearce
Neraida
Cadwell
Ethan
Talynn
Rhun
Sybil
Rhiannon Thurlow
Cadwallon/
Ray Murdock
Cadwaladr/
Doc Alexander
Vanora
Noah Purcel
Pocahontas/Rebecca

the Dark Age Atlantis
Tory/Sorcha

Temperance

Maelgwn
Brockwell

Turan
Adelgar

Katren
Tiernan
Ione

Tabitha
Durand
Lilith

Rhys
Darius
Jenovefa
Anthea
Cara
Vortipor/Cadwell
Angus
Alma
Rhun
Xavier
Bridgit
Sybil
Aella
Annora
Bryce

Zadoc

Caradoc
Vanora
Selwyn

Alaric
Antonia
Seth

Nicholas Pearce
Helen of Sparta
Daniel Alexander
Cleopatra
Aunt Rose
Taliesin/Teo
Seshut/Donna
Mryddin/
Renford Alexander
Vivian/
Helen Alexander
Walter Cadfan
Queen Hatshepsut
Thomas Mateus
Hero
Patrick Haze
Season

Gawain

Gaspard

Cai

Lazarus

Lady Gladys
Taliesin

Nin Bau
Jerram
Mahala

Mryddin

Absalom

Vivian
Cadfan

Melcah

Thais

The Nefilim Tree

23
PASSING TIME

A

fter Cadfan’s deliverance from the ICA and his
recovery from the effects of his zombie state,
the volunteers from the underground tribes
returned to their individual bases to await the time of
the Gathering — some fourteen years away.
Although there were still many immortals trapped
by the NERGUZ-I-NUEN, Taliesin advised that it
would be wise to wait until the Gathering was nearly
upon them before attempting another rescue. If the
ICA were left alone they would perhaps be lulled into a
false sense of security. The less their abilities were
tested, the more lax they would become.
By the same token, Taliesin didn’t want Tory
stirring up any more trouble either. He reminded her of
Maelgwn’s request that she stay hidden, then asked her

to consider all that had happened since she’d chosen to
ignore the warning. How much of it could have been
avoided if she’d taken that advice; was the world really
a better place for her defiance?
Tory mulled over his supposition carefully. She had
saved lives, true, but no one that she wouldn’t have
been reunited with eventually. She had not prevented
the gaping hole in the ozone layer over the Middle East,
or the abduction and murder of innocent people in
Alaska. Nor, with Ray’s death, would they be able to
prevent the implementation of the Fusion project. Tory
had, however, lost her daughter through their
involvement in ICA affairs and this most certainly
would not have happened had she heeded Maelgwn’s
warning. So, in the end, Tory persuaded herself to see
reason and vowed to Taliesin that she would leave
Doc be.
Although Taliesin wholeheartedly wanted to take
Tory at her word, he couldn’t help but caution her. One
of the trials in these times of tribulation, he said, was to
resist wasting their resources on little individual battles.
For only then would the Chosen stand a chance of
winning the war.
Walter Cadfan and Patrick Haze had no problems
fitting in at Watarrka, and before long had set up their
own healing practice and a thriving herbarium. With
the procession of the years, however, their powers of
healing were tested more and more. For, with the
weakening of the Earth’s magnetic field due to its axis
shift the planet was bombarded with radiation from

space. The levels of poisonous toxins in the air
increased to an unbearable high and with this came a
plague of respiratory, digestive, skin and mind diseases,
usually fatal.
The human race was driven to seek refuge in the
few large bodies of forest the planet had left to offer; for
only the trees had the ability to transform the poisonous
gasses into fresh breathable air.
Biodomes were no longer just scientific
experiments for collecting data on the biosphere and
its ecosystems. They had become an integral part of the
future of life on Earth and life in space. Underground,
under the sea, on the moon and on the Earth’s surface
whole cities with carefully monitored environments
were constructed. Clean, healthy surroundings became
a luxury that only the rich could afford to enjoy every
day, though the middle classes could vacation in the
Biodome once they’d saved enough money to afford
the entry fee. The best bet for the average Joe Blow in
the street to be granted residency was to land a job
with a major corporation who operated from within
one of the Biodomes. The remaining population,
though promised residency in paradise when enough
Biodomes had been constructed, was continually
misinformed about the damaged environment to
prevent panic. In their ignorance, a large majority of
Earth dwellers were at the mercy of cosmic radiation
and its slow but inexorable toll.
The large opening in the roof of the cavern of pools
was closed over to protect Watarrka’s community from
harmful radiation. Under Rhun’s guidance, the

immortals pooled their telekinetic know-how to help
achieve an amazing feat of organic cementation. But,
unlike a Biodome, Watarrka was still not completely
isolated from the outside world, for their water supply
was fed from external sources. The water trickled in
through various rocky crevices in the canyon floor, far
too many to hope to find and block them all. As a
further means of prevention, they planted as many trees
and shrubs around the outside pools as possible. They
also boiled and filtered all water for consumption. In
the end, though, they could only hope to delay the slow
poisoning of their people.
These measures kept the health problems of the
outside world at bay for many years, but by the year
2028 the mortals at Watarrka starting showing the first
symptoms of radiation-induced illnesses.
Due to her age, Aunt Rose was the first to fall ill. As
she was an immortal, however, Tory arranged for a fatal
injection to be administered to her aunt in her sleep.
Rose awoke the following day to find her health and
youth restored. Returned to the fair and supple beauty
Rose had been in her prime, Tory recognised her as Nin
Bau, once the High Priestess of Chailidocean and the
lover of the Lord Marduk.
Tory also arranged to have Noah, Nicholas, Daniel,
Floyd, Pete Nangina, and his family, put out of their
misery before it began. One simple injection whilst they
slept and it was done. Floyd was the only one who even
wised up to the transition straight away, as he was
noticeably more youthful and now sported a full head of
hair.

There was one amongst them whose suffering Tory
could not prevent.
Brian lost his beloved wife, Naomi, to cancer during
the Winter of ’29. In the end she went willingly,
trusting Tory’s word that her immortal self was making
her way back to them as they spoke. Since they had met
some thirty-three years before, Brian had loved Naomi
faithfully. Needless to say he was not the same man for
many years after her death.
Having dedicated many years to gazing at the stars,
Daniel Alexander finally made a significant discovery.
At approximately midnight on the 16th December,
2036, Dan was making a routine check of the
constellation of Taurus when he chanced to witness a
new light appear in the night sky. This twinkle, he
immediately concluded, had to be a comet.
These great lumps of dust and ice often appeared
without warning as they travelled into the inner reaches
of the solar system from the Oort Cloud far beyond the
reaches of the planets. Comets only became visible once
the sun’s heat had evaporated some of their ice mass.
This thawing released dust from the comet’s surface
creating a vapour cloud that reflected sunlight and
made the comet visible from Earth.
By breakfast time the following day, Daniel was still
checking the orbit paths of all the known periodical and
non-periodical comets. There was really no need to do
this, as Daniel knew them all by heart. Still, he had to
be sure. Perhaps there was one obscure comet in history
he’d not studied, or that he’d forgotten. When nothing

matched up, however, Daniel was forced to concede
that he must have discovered an entirely new comet.
By this stage of the century only the immortals
inhabited the underground base at Watarrka and the
Goddess easily accommodated them all. They had
reversed the cementation job done on the roof of the
cavern of pools as their isolation no longer served any
purpose. They took Merlin I and II on regular runs to
scout for any stray immortals who might still be
wandering the vast wastelands of the Earth. This gave
them something constructive to do apart from their
studies. The only terrorist activity they’d participated in
of late was their monthly raid on Biodome food stocks.
Watarrka’s once-thriving cavern of produce had died
along with the mortal inhabitants.
Daniel raced through the dark middle cavern that
had been powered down long ago to conserve energy for
Floyd’s computers. This cavern gave Dan the creeps
these days — there were far too many ghosts haunting
the shadows therein. His pace slowed when he entered
the partially-sunlit cavern of pools, where the Goddess
was docked. Daniel guessed everyone would be at
breakfast in the rec room, and ran up the gangway eager
to tell his news.
Daniel raved on for a good ten minutes about
celestial latitude (declination), longitude (right
ascension), and other data he’d been filling his brain
with most of the night.
It was Noah who was the first to pick up on where
Daniel’s spiel was leading. ‘Ah, you would be referring

to the comet the Anglo-Australian Observatory
claimed the discovery of early this morning.’
‘That’s bullshit, man,’ Daniel insisted. ‘What was
their official time of discovery?’
‘One-fourteen this morning.’
Daniel let loose a screech that might have been a
laugh were he not so frustrated. ‘I discovered it nearly
an hour before them.’
Brian gave his son a chug on the shoulder for his
achievement, even though they both knew he could not
publicly state his claim. ‘Well, at least we know it’s
“Alexander’s comet”, no matter what the experts decide
to name it.’
‘Too right.’ Noah seconded Brian’s view. ‘I’ll make
note of it in my scripts. Perhaps, with the passing of
time, the oversight will be corrected.’
‘Thanks, guys.’ Daniel collapsed into a seat, seeing
his chances as grim.
‘Oh, come on.’ Tory attempted to snap him out of
his sudden melancholy. ‘You haven’t been studying the
stars all these years for the glory. Discovery and
observation is what it’s all about, and that’s exactly
what you’re doing … so, be glad. I feel quite sure the
universe threw that comet into your line of vision for
good reason, so you’d best figure out what that is.’
‘You think?’ he responded more positively.
‘Don’t you?’ She threw the ball back in his court.
‘Perhaps you’re right.’ Daniel reached for the breakfast
cereal, his enthusiasm in the new comet rekindled.
‘But don’t go neglecting the other regions of space,’
Rhun warned.

‘I know,’ Daniel said in a bored fashion. ‘Especially
Sirius.’
Rose wandered in half asleep, an absolute knockout
in a pair of cut-off jeans and a midriff top. She wasn’t
even given the chance to wish all of them a good
morning before every male in the room broke into loud
whistles.
‘Looking good, Aunt Rose.’ Even after eight years,
Rose’s transformation still amazed Brian. He just
couldn’t get used to the fact that this dark-haired,
green-eyed babe was his old aunt.
‘Thank you, pumpkin.’ She tweaked his cheek as if
he were a child.
‘Ah, you’re an awful tease, Rose,’ Rhun accused her
playfully, as he gave her a squeeze.
Rose giggled, lapping up the attention. ‘If you’ve got
it, flaunt it, I say.’
‘Here, here,’ all the men agreed.
Floyd strutted into the rec-room, his long fair hair
flying in the back draft. ‘Morning all.’ He sounded
disturbed, but he kept his beef to himself, strolling
straight up to the breakfast bar.
‘The usual?’ Patrick placed the strong Irish coffee in
front of Floyd. ‘It’s got a little extra kick this morning,’
he winked.
Patrick took care of all the catering arrangements
these days, and having proven himself a talented
telepathist, he prided himself on knowing what people
wanted before they asked.
‘Cheers.’ Floyd sipped on the brew, and finding it a
pleasant temperature, drank the whole mug down.

‘Jeez, what’s eating you?’ Patrick immediately
replaced the empty with another he’d already prepared.
‘Mongolia,’ commented Floyd, taking the mug in
hand.
‘That would have been my next guess!’ Patrick
appeared a tad concerned for the man’s well-being.
‘Well,’ Floyd threw an arm in the air, ‘after blatantly
refusing the ICA’s request to do some surveying in their
region, the Mongolian Government have now had an
abrupt change of heart.’
‘God, that shits me.’ Patrick played along.
‘So what’s that now?’ Noah counted scenarios in his
mind. ‘Five countries the ICA has blackmailed their
way around thanks to the fusion grid.’
‘You would think they’d all wise up,’ Rose scoffed.
‘They probably have,’ Tory rose to clear her
dishes, ‘only now it’s too late to do anything about it.
Besides, anyone who’s someone is tucked up safely in
the cosy atmosphere of their little domed paradise.
And as long as the ICA keep pumping the power their
way, they don’t give a damn what happens to the
world outside.’
‘Sounds a bit like us,’ Brian grumbled, voicing the
restlessness they all felt.
‘Don’t start with me, Brian,’ Tory warned, and he
dropped the subject.
‘What do you think their interest in Mongolia is,
anyhow?’ Rhun posed in a general fashion. It was his
mother who answered him.
‘We don’t know, and we don’t care,’ she stated
forcefully. ‘Subject closed.’

‘Besides …’ Patrick reverted back to his original
question, and passed Floyd his third refill, ‘I don’t think
that’s what’s really bothering you.’
‘Hey,’ Floyd took a swipe at Pat, who jumped back
out of harms way, ‘don’t be getting into my head this
early in the morning.’
‘Touchy.’ Pat provoked him further. ‘I was only
going to ask her name?’
‘I don’t know! Okay?’
Tory, who’d finished rinsing her dishes, overheard
the comment and was too curious not to inquire: ‘To
what her are you both referring?’
‘I just got through telling him, I don’t know. I just
had a couple of dreams, that’s all. More like wishful
thinking, than anything else,’ Floyd mumbled in
conclusion, and was about to walk off in a huff, when
Tory glimpsed his mind and a vision of the beauty who
was haunting him.
‘I know her name,’ she announced boldly, and
waited for Floyd to do an about-face. ‘I even have a
couple of photos. Want to see?’
Though Floyd couldn’t imagine in his wildest
dreams how this could be possible, he knew better than
to doubt Tory’s claims. He gave a vague nod and
followed her to the CD-ROM library.
‘I know they’re in here somewhere.’ Tory glanced
through the titles on the computer screen. ‘I had a
whole bunch of photos from my travels scanned onto a
CD for safekeeping. Gwynedd,’ she announced. ‘Here it
is.’ She double-clicked on the file, and the computer

searched, selected and loaded the CD in question from
amid the hundreds it held in its stacker.
A slide show of photographs appeared one by one
on the screen.
‘Is that your wedding?’ Floyd was gaping at the
shots, which looked rather like the stills from a grand
period movie.
Tory nodded, feasting her eyes on the fleeting image
of her love. ‘Happiest day of my life,’ she told Floyd
with certainty. The next picture that faded in was of all
twelve of the original members of the Dragon’s circle
who had served as guardians of Britain during
Maelgwn’s rule. ‘There she is.’ Tory froze the screen,
selecting only the figures of Ione and Sir Tiernan to
blow up and enhance.
‘It is her … and me!’ he realised, having taken a
closer look. ‘Rhun told me about my life in Gwynedd as
the champion of King Caswallon and then King
Maelgwn after him.’ Floyd lowered himself into a chair,
believing that if he didn’t sit down he’d fall down. ‘But I
always assumed he was either exaggerating or pulling
my leg.’
‘Don’t look so worried,’ she chuckled. ‘Your
dreams are just your past life memories bleeding
through. We’ve all experienced this to differing
degrees. The training Rhun and myself have been
putting you through is designed to encourage such
experiences.’
‘So, let me get this straight.’ Floyd’s new
understanding made him smile. ‘Are you saying I was
involved with this woman?’

Tory rolled her eyes at his choice of words. ‘God,
Floyd, you’re such a damn bachelor sometimes.
Marriage is not a dirty word you know?’
‘She married me! Why?’
‘She was your wife in two different lifetimes that I
know of,’ Tory stated. ‘Why should this be so surprising
to you?’
Now Floyd was laughing. ‘Because she has the
makings of a super model, or a Goddess even. What the
hell would she see in me?’
‘The makings of a champion, a genius, or a King,
perhaps?’ Her response seemed to floor him, and he
went quiet for a moment.
‘So what is the point of me remembering her? Is this
some sort of cosmic torture?’
‘Hardly. I’d say she wants to make sure that you’ll
recognise her when she returns here with Maelgwn and
the others next year.’
‘Next year!’ This piece of information certainly
rattled Floyd somewhat as he looked down at his
youthful, though undeveloped, body. ‘Jesus! If she’s
expecting a champion, I sure have some work to do.’
‘That might be wise.’ Tory thought she’d give him a
little extra incentive. ‘Ione’s perfect incarnation was
none other than the great warrior, Boadicea — Queen
of the Iceni people in the east of Britain. She was an
ally of the Romans until she saw her people overtaxed,
her husband slaughtered and her daughters raped. In 61
AD she led what became an almighty massacre against
the Romans, and burned London and St Albans to the
ground.’

‘So you think I might have been her husband then?’
Floyd theorised, fascinated by the tale.
‘Almost certainly,’ Tory advised, ‘though only you
can really confirm this for sure by endeavouring to get
in touch with your incarnation at that time.’
‘Well, I just might do that.’ He arose, inspired.
‘Thanks for the insight.’
‘Any time,’ she smiled. Floyd made haste from the
room to reach his computers and do a bit of research
himself.

24
SUPERNOVA

A

s 2036 gave way to 2037, the night sky played
host to some very unusual activity.
The first episode of note occurred on a
moonless night towards the end of January. Daniel was
plotting his comet’s course across the heavens when a few
portions of it were seen to split away from the main body
and take off on their own course. The comet itself was
entering our solar system, its trajectory against the general
orbit of the planets, but the splintered fragments it shed
headed off in the same orbit as the rest of the system.
‘This just doesn’t happen,’ Dan explained to his
colleagues over breakfast. ‘If some force had caused the
comet to shatter or explode, then it would have been
dispersed in all directions … the bulk just couldn’t
maintain its original course.’

‘Are you quite sure about what you saw?’ Noah
looked up from sourcing information on his portable
computer. ‘You weren’t smoking any of Floyd’s pot at
the time perchance?’
‘What kind of an idiot do you take me for, Purcell?’
Daniel took great offence at the suggestion. ‘I’ll have
you know I take my work very seriously.’
‘Hey.’ Noah held up his hands in truce. ‘Look, if
something of such astronomic importance occurred last
night, I’m just wondering why one of the major
observatories hasn’t reported it?’
‘They haven’t?’ Daniel was stunned. Noah shook his
head. ‘I have photographic documentation of the event.
They must have seen it.’
‘If you’re right,’ Floyd spoke up, ‘the only person
who could force a conspiracy of silence of that
magnitude is Doc Alexander.’
‘Why would he care about the movements of some
comet?’ Rose queried.
‘He wouldn’t,’ Tory cut in. ‘Unless, of course, Dan’s
comet is not a comet, but say, a space station.’
‘A space station!’ echoed everyone in the room in
disbelief.
‘Now hear me out.’ Tory stood and paced — this
helped her to think. ‘Tell me, Dan, could any other
heavenly body that you know of split apart in the
manner your so-called comet did last night?’
‘It’s hard to say.’ He avoided giving a direct answer.
‘There is still so much in the universe we don’t
understand, that —’
‘I said, that you know of.’ Tory pushed for an answer,

not wanting to get caught up in the ‘what ifs’ of a leftbrain thinker.
‘No,’ he conceded finally.
‘But … a station could maintain course whilst
launching a couple of large, deep-space vessels off in
another direction. If I’m not mistaken, this manoeuvre
might look an awful lot like what you saw.’
Daniel went pale. ‘The vessels would have to be at
least a quarter the size of our moon to be spotted from
such a distance.’ He turned Tory’s suggestion over in his
mind. ‘But, yes, I suppose that could appear as I
described.’
‘That theory would seem to justify a conspiracy,’
Brian agreed with his sister. ‘Do you think it might be
Maelgwn and Co, heading our way?’
Tory raised both brows, unable to say for sure.
The comment got Rhun thinking, however, and he
looked to Daniel to quiz him further. ‘This … body,’ as
he decided to call it in the absence of more information.
‘Could it have come from the general region of the
Sirius system?’
‘I can’t prove it for sure, but there are factors
supporting this assumption. The constellation of Taurus,
against which I first spotted the anomaly, appears close
by Sirius in the sky. And, the fact is, the star clusters are
over sixty light years apart. Sirius is much closer to us at
eight light years away, than say … the star Aldebaran in
the constellation of Taurus is sixty-eight light years
away. Therefore, if one considers the ascent angle a
space station might take to approach our galaxy from
Sirius, there’s actually more chance that it would come

from that system as opposed to any other star cluster in
the vicinity.’
Rhun clapped his hands together, pleased to hear
this. ‘The Dragon’s on his way.’
‘But what of the supernova Maelgwn said would
coincide with his arrival?’ Tory was not yet convinced.
Rhun shrugged. ‘Well, it’s over one light year to the
Oort Cloud at the outer reaches of our solar system, so
they still have quite a way to travel before reaching us.
Father’s prophecy may yet be fulfilled.’
One month later the prophecy did come to pass,
although once again Daniel could offer no explanation
for the occurrence.
What appeared to be a large supernova flare erupted
in the vicinity of Sirius. Such a colossal stellar outburst
was the result of the collapse of a massive star, much
larger than our sun. Stars subject to this kind of
behaviour were dubbed red super-giants; trouble was,
there were no such stars in that region of space.
Daniel was the only one amongst his kin who seemed
even mildly worried about the paradox. ‘It just can’t be,’
he mumbled, as they all stood on the canyon ridge staring
up at the newest, brightest light in the night sky.
‘You keep saying that, and yet there it is.’ Tory
grinned broadly, knowing this was a sign that her
reunion with Maelgwn was imminent.
‘So what’s the official word?’ Brian looked at Noah,
who was their propaganda hound.
‘A supernova.’ Noah stated the obvious. ‘They’re
blaming an unknown super-giant in the deep reaches of

space that must have remained hidden from us for all
these years thanks to Sirius A’s bright luminosity.’
‘I don’t think that’s very likely.’ Daniel sounded
disappointed, as a reasonable theory would have been
really friendly right now.
‘Why?’ Tory was interested to hear his view. ‘What
do you think it is?’ She didn’t really have to ask, for she
knew his mind, but she wanted Daniel to feel confident
in voicing his speculations.
He hesitated, thinking his hypothesis far too
outlandish. ‘Perhaps it is the first evidence of the
eruption of a white hole?’
‘You might not be too far wrong.’ Rhun considered.
‘My father never actually said it would be a supernova.
We just assumed it would be from the phenomena he
described.’
‘Good point.’ Tory realised he was right.
‘Well, one thing’s for sure …’ Brian threw an arm
over his son’s shoulder. ‘If this means what we think it
means, it’s a good omen.’
Over the next twenty-four hours, Daniel studied the
progress of the eruption of light in the sky.
If this anomaly was truly a supernova flare, a gas
and dust-filled cloud should have been zooming away
from the imploded star at several kilometres per hour.
Yet, as far as Daniel could see, the bright disturbance
in the fabric of space appeared to be remaining
perfectly constant. By the same token, if this was a
white hole it should have been spewing forth cosmic
matter, and this was not the case either. Round and

round in his head the theories went, until he was left
with only one.
‘It has to be a wormhole.’
Closely allied to black holes and white holes,
wormholes could best be described as tunnels through
space, connecting one part of the universe to another,
or connecting this universe with parallel universes and
dimensions.
‘Well,’ Dan decided, after too many hours without
rest, ‘the only way I’m ever going to prove it is to find
out where the wormhole leads. And I’ve got about two
chances of doing that — zero and none.’ He leant
forward to rest his weary brow on the desk, dreaming of
a spaceship with light speed capabilities. He drew a few
deep breaths in an attempt to clear his muddled
thoughts, and in so doing drifted off to sleep.
She was a beautiful, fair-skinned beauty, with eyes
like emeralds, and long locks of flaming red hair. It’s
time to wake up, she whispered, her sweet smile
enchanting him. The wait is over.
‘Dan!’ Noah came bursting into the room, and on
finding the astronomer asleep at his desk made haste to
wake him.
‘Leave me be,’ Daniel muttered, doing his best to
slap Noah away without emerging from his dream. ‘I’m
far happier here.’
Noah wasn’t listening to Dan’s sleepy drivel.
‘You’re coming with me, my friend … sorry.’ He
grabbed hold of Daniel under the arms and hoisted
him from his seat.
Dan was on his feet before he awoke fully, and was

none too pleased about his return to reality. ‘Jesus,
Purcell, couldn’t it wait!’
‘I don’t believe so.’ Noah had transported them to
join the others on the canyon ridge.
All eyes were upturned to the night sky and everyone
maintained a reverent silence, in awe of the wonders
they were witnessing.
An enormous vortex spiralled above the Earth, out
beyond the orbit of the moon. Its centre was expanding
to form a huge glowing corridor through the fabric of
space. This brilliant mass shot forth thousands of
glowing balls of light, that proceeded to descend toward
our planet.
‘Well, now I know where the wormhole leads. I
suppose it’s safe to assume the premise is correct,’ Daniel
mumbled, even more in awe of the marvel than his
crewmates were, as he truly understood how incredible
it was. ‘Einstein and Rosen were right.’
‘Should we panic?’ Noah prompted the expert for
comment.
Daniel closed his jaw as he considered how to
answer. ‘The wormhole presents no real threat to us, as
it neither sucks in nor exudes matter. It’s like a tunnel
through space that is constructed of antigravity, or so
the theory goes. As for the lights it’s spewing, I have no
idea.’ But then, recalling his dream, Daniel put forward
the theory that perhaps they were some sort of craft,
which glowed when emerging from light-speed?
‘I’d say that’s a damn fine theory,’ Tory exclaimed.
‘Now all we have to do is figure out if these are the good

guys, or if it is they who are still making their way to us
from the outer reaches of the solar system?’
‘No,’ Daniel ventured, at the risk of sounding like
he knew what he was taking about. ‘The wait is over.
This is them.’
A faint rumble echoed across the landscape from
the distant horizon, growing rapidly louder as something
approached. Though it was still dark, the phenomena in
the sky lit up the night far better than the brightest full
moon and they could suddenly see what was coming.
As a wave of supersonic airforce fighters passed
overhead, Tony got the feeling Daniel was right.
Somewhere in this light wave of alien craft was her
husband, and she didn’t much like the reception the
defence department had planned for him and his
company.
When the thundering mass of aircraft had passed,
Brian started firing orders. ‘Floyd, Noah, Nick. Get
down below and find out what the official word is.
Cadfan, track down Taliesin or my father and see if they
know what the hell is going on. Dan —’
‘I know — telescope.’ Dan vanished to do his
father’s bidding along with the others who had their
instructions.
‘Tory, Rhun and I shall keep watch out here. I want
everybody else underground and out of sight until we
know what’s really going on. Jen,’ Brian made one last
request, ‘round us up some binoculars and fetch me
three Stormers, will you?’
‘You got it!’ She winked, fading from sight along
with Rose, Tom and Patrick.

Brian looked to the heavens where the first wave of
space lights had begun to enter the atmosphere. These
had turned amber in colour, becoming balls of flame as
they plummeted toward the Earth. ‘At last, some action.’
‘And that could come in a much sweeter form than
you imagine.’ Rhun raised his brow suggestively.
This certainly put a smile on Brian’s face. ‘We can
only hope.’
The dawn saw the first of the glowing pods crash to
earth not far from Watarrka, and several others followed
it in close succession. Central Australia was not the
only place the strange fiery pods had landed, however.
Every nation in the world was being bombarded by the
phenomenon.
‘Let’s get closer.’ Tory willed herself to the old,
abandoned ranger station on the outskirts of the canyon
in the general direction of where the group of pods had
gone down.
She arrived at her destination expecting to see some
evidence of a crash site close by, but there was no
smoke, no churned-up dirt, nothing?
‘Don’t do that!’ Brian arrived on the scene, fuming.
‘From now on you wait for us, understood?’
‘What do you think I’m still doing here?’ She raised
her binoculars to scan the surrounding area.
‘I’m serious, Tory. We don’t know what we’re dealing
with yet, so please don’t go charging off on your own.’
She wasn’t listening. She was madly trying to zoom
and focus the glasses on something she’d spied way off
in the distance.

Rhun had arrived by this time, and noticing his
mother’s excitement he was curious. ‘What is it?’
She gasped, too overwhelmed to speak right away.
‘It’s him.’ She shoved the binoculars in her son’s hand
and took off toward the horizon as fast as her legs would
carry her.
‘Damn it, Tory,’ Brian pursued her, again angered by
her lack of caution. ‘You don’t know that for sure.’
‘Yes I do!’ she insisted, picking up speed to escape
her brother. This attempt proved useless, and he tackled
her to the ground moments later.
‘Let me go.’ She fought him off.
‘Please, Tory, listen! You’ve waited an eternity for
him to return, I know, but a few more minutes isn’t
going to kill you.’
Tory gave up her struggle, cursing Brian’s good sense
even though she knew he was right.
Rhun caught up to them before the eleven darklyclad figures advancing across the plain got too close.
Eight of the eleven were females, and having feasted his
eyes already, Rhun passed the binoculars to his uncle.
‘Take a look,’ he prompted, with a devilish grin.
Brian discarded the glasses after only a moment’s
use. ‘Naomi.’ He’d spotted his love and was off across
the dry, grassy plain to greet her.
‘I guess that means it’s safe now.’ Tory commented
sarcastically, rolling her eyes as she and Rhun pressed on.
The sun was higher in the sky now, and visibility
was better. As Tory neared the line of advancing people,
only some of whom she recognised, Maelgwn’s
dominating form stood out a mile.

‘Tory!’ he called to her, breaking into a run.
Just when she thought she could move no faster, the
sound of his voice nearly caused her to fly. The next
thing she knew, Tory was wrapped up in Maelgwn’s arms
mumbling his name over and over.
‘I must be dreaming.’
‘This is no dream,’ he assured, giving her a kiss that
was long overdue.
‘Do you two need a private room or something?’
One of Maelgwn’s male associates jeered, coming to a
stop beside them.
‘Yes, please,’ they both replied, parting for breath.
Then Tory realised it was Sir Rhys who addressed
them, or rather, his perfect incarnation, Sir Robin of
Loxley.
‘Well, if you’ll kindly tell me where I might find my
other half,’ Robin said, ‘I’ll gladly leave you to it.’
‘I suppose we should help him out?’ Maelgwn looked
down upon his love, his smile as broad as could be.
‘But what of your transport?’ Tory quizzed. ‘The Air
Force is going to be combing this place before long. In
fact, I’m surprised they’re not here already.’
‘They won’t find anything, bar a few holes in the
ground. I have my vehicle right here.’ Maelgwn
gestured to the rather complex-looking module he wore
around his left wrist. Then, noting Tory’s concern, he
laughed. ‘I haven’t gone mad,’ he assured her, as they
began to walk after the others. ‘Let us collect Nin Bau,
and I shall demonstrate for you.’
‘What do you want with Rose?’ Tory wondered,
jealous already.

‘It is not I who wants her, but the Lord Marduk. It is
my charge to collect her and take her to him.’
‘And where might he be?’
‘He’s back at base,’ Maelgwn announced casually. ‘I
thought that after we drop Nin Bau off, you might like
to come back to my place … or is that being a bit
presumptuous for a first date.’
‘Hardly,’ Tory quickly replied, thrilled at the
prospect of going anywhere with him.
At the massive reunion, many inhabitants of Watarrka
recognised their other half immediately, due to the
dreams or past-life experiences they’d had during their
time in exile. Others experienced an instant affinity
with a total stranger.
Naomi’s ‘Chosen’ incarnation looked more like her
Atlantean self: dark eyes, long, dark curls and an olive
complexion. She was the Middle Eastern Queen,
Candace of Shamar, a wise and benevolent ruler who
had been a contemporary of Alexander the Great. Even
with his blond hair and blue eyes, she recognised Brian
as the great warrior who had stolen her heart back in
the third century BC, when he’d saved the life of her
son. Brian found it hard to accept her claim that he was
once the legendary King of Macedonia, for he had met
Alexander’s daughter, Neraida, and she had not seemed
to identify him as her father.
‘You did not part on the best of terms,’ Candace told
him. ‘In fact, you banished her in a fit of rage when her
lover, your cook, found the water of life you were
seeking and gave it to Neraida instead. To punish her

lover, Andreas, you tied a millstone around his neck
and had him flung into the sea.’
‘Oh,’ Brian said, feeling a little guilty. ‘Then I shall
apologise.’
‘That won’t be necessary, because Andreas has been
returned to her this day in the form of his perfect
incarnation, King Cadwell of Gwynedd.’
They couldn’t help but marvel at how intricately
interwoven their lives had been throughout history. In
one way or another, they had all assisted each other to
greatness at some time; souls threading their way
through the fabric of time until their turn for greatness
came. Brian found it hard to believe that the Gods
would choose his present incarnation over that of
Alexander the Great. But when Candace pointed out
how ruthless the great ruler had been when it came to
achieving his desires, Brian began to understand why he
might have been the preferred choice.
Daniel finally met the beautiful redhead of his
dreams, whom he was bowled over to discover was the
great Queen Cleopatra, who at once recognised him as
her beloved, Mark Antony. As it turned out the classic
film image of the great Queen was all wrong, for she was
not an Egyptian, but a Greek.
The one woman amongst the newcomers whom
Tory would have initially pegged as Cleopatra turned
out to be Queen Hatshepsut, the first female to rule
Egypt, in the year 1665 BC. She and Cadfan stood
regarding each other fondly, as he knew her to be his
beloved wife and Queen who had died giving birth to
their son, Cadwallon.

Nicholas was completely unaware of who he was
supposed to be looking for. Yet he had no complaints
when the woman whose face had launched a thousand
ships stepped forward to introduce herself as Helen of
Sparta. Paris, she called him, the Trojan prince who had
risked everything to have her.
As there were only three women among the ranks of
those inhabiting Watarrka — Jenny, Rose and Tory who
were all spoken for — Tory was wondering who the
other male in Maelgwn’s party had come in search of.
‘We call him Season. His real name is hell to
pronounce,’ Maelgwn whispered to Tory confidentially.
‘He ruled for a time in Memphis, around 3000 BC, and
was hailed as a great and wise Pharaoh until he refused
to marry, having fallen in love with another man. This
so outraged the Gods of Enlil’s flock, that they forced
Season to witness the brutal murder of his lover before
being stripped of his title and place in history. He was
then banished into the desert to die like a dog. Your
great-grandfather, Enki, seeing Season for the great and
honest man he was, selected him as one of the Chosen,
and promised him that there would come a time when
his homosexuality would not be frowned upon.’
Tory realised that Season had come to claim
Patrick, who was both excited and relieved to find his
perfect other half was a male and not a female, as
Patrick had feared.
Floyd found his Boadicea, and Rhun was reunited
with Brigit’s perfect incarnation, Sybil, the prophetess
of Atlantis. Thais and his love recognised each other
immediately, despite the fact that they were both in

human form. She was a centaur, as was he, named
Hero, whom Thais had not seen in over six thousand
years.
The last member of Maelgwn’s party was a beautiful
Indian squaw. ‘John …’ she approached Noah shyly, ‘it
is I, Pocahontas, though you used to call me Rebecca.
Do you remember?’
‘I do,’ he lied, so captivated by her beauty that he
could not bring himself to disappoint her. I must have
been John Rolfe once, he surmised on the quiet; Noah
had recalled many of his past lives, but this had not
been one of them.
Rebecca caught his mind, however, and thought his
lie a sweet one. ‘I remember every second of our time
together. I could tell you about it, if you like.’
‘I like,’ he assured her, and they walked away to talk
in private.
‘Well,’ concluded Maelgwn. ‘I don’t think that we’ll
be missed here this evening. Shall we away?’
‘Please,’ urged Rose, eager to join her lover in the
heavens.
‘So be it, then.’ Maelgwn raised his left arm, aiming
the module he wore at the pool before him, then
clamped his right hand over the top and uttered the
words: ‘AN-ME-A-DU.’
The language he spoke was Atlantean, thus Tory
understood the instruction to mean: Heavens – Flying
ship – Water – Initiate. And from what happened next,
she knew her translation to be correct.
A blue beam shot forth from the module and formed
into a bright ball of light several feet away. Once the

beam was spent, the ball of light expanded and began to
assume a physical form.
‘Oh, my lord,’ Tory mumbled, as a large disk-shaped
object, made of the strange black metal she had come to
associate with Nefilim construction, took form. It was
not a perfect disk shape, however, as two opposing sides
of the craft curved slightly down and under.
‘Wow.’ Rhun was mind-blown. ‘Total particle
manipulation.’
‘And this is only one of the various forms these craft
can assume,’ Maelgwn advised his son, ‘depending upon
the conditions one is dealing with.’
‘What’s the power source?’ Rhun circled around the
edge of the pool of water to view the ship from another
angle.
‘Simple crystal-generated energy blasters to get it
airborne, then what you might know as an A-frame
propulsion system kicks in.’
‘Never heard of it.’ Rhun pleaded ignorance.
‘It’s a form of magnetic propulsion, whereby
magnetic rings are shot forth from of the front of the
vessel. The ship, being made of a highly conductive
metal, is pulled into the magnetic field. As the vessel
moves forward, the magnetic energy is sucked back into
the rear and recycled.’
‘Incredible.’ Rhun shook his head in amazement.
‘What’s the maximum speed?’
‘Ah, I knew that would be the next question.’
Maelgwn grinned. ‘By your terms of measurement,
about nine-hundred thousand kilometres a second, in
free space.’

Rhun’s eyes parted wide. ‘But that’s over three times
the speed of light — nearly a parsec per second!’
‘Very good. I’m glad to see they’re teaching
something down here. Ladies,’ Maelgwn motioned Tory
and Rose into the vessel, as a hatch on the side raised
itself to grant entry.
The long, slender, inner body of the craft was
designed to accommodate eight people, including the
pilot and co-pilot. But the cockpit was not a mass of
switches, buttons and flashing lights as were modern,
Earth spacecraft. A large, round telekinetic plate was
positioned beside the joystick that steered the craft,
along with a couple of round plates that Tory assumed
were screens for communication and tracking.
When Rose was comfortably strapped in, Maelgwn
invited Tory to sit beside him in the co-pilot’s seat.
‘Word has it you’ve become a pretty good pilot yourself?’
Tory shrugged modestly, as this craft could hardly be
compared to the archaic equipment she was used to
operating.
‘We’ll have to get you onto a simulator,’ Maelgwn
suggested. ‘I’m sure you’d be able to operate one of these
with your eyes closed.’
As Tory planted her butt in the co-pilot’s seat, the
safety harness startled her by automatically locking her
in. ‘I don’t think so,’ she said warily.
‘It’s easier than it looks.’ He grinned, settling into his
seat. ‘If you can think, you can fly.’ Maelgwn placed his
hand on the telekinetic control panel and, as the thrusters
lifted them above the surface of the water, he guided them
towards the opening in the roof of the cavern.

Rhun made a dash around the pools to the far end of
the cavern to watch the craft depart. The rounded flanks
of the transport folded underneath it to form a long cigarshaped object. The thrusters cut out as the vessel was
catapulted forward, and was gone in the blink of an eye.
‘Hey,’ Sybil called to Rhun. ‘If that’s what it takes to
get your attention …’ She held up her arm, exposing
the craft module on her wrist.
‘What a woman.’ He smiled gleefully, making his
way back to her.
Their craft was out beyond the stratosphere of Earth
before Tory had fully realised they’d even taken off.
There was no evidence of the massive forward thrust that
was a feature of existing twenty-first century spacecraft.
Tory could have been sipping a cup of tea during their
ascent and not have spilt a single drop. There was no loss
of gravity, either, and their flight was completely silent.
‘Tell me …’ she had a thought. ‘Couldn’t we have simply
willed ourselves to your base craft?’
‘Sure,’ Maelgwn conceded, ‘but this is more fun, and
I get to show off.’ He kept well clear of the space
stations and satellites that were orbiting the planet.
‘Cadwaladr’s been busy, I see.’
‘Oh, you bet he has,’ Tory confirmed. ‘But I’d say all
the phenomena you’ve manifested over the past twentyfour hours has got him worried.’
‘Don’t count on it,’ Maelgwn scoffed. ‘He knows
Shamash is on his way, although from our calculations
we’re maybe a week ahead of his fleet. A good thing,
too, as it buys us some time.’

‘Some time for what?’
‘Oh no.’ He avoided answering. ‘That’s business,
and business can wait until tomorrow, hey?’
‘Agreed.’ Tory was all for that. Her gaze shifted back
to the front window and she noted that they seemed to
be heading for the wormhole. ‘You’re not taking us in
there?’
‘No, no.’
‘Then where? I can’t see any vessels out here.
Certainly nothing big enough to be a space station.’
Maelgwn found her guesswork somewhat amusing.
‘Do you think we’d leave the ATEN sitting out in the
open for all to see?’ ATEN translated into ‘imperishable
star’ — Tory recognised the word from ancient
Sumerian texts. ‘Cloaking device?’ she assumed.
‘Correct.’ Maelgwn placed his hand on the
telekinetic control panel, whereby a headset lowered
from the roof to encompass his eyes and forehead.
Dragon One requesting permission to dock, landing code,
CX 509.
Permission granted, Dragon One. Please proceed to
Docking Bay Seven.
A ripple penetrated the space before them, and was
seen to rip a hole in the fabric of the universe. As their
craft proceeded through the illuminated tear, the massive
body of the ATEN suddenly appeared before them.
‘Holy shit.’ Tory had not expected their destination
to appear so large, so quickly.
‘Relax. This is home,’ Maelgwn advised. The
headset retreated back into the roof from whence it
came. He guided their craft around the huge bulk of the

ATEN and into a long, circular tunnel that became
smaller and smaller until the craft finally docked
comfortably within its circumference.
‘Are you alright,’ Maelgwn asked Tory, who seemed
to have stopped breathing.
She let out a huge sigh of relief, realising the flight
was over, when her seat harness suddenly retracted and
startled her again.
Maelgwn laughed at this. ‘You’ll get used to it. Oh,
speaking of scary surprises, this might be a good time to
inform you both that Homo sapiens are not the only
form of humans in existence.’
‘What?’ Tory frowned, not really getting his drift.
‘Well, as we were fashioned from apes, other breeds
of human have been fashioned from creatures who are
better adapted to the different climates and terrains of
other planets. Take Thais, for example, who was
fashioned from a horse, a breed known as Homo
gammurugu. You’ll see what I mean.’ He decided a
picture was worth a thousands words. ‘Just try not to
stare. These people are my friends.’
‘I’ll try not to embarrass you too much.’ Tory raised
herself from her seat.
Maelgwn gave her a squeeze, not wanting her to get
him wrong. ‘That will never happen,’ he told her. ‘It’s
just that I have told everyone so much about you, my
associates could seem a little overwhelming.’
‘I understand.’ She held his face a moment,
thinking how handsome he was.
‘A-hum!’ Rose gave them a wave to get them
moving.

25
BODY PARTS

W

hen the hatch opened they were greeted by a
stocky, round-faced lad with a great mane of
long, curly auburn hair. ‘Hey, boss.’ He
waved to Maelgwn, fleetingly admiring the females at
his side. ‘Good flight?’
‘Not bad, thanks Remme,’ Maelgwn answered,
taking off his control module and handing it to the lad.
‘The thrusters are still a bit sluggish, though.’
‘Roger that, Commander.’ He smiled broadly. ‘I’ll give
’em a service then, eh?’ Remme watched Rose pass him by
on her way out, and gave a low purring sound of approval.
It was not until Tory glanced over her shoulder at
Remme that she noticed he was sporting a long, tan
tail, with a furry tuft on the end that was twitching
uncontrollably.

‘Let me guess. Some sort of feline?’ She whispered to
Maelgwn once they were a safe distance away.
‘Homo dullogu,’ he enlightened her. ‘Remme is very
good natured, but his breed are often fairly shorttempered, especially the females.’
‘I’ll remember that,’ Tory mumbled, her attention
already diverted to a couple of men with huge brown
and black wings. These two were fluttering around the
top of another craft in the huge dock area, repairing it,
presumably.
One of them, having spotted Maelgwn, came
swooping over to address him, fluttering above them as
he spoke. ‘Greetings Dragon. Is this the little woman?’
‘Yes, indeed it is. Tory, I’d like you to meet Leander.’
Maelgwn did the honours. ‘Leander, this is Tory.’
‘Very nice,’ said Leander, ‘for a hairless ape, you
understand.’ He winked at Maelgwn, then looked back
to Tory. ‘I’m delighted to make your acquaintance.’ He
bowed his head, one hand over his heart in sincerity.
‘Likewise,’ said Tory, quite sure that Leander had
meant no offence by his comment. It seemed to be
more of a private joke between Maelgwn and himself.
‘And may I say you are very fine for a nearly featherless
bird —’
‘Falcon,’ Maelgwn whispered on the quiet.
‘Falcon …’ Tory was quick to correct her error.
‘I’ll bet you say that to all the Homo felemous,’
Leander flirted.
‘Oy, Leander,’ his friend yelled from the vessel they
were preparing. ‘Do you want to stop socialising and
help me fix this damn accelerator?’

‘Gotta go.’ He gave them a wave and flew back to
work.
The three of them exited the dock area through a
door that vanished upon their approach. It led into a
series of corridors, where they met others of all the
differing races Tory was becoming aware of. Maelgwn
seemed to know just about everybody in this sector of
the space station, and was obviously well liked and
respected. There was one other breed, however, that
had distinct differences to the rest. Maelgwn advised
that these people were of the Homo delphinus variety.
Bred from dolphins, they could be distinguished by their
webbed feet and hands. They were extremely good
natured and telepathic. Their skin was very smooth and
had a bluish tinge about it. Naturally, they were
excellent swimmers, and they had a blowhole on the
crown of their heads, as dolphins did, for breathing
underwater.
Maelgwn left Rose in the care of one of these
people — Dylan. A personal servant to the Lord
Marduk, Dylan had been sent to collect Rose and
guide her to his Lord’s Star Chamber.
The errand for his superior completed, Maelgwn’s
time was now his own. He turned to the stranger beside
him, unsure of where to start with her. If he’d been able
to calm himself, he might have been able to read Tory’s
thoughts. As it was, he was at the mercy of his instincts.
‘So, what shall we do? I could show you around. Or if
you’re hungry, we could get something to eat.’
Tory looked down the wide, arched corridor that,
consistent with everything else she’d seen, was a dark,

moulded, metallic structure. There were long, clear
sections inset along the walls, ceiling and floor that
allowed a subtle light to illuminate the infrastructure.
‘This is only the maintenance level of the ATEN,’
Maelgwn advised. ‘The rest of her is far more
spectacular.’
This was a tough call in Tory’s opinion. Should she
go exploring an advanced alien civilisation, or get laid
for the first time in forty years? ‘Mmm. It all sounds
wonderful, but I think I’d like to see your place first.’
She raised her eyebrows and awaited his reaction.
‘Really?’ Maelgwn suppressed his enthusiasm. ‘It’s a
bit of a hike from here. But, I could will us there … if
you like?’
‘Well, it does seem silly to walk all that way.’ She
played along, placing her hand in his.
Tory’s eyes remained fixed on her lover’s face. As the
ethers of their passage departed, she inquired if
Maelgwn lived alone.
‘Yes I do, as it happens, because —’
A long and luscious kiss, that shocked Maelgwn
slightly, interrupted his explanation. Still, he was only
stunned that his aspirations were being fulfilled sooner
than he’d hoped — or so he thought.
Tory let go of him just as abruptly as she’d taken
hold. ‘So, this is where you’ve been hanging out all this
time?’ She made polite conversation, as though her
emotional outpouring had never taken place. She gazed
about his chambers, seeing nothing of how aesthetically
pleasing the design was, nor how amazing and

functional the furnishings were. In her mind she was
still hugged close to his body, reeling at his touch, his
scent, his taste.
He took up her hand gently and tugged her back
into his embrace. Maelgwn pressed her body to his, to
let her know that she was not the only one who was
eager. ‘Time spent here is time spent missing you.’
‘Not any more,’ she smiled.
In that instant, the years of separation melted away
and they allowed their long forbidden affection to flow
freely and easily between each other.
‘This is not how I planned it,’ Maelgwn said,
struggling to remove the skin-hugging jacket of his
flight suit. Tory was making it twice as difficult for him
as she caressed the smooth skin of his exposed torso
with her fingers and her lips. ‘I promised myself that I’d
at least take you to dinner. You know, in a token stab at
romance?’
‘This is romantic,’ she whispered, kissing his mouth
to silence him.
Given leave, Maelgwn carried her over to his bed
and laid her down. The lighting dimmed, and a
haunting tune began to waft softly through the room.
Beneath her body his bed felt as soft as air itself, yet it
cushioned their weight as they quickly dispensed with
the remainder of their clothes. Tory laid back to
welcome Maelgwn’s naked body to hers. It was then she
noticed that the bed-head was a huge circular window.
It curved over their heads following the shape of the
external structure and gave views of the Earth, the
Moon and the great expanse of space. She looked back

at Maelgwn, who had not come upon her as expected.
All she could make out was a dark silhouette, standing
quietly in the shadows beyond the bed. ‘Am I raising
your expectations, Commander?’ she asked playfully, the
subtle movements of her body urging him forth.
In Tory’s beauteous form, bathed by the blue light of
the moon, Maelgwn saw both his greatest desire and
greatest fear unfolding. The latter he’d been sure he
could deny, but now that it came down to it, the horror
recollections were flooding back.
‘Maelgwn?’ Tory queried his restraint.
‘You’ll have to go easy on me. It’s been awhile.’
Maelgwn bowed his head forward to smother his sudden
feelings of hurt, guilt and loathing.
Though Tory could not see Maelgwn’s expression
underneath his long, straight hair, she sensed his
dismay. She ignored her scattered emotions in an
attempt to bethink the problem from him, but no
images would come. Whatever it was that taunted him
was being blocked out with all the might he could
master. When he turned away from her, Tory knew
there was something seriously wrong. He’d never been
fearful, not like this. As she sat up, her mind turned to
the one event that had happened during their
separation that could have caused him so much damage.
‘Do you want to tell me about Inanna, Maelgwn?’ She
nearly choked on the words, so afraid he was going to
tell her that he was having an affair with that Goddess.
His hesitancy to answer was even more alarming, so
Tory thought she’d best put them both out of their
misery. ‘Are you in love with her?’

‘No,’ he stated, surely. ‘I despise her more than any
creature I have ever encountered, for she is by far the
most wretched.’
‘What did she do?’ Tory leaned towards him in a
desperate attempt to reach him, but he drew away
beyond her reach. ‘To hate someone with such intensity,
is —’
‘A drain on my energy. I know!’ Maelgwn pulled on
a loose-fitting pair of trousers and seated himself in a
large hanging chair that faced the bed. ‘I’ve had all
manner of spiritual tutors in my head trying to put
straight what Inanna messed up in there, and the truth
is, telling you is the only thing that promises to be of
any help whatsoever.’
‘I’m here to help.’ Tory pulled one of the bed covers
around herself and awarded him her full attention, at
which time he became warier.
‘Even now I am wondering if it is really you I’m
addressing, Tory.’ he stated in all seriousness. ‘Even
though I came and got you myself, Inanna could have
got to you first.’
‘She tried —’ Tory began.
But Maelgwn raised a hand to prevent her from
trying to convince him. ‘Please, I just need you to
listen.’ Tory nodded for him to continue, and he did so
without delay. He’d dreaded this conversation for so
long that all he wanted now was to get it over and done
with before his fears drove him insane.
So she listened, with mounting horror, to how Inanna
had tested out the stolen prototype of the NERGUZ on
Maelgwn. Using the power of suggestion that the module

gave her over her captive, she had instructed Maelgwn to
see her as his beloved wife. She’d raped him several times
before her desire for him to love her in her own form
brought the affair to a grinding halt. No amount of
seduction or torment could sway his resolve once he’d
learned of the deceit. This infuriated the Goddess; if he
didn’t love her, then she would to see to it that he loved
no one. Inanna used Tory’s image when torturing
Maelgwn and, due to the number of mindlessly violent
acts he’d witnessed her commit, the Goddess had done
her best to tarnish the memory of his wife forever.
When Maelgwn seemed finally out of words, Tory
felt as though she’d been cursed; she had been! Now she
understood why Maelgwn hadn’t visited her more than
once. The sight of her must have induced the most
vivid memories of his harrowing ordeal. Tory swallowed
back her tears, and slid off the bed to find her clothes.
‘I knew she wasn’t you, Tory, but still —’
‘You couldn’t have resisted her Maelgwn. I am well
aware of how the NERGUZ works. Your entire being
would have believed whatever she wanted you to
believe. And now, without the module, you remember
the truth of it, as if those decisions and thoughts had
been your own.’ It was a horrid form of torment. Tory
paused from dressing, overcome by nausea and sadness.
After all this time apart, the Gods had found a way to
destroy even this moment for them. ‘I am only sorry
that I am unable to be of any comfort to you, as Inanna
has obviously made me your worst nightmare.’
‘None of this is your fault.’ Maelgwn came near to
her, though he paused short of touching her.

‘Still,’ Tory smiled meekly, having noticed his
attempt at contact and his overpowering reluctance to
make it, ‘I blame myself anyway, for entrusting our lives
to outside forces for so long.’
As she pulled on her trousers and fastened her belt,
Tory had that going-into-combat look about her, and
that was a worry. ‘Tory. Please, don’t do anything rash.
Tell me what you’re thinking. I really need to hear it.’
‘I’m thinking … that I want to hate that bitch for
what she has done to us.’ Tory pulled on one of her boots
and, with a mixture of determination and frustration,
laced it up. ‘But I also know that hate will not take away
the doubts she has forced upon you, nor will it change
the crux of the problem. Which is,’ her head shot up,
and her eyes were bulging from her burst of clarity,
‘Dumuzi. Yes!’ She was suddenly excited, drawn into the
scenario unfolding in her mind. ‘Remove the prime
motivation, and the rules of this game will change.’
Dumuzi’s disappearance had taken place the last
time the Nefilim were frequenting the Earth. She knew
Inanna believed Dumuzi had been dismembered and
hidden by Marduk. ‘Find Dumuzi and Inanna can have
her lover back. This would, in theory, give her nothing
more to war about. Plus, we could establish my
grandfather’s innocence in regard to Dumuzi’s murder.’
She looked back to Maelgwn to catch his response, and
found him looking astounded, and quietly pleased.
‘You asked me earlier why I needed to bide my time
in this region of space before the arrival of Shamash’s
forces. It is because it has fallen to me to find Dumuzi
and, as you say, prove the Lord Marduk’s innocence.’

This was a stroke of luck by Tory’s reckoning, as she
wasn’t going to have to con him into aiding her with
the search. ‘So Shamash has taken up his sister’s cause, I
assume, and is opposing my grandfather?’
‘So he would like it to seem,’ Maelgwn scoffed in
frustration. ‘In truth, it is Shamash who has the greatest
motive for getting rid of Dumuzi. Before Inanna’s
marriage, Shamash had been his twin sister’s regular
lover and was most put out when she wed another.’
‘I know,’ she grinned, confident of gaining the upper
hand. If she could endeavour to solve the bulk of the
Nefilim’s disputes, then perhaps the war at the
prophesied Gathering might be avoided altogether.
Clearly, they needed Dumuzi as bargaining power and
Tory did not expect that obtaining him would be easy.
Dumuzi’s true attacker had kept his or her identity and
the victim’s location a secret for eons, and probably
planned to keep it that way.
‘I know what you’re thinking, Tory, and I have to
say I love you for it.’ Maelgwn gripped hold of her hand
and squeezed it tight.
‘Well, it’s clear that you will have trouble relaxing
with me until this matter has been laid to rest and you
know it cannot come back to haunt you.’ She let go his
hand to put on her other boot. ‘I can see no point in
sitting around here moping about it, so we may as well
get on the case.’
Maelgwn watched as she finished preparing herself
to depart, and her resolute manner was breaking his
heart. She did not attempt to place blame, burst into
hysterics, or begin plotting her revenge. Instead, she

calmly went about doing whatever it took to right the
situation; this was Tory, there was no doubt in his mind.
‘You don’t have to come with me,’ she offered,
noting Maelgwn hadn’t budged. ‘I can do this alone.’
‘I vowed to myself that once we were reunited we
would never be separated again.’ Maelgwn gathered up
his flight suit to get changed, and then paused to look at
his wife. He was sorry now that he’d doubted and
disappointed her. ‘We don’t have to leave right away.’
Though Tory noted that familiar glint in his eye,
she knew that if she rushed him, it might disappear just
as quickly. ‘We have forever,’ she smiled and shrugged,
seeing this as a way to tease him out of his dilemma.
‘Why rush?’
Half of Maelgwn appreciated her patience and
understanding. The other half cursed that he’d denied
himself the chance to love and trust her.
The ATEN, one-third the mass of Earth’s moon, was
one huge city. Long observation walkways connected
the outer buildings to the inner structure.
Tory observed the various flying craft beyond the
transparent domed ceiling of the observation bridge
that they were crossing, when she spotted a male of the
falcon breed. Unlike Leander, this Homo felemous was
zooming along in an enclosed vessel and Tory had to
wonder why he wasn’t using his God-given attributes to
transport himself. ‘Do any of the other human races
have the immortal gene?’
‘No, Homo sapiens are pretty much unique in that
sense. Enlil and his clan would never have known about

us either, if Inanna hadn’t captured me and discovered
my everlasting capabilities. There are a few exceptions
among the other races that your great-grandfather and
his kin have set apart as Chosen, like Hero and Thais
for example. Even so, those of the other breeds who live
here on the ATEN have an extraordinarily long lifespan
anyway, as they have no real concept of time.’
‘So that’s why there’s such a big interest in this
sector of space all of a sudden.’ Tory was still dwelling
on the first part of Maelgwn’s reply to her question.
‘The Nefilim are heading this way to see how out of
control the immortal problem has become on Earth.
And, in light of this new investigation, there’s a chance
that a tonne of dirt from the distant past could be
dredged up in the process.’
‘Indeed.’ Maelgwn marvelled at her perceptiveness.
‘But it was bound to happen, sooner or later. The
prophecy of the Gathering, when the Gods would
return to sit in judgment on mankind, was also
inevitable.’
They entered a large multi-level structure. Maelgwn
explained it to be the main technological centre of the
ATEN. ‘The Lord Gibal works out of here, and your
grandfather advised that Gibal could head me in the
right direction to begin the search for Dumuzi.’
‘So, you finally put all Gibal’s parts back together
again.’ Tory assumed this must have happened if the
God was returned to his work.
‘Not exactly …’ Maelgwn paused in a quiet corner
to explain. ‘By the time I found the all-important head,
we had no time to recover the parts still missing.’

‘What?’ Tory stepped away in horror. ‘He’s nothing
more than a head!’
‘We needed his mind to make the wormhole
happen. It is a new and experimental technology, using
antigravity, which he developed. If we’d mucked around
finding his other parts first we would never have beat
Shamash here. They were counting on Gibal’s
dismemberment to delay us longer than it did … I got
lucky. I found his head early in the search.’
‘But you said he was working here?’ Tory tried to
refrain from being amused by the notion. ‘How does
Gibal function with just a head?’
‘Ah?’ Maelgwn continued down the corridor
towards the double doors at the end, turning briefly to
urge her to follow.
The doors vanished before them, and Maelgwn
led Tory into a huge chamber containing
technological equipment of mammoth proportions.
The layout of the machinery was not in any way
orderly to the untrained eye. In fact, it just looked
like piles and piles of matted, twisted junk and
wiring. But the apparatus had the familiar hum of
processors at work. High above their heads, the arms
of a huge metal spider reached down to tend the
differing areas of circuitry in the room. A long, steel
shaft extended down from the spider’s belly to a
platform. On the platform was a mound, on the
mound, a head, and on the head was a helmet. The
headgear encompassed the controller’s eyes and
connected him, via the long shaft, back up to the
maintenance arms above.

‘It is all psychokinetically controlled,’ Maelgwn
whispered to his awed companion. ‘Gibal sees all
through his machines, just as he always has.’
‘Greetings, Dragon.’ A pleasant voice resounded
round the room. ‘Marduk said I could expect you. He
failed to mention your beautiful companion, however.’
‘I am Tory Alexander, your brother’s granddaughter, or Lamamu, as he insists on calling me.’ She
looked about her, unsure from which direction Gibal
was viewing them.
‘I see you from all angles,’ he advised. ‘I know why
you have come, and as I now have a vested interest in
your negotiations with Inanna, I shall tell you my
theory as to what became of my baby brother.’
‘Have no fear my Lord Gibal. I shall persuade
Inanna to return your missing portions, whether or not
your theory proves correct.’
‘That’s what I like about you, Dragon. Always
straight to the point.’
Maelgwn bowed his head to accept the compliment,
but said nothing more as he awaited Gibal’s summation.
‘It is my guess that Shamash’s father, Narnar, may
have aided his son with Dumuzi’s disappearance. Narnar
had already been banished to the Otherworld of your
world’s moon before Dumuzi mysteriously vanished.
Therefore, Narnar had nothing to lose by aiding his son.’
But he might have had something to gain? Tory posed
on the quiet, wondering what Shamash might have
offered his father in return for storing Dumuzi’s body.
‘May I know why Narnar was banished?’ she asked.
‘It was discovered by his wife, Ningal, that Narnar

had forced himself on many of her female staff. Rape is
a most grievous offence by our laws, Lamamu, deserving
the punishment of banishment or dismemberment.’
Gibal sounded a tad bitter about the latter.
‘Nice,’ Tory commented. She could hardly wait to
meet the fellow. ‘So, Narnar is still to be found in the
Otherworldly realms of the moon then?’
‘Oh yes,’ Gibal assured her. ‘He is still brooding
there, waiting for the time when Ningal will forgive,
and return for him.’
‘Is Ningal with you,’ Tory excitedly entreated
Maelgwn.
‘Unfortunately, no, she is back on her home planet
of Tarazean in the Sirius system,’ he regretfully replied.
‘She has not yet forgiven her husband it would seem.
The Nefilim really know how to hold a grudge.’
‘Especially the females,’ added Gibal.
‘So how do we find the entrance to Narnar’s
Otherworldly realm?’ Tory was not too familiar with the
moon’s surface, so she had little chance of just willing
herself there.
‘On the moon there is a crater, in that crater a cave.
Follow it.’
A red light flickered and then materialised as a
small ball before them. Its abrupt appearance startled
Tory, though Maelgwn didn’t bat an eyelid. He stood
observing the face of the rotating holographic moon,
studying the craters until their proposed destination lit
up in blue.
‘I see,’ Maelgwn acknowledged, spotting the hole in
the crater wall inside the designated area.

‘I have already programmed the coordinates into
your transport, Dragon. May the universe speed your
quest and safe return to us.’
‘Many thanks for your time, my Lord.’ Maelgwn
waved as he retreated to the door, and Tory followed his
lead.
‘Just let me know if I can be of any further
assistance.’ Gibal went back about his business.
Their transport awaited them at Maintenance Level
Dock Seven, so Maelgwn got Tory geared up in a flight
suit in the adjoining suiting station.
‘What is this stuff. It feels kind of funky.’ Tory had
trouble adjusting to the feel of the fabric, which hugged
and moved with her body like a second skin. It was
made of a rubbery, leather substance, that allowed the
body to breathe whilst keeping it just warm enough.
‘It’s living organic fibre,’ Maelgwn began.
‘It’s growing on me?’ Tory was horrified.
‘It’s protecting you, and it repairs itself.’ He
explained the nature of the invention. ‘It expands and
contracts with the prevailing conditions, acting like a
protective outer layer. Likewise, the boots will protect
your feet, and keep them at a pleasant temperature no
matter what extremes you may be trudging through.’
By the time they were space-borne Tory was used to
the suit and forgot about it. The scenery out here in the
solar system was totally awe-inspiring, and she decided
that she could really get used to this intergalactic lifestyle.
Their vessel steered well clear of the moon’s
populated areas, heading them into a vast, grey desert of

craters. Here they descended and slowed as if they were
to land. But their craft kept moving, or rather, creeping,
towards a huge cavern that was situated at the base of
one of the larger craters.
‘You’re taking the ship in there?’ Tory squirmed in
her seat.
‘Sure,’ Maelgwn acknowledged cheerfully, ‘unless
you’d rather get out and walk?’
After observing the great boulders strewn over the
cavern floor, Tory frowned. ‘I think I’ll pass.’
At this point, they lost the natural sunlight. The
pilot’s headset automatically extended from the ceiling,
and Maelgwn made himself comfortable in his seat to
view the dark world outside.
‘What do you see?’ Tory was uncomfortable with
flying into blackness. ‘Hasn’t this thing got lights?’
‘Then the inferred vision wouldn’t work, and
everyone would see us coming,’ he grinned, maintaining
his visual advantage. ‘O-oh.’ He slammed his left hand
onto the control plate, and clutched the joystick in his
right fist. ‘Brace yourself,’ he warned, calmly.
‘Do you want to be more specific?’ Tory looked at the
blackened windscreen in a useless attempt to be
enlightened. That’s when she noticed the craft begin to
tilt. ‘What are you doing? Whoa …’ In the next instant
she was upside down heading headlong into a downward
spiral, and in a dark rocky cavern, she knew that wasn’t
good. ‘Is this really necessary? Can’t you stop it?’
Maelgwn let go of the controls altogether, his
headset retracting, and still the swirling, diving motion
of the craft continued. ‘I’m not driving any more. It’s a

magnetic tracking system in the tunnel. It’s pulling us
along.’
‘Hopefully not into a dead end?’ Tory forced a smile
and closed her eyes. She gulped down her fear, and her
urge to be sick subsided. The ride seemed to be getting
easier, and when their craft swerved out of the final
bend the flaming torches of a great stone palace lit the
way to Narnar.
It was a cold, bleak-looking structure — a ziggurat.
The ancient dwelling would have appeared completely
abandoned, if not for the torches burning brightly up
either side of the entrance stairs.
Tory stood staring up at the palace, thinking it not
too inviting with its stony gargoyles perched all over the
place like a silent army ready to strike.
Maelgwn dispensed with their transport by aiming
the module he was wearing at the craft. It decomposed,
at his word, into light matter and was sucked back into
the storage module. ‘Come on.’ He held a hand out to
Tory, who took it gladly.
They strode up the stairs to the opening on the first
level of the ziggurat. A long, wide stone passage led into
the belly of the structure. Torches lined the walls to
light their way. Between each torch was a pillar, and on
each pillar was a gargoyle. These winged, spindlylimbed creatures struck a variety of poses, and were the
very image of little devils, though they were as grey as
the stone they were carved from.
‘Narnar really has a thing for these little guys, hasn’t
he?’ Tory observed the statues as she passed them by,
feeling that they were observing her just as closely.

‘What was that?’ Tory paused to listen. ‘I could have
sworn I heard a whistle.’ She placed both hands on her
hips, accusingly, looking to the gargoyle she had just
passed.
The sound of devilish laughter began to emanate
from the carvings and echo round the chamber.
‘You’re brave,’ the accused statue turned its head to
address Maelgwn, ‘bringing a woman down here.’
Suddenly all the creatures broke from their poses,
and fell about laughing on their pedestals.
‘In fact, I’d say you’re brave coming down here —
period!’ The troublesome creature sprang onto
Maelgwn’s back, screaming with laughter as he yanked
at his hair.
‘Oy.’ Tory drew the attention of the whole swarm
when she dangled a ring on a chain in the attacking
creature’s face. These little fellows were of your basic
variety of Earth elemental, which meant they had a real
fetish for trinkets of precious metal.
‘Ah!’ The stony demon grabbed for the jewel.
‘Not so fast!’ Tory quickly withdrew the item. ‘Take
us to Narnar, and I shall give this to you as payment.’
All the little beasts screeched with laughter again.
‘What if I just took it anyway?’ The creature leant
over Maelgwn’s shoulder to call her bluff.
‘What if I just wring your neck?’ Maelgwn raked the
critter off his back, but it had vanished before he got a
chance to finish the job.
‘Deal.’ The demon reappeared between Maelgwn’s
shoulder blades, near startling the life out of him. ‘I’ll
take you to Narnar. But I expect payment despite his

reaction.’ It vanished again before Maelgwn could hit it,
and then materialised further down the passage. ‘This
way.’ He flew off ahead, his buddies resuming their
motionless forms.
The creature led them through a labyrinth of
passages and stairs, until they came to a grand central
chamber. A masked warrior sat playing cards with
hordes of the stony, grey devils.
Their guide did an about-face, and demanded
payment with a whistle and a click of his fingers.
Where have you been, Tobit? Narnar inquired of their
guide.
‘Wait.’ Tory went after Tobit, having handed over
the ring as promised. ‘You were sent to get us?’
A devilish grin consumed the creature’s face, but
before he could nod, Narnar stood, enraged.
How dare you bring a female here! I have banned the
foul creatures from this place.
Maelgwn restrained his wife, clamping a hand over
her mouth to withhold her fiery protest. ‘I do apologise,
my Lord, I did not realise —’
It’s too late now, Narnar interrupted him to
announce. You’ll have to fight me for her.
‘Pardon me, my Lord, but I was under the
impression you didn’t want her here.’
I don’t. If I win, I shall kill her.
The stony beasts all seemed to like that idea.
‘Pardon again, my Lord, but she is immortal, you
cannot kill her.’
There was an almighty gasp as all present drew back
in reverence, and Narnar changed his tune.

You are Gods? Narnar assumed.
Maelgwn nodded, sensing it was the safest way to
plead, when Tory elbowed him in the ribs and he was
forced to free her.
‘We have come in search of the Lord Dumuzi.’ She
strolled forward to confront the huge warrior. ‘You can
name your price if you know of his whereabouts?’
I don’t like females of any breed! Narnar leaned
forward to impress his words on Tory, his huge form
towering over her.
‘Ah …’ Maelgwn intervened on cue, pulling Tory
back out of the way. ‘If it pleases my Lord, you may deal
with me.’
In whose name do you seek Dumuzi? Narnar lowered
himself back into his throne, as Tory held her tongue
and remained in the background.
‘The Lord Marduk wishes to prove his innocence in
the affair of his brother’s disappearance.’ Maelgwn
decided honesty was the best policy, despite the fact
that Narnar belonged to the house of Enlil and was not
of the Serpent’s clan.
Does he now. Narnar gave half a laugh. And it would
serve that lying maggot, Shamash, right, if he did.
‘But Shamash is your son, Sire,’ Maelgwn reminded
him, just to see what kind of a reaction he’d get.
Not any more he isn’t! The warrior was back on his feet
and fuming. He broke his vow to me! Narnar brought his
fist down on the card table, smashing it in two, whereby
all his fellow players threw in their cards, disappointed.
‘Perhaps I could succeed where Shamash has failed
you?’ Maelgwn’s suggestion brought the God’s flight of

anger to an abrupt end. ‘What is the vow of which you
speak?’
All the creatures burst into giggles, which they
immediately suppressed as Narnar took offence.
Silence! Begone, he ordered, and it was so. Well, he
grumbled, once they were alone. It is a matter of some
delicacy. Narnar motioned Maelgwn closer so he could
privately speak of his dilemma, keeping a watchful eye
on Tory all the while. She folded her arms, rolling her
eyes at their boyish behaviour.
After a short time, Maelgwn stepped away from
Narnar. ‘Well, I have a little experience with this,’
Maelgwn commented, trying not to look as affected by
what he’d learnt as he obviously was.
That’s females for you. Narnar’s gaze was fixed on
Tory, and she felt he was begging for a fight. They’re
merciless enchantresses, every one of them.
‘Oh great.’ She threw her hands in the air. That was
exactly what Maelgwn didn’t need to hear right now.
But she paced out her frustration, and took the matter
no further.
‘So if I was to return your …’ Maelgwn searched for
a subtle word for it, ‘property, are you in a position to
hand over Dumuzi to me?’
Hands, legs, and the rest of his body parts. I will hand
them over gladly for this item. His business done, Narnar
returned to his throne. The card table righted itself and
the cards fluttered up and into a neat pile, ready to play.
I hope Shamash rots in hell, just as I have. Narnar leaned
forward and dealt the cards, whereby his Otherworldly
playing partners returned to the game.

Maelgwn backed out graciously, and made his way
past Tory towards the door.
‘You’re going to take his word that he knows where
Dumuzi is?’ She ran to catch up with Maelgwn.
‘What choice do we have?’
‘But I don’t understand. What’s this item he wants?’
‘I’ll tell you once we’re out of here.’
As it turned out, Narnar’s lost property was his penis
and matching genitalia; his wife had cut it off before his
banishment and kept it as a memento.
‘First Gibal’s brain, now Narnar’s genitals.’ Tory
couldn’t resist the urge to laugh. ‘Have you ever thought
of taking headhunting up professionally?’
‘Tory, please, it’s no laughing matter,’ Maelgwn
struggled to keep a straight face. ‘Especially when
Ningal is back through the wormhole on Tarazean.’
‘To the Sirius system, then,’ Tory announced, as
their craft came screaming out of the cavern to skim
across the moon’s surface.
‘And don’t spare the horses,’ Maelgwn added,
activating his headset to request that Gibal plot them a
course.

26
UNITE

T

he churning clouds of dust and wind that
constantly plagued the Middle East made for
poor visibility.
Candace had been instructed by the Lord Marduk
to investigate this region and report on any activity
taking place there. Due to the annihilation of all life in
the Middle East some seventeen years before, most at
Watarrka fully expected her mission to be a noneventful one.
To their surprise, they discovered that on the barren
desert floor was a huge structure — the excavation went
for miles.
‘What the hell is that?’ Rhun gaped at the massive
dig from inside the control deck of the Goddess.
‘It’s a landing pad,’ Season advised. ‘It has been
hidden on Earth since the Nefilim’s departure.’

‘Then it’s just as we suspected,’ Noah commented.
‘The premature detonation of that bomb was no
accident.’
‘I’m going to take a closer look.’ Rhun vanished.
Brian, Candace, Robin and Boadicea went after
him.
‘What the hell.’ Floyd decided to get involved in
the heroics, not wanting to tarnish the brave image his
new lady friend had of him.
Everyone else stayed put to man the Goddess and
continue the air surveillance.
Rhun’s party watched all the activity at the site from
behind one of the huge mounds of earth that
surrounded the dig.
‘Jesus,’ uttered Brian, ‘looks like it only needs a bit
of a polish, before it will be alright to go.’
‘At least we know what’s been keeping Doc amused
all these years. I knew we should have been keeping an
eye on him.’ Rhun cursed under his breath.
‘No, Rhun, this is good.’ Candace whipped an ultrathin viewing mechanism from her belt and placed it
over her eyes. ‘We want Shamash to come here and
make himself at home.’
‘We do?’ This was news to Brian.
Candace nodded, though her viewing distracted her
from explaining further. ‘There’s something going on
down there.’ She dispensed with her device, pulling a
gun-like weapon from her thigh holster, the barrel
pulsating with light once she’d activated it. ‘It’s Talynn.’
She looked to Boadicea.

Boadicea immediately pulled out her weapon.
‘Cover us,’ she instructed Robin, following Candace
over the dirt mound.
‘What’s happening? Who’s Talynn?’ Brian implored
Robin, who had pulled out his weapon and nestled
himself into a comfortable firing position.
Robin took the viewer from his belt and attached it
to his gun. Its magnified sights helped him keep a close
eye on his comrades. ‘Talynn was one of the Dragon’s
original circle. A woman called Alma.’
‘I remember her,’ Rhun cut in.
Brian and Floyd were a little slower off the mark.
They both had recollections of their lifetime in
Gwynedd under the Dragon’s rule, but only fragmentary.
‘Sir Angus’ wife,’ Rhun prompted.
‘Oh yeah.’ Brian made the connection and nodded
in accord. ‘Blonde, blue eyed. Sweet little thing.’
‘Whatever became of Angus?’ Floyd wondered,
having several recollections of the knight.
‘He outlived you Tiernan, I mean Floyd,’ Rhun
shook his head. ‘Boy, this is weird.’
‘I know what you mean,’ Robin agreed. ‘I don’t
know by what name to call anyone.’
Rhun raised his binoculars to view the commotion.
‘What are they doing, anyhow? It looks like they’re
hauling a body.’
‘Ha — ha!’
Someone somersaulted over the earthen bank to
stand before them, and all weapons turned his way.
‘Greetings! You lot certainly took your time getting
here.’

Rhun recognised this man as his son and father-inlaw. Cadwell was the spitting image of Vortipor, High
King of the Britons between Maelgwn’s reign and
Rhun’s own. Which was not surprising, as Vortipor had
been Cadwell’s grandfather.
‘What’s wrong, little Dragon, has the past got your
tongue? Do you not recognise your own son?’ Cadwell
teased with a laugh.
‘Aye, all too well.’ Rhun moved to shake his hand.
‘This arsehole is your son?’ Brian lowered his
weapon. ‘Well, I suppose that figures.’
Candace, Boadicea, Neraida, and Talynn dragged a
fifth party over the earthen mound.
‘Neraida. What are you doing here?’ Brian recognised
her at once.
‘I live here,’ she replied, as they lay their
unconscious captive on the ground.
‘And who might this be?’ Brian referred to the
body.
‘He’s my son.’ Neraida bent down to check him
over. ‘I had to get him away from the Unken. I couldn’t
wait any longer.’ She pulled out an ENZU-GUZ to
disconnect him from the module’s influence. These
devices had been widely distributed to the underground
tribes following its invention.
Brian crouched beside Neraida, recalling what
Candace had said about his life as Alexander. ‘I don’t
remember any of it,’ he began, ‘but if in some past life I
caused you pain, I want to say that I’m very sorry.’
‘It was a necessary phase of history, I see that now.’
Neraida shrugged.

‘Hey, why don’t you apologise to me,’ Cadwell
invited Brian. ‘I’m the one you tied to a millstone and
threw in the sea.’
‘Yeah, but you probably deserved it,’ Brian jeered.
He looked at the face of the unconscious man. ‘It’s
Angus.’ He nearly passed out from the shock.
Rhun, Floyd and Robin rushed over to check for
themselves.
‘So it is,’ Robin confirmed with a light-hearted
chuckle.
‘I told you I’d find him.’ Talynn winked back at
Robin. ‘Hell, it looks like I found everyone!’ She saw so
many familiar faces amidst this crowd, some of whom
she had not seen in lifetimes.
Rhun backed away, seeing vivid images of his youth
when all the original members of the Dragon’s circle
had last been gathered in one place. ‘Masters of the
Goddess, you are all here.’
‘Yet the Dragon and our Sensei are still absent,’
Talynn noted.
‘They have another task to perform,’ Candace
advised. ‘But, Goddess permitting, they will join us
soon.’
Mongolia was graced by an unusual amount of
sunshine this winter. The only bad news was the
freezing gale force wind that blew across the barren
landscape. Autumn and summer brought fierce
thunder, lightning, heavy falls of snow, and hurricanes.
In spring, storms rose out of the Gobi Desert and
lasted for weeks at a time.

Doc had waited until late winter to make his trek
into the Hentiy Mountains. His party flew into Ulaan
Baatar, where they met up with an official escort who
were to guide them on horseback to their destination.
Doc did not need directions, however. He knew the
terrain like the back of his hand. If he’d been able to
pull off this quest alone, he would have popped in and
out of Mongolia and bypassed the Government
altogether. Unfortunately, he suspected he would need
labour, which was why he decided to make his trip
official. This meant dealing with the escort that the
Mongolian government arranged to accompany them
into the mountains, but better that than being caught
illegally digging up a communist state.
The official escort was not the threatening force
Doc had expected. The ICA team outnumbered the
seven middle to old-aged herdsmen by two to one.
These local men appeared surprisingly healthy and
unaffected by the radiation sickness that plagued the
rest of the world’s population. These folk were so
tanned and weather-worn from enduring the conditions
of their harsh climate that their tough immune system
was no doubt keeping them alive.
The same couldn’t be said for Rhiannon, however.
She hadn’t been well for months. Aged forty-one, she
still hadn’t experienced physical death and therefore
suffered the ailments of a mortal. Doc’s doctors had
detected the cancer that was slowly eating her brain
when Rhiannon first fell ill. But Doc’s relationship with
his wife hadn’t been the same since the Death Valley
earthquake disaster. Shamash’s constant lectures on how

Rhiannon would deceive Doc had succeeded in
brainwashing him. Somehow Shamash managed to
attribute every little misfortune to Rhiannon’s scheming.
The evidence became so overwhelming in the end, that
Doc believed her treachery was real. So, her illness
brought a timely opportunity to dispose of the problem;
she knew far too much about his operations.
Through involving her in his affairs, Doc had also
to a degree earned Rhiannon’s trust. When Doc advised
her that she was suffering from nothing more than a
passing virus, she believed him. The disease had
rendered her psychic abilities useless and the painkilling drugs his doctors were pumping her full of kept
her controllable and semi-delirious.
Doc had not told anyone what his little expedition
into Mongolia was all about; he knew Rhiannon would
be curious and insist on coming along.
It was true to say that Rhiannon had no idea of the
agonies this journey would expose her to. All she knew
was that Doc was up to something, and despite how she
felt she had to go with him.
The still morning air at Ulaan Baatar was absolutely
chilling, and though the sun shone brightly above,
Rhiannon felt nothing of its warming effects.
The herdsmen who awaited them with horses took
one look at Rhiannon and started waving their arms
about in protest.
‘What is it?’ she inquired of Doc, who spoke the
language like a local.
‘They say you are too frail to ride alone.’ He
appeared to be disappointed. ‘I’ve equipment that I

have to carry with me, as do my men. I’m afraid you’ll
have to stay behind. You need to rest.’
‘No,’ she insisted stubbornly, nearly passing out
where she stood. ‘I shall pay one of the herdsmen to
take me. Ask them to name a price.’
‘You’re being unreasonable —’
‘Just do it!’ she snapped.
‘Okay.’ Doc held both hands up in truce, struggling
to keep the smile from his face as he turned to consult
the herdsmen. He was enjoying toying with her and
watching her suffer; it was karma, or as he saw it, selfdefence.
It was one of the older herdsmen who stepped
forward to accept the offer. He bargained a damn good
price for the service too, demanding payment up front.
Fees settled and horses loaded, the party headed off
across the barren grassy plains towards the Hentiy
Mountains.
The old herdsman had seated Rhiannon in front of
him on the horse so that she could lean back against
him as they rode. She was thankful for the support, and
the time to rest. Her medication made her so drowsy
that she couldn’t feel the thumping pain in her head,
nor the biting cold wind. Her eyes were lulled closed
with the gentle rocking motion of the horse, and it was
only then that she noticed the sunlight on her face. This
is almost paradise, she decided on the quiet, as their
horse had fallen behind the rest of the party.
My dear girl, what has become of you?
It was Ray’s voice Rhiannon heard in her head, and
it brought tears to her eyes it was so clear. The drugs

were obviously playing havoc with her imagination, and
she refused to succumb.
What happened? he persisted. What did he do to
you?
It’s not what Doc did to me, Rhiannon answered in
her mind, as her thoughts drifted back to the day Ray
had been shot. I just stood there and watched Doc murder
you. At the time it meant nothing. It wasn’t until the effects
of the NERGUZ wore off that I realised you’d surely
perished that day. I couldn’t stop the contempt from growing
inside me after that, or the guilt.
No, you must let these feelings go. They are the root of
your disease. The nightmare will be over soon, Ray told
her. Your kin are coming for you.
Ray’s words were comforting, however imaginary.
So Rhiannon allowed his memory, and those of her
family and friends, to take her far away from her bleak
reality.
As a sigh of delight escaped his passenger’s lips, the
old herdsman looked down upon his charge and smiled
too.
The spinning, surging motion of their craft being shot
through a multi-coloured vortex in space at several
times the speed of light, was a heart-stopping
experience. Tory felt sure she didn’t drawn breath for
the entire duration of their ride through the wormhole,
which could have been minutes, hours, or days — the
event seemed endless at the time.
As they emerged out of the far side of the porthole,
their craft righted itself and slowed down.

‘That is such a rush!’ Maelgwn let loose a howl of
exhilaration. ‘Are you still with me?’
‘I … I, yes.’
Tory hazarded a laugh. Here she was in an entirely
new solar system, one that revolved around twin suns.
Tory could see these stars ahead, burning brightly in the
distant space, one vastly outshining the other.
‘You see that star over there.’ Maelgwn drew her
attention to the direction they’d just come from. ‘That’s
Apsu, your sun. I can spot it easily, as I have looked for
it often.’
‘I have been wondering about this place where you
have dwelt.’ Tory turned back to look ahead. ‘How long
till we reach Tarazean?’
‘As luck would have it, the planet’s current position
in orbit places her between us and her suns.’ As Tory
stared at him blankly, Maelgwn clarified. ‘Shouldn’t
take more than a couple of Earth hours.’
‘Is there a plan? I don’t suppose you know this
Ningal at all?’
‘Not really.’ Maelgwn shuddered to think what such
a woman would be like. ‘But considering she cut off her
husband’s private parts, I might let you do the talking
this time.’
Their craft flew itself with little guidance needed.
Tory and Maelgwn spent the next few hours discussing
what their friends might be up to back on Earth. They
told stories about their individual adventures during
their separation. Both carefully avoided the subject of
Maelgwn’s capture, though they knew it was an
underlying bone of contention.

By the time they were entering Tarazean’s distinctly
purple atmosphere, good conversation had swept away
any care they might have had.
His face sore from laughter, Maelgwn took a few
deep breaths. ‘I’ve missed this,’ he confessed, only
realising how much as the words left his mouth. ‘I see
you now for the person you truly are, Tory Alexander.
And just for the record … if I were again given the
chance to be intimate with you, I would not hesitate. I
just had to be sure.’
Naturally, for Tory it was a major relief to hear him
say so. ‘How long have we got before we land?’ she
queried innocently.
Her question was answered as the pilot’s headset
extended from the roof. Maelgwn shrugged apologetically.
The misty, purple cloud cover cleared and the dusky
sunset was alight with the most beautiful mauve hue.
Night lighting lit up a spectacular city that was nestled
in the side of a mountain with steep, rocky inclines
towering around it on three sides.
‘Gibal said Ningal would be expecting us,’ Maelgwn
informed Tory, heading them into the docking bay
entrance beneath the city.
The Goddess was expecting them alright. There was
a small army of officials waiting to greet them as they
landed.
Tory was surprised to consider that her surroundings
were not so unusual — for her first glimpse of an alien
nation. These people seemed to have all the same
creature comforts as humans did, and probably then
some. In fact, Ningal’s officials looked human.

‘They are,’ Maelgwn informed on the quiet. ‘This is
what became of the Mayan population.’
They were of similar build and features to the
Indian peoples of Central America, though their skin
was paler, perhaps due to the different climate of their
adopted planet. Tory was not given the chance to have
a proper look around, because they were immediately
escorted to a large, metal plate in the docking station.
Tory followed Maelgwn onto a designated section of the
floor, whereupon it lit up and they were instantaneously
transported to Ningal’s quarters.
‘So this is where Taliesin acquired his technology,’
Tory commented upon arrival.
‘What can I say. The Merlin has foresight.’ Maelgwn
spotted their hostess awaiting their attention at the far
end of the chamber, and so headed that way.
High, smoked glass walls sloped and met in the
centre of the ceiling, forty or so feet above them,
forming a long triangular room with spectacular views.
Outside, the cliff wall towered to the left of them and
on the right, the twin suns set over the canyon. The
floor was laid with large tiles, smooth as marble, but
reflective and purple in colour. The chamber was
sparsely furnished with a lounge here and there, a table,
a work of art, or an unusual plant. Much like their
hostess, the decor was breathtakingly simplistic.
Ningal was seven foot tall and as slender as a waif.
Her short, black hair accentuated her milky-white skin,
her pixie-like features, and her luscious, blue-painted
lips. Her large almond shaped eyes of deep violet had
whites that were so brilliant light appeared to beam

from them. Her long, white dress hugged her slender
shape and trailed off behind her.
I am told you have just come from visiting my husband?
She directed the query at Tory.
But the shock of Ningal’s surpassing beauty caused
Maelgwn to speak out of turn, for he now believed he
knew what she needed to hear. ‘We have, Nin, and he
misses —’
I asked Lamamu. She used Tory’s Atlantean name,
though Ningal had not learnt this via a formal
introduction. How is dear Narnar, in your opinion?
‘Well, Nin …’ Tory considered her true impression,
‘he’s coming apart.’ The Goddess began to chuckle at
this, so Tory added, ‘No pun intended.’
You may stay, she held her hands to her heart,
delighted. I have had quarters prepared for you, Dragon.
You may retire to them for now.
‘As you wish, Nin.’ Maelgwn was a little offended by
her dismissal. ‘But we are running on a rather tight
schedule —’
I am fully aware of how much time you have. Ningal’s
eyes turned stormy, and then immediately calmed. But
as we are expecting a sandstorm, I am afraid you shall be
my guest until at least tomorrow morning.
‘In that case,’ Maelgwn bowed slightly in leaving, ‘I
hope to make your acquaintance again, sometime before
then.’
Mmmm. Rather charming, really, Ningal commented,
once Maelgwn had returned to the transporter plate and
left. It’s a pity my venomous daughter got to him. She has a
knack for ruining the very best in men. Ningal shook her

head and looked back to Tory. And why have you not
healed his pain, Lamamu?
It took Tory a moment to find her voice. ‘Sorry?’
He craves your love terribly. He needs you to soothe
away the dreadful images that Inanna implanted in his
mind.
Tory decided to go on the offensive herself. ‘And
what of your husband’s pain, Ningal?’ The Goddess
looked set to fly into a rage, but Tory persisted to plea
Narnar’s case regardless. ‘I feel sure that Narnar is not
the same man you condemned … but rather a faint,
mad shadow of that warrior. If it was your desire to cut
him down to size when you seized his manhood, then I
would say you have well succeeded.’
He is mad, you say? Insane? Ningal inquired,
sounding almost concerned.
‘Your husband has been playing cards with stone
deva gargoyles for thousands of years, without so much
as being able to scratch his balls.’ Tory held up both
hands in supplication. ‘How long do you think that
kind of lifestyle can be healthy for him?’
A fair point, Ningal conceded.
‘If you are not going to fetch him off that rock, then
at least allow me to return his missing parts.’
Half a solution still leaves half the problem to fester.
The dulcet tones of Keridwen’s voice resounded round
the massive chamber.
Tory and Ningal were stunned into silence by the
unexpected interruption. They bowed their heads in
reverence to the Goddess as she manifested before them
in a blaze of misty light.

Keridwen had the same pixie-like features as her
niece, but her long hair shimmered with silver and her
presence exuded the life-force of an enlightened soul.
Ninharsag, I am deeply honoured by this visit. Ningal
lifted her head, even more overwhelmed than Tory was
to see the wise woman. Is there something you require of
me?
Indeed, Ningal … it is time for Narnar to resume his
rightful place in the Pantheon of Twelve. But his peers will
only forgive him and welcome him home if you do.
Therefore, I would ask you to accompany Lamamu to
DUG-GA-E, to return what you took from Narnar.
Sensing how unfair Ningal thought the request to be,
Keridwen smiled. I know you still love him, Ningal, and,
furthermore, he still loves you. Why fear and delay the one
and only act that can bring you true peace and happiness.
Ningal looked down at the ground. She could not
deny the truth of her aunt’s claim. Despite her
husband’s faults, she missed him terribly. Lately, all her
fond memories of Narnar had begun to replace the notso-pleasant ones. The only reason Ningal had delayed
his release was because of a fear that her husband would
despise her for waiting so long. You are right, Aunt. It is
high time I faced my fear and forgave him. Ningal looked
to Keridwen, longing to believe her nightmare would
come to a happy end. But dare I believe that his time in
isolation has changed Narnar’s contempt of women so much
that he will now treat me, and all women, with the respect
he always should have afforded us?
Tory was a little worried at this point, recalling how
Narnar had reacted to her presence.

Ningal, my dear child. During Narnar’s banishment he
has realised the error of his ways, Keridwen assured her.
You are the only woman who ever truly held his favour, and
by going with Lamamu and setting Narnar free, you will
redeem his faith in women.
Ningal ventured a smile, and nodded to confirm she
would do as suggested.
Tory was pleased by Ningal’s decision, but said
nothing as Keridwen turned her large green-grey eyes
Tory’s way.
Lamamu, I wish to apologise for the trouble my kin have
caused you, and I assure you that all shall be amended very
soon.
Ningal’s spirits were high and a generous
mood overtook her. I feel sure that I can assist
Lamamu in amending some of the damage done her by my
daughter.
Tory moved to decline the offer, wary of pushing
Maelgwn into an uncomfortable predicament. ‘But you
have both already been more than enough help to our
cause, I —’
Do not fear, child, Keridwen interrupted, knowing
Tory’s mind. You have been studying the ancient texts of
your planet, so consider Ningal’s acclaimed talents … she
has experience and expertise in such matters.
Ningal had been revered as the saviour Goddess of
the soul, and had had a reputation for wisdom and
grace. Tory thought that perhaps she could be of some
aid. ‘When you put it that way, it would be foolish not
to accept.’
It is the very least we can do, Keridwen said.

Ah, Dragon. There you are. Ningal swept into the
chamber where Maelgwn was pacing, and he ceased his
frustrated movement.
‘Yes, Nin.’ He gave a slight bow. ‘I am right here,
where you put me.’
Could you find nothing to entertain you? Ningal
completely ignored his sarcasm, and neared Maelgwn to
place a hand upon his cheek.
Overwhelmed by her amorous mood, the warrior
king was struck dumb.
Well then, we shall have to see if we cannot devise
something for your amusement.
The next moment they were in a lush, forest garden,
alive with colour and as tranquil as paradise. ‘Where
have you brought me?’ Maelgwn became a mite
uncomfortable — Ningal was Inanna’s mother, after all.
These are my private gardens, she told him, her
emphasis on the ‘private’. And they are yours to explore.
That sultry tone in her voice was a worry —
Maelgwn backed up a step. ‘Where is my wife, Ningal?’
Oh, I am sure you will find her around here …
somewhere. The Goddess looked around, and then
unexpectedly vanished.
‘A-huh.’ Maelgwn cocked an eye, sensing there was
a game afoot.
The rooftop garden was a huge greenhouse that, at
night, was internally and externally lit. Outside, the
lights were much brighter to highlight the swirling
purple sands that came with the raging desert storms
that often plagued the city. Inside, the lighting was
used to add atmosphere or to light a beautiful sculpture,

the exquisite plants or the gushing fountains and
waterfalls.
Maelgwn turned in circles, wondering which way to
go, when music came wafting along to guide him.
‘Albinoni,’ he smiled, heading down the garden path in
the direction from which the tune beckoned. It had
been Tory who had first introduced him to the works of
this early seventeenth century composer. This particular
concerto for violin, when played allegro, was a joyous
piece with a hint of mischief. The music spurred
Maelgwn on; it stirred memories of striking clarity, of
the life and times he and Tory had had together in
Gwynedd. It was as if he had locked away the precious
images for safe-keeping, and through music Tory had
found the key to unlock that sacred place.
A pond, alight with numerous floating candles,
brought the trail to an end. On the far bank Tory was
seated amid a picnic dinner, wearing the dress she
always wore in his dreams.
‘It is a superb rendition of this piece,’ he
commented across the water to her.
‘Why, thank you.’ Tory stood and approached the
water’s edge. ‘Ningal recorded it from my memory, upon
which it is eternally etched.’
The Albinoni concerto ended abruptly and a
soothing concerto played adagio replaced it.
‘You see, my lover, I figured that your problem is not
what you need to forget … but what you need to
remember.’
‘Aye, I do remember.’ Maelgwn’s eyes began to
water, but he pulled his emotions into line before they

got the better of him. ‘So, tell me. Am I to swim across
to you?’
‘Chivalrous,’ Tory judged, ‘but unnecessary. You
might prefer to take the maze.’ She motioned to the
large, thick patch of trimmed hedges that lined the
pond at the far end.
‘Not likely,’ he announced, proceeding to strip
down to his trousers. ‘I could be lost in there for hours.’
‘That’s the spirit.’ Tory cheered him on, unable to
believe he’d chosen the quicker, though more
inconvenient route; that had to say something about
the way he felt.
Maelgwn pulled off his second boot, and dived out
over the water. He never broke the surface, however,
just vanished in mid-dive.
‘Hey, that’s cheating.’ Tory turned to encounter
him.
‘I have dreamt of you in this dress, or rather in part
thereof, more times than I care to recall.’ Maelgwn slid
his hands around her waist to pull her close.
Tory was a little thrown by this sudden eagerness.
This kind of amorous behaviour was indicative of the
Maelgwn she remembered, but with the way he’d been
acting since they’d been reunited she had good reason
to wonder if she wasn’t being deceived by an impostor.
‘I told you I would not hesitate.’ He gently moved
Tory backwards, against the soft, mossy surface of a
nearby tree, and with a long, lingering kiss he put her
doubts concerning their love to rest.

27
RAISING THE DEAD

T

he mountain Doc sought was Burqan Qaldun,
although no one had called it by that name for
centuries. This was the source of the three great
rivers of the Kublia Khan: Orhon Gol, Tuul Gol and
Herlen Gol. High in the mist-swathed hills of this
place, an ancient tree marked the burial chamber of an
old cohort of Cadwaladr’s, named Temujin. No one but
Doc knew that they had camped for the night just a few
kilometres short of this burial ground. As far as the
locals knew this was a surveying trip. They were
completely unaware that come first light, their services
would no longer be required.
Whatever the herdsmen were feeding Rhiannon, it
was keeping her alive and kicking. This was fortunate
from Doc’s point of view. He had feared that his wife

was so weak that she might die and assume her
immortality before they arrived at their destination,
which would make the task of her disposal far more
difficult.
The old herdsman she’d hired to transport her was
particularly attentive to her needs. Besides cooking for
her and feeding her, he also made sure she was kept
warm. He pitched and dismantled her tent as required.
The old man brewed a tea-like substance especially for
Rhiannon, which kept the nausea caused by her
medication under control, and made for a much more
pleasant trip for all concerned.
‘Good value, these herdsmen,’ Doc commented to
Stanley, as they saddled up for the day.
‘Yeah. It’s a shame they wouldn’t take the modules
when we offered them,’ Stanley added. ‘Now we have to
leave them behind, and the little buggers are damn
useful when it comes to setting up camp.’
Once they were loaded up and ready to go, Doc had
Stanley rally together their guides. The old herdsman
lifted Rhiannon onto her mount before walking over to
join the assembly. She watched as Doc addressed the
locals, as he’d done every day before setting out.
But today, Stanley Brennon stood behind the
herdsmen and blasted them all to unconsciousness in
seconds with his treasured Stormer. ‘No!’ Rhiannon half
climbed, half fell off the horse. ‘What are you doing?’
She stumbled over to fall at the side of the old
herdsman. This man had made her feel better than she
had in months, and the thought of pressing on without
his aid was far too terrible.

‘You’ll just have to manage on your own.’ Doc
pulled her to her feet. ‘We haven’t got far to go.’
‘But you said there was a storm coming. You can’t
just leave them here at the mercy of the elements!’
Rhiannon pleaded, knowing he had every intention of
doing just that. ‘Leave me here with a tent and I’ll take
care of them.’
Doc and Stanley just laughed at this. ‘You can’t
even take care of yourself,’ Doc reasoned, mocking her.
‘I’ll manage.’ Rhiannon glared at him, though her
growing anger made her head throb.
Again the men laughed.
‘She’s really got a thing for the old bloke,’ Stanley
jeered.
‘Well, I tell you what.’ Doc put an arm around his
wife’s shoulder to suggest: ‘We’ll stick the old man in
front of you in the saddle, and as long as you can hold
him up, you can keep him. Fair enough?’
The hatred that burned in the pit of her stomach
gave her the determination to accept his terms, despite
the fact that she had needed the herdsman’s help to
keep herself in the saddle the day before. ‘What about
the others?’ she queried.
‘That’s a bit adventurous.’ Doc made light of her
concern. ‘I hardly think you’ll be able to support all of
them. Think of your poor horse?’ He walked off,
motioning for Stanley to load the old man up for her.
‘Prick,’ Rhiannon muttered under her breath. She
collected the herdsman’s bag containing his herbs and
utensils before following Stanley back to the horse.
It may be that they rode only a few hours that

morning, but to Rhiannon it felt like days. The
herdsman was a dead weight in her arms and her
weakened back was aching from having to support him.
Come on, Ray. She closed her eyes, in need of rest.
Speak to me now. Tell me how everything is going to be fine.
He had spoken to her often during this journey, yet
now, when she really needed to hear it, he did not
speak.
By the time they finally stopped, Rhiannon just sat
in the saddle. She was too exhausted to even dismount,
and was trying to figure out how to unload the
herdsman without killing him, when two of Doc’s
muscle men dragged both her burden and herself off the
horse.
The rest of Doc’s cronies had set to work digging at
the side of a hilly mound. Rhiannon sat marvelling at
the speed of their progress, when she spied her husband
approaching.
‘Your friend is still with us, I see.’ Doc made
reference to the herdsman, whose head was resting in
Rhiannon’s lap.
Rhiannon was tempted to say, ‘no thanks to you’,
but refrained for fear Doc would take the old man’s life
out of spite. ‘Are you going to tell me what we are
digging for?’
‘An old, old friend of mine,’ Doc informed her, with
a grin. ‘Temujin was his name … though his people
called him Khan the Mighty.’
‘What!’ Rhiannon was nearly sick. She didn’t know
what she’d been expecting him to say, but this certainly
wasn’t it. ‘Are you telling me you knew Genghis Khan?’

‘Pardon me, but I was the reason he believed in
immortality,’ Doc advised. ‘Together we searched for the
secret place of the three sacred fountains.
Unfortunately, Temujin died before we found the elixir
of everlasting life.’ Doc shrugged. ‘But now I have it,
thanks to Shamash, so I am delivering it as vowed.’
If the subject didn’t have the vital gene in his make
up he could not return to life. Rhiannon knew this, but
still felt she had to protest — just in case. ‘You can’t just
raise him from the dead after eight hundred years! His
soul has surely moved on elsewhere.’
‘And what of Jennifer Pearce’s soul? She was raised
from the dead in this fashion, after I killed her.’ Doc’s
smirk broadened as he perceived Rhiannon’s dismay.
‘How do I know about her resurrection?’ He crouched
beside his wife, to better perceive her rising dread.
‘Well, honey, it’s like this … you’re not suffering from a
virus, but rather a big, bad growth on your brain. This
growth is playing havoc with your mind’s functions and
you’re remembering things that you thought were long
erased from your memory. For, as with a computer, data
is never really erased from the mind. It just gets stored
in an out-of-the-way place, waiting for some hacker to
come dig it up. It was a nice try though,’ he allowed in
closing. ‘You really had me fooled for a while there. A
long while.’
By now, Rhiannon really felt like she’d had the shit
kicked out of her. ‘What else do you know?’ She was
almost too afraid to ask.
‘Oh, lots of interesting things.’ Doc took a long
pause to consider which pieces of information would

vex her the most. ‘For example, I found out Ray
Murdock was your lover … which did seem to explain
why you’ve been pissed at me since the Death Valley
disaster. It must have felt really shitty, just standing
back and allowing me to fill your true love full of holes.’
‘Shut up.’ Rhiannon made a feeble attempt at
hitting him. ‘I am glad you know. Now I can tell you
how every second I spend with you makes my skin
crawl —’
‘However, that’s not the best thing I found out.’ Doc
spoke up over her outburst and ended it. ‘I know where
the base of your illusive kin is located.’ He raised his
eyebrows and nodded surely to confirm her horror. ‘But
before I can deal with them, I need a strategist,
someone I can trust. And that’s why I have come to
fetch Temujin, as he was, after all, history’s foremost
conqueror.’
Rhiannon began shaking violently when she
realised that the only way she could stop Doc was to kill
herself. She grabbed for his gun, but in her weakened
state her reach fell short of her hopes.
‘No heroics, thank you.’
Rhiannon felt the familiar prick of a module being
clapped around her wrist, at which time she knew it was
all over.
‘Stick around. The fun has only just began.’ Doc left
her to check on the progress of his excavation.
Rhiannon checked her pockets for the ENZU-GUZ
as soon as Doc’s back was turned, but between all her
layers of clothing and her fragile state she could not
locate it.

Within the hour Doc’s workers pulled back the
tombstone, and they all entered the underground
passage that led to the burial chamber. Here was
inscribed a curse on those who would disturb the resting
place of the mighty Khan. Doc took this curse to mean
the smell that got worse the further they proceeded into
the crypt.
The great ruler had been buried in five coffins, one
inside the other. The innermost one was made of pure
gold; Doc knew this as he’d been at the burial
ceremony. He also knew Temujin had been entombed
with several slaves, horses, jewels and so forth. But,
since it was only the ruler’s body he’d come for, Doc left
all else as it was.
As the workmen hauled the huge coffin out into the
daylight, Rhiannon was seized by two of Doc’s men and
hauled towards the entrance of the tomb. Doc was
insisting that she see the inner sanctum and, although
she was just as insistent about not seeing it, when he
ordered her inside Rhiannon could not refuse.
She edged down the passage, Doc pushing her
onward, the smell of death wreaking havoc with her
already sensitive stomach. Up ahead, a couple of
torches had been lit, so when they entered the chamber
all the beauty and the horror of the sacred burial place
impacted on Rhiannon to its fullest extent.
Jewels and great treasure glistened around the rotten
remains of men and horses, who had been buried alive
with their leader.
‘Okay, I’ve seen it. Can I go now?’ she pleaded,
quickly covering her nose and mouth once more.

‘No.’ He shoved her to the ground, and she sprawled
in the space the huge coffin had once occupied. ‘You get
to stay. The module on your wrist will prevent you from
willing yourself out of here and destroys all hope of your
kindred ever finding you. And, just in case you’re
thinking you can cut your way out of this one …’ he
held up the ENZU-GUZ that Ray had died to give her,
‘you’d best think again.’
She was beyond words, beyond hope.
Rhiannon had nothing left to fight him with, no
trick left up her sleeve.
‘But just to show you there are no hard feelings, I
won’t leave you to rot alone.’
Stanley entered carrying the unconscious herdsman
and dumped him on the ground beside Rhiannon.
‘No, please, he’ll surely die.’ She begged them to
reconsider.
‘Well, it wasn’t my idea! You’re the one who insisted
on bringing him with you.’ Doc grinned and then
followed Stanley out. ‘Ciao bella, it’s been fun.’
‘This isn’t goodbye, Cadwaladr, you scum sucking
maggot!’ Rhiannon yelled after him, though her fury
only made her feel worse. ‘I hate you,’ she screamed
with the last of her strength, as they sealed the tomb
over. ‘I’ve always hated you,’ she mumbled, collapsing
into an exhausted heap of tears.
Soon the torches would use up all the oxygen and
burn themselves out. Rhiannon wondered if the dear
old herdsman would have the chance to regain
consciousness before they both died of asphyxiation.
She would be born again, but the herdsman would not.

He would end up like the other poor bastards who had
been entombed alive in this place, and then she would
have to live with his death and his rotting corpse.
Upon leaving Tarazean, Tory and Maelgwn felt a lot
better than they had when they’d arrived. Besides their
renewed trust and zest for each other, they carried with
them Narnar’s private parts, the ransom the God had
asked for Dumuzi’s release.
This is like a bad dream, Ningal said, as she caught
sight of Narnar’s stone palace, for she remembered
how her husband had implored her not to leave him
there. It does seem to me now that I must have been as
heartless as he.
‘But we are going to change all that,’ Tory assured
her. ‘Just by being here, you have already become part of
the solution.’
How clever of you, Lamamu. I have, haven’t I? The
Goddess touched an escaped tear from her cheek. It just
hurts less when you’re part of the problem.
Tory shook her head to disagree. ‘No. Fear, hate,
pain, guilt, lust, excess, greed — they kill the emotions.
You’re numbed! So in reality, it only seems to hurt less.’
I knew that once, the Goddess announced, a mite
ashamed of being lectured in the nature of spirituality
by one who was not of her breed. I knew it, I believed it, I
lived it. But I have long forgotten the wisdom taught to me
by my father. Since Enki vanished from our midst, I think
we have all forgotten. Ningal bowed her head in shame.
‘What happened to him?’ Tory was intrigued, Enki
being her great-grandfather.

Ningal looked back at Tory, and with a casual shrug
replied, He became so enlightened that he evolved to a
higher state of consciousness. As did Enlil, Ninlil, Ninki and
Ninharsag.
The last three Nefilim mentioned were females,
who Tory felt confident comprised the triple goddess
she had encountered on more than one occasion.
She already knew Ninharsag was Keridwen, so the
rest just stood to reason. ‘So who is ruling the galaxies
if all the responsible adults, so to speak, have
moved on?’
The Pantheon of Twelve, of which I am a member,
Ningal informed her, taking offence.
‘Shamash and Inanna too, I suppose?’ Tory got a
nod for an answer. ‘Marduk,’ she went on.
‘No, Marduk was banished, because of Dumuzi,’
Maelgwn cut in. ‘Since then, it has been discovered
that your grandfather further offended the Pantheon by
making love to a mortal woman, even though Enlil
expressly forbade it.’
‘Several women most likely,’ Tory added,
considering that all the immortal tribes had acquired
the vital gene from someone.
But Maelgwn knew different. ‘Marduk swears he
only ever loved the one woman. It was just over several
of her lifetimes.’
Well, I cannot see that his coupling with this woman is
as great a crime as Enlil once decreed, Ningal reasoned.
Not if the likes of you and your husband are the result … at
least Marduk still has the capacity to truly love another.
‘That’s a lovely thing to say, Ningal,’ Tory told her.

‘I would ask that you bear that view in mind at the
Nefilim inquiry into these matters. Which is bound to
be forthcoming,’ Maelgwn added.
Fear not, Dragon. I predict Marduk’s children shall fare
well. If what you claim is true, it shall be my children who
rue the day.
Tory and Maelgwn followed Ningal down the entrance
hall on the first level of Narnar’s ziggurat, for Ningal
needed no guide to find her way to the main chamber.
‘Just where do you think you’re going?’ Tobit
appeared between Maelgwn’s shoulder blades, but did
not attack.
‘I’m sorry,’ Tory forced a grin, ‘but I don’t answer to
lying, cheating scumbags like yourself.’
Ningal stopped and turned to address the little grey
creature. Give Lamamu back what is hers, or I shall reduce
you to a one-fold elemental so fast it will make your head spin.
Tobit appeared horrified, both by the Goddess and
her threat. ‘But if you take away my fire, I won’t be any
fun … I won’t have any fun!’
Then do not abuse the privilege, Ningal advised.
The gargoyle’s face drooped into a moping
expression as he stroked the golden band that hung
loosely around his scrawny neck.
We are waiting, the Goddess pushed.
Reluctantly, Tobit pulled the ring off through his
neck and held it out to Tory.
And what do we say?
‘Sorry,’ Tobit sniffled, fit to cry. ‘But when you held
the jewel before my eyes, it made me crazy!’

‘Apology accepted, Tobit,’ Tory said cheerfully. ‘You
may keep the ring.’
‘What?’ His mood turned to elation, and tears of joy
rather than sorrow filled his eyes. ‘I don’t understand.’
He wiped the water from his face. ‘What’s happening to
my face?’
That is water, Tobit, the seed of emotion, the Goddess
granted. Use it well, for it can help balance your
hardworking earth side with your creative and often
mischievous fire side.
‘I am three-fold!’ Tobit felt very strange, having
never really felt anything before.
‘See, Tobit,’ Tory nudged him. ‘There are rewards to
be had from doing the right thing, and that is always far
more satisfying.’
Too confused and dumbfounded to comment, Tobit
took flight over their heads. ‘I must go and warn, I … I
mean tell, my Lord of your arrival. Narnar will be
pleased.’ The beast tried to sound more confident than
he was, crying and laughing uncontrollably as he made
haste to Narnar.
Tobit ended a good hand of poker when he crashlanded
in a heap in the middle of the table. ‘My Lord, forgive
me,’ the deva sobbed, and then chuckled as he found
his feet.
What the hell is wrong with you, Tobit? Narnar threw
his cards on top of the beast in disgust.
‘My Lord,’ Tobit cowered, shaking like a leaf. ‘The
young Gods have returned with your …’ he pointed
coyly to his master’s groin area.

Excellent! Narnar rose, grabbing Tobit and throwing
him in the air.
When the creature had regained its equilibrium, he
fluttered in mid-air beyond his master’s reach. ‘Ningal is
with them.’
What! Narnar stood. They would dare bring that
creature here!
‘But my Lord,’ Tobit appealed bravely. ‘What if
Ningal is coming to reinstate you? She does seem to
have a rather giving spirit. Look at what she did to me!’
Tobit motioned to his new-found tears. ‘Ningal granted
me my three-fold nature, just for being good!’
The other gargoyles gasped, the notion being
inconceivable to them.
For being good, hey? Narnar rubbed the empty space
between his legs. I haven’t tried that for awhile. I’m not
sure I remember what that entails.
‘If I may say, sire, I believe the qualities you seek are
love, honesty, respect, truthfulness, loyalty … that was a
difficult one for you sire, if memory serves.’
Yes, thank you, Tobit, Narnar said irascibly.
‘Now, sire, be nice,’ Tobit warned as Ningal entered.
‘Forgiving, warm, hospitable — you can do it.’ The
creature encouraged Narnar with a nod.
Ningal froze when she spotted the hooded figure of
her husband in the midst of the accoutrements of his
existence all these years. Her guilt consumed her. How
was she to forgive Narnar, when she could not forgive
herself?
‘Allow me, Nin.’ Maelgwn took possession of the
metal canister that contained Narnar’s organ. He then

approached the God alone. ‘My Lord Narnar,’
Maelgwn bowed. ‘I have succeeded in the task you set
me I believe beyond your expectations. But, I would
suggest that we retire to a more private place to
conduct our business.’
Narnar looked to Ningal, who nodded to give
Maelgwn the authority to speak on her behalf. This way.
Narnar motioned Maelgwn to exit.
As the two men retired to another chamber, Ningal
stood staring at the door they had passed through. I had
forgotten what it was to have a friend.
‘After last night, I believe Maelgwn feels he owes
you a favour or two.’ Tory placed an arm around the
Goddess to reassure her.
The Goddess smiled at this, patting Tory’s comforting
arm affectionately. The unconditional love you have for each
other is an inspiration, Lamamu. I knew that feeling once,
and with the grace of the Gods I will know it again.
Maelgwn and Narnar returned to the chamber, only
Narnar was not hooded any longer. His locks of blonde
hair framed his smiling features, and his blue eyes
beamed with delight. Tobit shall show you to Dumuzi, he
instructed Maelgwn.
Tory wished Ningal well, before following Tobit and
her husband from the room.
‘Do you think it’s safe to leave them alone together?’
Tory queried her husband once they were well away.
Maelgwn raised his brow and with a broad grin
announced, ‘With what’s at stake, I do believe they’ll
work it out.’

‘Now for Dumuzi and Inanna.’ Tory rubbed her
hands together expectantly.
‘You really haven’t changed one bit.’ Maelgwn
halted to give Tory a squeeze of appreciation. ‘Still, I
would not be so eager if I were you.’
‘And why not?’
‘Because Dumuzi was the God of Fertility, and he
hasn’t fertilised anyone for thousands of years.’ Maelgwn
grinned at his wife’s dismay.
‘Perhaps I should wait here.’ Tory pushed her rather
amorous husband away.
‘Only if I can too.’ Maelgwn kissed her, drawing the
rest of her close with ease.
That’s it, do it, do it! The couple parted abruptly,
looking to Tobit who was casually leaning against an
archway support watching them.
Well, please don’t stop my account.
The words did not come from Tobit, but he pointed
upwards to the keystone of the arch where a head was
embedded.
‘My God!’ Tory backed up a few steps, noticing the
support arches had legs cemented into them. Two arms
were embedded in the arch, and hands held up the
keystone. ‘Dumuzi?’
Oh yes, say it again, enchantress, this time with
meaning, the head encouraged, blowing her kisses.
‘Watch it,’ Maelgwn warned, ‘or you will remain as
you are.’
You mean you’ve come to rescue me?
‘That depends on how helpful you are prepared to
be?’ Maelgwn advised.

Oh anything, anything! Dumuzi insisted. But who sent
you? How did you get past Narnar?
‘Your brother Marduk sent me,’ Maelgwn said no
more, seeking an honest reaction.
Oh praise Anu. I knew Marduk could pressure
Shamash into disclosing my location.
‘I’m afraid Shamash has fooled everyone, Dumuzi,
for it was Marduk who was accused of your murder and
banished.’
What! But that’s simply not true. Who accused him?
‘Inanna, I’m afraid,’ Maelgwn advised.
But, whatever put that notion into her head?
‘Her former lover of course!’ Tory couldn’t believe
how slow he was.
No, that can’t be. Inanna said that she was through with
her brother … that she could not go back to him after me.
‘Where is the rest of you?’ Tory was curious.
‘Behind those doors, yonder,’ Tobit pointed. ‘And I
can help you with these bits of you like?’
‘Yes, thank you, Tobit,’ although Tory cringed at the
thought, ‘that would be most appreciated.’
Closing his eyes, the creature raised both claws
towards the archway and the stonework vanished. The
cold gray body parts fell to the ground, but Tobit caught
the head on its way down.
Thanks. Dumuzi smiled at the creature.
‘You’re welcome,’ Tobit told him, tucking the head
underarm like a basketball, Dumuzi’s nose to his armpit.
Oh no, please. When was the last time you had a wash?
Dumuzi protested as he was carted off down the corridor.
‘Arms or legs?’ Maelgwn gave Tory first preference.

Screwing up her face, Tory reached for the arms.
‘Legs it is then.’ Maelgwn gathered the leftovers,
and followed Tory and Tobit to the rest of the body.
They were down to the last few dregs of the oxygen
inside the crypt. The torches died, leaving Rhiannon
with vivid images of the bony remains that surrounded
her. She huddled close to the one living thing in the
tomb with her, the unconscious herder. He was
struggling for air as she was. ‘Thank you for your
kindness,’ she whispered, ‘and forgive my selfish desires
that brought you to this end.’
The herdsman’s eyes opened as Rhiannon’s closed.
It took a moment to orientate himself to the
darkness.
‘Rhiannon?’ Cadwallon felt the dead weight against
him and pulled off his gloves to search the features of
the face, realising it was her. ‘What is that smell?’
Cadwallon resumed his normal appearance and attire.
He retrieved a glow-light from the belt of his flying
suit, giving it a shake, and the tiny tube lit up the entire
crypt. ‘Oh dear Goddess. How did we get here?’
Cadwallon gathered Rhiannon in his arms to help
facilitate her return to consciousness. She began
drawing in breaths of stale air, and coughed them
back out, her eyes opening wide. ‘It’s alright. Just don’t
draw breath. You don’t have to any more.’
‘Ray?’ She urged him to kiss her without delay, and
Cadwallon obliged. ‘I have died and gone to heaven.’
She fell back into his arms, but then, noticing the
surroundings, was startled upright. ‘No I haven’t.’

Cadwallon shrugged apologetically.
‘Then you can’t be Ray?’ Rhiannon was horrified
that she’d just been so intimate with a total stranger,
but then she couldn’t deny that his kiss had kindled
emotions in her she thought were long dead.
‘Ray is a part of me, Rhiannon, for I am his Chosen
incarnation.’ He stood to introduce himself properly.
‘My name is Cadwallon, and I am very pleased to meet
you at last.’
‘I’ll bet you are,’ she scoffed, trying to figure out
where she’d heard that name before. ‘Hold on. You’re
not Cadwallon as in Cadwaladr’s father, Cadwallon?’
‘The one and only,’ he smiled, with a bow.
‘Oh boy, that explains an awful lot.’ Rhiannon bit
her lip. ‘Like Doc’s resentment of Ray, for starters!’ As
her eyes wheeled about trying to process the
information, Rhiannon noticed the herdsman was
missing. ‘Where’s my guide?’
‘I’m right here.’ Cadwallon threw his arms wide.
‘No. The local who has been tending me these past
few days?’ Rhiannon continued her gruelling search for
him.
‘Aye,’ Cadwallon acknowledged surely. ‘That was me.’
‘That was you?’ Rhiannon’s attention shot back in
his direction, her heart all a-flutter in her chest. ‘So it
was you who was bethinking me as we travelled.’
‘It was not my intent to deceive you, I just —’
‘No.’ Rhiannon approached, not wanting him to get
her wrong. ‘The things you said were beautiful.’ Upon
nearing him she noticed how well-built Cadwallon was.
This man was a warrior, like her brother.

‘It is you who are beautiful,’ he told her. ‘You are
every bit as brave and wonderful as you ever were.’
‘Oh Goddess,’ Rhiannon felt herself drowning in his
eyes. ‘Is it hot in here?’ she inquired casually, fanning
her face in the hope of composing herself.
‘Of course.’ Cadwallon held out his hands to her.
‘Allow me to get you out of here. You can tell me the
story of how we came to be in this wretched place at
some later date.’
Rhiannon gladly took hold, closing her eyes to be
transported somewhere else. It would be home, most
likely; she must warm them of Doc’s pending attack.
‘Yes!’ She opened her eyes to find herself alone in
the crypt. ‘Cadwallon?’ She called meekly to him,
fearful of waking the dead. ‘Oh shit! The module must
have prevented him from teleporting me.’ She shrugged
if off, thinking he would return at any moment. But as
time dragged on, she recalled that Cadwallon had been
unconscious for the last part of the trek, and the module
would prevent him from willing himself back to her.
‘Oh Goddess no,’ Rhiannon uttered. ‘Please let him find
me.’
‘Sorry about that.’ Cadwallon reappeared, with
Rhun. ‘I got a bit caught up with your brother here.’
‘Rhun.’ Rhiannon rushed to his familiar embrace.
‘Are you alright?’ He checked her over, hugging her
intermittently.
‘I’m fine, really I am. But,’ she turned back to
Cadwallon, ‘how did you locate me?’
‘Are you kidding?’ He glanced around. ‘This place
lingers in your memory.’

‘Oh Rhun.’ Rhiannon’s mind skipped to more
important matters. ‘We must evacuate Watarrka at
once. Doc knows of its existence and is planning an
attack.’
‘Whoa girl, slow down,’ Rhun urged. ‘We have
already relocated.’
Rhiannon closed her eyes to say a quiet, thank you,
whilst Rhun pulled an ENZU-GUZ from his pocket and
cut her loose from the module’s restraining device.
‘Let’s get you back to the Goddess, hey.’ Rhun took
one of her arms, and Cadwallon the other, and together
they conveyed her back to base.
Five coffins made of various precious metals were laid
out before Doc, one next to the other. The separation
procedure had taken place in a long, wide gallery in the
west wing of Doc’s manor. He’d had the area cleared, to
be alone with his colleague when he awoke. All the
curtains had been drawn and candles lit the room. The
smallest coffin, made of gold, was the only one still
sealed.
‘I have missed you, my friend.’ Doc gazed at the
ornately carved figure of Temujin resting peacefully on
the lid. ‘Through the ages, there are few people I have
trusted so well as you.’
At Doc’s willing it, the heavy gold doors of the
coffin opened to expose the skeletal remains of the
warrior, fully attired in battle dress.
‘You boasted often that you were the son of a God.’
Doc removed the stopper from the vial in his hand, as
he positioned himself at the head of the casket.

‘If your claim to divinity be true,
let you stand before me now,
the warrior, the friend, the brother,
that once I knew.’
Doc poured the elixir over the skull of Temujin, and
held his breath. He really needed an ally now, someone
he could trust beyond question.
‘Temujin is not one of the Chosen — it is a waste of
time trying to resurrect him.’
The comment startled Doc and he did a quick aboutface to find a woman whom he knew not. And then, in
the next instant, he thought he recognised her. He
marvelled at her strange, black attire and all the gadgets
and weapons she sported. ‘How did you get in here?’
‘You let me in,’ she replied, taking a seat on a
nearby table.
Doc noticed the symbol of the serpent on the
shoulder of her suit. ‘What can I do for you, I am in the
middle of something here —’
‘The base at Watarrka has been abandoned, Doc. If
you were hoping your dead friend there was going to assist
you to attack the serpent’s clan, you’re wasting your time.
The only strategist you need the aid of right now, is me.’
‘And why should I believe you?’ She only smiled at
the question and Doc worked at preventing his jaw from
hitting the ground — the woman was beautiful. Tall
and slender, she had pale, ivory skin that was in vast
contrast to her long, brown locks and eyes of ebony. ‘I
know you, don’t I?’ His memory was doing overtime
trying to place her.

She nodded in encouragement. ‘Think harder,
Caradoc.’
‘Caradoc, eh.’ Doc turned and walked away from
her, searching his memories for the answer. ‘Vanora.’
He turned his eyes back in her direction. ‘If I
remember rightly, you left me to rot in your father’s
dungeon.’
‘Well, I was possessed at the time,’ she said
defensively. ‘But back in Atlantis I was your wife for
hundreds of years and in Troy we were wed for near to
sixty … are you going to let one bad lifetime spoil an
almost perfect track record?’
‘I don’t believe I need anything from one who is in
league with the Serpent’s clan.’
‘But you are one of us, Cadwaladr.’
‘No! I have never been one of you!’ He flew into a
rage. ‘I have always been on the outside, looking in.’
‘And do you know why?’ Vanora queried calmly, as
if he were as relaxed as she.
‘Because Taliesin locked me out!’
‘No, my sweet. Shamash locked you out, and he
locked you out on purpose. I have the proof.’ She held
up a headband.
‘What is that?’
‘It is a recording of the murder of your father,
Cadwallon.’
‘That does sound entertaining.’ Doc grinned, but he
was still wary of the unfamiliar device.
‘There’s nothing to penetrate the skin. It’s perfectly
harmless.’ She held it out to him. ‘Just put it on your
head.’

He took the device in hand, but was still hesitant to
wear it.
‘Cadwaladr,’ she implored him gently. ‘All your life
you’ve wanted someone to aid and guide you in times of
crisis. Well, here I am. If it is allies and friends you seek,
you have many. Don’t allow Shamash to keep you
locked out any longer. If you do, you could spend the
rest of eternity regretting it. Shamash is going down,
and your resolve in this instant will decide whether or
not you are condemned with him.’
Doc gazed at Vanora as she assisted him to position
the mechanism on his temples. ‘Blind trust. This is a
first for me,’ he told her.
‘Close your eyes.’ She gently stroked his lids with
her fingertips. ‘And allow all to be made clear.’
When Doc had perceived the entire recording,
tears were welling in his eyes. He removed the device,
pressing his fingers hard into his tear ducts to stop the
flow of emotion. ‘My whole life has been a lie,’ he
realised. Cadwaladr had not felt the urge to weep
since he was a small child, but his remorse and anger
in that instant were so overwhelming that he was
tempted to succumb to the pain he felt. ‘Goddamn my
ignorance!’
‘It wasn’t your fault,’ Vanora placed a hand on his
shoulder. ‘The Dragon knows that.’
Doc shrugged off her touch; the very mention of his
great forefather enraged him. He was so used to
despising his kin, that now he didn’t know what to feel.
‘I have betrayed everyone! I have lied, I have schemed,
I have killed, to avenge the wrong done me —’

Vanora made haste to grip both his hands, before he
worked himself into a state. ‘But still you were
“Chosen”, Cadwaladr.’
This realisation silenced him.
‘There are no accidents in that regard.’ Vanora’s
eyes were diverted to the coffin behind Doc, where the
reconstituting remains of Temujin arose to a seated
position. ‘I stand corrected,’ she uttered, aghast. ‘This is
unexpected.’
‘No, it isn’t. This man is one of the finest who ever
lived. Some histories blackened his name and he and
his conquests have been widely misunderstood.’ Doc
moved to greet the age-old warrior, who was once again
in his prime. ‘Temujin, old friend, I have returned for
you as vowed.’
Doc had switched to the Khan’s native tongue and
Vanora understood it perfectly. All the Chosen were
well practiced in telepathy.
Temujin leapt from his resting place, alarmed. His
dark eyes darted about, assessing his situation.
Suddenly he sprang into a triple backflip, before
coming to rest a safe distance away from his company.
‘Who are you?’ He looked from Doc to Vanora and
back again.
‘Sorry, my fault.’ Doc urged the warrior to stand
easy, having realised his error.
The newly-revived twelfth century conqueror stared
in amazement as Doc’s pale blue eyes turned dark as
night. His short, blond hair turned black and thickened
as it grew to his waist. The soft features of his face
hardened into those of Cadwaladr, and his body

erupted with muscles that threatened to tear through
Doc’s comfortably fitting shirt.
The Khan relaxed as he recognised his host, and
opened his arms wide. ‘Cadwaladr, my brother.’
‘Indeed,’ he affirmed as he approached to embrace
Temujin. ‘Welcome, mighty Khan, to the twenty-first
century.’

28
THE GATHERING

T

he Goddess was submerged at the bottom of the
Persian Gulf when Tory and Maelgwn rejoined
her. They had the reconstructed, washed and
partly-clothed Dumuzi with them, who was still overamorous, but under control.
Dumuzi had begun to radiate light as soon as his
body had become whole. He was short for one of the
Nefilim breed, being scarcely taller than Maelgwn. His
glowing amber eyes gave him a devilish appearance, as
did his straight, amber-brown hair that fell to a point in
the middle of his forehead. When offered a flight suit to
wear, the God would only succumb to wearing the
bottom half. Dumuzi was not affected by temperature
and liked to flaunt his tanned muscular body at all
times. Clothes were against his religion.

‘Look at all these beautiful women.’ Dumuzi kissed
the hand of every one he could. When he tried his
charms on Boadicea, however, she socked him one in
the eye.
Maelgwn was pleased to see Talynn had found
Angus, whose perfect incarnation went by the name of
Ethan. Still unconscious, they had tied Ethan in a chair
just in case he came out of his coma swinging punches.
‘Hello, father.’ Rhiannon emerged from the crowd
to meet the legendary Dragon she’d heard so much
about.
Her appearance floored Maelgwn for only a second.
‘Hello, Princess.’ He drew her to his chest to hug her as
Miles used to.
‘It is you.’ She squeezed him tight, moved to tears.
‘Well, who were you expecting. Superman?’
Maelgwn posed in jest, which made her smile.
As Tory watched her husband and her daughter
become reacquainted, Rhun’s arms enfolded her waist
from behind and she glanced over her shoulder at
him.
‘How about that. The whole family together in the
same place, at the same time.’
‘It’s a miracle to be sure.’ Tory smiled, leaning back
against her son to enjoy the moment.
‘Oh, speaking of family …’ Rhun thought he’d best
keep her informed. ‘No one has seen hide nor hair of
Myrddin or Taliesin since the day the other half of our
force arrived.’
‘That’s odd,’ Tory mused. ‘I was under the
impression they would be here guiding us through this.’

‘You don’t think …’ Brian had overheard the
conversation. His voice trailed off as he shook his head
in rejection of the idea.
‘What?’ Tory insisted.
‘Do you think they had a perfect other half?’
‘Aye, they do.’ Maelgwn broke from the
conversation he was having with Rhiannon. ‘I know
Taliesin’s female half. Her name is Seshut. She has been
an adviser and scribe to Marduk all through his exile.
Myrddin’s true love, however, has been trapped in a part
of the Otherworld that has been shut off from this plane
since before I was born. It was said that the window to
that place would re-open at the time of the Gathering.’
‘Avalon,’ Tory surmised, thinking it all very
romantic. ‘Then the perfect incarnation of our mother
must have been Vivien, the Lady of the Lake. No
wonder we could never get Dad to leave England for
any great length of time.’
‘But he never mentioned any of this to us,’ Brian
protested. ‘I was under the impression that merlins were
beyond the need for earthly pleasures?’
This notion put a smile on the face of everyone
within earshot, as all had been indulged of late.
‘Their desire to seek each other is wholly spiritual,
for until they are joined with their other half, they
cannot evolve to a higher plane of consciousness.’
Maelgwn found the notion beautiful and rather
comforting.
Tory, however, was distinctly disenchanted. ‘My
father and Taliesin could be evolving from this
existence as we speak?’

‘Aye,’ Maelgwn stated, grabbing hold of his wife to
prevent her from dashing off in a flight of hysterics.
‘This is a very special time for them, Tory. Don’t spoil it
by demanding goodbyes or explanations. If either of
them wish to see you, they will come to you.’
Tory stood staring at Maelgwn like a scolded child,
wondering whether to cry or rebel.
‘We can pull this off on our own.’ He placed a hand
on each of her shoulders to emphasise the fact. ‘You said
it yourself, Tory. We don’t need higher supervision any
more.’
Tory nodded, agreeing to let the matter rest for now.
‘Excuse I, Commander.’
‘Vanora!’ Tory gasped upon sighting her.
‘Tory.’ Vanora acknowledged her, before looking to
Maelgwn to report. ‘Cadwaladr is ready to talk. Our
place or his?’
As the sound of his name almost incited a riot in
the room, Maelgwn decided that Cadwaladr’s place
might be best.
‘There’s been a little unexpected development,’
Vanora added. ‘It would seem the Khan had the
immortal gene in his make-up after all.’
Maelgwn raised both eyebrows, surprised. ‘He must
have had the immortal gene in his family line, but was
bypassed as one of the Chosen at the time of his death.
Not to worry. The elixir Doc has given him will grant
him life for only so long as it suits Shamash’s purposes.’
‘Hey!’ Brian alerted everyone to Ethan, who was
sitting up in his chair, observing the scene before him
with a blank look on his face.

‘I seem to be having a flashback.’ Ethan cracked a
huge smile. Although his mother was of the middle
eastern tribes, Ethan had more Anglo-Saxon in him.
His father had been a knight in the Crusades —
Neraida had recognised Ethan’s father as one of her lost
love’s reincarnations. Ethan’s skin was olive like his
mother’s, but fairer in colour. His trimmed-short hair
was brown and his eyes were hazel-brown.
Neraida and Talynn rushed their patient, showering
him with hugs and kisses.
‘It’s good to see you, man.’ Brian held a hand out to
shake Ethan’s.
‘Brockwell,’ he mumbled and moved to take the
hand of his old comrade, only to realise he was tied up.
‘Um, I really don’t think you people have anything to
fear from me.’
‘Sorry about that.’ Talynn explained as Neraida cut
her son’s bonds: ‘You got a bit out of hand when we
tried to disconnect you from the module.’
‘Aw …’ he grabbed hold of his head with both
hands. ‘Now I remember.’
‘Take it easy, lad.’ Cadfan came forward to lead
Ethan off to a quiet room to recover his strength in
peace.
But as they passed by Maelgwn on the way out,
Ethan wavered. ‘I know the inside of that base like the
back of my hand. Don’t be going in there without me.’
‘You go and rest yourself. Shamash has yet to arrive
and we have other matters to attend to. I promise I will
seek your counsel if that need arises.’ With a slap on the
shoulder, Maelgwn sent Ethan to bed.

Everyone else gathered round Maelgwn and Tory to
brainstorm the next step in Shamash’s downfall.
All the same faces, and a few new ones, graced the
circle. Many of them had only met in the last few days
and yet a myriad of experiences bonded them together,
so that no one was a stranger. These were history’s finest
warriors, scholars, strategists, technologists, healers —
the list went on. If they couldn’t pull this mission off
successfully, then nobody could.
Maelgwn chose a token band of people to accompany
him to a meeting with Cadwaladr. Not so many as to be
intimidating, but a suitable force to deal with an
ambush should that be Cadwaladr’s intention. Except
for Tory and Vanora, Maelgwn selected people who
were emotionally detached from Cadwaladr: Robin,
Boadicea, and Cadwell.
Vanora guided them to the hallway outside the
conference room in Cadwaladr’s mansion. She knocked
and entered ahead of the others to announce their
arrival.
Tory closed her eyes to prepare herself for
confronting Cadwaladr again. I saw enough good in this
man once to ensure his soul was spared. Rejection is what
Cadwaladr fears most … don’t feed his fear.
The double doors parted before them. Cadwaladr
stood at the far end of the conference table with a
couple of bodyguards and Vanora at his side. ‘You
wished to see me, Dragon?’
As the party entered, Maelgwn couldn’t help but
stare at their host, who was the identical incarnate of

his brother, Caradoc. He and Caradoc hadn’t been
friendly since they were teenagers, but Maelgwn strived
to recall the times they’d been together before the war
that changed them from kinsmen to enemies. ‘I have
come to ask you to unite with us against Shamash,
Cadwaladr.’
Behind Maelgwn and his band the doors closed of
their own accord.
‘It seems we have come full circle, Maelgwn.’
Cadwaladr had to smile at the irony of the situation in
which he found himself. ‘And, in light of the fact that
the last time you gave me such an ultimatum I refused
and lost badly … I figure, it might be wise to cooperate
this time.’ Then Cadwaladr became more serious. ‘It is
clear from the evidence Vanora has presented to me
that Shamash had planned my plight since before my
father was even born. He has kept me in the dark my
whole life. I’d like a shot at keeping him in the dark for
at least a few days.’
‘I would also request that you release all those you
hold under the influence of the NERGUZ,’ Maelgwn
stated firmly.
‘Apologies, Commander,’ Vanora came forward to
present Maelgwn with Doc’s master control module. ‘I
meant to advise you — it has already been done.
Shamash will arrive at his excavated landing base in the
Middle East to find it devoid of occupants.’
This came as a shock to Maelgwn. He’d expected an
argument at the very least.
‘It’s strange, isn’t it, Dragon,’ Cadwaladr
commented. ‘Endeavouring to trust someone you’re

used to despising. I know your doubt and hesitation.
Believe me, I know it.’
There was a knock on the conference room doors
and Stanley Brennon entered. He was surprised to find
strangely-clad visitors therein, and was reluctant to
speak in front of them. Instead, he walked all the way to
the other end of the room to have a quiet whisper in
Doc’s ear.
‘Well, then,’ announced Cadwaladr. ‘The moment
of truth.’
‘Shamash has arrived,’ Maelgwn assumed.
‘Soon. And he will expect me to be present. So
what’s the scam?’
Maelgwn closed the distance between himself and
Cadwaladr. ‘Did you tell Shamash of your intention to
dispose of Rhiannon?’
‘He wanted it,’ Cadwaladr frowned. ‘Maybe Utu
even put me up to it. But, no, to the best of my
knowledge I did not tell him of my intentions. I
suspected for some time, though, that Utu was twisting
my mind to suit his purpose. I needed someone I could
trust, someone Utu was unaware of, who could monitor
this for me … that is why I went in search of Temujin.’
He motioned to his silent partner, now standing behind
him. Temujin did not understand the language being
spoken, but Cadwaladr would fill him on the outcome
of the proceedings after the meeting had adjourned.
Maelgwn looked over the renowned conqueror of
the orient who was observing him just as closely. His
appearance was of a warrior to be reckoned with, and
quite frankly, Maelgwn was relieved that the Khan was

now on their side. ‘Well, then,’ he concluded, sensing
Cadwaladr spoke the truth. ‘It seems that you have
ended up with more allies than you bargained for.’
Cadwaladr shook his head in bafflement. He just
couldn’t imagine fitting in with the Dragon’s kin. ‘Half
of your flock would see me drawn and quartered.’
Maelgwn shrugged. ‘Same old, same old, really,’ he
said. ‘However, as of now you are under my protection.
If anyone wants a piece of you, they’ll answer to me.’
‘And me.’ Tory strode down to join them. ‘If
Shamash starts manipulating you and gains control of
your domain here, we’re all stuffed.’
‘I can’t say how much Shamash already knows about
my operations here.’ Cadwaladr wanted to make that
clear. ‘To keep things secret from Rhiannon, I allowed
Utu to wash away aspects of our conversations, but then
I could never really be sure he didn’t do more than
that.’
‘Then, he most certainly did.’ Maelgwn found
himself feeling rather sympathetic.
‘We must secure the fusion reactor in space and the
facility at Farwell,’ Tory suggested. ‘If Shamash gains
control of either of those, he can shut down the world
power grid, or blow us all to kingdom come.’
‘You know about that?’ Cadwaladr was sure he’d
kept the glitch under wraps.
‘It was us who stole your hard-drive,’ Tory explained
apologetically.
‘I knew it —’ Cadwaladr began.
‘Later people,’ Maelgwn advised. ‘We’re a little
pressed for time. Vanora — assume Rhiannon’s form and

accompany Doc to greet Shamash.’ He looked at
Cadwaladr. ‘I leave Cadwell, Robin and Boadicea with
you also. They can be disguised as your personal
bodyguards. Shamash will get himself settled in before
causing too much havoc, but should all not go well with
his arrival, my people will get you to a safe place.
Meanwhile, Tory and I will arrange for the defence of the
power grid, and see if we can’t round up an army for you,
to replace the one you’ve lost … save, having to explain
to Shamash what happened to the immortals you have
released from the influence of the NERGUZ. Sound
good?’ Everyone nodded in accord, except Cadwaladr.
‘Just one thing.’ He seemed reluctant to bring the
point up. ‘The module? If I am not seen wearing it, I
can hardly claim to be controlling the masses. There is
only one of its like on the planet.’
Though Maelgwn could see the sense of what he
said, he also knew that many of the ICA’s abductees
would not yet have found their kin, or indeed their own
mind. A split-second change of heart on Cadwaladr’s
behalf and he would be calling on all those that had not
yet recovered from the module’s influence to follow
him.
‘You’re just going to have to trust me, I’m afraid,’
Cadwaladr prompted.
Maelgwn looked to Tory, who, after a second’s
consideration, gave the nod.
The band was passed over, and Cadwaladr was
dumbfounded by their resolute style. ‘You always were
too trusting, Maelgwn,’ he said, his voice even hoarser
than usual.

Maelgwn shook his head at this. ‘I never lose,
Cadwaladr, because I only ever back a sure thing.’ With
a confident grin, Maelgwn slapped his hands together to
get everybody moving. ‘Stay alert, people. At the first
sign of trouble head back to the Goddess.’
The two huge cylindrical craft belonging to Shamash
finally approached the Earth. One parked itself in orbit,
amid the satellites and space stations, while the other
proceeded toward the exposed runway in the Middle
East.
Pictures of the alien craft were being beamed to
Earth via satellite from the Brunanburh Space Station.
This facility was now a permanent attachment of the
fusion reactor that supplied power to the moon’s bases
as well as the Earth’s. The Brunanburh was supplying
the bulk of the information on the new arrivals because
it was the closest space station to the visitors.
The crew members of the Goddess who were
watching the broadcast were starting to get a little
concerned. Maelgwn and his team were taking longer
than expected.
Floyd was especially nervous. He’d only just found
Boadicea and his fear of losing her made him braver
than usual. ‘I think we should go after them.’ He
attempted to distract everyone from the television.
‘Dear Floyd.’ Candace placed a hand on his shoulder
sensing his personal dilemma. She couldn’t help but
smile at how little he knew about his love. ‘I know
Boadicea very well, and I assure you, the only reason we
need go after her is if you wish to save her foe.’

‘Yo, team.’ Tory called everyone to attention.
When Floyd saw that only Maelgwn and Tory had
returned, he panicked. ‘Where’s Boadicea?’
‘I left her guarding Cadwaladr, with Vanora,
Cadwell and Robin,’ Maelgwn informed him.
‘What!’ Floyd couldn’t believe his ears, and moved
to confront the huge warrior.
‘Now, Tiernan —’
‘Floyd.’ Tory corrected Maelgwn.
‘Floyd,’ he continued. ‘We have no time to argue. I
am told you are a code breaker.’
‘Well, yes.’ Floyd was overcome by the man’s
forthright manner and followed an overwhelming
instinct to hear him out.
‘Then I need you to accompany Rhun, Brian,
Season, Candace and Sybil to Farwell.’ Maelgwn turned
his address to his son. ‘Rally the local tribes if you have
to, but you must secure the host station for the fusion
grid.’
‘Aye, aye, Commander.’ Rhun grinned, happy with
his mission and his team.
Maelgwn looked back to Floyd. ‘I need you to
override, and then rewrite code for, the security system
of the host station and the reactor in space. Can you do
that?’
Floyd’s eyes boggled at the task. ‘What kind of a
time frame do I have?’
‘Yesterday would be nice, but as soon as immortally
possible will do.’ Maelgwn gave the hacker a friendly
slap on the shoulder, knowing he was asking the
impossible of Floyd, but then, where this man was

concerned, he was used to getting exactly that in the
end.
‘Gotcha,’ Floyd replied, scratching his head as he
considered what he’d need.
‘Cadwallon.’ Maelgwn motioned him closer. ‘It was
as Ray Murdock that you designed some of the systems
for the fusion reactor.’
‘Yes,’ Cadwallon replied, anticipating his question.
‘I still recall the layout of the Brunanburh and her
fusion reactor’s electronic monitoring system. What is it
you wish me to do?’
‘For the present, I just need you to go to the control
room, secure it and await further orders.’
Rhiannon stepped forward to accompany
Cadwallon. ‘Well, as no-one knows that Doc has tried
to knock me off, I guess I still have the authority to give
orders up there if you have no other mission for me?’
‘Good.’ Maelgwn gave her the nod. ‘You can also
act as a messenger. At the first sign of trouble, report
back here.’ Rhiannon understood his meaning. She was
not to wait for Cadwallon in such an event.
‘Neraida.’ Maelgwn turned to her at the last. ‘Take
Tom, Hero, Ethan and Talynn and rally as many of
the clans as you can to go to the landing platform in
the Middle East. Cadwaladr has released all those
under the influence of the NERGUZ, so we need the
numbers to replace them. Keep an eye on Boadicea
and the others, and do not attack unless Cadwaladr or
myself order you to do so. You are supposed to be
under his influence, so do not blow his cover
unnecessarily.’

‘I understand,’ Neraida advised. ‘But are you sure we
can trust him?’
‘If there is one thing I know about Cadwaladr, it’s
that he gives his complete devotion to whatever cause
he is fighting for. Now that his gripe is with Shamash,
he shall not betray his allies.’
Neraida nodded to confirm she would respect his
judgement.
‘The object of this mission is to defend,’ Maelgwn
raised his voice for all to hear, ‘but mainly to stall.
Narnar and Ningal of the Nefilim are rallying the
Pantheon of Twelve to apprehend Shamash. We need
only keep him occupied until his peers arrive.’
The whole room gave a cheer at this, as salvation
was in sight.
‘I want one person from each mission’s team to
check in here at hourly intervals. Should anyone fail to
make this contact, we shall assume the worst and plan
accordingly. The rest of you are to stay here and keep
the lines of communication flowing. Tory and I are off
to take Dumuzi to Inanna to sway her to our cause. Any
questions?’
‘Ah, just one.’ Patrick pointed to a bright ball of
glowing blue light that was heading toward the large
observation porthole of their submersible’s control deck.
‘What is that?’
The ball passed straight through the glass, homing
in on Tory and disappearing into her forehead. When
she had absorbed the message, she opened her
eyes and looked at Brian. ‘It’s Dad, Brian. He wants to
see us.’

‘Now!’ He snarled, exasperated. He was preparing to
leave for Farwell.
Tory nodded, looking at Maelgwn to seek his leave.
Maelgwn sighed heavily. ‘If Myrddin is asking to see
you both, it must be important. You go. I shall take
Dumuzi to Inanna. Brian, you can rejoin the others at
Farwell when you’re through.’
‘Oh shit!’ Brian threw his backpack on the ground,
annoyed.
Tory took hold of Maelgwn’s hand, knowing how he
feared confronting his torturer again. ‘Please, wait for
me. I want to come with you.’
He raised his brow, wishing it could be so.
‘Circumstance decrees I must face her alone, so let’s not
argue.’
‘He shall not be alone.’ Dumuzi came forward to
hasten the proceedings. ‘I shall be with him. And as he
is my saviour, I can assure you, Nin, he shall not be
harmed.’ The God kissed Tory’s hand, and then turned
abruptly to Maelgwn. ‘Can we go now?’
‘In a minute.’ Tory urged Dumuzi aside. She wanted
to kiss her husband.
‘Well, you don’t have to rub salt into the wounds.’
Dumuzi folded his arms, impatiently gazing upon the
lovers’ rapture.
‘Come on.’ Brian held out his hand to urge Tory
along. ‘There’s a mission at hand. Let’s not miss the
whole thing.’
‘I’ll join you as soon as I can,’ Tory vowed as she
parted from Maelgwn.
Brian gripped his sister’s hand and they were gone.

When the ethers of their flight dispersed, Tory and
Brian found themselves high on a hill overlooking a
parched, abandoned countryside.
Tory didn’t recognise the landscape at first. It was
reminiscent of the Australian outback, though not as
red in colour. When Tory turned to confront the
Glastonbury Tor, she realised exactly where they were.
‘Oh dear Goddess! This is Britain?’
‘Looks like the solar radiation has hit here hard.’
Brian shook his head in despair, before the thought of
his mission urged him to wonder: ‘So, where the hell is
our father?’
Tory shrugged as she wandered over to the ruins of
the tower to have a look there. ‘You willed us to him, I
gather?’
‘Of course.’ Brian followed her inside, and was
disappointed to find the place abandoned. ‘Has he no
idea what’s going on in the world? I mean, if Dad must
pull us out of the battle of the millennium to have a
family chat, you think he’d do us the common courtesy
of at least being here.’
Tory, not as impatient as her brother, could sense
her father’s presence. When she also sensed her mother,
it took her by surprise and she gasped.
‘Have you got something?’ Brian approached her.
She turned to face the entrance, her violet eyes wide
with wonder.
‘Something is happening,’ she replied, eyeing the
inner walls of the tower.
Brian followed her line of sight to discover bizarre
shadows running round the inner stonework. The

reflected images took a semi-human form and the sound
of childlike laughter accompanied their frenzied
movements. Through the great archway that led outside
a body of mist was seen to enter, yet the day had been
fine and clear only moments before. ‘This is no time for
Otherworldly archaeology, Tory?’
‘This is not my doing.’ She spied a familiar figure
emerging from the mist and moved toward it. ‘Mother?’
Tory stopped short, realising she was addressing nothing
more than a ghost.
The last time Brian had seen his mother was at her
funeral, so he found her manifestation a little offputting.
Helen Alexander had died in the Heathrow plane
disaster of 2007, along with the rest of the orchestra she
had been on tour with at the time. Brian hadn’t shed
many tears at the funeral. His mother had become a
stranger to him when she divorced their father to marry
a younger man. Not that they had been especially close
before his parents separated; Helen was a harpist and
was always on tour with one orchestra or another.
Oh Brian, his mother entreated him. That was
several lifetimes ago for me, and I believe I paid dearly for
my mistakes. Life without your father took a distinctly
downward spiral.
‘But what has happened to you?’ Tory referred to her
mother’s lack of physical form. ‘I was under the
impression you were one of the Chosen, and therefore
immortal.’
I am, child, and have been for a long, long time. She
smiled. So long, in fact, that it is time for me to move on in

my journey. The molecules of my body have risen to a faster
vibratory rate to attune to a higher plane of awareness. My
physical body has given way to an etheric one and soon I will
vanish from this earthly existence altogether.
‘After you and father merge back into one being,
and ascend, as it were?’ Tory couldn’t help but be upset
that she was about to lose her parents to totality.
You are not losing us, Tory, we are simply assuming a
different form, a higher function, that is all. She looked to
Brian, who didn’t seem to know what to make of their
dialogue.
In truth, Brian hardly recognised his mother with
her long, flaming-red hair and a figure that rivalled his
sister’s. She was not a warrior like Tory; she appeared to
be more like a Celtic princess.
She was amused by his assessment. That is not so far
from the truth, you know. I am known by the name of
Vivian these days. She encouraged Brian to approach.
Please, let me look at you both. It has been forever since I
have seen you.
Brian did as she bid, but only to bombard her with
questions. ‘Where are we? Where is Dad? I am supposed
to be on a mission in New Mexico right now, and —’
Yes, Brian, we know all about it, she assured him. You
shall find your father yonder, discussing exactly that with
Taliesin. She calmly motioned to the arched exit, out in
the mist.
‘Thank you.’ Brian was mildly appeased. ‘And may I
say that besides being see-through, you are looking
mighty fine, mother.’ He gave her a wink as he headed
off to find his father.

‘Taliesin is here, too?’
Vivian raised her brow and nodded to give Tory
leave to follow her brother outside.
‘Now this is more like it,’ Brian announced,
whipping an apple from a nearby tree and shining it on
his shirt as he admired the view.
Mists drifted over a lush, green landscape, littered
with abundant orchards, gardens, forests and rolling
green fields.
‘No.’ Tory snatched the apple from him before he bit
into it. ‘You’ll get trapped here. Don’t drink anything,
either.’
A whistle drew their attention to Myrddin,
who beckoned them to join him on the nearby
hillside.
Taliesin was with him, and standing between the
two High Merlins was a beautiful lady, whom Tory
assumed was Seshut — scribe to the Lord Marduk. As
she drew near, Tory recognised Seshut as the Azorean
beauty Teo had married. Of course! She should have
guessed Taliesin’s perfect other half would be this
woman. After all, Teo had also wed the same girl back
in his days as an Atlantean prince.
‘Well, now I’ve seen everything,’ Tory announced as
she came to stand before the three etheric beings, and
though she tried to hide her fear of loss the tears welled
all the same.
You know why we have summoned you? Taliesin asked
her.
‘Yes.’ Tory bit her lip to stop it quivering. ‘You’re
leaving us to it.’

Now please don’t be like that. Taliesin felt her sorrow.
You have known ever since you joined the ranks of the
Chosen that this event was forthcoming. Your training is
complete, Tory. It is time for me to hand over the
guardianship of mankind’s destiny, just as Keridwen handed
it to me all those eons ago.
‘I beg your pardon?’ Tory backed up a few steps. ‘I
just thought you wanted to say goodbye.’
Well, that too, Taliesin conceded fondly. But first, I
have a graduation present for you. Hold out your hand.
‘We really don’t have time for this,’ Brian said
impatiently.
Hush, lad, Myrddin scolded. This is very important.
Just bear witness. That’s what you’re here for.
Overwhelmed, though curious, Tory did as
requested. An orichalchum pendant on a long,
matching band materialised in her palm. It featured a
ball that connected to a small three-sided pyramid, the
pinnacle of which pointed down. ‘It is beautiful.’ She
placed the chain over her head and admired the
Egyptian hieroglyph depicted on each side of the object.
Beautiful! Taliesin scoffed at her understatement.
This is the Tablet of Destinies, the most powerful tool of
divination in the known universe. It was given to me by
Keridwen to guide my way and now it shall guide yours.
That is her wish.
Tory had read of the Tablet of Destinies when
searching through ancient Egyptian texts for
information about her grandfather. ‘But the Egyptians
claimed that the crone gave this pendant into the
keeping of Thoth.’

Yes, that was the name I was known by at that time, he
announced casually, though Tory was bowled over by
his statement.
‘I really don’t think I can accept this. What if I lose
it, or it is stolen? I can’t be responsible —’ Taliesin just
shook his head calmly, so Tory didn’t bother finishing
her protest.
Brian. Would you try and snatch the item in question
from your sister.
‘Sure.’ He reached for it, but his fingers passed right
through the metal. ‘Huh?’
It is attuned to Tory’s personal sonic. No one else can
touch it, or read it, including myself.’
‘So, how do I make it work?’
The pyramid is magnetised, so it easily detaches from its
setting. Taliesin nodded for her to give it a try.
Sure enough, the tool came away from the chain.
Seeing the Eye of Ra on the base of the treasure, Tory
placed it against her third eye.
Excellent, her father stated proudly.
As the trinket began to glow and expand, Brian
became more interested. ‘Wicked. What is it doing?’
Suddenly, the pyramid leapt away from Tory’s
forehead and began unfolding before her eyes to form a
flat triangle containing four smaller triangles therein. In
all four fragments of the tablet Tory saw a different
image. ‘Awesome, what does it all mean?’
In the centre you see your concern, the Merlin
advised.
The picture Tory saw in this portion was that of
planet Earth. ‘Okay, that makes sense.’

‘What does?’ Brian gazed at the huge triangle that
hovered before his sister like a monitor, yet that was all
he saw.
Bottom left, Taliesin continued, you shall find the bestcase scenario of your intent.
Tory saw a beautiful civilisation like Atlantis.
‘Could such a heavenly place still exist in the Middle
Kingdoms of this day and age?’
The Tablet never lies, the Merlin told her. Now look
to the bottom right, to see the worst that could result from
your present intent.
Tory frowned at what she perceived. ‘Now it has lost
me I’m afraid.’
‘Why?’ Brian was dying to know what she saw that
he could not.
‘It’s nothing.’ She shrugged. ‘There’s nothing there.
Just empty space — as in the cosmos.’
Top segment, you shall find the result should no action
be taken. Taliesin raised a brow, eager to hear her
impression.
Tory gazed at the segment a moment, at first
perplexed and then terrified. ‘No,’ she cried, backing
into Brian in her attempt to draw away from the tablet.
‘Jesus, Tory, what is it?’
She gripped hold of Brian, trying to recover from
the shock of what she’d learnt. ‘Shamash means to
destroy us all.’

29
THE GREAT
CRACKER

T

he Brunanburh Space Station had a crew of
twelve, who were into the second month of a
six-month tour. These six men and six women
had been working overtime since the arrival of the alien
craft. They had continued transmitting updated
pictures, and details of the vessel’s movements, even
after they had lost all their audio feeds to mission
control at Farwell.
When Cadwallon and Rhiannon arrived in the
control room, there were only two crew members
present, and both were so absorbed in their work they
didn’t see their visitors materialise. Cadwallon
recognised one of the men as Commander Philip

Merchant, who had headed Ray Murdock’s tour in the
Brunanburh. ‘Merchant, you old space junkie. Don’t
you have a home?’
Both men dropped everything when they saw the
outsiders. Nobody should be able to get in or out of the
space station without them knowing about it. If some of
their systems hadn’t been down, they would have been
forced to assume it was an act of God.
‘Ray Murdock. Am I ever glad to see you.’ The
commander drifted over to shake Ray’s hand. ‘How the
hell did you get here, son?’
‘Classified,’ Rhiannon announced.
The commander suddenly saw who Ray’s
companion was, and became more formal. ‘Mrs
Alexander! I am sorry. I barely recognised you.’
‘No need to apologise, Commander,’ Rhiannon
assured him, launching herself through zero gravity in
the direction of the control deck. Here she could view
the monitor that displayed pictures of the huge vessel
outside, as seen through the lenses of exterior cameras.
‘My husband has instructed that we sit this one out with
you. Will this inconvenience your routine in any way?’
‘There’s nothing routine about this tour lately. The
more the merrier,’ the Commander replied without
reservation. ‘I don’t suppose you know what has
happened to our audio-visual feeds? Are any of our
pictures getting through?’
‘They are reading you clear as a bell down there,’
Cadwallon advised, having seen the pictures himself.
‘The problem must be at this end … I’ll take a look at it
for you.’

Philip smiled, weary-eyed from no sleep. ‘Christ it’s
good to see you, Ray.’ He’d never known anyone with as
much technological expertise as Ray Murdock, and
during an event of this magnitude it was comforting to
know that the man who had designed many of the space
station’s systems was along for the ride. ‘Come on, I’ll
get us some coffee. And when I say coffee, I mean it in
the broadest possible sense, you understand.’
‘Fear not, I’ve suffered worse.’ Cadwallon motioned
him to lead the way.
Cadwaladr could almost hear all the phones ringing
back at the ICA. The Agency had taken over the
investigation into all the strange space phenomena that
had been taking place in recent weeks. The vortex had
proven harmless and a source of much astrological
excitement. Not a trace of debris had been found from
all the fiery lights that had plummeted to earth. There
had been a few isolated reports of visitors from outer
space and their vanishing craft, but these had been
easily dismissed and the whole incident written off as a
freak space anomaly.
These two huge alien craft were not going to be so
easy to explain, however. Shamash had said he would be
discreet about his arrival, but maybe the sight of the
vortex had led him to assume this was no longer
necessary. Or perhaps the God had entirely different
reasons for making his presence known.
From the ground, the shape of the vessel could only
be defined by the bright, billowing clouds encasing its
bulk as it ploughed down through the atmosphere.

Cadwaladr’s team had so far been unable to power
up the control room of the complex they’d unearthed in
the Middle East, yet suddenly, the whole structure was
fully operational.
The pairs of towers that lined each side of the long
runway lit up, shooting several bands of green laser light
between them to form a series of nets.
The entire site must be activated by the approaching
craft, Cadwaladr concluded on the quiet, gazing at the
light show that stretched out before him for miles. But
the multitude of warriors who formed neat lines on the
landing pad diverted the diplomat’s attention. Doc
presumed them to be the stand-in army Maelgwn had
promised. They were all wearing Unken attire and
NERGUZ modules, though they were not the same
fighters Doc had recently freed. Who are all these people?
I had no idea Maelgwn still had so much influence here on
Earth.
‘They are your kindred … and just like you, they are
Chosen.’ Vanora enlightened him, obviously following
his every thought.
‘Damn it!’ Cadwaladr turned to her. ‘How am I too
hide my intentions from Shamash if I can’t even shield
my thoughts from you?’
‘Just concentrate on your original plan, and all shall
be well.’ Vanora told him. ‘The four of us surrounding
you will act as an additional psychic field. You have
nothing to worry about.’
Temujin stared at the awe-inspiring spectacle taking
place around him. How much the world had changed in
his absence. He moved away from Cadwaladr, so that he

did not seem to be a bodyguard. Back in the days when
he had ruled most of the known world Cadwaladr had
watched his back. Now Temujin felt it was his place to
return the favour.
The cloud cover began to disperse from the narrow
length of the vessel approaching the illuminated runway
ploughing through the first rows of the glowing green
web. Each laser barrier the vessel encountered slowed it
down until it hovered to a graceful stop in front of the
main complex where Cadwaladr and his army awaited.
Hidden in the midst of the hundreds of troops,
Maelgwn’s additional force assessed the situation.
‘That is not a transport, it’s an entire city,’ Neraida
uttered as she witnessed Shamash’s legions being
beamed forth from the belly of the obstruction. His
warriors were a wild array of differing human breeds,
and they appeared to be armed to the hilt.
Talynn was closely scrutinising the weaponry they
carried. The troops were not armed with sonic pulse
blasters like the ones she and her friends carried. These
guns were unlike anything she’d ever seen. ‘What do
you think they are?’ Hero whispered to her. ‘Some sort
of molecule converter?’
Talynn folded her arms, concerned. ‘Whatever their
function, they are illegal issue. Shamash couldn’t have
cleared the design with the Pantheon — or I would
know about it.’
Since being plucked out of ancient Gaul by the
Nefilim, Talynn had carved herself an illustrious career
as an industrial spy for Marduk. There wasn’t much in

the way of technological research and development that
she wasn’t aware of.
‘Get close to Cadwaladr,’ Talynn advised the others
in her party. ‘Shamash is sure to move inside before
getting down to business, and we must keep Vanora and
the others covered.’
Ethan grabbed hold of Talynn’s arm as she moved to
sneak off. ‘Where are you going?’
‘To see if I can’t get my hands on one of those
weapons.’
‘Lead the way then.’ Ethan let her go.
She rolled her eyes, not wanting to argue or
otherwise draw undue attention to them. ‘No. I work
better alone.’
‘Really.’ This was news to Ethan. ‘I seem to recall we
were a team once, a great team.’
‘Not now, children.’ Neraida urged them along. ‘Just
do it and meet us inside.’
Neraida kept low and headed off towards the
complex, Hero and Thais hot on her heels.
Inanna had no desire to accompany the landing party
her brother sent to deal with the abominations of this
planet. She wasn’t in the mood for retribution,
possessed as she was by a deep melancholy. She
wondered why she’d allowed Shamash to persuade her
into returning to this godforsaken place, as she observed
the planet through the large windows of her chamber. A
paradise lost, she mused. The greatest and only
happiness she’d ever known had been here. But Gaia
had also been the stage on which her lover’s undoing

had unfolded. I searched for you, Dumuzi, and although I
never found you, I avenged your unfair sentence … I am
still avenging it.
You have been seriously mislead, I fear, Dumuzi
replied.
His words struck the fear of the Goddess into
Inanna’s heart. She turned, unable to believe it was her
lover — even when she saw him with her own two eyes.
What trickery is this, Dragon. She spotted Maelgwn
beside the illusion of her husband, and her vindictive
mood was rekindled. Come to seek your revenge, have
you?
At her words, Dumuzi’s playful, lighthearted
demeanour departed, for he saw how his wife had
tormented his saviour. Maelgwn had done well to keep
his torture a secret. Dumuzi turned and bowed to him to
thank him for his discretion. You are an honourable man,
Dragon. I feel my wife does not deserve the respect you
award her.
Then the God turned his woeful face to Inanna.
She humbled herself as she realised this was no
deception; her own spiteful thoughts had just
condemned her in her lover’s eyes.
I can hardly believe how wretched time has made you,
Inanna. Marduk warned me of how easily you could be so
inclined.
Inanna drew herself up into a righteous stance.
Marduk drove me to this madness. He was against our
union from the very beginning —
My brother may have arrested and punished me for my
offence, Dumuzi spoke up. But it was not he who

dismembered my body and set it in stone to rot for all
eternity. It was Shamash.
The claim was earth-shattering for Inanna.
Shamash was her twin, her brother, her closest
confidant. He could never have sustained such a lie all this
time … not with me!
‘Both your parents are willing to testify to the
contrary,’ Maelgwn told her. ‘I am sorry, Nin, but it is
the truth.’
As the implications of this revelation rebounded
through time in her memory, remorse flooded in and
she had to be seated. Oh, dear Goddess, what have I
done? A multitude of emotions matted themselves
around and into her heart, expanding and exploding.
There is so much to amend. I do not know where to start.
‘In the name of Marduk, I am at your disposal,
Inanna,’ Maelgwn advised. ‘My lord understands that
you have been as much a victim in this affair as he.’
Although Maelgwn spoke for his lord, Inanna knew
that deep down these sentiments were more his own.
She looked at him unable to comprehend how after all
she had put him through he could stand there before
her willing to help her out of the hole she had dug for
herself. You make it painfully clear, Maelgwn of Gwynedd,
who the superior race really is.
‘Superiority is an ego-based delusion,’ Maelgwn
advised her. ‘Love, however, is a life-giving force. You
were a Goddess of Love once, Inanna. You have just
forgotten how.’
The Goddess was near to suffocating from suppressing
her emotions. She could not speak, she was so moved.

I have not forgotten. Dumuzi neared and knelt before
her, clutching Inanna’s hands in his own. We have both
been foolish, Inanna. … always wanting what we could not
have. But, during all that time without you, I realised that
all I ever really wanted was to make you happy.
And I, you, she wept openly. But I have done dreadful
things in your absence, shameful things that —
Shh, Dumuzi urged her, placing a finger to her lips.
There is nothing that has been done, that cannot be undone.
Help us bring my rightful assassin to justice and clear my
brother’s good name. In so doing we shall save the Dragon’s
kin and then maybe, just maybe, we shall find it within
ourselves to forgive each other and start over.
Yes. Inanna pledged herself to their cause. I’d like
that very much. She leaned forward to kiss Dumuzi, but
suddenly drew back. The Great Cracker, she gasped,
turning to Maelgwn. Shamash has developed a new
weapon that was specifically designed with the Chosen in
mind. Yet it could just as easily destroy my kind as yours.
‘What manner of weapon is it?’ Maelgwn inquired.
It is a double-action, hand-held weapon. Equipped with
heat-seeking pellets that will turn a living target to stone on
impact. This molecular blast is followed by a pulse laser bullet
that shatters one’s petrified victim into innumerable pieces.
The Cracker … I remember this, Dumuzi added.
Production of that weapon was banned by Enlil before the
plans ever made it off the drawing board.
Well, each member of my brother’s force is equipped
with this weapon, Inanna continued. But an even greater
threat is mounted inside the belly of the ship, for Shamash
had a much larger prototype made. The Great Cracker he

calls it, and it is very true to its name. I have seen its
destructive force demonstrated on a planet not much smaller
than this one … complete annihilation was the result.
‘Once the weapon has taken its ultimate toll, can
the process be reversed?’
The molecular process, yes, but once phase two has
been initiated, there is no reversing the outcome.
Maelgwn’s mind went into overtime. He had people
all over the place and he needed to warn them all.
Meanwhile, Inanna materialised several of the
weapons that had been dubbed ‘the Cracker’; half of
these she handed to Dumuzi and the rest to Maelgwn.
Calm yourself, Dragon, Inanna said, her tone stressing
the importance of the pending announcement. There is
one more thing you must know.
Rhun’s team had materialised inside the control room of
the main facility at Farwell to find one of Shamash’s
task forces waiting in ambush and were forced to fall
back to the outside of the complex. The majority of the
locals they’d recruited were turned to stone, along with
Season, Sybil and Floyd. A couple of the local Indian
lads had managed to grab Rhun and Candace and
transport them outside the site’s perimeters before they
got hit.
‘Jesus Christ, what the hell happened?’ Rhun
demanded an answer from Candace, insane with worry
for his lover and comrades.
‘I don’t know,’ she snapped back at him, still
recovering from the shock herself. ‘It is a new weapon.
I’ve never seen it before.’

‘Well, that’s just great!’
Brian arrived on the scene to see Rhun toss his
weapon on the ground in a fury. His eyes quickly darted
around and, spying Candace close by, Brian breathed a
sigh of relief. ‘Thank god you’re alright.’ He moved to
embrace her.
But Candace avoided his affection. She was still too
disturbed by what had happened. ‘Many of us are not.’
Her focus rested on Rhun, who was so caught up in
remorse he hadn’t even noticed Brian arrive. ‘What
have you learnt?’
It’s alright everybody, you can relax, I’m here, Dumuzi
announced, handing out the weapons in his possession.
Rhun came bounding over to grab one and
inspected it. ‘Where did you get these?’
Compliments of your father, he advised. Now, listen
carefully.
Dumuzi demonstrated how to activate the weapon
while explaining how and what it fired. Rhun and the
others listened impatiently to the information Dumuzi
had acquired from his wife. They were eager to get back
inside the complex before Shamash’s force decided to
finish off their team mates, shut off the power to the
grid, or start blowing up energy plants at random.
Are we clear? Dumuzi finished, and everyone nodded
in accord. Then what do you say we secure this facility?
They all activated their weapons and vanished.
Maelgwn arrived at the landing strip in the Middle East
to find the battle over. The entrance to the underground
complex was sealed and the spaceship hovered silently in

its dock, not a guard to be seen. The army Neraida had
rallied had become one with the landscape, the figures of
petrified rock were scattered all over the runway and
beyond. Maelgwn wondered at Shamash’s restraint, for
none of the victims had been finished off. Perhaps the
God planned to collect them all like trophies when he
was done. Or he might have spared them to use as
bargaining power, should it come to that. Whatever his
reasons, Shamash obviously hadn’t planned on his foe
getting their hands on his new power tool.
‘Dear Goddess!’
Maelgwn looked across to find Tory grief stricken
staring at the scene before her.
‘I am too late,’ she uttered.
‘Though it would seem so, that is fortunately not
the case.’
Tory was startled when Maelgwn spoke. ‘Oh, thank
God.’ She flung her arms about his neck. ‘I thought one
of these statues was you.’
‘I’m fine,’ he assured her with a kiss and a pat on the
back. ‘Here …’ Maelgwn placed a Cracker in her hands.
His eyes became fixed on something yonder. ‘I do
believe I recognise that hunk of rock.’
Ethan and Talynn had been frozen together in an
embrace, like a beautiful piece of sculpture. Maelgwn
set his weapon into reverse and the burst it fired
evaporated the stone. The couple fell to the ground
shivering with cold and shock.
It took Ethan and Talynn a little while to recover
their sensibilities, and Maelgwn started wondering if he
and Tory should perhaps proceed without them.

‘I’m okay,’ Ethan assured him, having given his head
a good shake, ‘I’m only seeing double now.’
‘Good man.’ Maelgwn tossed him one of the
weapons that had put him under. ‘Now, you said you
knew the inside of this base fairly well?’
Ethan nodded, torn between answering the question
and checking out the weapon.
‘I need a quiet area,’ Maelgwn advised, ‘where we
won’t be spotted on arrival. Preferably, this area should
be situated not too far from the main chamber.’
‘Yes.’ Ethan finally snapped back to reality. ‘There
are a couple of antechambers that lead off the end of
the main chamber to its mezzanine level. They offer
partial seclusion.’
‘Perfect,’ Maelgwn decreed. ‘Guide us there.’
Shamash stood in front of the monitors and controls
that gave command of the entire fusion grid, limbering
up his fingers to begin his reign of destruction.
Like his father and his grandfather before him,
Shamash hated Homo sapiens, mortal or otherwise.
Some of the human breeds he could abide, as they made
obedient labourers or slaves or fighters. But Homo
sapiens had never been very good in a subordinate role.
The Nefilim had tried to wipe the rebellious breed from
existence many times in the past, but the Serpent and
his clan always managed to save a few. And Homo
sapiens had, unfortunately, always proved to be reliable
breeders. Their numbers had increased to outrageous
proportions. Their technology, although primitive, was
developing in leaps and bounds, and now that Marduk

had started blasting wormholes between galaxies,
humans were sure to start spreading themselves
throughout the known universe. Shamash thought it
better to be rid of them now, while they were still
confined to this little, out-of-the-way solar system. His
new weapon would see to their total annihilation fairly
efficiently, but there was no fun to be had in destroying
them all in the blink of an eye.
He would start with the seven main power stations,
then move on to the sub-stations. Once all the power
feeds were destroyed the Biodomes that were the last
havens for the mortal beings of this planet would
become giant tombs. Without power the air filtration
system failed, and so did the exit doors and transport
system. This would surely throw the creatures into a
frenzied panic. They would kill and maim each other in
an attempt to escape their fate, and such mayhem
promised to be a good evening’s entertainment.
Africa sounds like a good place to start. Marduk always
liked it there. Shamash looked to the keypad, and it
automatically began typing his instructions into the
computer. Thanks to Cadwaladr, he knew the entire
security system inside and out. He was about halfway
through the initiation process when a great chill spread
over him. It started at his legs and crept toward his
thighs and torso.
Long time no see, Dumuzi said to his victim, who
turned to face him. Shamash’s movement was confined
by the stone possessing his body. Dumuzi waited for the
pellet to complete the transformation to solid rock
before blasting his target away completely.

‘Holy smoke!’ Rhun came racing in from the
corridor, where he and the others had finished
incapacitating the rest of the enemy task force. He
fanned the flying soot away from himself to observe the
pile of rubble left behind in the star warrior’s wake.
‘How are we going to bring Shamash to trial now?’
That was not Shamash, Dumuzi informed him. That
was a clone.
‘I beg yours?’
Shamash has made two clones of himself, and
because they have no soul, he is free to occupy any one
of them at will. Both are completely like-minded and
know all that he knows. They think as he thinks. We
shall have to destroy the other clone to trap Shamash
and bring him to trial. Your father has gone after the
second clone in the Middle East, and Inanna has gone
after the original. A NERGUZ module will keep him
out of trouble until the rest of the Pantheon arrive.
‘Well, in that case, that’s one down, two to go,’
Rhun announced cheerfully, brushing the dust off the
controller’s chair. ‘We’d best get Floyd onto changing
the security programs before Shamash attempts to
assume control of the grid again.’ Rhun gave a loud
whistle to call for order and get them organised.
The mezzanine level of the main chamber was, like the
rest of the ancient landing complex, lit up like a
Christmas tree. Obviously Shamash still had no idea
that there were Earthlings roaming free with full recall
of the layout of his base, for guards had yet to be posted
on the upper level.

Upon materialising in the stairwell, Maelgwn, Tory,
Ethan and Talynn were surprised to find Temujin
observing the scene unfolding in the chamber below.
On recognising an ally Maelgwn lowered his
weapon, motioning for the others to do likewise. Once
they had relaxed, Temujin did likewise, nodding to let
them know he was pleased to have aid.
They could not see Shamash. From this position
Cadwaladr had centre stage.
Ethan nearly had a fit when he spied his mother and
the others encased in stone, but Talynn managed to
smother his protest before he voiced it. ‘Cadwaladr has
betrayed us,’ he whispered as Talynn set him free.
‘Shh,’ Maelgwn and Temujin cautioned as one.
They wanted to hear what was transpiring between the
diplomat and the God.
So, concluded Shamash, are you still of the mind to
aid the Serpent’s clan? Think carefully now. The God
nodded to the guard alongside him.
The centaur raised his weapon, and picking one of
the stone figures at random he blasted it to dust. The
unfortunate victim was Stanley Brennon. The assassin
could not have made a more vexing choice where
Cadwaladr was concerned.
This situation unfolding below was most confusing.
How, with so many of the Serpent’s clan to aid
Cadwaladr’s psychic defenses had Shamash managed to
perceive his intent? Or was Cadwaladr so accomplished
at thought control that he had managed to deceive
Maelgwn to betray the Serpent’s clan voluntarily?
Either way, there were several dozen troops surrounding

Doc and his frozen security team, Maelgwn didn’t like
their chances of taking out Shamash’s soldiers without
risk of their own team being finished off in the process.
‘We need a distraction.’ Maelgwn looked to find
Temujin had already disappeared.
‘I have some explosives that might do the trick.’
Talynn took Ethan’s hand. ‘We’ll be right back,’ she
assured as they both vanished.
When Cadwaladr turned back to confront Shamash,
the wrath of God was in his eyes. ‘You have made my
life a misery, Utu. Before I was even born you had seen
to it that I would be an outcast.’
Is that what they told you?
‘That is what I know!’ Cadwaladr roared over
Shamash’s mocking laughter. ‘I’ve dedicated eleven
hundred years of my life to avenging a lie!’
‘Not yet, Cadwaladr. Hold off,’ mumbled Maelgwn.
‘Just a few more minutes and we’ll have our distraction.’
You made all your own choices, infidel, Shamash
reminded his accomplice. He glanced at the armed
centaur beside him who turned his weapon on
Cadwaladr.
‘Based on your deception.’ As Doc raised his finger
to point at the God, a Stormer slipped down his sleeve
into his hand. Ironically, Stanley had insisted Doc carry
the weapon as additional protection when confronting
Shamash this day. They’d never tested the Stormer’s kill
function on a living target before, though on inanimate
objects it had proven to have explosive potential.
But before Shamash’s guard or Cadwaladr could fire,
Temujin leap out of the rafters and knocked the centaur

out cold. In an amazing display of martial arts fighting
skill, the ancient warrior took out several of Shamash’s
guards before he was turned to stone and blasted to dust.
Talynn and Ethan surprised the guards that were posted
inside the locked entrance doors of Shamash’s
unearthed base.
‘Good work, you’re a crack shot,’ Talynn
commented to Ethan, as she bent down to transport two
of the unconscious guards to a safe distance.
‘You could have given me a little more warning.’
Ethan grabbed hold of the remaining two guards by the
feet, and willed himself after Talynn.
They returned to the locked entrance doors, where
Talynn detached a small metallic ball from her belt and
began frantically unscrewing the top half of it.
‘Get back to Maelgwn, and I’ll finish here,’ Talynn
instructed as the top of the metallic ball in her hand
came away to expose the tiny detonator. Talynn glanced
up to find Ethan still observing her, and so stressed the
urgency. ‘Go man go, you’ve got five seconds.’ Once the
device was activated, the explosive casing was
magnetised. Talynn simply attached it to the metal wall
and willed herself after Ethan. ‘Four, three, two …’
‘Damn you to hell, Shamash!’ cried Cadwaladr, and at
his silent command, a laser bullet shot forth into the
God’s body and exploded his form into a million
flaming pieces.
‘Oh shit.’ Tory jumped into action, racing out along
the mezzanine level blasting every warrior in sight.

Maelgwn joined her, and in the confusion Cadwaladr
managed to slide for cover behind a huge marble
support arch. He set the Stormer back to stun and
began blasting away at the guards.
Shamash’s forces were thrown into further confusion
when an explosion was heard elsewhere on the base.
Many of the troopers fled the chamber in fear of their
lives. Between Cadwaladr’s ground assault and Maelgwn’s
and Tory’s overhead advantage, they managed to take out
the few die-hard guards who remained.
‘Nice work.’ Maelgwn congratulated his great-greatgreat-grandson on his marksmanship, after he and Tory
leapt down to ground level.
‘I thought you weren’t going to make it,’ Cadwaladr
replied, unable to prevent his mouth curving into a
smile — the legend lived up to his reputation, after all.
‘Oh, we’re full of surprises.’ Tory turned and blasted
Vanora back into a human state.
As Cadwaladr was unaware of the Cracker’s reverse
function, his spirits suddenly soared. He had not failed
his new allies after all. ‘I am fast learning to love this
family,’ he commented to Tory as he knelt beside
Vanora to aid her return to the land of the living. ‘But
what of Stanley and Temujin?’
‘I am sorry, Cadwaladr,’ Tory placed a hand on his
shoulder, ‘but their fate cannot be reversed.’
The huge figure of a man hung his head a moment
to mourn the death of his two dearest friends. ‘Well, at
least Shamash has paid for their loss. My apologies for
the mess.’ Cadwaladr raised his eyes to speak with
Maelgwn, swallowing back his emotions. ‘I know you

wanted to bring Shamash to trial … but I had no idea if
you knew what we were up against. I thought it best not
to run the risk of him escaping.’
‘Well, you have narrowed his chances considerably,’
Maelgwn said, in all seriousness.
Cadwaladr thought him joking until informed that
he had destroyed a clone. ‘You are kidding me?’ He
simply refused to accept it.
‘I kid you not. If that had been the real Shamash he
would have reconstituted by this.’
Cadwaladr looked over the scattered remains,
realising Maelgwn was quite right. ‘So where is the
double-crossing maggot?’
‘Give the others a few moments to come round, and
I’ll enlighten you,’ Maelgwn advised, while Tory went
about restoring the rest of their team.
Shamash had a master control room overlooking
the main bridge of his spacecraft, situated out beyond
the Earth’s atmosphere. It was here, where he was seated
comfortably in his large, hovering seat amid his controls
and communicators that Inanna sought him.
The lighting in the chamber was dim, but by all
appearances her brother was alone in the large control
room. She drifted over to Shamash, waving around a
NERGUZ band that she toyed with in her fingers.
Shamash, my darling heart. I’ve been thinking about
these NERGUZ modules. She slid up close to him on his
righthand side. And I’ve had a revelation.
Save it, he advised her. I am a little preoccupied at
present.

So I see. Inanna smiled when her brother’s attention
did not waver from the monitors inside his headset.
Slowly she slid the hand holding the module along
Shamash’s arm towards his hand. This cannot wait. She
locked the module round his wrist and activated it with
a word. Now, brother dear, you will answer to me for your
treachery. She withdrew from him, hitting the plate that
retracted his headset. Did you dismember Dumuzi?
Yes. Shamash emerged from the shadows at the back
of the chamber, holding a cracker in his hands. I hated
sharing you with him then, and I will not share you with him
now!
As he advanced towards her, Inanna backed up.
There must have been three clones, she concluded,
realising her brother now held the upper hand.
I know Dumuzi has pulled himself together, Shamash
told her. He destroyed one of my clones with my own
weapon! He waved the Cracker about. How did he get
hold of the Cracker, Inanna?
Dumuzi lives? she gasped, attempting to fake her way
out.
Whore! he cried, whacking her across the jaw with
the butt of the weapon. How much have you told them?
Inanna turned and spat the blood that filled her
mouth into her brother’s face. Take me apart piece by
piece. I still won’t tell you. She grabbed for his weapon as
he attempted to wipe the blood from his eyes. In the
ensuing scuffle, it fired, and Inanna froze.
The Brunanburh had re-established verbal contact with
Mission Control at Farwell, and Cadwallon was overseeing

Floyd as he altered the security codes for the station.
Cadwallon was on his third container of coffee that he
didn’t really want to drink. He was amusing himself by
allowing droplets to escape from the straw and then
catching them in his mouth once they’d risen to the right
height. He did this without really being aware that he was.
Commander Merchant chanced to look across and
catch what he was doing. ‘Murdock, I’ve told you a
million times — don’t do that. If any of that liquid gets
in the instrumentation we’ll be up shit creek.’
‘Sorry, boss.’ Cadwallon smiled when he recalled
this had been one of Ray’s common practises. ‘I guess
old habits die hard.’
‘Greetings, Godbusters. It is I, Cadwaladr, with a
handy, helpful mission update.’
‘Mr Alexander,’ Commander Merchant jumped
to attention, again wondering at the completely
unannounced arrival.
‘You no good son-of-a-bitch,’ Rhiannon sprang from
her seat and launched herself at him. ‘You left me to rot in
that hole, you arsehole!’ Rhiannon made it look like she
was going to kick him, but she punched Cadwaladr in the
nose instead. Zero gravity lessened the impact of the blow,
though she still managed to break his nose, momentarily.
‘No!’ cried Merchant. ‘don’t let any of the blood
escape.’
‘Good idea,’ Rhiannon realised, grabbing hold of
her husband’s nose and squeezing it tightly. ‘Let’s
suffocate him.’
‘Hi, honey,’ he humoured her, figuring he did
deserve it. ‘Though I would dearly love for you to beat

me around like this for all eternity, I have a rather
urgent directive from your father.’
‘But her father is dead?’ commented Merchant,
stating a well-known fact.
Everybody looked to the Commander, speechless for
a second.
‘You really don’t want to go there, Commander,’
Cadwallon recommended.
‘Hello, father.’ Cadwaladr gave Cadwallon a nod as
he covered his healing nose with a handkerchief from
his pocket.
‘Hey?’ Merchant was wondering if everyone else had
gone nuts, or was it just him?
Cadwaladr, being in no way inclined to explain,
blasted the Commander with his Stormer. He then
turned and took out the other crew member working
quietly in the corner.
‘Jesus, Doc.’ Rhiannon hit him again. ‘The situation
is under control. They work for us, remember?’
‘Don’t make me knock you out, too,’ Cadwaladr
threatened.
‘Over my dead body,’ Cadwallon came forward to
make his presence felt. ‘What does Maelgwn want of us?’
‘We are to plot the coordinates of Shamash’s vessel,
and aim the fusion beam at her belly.’
‘To what end?’ Rhiannon was wary. It sounded like a
revenge scheme Cadwaladr would hatch himself.
‘That fusion bean is designed to hit conductor rods
that are vast distances away. At this close range, it could
do some serious damage to Shamash’s vessel.’ Cadwallon
stared at his son, accusingly.

‘I’m just telling you what Maelgwn told me. He said
that you,’ Cadwaladr referred to Cadwallon, ‘ought to be
able to do this, with some help from … Floyd?’ Cadwaladr
recalled the name, then shrugged to imply he didn’t know
if the message would mean anything to them.
Rhiannon moved to the headset to speak with the
said fellow. ‘Brunanburh to Mission Control. Have you
been advised of a new directive?’ She listened as Floyd
said that Boadicea had just arrived there with the same
instruction Cadwaladr had just given her. ‘Well then, I
guess we turn this baby around.’ Rhiannon held out the
headset to Cadwallon.
By the time Shamash gave the order to finish off the
army of immortal warriors that he had turned to stone
upon his arrival in the Middle East, Maelgwn’s people
had surrounded the transporter beam that operated from
the belly of the docked ship.
Maelgwn, Tory, Ethan, Talynn, Neraida, Hero,
Cadwell and Thais, turned several waves of Shamash’s
troops to stone before the invaders ceased their fruitless
attempts to retake the runway.
The rocket ship’s thrusters burst into life and the
runway lit up. As the huge vessel moved off, the small
rebel band gave a triumphant cheer.
‘Well, that was easy,’ Ethan commented to Maelgwn
as they began freeing their comrades from the stone
they were trapped by.
Maelgwn was still wary; ‘We’d best get these people
conscious and under cover in a hurry.’ He looked over
at the collapsed entrance to the landing base that

Talynn had demolished with an explosion. ‘We’d best
get Shamash’s men dug out of there. They are not
immortals, and will surely suffocate before too long.’
Ethan gave Maelgwn a wave to say he’d get right
on it.
‘Hey, Grandpa.’ Cadwell wandered over in a rather
concerned state. ‘It just occurred to me that they might
be of the mind to launch an aerial attack … it’s not like
Shamash to retreat that quickly.’
Maelgwn looked to the horizon to see the ship leave
the landing pad. ‘Indeed they might.’ His gut instinct
told him Cadwell was right. ‘I want everybody who has
a craft in the air now. Everyone else is to get to shelter.
Neraida …’ Maelgwn waved her over. ‘Get to your
communications room, and rally any of the Chosen who
have fighter aircraft. Tell them the war of the sovereign
is here and now.’
‘Maelgwn.’ Tory approached him cautiously,
knowing he was not going to like what she was about to
suggest. ‘If Shamash has just given the final attack
order, Inanna could not have gained control over him.’
What’s that you say? Dumuzi arrived just in time to
catch the end of the comment.
Tory put him off a second, staying focused on her
husband. ‘You must stay and fight. I, however, do not have
a craft, and I am not going to sit this out in a shelter.’
‘And you are not going after Shamash, Tory. Forget
it! If Inanna couldn’t subdue him —’
I shall go, Dumuzi cut in.
‘And I shall go with you.’ Tory took up his hand and
was gone before Maelgwn could argue.

‘No, stop —’ Maelgwn decided to save his breath,
though he had a sudden urge to hit something.
‘Commander,’ Vanora called to him as she climbed
into her craft. ‘The fight is up there, but if you don’t
move your arse it is going to be down here.’
It was not easy to put his fears aside, but what
choice did he have?
Once he had activated his craft, Maelgwn climbed
inside and took the pilot’s seat. As he breathed deeply
in an attempt to ease his worry, the voice of his old
mentor was heard to say:
Heed the call to battle, Dragon,
the time of the Gathering
is upon you.
Sons of Bedi arise, and reclaim
thy rightful inheritance.
The Chosen, by the power of air
will fulfil my age old vow …
I saw Maelgwn battling,
the host acclaimed him.
To him they gave their blessing,
to regain his Eden lost.
Maelgwn closed his eyes, comforted to know
Taliesin was still with them. Keep Tory safe, he
requested quietly, as he fired up his craft.
Haven’t I always, the Merlin replied.

30
RETURN TO EDEN

C

adwaladr, Cadwallon and Rhiannon watched in
horror as Shamash’s vessel lowered its primary
weapon.
‘He is going to use it. We have to destroy him now!’
Cadwaladr appealed, but Cadwallon refused.
‘Not until Maelgwn gives the word.’
‘And what if he’s tied up right now?’ Cadwaladr
persisted.
‘Cadwallon’s right,’ Rhiannon had her say. ‘We
don’t know who might be on Shamash’s craft.’
‘Oh, well there’s a surprise, you agreeing with him.’
Cadwaladr was enraged by their complicity.
Rhiannon rolled her eyes, and was about to get into
an argument, when she thought of a more constructive
form of criticism that might serve her better.

‘Cadwaladr, think. You’re the brilliant criminal mind.
There must be something else we can do?’
Cadwaladr took another look at the weapon. Now
that it was fully extended from the ship he noted the
single metal arm that secured it to the vessel.
‘We’ll just blast it off,’ he announced.
Cadwallon gave half a laugh at the suggestion.
‘That’s a damn small target. What if we miss?’
‘It’s no smaller than the host station conductor rods
on the moon and Earth that we align the beam to hit
every day.’ Rhiannon seconded the idea.
‘You’re both insane.’
‘Aw,’ Cadwaladr waved his father off, ‘you always
were a wimp. Come on.’ He motioned Rhiannon to
follow him. ‘We’ll use the targeter in the fusion station.’
‘Hey, I wasn’t the one who lost half of Britain.’
Cadwallon raised himself into the air to follow them to
the reactor control room.
‘No, you just conveniently died in the middle of a
war, and left me to deal with it.’
‘Truce,
guys!’
Rhiannon
urged
strongly.
‘Armageddon. Remember that?’ She propelled herself
along in front of them, motioning them after her.
Dumuzi and Tory found Inanna petrified in rock. Beside
her sat Shamash in a hovering, control chair. In one
hand he held a Cracker, which was aimed at his sister’s
frozen form. The God’s other hand rested comfortably
on a telekinetic control panel on the arm of his chair.
Lamamu, Shamash pronounced upon sighting her.
My sister’s earthly counterpart, who, like Inanna, is as

beautiful as she is dangerous. And my brother-outlaw. His
delight changed to boredom as he looked to Dumuzi.
Disappear, lover boy, or your wife is dust.
Dumuzi faltered, having made an unspoken promise
to Maelgwn to stay with Tory.
Do it now, Shamash ordered, digging the weapon’s
head into his sister’s belly.
Dumuzi turned to Tory, torn between loyalties.
‘Go,’ she bade him.
Forgive me. He faded from her sight.
‘So, I get to stay do I?’ Tory had her weapon aimed
at Shamash. If he decided to shoot her, he’d be stone
before he could finish her off.
I find a victory is not the same without some poor victim
to share it with.
‘Your morbid humour will be your undoing,
Shamash. Give me one good reason why I shouldn’t
turn you to stone right now?’
You are at an impasse, I’m afraid, he explained. Your
battle and your little planet are lost without me.
‘Yeah, that’s what you think.’ Tory made a habit of
never believing anything she was told. ‘Call off your
fighters, or you’re stoned.’
Make me, he dared her. But I must warn you … I
have set the Great Cracker on its own time schedule and it
will fire unless I override the order.
‘How much time do we have?’ Tory questioned
down the barrel of her weapon.
More than a second, less than a day. He smiled,
admiring her form. You know, some of you Earthlings
really aren’t that badly put together. If you are as smart as

you are valorous, I’m sure you could figure out a way to
extract from me the information you seek.
Tory smiled, though on the inside she was fuming.
‘We’ll figure it out without you,’ she assured him, taking
aim.
Now all you have to do is figure out how to shoot both of
us at once.
A chill crept over Tory, and she sensed a presence
behind her.
Dumuzi appeared in the co-pilot’s seat of Maelgwn’s
vessel. The sky was filled with fighter craft engaged in
battle, and although Dumuzi could see that the Dragon
had his hands full he also felt he had a right to know
what had happened.
Ah, Commander?
Maelgwn peeped beneath his headset only long
enough to make out who addressed him. ‘Dumuzi! What
are you doing here?’
Shamash persuaded me leave.
‘You left Tory alone with him?’ Maelgwn grabbed for
the God to extract an explanation.
I had no choice. He has turned Inanna to stone, and
was threatening to finish her. Watch out! Dumuzi warned
of an oncoming craft, which Maelgwn promptly
avoided. Drive, man, drive. That’s why you have controls.
‘Well, you’re disturbing me!’ Maelgwn endeavoured
to steer them away from the heavy fighting.
Hold on. Dumuzi noted another incoming wave of
craft. They are the fighter craft of Horus, Ningal and her
brother Nergal.

‘Nergal, the head of the Pantheon is here?’ Maelgwn
wanted to confirm this before he got too excited.
Yes, the markings are unmistakable. Dumuzi gave a
cheer, as the reinforcements began taking out
Shamash’s fighters.
‘And not before time.’ Maelgwn aligned his ship
with an oncoming enemy fighter. He retrieved his
Cracker and gripped Dumuzi’s wrist, willing them to
Tory.
You’re a maniac, Dragon! Dumuzi watched with
horror as the approaching fighter ploughed into the
ethers and vanished in a blaze of light.
It was not like Tory to give up without a fight. She
kicked out behind her, knocking Shamash’s weapon
from his hands, but he grabbed for her weapon. As she
struggled to keep her Cracker from Shamash the clone
that was still seated in the control chair attempted to
get a clean shot at her.
Well, Shamash prompted his double. What are you
waiting for? Shoot!
A pellet came speeding past Shamash’s body to
plant itself in the clone’s third eye. The God witnessed
himself freeze, before turning to confront Maelgwn’s fist.
Shamash went flying backwards, to land in a heap
on the ground. When he recovered from the blow, he
glanced up to discover three Crackers were aimed at
him. He chuckled as he raised himself, pressing a
pendant on his chest.
An alarm sounded. All the doors in the room were
flung open and a mass of soldiers entered.

A bunch of outlaws are not going to seize me on my
own ship!
Perhaps not, but I certainly can.
This was the voice of Nergal, supreme ruler of the
Pantheon, and Shamash trembled at Nergal’s
intonation.
All Shamash’s soldiers knelt in reverence to their
high lord’s presence. Maelgwn and Dumuzi bowed, but
Tory remained as she was.
Nergal was tall and slender and light radiated from
him — especially from his large, violet eyes. As with his
sister, Ningal, his hair was dark and cut short to
accentuate his angel-like features. His fine robes were
adorned with jewels. Here was a very imposing figure of
a God, despite his youthful appearance.
Shamash looked towards Nergal to also see his
reunited parents and most of the Pantheon. Before he
recovered from the shock, Nergal’s warriors had slapped
restraining bands on Shamash’s wrists to prevent him
from disappearing.
‘He has the Great Cracker on a detonator. We must
get him to cancel the instruction before it destroys what
is left of our planet.’ Tory strode into the middle of the
gathering of Gods to demand justice.
Well, Shamash. Nergal ordered him to act.
I am sorry, but I had my clone wipe that information
from my memory, he advised in a vague, indifferent
manner.
‘I am going to tear you apart myself.’ Tory took a
swing at him, but Maelgwn and Dumuzi prevented an
incident.

This is the woman who taught you how to love again?
Nergal questioned his sister, as he watched the two men
struggle to restrain her. I pictured her differently, he
confessed.
‘Well, I am sorry, your worshipfulness,’ Tory
composed herself, ‘but don’t you think we should do
something?’
Oh, besides rumble, you mean? Nergal queried. Yes,
quite. I suggest we get Gibal onto it.
When the ship suddenly rocked and a great boom
was heard, Tory feared that the Great Cracker had fired.
A single soldier entered the master control room,
surprised to discover what had befallen there.
Yes what is it? Nergal insisted he speak up.
‘My lord Nergal.’ He bowed deeply, sounding a little
hesitant to voice his news. ‘My lord Shamash, we have
just lost our primary weapon.’
Lost it, Shamash was furious. How?
‘I am sorry, Lord,’ the soldier advised, ‘but it has
been shot off.’
Tory and Maelgwn looked at each other, puzzled.
‘Cadwaladr,’ they resolved at once, releasing an
almighty cry of victory as they launched themselves
into each other’s arms.
Nergal set the trial hearing for the following morning,
Middle Eastern time. The Pantheon would hear
everyone’s grievances in the main chamber of the
landing base there, once Nergal’s forces had cleared the
passageway. He asked that all the Chosen attend, and
the banished Marduk, also.

Meanwhile, Cadwaladr got in touch with the
United Nations and the US President, Hagar, who had
been kept in the dark about the entire affair. The
dogfight that had taken place just beyond the
atmosphere of the planet had been witnessed firsthand
by no one, as all satellites in the area had been
destroyed. The demolished equipment was blamed on
all the freak space anomalies that had occurred of late.
The Brunanburh Space Station had been the closest to
the action, but when Shamash had invaded Mission
Control at Farwell, those visual feeds had also been lost.
So, as all the alien aircraft were now cloaked, Doc
explained the whole incident as an elaborate hacker
fraud. Several individuals had besieged the main fusion
station at Farwell. After playing havoc with the security
codes, they managed to pass on their footage of the
phony alien invasion to the media. Having come
through all the right channels this footage would, to all
appearances, have come from the Brunanburh’s
cameras.
Doc assured the United Nations that no such threat
had ever really existed, and if any satellite or moon base
data indicated differently, they could safely assume the
aforementioned hackers had also screwed with their
systems. Cadwaladr wasn’t really surprised when the
authorities bought his story. Why wouldn’t they? A
simple rational explanation sure beat the hell out of
believing the world was under alien attack. Doc advised
that his people had the culprits in custody, and a full
confession would be forthcoming. With that, the affair
was all but forgotten by mainstream Earth society.

The enormous audience chamber at the landing base in
the Middle East was filled to the rafters both on the
ground and at mezzanine level. As the Dragon and his kin
were so intimately involved in the proceedings, they were
assembled directly in front of the full Pantheon of Gods.
Tory spied an old acquaintance of hers standing
amongst those Gods gathered before them. He was Shu
Micah, the High Magi of the Orders of Passage, whom
she had met in Atlantis. At that time, he had told her
that they would meet again at the time of the
Gathering, and he acknowledged Tory’s presence with a
polite nod.
Noah was feeling particularly honoured to be the
only reporter present, and busied himself capturing the
event on his motion CD camera.
The first item on the agenda was the pardon of the
Lord Marduk in the Dumuzi affair. But when invited to
resume his rightful place in the Pantheon, at Nergal’s
side, Marduk refrained.
Though it would be my greatest honour and joy to do so,
Nergal, if my chosen concubine cannot be at my side, he
motioned to Rose, who appeared rather tiny beside him,
then, regrettably, I shall be forced to decline.
‘Are you crazy?’ Rose gasped, looking to her masked
lover and shaking her head to urge him to retract the
ultimatum.
But Marduk only looked back at Nergal, whose
sister was having a quite word in his ear.
Yes, quite, Nergal nodded, looking back at his
breathless audience. Considering how many children you
two have obviously had, we have decided to make an

exception to the law in your case. Putting this family through
a separation would be hell. You shall wed immediately
following these proceedings. Nergal smiled as the entire
room cheered the ruling.
Marduk removed the helmet-like mask from his
head, casting it aside to pick up his soon-to-be wife and
kiss her. His long, dark hair and dark eyes were akin to
the Dragon’s clan, whom he had fathered.
Narnar was reinstated to the Pantheon, and
Shamash was charged with Dumuzi’s disappearance,
Cadwallon’s murder, Cadwaladr’s misspent years, and a
good part of the Earth’s destruction. Utu-Shamash was
therefore sentenced to his father’s cold Otherworldly
prison on the moon, until such time as Narnar and
Dumuzi saw fit to release him. Inanna was absolved of
her part in the affair, though she was to give up her
place in the Pantheon in favour of her husband,
Dumuzi. Inanna was more than grateful to accept this as
her punishment, and promised to return the rest of the
Lord Gibal’s body parts to him.
As for Cadwaladr, Nergal decreed that for his crimes
against humanity Cadwaladr would answer to his own
kind and left Maelgwn to nominate his fate.
‘I believe Cadwaladr has suffered enough for one
lifetime,’ Maelgwn advised. ‘Due to the part he played
in Shamash’s downfall, I am willing to grant him a full
pardon for his crimes. Provided, of course, that he
strives to amend the damage he has done to the Earth
and her occupants.’
Vanora and Cadwaladr were well pleased to hear
this. Cadwaladr turned to Maelgwn and held out his

hand to him. ‘I have never in my life been grateful for
anything, but I am most obliged for this.’
‘Friends then,’ Maelgwn suggested.
‘Brothers,’ Cadwaladr assured him.
Well then, Nergal announced, all is well that ends well.
‘My Lord, I beg to differ.’ Tory spoke up, for she had
Taliesin in her mind urging her to do so.
All those speeches you’ve been serving me over the ages
about how unjust the Gods have been? This might be a good
time to get that off your chest, the Merlin advised.
‘Tory?’ Maelgwn objected quietly. ‘We’ve done well.
Don’t push it.’
‘Done well?’ Tory scoffed, ‘I hardly think so.’ She
scaled some of the steps that led to the stage, to where
she could address all the Chosen. ‘What we’ve done is
solved all the Nefilim’s problems and disputes. All
through history we’ve dug their mines, fought their
wars, and suffered their wrath and superstitions. And
now that they have finally sorted everything out, and
can live happily ever after, we are left with an
exhausted, dying planet, with air not fit to breathe,
water too filthy to drink, and land not fit to produce or
mine.’
There’s always one in every crowd, Nergal commented
to Horus beside him. And of course, it’s the little prima
donna who will not even bow before ME, supreme ruler of
the heavens.
‘I will bow before you, Sir, when I see your
judgments are just, and worthy of respect.’
Maelgwn very much wanted to cut in at this point,
knowing how powerful the being she addressed truly

was. An evil entity like Shamash didn’t cower before
Nergal for no good reason. But Tory had a beef that she
would voice no matter what anybody thought,
including himself, so why fight the inevitable?
Ah, you almost make it sound like a challenge,
Lamamu. Nergal smiled, thinking her very clever.
‘If you find it challenging to be just, I suppose it is,’
she told him surely.
Nergal was amused by this woman’s whole
demeanor. She was forthright, witty and fearless —
much like himself. Am I then to assume that you hold us to
blame for your misguided ways and the degenerated state of
your home planet?
‘Well, as far as I know, Lord, apes are not prone to
killing one another for enjoyment, or destroying their
natural environment. The same could not be said of the
Nefilim, however.’
Nergal considered this a justified statement. Monkey
see, monkey do, you think? Well, you could be quite right.
Tory allowed the condescending remark to pass,
only because he was agreeing with her.
But you all know better now, is that it? You think the
human race would have done a much better job of it if we’d
only left you alone? Goddess, I’ve heard this before.
Tory turned to the rest of the gathering to seek their
opinion, which, of course, was unanimous.
Right then. I have the very thing to resolve this dispute
once and for all. Nergal seemed rather pleased by the
response and stood to announce his proposal. We have
just discovered a small planet in a galaxy not too far from
here that is very similar to this planet ten thousand years

ago. We have already introduced various forms of flora and
fauna, most of which you would be familiar with.
‘Pardon me.’ Tory had to cut to the chase. ‘Are you
offering us our own planet?’
Well, it would be on a trial basis, of say … How long
ago, in Gaia orbits, since we first got here? he questioned
his associates.
‘Four hundred and fifty thousand years ago, give or
take a couple thousand years.’ Noah spoke up as the
Nefilim appeared unable to answer.
Then we shall give you as many orbits to prove your
boast, Nergal decided. If, as you say, you make a better go
of it without us, then we will talk ownership.
Tory didn’t have to turn around to learn the rest of
the room’s thoughts on the matter. Their elation was
deafening. Maelgwn grabbed hold of her, excited
beyond belief about the deal she’d struck.
Nergal’s warriors called the room back to attention
and Nergal continued: You who are the Chosen of the
great Enki, and his son, Marduk. I believe you have earned
the right to make a new start. The rest of mankind will be
left alone henceforth by the Nefilim, to make the most of this
world they, at least in part, helped to create. Who knows,
maybe the old Gaia will come good after all. Collect your
things — size is no object — and return here at dusk for
departure. The planet for which you are bound is Kila,
which, literally, means ‘Gaia’s double’. This is the word and
the will of the Pantheon of Twelve.
‘So be it!’ the room responded.
Tory bowed deeply to Nergal. ‘Your decisions are
just,’ she told him.

It is a relief to hear you say so, Lamamu. Nergal was
in good spirits. I thought you were going to start a rebellion
there for a moment.
‘As long as you stick to your end of the bargain,
Lord,’ she announced in a cheeky fashion, ‘you need
have no fear of that.’
Although Tory was excited about settling a new planet,
she was also the keeper of the Tablet of Destinies, and
was therefore bound to consider the fate of the world
she would have to leave behind.
Ningal had said she would speak with Gaia’s
elementals, and urge them to return to this time to
assist with the planet’s re-growth. As Cadwaladr would
be staying, Ningal instructed him in the art of fairy
sight. If he played his cards right, he would have many
willing helpers to aid him with the restoration of Gaia’s
natural beauty and health.
Vanora had elected to stay with Cadwaladr, to help
repair the wrongs they’d both done the planet at one
stage of history or another. Together, these two soulminds had ultimately been responsible for the sinking of
Atlantis and the near ruination of the Dragon’s empire
in the Dark Ages. Added to Cadwaladr’s current crimes
against humanity and nature, the pair certainly had
much amending to do.
As head of the ICA, Cadwaladr’s task was well
within his means. The question was, could he be trusted
to properly tend and protect the tarnished jewel left in
his care? Did he possess the conviction and vision to
transform the world’s greed into awareness?

Alone in her cabin, Tory consulted the sacred
divining tool on the matter. Her head was telling her to
stay behind; but that was fear, fear of trusting
Cadwaladr. Her heart was urging her to go, as it had
been she who had struck the deal with Nergal, and she
could hardly see to living up to her end of the bargain if
she stayed here.
‘But Gaia and her people must be protected too.’
Tory closed her eyes, and placed the eye of Ra against
her forehead. ‘Could Cadwaladr be the one?’
His first ten years with the ICA indicated that he
was capable of coordinating world solutions and
cooperation. But his last ten years as Cadwaladr, King of
Gwynedd, exemplified the barbaric lengths the demigod could resort to if so inclined.
The small trinket against her forehead expanded
and unfolded as it positioned itself before Tory, where
she could view it’s advice clearly.
In its central triangle she saw Gaia — the cause of
her concern. In the triangle pertaining to the best
outcome, Tory saw the people of the Earth emerging
from their Biodomes into a vast, thriving wilderness
outside. In the triangle that divulged the worst outcome
she saw the same vision. Tears welled as she viewed the
crowning triangle that foretold of what would happen if
Cadwaladr was not entrusted with this charge; the
planet seen here appeared a dry and wasted place.
‘He will succeed.’
With her words, all four sections of the Tablet were
suddenly filled with a glowing green presence that
radiated light from its core.

Gaia’s destiny and your own lie along a different
path now, Lamamu.
The three voices of the Triple Goddess — the
maiden, the warrioress and the wise woman — were
comforting her. As a protector of humankind, realise that
they are far more widespread in the universe than just this
small pocket of civilisation. Take our Ark and present it to
Cadwaladr, for it will allow you to guide and advise him
from your new home on Kila. The Tablet of Destinies will
enable you to follow Gaia’s progress. This is the will of the
Great Houses, Lamamu.
The glowing green presence burst forth from the
tablet, bathing Tory in it’s lustre as the loving, calming,
empowering energy of the divine quickened her entire
being and magnified her senses.
When the powerful life-force retreated, it left Tory
revitalized and pulsating with awareness. She realised
that Cadwaladr needed love, reassurance, acceptance
and forgiveness the same as anyone. With the
emotional void in his life filled, he would find the
divine in himself, just as the rest of his kindred had.
Go in peace to your new life, knowing that you leave
Gaia in the very best of hands. For, more so than anyone,
Cadwaladr knows what must be done to solve Gaia’s
problems and who must be influenced to enable her to heal.
‘I see the truth of it,’ Tory conceded, her heart and
her head at peace with each other. ‘As you wish it, great
mother, so shall it be.’
Fortunately, the home of Tory’s kindred was fully mobile
already; the Goddess would serve as a marvellous

temporary home for them on Kila until they built more
permanent dwellings. But theirs was not the only such
vehicle to appear out of nowhere. Many other tribes
had managed to keep similar observation craft a secret
from earthly civilization.
Tory, Brian, Maelgwn and Rhun visited Myrddin’s
cave at Dinas Emrys to retrieve the remaining twelve
wonders of Britain to take with them to their new
home. Taliesin and Myrddin had made a gift of the
thirteenth treasure, the Chariot, to Noah — their
merlin-in-training. They also retrieved the Ark to
present to Cadwaladr, as the Goddess had instructed.
Tory had half expected to see her parents at the cave,
since their goodbye had been cut short by Shamash’s
devastating arrival. But the cavern of treasures was
quiet and empty. Not even Tobias, Myrddin’s owl
friend, frequented the cave any longer. Once they had
collected the twelve treasures and the Ark the cave was
devoid of any evidence of the great Merlin’s existence.
Alone in his office at the ICA complex in Biodome,
London, Cadwaladr gazed out his window over the hustle
and bustle of people going about their daily routine. For
them, today was just another day in a week like any
other. The affairs of interstellar importance that had
transpired this fortnight past had been completely life
transforming for him, and yet to the remaining
population of the planet, it had been just another news
story — a hoax to capture the imagination or ignore.
‘Ah … what’s up, Doc?’ Tory employed her very best
Bugs Bunny impersonation to advise Cadwaladr of her

presence. He projected the appearance of Doc today —
blonde, blue-eyed, slick and businesslike.
He smiled, surprised by her visit, but he did not turn
from his view to address her. ‘Have you come to lecture
me before your departure, Goddess?’
‘Hardly. You’ve done well, Cadwaladr. I am here to
reward you.’
He turned and saw an ornate golden treasure that
must have materialised with Tory and wondered at its
purpose.
‘It’s a gift,’ she caught his mind, ‘from the Goddess.’
Cadwaladr cocked an eye; perhaps it was some sort
of entrapment device, or a spellcaster.
‘It’s the Ark … it was in my father’s safekeeping,
and now it is in yours.’
The gesture completely overwhelmed Cadwaladr. It
was a great honour to be entrusted with such a treasure.
‘It has many functions,’ Tory informed the
dumbfounded recipient. ‘It can enable you to speak and
visit with us on Kila —’
‘You don’t trust me.’ He assumed the worst reason
for being granted such a treasure.
‘On the contrary.’ She held out her hand to him.
Cadwaladr had to smile at his own apprehension. ‘I
don’t understand.’
‘It’s very simple, Cadwaladr … you just take my
hand.’ She beckoned with her fingers for him to comply.
‘But why? To what end?’
Tory rolled her eyes, not really surprised that he still
considered her to be a threat. ‘I’m just going to show
you a safe place to store this. You have nothing to fear.’

The smile on his face broadened, as he transformed
into the warrior he truly was. ‘Down through the ages I
have feared no one. I’m not about to start now,’ he assured
her, slapping his hand into hers and gripping it tight.
Cadwaladr found himself in a huge cathedral-like room,
filled to the rafters with exquisite art, artefacts and
furnishings, all of which he could well appreciate being
a collector himself. The main feature of the chamber
was a huge stone that was inset into the centre of the
floor, upon which was carved a Celtic cross.
‘This was Taliesin’s Otherworldly abode.’ Tory found
her companion’s thunderstruck expression most
amusing. ‘He has no use of it any longer, but I thought
it might suit your purposes well.’
Cadwaladr gulped back the emotion that welled in
him — having finally been made privy to the secret
place where all his forefather’s had been instructed in
the greater mysteries. ‘I heard the legends about this
place when I was a boy in Gwynedd … but I never
imagined that I would ever see it.’
‘Taliesin would want you and your descendants to
continue to make use of the facilities here. Beyond
those doors,’ she referred to the double doors at one of
the chamber, ‘is a whole world of discovery … all the
knowledge that was wrongfully denied you.’
Cadwaladr looked from the doors back to Tory.
Such an act of trust confounded all reason. ‘After
everything I’ve said and done, you would entrust me
with such a place?’
Tory smiled and gave a nod. ‘It is the will of the

Great Houses, Cadwaladr, that I welcome you home.’
With this, Tory approached the huge, dark warrior and
embraced him.
Cadwaladr held back a moment. He was so used to
her as the enemy, he was startled by the fact that she
obviously bore him no malice. ‘Tory Alexander, your
compassion is a wonder to me.’ He let go of his hatred
and hugged her back.
‘If there’s one thing I hate, it’s hate. There’s no one
happier than I that we got to the bottom of all the
deception and misunderstanding.’ Tory pulled away
from Cadwaladr to find him blinking the tears from his
eyes.
‘I thought I had forgotten how to cry.’ He wiped the
water from his face, forcing a smile.
‘And love, and trust,’ Tory added. ‘But now you
remember, and shall never again forget.’
He nodded in agreement, looking around his new
home base. ‘On that you have my word.’
‘That’s all the assurance I need.’ Tory placed a hand
on his shoulder, and stared up into his dark eyes. ‘The
Goddess is with you, Cadwaladr. Always was, always
will be.’
The statement stirred something deep inside the
warrior and he sank to his knees before Tory. ‘I am her
humble servant.’
‘The divine is within you, Cadwaladr.’ She crouched
down, to avoid his adoration. ‘Serve it and the Goddess
will be appeased.’
‘I am proud of my family,’ he advised with absolute
conviction, ‘and they will be proud of me.’

‘You do us proud already, Cadwaladr.’
Tory placed the palm of her hand over his cheek
and he leant into her touch, closing his eyes to be
relieved by the calming energy it extended him. The
guilt and hatred that had possessed his soul for so long
seemed to flow from his body with his tears.
But Tory felt more than this. The loneliness the
man had endured in twelve hundred years of life and
the accumulated bitterness of his abandonment were so
all-encompassing that the mother in her was compelled
to comfort the child in him. ‘Your isolation is at an
end.’ She hugged him to her. ‘You shall never be forced
to stand alone again, I swear it.’
‘Forgive me.’ He’d curled up in a foetal position in
Tory’s lap and he openly wept.
‘All is forgotten … you have only to forgive
yourself.’ She stroked his hair, and cradled him as he let
his pain go.
Cadwaladr was going to be alright.
Back in the Middle East most of the Chosen had
already boarded Nergal’s huge vessel, but Maelgwn was
still on the runway, pacing to and fro. ‘What is taking
her so long?’ His eyes scanned the vast wasteland
around him.
‘Are you waiting for someone?’
Maelgwn swung round, relieved. ‘I was worried.
Does all go well with Cadwaladr?’
‘All does.’ Tory smiled, then, looking around the
landing strip, her good spirits dampened. ‘He has a huge
task ahead of him, I fear. But his hunger for the battle is

fueled as always, so he ought to do well, Whether he
can induce mankind to come to the party remains to be
seen. If Gaia is to heal, it will require the awareness and
care of every living soul, not just the crusaders.’
Maelgwn raised his brow, not overly concerned.
‘Well, if history proves one thing, it’s that Homo sapiens
always shine in crisis situations.’
‘Well, they’d better,’ considered Tory, ‘before Gaia is
so fed up that she completely rids herself of the
torment.’
‘It won’t come to that … we shall aid them from
Kila.’ Maelgwn tried to perk up her spirits.
He knew Tory would miss Gaia for awhile, just as he
had, but the universe was an amazing place and there
were ever-expanding parts of it to discover and explore.
If he could just get Tory on their transport and out of
here, he felt sure she would love life outside of this star
system.
‘Stop worrying,’ he encouraged. ‘Where’s your sense
of adventure?’ But Tory continued turning in circles,
observing the landscape with a rather solemn look on
her face.
‘My father has never been very sentimental,’ she
said, suppressing her disappointment down deep to
prevent any tears, ‘but I really thought that Taliesin
would show up to say well done, good-bye … or
something.’
‘Why would he think to say goodbye, when he
hasn’t left.’ Maelgwn placed a hand on her shoulder to
get her full attention. ‘Stop looking outward, Tory. The
Merlin is inside now.’

She sniffled. ‘It was he who urged me to confront
Nergal this morning.’
‘And that is just the first of many such urges, I am
sure.’ He squeezed her shoulders and turned her around.
‘Like, right now, I feel certain he is urging us to board
this craft.’
Tory submitted with a smile, but then turned back
abruptly to wave farewell to the planet of her birth. ‘So
long Gaia. Ours has been a grand adventure. May the
Goddess protect and guide you, for all time.’ She bowed,
as she would have to her Sensei.
Well done, good-bye … or something.
Tory straightened up at the sound of Taliesin’s voice,
and could not stop her tears flowing when he was
nowhere to be seen.
Gaia has been a truly grand adventure. But a whole
new adventure awaits us on Kila. You are beholden to none,
Tory Alexander, and a master of your own reality. You must
make something of this new-found freedom. So let us go,
before you get left behind.
Tory breathed a deep sigh of relief, and with a
deciding nod, she took up her husband’s hand and made
a dash for the transporter beam.
On the first night of their voyage to Kila, the Dragon’s
kin were to be entertained with a preview of Noah’s
long-awaited novel.
They gathered in the Goddess’ rec room for the
event, and proved a rowdy bunch to settle down by the
time the storyteller finally got up his nerve.
‘Before I begin, I wish to dedicate this work to Tory

Alexander, my inspiration and saviour.’ Noah spurred a
round of applause and whistles from the crowd.
‘You saved yourself,’ Tory corrected. ‘All I did was
give you a job.’
‘You did a lot more than that,’ he insisted, but
moved on. ‘I would also like to dedicate this story to
you, the characters, without whom this whole tale
would obviously not have been possible.’
His audience outdid themselves with recognition on
that score, but fell silent as the lights dimmed.
All that could be seen was Noah’s face, illuminated
by the light projecting off his computer screen and a
candle that sat beside it on the bench. His first words
were not read, however. Instead, Noah addressed his
audience directly.
‘The tale of the origins of the Chosen is as complex
and baffling as time itself. For they were the legends and
heroes of myth made manifest, and were, among men,
righteous kings and philosophers, seers, healers,
astronomers, and orators wise. The beginning of the
Dragon’s line of these immortal warriors can be traced
back to one afternoon in Oxfordshire, England. The day
of the summer solstice in nineteen ninety three …’
He looked to his computer and began to read. ‘As
evening cast its shadow across the horizon …’

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ash, David A., The Vortex, Golden Path Spiritual
Developement Association, Devon, 1991
Ballard, Robert D., Explorations, Weidenfeld &
Nicolson, London, 1995
Berlitz, Charles, Doomsday 1999 AD, Souvenir Press,
London, 1981
Bletzer, June G., Encyclopedic Psychic Dictionary,
Donning Co, Virginia, 1986
Davies, Paul, About Time, Simon & Schuster, USA,
1995
Devereux, Paul, Secrets of Ancient and Sacred Places,
Blandford Press, London, 1992
Devereux, Paul, Earth Lights Revelation, Blandford Press,
London, 1989
Frederic, Louis, Dictionary of the Martial Arts, Athlone
Press, France, 1991
Hope, Murry, Ancient Egypt — The Sirius Connection,
Element Books, Shaftesbury, 1994
Hope, Murry, Time — The Ultimate Energy, Element
Books, Shaftesbury, 1991
Kerrod, Robin, The Star Guide, RD Press, Australia,
1993
Lorie, Peter, Revelation, Labyrinth Publishing, UK 1995
Mallove/Matloff, The Starflight Handbook, John Wiley &
Sons Inc., USA, 1989

Moore, Patrick, Guinness Book of Astronomy, Guinness
Publishing, U.K., 1995
Plato [Desmond Lee (trans)], Timaeus and Critias,
Penguin Books, London, 1977
Sitchin, Zecharia, Stairway to Heaven, Avon Books,
N.Y., 1983
Sitchin, Zecharia, The 12th Planet, Avon Books, N.Y.,
1976
Sitchin, Zecharia, The Wars of Gods and Men, Avon
Books, N.Y,. 1985

Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to thank all those readers who have
patiently waited a whole year for this final instalment of ‘The
Ancient Future’ trilogy — your letters and emails have been a
great inspiration, bless you all.
A special hunk of gratitude to my husband, David, to
whom I dedicate this book. Quite apart from his artwork, fast
becoming famous, I wish to acknowledge his creative
contribution to this story — I would have had great difficulty
plotting industrial espionage without him.
Many thanks to my parents, all my friends, my agent,
Selwa Anthony, and my editors, Sue and Stephanie. Their
support and guidance has been essential to the completion of
this work.
Last, but by no means least, I would like to thank all
those at HarperCollins who have worked so hard to make this
trilogy a success. A better publishing house I could not want
— what a team!

About the Author
Traci Harding lives on a quiet acre of bushland on the
Hawkesbury River, with her exceedingly talented husband,
David, and their beautiful daughter, Sarah.
Book One of the Trilogy, The Ancient Future: the Dark
Age was published in 1996; Book Two, An Echo In Time:
Atlantis was published in 1997; and Book Three, Masters of
Reality: the Gathering in 1998. A stand-alone book, The
Alchemist’s Key, was released in 1999. Her next trilogy was
The Celestial Triad: Chronicle of Ages, Tablet of Destinies and
The Cosmic Logos.
In 2002 HarperCollins Australia created a new Traci
Harding website and Traci visits the message board in the
community section daily, to discuss the greater mysteries with
her readers. At the website there are glossaries of the terms
used in Traci’s books and author notes for those interested in
delving deeper into different esoteric and historic aspects of
this author’s work. You’ll find Traci’s new website and message
board at: www.voyageronline.com.au/traciharding
Feel free to write to Traci Harding at the following
email address: hardingd@ozemail.com.au.

For information about Traci Harding and her books,
plus all the latest science fiction news, visit:
Voyager Online: www.voyageronline.com.au
the website for lovers of science fiction and fantasy.

Credits
Cover and internal design by Darian Causby, HarperCollins
Design Studio, Australia
Cover illustration by David Harding

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places and
incidents either are the products of the author’s imagination
or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events,
locales, organizations, or persons, living or dead, is entirely
coincidental and beyond the intent of either the author or
the publisher.
MASTERS OF REALITY Copyright © 1998 by Traci
Harding All rights reserved under International and PanAmerican Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book onscreen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or
introduced into any information storage and retrieval system,
in any form or by any means, whether electronic or
mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the
express written permission of PerfectBound™.
PerfectBound™ and the PerfectBound™ logo are trademarks
of HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader 10/2003 eISBN 0-7322-7859-7
Print edition first published in 1998 by HarperCollins
Publishers, Inc.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.perfectbound.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.perfectbound.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.uk.perfectbound.com
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.perfectbound.com

